Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The castle chapel: a romantic tale
THE
CASTLE CHAPEL.
CHAPTER I.
^*.f^*:*4
c ' Stung Avith the thoughts of home—tht thoughts of home Rush on his nerves, and call their vigour Iorth In manj a vain attempt- How sinks hia soul ! What black despair, what horror hib ht 3 heart ! 'lhinking o'er tdl the bitterness of death, Mix'd with the tender anguish nature shoots Thro' the urung bosom of the dying man," J N placing himself at the mercy of chance fortune, by declining the situation that was offered to his acceptance, Eugene may be accused of folly, by the prudent vol. il в
part of the world, to a certainty ; but in extenuation of this folly, it should be ta¬ ken into consideration, that Eugene was a very young man, just at that period of life, indeed, when trifling matters have an importance, which, at a more advanced stage, we are astonished vie coukl ever allow them. The very few acquaintances he had in London were ali young men, like himself, who considered the cut ofthe coat, shape of the hat, and polish of the boots, as matters of the most essential con¬ sequence. To expose himself to the ridi¬ cule of such, by consenting to have his head shaved for his support, was more, he felt, than he had philosophy to endure ; but, above all, he was a lover, full of ro¬ mance, and wishing to appear as ever in the eyes of his lovely mistress. At an eariy hour anxiety led him to С ---------—" Well," exclaimed the man of business, with an ironical laugh, as he saw him entering, " am I to congratulate you on your being appointed secretary to the craniums ?"
Eugene pretending to be looking over some books, replied, with affected care¬ lessness, in the negative, though his blood glow r ed at the manner in which the ques¬ tion was asked.—" Then, perhaps," resu¬ med С --------- , " since you can turn the out¬ side of theirs to no advantage, you will have no objection to try what the inside of your own will enable you to do for your¬ self;" and he proceeded to inform him, that he had the unpublished manuscript of a deceased author lying by him, which, wanting revision, he would pay him hand¬ somely for editing. Eugene inquired the subject ; and find¬ ing there was nothing offensive, either to religion or morality, in the work, he readi¬ ly closed with the offer; and, with the first part of it in his pocket, returned with something of a lightened heart to his lodg¬ ings, impatient to enter upon a task, the execution of which would enable him to return to St. Doulagh's. The wretchedness his Rose must suffer в l 2
till she saw him again, was too terrible to his imagination, not to render him inde¬ fatigable in his exertions to restore her to tranquillity ; he hardly allowed himself a moment's respite, and scarcely ever went out, except it was to С --------- 's, to whom, according to his desire, he returned the work in detached parts, novv and then ac¬ companied by trifles, such as essays, and ballads, that, by way of relaxation, he sometimes permitted himself to compose ; and for which, instead of only receiving two or three pounds, all he conceived him¬ self entitled to for them, he was often verv agreeably surprised by getting a check for ten or ñfteen pounds. He had gone on in this manner for two or three weeks, when, late one evening, a billet, to the following effect, was brought him, by an unknown messenger, who va¬ nished the moment he had put it into his hand :—
" To Eugene O'Neil, Esq. " If Mr. O'Neil will call this night, at No. —, Pali Mall, bebveen the hours of ten and eleven, he will see a per¬ son vvho has a communication of very great importance to make to him." We may readily believe Eugene could not peruse such a note without emotion— vvho it came from, or w r hat was the nature of the communication it alluded to, he could not form the most distant idea. For an instant his thoughts glanced at Rose ; could she, fearful of his truth and constan¬ cy, have confided their story to some one, for the purpose of having the cruelty he was committing, in trifling with her feel¬ ings, by longer delaying his return to St. Doulagh's, represented to him ? but no, this was too improbable, from what he knew of her delicacy, her timidity, to be imagined ; he had a thousand reasons for believing this could not be the case ; antl at length, finding conjecture on the sub-
ject only distracted him, he determined on endeavouring to wait patiently for the elucidation of what was at present so per¬ plexing. He would, however, have gone out, for the purpose of inquiring who lived at —, in Fall Mall ; but just as hj took up his liai, with this intention, a young friend. not knowing wdiat to do with himself, rame in, for the good-natured purpose of bestowing his tediousness upon him, and detained him till within a minute or tw T o of the time for keeping the appointment. On knocking, Eugene was admitted in the dark, but by whom, the manner in which the door was opened, and the hasty way in which it was closed, prevented his discerning ; but hardly had he heard it fastened behind him, ere he received a tre¬ mendous blow on the head, that felled him to the ground. On regaining his senses, he found him¬ self extended m a large parlour, through which the glare of a lamp, immediately fronting the windows, one of which v/as
lying open, diffused a sufficient light to let him see about him ; and, to his un¬ speakable horror, he beheld, at a little dis¬ tance from iiim, a man stretched upon tne floor, weltering in his gore. He started up, and flew to the door, but it was fas¬ tened ; shouting aloud, he caught at the bell-ropes but, through the violence with which he pulled them, they each gave way in his hand. He then hastened to the open window, and forgetful, through the state of mind he was in, and his anxiety to discover whether it was too late for any assistance to be rendered to the ghastly oDjeet within the apartment, or of the depth of the area below, was stepping out, when he was violently pushed back by the pole of a watchman, vvho was passing at the instant, and who naturally concluded he could not be a good man or true, who was making his exist from a house in such a manner. An alarm was given, the street-door was foi ced, and ere Eugene, from the bewildered state of his senses, well knew what they were about, he
found himself taken up on suspicion of murder. He passed the night in a solitary cell of the watchhouse, to which he was convey¬ ed, and the next morning was brought be¬ fore a magistrate, who, after a long and patient investigation of the affair, conceiv¬ ed himself fully justified, from the circum¬ stantial evidence against him, in commit¬ ting him to prison, to take his trial for the alleged offence. Nothing indeed could be stronger than this; steeped in blood, he was detected, apparently attempting to ef¬ fect his escape from the house where the atrocious deed was committed ; in vain he told his story, he protested his innocence- man can but judge from appearances, and these were all against him ; even if the note, that had been the treacherous means of drawing him into this dreadful predica¬ ment, could have been of any service, he had it not to produce, having been taken from his pocket after his being knocked down. Who eould be the contriver of this diabolical plot ? or what the instigation to
it? Invain he tried to conjecture, un- conscious as he was of ever having done any thing to provoke enmity; but that he had, enmity of the rancorous, the most deadly nature, was but too evident from wdiat had happened, and that he should assuredly fall a victim to it was equally so, for every circumstance, he clearly savv, must make against him. Who can paint his feelings when the gloomy walls of Newgate came in sight- that dismal place, that even, when only contemplated as the prison of another, he never could pass without a kind of shutl- der í His despair at first rendered him frantic—repeatedly he dashed himself a- gainst the stone floor of the cell in which he was locked up. It was not enough that he was to be cut off in the very springtide of his youth, but an ignomi¬ nious death was to be his.-—" Why," he raved, " when tossed upon the foaming ocean, with but a frail plank between me and eternity, why was I not plunged be- б S
neath the whelming waves ? Why, when the balls of the enemy whizzed round my unscreened head, was I not struck down ? was I only saved—was I only shielded— was I only reserved for this ?" reproach¬ fully raising his manacled hands to hea¬ ven, " to meet a felon's fate ! to die under the agonizing idea of leaving an execrated name behind me ! Those I love will be¬ lieve in the protestations of my innocence —but that will not be sufficient to rescue my memory from detestation ! their belief 1 in tbem will be imputed to the fond ere* dulity of affection—and their efforts of course to induce others to join in it unsuc¬ cessful !" But calmer thoughts succeeded ; and the visits of the chaplain, who wan unre¬ mitting in his attentions to hiin, tended not a little to the continuance of these, or, in short, to gradually bring about a bet¬ ter way of thinking ; either he really gave credit to Eugene's solemn asseverations of hk innocence, or else, compassionating his youth, he evinced a degree of sympathy
for him, that had no slight effect in soft¬ ening the feelings of the unfortunate youth. The first agony of distraction over, Eu¬ gene reflected he was not the first vvho had innocently suffered, and that he had no more right to fly in the face of Hea¬ ven, therefore, for permitting a thing of the kind, than others Λνίιο had gone be¬ fore him. Even He, that divine being, on Λνΐιοιη all rely for intercession, with every other virtue, what an example of patient resignation under unmerited suf¬ ferings has he set his followers î with what uncomplaining meekness did he take up his cross, and submit to the most cruel and ignominious death that coultl be in¬ flicted í and should he then, a worm, a rep. tile, in comparison, dare to outrage the majesty of Heaven by murmurs md сопь plaints! No, following the exi.nple of his Blessed Saviour, he would humble himself befbre it, and in his words say— fcr Oh my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me ! nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt !" Justly has it been
said, that religion is the anchor of the soul —the moment we turn to it, in truth and in spirit, for consolation, we receive it.— " A broken and a contrite spirit I will not despise/ saith God ; and we feel the as¬ surance confirmed in the innermost reces¬ ses of that spirit, the moment we lay it prostrate before his throne. As soon as ever Eugene was brought to a frame of religious resignation, he became comparatively composed, and sufficiently collected to be enabled to do whatever was requisite for himself. But his cares, or thoughts, were not confined entirely to himself; contemplating his death as cer¬ tain, he prepared two letters, to be for¬ warded to St Doulagh's, by the chaplain, after his execution. One was addressed to his aunt, assuring her of his innocence of the crime for which he suffered, and making known the attachment between him and Rose, whom he represented as his wife by a private marriage, and for whom he implored, in the most earnest and pathetic terms, the continued protec-
tion and kindness of his family. The other was to poor Rose herself, beseeching her to support herself under the disastrous stroke that separated them, and evince her love to his memory, by exerting her¬ self to supply his place to his afflicted re¬ latives, and in particular to poor Grace, to whom he addressed a few r lines, recom¬ mending them, in the most forcible man¬ ner, to the love and care of each other. But innocence is Heaven's peculiar care— we may doubt and despair of its good¬ ness, but let us patiently wait, and we shall see the " ways of Providence justifi¬ ed to man." Eugene's trial was almost on the very eve of taking place, when three men were taken up for a robbery, and committed to Newgate. One of them, almost immedi¬ ately after his committal, offered to turn king's evidence : and being permitted, not only confessed the commission of the crime for which he and his companions were ap~ prehended, but that they, that is, the other two, had perpetrated the murder for whieh
Eugene was about being tried. It seems the house in Pall Mall, to which Eugene had been so insidiously decoyed, belonged to a gentleman of fortune, then abroad, and had been in the sole care of a confi¬ dential servant, of which circumstance the villains getting apprized, a plan for mur¬ dering him, and robbing the house, was concerted : with their hands reeking in his blood, they repaired, with as much of the property as they could carry off, to his, the informant's, lodgings, where, he aver¬ red, some part of it was still concealed. This being ascertained to be the case, very little more was requisite to fully establish the innocence of Eugene; and, in short, on the very morning that the forms of law obliged him to be brought up for trial, he was liberated. What the overflowings of his heart were on this occasion, vve presume may easily be imagined ; but in the midst of his gratitude and joy, his heart was seized with sudden terror, at the idea of the aw¬ ful predicament he had been in being by
this time perhaps known at St. Doulagh's, and the apprehension of the effect it might have produced there, although his letters vvere not forwarded. While considering iiow, under this apprehension, he should act, being most unwilling, if not already known to them, to let them ever learn the terrible situation in which he had been placed, he received a letter from Grace, of recent date, written with even more than her usual liveliness, and containing the gratifying assurance of all being well at home. He, of course, lost not a minute in answering it, that in case any unpleasant rumour should yet reach them, they might have this letter to turn to immediately, for the removal of any alarm that might be created. Relieved from anxiety about tliose at home, he delayed not waiting on С ---------, the expenditure of all the little hoard he had lying by him rendering it impossible for him to quit Loudon, as, after what had occurred, he would immediately, if in his power, without a reimbursement, which
could only be obtained by finishing the task he had undertaken for C--------. This gentleman, who, though prevented from seeing him while in prison, by a se¬ vere fit of illness, had still been extremely attentive, in sending from time to time, to inquire whether there was any service he could render him, received him most kindly. After congratulations and ac¬ knowledgments had been exchanged, Eu¬ gene expressed his readiness to complete what he had begun ; and accordingly the remainder of the w r ork was handed over to him, with a few pounds. If indefatigable 'before, Eugene was now, if possible, ten times more so, heigh¬ tened as was his anxiety to quit London, by the apprehension of having a secret enemy there, who might again bring his life into jeopardy. But who was this enemy, to whose machinations he had so nearly fallen a victim ? His conscience could not reproach him with injury to any one, ex¬ cept one, too good, too innocent, too ten-
derly attached, to harbour revenge or ma· lice. So much did his brain run upon the subject—so greatly did it perplex him, that he found it at times difficult to col¬ lect his thoughts sufficiently to go on with his task ; but at length it was completed, and with a joyful heart he took it to " Well/ exclaimed С ---------, on paying him the remainder of the stipulated sum, *' what next shall we set about ?" " Nothing at present," replied Eugene, proceeding to inform him of his intention of immediately departing for Ireland. " Are you serious?" demanded С ....... <. " Perfectly so/ ťí Well, this is wrong—very wrong," cried С —------, "just at the moment when we were beginning to understand one an¬ other, and matters might have gone on so well/ " Well, perhaps our acquaintance may not end here," said Eugene, who encouraged a vague idea of returning again to Lon-
don after his marriage * " but whether it does or not, be assured Ί shall not forget your kindness in many instances." " Oh, I know to what you allude! but if you have positively determined on leav¬ ing this, I have a secret to disclose." " I am then, positively." " Well, then, not to take to myself what I do not deserve, though I will not do myself the injustice to say I am not capable of a liberal act, the remuneration you received for the little matters you from time to time brought to me for pub¬ lication was not entirely out of my poc¬ ket." " I don't comprehend you," said Eu¬ gene. « Why, the fact is, you have a secret friend here." " Indeed í well that is a very agreeable counterpoise, or counterbalance, to a se¬ cret enemy ; but pray explain—who is he ?" " Why, really, I know very little more of him than his name. The circumstance altogether is a very romantic one, inso-
much that I think some day or other I shall mention it to some one of my p^t authoresses, to see whether they cannot work it mto sometiung oi an incluent lur one of their novels. Immediately after your first visit to me, a gentleman of most prepossessing appearance entered the shop, and having inquired whether the young gentleman he had seen quitting it was not so and so (meaning you), proceeded to introduce himself to me, as a person most particularly interested about you ; but which interest, very peculiar circumstances then preventing his making known to you himself, he wished to make me the in¬ strument of proving it, by lodging in rny hands a certain sum of money, to be given in addition to whatever I might, from time to time, myself give for any of your produc¬ tions; of course I vvould not do you the injury of not being his agent on the occa¬ sion, and the matter was soon settled be¬ tween us, vvith an understanding that you were to be kept in ignorance of it, except any thing occurred to induce you to leave
this, in which case I had his permission to acquaint you vvith it, and give you his address, it being his wish to have a con¬ versation with you ere your departure." '* This is a most extraordinary affair Í" said Eugene, impatiently holding out his hand for the card of his unknown friend. ** Wilkinson ! Wilkinson !" he repeated, as he cast his eye over it—" No. —, Char¬ lotte-street, Bedford-square ?'—I don't re¬ collect ever being acquainted with one of that name. However, I shall soon know wha*he is;" and with a hasty nod to € ■ ............... » he darted off. We need hardly say his steps were di¬ rected to Charlotte-street. He knocked at the door ofa handsome house, and had tbe-unfcpeakable satisfaction offinding Mr. Wilkinson was at home. A servant in a handsome livery threw open the door of a back parlour, fitted up as a library,, and in the gentleman who rose to receive him, Eugene instantly recognised the stranger who-had journeyed with him from St. Doulagh's to DubHn.
CHAPTER II.
<t— -------- - How many shake With all the fierce tortures of the mind, Unbounded passion, guilt, remorse ! Wrench from their liands oppression's iron rod, And bid the cruel feel the pains they give.** " This is an agreeable surprise indeed !" said Eugene, as he advanced to meet the extended hand of Mr. Wilkinson. " I am gratified by your allowing me to imagine you feel it so," was the reply ; " for, I assure you, you have lived in my remembrance since our meeting." " You have given proofs of that, sir," said Eugene, " that I know not how to express my gratitude for: but, pardon me, w a flush of pride mantling over his cheek, " if I say I cannot remain perfect-
ly easy under a weight of pecuniary oblí- gations." " I know what you allude to; but if you really wish me to believe you consi¬ der me as your friend, you will not touch upon that subject again ; it is the duty of the old to aid the young, if they have the power, more particularly the young and enterprising; and all I regret is my being so peculiarly circumstanced at the time of your arrival in London, as to be compel¬ led to make another the medium of my goodwill to you : but come, be seated, and let me account to you for what must have surprised you so much, as my not return¬ ing to take a more particular leave of you thau I did at the moment of our parting at the hotel in Sackville-street. You must know then, that the person whom you may remember 1 said I wished to speak to, on catching my eye, fled. I pursued him, nor gave up the pursuit till I found he had baffled me for the present, by step¬ ping on board a steam-packet, just then on the point of sailing for Liverpool. The
fatigue 1 had gone through made me stop atthe place to which I had ti aceti him, and when í returned the next morning to Sackville-street, to take a more formal leave of you than I had prev iously done, and express my hopes of a further renewal of our acquaintance, previous to my de¬ parture from the kingdom, I found you had embarked for England, but for what port I could not discover, though 1 rather conjectured, from some hints you had given me of your plans ; till by chance I espied you coming out of Mr. C---------- 's. Without flattery, I assure vou, 1 nevei met with a person who. upon so slight an acquaintance, interested me more ¡strong¬ ly ; insomuch, that I should have feita lasting regret, if an opportunity for re¬ newing, or rather becoming more inti¬ mately acquainted, had not occurred; vvith difficulty 1 have so long curbed my impatience, to avail myself of it ; but ibi this some time past 1 have not exactly been my own master, the concerns of an afflicted and very dear friend having ah
most totally engrossed me; but the re¬ straint imposed upon me by his affairs be¬ ing now at an end, Mr. С ---------, in the information he gave you this day, only anticipated Λνΐΐαί I meant myself to-mor¬ row to have given you." " Again, sir/' cried Eugene, " I must say that I know not how to express what I feel for the kind interest you have evin¬ ced about me. I did not think I should have felt such a pang at leaving London ; but I must be cold and insensible to kind¬ ness indeed, if I could depart from a place, containing a person I have such reason to esteem and regard, ţvithout a feeling of deep regret." " Professions are fine things/' said Mr. Wilkinson, with a good-natured smile; i4 but actions are the tests of sincerity I rely on. I shali see луЬе^ег you indeed feel what you intimate, by your appear¬ ing to forget, from this moment, that we have not been longer acquainted, and ma¬ king my house your home, should you return to London/'
iť I have now an inducement to do so. which will make me feel a ¿sensation oi disappointment, should I be compelled to abandon the intention," said Eugene. tft I am hanpy to hear vou entertain such a one," replied Mr. Wilkinson ; " Lon¬ don is indeed the place for a person who has to make their way in the world. With talents, with genius, what a terrible tiling. for a young man to suffer bimsen г* sink into obscurity, without a struggle for in¬ dependence—that, without vvhich therr can be no real enjoyment! He that pos¬ sesses it, has reached indeed the poin· of happiness, for independence is at oner a shield and helmet; then does the soui walk uprightly, and proudly guard the dignity of its nature, because exempt from the cruel necessity that, under other cir¬ cumstances, might compel it to bow xo titled villany, and overlook an insult ot- fered by a hand that was decorated with a sparkling ring." " Be assured, sir, none can more highly VOL. IL t
estimate it than I do," said Eugene— " none be readier to undergo any possible privation for its attainment; since with¬ out, I conceive it utterly impossible but that a spirit endued ΛνΗΙι any thing of lofty feeiing must speedily be crushed. Gootl Heavens ! as you say, to be com¬ pelled to stoop to those we despise— oh, death—death to me would be infi¬ nitely preferable !" " Perseverance is almost always, as in- tleeel it deserves to be, crowned with suc¬ cess/' resumed Mr. Wilkinson; "those who are determined on reaching a certain goal are seldom disappointed. But you see how I practise what I preach—by speaking to you as if indeed we had been acquaintance of long standing." " I consider your doing so as a kindness and an honour, sir," saitl Eugene. " In what estimation must a young, inexpe¬ rienced man, like me, hold the advice and suggestions of a person of your experience and juelgment !" " Well, without perhaps allowing that
I entirely merit your compliment, I may, perhaps, from what I have seen of the world, be able to suggest hints that may be of service to a young person just enter¬ ing it. But do you know, 1 am not clear that we shall part quite so soon as you now imagine—as I just mentioned to you, I am again my ovvn master, and the tour wdiich I proposed making through your Emerald Isle not being completed, I really think, if you can put off your depar¬ ture fora fortnight, I shall accompauy you/' Eugene hesitated, but it was ouly for an instant. His very soul was on the wing to his Rose ; but after the kindness he had received, how could he refuse compliance with this intimated wish? no, the thing was impossible; and finally it was settled, they should set out together at the expi¬ ration of this period. He was not suffered to take his leave until he had promised to return to dinner. As he slowly retraced his way home, how agreeable were the meditations in vvhich с 2
he indulged ! every thing about Mr. WH* kiusou argued his being a man of wealth ; and from the warm, the reallv extraor- dinary interest he evinced about him, who knew but that there might be a speedy end to all further occasion for intense anx¬ iety about the future?—" And yet I murmured so, and desponded !" cried Eu¬ gene ; " really, after so often giving way to repinings, I scarcely merit the good fortune that appears opening to my view : but I trust, in consideration of our natu¬ ral infirmities, these will he forgiven ; antl with the usual proneness of all warm temperaments, or romantic imaginations, he set about castle-building, or, in other words, erecting castles in the air; but as the streets of London are not exactly the places for buildings of this description, not a few were the thumps and angry shoves he met with in consequence, till at last la- was fairly compelled to rouse himself froni his waking dream. He and his new friend dined tetc-li-tclc, nor was there any addition to the party in
the evening, nor any indeed wanted, so well qualified were both gentlemen for supporting an unaided conversation. From this day almost the principal part of each was passed by Eugene at Mr. Wilkinson's, no matter at home or abroad. that gentleman having informed him that he would always find his library open for him. But though he went, it might be said, at all hours to the house, he never. by any chance, met any one there but Mr. Wilkinson himself; nor did any thing ever transpire from him to render him in any degree acquainted with his connex¬ ions. These were circumstances that Eu¬ gene but slightly commented on, if at all ; there were many people, he knew, who had a dislike to mixed society, and per¬ haps he had no connexions, or at least, none sufficiently interesting to speak of A week had passed in this vvay, w he ík one morning that Eugene called as usual. Mr. Wilkinson informed him he had just received a letter from the friend he had before alluded to, entreating him to pass
a day or two with him at his cottage in Hertfordshire— ť< I am therefore just set¬ ting off," he said, " but in positive expec¬ tation of being followed by you—my frienďs invitation extending to you, I as¬ sure you. You may feel surprised at saying follow : but the fact is, I am pre¬ vented asking you to accompany me, by having to call in my way at a house, where a recent calamity prevents my at¬ tempting to introduce a stranger. 1 know you have no horses of your own ; antl as í do not think those got at livery stables always safe, I shall send one for you early in the afternoon." Eugene thanked him for his considera¬ tion about him, and all matters belüg ar¬ ranged, Mr. Wilkinson departed. At his express desire, Eugene took an early dinner in Charlotte-street He soon found, however, this need not havt 1 been hurried, as minute after minute passed awav» and still no horse arrived. He was at length beginning to think something had happened to Mr. Wilkinson, and to get
very uneasy in consequence, when he was informed the horse was come. The ser¬ vant who brought it accounted for the de¬ lay, by saying a shoe had fallen off his ovvn, which obliged him to stop by the way. íť That was rather an unfortunate cir¬ cumstance, my lad," said Eugene, as he prepared to mount, " for I understand the road we have to go is a very lonely one, and there is no moon novv." íť 'Tis a safe road, for all that, sir," was the answer, and they set offi They were within three miles of what Eugene understood was their destination, and a little way advanced in a dark, nar¬ row glen-like lane, into vvhich they had struck off of the high road, when the ser¬ vant riding up to Eugene, informed him he was under a necessity of turning back for a parcel which he Iiad forgot to call for at a house which they passed—" But 1 shall make great haste, sir," he said ; " and at all events, you can't miss your way
here, as there is but one turn in the lane that leads direct to the cottage." " Of course not," was the reply, and the man rode off. Eugene every moment expected to see the turn that had been mentioned to him : but he rode on, and on, till at last he be¬ gan to think that this lane would prove a contradiction to the old saying, that " the longest has an end ;" every moment it as¬ sumed a more fearful and savage aspect, both from the fast diminution ofthe light that still lingered in the sky, and the height of the beetling banks, completely overrun with thickets and trees, that in many places stretched from their summits across it. Eugene had proceeded a distance that. from what he had heard, should, he con- ceived, have brought him to the end of his journey, when a pistol was fired across tlie path, and so immediately close to him, tliat he fclt the ball graze his hat. The horse started, reared, and threw him, and for a moment he was so stunned by the
circumstance, as to be unable to rise. He then quickly succeeded in regaining the horse, and clapping spurs to it, galloped back in the direction he had come, con¬ vinced that he had heard the person who fired the pistol running up the lane, and that therefore it would be the height of imprudence for him to go forward. He looked every moment to meeting the groom ; but he neither met him nor any other person ; and having regained the high road, conceived, under all the cir¬ cumstances, his best plan would be to re¬ turn to town ; a strange idea having taken possession of his mind, that и г 1юел^ег vvas the person that had fired the pistol, it was the person vvhose enmity he had so un¬ consciously provoked. In vain he tried ίο argue himself out of it, by reflecting that he had latterly no kintl of intercourse whatsoever but with Mr. Wilkinson ; antl the utter improbability therefore of this secret enemy, if indeed still aiming at his life, being able to know any thing of his с 3
movements, so as to be enabled to con¬ trive this scheme for his destruction ; he could not divest himself of it, and, in con- seqiwce, resol ved on having an imme¬ diate com nm nica tion with С ---------on the subject, and advising with him what steps to take, in pursuance ofthe suspicion un¬ der which he laboured. It was about ten when he reached towu. and on suddenly finding himself in the vi¬ cinity of Charlotte-street, he thought he had better at once leave the horse there than take any further charge oí it. As the servant vvho answered his knock took the animal from him. he asked him whe¬ ther he would not walk in? Eugene he¬ sitated for an instant, and then thought he would just step in, to examine whe ther the ball had done him апл other in¬ jury than that of merely grazing his hat. He accordingly proceeded to the parlour: but what Ian «пище can tlo justice to liis astonishment, when, as he threw open i lic door, Ilio first object that met his еуеь was Mr. Wdkinson, whom he at the in-
^tant imagined so many miles distant from town, seated in deep thought at a table * Greatly as he was surprised, however, Mr. Wilkinson appeared equally so—per¬ haps from a similar cause; he started up with an air of the wildest perturbation. and—" Good God î" escaped him—*' vou here again Γ • ( I have surprised you, sir," said Eu¬ gene—" alarmed you" he was involunta¬ rily on the point of adding ; but was pre¬ vented by seeing Mr. Wilkinson, with an ashy paleness, staggering back against the wainscot.—"You are ill, sir!" cried Eu¬ gene hastily. " 111 !—oh God !" and he dropped into a chair. u What can I do for you, sir?" asked Eugene, making a movement as if to pull the bell. *« Stop—nothing—that is, a glass ot water is all I require; there is some on the sideboard;" and having swallowed some—«' I feel better now," he said— " pretty well recovered indeed, consider-
ing the shock I received. Yes. I fancied, on seeing you so unexpectedly, that— that—-in short, I was but half-way to my friemľs, when I was overtaken by a mes¬ senger, requiring me to return to town on business that coultl not be put off; but having sent on a servant to apprize my friend ofthe circumstance, and desire him to detain you, as I expected to be down with him the latter end of the next day at least, I could not help imagining, on seeing you coming in so unexpectedly, that something terrible had happened tu him, as I know he is subject to iiis, to pre\ent your stopping." " Tlirough my sudden return \ou need he under no apprehensions about yom hieml. чг," said Eugene 1 ; " the circum¬ stance being owing to one by no meam connected vvitli him;" and he proceeded to explain the cause of it. *'Graze }our hat' so near taking, and yet fail------" exclaimed Mr. Wilkinson. " Of taking my Hie,*' cried Eugene, finishing the sentence ibr him: " I ha\e
had, indeed, a narrow escape, but which, with every other I have experienced, I must attribute to the watchful care of a superintending Providence." "And what do you think ? do—do you suspect ? but, of course, you knew it to have been a robber." ťt It is a natural supposition certainly," said Eugene; " but then, when, by my fall from my horse, he might have sup¬ posed he had killed me, why not come to riñe me ?" " Per—haps—when you fell—he—he-— might have been so panic-struck by the deed he thought he had committed!" " Oh no, my dear sir," cried Eugene, smiling incredulously, ** that is not by any means an admissible idea! it is only when we commit a terrible deed, or occasion a dreadful catastrophe, through accident. not design, that we are apt to be panic- struck. The fact is, a strange persuasion has taken possession of my mind; I have reason to beiieve that I have some secret, deadly foe here, that lies in ambush for
my life ; and I cannot divest myself of the idea, however improbable it seems, from my not recollecting lately my hav¬ ing mentioned any of my intended move¬ ments to any one but yourself, that it was through him, not a stranger, this attempt was made to destroy me." " A deadly foe í You surprise me ! What reason have you for such a conclu¬ sion ?" " Are you then ignorant, sir/' asked Eugene, " of what recently occurred ? through the publicity it obtained through the newspapers, I thought the reverse must be the case, but that delicacy to my feelings prevented your touching on it," " No, really I don't know what vou 7 j j allude to. I w r as so entirely engrossed, fbr some time, by my poor friend, that I had not even time for the perusal of a paper— but I should be glad you would explain yourself." Eugene proceeded to oblige him. He was hearkened to with the most profound attention ; and when he had conci uded—
'- 'Tis a strange affair indeed ! a raost ex¬ traordinary one !' said Mr. Wilkinson. " Have you any idea, any suspicion of who this secret enemy can be ?" α Not the slightest—I am happy, I am grateful to Heaven for being enabled to say—I am not conscious of having done any one an injury, to make such an ene¬ my." " Well, be that as it may, it seems you have one ; I must, however, entirely dis¬ sent from you, in thinking the recent at¬ tempt on your life by him ; for, except an invisible being, hovv, in the name of all that's wonderful, could he obtain a know¬ ledge of intentions that were hardly known to yourself? for instance, this visit to my friend—it was quite a sudden thing, you know, and 1 believe not mentioned to any one ?" " Not to any one." " Then I say," resumed Air. Wilkinson, in an animated tone, " imputing this re¬ cent attempt on your life to any one but a common ruffian, is * uite absurd, and 1
therefore advise your not mentioning your first idea to anv one ; it would onlv be the occasion of having late occurrences revived in the public mind—which, between our¬ selves, are quite as well forgotten—and having yourself beset and besieged by all the police-men in town, under the pretext ofhaving taken up mysterious personages/ '* Well, sir, I believe you are right," said Eugene ; " and I shall relinquish what assuredly was my intention in the first instance." Things reverted to their former chan¬ nel, and every thing went on quietly for a few succeeding days, when one morning (within a very few days, as Eugene hoped, of commencing preparations for their de¬ parture for Ireland) Mr. Wilkinson told him he had just received a packet of pa¬ pers from a friend in the country, requi¬ ring him to look over them, for the pur¬ pose of giving his opinion on the subject of which they treated.—" I really would wish to oblige him," he said, " but the writing is of such a description, that I
might just as well hope to make out one of the manuscripts of Herculaneum, as de¬ cipher it ; but some people have a knack of making out bad writing, and if you are one of these, and have any time to spare, you would greatly oblige me by transcribing those papers for me, so that I may be enabled to read them." " With pleasure, sir," replied Eugene ; " and really," glancing his eye over them, íť I don't think the task will be so difficult as you led me to imagine." " Tant mieux? said Mr. Wilkinson ; %< and that I should be no interruption, or hindrance, to you in it, I shall take myself off till you have finished it." As Eugene proceeded in his task, he felt happy it had not devolved to any other person—of so seditious and inflam¬ matory a nature were the papers he was copying ; so violent a tirade he had never read against government—king, ministers, and laws, were all libelled, and open re¬ volt and rebellion preached up to the people. Of course he communicated what
he thought to Mr. Wilkinson on his re¬ turn. " Well/ replied that gentleman, " I am not surprised by what you tell me ; for, between ourselves, I have long ago sus¬ pected my friend of being inclined to ra¬ dicalism» However, if I can help it, he sha'n't get his neck into a noose. I shall, as indeed desired, give my opinion of his papers, and endeavour to obtain his permis - шоп to destroy them." When Eugene was about taking his leave in the evening, Mr. Wilkinson said, as it would not be ranch out of his way, he should be obliged by his taking the trouble of dropping a parcel for him, at such a bookseller's, in such a street—" It contains papers of consequence," he said, ." for which he must therefore let you have a receipt ; and in return, beg of him to lose no time in their publication, and to cover the expences of which, give him also this," presenting as he spoke a bank-note of some amount to Eugene. Eugene faithfully fulfilled the instruc-
tions given. He heard no more of the business for some days, nor expected in¬ deed to hear more about it, when, to his utter astonishment, he received notice of information beiner filed against him, by the attorney-general, for a libel against the king and government. But if he was bevvildered by this notice, ΙιοΛν infinitely more so Λν38 he, when, upon inquiring into the business, he found that the papers which he had copied for Mr. Wilkinson луеге the identical ones vvhich he had ta¬ ken, by his directions, to a bookseller, Λνιίΐι a positive order for their immediate publication ! and which being supposed to be his, from the circumstance of his ob¬ taining a receipt for them in his own name, occasioned what folioweel. Hardly indeetl had they made their ap¬ pearance, than their seditious tendency, as might luwe been anticipated, causetl their publisher to be taken up. He diel all he could to avoid betraying the sup¬ posed author; but finding there was no alternative but his doing so, or submitting
himself to all the pains and penalties of imprisonment, he at length gave him up. In vain Eugene pleaded his innocence— proofs, as in a former instance, were again too strong against him, to permit his asser¬ tions of it to have any weight. He stated the facts simply as they were ; but they were only considered aggravations of his offence, from the tissue of falsehoods they appeared to be, there being no Mr. Wil¬ kinson to be found, or even heard of, to corroborate his statements; the people of the house where he alleged having met him, declaring that they had never given up the occupation of their residence to any one, as could be proved by their neigh¬ bours ; and that, neither directly nor in¬ directly, did they know any thing of a person of the name he said he had met there. In short, Eugene being unable to deny his handwriting, or invalidate, in any the slightest degree, the testimonies against him, was tried, fbund guilty (with a full conviction on his mind of Wilkinson be-
ing the villain who had brought all this miseli ief upon him), sentenced to one year's imprisonment, i.nd to pay a fine of one thousand pounds ; and further, as usual, to be imprisoned till said fine was paid. The instant he found Wilkinson was neither to be seen or heard of, that instant the conviction flashed upon his mind, of his being the secret enemy, who had, for some time, been labouring for his destruc¬ tion. But how, in what way was it, he had provoked such deep antl deadly ma¬ lignity? had he unadvisedly said or done any thing that coultl have offended him in their journey from St. Doulagh's to Dublin ? for whatever was the cause of his enmity towards him, it was certainly in Ireland it had been conceived. His blood curdled when he thought of having sat so quietly with the fiend, who had so narrowly betrayetl him to an igno¬ minious death, and then attempted to take him off by assassination. His agitation on so unexpectedly seeing him, on the
night he returned from Hertfordshire, was now accounted for; for no doubt, лу1ю- ever was the person that had been em¬ ployed to take him off, had been led to believe him killed, from hearing him fall from his horse. Twice had he been foil¬ ed in his machinations, but the third time had proved but too successful. A year's imprisonment was no great matter, but a fine of one thousand pounds was incarce¬ ration for life, Eugene knowing he might just as well hope to raise a million as raise that sum.
CHAPTER III. u Alı ! never agam, in the green bhadv bowers, Where my lorei'atherb hv'd, bhall I spend the weet hours, (Jr cover my harp vvith the wild woven iìowers, And stnke the sweet numbers of Erin go Bragh." „Committed to the King's Bench prison, a a world within itself, Eugene was accom¬ modated with an apartment at the top of the prison, whence his prospect consisted of the iron spikes surrounding the wall, the dome of St. Paul's, the top of the äIo- nument, and the spires of innumerable churches. What a prospect for him, who so delighted in the wild beauties, the ro¬ mantic solitudes of Nature, to "----------„-------wiauler o'er the dewy fields, VVhere fVubimeSb breathes and dash the trembling diopa ľiom the bent biibh, as thru' the venlanr maze Oí bweetbriar hedges he pur^uM his walk."
To him who loved the tt -------------------valley sunk and unfrequented, where At fati of eve the fairy people throng, In various game aud revelry, to pass The saramer night, as village stories tell." For him who loved to see c< Among the crooked huies, on every hedge, The glow-worm light his gem ; and thro' the darfc A moving radiance twiukie, while ■ ' - ........... ■------a faiut erroneous ray, Glanc*d from the imperfect surfaces of things, Flings halfan image on tiie straining eye; And wavering wooas t and villages, and streams, And rocks, and mountain tops, that loug retained Th* ascending gleam, are all one swimming scene, Uncertain if beheld !*' As his wearied eye rested on the objects that now alone met them— ( ' Is it not cruel/ he involuntarily cried, " that man will not keep pace with the improvements of the day, and not, by remaining station¬ ary, pursue systems that ought to be ex¬ ploded? Here, for instance, am I con¬ fined in a prison, though an innocent man, because, forsooth, ignorant people choose to adhere to the practice of ancient times—
that of placing the innocence or guilt of a man at the mercy of twelve men as igno¬ rant as themselves; who hear evidence, and on that, whether a man is innocent or guilty, decide his fate. l$ow had they proceeded on the system of Gall and Spurzheim, by examining the cranium, hovv differently vvould they have acted vvith regard to me! As my aunt has stated, my organs of destructiveness and inventiveness being so full, I never could, in that case, have had a chance of being sent to pay this visit to prison, because I could have no control over my actions. Gracious Powers! amongst the hundreds of unfortunate beings I passed through in the yard, how many are probably as inno¬ cent in fact ás I am ! debt is the crime the major part are accused of; but has it ever been ascertained by the new system whether they could have avoided incur¬ ring this ? I'll answer for it, not ; so that, by thus confining them, they actually are men * more sinned against than sinning.' "VOL. II. D
For instance : suppose a man hatl a very large organ of projusivedness, which inade him spend, in a very short time, all he had in the world—what then ? is that any premeditated fault of his ? certainly not, be¬ cause he had no control over it. In the next place, that his organ of acquisitivedness was proportionably extended, which made him go instantly to work, to gather vvhere he could provision for his organ of prqfu- sivedness —was this not proceeding ac¬ cording to nature? are we not told, ne¬ cessity is the mother of invention ? why not profusivedness the mother, or father, of acquisitivedness ? And do vve live in this enlightened age, to see our fellow- beings cast into prisons because they fbl¬ low tlie dictates of nature—more especially when it is really impossible they could avoid it? W r e are told, the fear of impri¬ sonment prevents many men from ob¬ taining money when they well know they can never repay it; but how is that proved? does not every day testify the contrary—establishing still more fully the
correctness of the system of Gall and Spurzheim, that though prisons are sta* ring men in the face, with wide-extended jaws ready to swallow them up, yet, how¬ ever desirous they may be to avoid sucii unpleasant places (and that every man must be anxious to do this it is but natu¬ ral to imagine), yet it is totally out of their power, in consequence of certain or¬ gans, that propel them to lay their hands upon cash wherever they can find it ? Nay, de>es not the organ of inventiveness drive one on, at times, into scenes the most extraordinar) 7 , for the sole purpose of supplying the never-to-be-satisfied or¬ gan of profusivedness with what it re¬ quires from time to time? And all these matters are v i ¡sited as crimes upon the heads of men, who, if they had no such organs, would have walked quietly through life, AvithoLit ever dreaming of touching their neighbours' goods. " And what benefit does this severity tlo society? I'll venture to tell what in- D 2
jury it will, to a certainty, be the conse¬ quence of to the morals of the people : a man of the best principles, well educated, who mixes in the first society, and who would sooner run the risk of losing his life—that is, being shot through the head —rather than allow any man to call his word or honour in question; this man, unfortunately for him, has a large organ of praßmve(lness\ which, in spite of all his care, runs him in debt to a large amount ; he is suddenly called on for pay¬ ments which he cannot make, and, with¬ out ever ascertaining whether these en¬ gagements were contracted in a fair or foul manner, by the examination of his cranium, they cast him ibrth wit h into durance vile. Yery well—now let us see the result: in this sink of iniquity, a prison, lie remains for some length of time, agreeable to the terms of the insol¬ vent act (it is wonderful the legislature have been sufficiently modernized to esta¬ blish even this little benefit) ; during this period, this Corinthian pillar of society
loses much of its polish ; and when he en¬ ters the world again, proves, by the ta me¬ ness with which he bears the sneers and scoffs he may encounter, that much ofthe exquisite sensitive i tess of his feelings is lost, the first antl most certain indication that can be given of relaxation of princi¬ ple; efforts are no longer made to curb the organ of profusivedness, but rather the contrary, while care is taken that in- ventiveness shall keep acquisitivedness close up to it, so that it should not lan¬ guish for want of succour; und this is the benefit having a new exerciser of hi-^ wits cast upon the public, that the community derive from clapping people in prison ' "He gets out, however; but, for me, there is no insolvent aet. Here i am lodged for life—here shall 1 see seasons return, but not for me, with their varied sweets or sources of enjoyment—fbr me no more the cheerful hearth of home- fireside enjoyments—the incense-breathing morn—the wildly devious walk with her \ i ove —f or ше no niore
f Domestic happiness, that only bliss Of Paradise that has surviv'd the fall! The гшгье of \irtue, in whose arms She smiles·, appearing, as in truth ahe is, Heaven-born, and debtin'd to the skies again!' no; to satisfy my royal creditor, there is no other mode save through purse or prison—were the twenty acres of bog on the Cunnamara Mountains mine, all would not produce sufficient for my ransom. We talk of the laws of our country, that guard us from tyranny; but can it be denied, that a fine imposed upon the subject be¬ yond his means of ever paying, knocks down, at one blow, whole barriers that secure us from being swept away by the overwhelming torrent of despoti&m ? When I have so warmly advocated the constitution of England, 1 was not aware of this dangerous power in the hands of our rulers.—Oh, my beloved ! and is it come to this? must I be content to resign thee, or see thy beauty and thy fragrance wasting away within the confines of a pri¬ son? But, no, it cannot be; witli thee, in a thatched hovel, even on the bleak
sid? ofthe Connaught Mountains, I could be happy ; but here, to behold thee amidst vice, misery, depravity of every kind— amidst the horrors of the gloomy gaol— f _---------—----------Where mi*-erv moans— Where sickness pines— w here thirst and hunger'bu n, And poor nn fortune í t fib the lush oí' vice'— no—no ; and you are lost to me for ever !" The die was cast—it was useless to re¬ pine ; but as there was no hope, no pros¬ pect of liberation, he deemed it expedient to acquaint his friends at St. Doulagh's with the fatal end of his career. He had hitherto kept them in expectation that his journey to London would be crowned with advantageous results; but now. that it would be both cruel and decep¬ tive to insinuate any longer this be¬ lief he decided on coming to an explana¬ tion with them. This truly painful task over, he tried, as much as possible, to fly from thought ; and in his efforts for the purpose, he was aided by the variety of characters he met with. He had not long been confined
before his abilities were spread through the prison; in consequence of which he was beset with a host of followers, each asking some favour at his hands. The first that approached him for this purpose were a set of young men who professed themselves Radicals, without well know¬ ing what it meant; but considered, as he was confined on the score of having writ¬ ten in their favour, their society must be acceptable to him, and a pleasure felt in obliging them. Memorials, petitions, re¬ presentations of all kinds, to people in ofiiee and out of office, were what they required the exercise of his abilities in ; and, hut that he had an exhaustless fund oí 4 good-nature, they certainly would have deprived him of all patience, so heavily and incessantly did they tax it. Hut these were not the oniy suitors who bowed at his levee; he was also annoyed b ν a set of young half-pay officers, com¬ plaining of cruel creditors, and overlooked services. 0»e morning, a dashing Bond- street loLuger, but vvhose perambulations
were now confined to the rules of the King's Bench, through the unreasonable conduct of a Jew tailor, entreated an au¬ dience ; and on being admitted, presented himself, accompanied by this Philistine ot the shears. It seems captain В ——, having got a remittance from an uncle, had prevailed on all his creditors, save the one who now accompanied him, to compromise their debts for ñve shillings in the pound ; and having heard much of the cleverness and eloquence of Eugene, conceived, if he could but obtain his interference with him, he miglit be brought into terms like the others. Eugene could not decline what was re¬ quested, xifter some arguments on press¬ ing the composition on the Jew—"* Ble^h my heart!' he cried, assuming a counte¬ nance of astonishment. " but iťsh won¬ derful how preposterish the affairs of t h Kb vorld are managed' naturally von vould imagine, tie interesht ofa few shoultl give d 3
place to the intereshts of the many ; but no such a thing——" " Why, hovv do you mean, Mordecai ?" demanded captain В ——. "Yy, vat I mean ish, if there were more examples made of young shentlemen for running in debt, above their means to pay, they vould not be so apt to do so.'" " And what the devil then, do von 7 j think, if they didn't, you'd have got on as you have done? do you think, if the lads came down at once with the ready rhino to you, they'd let you make up the bills you do against them ? No, no, my buck í so don't abuse what's the making of your fortune, as well as that of all the other knights of the goose." " Biessh my heart, to hear how you runs on ! Make our fortunes !—Here come*: a young shentleman, and he orders so and so; and when, like de honesht man, I be¬ gin to tell him vat the cost of such and such articles will be, he saysh— ť Oh. d —— -n the ex pens h ľ and to be sure he may veil care little about it, vhen 1 finds
he never pays : and then comes another ----- '* « Oh, d ------ n it, Mordecai, no prosing î long bills are the devil ; but long speeches are worse, if there be any thing worse." " Ay, all ish bad, vhen ve come to speak about our monies; but vhen one young shentleman meets anoder, with a fine, stylish new coat on, does he not lay his hand upon his shoulder, and cry, * Who shuffers?' and does not the oder say, * Oh, cursh it î the rascally tailor, to be sure ?" " My good friend, supposing this to be the case," cried Eugene, " that there be a want of principle in some instances, are the innocent to be punished for the guilty? Both by captain В ------ 's shewing, and your own allowing, you have got a good deal of his cash ; it is therefore evident, that he never meant you should suffer through his means ; that is, when he contracted a debt with you, itwas not without an in¬ tention of discharging it." tc Yesh, I don't dishpute I have got some of his monies ; vhen firsht he came
to me he had de long pursh; but, blcssli my heart, no pursh could have stood his calls upon it ! Eirsht he get de cottage onice near town, den he get the housh in town itself, den de carriage, den tie shoot¬ ing-lodge in Norfolk, den tie marine villa at Brighton, den de fine------" *' Come, no more of your dens, if you please, sir'" said captain В ------. *" No, no more dwelling on such mat- ters/ resumed Eugone; " but supposing captain В ------ can really be accused of extravagance, are you certain (without being which you should not condemn him) that he could help it? in short, did \ou ever examine his cranium, to ascer¬ tain how his organs of t hough I antl voli¬ do и stood ?" ** li ish vhat?" crietl the Jew, staring. ** His crani mn —beioie you arrested Lin 1 , did vou examine his head, to see wlnt his organs were?*' kt Mv °oot sir, my busincssh ish vid tie bodv, not vid de head; that belongs
to the hatter, as the veet and legs do to tlic shoe and bootmaker." " Ay, poor devils, we are all cut up amongst you," said captain В —— ; '* one seizes this part, and another that part, and by the time you are all done vvith us, vve are dressed with a witness." * fc Am 1 to understand," again resumed Eugene, " that you know nothing about the sv stem of Gall and Spurzheim, that has made so much noise in the world— that is, that you know nothing of phre¬ nology ?" " Xo, nothing—nothing at all at all/" replietl the Jew, shaking his head. k * i am sorry for it, from the liberality it inculcates ; not that 1 can permit my¬ self to doubt, finding you possessed of all we can expect or desire. You must know, my friend, from this, that the old mode of proceeding against our fellow-creatures, \\hen tliey happen not to perform their engagements, agreeable to their promises, should now be laid aside, İt being clearly proved by it, that they could not help the
conduct or actions that occasioned their incurring such engagements. Formerly it was understood we were reflecting be¬ ings, each in possession of a certain pro¬ portion of reason, to guide us through life, and thereby rendered accountable, both to God and man, for our actions. But this is now all proved to have been an error; by the discovery of those enlightened phi¬ losophers, it is now ascertained that we are more mechanical than rational crea¬ tures. Hence the cruelty, to say nothing uf the injustice of coercion, or incarcera¬ tion of any kind. Had you therefore, my friend, been acquainted with this system. and in consequence studied the cranial map of captain В ------ 's head, I make no doubt you wouid either not have permit¬ ted his name to blot your ledger, or else, having done so, would have patiently borne whatever might have been the con¬ sequence, for I do rather conceive, that you would have found his organ of pro- fusivedness so large, that in terror you would have refused opening your book for
his orders. As the business is, however, now done, and cannot be recalled, I will hope, that after this explanation, you will not refuse acting as we wish, more espe¬ cially when I render you happy by shew¬ ing—for I perceive, by your own state¬ ment, you are a man of great organs of philanthropiness — that captain В ------4 having squandered, as you call it, large sums in building, and so on, may rather have done benefit than mischief to soci¬ ety. May not a shilling spent by such a man, in what the world denominates folly, be picked up by a man whose organs, for¬ tunately for him, are under better con¬ trol? it is therefore not lost. You say my friend here has built fine houses, and furnished them richly, has lived in them expensively, and in a few years has ruined himself; but the masons, carpenters, smiths, and other honest tradespeople, have they not by him been assisted in maintaining their families? so who is it actually he has injured by this conduct but liimself 3 Under all these considera·
tions, therefore, I am persuaded you can« not any longer hesitate about coming in¬ to the proposed terms." (i Veil, I do ЬеИел'е your advish is for the besht," said the Jew, " and so 1 will not refush to acquiesce in it. As veil as 1 understhands vat you have been speaking about, tish that the vise vay ish to look to the outside of man, to shee vat they are, and tish ish vat I've always done. and never yet found myshelf mishtaken." With a nrofound bow, he then said he was ready to attend captain В ------, and retired with him. If 4i hope deferred maketh the heart sick,' what must the extinction of hope do? When Eugene reflected on his last da} s of happiness—when he compared the cheerful past with the miserable present, and the dreary future, his soul shuddered within him, antl loathing life, he wished to have resigned it. It was not enough that he was separated from her he adored. the reflection was aggravated by the con¬ sciousness of having brought ruin upon
hex —ruin fbr which he could make her no reparation. In vain, arguing from the notions he had imbibed, he tried to persuade him¬ self he was not to blame for this—it is not, in the moments of bitter sorrow and repentance, fallacious reasoning ΛνϋΙ prove efficacious; the tortured heart re¬ quires some other unction than can be derived from it, to allay its agony. Gra¬ dually he began to doubt and to deride what he had before so obstinatei ν adhered to. Conscience awakened restored him to his reason ; antl to his aunťs sudden re¬ futation of all she had early and previous¬ ly taught him, he now clearly saw all the inextricable 1 misery in which he was in¬ volved was owing; but for the doctrine to which she had made him a convert, he never would have been capable of t J ie rashness and presumption that de¬ prived him of his profession, and turning him adrift upon the worid, exposed him to all those temptations and snares that eventually proved his ruin,
Êut retrospect was useless—oh, could time past be recalled, where is the mortal that could say there was not some portion of his he couid wish to live over again ! As the poet says— íť How readily we wish time spent revok } d, That и e might try the ground again, where once (Through inexperience as we now perceive) We mibsM that happiness we might have found ! Some friend is gone, perhaps his son'b hest friend, A rather, whose authority, m shew When most severe, and inust'iing all ib force, Was but the graver countenance of love ; Whose favour, like the cloudb of spring, might low'r, And utter now and thea an avvful voice, But had a blessing in its daike-bt ft own, Threatening at once, and nourishing the plant. We lov'd, but not enough, the gentle iiand That rearM us. Ata thoughtless age, allur'd By ev'ry gdded folly, vve renoimc'd Hi^ sheltering side, and v. il fully forewent Ttmt converge w Inch we now in vam regtet. How gladly would the raan recall to hie The bov'^ neglected sire ! a mother too, That softer friend, perhaps more gladly -»till, Might he dernaiicl them at the gates of death." But the ti^fe may roll back, to throw into our arms that which we have lament-
ed ; but there is no ebb or flow of time, to restore to us that which we have lost in its silent progress. Eugene believed his fate inevitably fixed. Oh, the sinking of his heart, as his eye, wandering round the high walls of his prison, contemplated them as the enclosure of a living tomb, that interposed between him and all he loved on earth ! oh that he луаз but one ofthe sparrows that sat upon their top, that he might fly away to the bosom of his Rose ! oh that but for one hour he could be indulged Λνίίΐι seeing her, to kiss away her tears, study her wishes, and learn whether she could be content to share his wretched destiny ! But, no, no, no, this was a felicity he never more ex¬ pected to enjoy ; and the distraction which, in these moments of despair, he gave way to, led to an idea that his intellects were at times disordered: but we must now leave him to his sorrowful reflections, to look in upon our friends at St Doulagh's.
CHAPTER IV. г * T huve a silent sorrow here, a ^riet П! iie'ei impait— ït breathes no sigh, it slictls no tear, hut it con^nnts mv iieart ; Tlus cherish'd wo, this lov'd despair, my lot fVjr tvti hi', So, шу ьоиГь iord, the patiğe 1 feel he nevei ktiuwn h) thee/' On deciding to acquaint his friends with his unfortunate situation, Eugene con¬ ceived it would be difficult to make them clearly comprehend how he should be cast into prison, although perfectly innocent of the crime for which he was tried, with¬ out entering into a detail of his supposed enemy, which, wishing to avoid, lest of adding to their unhappiness about him by the excitement of vague fears, he made up his mind, after some further little conside¬ ration, to merely inform them that he was to be imprisoned a year, and fined a thou-
sand pounds, in consequence of its having been proved against him that he had libel¬ led the British government. Gladly would he have concealed the disastrous circum¬ stance, and would liave made every eflbrt for the purpose, had his sentence been for any specific period ; but as he considered it in the light of one for lrfe, he deemed it absolutely necessary to prepare them in time for his returning no more to his na¬ tive home. On the news arriving ofthe fate of this beloved relative, to describe the scene that took place at the castle of St. Doulagh's would be impossible. The lieutenant, when he could comprehend that his son was imprisoned by order of the king, for high treason, as he called it, raved about like a frantic bedlamite; while Grace and Rose dropped lifeless from their chairs ; Miss Agnes Flora Judith, to whom, as already stated, Eugene's letter was ad¬ dressed, having, in the indignation it ex¬ cited, communicated the distressing infor¬ mation it contained without the slightest
preparation. The servants, frightened at all they saw, at all they heard, ran about, without луеН knowing whom first to call in to assist. At length the young ladies being reco¬ vered—" Well," said Miss Acnes Flora Judith, wiping away the tears from her eyes, with as much carelessness as the real¬ ly-agitated state of her mind would per¬ mit her to assume the air of—" well," she saith " our immolated dear one is not the first of his family Λνίιο has suffered in the cause of freedom, and for the good of his country. The great O'Neils often strug¬ gled to free their native land from the au¬ thority of the English throne altogether, and many of their royal race have fallen in the glorious effort. Why should we take to heart, therefore,, his having met with a similar fate? I make no doubt his name revived old animosities. As for one year's imprisonment, that would be no¬ thing; but the fine keeps him in confine¬ ment for life; but this, their laying such a one upon him, only proves more strong-
ly than ever the cold blood of these Sassa- naeL·. There was a time when the Irish kings woidd not have alloweel such a set of upstarts to sit at table with them! What a state of darkness w r as England in between the first and second century, when this " lovely green isle of the ocean" flourished in religion, learning, and arts! As to St Patrick being the founder of Christianity in this land, it is false; while our opposite neighbours, therefore, were in¬ volved in the most profound darkness, go¬ ing through the horrid rites of Druidism in their woods and groves, we were an en¬ lightened people, and should, accordingly, ever have been the most respected ; for it is proved, beyond controversy, that when he visited Ireland in the fifth century, it was merely (as was customary in those days, according to St. Paul's recommendation), to review the churches, and report accord¬ ingly ; and in so pure a state did he find them, treading so immediate!} on the footsteps of the apostles, that it is a well- ascertained fact, he took bishops from
hence to Scotland, to preach the word of salvation there. Nay, they have it re¬ corded, so high was the estimation in which Ireland then stood in foreign coun¬ tries, that their youth of quality were sent over here for education, to what they termed the Island of Saints, being chiefly for instruction in religious knowledge. In those days each province was governed by different monarchs, whose courts (where the greatest luxury, refinement, and beau¬ ty, were to be found), were visited by the most enlightened nations. They possess¬ ed both gold and silver, as their coins, ex¬ tant to this day, can verify. The prero¬ gatives of royalty were exercised by O'Neil, in spite of all the attempts of Eng¬ land to subjugate that great prince, down to the latter end of the fifteenth century. Here," continued Miss Agnes Flora Ju¬ dith, opening a small casket " here is a gold coin of that reign, on which may be perceived an impression of that king's head, and on the reverse the cross, with the inscription declaratory, in the chnrac-
ter called Ogham Croabb ; and as I nevei¬ met with any of a later, or so late a date, belonging to any other ofour Irish kings, this is a proof to me, that our royal house was the last that became completely mi In¬ jected to the yoke of England. Bui: for its long resistance, what a revenge is now taken ! for to the recollection of this, I am persuaded, is owing all that has novv hap¬ pened/' " Stuff, stuff/ exclaimed her brother impatiently, who had been pacing the room all this time, attending to her as little as he vvould to the whistling of the wind. ** By the Lord, Agnes, you are enough to drive one mad, with your old coins, and I dont know what: by what right, I say, did this youug rascal at¬ tempt to find fault with a government looked up to by the whole world as a mo¬ del for imitation ?" ťí By the right which Heaven gave him, in enduing him with reason ! and let me tell you, that if you find fault with him, VOL. и. e
for what is natural to man, political jea¬ lousy, or an aptitude or propensity to sus¬ pect and inquire into the conduct of those w ho rule us, being inherent in our nature, you oppose nature herself. How ably is this proved by doctor Benjamin Franklin, from tlie most faithful of all histories, the Holy Bible ! Hear what he says iu illus¬ tration or support of the argument.—' The Supreme Being had been pleasetl to nou¬ rish np a single family, by continued r via of his attentive providence, till it becaint* a great people; and having rescued them from bondage, by many miracles per¬ formed by his servant Moses, he personal¬ ly delivered to that chosen servant, in pre¬ sence of the whole nation, a constitution and code of laws for their observance, ac¬ companied and sanctioned with promises of great rewards, and threats of severe pu¬ nishments, as the consequence of their obedience or disobedience.' u This constitution, tliough the Deity himself wan to be at the head (anditi, thercíbre called, by political writers, a theo-
cracy), could not be carried into execution but by means of his ministers. Aaron and his sons vvere therefore commissioned to be, with Moses, the first established ministry ofthe new government. " One would have thought that the ap¬ pointment of men who had distinguished themselves in procuring the liberty of their nation, and had hazarded their lives in openly opposing a powerful monarch, who would have retained that nation in slave¬ ry, might have been an appointment ac¬ ceptable to a grateful people; and that a constitution, framed for them by the Deity himself, might, on that account. have been secure of an universal welcome reception. Yet there weie, in every one of the thirteen tribes, some discontented,. restless spirits, who were continually ex¬ citing them to reject the proposed new go¬ vernment, antl this from various motives, ** Many still retained an affection for Egypt, the land of their nativity ; and these, whenever they felt any inconve- i : 2
nience gr hardship, though the natural. and unavoidable effect of their change of situation, exclaimed against their leaders, as the authors of their trouble; and were not only for returning into Egypt, but for stoning their deliverers. Tliose inclined tt> idolatry were displeased that their gol» ihn calť was destroyed. Many of the chiefs thought the new constitution might be injurious to their particular interests— that the profitable places would be en- çrosbcd by the jam i lies and friends of Moses and Λαι on; and others, equally well born, excluded. In Josephus and the T'dmud we learn some particulars not ^o fully narrated in the Scripture. We are tiiere told, that Corah was ambitious of the priesthood, and offended that it wa. conierred on Aaron, and this, as he said, by the authority of Moses only, without the consent of the people, lie ac¬ cused Moses of having, by various arti- ticts, fraudulently obtained the govern· ment, and deprived the people of their li¬ berties, and of conspiring, with Aaron, to
perpetuate tiıe tyranny in their family. Thus, though Corah's real motivo was tht· supplanting of Aaron, he persuaded the people that he meant only the public good ; and they, moved by his insinuations be¬ gan to cry out— ť Let us maintain the common liberty of onr respective tribes' ; we have freed ourselves from the slavery imposed upon us by the Egyptians, and shall we suffer ourselves to be made slaves by Moses? if we must have a master, it were better to return to Pharaoh, who at least fed us with bread and onions, than to serve this new tyrant, who, by his ope¬ rations, has brought us into danger of fa¬ mine.' Then they called into question the reality of his conference with God, and objected to the privacy of the meetings and the preventing any of the people írom being present at the colloquies, or even approaching the place, as grounds of great suspicion. They accusetl Moses also of peculation, as embezzling part ofthe gol¬ den spoons antl chargers that the princes had offered at the dedication of the altar,
and the offerings of gold by the common people, as well as most of the poll-tax; and Aaron they accused of pocketing much of the gold of which he pretended to have made a molten calf. Besides pe¬ culation, tiiey accused Aloses of ambition ; to gratify which passion, he had, they said, deceived the people, by promising to bring them to a land flowing with milk and honey—instead of doing which, he had brought them from such a land ; and that he thought light of all this mischief, provided he could make hiro r if an abso¬ lute prince. That, to support the new dignity with splendour in his familv, the partial poll-tax, already levied and given to Aaron, was to be followed by a general one, which woukl probably be augmenteel from time to time, if he vvere suffered to go on promulgating new laws, on pre¬ tence of new occasional revelations of the Divine will, till their whole fortunes were devoured hy that aristocracy. ' ť Moses denied the charge of pecula¬ tion, and his accusers were destitute of
proof to support it; though facts, if real, are in their nature capable of proof.—* I have not/ said he (with holy confidence in the presence of God)—* I have not taken from this people the value of an ass, nor done them any other injury/ But his enemies had made the charge, and with some success among the populace; for no kind of accusation is so readily made, or easily believed by knaves, as the accusa¬ tion of knavery. From all which we may gather, as the doctor observes/ 1 continued Miss Agnes Flora Judith, " that popular opposition to a public measure is by no means uncommon ; or, in short," conclu¬ ding the remark i u the way that was most agreeable to herself, " that the ruled have always a right to inquire into the conduct of the rulers." We are told that^ " the grief that can¬ not speak, whispers the o'erfraught heart, and bids it break." We may therefore be led to imagine, from this long tirade of Äliss Agnes Flora Judith, that hers was not exactly of this description ; but there
is no rule without an exception ; she was indeed absolutely overwhelmed with af¬ fliction, by the terrible situation of Eu¬ gene, vvhom she loved with even mater¬ nal tenderness, and had long looked up to as the pride and ornament of her house; and whatever aggravation her dis- tress was capable of receiving, it met with, in a dawning idea of being, in some way or oth'T, the cause of his misfortunes But acute as vvere her sufferings on his account—acute as were tliose of his sister, who could not even have heard ofa stran¬ ger heing doomed to so rigorous a fate without pain and commiseration—what were they, when compared, in bitterness, with those of the distracted Rose—she who had such reasons, such manifold rea¬ sons ibr anxiety for the return of Eugene î As already hinted, the nocturnal meet¬ ings in the chapel—the unbounded love experienced for Eugene—the unlimited confidence reposed in his honour—had proved fatal to her repose ; disgrace, from which nothing but her marriage with him
could save her, was staring her in the face; and all hope of this being now at an end, she resigned herself to despair. She had no one to consult with in this dread¬ ful emergency—no one to whom she could venture to intrust the secret of her indis¬ cretion. Having previously withdrawn iier confidence from Grace, she had no right now to torture her with the know¬ ledge of her situation, more especially knowing, as she did, that Grace possessed not the power of affording her the assis¬ tance it required ; but had the reverse been the case, how could she bring herself to impart such a secret to her?—hovv en¬ dure to meet her eye, after seeing her cheek kindle with the blush of shame for her disgrace? No—the thought was not endurable; and happen what vvould, she resolved that Grace should not be the re¬ pository of her wretchedness. She had a father certainly at hand; but to think of crossing the threshold of his cabin, either tor consolation or protection under her E 3
present circumstances, was out of the ques¬ tion, he never having evinced any thing- like the tenderness or interest of a parent for her, owing, she conceived, to her having been brought up in tenets diffe¬ rent from his by her early protectress and benefactress; besides wdiich, knowing as she did, the even romantic notions which the Milesians entertain of the sacredness of female chastity, she was convinced, that to reveal her misery to him vvould be to have herself spurned with maledictions from his door. How, in this agonizing moment of utter desolation, did she de¬ plore the absence of the affectionate crea¬ ture, to whose maternal care she had been consigned almost immediately after her birth, through the inability of her mother. who died while she was yet but an infant, to perform the part of one to her ! Had Margaret Brady beeu near, she vvould not have wanted a friend in the sad hour of necessity; but, alas! her fond nurse was tar distant from the Emerald Isle, having gone over to the West Indies, to reside
with a brother there, shortly after Rose's adoption by her late benefactress; not willingly, certainly, but from necessity; as she would infinitely have preferred, for the sake of being near her darling, to have remained the manager of Cormack's cabin : but unfortunately, as it so happened for poor Rose, some missionaries travelling through Ireland had so completely satis¬ fied Mrs. Brady of the errors of the Popish persuasion, that her absolute recantation of it was the result. There being nothing, perhaps, however of the martyr in her composition, this was a step she rather felt solicitous to keep from the knowledge of Cormack, from the consequences she apprehended from its disclosure; but all her precautions for the purpose were un¬ availing ; partly through the hints of some, the positive assertions of others, and his own observations, Cormack came to a knowledge of the truth, and finding that neither he, nor, what was more, father O'Dogherty, could succeed in bringing her back to the path from which she had
strayed, made up his mind to expelling her from beneath his roof; which resolu¬ tion he carried into effect, vvith all the zeal and alacrity ofa true defender, as he con¬ ceived, of the faith, by turning her into the road one night, iust on the eve of" Christmas, and in the midst of sleet, snow. and darkness, when even an enemy's dog might have moved one sufficienti) to com¬ passion not to drive him from the duor; taking care, previous to her expulsion, to secure two bottles of holy water from fa¬ ther O'Dogherty, that the house might undergo a purification immediately after it had taken place, lest otherwise it might bee-fine the abode of those that shall be nameless. Young as Hose vvas at the period ofher nurse's departure, she had never ceased to recollect her. omitting no opportunity of writing to her, and sending her little re¬ membrances of her regard ; among these was her picture, at the particular desire of the affectionate being, shortly after her taking up her residence at St. Doulagh's.
^ What would she not have given that she was now within her reach—now, when she so much wanted a confidential friend, a maternal bosom, to receive and shelter her! But she was far, far away, httle recking the fate of her she loved as her own. In the first moments of her distraction, a thousand wild plans suggested them¬ selves to her ; one instant she thought of writing to Eugene·—the next of flying to him ; but the design was hardly formed. ere it was abandoned, with the same pre¬ cipitation it had been conceived. No, since she hatl not previously acquainted Eugene with her unhappy situation, as the daily, almost hourly expectation she had latterly been in of his return, had pre¬ vented her, she would not now, when no aggravation of misery was wanting to crush him to the earth. She knew him too well uot to know what the result of the tor¬ turing communication would be ; but how, at the very moment when, stopped in his career of fame aiid fortune, he must be indebted to the kindness of his family
fot what he could no longer supply to himself by bis own exertions, how could she bear to throw herself, with her help¬ less burthen, upon him ? No, death was preferable to the thought, and to death she now looked for relief from her woes. But sbe did not only weep her fatal im¬ prudence—-with equal agony she wept over the idea of no more beholding him, for whom, if possible, the tenderness of her heart was redoubled, through his mis¬ fortunes—her affianced husband in the sight of Heaven, with equal the idea oí wbat she was well aware he was suffering on her account, though unacquainted with the full extent of her miserv. Oh that he eould burst his way through his pri¬ son» and flee with her to some wild soli¬ tude, tliough the bare earth were all their resting-place, its roots their í bod, some cleft their habitation ; or, oh that, un¬ known, she could be near him, to creep to his bosom, pour the balm of love into his distracteel soul, and kiss him to his rest î But these were but the delirious wishes of
despair; she sliould never more behold him : if he returned, he would seek her, but he should not find her. But he never would return—never would his adventurous foot scale his native hills again—never would he again stray through those green shady bowers, where they had passed so many delicious hdurs together; his youth, his beauty, his talents, would waste and wi¬ ther away within the gloomy limits of a prison—and when he died, English dust would cover him, and a nameless grave receive him, once so loved, so valued ! Her deep dejection was, at first, rather imputed by Grace to her sympathy in the sorrows of her friends, but observation shortly tended to convince her, that there was yet a more powerful cause for it ; thus confirming a suspicion, previously excited, of a partiality in her bosom for Eugene, through the flutter, or variation of colour, which, from the moment of his departure, any allusion to him occasioned ; but if she had forborne before touching oti the sub¬ ject» from a fear of the opposition an at-
tachment between them—and of Eugene's she had all along been aware, if not from her father, at least from her aunt, whose prejudices in favour of birth she knew to be unconquerable—she vvould not now at¬ tempt doing so, when, from the predica¬ ment in vvhich Eugene was placed, a uni¬ on between them must be downright mad¬ ness; but dearer than ever did she feel Rose to her heart, from the idea she had conceived of her affection for Eugene, and with feelings, in consequence, easier to be imagined than described, soon perceived her health declining, the rose grow pale and leave her cheek, and all her natural, her w r onted spirits utterly forsake her. Oh how was the affectionate heart of Grace torn at this juncture! by what conflicting feelings, by what clashing interests, was it occupied and rent ! Sisterly affection would have urged her to fiy to the poor prisoner—to try if, by her attentions, she could do any thing towards alleviating the bitterness of his fate ; but at the very mo¬ ment she had almost made up her mind
on the point, she was drawn back by the state to which she saw her father and aunt reduced through their affliction for him ; while again she was called away from them, by seeing her, her sweet companion, her adopted sister, the friend of her heart, to whom she had looked for support and consolation, in some degree, under this heavy calamity, fading away before her eyes, like a blighted flower. Oh, it re¬ quired more almost than human fortitude to enable her to bear up under such sor¬ rows î but she had recourse to that which is never disregarded, prayers to Heaven, for strength to be enabled to perform the sad duties which had devolved upon her.
lecting all the little ornaments she pos¬ sessed, though many of them were most precious in her estimation, as memorials of the affection of W illiam Delamere, whom, if she did not regard as a lover, she yet loved vvith the truest fervour as a friend, and dispatched with secrecy to a town at some distance, to be disposed of. But this was not all—she began to turn in her mind how, unknown, she could ex¬ ercise her abilities for him ; for she coukl not divest herself of the pride appertain¬ ing to her station—the pride ofa delicate and sensitive mind, that would shun «-------------------the cruel bcorn
Which \ it tue, sunk to pcnerty, would meet From guldy раьыои and low-minded pride." But wretched as she and her father were about poor Eugene, still the unhappiness of Miss Agnes Flora Judith, on his ac¬ count, exceeded theirs, heightened as it was by self-reproach ; for in vain she tried to fly from the idea, she could not evade it, that she had been the cause of his ruin,
by the notions to wiiich she had made him a convert. To rashness and presump¬ tion were to be attributed the loss of his profession ; and of these, with feelings of the deepest self-remorse for the change she had wrought in his disposition, she reflect¬ ed he had never given any indications till she had taken hiin in hand ; and sure¬ ly, in a system productive of such conse¬ quences, there must be something wrong. In this persuasion she began to be still further confirmed by a simple circumstance that took piace about this time, but which, simple as it was, had still perhaps a greater effect upon her than the eloquence of a Cicero would have produced. It appears, after Eugene's departure, Miss Agnes Flora Judith feeling a great vacuum in the want ofa person to instruct in the new system, cast her eyes upon Martin, the son of one of the cottiers of St. Doulagh's, a deep shrewd young rogue, who served in the castle in capacity of footman. He had dived i títo tlie cha¬ racter of the old lady, and conceiving her
mad, decided within himself on hu¬ mouring all her whims and fancies, under the persuasion, that he should thereby reap unto himself no small advantage. In this conclusion he was soon justified, by seeing himself gradually becoming a favourite with her. At length, one day, she promised to buy him a silver watch, provided he consented to have his heatl shaved by Barney, in order that she might be enabled to take a map of his cranium. The bribe she oftered for his compliance was so great, that any thing, short of hav¬ ing the head itself shaved off, the delight¬ ed Martin would have consented to oblige her in. Accordingly^ his skull being prepared for her inspection, by being rendered as bald as the Scalp in the county Wicklow, she proceeded, in all due form, to its examina¬ tion. In a little time—" I feel, Martin, that you have got here a bump of philo- progenit¡veness large ; this is an exceed¬ ing amiable trait in your character, Mar¬ tin, indicating that you will be an affec-
tionate father : but here is one of rather an opposite description, combativeness, also; are you fond of fighting?" ·' There isn't a lad in the parish, man or boy, but I'd give a black eye to if he vex¬ ed me." ik Correct— eonstructivciiess large again; how do you feel on that head ?" " Ah then, mistress jewel, what may that be?" " Why the organ of contrivance ; when at a Ions fbr any thing, you are ready at invention/ 1 ·* Faith and troth, mistress, if this is the way you are going on, you'll be getting more out of me than ever father O'Dog¬ herty did, with all his cutcness ; but let me alone for iielping myself—'tis 1 that was never at a loss at a pinch î the ould one himself would hardly be up to me, when I set my wits 1 1 work !" " Good again î — acquisitiveness ; ah, this is of a size indeed, exceeding all the others !" Martin put the usual question to her.
" Why the intention of nature, Mar¬ tin," was the reply, " in bestowing this organ upon you, was to inspire you with the desire of acquiring, so that, in conse¬ quence of its activity, you might have what you required, and not be left to the uncertain provision that could be.made from the mere dictates of reason, after tra¬ cing a long chain of consequences. How- stand your feelings as to this organ ?" Martin was silent ; vvhich Miss Agnes Flora Judith imputing to his not perfect¬ ly comprehending her, as was really the case, proceeded to render herself more in¬ telligible, by stating, that this faculty, if not controlled by superior powers, pro¬ duced theft. " Oh now, any how, mistress, but you are going the lengths with me! Alaybe it's after telling the master you'd be, and getting me to be sent to prison if I an¬ swered ?" " To prison, you foolish boy ! for wdiat ? for yielding to the influence of a propen¬ sity which you could not help? No, that
would be treating you barbarously indeed : and so you acknowledge------" " Oh no, mistress, no !" said Martin, alarmed ; " don't bc after going to say as how I ever confessed stealing any thing, and so get me clapped up into prison !" <£ Haven't I already told you, if you had been convicted of any thing of the kind, you shouldn't be blamed for it, from the size of your bump of acquisitive ties s ?" " Well then, troth ахла faith, and upon my conscience, antl that's as good as if I biblcd it, myself never stole any thing; because father O'Dogherty tould me Td go to hell, after being hanged for it, if ever 1 meddled or made with my neigh¬ bour's goods ; though I woiťt go for to say, that my fingers haven't often and often itched to touch what didn't belong to me." " Father O'Dogherty is a stupid old fool," cried Miss Agnes Flora Judith, "ignorant of all he should know; but send him to me, and ITI soon shew him, vol, n, F
that if you committed any act he thought wrong, you should not be blamed for it, because, from your organization, you could not help it." This was most agreeable information to Martin, who had long cast a longing eye upon some valuables of Miss Agnes Flora Judith's, contained in a casket that stood upon her dressing-table, and which the bump of euriosity had more than once made him examine, while that of acquisi¬ tiveness, dazzled by the splendour of the contents, consisting of brilliant earrings, necklace, and several diamond rings, strongly tempted him to appropriate them to his own use. The dread of the gallows, hou ever, as well as of future punishment, as held up in terrorein to him by the priest, to deter him from the commission of such a crime, still prevented him from giving way to this evil inclination, and with a sigh of regret, he would close the box. The case was now altered. Relieved from all further apprehension of punish¬ ment, by what Miss Agnes Flora Judith
told him—assured by her that he might laugh at the threats of father O'Dogherty, and set a gaol at defiance, he determined, with a heart beating with delight, on no longer delaying to secure to himself what would be the making of his fortune for life, without the necessity for any further ex¬ ertion ; and accordingly possessing himself of the long-coveted casket, decamped with it early the next morning. There was but one jeweller's shop in the town, to which he repaired from the castle, where producing his prize, the master of it very naturally concluded he could not have come by such articles honestly, and took him befbre the mayor, vvho discovering, on examination, hovv they were obtained (not a very difficult matter, partly through the fright Alartin was thrown into, partly through his confidence in what Äliss Ag¬ nes Flora Judith told him), he committed him to prison, and sent off an express to St Doulagh's, to acquaint the family there vvith what had occurred.
Ii О
Äliss Agnes Flora Judith was abso¬ lutelv overwhelmed with shame and con- j fusion by the intelligence; she rested not till she had obtained the liberation of the poor ignorant being she had so helped to delude, by pretending that what had hap¬ pened was all through a mistake; and having seen him, for the purpose of en¬ deavouring to undo the mischief she had done, gave him a sum of money, to en¬ able him to seek his fortune e^vhere, as, r " 4 τ what had taken place, he could no more be admitted to the castle. This simple fact worked wonders in the mind of Äliss Agnes Flora Judith against the system she had adopted ; she confined herself almost entirely, for some days after, to her closet, for the purpose of giving it a full and patient investiga¬ tion; when, being fully satisfied and con¬ vinced that this hypothesis of human ac¬ tions is indeed ill calculated for the sub¬ sequent improvement of our species, but, on the contrary, has a direct tendency to
lead to the doctrine of materialism, she abandoned it altogether; but with what bitter regrets for ever having adopted it, from the ruin and misery in which the circumstance had been the means of in¬ volving those who were so dear to her !— '*' Oh that on me, on me the punishment due to error had alone lighted !" she cried ; * ť and yet, could an}^ personal infliction equal the agony of thinking I have been the cause of suffering to others?" The intensity of her feelings brought on a severe fit of illness, and nothing could in any degree sooth or compose her, but consulting ΛνΗΙι Grace on the means of obtaining the power of administering to the comforts of Eugene. But, not¬ withstanding the л\ г ау that Rose lived in the castle—notwithstanding her being considered as almost a second Grace, the pride of Miss Agnes Flora Judith not brooking that she should know the abso¬ lute necessity there was for these distress¬ ing consultations, she was often, in conse¬ quence, left for the greater part of a day
to herself, through her exclusion from her apartment. These welcome hours of freedom were passed by Rose in the indulging absorp¬ tion of her deep despair, fast approaching to insanity ; the wildest, the gloomiest, the most savage haunts about the castle, were the spots she sought, the moment she found herself at liberty to stray where she pleased. Here, unmindful of all that, in other days, was wont to delight her in¬ nocent mind, occupied by one fearful, one terrible idea, she would remain, forgetful of the lapse of time, heedless of the length¬ ening shadows of evening, the gathering cloud, the pelting shower, till sought and found out by the alarmed Grace. With the most appalling intention, the unhappy girl often struck into the walk leading to the Lover's Leap, that spot where first the light of love had broke upon her soul. As long as sufficient rea¬ son remained, enabling her to govern her actions, her deep sense of religion, on con¬ sideration, proving if she was not warranted
in self-destruction, she surely could not be so in taking the life of another, hatl hi- therto operated in preventing the execu¬ tion of her rash design, such reflections ever rushing on her mind as she came in sight of the awful gulf, down which she proposed precipitating herself—a cold shuddering would come over her-—she would draw back with dismay and hor¬ ror, and precipitately hurry into the em¬ bowering walk leading from it. At length, the consciousness of the enormity of the act she had committed wrought wdth such intensity on her feel¬ ings, that they, at times, would overthrow the noble faculties of the mind; yet, tlu¬ ring these paroxysms, there was a method in her actions not a little surprising. One evening she stole forth, determined on destruction—never had it appeared so in¬ evitable as at this moment. After a course of the most distressing reflections, she proceeded towards the fatal spot : with a degree of calm composure, that she had long been a stranger to, her step was
firm ; all proclaimed a state of mmd fit for the dreadful purpose. She suddenly turn¬ ed the angle—the opening stood before her; she no longer shuddered, or suffered herself to draw back ; but for one moment she paused, and that was but to raise her hands to heaven. Advancing, she stepped npon the projecting rock—that fatal point, vvhich once to have touched would have made her senses reel with terror, and her blood freeze within her— " Ail peibue on the miu^m as b\ic stood, CooU-ndm^ ¡ĹMb4tii!-5 toi e her wo ťi:iu«ht breast : Wjili tenrfU c)c bhe ira/e^ on the flood, W ith lcm^tıiü с<1{>( rilevi bhe panf-î ťor геЧ " Her arms were extended, when, as she tottered on the extreme brink of destruc¬ tion, she was forcibly dragged back. The suddenness and violence of this shock re¬ called her scattered senses ; but rendered desperate by her situation, she struggled, but to no purpose, to free herself; and after a few more unsuccessful efforts, with a sudden conviction that it could not be Grace that held her in so firm a grip, she
turned to see who it was, and beheld the tear-bedewed countenance of an elderly woman. Who was she? was not a ne¬ cessary question, the stranger, by sud¬ denly clasping her to her heart, with a burst of rapturous tenderness, proclaiming herself; and Rose, overpowered by the sudden revulsion of her feelings, the un¬ deserved kindness of Heaven, in sending such a friend to her aid as her beloved nurse, at the very moment she was so impiously doubting its goodness, sank, to all appearance, lifeless, on the bosom that throbbed with such maternal solicitude for her. The return of Mrs. Brady indeed was not more providential than sudden and unexpected; her brother dying, left her at liberty to do again as she pleased, and accordingly she made the best of her way back to Ireland, where, the moment she landed, she set off for St. Doulagh's, and, without announcing herself at the castle, inquiring for Rose, was directed where to ν 3
find her by a servant, Λνίιο had chanced to meet her in her way to the Lover's Leap. Fortunately for Rose, this faithful friend was a woman of firm nerves, else she must have stirfened into stone Avith horror, at the sight that presented itself to her view- on gaining this spot—horror not merely at the sight ofa human creature tottering on the brink of destruction, but of thai creature being the one on whom she alone depended for all she hoped to taste of hap¬ piness in this life, death having swept away all her own natural connexions. The observations which she had an op¬ portunity of making, while endeavouring to recover Hose, gave her a suspicion ofthe cause of the rash act she had meditated ; yet perhaps it might not be so bad as she appre¬ hended. She had stopped at different cabins in her way to St. Doulagh's. to make inqui¬ ries at them concerning the family there; and from what she had heard amongst them, had been led to conceive that an attach¬ ment subsisteel between Eugene and her darling—" And who knows," thought she,
" but a private marriage may have taken place between them, and that fear of its being discovered, from the situation he is now in, raay have driven her to the de¬ spair she must be in, to think of what I saved her from?" Anxious to be out of suspense, on a subject so interesting to her feelings—" Then, perhaps, after all, my darling," she cried, on Rose's reviving, " it is not for Rose Cormack, but Rose something else, I should have inquired at the castle ?" The blood vvhich had forsaken the cheek of Rose now rushed to it, her very fore¬ head was crimsoned, at the idea ofthe se¬ cret she had to disclose, as, burying her face in the bosom of the good woman, she faintly murmured—" No—no." " Well, well, all in good time, my dar¬ ling," said Mrs. Brady, affecting more cheerfulness than she really felt at the moment, the discovery she had made be¬ ing a terrible shock to her feelings, having looked forward to a very great match foi- Rose, from her beauty and accomplish-
ments. She made up her mind that Eu¬ gene was a complete young reprobate, persuaded nothing but the most insidious arts could have effected the destruction of her child. But this was no time to ask questions; she was convinced, from all that had occurred, that Rose's unhappy situation was as yet undivulged to any one, and she immediately determined on taking her away, where there would be no chance of its being discovered, her ho¬ nour being even more precious to her than her life. Some little indignation was cer¬ tainly mingled at the moment with her feelings—" But to comfort, not upbraid, is the duty of a Christian," she reflected; "independent of the blindness of love, for¬ giveness is the more readily claimed, when wc behold such strong symptoms of con¬ trition as this poor darling has mani¬ fested/ But then all her prospects were closed for life, and tears of* disappointed pride and affection, spite of all her efforts to suppress them, gushed from the # eyes of poor Mrs. Brady, She was a woman
of a strong mind, however, and good na¬ tural understanding ; and aware therefore, that it is not by mere lamentations we can remedy what is Λνιχ^, she speedily exerted herself to explain to Rose, that she was come to take her away for some time from St. Doulagh's.—" After our long separation, they can't grudge, I am sure," she said, " letting you pass some time with your poor old nurse. 1 shall only stop there this night; to-morrow 1 shall be off, to get every thing ready for you, in a place 1 have in view ; and as soon as I have done so, which will be, 1 am ceitain, in the course of a few days at farthest, will be back again for you with a mountain car." She shoulel have the shelter then, the concealment she required, to recompose her distracted mind, enable her to make her peace vvith oftended Heaven, and pre¬ pare herself for whatever might ensue; and bursting into tears of grateful joy, the afflicted Rose again threw herself upon the bosom of her maternal friend.
Mrs. Brady exerted all her eloquence to sooth her, anxious to leave a spot where she could not look around her without shuddering. At length they repaired to the castle, where Mrs. Brady received the kindest лл т е1соте from Grace, the only one of the family who appeared. Far from starting any objection to her proposal re¬ specting Rose, she expressed herself de¬ lighted at it, from the benefit that she conceived it likely she might derive from change of scene, and the soothing atten¬ tions of a person Λνίιο had the power of devoting herself entirely to her. Every thing was done as settled by Mrs. Brady; she went aw r ay the next morning, and at the expiration of a week, passed by Rose in a state of comparative, though melancholy, tranquillity, from the relief her mind experienced, freed, as it now was, from those torturing apprehensions that had so long agonized it, returned with a mountain car for her. Rose took leave of all but Grace over¬ night ; but when in the morning she was
bidding her farewell, then indeed vvas the renewal of sorrow. An ill-divining spirit whispered to her that she should see St. Doulagh's no more, or, of course, her friend. Under the terrible thought, she returned again anel again to press her in her arms, to weep over her, to kiss her hands in agony. At length, dropping on her knees, with her own trembling hands uplifted to heaven—" Oh God !" she in¬ wardly prayed, tť let peaee and happiness be restored to this house, though I shall not live to witness it ! restore to it him, without whom neither can be more en¬ joyed within it, though on my cold bo¬ som the sods of the > alley will soon be pressed !" At last Mrs. Brady, alarmed by the prolongation of such a scene, interfered to terminate it, and more dead than alive. Rose was placed upon the car. They had proceeded some way ere she was able to rouse herself from the state of afiliction in which she had left the castle. At length the consideration of what was due to the
kind friend who was making such exer¬ tions for her, and the reason she had for thankfulness, operated to induce her to make an effort for the purpose, and, by degrees, she began to enter into conversa¬ tion, to the no small delight of her com¬ panion. It has been remarked, that when the mind is at ease, the body is delicate, or, in other words, that when we have no cares to perplex us, trifling matters will be deemed of consequence, illustrating the story of the luxurious Sibyrite, who could not rest because a rose-leaf was crumpled under him. The mind of Rose was too much occu¬ pied, or rather entirely engrossed, by its sorrows, to allow her to think of personal inconvenience, or else perhaps she might have complained a little of the fatigue of the present journey. She soon fbund, from the track they were pursuing, that Mrs. Brady had com¬ pletely deceived them at St, Doulagh's, with regard to their destination—a cir-
cumstance that tended to confirm the sus¬ picions previously entertained of her alrea¬ dy guessing all she had to communicate. Their course lay, for some length of way, through roads made alone by the torrents that in winter came rushing from the mountains ; it may therefore be easily imagined how they must have been sha¬ ken and jolted on such a vehicle as an Irish car, without springs, in proceeding through those deep gullies, rendered rough and dangerous by the stones brought down by the violence of the floods from the mountains. Such were the sudden shocks they received, that nothing but having firm hold of the bars of the car prevent¬ ed their being flung off amidst the briers and nettles that fringed the wav. At length, after crossing several hills, that elsewhere might have passed for to¬ lerable mountains, they found themselves without any other direction to proceed, than was afforded by the tracks of cars a- long the sides of the mountains, employed some months before in drawing turf from
their summits ; and in many places ren¬ dered hardly perceptible through the fern and moss that had grown above them. Here and there this road, if it could be called one, sloped down into deep glens, at the dark bottoms of which foamed noisy torrents, creating a degree of awe and ter¬ ror in the mind, from the idea of danger they awakened ; in some places, it being impossible to ford them, the trunk of an old tree, or its intertwisted branches, were thrown across them, which the boy who drove the car, by way of dissipating any " fears of the females, generally expressed his hope they would not find rotten, as many a one to be sure had done before them, to the loss of many a poor man's horse. On these occasions, with admirable dexterity, he took the wheels from the car, thus re¬ ducing it to a sledge, the only mode in which it could be got over. The travellers, however, got on with¬ out meeting with any accident; and but for their apprehension of something of the kind, would have found this part of the
journey agreeable enough, the road being ол т ег a soft moss, or heath, the latter per¬ fuming the air around, while the νίοΛΛ^, though Λνϋίΐ in the extreme, луеге still highly romantic and interesting; but луЬсп all became lost in confusion, or ra¬ ther, лл т а$ only sufficiently seen to let them perceive the risks they ran in their advance, when, in short, night overtook the travellers, amidst rocks, and gullies, and roaring torrents, the case became л т егу much reversed. In the silence imposed by terror, they proceeded for about a mile, when Mrs. Brady, with a sudden exclamation of thankfulness to Heaven for their escape from all the perils of the way, thrøv her arm round the neck of her companion, and fondly kissing her cheek, told her they hatl got to the end of their journey, pointing out to her, as she spoke, a long thatched cabin, or cottage, at a little dis¬ tance. Rose, however, was by this time so completely overcome by the fatigue she
had undergone, and the restraint she had imposed upon her feelings throughout the day, on account of her kind friend, that she was unable to join in the gratulations occasioned by the circumstance. She was lifted from the car in a state of exhaustion, that made Mrs. Brady conceive it would be advisable for her immediately to retire to bed, to the great disappointment of Judy, the girl hired by way of attendant, having anticipated no small degree of pianse from the nice manner in which she had cooked the supper. Instead of parta¬ king of this, however, Rose swallowed a basin of white wine whey, vvhich opera¬ ting as an opiate on her, soon threw her into the sleep she so much required. She woke from this much refreshed in the morning; but still, with something ofthe restless impatience of sorrow, hastily rose. As she cast her eyes about her chamber, she was rather surprised by its neatness; and still more agreeably when, on drawing back the white dimity win¬ dow-curtain, she found the cottage was
situated at the entrance ofa beautiful val¬ ley, instead of being seated at the side ofa bleak mountain, as she had rather conceiv¬ ed, from the imperfect view she had alone been able to obtain of objects the preceding niirht, was the case. There were no other habitations immediately in sight, butin the centre of the vale vvere the extensive ruins of a very ancient monastery, rendered pic¬ turesque in the extreme by a high tower, completely mantled over with ivy, rising from the centre of the building, the roof of which having given way to the destroying hand of time, and thus permitting the light to traverse the interior, its numerous pillars, arches, and receding aisles, begirt vvith long streaming grass, wild flowers, and ivy, were displayed to the greatest advantage, impressing upon the mind pe¬ culiar interest and grandeur. The valley was enclosed by stupendous mountains, many of them clothed to the very summits with wood, others skirted with hanging groves of oak, ash, and beech, while tufts of elder trees clustered
about the ruins ; and innumerable streams, gushing from the sides of the steeps, me¬ andered in wild mazes across the paths, or collecting in natural reservoirs, formed limpid wells under the shadow of the rocks. The cottage of Mrs. Brady was not un¬ worthy of its situation ; it was a commo¬ dious building, for one of that description, though somewhat ancient, as the house- leek and moss upon its thatch denoted, but still in good repair, and consisted of a neat parlour, kitchen, and three bed-cham- ^ bers, honeysuckles and rose-trees cover¬ ing part of the front, and behind it a de¬ licious garden, that is, from its situation, stretching up a sunny hill, in every nook of vvhich was a profusion of wild flowers or aromatic herbs. Nothing that could conduce to the comfort of Rose was omitted, and could she have steeped her senses in forgetfulness, she might, she would have been happy î but *' Keniembi anee wak M, wiih .sli :ь Ьь-»у tiam, bwtll'd at her heait, atid tui ΛΙ ıh» past topam."
The requisite confidence was soon re¬ posed in her friend, and the weight on her heart seemed in some degree lightened by the circumstance. Aware of what she would suffer if she conceived herself under any restraint, Mrs. Brady always affected to Lv- busy, that she might feel herself at liberty to do as she pleased, except when she actually saw that she had an inclination to converse with her. The ruined monastery soon became the fa\ ourite haunt of Rose. Here, where the want of animate objects, the dead si¬ lence that reigned around, the solemnity ofthe venerable pile itself, iorm ed a com¬ bination well calculated to give rise to pensive reflect ions, all was in union with lier present ieelings. Yet, absorbed as bhe was in these, there were momenta when she wa& almost stolen out of herbelf by the admiration and curiosity excited by this romantic ruin, and the pleasure ¿.he took in involuntarily examining every part of it—its pillars, its arches, the cu-
rious and elaborate tracery of its лvindows, and exploring the very minutest of its re¬ cesses, for '* ľ, к h prop« ι omame nf u.ia tiitte, 'I h it should .1 chapel 31 ace , The lattice loi umlession íram'd, \nd h()[}-u ih j v tst But as the excitement of пол city ceased as all became familiar to her eve, this ef- j ' feet ceased to be produced, and the in¬ crease of her melancholy, the air, the look of utter despondence with vvhich she re¬ turned to the cottage, after passing hour> amitlst all the filence, the elreariness, oí long-drawn ailes and fretted vaults so alarmed Mr«. Brady, that at length she interfereth by endeavouring to prevail on her to bend her steps in a different direc¬ tion when she went out. But the scene congenial with its feel- ings is the one the mind will cling to. Rose could not be induced to forego her visits to this lonely pile, so adapted for sorrow, that sorrow seemed soothed by being indulged within it; and where, if
any thing could steal her for a moment from the contemplation of her woes, it was the objects of interest by which she was here surrounded.
VOL. IL
α
CHAPÏEll V'ţ. ' ť No wounds Hke thoae a wounded .spirit feels, No cure for such, till God, who makes them, heals And thou, sad sufferer, under nameless ill, Tiiat vield*¡ not to the touch ol liuman bkill, improve the kind occasion, understand A father's frown, and kibS lus chabt'mn^ hand . To thee the day-spring, and the htaze of noon, The purple еу'шпц, and revendent moon, Ihe star's, that, %pmikled o'er the vault ot night 7 Seem drop 1 , descending in a bhower of hght, Shine not, or undesir'd and hated, shine, Seen through the medium of a cloud like thine . Yet seek Him— m hib favour life ь fnind— A\\ hlisi beside a sh idow, or a sound. Then heaven, eclips'd so Ions;, and this dull earth. Shall stem to start into a second hirth; Nature, assuming a more io%eb face, B.iîi-iiwins; a besaity fiom the wot к s ofgi.ic··, Shall be deîpis'd and overlook'd no more.'' " ť Вст was he ever—лvas her Eugene foi ever to remain in confinement?" the an¬ guished Rose at length began to demand oť herself; * k was there no way to be
thought of— no plan to be suggested, for freeing him from it ? She had conceived the most exalted opinion of the nobleness, the generosity, of the British character, and could not therefore believe, that if his story were made known, some exertion would not be made to effect his liberation. No; she could not bring herself to ima¬ gine, that those who had torn the fetters from the oppressed African, who hatl come forward with such enthusiasm to aid the glorious patriots of Spain and Greece, vvould permit a fellow-subject to languish away his life in a prison, for what was ex¬ cusable on the score of youth and inexpe¬ rience, exclusive of any consideration of the fallibility of human judgment ! No— the thing was impossible: but who was the person—vvhere was the friend, tliat was to take up the pen in his cause ? In vain she bethought her, till she at length came to the resolution of becoming his advocate herself. She was aware her ad¬ dress would contain no subtlety of argu- G 2
ment ; but then she believed that a simple statement of facts wouid be a resistless ap¬ peal, and accordingly sat dovvn forthwith, with all the eagerness of newly-excited hope, to compose a pamphlet, which, when finished, she immediately dispatched to one of the most eminent booksellers in London, with an accompanying letter, entreating he would print and publish it without delay, and add to the obligation, by letting her have a line of acknowledg¬ ment on its receipt. Full of the most delightful anticipa¬ tions—for of the result being all she wish¬ ed she ΛνοιιΜ not permit herself to enter¬ tain the shadow ofa doubt—she suddenly evinced a degree of cheerfulness that abso¬ lutely astonished Mrs. Brady, ignorant as she was of the cause; Rose, in order, if possible, to add to the joy of Eugene's unexpected liberation, having decided on imparting to no one ΛνΙ^ she had done, till the purpose for луЫсЬ she had exerted herself was effected. She no longer ob¬ jected to varying her лvalks a little, as her
kind friend had before proposed in vain, nor sought to decline having her company in them. Restored to comparative tranquillity, she was now able to do full justice to the beauties of her present abode. In this wild, but, to her, enchanting spot, in what happiness, what bliss, she thought, could she pass her days, were her Eugene restored to her ! and might he, WOuld he not, after all that he had suffered, be ea¬ sily induced to settle with her in retire¬ ment, far from the " meddling crowd's ignoble strife?" and if he were, where could a more delightful one be found tban this? Mrs. Brady's cottage was large enough for the accommodation of all, and with her to be a mother to them, what felicity might they not enjoy ! true— " No ponder'd pert, proficient in the art Of »ounding an alarm, would assault their door¡>; --------—------—. .---- uo stationary steeds Cough their ovvn ìdfcU, wh le, heedless of the sound, The silent circle fan themselves, and quake ;" but here the needle " would ply its busy
task," the poeťs, or historian's page, by one be made vocal for the amusement ör instruction of the rest, while " The sprightly lyre, whose treasure of swe« t sounds The touch from m«ny a trembling chonl bhakes out ; And the clear voice syraphonious, yet distinct, And m the charming strife triumphant still," would beguile the night; and, in short, she gave herself up to the most enchant¬ ing day-dreams, the most soothing reveries. Her eyes no longer wandered mechani¬ cally over the grandeur of the dilapidated monastery ; with all the rapture of grati¬ fied taste, they ran along the lines of Go¬ thic pillars, sweeping beneath sublime arches, to take in the splendid relics of the eastern window, the grand termina¬ tion of the choir, the length of the nave, the height of the луа1Ь, the aspiring form of the pointed arches, the exquisite deli¬ cacy of the tracery ofthe windows, clothed or ornamented by the hand of time, wdth gay shrubs, flowers, and ivy, which, clo¬ sing the perspective, gave something of tbe appearance of a twilight grove to the
furth^ end. ßut ás the tittle approached for bringing the expected letter from England, she again beeaftie ťeetless ; and when day after day passing away without any thing but disappointment tó her, led her to beiieve she had completely deceived herself by the hope she had yielded to, again sank back into despair—a despair of a still deeper, gloomier nature, if possible, than that she had previously indulged, the anguish of her reelings now being in¬ creased by the bitterness of disappoint¬ ment, as darkness seems more profound after a transient flash of light. In Vain her maternal friend argued with her on the impropriety of the feelings she was novv giving way to—in vain repre¬ sented to her that it was the duty of a Christian, one of the strongest proofs they could indeed afford of being what they professed themselves, to suffer with pa¬ tience ; there were momenta when, in the black despair of her soul, Rose almost re¬ gretted what she had before considered
the providential interposition of her friend at the Lover's Leap. But the time was now fast approaching that was to give her a name that, under other circumstances, she would have re¬ joiced at. As it drew near, Mrs. Brady became extremely perplexed how to pro¬ cure her the requisite assistance without exposure. Barney O'Rooke was the per¬ son whom she vvould have called upon on the occasion, but this would be attended with utter ruin to her darling; and at last, after lying awake night after night, revolving what she should do in this puz¬ zling dilemma, she finally made up her mind to sending for a gentleman in his line but a few miles further off. On the arrival of the hour that rendered it expedient her doing so, she dispatched two lads, whom she had in her pay, with the necessary instructions for him. But poor Mrs. Brady, in her calculations, had quite forgot to take into consideration the possibility of his being out of the way. This, however, actually proved to be the
case, and her messengers, in consequence, were quite at a loss what to do, till they suddenly recollected O'Rooke, which hav¬ ing done, they forthwith proceeded to his habitation, with a determination of treat¬ ing him exactly as they had been instruct¬ ed to treat the other. The night was a cold, damp one, and after solacing himself with his pipe and glass of whiskey-punch, over a large turf fire, Barney had betaken himself to bed, where he was comfortably snoring at the moment he was aroused by a violent knocking at the door. Hastily rising, as soon as he was con¬ vinced, bya repetition ofthe knocks, that he hatl not been dreaming, he opened his window, and popping his well-defended head out of it, demanded who the devil was there? In reply he was informed, that a gentleman's carriage had been over¬ turned just at the entrance of tlie village, and his services immediately required, in consequence of some very severe contu¬ sions the gentleman had received. G 3
Barney hesitated ; he was very unwil¬ ling to go out at such an hour, but still more so to lose the handsome reward which he made no doubt he should receive from a gentleman for his rest being dis¬ turbed; and accordingly, hastily doffing his nightcap, and slipping on his great¬ coat and brogues, he unbolted the door, and sallied out. The lads, lest of bis suspecting a trick, had bribed a person with whom he wns acquainted to call him, and with him Bar¬ ney was trotting on at a brisk pace, from his impatience to grasp the sovereign, or sovereigns, that, like the ideal dagger of Macbeth, were glittering befbre him, the expected remuneration for his trouble. when, just as he reached the head ofa so¬ litary green lane, two men bolted out upon him, and having gagged him, and put a bandage over his eyes, forced him upon a car, and placing themselves one on either side of him, drove off with all speed. Not a few, nor slight, were the sti üg-
gles of Barney tö extricate himself**but all were useless ; and at last he was told by one of his companions, he had better take hiâ advice, and be asy««'* For* to tell you a secret, my lad," he cried* " I am lieutenant Moonlight, and my friend at your tother side is ensign Starlight, and we are the boys, you may know from our names, that are not to be daunted or disappointed in any thing we take in hand, and we have been ordered to bring you to the assistance of captain Rock's lady, who is about producing an heir to that renowned commander, righ ter of wrongs, and redresser of grievances ; and who know r s but, if he takes a fancy to you, he may keep you by way of family sur¬ geon ?" Poor Barney trembled, both in flesh and spmt f on hearing this intimation, captain Kock being the complete Blue¬ beard, or Raw-head and Bloody-bones of the neighbourhood, and quite overawed by it, ceased all further efforts to liberate himself.
The journey was pursued in silence; and from the roughness of the roads, or rather, the up-and-down-hill work, Barney was convinced, to a certainty, that they were taking him to some one of the nu¬ merous mountain-fastnesses of captain Rock. He was endeavouring to think how the adventure might end, when, pretty near the end of the journey, the car coming in sudden contact with a huge stone, was upset, and Barney, with his companions, flung to a distance from it. The latter soon regained their legs ; but Barney, being fat and unwieldy, lay sprawling amidst the nettles amongst which he was thrown, till he suddenly heard the lads in pursuit of the horse, who, frightened by the accident, had made off as fast as he could, with all that remained of the car. Barney no sooner became sensible of this, than he thought it would be a good thing for him also to make off too, and accordingly rising, with greater alacrity than he had conceived himself capable of, he quickly succeeded
in ungagging his mouth, and unbandaging his eyes. Day was now just beginning to break, and by its faint light, on looking about Ыт hp ciinr f» rtŕ>íif nr\t t-inr-r* qf « liftlo rii«_ lij, ÏJV^ U»»r V» "İV"« VUVVUjivj V*V l·» ΛΑ%>%>.\* U1.U tance ; and after a little consideration, thi¬ ther he thought he would bend his steps, to entreat shelter, till he could obtain some safe conveyance back to his own village. Hardly had he come to this resolve, when an old crone, the wretched inmate of a miserable hovel he had not before noticed, so completely, through time and neglect, was it incorporated with the mud bank in which it was inserted, came out with a pitcher fbr water; antl of her Barney, on seeing her, conceived, as appearances were sometimes deceitful, he might just as well, ere he proceeded to it, inquire who the owners of this cottage were. Her answer filled him vvith astonish¬ ment, being led to imagine, from what he had heard at the castle, that Mrs. Brady was gone in a very different direction. Something was wrong, it instantly struck
him, and having the most important rea¬ sons for ascertaining, he repaired, with the old woman* to her cabin, where promising her a liberal recompence for concealing him for a few hours, he succeeded in ob¬ taining from her all the information he *vished (unfortunately for the inmates of the cottage, or at least for poor Rose, she and the girl engaged by Airs. Brady for an attendant being quite intimate)—informa¬ tion of such consequence, from the reward he was aware he should receive for it, as would have made him willingly undergo infinitely more than he had alreadv to ob¬ tain it: The old woman declaring her readiness to take her book oath that she had neither seen nor heard him, on the lads coming back to seek him, they made up their minds that he w ? as fairly off, and after a little consultation, agreed, since matters had turned out so, to say notliing about him at the cottage, their minds, prior to the accident, beginning to misgive them, that after all Mrs. Brady had said to them
about secrecy, she wonld not be pleased by what they had done in bringing him. How Mrs. Brady, after this disappoint¬ ment, managed, it matters not to say ; suffice it, Rose gave birth to a lovely in¬ fant, but which hardly opened its inno¬ cent eyes to the light, ere it closed them fbr ever—-a circumstance that, though con¬ sidered fortunate by the hapless mother, yet excited such feelings in her breast, as considerably retarded her recovery. But at length she was again able to leave her chamber; but so paie, so attenuated, from illness and affliction, as to have more the appearance ofa shadowy than a corporeal body. She novv never stirred out, except to visit the ruins, and there it was she now passed almost the whole ofher time: it was there she often first beheld the kin¬ dling light of day—there she sheltered herself froni the sultry heat of noon— there she often saw the evening yielding the world to night. It was at twilight, indeed, she particularly loved to be there, but more especially when there was a
moon, to shed her pale lustre over the sur¬ rounding scenery ; it was then she liked to find herself within the dreary pile, from the recollections at such an hour it recall¬ ed—recollections which deluged her iu tears, as she indulged them, seated on a fragment of the building, or some marble covering of the dead—perhaps the grave¬ stone of some holy father, now sainted in the calendar ; 01* some fair sister, born " to waste her sweetness in the cloistered cell," but who, spotless of crime, wedded to her God, had passed away in the blessed hope of everlasting happiness. The evening sun was on the fields, the newly tedded hay scented the air, and all was delicious sweetness and serene beauty, when Airs. Brady joined Rose one even¬ ing in the ruins. She found her, as usual, absorbed in sorrow ; but without appear¬ ing to notice this, she seated herself by her, and entering into conversation about the stories and traditions connected with the building, gradually succeeded in en¬ gaging her attention, Rose being just in
that state of mind when the excitement occasioned by the marvellous is particu¬ larly agreeable to the disturbed imagina¬ tion. " If a body w r as to believe all they hear," said Mrs. Brady, " many a screech and a sigh was heard here that no one could ac- count for ; and indeed I myself know people that have seen sights here, that they could never think of after without shaking in their skins ; but of all the curious stories of the place, that is the most curious of a young woman that was buried here—did I never tell it you ?" " No," replied Rose; " I don't recollect any thing of the kind." " Well, first I'll shew you her grave/ resumed Mrs. Brady, " It was the fa¬ shion, many a long day ago, to come to visit it; but, och hone! I don't know how it is, this place, like all about it, may be well said to be gone to decay ;" and as she spoke, she drew her companion out from amidst the ruins into the open space about them, marked by many a grass-grown
grave and mouldering tombstone. Wa¬ ding through a complete bed of nettles, they came to a grave, in a femóte corner, almost lost amidst the weeds that over¬ run it, and contiguous to a fragment of the wall that had once enclosed the place, and in which were still to be discerned the piers of a gate that had opened to a a small village now lying in ruins. The rebellion of 1798 had brought destruction to the place, the insurgents having in¬ trenched themselves here for some time, so that all that now remained of a once neat village, " Where health and plenty chctr'd the lab'ring sv\ain, ,) were the gable ends ofa few houses, some roofless cabins, and shattered barns, but amidst whicii some wretched beings still found shelter, betrayed to the astonished stranger by filthy dunghills, stagnant pools of water, a sudden burst of smoke, the grunting ofa pig, or cries of squalid chil¬ dren. rt In this grave," said Mrs. Brady, " lies
Kate Roonan, reckoned in her day one of the prettiest girls in this village. Her fa¬ ther was a comfortable farmer, with but her and a son to provide for. Kate was always a good chiid, dutiful and affection¬ ate ; but the son was always a trouble to his father, idle and headstrong; and finding he couid make nothing of him, he at last sent him to sea ; and when he died, two or three years after, took care to shew what he thought of the difference of his daugh¬ ter's behaviour, by leaving her more than the half of what he had, together with the house they lived in, in the village, that old shattered one just opposite to us, in the gable end of which you may still see a window remaining. WeH, all this add¬ ed to her beauty, brought Kate not a few admirers. Out of so many, it would have been strange if she hadn't found one to please her ; and, about a few months after her father's death, every thing was settled for her marriage with a young man be¬ longing to the place. Just about this time her brother returned from sea, and
though he had never been a very kind one to Kate, yet she vvas quite delighted to see him, thought she could never make too much of him, and added many things to what he was entitled to by his father's will. i( Well, the day for her wedding was fixed, and it was expected there would be quite a gathering at it, when, lo and be¬ hold, wdthin a morning or two of it, Kate was found lying dead in her bed ! You may well suppose the consternation this occasioned, and the strange talk it at first gave rise to ; but, after a close examina¬ tion of the body, no marks of violence could bc discovered on it, and it was at length supposed she had died by the visi¬ tation of God ; and, after being wakeel the usual time, she was buried here ΛνΗΙιουί more ado. Her brother, of course, came in for all she had been left ; but after living a few months here, after her death, he sud¬ denly took it in his head to set his place, and go and settle in another part of the country. The house was accordingly shut up, and the key given to a neighbour, to
shew it to any one that might like to take it. " Just about this time there was a mill built here-—you may see the remains of it on the hill yonder. The chief person em¬ ployed about it was a stranger in these parts, a man by the name of Dickson ; he took a cabin at the further end of the vil¬ lage, and was thus obliged, in his way back¬ wards and forwards from it and the mill, to pass the gate that was then standing here, and indeed, till the year 1798, when it was destroyed, together with all that re¬ mained of the old îVyed wall, by the army in their attack on the rebels, who had ta¬ ken possession of this, as well as every other place in the neighbourhood. His hours were very irregular through his business ; sometimes it was dark night be¬ fore he returned home; and at last he be¬ gan to be surprised by seeing a woman, regularly as he passed this at night, come out at the gate,and keeping at theother side of the way, walk on with him to his cabin,
where she always disappeared, he didn't know how. " Once or twice he thought of mention¬ ing the odd circumstance to his neighbours, but then if it was any trick they were playing him, on account of his being a stranger, why what good would this do him ? and so he made up his mind to try¬ ing to satisfy himself about it, entirely through his own means ; and accordingly, one night that, as usual, he saw the wo¬ man coming out at the gate, as he was passing, instead of walking on straight, as he was used to do before, he crossed over to her, with the intention of speaking to her ; but without allowing this, she direct¬ ly turned back to the gate. He followed, nor lost sight of her till they reached this identical spot, when, suddenly turning round upon him, she gave him a sorrow¬ ful look, and then seemed to sink into the earth before him. Well, after this, to be sure, he couid no more doubt what he had seen ; and it was natural enough he sliould tremble a little ; but he had a stout heart
and a good conscience, and so presently getting the better of his fright, lie stiick a bit of a stick he had in his hand in the grave, convinced tliat something wrong had happened, which, some way or other» he was chosen by Providence to bring to light. ** The next morning, at cock crow, аь he was going to the mill, he espied an old man digging a grave here, just close to the one he wanted to know about ; so be .stepped in, and after a little chat, he asked whose grave that was, meaning poor Kate's, making the fine garlands of cut paper, with vvhich it was hung, the ex- eiţse for asking. t4 The old man suspending his work, re¬ counted to him her sad story. Dickson wa*s all attention, and when the story vvas finished— ť So/ said he, ' the house in which she died is to be let—well, I should like to look at that house, for I'm thinking I sha n't 1ю long without taking a wife, and then, you know, one would be wanting a larger place than the one I have now.'— ť Very
луеИ, neighbour/ said the old man ; * when¬ ever you like it, you can see it, for I have the key / and so it was settled, that by the first opportunity Dickson should view it. " Well, this wasn't long wanting, for he was all curiosity, as you may well con¬ ceive, in consequence of what had hap¬ pened. He got the key, and Λν6^ to look at it by himself, the old man being busy wdien he called. The house was part of an old-fashioned one, that had belonged to a great family in the place, and was a queer straggling kind of build¬ ing, built all in ins and outs—nothing of which was lost upon Dickson, who was a shrewd fellow, and from being a good scholar, knew a good deal about the na¬ ture of these kind of buildings. He had had her chamber particularly pointed out to him, and there he went searching about, to try if he couldn't discover some secret means of gaining entrance to it—but no such thing; and he was just on the point of leaving it, when a hook in the wall caught his coat, and in the jerk he gave
to pull it away, he dragged down a panel, and what should he behold behind it, but a narrow stair within the walls, lead¬ ing down to an old building filled up with rubbish. Well, upon this discovery, lie was convinced there had been foul play here ; so, deciding how he would act, he returned the key, and told the old man he thought he would go off to Roonan, and try if he could not get a better bar¬ gain of the place than he had the power of giving him ; so off he was, as good as his word ; and when Roonan heard his er¬ rand, he made him kindly welcome, and asked him to stop the night with him ; and in compliment to the stranger, two or three neighbours were invited. %r In the midst of tlieir chat, after supper, said Dickson, addressing him¬ self to Roonan—* Every man, to be ¡*urc, is the best judge of his own affairs, but I can't help wondering that you should prefer the place you are novv living in to the one you are about letting, since, to my vol. IL h
mind, one is not to be compared with the other;' antl that was very true indeed, the house Roonan then resided in being a very poor one, on the edge of a dreary bog.— ' That's no lie,' replied Roonan ; 'but as you've said, neighbour, every one has their own reasons for what they do.'—* To be sure they have,' said Dickson ; ť and, between ourselves, í am in two minds about taking this place of yours, for 1 have met with something that troubles me in the village.' —'Have you?' cried the other; 'why then, if it wouldn't be making too free, may 1 hv after asking Λν -hat that is?'— 4 And welcome,' was the reply ; * indeed it will be an ease to my mind unburthen- ing it;" and so he told him all about the ñgure he had san coming out of the churchyard, and vanishing in it, keening his еле upon him all the time he was speaking ; and sure enough, he savv him turn all manner of colours as he went on, ami his hair, at last, as it were, bristled up, and the perspiration trickled doun his fae*e in large drops—* Aud more
than this/ continued he—but this was ail an invention of his own—* the same wo¬ man, that vanished from me in the church¬ yard, appeared to me in a dream, and told me, that, as siie was lying asleep in her chamber, dreaming of no harm, either to Iierself or any one else, a person got into it by a secret door Г —But here the fall of Roonan, vvith a deep groan, from his chair, put a stop to any thing further; and wheii he was brought to himself, which was not without great difiicultv, he de- sired every one to leave him but the stran¬ ger; andas soon as thev uere alone, he fell on his knees beibre him, and told him he savv what he was reallv come about— not to bargain about the house, as he had pretended» but to prove to hiin that the watchful eye of (iod is over aH ; and, with¬ out further delay, confessed the murder ofhii> sister, partly through avarice, partly revenge, at her being left more than he was by their father. Administering an opiate to her, on the night he hatl deter- и 2
mined on the perpetration of the atrocious deed, he availed himself of the secret en¬ trance to her chamber, unknown to all but himself in the place, and by means of melted lead, poured in at her ear, de¬ stroyed her; trusting, by the method he had had recourse to for her destruction, and the precautions he had taken in exe¬ cuting the foul deed, no suspicion vvould be entertained of the truth. ť But see,' he added, * how vain is the hope of the sinner ! the guilt which he flatters him¬ self hid for ever, God ΛνϋΙ himself, if man does not of his own accord discover it, con¬ trive means to bring to light. But what punishment can I meet with from man, for my crime, equal to that vvhich my own secret consciousness of it has inflicted on me ? From the moment 1 murdered liiy sister, peace has been a stranger to mv heart; and had 1 had seas of molten gold, and mines of diamonds, I vvould h.ave given them all up to have recalled her to life. From that moment she has never ceased to haunt me—go where 1
would, do what I might, there she was still regarding me; but not with a sweet, kind smile, as in her days of life, but with a threatening aspect. It was on this ac¬ count I left the village; but I could not leave my guilty conscience behind me. The first thing that met my eyes here was the spirit of my sister — here, on the dreary bog, has she glided beibre me in her windingsheet—here, at the cheerful hearth, has she stood frowning on me— here she woke me at the dead hour of midnight, to make me feel that there is no rest for the murderer !' " In short," continued Mrs. Brady, " not to make a long story of a short one, he was committed, on his own confession, to prison, tried, fonnd guilty, and sentenced to meet with the punishment due to his crime; and noise enough, as you may be¬ lieve, the affair, attended with so many extraordinary circumstances, made in the country. Often and often have I heard all the particulars of it from old Dickson himself, for he was old at the time that I
was quite a child, and heard them from him, like all children, I believe, being fond ofthe marvellous, and therefore never tired of questioning him on the subject, though I never listened to the story that my teeth did not chatter and my nails turn blue, and that I did not lie all the night smothering up in the bed-clothes, longing for the first glimpse of day, lest poor Kate's grimly ghost should meet my eyes, frowning on me as she had done on her guilty brother.—But this is not all I could tell you/' said Mrs. Brady, either in a par¬ ticularly gossiping humour, or else indu¬ ced to go on, by conceiving she was amu¬ sing her companion, ** of this place. It is said that immense riches were hid here in the troubles, but more especially in those of Cromwell's time, and some have from time to time been discovered here, by means of dreams and apparitions. I myself knew a man, who, from being so poor that he was obliged to sleep under hedges and ditches, get all of a sudden so rich—no one could tell how, except by get-
ting a pot of money here, as every body believed to be the case—as to be able to take one of the best farms in the neighbour¬ hood ; and two lads who, in consequence, came to dig here, but vvho were so frigh¬ tened by a violent hurricane that came on just as they came in sight, as they said, or a trap-door, that they ran off; and since that, I believe, no one has ever searched here for money." " I am not by any means one of those," said Rose, " who deride every thing that is marvellous ; on the contrary, from the extraordinary discoveries vve have heard of, brought about through the agency, as we have had reason to believe, of super¬ natural means, I conceive it would be stupidity to do so. \V r hat we are speak¬ ing of, reminds me of a curious article 1 met with in an old magazine ; it is an ac¬ count written by the dean of Christ Church, in England, in the year 1726, of a gentleman of the name of Reynolds, when he was at school at Eton, who dreamed that his father was deceased, and
that he was walking in the meadows very melancholy, when a strange woman came up to him, vvho told him she was his mo¬ ther, who, it seems, had died soon after he was born ; she said to him— ť Yes, your father is dead, and your mother-in-law has had too much influence over him ; he has left all the property to the younger sons ; but there is an estate he had no right to leave away from you, the writings are in (mentioning some acquaintance of the fa¬ mily's) hands, and you may recover it/ Reynolds, hearing no news from home of this description, soon forgot his dream. About a year after he went dovvn to his friends, and found his father very well ; but, at the time of Reynolds's dream, he had been extremely ill, and recovered be¬ yond expectation. The first to whom he related his dream, when he described to him the person of the woman who appear¬ ed to him, said, they who had been well acquainted with his mother's person could not have described her more correctly. About a year after his father fell ill again»
died, and left all to his younger children. Upon this Reynolds's dream came into his mind ; he went to the gentleman named to him by his mother in his dream, and found that it v/as exactly as he had been told; namely, that this gentleman had the papers of the estate which had been unjustly left from him, and by which he was enabled to recover it." " Wonderful, to be sure !" said Mrs, Brady ; and as one story of the kind ge¬ nerally brings on another, they continued conversing in this manner till the increa¬ sing darkness warned them to return to the cottage.
η 3
CHAPTER VII.
" Farewell awhde, I will not leave you long, Por in \our shades I deem some spirit dwells» r lhat from the chid ng sueaui, oi groaning oak, Stiil heart» and anbwers to Matilda's moan." Mrs. Brady finding that she could not de¬ tach Rose from her lonely haunt, endea¬ voured to let her be there as little as pos¬ sible by herself; but in spite of all her anxiety to this effect, she was sometimes prevented following, or at least joining her there, as quickly as she could have wished, having many matters to attend to at home, and being frequently called away to a distance from it, by the claims of the miserable cottiers in the neighbour¬ hood on her charity. It was upon one of these latter occasions, that, detained out till a late hour, by the dying infant of a poor woman who hatl besought her to
come to her, tliat Rose, uninterrupted in her melancholy ruminations, quite forgot herself in the ruin. There was a time, that to have even thought of remaining till such an hour in such a place, by her¬ self, would have scared her imagination ; but what would then have been repelling, ΛνΉ8 now inviting or unheeded—grief, car¬ ried to an excess, rendering us incapable of those sensations natural to us at other times: thus she who луоиЫ once have shrunk from darkness and solitude united, no longer had a fear of visiting the habita¬ tion of the deael at unseasonable hours. Having roved about the dreary aisles till she was weary, she had seated herself on an old tomb, and with her eyes steadfastly fastened on the recumbent effigy on it, though without being conscious of what they were rivetted on, was giving way to the most sorrowful reflections,when she was roused from her reverie by a deep-drawn sigh; she instinctively looked up—but what Λνοι -ds can paint her feelings, when, by the moonlight gleam, she beheld, al-
most elose to her, the selfsame figure that had appeared to her in the chapel of St. Doulagh's, on the night—the fatal night, at least to her, that Eugene had prevailed on her to exchange vows with him ! The apathy in which, but the minute before, she had been wrapt, as to external objects, instantly vanished; she started up, and with a faint scream, receded : the spectre, for such it had every semblance of being, advanced. Rose, at this, uttered a still shriller cry, and dropped lifeless on the pavement. On recovering, she found herself sup¬ ported in the arms of Mrs. Brady.—" So, I suppose," said her alarmed friend, as soon as she saw she was in a condition to attend to her, " you have seen something at last in this dismal old place to frighten you ?" " Seen !" repeated Rose somewhat wild¬ ly, and casting her eyes shudderingly around her ; " and did you yourself see nothing to frighten you w T hen you enter¬ ed?"
" Yes, enough, I am sure ; for I saw you stretched on the ground, to all ap¬ pearance a corpse." " It had vanished then !" resumed Rose ; " or else to me alone are its visitations." íť What vanished? What do you mean, my dear child?" exclaimed Mrs. Brady, in absolute agony, conceiving Rose Λνββ becoming delirious. " Nothing," replied Rose, trying to check herself, but unable— u nothing, but that, as I am a living being, I saw an appa¬ rition here to-night !" " Pooh, pooh ! this is nonsense—folly !" cried Mrs. Brady—" entirely the effect of the fancies you have been giving way to for some time past. I thought, by hu¬ mouring you a little in them, I might be doing you a service ; but I novv find I was mistaken, and I must positively therefore prevent your coming here as usual." " If you hear all I have to tell you, you won't deride virhat I have now mentioned to you. Amongst the circumstances I had to disclose to you, there луаз one I concealed, lest you should think I was
raving. On the night that Eugene pre¬ vailed on me to kneel before the altar in the chapel of St. Doulagh's, I saw an ap¬ parition, and the very same I have seen this evening here." " No, no ; don't suppose I will be in¬ duced to believe any such thing," saitl Mrs. Brady ; " don't I know what the ef¬ fects of people going about pining and moping by themselves are ?" " Yes ; but I was neither pining nor moping at the time I saw this figure at St. Doulagh's," " No ; but then you had done wdiat was very wrong; or, at least," said Mrs. Brady, recollecting herself, " what, by your own account, you thought so ; and when that is tiie case, the imagination is easily dis¬ turbed." " But don't you yourself believe in su¬ pernatural appearances at times?" * c I won't answer another question," said Mrs. Brady, " till we leave this. Here you are trembling like an aspen leaf, antl as cold as death. These goings on will never do ; I blame myself \ery much for
having allowed them so long ; but the case must now be altered." She did indeed believe, that, owing to the melancholy to which she had given herself up, the imagination of Rose was beginning to be affected; and from the turn she seemed inclined to take, she grieved that she had told her the stories she had done; but it was through a good motive—-partly through a hope that she might by them render her perhaps loth to be as much as usual at the abbey, and part¬ ly a wish to divert her thoughts. She did all she could to argue her out of the be¬ lief she savv with such alarm she had conceived ; and Rose, at length, weary of contesting the point with her, seemed to give it up; but notwithstanding this, Mrs. Brady would have been happy for a time to have sent her from so lonely a spot as the cottage, and would accordingly have proposed to return to St Doulagh's, but that she knew poor Grace was still too much engrossed there by her afflicted aunt and parent, to be able to watch over her
in the manner she still thought requisite ; and all she could accordingly decide on was, to attend to her more closely than ever herself, and try to find amusement for her. When Rose came to reflect on what had occurred, hovv did she lament her want of nerve on the recent occasion ! Her judgment was certainly in a degree unsettled, by the mental struggles she had been long enduring; and firmly persuad¬ ed, by what she hael seen at the ruins, of the reality of what she fancied she had seen at St. Doulagh's, how did she regret that she had not had strength of mind sufficient to enable her to bear the awful sight without shrinking ! It had then evidently come on a warning errand, and had probably appeared again for a similar purpose—to caution her of some new dan¬ ger ; or perhaps point out to her some long-buried treasure, that, brought to light, would effect the liberation of her Eugene, and restore both to happiness. Cold in¬ credulity, or hard-hearted scepticism, might
laugh at the idea; but what extraordinary things had we heard, had we read of, dis¬ covered by Providence through the me¬ dium of dreams, or agency of spirits? have not, in both instances, crimes of the greatest magnitude been detected, and their perpetrators brought to punishment ? have not treasures been pointed out through the means of the one and the 11 other?—" Does not what I have lately been listening to from Mrs. Brady," she continued, arguing the point with herself, " go to prove the faith that should be placed in such things ? was not this very place the scene of a supernatural visita¬ tion? did she not hear, and see, and speak, with the person who, by means of the kind, whs made the especial instrument of Providence for bringing guilt to light ? and have not riches been discovered here in a similar way? why then should 1 strive to discredit the evidence of my senses ? or in allowing their testimony to be correct, permit myself to suppose that this appa¬ rition that has twice appeared to me has
done so, or rather been allowed to do so, from any other than a benevolent purpose ? I am miserable, afflicted, beyond measure ; I see the man I consider as my husband imprisoned, without a hope of obtaining his liberation—I behold the friends who have supplied to me the place of every natural connexion involved in wretched¬ ness I cannot remedy, and my heart is consequently abandoned to despair. God is never so near us as when we conceive ourselves utterly forsaken by man. He that regardcth the prayer of the poor des¬ titute, may he not, in his infinite mercy, at length have taken compassion on my sorrows, and permitted a visitation that may be the means of ending them? yes, 1 do—I will believe so; and under this persuasion, will find courage to visit the ruin agaiii." But her resolve to do this she was not able to carry into effect so soon as she wished, so closely was she novv watched by Mrs. Brady. Whenever she saw her preparing to go out, she was sure to be at
her elbow% and instead of allowing her to bend her steps towards the abbey, always turned them in a different direction. But at length a message was received by Mrs. Brady one evening, requiring her presence in the cabin of a poor woman, at some distance from the Vale, one of whose chil¬ dren had suddenly been taken ill. Mrs. Brady could not avoid attending to the urgent request she had received, and accordingly the car was ordered. Before setting out, however, she took Judy aside, to lay an injunction upon her not to stir out during her absence, except Rose went from ho. ne, when she was to follow, and keep close to her, let her say what she would to tbe contrary. Judy promised, nay swore upon her conscience, that she might depend on her; but no sooner had she seen her mistress fairly out of sight, than whipping up to Rose's chamber, she abruptly asked her— " Was she #oing out?" " Why do you ask?" demanded Rose,
raising her head from a book on which she had been trying to fix her attention. "Why, Miss, I'll tell you —because the mistress has charged me not to put a foot outside the door, if you went out; but if you were going to stay at home, ľd just be after running over to ould Nell Flannagan's wake, because I know I'd be back again before her ; and sorrow such a wake, they say, there has not been here¬ abouts these twenty years ! for Nell had the stocking, and her ould man says that's himself will do the ginteel thing by her, seeing shell never want any thing more from him." " Well, you may go," said Rose. " Yes, Äliss ; but it's yourself that won't he after telling on me to the mistress ? for I gave her as good as my affydavy that I wouldn't put hand or foot out of doors till she came back ; so it's kilt myself vvould be by her, if she found I broke my word wid her." Rose nodded, and away scampered Ju-
dy, only stopping till she put on her best cap, to be off to the wake. As she had watched her mistress out of siirht, so Rose watched her, and then verv deliberately walked out herself It would be superfluous to say her steps were di¬ rected to the ruin ; yet with all her impa¬ tience to find herself again within it, her steps began to falter as she drew near it, and a cold dew to gather on her brow.— " But this is no positive failure of cou¬ rage," she said; " nothing but the com¬ mon infirmity of human nature : and, af¬ ter all, what is this (as an able writer has demanded) that so alarms and terrifies the human mind, at a visit from those who are merely gone a journey before us, which sooner or later we are all destined by na¬ ture to take ? Is it not the will of God that our mortal bodies be laid aside, when the soul is to enter into real life? we may fairly consider ourselves but preparing, in this state, for living for ever; we are not completely born until w r e are dead ; why then should we fear a visit from a mem-
ber of that happy society, which it is our earnest wish, and ought tc be the whole ex¬ ertion of our mortal lives to endeavour to merit a pkce amongst ? Are we not spirits? Bodies are lent us, while they can afford us pleasure—while they can assist us in ac¬ quiring knowledge, or doing good to our fellow-creatures ; when they become unfit for those purposes, we get rid of them through death. Why then apprehend such terror, when visited by a former friend and companion ? We may rest as¬ sured, if Providence permits our return here, it is not to injure the living, or for any idle purpose, but for some wise, some good end \' and reassured by this argu¬ ment, she advanced within the building : but all was dread silence here, and undis¬ turbed, " nor eye, nor listenin·;· ear/ 5 an object found, but what was familiar to them. She went on towards the innermost re¬ cesses of the place, but still pausing al¬ most at every step, to look around her, or listen, but without seeing any thing but
the shadows of the pillars, or hearing any sound, bave that of the rustling of the long streaming grass that begirt the walls, in the night breeze, as it ъ u ay ed it to and iro. At length, just as she was beginning to give up the expectation that had again. allured her to the spot, she suddenly saw the spectral figure before hei, as if risen from one of the tombs. For an instant she drew back; then seeing the figure receding, but vvith a gesture to follow, she rushed forward—" It in ites me to follow—to speak to it !" she cried ; but the excitement of her feelings was too much for lier —her head grew giddy, and with a faint exclamation, sh· 1 fainted away. Mrs. Brady tarried not a minuti' longer tlian she was absolutely obliged—she felt a restlessness, an inquietude of spirit, that made her think she should never get back again. The instant she entered the house, her first inquiry was after Hose, " Oh. she's up in her room, snug
enough!" replied Judy, making herself sure of this being the case, for she had not had time to ascertain, having only got in a minute before her mistress; " sorrow foot either of us stirred out since you went away !" ** Well,you sha'n't be the worse for keep¬ ing your word with me," said Mrs. Brady, taking the candle from her to go to Rose's room—but the bird was flown ; she search¬ ed all the other chambers without finding her, and in utter consternation returned to the kitchen.—" Why what's this you have been telling me," she said, " of no one having gone out while I was away? I can't find Rose high or low." " Ah then, mistress honey, how can that be," cried Judy, with a well-coun¬ terfeited look of surprise, " when my¬ self, as 1 sat spinning here in the kitchen, must have seen her, if she went out?" " You young jade!" exclaimed Mrs. Brady, now noticing her cap, which in her flusteration, as she called it, at find¬ ing her so close on her heels, Judy had
forgot to take off, " I see how it is—you have been to the wake ; and while you were away, my child took the opportunity of going by herself to the abbey ! Go call me Pat directly !" the boy who drove the car, antl was now putting it up. A lantern was lit, for it was now quite dark, and giving it to Pat, the greatly- alarmed Mrs. Brady set off with him for the ruin. But no sooner did Pat understand whither they were going, than he would have given all he expected to earn for years to come, to have been fairly off, in such terror at this hour did he hold that dreary place—in so much, indeed, that vvith all his dread of captain Bock, he wouhl infinitely have preferred encountering, at anytime, this self-appointed ranger of the Irish hills and mountains, vvith even all his merry men at his back to boot, than have been obliged to visit the abbey in the dark. However, knowing he could not avoid obedience to his mistress, he tried to summon all his courage to his VOL. IL I
aid ; but in spite of his efforts, he trem¬ bled at every blast of wind that shook the bushes surrounding the place, ex¬ pecting the next instant to see the ghost stalking forward that had occasioned the noise ; and when, holding up the lantern at the west entrance, he cast his eyes fear¬ fully forward, and saw the long double row r of receding pillars, appearing like so many sheeted spectres to him, vvith their flow¬ ing drapery, or loose tresses, if it might be so styled, of ivy, wafted about by the night breeze, he stopped in an agony of fear. " Why don't you come on ?" demanded his mistress impatiently. " By my blessed namesake, St. Patrick, mistress, but I can't !" was the reply ; " but the Holy Mother have mercy on my sin¬ ful soul ! if there was but one ghost, or two, but ifl don't think all the ghosts that the churchyard contains are now before us !" fc * Ghosts, you silly fellow! where?" " Oh, mistress jewel! there, just right for'nent you ! just—the Lord save us, and
defend us !—like a parcel of White Boys coming down the hills !" " Come, come, this is no time for play¬ ing tricks, Pat!" cried his agitated mistress, seizing him by the arm, and dragging him forward. " I wish/ laying her hand upon oneof the pillars, " we may meet with no¬ thing else here to frighten us than these." She tlien called aloud upon the name of Rose ; but no Rose replied to the call : " My child ! my darling !" echoed through the building, but to no effect. At length, having traversed every part of it, examined into every nook and cor¬ ner, and through all the gloomy cloisters Mrs. Brady began to tremble with appre hension of her having turned her steps in a still more dangerous direction that even¬ ing. In their recent walks, she recollect¬ ed her having, more than once, stopped to gaze upon some dangerous spots among the mountains ; and in particular, her ma¬ king an observation on one of a particular¬ ly appalling nature, that occasioned her to ι о í л*
hurry her awav from it, with a determi- nation never to let her approach it again, if possible. As this alarming circumstance recurred to her recollection, so at the same mo¬ ment did the terrific scene at the Lover's Leap at St. Doulagh's ; and rushing from the ruin, in absolute distraction, she called to Pat to follow with all quickness to the lient, a frightful fissure in one of the ad¬ jacent cliffs, reported to have been caused by an earthquake, and at the bottom of which was a deep abyss of water, apparent¬ ly of the colour of ink, from the almost immeasurable height from vvliich it was viewed, and the ivy and fern that crept about the bleak rocks that formed the re¬ servoir. She was within a few yards of the hor¬ rid spot, when Pat, vvho was uimssaileti by her sickening apprehensions, and whose courage had gradually revived as he re¬ eeded fiom the abbey, suddenly springing before her, exclaimed, with a shout—*' 1 have her, mistress ! here she is !" stooping
as he spoke ; but, to his utter disappoint¬ ment, instead of a human form, merely grasping a long cloak, that lay stretched upon the cliff. Mrs. Brady instantly knew the cloak to be Rose's.—" She has been here then Γ with a shriek, she exclaimed ; and in the height of her distraction was about making an attempt to scale the precipice, for the purpose of looking down the chasm, for¬ getting, from the state of mind she was in, both the danger antl uselessness of such an attempt, at such an hour, when she was prevented by Pat.—" For the Lord's sake, have mercy upon yourself, mis¬ tress !" he cried, holding her firmly by tho arm. " What good would it do Miss Rose for you to bc getting yourself dash¬ ed to pieces, as to be sure you must, it you attempted scrambling up the cliiľ at such a time as this ?" His remonstrances, however, were lost upon her, antl desperation lending her strength, he would not much longer pro¬ bably have been able to prevent her ra-Ji
design, had not a neighbour, passing that way, come to his assistance, and enabled him to convey her home, where she was kept by force till morning ; when, at its first glimpse, they all hasted away to the Rent. Midway the cliff the bonnet of poor Rose was found, and immediately within the fissure a fragment of her gown, as if caught and torn away by the sharp point¬ ed rocks, at the moment of her throwing herself down. Of the horrible catastrophe that had evidently taken place, no doubt, after this, could be entertained. Mrs. Brady was conveyed back to the cottage, in strong convulsions, and for a fortnight after, her life was despaired of: she then slowlv recovered, if recovered it coukl be railed, to feel that she must ever after bear a wounded spirit about her.—" Oh, how I grieved," she cried, from time to time, wringing her hands, " when I thought my child was dying here ! how I prayed to Heaven to spare her! but had it been the divine will then to take her, amidst all my
grief, I sliould have had the comfort of seeing her laid quietly in holy earth í not as now, as I do continually before me, wounded, bleeding, dashed to atoms, through her own means!" The cottage had now become hateful to her, and accordingly, the moment she was able to travel, she shut it up, and set off for St. Doulagh's, convinced, if cap¬ able of any consolation, it would be in the sympathy she would there meet in her af¬ fliction.
CHAPTER VIII.
u SsocKtVj inencUljip, a ¡id io\ ^ DitiiieK htrt^u'd (¡pon шли, Oí), had 1 tin* \h\wz- ol a dove, Una ъ(>')П vund.l ï ta-te \ou ag.tjn ! " M\ «(¡по«; I ihen m ¡¡μ h t a^^^ìa^ζe, In tiıe \\a\s or rríiĽJ -ы and tiuth, Mipht learn írom lhe wisdom of îiir*>, And be cheer* d by tlu- sdlicv oî vouth.*' Ax ancient author compares life to a voy¬ age, in the progress of which we are con¬ tinually changing our scenes ; we first leave childhood behind us—then youth—- then the years of ripened manhood—then the better or more pleasing part of old age. The passage recurred to the recollection of Eugene one day, and led to a train of the most melancholy reflections—what change. what fluctuation should he experience ! youth, manhood, age—each would be
equally unenjoyeel by him ' equally un¬ marked by opportunities of evincing that change of feeling, that alteration of senti¬ ment, vvhich their advance upon one an¬ other naturally produces. The energies of youtli as yet unimpaired, a life of even stormy indifference vvould have been pre¬ ferable to the idea of the dull, the cheer¬ less, the monotonous one to vvhicli lie seemed doomed ; his spirits, sinking be¬ ibre, now began utterly to fail him ; and α long interval of silence from St. Doulaglľs, by alarming him about its beloved in¬ mates, did not tend to raise them. In vain he tried to shake oif the melan¬ choly that oppressed him ; never had he felt so sick, so sad at heart, as on the evening of this day ; and it seemed a cu¬ rious thing, that thib wds the very even¬ ing, ashe afterwards asci ι tained, on which the fatal catastrophe of poor Rose took plaee. In vain he tried to divert Ьь thoughts by reading; books, for the first time, were but formal dulness to hun, At ι 3
length, the following exquisitely beautiful and sublime lines fixed his attention, but only to excite a still intenser feeling of melancholy in his soul :—
IHL rilEAòURLò O t I lit UtLľ Vvhat iníi'bt thou m thy treasure, \vu\eb and celí? r Пюи hollow-soundaig and mysterious main ! Paie glistening peurl», uud rambuvv-coluur'd sheiU, Bnghî thmgb which gleam unreck'd of and m vam Keep, keep thy riches, melancholy ьеа ! W е аьк nol such from ι hee.
ìtt tu iie— the depths iuue moie ! V\ hat «елки ımîuhl, { . r down, and shining, through then ьЫ1пеьь he? ! 'I *iou hast tht starry gems, the burning goid. Won tľi»m ten thousand loyal агцоыеь- Ь>". eej) o'er thy ¡spoils, rhou и Au nuú wiaihful imun! Luì th tlamt*. uoî ïhc"*e iiriin. > t\ unui —tht depths haie mort ! 'Í by vv.ue* Ь.ле rolľd Above the citte« ofa w и. Ici gone by ! büÍVi hath tilľd up lhe palaccü oí uld, beu-weed the halls of revelry ! IXtbh o'er them, ocean, m thv bioinim 1 1 y ' Man yields thern to de¡ av.
Yet mure—the billows and the depths have more ! High hearts and brave are gather'd to thy breast! 1 bey hear not now the booming waters roar, The battle-thunders will not break their rest. Keep thy red gold and gems, thou stormy grate- Give back the true and brave ! Give back tiie lost and lovely î those for whom The place was kept at board and hearth so long ; 1 he piacer went up through midnight's breathless ¿loom, Лш! thf vain yearning woke mid^t festal son^ 1 Hold fast thy buried isle«, thy towers o'erthrown— But all is not thy own ! 1 o thee the lo\e of woman hath gone down, Dark How thy tides o'er manhood's noble head, O'er youth's bright locks, and beauty's flowery crown; Yet must thou hear a voice—'* Hestore the dead !" Earth shall reclaim her precious thmgs from thee— " Rustore the dead, thou »ea !"
A kind of holy horror thrilled through ins frame, if the expression may be allow¬ ed, at the conclusion of the last line, and closing the volume that contained the poem, he retired to bed. Here he hatl not been long, when he fancied he heard the chamber door open, and saw a woman en¬ ter ; she walked round the bed, and com-
ing to the opposite side, drew back the curtains, and looked in at him ; and at that instant he discovered that it was Rose he beheld ; but a different Rose indeed from her he had left behind him—pale, sorrow¬ ful, and ghastly. He started up in his bed. with a sensation of mingled surprise and joy, to enfold her to his breast—but she eluded his grasp; and on his repeating the attempt, retreated in seeming displeasure. He followed her from the room, out oí vvhich she hastily passed, through intrica¬ cies of the building he had not befbre any knowledge of, till he suddenly found him- belf beyond it, in a wild and dreary scene ol' rocks and mountains over which ht continued to pursue her, with astonish¬ ment at the fearless celerity with which she passed them, till they came to tlic edge of a horrible chasm, where she ν anish¬ ed, he knew not how, from his view, and stooping down, he found, on the spot where she had disappeared, a pair of fune¬ ral gloves. The impression made upon his mind hv
this dream was so great, that not even the return of daylight could dissipate it, and in agony at the idea of something afflict¬ ing having happened at St. Doulagh's, he addressed a letter to Grace, entreating to hear from her without delay, as he had been tormented the whole of the prece¬ ding night by dreams about them at the eastle. By return of post he received an answer from Grace, in vvhich, in a general way, Лш sakl they were all well at St. Dou¬ lagh's, and intimated a hope of some one of his familv seeing him ere !on£. The period to vvhich he had been nomi¬ nally sentenced to confinement w r as now drawing to a close, but the exact day on which it would expire was forgot by him, through the agitated state of mind hewas now in, as a matter indeed of no conse¬ quence to him to remember; so that it might, on its arrival, have passed by en¬ tirely unheeded by him, but fbr his being reminded of it by ьоте of his fellow-pri- M.)!itľ> Це smiled, in bitterness of spirit,
at its announcement, and almost instantly after retreated to his room, to conceal the feelings occasioned by the circumstance.— " It is come then !" he cried, gnashing his teeth, and pacing the room with impatient steps; " but only to mock me—the day which, under other circumstances, I should so have longed for, so have hailed лукп rapture; but ΛνΙιιΛ has now only arrived to add additional bitterness to my feelings, by the exposure it occasions of my being a poor, miserable wretch, destitute of the means of relieving myself from a cruel and unmerited imprisonment !" Hardly had these луогеЬ been uttered, when a person belonging to the place en¬ tered, to inform him, in due form, that his fine was paid, and every thing arrang¬ ed fbr his immediate discharge. Eugene stared wildly, incredulous of the truth of what he heard.—" Are you serious ?" he demanded of the man ; " but yet, no one would—could have the bar¬ barity to trifle with the feelings of a per¬ son situated as I am !"—But who was the
kind friend who had so unexpectedly open¬ ed the prison-gates for him—to whose gene¬ rosity he was indebted for his despaired-of liberation ? This, however, was informa¬ tion no one could give him ; the affair had been conducted in a way that com¬ pletely set all inquiries on the subject he was anxious about at nought He could not, however, rest, without endeavouring to surmise, and at length, after long puzz¬ ling himself in vain, it suddenly struck him that С ---------, who had continued to keep up a friendly communication witli him, frequently visiting him in prison, and from time to time affording him the means of replenishing his purse, by doing little matters for him, was the man. Under this impression, he proceeded straight from St. George's Fields to his house; but, to his extreme disappoint¬ ment, he was out of town, gone on a kind of desultory tour, so that a letter might not possibly reach him, nor expected back for a fortnight. In consequence of this information, Eu-
gene, notwithstanding his impatience to find liimself again at St. Doulagh's, de¬ cided on putting off his immediate depar¬ ture for Ireland, conceiving himself bound, both in gratitude and honour, to see his kind friend ere he left England, that some arrangement might be made for the at least gradual discharge of his pecuniary obligation to him. Having made up his mind on this, he lost not another moment in acquainting them at St. Doulagh's with what had occurred, desiring them, at the conclusion of his letter, not to be uneasy if they did not see him exactly at the time specified, as С ---------might not perhaps be punctual to a day in returning. The next morning, as he was saunter¬ ing about St. James's Park, enjoying the delicious privilege of loitering where he pleased, he was sudtlenly accosted by one of those gay young men with whom he had occasionally, previously to his committal, been now and then in the habit of asso¬ ciating with in the coffee-houses about town. Having warmly congratulated Eu-
gene on his liberation—" You are the very man," he added, " I wanted to see ; I was at the King's Bench last evening to look for you, but the bird was flown; and as I know your friend С —-----was out of town, curse me if I could tell where to find you !" tť And pray," asked Eugene, with some little degree of surprise, " is there any particular cause for the anxiety you ex¬ pressed to see me ?" " Yes, faith, ¿. wish to serve you." ťť As how, pray ?" " Why, I know you sometimes amuse yourself with your pen, and so, on a very particular friend of mine asking me if I could recommend any one to him qualified to look over and prepare some poems of his for the press, I thought I woultl speak to you on the subject." 6i I am much obligetl by your thinking of me," said Eugene; " but my departure fiom London is now so very near, that if they would take up much time-—-" M I am certain they wouldn't take up
more than a week, or ten days at the furthest; and a hundred pounds will be your remuneration fbr your trouble." " London is a terrible place," cried Eu¬ gene, with a smile, " for making one selfish. Since you say they will not take up more time, I readily undertake the task," he added, not a little pleased at the idea of obtaining a sum that would enable him to take over some little presents to St. Doulagh's ; (e so let me have them im¬ mediately." " Fair and softly, my good sir; you httle know the person to whom they be¬ long, or you would noi conceive it possi¬ ble he would intrust them to such a hair- brain as he considers me ; but call on me in the course of an hour, and you shali have a letter of introduction to him, which, as you are so limited for time, I advise your delivering without delay." Eugene gave the requisite assurance, and they parted. On calling, he fbund the promised let¬ ter ready for him, directed to a gentleman
at Hoxton. For this Eugene immediately set off in one of the stages, and was set down at a very large, handsome mansion, enclosed within iron gates. A well-dressed footman answered his knock, and to his demand of his master being at home, an* swering in the affirmative, ushered him into an elegantly-furnished parlour. Here he had not been many minutes, when an elderly, grave-looking gentleman, with any thing but an air that Eugene would have taken for one of genius about him, made his appearance. Bows being ex¬ changed, he begged to know to what he was indebted for the honour of the pre¬ sent visit. Eugene replied to this interrogation by respectfully presenting his letter. The stranger, casting his eye over it— 4 ' Oh, ay," he exclaimed, " I see how it is.—Well, sir, and you know the purport of this letter ?" Eugene bowed. " Right, quite right—I ащ satisfied* " I hope, sir," said Eugene, " you will
have reason to consider yourself so. I am aware, of course, that my friend has spo¬ ken favourably of me; all I am afraid oí is, his having mentioned me in higher terms than I merit. If I fail, however, in answering the expectations he may have raised, it wili not, I assure you, be for want of due exertions." " Oh, I make no doubt. But come, suppose you take a walk in the garden and grounds before dinner; it will cool and refresh you, after your ride in a hot stage-coach." ťť Excuse me, sir," said Eugene ; " but my time is so limited, as I observeel to my friend, that if you could conveniently let me have the papers now, with your instructions------" " Oh, I see—but it will be time enough after dinner to speak about business ; and, in fact, 1 am particularly engagetl just πολύ. In the interim, I advise you again to breathe the fresh air of the garden ; it will be cooling, and of course salutary foi you ;" and without further ceremony he
rung the bell, and ordered the servant to conduct the gentleman to it. Eugene, though extremely vexed, every inoment being so precious to him, yet knew not how to resist what might be owing to good-nature, antl accordingly suffered himself to be shewn to the grounds as directed. He found them ex¬ tensive, and well laid out, and could not avoid thinking all he saw a great encou¬ ragement to genius, if indeed owing to its exertions; but of this he had very great doubts, from the appearance and manner of the stranger, and began, in consequence, to fear that he had under¬ taken a task that would prove more disa¬ greeable than he had previously anticipated. He had not strayed about long, when he met sev eral ladies and gentlemen, most of them walking by themselves; and as he could not imagine they were all one Iamily, he concluded they vvere guests in¬ vited to dinner, and felt stiil more discon¬ certed by the supposition, owing to the utili greater delay he conceived the cir-
cumstance would occasion to his returning to town. For some time he appeared to be un¬ noticed; but at length, a gentleman com¬ ing up to him, begged to know, with a profound bow, whether he could favour him with any account of the ascent of a balloon that had very recently taken place—" Of course I knew," he said, " I should see'nothing of the process of in¬ flating ; but I did flatter myself I should have seen it majestically sailing over our heads here. However, the wind suddenly shifted—nothing so fickle, you know, sir," with a laugh, " as the wind, except a lady's smiles—and bore it, to my ex¬ treme disappointment, quite in a contrary direction." " No, indeed, sir, I cannot," replied Eugene ; " I w T as not so fortunate as to witness the ascent.' ** Then, sir, w r e may condole vvitli each other on the circumstance." " As to that, sir," said Eugene, laugh¬ ing, " very little condolence is requisite
about a matter that one does not regret ; having seen one or two ascents, my curio¬ sity is perfectly satisfied, there being no¬ thing of interest to keep it alive in them." " Nothing of interest ! you astonish me, sir! What, no interest excited by seeing your fellow-beings soaring and pe¬ netrating into the regions of boundless space—those regions to which our longing eyes were once raised, hopeless of ever as¬ cending to them ?" " No, sir; because I conceive no benefit can result to mankind from their possess¬ ing the power of doing so; could bal¬ loons, indeed, be rendered stationary,
" Sir—sir, this is a conclusion that a scientific mind would never be capable ofi" cried the other, hastily interrupting him ; " shouid not—must not tirne be al¬ lowed for improvements in every disco¬ very ? It is not the moment one is made that w r e can take in or comprehend all the results that may be frhe consequence of it «—it is progressively all sciences advance to
perfection : astronomy was not at once what it now is ; how long were we mis¬ taken луНЬ regard to the form of the globe, and the nature of the planetary system ! and arguing by this, is it not fair and natural to imagine, that the fourth element may yet be rendered as subser¬ vient, and as much under the control of man, as the other three have been, by his attaining the means of steering and navi¬ gating a balloon through it ? You may smile, sir ; but be pleased only to recollect how many things have been scoffed at in one age, that the next have proved possi¬ ble beyond controversy, by accomplishing them—be pleased, I say, only to cast your eyes a hundred years back, and think how they would have sneered at and de¬ rided the idea ofour being enabled, in the ensuing century, to traverse seas of cold water, merely by means of a little hot, liiïht our streets with smoke, and tra- vel at the rate ofa hundred miies an hour through the air, seated snugly beneath a puffed-out bag of silk, filled with the same
light vapour ! I say, sir, do this, and you will perhaps not deem what I have now said so ridiculous as you seem to intimate your thinking it." Eugene could not immediately reply. Had the stranger been a person at all ac¬ quainted with him, he would have con¬ ceived he was indulging a laugh at his expence, so exactly similar were the argu¬ ments he made use of to those he had himself advanced, on an occasion that he could never think of but with shame and confusion. " Yes, sir, I say," continued the stran¬ ger in a triumphant accent, misconstruing the silence of Eugene into something of conviction, " that balloons may not only yet, but immediately, be rendered subser¬ vient to the control of man, I myself having devised a project for the purpose; it is nothing more than having so many fathom of line attached to them, which setained below, to draw them gently back on a given signal, will allow of their tra- VOL. i L к
versing the heavens to an almost immea¬ surable distance !" "That is to say, sir," said Eugene, again laughing, " you will allow them to travel the length of their tether ?" The stranger frowned.—" It is as much as to say, sir," he cried, " that I can at once render them serviceable; and once rendered so, what glorious discoveries may not be anticipated from the circum¬ stance I We are told, there is no part oí space unoccupied : and if this be the fact, may not the adventurous aeronaut, in his almost celestial voyage I may call it, pos¬ sibly discover some glorious creatures. forming the link between us and those more spiritual ones, that walk, as we are assured, the earth unseen ?" " Why, certainly, sir/ said Eugene, again giving way to his risibility, ' r as wt know there are such a number of castle.v elevated in the air, it woultl not be verv unnatural tt) suppose they had inhabitants/ " Oh, you are pleased to be facetious, sir ! but a sneer wont deter me from ьау-
ing what I think; so, not to dwell upon what to me is, I assure you, of no weight —as discoveries, we must suppose, are the suggestions of the Deity, how do we know but that this of balloons may be for the benevolent purpose of opening an in¬ tercourse between us and the inhabitants of the other planets, and thus finally amalgamating us all into one happy har¬ monized iamily of love and concord ? I know, in refutation to this idea, you will begin to argue philosophically of the at¬ traction of the earth, and of tin millions of years which it is computed a cannon- ball would take in flying from one star or planet to another; but, sir, in reply, î say, with regard to the first observation, there is nothing too ditlicult for science to surmount; and vvith respect U> the latter, that when the computation was made, it was at a period when the facility with which we can now bolt into the air was unknown. Conceive, sir, it it be possible for you to do so, what, shouhl such even¬ tually prove to be the case, must be the к 2
transport of the traveller, at finding him¬ self going with as much case from one planet to another as ever he did from one place to another here—what his sensations must be when, for the first time, he finds himself within the ring of Saturn, and pe¬ netrates the belts of Jupiter ! what will the interest created by the discoveries of captain Parry, or captain this, or captain that, be, compared with what his will ex¬ cite, after his visiting the elegant inhabi¬ tants of the moon—the more beauteous, hut perhaps not more interesting ones, of Venus—the fiery and animated ones ot the more torrid planet Mercury, and so on! Oh, sir, 1 could envy the antedilu¬ vians their prolongation of existence, from what 1 anticipate being yet discovered to man !" Eugene knew not what to say or tliink ; but from his perplexity about this he was speedily relieved by the sound of the din¬ ner-bell—a sound that was no sooner heard than every one hasted from the garden, leaving him to j olio w or stop as he pleasetl He was slowly doing the former, when a
servant came out to meet him, and by him he was conducted to the dining-room, where he found the master of the house already seated at the head of the table, with his guests ranged at either side of him. He merely noticed Eugene by a nod, antl motion to sake a seat. But if Eugene was surprised by what passed in the garden, how much more was he by the conduct observed at din¬ ner ! no one speaking, not a mouth being opened, except for the positive purpose of receiving food. But this was not all ; some of the guests distinguished them¬ selves in a way that was equally curious : one lady made a sudden grasp at a pud¬ ding, but which she dropped the instant she caught the eye of her entertainer; and as another was raising her fork, with abit of chicken, to her mouth, a gentleman dexterously turned it aside, and put it in his own ; and altogether Eugene began to iorm strange surmises as to where he was. They were, however, perhaps, wide ofthe .mark; but when, by a bhort conversation
after dinner with the supposed poet, he actually ascertained he was in a private mad-house, as we make no doubt the reader has by this time conjectured, what his feelings луеге at the circumstance we leave to be imagined—his feelings, at the almost appalling idea of the inveterate enemy, that had previously aimed at his life and character, not being yet satisfied with what he had maele him suffer; since to his contrivance he of course at once at¬ tributed what had novv happened ; and working, as he did, in the dark, like an invisible agent of mischief, knew not how he should be able in any way to cope with him. The enemy w r c know where to face we in some degree lose our fear of, but some¬ thing like a freezing sensation of terror accompanies the idea of one whom we in vain endeavour to detect, луЬПе still con¬ vinced they are hovering about us. But leaving him in this deplorable place, to chew the bitter cud of reflection on the errors, or misconduct, that had cither been
the means of raising him up this enemy, or, at least, of enabling him to plan suc¬ cessfully against him, we shall, for the present, bid him adieu, and pass over, though луШюис either the aid of a steam¬ boat or a balloon, to St. Doulagh's, having always thought the time for visiting our friends л^ав indeed when they vvere in sor- row, as was полу the case with the family at the castle.
CHAPTER IX. " Do you love me ?" " Troth, n.i—no more than геаьоп." Ere Airs. Brady's arrival at St. Doulagh's, slie had fully decided on concealing from all, save Eugene himself, the fatal catas¬ trophe of poor Rose, lest otherwise a sus¬ picion of the circumstance to which she entirely imputed it shoultl be excited, and thus a stain cast upon the memory of her lost dariing. To Eugene she consi¬ dered its disclosure but a merited punish¬ ment for his conduct, and accordingly de¬ termined, should they ever chance to meet, on pouring into his bosom all the bitterness of her own lacerated one; for though Rose had done all in her power to exculpate him in her eyes, still she would not, could not be induced to believe but that he had been terribly to blame.
From the effect of her melancholy ti¬ dings upon the family of St. Doulagh's, in particular upon Grace, she rejoiced in not having heightened the shock these im¬ parted, by a full confession of the truth. Against such a one Grace would hardiy indeed have been able to bear up; as it was, she w r as, for a few days, completely overpowered by the loss of her adopted sister, the sweet friend of her heart, and confidant of every thought ; nor even then perhaps would have had power to make a struggle against her absorbing grief—a grief aggravated by her belief of the early death of Rose being imputable, in a great degree, to the undermining eífect her hopeless attachment for Eugene had upon her health, but for the consideration she knew due to the feelings of others, and the kintl attentions of some friends in the neighbourhood; but while life remained, she felt Rose must be regretted, and that no succeeding friend could ever fill up the void she had left in her heart. к 3
Persuaded of tliis unfortunate attach¬ ment being returned by Eugene, she dreaded, with his ardent feelings, and si¬ tuated as he then was, without any friend at hand to reason with or console him on the subject, imparting to him what had happened, and hence her evasive reply to the letter occasioned by the agitating dream he had Imd in prison. She simply stateti to him that all were then well at St. Doulagh's, aware that, a? he knew not of Rose's departure from it, he would by this statement be quieted about her; for whatever was the alarm he w T as under, the manner in vvhicli he inadvertently ex¬ pressed himself in one or two parts of his letter, had betrayed its being about her, a circumstance that occasioned a kind of strange inquietude in the mind of Grace, arguing, as it seemed to do, our receiving ¿още secret intimation of the sorrow that ¡s approaching; for, from the date of Eu- *jene*s letter, she saw that it was on the ν ery night of poor Rose's death that he had been thus disturbed about her. But
ed too curious to enter upon; Qftd, $s much 88 possible, she t^ied tP divert her thoughts from dwelling on thb. Hardly had she come to the résolve of not making known, for the present, the death of poor Rose to Eugene, when the letter, announcing his liberation, through the kindness of an ипкполуп friend, ar¬ rived. A few weeks before, and vvhat transport Λνουΐά this announcement liave communicated to her feelings ! but now, how was the joy it imparted alloyed and imbittered by the conviction of the sonwv that awaited his return home—a somrw of which she had such apprehensions, that she almost felt it as a kind of respite his departure from England being a little longer delayed. But still, notwithstand¬ ing her dread of what he Iiad to endure on hit; return, there was real, substantial comfort in the thought of his restoration to his family, such as had, by degrees, its effect upon her feelings, lightening and relieving her heart of the intcieraWe load
of anguish that had for some time pre¬ viously oppressed it. Hardly had the agitation occasioned by Eugene's most unexpected liberation been recovered from, when Grace was given to understand that William Delamere might now be daily expected at St. Doulagh's. More than seven years had now elapsed since his departure from it—seven years ! what a period to look forward to, and yet bow quickly is it passed ί Long before its expiration, Grace would probably have ceased to think ahout the foolish promise that had passed betw r een them, but for the continuance of their correspondence, and the manner in which he, from time to time, alluded to this. Led, from the vvay in which he reverted to it, to at length believe he viewed it in a serious light, she at last began to feel as if engaged to him, and make up her mind to their being yet united. The idea excited no kintl of emo¬ tion, one л\*ау or other : she still loved William quite as vv'ell as she had ever done, but still it was with that kind oí
affection that, while it prevented any re¬ pugnance to the thought of being his, would equally have prevented any unhap¬ piness at the thought of his being married to another, provided she was certain that other had as sincere a regard for him as she herself had. Thus thinking and feeling, she received the following letter from him, about a year previous to the period of vvhich we are now speaking; the result of which was, the immediate termination of the affair between tliem. " To Miss O'Neil. ** 1л'.к . ι. jí; . u ľ\JV ПЕЛИ (¡ILYCE, " Should this letter prove neither a very connected, nur a very long one, impute th.e circumstance to the agitation of spirits untler which I write. í have at length, in the course of successive conver¬ sations with niy uncle, discovered that he has all along had a particular alliance in
view for me, on my acceding tp which depends the realization of those flattering expectations I was so long permitted to encourage. Of course I oould not learn this without some little discomposure; but do not be alarmed—destitution will not be the consequence of refusal; the small patrimony of my father, redeemed on his decease, from the creditors that had seiz¬ ed it, by my uncle, and already restored to me, still affording a competence. And now, my dear girl, as a competence with you is preferable to affluence with any other woman, do not let me hear you say you regret the promise plighted to me ; or, in other words, that you have ever considered the affair between us in anv j other than a serious light : neither peraiit yourself to think, that any thing I relin¬ quish for your sake can be regarded by me as a sacrifice, since, if I understand the meaning of the term, nothing can be denominated a sacrifice that is not attend¬ ed with pain to our feelings. Let me hear from you without delay ; but when
did I write to you without requiring this ? I am now, however, more anxious, if possible, than usual, for your attending to this request, our stay here being quite uncertain ; so that, if you delayed writing immediately, I am fearful a tedious time might elapse ere I received your letter. Remember me, as usual, to all kind iriends at St. Doulagh's, but in particular to those of the castle ; and beHeve me, your more wnrmiy than ever devoted " William Delameee." Grace had hardly come lo the conclu¬ sion of this letter, ere her determination v/as taken as to the purport of it: the lit¬ tle hesitation she had on the subject was a convincing proof to her of her attachment to Delamere not being of a nature to en¬ title her to the sacrifice he meditated for her sake, and perhaps she was not altoge¬ ther sorry to have a lair pretext for ex-trio eating herself from an emnigement she had somehow got herself entangled in, with-
out exactly liking tbe idea of it, there being minutes in which she could not help thinking something more than es¬ teem w r as requisite for the person to whom one thought of allying themselves for life. Had she been inclined to waver in her decision, the unqualified approbation it met with from her aunt, to whom, through the force of habit, she w T as still accustomed to look up, would have prevented her. In his kind tokens of regard for Grace, William did not forget Miss Agnes Flora Judith, and wdio accordingly, from very mueh liking his remembrances always felt a fidgety kind of impatience for the perusal of his letters, to see whether any thing new might shortly be expected. Impelled by this, she hardly permitted Grace to finish this letter, ere she demand¬ ed it from her. Grace handed it to her without any comment ; but not without comment did Miss Agnes Flora Judith peruse it.— " Good Heavens!" she exclaimed, ** I am
# really quite agitated ! and so, after his being allowed to draw you into an en¬ gagement to him, here's an end to all his expectations ! well, really I never кпелу any thing so-^ -----" " No, my dear aunt," cried Grace, has¬ tily interrupting her, " there is not an end to his expectations, at least as far as I am concerned in preventing their termination, as on my account I certainly shall not per¬ mit of any relinquishment." Her aunt asked her to explain herself Grace obeyed her ; and the mind of Äliss Agnes Flora Judith became immediately relieved from extreme alarm, being sadly afraid that, with the romance usual to girls of her age, Grace ΛνοιιΗ have persisted in her engagement, now that she saw it was likely to meet vvith opposition, to the ut¬ ter discomfiture of the only he>pe she (Miss Agnes) now had of the retrieval of the fa¬ mily consequence, through means of her beauty and accomplishments, believing sho only required to be seen to be admired, and
an introduction into life, to make a conquest of some man of illustrious birth and fortune. —" Well, really I am rejoiced," she cried» " to find you determined on acting so ra¬ tionally, determined on not throwing your¬ self a way." M No woman," said Grace, with warmth, " could be accused of throwing herself away, by allying herself to such a man as William Delamere, even though he did not possess a shilling ! but though such is my opinion, I should still, from a variety of reasons, think myself highly culpable if I eould now consent to marry him !" But again becoming a little alarmed·*- " Thinking so highly of him as you do," cried her aunt, " may you not be persua¬ ded, in spite of ail your objections—in short, am 1 to believe you serious ?" * My letter shall convince you," replied Grace, unlocking her desk, and sitting down to it as she spoke, to address herself as follows to William :—
u To William Delamere, Esq. « St. Doulagh's, 18—. " MY DEAR ΛνίΕΕΙΑΜ, " It was not indeed necessary to request an immediate answer to your last, as my anxiety to prevent any act of impru¬ dence that might be laid to my account, would have been sufficient to prevent any delay in replying to it, even though unsoli¬ cited on the subject. That I feel as I ought the sacrifice you would make for my sake, 1 hope I need not say ; but I should hold myself unworthy indeed of the sentiments that prompt it, could I permit any thing of the kind. No, my dear William, I cannot, 1 will not ! on this point my mind is unalterably made up ! Nothing, I pro¬ test, I declare most solemnly, most sacred¬ ly to you, shall induce me to recede from the resolution I unhesitatingly came to on the subject. To be plain with you, I feel that I have no claim upon you to make such a sacrifice—a sacrifice that would oc¬ casion you to be stigmatized at least, to say nothing on the score of ingratitude to your
uncle, with the imputation of folly—for what could your attachment to me be de¬ nominated, but a mere boyish impressioin unsanctioned by any subsequent know¬ ledge of me ? in short, my regard for you is of this description, that I coultl willing¬ ly see you become the husband of another this instant, луеге I only assured that otlier was truly worthy of you, ts This declaration may perhaps wound your feelings for a moment, and occasion you to demand—why then, this being the case, did I allow myself to hearken to your wish for our union ? In answer I shali reply—because, having seen no one who had inspired me witb a warmer feel¬ ing, I entertained no repugnance to the thought, or rather, perhaps, because the very affection that would make me rejoice to see you happy with another, made me leel pleased at the idea of rendering you so myself. But I shall attempt no fur¬ ther vindication on the subject, feeling, that to do so, would probably be only to confuse you and myself. This only I will
further add, that if my fate to have become yours, I hope and trust you would have found in me all the faithfulness and affection you would have had a right to ex¬ pect in a wife. But, as might naturally have been expected, had we suffered ourselves to reflect on what was likely and probable, your uncle has íormed very different views for you, from those you formed for your¬ self. That you will evince your good sense, by your acquiescence in them, I sin¬ cerely hope, and equally so ensure your felicity ; but of this I have very little doubt, since I cannot for a moment ima¬ gine, that your uncle would have fixed upon any one for you, net sufficiently ami¬ able to deserve your regard and admiration. " Your next letter will, I trust, be to claim my congratulations on your happi¬ ness ; none other, at least none attempt¬ ing a now forbidden topic, will I notice ; merely as a friend, it will always afford me the highest pleasure to hear from you —but only as a friend can I henceforth be induced to hold any correspondence with
you, or allow you to consider your affec¬ tionate " Grace." This letter was perhaps one of the cru¬ ellest shocks the susceptible feelings of William ever received. That Graoe wafc altogether as much in love with him as he couid have wished, he did not perhaps al¬ ways allow himself to imaging but that her regard for him was sufficiently strong to have prevented her losing him without regret, much less giving him up without hesitation, he certainly did flatter liimself. Some little demur, from her natural deli« cacy and generosity of feeling, about per¬ mitting the sacrifice he meditated for hci sake, he perhaps anticipated, but certain¬ ly nothing like the letter he received—a letter so plain and positive in all its asser- tions, as entirely to preclude his throwing himself upon the kindness of his uncle, foi indulgence to his passion. No, he could not ask to be indulged in withstanding his
wishes, for the sake of a woman who had plainly tead him she wouid as soon see him the husband of another as herself. No, after this galling, this almost insult¬ ing avowal, he wonld not, even though commantled, renew r his suit to her ; but it was not without a bitter pang he thought of relinquisliing the hopes in which he had been so long indulging. The hold which Grace had taken of his imagination was not easily to be shaken off, strengthened and confirmed as was the impression she had made upon his boy¬ ish fancy, by all he had subsequently heard and understood of her, from the accounts of others, and her correspondence with him. If, as an ť * unîesson'd girl, unschooľd, unpraetibd/ she had been so captivating, what must she be, he conceived, as she grew up—finibhed in all those graces and accomplishments that at once affect the heart and inspire love ! in short, wherever he went, whatever he did, her idea was« still pres' nt to him, occupying his imagi¬ nation, and delighting his fancy , but
there was now an end of any further thought about her—she had thrown him back the heart that had been so long de« voted to her as a valueless deposit, and pride and reason now alike instigated him to forget her. But why did he write to her on tlie subject of his uncle's intentions? because he had flattered himself her letter would have furnished him with a pretext for appealing to his generosity ; if he had not done so, they might still have con¬ tinued mutually deceived—he with re¬ gard to her real sentiments for him, and she as to their positive nature ; antl could he—he who felt that «--------------------- nutikin but !ov< С .iu answer ] nc-, and i e n c i ť r bťty> serut**," could he really ha r e wished to remain un¬ deceived on this subject'^ No ; and with all the pain inflicted by the acknowledg¬ ment of her indifference, he still rejoiced at the timely discovery of it. Her letter of course sealed his lips with regard to her to his uncle ; aiid soon after its receipt they left Geneva for Lausanne .
and here it becomes necessary to mention that his uncle, who for a series of yean had held a highly-lucrative situation in India, was hardly joined by him there ere he made up his mind to quitting the country altogether, and passing sctij years in travel in Europe, for the retrieval of his health, injured by his long residenci 1 in India. To the inquisitive mind, and ardent imagination of William, no plan couid possi bl) have been more agreeable. and several years of real enjoyment were, in consequence of it, passeei by him. In the course of their short journey from Geneva to Lausanne, his uncle be¬ came more communicative, and at length ackno w ledged that the person he had se¬ lected for him was no other than his own daughter, the offspring of a connexion which, from being infinitely beneath him. pride had hitheito induced him to conceal from his family. He represented the young lady as having received every advantage etlucation could bestow. On the death oi Λ"01„ İL L
her mother, a Swiss governess, she haf 1 been sent over, then quite an infant, to her deceased parenťs family at Lausanne. with whom she had been brought up, with no pains or expence spared on her educa¬ tion ; and altogether, he spoke of her in terms ofthe highest delight and affection The expectations which he raised con- cerning her were not disappointed: Dela¬ mere found her amiable, elegant, inte¬ resting—in -short, well cakulatcd to efface the idea ofthe unkind Grace, and accord¬ ingly soon found no difficulty in paying her those attentions that were so agreeable tu hi.s untie. The \oun£> lady received them with complacency, and in becoming his «»uide almit the romantic and enchant- ¡ííľ environs vf Lausanne, alibrded hin: г" 4 idi those opportunities that tould be wish¬ ed for, ior paying tht in. Witli her hi \iMttd the adjacent lake, wandered about t lie nigged coast of Chablais, and viewed the principal beautks >f the Fa} s de \ aud, deriving additional pleasure Iron:
those delightful excursions from the com¬ panion he had. The manner in which she often fixed her large black eyes ιφοη him, led him to believe she wos trying thoroughly to un¬ derstand his character; nor was he mis¬ taken in the surmise, tliough from a very different motive to what he ascribed the circumstance, lîut she was soon explicit with him—she only delayed heing so till as¬ sured of his being capable of being the ge¬ nerous friend she required. Once conv i need of this, siie had no further reserve from him , and with some shght emotion of pain he learned, that she had neither heart nor hand to bestow, both being already gívtn to a young Englishman of t he name of Langrish, wdio had fbr some time taken up lus им- dence at Lausanne, and who, kaiiul her father would never sanction his addresses to her, Irom the inferiority of his fortune to that she expected, had at length pre¬ vailed on her to become his in private Dt laniero did uot disappoint the confi- i о
dence she had in his kindness and genero- sity ; he at once undertook to break what she had disclosed to him to her father, and intercede for her. But, for a length oi time, his zeal in her cause was unavailing Mv. Delamere wa¿ one of those characters that could never patiently bear disappoint¬ ment, and he had Jong set his heart upon seeing the wliole of his immense fortune centred in his tw r o nearest and dearest re lati ves, his daughter and nephew. In the first paroxysm of his fury, on hearing what she had done, he vowed a shilling of that fortune, from the certainlv oí vvhich he concluded she had acted a> she had dtme, should never he lars; hut af length, the serious reflection** brought on by a dangerous fit of illness, seconden! as ihey were by the renew ť d importunities of William, and the cer tainty that, neither with regard to íamih or character, Mr. Langrish was unworthy (»fher, eflccted what William had been 5o long previouslv labouring to bring about in vain. But the reconciliation did
not take place without his daughter being informed, that, from this period, she must make up her mind to but half of his pro¬ perty being hers, it being his determina¬ tion that her cousin should not suffer througii her conduct. He kept his word—William finding, on his decease, which took place some months after, his fortune equally divided between them. The Langrishes were quite as little displeased as surprised by this division of it: thev knew their obligations to Wil- liam —were perfectly aware that, but fbr liis zeal in their cause, they would, iti all probability, have been entirely cut off from any part of it, and accordingly felt neither envy nor displeasure at his being an equal sharer with them in the wealtii of the de¬ ceased. They by this time quite regarded lnm in the light ofa brother; so much so, that Mv. Langrish, who happened to be an isolated being, expressed a wish to settle wherever he did ; arid accordingly, it be¬ ing William's determination to have whut he siiouid consider lus permanent home in
Ireland, they all set out for that kingdom shortly after the decease of Mr. Delamere. Either from early prejudice, or, in re¬ ality, knowing of no place that surpassed it in romantic beauties, William felt that St. Doulagh's was, of all places, the one he should like to settle in, and thither ac¬ cordingly it was decided the party shouki repair, after a short stay in Dublin, for the purpose of ascertaining whether their wish for taking up their abode there could be gratified. All that is already known to the reader was already known at St. Doulagh's, and in consequence, not a little was the bustle whieh the announcement of William's vi¬ sit to it occasioned. This announcement took place through the medium of the dissenting minister and his wife, Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton, by whom he had been brought up, and with whom he had kept up a constant correspondence from the period of lus departure» feeling for them something of the kindly feelings ofa son, as they did for him those of parents,
Mr. Hamilton was a quiet, unobtrusive, excellent-hearted man, of good sound sense, and well educated ; but though well calculatetl, by learning, for conversa¬ tion, infinitely more inclined to commune vvith himself than the world. Not so Mrs. Hamilton—that is, she had no ob¬ jection to commune vvith her own heart; nor why shoultl she, fbr it was a happy, contented heart, at peace with itself and all the world ?—but to be still was another thing; in short, she was all bustle and ac¬ tivity, fonti of knowing all that was going on in the world, and equally so of par¬ taking, as far as she could, of its plea¬ sures. A game of cards was her delight, and a social gossip with a neighbour one of her greatest recreations; but neither her love of cards, or gossiping, occasioned the slightest neglect in any ofher duties; and when this is the case, a little love of pleasure is excusable. It wab impossible to find a thriftier housewife, a better wife, or a kinder neighbour; and if she did like to know the affairs of others, it cer-
tainly was not out of any invidious motive. But, with all her excellences, she did uot meet with that general attention at St. Doulagh's she was so deserving of. The fact was, most of the frequenters of the meeting-house belonged to what was there considered the second class, and as she could not but be intimate with Ihem, from motives of policy, to say nothing of any others, she was, in consequence, ra¬ ther looked down upon by those who re¬ garded themselves as the first. Amongst these was Mrs. Mayfield, the rector's wife; thouoh no one more aimed at being thought amiably condescending than she did. A kind of intimacy was indeed, by the desire of her husband, who had a high respect for the minister, kept up between her and Mrs. Hamilton; that is, she nou- and then invited her to tea, when there was no one with her she cared about ; and in return, once in the course of the win¬ ter, accepted an invitation from her; but when she had what she called her select party, poor Mrs. Hamilton might just a>:
w^ell have hoped for an express invitation to St. James's, as to obtain admission to the rectory. Still no offence was taken, IMrs. Mayfield so contriving it as to pre¬ vent her omissions on these occasions from appearing any way pointed; so that, thougli poor Mrs. Hamilton could not but regret her not being of parties where she knew she should have been certain of meeting vvith such excellent whist-players, she never once thought of taking offence at the circumstance. But at length a change took place : Mrs. Mayfield, either beginning to esti¬ mate Mrs. Hamilton as she ought, or else through some other cause, suddenly be¬ gan to pay her the greatest attention, and not only to invite her to the parties from which she had heretofore been excluded, but absolutely to make such on purpose for her. This agreeable change took [»lace very shortly after the welcome tidings of William's succeeding to the half of his uncle's fortune, and his intention of short¬ ly 3
ly paying her a visit, had reached her; so that Mrs. Hamilton hardly required it to render her happier than she was. But this was not all : not satisfied with having her when invited, Mrs. Mayfield began to call her unkind if she did not see her of her own accord. If a day now passed without bringing her to the rec¬ tory, one or two ofthe young ladies, with their coaxing ways, were sure of being with her, to sec what had become ofher; and then, such caps, and frills, and bas¬ kets, and pin-cushions, and reticules, as they commenced working and making her, that, in short, she might have set up a repository if she pleased. Aii was received as proofs of regard; but there vvere some in the village who slily laughed, and affected to think, that but for William, she would not have had to return thanks for such. But where is the place in which people are to be found who will not now and then be sarcastic, and inclined to impute the actions of others to other motives than tliey choose
to avow? Poor Mrs. Mayfield having five unmarried daughters, all ready for prefer¬ ment, as Mrs. Hamilton said, was the cause of this innuendo, or insinuation ; be¬ sides which, she had two married ones, and two sons, the eldest his father's cu¬ rate, and the youngest studying physic at Edinburgh ; so that, altogether, her fa¬ mily was certainly large enough to occa¬ sion some little maternal anxiety. But then, two of the girls were aheady well married ; and amiable and accomplished as the others were, and so well taught and disciplined, as to be ready to take the first good offer thr.t was made them, there was no occasion to fear their not being yet well established in life. To aid any natural advantages they might possess, she had omitted no pains; they played on the harp and piano, war¬ bled, if not very sweetly, at least verv scientifically, and, in short, it was emite the fashion to admire, and hold them up to imitation, according to their nrøminaV assertion, being not less amiable than ac-
complished. But while, in some way or other, she was always contriving to bring them forward, it was remarked by some, that she did not do equal justice to the merits of others. This was a remark, however, ascribed by her friends to envy, that is still excited by superior merit. But though Airs. Hamilton could not fail of being flattered by the attentions of a family so universally looked up to, and considered the vcrv first in St. Doulacdi's, e' iT) ' her self-elation had not the effect, as is but too often the case, of rendering her ncidectful or inattentive to those to vvhom attention was still due, and accordingly, the family at the castle still, as usual, never fbund a day pass without seeing her. Her attachment to them indeed was of a description not easily to be shaken— a variety of circumstances had contributed to confirm it. In the first place, she had always received the kindest and most un¬ remitting attentions from them; in the next, she had long contemplated a union between Grace and William, whom she
loved as a son, as a certain thing; and in the third, Mr. Hamilton, to whose judg¬ ment she paid the highest deference, had repeatedly declared he knew not a family any where more deserving of estimation. Through his means it was that they were kept in ignorance of all that befell Eugene in London ; he was the first that heard of the terrible predicament in which he was placed there, and immediately set about ewerting himself to have it kept from their knowledge. But this was not the only obligation which they were, unconsciously, under to him and his wife; the discovery of this, however, was not requisite to add to theñr regard for them, having long con¬ sidered them in the light of their iirst friends. At length came the long wihhed-fbr let¬ ter from William, anuouncincc his arrival from Switzerland, and intention of Ьсчпц· soon dovvn at St. Doulagh's, accompanied by his cousin and her husband. Hardly, however, had the flutter of joy iuto which it threw her a little subsided, ere Mrs.
Hamilton began to feel herself in a state of terrible perplexity, from not having the power of immediately accommodating the party under her ow r n roof, owing to the house being then undergoing some repairs.— u Was ever any thing so unfor¬ tunate," she thought, "just at this time to have the place in such a state!" But there was no use in fretting about the matter; the bricklayers, and plasterers, and carpenters, had got in, and to get them out time enough to have every thing ready for the reception of the travellers was out of the question ; so all that could be done was, to consider vvhere she could bestow them fbr a time. This, however, required more consideration than she was at first aware of, there being very few lodgings at St. Doulagh's, and those of a very sorry description, and no inn of any consequence, the лilİage not being a tho¬ roughfare. She would have had no hesi¬ tation in asking accommodation for them in that barrack of a place, as she called the castle, with its numerous suits of chum-
hers, but after what had occurred between Grace and William, this could not be done with any propriety. In the midst of her dilemma on the subject, in walked Mrs. ä lay field, with the young ladies—a real compliment, if she knew but all, as they had just been on the point of turning their steps in a different direction, to pay a vi>it at a house of some consequence, when a whis¬ per of a letter having been received from William reached them, and occa ioned them immediately to change theii inten¬ tion. Mrs. Mayfield entered with her usual honied smile, but which vanished the in¬ stant she beheld the thoughtful looks of Mrs. Hamilton, and with an eagerness not usual to her, her feelings and passions being generally in ι state of excellent sub¬ jection, so much so as to permit it seldom to be known w hat was passing in her mind, she demanded what had happened-—whe¬ ther there was any ill news—whether, in
short, William had entirely put off his long-expected visit, or------ " No, no," replied Mrs. Hamilton, iS no such thing—it was not because he put off his visit, but because he's about paying it, that you found me cogitating in this manner;" and she proceeded to explain the dilemma she was in. " And is this all !" said Myh. Mayfield, her countenance immediately brightening up, like the sky after the pas.sing away o t a thunder-storm; "you really are a sad woman to cau-e one such a fright ; for real¬ lv, from vous* looks, I was o uite afraid Mr. Dclameie had abandoned his inten¬ tion of coming here, and that woidd have been such a cruel disappointment to-—to you, I know, that really 1 was quite pain¬ ed at the thought; but really I don't know how I shall forgive your allowing yourself to be teased and perplexed in Ihis manner, when you must know you had friends here, vvho vvould feel it quite a happiness to accommodate any iriends of vours.*'
" Yes, that I knew right well,* 5 replied Mrs. Hamilton ; " and I certainly should have gone up to the castle, to have asked a few nights' lodging for rny visitors, but for this coolness between William and Grace." " Tut, tut !" cried Mrs. Mayfield, a little i m pätien íly, and with a slight contraction of her brow ; " when I spoke of your friends here, it was not the family at the castle I alluded to, but the family at the rectory. After the ill usage William re¬ ceived from Miss O'Neil—her breaking with him in the abrupt manner she did, without rhyme or reason, it certainly would be insulting to him to attempt bringing about any renewal of his former intimacy at the castle.*' " Well, I doift know that he would think that, or rather that he really consi¬ ders there's an end of his intimacy there. Grace's not choosing to marry him is no reason why he should quarrel with her family—a family who were always so fond
ofhim ; but, however, that's not the ques¬ tion at present." " No, certainly not," said Mrs. May- field, again a little impatiently ; " if Mr. Delamere chooses to put up vvith what is generally considered most unworthy con¬ duct to him—conduct I should blush to think any of my girls were capable of— that's his affair, not ours." " Certainly ; but indeed, my dear friend, when you come to hear and understand every thing, you'll find my sweet Grace has not been so much to blame, if at all, as you now seem to imagine." " Well, perhaps so," a little peevishly ; ** but to return to what 1 was saying—how could you think of perplexing yourself in such a manner, about accommodation for vour friends, when you must know you had only to acquaint me with your dis¬ tress, to be relieved from it ?" " Yes, I know that ; but then such a thronged family as you art in yourselves : besides, didn't 1 hear you dictating a let¬ ter to Miss Harriet the other day, in re v -
ply to one from your old uncle, saying he wished to come with his daughters to pay you a visit, to excuse yourself, on the score of room, from receiving him?" «í Why, yes, undoubtedly you did," replied Älrs. Älay field, with a slight blush, and after a momentary hesitation ; " but the fact is, I actually had no room to spare just then, owing to a—a—an appre¬ hension of one of the girls being taken ill, or indeed the whole set of them, for I thought the eomplamt Anne was getting was the measles ; but that alarm is now over, and >o I shall have the greatest pleasure in the world in having your friends with me." 41 Well, since not inconvenient, I shall be obliged by your letting Mr. and Airs. Langrish have a chamber for a night or two; but as for William, I don't think I need trespass upon you fbr him, for in some nook or corner 1 think I shall be able to make up a bed for him myself here " ** No, no, I positively insist against any thing of the kind ; there are two unoccu-
pied chambers now at the rectory, and so leave this I will not, till you write to him, to let him know what arrangement you have made for him and his cousins," Thus urged, Mrs. Hamilton sat down to write the required letter, which having perused, Mrs. Mayfield undertook putting in the post-office herself, lest of any dis¬ appointment to her plan. " Well, I think we have him secure," saitl Mrs. Mayfield, talking over the mat¬ ter with her eldest married daughter ; " his taking up his abode here will afford a pre¬ text for monopolizing him, in a way that ean scarcely fidi, I think, of leading to an agreeable result. I wonder which of the girls he will most like ! if very intellectual, 1 think Charlotte will be the one ; but if apt to be struck by Ы,. 'y» our darling Myra will have the best chance." " That would be unfortunate," returned Mrs. Neville, " after the lengths she has gone with Falkiner; why, she confessed to me having absolutely engaged herseli to him."
u Pooh, pooh í what signifies ? do you think she would be fool enough, or that, if so inclined, I would permit her, as to reject such a match as Delamere for the sake of a person so inferior in fortune as Falkiner? Should the former take a fan¬ cy to her, and the latter not be inclined to give up his pretensions, why your fa¬ ther and I, vvho have hitherto pretended to be ignorant of the affair, in order that we might not be accused of encouraging a son in disobedience to his parents, must then come forward, to extricate her from him, under the pretext of disapproving of what is clandestine. However, as in him she certainly vvould havt 1 a very good match, I should much rather Delamere took a fancy to any other of the girls than I о her. Should she, however, be his choice, 1 hope we shall he able to manage matters so as to keep Falkiner among us. 1 know very well, that neither Bell nor Bab would object to him, and am posi¬ tive, that hatl not Myra come in his way, he would have become particular to the
latter. I now see the bad policy of bring¬ ing out more than two or three girls at u time." By return of post a letter arrived from William, stating the precise day on which he might be expected; but that, owing to a slight indisposition of Mrs. Langrish's, his cousins would not accompany him, though it was their intention soon to fol¬ low ; and with his acceptance of her kind offer of a bed for a few nights, requesting Mrs. May field to be assured of his grati- I tude for her kindness in offering it. Grace could not help smiling, a little sarcastically, when she heard of this offer, from pretty well knowing the motive to which it was owing. What she thought. however, she kept to herself. The keen¬ ness» of her observation would not permit her tojóin in the wann encomiums it was the fashion to bestow on the family at tht rectory ; but no one ever heard an ill-na¬ tured hi&inuation against them from her ; she was indeed particularly guarded in what she said about them, lest of being
accused of pique or resentment, so little was the attention she received from them, or rather so slighting, in general, was their conduct; but she was too much calculated to excite admiration not to occasion envy, while her want of fortune prevented her being of any consequence in their eyes. That William was seriously offended she could not doubt, from the total cessa¬ tion of his correspondence with her, and grieved at the idea, from her sincere re¬ gard for hhn, she had long looketl for¬ ward with impatience to his present visit to St. Doulagh's, from the opportunity she conceived it likely to afford her of en¬ deavouring to bring about a reconciliation between them; but in her hope of thi.s she began verv much to iear she should be disappointed, on learning the ;. ι range¬ ment that was made tbr hint— a fuir that, of course, made her regret the circum¬ stance; for, from the object she w ал aware the family at the rectory had in view in inviting him to their house, she was con¬ vinced they would do ali in their power
to prevent the renewal of any intimacies that might be likely to detach him from them. At length the subject of all this specu¬ lation and anxiety arrived, and as he dash¬ ed through the village in his handsome cur¬ ricle, with the usual accompaniment of attendants, the whole place seemed to be thrown into commotion by the impatience there was to behold him. He stopped at Mr. Hamilton's ; but hardly had the first affectionate greetings been over between him and his much-valued friends there, ere Mr. and Mrs. Mayfield made their ap¬ pearance to claim him as their guest, and without more ado, bore him off in tri¬ umph to the rectory, vvith Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton, ( í race could not help being thrown iuto a little flutter on hearing of his arrival; she knew not how the welcome she was so longing to give him might be received, and felt that she could not quite compose herself till bhe had ascertained whether, in addition to the resentment she had occa-
sioned him, change of circumstances had effected any change of manner. She was not immediately, however, to be put out of suspense on this point; nor indeed did she altogether, from her knowledge of the .Mayfields, imagine she should. He arrived early in the morning, and the day advanced without hearing any thing more ofhim than that he was come, except it was the work that was making about him at the rectory. Miss Agnes Flora Judith had again got into the clouds, so she made no comment on the circumstance. Not so, however, her bro¬ ther; he had always dearly loved William, and could not help therefbre feeling sensi¬ bly the indifference, which his being so many hours in the village without look¬ ing in on his old friends at the castle, ma¬ nifested about them. A fit of the gout, from which he was just recovering at the period, did not tend to render him more patient under any little vexation, and with downright indignant bitterness he VOL. iL M
spoke of William's seeming unkindness. —« Well, well, times are altered !" he said ; " there was a time when Mr» Wil¬ liam wouldn't have passed these gates without stopping, if he could have helped it ; but he wants no further attention from us: he knows how matters have gone on here, and so, like the worlds in general. * no longer pipe no longer dance ;* he has given us up for those who can better en¬ tertain, and afford him more amusement !" " Let us not judge him prematurely, my dear father," said Grace ; " I can hard¬ ly think we shall find him so much changed as you seem to imagine." " Tut, tut ! that is a sign you know nothing of the world, child, or you wouldn't say so: as the barometer rises and falls according to the changes of the weather, so your friends* regard is very apt to increase or decline according to the increase or decline of your fortune. Βμί there is one thing I am determinedon, and that iş, to let. him know my mind- Yes, I'll take care, as soon as I get on
my legs again, to brush up the memory of my gentleman, in such a way for him as shall make him blush, if capable of blushing. But if we had any doubt of his being altered, wouldn't his having given up entirely writing to you be a proof that heis?" Grace was on the point of saying no, but checked herself, from the reflection of the explanation that must have followed the assertion, deeming it as well, since there was an end of the affair between her and William, that her father should know nothing more ofthe matter than he already did, and that was only that if she had liked to give him encouragement, she might perhaps have had William for a se¬ rious admirer. " One wouldn't like to be thought im¬ patient, Grace," resumed the lieutenant, " by complaining ; but somehow one can't help feeling a little sore at seeing every one getting on, as it were, in life but one's self! Here's this jackanapes» for what I M 2
know r to the contrary, Delamere, come flourishing down amongst us, who went away a dependent on the kindness ofa ca pri cious uncle ! and here's the rector get¬ ting his daughters married, and his sons established in life! while here we are just as we were seven 1οη<χ years ац-о, or rather much worse, for my expectations about Eugene were not then disappointed : buí don't crv, Grace—don't crv ; it will frei me if I think I have said any thing to vex you, God knows you have had buí too many tears lately, my poor girl; your trials indeed commenced earlv. In your spring-tide, a nipping frost has fallen upon your young hopes ! Yet—no, J will not think so ; I will trust that the\ will yet bud una bloom out as freshly n** ever. Now, don't shake your head in that maimer, Grace; I cannot bear—J mean. 1 don't like it. it puts meso much in mind of poor Rose'" and the lieutenant drew forth his handkerchief from beneath the bolster of the sofa, on which he was re¬ clining , " thaťs the way she used to shak*
her head latterly, whenever I tried to cheer her, by saying she would yet be as blooming and merry as ever. I always liked that poor child ; but," and there was a slight break jn his voice, íť I never thought, or rather knew, I loved her so well, Grace, till we lost her." Grace was applying her handkerchief to lier fast-falling tears, when she was star¬ tled by a sudden bustle in the hall, and the sountl of a strange voice ; she listened attentively—could it be? Yes, she was sure it was the accent of William , and under the idea of its being hirn she heard, ^he was darting to the door, when, hap¬ pening to brush against her father's elbow, the part in which the gout had just then lodgetl itself, he seized her by the gown, to demand what she was about, declaring that slie had nearly killed him by what >he had done. '* I beg your pardon, my dear sir,' cried Grace, gently struggling, as she ->poke, to disengage herself—** but I reaiiy think—-"
" If you wish to save me from dying, rub my elbow!" cried her father, inter¬ rupting her, " for I am in agony." Grace, vvithout a further effort to re¬ lease herself, knelt down beside him. In a minute after the door behind her opened; she tried to glance round, but her father's hand was resting on her head, and that prevented her. Presently the lieutenant's eyes were raised from following the mo¬ tion of her hand as she rubbed his elbow, and—"Bless my heart!" he exclaimed, ** Λνίιο have we got here?" Grace now instinctively turned round —* s And who have we got here indeed !" she луаз on the point of repeating ; for in the tall, finely-grown, elegant-looking young man that stood before her, she could hardly bring herself to ЬеНел г е she beheld the identical William that seven years ago had left St Doulagh's. But, yes, it луав him ; his smile—the lurking Smile at the surprise he excited, betrayed him. And—^ Really you are so im— so altered," said Grace, correcting herself,
as, after standing a minute to enjoy the stare he occasioned, or else througii some other cause, he stepped forward to receive her extended hand, and raise her from her kneeling attitude, '* that I should hardly have recollected you elsewhere.'* ** Altered !" exclaimed the lieutenant ; w yés, that you may well say, indeed ; by the head of Neptune, but he has grown a proper fellow í but this comes of the books being thrown aside. Poor Hamilton, however, is not to be blamed for having kept you so close to the oar as he did; it was xill along, I know, by the order of your uncle, who, if not obeyed, would have removed you to where you would not have received such kindness.'* But suddenly changing his tone, and drawing back on the sofa— " So at last, sir, you have found your way here, I perceive,'* he said. '* And that I did not sooner do so, I am not to blame," cried Delamere, drop¬ ping the hand of Grace to take the lieute¬ nant's ;- ** but really there was so mucir îo
talk over with my friends, the Hamiltons f and then------" ** So much at the rectory to render you forgetful of every thing else, that------ Well, well, that's all natural; when a young fellow gets amongst a set of pretty girls, one can't wonder at his being un¬ willing to break away from them ; and so here's my hand, of my own accord, and with it a hearty welcome back again to St. Doulagh's ; but come, Grace has told you that you are altered—do you think her so?" " No ; I perceive no other alteration in her," Delamere calmly replied, " than what might naturally be expected/. " That is, you left her little more than a child, and you have found her a young woman : and how many in the village would be glad you found them the same !" added the lieutenant with a laugh, for his spirits had received quite a fillip from this visit ; " eh ! what do you think, my lad ?" 4t Perhaps so, sir ; but-----" " You were going to inquire about the
rest of us! Well; my sister is just the old thing still—a Socrates, or Plato, or any other philosopher you choose to name, in petticoats ; and Eugene, he'll soon be here again, I suppose; but, God knows! I don't know how, but that it would be quite as weli he staid away; for I am much afraid he is coming here only to af¬ flict himself and us all. Ah, Bill," sud¬ denly reverting to old times, " I little thought, when, perhaps as great a boy as you both, I shared or promoted your sports here, that that boy, then so pro¬ mising, and every thing a father could wish, would ever have caused me the sor¬ row he has done!" ** Come, come, my dear sir, I miist not hear any thing said against my friend Eu¬ gene/ " Well, well, I sha'n't say a word more against him ; nor should I now, only to a friend like you. Indeed, you have reason to regard the poor fellow, for, next to Ids own family, I don't suppose there m 3
is a person in the world he loves more than you." " I never doubted his regard, sir. No, I never doubted Eugene's possessing a warm heart—such a one as would render him incapable of meeting the affection of a friend with indifference." His colour rose as he spoke, and Grace caught what she thought a reproachful glance from him. Well, it was only what she had previously made herself certain of being the case; she had offended him; but being so long convinced of this, why now feel herself so uncomfortable at the thought? But William had always had such a way of shewing resentment by his eyes, and she found he had not lost the trick. She began to feel awkward ; Wil¬ liam*, after the first shake by the hand, made no attempt to unbend towards her ; and' uncertain whether, after all, the re¬ serve of his manner was altogether owing to resentment, or the absolute conversion of InVfòrmer sentiments into indifference, she knew not how to make an effort to
enter into conversation with him. To re¬ lieve herself from the unpleasant restraint this imposed upon her, she suddenly rose, and said she vvould go seek her aunt. Ere she reached the door, however, it was opened by Miss Agnes Flora Judith her¬ self, apprized of the visit of Delamere, and as impatient to see him as a person of her dignified habits would allow themselves to appear.
CHAPTER X. " Silent md rlnste she ь*ел!ь along, Far from tlie world** gay busy throng, With conile, ¿et prevalimi; torce, intent upon h* r dost. n'd сош "-с; (ïrhtti'iil tind useful idi she does" Miss Agnes was quite as little prepared for the alteration that had taken place in the appearance of William as were the others, and her looks, like theirs, testified the surprise it occasioned. Mutual greet¬ ings over, and a little incidental conversa¬ tion ensuing, William at length rose to depart.—" What f leaving us so soon ?" demanded the lieutenant. " Nay, this is unkind, after so long an absence; tea is just coming in, and you know you used to say there was no one in the world made- it so well as Grace. Come, stay a little
longer, if it be only to see whether she has lost the art.'* William looked at Grace and smiled. " As much as to intimate," thought Grace, " that when he made that assertion, it was at a time when he was weak enough to think very differently of her from what he now did." But let liim have meant what he would by the smile, his hat was thrown aside, and down he sat again. The lieutenant knew he had travelled a great deal, antl he now began to ques¬ tion him as to the places he hatl seen. In the course of conversation, wanting some observations illustrated, he cailed to Grace to hand him down a bundle of maps, that, enveloped in dust and cobwebs, lay upon the top of a bookcase. Now the bookcase was so high, that to attempt to get them, without either running the risk of pulling it down on her head, by her efforts to reach them, or else mounting on a chair, was out of the question ; and as she liked neither one or the other, she stood irreso¬ lute.— " Why, whaťs the matter with you,
Grace?" said her father a little petulantly: " didn't you hear me ?" " Yes, sir; but------" " Then why don't you do what I desire, pray ?" Grace coloured, and so did Delamere, either from bein^ unaccustomed latelv to lh? i/ hear females treated or addressed in this authoritative manner, or some other cause. —" Xo, no !" he exclaimed, interposing between Grace and the bookcase, as she turned to it, and taking down the maps, and at the same time drawing down a whole shower of dust upon himself, he presented them to her father. The lieutenant laughed heartily at the figure which he had made of himself by what he had done.—" Well, you may thank Miss Grace for this," he said; " and the least she could do in return, I think, for the figure you have made yourself ior her, would be to give your jacket a good dusting for you/' " I am sure I am veiy sorry," said Grace; " but——" Her hand was some-
how in the луау of William at the mo¬ ment, and there was a pressure of it at the instant, that either through surprise, or the indication this seemed to be of some little relenting towards her, caused an emotion that prevented her finishing what she was about saying, and made her resume her seat in silence. Tea over, William aga'ţn took up his hat to be off.—" So you are in a hurry to leave us?" said the lieutenant again, a lit¬ tle reproachfully. tť Äly dear sir, I really stole away." " Well, what then ? Perhaps you are not missed yet ; and if you are, a few mi¬ nutes longer delay can make no diffe¬ rence. I wanted to see whether you re¬ membered any thing of the lessons I gave you at chess." " Another time, mv dear sir; but now really——" '* Oh, very well í I see poor Grace is to have no respite ; fbr except some cha¬ ritable person drops in to relieve her, which is very seldom the case, down she
is obliged to sit every evening to chess with me." Again the hat of William was thrown aside, and—" Where is the chess-board ? ' he demanded.—" And all these summer evenings," he asked, as they were arran¬ ging the men, " do you keep her pent up, playing chess ?" " Why, what can I do?" replied the lieutenant. " But my poor girl, I know —I know she is lost amongst us." From this moment the lips of Dela¬ mere became seaied, and he became so evidently abstracted, that the lieutenant at last thought it would be a charity to release him ; and accordingly pretending a sudden twinge, that rendered playing any longer unpleasant to him, he said that he would no longer detain him. For the third time then the hat was taken up, but not for the third time to be resigned. " Well," said Miss Agnes, " who ever would have thought that William would
have grown up so fine a young man ! Not Ï, I am sure." " Nor I, I am sure," said Grace, with a sigh. (S And then I think him pretty much what he was with regard to good-nature. If there was any little stiffness or shyness in his manner, I certainly think it im¬ putable to your breaking with him—to the way in vvhich his pride was piqued by that circumstance/ Grace looked at her father ; but he was too much occupied at the moment, in looking over a map, for some of the places mentioned to him by Delamere, to be paying any attention to them.—" Well, perhaps so," she said ; *' but if so, pride is, I believe, by this time, the only feeling that remains at all hurt by it/ " It is not, however, altogether impos¬ sible for former sentiments to be revived," observed Miss Agnes a little thought¬ fully ; " and an alliance vvith William would not bc an undesirable thing now/ " Of that there is very little chance now,
I believe," said Grace, rising, and moving to a window; " therefore, my dear aunt, I beg you may speak no more of such a mat- ter." Delamere was not yet completely out of steht. Grace involuntarily clan ced О »'O round the room ; antl what a contrast in her imagination did the great old-fashion¬ ed, dusky apartment—did the stiline.^, the solitude of the castle, whence mirth and cheerfulness had long departed, form to the pleasant abode, the gay domestic cir¬ cle, to which he was hastening! No won- der he should be in such a hurry to depart from a place where it was hardly possible for the spirits not to be affected—and she sighed heavily. Yet there was a time when William would not have thought it a punishment to remain vvith his friends at the castle ; but tiiat time was passed— their circumstances were altered, and so were his; yet do not let her do him injus¬ tice—if his feelings fur them were changed, had she not to thank herself ibr it? Not content vvith merely breaking with him.
had she not said every thing she could on the occasion to affront and offend him? Why not be satisfied with simply stating, that, after his uncle's explanation, she could not possibly think of any further encou¬ ragement to his addresses ; without tell¬ ing him she did not care one pin about him, which her declaration, that she would as soon see him the husband of an¬ other ан herself, was certainly tantamount to ; when, after all, she was actually any thing but decidedly indifferent about him? But if his attachment was of the deep- rooted nature he would once have led her to imagine------but man was proverbially an inconstant creature—ahvays prone to change, and then so proud as not to be of¬ fended with impunity; and so, all thing-, considered, the manner in which she had piqued him, and where he then was, sur¬ rounded by those whose object it would be to keep them asunder, she could not avoid thinking there was indeed very lit- tie chance or hope of the renewal of his addresses. But was there no indication
whatever of former feelings during his re- cent visit? antl she began to run over every look, and vvord, and glance, that had escaped him. The motionless manner in which he stood contemplating her on his entrance—the sudden pressure of her hand—the flushed cheek at her father ap¬ pearing angry with her—his anxious in¬ terposition to prevent her running any risk of harm ; did not these circumstances indicate something flattering—some little struggle in his mind about her? but then, opposed to this, was there not his anxiety to depart ? and his sudden abstraction, as if his thoughts were any vvhere but where lie then was? Ah, it was idle, ridiculous to imagine he entertained a further idea about herí Well, let things turn out as they would, it was fortunate perhaps for him, thut she had not sooner understood what her real sentiments for hini were, since, if she had, she rather doubted whe¬ ther she could have absolutely relinquish¬ ed hirn in the decided terms she had done; and without lier having done which, per*
haps he vvould have done something to provoke his uncles displeasure on her ac¬ count, and so probably have prevented the settlement ultimately made in his favour; and then where would be all the attention he now received, the ringing of bells, the blazing of bonfires, at his ar¬ rival at St. Doulagh's? hovv quietly, with all his wi rth, his captivating graces and accomplishments, might he then have stole in and stole out ofthe place! The moment he was missed at the rec¬ tory, it was guessed where he was gone ; to be out of doubt on the matter, how¬ ever, Mrs. Hamilton was referred to. Not a little was the perturbation of Mrs. Mayfield, at finding he was actually, as she had surmised, gone to the castle. In vain she tried to retain her usual placid brow and tranquil manner—she continued in a downright fever, till a significant look (Vom one of the young lathes, who were all stationed at the respective windows ofthe drawing-room, commanding a full view of the road, dissipated the alarm she was in,
of his having deserted for the evening, by announcing his return. * ť Well, after all, his visit was not so very long a one ; and perhaps, from the consideration of former inti id асу, he thought an immediate one could not well be avoided / and she forthwith proceeded to ring for the tea-urn, which she had not power before to do, notwithstanding the yawnings of poor Mr?. Hamilton, who al¬ ways liked what she called an early cup of tea; and— u Been to see some of your old friends ?" she said, with one of her sweetest smiles, and in her most dulcet tone, as he entered. iS Yes, I rank my friends at the castk amongst шу very oldest." ** Well, and ------ M she hesitated, with all her anxiety to proceed, fearful of betray¬ ing that anxietv, " weil, and-----" after a slight pause, " you found wonderful alter¬ ations there I suppose?" " No, by no means ; so little alteration there indeed, that I coukl almost have
fancied it was but the day before I had been there." " Oh, that is with regard to the place itself, you mean ; but \\ ith regard to the inmates—now Miss Grace, for instance ?" " Certainly no wonderful alteration with respect to her, for it couldn't be very wonderful to find a person you leit achild, se\en years ago, now a young wo¬ man." '' Assuredly—undoubtedly not!" assent¬ ed Mrs. M ay field, taking a sip of tea be¬ tween eaeh word, to conceal a something \ery like a feeling of discomposure at the coolness of this observation, or rather, per¬ haps, vvith which it was uttered. u Well, and young woman as you now find her, what Is \our opinion of her ?—she certain¬ ly was a pretty child—but 1 don't know how İt is, yet there are people who still think her rather pretty ish.' ** Indeed ' well 1 could never agree with them in thinking so' ' ťk No T exclaimed Mrs. Mayfield, with all the vivacity ot surprise, and a wide
distension of eyes, sparkling with delight —-"no!" " No." Mrs. Hamilton laughed.— " You may well look surprised," she said, addressing herself to Mrs. Mayfield; " but when you know this gentleman as well as I do, you won't be taken in by him, as you have now been. I'll tell you the reason why he couldn't join in opinion with those who only think our Grace prettyish—because he himself thii k s her beautiful." « " Indeed !" said Mrs. Mayfield, affecting a laugh, but with a slight variation of co¬ lour; " very well explained indeed!—And is it so ? (to Delamere) is it really as your friend has intimated?" " 1 wouldn't on any account be the means of having Mrs. Hamilton's judg¬ ment or penetration called in question !" replied Delamere evasively. Mrs. Mayfield did not like this answer; yet, after the manner in which he had been treated by Grace, as she had contri¬ ved to learn from Mrs. Hamilton, who,
though fully her equal in plain good sense, was certainly not her match in subtlety, could he really retain any further prepos¬ session for her ? how she should have liked to be out of suspense on the subject í But supposing he did, was it likely he would continue much longer to indulge it, assailed, as he would now be, by all kinds of charms and allurements? no, she coultl not imagine such a thing ; and her spirits reviving at the thought, she became quite as agreeable as ever. By this time the pretty fair-haired Myra had taken her cue, or, to be more explicit, perceiving that depreciating Grace was not the w 7 ay for any one to recommend them¬ selves to the good graces of Delamere, had decided on acting quite a contrary part, allured to do so by the belief that he seem¬ ed more inclined to admire her than her sisters; but of what consequence couhl his admiration be to her, it might bc re¬ marked, having engaged herself, as she had done, to another ? 'tis true slie had VOL. IL N
done so, but then it was vvben she had no chance of making such a conquest as the present, and to try and secure which she determined to let nothing prevent her, cer¬ tain of both the sanction and concurrence of her mother and sisters in her efforts for the purpose.—" La, my dear mamma," she exclaimed, " how any one could say Grace O'Neil was only prettyish, when to be sure, in my opinion, she is one of the sweetest-looking girls !" " Yes, and in mine too, my love," said her mother, quite forgetting her insinuation to the contrary but a few minutes before ; " but I never knew any one, indeed, to whose pretensions you did not do justice.—- How amiable," she added, in a pretended whisper to Mrs. Hamilton, but which, like a playhouse whisper, was epiite distinct enough, and intended to be so, for everv one to hear, " for one pretty girl to praise another! 'tis so seldom the case—but in¬ deed, both hy precept and example, I have always tried to guard my daughters against envy."
" Yes, that I am sure of," said Mrs. Ha¬ milton ; " but whatever cause you may have given for envy, I am sure you have had no cause to feel it, with your excel¬ lent husband, and your fine family, and every thing so happy, and comfortable, and thriving about you." " Certainly, my dear friend, certainly I acknowledge myself a most fortunate wo¬ man—superlatively so with regard to my family ; since, in point of elisposition and abilities, anel all indeed that can flatter the pride, and delight the heart of a mother," and she put her handkerchief fbr a mo¬ ment to her eyes, " I believe I may say none can surpass them." The contemplation of domestic happi¬ ness was always delightful to Delamere, and the felicity a man must enjoy with a partner selected from such a family of love as the present, appeared to have suddenly struck him. As the thought occurred, his eyes were involuntarily bent upon the fair sisters, anel without being well con« N 2
scious of it, he was minutely scanning the countenance of each, when a sudden smile from Myra drew him to her side, and a playful flirtation immediately commenced between them. But though he certainly was struck with her, and thought indeed that any of the daughters of such a wo¬ man as Mrs. Mayfield must be consider¬ ed as a prize, still his ideas wandered ; and at length returning to Mrs. Hamilton, he seemed to forget there was any one else in the room but her. What would not the party have giveu to have known what they were conver¬ sing about with such earnestness, and the meaning of her evidently assenting nods from time to time !—-almost as much as to have knowu his real opinion of Grace: but at leiigth patience becoming exhaust¬ ed, Myra undertook breaking up the tete- a-tete, by asking him, in a rallying tone, how he liked the song she had just sung? "The song!"' repeated Delamere, sta- ring— 41 did you really sing? 1 * ** Oh ! a pretty gallant gentleman you
are, to ask me this, when here I have been doing my best to charm you this half- hour !" " Perhaps I shall yet be able to prove to you not in vain," said William, rising, antl drawing her harp to her, near which she had purposely seated herself as he spoke. The moment he vacated his chair by Mrs. Hamilton, it was taken by Mrs. May- field ; and who, in a very few minutes, succeeded in learning what he and his old friend had been conversing about; but no address was requisite for the purpose, as it was intended she should be made ac¬ quaintetl vvith it, without making any in¬ quiry on the subject. The fact was, all his former anxiety about her revived by seeing her, to say nothing of any other feeling. Delamere had proposed to Mrs, Hamilton making a pleasant party, for a week or a fortnight, on account of (»rate, to a little bathing- place on the coast, about eight or nine miles from St. Doulagh's, though osten-
sibly for the purpose of seeking lodgings there for Mrs. Langrish, under the pre¬ text of there being none at St. Doulagh's that would suit her. Mrs. Mayfield rea¬ dily acceded to the plan, and the young ladies were highly pleased with it, from the amusement they anticipated from it; and wouid have been still more so, but for the explanation of Mrs, Hamilton, However, it might be only out ,of mere good-nature that he had thought of such a thing for Grace. Had he been questioned on the subject, he certainly would have denied its being through any other motive, wounded as his pride and sensibility had been by her, and determined as he was never again to consider her in any other light than that ofa mere common acquaintance or friend. Yet how inconsistent vvith this detenni- Lation was the manner in which he suf¬ fered himself to dwell on hei* idea, and the feelings he pictured to himself would have been his, had he returned to St, Doulagh's undeceived about hers! She
was so lovely, so interestingly lovely, even beyond what he had conceived he should find her, that he could not help dwelling on the thought ; and yet perhaps it was the manner in which he found her en¬ gaged—her kneeling attitude, the mingled expression of astonishment and pleasure that pervaded her countenance, as her head was thrown back to gaze at him, that alone gave to her appearance that kind of interest or character that fixed him for a moment in an absolute trance of admiration. Made up as his mind was about her, it was of no great consequence certainly for him to ascertain, and yet he lelt he should greatly like to know what she thought of him. Ofthe improvement in his appear¬ ance, the personal advantages he, in short, now possessed, he was not uuconscious— had they produced any effect upon her.'' did her looks betray any other kind of emotion than that of mere surprise? He thought he had observed a slight variation of colour once or twice, a something indi-
cative ofa little flutter, a resting for a mi- nutc or two of the long, dark eyelashes upon the beautiful cheek, as if there had been something beneath them to conceal. But hovv ridiculous these fancies, or ra¬ ther, what weakness, to permit himself to draw any nattering conclusions froni them! was it to give heran opportunity of again telling him she cared nothing about him? no—he would not expose himself to any thing so mortifying again. Yet if there was a chance of subduing this indifference------but, no, no ; this was the way, by yielding to delusive hopes, that mankind lost the means of securing hap¬ piness ; he really thought, and believed, he had seen, in the pretty and elegant Myra, a person perfectly adapted to com¬ pensate him for bib first disappointment ; and how much wiser then to try and turn his thoughts upon her, than suffer them tí) wander or dwell where no return was to be expected.—" Yet, cruel, cruel Grace, to compel me to such & struggle with my feelings 1 " he culled her, as he paced to
and fro his chamber, utterly regardless, contrary to the expectations of Mrs, May- field, of the many tasteful specimens it contained of the young ladies' skill in drawing and needlework, purposely col= lected and hung up there for the occasion. If for a moment he paused, İt was only to station himself at the window, com¬ manding a full view of the then-slumber¬ ing village, gradually leading up to the castle, on which so often he hfød stood gazing at the same hour, or rather, sigh¬ ing his soul toward it, like the lovesick Troilus, " toward the Grecian camp, where Cressid lay." The first thing that Grace heard the next morning was, of his having gone, accompanied by the family at the rectory, to view a seat called Rockland, sonn? miles off, the proprietor of which, an ab¬ sentee, it was understood had some idea of disposing of it. Well, there was ;in end of any hope of seeing him that dav¬ on her own account slie did not much mind that; but her father, so sincere and
aflectionate himself—she knew he would bé vexed at this apparent indifference; and she thought — yes, certainly slie thought, that he might have spared a mi¬ nute or two, if it was only to ask him how he was, knowing he would be pleased 'by 'the attention. But he was too much engaged with, too much engrossed by his new friends—for, long as he had known the Mayfields, still they could only be considered as such ; for well she remem¬ bered the time when he might have wan¬ dered about the rectory for hours without ever being invited into it— tò think of his old friends, novv no longer able to contri¬ bute to his amusement. She had taken, the preceding night, she did not know- how, unconsciously she believed, the lock¬ et containing the raven lock of hair she had despoiled his head of seven years ago, in the moment of parting ; it was now in her bosom, and drawing it out, she was almost tempted to throw it aside again. But no, she would not give way to such petulance, such irritation; and according-
ly returning it to its hiding-place, she tried to resume her work ; but there was a something that dimmed her sight for a few minutes, that rendered the immediate attempt ineffectual. The morning was not quite over when in came Mrs. Hamilton. Grace looked the surprise she felt.—" What, not of the party to Rockland !" she said ; " hovv comes this about ?" " Na, na," cried Mrs. Hamilton, speak¬ ing in the broad Northern accent she sometimes chose to express herself in, " gadding about every day won't do ; 'tis an old saying, and a true one—* If we Λνίβΐι to keep a house, we mustn't leave the house to keep itself Γ I had something tp do at home this morning; but the busi¬ ness being finished, and my good man being gone to dine w r ith his friend Fow¬ ler, I shall take my chance here to-day, if you, Grace, promise to come up with me in the evening to the rectory." Grace coloured violently.—" No, you'll excuse me? she said.
" And why so ? why should I excuse you ? M ** Oh, it's no matter—Pd rather you wouldn't ask/ u Yes, but I must ask/ ** Why then, the fact is, I can't think of going to a place where I have reason to imagine my company not desired. I should be sorry, extremely sorry, to be of a captious temper, apt to misconstrue or take offence—but where is the attention I have ever received from Mrs; Mayfield? ivhat young parties is she not continually making, and to what one of them has she ever had the politeness, or good-nature, or whatever you please to term it, to in¬ vite me? No, no, my dear ma'am, you must excuse me indeed." " But indeed I won't !" was the reply. " This is not like my own Grace, to speak in this manner—I am sure there must be some mistake 'm this matter : perhaps be¬ fore I knew Mrs. Mayfield as inti mateir¬ as I now do, I might not have thought so ; but now that I really know her, I give
it as my opinion that she is incapable of any slight, or intentional neglect, to any one, particularly to a person she esteems and admires as she does you. She is a charming woman indeed, and they are al¬ together a charming family ; and William thinks so as well as I/ The colour, which had begun to fade from the cheek of Grace, again revived— " Oh, he would be singular if he didn't !" she said. " Yes, he admires them all greatly, but Myra especially/ " Really ! well, I—I------" and taking up her scissors, Grace began to snip away most unmercifully at the frill she was working—" I don't wonder at that, for she—she certainly is pretty." ť< Yes, with her sweet flaxen hair, and laughing blue eyes!—But, child, what are you about ? you are cutting your frill to pieces !" " Oh, no matter/ said Grace, but blushing more deeply than ever—" it was spoiled before/ and hastily crushing it in
her hand, she thrust it into her work- basket " But what do you think of our Wil¬ liam himself?" " Our William !" repeated Grace, with a supercilious smile. " Well, my William—is he not grown up a bonny chiel ?" " Yes, he's grown up very well," re¬ plied Grace coolly. " See how he has remembered me !" said Mrs. Hamilton, producing a very hand¬ some watch as she spoke. *' He would have been ungrateful, eould he have forgot you." " Well, perhaps so; but I am not the only person who occupied his thoughts while absent : he has deputed me to pre¬ sent these tokens of regard to his friends here;" and as she spoke, she took out a box, containing a variety of beautiful trinkets for Miss Agnes Flora Judith and Grace, and a superb snuff-box for the lieutenant Miss Agnes Flora Judith had a femi-
nine passion for trinkets, which she could not resist ; William's presents were there¬ fore not refused, though, as much as pos¬ sible, she tried to give her accepting them the appearance of condescension; but Grace, after running her eye over those intended for her, positively refused taking them. " Not take them !" exclaimed Mrs. Ha¬ milton, much surprised ; " why, William ΛνϋΙ take your refusal of them very un¬ kind!" " I don't care; he has other friends, to whom such things would be more desir¬ able than they are to me. The pearls would be very becoming to Miss Myra; and, in short," suddenly drawing back en¬ tirely from the table, " upon my honour Ι ΛνϋΙ not accept them !" " Very луеП —I shall of course then re¬ turn them to him ; but I hope I sha'n't find you in a disobliging humour about every thing this morning;" and Mrs. Ha¬ milton proceeded to mention the party that was made for Strandmore, «id Grace's
being included in it. William had posi¬ tively charged her not to let Grace know that it was on her account it was made ; but somehow Mrs. Hamilton was not al¬ ways on her guard in her communications, and though she did not directly disobey him, she spoke in such a manner that Grace, ere long, began to surmise the truth. To und we have unjustly accused, or suspected any one, never fails of making us feel angry with ourselves, if we possess any feeling. Grace could almost have cried when she thought of the manner in which she had inveighed against William, in her own mind—the anger, the resent¬ ment she had given way to, against him, at the verv moment that he was contriving* a plan for her health and amusement; and how much did she now wish she had not been so positive in her rejection of his presents, undeserving, as he had now- proved himself of any ungraciousness from her ' and almost she had a mind to ask tor then:. But, after all, could slie profit hy
his present kindness? could her father spare her? or daily expecting Eugene as she was, and wishing to be on the spot on his arrival, to try what she could do to- Λν3ΐχΐ8 mitigating or consoling him under the sorrow that awaited him, how could she think of leaving home? But Mrs. Hamilton obviated all her objections: Airs. Brady would supply her place as nurse and attendant to her father, and her good man had given her a promise to drop in every evening for an hour or two to play chess with him ; and it was rather to be supposed they woukl hear again from Eugene befbre they saw him ; but if not •—if he should arrive unexpectedly, the melancholy disclosure that awaited him could very well bc kept back, the distance was so short to Strandmore, until she was sent for; and finally it was settled that she should leave St Doulagh's on the morro iv, with the rest ofthe party, She no longer refused accompanying Airs. Hamilton in the evening to the rec¬ tory, anxious to have an early opportunity
of trying to atone, by her manner to Wil¬ liam, for the ungraciousness she feared he would accuse her of in refusing his pre¬ sents. They arrived just as the party had re¬ turned from their excursion, having dined on a cold collation they took vvith them in the beautiful woods of Rockland. Mrs. Hamilton was rather expected, as they knew she would be impatient to learn whether there was any chance of Wil¬ liam's getting Re>ckland—but not Grace, and seeing her was certainly not an agree¬ able surprise, a dance being settled for the evening, and arrangements altogether made, or at least expectations entertained, with which they much feared she ΛνοιιΜ interfere, well knowing that wdiercver she appeared, she was still the magnet of at¬ traction ; but it could not be helped—this odious Mrs. Hamilton луаз always a busy over-officious person ; and so veiling their real feelings with smiling countenances, all was kind greeting to Grace.—" An additional obligation to dear Mrs. Hamil*
ton, our seeing you here, I dare say," said Mrs. Mayfield, with one of her sweetest smiles ; ťí for I don't know how it is, but you are a terrible stranger here, Miss O'Neil." " But she won't continue to be so^ 1 know she won't," said Myra, skipping up to her at the moment, and laying her hand on her shoulder—" I кполу she won't, » when she knows how we all love her so. Yes, indeed," she cried, passing her arm under hers, and walking her away to a window, " and we are all so delighted to think we shall have you for a fortnight at least amongst us. But Λνΐ^ a good-na¬ tured creature this William Delamere is !" she said. " Do you know, that the moment I told him last night that we had been at mamma almost this whole summer in vain, to take us to Strandmore for a few days, he immediately decided on making a par¬ ty to it. The girls are quite beginning to tease me about him ; but, la ! 'tis cjuite ridiculous to suppose that, knowing so little of me as he does."
She might have saved herself the trou¬ ble of arguing the point, fur Grace knew not another word of what she was saying ; her feelings had undergone a revulsion. It was then for Myra, not Grace 5 that the party was made, and Mrs. Hamilton had quite deceived her by what she had insi¬ nuated ; and she felt inclined to be very angry with her, but checked herself, for what motive could she have for deceiving her but good-nature ? she thought a little change of scene would be of service to her, and so had recourse to a little artifice, to induce her to consent to it. Well, she would not disappoint her—she would not give way to this kind of captiousness she was beginning to experience. And what on earth was it she expected from Dela¬ mere ? she had refused him decidedly as a lover, and yet it seemed to her as if she was angry because lie was not still dan¬ gling after her ! really it was quite ridicu¬ lous this feeling—quite preposterous to feel displeased at seeing the attentions she had declined transferred to another ! Yet
notwithstanding this arguing with herself, she rather allowed him to take her hand than gave it to him, on his coming from an inner apartment, where he had been on her arrival, with a countenance all radiant with delight, on learning from Mrs. Ha¬ milton that she had consented to be of the party he had made for her, and an¬ swered his inquiries after her father in a manner that made him stare at her—for what had he done to offend her ? Ilis look made her recollect herself; and blushing deeply, she was about asking some question about the place he had been looking at, calculated to lead to a recon¬ ciling conversation between them, when ere she could give utterance to it, Myra gave him a whispered message to one jf her sisters, and under the prett xt of be¬ ing fearful he woultl not deliver it cor¬ rectly, almost instantly followed him. He was almost immediately surrounded by the whole set, and from the gay badi¬ nage that ensued, found it next to im¬ possible to break away. And for what
should he? why should he leave those who seemed to take pleasure in conversing with him, tojóin a person who looked so cold upon him as Grace ? no, he felt of¬ fended, and would leave her to herself. Yet, when dancing was about commen¬ cing, he could not help anxiously watch¬ ing her, but she had no idea of dancing; in vain she was asked and solicited—wdth the sister of her heart, her beloved Rose, so recently lost to her, she could not think of joining in such an amusement. Delamere seemed to enjoy every thing «—it was the least return he could make for tlie kind hospitality he experienced ; but his thoughts, his looks, wandered— he wanted to catch the accents of Grace, to hear those remarks that seemed to give such pleasure to those who, from time to time« took a seat beside her. If he watched her, Mrs. Mayfield watch¬ ed him, and at length becoming absolute¬ ly provoked by the involuntary inatten¬ tion which she was the cause of to his pretty partner Myra, suddenly joined her,
and telling her, in an under tone, she was sure merely looking on must be a stupid affair for her, said, she would not press her longer stay, in consequence of think¬ ing so, if she had a mind to avail herself of one the servant-men being about going to the village. Grace took the hint, and immediately rose to depart : she did so with a heavy heart, for she saw a very great likeli¬ hood of Delamere being entangled in the net she was aware would be spread tor him, and there was hardly a connex¬ ion he could form she could more have disliked the idea of, than one with the Mayfields, since there was hardly one, she was certain, that would be more likely to detach or estrange him from all his old in¬ timates, they were so extremely worldly and selfish. She knew of the affair be¬ tween Mvra and Falkiner—ofher having encouraged his addresses, contrary to what was known to be the wishes of his parents, and engaged herself to be his the moment he was of age, consequently, that if she
married Delamere, it would be entirely out of interested motives. How did she wish that he might be timely apprized of this! but with the pains that would be taken to keep him in ignorance of alíthat might frustrate the views of the family, she conceived there was very little chance of any thing of the kind, and sighed to think of such a heart as his beiug thrown awav. Htrandmore, the place to which the St. Doulagh's party, as already stated, was going, was a romantically-situated village on the coast, straggling over very high hills, at the foot of which stretched a most beautiful strand ; the bay was formed by two immense promontories, or headlands, against the extreme points of which the restless waves ibr ever dashed with fury, while from every part ofthe village the eye ranged over a vast expanse of Neptune's dark domain. Of a fine summer morn¬ ing, nothing could be more delightful than to inhale the refreshing breezes from this, or view the gentle swell ofthe rippling
waves, as they broke, with a kind of drow¬ sy murmur, on the shore; but when this mighty mass of waters became agitated by a coming storm, while the eries of gulls, the sure precursors of one, assailed the ear in every direction, then indeed, from tlie images of dread with which it filled the fancy, was the sight of it appalling ; more especially when, if a vessel got em¬ bayed in foul weather, destruction was all but inevitable. The village consisted of a few pleasant private residences, several ranges of com¬ modious lodging-houses, and an excellent" hotel, the place in vvhich our party pro posed taking up their short residenci. Delamere, whose guests they were given to understand they were to consider thern- selves, preceded them, to see that every¬ thing was properly prepared for their re¬ ception, and about dinner-time, escorted by young Mayfield, they arrived, and found an elegant dinner awaiting them. Mrs. Mayfield was all delight; but inten vol» ι L о
on losing no opportunity for forwarding her plan, she chose to seem to consider every thing as a compliment to her and her daughters—" Really it was quite ta¬ king too much trouble for them, and she didn't know how she and the girls could ever be sufficiently obliged for all dear Mr. Delamere hatl done to render them plea¬ sant;" and without any hesitation, she usurped the head of the table, to which it certainly had been the intention of Wil¬ liam to hand Mrs. Hamilton ; while Myra placed herself by him at one side, and one of her sisters at the other ; and in the same way on their going out in the evening to walk, each took an arm, to the utter pre¬ cluding of any particular attention to Grace. Delamere felt vexed and disconcerted ; he had not hy any means calculated on being so entirely monopolized and en¬ grossed ; but in v$in he sought to have a little conversation now and then with Grace : if for a moment he succeeded in disengaging himself from the sisters, the
brother was sure to be on the alert, having received his cue, and instantly possessed himself of Grace, vvho, but for the object he had in view, that of aiding the designs of his sisters, would certainly not have been honoured with any attention from him, her well-known want of fortune ren¬ dering her of no consequence in his eyes, or rather a person it was a condescension to notice. Mrs. Hamilton's having a number of old friends and acquaintances at the place, and in consequence being continually on the gad from one to the other, was the means of leaving her more at the mercy of the party than would otherwise have been the case. Still, while she felt her¬ self evidently neglected, matters were so managed, that no one could have believed she had any grounds for complaint—the mother was all maternal solicitude, thé sisters caressing, and the son entirely de¬ voted to her ; while Myra was so particu¬ larly fond of her, that she would share no о 2
other person's apartment, the hotel, froni having other company in it, not being sufficiently large to accommodate so large a party vvith distinct chambers. Grace, vvho by no means wanted self- possession, would certainly not have per¬ mitted the arts that vvere practised to keep her and William asunder to succeed, had .shebeen aware how much it was his wish to have her a little more to himself; but pre¬ possessed with the idea of having offended hhn in a way not to be forni vcn, and with his really admiring INJ yra, she could not think of forcing herself more upon the party. Left pretty much to herself, through the almost eternal gadding of Mrs. Ha¬ milton at one side, and the manoeuvring of the party at the other, Grace sought amusement in rambling ahout where slu* was least likelv to meet with observation. in these moments, feeling indeed the want oí a bosom friend, how continually did her thonghts revert to the idea of Hose '
how truly did she feel that her loss to her cokiid never be supplied î The shore, all along iu this direction. was indented with a number of roman* ic coves, the little strands of which were com¬ pletely strown over vvith a variety of beau ti¬ ful shells and pebbles. Grace delighted to frequent these romantic places, attracted by the grandeur of the overhanging cliffs perforated and shattered by the conflicting elements to which they were exposed, iu¬ to a variety of fantastic fonns, the resem¬ blance of pyramids, arches, and ruinated fortresses, all begirt with the streaming weeds of decay and desolation, while seals, cormorants, anil gulls, filled up every nook and crevice, mingling their plaintive and discordant cries, according to the varia¬ tions ofthe weather, with the hoarse mur- murh of the sounding deep. After being near a week at Strandmore — ť ' How does your friend Grace dispose ot huselfevery day until dinner-time?' one morning inquired Delamere of Myra, knowing that bliv was not Mr>, Hamilton's
companion in her gaddings, and finding she never walked out with the sisters*^,, * ť Really I don't know," said ÄÍyra — " she has always made some excuse^ ox other for not walking out ΛνΗΙι the girls and mc, so I suppose she don't like it; but perhaps," with something like a slight sneer, " she may be writing a poem on the beauties of the place, лукЬ which she means to surprise us." " Perhaps so? replied Dela merergrave¬ ly ; " if she attempted the subject, I know no one more calculated to do it justice." " Oh yes, I know that," said Älyra, in no slight alarm at the idea of having a little betrayed herself—" I know she has quite a talent fbr writing; but," and her fair bo¬ som heaved a gentle sigh, and with a look of the most alluring softness, she cast her blue eyes to the ground, " she is a talent¬ ed being in every respect" " Yes? said Delamere, with a smile, and taking the hand of the little syren ; " but she has not engrossed every charm ;"
and ûsë kissed the лупке hand he had invo- luntaiüy*ítaken. í <&Mfwas safe then ; and but a little more management, and the field would be won. — " Do you know," she said to Grace, as they vpere dressing together for dinner, " Delamere has been inquisitive about the manner in which you pass the morn¬ ings ; he-' is beginning to fear you may feei yourself neglected, or—for to be sure that could not be the case, as you кполу л it is our Λνιείι to have you always with us ; and indeed I vvish you would begin to walk out with us ; for if you wete with me, he лтоиИ not be able to draw me away by myself, as he is continually trying to do; and really lie is getting so teasing. But won't you walk vvitli us for the future ? for, as I was going to say, he said*----- but I really have quite confused myself." " Oh, weM; no matter," said Grace; ** I understand you sufficiently." ** And you ΛνίΙΙ then," a little alarmed, " walk out with us sometimes ?" u Oh yes, if you wish it so much,* re-
plied Grace with a smile, the peculiar ex¬ pression oí* vvhich was not altogether lost upon Miss Myra, and excited a degree of confusion that made her avert her looks to conceal it. But however Grace might have doubted her truth in other respects, bhe certainly did not discredit her insinu¬ ation with regard to Delamere ; and the result of which was, an involuntary air of coldness towards him when they met at dinner, and a studied avoidance of every attention he wished to pay her. Delamere was at first surprised, then became piqued, and finally desisted from any further attempts to attach himself par- tit ularly to her, as on this evening he had be* n more than ever tempted to do. Hut to detach William from Grace was not sufli-ek-nt for the furtherance of Miss 31 vi Λ designs; in the walks which she look with her bisters, Λνίιο had themselves tt» mi leider, and of course preferred the dirtction in which they would have the ht\st cliunee oí" being >oen, they were con¬ tinually пн -eting wuh something or ыпш
one to divert his attention from her, and break in upon their conversation. Accord¬ ingly, with all the innocence of artless simplicity, she saitl she had a great secret to confide to him—namely, her wanting to surprise mamma vvith a sketch of some of the romantic scenery of the place ; and so proposed that he should secretly ac¬ company her to the spot she had fixed on for the purpose of taking it, either to amuse her by reading, while she was em¬ ployed vvith her pencil, or else assist her by his advice. Of course, whatever were the secret feelings or wishes of William, he could not be so ungallant as to refuse her, and accordingly to the place alluded to they sped the next morning. Now it happened that this spot vvas the very identical one tixed on by Grace i'or really taking some views to surprise Mrs. Hamilton with. The rocks were here completely perpendicular, dented and delved into a variet of fantastic forms» pillars, caves, and arches, the entrance to
ifM intricacies, within which all was evening gloom and solemnity, while at times a cabin child, or sportive kid, was seen peeping over the very edge of the cliffs, from which hung raany a streaming wreath of wâld flowers, intermingled with the sedge of the rock, a grey tint a little forther off betraying the hovel to which they belonged; and all, in short, was wild, romantic, picturesque, and well adapted for the pencil. Completely engrossed by hers, Grace heeded not the approach of Delamere and his companion, till they were almost close to her. That they hatl not coinè to seek her, she w r as certain ; and perhaps the persuasion was the cause of her not appearing any way discomposed Ъу their sudden appearance. But Dela¬ mere was taken by surprise ; he had not expected to find her there, and yielding tø a sudden sensation of delight at behold* ing her, he sprang over a few impedi¬ ments in the way, and placing himself he¬ ade lier, involuntarily passed one arm round her waist, while with his other
hand he took hold of hers, to examine the sketch it contained.-—" And so this is the way in which you are employing your¬ self e\ T ery morning!" he said. " Why make such a secret of it ? one or two of us could not have interrupted you, by be¬ ing allowed to accompany you here." " I made no secret of it," replied Grace. " No !" " No ; for no one asked me a question on the subject" " Now how can you say so, Miss O'Neil !" said the cruelly-mortified Myra, from the spot on wdiich Delamere had left her, divided from the one луЬеге (»race was sitting by little pools of water and pieces of rock. ** You know you never men¬ tioned to any one what you were doing, so I am sure that was making a mystery of it.—But, dear me, I had no idea that this was such a nasty, plasby place," draw¬ ing her skirt tight round her; "do, Mr· Delamere, let us leave it for some other." But Delamere could not attend to her; he was sitting close to Grace—he was
holding her, unresistingly, to the heart that was so long panting to have her fold¬ ed to it ; and, in short, he could not bring himself to stir.—" Nay, I am sure,'" he said, " a more enchanting spot than this cannot be found. Besides this is the very place, you know, you fixed on yourself for taking a sketch from/ " Yep. ; but that was beibre 1 knew what Miss O'Neil vvas about. You don't Mipposc, after her picking out the best ot every thing, I shall employ myself in copying the fag end of cliffs, and all the rubbish she has chosen to reject." Neither t ¿race nor Delamere couid for¬ bear laughing aloud at this remark. Miss Myra got quite affronted; the pretty pink colour of her cheeks became erimson, and her eyes sparkled with more than wonted animation.—*' 1 seem to have amused vou/ she said ; ** but I must confers, I don't thmk it over polite to laugh at one.' и Yet who, my dear girl," cried Grace, * 4 could forbear laughing at your remark, as if I had absolutely made an end of the
cliffs as I sketched them ? Come, skip over these stones to me; anel луЫю we are engaged, William (hovv pleased was William to hear her call him William Í) will amuse us with the book I see peeping out of his pocket." Myra hesitated ; but the danger of be¬ traying any further petulance suddenly occurring, she fbrced herself to accept tlie invitation of Grace. Nothing, however, was further from her thoughts than to employ herself in the manner that was ex¬ pected; indeed she could not, ibr having no real taste or genius fbr drawing, to bketch from nature was a stretch quite be¬ yond her abilities : she affected, however, í о be very busy ; and pretending to think Delamere wanted to have a peep at what ■die was doing, played off a thousand little childishnesses, thai she thought quite al¬ luring. Sick of her fooleries, Delamere at length began to read; the subject was the Bride of Abydos ; írom the perusal of tliis, the other роешь oi the delightful author
came under discussion, and this discussion naturally led to one on the respective pro» auctions of the other poets of the present day. Myra got quite into an agony ; hav¬ ing very little taste for any thing but what was just calculated to render her more alluring to the eye, she knew hardly any thing of what her companions were conversing about, and to have it discover¬ ed that she was the superficial little crea¬ ture she was in reality, %vas absolute tor¬ ture to her pride. Like all the rest of her family, she made pretensions to superior sense and accomplishments—pretensions which the keenness and quickness of her mother were no small means of having «upported; and to have these at length detected to be false ones—the laugh— the sneer, so often levelled at others, re¬ torted upon her, was a thought that was not endurable ; but what was to bedone? She had rio mother, no sister now at hand toextncate her from the dilemma in which «he found herself; if she remained silent, it would evince her stupidity, and if she
spoke, she would betray what she was so anxious to conceal. She tried a thousand ways to interrupt the conversation, or give a turn to it ; but it was too interesting to those who were pursuing it to allow her petty little artifices to succeed ; now she was frightened by the little crabs that were crawling about in the little pools of water— then she was sure the tide was coming in, and there w r as no knowing the danger that might ensue from their remaining longer where they were : at last she espied a tuft of weeds, or wild flowers, upon the point of one of the rocks, and she would get it for the examination of Charlotte, she was such a botanist. The rock was steep and slimy, and on turning to descend it, she either was, or pretended to be frightened, and called to Delamere to come to her assistance. He started up ; but ere he had time to stretch out his hand to her, she made a sudden spring, and fell into his arms, or rather upon one of them, with such force, that he staggered back with the pain inflicted by the shock.
Grace started up.—" You are seriously hurt, I fear," she said to him. William tried to make light of the mat¬ ter; but it was evident to her his arm had sustained an injury, and she could not help being extremely provoked by the circumstance that had occasioned it— " How could you be so ridiculous?" she demanded of Älyra. " You really have been more like a restless cliild this half hour than a grown-up person." te And I may ask, hovv can you be so ill-natured, as to seem to suppose that I would hurt any one intentionally, but more particularly dear Mr. Delamere !" cried Myra, hanging about him, and put¬ ting her handkerchief to her eyes. " Come, come, our best plan now will be to hasten from this," said Grace, " that he may. obtain the assistance I am sure he requires;" and they accordingly quitted the spot i .At/the door of the hotel, Delamere parted fronrthem, with, an injunction that they should, say .nothing about what had
happened, as it really was not worth think¬ ing about. Grace, however, was of a con¬ trary opinion, and fearful he might not, out ofa false delicacy for the feelings of Myra, do what was requisite for himself, she had hardly been in her chamber—to whicii she repaired the moment she re¬ entered the hotel, Miss Myra appearing quite huffed with her—above a minute, ere she decided on seeking him, to insist on his having some surgical advice. As she descended the stairs, she thought she heard his voice in the sitting-room, and accor¬ dingly entered : but what words can give an adequate idea of the confusion into which she was thrown, or rather the shock her feelings received, on beholding Myra, the only person in the room with him, ab¬ solutely reclining against his bosom, with her cheek apparently pressed to his ! Grace involuntarily started back, and instantly retreated. She thought she heard him calling after her ; but she would not wait to ascertain—the emotion she was in would not permit her to delay
