--^' r^ 
**-*' 










§L, 



/ 



v^^ 



^' 




'^^ 






i 



J 






^* 




//./.. lA. 



//./'/// r^rre^. 




LI E) RARY 

OF THE 

U N I VLR5ITY 

or ILLINOIS 

^J 



Return this book on or before the 
Latest Date stamped below. 

Theft, mutilation, and underlining of books 
are reasons for disciplinary action and may 
result in dismissal from the University. 
University of Illinois Library 



m 1 



Dr^ 



}m 



L161— O-1096 



CONTRAST. 



IN THREE VOLUMES 



BY 
REGINA MARIA ROCHE, 

AUTHOR OP THE 

Children of the Abbey; Discarded Son; Vicar of Lansdown 

Bridal ofDunamore ; Tradition of the Castle ; 

Castle Chapel, ^c. ^c. 



There is nothing on earth excellent on all sides : there must be something 
wanting in the best of creatures, to shew how far they are from perfection. 

db. watts. 



VOL. I. 

LONDON: 
A. K. NEWMAN i CO. LEADENHALL-STREET. 

1828. 



^^3 

'J. / 

TO HER ROYAL HIGHNESS 

THE PRINCESS AUGUSTA. 



MADAM, 

In the chequered page of my eventful 
life, the honour of being permitted to in- 
scribe to your Royal Highness the present 
Work, will ever inspire me with heartfelt 
gratitude. 

While engaged in composing the " Chil- 
^ dren of the Abbey," it pleased Providence 
to favour me with many friends, and to 
open to my view, a prospect bright and 
encouraging. Under these auspices, I 
brought out that Work ; when, to com- 
plete my happiness, I was honoured by 
the signal notice of her late Majesty, 



VI DEDICATION. 

your Royal Mother, whose condescending 
goodness left me no wish ungratified. 

Bereft since of these supports, by the 
same hand that gave them, it has been 
the will of Heaven to change my destiny, 
and to allow the horizon, once so bright, 
to be clouded with sorrow and disappoint- 
ment. 

From this sad reverse, however, I now 
feel, as it were, emerging : the Almighty, 
in tender compassion to my sufferings, 
has sent succour to his afflicted. " He 
has smote the stony rock indeed, that the 
water gushed out, and the streams of 
comfort flowed withal." 

By his Divine permission, new friends 
have stept forward, and ministered re- 
lief to wounds of long endurance. To 
the gracious kindness of your Royal 
Highness, and of other branches of your 
illustrious family^ I am become a per- 



DEDICATION. Vll 

petual debtor; and were it possible to 
lay open the recesses of my heart, there 
would be found no other sentiments than 
those of the liveliest gratitude, and the 
most profound respect. 

Deign, Madam, to accept, for the pa- 
tronage with which you have honoured 
me, my humble tribute of sincere thanks 
— " Evermore thanks, the Exchequer of 
the Poor." 

While I thus obey the dictates of my 
heart, I cannot suppress my apprehension 
of the defects that may be found pervad- 
ing the Work now humbly presented to 
your Royal Highness, for which reason I 
must implore your indulgence ; and that 
your Royal Highness will make some al- 
lowance for the anguish of mind under 
which I laboured, while engaged in the 
task. This severe trial has been too well 



VIU DEDICATION. 

attested by those who witnessed it, and 
who have been pleased to express their 
approbation of the manner in which I bore 
it : but I must have been forgetful of the 
precepts of early youth, had I wanted 
fortitude on the occasion. Religion, that 
inward principle of action, that stay and 
sanctuary of sorrow and of suffering, cheer- 
ed and supported me through the dreary 
path, until the long night was over, and 
the dawn of comfort broke in upon the 
bed of sickness. 

How welcome to the forlorn pilgrim, 
in this vale of tears, is that religion which, 
during the splendour of pagan worship, 
under imperial sway, was ushered into the 
world in a distant province, under the 
mildest and most benevolent aspect ! 

Connected with this sublime theme, I 
may venture briefly to advert to the be- 
nign source whence pure religion has in 



DEDICATION. ix 

this country derived so much of its 
strength and prosperity. 

The Great Disposer of all things, in 
bestowing the crown of this realm on his 
late Majesty, your Royal Highness's re- 
vered Father, rendered it as famous for 
defending and supporting the Protestant 
Church, as it is conspicuous for its glory 
and splendour. Such a return of Divine 
Providence may justly be attributed to 
the exalted virtue of the INIonarch, who, 
in the great scenes of his reign, had 
evinced a sacred regard for religion, and 
thus realized the assurance in Holy Writ, 
that " God honours those who honour 
him." 

It is worthy of observation, that in the 

Dedication of a pious work to his late 

Majesty, at the commencement of his 

reign, the Author justly affirmed, that 

b3 



"X DEDICATION. 

" True piety has in all ages been ac- 
counted the truest honour; for religion 
diffuses the greatest glory around the hu- 
man character, and sweetens and embalms 
the memory of princes." This happy 
presage has been eminently fulfilled in the 
illustrious instance just referred to, and 
" the memory of the j ust is blessed." Dur- 
ing a reign of unexampled date in the 
English annals, that virtuous Sovereign 
shewed an earnest concern for the eternal 
happiness of his people, as well for their 
earthly protection. 

It may be truly remarked, that under 
no former sovereign have the subjects of 
this realm displayed so great zeal, la- 
bour, and care to enlighten mankind with 
divine knowledge. The wide dissemina- 
tion of the Scriptures in all languages, 
and in all quarters of the habitable globe, 
confirms this interesting truth, and justi- 



DEDICATION. XI 

fies the happy simile drawn by a reverend 
divine, " That while the sacred writings 
afford matter of meditation to the highest 
intellect of man, they also resemble that 
celestial manna which fell, not for the pa- 
lates of a favoured few, but for the nurture 
of all Israel." 

Before I take leave of the interesting 
subject, may I be permitted in this place 
to record the tribute of my sincere ho- 
mage and loyalty, towards his present 
Majesty, your Royal Brother, who has 
signally advanced the glory of this coun- 
try, by every means in his power, and who, 
by his humane and liberal patronage, has 
encouraged and called into action the va- 
rious energies and talents of a free people. 

If the sincere prayer of an humble in- 
dividual can be heard with effect, I would 
prefer it to the Throne of Mercy, and be- 
seech the Giver of all Good to vouchsafe 



XU DEDICATION. 

a continuance of his blessings upon the 
King, and upon every branch of the 
Royal Family. 

I remain, 
With profound respect, 

MADAM, 

Your Royal Highness's most obedient 
and devoted humble servant, 

REGINA MARIA ROCHE. 



London, lOth April 1828. 



PREFACE. 



The afflictive causes which have im- 
pelled the Author to publish a work by 
subscription, may seem to require some 
explanation. The engraved letter which 
has been circulated, conveyed a faint idea 
of those causes, and of the steps taken to 
mitigate or remove them. Disappointed 
in this just expectation, the Author has 
been compelled, as a last resource, to ap- 
peal to the Public, who have accordingly 
vouchsafed their generous sympathy, and 
ministered kind relief To express, now, 
in suitable terms, thanks towards those in- 
dulgent friends who have patronized her 
labours, is indeed an arduous task, to 



XIV PREFACE. 

which she feels utterly unequal. Their ge- 
nerous sympathy has restored the author to 
comparative happiness. Those who can ima- 
gine the effect produced on the mind, when 
a long night of sickness and privation has 
given place to the dawn of health and com- 
fort, and where gloom and despair have been 
succeeded by hope and sunshine, may form 
some faint notion of this auspicious change. 

For the strength that enabled her to 
struggle through her trials, and the good- 
ness she has experienced, she feels she can 
never be too grateful. 

The next consideration that weighs 
upon the Author's mind, is the reception 
which awaits her performance before the 
tribunal of the public. She cherishes the 
hope, that the peculiar circumstances un- 
der which it was composed, may obtain 



PREFACE. XV 

for her the indulgence of which it may be 
found she stands in need. From her be- 
nevolent Subscribers, and from those who 
have perused her Circular, she anticipates 
a favourable judgment ; but with the ma- 
jority of her readers, who may be strangers 
to her history, she cannot expect the same 
allowance : — to such readers she can only 
offer the assurance, that at no period of 
her life did she take up the pen under 
difficulties and afflictions so overwhelm- 
ing, and must therefore trust to their 
generous candour, to overlook or excuse 
the defects they may meet with in the 
Work now submitted to them. 

In conclusion, may the Author be per- 
mitted to add, that it has been her anxi- 
ous wish and aim, to inculcate, under a 
pleasing form, pure morality ; and under 
the garb of fiction, to express only such 



XVI PREFACE. 

sentiments as may be conformable to the 
precepts of religion. 

How far she may have been successful, 
it is not for her to decide. 



SUBSCRIBERS. 



Her Royal Highnf.ss the Duchess of Clarence 
Her Royal Highness the Duchess of Gloucester 
His Royal Highness the Duke o? Sussex 
His Royal Highness the Duke of Gloucester 
His Royal Highness Prince Leopold 



A. 

Adair Alexander, Esq St. James's-square 

Alton John T. Esq Windsor 

Alexander Henry, Esq. M. P 37, Upper Harley-street 

Arden Lord 26, St. James's-place 

Argles Captain, R. N Southampton 

Astell William, Esq. M. P 4, Portland-place 

Auckland Lord 30, Grosvenor-street 

B. 

Bailey Colonel J. M.P 9, Devonshire-place, PorthiJid- 

place 

Baldock Mrs Falmouth 

Barber , Esq Grasmere 

Bath and Wells Bibhop of Welton Palace, Somersetshire 

Bauer Francis, Esq Kew-green 

Beauchamp Countess St. James's-square 

Bennett Mrs Privy-gardens 

Blachford Major-General Ham-common 

Blunt George Lane, Esq 11, Upper Baker-street 



XVlll SUBSCRIBERS. 

Bolgar Edward, Esq East India House 

Buccleugh Duchess 

Buckingham J. S. Esq 32, Tavistock-square 

Budd Mrs 'Richmond, Surrty 

Bull Edward, Esq Holies-street, Cavendish-square 

— 2 copies 

Bull Mrs Malbrough Cottage, Falmouth 

Burgess Captain Samuel, R. N. , .Mansion-House-place 

C. 

Cameron Iieut.-General W. N. ..Bath 

Campbell S. F , . , . .Mansion-House-place 

Campbell Mungo, Esq. Mansion-House-place 

Campbell Robert, Esq 5, Argyle-place 

Camac Mrs 37, Baker-street 

Carnac Major James Rivett 21, Upper Harley-street 

Cartwright Samuel, Esq 32, Burlington-street 

Chappel , Esq Pall-Mall— 4 copies 

Colburn Henry, Esq 8, New Burlington-street — 

2 copies 

Colquhoun Gideon, Esq Old Jewry 

Combauld , Esq Hampstead 

Cooke Richard, Esq Dartford 

Coventry Countess 

Croker Crofton, Esq Admiralty 

Cumming Major-General 15, Upper Chrosvenor-street 

Cunningham Captain Falmouth 

C. Esq Richmond 

D. 

Damer Hon. Anne Seymour 18, Upper Brook- street 

Dartmouth the Earl of 12, Berkeley-square 

Delafosse the Rev. D. C Richmond-green 

Derby the Earl of 23, Grosvenor-square 



SUBSCRIBERS. XIX 

Downie Robert, Esq. M. P 25, Duke-street, Westminster 

Dobby n Mrs Waterford 

Dowdeswell George, Esq Dovm House, Worcestershire 

Dunlo Lord of Garbally, Ireland 

Duncan P. Esq. 

Durrani Mrs York-street, Portnan-square 

E. 

Edraonston N. B. Esq 49, Portland-place 

Edwards Miss .Bella Vista, Falmouth 

Elleker Mrs Richmond 

Elliot Richard, Esq 

Exeter Dowager Marchioness of . . Privy-gardens — 2 copies 

F. 

Fanning William, Esq. Mansion-House-place 

Farquhar Sir R. T. Bart 2, Richmond-terrace, Whitehall 

Fergusson R. Cutlar, Esq. M. P.. .17, Great Cumberland-$treei 
Forbes Sir Charles, Bart. M. P. . .9, Fitzroy-square 

Forbes the Honourable John Mansion-House-place 

Forbes John, Esq. M. P Fitzroy-square 

Forbes George, Esq Fitzroy-square 

Forbes Michie, Esq Sunning-hill, Berks 

Forster Mrs. Colonel 15, Upper Baker-street 

Fraser Alexander, Esq 6, Lincoln' s-inn-fields 

A Friend Falmouth 

A Friend to Humanity Richmond 

F. H , .St. James's Palace 



G. 

Gee , Esq Mortlake 

Goddard the Venerable the Archdeacon, D. D. Kew-gre«n 
Goderich Lord Viscount Downing-street 



XX SUBSCRIBERS. 

Grant L. Esq Mansion-House-place 

Grey the Earl 48, Berkeley-square 

Gwydyr Lord 142, Piccadilly 

H. 

Hall Mrs Clarendon House, Kennington 

Hamilton Colonel Ralph 5, James' s-street, Buckinghum- 

gate 

Hamlet Thomas, Esq 8, Cavendish-square 

Harcourt the Countess NunehamCourtney, Oxfordshire 

Harris Lady Belmont, Kent 

Harrowby the Earl of 39, Grosvenor-square 

Haverfield Lieut. -Colonel Kew-green 

Hawkins the Reverend E Oriel College, Oxford 

Hensley John, Esq 

Hertford the Dowager Marchioness Manchester-square 

Hertford the Marquess of 105, Piccadilly 

Hill Miss 

Hogg LieuL-Colonel 27 ,Montagu-^lace, Russell-sq. 

Holland the Reverend W. W 

Houghton George, Esq Admiralty 

Humphreys Mrs Morden, Surrey 

Hunter Miss Burton-crescent 

I. 

Iveson Henry, Esq Mansion-House-plact 

K. 

Kavanagh Lady Harriet 

Kavanagh , Esq 

L. 

Lake James, Esq Falnwuth — 2 copies 

Lansdowne Marquess of Berkeley-square 



SUBSCRIBERS. XXI 

Leith W. H. Esq Mansion-House-place 

L. E. L Sloane-street, Chelsea 

Lethbridge Lieut.-General Shrewsbury 

Lincoln Lord Bishop of Buckden Palace, Huntingdon- 
shire 

LlandaflF Lord Bishop of Llandaff Court, Glamorgansh. 

Lock John, Esq 18, Bedford-place 

Lodge , Esq Hawkshead 

Lonsdale Countess of 12, Charles-street, Berkeley- 
square 

Lushington L. J. Colonel 

Luxmore Miss 78, Gloticester-place 

A Lady, per C. Bolton, Esq 

M 

Macbride the Rev. Dr Oxford 

Mackillop James, Esq 4, Montague-square 

Mac Mahon JNIrs 10, York-street, Portman-sq. 

Malcolmson James, Esq Mansion-House-place 

Masterman John Esq. ,-, 34, Nicholas-lane 

Meeke Mrs. Beddington, Surrey 

Meyer F. C. Esq 62, Torrington-square 

Miller Captain Falmouth 

JVnils Charles, Esq. . , 29, Norfolk-street, Park-lane 

Mitchell Major 21, Cornwall-terrace 

Moone J. B. Esq Hackney 

Morris John, Esq 21, Baker-street 

Moreshead Lady Richmond 

Mouchet Joseph, Esq St. Martin' s-lane 

Murray John, Esq Albemarle- street 

N. 

Nelson the Countess of 23, Portman-square 

Nicholson Mrs, General 2, York-place 



XXll SUBSCRIBERS. 

Noel Sir Gerard N. Bart. M.P. . . .11, Chandos-street, Cavendish- 
square 
Norwich Bishop of Palace, Norwich 

O. 

Ogilvie Mrs 

Osborne Daniel, Esq County Kilkenny, Ireland 



P. 

Palmer Mrs Bivev'side Villa, Richmond 

Paul Mrs Falmouth 

Phillip Mrs 18, Cavendish-square 

Pophara Lady 52, Baker-street 

Popham Lieut-General Littlecot Park 

Popham Edward, Esq Kew 

Popham Captain J. L. R.N Falmouth 

Popham Miss Falmouth 

Popham C. W. Esq Trevurno, Cornwall 

President of St. John's College . . . Oxford 

R. 

Reade James, Esq 

Reeves Frederick, Esq Sheen Cottage 

Remington J. G. Esq 69, Lombard-street 

Richardson , Esq 

Richardson John, Esq 4 copies 

Rickards Robert, Esq 54, Wimpole-street 

Ridley Miss Hittgham 

Robertson Walter, Esq Bygrove Cottage, Merton 

Robertson William, Esq Ditto 

Robinson Sir G. A. Bart 73, PalL-Mall 

Robinson Mrs .5, York-Gaie, Regent's Park 



SUBSCRIBERS. XXIU 

Roberts Joseph, Esq Helstone 

Roche Mrs Bath 

Rogers John, Esq Penrose, Cornwall 

RoUe the Right Hon. Lady 18, Upper GrosvenoT'Street 

Russell the Rev. Dr 

Ryland Frederick, Esq Admiralty 

S. 

Sarel A. S. Esq Grove House, Enfield 

Sarel Mrs Ditto 

Salisbury the Lord Bishop of Palace, Salisbury — 2 copies 

Salisbury the Dow. Marchioness . . 20, Arlington-street 

Schnell Mrs Kew Green 

Shank Henry, Esq 62, Gloucester-place 

Shepherd Captain John Mansion-place 

Sheppard Mrs. John Waterford 

Simpson William, Esq 15, Nottingham-place 

Smith Miss 

Smith William, Esq 

Smith Osborne E. Esq Savage-gardens — 5 copies 

Smith Samuel, Esq Calcutta — 10 copies 

Smith the Rev. C Richmond 

Southey Robert, Esq Keswick, Cumberland 

Spencer Lord Robert 13, Arlington-street 

Stewart B. Esq Cheapside — 2 copies 

Stillingfleet Mrs St. James's Palace 

A Subscriber Chester 

A Subscriber, G. B. Falmouth 



T. 

Taylor Sir H 13, Cadogan-place 

Taylor Miss Brick Farm, Mortlake 

Taylor James, Esq 



XXIV SUBSCRIBERS. 

Thomhill - 8, Cornwall-terrace 

Tyson S. Esq Ulswater — 2 copies 

Travers George Coram-street, Russell-square 

Travers Peter Pare, Esq Fairfield Lodge, Eieter 

V. 

Verulam the Earl of .42, Grosvenor-square 

W. 

Wallis John, Esq Bodmin 

Warden of Wadham Oxford 

Webb Major, N. S. E. I. C 

Wellington the Duke of Apsley-House, Piccadilly 

Wells C. H. Esq. E. I. C 

Wells W. Esq Mitcham 

Wellstead Captain G 2,1. Albany 

Wild , Esq St. Martin's-lane 

Wildebore Mrs Circus, Trinity-square 

Willis John, Esq Mortlake 

Wingfield, Mrs Shrewsbury 

Wood Mrs Nonsuch Park, Surrey 

Wordsworth Wra. Esq Rydel Mount 

Wylie Mrs 

Winchester Bishop of Farnham Castle 



Yorke Vice Admiral Sir J. K.C.B. M.P. 14, New Burlington-st. 
Young Sir William Bart 24, Upper Wimpole-street 



CONTRAST 



CHAP. I. 

The beings of the mind are not of clay : 

Essentially immortal, they create 
And multiply in us a brighter ray. 

And more beloved existence : that which fate 
Prohibits to dull life in this our state 

Of mortal bondage, by these spirits supplied. 
First exiles, then replaces what we hate ; 

Watering the heart whose early flowers have died, 

And with a fresher growth replenishing the void. 

Childe HaroUe. 

" Nothing unpleasant, I hope, in 
that letter, De Montville?" said his friend 
Melcombe, seeing him poring over one 
just received from England. 

*' Unpleasant !" repeated the other, as 
if unconsciously, and with something of 
bitterness in his tone ; " oh, no ; only that 
I must give up enjoying the pleasures of 
the carnival here this season." 

VOL. I. B 



2 CONTRAST. 

" The deuce ! Why, at this rate, what 
with your going and Trelawney's, it will 
hardly be worth my remaining for, unat- 
tached as I shall then be to any particular 
party. But pray, may I ask the occasion 
of your sudden departure hence ?" 

" There, let that answer you," said De 
Montville, pushing to him the letter, 
which, on being roused from the reverie 
into which it had plunged him, he had 
rather petulantly thrown aside, and at 
the same moment starting up from the 
breakfast-table, at which they had been 
loitering, to pace the apartment. 

Melcombe impatiently took it up, and 
read as follows : — 



" Hon, Horatio De Montville, 

Ashfield, 7th February 18—. 

" Letter after letter, and still no 
period fixed for your departure from Sici- 
ly, which you gave us all to understand 
was to be the finish of your travels for the 
present. Were I in a different humour, 
I should be tempted to say, your linger- 



CONTRAST. 3 

ing there is enough to create a suspicion 
of the sirens of Ulysses being still in ex- 
istence, without any of his wise precau- 
tions being had recourse to, to guard a- 
gainst them. Seriously, such a protracted 
absence is a circumstance calculated to 
give uneasiness to your friends, and the 
suspicion, I am candid in acknowledging 
it has excited, will not be lessened by your 
disregarding this intimation. I did not 
wish before to be peremptory on the sub- 
ject, lest of being accused of usurping an 
unjust authority over you; but finding 
your mother's expressed washes for your 
return passed over in silence, I cannot for- 
bear observing, I shall expect this to be 
answered in person. If, after an absence 
of so many years abroad, your curiosity is 
not by this time completely satisfied, you 
must indeed have devoted yourself to very 
unprofitable pursuits. Be that as it may, 
however, your return can no longer be 
dispensed with, from certain arrange- 
ments that have been made. I am now on 
the very point of setting off for Ireland, 
b2 



4 CONTRAST. 

where, as soon as you have paid your du- 
tiful devoirs at home, I shall expect to be 
joined by you. Words are nothing, and 
of course professions, until put to the test: 
the sincerity of yours will be evinced, or, 
in other words, your regard for your 
friends, by your letting them find, that 
their anxiety for your welfare has not been 
useless. In the pleasing hope of a happy 
and speedy meeting, I remain, your affec- 
tionate kinsman, Le Poer." 



" So," cried Melcombe, " a mandate in- 
deed ! but is there no way of evading it ?" 

" Yes, certainly, of resisting it, but at a 
risk that " 

'' T comprehend : the old gentleman is a 
godpapa, who has held out a hope of your 
yet touching some of his thousands, pro- 
vided you continue a good boy." 

'* Exactly. My mother is his niece, 
but was portioned as a daughter. While 
yet a mere child, I had, I don't know 
which to call it, the good or bad fortune, 
that yet remaining to be proved, to particu- 



CONTRAST. 5 

larly attract his regard ; and in conse- 
quence of the expectations created by this 
partiahty, my father died without making 
any addition to the provision previously 
secured to me by settlement. Hitherto I 
have had no reason to regret the circum- 
stance, from the liberality I have expe- 
rienced from his lordship ; but now comes 
the tug of war, when I shall know whether 
I have cause or not to lament the want of 
a certain independence." 

" Then it is as I conceived ; from his 
lordship's letter, you are summoned home 
on some matrimonial project, not alto- 
gether agreeable to your imagination ?" 

" Agreeable !" exclaimed the other, his 
cheek flushing, and starting up again 
from the chair on which he had thrown 
himself; " any thing but that! The 
fact is, it was the hope of this strange 
whim, that occasions my return home be- 
ing now so peremptorily insisted on, being 
relinquished, if I kept out of the way, that 
induced me to prolong my stay abroad 
to this period." 

" Strange whim ! I don't understand 



6 CONTRAST. 

you. Is there any circumstance that ren- 
ders the lady an unsuitable alliance for 
you ?" 

" In a worldly point of view, assuredly ; 
and that it is which justifies the expression 
that appears to have puzzled you. She is 
a destitute. orphan, related, I understand, 
to the Le Poer family, but of whom I 
never by any chance heard, until taken 
under the protection of his lordship and 
my mother, for the avowed purpose of 
bringing about an alliance between us." 

" Well, faith, odd enough ! but it may 
yet be satisfactorily accounted for. But 
have you seen her ?" 

"No." 

** But you have received some descrip- 
tion of her, I presume ?" 

" Yes." 

" Well, and " 

" Why, as you so sagaciously inferred 
one thing, I think you might also this, 
that had the account been pleasing, my 
unwillingness to return would not have 
been quite so great." 

" True ; but perhaps the lady, though 



CONTRAST. 7 

not actually a divinity, may still be at- 
tractive ; that is, gifted with those mental 
charms that more than compensate for the 
want of personal ones : and what, after all, 
is beauty ? a flower that fades in the 
course of a few revolving suns! Is not 
the poet's observation, that " it soon grows 
familiar to the lover, fades on his eye, and 
palls upon the sense," verified by . the 
number of beautiful wives we see forsaken, 
for rivals not in any way to be put in 
competition with them ? Therefore, my 

dear fellow, af " 

" Ay, this is all very fine reasoning," 
said De Montville, impatiently; " but I 
never knew a man who could not be a 
philosopher, when merely interested about 
the affairs of others ; but touch the spring 
of selfishness, and see hov/ very differently 
he will then argue and appear to feel. 
However, even in those graces on which 
you lay such stress, I am told my intended 
is deficient ; that, in short, she is nothing 
better than an untrained, unschooled girl, 
without any one charm but that which is 
constituted by youth, and as such " 



8 CONTRAST. 

" You will none of her ; but, in that 
case, what becomes of godpapa's thou- 
sands?" 

" Ay, there's the rub, for he is a man 
inexorable in his resentments, and circum- 
stanced as I am, through my father's re- 
lying so much on his fondness for me, I 
candidly confess, it would be a most un- 
pleasant circumstance to forfeit his favour." 

" Doubtless : therefore, for Heaven's 
sake, don't run the risk. It is astonishing 
with what tenacity old people adhere to 
any favourite plan ; their adhesion to it, 
if I may use such a comparison, is just 
like that of a barnacle to a rock." 

" But to sacrifice every feeling ! — to be 
compelled to associate with a person I 
cannot like !" 

" Pooh ! — stuff ! Was a man under an 
obligation never to move without his 
wife ; but the very usages of polished life 
exempt him from so dreadful a necessity : 
take my advice, therefore, since go you 
must, make a virtue of necessity, by not 
delaying your return ; secure the indepen- 
dence you require, by taking the lady. 



CONTRAST. 9 

and be yourself again. And there is one 
consolation in your ease, you know, your 
heart being disengaged: were the case 
otherwise indeed," and he paused, and 
looked very much inclined to laugh. 

Again the countenance of De Montville 
underwent a transient suffusion, as ab- 
ruptly turning away, he told Melcombe 
he should be engaged the whole of the 
morning, and left the room. 

Not, however, in the way that the other 
might naturally have concluded, from 
what had just occurred, was it passed by 
him. The moment he quitted the apart- 
ment, he ordered his horse, and, unattend- 
ed, rode out in the direction of the moun- 
tains that form the romantic back-ground 
of Palermo. A fear of being encountered 
by any one he knew, prevented any lin- 
gering until he began to ascend amongst 
them, when he was necessarily obliged 
to alter the pace at which he had previ- 
ously rode, and with a deep sigh began to 
reflect on his situation — the cruel predica- 
ment in which he was placed ; compelled 
b3 



10 CONTRAST. 

to give up hopes he had flattered himself 
were on the very eve of accompHshmentj 
or else run the hazard of forfeiting the in- 
dependence he had so long contemplated 
as a certainty. 

De Montville was of an ardent tempe- 
rament — lively, brilliant, easily affected, 
and prone to follow the bent of his feel- 
ings. While none had a keener relish for 
the pleasures of fashionable life, there was 
a degree of romance in his nature, that led 
him, like the minstrel of Beattie, to de- 
light in lonely musings, in all that affect- 
ed the imagination, or excited enthusiasm. 
The magnificence of nature, the records 
of departed greatness, unaspiring worth, 
and genius struggling with the obstacles 
of adverse fortune, feelings too deep for 
words to utter, were then touched and 
awakened, and, for the time, he became 
lost to external objects, in a world of his 
own creating. 

In one of his solitary and exploring 
rides, one day in the neighbourhood of 
Palermo, on turning to regain the road 
from which he had diverged into a by 



CONTRAST, 11 

one, he found himself completely bewil- 
dered : in vain he sought to catch a glimpse 
of some object that might serve as a land- 
mark. The city, with its intervening 
plain, was completely hidden from his 
view, by the wild, luxuriant thickets of 
aloes and Indian fig, that overran the un- 
equal surface of the ground, intermingled 
with oleander and palmetto, surmounted 
by lofty beech and chesnut, again clad in 
spring's green livery, while as yet hardly 
a tender bud in colder climates marked the 
glad return of the genial season. He went 
on, looking about him for some place at 
which he might inquire his way, when he 
suddenly found himself on the edge of a 
deep rift, or glen, in the very heart of the 
mountain, at the opposite extremity of 
which stood a very ancient, solitary-looking 
building, with the green summit of the 
steep acclivity on which it was erected, 
appearing above it, casting a soft shadow 
on the nether scene. Here De Montville 
thought he might obtain the direction he 
required; and accordingly, throwing the 
bridle of his horse over the arm of a tree. 



121 CONTRAST. 

he descended into the glen ; but did not ad- 
vance, without frequently pausing to ad- 
mire the profusion of glowing flowers with 
which it was enamelled, sending forth a 
cloud of fragrance, as his foot carelessly- 
pressed them, and the sunbeams playing in 
the wild eddies of a beautiful stream that 
meandered through the verdant turf, uni- 
ting its soft murmurs to the still softer ones 
of the Sicilian dove. As he drew near the 
building, he perceived it was in a very ruin- 
ous state, and altogether had such an aspect 
of decay and desolation, as inclined him to 
fear he had incurred his present trouble to 
no purpose. Determined however to ascer- 
tain whether it was untenanted, as he had 
such reason to imagine from its appearance 
and the profound stillness that reigned 
around, he knocked loudly at the old 
portal ; but no answer was returned, and 
after repeating the knock several times, he 
became confirmed in his surmise of its de- 
sertion. By this time there was a curi- 
osity awakened to view the interior, and 
he went reconnoitring about, to try if he 
could discover any way of entering, con- 



CONTRAST. IS 

ceiving there could be no great impro- 
priety in intruding into a place that was 
abandoned. At length his diligent scru- 
tiny discovered to him, within a deep 
niche or recess, in one of the old towers 
that flanked the portal, a small door, that 
with very little difficulty yielded to his 
hand, and admitted him into a spacious 
court, surrounded by the building. Here 
all was silent as the grave — all evinced the 
melancholy omnipotence of Time ; the fine 
entablatures of the marble colonnade that 
ran round it, were mutilated and defaced — 
the fountain, that had once diffused an agree- 
able freshness through the place, no longer 
played; its basin was covered with slime and 
weeds; and the waving of some tall cypresses 
added, if possible, to the mournful aspect 
of the place. De Montville looked and lis- 
tened, to try if he could see or hear any 
indication of an inhabitant ; but nothing 
of the kind met either eye or ear ; and he 
ventured to advance into another cloistered 
court, thickly planted with orange, lemon, 
and citron, and containing in the centre a 
capacious marble basin of limpid water. 



14 CONTRAST. 

The heat was by this time intense, and to 
obtain a temporary refuge from it, he sat 
down upon the step of the colonnade, re- 
freshed by the cool look of the water, and 
the diversified tints and balmy fragrance 
of the agrumi : as his eye wandered, he 
every where beheld evidences of decay and 
desertion, in shattered windows and moul- 
dering turrets, hung with streaming grass. 
A sensation of melancholy was impressed 
upon his mind, and he gradually sunk into 
a fit of musing, from which he was sud- 
denly roused by the low creaking of a 
door, at the end of the colonnade under 
which he had taken shelter ; but whether 
through the influence of the air, or the 
movement of a hand, he could not of course 
decide ; keeping his eye fixed, he saw it in 
the course of a few minutes gradually 
open, and a female, of an elegant form, 
issue from it, her head shrouded in the 
antique veil of the Sicilian women. She 
advanced with not merely a cautious, but 
fearful air, and, with her looks directed to 
the other side of the court, was within 
a few paces of De Montville, when his 



CONTRAST^ 15 

sudden, perhaps involuntarily, rising at 
her approach betrayed him to her: she 
started back, her veil at the same instant 
escaped from her hand, and her face re* 
vealed to his view, he beheld one of sur- 
passing beauty. He was on the point of 
expressing his regret at the alarm it was 
evident to him he had occasioned her, 
when, with a faint scream, she retreated 
within the door from whence she had just 
issued. De Montville, hardly conscious 
of what he was about, was rushing after 
her, when he was prevented by the start- 
ing forward of another female, but of a 
very different description, from a still 
nearer door under the colonnade ; and at 
the same instant, ere she had time to ad- 
dress him, as she appeared about doing, a 
gruff, masculine voice was heard behind 
him, demanding what was the matter? 

" By our Lady if I know !" cned the 
female. 

" Allow me to explain," said De Mont- 
ville ; and turning as he spoke, he encoun^ 
tered the keen, sly-looking visage of an 
elderly man ; and he proceeded to state the 



16 CONTRAST. 

mistake to which his intrusion was owing. 

" Humph!" exclaimed the man, in a 
surly tone, and one of doubt ; " it may be 
as you have stated, signor ; but now that 
you know the place is not unoccupied, the 
next time you choose to pay it a visit, I 
hope you will honour me by letting me 
be the person to give you admission." 

" Assuredly," replied De Montville; 
'* I should hardly think of admitting my- 
self to a place I did not think deserted ; 
and I have to regret what has occurred, 
from the fright it has been the occasion of 
to the lady of the place." 

" Lady ! what lady does he mean, Ise- 
nella ?" demanded the man. 

" By St. Rosalia, that's more than I 
know !" she replied, '* except it be, that," 
smoothing her skirt, and drawing herself 
up, " he takes me for one." 

" No, pardon me," said De Montville, 

" that is it was a very young lady, I 

am apprehensive I alarmed by my intru- 
sion here." 

" Lady !" again repeated the man; " why 
your eyes must have deceived you, signor, 



CONTRAST. 17 

or else you were napping, for there's no 
lady here." 

" No, that there is not, nor has for many 
along year," followed up the woman; "and 
'tis not to visit such an old ruinated place 
as this, stuck in a mountain, like a bird's 
nest in a tree, that the gay signoras of Pa- 
lermo would be coming ; no, no, they pre- 
fer the Ottangolo and tTie Marino, and 
going from one fine palazzo to another, 
and " 

" Did any one ever hear such a clapper, 
but a sexton?" cried the man. "Why 
what signifies who does, or who does not, 
come here ?" 

" And do you really say that no one 
lives here ?" demanded De Montville. 

" No, signor, I assert no such thing : I 
thought I gave you to understand it was 
inhabited : my wife and I live here ; but 
we are its sole occupants." 

" Except the rats in the cellars, and the 
owls in the turrets," cried the wife. 

" And so now, signor," in an ironical 
tone, added the husband, " having answer- 



18 CONTRAST. 

ed your questions, if you permit, I'll have 
the honour of shewing you out." 

De JNIontville hesitated ; their positive 
denial of the lady served to heighten his 
curiosity respecting her ; a thousand roman- 
tic stories of tyranny and oppression re- 
curred to his recollection, inclining him 
to believe she was suffering through some 
act of injustice, else why their solicitude 
to make him discredit the evidence of his 
senses ? her cautious look, her fearful step, 
strengthened the surmise; but if it was 
their policy to deceive him about her, it 
was his to allow them to think they had 
succeeded, else any further efforts to ascer- 
tain the fact he wished might be disap- 
pointed : accordingly, without further de- 
lay, but not without casting a longing, 
lingering look at the door by which the 
lovely vision had disappeared, he suffered 
himself to be conducted to the one by 
wrhich he was to leave the building. Here 
however pausing, he took out his purse, 
with a hope that he should not offend, by 
wishing to make some recompence for the 
trouble he had given. 



CONTRAST. 19 

" Oh, not in the least, signer," was the 
reply ; " I am never offended with what 
pleases me." 

" And may I ask," resumed De Mont- 
ville, still loitering, and with assumed care- 
lessness, " who the owner of this villa is ?" 

The man surveyed him for a moment, 
with a sly, malicious look, then with a 
forced, or rather jeering laugh — " To be 
sure, signor, you may ask what you please ; 
but asking and answering are distinct 
things ; and so," opening still wider, as he 
spoke, the door by which the stranger was 
to depart, and which De Montville per- 
ceiving it was useless to expect the grati- 
fication of his curiosity from him, did 
without further delay. 

Curiosity ! it was more than curiosity 
was excited ; a feeling of intense interest, 
such as determined him on not resting until 
he had endeavoured to ascertain something 
more concerning the fair stranger, whe- 
ther, as he had surmised, she was a sufferer 
through any tyrannical influence. Why 
had she so abruptly started away on see- 
ing him? But how ridiculous to suppose 



20 CONTRAST. 

that had she remained, any claim would 
have been made on the services or sym- 
pathy of a total stranger ! but then some- 
thing might have been elicited, that might 
have instructed him as to the method of 
serving her, if indeed any services were 
required. In short, all that was romantic 
in his nature was awakened by the belief 
she had given rise to ; and on recrossing 
the glen, instead of looking about him for 
the spires of Palermo, he looked about 
him for some one, or some habitation at 
which to inquire the name of the villa he 
had just left. At length, on descending 
a little further into the woods, bearing 
upon the bay, he came to a cottage front- 
ing the sea, at the door of which sat a wo- 
man, twisting silk, with some children 
playing about her. Having accosted her, 
by inquiring the nearest way back to the 
city, De Montville, after throwing some 
money amongst the children, who came 
running to gaze at him, proceeded to ask 
whether she knew the name of such a 
villa, describing the one he had just come 
from. 



COXTKAST. 21 

" What, the villa high up in the moun- 
tains here at the head of the glen ? oh yes, 
signor, that is the villa Zerbino." 

" And the owner, does he reside in it ?" 
impatiently demanded De Montville. 

*' What, the count Zerbino ? — no, sig- 
nor, no ; it's many a long year since it has 
been the abode of the family ; he has far 
finer residences elsewhere — a fine palazzo 
at Naples, and a beautiful villa on the 
banks of the Brenta ; and one can't won- 
der, I am sure, that he should prefer these 
to this old out-of-the-way place, that, they 
say, is as ancient as the Saracens or Nor- 
mans, and that, what with time and wars, 
and being given up entirely for so many 
years to the occupation of servants, would 
take a mint of money to have it put in 
proper order for the reception of a noble 
family again." 

" Entirely to servants!" repeated De 
Montville, with an eagerness he could not 
repress ; " what, are there none but servants 
now occupying it?" 

The woman looked earnestly in his face 
for a minute, then — " Why I can't exactly 



22 CONTRAST. 

answer that question, signor," she said. 

" They do say but here if I have not 

got my silk tangled — well to be sure, if 
this is not a plague : but as I was going 

to tell you but look at that urchin 

Marco risking his neck, climbing up that 
chesnut; beshrew me if I don't think all 
young boys are a kind of imps, for ever in 
mischief — mischief." 

De INIontville, not without a strong in- 
clination to give the young rogue a flog- 
ging for his attempted escalade, quickly 
dragged him down ; then with an air of 
impatience that could not be misunder- 
stood, again turning to the mother — 
" Why yes, signor," she resumed, " they 
do say, but I am sure I can't take upon 
myself to vouch for the truth of the re- 
port, that a young sister of the count Zer- 
bino is now confined in the villa." 

" Now !" cried De JVIontville with emo- 
tion — " on what account pray ?" 

" Why, signor, in order to compel her 
to enter a convent, that he may keep to 
himself a very large dower he must other- 
wise give her." 



CONTRAST. 0,3 

" Good Heavens," exclaimed De Mont- 
ville, " what cruelty ! But is there no 
one to interfere about her — no one to res- 
cue her from him ?" 

" No, signor ; the old count and coun- 
tess, her parents, are both dead, rest their 
souls, and she has no near relation but her 
brother, who accordingly treats her as he 
likes ; but by our Lady, if she have but 
the spirit of a mouse, she'll never be fright- 
ened out of her liberty, to give him up 
her dower. Marry come up indeed ! I 
wish any one had thought of serving me 
so, for you must know, signor, I had a 
good share left me, with my brothers, of 
the olive plantations our father had." 

" But supposing any one were suffi- 
ciently interested about her, to endeavour 
to rescue her from this unjust brother, 
think you," anxiously inquired De Mont- 
ville, " any way could be found for ten- 
dering their services ?" 

" Why, signor, I do think it would be 
a difficult matter ; for except the imme- 
diate intimates, or favourites of Ugo and 



24 CONTRAST. 

his wife Isenella, few, if any, are admitted 
to the villa." 

" But to such a ruinous, rambling build- 
ing, I conceive there could be no great dif- 
ficulty in obtaining secret access," said De 
Montville ; " and I know a person who 
would well recompense an effort for the 
purpose." 

" Well, signor, you are really such a plea- 
sant-spoken cavalier, I should like to oblige 
you myself; for, as my husband, Stefano, 
says, ' a smooth tongue, like soft running 
water, gains upon us before we are aware." 

" Then, as an earnest of my gratitude, 
you must accept this," said De Montville, 
putting some gold into her hand. 

" Oh, signor, this is really being too ge- 
nerous, after what you have already thrown 
to the young rogues." 

" By no means. But when do you 
imagine you could make the attempt you 
have indirectly promised me?" 

" Why, signor, I cannot positively say 
when, but you may be sure as soon as 
ever I can ; and whenever you come this 
way, you know you can call ; and should I 



CONTRAST. 25 

be absent at the moment, don't fear I shall 
be long away ; for what with this thing 
and that thing, minding my silk-worms, 
and helping to repair Stefano's nets, for 
he's a fisherman you must know, signor, 
and minding the young ones, and going 
daily to mass, and now and then to con- 
fession, the saints can witness, if I have a 
moment alaiost to bless myself withal, 
much less for gadding." 

As De Montville pursued his way back 
to Palermo, he could hardly help smiling 
at the idea of the adventure in which he 
had so suddenly engaged ; yet after all, if 
all were explained, surely even by those 
inclined to ridicule, it could not excite 
laughter, so natural was the impulse that 
occasioned it : but he had no intention of 
ascertaining this, by determining to make 
no confidant on the occasion ; for silence 
on the subject there were many reasons; 
it might be found impossible to apprise 
the lady of the champion she had acquired, 
and it was also doubtful whether the cir- 
cumstance was one she would be inclined 

VOL. I. c 



26 CONTRAST. 

to profit by ; but supposing she were, 
there was no knowing the motives she 
might have for wishing to have the whole 
affair remain a secret ; and would he be 
satisfied with her acceptance of his services, 
without any claim being allowed him to 
her further notice? Assuredly; for what 
interest could he feel for her but as an in- 
jured person ? True, she was young and 
fair ; but headlong love he had always ri- 
diculed ; and he felt convinced that had 
she been the very reverse of what she was, 
he would still have experienced the same 
readiness to serve her. Certainly she was 
a creature that might well excuse an in- 
stantaneous passion, so lovely with her 
dejected mien! her locks of raven hue, 
clustering over a brow of marble white- 
ness ! and then her dark eyes, so beautiful 
in the wild terror they had expressed at 
his sight ! surely she could never have been 
seen, or it would not have remained for 
him to offer his services. 



CONTRAST. 27 



CHAP. II. 



" Such is the refuge of our youth and age, 
The first from hope, the last from vacancy." 



He allowed but a day or two to elapse, 
ere he paid another visit to his new ac- 
quaintance Bianca. He found her at the 
door, looking anxiously in the direction in 
which he might be expected. On seeing 
him, she retreated into the cottage, beck- 
oning him to follow. — " Well, signor," she 
said, " you shall hear what I have been 
doing since. As I was puzzling my 
brains to think how I should set about 
trying to oblige you, who should come 
to pay me a visit but Enrico, my son — 
my eldest son, you must know, signor, 
whom an old uncle, a shepherd, has brought 
up, and, amongst other things, taught him 
to play upon the pipe, as all the shepherds 
in these parts do ; and to be sure so sweetly 
c 2 



28 CONTRAST. 

he does play on it, that no wonder the silly 
sheep come flocking about him, when at 
sunset he takes it up to call them toge- 
ther : well, hardly had he been with me a 
minute, when it struck me his music might 
be the means of enabling me to discover 
the part of the villa the signora occupied, 
without which I knew it would be useless 
my attempting to do what you wished : so 
pretending to him I wanted to gather 
some herbs about the mountains, and that 
I should like to have him to divert me 
with his pipe whilst collecting them, I set 
off for the villa; but in vain I kept wan- 
dering before it — no one appeared : so at 
last I clambered up to it, and kept loiter- 
ing about, making Enrico still continue 
his playing ; till at length the upper lattice 
of an old tower, that juts far into the woods, 
opened, and at it appeared the loveliest 
creature — why he would be worse than 
the Saracens, of whom they tell such tales, 
who could think of shutting up such an 
angel in a nunnery ; but, as I was going 
to say, she didn't immediately perceive 
me, she was so engrossed by the music of 



CONTRAST. 29 

Enrico, who, the sun being setting, had 
just commenced the evening service to the 
Virgin ; but when she did, and just as I 
was on the point of making her compre- 
hend by a sign that I was a friend, she 
started back, and instantly closed the lat- 
tice with a look of terror." 

" And is this all you have to commu- 
nicate?" asked De Montville, evidently 
disappointed. 

" All ! and is not this something, signor ?" 

" I can't perceive it is — that is, if thus 
alarmed at the sight of any stranger, I 
can't see how there will be a possibility 
of obtaining an opportunity of letting her 
know what is wished." 

" Ah, signor, as my old grandfather 
used to say, ' it is not always at the first 
glance that one can discover or ascertain 
the depth of a well.' 'N'^^ithout getting to 
speak to her, how could I deliver a mes- 
sage? and to obtain an opportunity for 
this, it was necessary to learn the exact 
part of the villa occupied by her, else, in 
such a rambling wild place, one would run 
the chance, supposing they could enter it 



30 CONTRAST. 

secretly, of losing themselves, or worse, 
popping into the jaws of that tiger, Ugo." 

" Ah, now I begin to understand you," 
said De Montville, in an altered tone. 

" Yes, I thought you would !" cried 
Bianca, bridling up with pleasure. 

" Well, and you have discovered a way 
of obtaining access to the signora ?" 

" Not yet, signor; but all in good time. 
I have an old neighbour, who was brought 
up in the villa, and knows all the inlets 
and outlets of it, as he himself boasts, even 
better than its owner, and of him I mean 
to learn how I may enter it secretly ; and 
then to be sure when I get to the signora, 
I sha'n't tell her of the young, and the 
handsome, and the most illustrissimo ca- 
valier that is ready to carry her off." 

" Hold ! hold ! nothing of that kind, if 
you please, my good Bianca ; all you must 
say is, that the services of a stranger, not 
unworthy from rank of tendering them, 
are at her absolute command, if she will 
but honour him by their acceptance ; or I 
will address a letter to her for you to de- 
liver, for that I believe, upon considera- 



CONTRAST. 31 

tion, will be the best, or most correct, 
mode of tendering them." 

" Well, signor, that's as you please ; but 
I fear me I shan't be able to deliver your 
letter immediately, for old Thomaso is 
very bad, and confined to his bed, and till 
he gets better, there's no asking him any 
question; poor soul, his last clamber up 
Monte Pellegrino, to pray at the shrii:ie of 
the blessed saint Rosalia, was too much 
for his old bones." 

" Does he stand in need of any assist- 
ance?" demanded De Montville. 

" Why truly, signor, I don't believe 
he's much better off than other folk, more's 
the pity, for when well, he's much given 
to kindness and hospitality." 

De Montville's ready purse was im- 
mediately in his hand. He departed, with 
an intimation that he should call again in 
a day or two : but not so readily, as might 
have been expected, was his intended let- 
ter written ; for the first time perhaps, as he 
collected himself to write it, he began to 
consider seriously of what he was about, and 
the result were such doubts of the ultimate 



32 CONTRAST. 

success of his project, as almost tempted 
him to relinquish it. Supposing it drew 
upon him no imputation of presumption, 
yet might not the innate delicacy of her 
sex, the natural timidity of youth, the 
cloistered seclusion in which she had pro- 
bably been kept from the world, all oppose 
obstacles to the lady's acceptance of the ser- 
vices of a stranger ? but then, should the 
reverse chance to be the case — and finally 
he decided on persevering in an effort for 
ascertaining, satisfied that, end as the mat- 
ter might, he should still have the consola- 
tion of thinking he had acted from the 
purest motives. 

His letter was simply a repetition of 
what he had commissioned Bianca to say ; 
and he had at length the gratification of 
learning that she obtained the information 
requisite to enable her to deliver it. 

What were not the feelings of De Mont- 
ville at this information, at seeing that at 
length there was a chance of his introduc- 
tion to the lovely being who had awaken- 
ed so lively an interest in his feelings! 
Divided between hope and fear, he had 



CONTRAST. 33 

solely given himself up to one idea or con- 
templation, when the letter of lord Le Poer 
arrived, to recall him to other thoughts. 

Overwhelmed with despair, he hastened 
to Bianca, determined that, let him ulti- 
mately decide as he might in obedience to 
this mandate, nothing should induce him to 
leave Sicily, until he had ascertained the 
result of his letter to the fair Zerbino. Bi- 
anca was, as usual, on the watch for him, his 
visits being always productive of something 
agreeable to her; but notwithstanding which 
consideration, her brow, on this occasion, 
was nearly as dejected as his own : and 
— " Ah, signor !" she exclaimed, the in- 
stant she beheld him, applying, as she 
spoke, the end of her veil to her eyes. 

De Montville turned pale — " You have 
failed then in your attempt to enter the 
villa?" he said, " or the signora has reject- 
ed the letter?" 

" No, signor, neither is the case. Di- 
rected by old Thomaso, I made my way 
into the old tower, and admitted myself 
to her chamber by means of a sliding pa- 
nel ; but hardly had I given her your let- 
c3 



34 CONTRAST. 

ter, and intimated that I should be under 
her lattice the next morning for an an- 
swer, ere I was fain to retreat, in conse- 
quence of hearing some one approaching. 
Well, as I had said, ere the sun was well 
up, I was at the tower ; but oh ! the saints, 
what should I see, but, instead of finding 
her watching for me, as I fully expected, 
her driving off with that cruel brother of 
hers, the count Zerbino !" 

De Montville almost staggered under 
the shock this information gave him — 
" Forced away then at last !" he exclaimed. 

" No doubt, signor; indeed it was evi- 
dent, from the emotion I saw the angel in." 

" Why was I not on the spot at the 
moment!" cried De Montville; " they 
should not have found it so easy a matter 
then to have carried her off. But which 
way did the carriage go?" he demanded, 
wdth a look of wildness. 

"It inclined towards the bay, and I am 
therefore induced, from this circumstance, 
to imagine she w^as put on board a vessel, 
as the safest and readiest way of sending 



CONTRAST. 35 

her to the convent where she is to be se- 
cluded. 

De Montville waited to hear no more ; 
be rushed up to the woods about the villa, 
where so often he had lingered since his 
first visit to it. Several hours elapsed ere 
he could at all compose himself, so deep 
was his regret — so severe his disappoint- 
ment at what had happened. A thou- 
sand wild projects floated through his 
brain, but which were finally relinquished, 
as the suggestions of rashness and despair ; 
and all hope of ever seeing or hearing more 
of the fair Zerbino over, he returned to 
the city, to prepare for his departure to 
England, anxious, one way or other, to be 
out of the state of agitating suspense he 
was now in as to his future prospects. 



86 CONTRAST. 



CHAP. III. 



" I know not why — but standing thus by thee, 
It seems as if I had thine inmate known." 



Immediately on landing, he set off for 
the seat of his mother in Berkshire. He 
found the old lady well, and, what was an 
almost equally agreeable circumstance, by 
herself, or in other words, his intended 
bride not with her, as he had rather feared 
and imagined would have been the case ; 
for though he certainly wished to see her, 
in order that he might judge himself what 
she was, yet he certainly by no means de- 
sired an introduction to her, until he had 
positively ascertained what he might ex- 
pect, should he find it impossible to acqui- 
esce in lord Le Poer's project respecting 
her. All that he desired to learn, he made 
no doubt of now hearing from his mother, 
she was so easy, and so artless, and more- 
over so fond of him ; he was indeed her 



CONTRAST. 37 

favourite, being the only one of the family 
that had been allowed to remain under her 
influence, her lord, the late earl of New- 
bury, and his mother, not conceiving her 
by any means sufficiently fashionable in 
her notions to have the management of 
young persons, destined to move in the 
rank her children were. 

After the first joy of meeting had a 
little subsided, De Montville commenced 
the inquiries so interesting to him. Lord 
Le Poer was gone to Ireland, and expect- 
ed him to speedily follow — " And then I 
shall see her ?" said De Montville, finish- 
ing the sentence for his mother. 

" Yes, you will then see Ady." 

" Ady !" repeated De Montville. 

Lady Newbury laughed — " Ah, I re- 
collect you don't like names abridged, and 
really her name is so pretty, it is a pity to 
shorten it — yes, you will then see Ade- 
laide." 

" And what kind of creature shall I ac- 
tually find her?*' said De Montville. 
" You know Louisa drew a most unfa- 
vourable portrait of her." 



38 CONTRAST. 

" Yes, I know ; but then you must re- 
collect Louisa wished you to marry an- 
other person." 

" True, in hopes, if I took the sister, she 
might obtain the brother." 

" Oh well, we mustn't say that of your 
sister; but I assure you Adelaide is pretty, 
at least in my eyes." 

« Ah !" sighed De Montville, " if I 
could but hear any one else say the same : 
but, my dear mother, you are so kind- 
hearted, you wish to have every one 
thought so favourably of, and make them 
feel so pleased with themselves, that you 
really often deck them with charms they 
do not possess. There were the three Miss 
Gubbins's — what a description did you 
give me of them, and when I came to see 
them " 

Again she laughed — " Well, to be sure 
they were not very beautiful ; but then, 
poor dear things, they were not quite so 
ugly as some people said." 

" Well, if I can't be exactly satisfied as 
to what this Adelaide is, let me at least 
be satisfied as to who she is," said De 



CONTEAST. 39 

Montville — " what lord Le Peer's mo- 
tive can possibly be for desiring an alliance 
between us, destitute as she is either of 
that rank or fortune, to which, I under- 
stand, he has hitherto attached so much 
importance ?" 

" You shall learn all you are anxious 
about concerning her. It never was his 
lordship's intention that an introduction 
should take place between you, without 
your previously knowing who she really 
is." 

" Then I am to understand he has em- 
powered you to satisfy my anxiety on this 
head?" 

" Yes ; and this was his chief reason for 
desiring you to see me ere you followed 
him to Ireland." 

" Then, my dear mother " 

" Oh, you are all impatience-^well, that 

is very natural indeed ; and so to begin 

But how Frisk keeps jumping about you ! 
dear fellow, to be sure the attachment 
of these animals is astonishing. I was 
reading in an old magazine lately an ac- 
count ** 



40 CONTRAST. 

" Yes, there are a great many wonder- 
ful anecdotes told of them. But really 
now I am so anxious to hear " 

" Oh ! what I have promised ; well — 
But how sunburnt you are ! however it's 
no injury ; no, really I do think you are 
handsomer than ever;" and she fondly 
kissed his cheek. 

" Well, I shan't try to doubt that," said 
De Montville, laughing. " But come, 
my dear mother," and he drew his chair 
still nearer to hers. 

" You have heard, I believe," she said, 
" that my uncle was married to a lady he 
did not like ?" 

" Yes, with commiseration for what she 
must have endured, since unconciliating 
as he is even to those he likes, what must 
he have been to any one he disliked ?" 

" A natural conclusion indeed. He 
certainly never was a very gracious per- 
sonage ; so much the contrary indeed, that 
in my youthful days he was known 
amongst the young folks by the title of 
baron Grim : but I really think, poor dear 
man, that he would not have been half so 



CONTRAST. 41 

bad, but for the harsh and unyielding 
father he had. But before I proceed fur- 
ther, I want to ask you a question. You 
have heard, you say, of his being married 
to a lady he disliked ; but did you ever 
hear of his being married to one he liked ?" 

" No, never." 

" So it was however. But to resume. 
This terrible father of his forced him into 
a marriage entirely contrary to his incli- 
nation, a circumstance, I am persuaded, 
that added not a little to the natural seve- 
rity of his temper : the lady was not only 
some years older than himself, but very 
unamiable in every respect, destitute of all 
those graces that win esteem, as it has been 
observed, even where admiration cannot 
be obtained : while his father lived, his 
real feelings with regard to her were, in 
some degree, concealed; but no sooner 
was he relieved from the restraint he had 
imposed upon him, than she began to be 
made fully sensible of the cause of their 
alhance ; upbraidings were the consequence 
of the discovery, and their mutual dissatis- 
faction, heightened by the want of off- 



42 CONTRAST. 

spring, they by degrees came to have 
hardly any intercourse with each other, 
though they still continued to reside un- 
der the same roof, for the sake of keeping 
up * the dignity of appearances,' as his 
half-sister, lady Dorothy Dubois, a most 
awful-looking personage in my eyes, used 
to observe. My poor dear papa, as diffe- 
rent from his brother as day from night, 
died about this time, and disappointed in 
his hopes of a family, lord Le Poer began 
to turn his attention upon me, and, as his 
presumptive heiress, I was taken from my 
dear, artless, unsophisticated mother, to 
be given up to the control of lady Doro- 
thy. The change from perfect freedom 
to the severest restrictions, was too pain- 
ful to be endured without murmurs; here- 
tofore allowed the free use of the faculties 
with which Heaven had blessed me, to 
dash forth into the fresh fields, ere yet the 
speckled lark had w^ell risen from his tufted 
bed, and hail the glories of the rising sun, 
amidst the sweets of opening day, I could 
not very well bear to be the absolutely 
manacled inmate of a dull apartment, com- 



CONTRAST. 43 

pelled to do every thing by rule; but 
there was no help for it. My poor dear 
mother was too timid, and stood too much 
in awe besides of my titled relatives, to 
dream of interfering about me ; and so, for 
two years, I continued paying for my ex- 
pectations of being an heiress, by the loss 
of every enjoyment. 

" You have heard of Rockcliffe Castle, 
the family seat on the Irish coast. A 
vessel was driven on shore near it one 
stormy night, and some of the terrified 
and exhausted passengers, amongst whom 
was a gentleman of the name of Hartland, 
and his daughter, sought refuge there. 
Lord Le Poer was by no mean^ pleased 
at the disturbance this occasioned : he 
liked no freedom or liberty whatever to 
be taken with him ; and in a very bad 
mood was repairing to the breakfast-par- 
lour the next morning, when, in crossing 
the hall, his eye encountered a beautiful 
girl of seventeen at a window, in earnest 
contemplation of the element that had so 
nearly proved fatal to her the preceding 
night. He directly rang for an attendant. 



44 CONTEAST. 

of whom he inquired who she was. The 
servant mistaking the cause of the inquiry, 
informed him that he had given her father 
to understand there was an inn a little 
way farther off, and that they were about 
departing for it, — ' And who ordered you 
to be so officious, sir ?' demanded his 
lordship, with one of his black frowns; 
and he immediately sallied forth in quest 
of Mr. Hartland ; and as he ushered him 
and his daughter into the parlour, ex- 
pressed his regret at not being up the pre- 
ceding night, to see that every attention 
was paid to them their situation required ; 
and also his hope, that, until perfectly re- 
covered from their recent fatigue and 
fright, they would not think of removing. 
He now learned who they were. Mr. 
Hartland was a widower, and resident in 
Devonshire ; and had come over to pay a 
visit, or rather for the purpose of intro- 
ducing his daughter to her mother's con- 
nexions, the Mountflorence family, whose 
beautiful and romantic seat, in the neigh- 
bourhood of RockclifFe Castle, you have 
heard me describe. There had been 



CONTRAST. 45 

a coolness between Mr. iNIountflorence, 
Mr. Hartland's brother-in-law, and his 
lordship, for a considerable time ; but it 
now appeared to be suddenly forgotten; and 
an intimacy, greater than had ever before 
existed between the families, took place. 
In about a year after this, lady Le Poer, 
who had previously been in a lingering 
state, paid her debt to nature. Hardly 
were the last duties paid to her remains, 
ere his lordship departed for England, 
whence, in the course of a few revolving 
months, he returned wdth Miss Hartland 
as his bride. It was whispered that the 
young lady was by no means as ready to 
accept his proposals as her father, owing 
to an attachment to another ; and there 
was a pale dejection in her looks, a seem- 
ing disregard of the pomp and splendour 
by which she was surrounded, that con- 
firmed the report. She was immediately 
taken in hand by lady Dorothy, to be 
schooled into the proper observance of all 
the ceremonies of her exalted rank. Poor 
thing ! I, who had had such experience of 
this schooling, felt for her : but what was 



46 CONTRAST. 

her punishment was my release. Lord Le 
Poer, again indulging hopes of a family, 
it was deemed expedient I should be re- 
turned to my mother. Oh, the joy, the 
rapture of that moment, in which I found 
myself again in her maternal arms ! again 
under the thatch of our dear woodbine- 
covered cottage, free once more to range 
the verdant fields, and enjoy, unrestricted, 
the beauties and the blessings of creation ! 
" Years rolled on. Again lord Le Poer 
was disappointed in his hope of a family, 
and once more he began to regard me as 
his future heiress : in consequence, I was 
again taken from my mother, who did 
not long survive our separation. Shortly 
after, in Dublin, I was introduced to your 
father, w^ho with his mother had come 
over to pay a visit to the viceroy and his 
lady. Every where announced as the 
certain inheritress of the fortune of the 
Le Poer family, the introduction was soon 
followed by an overture for my hand. 
Well for me was it that I had no inclina- 
tion to reject it, since assuredly I should 
not have been permitted, so pleasing was 



CONTRAST. 47 

the alliance to my uncle ; but I was not 
fashionable enough in my notions for your 
father or his mother, as he would have seen, 
had he given himself a little more time than 
he did to study my character: however, 
that's all passed." Her voice faltered a 
little. — " I believe he did at length begin 
to perceive that there are qualities that 
may compensate for the want of more 
dazzling ones." 

" Assuredly," said De Montville, touch- 
ed by the emotion she evinced ; " there 
can be no doubt he did ample justice at 
last to your worth ; and that which is late 
accorded must be the most flattering, as 
the result of experience." 

" Shortly after my marriage," resumed 
lady Newbury, " I removed to England : 
I had been married about five years, when 
I was shocked by accounts from Ireland. 
Lady Le Poer, who certainly, between 
the jealousy of her lord, a jealousy origi- 
nating in his consciousness of not posses- 
sing her heart, and the authority lady Do- 
rothy usurped over her, led a very wretch- 
ed life, had formed an intimacy with a 



48 CONTRAST. 

very charming family in the neighbour- 
hood of RockclifFe, the head of which was 
a young man of the most pleasing, or, to 
use more romantic language, fascinating 
exterior; one of those sentimental-look- 
ing beings that appear all soul, all feel- 
ing, and, of course, are particularly cal- 
culated to awaken and interest sensi- 
bility. Lady Le Poer, so gentle and 
so unhappy, could not but be pleased 
with him, and he, in return, became so 
enamoured of her, as to determine, if 
possible, to win her to be his; trying to 
persuade himself, that to allure her from 
a husband, so every way unworthy of her, 
could not possibly be considered a crime. 
But whatever were the real feelings or 
sentiments of lady Le Poer towards him, 
in this opinion, not all his specious rea- 
sonings or insidious attentions could in- 
duce her to coincide. She was a victim 
to paternal authority, but that could not 
excuse her to herself for acting con- 
trary to the principles in which she was 
brought up, or forgetting the precepts of 
him by whom the sufferings of afflicted 



CONTRAST. 49 

virtue are never disregarded. Maddened 
by passion and disappointment, De Vesci 
conceived a project that you will hardly 
credit; namely, of criminating the object 
of his adoration, by means of suborned 
witnesses, so as, in some way or other, to 
effect a separation between her and her 
lord — all that he presumptuously allowed 
himself to believe was wanting to effect 
the accomplishment of his wishes. I know, 
if you read of such a thing, you would 
say it was too monstrous even for fiction. 
Still, what out-of-the-way occurrences are 
daily taking place in life ! such as even 
the extravagant imagination of a novelist 
would fear to lay hold of, lest of exciting 
censure for forced incidents, as a judicious 
artist is obliged to select, instead of copy- 
ing indiscriminately from nature : as 
for instance, sometimes there is a sky 
— but you smile — ah! I understand; you 
think I had better not go farther, lest 
I get out of my depth : and so, to pro- 
ceed — the plot succeeded but too well 
— the unhappy lady's asseverations of in- 

VOL. I. D 



50 CONTRAST. 

nocence were useless, unsupported as they 
were by those on whose testimony she 
had relied for their confirmation ; she was 
driven with ignominy from her hus- 
band's house ; and, in the course of a short 
time, a divorce was obtained : but the base 
contriver of her ruin did not profit, as he 
expected, by his scheme : not all the per- 
suasions he had recourse to — the miseries 
to which she saw herself exposed, could 
induce her to forfeit the reality of that in- 
nocence, which, in the eyes of the world, 
she had already lost : but there was ano- 
ther reason for rejecting his overtures — 
she had now, for the first time, a prospect 
of becoming a mother, and what new and 
absorbing feelings were not excited by the 
idea ! Convinced, however, that were the 
circumstance known, the child would be 
torn from her by its cruel and vindictive 
father, she decided on keeping it a pro- 
found secret ; and accordingly, in sorrow 
and obscurity, your Adelaide was born." 

De Montville started. — " Ah ! now I 
begin to conceive the motive of lord Le 



CONTRAST. 51 

Peer's anxiety for our marriage !" he ex- 
claimed. 

Lady Newbury nodded, and thus went 
on. — " Lady Le Poer's father was by this 
time dead, and the little stipend she pos- 
sessed in right of him being her only pro- 
vision, she would have suffered the bit- 
terest distress, but for Mr. Courtney, the 
gentleman to whom she was originally 
engaged, and his wife, seeking her out. 
The stigma attached to her name would 
not permit their receiving her under their 
roof; but all else that Christian charity 
and tender benevolence could do for the 
alleviation of her sorrows, they did. Two 
years she lived the object of their private 
bounty and compassion, when the cruel 
author of her misfortunes died, an early 
victim to intemperate passions. In his 
last moments, touched by remorse for the 
wrongs he had done her, he sent for her 
generous friend Courtney, and to him 
made a full and solemn confession of the 
contrivance he had formed against her, re- 
ferring him, for the truth of his statement, 
D 21 



uBRAinr — ^ 

UNIVERSnYOFlUINOtt 



52 CONTRAST. 

to the persons who had aided him in hfs 
scheme. Courtney lost no time in having 
it estabhshed ; and having succeeded to the 
fullest extent of his wishes on the subjectj 
he proceeded to enter upon it with lord 
Le Poer ; but in vain was all he urged ; 
implacable resentment had decided him 
on never permitting his injured lady's re- 
storation to society, if he could prevent it ; 
for, as afterwards appeared, confessions 
had previous to this been made him, 
that had considerably tended to her secret 
vindication. She must, he argued, have 
given some kind of encouragement to De 
Vesci, or he never could have thought of 
acting as he had done; and accordingly, 
even for this, jealous as he was of every 
look, and word, and thought, of hers, he 
determined to punish her with the bitter- 
est malignity." 

" A very Christian-like determination !" 
said De Montville; "and I much fear, 
that the temper that dictated it remains 
the same." 

His mother shook her head. — " But 
though," she proceeded, " this zealous 



CONTRAST. 53 

friend could not obtain her vindication to 
the world, he was so satisfied with her 
meriting it, that he no longer hesitated to 
associate her under the same roof with his 
wife: but notwithstanding his kindness, 
she did not trust him with the secret of 
the child, passing it upon him as a little 
destitute orphan belonging to her mother's 
family, and by whose name it was called : 
convinced, if apprized of the truth, he 
would conceive it his duty to make 
known the circumstance to lord Le Poer, 
she shrunk from the communication. Her 
Adelaide was now the only tie that con- 
nected her with life : if deprived of her, 
she should indeed be an isolated being ; and 
there is a cold desolation in the thought 
the heart cannot bear. 

" Years passed on without her friends 
having the slightest suspicion of the de- 
ception practised on them, when she was 
seized with an illness that proved fatal. 
Finding her last moments approaching, 
Mr. Courtney was summoned to her bed- 
side, for the purpose of having that secret 
Imparted which she had so long concealed. 



54 CONTRAST. 

You may well believe what his surprise 
was at her confession, and that a man of 
his just principles would hardly have been 
able to avoid some little reproach for her 
conduct in this instance, but for the me- 
lancholy state in which she then was. He 
immediately acquainted lord Le Poer with 
her communication, and his having in his 
possession documents to prove the validity 
of the young lady's claim upon him ; with 
an intimation, that should it be disputed, 
he should certainly, both from his regard 
for her and his deceased friend, her mother, 
take the necessary steps for establishing it. 
" But there was no occasion for this threat 
being carried into effect. Though his vin- 
dictive temper would not permit of any gra- 
tifying acknowledgment from him, lord 
Le Poer, long before this, had become fully 
convinced of the innocence of his lady, and, 
of course, could not doubt what he now 
heard ; more especially from the astonish- 
ing likeness of Adelaide to a favourite 
sister of his, the only being, I believe, he 
ever really loved, and whose death, owing 
to some accident in which he was concern- 



CONTRAST. 55 

ed, he cannot, even at this moment, speak 
of without being moved. By some chance, 
in a journey through Devonshire, a year or 
two before this, he encountered Adelaide, 
and actually thought, at the moment, he 
saw this deceased sister before him. But 
not to weary you with unnecessary par- 
ticulars, he repaired to Mr. Courtney's, 
for the purpose of satisfying all parties 
of his intentions : but while his admis- 
sion of her mothers innocence prevent- 
ed his disputing the right of Adelaide 
to his name and fortune, he had still 
many powerful reasons for not wishing 
openly to acknowledge her. In fact, he 
shrunk from the thought of reviving a 
story, that was by this time partly for- 
gotten — of making himself again, perhaps, 
a theme for ridicule and malignity ; be- 
sides, he reflected, from the moment al- 
most of your birth, he had adopted you, 
and he knew not how to disappoint the 
expectations he had so long encouraged. 
At length, the idea of a marriage between 
the rival claimants on his justice suggested 
itself to him, as the only means of adjust- 



56 CONTRAST. 

ing all difficulties, and extricating him- 
self from the dilemma in which he found 
himself so unexpectedly placed ; for while 
the nearer tie that connected them gave 
Adelaide an undisputed right to his 
first consideration, he could not but re- 
flect that his promises, with regard to 
you, had been the means of preventing 
any additional provision being made for 
you. But this was not all — by uniting 
you and Adelaide, a thousand morti- 
fying explanations would be avoided, that 
could not be the case in a union with 
any other person. In a word, he decided 
on the measure: and having informed me 
of all that had occurred, and his consequent 
determination, the young lady was intro- 
duced here as Miss Mountflorence, with 
a strict injunction, that to no one, save 
you, should the secret respecting her be 
imparted, until, at least, after her mar- 
riage." 



CONTRAST. 57 



CHAP. IV. 

** Enamour'd more, as more remembrance swells." 

" Well, my dear mother," on finding she 
paused, said De Montville, " I thank you 
for the trouble you have taken in narrat- 
ing these particulars I was so interested in 
learning ; but do you not think his lord- 
ship a little too arbitrary, in thus deciding 
as he has done, without any consultation 
with the parties most interested in the 
matter?" 

" Oh, he never dreamt of such a thing ; 
he has always been too much accustomed 
to exact unqualified obedience now to 
doubt it." 

" Yet he may be disappointed : you 
surely cannot suppose or expect that I 
shall surrender my inclination or judg- 
ment to him ; or, in other words, force my- 
D 3 



58 CONTRAST. 

self to act contrary to either? Should 
the union proposed for me be one that my 
feelings and principles will allow me to 
form, I, of course, shall not object to it" 

" Oh, don't frighten me," interrupted 
his mother, " by allowing me to think 
there is a chance of your declining it ; for 
think what the consequences might be, of 
disobeying or ofifending his lordship ; un- 
able as I am to do any thing essential for 
you, from the very heavy expence Louisa 
has been to me." 

" But supposing, my dear mother, it 
should so prove, that I could make no ob- 
jection to it, there are the feelings of ano- 
ther person also to be consulted." 

" Oh, but I know Adelaide cannot, will 
not make any objection to her father's 
plan. I know it is next to impossible, 
but that — that," she hesitated a little, " she 
must admire, love you, when she knows 
you ; and indeed, as a proof, she acknow- 
ledged to me that your picture, which I 
showed her, was very handsome." 

" Flattering !" said De Montville, laugh- 
ing : " pray, have you one of hers, that I 



CONTRAST. 59 

may see if it be possible to return the com- 
pliment?" 

" No, but at Rockclifife there is the pic- 
ture of the person she so much resembles: 
and now do give me the consolation 
of saying that, if it be possible, you will 
acquiesce in your uncle's wishes; for I 
have quite set my heart on your mar- 
riage with Adelaide, from knowing there 
would then be no obstacle to my residing 
with you for the remainder of my days, 
after I get Louisa off my hands; and oh, 
the delight of thinking I should be a re- 
sident again in dear Ireland, after my long 
estrangement from it ! What would I not 
give that I could accompany you at once, 
there to have the gratification of judging 
by your looks, as you visited the various 
places I have so often described to you — 
the fine remains of St. Finan's Abbey, 
on the grounds of Mr. Mountflorence, and 
the fine old seat of my mother's kinsman, 
sir Maurice Rossglen, whether I gave you 
a good idea of them." 

" Well, my dearest mother, I need not 
say I am sure," said De Montville, fondly 



60 CONTRAST. 

kissing her cheek, " that I hope, on many- 
accounts, all may be as you wish. Though 
I do like straying amidst woods, and wilds, 
and melancholy glooms, yet I assure you, 
I am not sufficiently romantic to wish to 
take up my abode amongst them, and 
shall certainly therefore not do any thing 
to irritate, or in any degree offend, his 
lordship, if I can possibly avoid it : but 
tell me, is Miss Mountflorence, as I am to 
call her, now with him ?" 

" Your introduction to her will not be 
delayed after your joining him," she rather 
evasively replied. 

" I fully expected to have found her 
with you," resumed De Montville : " is it 
long since she left you ?" 

" Yes, some months." 

" Months !" in an accent of surprise : 
" why, you gave me to understand she 
was to remain with you until we met." 

" Yes, but some circumstances occurred 

to — to but it is not material to explain 

them : and so, whilst I think of it, let me 
entreat vou to be particular in your atten- 
tions to lady Dorothy, for she is by na 



CONTRAST. 6l^ 

means a person that will excuse any kind 
of slight" 

" What ! is she still in existence ?" 

" Yes, and likely, from what I have 
heard, to continue so for many years to 
come; but she now resides at her own 
seat, a few miles from Rockcliffe, instead 
of at her brother's." 

" Well, depend upon it, my dear mo- 
ther, I shall pay all due observance to 
your wishes and commands, in every in- 
stance ; and to convince you how fully it 
is my intention to do this, will not delay 
joining his lordship." 

The next morning, accordingly, he 
posted off for Milford, whence he crossed 
over to the opposite shore. This was his 
first visit to the emerald isle, and one he, 
probably, would not have been in a hurry, 
to pay, could he have avoided it, owing to 
a slight degree of prejudice, that, in spite 
of his fond attachment to his mother, he 
had imbibed against the country, through 
the representations of his father and grand- 
mother. He landed on the beautiful quay 
of — , with a feeling of fastidiousness, 



i 



G^ CONTRAST. 

the result of this prejudice, that made 
him not only expect, in every object he 
saw, to meet with one of ridicule, but 
even anxiously look about for such. He 
was therefore not only surprised, but per- 
haps disappointed— for when inclined to be 
malicious, we are apt to be disappointed 
at not meeting with opportunities to gra- 
tify the humour— at finding that they were 
not in a positive state of wildness, at the 
hotel to which he was conducted, and that 
the chaise in which he proceeded to Rock- 
clifFe did not absolutely endanger his 
neck. " But wait a bit," as they say 
themselves ; it was not exactly in such a 
place that pecuharities were to be expect- 
ed. As he advanced into the interior, he 
should there find cause for laughter, and 
ridicule, and sarcastic observation. 

Forced, by coming over, to act contrary 
to his real inclination, and to which he 
had quite as great an objection as any of 
his fellow mortals, he had not recovered 
a sufficient degree of complacency, from 
this circumstance, to allow him to regret 
finding a letter, instead of lord Le Poer, 



CONTRAST. 63 

awaiting him, at the castle; written to ex- 
cuse his lordship not being there to receive 
him in person, through unforeseen busi- 
ness, that had detained, and might detain 
him for a few weeks longer in Dublin, 
where he had landed ; and which conclud- 
ed with a hope, that he would not feel 
himself uncomfortable from their meeting 
being a little longer delayed. 

" Quite au contraire,'' was the internal 
exclamation of De Montville. It was in- 
deed an absolute relief to him, to have a 
little further time to collect himself, ere the 
introduction he almost dreaded took place. 

Where he now was, afforded him, from 
its loneliness, all the leisure and quietude 
requisite for this. On the first moment of his 
arrival, this had a somewhat chilUng effect 
upon his imagination ; but he was suffici- 
ently an enthusiast soon to find pleasure 
in the contemplation of the wildness by 
which he was here surrounded. Rockcliffe 
Castle, remote from any other building of 
consequence, was a very ancient pile of 
cold grey stone ; but its cold and dreary 
aspect was in perfect keeping with the 
bleakness and sterility of the scenery about 



64 CONTRAST. 

it. The ocean spread in front, and at 
either side an immense tract of bog and 
heath stretched away to a range of distant 
hills, now blue as the cerulean vault, to- 
wards which they aspired — now shrouded 
in mists, the certain precursors of unfa- 
vourable weather. No wonder that, in 
such an habitation, De Montville thought, 
where there was nothing to sooth, or charm 
the imagination, the temper of lord Le 
Poer should have lost nothing of its natu- 
ral severity ; yet such was the force of early 
impressions, that, even to this repelling 
abode, his mother was delighted at the 
idea of returning. 

De Montville, as already intimated, quite 
congratulated himself, on his first arrival, 
at the idea of being left to his own thoughts 
and reflections for some time ; but he was 
not accustomed to such profound solitude, 
and soon becoming wearied by it, it struck 
him that he would pay a visit to the house 
of sir Maurice Rossglen, even the relief of 
paying one to lady Dorothy being denied 
him, by the indisposition of her ladyship, to 
whom, in due form, he had sent to an- 



CONTRAST. 65 

hounce his arrival, and bestow his tedious- 
ness there, until joined by lord LePoer; but 
on mentioning this intention to Michael, 
the old butler, he informed him that sir 
JNIaurice was not then at Woodston, but at 

the residence he also had in , to which 

but a few days preceding his, De Mont- 
ville's, arrival he had gone with his family 
— ** But where, to be sure, your honour, 
he would be quite as glad to see you as at 
his place here ; and why not ? and if I 
might be so bold as to give an opinion, 
I*d be after advising you to go, because I 
know it was on account of some fine par- 
ties about being given there, that himself 
and the ladies went." 

" What, parties in a country town, and 
that town an Irish one ! put himself in the 
way of being dragged into such horrors — 
forced to the necessity of making the 
agreeable to simpering misses — trying to 
look amiable ! — oh no, any thing but that ;" 
and where he was, he accordingly decided 
on remaining, until the return of the baro- 
net from his temporary sojourn at . 

But this decision did not oblige him to 



66 CONTRAST. 

confine himself entirely to the vicinity of 
the castle ; so one evening, soon after din- 
ner, he set off for a long ramble, and in a 
different direction to any he had previous- 
ly strolled. The rugged and wild-looking 
road gradually improved as he proceeded ; 
the sea murmured at one side, and at the 
other the green banks were surmounted 
by daisied fields, where the cattle were now 
softly lowing in the warmth of the declin- 
ing sun. An air of tranquillity pervaded 
every thing that was soothing to the feel- 
ings, and De Montville, as is often the case 
when sauntering by ourselves, became by 
degrees so lost in thought, as almost to start 
at finding himself, on suddenly uplifting 
his eyes, before an old-fashioned mansion, 
with a garden, laid out in the formal taste 
of other days, in front, and a hanging wood 
apparently pressing upon it in the rear, the 
country stretching away at one side in well- 
cultivated fields or farms, intersected with 
pleasant roads, and interspersed with habi- 
tations, sufficiently clustered near the house 
to form a small village; and at the other, 
the sea fenced off by a range of towering 



CONTRAST. 67 

cliffs, wrought into a variety of fantastic 
forms, by the incessant action of the winds 
and waves ; here indeed, when the angry 
spirit of the deep was roused, the bat- 
tling of the conflicting elements against 
the natural ramparts of the land was ter- 
rible, causing an absolutely gasping sensa- 
tion ; but at the other times, it was de- 
lightful to watch the waves throwing up, 
as if in play, their spray in the face of the 
rocks that frowned upon them, and listen 
to them in summer stillness, pouring their 
drowsy murmurs upon the shore. 

Hardly had De Montville cast his eyes 
upon the building, upon which he had 
come thus unexpectedly, ere he exclaim- 
ed to himself — " This is Woodston," at 
once recognising it by his mother's oft- 
repeated description of it, of the loved 
scenes of her early youth, " when every 
charm could please." " Dear soul ! merely 
from yielding to the feelings of nature, 
how graphically, in her artless, unstudied 
way, she has depicted it ! why, if brought 
by enchantment to the spot, I should have 
at once known it by her description — the 



6s CONTRAST. 

sunny gable end, covered with the spread- 
ing fruit-tree, the productions of which she 
never found equalled — the romantic cliffs, 
rising in towering grandeur along the 
coast — the green wood, in which the first 
flowers of spring were wont to be gathered 
by her infant hands ;" and he stood gazing 
at it with a sensation of ineffable delight, 
from the tender associations connected 
with it. At length, turning up a winding 
path, he soon found himself in the centre 
of the wood, extending far and wide around 
him — nothing could be more delightful. 
Here were primrose banks, winding and 
sequestered alleys, mossy seats for rest or 
meditation, and fairy rills, musically tink- 
ling through pebbly channels. While 
here, you were at one moment lost in the 
gloom of tangled trees and thickets ; anon, 
you w^ere gazing on the broad refulgent 
sea, with the barrier cliffs, topped by the 
green sloping fields that extended to their 
very edge. De Montville threw himself 
upon a seat to enjoy the scene : but this 
enjoyment did not long remain uninter- 
rupted ; reflections recurred, that tinctured 



CONTRAST. 69 

his feelings with sadness — his thoughts 
involuntarily reverted to Sicily, and the 
idea of the fair Zerbino, indissolubly con- 
nected with it, recalled to his imagination, 
he could not help again giving way to that 
acute feeling of regret her fate had occa- 
sioned. Luxuriating as he was himself at 
the moment in the charms of nature, how 
could he chuse but to deplore the fate of 
her who was torn from the experience of 
such a gratification, like a tender flower 
from the influence of vernal suns and 
showers, to wither prematurely in the cold 
solitude of monastic gloom ! Oh that he 
could have saved her from such a cheerless 
doom, even though the next moment as- 
sured that he had effected her restoration 
to liberty to make another happy ! but 
vain was the wish; she was now as com- 
pletely lost to him and to the world, as if 
already enskyed and sainted in her native 
sphere. 

He quitted his seat to descend to the 
house ; an old-fashioned folding door open- 
ed immediately from the hill upon the first 
landing-place ; he found it ajar, and open- 



70 CONTRAST. 

ing it a little wider, looked down a spa- 
cious staircase of polished oak upon a wide 
hall, with high-backed antique chairs, and 
a range of doors at either side belonging 
to the parlours. Almost he could have 
persuaded himself he was in the place be- 
fore, so familiar did every object appear, 
from the minute manner in which it had 
been described by his mother. As he 
stood here, a young lady crossed from one 
of the parlours to another ; in doing so she 
happened to look up the staircase, down 
which, through the half-open door, the 
radiance of the setting sun was streaming 
at the moment, and presented to the view 
of the astonished De Montville, the exact 
resemblance of her on whom he had just 
been musing. The emotion and curiosity 
excited by this circumstance would not 
permit of his departing, without endea- 
vouring to ascertain who she was; accord- 
ingly hastening to the front of the house, 
he knocked for admission. He was an- 
swered by the old housekeeper; but ere 
she could inform him the family were ab- 
sent, he acquainted her with his know- 



CONTRAST, 71 

ledge of the circumstance himself; and an- 
nouncing his name, desired to be allowed 
to rest for a few minutes after a long walk. 
He was shewn into a parlour, the very one 
into which he saw the fair stranger pass ; 
but she was not now there. — " Did she 
say all the family were absent ?" he asked 
of his attendant. 

" Yes, all." 

He mused. Who then could this fe- 
male be ? she did not seem as if she were 
a stranger in the place, and her air and 
style of dress forbade the idea of her being 
a domestic. Suppose he said he saw her ? 
and he accordingly did ; but the acknow- 
ledgment obtained him no satisfaction. 
The woman declared she knew not whom 
he meant ; but in declaring so, he thought 
she coloured, and appeared confused. 
Without ceremony he took the range of 
the apartments at each side of the hall ; but 
he encountered no one in them ; and in no 
little commotion of spirits, at length de- 
parted. So extraordinary a likeness be- 
tween two persons, he had never before 
seen, and until he had discovered who it 



72 CONTRAST. 

was that bore this astonishing resemblance 
to the fair Zerbino, he felt he could not 
rest. He could not divest himself of the 
idea of the housekeeper having deceived 
him, and he determined, as he proceeded 
in his walk back, to try and ascertain 
v^hether he was correct in this suspicion. 

He liad advanced some little way, with- 
out meeting any one to address his intended 
inquiry to, when suddenly — ** Why then 
may I be after axing your honour what 
o'clock it is ?" cried a voice, from the other 
side of a mud bank : and De Montville 
turning, beheld a man, with hard weather- 
beaten features, leaning against it, earnestly 
regarding him. 

" With great pleasure," was the reply 
— " that is, if I could ; but unfortunately 
my watch is down, having forgot to wind 
it up this morning." 

" Och! sorrow matter of consequence 
that is, on my account I mane, your ho- 
nour ; 'tis not because I so much wanted 
to know what o'clock it is I asked your 
honour, as because it is so natural to do so." 

" Well, I am glad it's of no consequence 
to you to know the hour, since I can't in- 



CONTRAST. 73 

form you. But you belong to this place?" 

" To this place ! troth and you may say 
that ; there's not a mother's sowl belonging 
to me, dead or alive, that don't belong to 
it." 

" Then, of <;ourse, 'tis needless to ask if 
you know that house," pointing to sir 
Maurice's. 

" Is it the master's, long life to him, and 
his, and may they never be worse than I 
wish them !" 

" I know he is not there at present," 
said De Montville ; " but are all the family 
absent ?" 

" Musha, and myself can't be certain of 
that." 

" But do you think it's likely ?" 

" Likely ! idad and I can't say that ; and 
now that I think on't, I shouldn't be sur- 
prised if they weren't all gone ; for it 
was only last week that one of the young 
ladies was mighty bad with a murthering 
sore throat, and I heard oul Nell, her nurse, 
telling a neighbour, that she was quite 
fretting the heart out of her body, lest her 

VOL. I. E- 



74 CONTRAST. 

mamma wouldn't be after letting her go 

with her sisters to , where they were 

going to have some iligent plays and balls." 

" Was this the eldest young lady ?" 

" What, the English young lady ? — No, 
your honour; it was one of our own young 
ladies, as we call the master's daughters, 
by his second lady." 

" Ah, it was then as I conjectured," 
thought De Montville, " one of sir Mau- 
rice's daughters I saw, denied during the 
absence of the rest of the family, to pre- 
vent her being intruded on by visitors." 

He had walked much further than he 
had intended, and he thought he should 
not now dislike to throw himself into a 
chaise; and he accordingly proceeded to 
inquire whether there was any place here 
where he could procure one. 

" A chaise !" in an accent of surprise ; 
" no, your honour ; but Ned Rooney keeps 
an iligent jingle here, and I'd be after get- 
ting it for you, only I know that oul Moll is 
turned out by this time upon the cliffs, to 
see what she can pick up for herself till 
the potatoes are boiled." 



CONTRAST. 75 

" Why, what has she to say to the 
boiled potatoes ?" 

" Ah then, it is she that has, the creat- 
shure ! by the time they are done, she comes 
back sniffing for her share of them, just as 
if she was a Christian." 

" A sagacious animal truly ; but ^" 

" No offence, your honour, but may I 
be so bould as just for to ask how far you 
have to go ?" 

De Montville informed him. 

" Ah, then I was thinking as much," 
he cried, " that you were the oul lord's 
hare, long life to your honour ! and 'tis 
yourself one may see will be the poor man's 
friend, when you come to his fortune." 

" Oh, we mustn't be speaking of that, 
my friend," said De JNIontville. " But 
I wont detain you longer, for I dare say 
you have not been so idle to day as not to 
wish now for a little rest;" and putting 
some money in his hand, he bade him good- 
by. 

Impatient to ascertain whether indeed 
it was one of the daughters of sir Maurice 
E 2 



76 CONTRAST. 

he had seen, he was considering whether, 
contrary to his first intention, he would 

not join the family the ensuing day at , 

when in crossing a waste churchyard, that, 
near the end of the road, lay between him 
and Rockcliffe, he fancied he saw a female 
gliding amidst the ruins of the ancient 
building to which it belonged. He invo- 
luntarily paused to be certain, inclined to 
think, from the gloom and dreariness of 
the place, he must be deceived by some 
shadow; but no— as he stood earnestly gaz- 
ing within the dismal obscurity of the di- 
lapidated pile, the person he imagined he 
had seen, emerging from another part of it, 
suddenly flitted by him, and in passing, 
discovered to him the features of the fe- 
male he had seen at Woodston. An ex- 
clamation of surprise escaped him, and he 
was involuntarily rushing after her, when 
he stumbled over a broken tombstone; 
and on recovering himself, looked about 
in vain for her. 

Bewildered, he returned home, for from 
what had now occurred, he could hardly 
allow himself to persist in thinking her 



CONTRAST. 77 

the person he had previously conceived; 
yet at Woodston, sauntering about, as she 
seemed to be, w^ith an air of carelessness, 
she certainly had not the appearance of 
being a stranger: and from this circum- 
stance he still could not bring himself al- 
together to relinquish the idea of her be- 
ing, if not one of the family, at least some 
person in some way or other connected 
with it : but the next day should termi- 
nate his perplexity on the subject; he 

would join the family at , and thus 

be enabled to ascertain at once what he 
w'ished. Yet w^ould it not be wiser to 
give himself no further trouble on the sub- 
ject ? — it might ; but what is wisest is not 
always what we are readiest to decide on ; 
and this was the case with him ; yet at 
such a juncture, when it so behoved him to 
be calm and collected, to have an idea thus 
revived, that could not be dwelt on without 
agitation, how cruel — how tormenting ! 

As he sat lost in deep thought, he 
chanced to cast his eyes upon an immense 
old-fashioned chimney -glass, exactly oppo- 
site the seat he had thrown himself on ; as 



78 CONTRAST. 

he did, his surprise may easily be imagined, 
at beholding, reflected in it, the figure of an 
elegant female standinor at a little distance 
behind his chair, apparently in earnest con- 
templation of him ; keeping his eye steadily 
fixed, the features gradually became defined, 
and he again saw those of the fair stranger 
he had twice encountered that evening. 
He started up ; but ere he turned, she was 
gone, and amazement for a moment rooted 
him to the spot. He then rang the bell ; 
Michael's look of alarm, on entering the 
apartment, recalled him to himself He 
inquired whether any visitor was in the 
castle ? and was decidedly answered in the 
negative. What was he then to think ? 
that he was either dreaming or delirious; 
but no — neither of these conclusions could 
be admitted ; and he accordingly rushed 
from the apartment, in eager quest of the 
person he was convinced he had seen : but 
his search, his inquiries were unavailing; 
and infinitely more flurried than before, 
he returned to it. But he must not go on 
in this manner ; the time he had been so 
happy to obtain for collecting and nerving 
his mind for what might ensue, must not 



CONTRAST. 79 

be wasted in this idle, this ridiculous man- 
ner. 

He was dependant : what bitterness in 
the thought ! how many generous im- 
pulses — how many fond wishes does the 
reflection often check and restrain, fetter- 
ing the soul, as it were, with a chain of 
iron ! In a few days and he should pro- 
bably be called upon to decide his own 
fate: from what he knew of the temper of 
lord Le Poer, had heard of the inveteracy 
of his resentments, and his anxiety for the 
marriage in question, he had many reasons 
to apprehend the loss of his favour if he 
declined it ; and the probability of the con- 
sequences that were likely to follow this, 
was certainly very painful to his imagina- 
tion : yet to unite himself for life to a per- 
son he might not be able to regard — but he 
would not be rash — he would not suiBfer him- 
self to be hastily influenced by first impres- 
sions, and perhaps, by acting in this man- 
ner, what he dreaded might be averted : 
but his spirits got low, and the intention of 

repairing to was abandoned. He 

had not yet had courage to visit the pic- 



so CONTRAST. 

ture-gallery, where, he was given to un- 
derstand, he should see a likeness that 
would give him a perfect idea of his in- 
tended bride ; but on this morning, attend- 
ed by the butler, to point out the family 
portraits to him, he entered it, and the re- 
sult was almost absolute despair. 

In a melancholy mood, he was wander- 
ing about the cliffs, when the arrival of 
sir Maurice Rossglen, to pay his compli- 
ments, was announced ; De Montville hast- 
ened back to the castle, and met with a 
most cordial greeting from the baronet, 
whose frank and easy manner, and manly 
open countenance, excited an immediate 
prepossession in his favour. The family 

were returned from , and the visit 

ended by De Montville accompanying 
him back to Woodston, there to take 
up his sojourn, until the arrival of lord 
Le Poer. In the apartment into which 
he was ushered, he was received by lady 
Kossglen, a very elegant woman, and 
the two eldest young ladies ; but neither 
of whom bore the slightest resemblance 
to the fair stranger; but there was still 



CONTRAST. 81 

another daughter to make her appearance, 
and in her he might recognise the person 
he was so anxious to discover ; but no — she 
almost instantly joined the party, and in 
her, like her sisters, De Montville also 
beheld a very beautiful girl, but one bear- 
ing no likeness whatever to the person 
who resembled the fair Zerbino. 



CHAP. V. 

" Can gold grow worthless that has stood the touch ? 
No : gold they seera'd ; but they were never such." 

Sir Maurice Rossglen, as already inti- 
mated, was a pleasant, good-natured man, 
ardent in his attachments, sincere in his 
professions, and of truly gentlemanly man- 
ners. In early life he became the re- 
presentative of his ancient family ; but the 
property, that with the title devolved to 
him, was, through various causes, so em- 
barrassed, as to be then little more than a 
e3 



82 CONTRAST. 

nominal one. Sir Maurice however nei- 
ther gave way to complaints nor dejec- 
tion at the circumstance; he knew his 
advantages both of figure and family, and 
could scarcely doubt their obtaining him 
such an alliance as would free him from 
his embarrassments. In a visit to one of 
the fashionable bathing-places in England, 
an introduction took place to a young city 
heiress, still under the care of her mother. 
He soon perceived his attentions were not 
unpleasing, and encouraged by the hint, 
persevered in them until he had succeeded 
in gaining her hand ; but not without the 
most violent opposition on the part of her 
mother, who had a most decided aversion 
to every one and every thing Irish — the 
effect of a narrow education, ever sure of 
creating vulgar prejudices. Holding each 
wild and savage tale of them devoutly 
true, her horror at the idea of the alliance 
her daughter had formed, was indescrib- 
able: but notwithstanding her displeasure 
at it, she could not decide on abandoning 
her to her fate ; and accordingly, by way of 
affording her some protection against the 



CONTRAST. 83 

barbarity to which she made no doubt she 
had subjected herself, she resolved on ac- 
companying her to her new habitation. 
Her first glance at this wrought a revolu- 
tion in her feelings ; and when, contrary to 
the expectations she had given way to, 
she actually found herself seated in a noble 
mansion, amidst all the comforts and ele- 
gancies to which she had heretofore been 
accustomed, with a train of respectful do- 
mestics, in waiting, and neither yelling 
savages in hearing, nor dismal bogs in 
sight, she began to think it might be 
possible to become reconciled to the event 
she had so much regretted ; and within a 
short space, through the influence of the 
comforts around her, really became so. 
But the domestic happiness of Woodston 
was of short duration. Shortly after giv- 
ing birth to a daughter, lady Rossglen 
died. A little before her death, sir Mau- 
rice was summoned to her bedside; and 
after thanking him for his uniform kind- 
ness and attention, and recommending 
her afflicted parent to his consoling care, 
she earnestly besought him, in the event 



84 CONTRAST. 

of his marrying again, of which she 
could hardly entertain a doubt, to pro- 
mise he would give up her child to her 
care. In such a moment, hardly any 
request could have been made that he 
w^ould not have complied with, and accord- 
ingly the promise demanded was unhesi- 
tatingly given. 

The old lady was now installed in the 
place of her deceased daughter, and from 
the additional consequence derived from 
becoming mistress at Woodston, drew no 
little consolation for the afflicting loss she 
had sustained. For two succeeding years 
things went on again tranquilly at Wood- 
ston, when sir Maurice's announcement 
of being about changing his condition, 
roused all that was acrimonious in her 
nature. She could not think with calm- 
ness of resigning to another the distinc- 
tion that had been so flattering to her, 
neither of her granddaughter losing her 
chance of being sole inheritress of the es- 
tate, which her mother's fortune had clear- 
ed, although the splendid fortune, se- 
cured to her by marriage settlement, ren- 
dered any accession of wealth utterly un- 



CONTRAST. S5 

necessary ; but neither remonstrance nor 
reproach could induce sir Maurice to re- 
linquish the intention he had avowed; 
and accordingly Mrs. Brydges decided on 
an immediate return to England, and tak- 
ing her granddaughter with her, not with- 
out exultation at the promise that al- 
lowed her doing so. 

Sir Maurice could not regret her de- 
parture, but he regretted the thought of 
the estrangement that might be effected, 
through her means, between him and his 
little Helena; however, with his usual 
sanguineness, he hoped the best, and that in 
time she might sufficiently relent to allow 
of his child being occasionally the inmate 
of the paternal roof. In his second choice 
he was alone influenced by attachment: 
Mrs. Mountflorence was a woman of the 
most amiable and accomplished manners ; 
but though the widow of a gentleman of 
considerable consequence in the county, 
was left with an only son, in such circum- 
stances as totally to preclude the idea of 
her hand being sought from any other mo- 
tive than that of affection. Such indeed 



80 CONTRAST. 

was her embarrassed situation, that there 
were people invidious enough to declare, 
that without some artifice on her part, 
sir Maurice could never have possibly 
thought of forming so imprudent a con- 
nexion. These insinuations reached her 
ear, and had the effect, notwithstanding 
her maternal fondness for him, of making 
her oppose her son's taking up his fixed re- 
dence at Woodston. This conduct, from 
the paternal interest he felt for the boy, 
chagrined sir Maurice not a little. Serve 
him, however, he determined he would ; 
and he accordingly early planned in his 
own mind a marriage between him and 
Helena, whose ample fortune would settle 
all matters, without doing her an injury. 
The plan was too agreeable to his imagina- 
tion to be concealed. The result of its 
disclosure was still more wounding in- 
sinuations against lady Rossglen : to her 
artful influence over him, it was assert- 
ed the scheme could alone be owing; 
and so much were her feelings of pride 
and probity wounded by these calum- 
nies, as to make her resolve to pre- 



CONTRAST. 87 

vent, if possible, an introduction ever 
taking place between Sigismund and Miss 
Rossglen, until one or other of them were 
engaged. 

IMountflorence's early entrance into the 
army favoured her wish for keeping them 
unacquainted. He remained abroad until 
the termination of the war by the battle 
of Waterloo, when he was put on half- 
pay ; but on which he only meant to con- 
tinue till he had investigated his affairs at 
home, and ascertained whether any thing 
could be saved out of the shattered fortune 
that had devolved to him. 

Amongst those who gave credit to the 
invidious calumnies against lady Ross- 
glen, none did so more readily than Mrs. 
Brydges : in consequence, nothing could 
induce her to allow of even a transient 
visit from Helena to Ireland, when old 
enough to be invited over, persuaded that 
the only object in view was to draw her 
into some engagement with young Mount- 
florence. In vain sir Maurice importuned 
her on the subject. At length, either 
wearied by his importunities, or else glad 



88 CONTRAST. 

to have an opportunity for giving utter- 
ance to her malevolent feelings against 
lady Rossglen, she addressed a very in- 
sulting letter to her ladyship, in which she 
assured her she might spare herself the 
exertion of any further artifice to obtain 
a visit from her granddaughter ; since, 
aware of the motives that occasioned so 
much anxiety on the subject, she was, as 
in duty bound, determined to prevent it; 
the sacrifice of one fortune in the family 
being, in her opinion, quite sufficient. 

The more her real character or dispo- 
sition became developed to sir Maurice, 
the more he regretted the circumstance 
that had been the means of placing his 
daughter under her care ; more especially, 
when he contrasted the advantages she 
must have derived from being brought 
up under the control of such a woman as 
lady Rossglen. His promise, however, he 
could not think himself justified in re- 
scinding, except, indeed, convinced that 
his adherence to it would be attended 
with positive injury to his child. To be 
satisfied on this point, he from time to 



CONTRAST. 89 

time paid a visit to London, and obtained 
from lady Anstruther, lady Rossglen's 
sister, a promise of keeping a watch over 
Helena. Those occasional meetings pre- 
vented that total estrancrement that would 
otherwise have been the natural conse- 
quence of the separation between the 
father and child. Helena could not per- 
ceive her parent's anxiety about her, or re- 
ceive his fond caresses, without being 
moved ; but beyond him, her regard did 
not extend to any of the family. In in- 
fancy, she had been taught to regard lady 
Rossglen with terror, and as she grew up, 
with distrust ; and the children of such a 
woman, as she was taught to consider her, 
she could not imagine deserving of her af- 
fection. Surrounded as she was by those 
whose interest it was to strengthen and 
confirm the prejudices early implanted by 
her grandmother, no wonder that Helena 
retained them, or, retaining them, con- 
gratulated herself on her removal from a 
home where there could have been so little 
enjoyment. 

On her abrupt return to London, Mrs. 



90 CONTRAST. 

Brydges had repaired to the house of a 
relative in Rathbone-place, but with an 
intention of immediately forming an esta- 
blishment of her own again. This was an 
intention, however, she was gradually in- 
duced to abandon. Mr. Bridgemore, a 
solicitor of some little note, with a wife, 
and one daughter some years older than 
Helena, was a man of the deepest art and 
cunning. Without an earthly object in 
view but his own advantage, he quickly 
perceived how much it might redound to 
his interest retaining Mrs. Brydges under 
his roof; and once struck by the idea, ceas- 
ed not, until by his artful representations, 
aided and seconded by his wife, and affect- 
ed shew of regard, he prevailed on her to 
consent to be his inmate, until the young 
heiress was of an age to require a more 
splendid residence. It w^as so pleasant for 
Mrs. Brydges to have all the comforts of 
a domestic establishment, without any of 
the trouble or anxiety, that, situated as 
she was, might be attendant on the cir- 
cumstance, that really she could not help 
being thoroughly delighted at the arrange- 



CONTRAST. 91 

ment that had been made. But though 
all regard for sir Maurice had ceased from 
the moment of his making another choice, 
yet to gratify her fond pride about her 
granddaughter, as well as occasion, as she 
hoped, invidious comparisons between his 
other daughters and her, of whose having 
similar advantages she never once dreamt, 
she kept up a regular correspondence with 
him, through the medium of which Hele- 
na was represented in a manner calculated 
to make her be regarded as a very supe- 
rior being. 

She was about nineteen when her 
grandmother, very unexpectedly, paid her 
debt to nature. Immediately on intelli- 
gence of the event, sir JNlaurice proceeded 
to London, to bring her over to Wood- 
ston ; but such was her reluctance to ac- 
company him to a home she had early 
been made to conceive a dislike to, that 
partly through this, and partly the art- 
ful influence of those about her, she so 
earnestly implored to be allowed to re- 
main a little longer where she was, that 
sir Maurice at last unwillingly consented: 



92 CONTRAST. 

but that nothing could have induced him 
to grant the permission thus sohcited, had 
he really known the kiwd of characters 
the Bridgemores were, may easily be 
inferred ; but through the most artful 
management, nothing had ever transpired 
to their prejudice; and though they cer- 
tainly were not the kind of persons he would 
himself have chosen for intimates, from 
their want of that polish to which he had 
always been accustomed, yet still he knew 
nothing to render them altogether unwor- 
thy of his daughter's longer association 
with them ; more especially as he had al- 
ready taken care to have her introduced, 
through some connexions of his own and 
lady Rossglen's, into those circles of ele- 
gance and fashion, both birth and fortune 
entitled her to move in. The motive they 
had for wishing to detain her with them, 
rendered them not a little overjoyed when 
they actually saw him departing with- 
out her. They had, in short, succeeded 
in entangling her with a person, to the 
acceptance of whose addresses they well 
knew^ her father never would consent, but 
her rejection of which would to them be 



CONTRAST. 9S 

a source of the bitterest disappointment. 
Sir Osbert Henley, one of the most 
worthless and dissipated young men 
about town, had long been one of Bridge- 
more's clients, and determined on reap- 
ing all the possible advantage he could, 
from her being thrown in some degree 
within his grasp, Bridgemore proposed 
trying to procure the hand of Helena for 
him, provided he was assured of a certain 
recompence. The conditions were not 
merely readily, but eagerly subscribed to : 
a formal introduction followed; his ad- 
dresses were paid and accepted, for his 
manners and appearance were specious and 
prepossessing ; and recourse was had to 
every art to try and induce Helena to 
consent to an immediate marriage: but 
though these arts were seconded by her 
grandmother, through the false represen- 
tations of Bridgemore, respecting the real 
fortune and character of sir Osbert, who 
had indeed been long a bankrupt in both, 
Helena firmly resisted them, from an un- 
willingness to fetter herself so early. But 
that this unwillingness would have been 
experienced, had she really felt any very 



94 CONTRAST. 

ardent attachment for sir Osbert, Bridge- 
more could not believe ; and, in conse- 
quence of the readiness with which it was 
but natural to conclude from this, she 
would break her engagement to him, if 
thrown under any influence hostile to it, 
he became so alarmed at the idea of her 
returning with her father to Woodston, 
as to make his wife and daughter implore 
her, even with tears, to remain longer 
with them. Thrown more than ever, by 
the death of her grandmother, into their 
power, and exposed still more constantly 
to the insidious attentions and blandish- 
ments of sir Osbert, they would probably 
have finally succeeded in drawing her 
into the fulfilment of her unadvised en- 
gagement, had not the watchful, per- 
haps jealous vigilance of lady Anstruther, 
detected the scheme, which, of course, was 
immediately communicated to sir Mau- 
rice. He directly posted off to London, 
where he had no hesitation in giving ut- 
terance to the indignation it excited : but 
while he inveighed against Bridgemore, 
for the part he had in the transaction, he 



CONTRAST. 95 

tried to find some excuse for the conduct 
of his daughter, in the supposition of her 
being ignorant of the real character of her 
unprincipled lover. 

Helena would not acknowledge whether 
this were the case or not : the language 
in which she was now addressed, was such 
as she was not accustomed to ; and not 
even the reflection of its proceeding from 
a father, could accordingly prevent her re- 
senting it. This feeling did not by any 
means tend to incline her to ready acqui- 
escence in his determination, of now tak- 
ing her back with him. To be dragged 
away in this abrupt manner, from the 
friends she had been so long accustomed 
to, for the purpose of being lectured and 
controlled — no, it was what she could not 
submit to. — " Return with you immedi- 
ately, sir," she repeated after him, " with- 
out being allowed a little time for prepa- 
ration ! really I cannot avoid considering 
this rather harsh, and must beg to be ex- 
cused saying no on the occasion." 

" Indeed ! but upon my life, young lady, 
I say yes, and shall therefore, if you will not 



96 CONTRAST. 

yourself issue them, give the necessary in- 
structions to your soubrette, to prepare for 
your departure. A father's house is the pro- 
perest home for a young unmarried woman ; 
more especially one who has fortune to 
tempt cupidity, without sufficient discre- 
tion to repose confidence in those who 
must have her interest most at heart." 

Helena retreated to her dressing-room, 
still more agitated. She had all the incli- 
nation in the world to resist the authority 
that, for the first time, was now beginning 
to be exercised over her, could she have 
flattered herself that the attempt would 
have been of any avail. 

" It is as I judged — just as I thought it 
w^ould be,"cried the cruelly-alarmed Bridge- 
more, obtruding himself upon her, along 
with his wife and daughter; " I guessed 
you would not be allowed to remain long 
here after the death of my dear friend ; 
or that, at the first intimation of your be- 
ing likely to give your hand to another 
than the person for w^hom it has been so 
long intended, you would not be hurried 
away : but, were I you, I would not sub- 



CONTRAST. 97 

mit to such injustice; I would at once 
assert my rights, and by consenting to be- 
come sir Osbert's immediately, rescue my- 
self from the persecutions you will other- 
wise undergo on account of major Mount- 
florence, who, I can inform you, is now 
arrived in Ireland." 

Helena hesitated. — " No," she said, " I 
cannot bring myself to acquiesce in any 
measure so precipitate ; besides, should it 
prove that sir Osbert is the character my 
father has represented " 

" Then, if for a moment you can allow 
yourself to imagine this, what must your 
opinion of me be ?" demanded Bridgemore, 
with an angry flush upon his cheek ; " me, 
the old and approved friend of your 
grandmother ! But no, you cannot so 
cruelly wrong my principles or regard, as 
to suppose m.e capable of introducing, to 
your particular notice, a person I did not 
know worthy of it. He has been tradu- 
ced, I must say it, however unwillingly, 
from my respect for sir Maurice, through 
the most selfish motives : but to argue the 

VOL. I. F 



98 CONTRAST. 

matter, allowing it were as he has repre- 
sented, what then ?" 

" What then I" repeated Helena, in an 
accent of surprise, and with a recoiling sen- 
sation. 

" Yes, what then ? I repeat. Suppos- 
ing him the character described by your 
father, which, however, I by no means 
allow, how is he more censurable than 
other young men of rank and fashion ? 

There is the duke of T , and lord 

L , and the marquis of G , and 

half a hundred more; and what have we 
not heard of their follies ? and yet most 
of them are now married, not merely into 
noble, but domestic families; their alli- 
ance not merely desired, but absolutely 
courted, and that by parents, it is but na- 
tural to suppose, quite as anxious about 
the happiness of their daughters as sir 
Maurice affects to be about yours ! Yes, I 
cannot express myself differently, for were 
his regard what he would wish it to be 
thought, he surely, ere this, would have 
evinced some solicitude for your forming 
a suitable alliance." 



CONTRAST. 99 

The arguments were plausible, but they 
failed of accomplishing the end in view. 
Sir Osbert was privately introduced to 
second them ; but he knelt, and prayed, 
and exerted all the eloquence of feigned 
passion, and all the rhetoric of art and 
craftiness, in vain. The only concession 
he could obtain, was a positive assurance 
of her hand being his on her coming of 
age, provided nothing occurred in the in- 
terim to deprive him of her esteem ; and 
a promise of keeping up a regular corre- 
spondence with him. Finally, her father 
succeeded in carrying her off, without any 
further open opposition; but the feehngs his 
peremptory conduct had awakened were 
not immediately subdued, as her clouded 
brow, and the reserve of her manner 
evinced. 

Sir Maurice did not permit himself to 
notice this, and the maintenance of his own 
cheerfulness had gradually an effect upon 
her. The happy influence of this was se- 
conded by that of the season, for again all 
was vernal delight and joy. The orchards 
F 2 



100 CONTRAST. 

stood thick with blossoms, the fields were 
strewed with wild flowers, and every bush 
and tree was prodigal of harmony. But 
what very different scenes awaited her at 
the other side ! Helena more than once 
thought, or rather, how little there would 
the influence of this delightful season be 
felt, amidst gloomy swamps, frightful 
rocks, and screaming seagulls ; for in every 
way that could create dislike to it, had 
the place of her nativity been described 
by her grandmother ; and to those who 
would and could have undeceived her, as 
to the correctness of the representations, 
she could not be induced to give the re- 
quisite credit. Prepared to find fault, and 
meet with a subject for ridicule in every 
thing she saw, she was disappointed nei- 
ther in this hope or expectation, when on 
landing she heard the carmen, in all the 
richness of the native brogue, pressing 
their iligent jingles upon the passengers, 
while a waiter from a neighbouring hotel 
kept running about with an air of dis- 
traction, to proclaim the good accommo- 
dation to be obtained at the house where 



CONTRAST. 101 

he served. But as the carriage, into 
which she almost immediately stepped, 
drove on, her feeUngs and sentiments be- 
gan gradually to undergo a change: she 
saw nothing to justify the prejudices she 
had cherished, or warrant the ill-natured 
conclusions she had allowed herself to give 
utterance to, and for which she now began 
to experience something like remorse. 
Where were the hideous bogs, and the 
menacing rocks, and the deforming aspect 
of misery in every direction ? She beheld 
nothing but pleasant fields and ridges of 
blue hills, and little villages, that, if not 
remarkably neat, were at least picturesque; 
and she began to perceive she had been 
imposed upon. Had this been previously 
doubted, her first glance at Woodston 
would have been sufficient to have con- 
vinced her of the fact. That detested 
home, so often described to her as the very 
abode of desolation and dreariness, that 
now, presented as it was to her view, under 
the influence of a lovely evening, with its 
old-fashioned windows burnished with the 
radiance of the setting sun, its green wood. 



102 CONTRAST. 

rich in leafy honours, overshadowing its 
antique roof, and every thing around pro- 
claiming affluence and tranquillity, seem- 
ed little less to her than an earthly paradise. 
Oh, should she find herself equally de- 
ceived, in every other respect? but no, 
she could not admit the probability of 
this ; and even, in this instance, she might 
not, after all, have been intentionally im- 
posed on ; for the place might have un- 
dergone many alterations since her grand- 
mother's residence in it. In short, she 
could not bear to think that a person 
whom she was bound by so many ties 
to love and reverence, should have been so 
wanting in liberality as wilfully to have 
misled her. 



CONTRAST. 103 



CHAP. VI. 

" But not to understand a treasure's worth, 
'Till time has stol'n away the slighted good, 
Is cause of half the poverty we feel." 

Lady Rossglen was rather inclined to 
fear, that Helena's becoming the inmate 
of Woodston, would not add to the hap- 
piness of the domestic circle there ; for if 
her grandmother, with fond partiality, ex- 
tolled her as possessed of every virtue and 
accomplishment that could win esteem 
and admiration, there were others who 
represented her as proud, capricious, and 
satirical : but she was not a person to be 
sw^ayed by selfish considerations ; as a proof 
of which, she was the first, on the receipt 
of her sister lady Anstruther's letter, to 
urge the necessity of sir ^Maurice's imme- 
diate departure for London ; yet she could 
not help wishing, that the return of He- 



104 CONTRAST. 

lena to Woodston had been a little longer 
deferred, that a little longer she might 
have had the uninterrupted enjoyment of 
her dear Sigismund's company, who, after 
many a hard-fought field, had just return- 
ed home; banished as the circumstance 
would occasion him to be, in a great de- 
gree, from Woodston, from her persever- 
ing in her determination of encouraging 
no intimacy between them ; more espe- 
cially novv% when the enforced return 
of Miss Rossglen, just at the very period 
of his, was so calculated to revive those 
rumours that had already proved so 
woundint>: to her feelings. 

" When this sister of ours arrives," said 
Caroline, the youngest of the grown-up 
girls, one day, " we must hide our dimi- 
nished heads." 

" Vanity !" exclaimed lord Glena, a 
dark-complexioned, sentimental -looking 
young man, who owned a fine seat in the 
neighbourhood, and loitered away much 
of his time at Woodston, as any one that 
had nothing else to do, than gratify a taste 
for pleasant society, might have been 



CONTRAST. 105 

tempted ; " if you thought so, you would 
not own it." 

" Complimentary, upon my word ; but 
I assure you I have not been so insincere 
in the declaration as you would insinuate. 
With the advantages of a London educa- 
tion, united to such beauty, how could 
you possibly imagine we could hope to 
stand any competition with her?" 

" London education, indeed !" repeated 
lord Glena, with a curved lip ; " yes, she 
has given a specimen of that, but such a 
one as not to render her, in my estima- 
tion, a formidable rival to others." 

" What, you have not then forgiven 
her affront to Walter?" a young relative 
of his lordship, who on going over to Lon- 
don to study for the bar, had received a 
letter of introduction from sir Maurice to 
Helena; but notwithstanding which, the 
respect due to such an introduction, his 
unfortunate accent, united to other pecu- 
liarities, caused her to make him such a 
subject of ridicule, as seriously to offend 
him, and occasion a mo5t unfavourable 
impression at the other side. 
F 3 



106 CONTRAST. 

" I have not forgotten it — the cruelty 
of making a diffident young stranger, new 
to the world, feel his deficiencies through 
the force of ridicule !" 

" Ah, well, no matter — when once you 
see her, you will forget and forgive." 

" Don't be sure ; the charms must be 
very resistless indeed, that can tempt me 
to forgive a want of due regard for the 
feelings of others." 

" Well, and hers are such." 

" Yes, I know she has been cried up as 
a prodigy by her grandmother ; but " 

" I do assure you she said nothing more 
of her than she merits, as I could prove, 
could I shew you her likeness, and which 
he asserts to be a most striking one, 
that papa brought over the last time he 
was in London ; but he has got it locked 
up in his cabinet; but, as it is, I can give 
you some faint idea of what she is, for 
Dorinda has taken a copy of it ;" and as 
she spoke, she looked about for the port- 
folio in which it was deposited, and not 
perceiving which, she asked Dorinda where 
it was. 



CONTRAST. 107 

Dorinda, with a glance to see whether 
there was any chance of its discovery 
where she had placed it, rather evasively 
replied, she could not tell. 

" Oh, well, no matter," said Caroline, 
carelessly, and resuming her work ; " some 
other time will do to satisfy his lordship's 
curiosity." 

" Assuredly. I feel no kind of impa- 
tience, I assure you, on the subject." 

Caroline laughed incredulously. — " You 
will hardly persuade me of that," she said ; 
" else why so many questions lately of 
this sister of ours? I would venture to 
lay any wager, that from the moment her 
arrival is expected, you will be on the 
watch to see her." 

" Well, I shall not argue the point with 
you ; but, nous verrons. But why so grave, 
Dorinda?" he said, suddenly seating him- 
self beside her. 

" I don't know," was the reply, with 
something very like a sigh ; " that is, I 
mean I don't know that I am particular- 
ly grave ; but you know, when you and 
Caroline commence this keen encounter 
of your wits, you seldom allow or afford 



108 CONTRAST. 

any one else an opportunity of speaking." 
" True, she is a very flippant girl, and 
likes to engross all the conversation to her- 
self; but she will never be able to engross 
every thing from my sweet Dorinda," and 
he kissed one of her fair hands, as he 
rested one arm on the back of her chair, 
and began amusing himself by disarrang- 
ing her workbox. 

Dorinda was no longer silent, and the 
trio were very merrily laughing and chat- 
ting, when visitors were announced. 

Lord Glena vacated his seat, and went 
sauntering about the room ; in doing so, 
he discovered the portfolio, and immedi- 
ately opened it. The eyes of Dorinda 
were upon him, and she saw him take 
something from it. Her heart fluttered, 
for the copy she had taken of Helena's 
picture was not the only likeness it con- 
tained. There was also one of herself ta- 
ken by Caroline, and which she knew on 
opening the portfolio he could not miss 
seeing. With his prize his lordship al- 
most instantly departed, and as instantly 
Dorinda proceeded to ascertain which of 
the drawings he had possessed himself of. 



CONTRAST. 109 

It was more than a feeling of vanity that 
sustained a shock, when she discovered it 
was the likeness of Helena, that happy and 
now for the first time envied sister. It 
was true then what, in her giddy way, 
Caroline had said of his solicitude to know 
something about her. Well, it was fortu- 
nate to learn this in time, else she might 
be more misled by the tenderness of his 
manner, or rendered more unhappy ; and 
she determined on immediate exertions to 
support, with composure, what she con- 
ceived now so likely to ensue. 

Sir Maurice had given no notice of the 
exact time at which he might be expected, 
consequently there was no one on the 
look-out for him. Just as the carriage 
stopped at Woodston, he saw a gentle- 
man approaching, whom he wished most 
particularly to speak to ; and accordingly 
desiring Helena not to delay for him to 
introduce her, she proceeded by herself 
into the house. The family, that is, lady 
Rossglen and the two eldest girls, toge- 
ther with a gentleman who happened to 
be with them at the moment, were in one 
of the back rooms, so knew nothing of her 



110 CONTRAST. 

arrival until announced by the servant. 
The emotion occasioned by her sudden 
announcement did not however take from 
the ladies the immediate power of saluting 
her. Helena could hardly credit her senses 
— could hardly believe that, in the elegant 
woman who came forward to welcome her 
with a maternal embrace — in the lovely 
girls that next folded her in their arms, 
she actually beheld the beings whom she 
had been so long taught to regard with 
sentiments of distrust and dislike. Feel- 
ings and reflections of the most painful 
nature pressed upon her heart ; she burst 
into tears, and sinking upon a seat, invo- 
luntarily covered her face wdth her hands. 
Lady Rossglen was at no loss to com- 
prehend the cause of this emotion; but 
aware that to notice might only serve to 
augment it, instead of attempting to sooth, 
she merely motioned for a glass of water : 
she made an effort to take it from the per- 
son who procured it ; but he would pre- 
sent it himself Helena felt one of her 
hands gently drawn away from her face, 
and saw a glass of water tendered to her ; 



CONTRAST. Ill 

she looked to see who offered it, and en- 
countered a pair of the finest dark eyes she 
had yet seen, intently rivetted on her coun- 
tenance ; she felt herself colour as she took 
the water, with a faint smile of acknow- 
ledgment. Her father's voice was heard at 
this instant, and she made an effort to reco- 
ver herself Fond greetings exchanged with 
those from whom he had been so unwil- 
lingly, though for so short a period, se- 
parated, he turned to embrace Helena, and 
bid her welcome to her native and her na- 
tural home. Refreshments were brought 
in, and the party collected round the table 
with every appearance of restored compo- 
sure; but Helena missed one of the per- 
sons she had seen on entering — the gen- 
tleman was gone, but probably to return, 
for it seemed to her, from what she had 
observed, as if he were no chance visitor — 
indeed it struck her that it was Sigismund 
Mountflorence she saw: but she was not 
long allowed to retain this idea. 

" Where is Sigismund ?" suddenly asked 
her father. 

" That is more than at this precise mi- 



112 CONTRAST. 

nute I can take upon myself to say," an- 
swered lady Rossglen. 

" I fully expected to have found him 
here," resumed sir Maurice. 

" You forget how much he is occupied," 
observed lady Rossglen. 

" Pooh, nonsense ! has he not his soli- 
citor to look over his musty parchments ? 
Really were I Helena, I should be quite 
offended at the want of curiosity and inte- 
rest about her, which his not being here 
evinces." 

" For Miss Rossglen to feel offended at 
the circumstance, \vould be to do him too 
much honour," said lady Rossglen gravely ; 
" but you cannot doubt his availing him- 
self of the first leisure moment he can 
command to pay his respects to her." 

" How cold, how studied !" thought He- 
lena; " how much does this manner of ex- 
pressing herself appear like the language 
of pique ! and probably it is so, at the failure 
that has hitherto attended her plans re- 
specting us." 

As the thought occurred, she chanced 
to uplift her eyes, and caught lady Ross- 



CONTRAST. 11^ 

glen's fixed upon her ; she coloured, as if 
certain of her heart having been read at the 
moment, and felt lessened, at the instant, in 
her own estimation, by the consciousness 
of having given way to an unworthy idea 
of another. But was it an unjust one? 
she had been taken by surprise — betrayed 
into admiration, without a moment's time 
for thought or reflection ; but as the first 
tumult of her feelings subsided, soberer 
ones began to prevail, or in other words, 
her sensations of delight to be qualified by 
revivinof recollections : she could not in- 
deed avoid believing the girls to be all 
they appeared, amiable and innocent ; but 
the mother, beneath that fair- exterior of 
urbanity and sweetness, what artifice might 
not be concealed ! but she would not judge 
hastily, or rather suspect wrongfully ; she 
would allow herself time for endeavouring 
to discover what she really was, ere she 
permitted herself to form a decided opi- 
nion respecting her. 

Visitors dropped in to tea. The arrival 
of Helena was soon known throughout 
the neighbourhood, and, from different 



114 CONTRAST. 

motives, there was a very general curiosity 
to ascertain what she was. JNIrs. Cosgrove 
was anxious to be satisfied, from the dread 
she entertained of any competition with 
her daughters ; and Mrs. Harman, who fol- 
lowed close upon her steps to Woodston, 
from the wish she felt to be beforehand 
with any one else in describing her. Mrs. 
Cosgrove's first glance made her tremble 
for the expectations she had long indulged 
of obtaining lord Glena for her eldest 
daughter, and the result was any thing 
but a feeling of good will towards the 
young stranger; besides w^iich, she would 
persuade herself there was an air of proud 
superiority about her, that her pride would 
not permit her to brook ; and accordingly, 
ere the first compliments of introduction 
were well over, she began to assume to- 
wards her a distant, or rather supercilious 
air, and by gradually directing all her con- 
versation to others, appear as if she had 
forgotten there was such a person in the 
room. Mrs. Harman, on the contrary, 
tried to court her notice, and for the pur- 
pose of engaging her in conversation, be- 



CONTRAST. 115 

gan speaking of a visit she had made a 
year or two before to London ; but in the 
course of expatiating on which, she be- 
trayed such downright laughable ignorance 
respecting the various noble individuals she 
pretended to have associated with, and the 
places she had seen, that Helena, little in 
the habit of concealing either what she 
felt or thought, could not avoid laughing 
at her in some instances, and contradict- 
ing her in others. Mrs. Cosgrove per- 
ceiving this, immediately took her part ; 
but not by any means from the pure mo- 
tive of good nature, but merely for the 
purpose of gratifying her spleen, by trying 
to have retorted upon Helena the ridicule 
to which she certainly had exposed Mrs. 
Harman, by her corrections of her state- 
ments. This was more than Helena could 
tolerate, and with her usual quickness of 
feeling, she directly took a decided aver- 
sion to Mrs. Cosgrove, and unjustly ex- 
tended it to her daughters : but to be con- 
nected with any one she disliked, was, in 
every instance, almost sufficient to create a 
prejudice against the person; for impulse 



116 CONTRAST. 

was her guide, and error, of course, was 
often the result. To evince her sentiments 
for the party, she suddenly started up, and 
seizing the arm of Caroline, hurried out 
upon the lawn. Without, all was calcu- 
lated to allay the little feeling of petulance 
that had just been excited, to still and 
calm each angry emotion. 

A full-orbed moon, risen high in a 
cloudless sky, and throwing its long level 
beams of light across the trembling waters 
of the romantic little bay of Woodston, 
gave a softened view of the wild scenery 
of the coast, while the total cessation of the 
busy sounds of labour permitted the mur- 
muring of the surge to have its full effect 
upon the listening ear. As Helena looked 
and listened, with feelings too lively for des- 
cription — " From what a home," she could 
not avoid internally exclaiming with a 
sigh, " had she been estranged !" yet how 
imperfect would her enjoyment of it be, if 
she continued haunted by distrust : almost 
she wished, from this reflection, that how- 
ever lady Rossglen might merit the cha- 
racter given of her, she had yet never 



CONTRAST. 117 

heard any thing to her prejudice; but 
from what snares might not the intima- 
tions she had received be the means of 
preserving her! yet safety was almost 
too dearly purchased, by the pain attend- 
ant on suspicion, a feeling so utterly un- 
congenial to her nature. She was indeed 
all generosity and openness, and it was 
those very feelings of warmth and sincerity 
that so often led to the appearance of her 
being under the influence of others, of a 
very contrary description, the slightest in- 
dication of insincerity, or ill nature, or any 
thing contrary to what she would have 
been capable of herself, never failing to 
elicit an answering one of indignation and 
contempt from her. The necessity of 
having a command over our feelings, and 
the policy of sometimes concealing what 
we think, were lessons to which she was 
utterly unaccustomed ; hence she often 
gave offence, without actually intending 
it ; but she was careless about this, except 
convicted of having done injustice, and 
then she was all compunction and peni- 
tence. 



118 CONTRAST. 

The epithet beautiful, might, without 
impropriety, have been applied to her ; yet 
it was intellectual feeling, more than regu- 
larity of features, that constituted her pe- 
culiar charm. The quick versatility of her 
feelings was visible in her countenance — 
all those fugitive graces that belong to sen- 
sibility were hers; while an innate con- 
sciousness of superiority rendering her dis- 
dainful of adventitious aids, gave to every 
thing she said or did, her whole appearance 
and manner, that unstudied air that is so 
resistless. 



CHAP. VII. 



" How readily we wish time spent revok'd, 
That we might try the ground again, where once 
(Through inexperience, as we now perceive) 
We miss'd that happiness we noight have found !" 



Such as we have described her, it may 
naturally be concluded she was incapable of 
the meanness, the illiberality of envy ; but 
she certainly liked distinction, or in other 



CONTRAST. 119 

words, not to be eclipsed. She was per- 
fectly aware of the manner in which she 
had been represented at Woodston, and 
she rather shrunk from the idea of falling 
short of that standard, to which she made 
no doubt she was, in consequence of the 
representations of her grandmother, eleva- 
ted in the opinion of all there: but she 
had not been above a day or two arrived, 
when she began to have some very embar- 
rassing misgivings, that this was likely to 
be the case. Left almost wholly to her 
own guidance, and brought up amongst 
persons by no means competent to point 
out the course of study requisite to be 
pursued for the completion of education, 
with the natural levity of youth, she 
grasped at what was most aaiusing, in- 
stead of most useful ; and while, in all the 
light and elegant accomplishments of the 
day, she had no cause to fear competition, 
she was by no means as well read in vari- 
ous parts of history or science as her sis- 
ters, educated as they were, under the im- 
mediate eye of a watchful and accomplish- 
ed mother. This certainly mortifying 



120 CONTRAST. 

discovery took off a good deal from her 
enjoyment in the domestic circle, from the 
frequent appeals, or references, that in the 
course of conversation were made to what 
was presumed her superior judgment and 
knowledge, such as would have occa- 
sioned her a oood deal of awkward embar- 
rassment, but for, she knew not how, the 
interference of lady Rossglen ; but whe- 
ther through a suspicion of the fact, or an 
apprehension of a display that might throw 
her daughters into the shade, remained to 
be ascertained. But since pedantry was 
the order of the day at Woodston, she 
must qualify herself for it ; and she accord- 
ingly began to possess herself of the requi- 
site volumes for the purpose ; to profit by 
them, it was necessary she should have a 
few hours every day to herself, and she 
accordingly began to form pretexts for ab- 
senting herself, for a little while, every 
morning from the girls ; but her new pur- 
suit interfered not with her evening en- 
gagements ; parties were constantly making, 
both at home and abroad, in compliment 
to her; and in the enjoyment of these, 



CONTRAST. 121 

every thing that was unpleasant ceased for 
the time to be remembered. 

The dark eyes which she had encoun- 
tered, in the agitating moment of her first 
arrival, were not forgotten ; but she looked 
in vain wherever she went, for the person 
to whom they belonged : a kind of restless 
curiosity to know who he was, induced 
at length an indirect inquiry on the sub- 
ject ; but in some way it was evaded. She 
could not refrain also from one concerning 
Mountflorence ; but neither did this obtain 
her any satisfaction. After being a few 
days at Woodston, she could not help 
thinking it odd that he had not been to 
pay his compliments to her : the circum- 
stance almost confirmed her in the belief 
of there being something of disappoint- 
ment and pique rankling in the heart 
both of mother and son with regard to 
her : yet to yield to this persuasion — and 
was it not to give credit to all that had 
been said to the prejudice of the former? 
and how could she do so, and behold her, 
by the uniform and unostentatious dis- 

VOL. I. G 



122 CONTRAST. 

charge of all her duties, her sweetness of 
temper, her polish, her tenderness, and 
refinement, rendering home, what home 
should ever be, the resort of peace, and 
love, and joy, and yet harbour a thought 
to her prejudice? she could have hated 
herself at times for doing so, and at others 
have wept to think it still behoved her to 
be doubtful. 

The girls, little dreaming of the senti- 
ments she was harbouring of the mother 
they so loved, were enchanted with her, 
and lady Rossglen herself w^as much pleas- 
ed. She soon penetrated into her charac- 
ter—that indeed was no very difficult mat- 
ter—and saw that what there w^as to con- 
demn, was more the fault of education 
than of nature. Had her feelings been 
less liberal, she would not have contempla- 
ted Helena with such pleasure, considering 
her, as she was obliged to do, as the cause 
of depriving her of her dear Sigismund's 
company ; for, participating in the proud 
feelings of his mother, he had early deter- 
mined on avoiding, if not an absolute in- 
troduction to her, at least her society, as 



CONTRAST. 123 

much as possible ; and of what did not the 
resolve deprive him, since harassed as he 
was with anxieties, what a solace would he 
have found for them in the domestic hap- 
piness at Woodston ! He had returned to 
find that not a wreck of his paternal inhe- 
ritance could be saved, and that hei of 
course, had no prospect before him, but 
that of reimbarking in life, literally a sol- 
dier of fortune. He loved his profession ; 
but he also loved domestic happiness, 
" that only bliss below;" and of this he 
now entertained very little hope; but 
while he could, it was his intention to con- 
ceal what he deemed inevitable, both to 
spare, his mother's feelings as long as pos- 
sible, and to avoid those offers of service 
from sir jNIaurice, which he was determin- 
ed to reject. His feelings of mortification 
and disappointment were heightened, by 
the conviction, that had his affairs been 
differently managed, such ruin would not 
have been the result: but the person to 
whom they were confided was unworthy 
of the trust. Mr. Wetherall was the hus- 
g2 



124 CONTRAST. 

band of the half-sister of sir Maurice, and 
in his hands, by the advice of the baronet, 
from the natural supposition that the con- 
nexion between the families would induce 
him to pay particular attention to his inte- 
rests, the affairs of Mountflorence were 
placed ; but Mr. Wetherall somewhat re- 
sembled Serjeant Eitherside in the play; 
and tempted by the bribes of a nobleman 
in the neighbourhood, whose political 
views rendered an accession of property 
necessary, acted in such a manner, as to 
render the sale of Mountflorence's family 
estate indispensable. 

Sir Maurice loved Helena ; but still he 
could not avoid regarding her with some 
little feeling of displeasure ; not merely on 
account of her reluctance to accompany 
him to Woodston, and the encouragement 
she had given to sir Osbert without his pri- 
vity, but also from the consideration of her 
being the cause of banishing Sigismund 
from Woodston, for whom he entertained all 
the affection of a father. In vain he Vv^rote 
— in vain he rode over, to try and procure 
his company there; and more than once, in 



CONTRAST. 125 

the anger excited by his disappointment, 
was tempted to inveigh with bitterness 
against the promulgators of those invidious 
reports, that occasioned so much obstinacy : 
but surely persons of such good sense as 
Sigismund and his mother, should despise 
such idle tattle ; but no — and so, after at 
length getting Helena over, all chance of 
profiting by the circumstance would be 
lost: well, really it was enough to pro- 
voke the patience of a Job ; and for the 
first time he began to display a humour 
not natural to him. 

But not always were the hours passed 
within, that Helena now chose sometimes 
of a morning to devote to other purposes 
than those of visiting, or amusing herself 
with the girls. There were some distant 
places in the wood favourable to study, 
and to these she often watched opportuni- 
ties for repairing. A picturesque hut, 
erected on the edge of a small lake, seques- 
tered in the very bosom of the wood, be- 
came her favourite resort, both from its 
remoteness from the house, precluding all 
fear of any unpleasant interruption, and 



126 CONTRAST. 

the pleasing effect which its romantic and 
retired situation had upon her feelings. 
The willow and the birch drooped over its 
conical roof of thatch, backed by trees of 
other size and characters gradually deepen- 
ing into gloom ; while every prospect, save 
that of the lake, was obscured by the wild 
rugged banks that hemmed it in — hung 
with pendant shrubs, and black with ivy 
and other creeping plants, forming altoge- 
ther a retreat, well adapted for study or 
contemplation. Here the taste of Helena, 
for the beauties of nature, was gradually 
elicited, and the purpose for which she 
chiefly repaired to the place was frequently 
suspended, to have the pleasure of gazing 
on the lake, and watching the light clouds 
that varied its undulating surface, and list- 
ening to the soft flow of its rippling water. 
She was sitting one day near the entrance 
of the hut, unconsciously lost in thought, 
v/hen chancing to uplift her eyes, she 
caught a glimpse of a gentleman, retreat- 
ing out of sight behind some thickets that 
overran part of the adjacent bank. While 
yet watching him, a paper came wafted 



CONTRAST. 127 

towards her ; she was rising to secure it, 
when the stranger, springing down the 
bank, which he had half ascended, caught 
it up, and again retreated, but not with 
such quickness as to prevent her seeing he 
was the person whom she had found with 
the family on the evening of her arrival at 
Woodston, and whose never appearing 
there since, had been more than once a 
subject of surprise and curious conjecture 
to her, intimate, as it was evident to her, 
he was there, and led as she was, she did 
not know how, to consider him a resident 
in the neighbourhood. That he had now 
seen her, she could not doubt ; and, consi- 
dering that he had seen her before, and 
where and what had then occurred, it 
seemed strange to her his not having made 
any sign of recognition. There was not 
merely a strangeness, but an ungracious- 
ness in such conduct, such as she could not 
have supposed him capable of, from the 
expression of those beautiful dark eyes, 
that had made such an impression on her 
fancy; but it was no matter — and she 
tried to resume her reading; but it was 



128 CONTRAST. 

not one of her collected days, so the effort 
was vain ; and after loitering away another 
hour in the hut, thinking she knew not 
of what, she returned to the house, half 
inclined to mention who she had seen, 
under the idea that it might betray the 
girls into the mention of his name ; but 
then, if she disclosed the circumstance, her 
visits to the hut would be revealed, and an 
end put to them, from the interruptions 
and intrusions she should then be liable 
to; so she thought, upon reflection, she 
would say nothing about it. For two or 
three successive mornings, engagements 
she could not decline kept her away ; but 
at length she again found herself at liberty 
to do as she pleased, and profited by the cir- 
cumstance to repair to her favourite retreat. 
In passing round to the entrance, she hap- 
pened to glance in at a small window at 
the side, and, with rather a sensation of sur- 
prise, or some other emotion, perceived the 
stranger, as she was still compelled to call 
him, seated at the rustic table that formed 
part of the furniture of the place, intently 
occupied by a drawing that lay before him* 



CONTRAST. 129 

Helena involuntarily bent forward to try 
and catch a view of this. The slight rust- 
ling this occasioned amidst the clustering 
shrubs, instantly disturbed the person 
within ; he started up in manifest confu- 
sion, and making a snatch at the paper on 
which he had been so intent, rushed from 
the building; but in his eagerness to escape, 
he missed securing what he intended, and 
Helena only waited until he was out of 
sight to enter the hut, for the purpose of 
possessing herself of it: but what her 
surprise was on taking it up, to find it 
a striking likeness of herself, may be ima- 
gined ; but surprise was not the only feel- 
ing excited by the circumstance — her bo- 
som heaved — her cheek glowed with a 
sensation of delight, altogether new to her, 
and for a few moments she stood lost in a 
whirl of strange ideas. Other thoughts 
and reflections then began to occur — cer- 
tain vows and promises began to be re- 
membered, and the impropriety of either 
giving encouragement to any indication 
of admiration from another, or experiencing 
pleasure at it. 

q3 



130 CONTRAST. 

" Yet, had I calculated on this," she 
said, " I should not have fettered myself 
so early. Why did I allow myself to 
be drawn into so hasty an engagement ? 
Yet, what has sir Osbert done, that I should 
now begin to repent it ? — has he done any 
thing to forfeit those sentiments, that so 
short a time since instigated me to brave a 
father's authority for his sake? And have 
I done so ?" she demanded of herself, with 
a feeling of sudden terror, as if only now 
awakened to a just perception of her error; 
" and can I hope — can I expect, to escape 
punishment for this ?" she cried. " Oh no, 
already I feel a sad presentiment of its 
awaiting me. And this is the result of 
my estrangement from my natural home : 
had I been allowed to continue in it, from 
what griefs, what evils, might not the 
circumstance probably have been the means 
of saving me ! but the past cannot be re- 
called, and let me not therefore give way 
to regrets, that are a tacit reproach to the 
beloved dead." 

But whatever were her further thoughts 
or reflections, she could not prevent her- 



CONTRAST. 131 

self from making another effort to discover 
who the person was, that kept thus haunt- 
ing her fancy, and haunting her haunts, 
by mentioning, in the course of the even- 
ing, the incident that had occurred — that 
is, mentioning her having found a like- 
ness of herself in the hut, left behind by 
some person who, on her approach, had 
fled. 

Dorinda changed colour ; and Caroline 
began to laugh. — " Ah, just as I thought 
it would be," she said ; " he has secretly 
been taking that peep, which a fear of ri- 
dicule, after all his violent resolves, would 
not allow of his yet doing openly." 

" I don't understand you," said Helena, 
" Who are you speaking of?" 

" Why, oflordGlena." 

" Who is lord Glena ?" 

" Why, a strange, odd kind of eccen- 
tric neighbour of ours, but still not very 
much amiss — that is, a kind of being that 
one would not absolutely disdain, to have 
make a sonnet on their eyebrow." 

" Well, but what is it you alluded to, 
in speaking of his violent resolves ?" 



132 CONTRAST. 

" Why, I laid a wager, that he would 
be quite restless until he had fully grati- 
fied his curiosity respecting you ; he pro- 
tested to the contrary; and, in order to 
make me think myself mistaken in the 
assertion, has, as it now appears, instead of 
paying his respects openly, been watching 
you in secret, and comparing you with the 
likeness he stole of you, out of Dorinda's 
portfolio." 

" And is it merely for the pleasure of 
disappointing you, that he has so suddenly 
desisted from calling here?" asked He- 
lena, with rather anxious curiosity. 

*' Oh no ; there is another reason — your 
having so greatly offended him." 

" I !" exclaimed Helena. " Why how 
could that be ? How can I possibly have 
offended a person I hardly knew any thing 
of?" 

" In the person of his kinsman, young 
De Burgh, to whom you cannot have for- 
got your cruel conduct," said Caroline, 
laughing. 

" What, is that creature, that one could 
render neither useful nor ornamental. 



CONTRAST. 133 

a relation of his? But you jest — lord 
Glena cannot think seriously of such a 
matter. But really it was a most barba- 
rous act of my father, to introduce such a 
being, with so much of the country cousin 
about him, to one, in London — elsewhere 
it would have been of no consequence; 
but there, where first impressions are every 
thing, and one has no opportunity for ex- 
planations !" 

" Terrible indeed ! But I assure you, 
lord Glena does not laugh at what occurred 
there ; on the contrary, he thinks very 
gravely of it. But come, I shan't say more, 
lest of making you despair of yet having 
him added to your train of admirers." 

*' Despair!" repeated Helena; " ere I 
can experience that, I must be first ambi- 
tious of having such an addition to them. 
If he be what you have led me to imagine, 
he must be a stiff, cold, out-of-the-way 
being ; and as such are my aversion, I 
shall think or speak no more about him." 

She had hardly announced this resolve, 

ere preparations were made for a visit to 

, where a succession of parties were 



134 CONTRAST. 

about taking place. Helena was rather 
surprised at the style of these ; she hardly- 
expected any of the kind, in a country 
town, but more especially a country town 
in Ireland. Every day, however, tended 
to prove that facts had been completely 
misrepresented to her ; all could not have 
been changed since the time of her grand- 
mother ; and she sighed to think, that a 
person whom she so truly loved, and 
whose memory she wished to hold in ve- 
neration, should have been capable of giv- 
ing way to feelings inimical to real justice 
and liberality. 

A few evenings after the arrival of the 
family at , there was an assembly at 

the rooms. On the morning of the day, 
the girls went out to their milliners, to 
give some orders for the occasion ; but 
Helena declined accompanying them. 
She had just received a letter from sir 
Osbert, and through some sudden change 
of feeling, one never now arrived, without 
occasioning a lowness and agitation of spi- 
rits, that rendered her, for some time after, 
unable to collect herself; but she was now 



CONTRAST. 135 

forced to make an effort for the purpose, 
by the arrival of several visitors, soon after 
the girls went out. In the course of the 
chit-chat that ensued, lord Glena was men- 
tioned ; a lady inquired of lady Rossglen 
what had become of him ? She protested 
her ignorance, not having seen him for 
some time; but he was in the habit of 
taking sudden flights from home, she add- 
ed, more especially whenever, as was now 
the case, the countess and his sister were 
absent. 

" Well, if any one is particularly anxi- 
ous about him," said another of the visi- 
tors, " I am happy to say I can satisfy 
their anxiety; for I met him a few mi- 
nutes ago on the quay, and he announced 
his intention of being at our ball this even- 
ing." 

Helena, who had been listlessly listen- 
ing all this while to what was going on, 
felt, at this instant, a sudden renovation 
of spirits, from the effect produced upon 
her mind by the letter of sir Osbert ; she 
had felt half-inclined to refuse going to 
the ball ; but now she could not help be- 



136 CONTRAST. 

ing pleased she had resisted the inclination. 
There was an impression made upon her 
fancy, that did make her wish to ascertain 
what kind of being lord Glena was, and 
the light in which he really regarded her. 

The girls soon returned — they also had 
met lord Glena ; the rencontre was attend- 
ed with mutual surprise, he not having 

heard of their arrival in , and they 

not expecting to meet him there. 

" And " said Helena, but she re- 
collected herself in time to check the ques- 
tion she was about asking. 

" He inquired whether we w^ere going 
to the ball," proceeded Caroline ; " I ex- 
pressed my surprise at his having any 
doubt on the subject; and in return asked 
for which set he wished I should keep my- 
self disengaged for him : he hesitated ; told 
me then not to lose any one of them on 
his account, as he was beginning to think 
he should not go, and very abruptly took 
leave." 

" Capricious, upon my word !" said Mrs. 
Wilson, the lady w^ho had announced his 
previous intention ; " I cannot avoid think- 



CONTRAST. 137 

ing these whims of his lordship savour a 
little of affectation." 

" Well, be that as it may," observed 
another of the party, " his not being there 
will be a terrible disappointment to some of 
the company ;" and coughing significantly, 
added — " You know Mrs. Cosgrove and 
her daughters will be there." 

Lady Rossglen, who had no kind of 
pleasure in these inuendoes, prevented 
the reply that was about being made, by 
some observation calculated to give a turn 
to the conversation ; and the visitors shortly 
after dispersed. 

" Could it be that it was knowing she 
was to be at the ball, that occasioned 
lord Glena to change his mind ?" Helena 
wondered ; but no, the idea was too ridicu- 
lous to be admitted; for assuredly, after 
all, what she had heard from Caroline of 
his pique and resentment must be mere 
bagatelle: but whether he were present 
or not, she now began to feel she cared 
very little, beginning to conceive him a 
very disagreeable kind of person, full of 
the affectation of eccentricity, which of all 



138 CONTRAST. 

things, in her opinion, was the most con- 
temptible. 

But this persuasion did not prevent her 
looking diligently about the room for him 
on her entrance, nor perhaps from the ex- 
perience of a slight sensation of disap- 
pointment at not perceiving him. The 
ball commenced ; two sets were danced — 
still he did not make his appearance ; and 
Helena began to relinquish all idea of 
seeing him that night: well, no matter; 
to her, at least, the circumstance would 
be no source of vexation. 

At the conclusion of the second set, she 
found herself occupying the same seat 
with Mrs. Wilson. — " So lord Glena is 
not come ?" observed the latter. 

" So I perceive," replied Helena. 

" Well, I should not like to have set 
my heart so much upon seeing him here 
this evening, as some persons that shall be 
nameless," added Mrs. Wilson, with a cer- 
tain turn of her eye, as she spoke, on Mrs. 
Cosgrove. 

" We are instructed not to set our 
hearts very much upon any thing in this 



CONTRAST. 139 

life," said Helena, laughing ; " liable as 
we are to disappointment." 

" Especially," resumed the other, " if 
depending for any thing upon such a 
whimsical, ridiculous, good-for-nothing 
being as lord Glena." 

" What an enchanting character you 
give him !" said Helena. " I have heard 
so many delightful traits of him since my 
arrival, that really 'tis enough to make 
one fall in love with him from report." 

" Oh that he could believe this !" sighed 
a voice behind her. 

The ladies turned with quickness, and 
" Lord Glena !" exclaimed Caroline ; and 
" Lord Glena !" echoed Mrs. Wilson ; " is 
it possible?" and "Lord Glena!" softly 
repeated Helena to herself; " is this he in- 
deed ?" for in him she beheld not the per- 
son she expected to have seen. 

" To prove it possible," said his lord- 
ship, repeating Mrs. Wilson's words, " I 
have to request the honour of an introduc- 
tion to this lady," bowing to Helena and 
then glancing at Caroline,. 

Caroline came forward to present him ; 



140 CONTRAST. 

and placing himself by the side of Helena, 
a lively conversation ensued, in the course 
of which his lordship expressed his obli- 
gations to Mrs. Wilson, for the character 
she had given him. 

" Well, you know the proverb," said 
Mrs. Wilson ; " but, after all, what did I 
say to your prejudice? I did not describe 
you as stupid, or old-fashioned, or quizzi- 
cal; I merely said you were whimsical, 
and affected, and good-for-nothing; and 
what more alluring character could a man 
of fashion wish for?" 

" If others could be induced to think 
so," glancing at Helena, " he would not 
uncharitably refuse forgiveness for the un- 
gracious portraiture she had drawn of him," 
was the reply. 

Helena, au fait in playful coquetry, 
laughed, and rallied, and affected incre- 
dulity to the indirect compliments his 
lordship began paying. Though disap- 
pointed, still she was pleased; she saw 
she had caught his fancy; and his rank, 
his fashion, above all, the difficulty she 
by this time understood there was in his 



CONTRAST. 141 

being pleased, or in other words, the fas- 
tidiousness of his taste, rendered the idea 
one of gratification to her. 

There was still another reason ; from in- 
timations received, she knew there were 
certain personages then present, to whom 
his singling her out would occasion morti- 
fication, and whom she certainly sufficient- 
ly disliked to wish to mortify ; and on this 
account, even perhaps more than on any 
other, she suffered herself to give an encou- 
ragement to his attentions, that she might 
not otherwise perhaps have done, thought- 
less as she was, and fond of admiration. 

Dancing with him was prevented by 
her being already engaged for every set 
that could possibly be danced that night ; 
but she did not permit this to be any great 
interruption to their conversation ; and 
between each set kept promenading about 
the room, leaning on his arm. At length, 
missing Dorinda, she repaired to the card- 
room to look for her. She found her seat- 
ed rather behind her mother's chair, who 
was at cards. — " What's the matter that I 
find you here?" asked Helena. 



142 CONTRAST. 

" Nothing," was the reply ; " but that 
I felt rather fatigued by the heat and noise 
of the next room." 

" Why, I think I have heard you say, 
that to render it delightful, a bail-room 
could not be too crowded ?" 

" Perhaps so ; but we are not always in 
the same humour." 

" So it seems : but come, I shan't allow 
you to be whimsical ; you must return 
with me, for we have hardly been together 
the whole evening." 

" Excuse me — I don't mean to dance 
any more." 

" But I won't excuse you," said lord 
Glena ; " for I expect to be made amends 
by you, for my disappointment in not be- 
ing able to obtain JNIiss Rossglen's hand 
for any of the sets this evening." 

" You flatter me !" replied Dorinda, 
with such a smile as Helena had never 
before observed her assume, while a sud- 
den flush gave a keen sparkling to her 
eyes, altogether new to them : " but 1 am 
so convinced of my incompetency to this, 



CONTRAST. 143 

that I certainly shall not allow myself to 
be persuaded to make the attempt." 

Helena looked steadily at her ; her eyes 
began to open to the truth, or, in other 
words, a suspicion to suggest itself, that Mrs. 
Cosgrove was not the only person in the 
room to whom the attentions of lord Glena 
to her, that evening, had probably caused 
a sore sensation. She mused — " And is it 
so," she said to herself; " but the stricken 
deer shall not weep, if I can prevent it ; 
I could not, if I would, accept her fa- 
vourite, and I would not, if I could ; but 
for the present, this shall remain a secret 
to myself, until the game I am determi- 
ned to play for her shall have succeeded ;" 
and she immediately decided on giving 
every possible encouragement to lord Gle- 
na, for the double purpose of foiling the 
plans of Mrs. Cosgrove, and forwarding 
the secret wishes of Dorinda, by the pro- 
bability there was of this conduct being 
the means of drawing him more constantly 
than ever into the domestic circle at Wood- 
ston: but in forming such a plan, she 
quite overlooked, with her usual inconsi- 



144 CONTRAST. 

derateness, what it might be the occasion 
of to herself; that as delicacy for the feel- 
ings of Dorinda must ever prevent her re- 
vealing her real motive for encouraging 
lord Glena, the circumstance could hardly 
fail of her incurring the imputation of co- 
quetry and levity, whenever it came to 
be known, as known it must, that at the 
precise time of giving this, she was under 
a positive engagement to another; but con- 
sequences were what she never suffered 
herself to dwell on, and, of course, she was 
continually laying up cause for repentance. 

Lord Glena was certainly much pleased 
with her; but there was a certain con- 
sciousness about him, that made him al- 
most draw back, from paying those atten- 
tions this feeling of admiration naturally 
suggested ; her smiles, however, were not 
to be resisted, and in the course of a day 
or two, he was every where considered as 
her lover. 

But who, all this time, was the person 
she had taken for him ? his name still re- 
mained a provoking mystery ; but neither 
her curiosity on this subject, nor the af- 



CONTRAST. 145 

fair in which she had engaged, prevented 
her spending a good deal of time in ram- 
bling about the ancient city of , and 

examining its remains of town walls, and 
old castles, and Danish towers, and con- 
trasting the quietude of its old-fashioned 
streets, ascending from the fine navi- 
gable river, on which it was built, to the 
hills that, in wild and rocky bleakness, 
rose above it, with the eternal noise and 
confusion of those to which she had been 
accustomed ; but with the pleasure these 
rambles afforded, a feeling of melancholy 
was often mingled, such as pensive reflec- 
tions naturally excite. 

In the great world, where she had been 
brought up, every art is used to banish 
thought, and the multitudes that throng 
it favour the effort; but in a small coun- 
try town, the reverse is the case; there 
what we lose is immediately pressed upon 
the observation — there every death in- 
deed creates a chasm — " And I should 
hardly like," observed Helena, one day, 
" to live in a country town, where one 

VOL. I. H 



146 CONTRAST. 

cannot avoid hearing the knell of their 
friends, and seeing, perhaps, continually 
the cold sod that presses the bosom, so 
lately alive to all the social feelings of hu- 
manity !" 



CHAP. VIII. 



" He is the freeman whom the truth makes free, 
And all are slaves beside." 



Before the return of the family to Wood- 
ston, some one suggested a party to view 
an ancient castle in the neighbourhood, 
belonging to the marquis of Ravensdale, 
a resident in England ; but on its being 
mentioned to lady Rossglen, she declined 
it ; and it was in consequence given up. 

Helena was rather vexed, for it was on 
her account the visit was proposed. Speak- 
ing of the circumstance in the course of 
the evening — " Do you know the reason 
of your disappointment?" asked Mrs. We- 
tl^rall, sir Maurice's half sister. 



CONTRAST. 147 

** No," Helena replied, " she could no 
otherwise account for it, than by suppos- 
ing lady Rossglen did not like to take the 
trouble of repeating her visit to a place she 
had seen before." 

" No, that's not the reason ; but," with 
a significant hen], " secrets, I perceive, in 
all families ; but you know that the illus- 
trious family of Ravensdale have a son ?" 

" Yes — I have heard so." 

" Why, I concluded you must have 
seen him in London ?" 

" No — London is a great wilderness, 
where it is next to impossible to see every 
one." 

" Well, no matter ; but you have heard, 
perhaps, that he is very handsome ? Well, 
this really charming young man came over 
here last summer ; it was his first visit to 
the family seat, and nothing could exceed 
the rejoicings that took place on the occa- 
sion ; of course your father was amongst 
the gentlemen who paid their compliments 
to him, and your sisters soon had him for 
their beau : but some daughters are fortu- 
H 2 



148 CONTRAST. 

nate in having very clever mothers ; my 

poor girls But I have long perceived, 

that in some matters I am a mere simple- 
ton." 

" Oh, well, be that as it may," said 
Helena, " I think it could require no ma- 
nagement, to induce a young man of taste 
and fashion to pay attention to such girls 
as Dorinda and Caroline." 

" You think so !" with a little short hys- 
teric laugh, and violently fanning herself; 
" however, that's no matter ; there are 

others who think But I might be 

deemed envious, perhaps, if I said what ; 
and so it was soon perceived that his lord- 
ship's attentions were not equally divided 
between the young ladies ; in short, that 
JMiss Caroline was the magnet of attrac- 
tion." 

" Indeed ! Well, I really don't know 
which I think, her or Dorinda the pret- 
tiest." 

"Really!" with again a little kind of 
laugh. " Well, I must acknowledge I 
don't exactly see them with your eyes : 
but to come to the point ; she might per- 



CONTRAST. 149 

haps by this time have been his bride, but 
that some officious person" — Mrs. We- 
therall could, if she had thought proper, 
have mentioned who this person was — 
" took upon themselves to give notice to 
the marquis of what was going on ; and 
the consequence was, his coming over, 
and a terrible work ensuing from his hav- 
ing fixed on an alliance for lord Selwyn 
in another quarter ; and so, after this, no 
one belonging to your father could, with 
any propriety, think of visiting a place be- 
longing to the family." 

" Assuredly not ; and I really conceive 
my father has every reason to feel himself 
offended ; since an alliance with a family, 
ancient as his, I think none, however il- 
lustrious, need disdain." 

" Certainly; but fortune is an object as 
well as family, with the marquis; how- 
ever, spite of his precautions, what he has 
objected to may yet take place ; for it is 
said," she looked cautiously around her, 
to see that no one was listening — ** that, 
unknown to your father, lady Rossglen 
has continued to carry on a correspondence 



150 CONTRAST. 

with lord Selwyn ; that, in short, during 
sir ^laiirice's recent absence in England, 
he came over, and still continues here, for 
the express purpose of making, in meet- 
ings with her at Woodston, and elsewhere, 
as opportunities offer, arrangements for a 
secret marriage with ^liss Caroline." 

Helena started. She was on the point 
of interrupting the invidious detail of 
Mrs. Wetherall, by a vehement protesta- 
tion of her disbelief of what lady Rossglen 
was accused of, when the mention of lord 
Selwyn's secret arrival, and clandestine 
meetings with her, gave a sudden check to 
the impulse, by rendering her uncertain 
what to think. Could it be that he was the 
person she had surprised with her ladyship 
and the girls, on the evening of her arrival 
at Woodston, and whose retreat, ere the 
entrance of her father, had even, in that 
moment of agitation, occasioned her some 
surprise ? The more she reflected on the 
circumstance, the more she was tempted t?o 
conceive it even so. The mystery made 
about his name — the way in which he loiter- 
ed about the grounds, tended to confirm the 



CONTRAST. 151 

supposition ; and finally, she gave in to the 
belief; and of course, that lady Rossglen 
was by no means the character she was 
credulously beginning to think, or fondly 
hoping to find her. The idea was produc- 
tive of pain ; for she wished to be allowed 
to love her: but this was not the only 
sensation of regret she experienced at the 
moment ; she was conscious of having 
given way to a fancy, that if known, would 
subject her to ridicule, and the reflection 
put her out of humour, both with herself 
and others. Her grandmother then, poor 
woman ! had not been so misled by preju- 
dice, as she was beginning to allow herself 
to imagine. Lady Rossglen was, after all, 
the artful, deceptions character she had 
represented, and but for her prudent 
precautions, in keeping her from Wood- 
ston, she might by this time perhaps have 
had to deplore the sacrifice of her interests 
to those of her ladyship's. 

The next day was Sunday : the last ser- 
vice in the old cathedral was late. On 
quitting it in the evening, lady Rossglen 
desired Helena to hasten after the girls, 



152 CONTRAST. 

who had gone on with some young friends, 
as she wished to speak to an old lady, who 
was coming out of a distant pew. 

Helena obeyed her ; but the girls had dis- 
appeared ere she reached the door ; and she 
paused near the steps, for the purpose of 
being joined by lady Rossglen, and listen- 
ing to the last chant of the organ, as it 
swelled with solemn grandeur through 
the vaulted roof Whilst standing here, 
amidst some other loiterers, engaged in 
examining some old monuments, in the 
shadowy light, cast on them by a few 
flickering lamps, lady Rossglen, leaning 
on the arm of a gentleman, brushed patet 
her. The eyes of Helena became rivetted 
on her companion j and just as they were 
descending the steps, she caught a suffi- 
cient view of his features to ascertain his 
being the supposed lord Selwyn. So it 
was for the purpose of meeting him, that 
her ladyship had remained behind; and 
this was her truth, her sincerity, and with 
a feeling of indignation she could not have 
disguised at the moment. So irritating 
was the idea of any imposition being at- 



CONTRAST. 153 

tempted on her, Helena hurried home, 
and was repairing to her chamber, in an 
agitation of spirits that rendered her un- 
willing to be seen by any one at the mo- 
ment, when she encountered her father, 
and was, of necessity, obliged to enter 
the drawing-room with him. Here she 
found her sisters, with the young friends 
with whom they had left the church. All 
inquired what was become of lady Ross- 
glen. 

Helena laconically replied she could not 
tell. Visitors dropped in to tea, but a 
considerable time elapsed before lady Ross- 
glen made her appearance. On being ral- 
lied as to what she had been doing with 
herself, she gravely replied — " When once 
poor Mrs. Dobson gets hold of any one, it 
is hardly possible for them to break away 
from her." 

Helena could hardly command herself, 
at what she considered so flagrant a breach 
of truth. Ere tea was well over, she re- 
treated to her chamber, and snatching up 
a pen, in the irritation of the moment, sat 
h3 



154 CONTRAST. 

down to address a letter to sir Osbert, in 
which she made no scruple of inveighing 
against her ladyship, as a most accomplish- 
ed dissembler: but hardly was this letter 
dispatched, ere she would have given 
worlds, if at her command, to have regain- 
ed it, so suddenly conscious did she be- 
come of the impropriety she had been 
guilty of, in expressing herself of a person 
so nearly connected with her father, in the 
manner she had allowed herself of lady 
Rossglen ; forgetting this was not the first 
time she had offended in the same way ; 
for just as her humour varied, she spoke 
of her — it was so pleasant, such a relief, 
when vexed, to have some one to whom 
she could give utterance to her angry 
feelings. 

The ensuing day the party returned to 
Woodston. Lord Glena followed, and be- 
came more regular than ever in his visits ; 
but he did not know how it was, he did 
not by any means feel as much at his ease 
in them, as he was wont to be : there was 
a consciousness about him, that at times 
rendered him awkward and embarrassed 



CONTRAST. 155 

in paying those attentions, to obtain op- 
portunities for which was his chief allure- 
ment to the house ; besides which, he fan- 
cied that there was an air of shyness in 
the manner of sir Maurice, never noticed 
before, and a want of that graciousness in 
the smile of lady Rossglen, with which he 
was wont to be regarded ; while Dorinda, 
the frank, the innocent, and heretofore af- 
fectionate, Dorinda, evidently shunned 
him. 

Sir Maurice did not indeed feel as much 
pleasure at seeing him as used to be the 
case, both because he considered, through 
his means, all chance of now obtaining He- 
lena for Mountflorence lost, and that, as 
matters now turned out, he had been too 
particular in another quarter ; while lady 
Rossglen, of a similar opinion, vainly 
strove to prevent any alteration being per- 
ceived in her looks or deportment towards 
him. What they thought on this subject, 
however, they did not communicate to 
each other, determined as each was, though 
from different motives and feelings, to do 
nothing that could occasion either to be 



156 CONTRAST. 

accused of preventing so eligible an alliance 
as his lordship's must certainly be consi- 
dered for Helena. 

But though, while in company, Helena 
gave him all the encouragement he could 
desire, the moment they were either alone, 
or detached from others, her tone and 
manner altered — she became distant and 
reserved; his compliments were checked, 
his attentions repelled, and every art and 
effort was had recourse to, to revive the 
interest which, from various circumstances, 
she was aware he had once both felt and 
displayed for Dorinda. But the attempt 
was vain ; the more she dwelt upon the 
excellencies of another, the more apparent 
her own became ; and the very petulance 
that she could not help at times betraying, 
at the ill success of her plan, only served to 
give a piquancy to her manner, that ren- 
dered her still more attractive. 

His mother, a very stately old lady, 
who was absent at the time of Helena's 
first arrival at Woodston, about this pe- 
riod returned to her seat in the neighbour- 
hood, with his sister. The rumour that 



CONTRAST. 157 

awaited her, of his having conceived a 
partiality for Helena, by no means tended 
to please her; on the contrary, nothing 
could possibly have more discomposed her, 
from a strong prejudice she had conceived 
against the young heiress, through thereport 
of her kinsman Walter, and her disliking 
her connexions at the maternal side; be- 
sides which, she had long set her heart on 
seeing her son united to a daughter of 
lady Rossglen's, from the esteem and ad- 
miration in which she held her ladyship. 
She was not a person by any means scru- 
pulous or backward in revealing her sen- 
timents, and she determined, on this oc- 
casion, by not attempting to disguise 
them, to do all in her power to prevent 
a marriage she utterly disliked the idea of. 
With this determination, she repaired to 
Woodston, ere lady Rossglen was apprized 
of her return. 

Helena, though fond of distinction, was 
not equally flattered by it from all; her 
acute feelings prevented this ; and at any 
time she would readily have given up the 
homage of the crowd, for the notice of a 



158 CONTRAST. 

person of assured worth. The high re- 
spect which she had been taught to feel 
for the countess and her daughter, ren- 
dered her solicitous to be known to them ; 
and accordingly, with pleased readiness, 
she obeyed the summons which she re- 
ceived to the drawing-room on their ar- 
rival, not without being inclined to think 
this unexpected visit might, in some de- 
gree, be placed to her account, as, even 
with their intimate friends, she understood 
they kept up a good deal of ceremony. 
Yielding, in some degree, to this flattering 
belief, that to impatience to know her it was 
at least in some degree owing, what was her 
surprise, her disappointment, at the recep- 
tion she met with! ice itself could not 
have been more chilling, more freezing, 
than the cold, the distant, the almost su- 
percilious manner in which they regarded 
her ; and without once bidding her wel- 
come, or paying her any of those little 
compliments usual on first introductions, 
turned away, after a slight survey, to 
resume the conversation with lady Ross- 
glen, which her entrance had interrupted. 



CONTRAST. 159 

Helena was deeply wounded; but it 
was not her pride alone that was hurt on 
the occasion ; for as the daughter of sir 
Maurice Rossglen, she was satisfied that 
the mortification now sustained could not 
possibly proceed from any feeling injurious 
to that ; it was her vanity — her self-love. 
She had allowed herself to believe that she 
must be represented in a light to cause a 
general prepossession in her favour, and, 
as already mentioned, was ambitious of 
the notice of lady Glena and her daughter, 
both from the respect she paid to real 
worth, and the additional distinction she 
was aware the circumstance would confer 
upon her, from the manner in which they 
were looked up to by every one. The 
humiliation of such a disappointment as 
the present was altogether new to her, 
and certainly not more bearable on that 
account. Pride, however, made her 
struggle to conceal the feelings it occa- 
sioned, while, at the same time, with her 
usual hastiness, she was almost tempted 
to betray them, by abruptly withdrawing. 

While struggling to resist the impulse 



160 CONTRAST. 

of indignation, too completely disconcert- 
ed, however, to be able to allow the ef- 
forts to succeed which lady Rossglen, ex- 
tremely vexed by what had occurred, was 
making to draw her into conversation, the 
girls, hastily summoned home from a walk, 
entered. Their appearance seemed to have 
the effect of magic upon both ladies ; in a 
moment they became metamorphosed from 
cold, stiff, formal-looking beings, into kind, 
gracious, warm-hearted ones. — " And, ah, 
my own sweet girls," said the countess, 
" it was you," as she affectionately em- 
braced them — " you indeed I wanted to 
see," and Helena thought she glanced at 
her at the moment. — " Laura and I have 
come for the express purpose of carrying 
you off with us ; our friends, the Danbys, 
with whom we have been spending some 
time on their way to the metropolis, are 
to stop a day or two with us ; and they 
made us promise that they should have 
the pleasure of seeing their little favour- 
ites, and we are to have quite a select, 
snug party." 

" You do the girls honour, by wishing 



COKTRAST. 161 

to include them in such a party," said lady 
Rossglen ; " but I cannot now," and she 
glanced at Helena, " permit them both to 
be absent from home at the same time." 

" Oh ! I comprehend you," said the 
countess ; " but if I can induce Miss 
Rossglen " 

" To accompany them," said lady Ross- 
glen, with quickness. 

" No, not exactly that," resumed her 
ladyship, after a sHght hesitation ; '* Miss 
Rossglen might not, I apprehend, exactly 
like a party of entire strangers ; what I 
meant, therefore, was, that if I could in- 
duce her to solicit, that, on this one oc- 
casion, her sisters should not be kept at 
home on her account." 

Helena, seeing she was expected to say 
something, gravely answered — " That on 
her account, she hoped her sisters would 
not be debarred from any thing agreeable 
to them ;" and her father entering at the 
moment, to pay his compliments to the 
ladies, took the opportunity of with- 
drawing. But with what soreness of 
feeling did she retire ! she was made to 



♦ 



162 CONTRAST. 

see, by the most intimate friends of the 
family, that there was a wide distinction 
made between her and the other members 
of it ; and that from the total want of any 
lively interest about her, her being consi- 
dered more in the light of a stranger, than 
any thing else, to all parties, she could well 
be spared from the domestic and social 
circles of Woods ton. 

Ardent and affectionate in her nature, 
hitherto accustomed to be an object of the 
first consideration, to find herself now where 
she conceived she was merely tolerated, not 
wished for, the thought was one of bitter- 
ness. " But might I not have foreseen all 
this ? might I not have anticipated all these 
wounds to my feelings ?" she cried, with 
tears she could not suppress ; and had she 
not, prior to this day, been made to feel, 
in some degree, what now so affected her? 
The domestics and dependants made no 
scruple of letting her understand they re- 
garded her but in a secondary light; was any 
service required by her and her sisters at 
the same moment, they were always sure 
of being the first attended to. " And I 



CONTRAST. 163 

can't help thinking," she said one day to 
the old Scotch gardener, who had been 
for years in the family, on being at length 
struck with the difference he made in the 
bouquets he prepared for her and the girls, 
" that I am not quite so great a favourite 
with you as my sisters." 

Dugald thrust his sun-burnt hand un- 
der his bonny blue bonnet, and after rub- 
bing his grey locks for some time — 
" Why, I'll not gang to deny that. Miss," 
he said ; " but then, you ken, these bonny 
bairns are the laird's ain daughters." 

" Well, and what am I then ?" de- 
manded Helena ; " am not I the laird's ain 
daughter also, as you call him ?" 

" Why, yes, to be sure," cried Dugald, 
recollecting himself; " no one is ganging 
to deny that ; any one, with but half an 
e'e in their head, might see that with these 
bonny black een of your ain ; but then ye 
maun ken, ye were not brought up amongst 
us, like these young lassies, and the plants 
we have tended and cherished oursels, we 
maun always like and love better than 
these brought from a distance to us." 



164 CONTRAST. 

This honest acknowledgment was pro- 
ductive at the moment of agitating reflec- 
tions. What it intimated, seemed now 
confirmed, and in the bitterness of her 
feelings, Helena deplored her return to her 
natural home, since so great an estrange- 
ment had, as she thought, been effected 
there from her. 

On quitting her chamber, she found the 
visitors gone, carrying off the girls with 
them, and Mrs. Wetherall just arrived on 
her jaunting car with her daughters. 
She observed that Helena looked pale, 
and said that a drive back with them to 
, would be of service to her. 

Helena, too much discomposed to ap- 
pear as usual, immediately caught at the 
indirect invitation ; and it was agreed that 
she should pass a day or two with Mrs. 
Wetherall. Her father did not look 
pleased at the arrangement ; he reminded 
her, that Sigismund Mountflorence was 
coming that evening to Woodston; and 
that as it was his first visit there since h^r 
arrival, he wished her to be in the way to 



CONTRAST. 165 

receive him : but Helena objected to giving 
lip her intention of accompanying INIrs. 
Wetherall ; there could be but little anx- 
iety, she conceived, for an introduction, 
that was not earlier sought, considering 
the opportunities there were for it ; and 
finally she persevered in what she had 
previously decided on. 

Mrs. Wetherall was quite delighted 
at carrying her off, not from any parti- 
cular affection formed for her, but the 
idea that having her now and then to 
herself, might enable her to get more into 
her confidence, and thus better enable her 
to put her liberality and wish to oblige to 
the test. 

Mrs. Wetherall had, in short, a great 
deal of worldliness about her ; with very 
inadequate means, she aimed at great dis- 
play, the fortune of the family being but 
small, and the head of the house by no 
means inundated with business; the con- 
sequence was, her being often placed in 
very embarrassing little dilemmas ; she had 
long looked, with an envious or covetous 



166 CONTRAST. 

eye, on the unlimited command of wealth 
Helena appeared to possess, and now re- 
solved on trying whether she could not 
derive any advantage from the circum- 
stance. Accordingly, the next morning, 
while yet at breakfast, she abruptly ex- 
claimed, as if from sudden recollection — 
" There, after all," addressing herself to 
one of the young ladies, " I beheve your 
papa has gone out, without leaving me 
the money I told him I should require so 
early this morning ; but, poor man, 'tis ex- 
cusable; he can't possibly think of every 
thing, overwhelmed as he is with affairs of 
consequence ; yet what is to be done — but 
perhaps," in a hesitating tone, and turn- 
ing to Helena, " you could " 

" Accommodate you," said Helena ; 
" certainly, with pleasure ; how much do 
you want ?" unclasping, as she spoke, her 
reticule. 

" How much have you about you ?" 
asked ]Mrs. Wetherall. 

Helena mentioned. 

" Oh ! well, that will nearly do ; but I 



CONTRAST. 167 

hope I don't put you to any inconveni- 
ence by taking it," eagerly extending her 
hand at the same time ; " however, if I 
do, it will be but for a short time, as I ex- 
pect INIr. Wetherall in every moment; 
and indeed I should not have troubled 
you, but that the person whose bill I want 
to settle, comes a great distance;" then 
hastily rising, with a request that she 
would excuse her for a few minutes, hav- 
ing some domestic matters to arrange, she 
retired, with a look to the girls to follow. 
" Well, I think I managed this matter 
dexterously," she exclaimed in a trium- 
phant tone, on their joining her ; " there 
you see, you'll have, after all, those exqui- 
site dresses of gros de Naples, that you set 
your hearts on." 

" Yes, now that that wretch Fangle's 
bill can be paid ; but after her insolence, 
in refusing to let us have them till that 
was settled, 'tis provoking to be obliged 
to get them from her." 

" Oh ! well, that can't be helped ; she's 
not only the most stylish dress-maker here. 



168 CONTRAST. 

you know, but the one that has the richest 
assortment of things ; so don't delay, lest 
the Cosgroves should have the start of 
you." 

" But should that affected thing above 
— remember your promise." 

" Oh ! leave me to manage that — and 
again, I say, don't delay." 

The command was too agreeable to the 
young ladies not to be obeyed ; and their 
mamma, who knew they would be some 
time absent, in order to try and divert 
Helena from inquiring about them, pro- 
posed, on rejoining her, that as soon as 
Mr. Wetherall returned, they should pro- 
ceed to view an old castle on some land of 
his, at a little distance from the city, which 
he was repairing, as a place not altogether 
unworthy of the notice of the tourist or 
elegant traveller; and it was, indeed, 
some such hope, working upon her ro- 
mantic or speculative imagination, that 
had induced her, not merely to persuade 
him to take it in hand, but also to rack her 
brain to invent a suitable legend or tradi- 



CONTRAST. 169 

tion for it, in order to heighten the interest 
she flattered herself it was calculated to 
excite; since if luentioned, so of course, 
she concluded, would the charming family 
to which it belonged, and thus be intro- 
duced to the notice of an admiring public. 
All the way to it, Helena was amuSed 
with an account of a lady Eva, who, 
during some siege it sustained — Mrs. We- 
therall had not yet exactly fixed at what 
period, whether in the time of the Danes, 
or immediately after the English inva- 
sion, or during the wars of Cromwell — 
was killed by an arrow in sight of her 
lover, and whose ghost was supposed ever 
since to haunt the building, making night 
hideous. " Ah ! that's a part of your story 
I wish you could make out," said the soli- 
citor; "but from the depredations com- 
mitted on Ballyshandra by the devils about 
it, 'tis evident they neither feared ghost 
or hobgoblin. Why, if I hadn't taken it 
in hand just as I have done, there would 
soon have not one stone of it been left 
standing." 

" Wretches !" exclaimed Mrs. Wether- 

VOL. I. I 



170 CONTRAST. 

all. " But we have interposed in time to 
save the noble pile ;" and as she spoke they 
came in sight of the four bleak black walls 
that composed it, with a thin sprinkling 
of grass on their summits, and a wide ex- 
tent of sterile land stretching around, in- 
tersected with dykes, creating a strong 
suspicion of there being a good deal of bog 
in the vicinity. Helena could hardly for- 
bear laughing as her eyes rested on it, and 
thought of the exclamation of Mrs. We- 
therall. However, she endeavoured to look 
grave, and gaze with all due earnestness 
at the loophole through which the " venge- 
ful arrow" was shot into the fair bosom of 
the lady Eva, to the utter disconsolation 
of the valiant knight her lover. While 
listening to a detailed account of all that 
was intended to be done for Ballyshandra, 
a gentleman on horseback approached. 
" Do you see who is coming ?" asked Mrs. 
Wetherall, with sudden abruptness, of He- 
lena. 

" Yes, I see it is — " lord Selwyn, she 
would have added, but she felt a difficulty 
or unwillingness to give utterance to his 
name that prevented her. 



CONTRAST. 171 

" So you know him ?'* said Mrs. We- 
therall, with something of surprise in her 
accent. " Till now, 1 thought you were 
not personally acquainted." 

" I have seen him before," said Helena, 
" but by mere chance, and we have never 
spoken." 

" Well, curious enough this, that you 
should have met without being introduced. 
But, of course, I shall now have the plea- 
sure of presenting you to each other." 

" By no means," said Helena, reddening 
and drawing back. " I see no necessity 
for any thing of the kind, and shall there- 
fore walk away till the gentleman leaves 
you." 

" Well, my dear creature," rather op- 
posing this intention, ** don't you think 
this will appear rather odd? that your 
thus seeming purposely to avoid him may 
give offence — may make him think — " 

" No matter what," said Helena, break- 
ing away from her. " No, 'tis of no pos- 
sible consequence to me what he thinks," 
she repeated to herself j " after what occur- 
red at Woodston, lest otherwise it might 
i2 



172 CONTRAST. 

appear that I put a misconstruction on the 
incident there, as well as from hearing 
him represented as a clandestine suitor to 
my sister : I conceive myself perfectly 
right in shunning an introduction to him." 
And she was walking on with unconscious 
quickness, when her aunt overtook her. 
" Why, my dear, you are positively flying," 
she said. " I am half breathless trying to 
come up with you. What in the name of 
wonder were you hurrying on so for? But 
you see the gentleman did not remain a 
minute, though he had some very urgent 
matters to talk over with Mr. Wetherall, 
on perceiving he had frightened you away." 
" Did he say so ?" asked Helena. 
" Why not exactly; but it is evident 
he thought so, or he would not have been 
in such a hurry to depart." 

" I am sorry I was the occasion of hur- 
rying him away," said Helena ; but sud- 
denly, " does he know who I am ?" 

" Who you are !" repHed Mrs. Wether- 
all, staring; " to be sure — I suppose so. 
Eut how is it, or where is it that you have 
met, that it has so happened that you were 
not before this introduced? But perhaps 



CONTRAST. 173 

it has been all contrived as a means of 
doing away the belief so long entertained 
of there being a project to unite you." 

Helena now in her turn stared — "A pro- 
ject to unite us !" she exclaimed. 

" Why, yes, my dear; surely you can't 
be ignorant of what was so well known to 
your poor grandmamma, and one of her 
reasons for never letting you come over ?" 

" You really puzzle me, my dear ma'am." 

" Indeed ! yet I think I speak very in- 
telligible." 

" Not in this instance. I don't think 
my grandmother ever heard the name of 
lord Selwyn." 

" Perhaps not — but it is not of lord 
Selwyn I am speaking." 

" No ; of whom then ?" 

" Of whom ! — why I thought you said 
you knew him? Of major Mountflorence, 
the gentleman who has just left us." 

" What he — major Mountflorence?' 
exclaimed Helena, in the most violent per- 
turbation. " Oh, no ! I hope, I trust not ; 
for not for the world would I, on — on his 
mother's account, have major Mountflo- 



174 CONTRAST. 

rence imagine that I would intentionally 
shun him ; as, from what has occurred, 
both to-day and yesterday, he must now 
conceive " 

'' Well, be that as it may," said Mrs. 
Wetherall, very composedly, " 'tis major 
Mountflorence you have just seen." 

" Why did you not tell me it was him ?" 
demanded Helena, with increased emo- 
tion. 

" How could I deem it necessary, when 
you told me you knew who he was ?" 

" True ; but it was all through an un- 
fortunate mistake, an but I can explain 

this to him myself, and thus make some 
excuse for conduct, that must otherwise 
cause me to be regarded by him in the 
most unfavourable light. Yet, no, no, I 
cannot, without running the risk of in- 
volving others in a still more distressing 
predicament ;" and, spite of her efforts to 
suppress them, tears of vexation burst from 
her at the thought. — " And is this he !" in 
bitterness of spirit she sighed to herself — 
" this accomplished, this interesting-look- 
ing being — he whom I was early taught 



CONTRAST. 175 

to fear being drawn into an alliance with ? 
Is this he, whose meeting with his mother 
made me pronounce that mother an ac- 
complished dissembler ? Good Heavens ! 
of what injustice have I not been guilty to 
both ! and how can I endure the feelings 
that occur from the reflection ! Ah, how 
little did I know either mother or son, 
when I entertained such fears of their de- 
signs ! Oh, were I but free, what would 
not my pride now be, to think they enter- 
tained any such views respecting me, as 
have long been ascribed to them ! for who, 
who is there that might not think them- 
selves happy and honoured in a union with 
Sigismund Mountflorence ! Of noble con- 
nexions, handsome, brave, accomplished, 
distinguished for all that is captivating to 
the imagination, that is seducing to the 
heart, that is gratifying to pride — who, 
who," she repeated, " but might be proud 
of his regard? — and he, this gifted being, 
it might perhaps have been my happy fate 
to have attached, had I remained under 
the paternal roof, or, rather, returned to it 
when urged. But self-will ruled the hour, 



176 CONTRAST. 

and already I pay the penalty of yielding 
to it." 

She determined on an immediate return 
to Woodston, conceiving it not impro- 
bable that Mountflorence might have gone 
back there ; and could any thing do away 
the impression made by her conduct, it 
must be some immediate explanation or 
apology for it. 

Mrs. Wetherall was greatly disappoint- 
ed on learning this determination, from 
some further designs she meditated on the 
generosity of Helena; but vainly she strove 
to have it relinquished; Helena was not to 
be dissuaded from any thing her feelings 
suggested ; and finally she set off for Wood- 
ston on her return. 

Hardly ever had she felt a greater hea- 
viness of heart, and more than once she 
wept as she proceeded. The pleasantness 
of the hour, the vernal beauty of the coun- 
try, in general such sources of delight, now 
failed of imparting a charm to sooth her 
mind, so greatly was it agitated — oh, no, 
for soon she should be removed from the 
contemplation of w hat was so pleasing ; 



CONTRAST. 177 

and that reflection was sufficient to em- 
poison present enjoyment. Yes, the pe- 
riod was fast approaching for tearing her 
away from those scenes, to which she had 
become so attached — from that happy, 
that well-ordered home, where first she 
had been taught to justly appreciate do- 
mestic bliss ; and again she demanded of 
herself, why she had so hastily, so rashly, 
allowed herself to give up her freedom ? 
But the past could not be recalled ; it were 
idle to suppose that sir Osbert would per- 
mit her drawinoj back from her eno^acre- 
ment to him, without some better reason 
being assigned for her wish to break it, 
than any she had the power to adduce ; 
and accordingly, to what she believed in- 
evitable, she saw the necessity of endea- 
vouring to reconcile herself 

She found all the family dispersed. Sir 
Maurice had rode out with De Montville, 
who, as already stated, had, just about this 
time, become an inmate at Woodston ; and 
lady Rossglen was gone to lady Glena's, for 
the express purpose of bringing back the 
I 3 



178 CONTRAST. 

girls : she wished to have asked some 
question about Mountflorence, but she had 
not the courage, or rather feared she could 
not make the inquiry, without betraying 
some little agitation; and forced herself 
therefore to remain in ignorance whether 
he was come back, or expected again that 
day at Woods ton. 

While awaiting in one of the parlours 
the return of some of the family, the door 
abruptly opened, and Mountflorence en- 
tered ; but on seeing who was in the apart- 
ment, started back. 

Helena, dropping the book she had ta- 
ken up, called after him — " Major Mount- 
florence, I entreat, I beg " 

Mountflorence, with a slight bow, again 
advanced into the apartment. 

" That I may not be the cause of dri- 
ving you, a second time, away to-day,** she 
resumed ; " but I fear you must be too 
much offended by what occurred this 
morning, to attend to any thing I wish to 
say, or have to offer, in apology for it." 

" You do me injustice by the supposi- 
tion," said Mountflorence, but in a cold 



CONTRAST. 179 

constrained tone ; " and I am concerned 
you should have allowed yourself to feel 
any uneasiness on the subject." 

" Oh, no ; for what should I be, if I did 
not feel uneasiness at the thought of hav- 
ing offended — a — a person so nearly allied 
to lady Rossglen ; but I do assure you, 
that the circumstance, so calculated to do 
so, was entirely owing to a mistake with 
regard " but suddenly recollecting her- 
self—" I can say no more than that it was 
entirely unintentional, and that I shall be 
miserable till you tell me that you think 
no more about it." 

" Then let me assure you of that this 
moment," said Mountflorence ; the cold 
and distant manner he had just assumed 
giving place to his wonted animation; 
such as those dark eyes, that had made 
such an impression upon the imagination 
of Helena, evinced being natural to him ; 
and as he spoke, taking her hand and kiss- 
ing it, " What is there, indeed, that such 
condescension would not atone for ?" 

" Then I have your promise," said He- 
lena, in her turn beginning to recover 



180 CONTRAST. 

her usual manner, " that from this instant 
you forget and forgive ?" 

Mountflorence smiled. 

" And that as a proof its sincerity," she 
resumed, " you will not estrange yourself 
as much from Woodston as you have re- 
cently done." 

Mountflorence looked confused. — '* I 
thought," he said, " you must have heard 
how very much I am occupied, by " 

" Oh, I have heard nothing that can 
excuse such conduct ; for do I not know, 
that Woodston is quite as much your 
home as your own immediate one? so, 
except you give the promise I require, I 
shall doubt your previous assurance ; and 
rather than have to think I am still the 
means of continuing to deprive lady Ross- 
glen of the company of her son — for I have 
found out that you were not by any means 
so great a stranger at Woodston before, as 
since my arrival — run off to some wild 
cave, or nook, though at the risk of en- 
countering some fierce Caliban, and 
being carried off by him, in some terrible 
fit of ill humour or capriciousness." 



CONTRAST. 181 

" No, no," said Mountflorence, " we 
pray against being led into temptation : 
how then can I voluntarily put myself in 
the way of it, by the promise you re- 
quire ?" 

" Oh, words of course !" said Helena. 
" However, I dare say you would find 
yourself fully adequate to resist any temp- 
tation you might encounter here ; but at 
all events, it is only by being put to the 
test we can know our own strength." 

" True ; but in bringing it to trial, what 
may we not meet with, to cause us ever- 
lasting pain ?" and they were proceeding 
in this way, the gentleman indirectly com- 
plimenting, and the lady certainly not 
discouraging him, when lady Rossglen 
and the girls entered. She looked sur- 
prised, not having expected the return of 
Helena so immediately. 

Helena, relieved from her recent unhap- 
piness, was again all herself; but she had 
a wonderful facility in recovering her spi- 
rits, and spite of retrospects or anticipa- 
tions, rendering the present moment one 
of enjoyment. — " Well, you see, my dear 



182 CONTRAST. 

ma'am," she said, laughingly addressing 
lady Rossglen, " I could not bring myself 
to deprive you long of my company ; and 
to add to the obligation, what do you 
think 1 have been doing ?" 

" I really cannot guess." 

" Why, insisting that this whimsical 
son of yours should not persist in render- 
ing himself so invisible at Woodston, as 
he has done ever since my coming to it." 

" Oh, well," replied lady Rossglen, but 
with her cheek slightly flushing, " I hope 
we shall have a little more of his company 
Tiow,'' the word now emphatically uttered. 

She spoke as she wished. The light in 
which lord Glena was considered, put an 
end to any further objection to an intro- 
duction between Mountflorence and He- 
lena ; and yielding to her maternal feel- 
ings, she accordingly wrote to him on the 
subject, concluding her explanatory letter, 
by desiring that she might see him as usual 
at Woodston. 

But with all his affection for her — all 
his love for the other dear inmates of this 
second home, there were feelings that 



CONTRAST. 183 

rendered Mountflorence reluctant to ac- 
cede to this request ; but the temptations 
to yield to it were too powerful to be even- 
tually resisted : and, finally, he promised 
that she should again see him there as 
often as possible. 

There was to be a large dinner-party 
this day at Woodston ; and after a little 
further chat, the ladies separated to dress. 

Helena, as we have elsewhere hinted, 
did not often study her dress, from a cer- 
tain consciousness that it was not requi- 
site ; but on this occasion, she could not 
help considering what would be most 
becoming; for it might almost be said, 
that this was the first day of Mount- 
florence seeing her, and she knew that 
first impressions are almost every thing ; 
and she certainly could not resist wishing 
to make such a one on him, as might in- 
sure to her his tender esteem, or, she did 
not know what term to make use of, 
create that interest that leads to lasting 
regard ; and in desiring which, the friendly 
regard of such a mind, she did not think 
there was any thing incompatible with 



184 CONTRAST. 

the circumstances in which she stood. — 
" Come, Flower," she said, as she rushed 
into her dressing-room, *' I want to look 
exquisitely to-day ; so, as you have some 
taste, tell me which of my dresses you 
think the most becoming ?" 

" Lauk, ma'am," replied Mrs. Flower, 
" they are all so beautiful and helegant, 
it would be hard to say ; but since you 
have thought proper to hask me — to my 
mind, the pink, with the border of wine 
leaves." 

" Pshaw ! its not a ball dress, but a din- 
ner one, I mean." 

" Oh, now, ma'am, I hunderstand you. 
Then really, ma'am, the gauze one, of 
French white, with the blond trimming ; 
that, with a rose in your hair, will look 
quite beautiful." 

" That is, make me look quite beauti- 
ful !" said her mistress. 

*' Oh, as to that, ma'am, you always 
look so; you always, as the gentlemen 
say, look hangelic in every thing." 

« Then come, let me see," taking the 
comb out of her hair, and shaking her re- 



CONTRAST. 185 

dundant tresses about her shoulders, " that 
you make me look so to-day, or I'll posi- 
tively have you locked up for a month in 
some one of the dismal old churches or 
castles here, along with all their screech- 
ing ghosts and hobgoblins." 

"Oh, ma'am! you make me quake at 
the very thought, for they do, to be sure, 
tell such stories of these here hirish ghosts; 
which to be sure is natural enough, seeing 
they are the spirits of such wild folks." 

" Well, don't let yourself be too much 
alarmed by these tales; for what would 
you say, Flower," and a gentle sigh heaved 
her fair bosom as she asked the question, 
at the little probabihty there appeared of 
her having the power to do so, " were I 
to settle here?" 

" You, ma'am ?" almost screamed the 
abigail. " Oh ! the saints forbid ! But to 
be sure, ma'am, you have no ideer of such 
a thing? You could never think of giv- 
ing up the hoperay and Almack's, and the 
theatres, and all the fine sights and shows 
of London, to settle in such an out-of-the- 
way, wild, heathenish place as this. Be- 



186 CONTRAST. 

sides, if you had, sir Osbert, I am sure — " 
" Now don't be impertinent, Flower," 
said her lady angrily. " So far, and no far- 
ther, you know, I allow you to proceed. 
Finish my hair, without saying another 
word, for I am in a hurry to be dressed." 

Mrs. Flower obeyed ; but in the alarm 
excited by what her lady had just said, no 
sooner found herself alone, than she placed 
herself at her writing-desk, which, with her 
usual carelessness, Helena had left open, 
and addressed the following letter to sir Os- 
bert, to whose interest she was bound, both 
by fees received and fees expected, and for 
whom she literally acted as a spy. 



" Onered sir, 

" As in dooty bound, i sit down to 
tel you that things are not going on here, 
in a way that i thinks you would like, i 
am sure, i am the last creeter in the world, 
that would spake amis of any lady I lived 
with; but you made me take my book 
oath, as to be sure, sir, you well knows, 
leaving Lunnon, to tell you all the truth ; 



CONTRAST. 187 

and so i must needs say, for a person hen- 
gaged to another, my lady is going on in 
a hodd way, flirting with this person, and 
flirting with that person, as if she still was 
at liberty to choose, or had her choice to 
make; to be sure she's young and flat- 
tered, as to be certain she would, even if 
not the beauty she is ; for as my grandmo- 
ther used to say, "vvhere there's honey, the 
bees will be buzzing; and those who have 
a long purse at their command, will always 
be sure to have some one asking their 
hand. The other day it was nothing but 
ray lord Glena, and now I can see, without 
using my high-g\siss, that it will be no- 
thing but major Muntflorence, who is 
com at last to take up his quarters here, 
not for nothing it may be sworn — and who, 
to be sure, will have the haid of his mo- 
ther, lady Rossglen, who, as the old lady, 
my lady's grandmamma, used to say, is one 
of the hartfellest women in the world — so 
mild and sweet spoken. But as the old 
proverb goes, * smooth water runs deep,' 
and ' all is not gold that glisters:' it's not 
for nothing the major is come here, or my 



188 CONTRAST. 

lady was dragged hover, just as he came 
from the wars — but it's an ould scheme 
to try and get her for him; marry com 
up, without a sous, as one may say, to 
bless himself with, to look up to a person 
of her fortin ; for they do say as how 
he's a ruinated man, and that an ould 
auncient place he has in the neebourhood 
must go to pot, if he doesn't get money 
somewhere ; and in my mind, so much the 
better, at least I knows if mine, I'd pull it 
down, seeing it such an harburd^s they say 
for ghosiesses, that peaceful folk can't rest 
in their beds o' night for them : but this is 
the case, as i finds, with all the ould places 
here; and then as if this weren't eniffio 
scare one, there's their good people the 
fairies, as they calls them, though i am 
sure seeing the tricks they play, stealing 
people's children, and leading one into 
bogs and quagmires, and popping through 
the keyhole, to pinch the maids and spoil 
the churning, i should call them the bad 
people ; but that's neither here nor there, 
has i was a going to say ; let things turn 
out as they will, i have done my dooty, in 



CONTRAST. 189 

putting you on your guard; but i does 
hope, that you will come hover without 
more ado, and tak us both back to Lunnon, 
for it would grieve my art, hafter all your 
generosity, and w^iat you have promised, 
you should be disappointed of my lady ; but 
i trusts when you have made up your mind, 
you'll let me com to no arm, for riting 
this here letter, seeing a poor servant has 
nothing but their karacter to depend on ; 
which to be sure they must lose, if it was 
ever known they blabbed ; having nothing 
more to say at this here riting, than hop- 
ing you are well, which i am appy to say 
both i and my lady am, i shall now finish, 
and, as in dooty bound, am, onered sir, 
" Your umbel servent to command. 

" J. Flower." 
" P. S. If i might make so bold, i would 
just trouble you, sir, to tel Mr. George, 
that i think it wouldn't have broke his 
art, to have ritten me more that one letter 
since i came hover to hireland; but I sup- 
poses 'tis with him as with other folk, out 
of sight, out of mind ; 'tis no matter how- 
ever, for if i could make up my mind to 



190 CONTRAST. 

give up dear Lunnon and all its kattrac- 
tions, as my lady says, I believe I need not 
fear having no kopportunity to change my 
name here." 



CHAP. IX. 

" Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie. 
Which we ascribe to Heav'n." 

Could any thing have discomposed He- 
lena, it would have been the circumstance 
of finding lord Glena in the drawing-room, 
lest it should prevent the conversation she 
wished for with Mountflorence. 

Mountflorence was the first of the gen- 
tlemen who quitted the table after dinner. 
Helena was standing at a window as he 
entered; she kept her position, but her 
eye was upon him. She saw him look 
towards her, hesitate, turn to speak to 
some one else ; but finally he joined her, 
and the conversation of the morning was 
resumed. The longer Helena conversed 



CONTRAST. 191 

with him, and the more she contemplated 
the fine expression of his countenance, the 
more firmly she was persuaded, that it was 
well for the tranquillity of her poor grand- 
mother, that an introduction had not ear- 
lier occurred between them ; but for her- 
self, was it equally so? she sighed at the 
thought ; but reflection was in this in- 
stance an enemy to present enjoyment, 
and she endeavoured to banish it as speedi- 
ly as possible. While thus engaged, lord 
Glena made his appearance, and imme- 
diately approached her. Mountflorence 
instantly rose from the seat he occupied 
by her on the same sofa. — " Don't let me 
disturb you," said his lordship; but at the 
same time with a look that seemed to say, 
he should be extremely disappointed if he 
did not dispossess him of the place. 

"Excuse me," said Mountflorence, " but 
I should conceive myself presumptuous 
indeed, if I attempted to dispute your 
right to this seat." Then, in a lower tone 
to Helena, " I see," he added, " there's no 
happiness that is not liable to interrup- 



192 CONTRAST. 

tion," and with a slight bow, moved to 
another part of the room. 

Helena was not merely vexed, but 
alarmed. She now, for the first time, be- 
came sensible of the very serious light in 
which her conduct towards lord Glena was 
considered, and the consequent necessity 
there was for an immediate effort to pre- 
vent any further particularity from him, 
if she wished to avoid being placed in the 
most awkward, the most distressing pre- 
dicament, through the imprudence she 
had been guilty of with regard to him. 
She was previously beginning to be aware 
of this; but through her natural careless- 
ness, might not perhaps so soon, or so se- 
riously, have reflected on the subject, but 
for the vexation it had now occasioned 
her, the hinderance it was likely to be, she 
saw, to those attentions from Mountflo- 
rence, which w^ould afford her the oppor- 
tunity she coveted for cultivating his re- 
gard, and enabling her, perhaps in him, to 
secure to herself an amiable and tender 
friend. But how was the effort to be 
made, so essential, on many accounts, to 



COXTRAST. 19s 

have no longer delayed ? Act as she would, 
assume what airs of capriciousness she 
might, still to her extreme surprise, from 
what she understood of his fastidiousness, 
lord Glena regarded her with evidently 
unaltered sentiments, as if, like the en- 
amoured Florizel, he thought there was 
nothing she said or did but what became 
her. In short, she found herself involved 
in a dilemma, from which she hardly knew 
how to extricate herself, and in which, now 
that she was beginning to see the conse- 
quences likely to result from, she could not 
avoid wondering at herself for ever having 
incurred the risk of placing herself in. 

What folly, what preposterous folly, to 
allow herself to imagine that it was only 
requisite to entangle lord Glena in her 
toils, to be able to direct his inclination as 
she pleased, to make, in short, an absolute 
transfer of him ! Surely, if she had given 
herself time for a moment's thought, she 
never could have suffered herself to yield 
to so absurd a suggestion; but this was 
not the first time she had suffered through 
a hasty giving way to impulse. 

VOL. I. K 



194 CONTRAST. 

Lost in the reflections that would now 
force themselves upon her, she was sitting 
after tea rather apart by herself, hardly 
heeding what was passing around her, 
when she was suddenly roused from her 
abstraction, by a ramble being proposed 
by the young people. 

The party proceeded just as whim or 
chance directed ; and Helena having at 
length succeeded in shuffling off lord 
Glena, and attaching Mountflorence to her 
side, began to regain the vivacity which 
had been so suddenly depressed. — " How 
delicious," she observed, " these evening 
walks in the country, when, as the poet 
says, * all the air is balm !' I really think, 
after the enjoyment of them, I shall never 
be able to endure again being pent up in 
a city at such a season." 

" They are pleasant indeed," said Mount- 
florence, " from the soothing effect they 
are calculated to produce upon the feel- 
ings. At such an hour as this, in the 
country, there is a pervading air of soft- 
ness and repose, that, as some one has ob- 
served, I forget who, makes its way at 



CONTRAST. 195 

once to the heart, disposing it to greater 
tenderness, by its influence over the mind 
and imagination." 

Helena, with rather an arch glance, felt 
that she should not dislike to have an ex- 
emplification of this observation at the 
moment ; but any little coquetry in which 
she might have been inclined to indulge, 
was checked by Caroline, at her other 
side, aflPecting to scold Mountflorence for 
his awkwardness in extricating their light 
drapery from the briars, and brambles, and 
jagged rocks, amidst which they rambled, 
— " This comes," she said, " of your not 
having had a Mrs. Mountflorence; had 
you been so happy, you would have been 
taught before this how to have been ser- 
viceable to a lady, without injury to her 
drapery." 

" Well," said Mountflorence, laughing, 
" as I rather fear it will yet be a long time 
before I have such a person to instruct me, 
perhaps you would have the kindness to 
take me in hand." 

" Me ! oh dear no ! for perhaps I shall 
E 2 



196 CONTRAST, 

soon have some one to instruct on my own 
account. But seriously, Sigismund, you 
are not going in downright earnest to turn 
hermit, or monk, and reconvert St. Finian's 
abbey to its original destination ?" 

" No, I have no such intention ; but as 
I am about to recommence soldier, I don't 
think it would be exactly the thing to try 
and obtain for myself such an appendage 
as you allude to." 

" The very reason ; for an agreeable 
companion is never so much wanted as 
when we are leading an unsettled, desul-r 
tory life : but the fact is, you are so fasti- 
dious — so difficult to please." 

" Don't accuse me of affectation," ex- 
claimed Mountflorence. 

" Well then, so indolent, that you wont 
take the trouble of looking out for a lady 
that might please you. — Is it not so?" 

" If you choose to have it." 

" Pshaw ! but I know it is ; and so as 
you will not take the trouble yourself, 
suppose you depute me ? But you must 
describe; or, as I know you are au fait in 
making sketches, have you never made 



CONTBAST. 197 

one of such a being as you could like to 
offer your heart to, that I might have it 
as a guide to direct me ?" 

Helena could not forbear, from the in- 
cident in the hut, looking at him at this 
instant. Their eyes encountered ; he co- 
loured, and appeared not only confused, 
but agitated ; but what answer he would 
have returned she was prevented ascertain- 
ing, by some of their companions turning 
at the moment to speak to them. 

De Montville was of the party ; but he 
rather kept sauntering on by himself. 
Nothing had occurred to relieve his mind 
from the anxiety occasioned by the inten- 
tion of lord Le Poer ; and there were 
times when, from its agitating and depres- 
sing effect upon his spirits, he felt hardly 
able to appear as he wished amidst the 
gaiety and happiness of Woodston. By 
this time he had pretty well relinquished 
all expectation of ever discovering who the 
person was that had excited so much cu- 
riosity on his first arrival, and for yielding 
to which, more than once since, he was in- 
clined to think he had been very ridiculous. 



198 CONTRAST. 

As he kept loitering on in musing 
mood, he almost unconsciously ascended 
a cliff, and was leaning over, apparently 
watching the waves, alternately advancing 
and receding, when he suddenly heard a 
female singing beneath : the voice was 
sweet, and he involuntarily bent still far- 
ther over the cliff, to see who it was. 

While endeavouring to discover — 
" Who are you listening to ?" asked Caro- 
line, who had clambered, or rather bound- 
ed up to him. 

" That's what I want to ascertain my- 
self." 

" Some mermaid perhaps," she said, 
" for it is reported by old fishermen, that 
more than once such creatures have been 
seen on our wild coast; but I'll soon 
know ;" and under the idea of its being 
some country girl, she called out — " Who 
are you ?" 

Instantly the voice, which had ceased 
for a moment, replied — 

" On ihe mermaid's rock I rest. 
Gazing on the glorious west ; 
Where the wild waves break in spray. 
There I dance, and there I play.*' 



CONTRAST. 199 

' " Some enchantress," cried Caroline ; 
" or, who knows ? perhaps a second Un- 
dine !'* and turning, she called to the rest 
of the party to come up. 

At the instant of her doing so, the per- 
son who had excited this curiosity ad- 
vanced from beneath the projection of the 
cliff, and glancing upward, with seeming 
carelessness, again presented to the view 
of De Montville the resemblance of the 
fair Sicilian — her on whom his enamoured 
fancy so pertinaciously dwelt. 

His previous emotion, at the first sight 
of her features, revived with an impa- 
tience that precluded reflection. He de- 
sired to be shewn a path to the beach, at 
the same time attempting to climb over 
the rampart of rock against which he had 
been leaning. 

Mountflorence seized him by the arm. 
" Why, my dear fellow," he said, " this 
is no lover's leap. A little way off, you 
will find a safe descent to the strand, ex- 
cept you wish to make a headlong plunge." 

De Montville, extricating himself from 
him, quickly made his way down ; but 



200 CONTRAST. 

ere he reached the bottom of the cliffs, 
the person he was so anxious to encounter 
was gone, and thus the opportunity lost he 
hoped he had obtained, of discovering who 
she was by tracing her home ; but if an- 
other occurred, he flattered himself he 
should not miss it, if indeed there was 
any positive wish for concealment. That 
she dwelt in the neighbourhood, he could 
not avoid imagining, although the denial 
of the family at Woodston of all know- 
ledge of such a person, rather argued a- 
gainst such a conclusion. He had men- 
tioned her to them, but without explaining 
the reason ; but they knew no one answer- 
ing the description given of her, and gave 
themselves no trouble on the subject, ow- 
ing to strangers being often in the habit 
of seeking to view the house and grounds. 
Every day rendered Helena still more 
anxious to be relieved from the embarras- 
sing situation in which her rash, her fool- 
ish conduct, her ridiculous project with 
regard to lord Glena, had placed her. His 
attentions were now absolutely disagree- 
able, interfering, as they did, with these 



CONTRAST. 201 

of another person, preventing those de- 
lightful conversations in which she might 
otherwise have indulged with Mountflo- 
rence: however previously assiduous or 
engrossed by her, the moment lord Glena 
appeared, there was an end of all farther 
attention, though not notice, for frequent- 
ly she surprised him intently regarding 
her, sometimes, she could not avoid 
imagining, with an expression of melan- 
choly, that made its way at once to her 
heart, exciting there a mingled sensation 
of pleasure, pain, and regret. But how 
provoking, that this abominable man 
would still continue to admire her, spite 
of all she could do to vex and teaze him ! 
she wondered, if his wife, whether he 
would so have resisted the influence of her 
whims and affected caprices : but since he 
would not secede of his own accord, some- 
thing must be done to make him; but 
what this something was, she could not 
decide. She could not tell him, that all 
this time she had only been trifling with 
him ; yet it seemed to her, as if nothing 
e3 



202 CONTRAST. 

short of this would answer the desired 
end, and she was almost in despair. 

About this time a ball was announced 
at Sandville, a bathing-place of some fash- 
ion, a few miles distant from Woodston ; 
and thither, on the appointed evening, 
the family, with the exception of sir Mau- 
rice, repaired ; and after taking tea at the 
hotel, where apartments had been engaged 
for them, and the ball was to take place, 
separated to dress. 

Amongst the company expected to be 
present on this occasion, was general Lati- 
mer, the heir presumptive to a peer in 
the neighbourhood, and a personage of no 
little notoriety in the fashionable world. 
Through some means or other, he had ren- 
dered himself particularly unpopular with 
lord Glena; so that he never mentioned 
him but in terms of absolute severity and 
dislike : from this, it struck Helena, that 
could she but attract his notice, her busi- 
ness with his lordship would probably be 
done, without any further trouble ; and she 
accordingly decided on laying herself out 
for the purpose, not without sanguine 



CONTRAST. 203 

hopes of success, from the passion she un- 
derstood he had for beauty, especially 
when aided by the charm of novelty ; and 
under the hope of being immediately sin- 
gled out by him, refused engaging herself 
to any one before entering the ball-room, 
even though asked for the first set by 
Mountflorence. 

De Montville having finished his toilet, 
was returning to the sitting-room belong- 
ing to his party, when a door in the gal- 
lery through which he was passing open- 
ed, and a lady in a ball costume ap- 
peared at it. De Montville involuntarily- 
turned, curious to have a perfect view of 
her, and again encountered the likeness of 
the young Sicilian. With difficulty he 
suppressed an exclamation of pleasure, for 
now beyond a doubt he should discover 
who she was: now there would be no 
means of evading the curiosity which her 
extraordinary resemblance to a person that 
had so strongly interested him had excit- 
ed. After looking up and down the gal- 
lery, as if for some one she wanted to see, 
she closed the door, without appearing to 



204 CONTRAST. 

have noticed him : but he remained rivet- 
ted to the spot, as if afraid, if he left it, 
she would again vanish without his ob- 
taining the gratification he sought; be- 
sides, by lingering there, he might per- 
haps chance to immediately learn who 
she was ; or in her way to the ball-room, 
obtain some opportunity of introducing 
himself to her immediate notice ; and he 
now congratulated himself that none of 
the fair sisters of Woodston had been at 
liberty to accept him for the first set. 

While thus engaged watching the door, 
Mountflorence also issuing from the hands 
of his valet, surprised him, and naturally 
inquired what he was doing there. A 
little confused, he replied he was trying 
to get some air. 

" What ! in this close place ? You for- 
get that the sitting-room is open to the 
•sea." 

De Montville was reluctant to quit 
the spot, but he could make no excuse 
for tarrying behind. In a few minutes 
they were joined by the ladies, and the 



CONTRAST. 205 

party then repaired to the ball-room, by 
this time nearly full. 

Here De Montville availed himself of 
his being at liberty to do as he pleased, 
to station himself at the door ; but the 
person he watched for, appeared not ; and 
after remaining there some time, it struck 
him that she might have already entered 
the room; and wondering at his stupidity 
for not sooner reflecting this might be 
the case, he proceeded without further 
delay to take a general survey of the com- 
pany ; but she was not amongst them ; 
and he resumed his station, not without a 
shght feeling of petulant wonder, at her 
so long delaying to make her appearance, 
apprized as she must be of dancing hav- 
ing commenced. 



206 CONTRAST. 



CHAP. X. 



" Hard lot t4 man \ to toil for the reward 
Of virtue, and yet lose it ; wherefore hard ? 
He tliat would win the race, must guide his horse. 
Obedient to the customs of the course." 



While De Montville was thus employ- 
ed, Helena was exulting in the accom- 
plishment of her plan with regard to the 
general. Hardly had she entered the 
room, ere she caught his eye; and an im- 
mediate application was made to one of 
the stewards for an introduction to her, 
of course for the purpose of asking her 
hand, which was immediately granted, to 
the equal surprise and indignation of lord 
Glena, who, from her positive refusal to 
engage herself either to him or Mount- 
florence, concluded she did not meditate 
dancing that evening, or at least so im- 
mediately. His anger at the slight thus 
offered, in standing up to dance after re- 
fusing him, and that with a person whom 



CONTRAST. 207 

she well knew he disliked, would instant- 
ly have prompted him to make her re- 
sume her seat, but for the general distur- 
bance such a circumstance must create, or 
rather his respect for the feelings of the 
party she belonged to. But he would 
not tamely pass over the affront he had 
received ; and either she must apologize 
for it, and evince the sincerity of her re- 
gret, by checking any further advances to 
intimacy from general Latimer, or he 
must beg leave to make his parting bow. 
He tried to conceal his agitation, but it 
could not escape the quick eye of He- 
lena ; and her exultation was in proportion, 
from the hope it afforded of the final suc- 
cess of her plan. 

The first quadrille over, the general con- 
ducted her to a seat, and then begged she 
would excuse him for a few minutes, 
while he paid his compliments to a lady 
he had just seen. 

Hardly had he left her, ere she was 
joined by lord Glena, leaning on the arm 
of Mountflorence, which in his agitation 
he had taken. — " So, Miss Rossglen^*' he 



208 CONTRAST. 

said, " I have to thank you for the flatter- 
ing proof of preference afforded by your 
conduct this evening. I naturally inferred, 
from what occurred at Woodston, that 
prior to coming here, you either did not 
intend dancing the first set, or were en- 
gaged for it ; but I now find I was wrong 
in the conclusion." 

" Did I tell you I was engaged ?" ask- 
ed Helena, with affected carelessless, well 
calculated to provoke him still more, as 
indeed it was intended to do, and adjust- 
ing her necklace as she spoke — " Oh ! well, 
perhaps so ; but if I did, I intimated what 
was not correct ; for in general, I make it 
a rule to keep myself disengaged until I 
enter a ball-room, that I may not altoge- 
ther want the power of making a choice, 
perfectly agreeable to myself" 

Lord Glena's cheek flushed — " You are 
pleased to be complimentary, madam," 
he said, with a bitter smile. 

" I am happy you think so, for I al- 
ways like to say what is agreeable : but 
seriously, you are not vexed at what has 
occurred ? intimate friends should not ex- 



CONTRAST. 209 

pect to be treated with the scrupulous 
ceremony used towards strangers ; I treat- 
ed major Mountflorence just as I treated 
you, yet you see he thinks nothing about 
it." 

" Perhaps," a little reproachfully, " he 
could contradict that assertion," said 
Mountflorence. 

" His choosing to pass over such an 
affront, is no rule to me ; and you must 
give me leave, madam, to tell you, that I 
cannot avoid construing your conduct of 
this evening, into a premeditated design 
to offend, and consequently such as I have 
a right to complain of." 

" Complain ! oh dear, no, it is I who 
have a right to complain of the attempt 
made to restrict me from the pleasure of 
dancing with general Latimer, one of the 
most delightful partners in the world ; his 
style of dancing being so inimitable, as to 
give one all the opportunity they could 
desire for display ; and then his waltzing 
is positively divine." 

" His waltzing !" 

" Yes," with an affected stare, at the 



210 CONTRAST. 

accent in which the expression was re- 
peated. " Why, you are not one of the 
declaimers against waltzing, I hope." 

" You hope then, madam, what is not 
the case," he replied, still more indig- 
nantly. 

" What am 1 to understand then, that 
you would not permit any female, over 
whom you had control, to indulge her- 
self in waltzing?" 

" Assuredly." 

" Oh ! shocking," cried Helena, affect- 
ing to wave him from her ; ** I shall have 
nothing more to do with you ; you have 
quite settled yourself with me." 

" This may be all very amusing to you, 
madam, but allow me to say, it is very 
much the reverse of being so to me; this 
light way of treating what I have so just 
a right to complain of, only makes me feel 
more hurt by it ; but," relapsing into 
something of his recent manner, " you can 
make me think no more of it, by assuring 
me it was not intended to offend, and 
that any further dancing with general 
Latimer will be declined." 



CONTRAST. 211 

" Excuse me — I have given him a pro- 
mise to dance all the alternate sets with 
him ; and I feel no inclination to break it." 

" Then you'll not be surprised, madam, 
at my considering this declaration as an 
intimation that my attentions are no longer 
agreeable." 

Helena bowed with a smile. 

" Very well, ma'am," said his lordship, 
with evident emotion; " I now clearly 
perceive that you have all along been tri* 
fling with me — that all along I have been 
the dupe of coquetry ; but beware, madam, 
how you attempt a similar game with an- 
other, lest you should not have the good 
fortune to find another influenced by the 
considerations that induce me to let you 
quietly off — respect for the feelings of the 
family to which you belong." 

" You are not going, lord Glena ?" said 
Mountflorence, hardly less agitated, and 
catching his arm. " Miss Rossglen, yt)u 
will not suffer his lordship to leave you in 
this manner ?" 

** Pardon me, I should be sorry to be 
any restraint upon him," she replied, cool- 



212 CONTRAST; 

ly, and turning away her head, as if to 
look at some other person. 

Lord Glena, who had allowed himself 
to pause, now impatiently extricated his 
arm from Mountflorence, and quitted the 
room. 

Mountflorence hastened to the card- 
room, where he found his mother engaged 
in conversation. He briefly communi- 
cated what had occurred, and seeking lord 
Glena, left her with him. — " I am really 
pained, lord Glena, she said " by what 
Sigismund has just been telling me; but 
I must hope, that what you have taken 
amiss, is merely the effect of some little 
mistake, that only needs explaining to set 
all matters right again." 

" Pardon me, madam, I have the lady's 
own authority for a contrary persuasion — 
her own acknowledgement to induce me 
to believe that what has occurred is the 
result of deliberate design to offend, and 
as such, you cannot be surprised that I 
should thus resent it, and decide on troub* 
ling her no further, with those attentions 



CONTRAST. 213 

that I now feel convinced were only en- 
couraged for her amusement." 

" I can hardly imagine this," said lady 
Rossglen, " hardly believe it possible Miss 
Rossglen could be capable of trifling in 
such a manner with the feelings of any 
one, more especially of a person so esteem- 
ed by her family. You know she has 
great vivacity, and this may sometimes 
betray her into a little thoughtlessness of 
expression and conduct. So do allow me 
to have a little conversation with her, ere 
you finally decide on departing, as Sigis- 
mund has intimated your intending." 

" It grieves me to refuse any request of 
lady Rossglen's, but in this instance I am 
compelled; after the total want of re- 
gard manifested for my feelings by Miss 
Rossglen, on this occasion, I should con- 
ceive I merited all the pain, so unjustly 
inflicted on me, were I to desire to be re- 
ceived again into what she may term her 
favour. Yet, at the same time, let me 
assure you, that whatever reason of com- 
plaint I accuse her of having given me, 
respect for the name she bears will ever 



214. CONTRAST. 

impose silence on me concerning it Be- 
sides, I can make allowances for the way 
in which she has been brought up, such 
as must soften the severity of censure. 
Well and happy for her would it have 
been, had she, by remaining under your 
care, been allowed to indeed profit by the 
nearness of her connexion to you; we 
should then have found some of those graces 
that are so captivating, more immediately 
applied to the thoughts and counsels of 
her heart, than now appears to be the 
case." 

He paused, for at the instant a look 
escaped lady Rossglen, that overwhelmed 
him with confusion, by the recollections it 
revived. She could not help it — " Why," 
it seemed to say, " if he attached so 
much importance to the circumstance, 
had he so suddenly veered about from 
a being equally lovely, who had been 
fashioned by her precepts, and instructed 
by her counsels?" But no, he thought 
not of it, till his feelings received a 
wound; and the compliment extorted by re- 



CONTRAST. 215 

sentment she could not appreciate as such. 

Lord Glena could speak no more on 
any subject ; reflections were excited by 
the recollections thus recalled, that made 
him wonder how he could have given 
utterance to what he had said to lady 
Rossglen ; or, in other words, have ad- 
dressed any complaint to her. In utter 
confusion at the thought, he indistinctly 
apologized for the vehemence with which 
he had expressed himself; and saying he 
would no longer detain her, took an abrupt 
leave, not without secretly rejoicing, in the 
midst of all his discomposure, that he had 
not yielded to her persuasions respecting 
Helena, comparisons, as well as recollec- 
tions, being occasioned, that made him 
suddenly feel his disappointment, with re- 
gard to her, a source of pleasure. 

Lady Rossglen, however, not exactly 
understanding this, and wishing, on many 
accounts, to have the affair amicably ad- 
justed, especially from the uneasiness and 
displeasure she was aware it was other- 
wise likely to occasion sir Maurice, now 
proceeded to seek Helena, conceiving, if 



216 CONTRAST. 

she could obtain any concession from her, 
the lover would not hold out ; but Helena 
had taken refuge in bed, from the remon- 
strances she expected on the subject, and 
on lady Rossglen entering her chamber, 
pretended to be asleep, in the enjoyment 
of that rest, which she was conscious a per- 
turbed mind would prevent for that night. 
She quickly saw that her contrivance to 
free herself from lord Glena was likely to 
succeed ; but hardly had she congratulated 
herself on its probable success, ere the re- 
flection occurred, at what a probable ex- 
pence she was likely to be extricated from 
the dilemma, in which folly and incon- 
siderateness had involved her — the esteem 
she so coveted to possess, and the regard 
of her father. Yet, in what other way 
than by this assumed levity, could she 
completely perhaps have accomplished 
what she wished, forbidden as she was to 
come to any calm and serious explanation 
with lord Glena, by the dread of its at- 
taching a still more positive imputation to 
her, of having all along only intended to 
trifle with his feelings ? Yet she could not 



CONTRAST. 217 

avoid wishing she had tried to devise some 
other method for relieving herself from 
her embarrassment concerning him, than 
the one she had adopted ; as usual, only- 
beginning to reflect on probable conse- 
quences, after she had incurred them : in 
meditating on these she now apprehended, 
all her recent exultation suddenly vanish- 
ed; the animation, the smiles, that had 
been so alluring, so attractive to the ge- 
neral, were gone; his compliments were 
no longer replied to, and more than once 
he thought they were not heard. His 
surprise at so sudden a change would have 
been still greater than it was, but for a cer- 
tain suspicion — he knew the light in which 
he was estimated by the party to which 
she belonged ; and he was not without an 
idea that there had been some officious 
whisper, to make her repentant of the ho- 
nour she had done him. 

Ere, however, he could make an effort 
for ascertaining the correctness of this, 
Helena suddenly affecting to be overcome 
by the heat of the room, declared she 

VOL. I. L 



218 CONTRAST. 

must quit it; and begging him not to 
keep himself disengaged on her account, 
as she certainly should not return, abruptly- 
retired : but in vain, as she had hoped she 
should be enabled to do by withdrawing, 
she tried to collect herself; she saw, she 
felt, that, prevented as she was, by deli- 
cacy and consideration for the feelings of 
another, from confessing the truth, she 
could offer no excuse, no extenuation for 
her conduct towards lord Glena; and fi- 
nally, could only decide on endeavouring 
to summon courage to meet what would, 
she feared, ensue from it. 

Her restless mind precluding repose, she 
soon abandoned her couch in the morning, 
and repairing to the sitting-room, found 
Mountflorence there by himself, looking 
over a newspaper. — " Well, I suppose," 
she said, hastily advancing to him, " I am 
in terrible disgrace with every one, for 
having made lord Glena so angry ?" 

Mountflorence replied not. 

"What! you won't answer me? But 
don't you know the construction your si- 
lence is liable to ? But, after all, do you 



CONTRAST. 219 

not think he was too easily offended?" 

" If I speak, I must speak the truth," 
said Mountflorence ; " and that sometimes 
offends." 

" Not when desired, surely." 

" Well, then, I conceive lord Glena had 
a positive right to be offended last night ; 
and I was vexed — I was grieved, to see 
Miss Rossglen, by the provocation she 
gave him, doing herself the injustice of 
creating a doubt of her wanting that real 
generosity, that none who thoroughly 
know her, but must be satisfied forms part 
of her nature." 

" You sooth while you wound," said 
Helena, with great emotion ; " but gentle 
admonition is that which most affects. I 
will not attempt to vindicate what I per- 
ceive condemned by those who I know 
judge impartially. I feel I have been to 
blame; yet perhaps not altogether so 
much as may now seem to be the case ; that 

is, I do think, if the real facts But, no ; 

I can enter into no explanations : want of 

thought — of due reflection, has involved 

l2 



220 CONTRAST. 

me in a labyrinth I vainly try to extricate 
myself completely from ; and in incurring 
censure, where I would most deprecate it, 
I pay the penalty of my rashness." 

" I have hurt you," said Mountflorence, 
much agitated, perceiving tears starting 
to her eyes : " if it is in my power, by 

any interference In short, since you 

have condescended to speak to me on the 
subject, if you will allow me to act the 
part of a friend, by intimating to lord 
Glena, that " 

** I anticipate what you would say," 
cried Helena, interrupting him ; " but 
you would not act the part of a friend to 
either of us, by attempting to bring about 
the renewal of those attentions I too long 
permitted. I respect lord Glena, for the 
many amiable qualities I understand he 
possesses; but " 

She paused, unable to proceed, from the 
intentness with which she saw Mountflo- 
rence regarding her, the overwhelming 
idea of the hght in which she was about 
making herself appear, by her confession 
respecting lord Glena — the light of a heart- 



CONTRAST. 221 

less trifler with the feelings of an honour- 
able and sensitive mind ; and in despair at 
the thought — despair at finding it impos- 
sible, turn which way she would, to avoid 
what she dreaded, she burst into tears, and 
covering her face with her handkerchief, 
gave unrestrained vent to the long-labour- 
ing emotions of her agitated spirit. 

At this instant, lady Rossglen entered 
the apartment ; she paused for a moment, 
then advancing — " Well," she said, " let 
the acknowledgment be taken as it may, I 
do not grieve to see these tears ; hoping, 
as I do," she added, taking the trembling 
hand of Helena as she spoke, and kissing 
her cheek with a benignant smile, " that 
I may consider them as signs of sweet re- 
morse." 

" No, my dear ma'am, not in the way 
to which you allude," replied Helena, with 
involuntary quickness; " I have just ac- 
knowledged what my real sentiments for 
lord Glena are — they are those of friendly 
esteem ; and being only such, no earthly 
consideration can ever induce me to per- 
mit his attentions again. That they had 



222 CONTRAST. 

been terminated in a less abrupt manner, 
I cannot avoid wishing ; but the past can- 
not be recalled ; and having said what I 
have said, it must be evident to you, my 
dear ma'am, that any further arguments 
on the subject must only be a needless ha- 
rassing of your spirits and mine." 

This positive declaration had the effect 
of confirming, in the minds of both her 
auditors, what she most dreaded — the be- 
lief of her never havinty encouraged lord 
Glena, but from coquetry; they sighed 
at the thought, for she was a being that 
could not be known without exciting 
a lively interest. Lady Rossglen was 
doubly pained, from the manner in which 
she feared sir Maurice would resent this 
conduct; but she suppressed this appre- 
hension, and set about endeavouring to 
calm the agitation that was so distressing. 

This however was not immediately to 
be done, and, in consequence, hearing 
some one approaching, Helena started up, 
and retreated from the room, by a door 
that led down to the beach, followed by 
Mountflorence. 



CONTRAST. 223 

They walked on, towards a solitary 
part of the coast ; the freshness of the air, 
the quietude of every thing, had gradual- 
ly a reviving and soothing effect upon 
Helena; but as agitation decreased, me- 
lancholy deepened : ere long, and she could 
not but reflect she should be removed from 
all that had so pleasing an influence on 
the senses, tossed again upon a wide and 
tumultuous ocean, without the certainty 
of any friend to guard her inexperience 
from its rocks and quicksands ; and what 
positive hope could there be then, of ever 
reaching any peaceful haven ? 

At length, after proceeding some way, 
she withdrew her arm from Mountflo- 
rence, and almost unconsciously seating 
herself on a weather-bleached stone, seem- 
ed, for some minutes, lost in the contem- 
plation of the scene around her ; the sea, 
glittering in the morning sun, the rocks 
rifted into a thousand fantastic forms, 
hung with pendant shrubs, and thronged 
with aquatic birds, now joining their que- 
rulous notes, in plaintive chorus to the 
murmurs of the waves, the sky " blue 



224 CONTRAST. 

without a cloud." As she gazed around 
her, she thought of the poet's observation, 
that God made the country, man the town 
— " And what heart of feeling but what is 
reminded of this," she sighed to herself, 
" by the very different effect produced 
upon the feelings by the respective places? 
Amidst the busy haunts of life, perpe- 
tually excited by the feverish anxieties of 
others, the fatigued spirit in vain seeks 
for that repose so essential to it ; but in 
the country, ere we have well time to ap- 
preciate its advantages, we feel its tran- 
quil influence stealing over our perturbed 
minds, like dewy sleep over the eyelids of 
exhaustion, stilling the wild waves of 
passion and emotion to peace. Who," 
she added to herself — " who could look 
around them here — contemplate this shore- 
less horizon, the rude grandeur of these 
rocky barriers to the incursions of the 
whelming waters, and not feel themselves 
at once soothed and elevated ? and to all 
these," with increased emotion, she pro- 
ceeded — " to all these perceptions of what 
is truly delightful, have I only awoke to 



CONTRAST. 225 

find, that they cannot be to me the source 
of enjoyment they were beneficently in- 
tended, thrown, as I may say I have done, 
my destiny out of my own hands. Would 
sir Osbert let me hang upon his arm, in 
quest of the wild and the romantic — would 
he enjoy, with me, the stillness, the re- 
pose of nature, amidst her own impressive 
scenery ? Oh no — I know he would not ! 
the world is his scene of enjoyment ; and, 
in binding myself to him, I fear — I fear 
I have bound myself to a life that, to me, 
indeed will be destitute of any." 

" I fear you are ill," exclaimed Mount- 
florence, suddenly starting from the re- 
verie into which he seemed plunged, on 
perceiving a tear again straying down her 
cheek. 

" No," she would have said ; but theve 
was a fullness in her heart at the moment 
that checked her utterance. 

" What am I to infer from this emo- 
tion then," cried Mountflorence, " except 
that, to repeat my mother's expression, 
these tears are, at length, signs of sweet 
remorse ? If so, how quickly will sym- 
l3 



226 CONTRAST. 

pathy for lord Glena be changed into a 
contrary feeling!" 

" No, no," cried Helena, impatiently, 
and rising from her seat, " in giving way 
to those tears, I thought not of lord Glena ; 
but the solitariness of this wild spot, these 
murmuring sounds, affect me. And now, 
after all," she said, as she resumed his arm, 
" since you will be forcing lord Glena 
upon my attention, do you really and 
truly think he has sustained a very irre- 
parable loss in losing me, whimsical, self- 
willed, capricious, as I have been repre- 
sented to you ?" 

" But enchantress as you have appear- 
ed," cried ISIountflorence. 

" Gallant, upon my word !" said He- 
lena, beginning to recover herself; " but 
there are some speeches from ladies that 
appear soHciting a compliment, and I ra- 
ther conceive mine was one of them." 

" Then you think there was no feeling 
to suggest " 

But the conversation, that seemed in- 
clining to become a little particular, was 
suddenly interrupted at this instant, by 



CONTRAST. 227 

the girls coming to seek her. She return- 
ed with them to breakfast, at which they 
were joined by some of the company that 
had remained for the night at the hotel ; 
with them they remained the morning at 
Sandville, and dined ; after which they 
departed for the residence of Mountflo- 
rence, at no great distance from Sand- 
ville, there to pass the night, as had been 
settled prior to their leaving Woodston, 
for the purpose of affording Helena an op- 
portunity of viewing the place. 

This was a fine old seat, taking its 
name from a very ancient abbey, the re- 
mains of w^hich still embellished the 
grounds, forming, with its decorating ivy, 
and receding arches, a grand and interest- 
ing object to the lovers of the picturesque. 
An air of repose pervaded the place, in 
character with its original destination, and 
in perfect unison with the aspect of solita- 
riness and melancholy that mountains, 
shutting out all prospect beyond, and 
woods, breathing a brown horror over the 
whole, gave to it. 

Helena was delighted; but with what 



228 CONTRAST. 

connected with Mountflorence, would 
she not have been delighted? little 
dreaming of the pang her unqualified 
admiration inflicted upon the heart of lady 
Rossglen, who, by this time, spite of the 
precautions of her son, to keep her as long 
as possible from knowing the truth, had 
begun to suspect, that, ere long, this ve- 
nerable seat of his ancestors would be 
wrested from him, and that, literally 
homeless, he would have to seek^ probably 
in scenes uncongenial to his nature, for 
that independence which thoughtless pro- 
digality had deprived him of 

Some of the neighbouring families were 
invited to meet the party from Sandville; 
and whatever were the secret feelings of 
some of this party, all appeared happy and 
contented. The girls were impatient to 
shew Helena the mansion. In ranging 
through the apartments, Caroline suddenly 
snatched up a rich silk shawl she found 
on the back of a chair, and holding it up 
to general view — " What, have you been 
playing the part of a knight, Sigismund ?" 
she demanded : " and is this the reward of 



CONTRAST. 229 

your valour from some fair lady ? or is it, 
as I hope, a present for me? for blue, 
celestial blue, is my favourite colour ;" and 
she was about taking possession of it, by 
throwing it over her shoulders, when 
Mountflorence, with rather a peevish 
" Pish !" snatched it from her, and flung 
it into another room. 

" Suspicious, upon my word !'* she cried ; 
" for if it was not what I first surmised, 
you could not be so churlish as to deprive 
me of it — and see, does he not blush ?" 

" Yes, I can bear witness to that," said 
De Montville, laughing. 

So could Helena too ; and the circum- 
stance occasioned an unpleasant sensation, 
which was not lessened by a look full of 
meaning she caught, exchanged at the 
moment between him and his mother. 
What, was he deceptive then? and she 
turned to a window, to conceal her emo- 
tion at the thought. But what a ques- 
tion ! had he professed — had she allowed 
him to profess, any thing that could en- 
title him to be so termed by her ? Oh no, 
neither was the case ; and she felt shock- 



230 CONTRAST. 

ed at the expression — still more shock- 
ed at the feeling that had suggested it. 
What, had she wished to inspire a ten- 
derer interest than circumstances could 
justify, in a heart she could not requite 
with her own? no, no, impossible! and 
she endeavoured to chase away the agita- 
ting idea, by immediately making an effort 
to resume conversation. 

Caroline was continuing her badinage 
about the scarf, till a look from her mo- 
ther checked her; the party adjourned to 
tea, and then proceeded to attend Helena 
to view the grounds. 

The residence of lady Dorothy Dubois 
adjoined St. Finian's Abbey. De Mont- 
ville expressed a wish to see it ; and they 
walked on in this direction. The man- 
sion was an old, formal-looking building, 
seated amidst grounds of a similar descrip- 
tion ; and De Montville expressed a dis- 
like to the appearance of the place alto- 
gether. 

" Yet that mansion has attractions," said 
a gentleman of the party. 



CONTRAST. 231 

" Not visible ones then," replied De 
Montville. 

" No, not always, or rather to every 
one but " 

" Oh, now I comprehend you," said De 
Montville — " you mean living ones." 

The other coughed significantly, rubbed 
his face, and cast a glance at Mountflo- 
rence. Every eye followed the direction 
of his; and again that sudden glow that 
Caroline had declared to be so suspicious, 
was seen upon the cheek of Mountflorence. 

De Montville mused, and Helena felt 
something like a recurrence of the sensa- 
tion she had just been at such pains to 
subdue. Could there be any meaning in 
what had just been hinted, the former won- 
dered; and he would have been inclined 
to think no more of it, but for the unfor- 
tunate blush of Mountflorence. Who 
could it be that had attracted his regard ? 
He did not conceive him a character likely 
to form, or at least give way to any attach- 
ment he would be unwilling to acknow- 
ledge ; and yet he had heard of no one 
of a rank similar to his own, residing with 



222 CONTRAST. 

lady Dorothy. But of course it no way 
concerned him to ascertain ; it struck him, 
however, at the instant, that he would 
make some inquiries of him concerning 
his own intended, nearly equally allied to 
both, and whom he understood from lady 
Rossglen, he had often seen. 

It so happened, that in the course of 
the extended ramble, Helena and Mount- 
florence became separated from their com- 
panions. The discovery was made just 
as they reached a seat of turf, oversha- 
dowed by an ancient elm, enwreathed 
with ivy. 

Helena sat down, to enjoy more leisure- 
ly the pleasantness of the hour — an hour so 
replete with all that is soothing and sof- 
tening to the heart, in its dubious sha- 
dows, its fading scenery, its dying sounds, 
and balmy dews. 

It was twilight — that hour so delicious 
to the pensive and reflecting mind ; the 
clouds were passing away, leaving the sky 
a region of azure ; the star of evening had 
just come forth, with tremulous eye, as an 
angel to herald the night ; not a zephyr 



CONTRAST. 233 

curled the breast of the stream that flowed 
near, nor stirred a leaf on the trees ; 
nought disturbed the tranquil hour, save, 
the wailing of the owlet in the ivy-man- 
tled tower of St. Finian's full in front; and 
a kind of drowsy sound, which stole over 
the vale, produced by the waves of the 
ocean, at no great distance, as they softly 
broke and murmured upon the silvery 
strand. 

All was tranquil and still ; but was 
equally so the mind of Mountflorence and 
his fair companion — were their feelings in 
perfect harmony, in perfect sympathy, 
with the hour — were there no regrets, no 
retrospects, no misgivings, no anxious 
cares, to check the influence it was so cal- 
culated to have upon the spirit? But 
whatever were the internal feelings of 
each, each tried to appear as usual. — 
" What a delightful place!" said Helena; 
" who could ever wish to leave it !" 

" But to wish is not always to obtain 
the power of acting as we please," replied 
Mountflorence. " How often are we com- 
pelled to act in direct opposition to our 



234. CONTRAST. 

real inclination ? 'tis this necessity that 
constitutes the bitterest trials of life." 

" Assuredly," said Helena, with a sud- 
denly recurring recollection of having 
heard something of a whisper concerning 
the probability of St. Finian's soon passing 
into other hands — " but I hope," she ra- 
ther hesitatingly added, " they are amongst 
those you may not be destined to expe- 
rience." 

" I thank you for the wish," said Mount- 
florence; " but I see very little chance of its 
fulfilment : but have not you heard — hais 
no rumour reached you, that it was prob- 
able — but I see by your averted eye it has 
— the period for the sacrifice hinted to you 
is fast approaching ; the distressing fact can 
no longer be concealed from the friends that 
will deplore it, and my own regrets on 
the subject are considerably heightened by 
the idea of theirs." 

Helena could scarcely control the emo- 
tions caused by this communication. — 
" Since you have, by thinking fit," she 
said, " to mention it to me, given me a 
kind of indirect permission to speak on 



CONTRAST. 235 

the subject, let me ask, is there no way 
— can no method be devised for prevent- 
ing such a sacrifice? You know the nature 
of my father — you know his strong affec- 
tion, his ardent regard " 

" Yes," interrupted Mountflorence; " but 
unworthy should I deem myself of that 
regard, if I suffered it to occasion any sa- 
crifice of the interests of those still dearer 
and nearer to him, to mine. Whatever I 
may be destined to endure in this state of 
probation — this vale of the tear and the 
sigh, as it has been not inaptly termed," 
he proceeded, with a melancholy smile, 
" never may I have to accuse myself as the 
voluntary cause of injury to others ! St. 
Finian's must pass into other hands ; and 
should I ever revisit them again, it will 
be indeed to find myself as a stranger in 
the ancient halls of my forefathers. The 
thought, I confess, is one replete with 
bitterness; but exclusive of other consi- 
derations, there are associations connected 
with the place, that could not but render 
the contemplation of its loss one of deep re- 
gret. Involuntarily dwelling on this, I can- 



236 CONTRAST. 

no longer experience any sensation of enjoy- 
ment in it, such as I once felt, when hope, 
enchanting, but to me delusive hope, bade 
the distant prospect smile. But how is it," 
seeing Helena suddenly veil her eyes with 
her hand, " how is it that I have suffered 
myself to speak in this manner? how to 
be betrayed into this obtrusion of my af- 
fairs upon you? but what selfishness in 
human nature, so consoling is sympathy 
to the wounded heart, that for the sake 
of obtaining it, we too often forget or dis- 
regard that it must be at the expence of 
another's feelings." 

" You have, indeed, deeply affected 
me," said Helena ; " but what should I 
be, if I did not feel an interest in the con- 
cerns of a person so nearly connected with 
my family, and so truly beloved by them ? 
But with the pain you have caused me, is 
mingled something of pleasure ; for, from 
the confidence you have reposed in me, 
may I not flatter myself that you, at least, 
do not estimate me in the light that I fear 
too many do — that, in short, the prejudices 
o^ others have not prejudiced you against 



CONTRAST. 237 

me; and that in your eyes, I have some 
little credit for reflection and feeling." 

" In my eyes ! oh ! if you knew," and 
he caught her hand — but as if through 
some sudden recollection, almost as in- 
stantly relinquished it. 

" But if," resumed Helena, after a slight 
pause, " no wish or power of my father's 
to prevent what must be so deplored is to 
be of avail, surely, with regard to others, 
the same fastidiousness, the same scruples, 
would not be allowed to influence you ? 
There must be — there are, I know, 
friends" — she paused through being sud- 
denly recalled to recollection by the in tense- 
ness of Mountflorence's regard. What had 
she been about saying — what offer about 
making? an offer, that, without accom- 
plishing the desired end — for with his 
loftiness of soul, his delicacy of feehng, 
could she, after all, allow herself to ima- 
gine he ever would permit himself to be 
benefited by her means, would probably 
have betrayed her feeling a deeper, ten- 
derer interest for him than circumstances 
justified. Yet oh ! to be prevented urging 



238 CONTRAST. 

what she wished, to know she had the 
means, without being allowed to use them, 
for the relief, the restoration of happiness 
to him who would have made his own 
happiness so subservient to that of others ; 
to think, by her unadvised engagement, 
her obstinacy, the ultimate cause of this 
repented engagement, in refusing to ac- 
company her father, when he first desired, 
to Woodston, she had precluded all chance 
of the only circumstance she did feel con- 
vinced that could have allowed Mount- 
florence to profit by her wealth — what 
were her regrets, her self-upbraidings ! In 
the bitter anguish of the reflection, she 
could no longer command herself, and, 
bursting into a passion of tears, she buried 
her face in her handkerchief jMountflo- 
rence, accusing himself as the occasion of 
all this emotion, became agitated in the 
extreme. He started up — he struck his 
forehead, and evinced an impatience not 
apparently natural to him. Helena, alarm- 
ed, made an instant effort to recover her- 
self, and by subduing her own agitation, at 
length succeeded in calming his. But he 



CONTRAST. 239 

still continued to implore her forgiveness 
for the pain he had given her — still con- 
tinued to press the hand he had suddenly- 
grasped, to a heart evidently palpitating 
with the most tumultuous feelings, and 
by the vehemence of his regrets on the 
subject, might perhaps have occasioned a 
renewal of the scene that had just occur- 
red, but for the approach of the party 
they had strayed from. All now returned 
to the house, where music and conversa- 
tion passed away the evening. Helena, in 
consideration for the feelings of Mountflo- 
rence, whose eye she perceived continually 
bent upon her, forced herself to appear to 
take an interest in what was going for- 
ward; but on retiring to her chamber, 
there was an end of any further restraint, 
and tears of a bitterer description than any 
she had ever before shed again burst from 
her. She now began seriously to consider 
whether, from the alteration her feelings 
with regard to sir Osbert had undergone, 
not but that she still considered him as she 
had done on the acceptance of his addresses. 



240 CONTRAST. 

namely, as good-humoured, fashionable, 
and generous, she should not make an 
effort to withdraw from her engagement 
to him — but no, from the ardour with 
which he had pursued her, from the nu- 
merous advantages she was aware that 
would accrue to him from their union, 
how could she flatter herself that he would 
quietly resign her, and without his ac- 
quiescing in the wish, what might not be 
the consequences of the attempt — the ex- 
posure of her name, and the endangering 
of her father's life perhaps in resentment 
of the circumstance. No, no, she had 
passively permitted a chain to be wound 
round her, that she could not burst with 
safety ; and with all that is supposed es- 
sential to enjoyment at her command, she 
looked forward to nothing but a joyless 
existence. 

De Montville, on repairing to his cham- 
ber, was attracted to a window by the 
shadowy scene presented from without. 
A full-orbed moon, rising in clouded ma- 
jesty, tipped with its silvery hght the 
mountain tops, and threw athwart the isky 



CONTRAST. 241 

the ever-shifting hues of softness and sub- 
limity. Beneath her chaste and tender 
beam, how mournfully impressive appear- 
ed St. Finian's ancient pile, where still the 
owl held on its strains of melancholy! 
while the long dank ivy rustled in the 
breeze of night, that, with a kind of shud- 
der, made the old woods ever and anon 
wave their shadowy and, in many places, 
skeleton-like arms. Here, as he stood 
contemplating a scene well calculated to 
awaken all the romance of his nature, 
he could not help reflecting on the strange 
disappointment of the preceding night ; the 
fair unknown, contrary to all rational ex- 
pectation, did not make her appearance in 
the ball-room. He at first was inclined to 
conclude it owing either to some sudden 
indisposition on her part, or some one of 
her party, for that she belonged to a party 
he presumed ; but, on inquiring, he could 
not learn of any one being suddenly taken 
ill, or suddenly departing from the hotel ; 
and in consequence remained utterly at a 
loss to account for what was really a greater 
source of vexation to him than he would 

VOL. I. M 



242 CONTRAST. 

have chosen to acknowledge. He felt very 
much inclined to quarrel with INIountflo- 
rence, for his officiousness in dragging him 
from the gallery, since, if quietly allowed 
to remain there, he thought it next to im- 
possible but he must in some way or other 
have succeeded in discovering who she was; 
but if ever he encountered her again, he 
was prevented deciding what his determi- 
nation w^ould be, by seeing Mountflorence 
issue at the instant from a door contiguous 
to the window at which he was standing, 
and strike into the avenue leading towards 
lady Dorothy's, So this was confirmation 
strong indeed of the suspicion or idea that 
had recently been excited. Well, who 
was it — who could it be in lady Dorothy's 
mansion, that had given rise to this appa- 
rently clandestine attachment? but he 
should soon have his curiosity satisfied on 
this head, even before perhaps he was ad- 
mitted to the honour of visiting at her 
ladyship's ; for Montflorence, at the hotel, 
had signified his intention of not returning 
with the party to Woodston, and he, De 
Montville, had intimated his of passing 



CONTRAST. 243 

a few days with him at St. Finian's ; and 
in the course of this sojourn, he thought 
it would be strange, with all the slyness 
and caution of Mountflorence, if he did 
not make the discovery he wished ; little 
of course aware that it was for the express 
purpose of preventing the risk of this, 
that he now saw Mountflorence sally out. 

Near the end of the old gloomy avenue 
into which he struck, he was met by a 
female, closely muffled up in a long man- 
tle. The instant she beheld him, she 
quickened her pace; and — " I was just 
despairing of seeing you to-night," she 
said, " when I saw the signal light in the 
turret." 

" You know," replied Mountflorence, 
" I desired you never to retire to rest, 
without first looking for it, as 'tis the 
only way in which I can, with safety, let 
you know when I have any thing to com- 
municate. He is here; it will therefore 
be expedient for you for some days to be 
on your guard." 

" De Montville, indeed ! — owing to any 
idea — any suspicion ?" 
M 2 



244 CONTRAST. 

" Oh no — merely for the sake of a little 
variation of scene : nevertheless, I should 
not be surprised, if through some imperti- 
nence this evening, a curiosity was excited 
that might lead to something unpleasant, 
but for this caution." 

** That would be terrible. But any 
news of lord Le Poer?" 

" No ; but he may now soon be ex- 
pected." 

" The thought agitates ; for then com- 
mences my trial." 

" But remember " 

" Yes — my promise to meet it with 
firmness : depend upon it, 'tis one I shall 
do all in my power to adhere to." 

After a little further conversation they 
separated, with an agreement not to meet 
again, until De Montville had returned to 
Woodston. 

There were none but the immediate 
party from Woodston at breakfast the 
next morning — profiting by the circum- 
stance — " I wish, Mountflorence," said 
De Montville, abruptly, " that you would 
tell me what kind of being this cousin of 



CONTRAST. 245 

ours, Miss Adelaide Mountflorence, as 
I am given to understand I must call her, 
is — for you know she is pretty equally al- 
lied to both — having, as I have been told, 
often seen her?" 

" Yes, a few times ; but notwithstand- 
ing, I really " 

" Pshaw ! — don't be teasing ; you know 
there is a reason that must render me 
anxious you should oblige me in this in- 
stance." 

" Still you must excuse me : I have a par- 
ticular dislike to describing any one — at 
least to those interested in the description, 
lest, as Shakespeare says, I should be ac- 
cused of * too short a praise, or too high 
a one." 

" Well, if you wont gratify me in one 
instance, you will perhaps in another, by 
letting me know when last you saw her ? 
for I really wish to know something of 
her movements." 

" Last saw her !" exclaimed Mountflo- 
rence, evidently confused — " last saw her !" 
he repeated, as if unconsciously. 

Caroline laughed. — " What a trick," 



246 CONTRAST. 

she said, " Sigismund has lately got of 
blushing ! Why, I shouldn't wonder," she 
giddily added, " if the blue scarf was a 
present from this new cousin of yours ; for 
you know it is only lately we have heard 
of her." 

A look, such as perhaps she had never 
before received from her mother, made 
her almost instantly sensible of having 
said something that was wrong: she co- 
loured, and immediately became silent; 
the look was not lost upon the rest of the 
party; but w^hatever was its effect upon 
them, it was not of course as instanta- 
neously known. 

Almost immediately after breakfast, the 
ladies departed for Woodston. On their 
way there, lady Rossglen pointed out to 
Caroline the impropriety of speaking at 
random, not only from the kind of levity 
it evinced, but the mischief that might be 
the result ; and as a proof, proceeded to 
explain the indirect engagement existing 
between De Montville and Miss Mount- 
florence, together with the story connect- 
ed with her ; with which she had herself 



CONTRAST. 247 

been long acquainted, and was now au- 
thorized to disclose to her own immediate 
family, by an express communication from 
lord Le Poer on the subject, in consequence 
of the approaching introduction of the 
young lady to them. Much surprise was 
expressed at what they heard ; and Helena 
knew not how it was, but she felt her 
spirits suddenly lightened, by learning 
that this said Adelaide was intended for 
De Montville. But she was not destined 
to enjoy this relief long; the manner in 
which her father received her, on alight- 
ing, convinced her that he was already in 
possession of all that had occurred at Sand- 
ville, and seriously displeased at it. 

Lord Glena had indeed lost no time in 
making a communication to him on the 
subject. Having entreated his interest 
with Helena, both from that, and the pub- 
licity of his attentions to her, he conceived 
himself bound, in justice to himself, to 
account for their sudden relinquishment ; 
and accordingly addressed a letter to him, 
almost immediately after his return from 
Sandville, expressive of his regret at 



248 CONTRAST. 

being compelled to resign the hope so re- 
cently entertained of an alliance with his 
family, by the conviction of his addresses 
being no longer agreeable to Miss Ross- 
glen. 

Sir Maurice, in much surprise, desired 
in reply, to know what cause he had for 
this conviction. 

Lord Glena, unwilling to be the occa- 
sion of any thing unpleasant to Helena, 
tried to avoid a direct explanation. His 
evasive answer led to an immediate inter- 
view, sir Maurice, in justice to his daugh- 
ter, deeming it but right to insist on what 
he required; and reluctantly his lordship 
was obliged to satisfy him. 

Sir Maurice was greatly hurt; such le- 
vity as Helena had been guilty of, he 
deemed utterly inexcusable; and when, 
in addition to the injury her conduct, with 
respect to lord Glena, might do her in ge- 
neral estimation, it had probably been 
the means of preventing his thinking 
seriously of her sister, with whom an 
union was most ardently desired by his 



CONTRAST. 249 

own family, he could scarcely control his 
indignation. 

" Hold, madam !" he cried, on seeing her 
about following lady Rossglen from the 
apartment, whence her ladyship, on a 
glance from him, withdrew, taking the 
girls along with her ; " stop, madam !" he 
cried ; " before you withdraw, you must 
allow me to speak my sense of what I have 
just heard. Grieved I am to think, that I 
should be obliged to use the language of 
censure and reproach to any daughter of 
mine ; but I should be lost, both to what 
I owe to her and myself, could I refrain 
from it on this occasion : caprice, vanity, 
even a little affectation, I could excuse, as 
the natural consequences of the education 
you received ; but I cannot excuse a want 
of sensibility — your heartless trifling with 
the feelings of an honourable admirer, and 
your total disregard of the respect due to 
your family, by selecting one of their most 
particular friends, as the object of your 
shameful coquetry. You know not the 
mischief that may yet be the result of this 
M ^ 



250 CONTRAST. 

conduct," and involuntarily he thought of 
the altered mien of his sweet Dorinda ; 
" to you, however, the consideration of it 
may be of no importance ; but those who 
must feel it, must resent it ; and I now 
candidly tell you, from what you have 
been the means of making me apprehend, 
I sincerely wish, that since so long a stran- 
ger here, you had remained one." 

Oh, what a speech, for a nature so fond, 
so sensitive, so clinging for affection to all 
she loved, as Helena's! this was indeed 
speaking daggers, though using none ; and 
in the intense anguish it occasioned, the 
anguish of being forced to think she was 
an undesired inmate in her paternal home, 
of having no one truly interested about 
her, in convulsive agitation she threw 
herself upon a seat. 

Sir Maurice in a moment became sen- 
sible of the cruelty of the speech he had 
uttered, and could bitterly have reproach- 
ed himself for suffering resentment to hur- 
ry him into expressions so contrary to his 
real feelings, for he had all the affection for 
Helena that her claims upon him entitled 



CONTRAST. 261 

her to. He implored her forgiveness for 
having so affected her ; he assured her of 
his love, and made every effort in his 
power to try and sooth the feelings he had 
so wounded. 

But it was some time ere he succeeded 
in these. Helena's confidence in his re- 
gard was shaken by what he had so unad- 
visedly uttered, and it was not immedi- 
ately she could get over the pang occasion- 
ed by the circumstance. 

At length, persuaded to believe that 
what he had said was indeed owing to the 
cause assigned for it, she suffered herself to 
make an effort for recovering composure — 
an effort which the truly maternal atten- 
tions of lady Rossglen, and fond caresses 
of the girls, when joined by them, tended 
not a little to aid. 

But hardly happier than the person to 
whom he had caused so much unhappi- 
ness, was lord Glena. Nearly as attached 
to the Rossglen family as to his own, he 
knew not how to give up his intimacy 
with them, without the deepest regret ; yet 
to think of continuing his visits at Wood- 



252 CONTRAST. 

ston as usual, at least for the present, after 
what had occurred, was out of the question; 
there would be an awkwardness, an em- 
barrassment in the attempt, not endurable; 
and, finally, after some little consideration, 
he decided on going abroad for a few 
months; but when he thought what might 
occur in that period, to disappoint the hope 
and wish that had revived, he was almost 
tempted to relinquish this design ; and 
would probably, but for the reflection of 
leaving his cause in the hands of those who 
were hardly less interested than himself 
about it, namely, his mother and sister, 
the fond and zealous admirers of his sweet 
Dorinda. 

Helena was now completely extricated 
from the distressing dilemma in which her 
foolish project with regard to him had 
plunged her ; but the circumstance seem- 
ed to afford very little relief to her mind ; 
reflections were continually recurring to 
harass and afflict her. If her father 
thought so severely of her recent conduct, 
when he did not but know she might at 
first have been serious in the encourage- 



CONTRAST. 253 

ment given to his lordship, what would 
he say — in what Hght would he, must he 
view it, when he came to learn, that at the 
very moment she was appearing to favour 
his addresses, she was under an engage- 
ment to another ! but then, might it not 
be so managed with sir Osbert, as to have 
this concealed ? perhaps so — but in that 
case, of what contumacy would not her fa- 
ther have reason to accuse her, in appear- 
ing to have formed it, after his advice and 
admonition to the contrary. Look which 
way she would, therefore, she saw nothing 
but what was unpleasant before her ; and 
if for a moment she escaped from the 
thoughts of her own situation, how pain- 
fully did the affecting confidence of 
Mountflorence recur to her recollection! 

The dejection evinced by her counten- 
ance, ever true to the varying feelings of 
her mind, imputed by sir Maurice to the 
impression made upon her by his unguard- 
ed speech, induced him to redouble all his 
fond attentions to her ; and at length, to 
make, if not the amende honourable, at 
least the amende grateful, as he conceived. 



254 CONTRAST. 

for what had occurred, he used his influ- 
ence with lady Rossglen, to prevail on her 
to let an entertainment, on a grand scale, 
she was about giving at Woodston, be a 
masquerade, as wished by the fair sisters. 



CHAP. XI. 



" Fate steals along with silver tread. 
Found oft'nesl in what least we dread. 
Frowns in the storm with angry brow, 
But in the sunshine strikes the blow." 



All was now preparation, and excite- 
ment, and apparent delight there. The 
house and its contiguous wood were parti- 
cularly adapted for such an entertainment, 
the former abounding in long suites of 
rooms and spacious galleries, and the other 
in fine alleys and grouped trees, easily con- 
vertible into all that was magical ; music 
was stationed at proper places, to heighten 
the general effect ; and nothing, in short, 
was omitted that could possibly please. 



CONTRAST. 255 

De Montville, accustomed to these kind 
of entertainments abroad, did not, on this 
occasion, feel all the interest that many of 
the company at least appeared to do. He 
was, besides, sometimes inclined to be a 
little affectedly indolent, and on this 
night happening to be in a humour 
of this description, kept sauntering about, 
without attaching himself to any party, 
till he was suddenly attacked by a lively 
little flower-girl, urging him to purchase 
her flowers, as so many means of re- 
minding him of the charms of his mis- 
tress. 

" The roses of her blushes, the violets of 
her eyes, and the lillies of her teeth, and 
all of her constancy," observed De Mont- 
ville, sarcastically. 

" And equally so perhaps of her lover's," 
cried an elegant nun, who, unperceived, had 
joined them ; " if man has to rail at wo- 
man's levity, woman has to weep for man's 
inconstancy." 

" And pray, fair saint," said De Mont- 
ville, turning his full regard upon her, 



25^ CONTRAST. 

** speak you from the experience of others, 
or your own ?" 

" Of others; early caution made me wise." 

" And in trying to escape the thorns, 
you gave up the sweets of life ? Oh ! 
terrible perversion of what nature intend- 
ed ! But it is not too late to repent. 
Allow me but an opportunity, and per- 
haps I shall be able to inspire a better 
opinion of my sex's constancy." 

" My vows forbid." 

" Rash vows ought never to be binding, 
and surely such must those be considered, 
that would bind youth and beauty to se- 
clusion." 

" But if I could, for what should I 
break them ?" 

" For what ! why to learn the delicious 
bliss attendant on the power of blessing 
another." 

" Oh no, but to find the peace of se- 
curity exchanged for doubt and incerti- 
tude. But I'll none of your flatteries ; 
you compliment me without knowing me ; 
and how am I to estimate the sincerity 
that will permit this ?" 



CONTRAST. 257 

" But though 1 have not seen that fair 
face," said De Montville, " does not this 
finished air, this faultless form, these ac- 
cents, at once so soft and harmonious, con- 
vince me you are all the heart would vo- 
luntarily worship? and as such therefore 
receive " 

But the conclusion of this gallant speech 
was prevented by a sudden rush at the 
moment, that separated them ; and his 
being unable, on finding himself again at 
liberty to look about to see her, a cir- 
cumstance of no slight vexation, it may be 
imagined, from his having, just at the mo- 
ment of their separation, obtained, through 
some slight derangement of her mask, a 
sufficient glimpse of her face, to almost 
convince him she was the person he was 
so solicitous to discover. In every direc- 
tion he instantly proceeded to seek her, 
almost tempted to think there was some- 
thing like premeditation in the manner in 
w^hich he was thus continually teazed 
about her. The crowd that seemed to 
have borne her away from him had nearly 
whirled Helena too in a direction contraiy 



258 CONTRAST. 

to that she wished ; for after reconnoiter- 
ing for Mountflorence in one direction, 
she was proceeding to try if she could dis- 
cover him in another, when she was pre- 
vented by the rush from the other apart- 
ments; she was vainly struggling to free 
herself, when a mask, in the habic of a 
minstrel, came to her aid, and seizing her 
by the arm, forced a passage for her into 
an anti-room opening to the w^ood. 

For a moment she could hardly breathe, 
then, a little recovering herself — " Thanks, 
kind minstrel," she said, " for your timely 
aid ; this cool air is indeed delicious, 
after the fatigue just experienced. But, 
may I ask, from what stately bower you 
come? or whose the charms? or whose 
the prowess you have lately sung ?" 

The minstrel sighed. — " Press not to 
know," he said, in a low tone. 

" And why ?" demanded Helena. 

" Because I wish to forget." 

" What, the charms you've sung ! — oh ! 
inconstant !" 

" No, no— not so; but " He slightly 

touched his harp, and rather murmured 
than sung the following words to it : — 



CONTRAST. 259 

" Mark'd you her speaking eye's dark glance— 
Mark'd you the strains that thrill entrance — 
Mark'd you the blush that wavVing plays, 
Dk« sunshine o'er the somraer seas ? 

" Too well I raark'd her eye's dark glance — 
Too well the strains that thrill entrance — 
Too well the heart's warm flushing glow, 
Quick mantling o'er a brow uf snow. 

" For well 1 know the same it were, 
And hope to win it from its sphere. 
To love some bright partic'lar star, 
Bright gleaming in the realms afar." 

Helena listened with attention ; and ere 
he had concluded, almost persuaded her- 
self it was Mountflorence she heard ; the 
air, the figure of the minstrel, were his ; 
yet avoiding all particularity, as he had 
hitherto ever studiously done, what rea- 
son had she to imagine this? but then, 
was there no meaning to be attached to 
the incident in the hut — and had he not, 
on his first introduction to her, been under 
the mistake of believing her engaged to 
lord Glena — and from these arguments, 
what was there then so improbable in the 
present suspicion ? She became agitated; 
if any thing were wanting to her present 
unhappiness, it was the thought of having 



260 CONTRAST. 

inspired a sentiment that might give pain, 
and that to a breast for the tranquillity of 
which she felt so deep an interest. She 
hesitated how to act — whether to make 
an immediate effort to retreat, or by re- 
maining, try to ascertain what she wished. 
Yet should it be Mountflorence, and should 
she, by continuing, occasion him to disco- 
ver himself, might not an explanation be 
forced, from what had previously occurred, 
calculated to put an end to all those atten- 
tions, those conversations, she found so 
soothing ? the idea terminated her hesita- 
tion on the subject of returning directly 
to the company. But on making a move- 
ment towards the door, the minstrel sud- 
denly starting from the listening attitude 
in which he had been standing for a mo- 
ment, caught her by the arm. — " No, no," 
he said, " we do not part in this manner ! 
— it was not to do so that I so anxiously 
sought you. We have much to converse 
about — much to explain ; but this is no 
place ; we are liable here to interruption, 
to intrusion." 

" Intrusion !" involuntarily repeated the 



CONTRAST. 261 

greatly astonished Helena, resisting the 
effort that was made to draw her towards 
the door leading out into the grounds. 

" I have a right to the attention I de- 
mand," he cried ; " to remove all doubt on 

the subject, see " He tore away his 

mask as he spoke, and the features of sir 
Osbert were revealed. 

Helena recoiled. — " Sir Osbert!" she 
faintly articulated. — " Good Heavens !" 

" Yes, the ill-treated, the undesired, the 
unwelcome sir Osbert !" 

*' Assuredly," cried Helena, through an- 
ger; instantly recovering her self-posses- 
sion — •* 'Tis as you have said — undesired, 
and of course therefore unwelcome." 

" And you acknowledge this ?" 

" Yes, because it was on the express 
condition of not attempting to see me, 
without my permission, that I agreed to 
correspond with you." 

" I recollect ; but when I subscribed to 
that condition, it was in the fond hope 
and expectation of finding that promised 
correspondence a source of consolation for 
your absence, instead of which, vague. 



262 CONTRAST. 

unsatisfactory, evidently forced as your 
letters latterly have been, what is not the 
apprehension, the anxiety, it has occa- 
sioned !" 

" I will hear no more," said Helena ; 
" if you had that respect for my feelings 
you ought, or a proper sense of delicacy, 
this, above all places, is not the one in 
which you would have thought of intru- 
ding on me. Except by letter, I will not 
hold any further converse with you for 
the present; if you remain, therefore, it 
must be without my company ;" and again 
she made a movement towards the ball- 
room. 

" By Heaven ! we part not till the anxi- 
ety that brought me here be relieved ; 
yet, as I understand your allusion, and 
would not," he added, in a softened tone, 
" needlessly give you pain, I will willing- 
ly converse with you elsewhere ; and in- 
deed you know I wished to guard against 
what you apprehend, by leading you to 
some other place." 

As the wily deceiver guessed, her dread 
of being surprised conversing with him, 



CONTRAST. 263 

induced Helena, though most reluctantly, 
to pass out into the wood with him. After 
proceeding a little distance from the house 
— " Well," now said Helena, pausing, 
" whatever you have to say " 

" No, no," exclaimed sir Osbert, in a 
hurried accent, ** we are still too much in 
the way of the gay revellers; a little fur- 
ther, and there will be no danger of being 
encountered by any of them." 

They accordingly walked on, till He- 
lena suddenly found herself at the extre- 
mity of the wood, where a lonely bye 
road, fenced in by high rugged banks, ran 
rambling, literally through bog, through 
brake, into a wild tract of country. Here 
she again stopped, much displeased at 
finding she had been drawn away so far 
from the house ; and again, in a still more 
peremptory manner, demanded of sir Os- 
bert what he had to say, as she could not 
allow herself to remain above another mi- 
nute with him. 

" And this is regard — this is love !" ex- 
claimed sir Osbert, reproachfully — " to 
wish to shorten this chance meeting. 



264 CONTRAST. 

Cruel, unfeeling Helena ! what have I 
done to merit this alteration of sentiment ?'* 

" Of what do you complain, sir Osbert?" 
demanded Helena. 

" Of what ! — Insulting inquiry, con- 
scious as you must be, of the cause for 
complaint you have given me, in your 
cold, brief letters ; but I might have anti- 
cipated that your residence here, amongst 
those who have selfish views of their own 
to accomplish, would be any thing but 
the cause of happiness to me." 

" This is a mode of expressing yourself 
I cannot tolerate," said Helena ; " and I 
must tell you, that in consequence of it, 
I feel so thoroughly satisfied, so still more 
sensible than I previously was, of the en- 
gagement I suffered myself to be drawn 
into with you, being a rash, unadvised 
one, such as regard both for my own feel- 
ings, and those of others, requires I should 
consider about, that, from this moment, 
I am resolved it never shall be renewed, 
without the concurrence of my father." 

Sir Osbert laughed derisively. — " Ere 
it can be renewed, it must first be broken," 



CONTRAST. 265 

he said, with a sneer; " and of permitting 
that, I shall take good heed. No, fair 
lady, I am not quite so great a simpleton 
as to allow myself to be used like your 
glove — pulled off or on at pleasure : you 
accepted my addresses — you promised to 
be mine, and mine you shall be, spite of 
threats, or whims, or natural inconstan- 
cy ;" and as he spoke, he caught her up 
in his arms ; and Helena now, for the first 
time, perceived that there was a chaise in 
waiting. His plan was indeed well ar- 
ranged. In alarm at the receipt of Mrs. 
Flower's letter, he came over, for the ex- 
press purpose of securing a prize that could 
alone save him from all the horrors of ruin, 
being by this time, in every sense of the 
word, a bankrupt. An interview with his 
confidant, on his arrival, suggested the 
idea of rendering the masquerade subser- 
vient to his scheme of carrying off He- 
lena, with an intention of taking her off 
immediately to Scotland She shrieked. 

" Your cries are useless,'* said sir Os- 
bert ; yet at the same time attempting to 

VOL. J. N 



266 CONTRAST. 

press his hand against her mouth : but re- 
sisting, she repeated them. — " No," she ex- 
claimed, " they have brought some one to 
my assistance," and at the instant a rust- 
ling was heard in the thickets above them. 

Sir Osbert listened ; but the sound not 
being repeated, he fancied she was de- 
ceived, and was calling to the carriage to 
draw up, when there was a spring from 
the wood : he instantly dropped his prize, 
and fled, followed by the chaise. 

Helena knew nothing more of what 
passed ; on regaining her senses, she found 
herself alone, reposed upon a couch, in 
one of the temporary buildings erected 
for the occasion : it represented a temple; 
the draperies were of pale purple silk, and 
the only light it had was diffused from an 
alabaster vase, placed on a small altar, 
before a niche, containing a statue of some 
fabled nymph. But who was her deliverer 
soon became the sole engrossing thought 
of Helena, to whose interposition was she 
indebted for her rescue, from worse than 
death — from becoming the victim of a 
being, she was now thoroughly convinced. 



CONTRAST. 267 

from the recent attempt, and the ruffian- 
like violence had recourse to, for carrying 
it into effect, was indeed utterly unworthy 
of the rash promise that had been made 
him ; she could fix on no one but Mount- 
florence, and him, chiefly from the deli- 
cacy evinced on the occasion, in not want- 
ing to receive her thanks, or witness the 
confusion it was but natural to suppose 
she must experience from the discovery 
that had taken place. But oh ! if indeed 
to him she was indebted, with the delight 
he must have felt in rescuing her, as the 
daughter of sir Maurice alone, what cen- 
sure might not be mingled ! Yet her re- 
pentance, her regret, for the imprudence 
she had been led into, the consciousness 
they evinced of the impropriety she was 
guilty of, in forming so hasty and un- 
sanctioned an engagement, would they 
not be considered, in his eyes, as some ex- 
tenuation of it ? she felt she should not 
know peace until she had ascertained ; but 
to do this might, she reflected, be a matter 
of greater difficulty than she even allowed 
N 2 



268 CONTRAST. 

herself to imagine. In dwelling on the 
thought, she forgot every thing else, until 
roused from her abstraction, by some per- 
sons approaching the temple, when, un- 
wiUing to be seen in such a state of con- 
fusion, she hastily retreated. 

While all this was passing, De Mont- 
ville was every where seeking for the fair 
nun: he was just despairing of encounter- 
ing her again, when he discovered her in 
the very room from which Helena had 
been decoyed : she started on perceiving 
him, and was retreating, when he prevent- 
ed her, by darting forward — " Why, you 
cannot have the cruelty," he said, " to 
think of serving me in this manner, after 
my being in search of you ever since we 
were parted ?'' 

" You flatter me by the assertion ; but 
I must go — my hour is come." 

" Your hour !" repeated De Montville, 
laughing, and affecting to retreat a few 
steps from her. " Why, you are not 
a ghost, bound to a particular hour to re- 
turn to your sepulchre?" 

" Yes, decidedly." 



CONTRAST. 269 

" This excites still greater curiosity !" 
cried De Montville. " You will not be 
so barbarous, surely, as to depart, without 
in some degree gratifying it, by at least 
letting me know where and when I may 
hope to have a chance of seeing you again ?" 

*' Well, and suppose I did, of what 
avail would that be, unacquainted as you 
are, even with my features — how, I ask, 
would you be able to recognise me?" 

" By having seen you before. I am not 
altogether so ignorant of these lovely fea- 
tures as you seem to imagine." 

" Indeed !" with some slight indication 
of emotion ; " and pray, may I inquire 
where it is you fancy you have before seen 
me?" 

" Were I to yield to a romantic imagi- 
nation, I should say, far distant from this 
I first saw you ; but here assuredly I 
have," and he mentioned the different 
places. 

She mused a little — " Well, 1 cannot 
contradict you," she said ; " but if you 
wish to have me acknowledge any recog- 
nition, should we chance to meet again. 



270 CONTRAST. 

you will not now attempt to detain me long- 
er, as the consequences of a longer deten- 
tion here may to me be most unpleasant." 

" Then, however I may regret the ne- 
cessity of so immediate a departure, I 
should be inexcusable to oppose it ; but 
may 1 not attend you to your party ?" 

" No ; I depart alone : but if you'll have 
the goodness to inquire for my carriage, I 
shall be obliged." 

" Instantly," cried De Montville, elated 
at the thought of no further concealment 
or mystery, with regard to her name, be- 
ing intended; but in an eager tone, indi- 
cative of this expectation — " Whose shall 
I say is wanting?" 

She laughed, he thought a little mali- 
ciously — ** Oh, it is not requisite to men- 
tion names : I ordered my carriage to be 
in waiting for me in a particular spot," 
describing it ; " should you not find it 
there, I shall accompany you, to seek it 
myself, when you return." 

De Montville flew off; but no carriage 
was in waiting where expected. He has- 
tily returned; but the lady was gone. 



CONTRAST. 271 

Could it be, that the inquiry he was sent 
on was a mere pretext to obtain an op- 
portunity of departing, without any risk 
of being followed, or traced to her abode 
by him. A fruitless search for her through- 
out the rooms, and another useless one after 
the carriage, almost persuaded him this was 
the case ; but whether her serving him this 
suspected trick was through coquetry, or 
a real wish to remain unknown, he could 
not, of course, possibly determine. Who- 
ever she was, however, the impression 
made upon his fancy by her extraordinary 
resemblance to a person who had excited 
a deep interest in his feelings, w^as not les- 
sened by the short conversation that had 
passed between them ; and altogether he 
felt more anxious, more impatient, than 
ever to learn her name. 

On quitting the temple, Helena was 
making her way through the labyrinthian 
alleys, intervening between it and the 
house, with an intention of taking refuge 
in her chamber from any further notice 
that night, when suddenly a group, re- 
presenting Comus and his crew, beset her, 



27^ CONTRAST. 

and bore her ofif in triumph to his hall : 
she was forced into the enchanted chair ; 
groups of Bacchanals danced round her; 
Euphrosyne tried to allure her with her 
smiles, and Comus with his flattery. 
Helena had not intended to play any 
part in the revels of the evening, but thus 
excited, and, perforce, brought forward, 
she rallied her spirits, in order not to 
appear stupid ; and in the language of 
the character thus forced upon her, an- 
swered or repelled the assailments of flat- 
tery, not without giving full effect to it, 
by the keen sparkling of her eyes and the 
sudden glow upon her cheek. At length 
a grey-headed shepherd appeared, to de- 
clare the means of releasing her from the 
spell of the enchanter. As he spoke, the 
side of the hall opened, and a fountain, 
begirt with sedge, was seen. Caroline 
advanced to the edge, and in a mellifluous 
strain invoked the aid of its goddess. The 
invocation was answered by Dorinda, as 
Sabrina; with a glittering vase, she ap- 
proached the enthralled maid, and seemed 
to sprinkle her from it. Thunder, accom- 



CONTRAST. 273 

panied by darkness, was heard at the in- 
stant; and when objects were again dis- 
tinctly visible, the company found the den 
of the enchanter transformed into a hall of 
baronial splendour, at the upper end of 
which, in suitable costume, under a ca- 
nopy of state, sat the lord and lady of the 
mansion. 

While Helena was looking on, with 
something of a bewildered feeling, from 
the unexpectedness of all that had occur- 
red, an elegant mask, in the habit of a red- 
cross knight, gently seized her hand, and 
led her to them. Having congratulated 
her on her escape from the enchanter, sir 
Maurice put into her hand a rich scarf, 
with a glance at the knight, that convinced 
her he was Mountflorence. As intimated, 
she flung the scarf over his shoulder ; the 
harp was touched in the gallery above, 
and, as if only waiting for this signal, 
characters of various descriptions issued 
from amidst the pillars of the hall ; and 
the knight conducting her to the centre 
of the hall, dancing commenced. 

The knight was all that could be wished 
n3 



274 CONTRAST. 

in attention ; but his lips were sealed : was 
this from affecting mystery ? or was it 
the result of reflection on what had occur- 
red? At the more probable idea of the 
latter being the case, the forced compo- 
sure of Helena forsook her; the spirits she 
had tried to rally, from a wish to gratify 
others, vanished, and with difficulty she 
maintained her place amongst the dancers ; 
but from the painful exertion requisite for 
this she was soon relieved ; sir Maurice 
suddenly exhibited the wand of the en- 
chanter, dropped in the hurry of escape, 
and waving it round his head, soft music 
was immediately heard from beneath, and 
the floor opening, a table, magnificently 
laid out with costly viands, and baskets 
of golden network, filled with the choicest 
fruits and flowers, gradually ascended, 
while, at the same moment, partitions 
flying up at the sides of the hall, disco- 
vered a range of other tables of a similar 
description. 

All was so well managed, as to give to 
the whole an air of enchantment. The 
knight conducted Helena to a seat ; but 



CONTRAST. 275 

at the very moment that, with a beating 
heart, she conceived he was on the point 
of following the general example, by un- 
masking, he drew back, took off the scarf 
she had flung round him, and throwing it 
over her, instantly disappeared. 

The act spoke volumes to the heart of 
Helena ; it was an intimated renunciation 
of her — of all those feelings, that growing 
sentiment of regard and esteem, that cir- 
cumstances might have induced her to 
conceive he entertained for her. At the 
thought, the seeming confirmation it was 
of the fear that a mind like his could not 
pass over the imprudence she had been be- 
trayed into, or rather her conduct with 
lord Glena, now that it was ascertained how 
she had been circumstanced at the very 
time of giving encouragement to him, she 
could no longer command herself; all 
around her literally became a swimming 
scene, uncertain if beheld ; and gradually 
receding from the table, she vanished from 
the room. But in the solitude of her 
chamber, with leisure and quiet to enable 
her to better collect herself, she suddenly 



276 CONTRAST. 

reflected she might, after all, be unneces^ 
sarily tormenting herself: she was not ac- 
tually certain that the knight was Mount- 
florence, or that INIountflorence was her 
rescuer from sir Osbert; and why then, 
unsatisfied on these two points, did she 
allow herself to be disturbed in the man- 
ner she was? The ensuing day, she could 
hardly doubt, would afford her an oppor- 
tunity of ascertaining what she wished, 
and till then she determined to try and 
prevent herself from dwelling on the sub- 
ject. But how vain the effort ! hopes and 
fears were excited, that rendered it impos- 
sible to subdue the agitation they occa- 
sioned. With what eager impatience, 
from the expectation she indulged, did she 
await a summons to breakfast the next 
morning ! but to her disappointment, on 
joining the party, she found it only con- 
sisted of lady Rossglen, the girls, and De 
Montville, conceiving as she did, that the 
first glance at Mountflorence would ter- 
minate the incertitude she was in ; but she 
was mistaken ; for just as she was on the 
point of inquiring of one of the girls whe- 



CONTRAST. 277 

ther he had returned to St. Finian's, he 
made his appearance, and by addressing 
her in his usual manner, without any par- 
ticularity of look, left her still as much in 
doubt as before as to what she should think. 

The entertainment of the preceding night 
of course furnished the topic of conversa- 
tion. De Montville mentioned his nun, 
and the evident trick she had played him, 
describing her as the person whom he had 
already expressed a little curiosity about, 
in consequence of his having seen her at 
Woodston, in his chance visit to it during 
the absence of the family. His detail ex- 
cited a good deal of interest, since while, 
from her suddenly appearing and disap- 
pearing in the manner she did, it seemed 
as if she resided in the neighbourhood; still 
no one of the family knew any one be 
longing to it at all answering the descrip- 
tion he gave of her. 

The girls puzzled themselves in trying 
to recollect — but no, and — " It therefore 
strikes me," said Caroline, " that since we 
certainly are acquainted with every one 
in our immediate vicinity, in the rank to 



278 CONTRAST. 

which you say this astonishing beauty ap- 
pears to belong, that she must be some 
Cinderella ; and under this persuasion, I 
shall not forget, at any other party in the 
neighbourhood, to look about me when 
the clock strikes twelve, as I have a most 
particular aversion to rats and mice ; but 
that's true, as you say," still addressing her- 
self to De Montville, " that you a little 
opposed her withdrawing, I shall certainly 
immediately have a search made for a glass 
slipper ; but not for the purpose of giving 
it to you," she added, " since who it might 
be found to fit, could be no manner of 
consequence to you, fitted as you already 

are " with a partner, she was about 

observing, forgetful of the recent lecture 
she had received, about speaking at ran- 
dom, " by your wise uncle, lord Le Poer," 
when a look from her mother checked her. 
After loitering some time over the 
breakfast-table, for the excitement given 
to the feelings by such an entertainment 
as that of the preceding night, does not 
immediately allow of a return to the usual 
avocations, those of the quiet and domes- 



CONTRAST. 279 

tic, the fair sisters strolled out into the 
wood, accompanied by the gentlemen. 
They had not proceeded far, when Helena 
found Mountflorence, who had given her 
his arm, gradually drawing her away from 
her companions. This was the first time 
he had ever made any direct attempt to 
engross her particular attention, and the 
conjecture to which the circumstance gave 
rise, made her heart flutter ; but after pro- 
ceeding some way, without any allusion 
being made that could possibly agitate, she 
was beginning to think herself mistaken 
in it, and in consequence to recover a little 
from the emotion it occasioned, when again 
she was thrown into a state of agitation, 
by suddenly finding herself on the very 
spot where she had experienced such alarm 
the preceding night. Was it purposely, or 
by design, that they had strayed thither ? 
She looked anxiously at Mountflorence, to 
try if she could ascertain by the expression 
of his countenance ; but his eyes did not 
meet hers at the moment. — " What a wild- 
looking spot !" she said, involuntarily. 
" Yes," replied Mountflorence; " but 



280 CONTRAST. 

still one I shall never be able to view with- 
out a feeling of interest, from the reflec- 
tion " He paused ; how agitating was 

the pause to his companion! — " I have 
often thought," he resumed, raising his 
eyes from the ground, towards which they 
had been for a minute declined, " that 
from the misconstructions, the misconcep- 
tions, we are sometimes liable to, it would 
be a happiness could the human heart at 
times be read." 

" Perhaps so," said Helena, with forced 
composure, for this exordium did not tend 
to calm her emotions ; " but as that is im- 
possible, should not the consciousness of 
our actuating motives being pure, make 
us rest satisfied, let our actions be judged 
as they may ?" 

" It were certainly wise to do so ; but 
there are cases in which our own perfect 
self-acquittal is not quite sufficient for our 
consolation: where we highly esteem, 
where we greatly regard, the good opinion 
of the person so valued, is nearly, if not as 
entirely, essential to our repose as our 
own. In the predicament to which I have 



CONTRAST. 281 

just alluded, by my observation, that there 
are times in which it would be for our 
tranquillity to have our hearts laid open 
to inspection, I now stand ; for in what 
I now meditate, I am aware I am liable 
to be misunderstood." 

" Not by me," cried Helena, losing, in 
the impulse of the moment, the feelings 
that, but the minute before, would have 
hindered her utterance ; " think not that 
I can misjudge you, if indeed I am any 
way concerned in what you meditate or 
intend." 

" Could I hope this, that when I explain 
myself, no suspicion will attach to the pu- 
rity of my motives — but why should I 
fear the contrary ? the generous mind is 
not distrustful. Yet, why did I not at 
once confront the villain ? — why not at 
once before her, of whose unguarded con- 
fidence so base an advantage was attempt- 
ed to be taken, declare what he was ? Un- 
worthy of alliance with virtue or feeling, 
what painful explanations and agitation it 
would have saved ! but then, at the pro- 
bable expence of others. The committal 



282 CONTRAST. 

of names I wish to hold sacred ; yes, that 
was the restraining consideration, else 
eagerly would I have availed myself of the 
opportunity to tell him what I thought : 
but I see, by your change of colour, that 
I have shocked you ; would that I could 
have maintained a greater command over 
myself" 

" You have indeed shocked me ; I can- 
not deny it." said Helena, " by your in- 
direct disclosure of being acquainted with 
my imprudence ; for it is, as I conceived, 
to you, I see, I am indebted for the frus- 
tration of the insidious attempt of last 
night. Yes, I cannot but feel shocked at 
the idea of the Hght in which I may pro- 
bably now be considered by you : but 
while you feel compelled to censure, still 
let me hope," and she looked and spoke 
imploringly, " that you will not utterly 
forget the guideless creature I have been ; 
how totally, through an erring fondness, 
left to my own control, my own judg- 
ment, at the very moment that a dazzling 
world, just opening to my view, rendered 
caution and restraint most necessary." 



CONTRAST. 283 

"How needless to urge all this !" said 
Mountflorence, in the most animated tone, 
and taking her hand ; " youth and inex- 
perience are in themselves alone an excuse 
for error. The specious manners of sir 
Osbert Henley might have deceived a 
more matured judgment than yours. Vil- 
lain ! villain ! when I think of his motive 
for imposing on you, when I consider the 
sacrifice he meditated making you to his 
ruined fortunes, how can I control my 
indignation ? but again you turn pale : 
am I then to regret being the occasion of 
pain to you, by being thus compelled to 
express myself of him ?" 

"No," repUed Helena, with firmness; 
" not at least through any such feeling as 
you have intimated your fearing; but," she 
added, suddenly recollecting herself, and 
slightly blushing, " that I may not appear 
in a still more reprehensible light than I 
at present do, by avowing indifference to 
a person with whom I suffered myself to 
enter into such an engagement, let me ex- 
plain the unadvised manner in which it 
was formed ; that is " she here got a 



284 CONTRAST. 

little embarrassed, and her eyes began to 
decline towards the ground, to avoid the 
keenly- penetrating ones of Mountflorence 
fixed, perhaps unconsciously, on her at the 
moment, " that it was without allowing 
myself due time to consider what I actu- 
ally felt for sir Osbert, as leisure and op- 
portunity for reflection soon convinced me, 
I promised him my hand !" 

" Thank Heaven !" exclaimed Mount- 
florence, with fervour, " since even if the 
case had been otherwise, I should still have 
conceived it an imperative duty to have 
shewn him in his proper light to you ; but 
with what bitter regret, from the reflec- 
tion of the pain that must then have been 
inflicted on your feelings by the circum- 
stance ! Yes, never would I have allowed 
the cruel betrayer of confiding innocence, 
the unprincipled contemner of his own so- 
lemn vows, to have gone on uninterrupt- 
ed in his course of deception. The ho- 
nour, the peace of a family, in the wel- 
fare of which, on account of one indivi- 
dual at least belonging to it, I take a very 
deep interest, are now at stake, through 



CONTRAST. 285 

his means ; and when you consider this, 
can you wonder at the vehemence with 
which I express myself concerning him ?" 

" And all this I may credit ?" said He- 
lena. 

Mountflorence drew back a few paces, 
w^ith a sudden contraction of brow that 
made her instantly recollect herself. — 
" Forgive me," she cried ; " I spoke not 
as I meant ; but how shall I make myself 
understood ? it was from a fear of not de- 
serving the happiness to which your state- 
ment restores me, and not to any doubt 
of the most unqualified credit being due 
to any assertion of yours, that led me to 
express myself in such a manner. Oh, if 
you knew from what a weight of misery 
my faith in your truth relieves me, you 
would not wonder that my very soul 
should shrink within itself, at the bare 
possibihty of being unintentionally as I 
know if by you it must be, misled ! Rash 
and thoughtless as my engagement to sir 
Osbert must ever be considered, still it 
was not formed without expressly inti- 
mating, that should any thing occur ere 



286 CONTRAST. 

the period fixed for its fulfilment to his 
prejudice, it must be regarded as at an end. 
Unpardonable as I deemed his attempt of 
last night, still I had my apprehensions 
that it might not be allowed as a sufficient 
excuse for breaking with him, considering 
the motives he might have to urge in 
vindication of it; but what I have now 
heard leaves me without any such fear; 
and never, in the overflowing delight of 
my soul, at my relief from the misery 
the reflection of it occasioned, will a 
prayer of gratitude be off'ered up to 
Heaven, without an accompanying one 
for the happiness of him to whom I owe 
so much." 

" Do not express yourself in this man- 
ner," said Mountflorence, evidently strug- 
gling with his feelings : " what must he 
be, who could see another tottering on the 
brink of a precipice, without stretching 
out a hand to save them ? and that one 
too, a being in whose fate he was bound, 
by the most powerful considerations, to 
take the deepest interest ! Exclusive of 
every other consideration, as the daughter 



CONTRAST. 287 

of sir Maurice Rossglen, my best and 
most zealous services will ever be at your 
command ; and now that I mentioned 
your father, let me express my hope, that 
you comprehend — you do justice to the 
motive that influenced me, rather to give 
you this warning myself, than let it be 
conveyed through the medium of those 
better authorized to caution and advise." 

" Oh ! well," said Helena, with emo- 
tion — " well do I understand the feeling 
that induced you to be my sole adviser; 
and my gratitude for your kind solicitude 
about me is heightened by the anxiety 
thus manifested to keep my imprudence 
from the knowledge of my family." 

" From this moment be it forgotten," 
said Mountflorence, again taking her hand ; 
" or, if not, only remembered as a warn- 
ing or caution for the future. All that 
aspire to happiness are not deserving of it, 
and amidst the many competitors for her 
favour, which the various attractions 
of Miss Rossglen cannot fail of drawing 
round her, some may again be found 
not worthy of the prize they aim at. And 
now, if you please, I'll conduct you to the 



288 CONTRAST. 

girls, lest otherwise they should raise an 
alarm, under an apprehension of my hav- 
ing ran away with you." 

Helena could not refuse. But why was 
he in such haste to lead her where there 
must be an end of any further particular 
conversation? was it, that he really felt 
no solicitude for this ? or was it, that he 
feared, if they remained much longer con- 
versing together, feelings might be be- 
trayed, calculated to excite a doubt of his 
being quite as disinterested, in washing to 
have her released from her rash engage- 
ment, as it was evident he desired to be 
thought. But a short time must now de- 
cide this — that is, what his sentiments for 
her really were ; for now at full liberty — 
oh, transporting thought ! — to give indul- 
gence to those he had inspired, she con- 
ceived it next to impossible that she could 
fail in eliciting his. 

They had not proceeded far, when they 
were met by the girls and De Montville. 
They shortly after returned to the house, 
where the party separated. 

Helena, as usual, impetuous and impa- 



CONTRAST. 289 

tient, lost not a moment, on re-entering 
her dressing-room, in writing her letter of 
renunciation to sir Osbert: but impa- 
tience, in this instance, was excusable. 
She reminded him of the condition on 
which she had promised her hand, and in 
consequence of which, she now conceived 
herself at full liberty to break with him ; 
not merely through his conduct of the 
preceding night — though that, in her opi- 
nion, was quite sufficient to justify such 
a determination — but also a circumstance 
that it had been the means of bringing to 
her knowledge ; and concluded by declar- 
ing, that that letter was the close of their 
correspondence. 

On joining the family at dinner, she felt 
a slight sensation of disappointment, on 
learning that Mountflorence had returned 
to Woodston ; she soon, however, got the 
better of it, from the consideration of the 
happiness to which she was so unexpect- 
edly restored. In the evening, she accom- 
panied the girls and De Montville to a 
large party in the neighbourhood, where 

VOL. I. o 



290 CONTRAST. 

most of the company of the preceding 
evening were assembled, similarly attired; 
but the amusement on this occasion chiefly 
consisted in a secret exchange of charac- 
ters, occasioning, as the circumstance did, 
a variety of diverting mistakes. 

De Montville was not without a hope 
of here encountering his nun again ; but 
after indulging the expectation for some 
time, he was on the point of relinquishing 
it, when he suddenly beheld her, he was 
convinced, entering, a splendid rosary dis- 
tinguishing her from others habited in the 
same way. He was darting forward to 
join her, and renew the short conversation 
of the preceding night, when he found 
himself prevented, by one of the sleeves 
of his domino having got entangled, he 
knew not how, in the drapery of a lady 
in a fancy dress. Apparently confused by 
the circumstance, she set about extricating 
it in a very awkward manner, and one 
that so little tallied with the impatience 
of De Montville, as at length to occasion 
him to tear it away ; but while thus enga- 
ged, the nun had disappeared, and in 



CONTRAST. 291 

vain he looked about for her. Well, this 
was really provoking; piqued perhaps by 
his not having immediately joined her, 
for he would persuade himself there was 
an intimation to do so, she had taken this 
method of signifying the same, and this 
after intending, it might be, to explain 
why she had served him in such a manner 
the preceding evening. He really wished 
the awkward being to whom his detention 
was owing had been any where but at his 
elbow at the moment. But was it likely 
that this provoking creature had really so 
immediately departed ? and under the 
hope that she might not yet be gone, he 
kept wandering about in every direction. 

At length, just as he was beginning to 
despair of again seeing her that night, he 
suddenly found her beside him. — " This is 
indeed almost an unexpected happiness," 
he said, and as he spoke, he attempted to 
take her hand ; but drawing back with an 
air of surprise, she withheld it. De Mont- 
ville's mask was off; he looked reproach- 
fully — " Am I to understand then, from 
o 2 



292^ CONTRAST. 

this," he said, ** that you feel no com- 
punction for the way in which you served 
me last night ?" 

" I do not comprehend you, sir." 

" No ! why surely you cannot but be 
sensible that you gave me some cause for 
complaint and reproach ?" 

" Assuredly not : I know not how I 
could have contrived to give cause for ei- 
ther, to a person who is a total stranger 
to me, to whom I never spoke until this 
instant." 

" Nay, this is attempting to impose 
upon me in a way I cannot allow," said 
De IMontville ; " what, after allowing me 
to converse with you last night, to tell you 
where and when I before saw you, and 
being permitted to hope, that when next 
we met, I should not be entirely regarded 
as a stranger, now to intimate that you do 
not, that you will not know me ?" 

" And you will try to persuade me of 
all this ?" she said, but laughingly ; and 
De Montville, encouraged by her manner, 
w^as resuming the reproaches he had com- 
menced, when he felt some one twitching 



CONTRAST. 293 

him by the sleeve. He turned to see 
who, and beheld the awkward dowdy, as 
he, a little petulantly, designated the lady 
in the fancy dress, from the vexation she 
had caused him, again at his elbow. — 
" With me, ma'am, did you wish to 
speak ?" he asked, gravely. 

" Yes, sir; you left some of the trim- 
mings of your sleeve behind you." 

" Ridiculous !" exclaimed De JNIont- 
ville. " I am sorry, ma'am, you gave 
yourself so much trouble, about a matter 
of no consequence," turning as he spoke 
to address the nun again, but she was 
gone. 

" Provoking !" was again his exclama- 
tion, as he looked round him to try if he 
could discover her amidst the crowd, when 
— " If 'tis for your companion, the nun, 
you are looking for," said the troublesome 
lady in the fancy dress, " I can show you 
where to find her." 

" Then if you will, you will oblige me 
beyond description," said De Montville. 

" Here, by this door," she said, leading 



294 CONTRAST. 

him on, as she spoke, to a door opening 
to the grounds. 

" This way do you say ?" said De Mont- 
ville, eagerly pressing forward. 

" You tread upon my dress," she said, 
passing out of the door. 

Apologizing, De Montville drew back. 
As he did so, the lady's mask fell off; and 
their eyes encountering, to his utter vexa- 
tion, he discovered that, in shunning her 
as he had done, he had actually been shun- 
ning the person he was so anxiously seek- 
ing. — " Well, really," he cried, " this is 
one of the most malicious tricks that could 
possibly have been played." But with- 
out appearing to heed him, she rushed 
forward, and though he followed close 
upon her steps, contrived to evade him. 

From all this, De Montville was more 
than ever at a loss what conjecture to form 
concerning her, whether her conduct was 
really the result of a coquettish desire to 
teaze, or an unwillingness to be known. 

After fatiguing himself in seeking her, 
he returned to the house ; and on rejoining 
the fair sisters, could not refrain from telling 



CONTRAST. 295 

them what had occurred; and they were not 
a little diverted by the trick that had evi- 
dently been played upon him. They were 
by this time really curious themselves to dis- 
cover who she was; but in vain they per- 
plexed themselves with conjectures ; they 
could not fix upon any one in the neigh- 
bourhood as likely to be her. But a letter 
from lord Le Poer, the next morning, in- 
timating that on the ensuing day he might 
be expected at the castle, suspended, for 
the present, all further anxiety on the 
subject, in the mind of De Montville. 
The crisis of his fate was at hand, and he 
could not contemplate it without emotion. 
From the idea he had been led to form of 
Miss Mountflorence, he could not indulge 
a hope of her being calculated to inspire 
an attachment; and the thought of being 
allied to a person incapable of creating 
any interest, was to him one of such mi- 
sery, from the intenseness of his feelings, 
as to make him think it impossible he 
could ever accede to such a measure ; his 
prospects, therefore, were very uncertain, 
aware as he was of the manner in which 



296 CONTRAST. 

lord Le Poer was likely to resent the dis- 
appointment of his plan, and the reflection 
did not of course tend to render his mind 
tranquil. 

Too much agitated by the receipt of 
this letter to be able to command himself, 
he took a hasty leave of his friends at 
Woodston, and set off for Rockcliffe, 
where, at the time expected, he was joined 
by lord Le Poer. His lordship tried to 
be gracious ; but it was not natural to 
him ; besides, he did not forget, that there 
had not been all that promptness in De 
Montville's return from the Continent, 
that might have been expected. Time 
had not by any means rendered him more 
amiable or prepossessing; its deep traces 
added not a little to the natural harshness 
of his countenance; while his tall gaunt 
figure, still retaining its commanding alti- 
tude, through the supporting aid of pride 
and haughtiness, he had all the imperative 
air of a person that would be obeyed. 
De Montville thought he had never looked 
more forbidding; he studied his counte- 
nance, in a manner he had never done be- 



CONTRAST. 297 

fore, to try if he could discover any indi- 
cation of feeling that might be worked 
upon; but no, all was fixed sternness 
there. 

Lord Le Poer did not allow any great 
time to elapse, before entering on the sub- 
ject interesting to him. By a letter from 
lady Newbury, he was given to under- 
stand, he said, that she had, as instructed 
by him, given to him, De Montville, all 
the particulars requisite for him to be ac- 
quainted with, ere his introduction to 
Miss Mountflorence; so that there was 
nothing now to retard, or delay, after 
its taking place, their marriage, his stay 
in Dublin being for the express purpose 
of having all matters relative to it arranged. 

De Montville could have wished he had 
not heard this, since, of course, the more 
assured his lordship was of the accomplish- 
ment of his project, the more enraged he 
would be at its disappointment, if indeed 
destined to experience one. But where 
was Miss Mountflorence all this time, that 
their introduction was so near at hand, a& 
o3 



298 CONTRAST. 

he conceived might be inferred, from the 
way in which his lordship had expressed 
himself? 

" You have not, I think you said," re- 
sumed his lordship, " been to lady Doro- 
thy's?" 

" No, my lord, not yet ; her ladyship's 
indisposition prevented me." 

" Well, on that account, there is no 
further hinderance to your visiting there, 
as she is now perfectly recovered. But I 
must now be candid with you, by ac- 
knowledging that her illness was not the 
only reason why you were not sooner re- 
ceived as a visiter there. The fact is. Miss 
Mountflorence has all this time been with 
her. I brought her over with me from 
England, and left her under the care of 
her ladyship, but with a positive injunc- 
tion, that no one should be acquainted 
with the circumstance, until my arrival 
here, having very particular reasons — 'twere 
needless to explain — for wishing her not 
to be generally known, or introduced into 
society, until her present name be merged 
in yours." 



CONTRAST. 299 

De Montville would have been at a loss 
to exactly define the feeling he experienced 
at this moment ; it was that uneasy sensa- 
tion, that a vague idea of being in some 
way or other imposed upon or deceived, 
occasions. Mountflorence could have ac- 
quainted him what had just been com- 
municated, he was convinced, yet he was 
silent on the subject. 

Could it be that Mountflorence had an 
interest in the concealment of the circum- 
stance ? and he thought of the hint that 
had been given of his attachment to some 
one under the roof of lady Dorothy, and 
the corroboration it had received, in the 
confusion it had evidently occasioned him ; 
nor was the incident of the scarf, neither 
his midnight sally from the house, for- 
gotten. But no, even allowing him at- 
tached to any one at lady Dorothy's, he 
felt almost a certainty, that it was not 
to Miss Mountflorence, both because, from 
all he had heard, he could not by any 
means fancy her the kind of creature likely 
to captivate such an imagination as Mount- 



300 CONTRAST. 

florence's, and because, from the peculiar 
manner in which she was circumstanced, 
he conceived Mountflorence would not 
voluntarily encourage any thing of the 
kind for her. 

There was, however, a good deal of per- 
plexity on the subject ; and he was sitting 
rather lost in thought, when he was roused 
by lord Le Poer signifying his intention 
of immediately introducing him to Miss 
Mountflorence; "for though we cannot 
dine at lady Dorothy's to-day," he said, 
" owing to some business I have to trans- 
act in the evening, there is nothing now 
to prevent our calling there ;" and accord- 
ingly the carriage was ordered. They 
were within a short distance of her lady- 
ship's, when in approaching a house by 
the road-side, lord Le Poer suddenly re- 
collecting some business he had with the 
owner, got out, and, uncertain how long 
he might be detained, desired De Mont- 
ville to proceed without him, and then let 
the carriage be sent back for him. On 
reaching lady Dorothy's, De Montville 
was ushered into a vacant apartment. In a 



CONTRAST. 301 

few minutes, the servant who had shewn 
him into it, returned to say that his lady 
was not yet ready to receive him, but that 
Miss Mountflorence would be with him 
directly. " So," thought De JNIontville, 
on the door closing again, " I shall soon 
be out of suspense, soon know now 
what I have to hope or fear, for 'tis 
vain to argue with myself If my intended 
bride be a creature that I cannot fancy, I 
will not have her, even though my rejec- 
tion of her hand be attended with the cer- 
tain loss of her tyrannical father's favour — 
arbitrary being ! who but a tyrant could 
have thought of making positive arrange- 
ments for the marriage of two persons who 
had never set eyes upon one another? a 
pretty eastern despot he would have made; 
but, thank Heaven, though he may plan, 
he cannot force — though, alas! I know 
he can punish ; but no matter, if turned 
adrift, I shall still have liberty to console 
and — but hark, she comes" — and the door 
gently opening at the moment, a lady en- 
tered. Tall, straight, perpendicular, in short, 
towering above her sex, though not exactly 



30^ CONTRAST. 

in the way the poet meant the lovely Mer- 
cia's doing, neither, like her, was she divine- 
ly fair ; nor yet had she the attraction of 
extreme youth : it seemed to De Montville, 
indeed, as if she was some years older than 
himself. And this was his mother's pretty 
Ady ! — had he placed faith in her descrip- 
tion, what a disappointment would now 
have been sustained! but he knew too 
well the flattering manner in which her 
benevolence of heart was wont to make 
her represent those she regarded, to allow 
him to depend exactly on it, more especi- 
ally contradicted as her statement was by 
the very different account given of the lady, 
by those who, from not being under the 
influence of such feelings, were less prone 
to judge inaccurately. Advancing to him, 
with what she might have considered a 
smile, but he designated a simper, she ex- 
pressed her hope she saw him well. De 
Montville could only reply by a bow, and 
appearing to move a chair for her. " You 
can't think, sir," she said, as she seated her- 
self, " how sorry I have been all this time, 
9X your not being allowed to come here 



CONTRAST. 303 

sooner, from the terribly stupid way in 
which I was certain you must be passing 
your time, in that old castle of lord Le 
Poer's by yourself" 

" You are very good, ma'am, for having 
thought so much about me ; doubtless I 
should have found it stupid and solitary 
enough, had I been left to myself; but al- 
most ever since my arrival, I have been an 
inmate in the house of a delightful family 
in the neighbourhood." 

" Well, that really was fortunate; for 
'tis terrible to be moping about by one's 
self, or shut up without seeing any one, as 
I know from experience, through the long 
illness of lady Dorothy. Yet in such a 
season as this, one might, I conceive, in 
the country, find a little amusement for 
themselves, independent of the aid of 
others." 

'' By walking, I presume you mean ? 
Why, to be sure, that may be pleasant 
enough to some; but I confess I am 
not over fond of rambling about in th« 
country, one gets so tattered and torn, 
^n making their way through briars and 



304 CONTRAST. 

brambles, and over hedges and ditches.'* 

" There are few pleasures that are not 
attended with some little drawback ; but 
if not fond of walking, I must presume 
you are of reading and music, in a taste 
for which we assuredly have an inexhausti- 
ble resource against the tedium of time, 
and the ennui it occasions." 

" Why, as to that, I must confess, a 
little reading goes a great way with me ; 
one has so much of it when they are 
young ; and as to music, there was so much 
trouble in learning it, that somehow I 
could never bring myself to like it." 

"Accomplished creature! Pray, then, 
may I ask, ma'am, what you have a taste 
for?" 

" Why," and she laughed at the ques- 
tion, " I don't altogether dislike taking up 
a book, when assured it is a merry one, 
not one that will put one in the dismals, 
which of all things I hate; then I like vi- 
siting, and hearing the chat of the day, 
and reading the newspapers, when there's 
no politics in them, and — but there is lady 
Dorothy's bell, to give notice that she is 



CONTRAST. 305 

ready to receive you ; so I'll now run off, to 
finish a little job I was about at the time 
you were announced;" and without further 
ceremony, she left him. 

" So, all is over!" cried De Montville, 
" suspense and hope; and, like poor Wolsey, 
I may bid adieu to all my greatness ; or, 
in other words, my long-indulged expecta- 
tions of independence. Yet is it possible 
that lord Le Poer could ever seriously 
suppose this scheme of marrying me to 
this half-acknowledged daughter of his 
could meet my ready acquiescence, desti- 
tute as she is, not merely of personal at- 
tractions, but those mental ones that com- 
pensate for the want of them, or that for 
declining it, he should punish me by the 
loss of that independence he so long per- 
mitted me to hope for ? Well, should he 
allow his resentment to carry him to such 
lengths, I shall at least have the consola- 
tion of knowing that all the world will 
take my part." 

A servant now appeared to conduct him 
to lady Dorothy. She received him with 
great stateliness ; and De Montville, as he 



306 CONTRAST. 

looked at her, did not wonder that in the 
early days of his mother, she should have 
been regarded as a very awful personage 
by her. 

After some inquiries as to how he had 
been engaged since his arrival in the 
neighbourhood, she asked whether he had 
yet seen Miss Mountflorence ? 

De Montville slightly bowed. 

" Yes, as soon as you were announced, I 
sent to let her know you were come, con- 
ceiving, from the indirect manner you had 
already been introduced, there was no ne- 
cessity for your delaying to meet, until I 
was ready to present you more formally 
to one another. Well, having seen the 
young lady, I suppose I may presume 
that you feel no great dissatisfaction at his 
lordship's plan ? She certainly bears a very 
strong resemblance to the family." 

" Yes," assented De Montville, still re- 
garding her ladyship. — " In particular, I 
think she resembles," resumed her lady- 
ship, " that favourite sister of lord Le 

Poer's, whose but you seem attracted 

by something without." 



CONTRAST. 307 

" Attracted indeed !" for while yet speak- 
ing, slowly emerging from the dark close 
avenue leading to St. Finian's, and which 
indeed, on crossing the dell that divided 
the grounds, was continued there, appear- 
ed the bewitching resemblance of the fair 
Sicilian, or, in other words, the provoking 
unknown, she who had occasioned him so 
much restless curiosity since his arrival at 
RockclifFe— " Who, or what is it you see ?" 

" A — a — lady, ma'am," stammered out 
De Montville. 

" A lady by herself, and coming to the 
house? Yes — oh, Miss Ferns — a young 
person who has been residing with me this 
some time, as companion. Your mother 
knew her father, a very worthy man, but 
a little thoughtless, so left a large family 
unprovided for; and as I wanted a com- 
panion just at the time, I thought I might 
as well be charitable, and take one of the 
daughters, with a promise of a little dower 
if she behaved well. This I shall soon be 
called upon to give, in consequence of a 
match I have determined on for her." ' 



308 CONTRAST. 

** Determined !" involuntarily repeated 
De Montville. 

" Yes, I am most particularly anxious 
to retain the medical person who attends 
me in the neighbourhood, from the know- 
ledge he has acquired of my constitution ; 
but find no bribe sufficiently powerful to 
induce him to acquiesce in this wish, but 
Miss Ferns and her little portion, and 
have therefore decided on their marriage." 

De Montville could not help smiling at 
the generosity and charity of lady Doro- 
thy, having, as they evidently had, her 
own convenience for their basis. — " And 
is the young lady satisfied with this ar- 
rangement?" sarcastically he asked. 

•* Satisfied !" and her ladyship drew 
herself up. " I should conceive it vastly 
odd, a most extraordinary circumstance 
indeed, if she were otherwise ; or rather, 
should attempt to object to any arrange- 
ment, which either I, or any other person, 
whose protection she might have the ho- 
nour of being under, might think proper 
to make for her. Persons in her circum- 
stances are not to pretend to have feelings 



CONTRAST. 309 

or inclinations, like those of a superior 
rank ; their duty is profound submission." 

" But is it not rather unkind to exact 
this?" said De Montville, with a slight 
hesitation in his voice, and flush on his 
cheek — " is it not rather taking an unge- 
nerous advantage of their situation ?" 

Her ladyship threw back her head. — 
" By those who are too romantic or self- 
willed, to allow of the proper subordina- 
tions in society, it may be so deemed per- 
haps, but not by those who " 

" Should Miss Ferns," demanded De 
Montville, involuntarily interrupting her, 
'* be amongst the number of those inclined 
to argue on it, what is likely to be the 
result ?" 

" That 1 think might easily be inferred 
from the manner in which I have express- 
ed myself — of course the immediate loss 
of my protection." 

** But assuredly, not without knowing 
that she is secure of some other ?" 

" That is no concern of mine ; however, 
I know of no one she has to receive her 



SIO CONTRAST. 

for by this time all her connexions are 
either dead, or scattered about the world ; 
but her being turned adrift will be but a 
proper punishment for her contumacy." 

" Adrift ! such a creature adrift ! be- 
cause she could not make herself a sacri- 
fice to worldly policy ! but no, should such 
a thing occur, I shall take care to prevent 
her suffering through it. In that case, ex- 
clusive of every other consideration, there 
will be a sympathy in our fates, that must 
interest me for her ; both suffering, as we 
shall then probably be, through a similar 
cause. Yes, I will take care that she be 
not a homeless, houseless wanderer, tempt- 
ing danger at every step she advances in 
this wide wilderness, the world. Over one 
benignant heart at least I know I have 
control, and that the kindest charities of 
that heart will be extended towards her, 
on my representation." 

" Why, Mr. De Montville, I believe 
you are in a reverie," cried lady Dorothy, 
a little exalting her voice. " You don't 
seem to me as if you had heard the door 
open, or any one enter." 



CONTRAST. 311 

De Montville hastily turned from the 
window at which he had been standing, 
and encountered the eyes of the lovely 
creature who had been the cause of his ab- 
straction. He started, not expecting to have 
seen her so immediately, and at a loss to 
know how he was to conduct himself to- 
wards her, whether as a total stranger, or 
a person that had seen her before, stood 
looking at her without speaking, while 
she remained equally silent and motion- 
less, as if waiting for him to address her. 
Lady Dorothy alternately regarded each. 
— " Why this is really very extraordinary 
— extremely odd !" she said. " You look, 
young lady and gentleman, as if you had 
never met before ; and yet, but a minute 
ago, I have been given to understand you 
were conversing." 

" No, ma'am," mildly said the lady. 

" No, ma'am," not quite so calmly per- 
haps, said the gentleman. 

" No !" repeated lady Dorothy, her small 
black eyes beginning to glisten a little ; 
" then how is it, sir, that you told me you 
had seen this lady ?" 



312 CONTRAST. 

" Pardon me, I did not tell your lady- 
ship any such thing." 

" No !" again exclaimed lady Dorothy ; 
" really this is the most incomprehensible, 
the strangest thing !" and she fanned her- 
self with no slight indication of emotion. 
" If I could bring myself to say an un- 
gracious or an unpolite thing, I should 
certainly say, sir, that these contradictions 
of yours, argue a wandering of thought, 
not by any means consistent with the re- 
spect and attention due in certain places." 

" 1 am not aware, ma'am, that I have 
contradicted myself" 

" No, sir ! what, after telling me, al- 
most in the same breath, that you have 
and you have not been speaking with this 
lady?" 

" Excuse me, ma'am, I never said I had 
been speaking with this lady; I merely 
said I had seen Miss Mountflorence, but 
I did not mention having seen any one 
else ; she is the only person I have had 
any conversation with, since my entering 
the house, except your ladyship." 

" Miss Mountflorence !" shrilly exclaim- 



CONTRAST. 313 

ed her ladyship ; " why, then, who do you 
take this lady for?" 

" Who?" and the emotion excited by 
the transporting idea this question sug- 
gested nearly deprived him of the power 
of distinctly articulating—" why, I thought 
— I imagined — I inferred from your lady- 
ship that she was Miss Ferns." 

" Bless me! why we have been all at 
cross purposes I see here. No — sir, for I 
see it has fallen to my lot, after all, to in- 
troduce you — this is Miss Adelaide Mount- 
florence." 

" Oh, the rapture of this moment !" said 
De Montville, as he took the hand of the 
fair Adelaide, and sought to read in her eyes 
whether her feelings were in unison with 
his, whether she, in any degree, participated 
in his happiness ; " for what painful linger- 
ing anxiety does it compensate ! But then 
the cruelty," in a lowered tone, " of put- 
ting my patience to the test, to the last 
possible moment, for I now clearly com- 
prehend the mistake I was led into was 
all the effect of a wicked contrivance ; but 

VOL. I. p 



314 CONTRAST. 

what if, through the despair it occasioned, 
I had suddenly disappeared in one of your 
neighbouring waterfalls ?" 

" Despair, indeed !" repeated Adelaide ; 
" you little knew the worth or varied at- 
tainments of her to whom you allude, 
when you speak of being thrown into de- 
spair by taking her for me." 

" Really ! well, I must confess — but I 
see how it was — that laugh betrays it — for 
the purpose of heightening the feelings of 
the moment, she put on a semblance not 
natural to her." 

Lady Dorothy, with all her stiffness 
and stateliness, was all this time laugh- 
ing, in her little affected way, at the puz- 
zle, as she called it, they had all been 
in ; it reminded her so much of the plays 
she had seen in the days of her youth, and 
she began trying to recollect them. 

Adelaide appeared to attend, but De 
Montville could put on no seeming atten- 
tion ; he was too much occupied, too much 
engrossed, by the sudden change in his 
feelings, the happiness he now contem- 
plated ; for from what had occurred, he had 



CONTRAST. 315 

no very terrible misgivings of any very 
violent objection being started by Ade- 
laide to her father's plan, now the only 
circumstance that could prevent its accom- 
plishment. 

But how many questions remained to 
be answered — how much curiosity still to 
be satisfied ! and when should he have an 
opportunity for what he required? He 
began to grow impatient for the arrival of 
his lordship, from the hope that it would 
cause a diversion in his favour. At length 
he made his appearance, and by his looks, 
testified his surprise at beholding lady 
Dorothy so much amused : the cause of 
this was soon explained; but either he 
was too saturnine, or else thought it too 
ridiculous for a smile, and rather abruptly 
turned from her, to regard the other par- 
ties in the room. Adelaide now approach- 
ed to pay her dutiful respects ; but they 
were coldly received. He could not for- 
get her being the daughter of a woman 
who had given him cause of offence he 
deemed unpardonable; and though he 
p2 



316 CONTRAST. 

had acknowledged her, it was more from 
necessity than inclination ; or, in short, to 
avoid the risk of again becoming a theme 
of public conversation, than from any- 
awakened feeling of tenderness, or natural 
affection. 

Accustomed to kindness, Adelaide seem- 
ed to experience a sudden chill, at the icy 
manner in which her demonstrations of 
pleasure at seeing him were received. 
There was evidently however nothing of 
resentment mingled with the feelings this 
occasioned. " The big tear filled her eye ;" 
but the quickness with which she turned 
away as it started, proved it was rather 
her wish to conceal, than obtrude it on 
his notice as a reproach. What she did 
not allow herself to evince, De Montville 
could with difficulty prevent some ex- 
pression of; but he consoled himself for 
the pain she experienced, by the reflec- 
tion that she would not be much longer 
depending for care or kindness on this 
arbitrary and cold-hearted being. Her 
emotion having passed away, he availed 
himself of lord Le Peer's being engaged 



CONTRAST. 317 

With his sister, to seek the gratification of 
the curiosity excited by recent incidents. 
After diverting herself by a little further 
trifling with this, she confessed that all 
that had been perplexing to him, was the 
result of a regular contrivance between 
her and Miss Ferns, for the express pur- 
pose, suggested by the inquiries she over- 
heard his making concerning her, on the 
evening of a stolen ramble to Woodston 
with her friend, who, all good nature and 
gaiety, had availed herself of the freedom 
from restraint, afforded by the illness of lady 
Dorothy, to lay herself out to amuse her. 

" For which I must love her, though it 
was at my expence," interrupted De Mont- 
ville. 

" You'll soon love, or at least regard 
her, on her own account," said Adelaide. 
" To the best qualities of the heart, she 
unites intelligence, information, and, in 
short, all the treasures of a well-cultivated 
mind; still, notwithstanding all I have 
said, I dare say you would be surprised, 
w^ere I to tell you who she has for a serious 
admirer in the neighbourhood." 



318^ CONTRAST. 

De Montville mused. He thought of 
Mountflorence : what had puzzled him 
appeared to be now explained — ^ I think 
I could guess," he said. 

" I should feel surprised if you could'; 
however, be that as it may, tliere's no use 
in guessing to me, for I am bound to si- 
lence on the subject." 

After a few more questions — ^ Well, 
you really," said De Montville, " have ac- 
counted very satisfactorily, in every in- 
stance save one, for the way in which you 
still contrived to evade and disappoint my 
curiosity, and that is the night in which I 
saw you in the castle." 

" What, at RockelifFe? No, I have 
never been there since your arrival." 

" Come, recollect yourself," said De 
Montville, seizing her hands, and looking 
laughingly in her face. 

" No, I cannot recollect what has never 
been." 

" Then you positively persist in saying' 
that you have never been to pay me a visit 
there?" 

" Yes." 



CONTRAST. 315 

De Montville still looked incredulous. 
But no further time was now allowed for 
his attempting to obtain a different an- 
swer or acknowledgment, lord Le Poer 
rising at the instant to depart, but with a 
promise of dining the next day with her 
ladyship. 



CHAP. XII. 



-But through the heart 



Should jealousy its rancour once diflPuse, 

'Tis then delightful misery no more ; 

But agony unmix'd, incessant gall, 

Corroding every thought, and blasting all 

Love's paradise. Thomson. 



Joy is ever communicative. Dinner was 
hardly over, when De Montville, mount- 
ing his horse, rode over to Woods ton. 
— " I have seen her !" he cried, as he 
rushed into the apartment where lady 
Rossglen, with the girls and Mountflo- 
rence, were sitting — " at length I have 
seen her. Miss Mountflorence !" he added, 



320 CONTRAST. 

in reply to the look of interrogation ad- 
dressed to him. 

" Indeed ! well, and what kind of crea- 
ture is she ? for you know this cross being 
here," glancing at Mountflorence, " would 
never answer any inquiry concerning her." 

" What kind of creature is she ?" re- 
peated the transported lover — " how shall 
I tell you?" 

" Well, tell me," resumed Caroline; 
" does she rival your Cinderella ?" 

" No ; but she equals her ; for she and 
my Cinderella, since you choose to call her 
so, are the same." 

" What, Miss Mountflorence the per- 
son who has occasioned so much specula- 
tion ? Well, this was what could scarcely 
have been imagined !" 

De Montville, laughing, proceeded to 
detail all the contrivances, as confessed by 
Adelaide, she had had recourse to for per- 
plexing him. 

The girls were infinitely amused by the 
recital, Caroline in particular, who de- 
clared, from what she had heard, she was 
convinced Miss Mountflorence must be a 



CONTRAST. 321 

most delightful creature — one quite after 
her own heart — all life and animation — 
" But were you the confidant of any of 
her tricks, Sigismund ?" 

The eyes of Mountflorence seemed al- 
most to flash fire at this question. He 
rose abruptly, and throwing aside a book 
he appeared to have been looking over, 
repaired to a window. 

" Why you seem vexed," said Caro- 
line : " sure you are not displeased at what 
you have heard ? It would be enough for 
you to be angry, if, instead of this pretty 
cousin, it had been the fair giver of the 
blue scarf who had been playing all these 
tricks." 

" You mistake — I am not angry or dis- 
pleased ;" but in a tone that rather contra- 
dicted the assertion—" why should I be so 
with any thing Miss Mountflorence does ?'* 

" That's more than I can tell ; but I ap- 
peal to every one present, if you do not 
appear discomposed ; and there — how an- 
grily at this very moment you are frown- 
ing!" 

p3 



S2^ CONTSAST. 

" I am not surprised at his froivning at 
you," observed her mother ; " you really, 

at times, are so teazing ; but '' and she 

addressed some inquiry respecting lady 
Dorothy to De Montville. 

She was answered at random ; the eyes 
of De Montville were on Mountflorence, 
and his thoughts were rambling rather 
wildly. What if there should be some 
mistake in what Adelaide had asserted, or 
more correctly, for she had not asserted 
what he accused her of, if he should be 
mistaken in his conjecture of Miss Ferns 
being the person admired by Mountflo- 
rence, and that instead of her, Adelaide 
herself was the object of his secret re- 
gard ? But, no, no, he would not give 
way to so cruel an idea— so distressing an 
apprehension ; various circumstances com- 
bined to preclude such a fear — Adelaide's 
own manner — the perfect knowledge pos- 
sessed by Mountflorence of lord Le Poer's 
intention with regard to her — and the ho- 
nour and feeling that must in consequence 
have tended to oppose any sentiment be- 
yond that of disinterested regard for her. 



CONTRAST. 323 

Yet he wished the thought had not oc- 
curred — it was as a cloud upon a happy 
dawn, checking the pleasure that had pre- 
viously been taken in its contemplation ; 
but if he believed it to be erroneous, how 
could he apprehend, or, rather, allow its 
being the occasion of any uneasiness to 
him? 

He accordingly made an effort to rally 
his spirits, and laugh and talk as usual ; 
but forced efforts are seldom successful 
ones ; his eye still turned upon Mountflo- 
rence, and what he was about saying, he 
more than once seemed to forget. 

But he was not the only person in the 
room whom the evident discomposure of 
Mountflorence, on the mention of Ade- 
laide, had disconcerted ; like him, however, 
Helena had recourse to reasonings and ar- 
guments with herself, to vanquish the un- 
easiness occasioned by the observation. 

Ere he took leave, lady Rossglen inti- 
mated her intention of being at lady Doro- 
thy's the next day, for the purpose of an in- 
troduction to Adelaide ; and De Montville 
promised to be there to meet her. 



324 CONTRAST. 

He took care he should not be anticipa- 
ted, by the early hour he left Rockcliffe, 
Adelaide immediately joined him. — " I 
am glad you are come by yourself," she 
said, " for I wished very particularly to 
speak to you. I quite forgot to mention 
yesterday how very much I should regret 
having the silly contrivances, I confessed 
to you, known to any one else." 

De Montville was confused ; he wished 
he had not been so precipitate in his dis- 
closure at Woodston. He hesitated whe- 
ther or not he should acknowledge the 
truth. 

" I hope," resumed Adelaide, in an anx- 
ious tone, not receiving an immediate an- 
swer from him, " that the caution does not 
come too late." 

" Well, I will not deceive you," said De 
Montville ; " I did amuse them at Wood- 
ston by the mention of them." 

" Indeed ! — a very advantageous light, 
no doubt then, you have made me appear 
in their eyes." 

" I know not that I could make you ap- 
pear in any other. Surely you cannot 



CONTRAST. 325 

imagine that the playful result of an inno- 
cent wish for a little amusement, could 
possibly injure you with any one?" 

" I hope not ; but every one does not 
argue in the same way ; and really I am 
very sorry I suffered myself to be tempted 
to act as I did, from the way in which I 
now view it. But was Mountflorence pre- 
sent when you mentioned this ridiculous 
matter at Woodston ?" 

" Yes." 

Adelaide turned pale with evident vex- 
ation, and for a moment averted her coun- 
tenance. 

" Yes, he was present," repeated De 
Montville, seeking her averted looks; " but 
why did you ask ? — was there any parti- 
cular objection to his hearing what the rest 
of the family did?" 

'' Oh no, certainly not ; but " 

" But what then ?" 

" Why he is so very particular — so ex- 
act in his notions." 

" Well, and is that of any material im- 
port to you ? — or, in other words, do you 
allow him any control over your actions. 



326 CONTRAST. 

that you appear thus alarmed at the thought^ 
of incurring his disapprobation ?" 

" No", but then, where we esteem, or 
wish to retain esteem, 'tis natural to ex- 
perience uneasiness at the idea of being 
deemed deserving of censure." 

" And do you really so greatly esteem, 
so passionately regard him ?" asked De 
Montville, grasping her hand, and much 
agitated, " that you dread his censure more 
than that of any other person ?" 

" I did not say that I passionately re- 
garded him,** said Adelaide ; " but that I 
esteem, that I greatly regard him, I never 
shall deny ; and, indeed," recovering at 
once her self-possession, " it would be ex- 
traordinary if I did not, considering he is 
the only relative that, for a series of years, 
noticed me." 

" True," asserted De Montville to him- 
self, " that is a circumstance that lays 
claim to gratitude ; and, as she has obser- 
ved, where we regard, we naturally wish 
to be esteemed," and he tried to recover 
himself; but he had been too violently 
agitated to permit his efforts for the pur- 



CONTRAST. 327 

pose to be immediately successful; and 
even after he had become a little more 
composed, there still remained a feeling of 
inquietude not to be subdued. In the 
course of the morning, as expected, lady 
Rossglen and the young ladies called. De 
Montville had for some time been anx- 
iously looking for them, under the idea 
that Mountflorence might accompany them, 
and thus an immediate opportunity be af- 
forded for ascertaining perhaps what the 
real feelings of Adelaide and him were for 
each other ; but he did not accompany the 
family. 

Had Adelaide retained any fear of being 
prejudiced in the opinion of lady Rossglen, 
by what De Montville had so thought- 
lessly, in the overflowing joy of his heart, 
disclosed, the kind manner in which she 
was regarded by her ladyship, as well as 
the fair sisters, must have dissipated it. 

They were invited to meet her and lady 
Dorothy the next day at Rockcliffe ; the 
succeeding day was fixed for dining at 
Woodston, and the one after at lady Do- 
rothy's; so that Adelaide saw by these 
engagements there were some little amends 



328 CONTRAST. 

about being made, for the, at least ima- 
gined, seclusion in which she had been 
kept, since her arrival in the neighbour- 
hood. 

Soon after the departure of the Ross- 
glen party, she and De Montville were 
again left to themselves. They had not 
been long tete-a-ttte, when a hillet was 
brought in to Adelaide, which she was 
about dropping into her reticule, when 
De Montville, whose arm was resting on 
the back of her chair, arrested her hand, 
exclaiming, " From Mountflorence !" 

" What, you know his writing then ?" 

" Yes, perfectly." 

" So I perceive," she said coolly ; and 
disengaging her hand, she deposited the 
note in the reticule. 

" Why don't you read your note ?" de- 
manded De Montville, in a flurried accent. 
" Pray don't let me hinder you." 

"Oh! I am in no hurry; it is quite 
time enough to know the contents." 

" But how do you know how — can you 
surmise what it may be about, whether it 
may not require an immediate answer?" 



CONTRAST. 329 

" Well, I shall see presently." 

" But now — now, I beg," and he at- 
tempted to take up the reticule, but 
which she prevented by laying her hand 
on it. 

" No, excuse me — I would rather not 
read it here." 

" Rather not read it here !" and he start- 
ed away from her, and took a stride across 
the room : " rather not read it here — what, 
because, I suppose, she fears it might ex- 
cite some feeling, some emotion she wishes 
to conceal ; but I will not be so foiled," and 
he resumed his seat beside her. 

" Do you know," said Adelaide, sud- 
denly interrupting him, " I am beginning 
to think you a very odd, out-of-the-way, 
whimsical kind of a person ? Take care I 
don't find you one of those people that 
don't improve on acquaintance." 

" Oh ! if we wish to find fault, we can 
readily find an excuse," said DeMontville. 
" But do now gratify me by reading 
Mountflorence's note; or, if you don't 
choose to take the trouble, let me do so 
for you." 



330 CONTRAST. 

" And why so anxious, pray, for this?" 
" Why? why because I want to see 
what his style of writing is to you.'* 
" What, for the purpose of copying it ?" 
" Copying it !" exclaimed De Montville, 
again starting away, and with a flush of 
indignation on his cheek. " I should be 
sorry — surprised, indeed, if his style of ad- 
dressing you and mine were to resemble 
each other." 

" Then since not on that account, I 
know of no other motive you could possi- 
bly have for wishing to read it ; therefore 
excuse my gratifying you by shewing it." 
What De Montville might have said in 
reply, was prevented by lady Dorothy 
walking in at the instant. Hardly had 
she entered, ere Adelaide with her reticule 
vanished, to the utter discomfiture of De 
Montville ; so much so, indeed, that he 
scarcely knew what her ladyship began 
saying to him. Yes, she was impatient, 
after all, to peruse her billet " Why did 
I not force her to do so before me," he de- 
manded of himself? " Why did I not at 
once candidly reveal to her the cause of 



CONTRAST. SSI 

my anxiety on the subject? but then, 
with a doubt on my mind of there being 
any just grounds for this anxiety, to have 
betrayed what might have drawn upon me 
the imputation of a gloomy jealous dispo- 
sition. Oh ! no ; well is it for me, perhaps, 
that I did not act so rashly ;" and he tried 
to recover himself, and believe that he had 
acted very ridiculously. 

On her return to the room, a few mi- 
nutes previous to the summons to dinner, 
he tried if he could discover any trace of 
emotion in her countenance; but no, all 
was placidity and sweetness there; and he 
felt still more inclined, from this circum- 
stance, to consider that he had acted very 
foolishly. Still, however, he could not 
help wishing to know what was said in 
the billet, and accordingly, in hopes of in- 
ducing an inquiry where it must be an- 
swered, in the course of dinner, with seem- 
ing carelessness, proceeded to ask whether, 
in the note she had received from Mount- 
florence, he had intimated any intention 
of soon returning to Woodston, which he 



332 CONTRAST. 

had quitted before him the preceding 
evening ? 

" From Mr. Mountflorence ?" said lord 
Le Poer; but the inquiry he was evi- 
dently on the point of making, was pre- 
vented by some provoking observation of 
lady Dorothy's. 

But the young lady shall not escape in 
this way, said De Montville to himself; so, 
in the course of a few more minutes, again 
addressing Adelaide, " I beg your pardon," 
he said, " but I am not sure whether or 
not you told me that Mountflorence said 
any thing in his note of to-day to you, 
about going back to Woodston ?'* 

" From Mr. Mountflorence, had you a 
note, child ? And what did he say to you ?" 

" Nothing of consequence, my lord." 

" That's a fine young man," said lady 
Dorothy ; " very decorous in his conduct 
and well behaved." 

" Yes," assented his lordship, and there 
was a pause, and no further question 
about the note from Mountflorence ; and 
this was the way in which his lordship 
passed over his daughter's receiving billets 



CONTRAST. 333 

from young men ; but, to be sure, the one 
this day was from a relation; and again 
De Montville began to think himself very 
ridiculous, and under the persuasion, to 
really make a serious effort to regain his 
usual manner. 

Lady Dorothy's old chaplain dined with 
them ; he was not therefore, on account of 
his lordship, obliged to continue at table 
after the withdrawing of the ladies. On 
his re-entering the drawing-room, he found 
Adelaide there by herself. Pleased at the 
circumstance, he was eagerly approaching 
her, when turning from a window, against 
which she had been leaning, she expressed 
a hope that he would excuse her leaving 
him, owing to a severe headache ; and 
adding, that he would find books in the 
apartment to amuse himself with, till join- 
ed by lady Dorothy, or Miss Ferns, va- 
nished ere he could prevent her. 

De Montville was vexed at her leaving 
him, disappointing him as it did of an im- 
mediate opportunity for doing away the 
impression which he was not without an 
apprehension his conduct might have 
made upon her. Not knowing what to 



334 CONTRAST. 

do with himself, he strolled out, and invo- 
luntarily perhaps bent his steps towards the 
old avenue already mentioned as leading to 
St. Finian's. The direction he took brought 
him to the edge of a steep glen, forming 
part of the ancient territory of the abbey. 
After a casual glance, by a precipitous de- 
scent, he plunged into the gloom of the 
place, so profound from the dark verdure of 
the banks, overgrown with moss and ivy, 
and the close interlacing of the thickly- 
planted trees, that, for a moment after, he 
could hardly see about him. He turned in 
the direction of an ancient hermitage, al- 
most buried beneath projecting hillocks, that 
terminated one extremity of the glen, and 
above which was seen the decaying abbey 
of St. Finians, now partially tinged with 
the crimson of the setting sun, but which, 
like a smile on the visage of despair, only 
served to render the desolation of the ve- 
nerable pile still more mournfully striking. 
While yet his eyes were fixed upon it, 
he suddenly beheld Mountflorence ascend- 
ing from the rear of the hermitage. He 
was about calling to him, when some sud- 
den feeling or idea checked the impulse, 



CONTRAST. 335 

and made him hastily advance into the 
place he appeared to have just left. On 
stepping within, De Montville found him- 
self in a kind of grotto, so gloomy, and 
so still, as to be well adapted to the pur- 
poses of penitence and prayer, if ever in- 
deed devoted to such, as, according to 
tradition, was the case. The outside was 
coarsely constructed of jutting stones, over- 
spread with fern and ivy, which here and 
there finding admission to the interior, had, 
in some places, thickly mantled it. Steps of 
turf formed the descent from the low nar- 
row door, through which, and a scanty 
iron grate, the only light it had was ad- 
mitted. The roof had the aspect of an 
excavated rock, while the floor, composed 
of unpolished pebbles, was marked, and 
worn in many places, as if by the tread of 
solitary feet. All around w^as rudeness 
and solemnity. From the depth of the 
cell, only a glimpse could be caught of the 
old trees of the glen, to the rustling sound 
of which was added the bubbling moan of 
a little rill of pure water, that oozing out 
of one corner, crept towards a small bason. 



336 CONTRAST. 

scooped for its reception, with an antique 
bowl of rusty iron chained to the edge. 

It was not, however, till after a hasty- 
glance round the place, or rather, a slight 
examination of it, to be assured there was 
no other apartment, that De Montville 
allowed himself to make any observations. 
He was then struck with its profound 
gloom, and the perfect adaptation of its 
furniture to it, consisting of a couch, com- 
posed of fibrous roots, and a wormeaten 
table affixed to the wall. While he stood 
lingering, ashamed of the feeling that he 
could not deny to himself had hurried him 
into it, he fancied he heard a low breath- 
ing. He turned in the direction whence 
it seemed to proceed, and there, within a 
niche formed by the irregular jutting of 
the stones, beheld a female form, but whe- 
ther one of earthly mould, or some wor- 
shipped image of other days, he had not 
sufficient light to distinguish, and was 
about ascertaining by the touch, when 
emerging completely to view as she spoke, 
" You did not expect to find me here, I 
believe ?" said the voice of Adelaide. 

De Montville recoiled, and with a feel- 



CONTRAST. 337 

ing, resembling that of an electric shock, 
staggered back against the wall. — " They 
have had an appointment then !" he ex- 
claimed, " and all is deception and despair. 
No," he cried, springing up the steps after 
her, for she had hastily passed him to the 
door, ,*' I did not expect to find you here, 
because, with so much apparent candour, 
I did not expect to be so imposed upon." 

" As how ?" asked Adelaide, calmly. 

" As how !" he indignantly repeated ; 
" by your feigning a headache to leave 
me, when, in reality, it was for the pur- 
pose of coming here, to meet " 

" Whom ?" 

" Mountflorence ! 'tis not a minute a^o 
since I saw him ascending from the her- 
mitage." 

" Well, and does that positively argue 
that I must also have seen him ?" 

" Yes, assuredly ; and you cannot deny 
that it was to meet him you came ? Yet, 
say it was not — declare to me I am mis- 
taken in the thought, and, spite of appear- 
ances, I will believe you." 

VOL. I. Q 



338 CONTRAST. 

" No," said Adelaide, " I will neither 
deny nor acknowledge any thing; there 
are some suspicions it would be a kind of 
degradation to think of vindicating ones- 
self from. But supposing I had met 
Mountflorence here ?" 

" There would have been nothing in 
the circumstance, certainly, if it had been 
by chance ; but by contrivance " 

" The expression is unpleasant," inter- 
rupted Adelaide, attempting to move for- 
ward as she spoke, but in which she was 
opposed by De Montville. 

" No," he said, " you must not — shall 
not leave me, till you relieve me from the 
suspense — the misery you have occasioned 
me." 

" Our acquaintance is but short," said 
Adelaide, " and if you think me capable 
of what you have indirectly intimated, 
it were advisable, for both our sakes, that 
it should not be prolonged." 

" Cruel ! But have I no reason for 
complaint, after what I witnessed ?" 

" You must allow me to proceed," said 
Adelaide. " You take advantage of my 



CONTRAST. 339 

being compelled, as you think, to listen to 
you, to wound my feelings." 

" What an ungenerous idea ! Oh ! if 
you knew me thoroughly, how truly 
would you be convinced, that to compul- 
sion I would owe nothing ! But is asking 
you to be candid, to wound your feelings? 
But on this I must insist — you have given 
me a right to do so." 

** But none that I have not the power 
of retracting." 

De jMontville turned of a deadly hue. 
— " Then you have deceived me !" he ex- 
claimed, " by allowing me to infer, from 
your manner, as well as other circum- 
stances, that the intention of lord Le Poer 
was not one of a repugnant nature to 
you? Why not at once acknowledge 
this? my disappointment would not then 
have been heightened by a short indul- 
gence of hope : but Mountflorence shall 
answer for his want of candour ;" and he 
was turning away. 

" Go," cried Adelaide, in a faltering 
voice ; " go, accuse, arraign me ! I am 
Q 2 



340 CONTRAST. 

prepared for the result. Thrown for a se- 
ries of years, upon chance benevolence 
for support, I was early taught to under- 
stand, that sorrow, suffering, and anxiety, 
might be my destined lot." 

In a moment, every angry feeling fled 
the bosom of De Montville ; in a moment, 
every thought, every doubt, injurious to 
her fled. He had caused her to weep, 
and what was there he would not do to 
atone for the barbarity of such conduct ? 
At her feet he implored forgiveness, yet 
how could he obtain his own ? — " Sure 
some madness must have possessed me," 
he cried, " to act, to speak, in such a 
manner ! but only forget it, and if ever I 
offend again in this way " 

" No," said Adelaide, with her hand- 
kerchief still to her eyes, " impossible !" 

" You drive me to distraction — to de- 
spair !" 

" I cannot help it; to forget when I 
please is not in my power ; but " 

" Ah, now I understand you. To for- 
give ! Yes, that is in your power : pro- 
nounce the blessed word, and if " 



CONTRAST. 341 

" Beware of rash vows !" said Adelaide, 
no longer struggling to free her hand ; 
" for those must surely be deemed rash, 
that we are not firmly convinced we have 
strength to keep ; yet, for your own sake, 
let me advise you against this tendency 
to suspicion ; a proneness to it must ever 
be a source of pain, since, with a prejudiced 
mind, or jaundiced eye, we naturally view 
every thing in a false light: and now let 
me ask, to what is owing all that has just 
occurred ?" 

De Montville coloured and stam.mered, 
and in short proved, by his hesitation, 
that it is sometimes much easier to recom- 
mend candour than to practise it. At 
length he acknowledged, that the uneasi- 
ness that occasioned him to act in a man- 
ner that he could not reflect on without 
pain, originated in an apprehension that 
the intimacy between her and Mountflo- 

rence might have on here he was 

again a little confused — on his side led to 
a tenderer attachment than that of mere 
friendship. 



342 CONTRAST. 

"But without something to corrobo- 
rate this fear?" and she looked at him. 

" There was the note in the morning, 
and " 

" This walk by myself in the evening, 
almost within sight of the house ! So all 
this mighty piece of work has been owing 
to these two insignificant circumstances ! 
How true that ' trifles, light as air,' are 
sufficient to perplex and disturb us, if in., 
clined to attach importance to whatever 
happens! But come," and she laughed 
and gave him her hand of her own accord^ 
" I am not going to lecture any more." 

For an hour or two after their return 
to the house, in conversing without incer- 
ruption with Adelaide, De Montville was 
the happiest of the happy. His thoughts 
then suddenly began to revert to the little 
satisfaction he had obtained from Ade- 
laide; that, in short, by the dexterous 
manner in which she had evaded either 
denying or acknowledging any thing, he 
was still exactly in the same state of sus- 
pense and incertitude, as when he impor- 
tuned her on the subject. But perhaps 



CONTRAST. 343 

she did suppose, that whatever was agree- 
able might be inferred from her way of 
expressing herself: positive explicitness, 
however, where the feelings were so con- 
cerned, was what ought to have been ex- 
pected, and he certainly felt, that he 
should regret not having been more ur- 
gent for it ; but how could he revert to 
the subject ? and yet, without knowing 
whether she and Mountflorence had met, 
he felt he could not be perfectly at rest. 
It has been advanced by certain authors, 
that our train of ideas, and the motions of 
the soul, proceed from habit, and which, 
though at first involuntary, we can after- 
wards repel and control as we please. The 
theory was a fine one, but with regard to 
himself, De Montville feared he should 
never find it a correct one. In vain he 
endeavoured to conquer his present feel- 
ings, and banish the ideas that tormented 
him ; neither could be subdued or repel- 
led ; and while he felt angry with himself 
on the account, he still thought it a cir- 
cumstance that admitted of excuse. 

But hardly did he find himself on his 



344 CONTRAST. 

way back to Rockcliffe, ere his sentiments^ 
underwent a change, and he would almost 
have given the world, if at his command, 
that he had made a more vigorous resist- 
ance to the recurrence of his uneasiness, 
from the sudden alteration he was con- 
scious it had occasioned in his manner, 
and the injury that he but too probably 
had done him with Adelaide; but such 
are the torments — the sudden changes of 
jealousy, that — 

*' Yellow-tinging plague 
Internal vision taints, and in a night 
Of livid gloom, imagination wraps." 



CHAP. XIII. 



-Ye fairy prospects, tiien, 



Ye beds of roses, and ye bowers of joy. 
Farewell !" 



De Montville proceeded the next morn- 
ing to lady Dorothy's, to be the escort of 
the ladies to the castle, but in by no means 
an enviable state of mind, from his incer- 



CONTRAST. 345 

titude as to the impression he might have 
left upon the mind of Adelaide the pre- 
ceding night: the smile of unaffected 
sweetness, however, with which she wel- 
comed him, dissipated all uneasiness on the 
subject, and restored him to complete hap- 
piness. Brought still more forward this 
day than before, De Montville was still 
more charmed with her, from the capti- 
vating gracefulness evinced in every ac- 
tion : the more too he contemplated her, 
the more he was struck w4th that astonish- 
ing resemblance that had first interested 
him for her. 

Mountflorence did not accompany the 
Woodston family ; but he was announced 
soon after. De Montville felt a slight 
emotion at his name ; but he forced him- 
self to go on with some observations he 
was making at the moment to Helena, 
though not perhaps in quite so cool, col- 
lected a manner as might otherwise have 
been the case; but this was not to be won- 
dered at, considering how much his atten- 
tion was diverted ; but he saw no height- 
q3 



346 CONTRAST. 

ened colour on the cheek of Adelaide, no 
indication of emotion either in her looks, 
or those of Mountflorence on their meet- 
ing : and then she held out her hand to 
him, with an air so frank — so unembar- 
rassed. Would this have been the case, 
had there been any consciousness of con- 
cealed feelings ? — assuredly not ; and he 
advanced to Mountflorence, and, in his 
turn, shook hands with him with all his 
wonted cordiality. 

Soon after the withdrawing of the ladies, 
he found himself engaged in a long dis- 
cussion with sir Maurice : in the midst of 
this, chancing to turn about, he missed 
Mountflorence; he immediately got con- 
fused — the thread of his argument was 
lost ; and after a few ineffectual efforts to 
resume it, he suddenly started up, and re- 
treated to the drawing-room. He looked 
for Adelaide ; but she was not there — nei- 
ther Mountflorence — " Where is she ?" he 
demanded of Caroline, in rather an eager 
tone. 

" She !" 

" Yes, she ! — Adelaide I mean." 



CONTRAST. 347 

" Oh ! now I understand — in the next 
room with Sigismund; so don't look so 
alarmed — nobody, you find, has carried 
her off." 

" In the next room with Sigismund ! — 
retired there to have some conversation 
with him !" and he made an involuntary 
movement towards the door ; but check- 
ing himself, drew back ; his eye however 
could not be diverted from it. At length 
Adelaide made her appearance. In pass- 
ing him to a seat, she addressed some 
observation to him, but without heeding 
what it was — 

" What have you done with Mountflo- 
rence," he asked with forced calmness — 
" is he in the next room ?" 

" No, he is gone." 

" Gone ! what, back to St. Finian's?" 

" Yes ; business obliged him to return 
early." 

" Business ! so it was merely to obtain 
an opportunity of speaking to her, that he 
probably came at all ;" and he walked away 
to a window, and seated himself at it. 

Caroline followed ; and looking out of it 
with him—" What's the matter?" she 



348 CONTRAST. 

asked. " Has there been any little hrouil- 
lerie between you and Adelaide, that you 
look so disconcerted ?" 

" Pshaw ! nonsense ! Why do you 
ask?" 

" Have I not told you ? Come, con- 
fess, that I may see what I can do as a 
peace-maker." 

" Mischief-maker rather ; for I am per- 
suaded you are more inclined to be one 
than the other." 

" Complimentary ! but no one minds 
what an engaged being, a half benedict, 
like you says." 

" Engaged !" sighed De Montville; and 
his looks involuntarily reverted to Ade- 
laide, who, apparently unconscious of the 
agitation she had occasioned, was smiling, 
and talking, and looking as usual. De 
Montville fancied he had a right to be dis- 
pleased, so he tried to maintain his moody 
humour; but in vain, and he soon became 
again completely himself. 

The evening passed away delightfully. 
After tea, the younger part of the com- 
pany repaired to the music-room, where 



CONTRAST. 349 

they amused themselves with dancing and 
playing. Adelaide now appeared to be 
quite in her element ; and as De Mont- 
ville still continued to watch every move- 
ment, and dwell on every word, he became 
still more enchanted than ever, by the na- 
tive gracefulness of her air and manner ; 
and, like the enamoured Florizel, could 
have said — 



-What you do, 



Still betters what is done. When you speak, sweet, 

I'd have you do it ever ; when you sing, 

I'd have you buy and sell so ; so give alms ; 

Pray so ; and for the ordering of your affairs, 

To sing them too. When you dance, I wish you 

A wave o' th' sea, that you might ever do 

Nothing but that ; more still, still so. 

And own no other function. Each your doing, 

So singular in each particular, 

Crowns what you're doing in the present deeds. 

That all your acts are queens." 

As he escorted her and lady Dorothy 
to the castle, so he saw them home. It 
was too late for him to expect to be ask- 
ed in ; but this did not prevent his linger- 
ing, after they had wished him good- 
night ; but he could not bring himself to 
return immediately ; there was something 
of enchantment, to his feelings, in the spot. 



350 CONTRAST. 

that detained him there, even after the 
barricading up of the old mansion, sighing 
out his soul, like Troilus unto the Grecian 
camp, when it contained his Cressid. But 
in the loveliness of the night, there was an 
excuse for this romantic folly, as gently 
murmuring past, the west wind waved to 
and fro the old trees, with their broad ex- 
panse of melancholy leaves, adding their 
rustling to the bubbling sound of running 
water ; while in the balmy air there was a 
coolness, refreshing to the feelings, more 
than once agitated throughout the day. 
As he stood gazing on the house, wonder- 
ing whether Adelaide could think, on so 
delicious a night, of retiring immediately 
to repose, he heard a distant window softly 
opening, and hastening towards it, beheld 
her leaning over an old stone balcony that 
stretched before it. 

" Is that you?" she asked, in a low 
voice, on his stepping forward, just where 
an old tree cast a deep shadow athwart the 
ground. 

" Yes, my very self," replied De Mont- 
ville. 



CONTRAST. 351 

Adelaide uttered a faint scream, and 
appeared to recoil. 

" What is the matter ?" demanded De 
Montville, with quickness. " You seem 
alarmed. If not to me, who is it you 
thought you spoke to ?" 

" How can you suppose I thought it 
was to any one but you ?" 

" Then why appear surprised ? or, as I 
already said, alarmed ?" 

" Oh, this pug of lady Dorothy's jump- 
ed upon me, without my knowing he was 
in the room. But what delays you here ? 
Really this is very ridiculous." 

" How can you be so unkind as to say 
so ? If you knew the pleasure there is in 
gazing on the roof that covers a beloved 
object, you would not express yourself so 
unkindly." 

" Yes, yes, 'tis really very foolish ; so 
pray go ; should we be overheard, we shall 
have the household tocsin sounded, and 
all the dogs in the place set barking." 

" Cruel !" cried De Montville. " This 
is not the way in which Juliet would have 
addressed her Romeo." 



35^ CONTRAST. 

" Perhaps not ; but that's no rule to 
me. A fine subject for ridicule we should 
furnish, if this silly conduct of yours were 
discovered; so good night. If inclined 
to play the part of Romeo, you must seek 
elsewhere for a Juliet," and retiring within 
the chamber, she very deliberately closed 
the window. 

De Montville mused ; what had brought 
her to it ? — was it to enjoy the fineness of 
the night, or was it any particular expec- 
tation ? He glanced at the dark avenue, 
nearly opposite, leading to St. Finians : 
he was tempted to explore this ; but 
no, the suspicion that would have urged 
him to this, was revolting to his feelings, 
and he accordingly resolutely bent his 
steps homeward. Yet still, her question 
on seeing him, still her exclamation of 
surprise, on finding it was he who answer- 
ed it, dwelt upon his imagination. Yet 
what was it, he reflected, that might not 
be misconstrued, and misinterpreted, under 
the influence of distrust ? and he persisted 
in going on, spite of the suggestions that. 



CONTRAST. 353 

more than once, inclined him to retrace 
his steps. 

Was he naturally of a jealous mistrust- 
ful temper? he now began to debate within 
himself. He did not imagine he was ; 
yet, assuredly, he had allowed himself to 
act as if the reverse were the case; but he 
would not be a self-tormentor, spite of the 
circumstances that had conspired to create 
uneasiness ; he would, taking confidence 
from the manner of Adelaide, try to be- 
lieve there were no real grounds for it; 
yet, much he wished he had never heard 
of the suspected attachment of Mount- 
florence to some one under the roof of 
lady Dorothy, since he could not discover 
who the object of it was. 

As on the preceding day, he was, at 
an early hour the ensuing morning, at 
lady Dorothy's ; and when he met Ade- 
laide, looking all unconsciousness of having 
given him any cause for alarm, he rejoiced 
at the conquest he had obtained over him- 
self the preceding night. 

The party at Woodston was select, from 
a previous understanding with lord Le 



354 CONTRAST. 

Poer, that it was not his wish to have 
Adelaide generally introduced until after 
her marriage. 

On withdrawing from the dining-room, 
the young ladies quitted the house for a 
walk. Helena, Adelaide, and Caroline, 
strolled on together ; and separating from 
the rest of the party, diverged into a path 
leading down amongst the cliffs to the 
beach. In their descent, Caroline inquir- 
ed of Adelaide whether, in the course of 
her stolen rambles, she had ever paid a 
visit to a curious cavern close by, called 
the Lady's Cave, from some old tradition 
of a female having perished in it; and 
being answered in the negative, led the way 
to the place, as one well worth examin- 
ing. It was a very romantic excavation, 
the sides and roof beautifully decorated 
with marine plants, and the bottom cover- 
ed with a fine silvery sand, thickly inter- 
mixed with pebbles, that Caroline des- 
cribed as bearing a fine polish, and being 
often selected to form into ornaments. 
Adelaide saying she should like to have a 
necklace and bracelets composed of them. 



CONTRAST. 355 

her companions began to assist her in col- 
lecting some for the purpose. 

While thus engaged, Caroline, suddenly 
raising her head, uttered a piercing shriek 
declaring, that if they did not fly, they 
were lost. They rushed to the entrance ; 
but shrunk back appalled, on seeing the 
sea almost close to it, Caroline having ne- 
glected to ascertain whether the tide was 
on the ebb or flow at the moment of lead- 
ing them thither. In vain she urged their 
venturing out ; their dread of being borne 
off by the recoil of the waves, made them 
regardless of her entreaties. For a mi- 
nute, the clamour of the seagulls, frighten- 
ed by their cries, was all that they heard 
in reply. They then distinguished voices 
from above, shouting out to them not to 
fear; and instantly after saw De iSIont- 
ville, Mountflorence, and some others of 
the party at Woodston, rapidly descend- 
ing the cliffs to their rescue. Adelaide 
was the nearest to the entrance, and Mount- 
florence the first to reach it. On behold- 
ing him she instinctively stretched out her 
arms; but passing her, as if not seen. 



356 CONTRAST. 

he caught up Helena, and bore her off in 
safety. The other gentlemen were equally 
successful in their efforts for her com- 
panions; and in a few minutes, the party 
becoming tolerably collected, again return- 
ed to the house. 

Helena, escaping from the inquiries and 
congratulations that were the consequence 
of the incident, hastened to her chamber, 
impatient to think over all that had occur- 
red — to dwell on the delightful assurance, 
just received, of being an object of superior 
interest to him who had been long so to 
her. Had Adelaide been preferred, would 
he have acted as he had done ? No, im- 
possible ; and she now indeed began to feel 
herself happy, relieved from the fears, the 
anxieties, that had been such a source of 
torment to her. Even on the score of sir 
Osbert, she had nothing further to appre- 
hend, as the following letter, received that 
very morning, evinced : — 



CONTRAST. 257 

To Miss Rossglen. 

" London, June 17, 18 — . 



" MADAM, 



" It has been observed, that when 
a pretext is wanting, we are generally in- 
genious enough to discover one : you ve- 
rify the truth of the remark ; but I disdain 
complaint, where I know it would be un- 
availing. Silence on our wrongs, how- 
ever, is no proof of their not being keenly 
felt. That you can possibly conceive 
yourself justified in your conduct towards 
me, is an idea I cannot admit, spite of the 
misrepresentations of my self-interested 
enemies. Be that as it may, however, I 
shall never cease to consider myself a 
much-injured and ill-treated man ; and am, 

" MADAM, 

" Your obedient servant, 

" OsBERT Henley." 



What a proof this letter, had one been 
wanting, of the correctness of the charge 
against him ! for could his conduct have 
borne the test of investigation, was it to 



358 CONTRAST. 

be supposed he would so readily have ac- 
quiesced in her renunciation of him ? but 
no, his guilty conscience allowed a hint to 
be sufficient to alarm : but the subject was 
unpleasant to dwell on, and tearing the 
letter into a thousand atoms, now and for 
ever she dismissed him from her thoughts. 



CHAP. XIV. 

" These are the charming agonies of love, 
Where misery delights." 

With a heart fluttering with delight, a 
cheek suffused with the glow of pleasure, 
Helena rejoined the party in the drawing- 
room; relieved from her fear respecting 
Adelaide — a fear that a sudden reserve in 
the manner of Mountflorence had almost 
confirmed, she should now know how to 
regulate her conduct towards him. The 
recent alteration in his manner had natu- 
rally, from a feeling of pride, occasioned 
one in hers ; but now that she had such 



CONTRAST. 359 

reason to come to a flattering conclusion, 
to believe herself indeed an object of inte- 
rest to him, she should have no scruple in 
letting him understand her real senti- 
ments. What the rapture of thinking 
there was nothing now to prevent this, 
that she was again at liberty to let her 
real sentiments be her guide ! 

In the course of the evening there was 
a good deal of laughing amongst the young 
ladies, at the woful appearance they made 
on being dragged out of the cave. — 
" How can you laugh" said Mountflo- 
rence, suddenly addressing himself to He- 
lena, with a little severity of look, " at 
what might have occasioned mourning to 
so many — what, were I to live for ages, I 
feel convinced I could never think of 
without a shudder?" 

" Nor I," said Helena, " without gra- 
titude to him to whom, under Providence, 
I owe my preservation : when I think of 
your risking your life for my sake !" 

" You over-rate the obligation," he in- 
teiTupted. " I would not have seen any 
one so circumstanced without doing the 



360 CONTRAST. 

same;'* and addressing some one near him, 
suddenly vacated his seat. 

There was something in this reply not 
exactly in unison with the elegant softness 
that in general distinguished Mountflo- 
rence; and for a moment Helena felt con- 
fused. Had any thing occurred to dis- 
compose him, or had she, after all, deceiv- 
ed herself with regard to his sentiments? 
and had he, perceiving this, watched for 
an opportunity of undeceiving her? but 
no, she would not yield to so cruel a sur- 
mise; it was not chance, but impulse, that 
occasioned her rescue by him. In the 
midst of all her terror, she still had per- 
ception enough left to perceive the arms 
of Adelaide outstretched to him in vain, 
while his eyes eagerly darted forward in 
search of her. But of wliat avail all this ? 
of what avail the persuasion of being be- 
loved, if his own heart was to be the sole 
repository of the secret? but was it pro- 
bable that the cold distance of manner he 
had lately assumed, would be able to hold 
out against her smiles — the unreserved 



CONTRAST. 361 

communication that was no longer for- 
bidden ? No, be the cause of this dis- 
tance what it might, she could not bring 
herself to think this likely ; and again she 
gave way to the indulgence of hope and 
pleasing expectation. 

The circumstance that permitted this 
was one equally calculated to have a happy 
effect on the mind of De JNIontville, had 
he noticed it ; but, in terror for Adelaide, 
he saw only her. On joining her, as 
usual, the next morning, at lady Doro- 
thy's — " Well, I am glad you are come 
so early," she said, " for I was quite long- 
ing for your arrival." 

" Thus let me thank you for the flat- 
tering acknowledgement," said the lover, 
seizing her hand, and imprinting it with 
kisses. 

" Come, come, a truce with this folly ; 
I want to speak seriously to you : you 
were telling me last night that the prepa- 
rations for our ' 

" Marriage were nearly completed," said 
De Montville, on finding she paused. 

VOL. I. a 



362 CONTRAST. 

^' Yes ; but still, notwithstanding, it can 
surely never be lord Le Poer's intention 
to have it immediately take place?" 

" And why not?" demanded De Mont- 
ville, eagerly. 

" The reason, I think, must be obvious : 
here we are hardly two days acquainted, 
and, in so short a time, what knowledge 
can we have obtained of each other ?" 

" Oh, if that be the only objection," said 
De INIontville, laughing, " I can obviate it 
at once. Half an hour is quite sufficient to 
let every one know you are the most en- 
chanting creature in the world ; and as to 
me, I assure you I am always the same : 
so that, if deemed endurable in the first 
instance, there is nothing further to be as- 
certained." 

" I am serious, however, in what I have 
said, whatever you may conceive to the 
contrary; and as a proof, now positively 
assure you, that I neither can nor will 
consent to so hasty a measure, as, to every 
rational and considerate mind, an imme- 
diate union must appear." 

" No, no !" exclaimed De Montville, 



CONTRAST. 363 

passionately, " you have some other rea- 
son for the objection you have stated ; 
you wish, by it, to gain time, to prepare 
me for the final disappointment of the 
hopes you permitted me to indulge." 

" You wrong me by the supposition," 
said Adelaide, with earnestness ; " I have 
no deception in my thoughts." 

" And you solemnly deny," resumed 
De Montville, " that you have no other 
reason for objecting to an immediate union, 
than because you think it too precipitate?" 

Adelaide looked down, and appeared 
embarrassed for a few minutes; then rais- 
ing her head — " Well then," she said, " to 
deal sincerely with you, there is another 

"Ah ! so I guessed," said De Montville, 
changing colour. 

" There is a friend," she proceeded — " a 
most particular friend, from whom I must 
hear, before I can form any serious en- 
gagement." 

'* Must hear ! extraordinary indeed ! 
And pray, may I ask, who is this friend, 
whom you have allowed to usurp this 
R 2 



364 CONTRAST. 

seeming control over you, or what the 
expected contents of this letter ?" 

" I can reply to neither question at pre- 
sent ; suffice it, that on obtaining the sa- 
tisfaction I require, there will be an end 
of all further mystery on the subject." 

" But why continue to make one of it 
till then ? why let me be tortured by the 
doubts and fears the circumstance must 
suggest? Give me your confidence at 
once, and thus entitle yourself to submis- 
sion to 5^our wish." 

** Impossible ! I cannot be more candid 
with you at present than I have been; 
but be assured, should it be our fate to be 
united, you shall not solicit my confidence 
in vain ; for never will I be either your 
wife, or the wife of any other man, with 
a consciousness on my mind of not having 
acted ingenuously." 

" And to what does all this tend ?" ask- 
ed De Montville, with forced calmness. 

" I should have deemed the question 
unnecessary, of course, to the postpone- 
ment of this certainly precipitate measure 
of lord Le Poer's." 



CONTRAST. 365 

" And in what way ? or through what 
means ?" 

" Yours, assuredly," replied Adelaide, 
" else I had not addressed you on the 
subject." 

" What, expect me to act in direct op- 
position to my fondest wishes ?" exclaimed 
De Montville, starting up with a glow of 
angry impatience on his cheek ; " that 
really is a stretch of complaisance I should 
hardly have thought any one could have 
looked to from another." 

" It is not slight favours that confer ob- 
ligations," said Adelaide, mildly ; " if I 
had not deemed you capable of a generous 
act, I had not decided on an appeal to 
you. I need not explain what the cir- 
cumstances are, or the feelings, the natural 
result of these circumstances, that hold me 
at such a distance from lord Le Poer, as to 
check the disclosure of any particular wish 
to him ; if you, therefore, in consideration 
of this painful restraint, that prevents my 
speaking for myself, will speak for me, 
you will oblige, in a way that, let what 
will occur, will never be forgotten." 
r3 



366 CONTRAST. 

" What flattery — what seducing flat- 
tery, to win me to your purpose!" said 
De Montville, resuming his seat, and in- 
voluntarily taking her hand. " But sup- 
posing I can be brought to render my im- 
mediate wishes subservient to yours, when 
may the elucidation of all that appears so 
extraordinary be expected ?" 

" Daily." 

"But before I promise any thing, 
there is a question or two I must ask : 
does Mountflorence know what you meant 
to require of me ? or," still more earnestly, 
" is he the unacknowledged lover of your 
friend Miss Ferns?" 

" I can reply to neither question." 

" Then, if so inexorably determined 
against satisfying me on any one point, 
how can you expect obedience to what 
you desire?" 

" Because I feel assured of your gene- 
rosity." 

" Ah, flattery again ! But do you know 
the risk I shall run of committing myself 
with lord Le Poer, by attempting to in- 



CONTRAST. 367 

terfere with any arrangements be has 
made?" 

" Well, the gi-eater the risk you incur 
on my account, the greater my obligation 
to you." 

" Ah, a fine way of trying to reconcile me 
to the folly you are urging me to be guilty 
of — that of positively opposing my own 
wishes ! But there is still another ques- 
tion I have to ask, which decidedly, ex- 
cept answered, I draw back : should the 
letter you have alluded to arrive to-day, 
to-morrow, or — no matter, the day after, 
would you then, in that case, still continue 
to object to our immediate marriage?" 

Adelaide hesitated ; then, with a slight 
suffusion on her cheek — " Well, I would 
not," she replied. 

" Then, for tliat assurance," cried De 
Montville, again kissing her hand with 
rapture, " I'll do all I can to prevail on 
his lordship to postpone making me the 
happiest of mortals." 

But how this was to be done, was a 
puzzle, considering the imperious and ar- 
bitrary temper of the person he had to 



368 CONTRAST. 

deal with ; and when he came to reflect 
coolly on the subject, he conceived he had 
acted most egregiously, in suffering him- 
self to be drawn in to make such a pro- 
mise as he had done ; but there was such 
resistless pleading in the looks of Adelaide. 
But what could be the communication she 
expected from her friend ? probably some- 
thing, after all, of no material import: 
was it unlikely, that some girlish vanity 
had got her involved in some little dilem- 
ma, which a fear of incurring the imputa- 
tion of imprudence rendered her anxious 
to conceal, and this desired letter was ex- 
pected to relieve her from ? 

The next morning, lord Le Poer, as 
usual, began speaking of the nearly-com- 
pleted preparations for the event he was, 
on many accounts, anxious to have speed- 
ily solemnized; asking De Montville 
whether there were any orders he wished 
to give on the occasion, in addition to those 
already received from him ? 

" I was thinking, my lord,'* said De 
Montville, " how happy — that is, what a 
gratification it would be to my mother, to 



CONTRAST. 369 

be present at Adelaide's marriage and 
mine." 

" Yes, I dare say it would," assented his 
lordship, gravely ; " but as you know she 
will not be at liberty, on account of your 
sister, to come over for some time, it is 
one she must necessarily dispense with." 

" True, my lord, true — except," and he 
rubbed his forehead, and stammered a little, 
" except the — the event were postponed 
for a short time." 

** Your marriage postponed !" cried lord 
Le Poer, setting down the cup of coffee 
he was raisiiig to h\< lipr, v.nd starting back 
into an attitude of indignant surprise, that 
would not have disgraced a first-rate actor. 
" Do I understand you clearly, sir ? — is it 
your wish, your desire, that your marriage 
should be delayed ? Take care, sir ; take 
care," drawing his chair back to the table, 
" what you are about, lest the suspicion 
be confirmed of there being some other 
motive for your long continuance abroad, 
than what you assigned for it. I need 
hardly tell you, I believe, that I am not a 
person to be trifled with, whatever you 



370 CONTRAST. 

may have thought proper to conceive to the 
contrary. I have never forgot that Ade- 
laide is my daughter, and, as such, shall 
take care to allow of no trifling where she 
is concerned. You have only to repeat 
your desire to have your marriage post- 
poned, and be assured you shall be grati- 
fied, not merely by its postponement for a 
short time, but for ever !" 

" Heaven forbid !" fervently ejaculated 
De Montville ; " that indeed would be to 
render me one of the most miserable of 
men ! In expressing the wish that has 
offended, I spoke contrary to my real feel- 
ings ; but I—I thought my " 

" Oh, well," interrupted his lordship, 
" lady Newbury is not so extremely self- 
ish as to think only of what is pleasing to 
herself As I have already mentioned, 
the preparations for your marriage are just 
completed, and there remains nothing 
then to delay it." 

De Montville bowed with an air of sub- 
mission to his lordship ; for the first time, 
not inclined to find fault with his peremp- 
tory temper. Well, since the matter had 



CONTRAST. S71 

ended in this way, he was glad he had 
complied with the unreasonable request of 
Adelaide. He hastened to communicate 
to her the result of what had passed, and 
was absolutely confounded by the agita- 
tion she evinced on learning it. She ex- 
pressed her fear of his not being sincere, 
and persisted in declaring, that as nothing 
could induce her to change the determina- 
tion she had avowed to him, he must make 
another effort for delaying their marriage. 

De Montville now became seriously ir- 
ritated, and was vehemently protesting 
against the unreasonableness of such an ex- 
pectation, after what had occurred between 
him and his lordship, and insisting on his 
positive right of knowing her motive for 
desiring this delay, when lady Dorothy 
walked in, and there was an end of any 
further opportunity of conversing with 
her for the present, the carriage being al- 
most instantly after announced, to take 
them to Woodston, where they were again 
to dine that day. 

The agitation of De Montville was not 
lessened, as he stepped after them into it. 



372 CONTRAST. 

by observing a blue scarf round Adelaide, 
exactly resembling the one that Caroline 
had found at St. Finian's, and displayed 
with so much laughter there : he could 
not, he would not, from the impression of 
previous circumstances upon his mind, per- 
mit himself to doubt its being the same ; 
and in yielding to this belief, he yielded to 
the conviction of there being a secret in- 
tercourse between her and Mountflorence ; 
what torture in the thought ! — but he 
would not much longer endure it — he 
would extort the truth from one party or 
the other — he would know her motive, for 
what had given him such just grounds for 
suspicion, and, if originating in what he 
apprehended, at once relinquish all further 
thoughts of the proposed union. 



END OF VOL. I. 



Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-Street, London, 


