Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The maid of the Hamlet: a tale
" and thus ends an intimacy fo produftive of pleafure ! Well, we have effefted this ourfelves ; it was our arguments prevailed on him to be reconciled to the world, and abandon his folitude." Her reft was broken and difturbed in confequence of the dejeftion and perturba¬ tion of her mind ; and eariy in the morning flie was roufed from a diflurbed flumber, by the maid, vvho delivered her a note, in which, to her infinite furprife, ihe found the following lines : " Mydear Mifs Stanley, " If you will truft yourfelf, for an hour after breakfaft this morning, to the care of an old man, you will greatly oblige " Your faithful friend, « J. Ashmors." She
She directly rofe, and, dreffing herfelf in hafte, repaired to the parlour, where Mr. Belmore already was. She ihowed him the note, and his furprife was eûual to her's on reading it. That Aflimore had fome r thing of importance to communicate, he could not doubi; accordingly, the moment breakfaft was over he bade her. haften to him. She had not got many yards from the cottage, when ihe faw Aihmore approaching it. He greeted her with a benevolent fmile, and drawing her arm under his, turned into a ihady and retired lane. " I fear," fald Aflimore, after a paufe of fome minutes, " I difturbed your repofe this morning ; but I am certain, when you hear the motives which prompted me to do fo, you will forgive me.—Yes, Mifs Stanley, it was folicitude for your welfare ? 2 made
made me anxious to fee you thus early. Knowing, as I do, from bitter experience, that innocence is too apt to be credulous, I thought you could not too foon be ap- prifed of the defigns formed againft you —too ibon cautioned to guard a heart/ rich in every virtue,, from the allurements of a man unworthy of a place within it:— This monfter! this barbarian! for fo with juftice may he be ftyled, who could form even a thought injurious to purity like thine, h Bromley." " Bromley!" cried Matilda, ftarting; " he harbour defigns againft me !"------ " Of the blackeft nature," replied Mr. Aihmore ,*—-"* but, inftead of declaiming againft him, I will relate ? littletale, which will unfold his charafter to your view, and let you fee the atrocities he is capable of committing. " A
" A favourite fifter died three years ago. She was a widow, in diftreffed circum¬ ftances, an I unable to make any provifion for an onlv daughter flie left behind her. I was then ftruggling with misfortunes, (my prefent In ing I have only enjoyed ? íhort time, ani procured by the mtereft of a valuable friend) and confequently could not take my niece under my proteftion. She therefore continued in the tow n, where ftie had always lived with her mother, under the care of a refpeftable family, who ma- niifefted the efteem they felt for my de¬ parted fifter, by the kindnefs they extended to her orphan child. Her youth— her beauty—her innocence indeed, were truly interefting ; and wo ! — wo ! upon, the wretch who blighted fo a hir a flower! " Bromley faw her by chance, and was ftruck by her beauty. He found means to ? 3 be
be introduced at the houfe v\ here flie lived : his infinuating manners procured him, in a fhort time, eafy and confiant accefs to it. He was not long in ingratiating himfelf into her favour,; and, as foon as he per¬ ceived the influence he had acquired over her heart, he made, as flie imagined, the moft honourable propofals, which he en¬ joined her, however, to keep a profound fecret, and accounted in fuch a manner for this injunction, as gave her no reafon to doubt his fincerity. " In an evil hour ihe confented to a pri¬ vate marriage, and accompanied hini to, a country-houfe at fome diftance, taken for the exprefs purpofe, where a perfon in the difguife of a clergyman performed the ce¬ remony. I was diffracted on hearing of her flight. For three months 1 could dif¬ eover no trace ofher. At the expiration of
ofthat time flie vvas found, by means of an old fervant belonging to the family, with whom flie had refided, in an obfcure vil¬ lage, whither flie retired on difcovering the perfidy of Bromley, which he himfelf cruelly and nudacioufly avowed as foon as he grew tired of her. " I haftened to her the moment I learned her retreat. I vvill not piin you by at¬ tempting to deferibe our meeting.—I pre¬ vailed on the unhappy girl, not without difficulty, to return to the lady from whofe houfe fhe had been feduced, and who loved her vvith a mother's tendernefs. <€ To have juftice done her by Bromley, or vengeance taken on him, vve found im¬ poffible, as ilie had no vvitneffcs to prove any thing againft him. From the kind and gentle treatment fne experienced, I in¬ dulged a hope of her forrow being al le¬ fi 4 ν iat cd
viated by time, and of feeing her again reftored to fome degree of comfort; but this hope flie defeated, by withdrawing herfelf from the knowledge of all her friends, leaving a letter for me ; in which flie declared, that ûie could not fupport the idea of continuing in a place, which re¬ minded her continually of paft felicity, and implored my pardon for all the anguifh flie occafioned me, " Thus, fweet Matilda, have I informed you of # misfortune 1 inceffamly mourn ; a rø ^fortune, w hi h has caufed my fon, the darhng of my widowed heart, to be an exile from his native home. He early beheld his lovely coufin with the moft partial re¬ gard, and I only prevented his avowing his attachment, till I faw fome profpeft of for¬ tune fmiling upon him. That profpeft was juft beginning io open, when ihe became fatali v ?
fatally entangled in the fnarcs of ? villain^ His anguifli and difappointment at lofing her—lofing her too in fuch a manna*, were fo great, as to fill me with apprehenfions for his life. Change of fcene, I hoped, might produce a falutary effect, ??? ??- cordingîy prevailed on him ro goto Gewva, where an old friend of mine is fettled, who often invited him thither."—Here the good man ceafed; and Matilda, as foe» ?$ fhe had recovered from the emotions his narrative excited, exprcfled the gratitude with which his folicitudc about her*had filled ber heart, and the fympathy İhe fek for ?? diftrefs. He then returned with her toward«, the cottage, and parted with her at no great diftance from it ; being unfit for company at this period. With flow ftep», and ab¬ forbed in meditation, Matilda was purfuing the remainder of her way, when How^d ? 5 unexpectedly
unexpeftedly made his appearance. At that inftant he did not notice her dejection ; being totally engroffed by intelligence he feemed anxious to communicate, if At length, Mifs Stanley," faid he, " you will get rid of a troublefome friend; I have this morning wrote to a gentleman, recom¬ mended to me by Mr. Belmore, (as ac¬ quainted with fuch matters) relative to a commiffion." Matilda's feelings on his firft declaring his intention of entering into the army, have been already mentioned; flie was now tremblingly alive to every feeling of fen¬ fibility. ff Will you not rejoice," con¬ tinued he, " at being freed from a perfon, whofe capricioufncfs has fo long inter¬ rupted yeur domeftic tranquillity? Come, congratulate yourfelf on the profpeft you behold of being delivered from him." Matilda
Matilda attempted to fmile ; the effort was unfuccefsful, and flie burft into tears. Howard looked amazed and fhocked^— flie flopped—a tremor fliook her frame— flie grew faint and was unable to fupport herfelf. This was not a time for fcruples, for doubts, for reftraints. Such an object as Matilda Stanley in d ifi refs, fufpended every other idea than that of offering her affift¬ ance. He fupported her in his arms; his accent was foftnefs itfelf. His affiduities for fome time had not the defired effect— his gentlenefs affefted her ftill more, and flie wept with increafing violence. Howard alternately preft her trembling hand to his bofom and his lips ; his fine eyes beaming with unutterable tendernefs. Matilda by degrees recovered, and as flie recovered, afliamed of her fituation, flie ? 6 gently
gently difengaged herfelf from Howard's arms, and, giving him an cxpreffive look of gratitude, hurried on. How ftrange and how perverfe are pre¬ judices ! that very heart, whofe tender emotions he could but ? moment before with difficulty controul, now reproached him for having betrayed too great a weak¬ nefs, in obeying the dictates of fenfibility. " O! Edvvard!" cried he to himfelf, as he tardily followed Matilda, "and is it thus I renounce—! abandon ? fex from whom you fuflained fuch injuries ? Yet, was not my refolution to do fo, raih? is it not barbarous to condemn all, for the errors of one?" By degrees, the ideas he had conceived of female levity, deceit, and inconftancy, were removed; and with them, the diftruft, indifference, and diflike they had given rife
rife to. As he gazed on the artlefs coun¬ tenance of Matilda, he foftly exclaimed, " It was indeed the index of ? celeftial mind." She reached the cottage before him; through the window he faw her leaning on Belmore's flioulder, her tears again falling. He ftarted back!—" Before a witnefs, at leaft," cried he, " I will not expofe my weaknefs." He turned haftily away; and yet, while retiring from the cotta¿;c, he almoft envied Belmore. To be the miri· gator of Matilda's diftrefs, to have her again reclined on his bofom, to hang over her with pity and mingled emotions, to hear her gentle fighs, to foftly wipe away her tears, to prefs her trembling hand— ? hat idle fancies (thought he)--how ndiculous —but is not human nature a compound of wifdom and folly? ????,
CHAP. II. '« That eating canker, grief, with wsfteful fpite, ** Pre) s on the roíy bioorø of youth.*' ROUE, χ HE narrative of the morning was cir- cumftantially related to Mr. Belmorr, whofe difpofition was too congenial to his adopted child's, not to be fenfibly affected by the forrows it difclofed. He fliuddered with horror at the danger to which Matilda had been expofed, and at the idea of the ftratagcms which might now
now be forming againft her: he knew how difficult it was to guard againft complicated villainy : the power, the art of Bromley rendered the defign he meditated dreadful to his imagination; and, as the beft method of putting a ftop to them, he refolved on removing Matilda for fome time from the neighbourhood ; convinced, when ac¬ quainted with the neceffity he thought there was for it, ihe would not oppofe his inten¬ tions, however painful a feparation from him might be. An incident occurred in the, courfe of this day which tended to prove the propriety of his refolution, and prevented any wavering in it. Bromley's trufty agent Le Rogne, tampered with his maid, and tried to pre¬ vail on her to promife accefs to his mafter whenever Mr. Belmore was abfent from home : her honefty, however, withftood all his
his temptations, and fhe openly commu¬ nicated all that had paffed between them to her mafter. Thus did Bromley, by too great folicitude to accomplifh his defigns, enable them more effectually to be counteracted. Though confident to an excefs, he had not affurance to venture to the houfe, after the laft interview between him and Matilda* His cruel relation, his dependent fitua¬ tion, were all indeed vifionary misfortunes; he had long been releafed from the autho¬ rity of conneftions, a» well as the controul of principle. The information received from the fer* vant ftrengthened the apprehenfions of Belmore, as it convinced him Bromley would leave no point untried to accomplifh his purpofes. He
He determined therefore to take imme¬ diate fteps for Matilda's removal. In the moft fooihing manner he informed her of his intentions of parting vvith her fur fome time; lhe could fcarcdy cred t what flic heard:—Half breathlefs with grief and difmay, flie wildly exclaimed—" You are not ferious ! Oh ! my more than parent, yeu cannot furely part with me! You wdl not fend awày your poor child ! 1 cannot indeed fupport a feparation from you !" Belmore preffed her to his bofom. "Oh! darling of my affections ! (cried the good old man, while his tears fell upon hercheek) " let the pangs you fee me fuffer at the idea of a feparation from you, con- s vince you that nothing but abfolute ne¬ ceffity could make me think of iuch a meafure:—" But there is no neceffity," faid fhe ; " protefted by you, I have nothing to fear from the treachery of Bromley." "Alas!
*' Alas! my child," replied Belmore fr I much fear I ibould be unequal to cope with the cunning of this moft infidious man :** —* f We may fiy him then," interrupted fhe. c * From clime to clime, would I fly with you/' cried Bel -nore; " but, alas ! in every clime might vve not find a Bromley."— Matilda wept ar.d he proceeded : " In the fituation in which 1 mean to place you, he will perceive all his attempts muft prove abortive, and weary, at length of expectations which he finds cannot be realized, he will, I have no doubt, give up his purfuit, and then I may receive peace and my Matilda again to my bofom." Belmore continued his difcourfe. He expatiated on her danger, and the fecurity ofthe fituation he pointed out to her. Matilda
Matilda had a heart, which, though breaking vvith regret, was ever bowed down to conviction i flie reafoned with herfelf; ihe acknowledged the juftice of his argu¬ ments, and that they demanded her com¬ pliance. Both her parents had been allied to iU iuitriotis families, though neither had been noticed by them, in confequence of their marriage, which was confidered imprudent in the extreme. Lady Denham, hovvever, a relation of her mother's, as flie grew up, condefcended to notice her, and fre¬ quently afked her to her houfe, to which, - however, Matilda as yet had never gone. From her profeffions of friendfliip, Belmore judged, for a fliort time flie would be pleafed to have Matilda under her protec¬ tion; and accordingly wrote to her lady¬ íhip to inform her; —That fome particu* lar
kr circumftances had occurred, which would make him happy to accept for Ma¬ tilda, the invitation her ladyfhip had fo frequently givea her. He retired to write this letter, leaving Manida overwhelmed with dejection : ihe fincerely wiíhed fhe had never known Bromley, whofe bafe defigning fchemes were about exiling fter from all flie held dear on earth: while breathing this wifh, the parlour-door opened, and Howard entered. She was leaning on a table, her hands were i bfped together,* and her countenance bidiCKed her internal agitation. He ft med back,—Good heaven, thought he, ani 1 ever to be betrayed into weaknefs by fuch fights?—He would have retreated, but the e\es of Matilda were direfted to¬ wards him, with an irrefiftible foftnefs, as fhe
ihe haftHy exclaimed—" Won't you come in ?" He fat down befide her—he looked at and from „er feveral times, " In no flat-on, no fituation/' faid he to himfelf, " is felicity permanent; the fmiks of Matilda are va¬ niihed ; that ga*ety which had power to mitigate the anguiih of my feelings, is over-* caft by gloom and dejection. " I am almoft tempted to imagine, Mifs Stanley/' faid he; " that my company has proved infeftious, and of courft"—"Oh! no," interrupted fhe» "but the idea of a fe¬ paration from my deareft friend, is attended with a pain 1 cannot exprefs, This is, in reality, my firft real forrow *' Howard took her hand :■—his eyes were fattened upon her face with the moft tender expreffion in them ; his bofom palpitated ; and a prayer ftole from the moft fecret re¬ ceffes
ceifes of his heart, that this might be her laft real forrow. His lips touched ??? hand :—- (he attempted to withdraw it;— * her eyes involuntarily refted on him for a, moment, and the livelieft bluflies fuffufed her cheeks. Howard alfo coloured:—as he caught her timid glance, he let her hand drop from his, and flightly bowing, precipitately quit¬ ted the room. Matilda's mind now became occupied with fuch emotions as fhe had never before experienced—emotions, however, infinitely more pleafing than painful. She recalled the affiduities—the tendernefs—fo unex- pefted, fo delightfully foothing of Howard, to her view; his mxiety for her reftoratíön to cheerfulnefs—his concern for her diftrefs —every word he uttered was recorded in her heart. " What
" What but efteem/' cried fhe to her¬ felf, " could occafion his folicitude about me?" The rapture which this fhppofirion in¬ fpired, is not to be wondered at: warm as her opinion of his merits was— next to Mr. Belmore ftie refpefted him; in his prefence ftie felt delight ; in his abfence fhe experienced fadnefs; but while flie nou- ri fhed his idea, ihe was ignorant of the ftrength ofher affeftion for him. The proud fpirit of Howard now fluc¬ tuated between its natural philanthropy and its acquired difcontent. The more, however, he knew of Matilda, the more he inveftigated the innocence of her dif¬ pofition, the lefs his prejudices became; thofe prejudices, to which, in a great degree, was owing his prefent gloominefs of tem¬ per, gradually, imperceptibly, almoft in¬ fen lib! y ;
fenfibly; ihe ftole upon hjs efteem, pleaded her own caufe, and that of jer fex. When Matilda was awakened from the pleafin j inince into which ihe had fallen, and confidered the approaching period when ihe muft quit the Hamlet, hér pro¬ tector, and Howard, a fudden agony feized her, and even the thoughts of returning wanted power to confole, by rejecting Howard, ere that period, would be in pot feíhvn of a commiffion, and far diftant from thofe feenes where they had enjoyed fo many hours of harmony and peace. Howard returned to dinner; he was more than ufually abfent and penfi ve; Ma¬ tilda this day was alfo filent and dejefted; and Belmore participated in the uneafinefs of both. From this time Howard became almoft a refident at the cottage: in vain he tried to
to perfuade himfelf it was the friendfliip of Belmore alone drew him thither; the emo¬ tions he experienced on feeing Matilda, convinced him to the contrary. The only happinefs he felt, was in her company ; yet this happinefs was often checked by fudden recollections; and it was eafy to perceive that fome fecret for¬ rou, ftiil heavier than any he had divulged, weighed heavy on his heart, A month elapfed without bringing any letter from Lady Denham ; but, confident of her fin¬ cerity, Belmore fuppofed flie was abfent from her houfe at the time his letter reached it ; and that, the moment flie returned to it, he ihould hear, as he expefted, from her. Matilda dreaded the arrival of this ex¬ pect vd letter, as much as he wiflied for it; though flic was now almoft a prifoner, as ihe feared to venture far from home, left vol. ?, ? flic
fhe fliould encounter Bromley, who fhe knew kept a conftant watch upon her, and made feveral unfuccefsful attempts to pro¬ cure an opportunity of fpeaking or deli¬ vering a letter to her.
CHAP.
CHAP. ?. ít «??. Her varying· charme *< A thoufand agitations íhow." BLACKLOCK. JVlATILDA's fears about quitting the Hamlet, were at length removed by the following letter from Lady Denham; €( TO GEORGE BELMORE, ESQ¿ "Sir, CÄ Denham-Lodge* " I am much flattered by your wifh of placing Mifs Stanley under my care¿ but c z with
with infinite regret muft, for the prefent» decline that honour, as an unexpected addi¬ tion of company deprives me of the power of accommodating her as I could wiih, the apartments I defigned to appropriate to her ufe being now occupied. ° Your fair ward will do me juftice, I hope, in believing I much regret not having her my gueft. u I am, Sir, ft Your moft obedient, ' c Humble fervant, " H. D."
* e This, then," faid Belmore, who at once developed her ladyfhip's motives for declining a vifit from Matilda, " is the friendfliip Öf the world i—Uie, who was courted, while fuppofed heirefs ofthe rich domain of Woodford, is now neglected, fince
fince inhabiting a lowly cottage in a Ham¬ let. Never, my child (cried he), while the glow of indignation mantled his cheeks— never, while thofe arms can fofter or pro¬ teft you, fliall you be expofed to the con¬ tempt of the proud, the flights ofthe low- minded :—and, ere I quit this earthly fcene, I truft I fliall have rhe happinefs of feeing you united to fome kindred fpirit, on whofe care and tendernefs you may fecurely depend. " Like yourfelf, my Matilda, in many refpefts new to the world, I am hurt and furprifed at every inftance of illiberality ; I have been too apt to miftake infinuation for fenfibility; but experience, almoft daily takes fomething from credulity, and gra¬ dually removes the veil which fcreened the vices and follies of mankind from view. " This woman's conduft muft not, how¬ ever, difturb our tranquillity:—In Provi- c J dence
dence we will place our truft, nor let ap¬ prehenfions of evil embitter our happinefs." This letrer, far from giving pain to Ma¬ tilda, afforded her the higheft pleafure.—· Its coldnefs was difregirded in the delight fne fek at continuing in the Hamlet:—· Her heart, her hopes vvere centred here; and her tranfports were too great to be concealed. Her blooming cheeks, her fparkling eyes, denoted her feelings :~5he embraced Mr. Belmore, and bid him not regret a re- pulfion which continued her to him. In her joy he foon had reafon to partici¬ pate; as Hiligrove, calling in, informed them, he had juft feen 'Squire Bromley in a chaife and four, followed by three or four grooms, fcouring acrofs the country; and, on aiking a fervant the occafion of this mighty fpeed, he faid, his mafter was going off,
off, exprefs, to a rich old uncle, who was dying. " So he is gone," continued Hiligrove, " on the feem of two thoufand a year, to try and get the ftart, if he can, of the reft ; to be in at the death is the point; fince fuch jockeys as himfelf and thofe he has to deal with, would never mind clapping a few papers in the fire, if much in their way. Lord! how long before fuch a wind-fall would come to an honeft man!" Freed from their uneafinefs about Brom¬ ley, the tranquillity of Belmore and Matilda was perfectly reftored ; and the neceffity for confining herfelf almoft entirely to the cot¬ tage being now over, Matilda indulged her felf, the jñrft evening of her emancipation, with a ramble, leaving Mr. Belmore bufy with his labourers, who vvere now gathering in the harveft. ? 4 CHAP.
CHAP. IV. cf ? Love î how ure thy precious, fweeteft minâtes " Thus ever crofa'd, thus vex'd with difappotntmenU !"
** Malicious, meddling Chance is ever bufy, *' To bring us Fears, Difquiets, and Deiays." Matildas feet, as if by inftinct, guided her to a little hill, from whence Howard's retreat was feen —the bright rays of the fun, reflecting on fome of its broken windows, gave a pleafing grandeur to the fcene;—flie looked—flie fighed, and, in contemplating
confemphting it, forgot all intention of proceeding. His appearance, at laft, roufed her from her reverie—flic ftarted! and immediately proceeded to meet him, with an intention of directing him to the field where Mr. Belmore was, whom ihe con¬ cluded he was coming to fee. Pale, de¬ jected, and difordered, he met her. " Well, Mifs Stanley," faid he, <c my mandate is arrived, and, in a few days, I bid adieu to the Hamlet." "Your commiffion!" ex¬ claimed Matilda, in involuntary agitation. ,f Yes, the cruel perfuafions of Mr. Belmore drive me from the only fpot where I was ca¬ pable of enjoying the leaft degree of plea¬ fure; yet, why deem cruel, what friendihip dictated? Ignorant of my fufferings, he ima¬ gines an active fife vvill blunt my forrows ; but, alas ! over a rooted fadnefs, I fear, it ivill have little power/' ? 5 « You
<c You ihould not yield," cried Matilda, much affected, Cî to defpair; to ñruggle againft misfortunes, is furely to break their force: but ifyou accompany mc to the cot¬ tage, Mr. Belmore, I hope, will be able to convince you, that if forrow cannot be en¬ tirely removed, it can at leaft, by felf- eTertions, be much affuaged," « I will," cried hé; <ζ yet I had better not, fince every vifit will but render the laft more painful. The focial hours I have enjoyed within it can never be forgotten ! They are all of Hfe I wifh to remember; the reft is dreadful!"—He ftopped, as if overcome by a fecret horror. At length, re¬ gaining fome degree of cornpofure, he at¬ tempted to fpeak on indifferent fubjefts;. but the effort proved vain—his foul was engroffed entirely by melancholy ideas. *< The friendfhip of Mr. Belmore has indeed/' he faid, as he turned with Matilda towards
towards the cottage, " been moft foothing 5 nor to your pity am I kk indebted: my roughnefs, my afperity, merited not fuch gentlenefs; I faw all through a ialfe me¬ dium ; my mind was tinctured by fufpicion; but 1 am now convinced, alas! too fatally convinced, that real innocence and fim¬ plicity are to be found in the female fex. Oh ! why," continued he, taking her hand with irrepreffible emotion, and cafting a defpairing look to heaven,—" Oh ! why did we ever meet, fince not before this period ?" Matilda's colour changed ; her hand trem¬ bled in Howard's, and fcarcely had ihe power to proceed. At this critical moment, Patty Hiligrove appeared from a little wood, and, running upto Matilda, mformed her, flie was coining to drink tea vvith her, Howard inftantly dropped the hand he held, and, without fpeaking, precipitately ? 6 retired i
retired; while the foft eyes of Matilda in¬ voluntarily followed him. " Weil, Lord blefs me," cried Patty, ft it is a droll thing of Mr. Howsrd to ?? away fo: to be fure, when firft he came here, I thought him a little crazy, always walking about by himfelf, and living amongft graves and tomb-ftones; but, my opinion is altered lately, in confequence of what farmer Gwynn's wife has told me, and, inftead of being mad, I find he is only croffed in love." u In love!" repeated Matilda, with in¬ voluntary emotion ; then recollecting her¬ felf, flie inquired, vvith affurned calmnefs, what flie had heard to make her think fo.— ** Why, í went the other evening (cried Patty) to drink tea with Mrs. Gwynn ; fb amongft other matters, I began to talk of the ftrange life Mr. Howard led; upon which
which Mrs. Gvvynn faid flie couid tell me fomething that would furprife mc, if I promifed to keep it a fecret; as her huf¬ band (fhe knew not why, indeed), had de¬ fired her never to mention a fylLibleof the matter to any one. I gave her the promife flie required, and fhe then told me, how three months ago, a beautiful lady, quite in the bloom of life, ftopped one cveaing, in a hired chaife, before the farm, and re* quefted her, Mrs. Gwynn, who was (land¬ ing at the gate, to give the poftìllion a di¬ rection to the Abbey; upon which, Mrs. Gwynn told her, as how the chaife could not make its way to the Abbey, the roads all about it vvere fo broken and rupted; but, if ihe chofe to alight, flic flioulú have fome one ro guide her to it, flic /ud, and welcome. She accordingly did, and Mrs. Gvvynn fent one of her little boys v\ ith her. She
She did not ftay long, and came back all in tears, and refufed all Mrs. Gwynn's offers of refrefliment; and got into the chaife again, and nobody could find where ihe came from, nor whither ftie went; and no doubt flie is ? fvveetheart of Mr. Howard's. And fo, to be fure, ï fliould like, of ail things, to hear their ftory; it is fo pleafant to hear of all the croffes of love; and I w\ r , Mifs Matilda, fome day or other, you would afk him about it, and what makes him live fo oddly, in that difmal old place, by himfelf." Matilda could make no reply ; a pang, unfelt before, now fmote her heart, and though ftie could not penetrate the myftery which enveloped Howard, its fource fhe conjeftured tobe love: hopelefs, fhe could not believe it, as the lady evidently purfued him; yet, that flie appeared difappointed in
in the purfuit, her tears evidently denoted; yet why, if young and beautiful?—-fhe was loft in conjefture: the tale was a ftrange one; and, the more ihe reflected on it, the more fhe was amazed. She found Mr. Belmore, with his friend Aíhmore, waiting for her at the cottage. She informed the former of the arrival of Howard's commiffion, which gave him fenfible pleafure; and, after tea, he propofed to Aihmore paying a vifit to the yo*mg foldier, and learning when he quitted the Hamlet, Patty foon grew tired of flaying vvith Matilda, vvho had not fpirits to fupport ? converfation with her; without any cere¬ mony, therefore, flie departed in queft of more amufement than flie could, at prefent find with her, and Matilda retired to the little embowered retreat in the garden: here
here flie felt moit forcibly how clofely pleafure was attended by pain ; in the morning her foul was fraught with joy; *n the evening it was finking beneath de~ fpondence. Howard, quitting the Hamlet,, filled her with regret; a regret which was aggravated by the idea of his going, per¬ haps, for ever,, to join the fair ftranger who had fought him out in his folitude.— Abforbed in melancholy reflections, the evening dew fell fait upon her unobferved;. nor did flie ftir till the love-lorn fong of¬ the nightingale fweet ly difturbed her me¬ ditations. She then haftened to the houfe, where Belmore foon joined her, and they. fat down to a vegetable repaft. She com¬ plained of a head-ach, and foon after fup¬ per retired to her chamber, but not to reft; her mind was difturbed, and in her txmûent íiumbers flie dreamed of Howard, and.
and imagined, in his new profeffion, flic faw him encountering innumerable diffi¬ culties,
CHAP
» Β Β?Ε ? ^?Γ?Γί ι ί ιί Ι ι 'l'' ι , ι ? ι "Γ Ü Ü ^ S Ü^HmTSS CHAP. V. ** Mftv ve fctrfâftsf wtf t în ?1? f <* We bow, alai ! muil part« " H£RMIT OF WARItWORTHt W ITH the earlieft light fhe arofe, and, foftiy unlatching the cottage-door, ftrolled out, in hopes the frefhnefs of the morning air would exhilarate her fpirits; but how great was her aftoniíhment on beholding Howard leaning peniTvely on the ruflic gate, rhat opened from the road upon the little bridge !—they ftarted on beholding each
each other; and flic would have retreated, had he not, by an impetuous motion, flown forward, and, catching her hand, befought her to purfue her walk. Thus urged, flie could not refufe, and they fauntered towards the village, from whence the cottagers were repairing to their daily labours-, Cheered by the bird's me- lodioui lay, which appeared as nature's morning hymn, to hail the glorious orb of day— ft This, indeed," cried Howard, " is a profpeft might well affuage all fadnefs but defpair :—how lovely is the contem¬ plation of innocence and induftry, and the beautiful country by which we are fur¬ rounded , yet thofe charming feenes I muft foon relinquifh—thofe Native bowers of innocence and eafe, Scenes of my youth,—vvhen every charm would pleafe ; How often have I paused on every charm, The fheltetd cot, the cultivated farm !
"???
" Blifsful feenes," exclaimed he, with increafing amotion, u I ihall no more re¬ vifit ye.". Surely," cried Matilda, "you may hope to return." "I do not hope it," faid he, " I cannot wifli to return to a country where all the profpefts of my youth are blafted ; where vice and infamy have entailed unutterable woe upon me; where thofe ??? dear are loft for ever; and all that has yet power to charm, is dangerous to feek." His language filled Matilda with the moit eager curiofity to know the fource of his afflictions; and particularly ihe wifhed to know, whether the lady flie had heard of had been at all acceflary to them. Timidity and delicacy, however, alike reftrained her from expreffmg fuch a vufh; and with affefted careleffnefs, flie aiked him when he departed. " The day after to-morrow," faid he; " and already I have
have taken what may probably be a laft farewell of the environs of the village, which a thoufand fond recollections will for ever endear to my heart. " However unfortunate and depreifed," he added, " a degree of vanity will, I believe, ever adhere to us, and make us defirous of efteem and admiration. Actuated by its powerful impulfe, I wifli to excufe that roughnefs and afperity which too often appeared in my conduft, and affure you they refulted from forrow,· not from my real difpofition. To live in your remembrance, is now my only hope: the idea of being fometimes an ideal gueft in the cottage of Belmorefoothes my fancy. " Say then, you can excufe the infirmi¬ ties of a proud fpirit, which could ill brook difgrace. Did you know my ftory, you would then, I believe, only pity. Abs ! much
much as I regretted my deftiny, till I be¬ held you, I did not efteem it half fo fevere. Now, ? gracious heaven, I cannot forbear execrating the perfidious wretch, who, under the femblance of love, received my wedded vows, and brought infamy and wretchednefs to my arms." Matilda ftarted !—She trembled, and had %not power to proceed. Her quivering lips would have repeated his laft words, but the founds died away. Full of penetration, Howard, in a mo¬ ment, difcerncd the feelings of her foul. He could have wept over her in the anguifli of his heart; but, delicate as tender, he checked his emotions, and, affecting corn¬ pofure, faid, he could not wonder at her aftoniíhment; that, if ihe wiflied, he would tranfcribe for her the particulars of his life ; in which, the reafons for keeping his mar¬ riage
riage a fecret, would be fully explained. She now recollected herfelf, faid ihe ihould be glad to fee them, then, flightly bowing, turned towards home. Howard followed her. As they entered the ihady lane lead¬ ing towards the tottage, he took her clay- cold hand: " lhis," cried he, " maybe confideied almoft a laft adieu, fince I ex¬ pect to depart fo foon : allow me now, therefore, to thank you for your pity, your kindnefs unto me: may the wiihes I have formed for your happinefs be more fuccefs¬ ful, than thofe I breathed for my own; may this hand never be given, but toa being worthy of the treafure it will put him in poffeffion of; may he, the bleffed mortal who receives it—may he be at once the tender friend, the faithful guardian, the"— He paufed involuntarily, and the palenefs of his cheek denoted what was paffing in his
his heart. After a momentary ftruggle, he proceeded in a voice fcarcely articulate: / Some kind chance may perhaps convey to me the delightful intelligence of your happinefs. Oh! how grateful—how wel¬ come to my foul!" A trickling tear now fpoke the fullnefs of Matilda's heart, as fhe withdrew her hand, and with tottering fleps proceeded to the cottage. Howard returned to his abode in agonies almoft too great for reafon to fupport. He groaned, he wept; he execrated the wretch, whofe artfices had deprived him of liberty. Had he been free, he now íàw youth, beauty, and innocence might have been his, and all the fweets of domeftic life— thofe fweets which he was compelled to re-' Iinquiih, and formed to enjoy even with a degree of enthufiafm. As
As he wrote his ftory, his feelings grew more compofed; there was a foothing charm in the idea of Matilda weeping over his fufferings. Belmore called upon him, and congra¬ tulated him on the arrival of his commif¬ fion; he alfo agreed to go the fir fl ftage. of his journey with him. The dejection of Matilda could not ef¬ cape Beimore's notice; but ihe attributed it to the effefts of a cold: in vain ihe en« deavoured to íhake off the languor which oppreffed her heart ; while the idea of Howard's wretchednefs haunted it con¬ tinually, all efforts for doing fo proved ineffectual. The evening previous to his departure now arrived, and fhe was fearful he had forgotten his promife to her. Soon after tea Mr. Belmore went out, and ihe faun- voL. ?. d tcrcd
O-F' THB HAMtET. tered into the garden ; where, in a few moments, Howard, by appearing, conv ine ed her her fears were groundlefs. Pale a languid, and dejected, he met her; aad prefented to her a little manufcript. '** Thefe pages, rny dear Mifs Stanley/* faid he, « contain a fhort and unvarnifhcd tale. Should the misfortunes I have here difclofed, incline you to excufe the afperities to which they alone gave rife, I fliall be more than compenfated for any pain the Barrating them has coft me ; but, even if you fhould not excufe, you will at leaft ceafe to wonder at thefe afperities, when you find the profpects, the hopes, the honours of my youth were blafted by the moft ab¬ horred perfidy. tff I..go/' cried he, with a figh, "perhaps never to return ; I go,, with a heart im¬ preffed, by your excellencies, and grateful for yojur
your kindneffes. Mr. Belmore, on reading thefe pages, will eafily conjefture the feel* ings which made me envelope myfelf in myftery. Alas ! the only confolation I can derive, amidit my mifery, is, that the blufli which burns on my cheek, is for the per¬ fidy of others, not my own; and that my life, though embittered by misfortune, is untainted by reproach. " Adieu, my dear Mifs Stanley ; I muft haften away, or my refolution will entirely fail, and I fliall ftrive to linger out the parting moment.. Farewell, then," he con¬ tinued, taking her hand and preffing it to his bofom, " farewell! moit amiable, moft lovely, moft beloved of women ; as Hamlet fays, let the parting words" be—Adieu! adieu! remember me!" He then precipitately departed, leaving Matilda motionlefs as a ftatue :—A fhort d 2 time,
time, however, reftored the faculties which anguifh had fufpended, and fhe empha¬ tically pronounced—" Remember thee! yes, Howard, while I live!" Tears now burft from her eyes, which relieved in fbme degree the weight upon her heart, but ibftened her, at the fame time, into an enthufiafm of tendernefs; for, There is a tear, Which» ib earning toran objeft lov'd and loft, "With mournful magic» tortures and delights ; Relieves us—while its fweet fhpprelKon loads, And, by augmenting, blunts the fting of woe. She received his manufcript as the legacy of an invaluable f iend ; with a fearful kind of curiofity flic wiflied, yet dreaded to perufe it. Her hat ftiaded her eyes from the obfer¬ vation of Belmore, At fupper, he told her they
they would not meet again till the enfuing evening, as he and Howard propofed felf- ting off at the dawn of day. He gave her a thoufand charges to amufe her fpirits rill his return; then tenderly embracing her, they retired to their refpeft i ve chambers. The manufcript fhe had not yet mentioned to him: flic durft not truft her voice with Howard's name: flie refolved, however, to pay him the compliment of putting it into his hands, ere flie perufed it. The morning was juft opening, when flie was roufed from an uneafy flumber hy the trampling of horfes; her he«rt beat quick, and flie was almoft tempted to rife, and give Howard that adieu, which the night before flie had not power to do: tranfienr, however, was this idea.; the impropriety of fuch an aftion, almoft immediately occurred to her, and flie refolved, within the moft fecret re- D 3 ceifes
ccffcs ofher heart, to conceal what her prin¬ ciples difapproved, and by the exertion of her reafon fhe hoped to fubdue. She heard Howard's voice as he flood near her vrindow; he feemed taking leave ofthe domeftics. in a few moments he and Bclmcre mounted ι Leir horfes and departed. Matilda raifed herfelf in the bed, and liftened with the moft pi ofound attention till the horfes feet could no longer be heard. " He is gone, then," faid flie, fink¬ ing upon her pillow, in a flood of tears, " and we have only known him to feel re¬ gret;—he is gone then, and we fhall/never —never meet again." She arofe, oppreffed with grief and lan¬ guor. As Sterne fays, " the Sun looked bright to every eye in the village but hers." -The maid prepared her breakfaft, but ihe could
tould not tafle it: her heart was fick; and her melancholy caft an air of gloominefs around her. She took up a book; its contents m- terefted her not.—The manufcript lay temptingly on her toilet—flie could no longer retain her refolution of waiting Mr. Belmore's return—She broke the feal, with a trembling hand, and perufed the follow¬ ing contents.
? 4 HOWARD'S
HOWARD'S STORY.
(i Had U pieas'd Heav'n * f To tiy me with afti&ions ; had they rained 11 ?? kinds of foi es and fliamcs on my baie head, ** ????\1 mc ín poverty to the very iips, * ( Giv'» to captivity me and my utmoft hopee, rí I ih jul J have found in fome place of my foul * { A drop of patience : but, alas ! to make me t! ?? fix'd figure far the time of fcorn '* To point his îîow and moving finger at! ** Yet I could bear that too—well, very well : ** But there, where I had garner'd up my htart, ** Where either I rrniil live, or have no life, *' Th2 fountain from the which my current runs, «* Orelfedlies upt to bedifcarded thence, << Or keep it as a citrern for foul toads " To knot and gender in—turn thy complexion there, *' Patience, thou young and rofe tip'd-cheruhim." SHAKESPEARE'S OTHELLO.
A.T that period in life, when infantile amufements are giving place to juvenile ardour, rny attachment for Edward Pclham commenced.
commenced. Ardent, generous, and feel¬ ing, he derived ftill greater dignity and fplendour from his virtues, than from his birth or fortune. Unexpected víciífitudefir deprived my father of independence : and at his death, left me totally unprovided for. My mother had long before paid the laft debt of nature, fo that 1 appeared to ftand alone upon the great ftage of life, without one guiding hand to lead me forward ; one foothing voice to counfel my inexperienced youth, or diminifli the forrows of my fate Edward heard my misfortunes, he flew to me, with the fervour of friendfliip; and infilled on my accompanying him to the habitation of his faiher, who, actuated by a fpint all powerful as his fon's, made mc confider his home as my own,,and by daily kindneffes, adminiftered by the hand of delicacy, made me forget my dependent fituation. o S Γη
In two years after this, he çohfulted me on my future deftiny in life; and finding my wiihes correfponded with his, equipped mc for the Eaft Indies, charging me never to forget I had ftill in England a parent and a brother, upon whofe fortune I had claims that ever ihould be anfwered. I left them with a heart oppreffed with gratitude, but a foul that glowed at the profpeft o/obtaining an independence, fmce a life of inglorious eafe was hateful to me. In the military line I arrived in India ; there I continued feven years; but my conftitution yielding to the climate, I ob¬ tained leave to refign, well affured I fliould enjoy more real happinefs in the limited indulgencies my income had now the power of procuring me, than when furrounded by Afiatic fplendour, and debarred the con¬ verfe of thofe to whom I was attached by every tie of fympathy. I
I had heard but twice in my long ab¬ fence from my friends : to the mifcarriage of their letters, however, not to any neglect, I imputed not having heard more frequently from them, and during my voyage I anti¬ cipated with rapture, the joy, the furprife my unexpected return would give them ; and hailed the white cliffs of Albion with unutterable delight. To Broomland, the feat of Pelham, I haftened a few hours after I had landed. Good heaven! with what emotions of de¬ light did I commence my journey. I fcarcely allowed myfelf time for refrefli¬ ment, much lefs for any inquiry relative to him or his father. At a little village con¬ tiguous to the caftle I put up my horfes, and, leaving my fervant, proceeded onward without delay., Every cot, every tree, every field, re¬ minded me of fome happy fcene— fome d ? tender
tender proof of recollected love; every fpot was endeared to me by the remembrance of Edward. The ivyed walls of the Caftle, that rofe,above the nodding elms which furrounded ii y at laft bleffed my fight. rf Hail! dear afylum !" I cried, with a degree of enthufiafm," of my youth ; happy feat of virtue, where hofpitaiity woos the bafliful ftranger to his food ; and the bounty of benevolence cheers the defponding children of calamity." The maffy gate which led into the dark and winding avenue before the Caftle, lay halfopen. I entered, and/ as I advanced, was furprifed to find all within filent and folitary. Joy and gladnefs, during my abode, had dwelt within its precincts ; and this un¬ ufual ftillnefs filled rr" with alarm. I reached the Caftle—Alas! it was no longer the
the maníion of mirth. The dóors and windows were barred; the fhrubberies around it were overgrown with weeds and brambles ; and all, by a melancholy air of wildnefs, denoted a dreadful change. I turned back to the Porter's ledge» which was juft befide the gate. Here I faw an old woman fpinning, who I immediately recollected to be the Porter's wife. She threw down her diftaff at my entrance, but did not remember me. I took her hand : I would have ipoken, but my feelings choaked my utterance. In a few minutes, hovvever, I recovered, fufficiently to be able to fpeak, and aiked her, ** if flie did not re¬ collect I loward, the former companion of her young mafter?" I can give you no adequate idea of the joy the poor creature expreffed on hearing my mme>and recognizing me; but it foon gave place
place toforrow; and*making mefit down on a wicker chair, ihe told me the following fimple tale* "Alas ! Sir, there has been fad doings at the great houfe fincè you went away; every thing topfy-turvy, and all gone to ruin. My old mafter (God reft his foul) died three years ago; and many, many a tear did his death caufe to be ihed. We were, however, in fome degree, comforted for his lofs, by having his fon over us; and a fine young gentleman he was, as one ihould fee on a fummer's day. Well, Sir, he had not long been his own mafter, when away he goes, and marries in fome diífcmt part of the country a young lady ; and then there was fuch doings here on bringing her home ! She was a beautiful creature, tobe fure; but I never thought much good of her; for ihe ufed to prink and prank herfelf out fo, and
and never came, as old Madam was wont to do, to aik a body how they did ; but al¬ ways looked proud, and fome way or other, as if ihe thought no one good enough to Ipeak to her, but thofe who were as great as herfelf. He, poor foul, faw no fault in her: but lhe, as if an angel could not make her happy, to be fure he was as good, and almoft as handfome as an angel, began to intrigue with a ftrange fort of a bold outlandiih fel¬ low, who they got acquainted with in Lon- > don, and invited down to the Caftle; where itwas foon plain enough to every body but my mafter himfelf, that flie was making a complete dupe of him. " Well, let people fay what they will, wickednefs cannot always thrive or be con¬ cealed; fo, when Madam leaft expefted it, her fins were brought ro light. My poor mafter was then in a moil perilous taking, and
and I don't know what he might not-have been tempted to do to his falfe friend, had he not made his efcape from his fury.— Madam was fent from the Cafle, and in a few months my mafter got a divorce j but from that hour never held up his head, and pined and drooped fo much, that he was advifed to go to foreign parts beyond fea, to try whether change of fcene would do him any good. Accordingly he went, and the Caftie was locked up and the keys given to my hufband, and we have only heard once or twice about him from the Steward, fince he went, and I underftand he is ftill in great forrow: but heaven will, I hope, in its own good time, reftore him to com« fort, for he gave it to many. My poor man and I pray for him night, noon, and morning." « Comfort!" thought I, as flie concluded. « f Alas ! I know too well the difpofition of Edvvard,
Edward, and that after a difappointment of this nature, he never can recover his hap¬ pinefs." Overpowered by my feelings, I quitted the cotrage; and in retracing every dear and well-known path about the Caftle, gave way to a melancholy, which foftened my whole foul. It was now the autumnal feafon ; the noon of the day was pafi, and the ftillnefs ofthe fcene was only interrupted by the breeze, which iighed amongft the trees and the low plaint of the birds cc Thus," cried I, as I looked at the leives which ftrewed the foot-path; " thus are the hopes of him, who owns this rich domain, fallen and fcattered; but thefe leaves (1 continued) fall to enrich their parent earth ; fpring will re-cloak the groves, and reftore all to primeval beauty: but man never ex¬ periences a fecond fpring—never fcarcely experiences
experiences a renovation ofthe hopes which perfidy has blighted." I longed tobe with him,and returned to the cottage, in order to inquire his refidence. Here I found the old woman's huiband, who joined with herin preffing me to partake of a frugal repaft ; but forrow rendered my heart too full ? permit me to accept their in- vitation. I fent for the Steward to inquire where Pelham then was; but he could not give me the information I required: all he Could tell me of his mafter was, that he was at prefent on the Continent, where, he underftood, he led a wandering life : in confequence of which, he advifed me, in¬ ftead of going in queft of him, merely to write, and he would forward my letter to a mercantile houfe in Leghorn, from whence all his mafter's letters were fent to him. I followed his advice, fpecifying the place I was
was to be found in, which was a village in Wales, whither, for fome time, I meant to retire. The fituation of this village, was retired and romantic. Nature here reigned in luxuriant beauty; and the inhabitants were the child en of fimplicity. In one of my rambles, I was particularly ftruck with the beauty of a little cottage; which, on the brow of a hill, overlooked a beautiful vaU ley,diverfified by trees, fhrubs, and flowers, and watered by a fmooth unfullied ftream Ã which reflefted all thofe lovely images of nature. As 1 gazed on this little Eden, a lady, in deep mourning, appeared, afcend¬ ing a winding path to the cottage. I looked at her attentively, and thought I never before had feen aught fo lovely ; her form was elegant; there was fafcination in her eyes; and the pale rofe, which bloomed upon
upon her cheek, conveyed an idea of the moit bewitching delicacy. Thrice in thecourfe of this day, I took a circuit round the vallev, but faw her no more. I felt difappointment, and deter¬ mined to aik the Curate, who knew every body, about her: he laughed at my in¬ quiries, but did not hefitate anfwering them. He faid fhe was in mourning for her hufband; that by marrying him ihe had difobliged her friends; and at his death, difdaining to force herfelf upon them, retired, with the fmall income he left her, to Wales, as a place of cheapnefs and privacy : he farther added, that her man¬ ners were as attractive as her looks; and affured me, though fuch a thing was dan¬ gerous, he would bring about an introduc¬ tion between us. Accordingly, the next evening we met at his houfe; dangerous, indeed, as he prophe¬ cied
cied was the meeting. All the feminine graces feemed to wait around her, and there was magic in her Voice. From this even¬ ing we became confiant companions: if our rambles commenced not together, they were fure at leaft to end fo; for, while with her, my time only paffed pleafantly. In the midft of ftrangers, my heart had long experienced a melancholy void, which ihe now filled up. The fervor of friendihip I had already known ; but it was left to her to infpire me with the tendernefs of love. On a fudden fhe entirely fliunned me : in vain I called ; in vain I wandered round the cottage; flie remained in vifible; and I, at length, became fo wretched, from her conduft, which was unaccountable to me, that I refolved rather to run the rifk of difpleafing her, than not try to obtain an ex-
explanation of it. Accordingly, one even¬ ing I entered the cottage abruptly, notwith¬ ftanding the refiftance of her fervant, and finding her in the parlour, demanded, with warmth, the reafon of her altered conduft. She biufhed—flie fighed—and, after fome little hefitation, informed me, the alteration I complained of, proceeded from a dread of incurring the cenfure of the world,"which, flie well knew, the privacy of her fituation would not guard her from, if fhe gave the leaft caufe for it. " Let us then," I exclaimed, " aft in fuch a manner as to give no reafon for it ; let our deftinies be united, and let us, by mutual tendernefs and affeftion, endeavour to make up for the deficiencies of fortune. My heart is folely yours; this cottage, while you are its miftrefs, will, to me be preferable to a palace; the hixmies of life are
are beyond our power, but its comforts arc within our reach; they areali we delire; they are all that yield real felicity." She hefitated to reply to my propofal ; but it was a hefitation which did not appear to refult from indifference, but generofity; from a fearof involving me in difficulties, by acceding to it, and undoubtedly it en¬ deared her flill more to me. I at length conquered her fcruples ; and in a day or two we were united in the vil¬ lage church. A fortnight after our marriage, fhe afked me one morning, whether I intended we íhouid always remain in our prefent fitua¬ tion? " for," continued fhe, " if fuch is your intention, we had better have the be¬ nefit of reclufion, by taking fome holy order upon us, and turning profeffed re- clufes.".«! ftared at her with utter aftoniíh¬ ment;
mentj and could fcarcely believe it was Juha fpoke, who had fo often painted, in glow ing colours, as the happieft that could be led, a life of paftoral felicity, She foon, however, gave me to underftand fhe never would fubmit to remain in our prefent retirement; " which," continued fhe, u may do very well for the old and ugly; but when heaven has been fo kind as to give us youth and beauty, I fee no reafon for not enjoying life; which really, amongft gabbling ruftics, and wild goats, it is utterly impoffible to do." Irritated and amazed, I left her in filence; but with a certain prefentiment that I had been totally deceived, and that my happi¬ nefs was as traniient as the g^y fkirtingsof a fummer's cloud. From an unpleafant meditation I was roufed, by a meffenger from the village inn,
inn, who informed me, that à gentleman í had juft arrived there, w f ho wifhed to fee me. 1 haftened to it ; and, on entering the parlour, ? young man flung himfelf into my arms; and, in articulating my mme, made me inftantly recognize Pelham. But, oh ! how different from the Pelham I had left ! no longer glowing with youth and animation, but finking beneath iilnefs and dejeftion. On the receipt of my letter he refolved to return to England, certain that the unreftrained elFufions of friendfhip would be a confolation to him. After the emotions caufed by our [meeting had a little fubfided, he related to me the particulars I already knew, and ended his diftreffing nar¬ rative by afluring me he utterly defpifed the faithlefs woman who had fo ungrate¬ fully repaid his love; and who, from a fituation almoft indigent, he had elevated to affluence and elegance. VOL. U. E « But
" But how deceitful is the human heart?" continued this admirable young man, " and how few can bear extremes of either kind! She fell from the fummit I hoped fhe would adorn, arid in her fall de- molifhed all my plans of felicity. 'Tis true I abhor her principles, yet I cannot utterly hate her; nay, I fometimes pity her, particularly, fincc my declining heakh has warned me of my impending fate. The .world recedes from my view ; I can find no pleafure in it; and feem an awful proof of the infuffickncy of riches to procure hap¬ pinefs. In the prefumption of youth, I thought myfelf fecure from misfortune ; but am now, alas ! fatally convinced, that ibrrow, though in various ways, all the children of men are liable to." Jn this hour of mingled pain and plea¬ fure, I acquainted him with my fituation ; and
and infifted on his making my cottage his abode, trufting the falubrity of the air, joined to the tender attentions I íhouid then have the power of paying him, might be of fervice to his declining health. He was delighted wdth the view of my dwelling. " Happy Howard," faid he, as, leaning on my arm, he flowly approached it, " your domeftic peace gives me a plea¬ fure nothing elfe could yield; long may it continue after the period when 1 ihall np more behold it!" His folemnity affefted my fpirits. I hoped the gaiety of my wife (for gay, in¬ deed, I now believed her to be) would ex¬ hilarate him. I led him to the parlour where ihe fat ; but how great was my hor¬ ror on beholding her ftart wildly from her chair, the moment he entered it, >yhiie he, finking upon my ihoulder, exclaimed, % 2 " Gracious
" Gracious heaven ! can it l>e poflible! the cruel, perfidious betrayer of my honour, the wife of Howard!'* His words revealed a fatal fecret: no language can give any adequate idea of the anguiih and defpair with whicii I was feized; all my tendernefs and admiration for her who was the- occafion of fuch wretchednefs to both, was inflantly con¬ verted into hatred, contempt, and detefta¬ tion, which time, inflead of diminiihing has rather increafed. I know not what act of defperation paf¬ fions, naturally impetuous, might have tempted me to commit, had not Pelham, by his mild reafoning, allayed the tempeft of my foul. The wretched bane of our repofe had, foon after her divorce, been abandoned by her paramour; fo tranfient is the duration of
of love when embittered by guilt, haunted by remorfe, and founded alone on the Meeting bafis of external admiration! Under the affurned character of a widow, flie then retired to the remote village I had chofen for a retreat, till time had a little deadened the rumour of her infamy, and enabled her to form a plan for her re» entrance into life. On me flie quickly perceived the impref¬ fion lhe had made; aad, as my wife, hoped in fome meafure to be re-eftabiiihed in the opinion of the world. The idea of living another hour with her after the dif¬ covery that had taken place, infpired mc with horror, I accordingly divided my fortune with her, and wc parted for ever. Her unexpected appearance and fituation gave ? fhock to my friend, which haftened his diffolution. Even at this moment I e 3 tremble
tremble to recolleft my fufferings at the period in which Heaven took him to itfelf. Pure, noble, difinterefted, he fell an early victim to deceit. He requefted I would fee him interred in the Abbey by the Hamlet, wnich had been the burying-place of many of his family. With this requeft 1 religioufly complied. The gloom, and, if I may fo exprefs myfelf, magnificent defo¬ lation of the folitary ruin, fuited (as Zanga fays) €f the gloomy habit of my foul." When I looked forward to the future, all was ? dreary void: I felt as if I had no in¬ tereft in life i and thought the ruined walls of the Abbey would be a fafe retreat from thofe envenomed fliafts which perfidy and malice fo frequently point againft inno¬ cence and fenfibility. Here, " the world forgetting, and by the world forgot," Bel- more difcovered me : became as the mi¬ niftering
niftcring fpirit of benevolence: hereafoned againft the afperity and mifanthropy which were daily gaining ground upon my difpo¬ fition, and gaveto me an internal wretched¬ nefs almoft impoffible to bear. He ar¬ gued with me on the duty, the fubmiffion, due from a rational creature to the will of his Creator, without whofe permiffion, neither good nor evil could befall us, and who juftly expected gratitude for his mer¬ cies, and refignation under his inflictions. Conviction and comfort attended his words. I refolved to exert myfelf to con¬ quer the gloominefs of defpair; but his ar¬ guments would not have made me relin¬ quifli my retreat, had they not been aided by a powerful motive; a motive which, hid¬ den in the receffes of my heart, fliall never be revealed. A íhort time ago the fatal caufe of my forrows difcovered my retreat, and ob- E 4 truded
trudcd herfelf upon me. Miflrefs of con¬ fummate art, flie hoped to tempt me to a reconciliation by a fliow of penitence and grief; but againft all her blandiibments I was proof, and fo ftrongly exprcfled my ab¬ horrence ofher, that fhe left mc with all the malignity of rage. Her view, in wifliing to live with me, was to be introduced again with fome degree of credit to the world. Pclham, my unfortunate friend, be¬ queathed to nielli in his power to beftow $ more than was needed by him who, like himfelf, was convinced ofthe infuíficieney of riches to procure happinefs. The regiment I am about joining, will fliortly be ordered to foreign quarters : I may not live to return with it to my native country ; let me, therefore, ufc the prefent opportunity of afluring you my belt wiihes, to the laft moment of my c\iiknec\ v»i!i
will be for the happinefs of Belmore, and his adopted child. Kind, compaffionate Belmore, adieu!—■ lovely Matilda, fweet poffeffor of every ex¬ cel lence, farewel ! may thy pu re foul never be wounded by vice, nor thy gentle fpirit bowed down by affliction; and may that good you both delight in diftributing, be three-fold returned unto you! As I raife my eyes from the paper, I behold your cottage—the bright fun illuminates the windows—the trees gently wave around it, apd the herds fport joyfully on the flowery pafture before it* I gaze on it with anguiih, as if my laft glance at earthly felicity: rhe idea of no more beholding it, of no more receiving, confolation from its inmates, that confola¬ tion whieh has been fuch balm to my la¬ cerated heart, totally fubdues me.—I cannot continue the fubjeft—adieu, and fometimes think of me ! ι 5 CHAP.
CHAP. VI. β( Unconfcious of her power, and turning quUk ** With unaffecied bluflies from his gaze, *' He faw her charming j but he faw not half " The charms her downcaft modefty conceald ** THOMSON. IHINK on thee!" cried Matilda, with a flood of tears, Cf Ah! Howard, never can you be forgotten: your misfortunes will be to me a conftant iburce of regret; and, could wiihes avail, the feverity of thy fate would foon be foftened/* From
From the foft luxury of grief ihe was interrupted by Patty Hiligrove, vvho, hear¬ ing flie was alone, came to invite her to fpend the day at the farm; but Matilda begged to be ex c u fed. « Lord! now," fays Patty, "why can't you come? I am fure it would be better than poring here at home by yourfelf; be¬ fides, vve have a charming day for rambling about, and father is fo fond of you, I know he will let me walk as much as I pleafe, if you are my companion; elfe he would fcold me for being idle, for he is always wanting mc to work as if I were an old grandam. But is it true that poor Mr. Howard has left the Hamlet entirely?" Cf I believe fo/* faid Matilda, in a low and he¬ fitating voice.—V Dear me! how very low- fpirited you feem, Mifs Matilda! (cried Patty, e 6 looking
looking earneftly at her) and now I perceive your eyes are quite red ; but that I fuppofe is owing to your having got cold." This ipeech of Patty's overfpread Matilda's face with bluflies ; and, perceiving the in¬ terpretation this fly girl was likely to put upon her refolution of continuing at home, ihc confented to accompany her; and put¬ ting on her hat and cloak, they proceeded to the farm. In their way thither a gentleman attended by two fervants on horfeback, in rich li¬ veries, met them. He ftopped his horfe to let them pafs ; and gazing flightly at Patty, his eyes faftened on Matilda, and an involuntary exclamation of, " By heaven— an angel I" efcaped him. Patty, who took this compliment to her¬ felf, immediately flackened her pace, not a little delighted at attracting his notice.— Matilda,
Matilda, however, haftened forward, and opening the little wicket which led to rhe houfe, her companion, with reluctant fteps, was obliged to follow her, giving the ftranger, however, a moft courteous and inviting glance. They found Hüigrove in the parlour, feated at his defk, fettling fome accounts : —" Lord!" faid Patty, in a whifper to Matilda, and flyly winking at her, w I wifh father was out of this, we fliould have fuch ñne fun, then for------ See how the gentle-. man has rode back to the houfe, and ftop¬ ped juft befide the gate." " Who is that/* faid Hillgrove, « you arc giggling and gaping at ? I wonder you aint aíhamed to be always at the window or flirting about the roads ?'*—« Lord ! let us come and walk, Mifs Matilda," faid fhe. « No, M replied Matilda, ff the fun is too warm at prefent
it will be much pleafanter to defer our walk till evening." She then took her work-bag and began her netting, " Aye/aye," cried Hiligrove, taking off his fpeftacles and putting up his papers, " I like to fee girls induftrious : why now, Patty would never defire any thing elfe than drefs herfelf and walk about. Egad, I wonder girls who aft fo, can ever expect to get married." Patty at laft, by her geftures, attracted the fole attention of her father, and drew him to the window. Here he began to lecture her feverely, and was driving her away, when ihe exclaimed, " Lord ! father, how could I prevent the gentleman from following me ? befides, how can you tell but what he may be fome perfon on bufinefs, who does not know the houfe?" " Adad," faid he, fud¬ denly recollefting himfelf, " fo he may be, fure enough. This is the 'Squire, I dare fay that
that farmer Gwynn faid w T ouId be here to¬ day, to look at the bay-hprfes : let me go out to him/' faid he, adjufting his wig— "let me pafs ; they were never in better trim to be íhown." Away he flumped, and, opening the gate, aiked the ftranger, "if he was not 'Squire Fenton come to purchafe his bay horfes ?" " No, Sir," faid the gen¬ tleman: then paufing for a few moments, as if contriving fome fcheme, he faid, " but, faith, it is lucky enough your mentioning thofe horfes—I have long wanted fuch a pair as you deferibe for my phaeton, and if you have no objection, will ftep in and look at them.*· The farmer immediately affured him he was extremely welcome to fee them. He then alighted, and walked forward with Hiligrove. " I fuppofe/* faid he, fC it is to you immaterial who purchafes themi**
them!" "Aye, that it is," replied the far¬ mer; " the beft bidder with me, is always the fure winner. But come along, they are as fleek as a lady's ikin, and as bright as a looking-glafs." He then conducted him to the ftable: the ftranger admired, or pre¬ tended to admire the horfes exceedingly, and the following moming promifed he would call and make a pofitive agreement about them. He then began to look about the farm, faid it was a very fnug place, and aiked many queftions about his ftock. " You have gotten two pretty laffes for your daughters/' faid he, u who, in my opi¬ nion, are better than all the live flock on the farm." « Aye, blefs your heart," ex¬ claimed the farmer, " I have but one, and ihe is enough in all confcience: why I have more trouble with her, than in breaking a colt; girls are fo ikittiih, and takefo.badly to the curb." The
The ftranger laughed, and, pretending fatigue, was invited in to reft and refreíh himfelf. Patty, who had watched all their mo¬ tions, was in extacy. On feeing him ap¬ proach the parlour, flie ran to the glafs, adjuftcd her cap and hat, and drawing up her head, put on her beft fmiles to receive the handfome ftranger. By her reception of him, he inftantly concluded fhe was the miftrefs of the manfion. To his faluta- tions Matilda only bowed, and continued working. AU the delicacies^ of the larder were foon produced, with a bottle of goofeberry wine, and fome fine old ale* Neither his entertainment, nor his enter¬ tainers, however, were regarded by the ftranger: his whole attention was engroffed by Matilda; and the ardent admiration with which he viewed her, at laft ftruck Patty, ' and
and filled her with envy and difappoint¬ ment; nor could ihe forbear wondering how he could prefer fuch a pale, fiknt, hum¬ drum thing as Matilda, to fuch a fmart, chatty, rofy-faced girl as herfelf: yet fo it was, and fcarcelv could ihe conceal the chagrin the difcovery excited. The farmer being called to his labourers, made an uncouth apology to his gueft for leaving him only with the girls : the ftranger received it with much good hu¬ mour, afluring him next morning he would conclude the bargain about the horfes. He then advanced to Matilda, and, with that air of familiarity which fo frequently is affurned by men of the world, vvhen con¬ fcious they are in company with inferiors, took her hand : " You are," faid he, the prettieft íílent girl I ever faw; but I fup¬ pofe you well know that a charming face, without
without the aid of language, is powerful enough to fubdue." " The converfation, Sir," (faid flie, gravely, and withdrawing her hand) " of people who, for the firft, and probably the laft time, have met, can be of little confe¬ quence to each other." " Why," cried he, " do you not live with the good folks of this farm?" "No, Sir."— " Where then?" exclaimed he : " upon my foul you have charmed me ; and I would fly vvith delight to the world's end to pay my devoirs at your flirine." Matilda now turned entirely from him, and refumed her work. Thus repulfed, he addreffed him¬ felf to Patty ; but the funfhine of her countenance was quite o'ercaft : and vvhen, in a half whifper, he afked where her little proud friend lived, flie anfwered, in aTulky manner, " Indeed I íhaitt tell you I" He
He now perceived he was quite miftakr-n in his politics : fo, like a wife general, he vras refolved for the prefent to retreat, till a new plan of attack was concerted : af- fuming, therefore, an air of greater refpect he bowed to the ladies and retired. The harmony of the day, however, was interrupted by his means, Patty was too much vexed by his neglect, to pay any at¬ tention to Matilda j who, left again to her own meditations, funk into her former de¬ jection ; and, in reflecting on recent events, found a painful fadnefs gathering round her heart which flie could not difpel. Sooa after dinner, Belmore came to the farm : he jcturned home much earlier than was ex- pecìed, and knew he ihould agreeably fur¬ prife Matilda by coming to her. Immediately after tea they bade the Hillgrovcs adieu j and as the evening was u u-
uncommonly fine, and Belmore not in the leaft fatigued, they fauntered about the beautiful environs ofthe Hamlet. " Poor Howard !" cried he, " his dejection increafed every mile we proceeded." The duties of his profeifion will, I truft, have fome effeft upon him, and, by diffipating his thoughts, prevent him from perpetually brooding over the caufe of his affliction :— he is indeed a ñne fellow ; arid, as I liftened r o his expreffions, the ebullitions of a woe- fraught heart, I could fcarce refrain ex¬ claiming, iike Ophelia, '« What a noble- mind is here o'erthrown!*' ci Noble, in¬ deed," Matilda would have faid, but a figh ftifled her words. She recovered herfelf however, i* a few moments, and mentioned the manufcript he had put into her hands. * f True," faid Belmore, r< I now recolleft his hinting fomething of the kind; but I did
did not perfeftly underftand him : his words indeed were unconnected, and he feemed loft in forrow." He then afked her if flie had read it. She blu flied as ihe informed him ihc had, and was beginning to apolo¬ gize for not waiting till his return; but he interrupted her, declaring he could not wonder at her impatience to learn the mo¬ tives of Howard's myflerious conduft. After a few queftions, and liftening to the comments fhe had now the power of making on it, he changed the fubjeft of difcourfe, and chatted on other matters. Abforbed in an interefting converfation, they wandered about till the moon, full orbed, with a more pleafing light, fliadowy fet off the face of things, and they found themfeives by the Abbey, Howard's late folitary abode. They
They ftopped almoft involuntarily be* fore it. " Awful pile!" cried Belmore, " thy defolation and decay chills even the foul of cheerfulnefs; on a heart of for¬ row then how great muft have been thy influence!" Matilda had never examined the build¬ ing; he afked her if ftie had now any in¬ ci ination to do fo?—it was the very thing fhe wifhed. A romantic tendernefs was diffufed throughout her mind, perfectly adapted to the folemn fcene. He led her through the ruined gate; the dark arch-way to the cloifters ofthe Abbey, at the termination of which were the apart¬ ments Howard had flightly fitted up for his accommodation : they were barely tenant- able; furrounded every where by images of ruin, broken pillars, and mouldering walls; which nature, as if to conceal the ravages
ravages of time, had partly overfpread vvith a luxuriant foliage of ivy. The chapel was difunited from the body oftheftruftureby decay; it was more than half unroofed; and gleams of moonlight gave a fuli \iew of all its fculptures and inforiptions. The great altar was yet entire: Matilda gazed upon it with reverential awe : flie felt €t a facred terror, a fevere delight creep through her mortal frame/' as fhe traverfed the lonely ailles, and viewed the mouldering tombs of thofe who had once been inha¬ bitants of the place. Here, in a mental ejaculation, ihe befought heaven to affuage the forrows ofthe wretched Howard. A white flag lay before the altar, which, Belmore informed her, covered the remains of Howard's friend. Fancy in a moment pictured
pifturcd the young ana unfortunate Pclham to her view. " He was good," faid ffie to herfelf; " he is now happy—he is at peace : no mofe can perfidy or ingratitude ftab his breaft. Yet, (cried fhe, as tears ftreamed down her cheeks) fuch is the weaknefs of human na¬ ture, we cannot help lamenting the deceafe of the noble, the youthful, the humane." On the wall oppofitc this flag, flie per¬ ceived fome words roughly engraved, which as. flie read, flie inftantly conjeftured were Howard's, alluding to the death of his friend.—They were to this purpofe: In the prime of manhood, the pofleiììon of riches, the exercife of virtue, he fell ; fell even as a flower of the field, untimely nipped by defolating winds. The gate of death, through which he pasTed, may fhortly be opened for me*, tliis reflexion is my chief confolation j happy are the íiumbers of the grave S bfeiTed are thofe who, ignorant of great offences, d epa j t in hopes of an hereafter ! vol. xi. f The
The emotions of Matilda were now too powerful for fuppreffion ; her fobs drew Mr. Belmore to her. He took her hand, and leading her out, "My child," faid he,"this overpowers you; 'tis the children of levity, and not difpofitions like yours, that require fuch an awful leffon as this fcene prefents." The ground around the chapel was yet ufed for a burying-place for many of the neighbouring rural families. The graves were now almoft all ornamented with gar¬ lands of flowers, by the village maids, as tributes of affection and refpeft to their 'departed friends. A foft breeze gently agitated the tall old trees; and the rooks, their long unmolefted tenants, now broke the ftillnefs of the night, Matilda could have ftaid for hours in this fpot, fo congenial was its awful gloom to the
the prefent feelings of her foal. But Bel- more, who perceived the depreffion of het fpirits, hurried her home, where fitting down to ? fimple repaft, he ftroye, by fond careffes, and foothing language, to revive her wonted cheerfulnefs, but in vain. Dif¬ treifed that ihe could not now appear as he wifhed to fee her, íhe pleaded an head- achas an excufe, for leaving him abruptly; and having put Howard's manufcript into his hands, retired for the night.
Vi i
F 2
CHAP.
CHAP. VII. ** A change fo fwîft what heart did ever feel \ f< Itmflld upon melike a mighty ftream, 4t And bore me in a moment far from ihore ! *' ? ve lov'd away myfelf in one íhort hour ; w Already I am gone an age of ?????." * PRYDEN, \\E fhall now introduce to notice, the ftranger mentioned in the foregoing chap¬ ter. His name was Hartland; he was a particular friend of Afhmore's, to whom he was going on a vifit when he met Ma¬ tilda* He
He was paft the prime of life, but a re¬ markable handfome figure madehimappear ' much younger than he really was: he flill re¬ tained all the ardour of yquth,united to thofe folid acquirements, which are feldom at¬ tained but by a long and intimate knowledge of the world; and was at once an enter¬ taining and infinuating companion. But though he too often praftifed thofe vices which the fafhionabie part of man¬ kind ftyle gaieties, he was yet capable of admiring real purity; and often declared, could he meet vvith a woman who anfwered his ideas of female perfection, he would -- Tb>r^Hift, and retire to his woods and waterfalls to enjoy umm ---- Proud, paffionate, and vindictive, he was yet generous; anc], where he profeffed a friendfliip, really fincere. He could in a laughable manner, without-the appearance f 3 of
ofthe leaft ill-nature, expofçthe foibles of others, while he flyly concealed his ovvn. His fortune gave him ample power to gratify his propcnfity to pleafure. He pof¬ feffed a large eftate in England, and, in right of his mother, a fmaller one in Ire¬ land. He had been a pupil of Aihmore's, and had the higheft veneration for him as a primitive charafter, in whom was no guile. He generally, in the courfe of every two or three years, paid a fhort vifit to him. Of an unufual length he now thought it probable his vifit might be. The beauty of Matilda had excited his wí^. ' * ... ^íijviítnuing her>coldnefs, he flattered himfelf he ihould foon find her more acceffible. What his intentions were concerning her, he himfelf did not know : he left it to time and chance to determine them. Soon
Soon after breakfaft the enfuing morning he ordered his phaeton, and leaving Afli¬ more inhis library,rode over tb Hillgrove's. The farmer was impatiently waiting his arrival:—the bargain for the bay horfes was foon concluded, and his groom ordered to take them to a neighbouring inn. Hiligrove wanted to know who he was, Where he came from, and his general refi- dence; but receiving no anfwer rn tbcfc quefir*-' "*" u saving no more bargains to make, he deemed any further attention to him quite unneceffary, and marched off to his labourers. The moment he departed, Patty, who had been watching all their motions, ran to the gate, and invited Mr. Hartland (juft as he was afcending his phaeton) into the parlour, to take fome refreíhrrient; flattering herfelf, as Matilda was abfent, fhe might now have a chance of ? 4 charming
charming him. Mr. Hartland faw through her motives for this invitation, and readily accepted it, in hopes of difcovering the ha¬ bitation ofher lovely friend: but Patty was here as fly as himfelf; and finding he could not obtain from her the fatisfaction he re¬ quired, he fhortlygrew tired of her company, and badeler adieu. He foon difmounted from his phaeton, and jrftmbM about the cottages; but though he faw blue eyes d roly cuu^ u,„, t- merable, he no where beheld the beautiful face he fought« Tired and difappointed^ he returned to the Parfonagc.—After dinner, Afhmore afked him if he was difpofed for a ramble ? —« Ifyou are," cried he, " I will promife you fuch a treat, as perhaps you may not often meet with." Hartland, at a lofs for amufement, confented to accompany him in
ín the propofed ramble, ¿ and they ??-, cordingîy proceeded to Belmore's cottage. Its neatnefs and fimplicity excited Hart- land's admiration; but he was ftill more pleafed with the manners of its mafter, whom they found in the parlour.— » c< Where," aiked Aflimore, after the com¬ pliments of introduction were over, Cf is my little favourite?—You know my vifits, in reality, are always to her.-7" w Wooing the zephyrs in the gak aen," replied Belmore: •—he then led the way to it. Matilda was fitting in the ihady recefs: fhe was reading; and fo intently engaged by her book, flie heard not the approaching vifitors till they were juft by her. The furprife and delight of Hartland on bejholding her, cannot be expreffed—fcarcely could he conceal them« A gbwing blufh mantled her cheeks on his introduction to r 5 her;
???: his firft addrefs ihe had confidered extremely free; but flie was now led to impute it to a little unfeafonable guiety ; and as a compliment to Mr. Aihmore, who íhe truly efteemed, ihe received his friend vvith the utmoft fweetnefs and affa¬ bility. The tea equipage, by their de¬ fire, was brought to the recéis. The con¬ verfation was general; and Hartland gazed and liftened with new rapture: Matilda's voice was harmony itfelf ; that voice now delivered fentiments replete with benevo¬ lence and candour, and which evinced a brilliant underftanding, highly cultivated. The unaffected elegance of her manner* the graces which appeared in every look and motion, fafcinatcd his foul, and en¬ groffed all his attention. After tea Mr. Aihmore faid, "You muft now, my dear girl, render perfeft the treat I pro«.
I promifed Mr. Hartland this evening, and which by his eyes I can eafily fee he would wifh repeated/' ** Yes/* faid Hareland " fince I muft ever think the fight of beauty and elegance the moft delicious treat aman of fenfibility can receive. But take care, my good Doctor, you have not brought me to an entertainment which will give me a difrelifh for all others!" The Parfon fmiled, and led Matilda to the parlour, where he entreated her to fit down to her piano.—She made it a conftant rule, to the extent of her abilities, to amufe Mr. Belmoie's friends; fhe, therefore, in¬ ftantly complied with his requeft. Her voice was not powerful, but its fweetnefs fully compenfated for its want of ftrength ; it was a fweetnefs which grave a thrilling pleafure to the heart. Hartland was paffionately fond of mufic, and liftened to her with rape attention. f 6 After
After a few fongs, fhe rofe and joined the reft of the party in rambling about the 1 cottage; the old gentlemen fauntering be¬ fore her and Hartland. The conver¬ fation between the latter turned on a paf¬ toral life, and its fimple'avocations. He afked, whether fhe had ever been in the metropolis? " Ño," faid flie, " nor do I now defire ever to vifit it : I am fatisfied vvith niy prefent* fituation: a change of fcene might perhaps produce a change of fentiments; much I fhould there behold would be beyond my power of attaining, and to wiih in vain muft be moit painful." " True," faid Hartland; "tofigh in vain for fome pleafures, and fome òbj efts, would to me, at leaft, be attended with defpair. «-Yet," continued he after a paufe, " you I can never think deftined to obfcurity." *—" Was fuch my deftination, however," cried Matilda, " I fliould not regret it, fince the
the ihade of life has ever been allowed the happieft."—They were now come to a thicket of rofes, where- Hartland, in the eagernefs of difcourfe, ftopped.--The flo wer- feafon was nearly over. Amongft the few rofes which remained, was one uncommonly beautiful, almoft hid by the boughs. « Why don't you pull it?" afked Hartland. " I think it a pity," cried Matilda, u it fhould ina few moments periih merely for my gratification." « Is it not a greater pity," he exclaimed, " it fliould die in obfcurity? Yes," faid he, looking at Matilda, f *fuch a lovely flower was never deftined ■ " ' ■■■ ■ ■» ** To bloom unfeen, " And wafte its fweetnefs in the defert air.** Matilda biufhed : flie perceived he applied the words to her; and íhe turned from him to avoid his penetrating looks. LJrlAJr»
CHAP. VIII. « Oh ! five's all foftnefs ! « ι and calm as a rock'd infant ; « She is the child of love, and ihe was born in fmiles.** LEE'S ALEXANDER. HARTLAND treated Matilda wit!* a refpeft he had never before paid to her fex. —Awed by the dignity of her manner, and the penetrating expreffion of her eyes, he durft not addrefs her with his ufual levity*. He never before had been fo charmed : he now
now iaw beauty devoid of affectation, and fimplicity dignified by fenfe; and the ad¬ miration he had conceived on firft feeing her, was heightened into the moft violent paifion. On his return to the Parfonage, he heard from Aflimore her hiftory. The old man, who adored her, dwelt with rapture on her praife, and heard his gueft's impaffioned expreffions with delight. Had Hartland been a profeffed libertine, he no doubt would have regretted finding the objeft of his admiration fo protected, and fortified both by principle and education, to refift his infidious fchemes. Such, however, was not his charafter. I had before faid, he had often exprefsed an inclination for a domeftic life: he now be¬ held a woman, with whom fuch a life could be enjoyed in its utmoft purity. His large fortune^
fortune; his manners, which, when he pleafed, he could render irrefiftibly pleafing; and his perfon, which he knew was hand¬ fome; all infpired him with a certainty of being accepted with pleafure by ? girl who depended on bounty for her fupport. His vifits now became conftant at the cottage; and in the courfe of a fevvdays, not only he, but its inhabitants, felt as if he had been an acquaintance of feme time.
CHAP.
;
Wiiww i Mw ii imt it , ?? ..... , i i^ n w »*— áwww»
CHAP. IX.
« I fee 'tis love diibrbs thy mina, 1 -«î/h to give thee reft." J. HE fadnefs of Matilda at laft caught the attention of Belmore, and filled him with the cruelcft alarms. The tranfient checr- fulnefs which flie forced herfelf to affume in the prefence offtrangcrs,he faw was but a veil to hide the real feelings of her heart :
—the caufe of her dejection he could too eafily divine. Whenever Howard was mentioned, he faw fhe became violently agitated; while crimfon blufheso'erfpread her face, "and, in faultering accents, flic endeavoured to change the fubject of dif¬ courfe, as if afraid of dwelling on it. He knew the rectitude ofher heart; but he alfo knew its tendernefs, and the con- ^ fequent ills that were likely to refult from an hopelefs paffion. From the purity of her prinr^ 1 — *"*" eafily coni**·- "» " ,,rfC ?? confliäs of hcr mmd were at the idea of entertaining an improper attachment; and much feared they would end in the utter lemolition of her peace and health. . What he fuffered on her act 4int is im- poffible to exprefs. He had cheriihed her as the comfort of his days, the laft hope of his
» — his life; and the forrow which afflicted her, overwhelmed him with anguifh." The* affiduities of Hartland at this critical junc¬ ture gave him much pleafure. He had received a moft amiable charafter of him from Aflimore, who affured him he had long been feeking for a woman of elegance and worth to unite his deftiny to. Such a woman, the impaffioned language of Hartland's eyes now declared he had found. Matilda's mind was open to reafon; and Belmore trufted, by convincing her of the advantages of fuch a connexion, uie would be prevailed on to accept the ad¬ ui CJJÇ5 UI lltt.i.,...«. .. _ f *'-~-c» ..»rtffh^ ? ? ten- tion, and difinterefted aHbaiun, n- -* iCa would overcome her unfiV^ liate prepoifef- fion. By thus HUerting her thoughts to another fource, and impofing new duties upon her, Belmore hoped flie might be.pre* ferved
ferved from the pangs of an ill-fated at¬ tachment: he encouraged thofe hopes ; he dwelt on them with pleafure ; thus leffening iie prefent evil by anticipations of future good. Though the company of Hartland * often afforded entertainment to Matilda, it ýet more frequently oppreffed iier, by pre¬ venting her from feeking that folitude, to which a heart burthened by a fadnefs it durft not communicate, naturally flies for relief She walked out one afternoon, determined to call on Patty, and endeavour to prevent *her ideas from rambling on forbidden fub- lefts; butuiiv^l— w-- ..... tül **~- une, fruftrated this refolution, and íhe haftened to lu.«^ a melancholy plea¬ fure.—She entered the ro^m Howard had occupied: as ihe ftood at the window in a meditating attitude, her bufy fancy retraced every
every fcene fhe had gone through fince her arrival at the Hamlet. The laft words of Howard recurred to her memory : " he bid me remember him/' faid fhe; <t alas! why do I fo faithfully obey ?^??" She thought with horror on the difaftrous fate which had united him toa wretch who had blafted the honour and life of his friend; nor did ihe wonder at the impreffion it made on a foul of warmth and fenfibility, fuch ns he poffeffed. Had he been free, fhe could not mifconftrue his words : incoherent as they often were, they yet plainly declared his feelings for her. To his other misfortunes were now added the pangs of hopelefs love: a tear fell from her at the idea, and fhe - frequently wifhed, for both their fakes, they had never met· Thus engaged, flie heard not the foot- fteps of any one approaching; and was con-
confequently not only furprifed, but em¬ barraifed, by feeing Hartland fuddenly be¬ fore her. He had called at the cottage ; and being informed ihe was gone to Hill- grove's, thither he went in purfuit of her; and was much difappointed at not finding her there. Patty, not a little mortified by the chagrin he expreffed, with a feornful tofs of her head, exclaimed, " No, truly, ihe feldom honours us with vifits ; but you will find her, in all likelihood, at the Abbey!" Thus direfted, he purfued and difcovered our heroine, who ftarted in theutmoft con¬ fufion and furprife at his voice. " Good heaven!" faid he, " what a fpot for youth and beauty ! Why a ikull and crofs-bones would make this a perfeft apartment for a Califta. Except to do penance for all the mifchief you have committed, I cannot conceive
conceive what brings you hither, for I muft hope you have no gallant gay Lothario to lament." " No, indeed," cried flie, " nor fliould I lament fuch an objeft." " The gentle Al- tamont," faidhe" is perhaps more fuited to your tafle; he whofe ardent love, not flights, not infults could fubdue:—fuch is the na¬ ture of a real paffion : I feel it from ex¬ perience/* ' c We had better return to the cottage," faid Matilda. " You would not have been in fuch hafte to return to it," faid he, re¬ proachfully, " if I had not joined you ! Oh ! Mifs Stanley, why thefe averted eyes? Why this repulfive coldnefs? —Affure me that your heart is another's, and I will en¬ deavour tq force mine from dwelling on your perfeftions : but without fuch an affurance, I mufl ftill hope, ftill love, adore, entreat." In
In much confufion Matilda would have paffed him, but he prevented her, by catching her hand. " ??? muft not fly me thus," héexclaimed; " the anguifli oc¬ cafioned by my prefent fufpenfe, compels me to fpeak thus abruptly; compels me " Mr. Hartland," faid Matilda, inter- - rupting him, « our acquaintance has been too fliort to authorife your fpeaking in this manner:—your declaratlons are more the effufions of gaiety than fincerity." " No," faid he vehemently, " by heaven they are fincere I I admired you from the firft moment I faw you. You appeared indeed fo beautiful, I imagined I fliould not have found you far removed from weak¬ nefs: the idea you may deem illiberal; but hitherto I had found beauty either debafcd by folly or affeftation, and concluded it would
^ would be ftill the cafe; you proved a lovely exception, and my heart, in doißg you homage, only did you juftice." " Let me pafs, Mr. Hartland," iaid Matilda, " I infift upon your letting me return home; and if you wifli to oblige me, change the fubjeft of difcourfe," He no longer detained her, but did not permit her to return alone, and by his pro¬ found filence feemed deeply meditatingfomc fcheme. Matilda hoped her looks and words had mortified his pride in fuch a manner, that fhe fliould not again be tormented by his profeffions. They found Belmore walk¬ ing in the lawn, Matilda was too much agitated to enter into converfation with him : ihe faid her walk had fatigued her, and ihe would retire to the houfe to reft herfelf; íhe accordingly went to her room, leaving Belmore and Harland together ; yol. ii, q little
little thinking of the advantage the latter would take of her abfence. She fat by an open window, enjoying the delightful ferenity and coolnefs which ac¬ companies twilight, and unheeding the un¬ ufual length of time which elapfed ere ihe was fummoned to fupper. On entering the parlour, Mr. Belmore, vvith eyes which denoted pleafure, took her hand, and leading her to a chair, feated himfelf by her, exclaiming, " Heaven, my Ma¬ tilda, has heard the prayers I offered up on your account, and has now given to me a profpeft of beholding you fettled ás I could wiih." Matilda had no power to reply: a fecret forboding fliot through her foul.—" Hartland," continued he, " has made for you the moit generous propofals. He has informed me he fpoke to you on íhe fubjeft, and received no rejection." « Heavens !"
< t Heavens!" faid Matilda, « is it poffible he could fo bafely pretend to misinterpret my words ? Had he made a pofi t i ve pro¬ pofal, 1 fliould have given a pofitive re¬ jection toit." " And why reject him ?" faid Belmore, tc Hartland poffeffes every requifite to pleafe ; and to a heart difengaged, could not fail of being acceptable/' Something like a feel¬ ing of confcious guilt pervaded the heart of Matilda; at thefe words, fhe biufhed, flie trembled, and unable to bear the looks of Belmore, averted her head. He faw her agitation, with pity he faw it, aware as he was of the feelings which caufed it; but this pity could not induce him to give up a plan, which in the end he firmly believed' would conflitue her happinefs. This, he trufted, was the hour of perfua- -fion, and he endeavoured to collect his ? 2 fpirits,
fpirits, in order to be better enabled to perfevere in the caufe he had undertaken. He remained filent till Matilda was able to fpeak: at laft, recovering, fhe faid, " I have no wifh beyond that of continuing with you: I can experience no felicity equal to that which is derived from your love and protection." ** Alas ! my child," he exclaimed, " life at the beft i& precarious; in the courfe of human nature I cannot reckon upon many yçars; to fee you provided for, ere I quit this world, is my moft fervent wifh. Did you know the many anxious hours I have fpent in looking forward to the period when I fliould leave you unprotefted—leave fo much innocence and beauty expofed to the rruel fnares of a deceitful world, you would, from pity, comply with my defire. Pid I not think Hartland in every refpeft calculated
calculated to render you happy, not all his wealth would intereft me in his favour; but vvhen independence and worth arc allied, as furely (I think) they are in him, a connexion with them is certainly defi¬ rable. Oh î Matilda, to have you fettled would give me happinefs too great for ex - preffion." He ftopped; by her countenance he faw her conflicting emotions, and he gave her time to think. Thus urged, Matilda was in agony : ftie fliuddered at the idea of accepting Hart- land; yet how to refufe him flie knew not, without appearing inflexibly obftinate, or aftigning the true reafon fordoing fo: to do thè latter was impoffible; even death itfelf was preferable to the fliame which would attend confeffing an attachment for a maa fo fituated as Howard. She heíjuieoi —ftie rcflefted; —asrainfhe thought, by accepting Hartian J, flic fliould G 3 in
in fome degree perform her duty to Bel- more, the confcioufnefs of which would leffen her mifery ; befides, the active life flie ihould, by doing fo, be engaged in, might, by preventing her thoughts from dwelling upon what now occupied them, greatly contribute to remove her unfor¬ tunate prepoflcffion: flie could not help, however, fincerely wiihing the fuit entirely dropped, Bc-imore at length finding ihe either would not, or could not fpeak, took her hand, and in α voice of tender folemnity faid:—" I have now, my dear, urged all that I poffibly could think of to render you propitious tö Mr. Hartland's propofal; ? fiiall therefore conclude vvith this definitive fentence, that it is now in your power to give the moit exquifite pleafure, or themoft bitter anguifb, to my heart; and that the. probable
probable peace of my laft moments de¬ pends upon the manner.in which I filali leave you fituated." Matilda could hear no more: fhe flung herfelf at his feer, and in an agitation which - rendered her fcarcely articulate, exclaimed, tf No ! the child of your bounty, fl:e whom you foftered in your bofom, fliall net ftab it with ingracitucle.-----1 am yours: —my friend—my benefactor—difpofe of me as you pleafe!—and oh! affift me ia teaching this wayward heart to fed lefs re¬ luctance in complying with your wiflies." " My child/* faid the good man, raifing and fondly preffing her to his bofom, while tears of unutterable tendernefs trickled down his cheeks, " how much does this compliance oblige mc ! Dearer, indeed, it cannot make you to me, for above all earthly objects I have ever loved Matilda." °4 - He
He then feated her, and faid every thing which could foothe or comfort her. His kind expreffions overcame her fpirits j fhe wept violently, and her fighs and tears de¬ noted a heart o f ercharged with grief. Belmore was affefted by her diftrefs -, but though he was feeling-, he vias not weak : nnd rejoiced at having drawn her into a meafure which he doubted not would eradi¬ cate a -paflion he thought only founded on romantic pity. Inftead of being agonized by the idea of feeing her pining away under the pangs of hopelefs love, or leaving her unprotected, he rejoiced to think he fhould now behold her in a fituation which, from elegance, education, and beaury, flie was qualified to adorn ; in which flic muit make exertions that couid fcarcely fail, he thought, of removing her melancholy. They continued together till the clock reminded t! em ofthe latenefs ofthe hour. —Belmore
—Belmore embraced, bleft, and again af¬ fectionately thanked her; wnile ilie, unable to fpeak, retired to her chamber. Here, no longer foothed or fupported by him, flie relapfed into agonies at the idea of the promife flie had given to him, a promife which her heart felt every mo¬ ment more reluctant to fulfil : it was not yet too late, fhe reflected, to declare ihe could not keep it!—flie ftarted at the thought !—but could fhe do fo without confeffing her prepoffeffion, for whom?— for Howard !—a married man ! Heavens î could ihe fupport the fliame of fuch an avowal ? No.—Could ihe bear to gfive forrow to Mr» Belmore, the friend ofher infancy, the guardian of her youth ?— Could flie bear to imbitter not only his prefent, but his laft moments ? No : to da fo would be attended with horror!—To g 5 comply;
comply, therefore, with his wifhes~to become, as flie had promifed, the wife of Mr. Hartland, was her only alternative.— To fubmit to this alternative with fome degree of cornpofure, flie endeavoured to ** fummon all her refolution to her aid, and * quiet the perturbed paffions of her mind, in efforts to regain tranquillity. The night ftole away unheeded ; nor had flie an idea of retiring to reft, till the twit¬ tering of fparrows, from the eaves of the cottage, roufed her from her meditations; and opening the fhutter, ihe faw the grey dawn appearing: ihc then retired haftily to bed, where, fatigued and exhaufted by the various emotions flie had experienced, fhe foort fell into a profound fleep, in which ihe continued till the maid, entering her apart¬ ment, informed her, her mailer had been ' waiting breakfaft for her a long time.—She ftarted up, and enquiring the hour, heard it
it "was juft eleven !—three hours beyqnd their ufual time of breakfafting ! Afliamed of fuch apparent indolence, the dreffed herfelf in hafte ; but on entering the par¬ lour, how great was her confufion to fee Hartland there !—ffie involuntarily ftepped back, and would have retreated to her room, had not Belmore followed her, and reconducted her in. Her whole frame trembled, and terror and repugnance feized her heart, when Hartland advancing, with looks of tranf- port, took her hand, and paffionately kiffing it, thanked her in the moft rap¬ turous terms for conferring on him fo much happinefs. Pale, weak, almoft finking with agita¬ tion, Matilda received his extravagant fpeeches in filence:—'flic faw it was now too tate to rec<ede, and that to betray her g 6 emotions
emotions might hereafter be produftive of much fuffering to her;, yet fcarcely could # fhe conceal them. The luxury of folitude was notr allowed her the whole day, as Hartland could not think of quitting the cottage. Naturally impetuous in every undertaking, and impatient of delay, he refted not till fhe wedding-day was ñxed^- and it was at length fettled that it ihould be that day fortnight. From this period he became Matilda's fhadow; ihe could not.ftir from the houfe without him : flie now, indeed, took very iittie pleafure in rambling about it, fince every fpot· reminded/her of feenes fhe was anxious to have buried in oblivion. Hartland difpatched meffengers to Lon* don, (where every thing- can in a moment be procured for money) for a number of valuable prefents fbr his intended bride 5 and
and by thefe, and the feulement he made upon her, evinced not only his affection, but a difpofition truly generous. Patty Hiligrove foon heard what wa& going on at the cottage, and felt the utmoft regret at the profperity of Matilda : full of curiofity, fhé went to it, and was not a little furprifed at the dejefted looks' of its fair inhabitant; the profpeft of fuch a connexion as flie was about forming, being, fhe thought, fufficient to elevate her to extacy, and fhe could not forbear expreffmg the furprife her melancholy excited. Immediately after the ceremony, it waar fettled they ihould leave the Hamlet; Hartland left at Matilda's option-, either to go to the metropolis, or to bk feat; íhe preferred going to the latter* Patty felt ferry at the idea of her departure! not from İ any
any regard ihc felt for her, but merely be¬ caufe flie thought flie ihould lofe much amufement, by her quitting the neighbour¬ hood. -Her father, however, who had long been tired of her perverfe humour, con¬ trived ? fcheme which effectually removed ail regret flie felt on this account. He came one morning to the cottage in fuch hafte, he was quite out of breath, and after fcraping and bowing a confiderable time to Matilda, (whom he treated with par¬ ticular refpect, fince informed of her in¬ tended marriage with a great 'Squire) he faid, if fhe would be pleafed to take his daughter Patty for an attendant, it would be doing him a great favour; that fhe had a pretty iittie hand at nick-knacks, and all thefe kind of things which a lady wants; but fhe was no good in the world to him, as he never liad had a fat turkey on his table, nor
nor a good checfe in his dairy, fincc fhe managed his houfe^— was fhe gone, his fifter Margery (good old foul) whom her ill- humour had banifhed from it, would come back to him, and he ihould then be quite happy. Hartland, vvho was prefent, immediately declared flie fliould be accepted in the ca¬ pacity he wiflied ; and faid it was probable he might have her fettled, ere long, with one of his handfome young tenants. Patty was delighted ât hearing this: all flie defired was to be from under her" father's countroul, which had long been in¬ fupportable to her.
????,
CHAP, X. ** What charms has ibi row in that face ? *' Sorrow fecras pleas'd to dwell with lo much fweetnefs % * c Yet, now and Chen a melancholy fmiJe ** Breaks oat, like lightning in a wintsr's n»ght, ** And ihews a moment's day/' DRYDj-N's ALL FOR LOVE, JL HE day at length arrived on which Matilda was to refign the proteftion of Bel- more!-—give up the fweet delight.of at¬ tending on him, and enter upon a ftate. to which all her feelings were averfe; She arofe with a heavinefs ihe could not diffipate, which feemed a prefentiment ihe was about facrificing all her earthly happi¬ nefs :
nefs: the prefence of Patty, who attended her while dreffing, alone prevented her from - breaking into tears and lamentations. Supported by the arm of Belmore, and followed by Patty, ihe walked to the church, where Aflimore and Hartland were waiting to receive her. While the ceremony was performing, all the faculties of her foul feemed fufpended; but when flie received the congratulations of the little party, and was folded to the bofom of Belmore, her fenfibility returned, and a flood of tears ftreamed dovvn her cheeks. Belmore was inexpreffibly affefted: the folemnity of the fcene had ftruck him with a kiad of dread; he began to think he ihould not have urged her as he had done; and in the moment he gave her away, he felt he fliould be the moft wretched of men, if flic was not happy in her new condition. They
They returned to the cottage, where a neat breakfaft was prepared for them, and a fuperb coaai and fix waiting to convey them to Hartland-Lodgc. Patty was all amazement and extacy on feeing it,— " Lord,! what ? handfome coach! what beautiful horfes! what rich liveries! what happinefs fome folks are born to!" flie ex¬ claimed, iC what pleafure to poflefs fuch a carriage ! ' ' Its fair miftrefs fighed at thofe exclama¬ tions; already fhe felt how diftinft grandeur and happinefs vvere from each other. Immediately after breakfaft they rofe to depart. Afhmore invoked, with all the warmth of piety and affection, Heaven's choiceit bif ffings on the new-married cou¬ ple. The two domeftics followed Matilda out in tears. The prefence of Hartland had not power to reftrain the grief they felt * at
at lofing their gentle miftrefs. Belmore hurried Patty after her, and the moment: they were feated, it drove off, and Matilda gave a Lift lookj and a hfi adieu, to the dear and humble maníion of her friend. The carriage proceeded vvith the utmoft velocity till it came to the road by the Abbey : here the ground being uneven and rugged in many places, it was obliged to proceed more leifurely, and the Abbey for a long time remained in view. Matilda iighed, as her eyes, for a few minutes, refted involuntarily upon it; and on withdrawing them, a faint blufli tinged her cheek at finding Mr. Belmore's faficned upon her* which was foon, however, fucceeded by a deadly palenefs. " Lord!" faid Patty, « I fliould have liked of all things to have feen Mr. Howard in his regimentals $ I dare fay he looked monftrous
monftrous handfome in them; for to be furc he is ? fine young man, and has quite got up his heart and fpirits, I fuppofe, fmce he went amongft the officers and fold i ers." " Who, or what is he? (feid Hartland). Mr. Aflimore once or twice mentioned fomething about him, and he muft have been a ftrange finguiar charafter from what I have heard." Belmore, who,for many rea¬ fons, wiíhed to wave thefubjeft, flightly faid, peculiar afflictions had given him a folitary habit; then pointing to a fine profpeft, he changed the difcourfe. Hartland-Lodge was only forty miles from the Hamlet ; they therefore expefted to reach it about the fafhionabie hour of dining. They were within two or three miles of ir, when a beautiful phaeton and fqur paficd them, in which, notwithftanding the
the rapidity with which it went, Matilda recognized Bromley, in deep mourning, with a very beautiful woman feated befide him. tf That is a neighbour of yours,*' faid Hartland, addreffing Mr. Belmore, " who has juft paffed us, and alfo of mine; his »uncle, who died lately, has left him a large eftate near the Lodge,· we are not, however, on vifiting terms, nor ever fhall." " So much the better," cried Belmore; "men of his profeffed principles ihould always be difcouraged." " Pray, Sir," faid Patty to Hartland, " may I juft aik if he is married to the tìne young lady who is with him?"—Hartland fmiled. ° 'Tis a temporary marriage,** cried he. Mr. Hartland's tenants met his carriage on entering the avenue, dreffed in their gayeft
gayeft attire, and preceded, by a pipe and tabor. A feleft party of his friends were affembled at the houfe to receive the lovely bride. - Hartland, with a countenance ex¬ preffive of rapture, led her amongft them, and fondly welcomed her to her new habi¬ tation. Ail was a fcene of joyous feflivity ; large tables were laid out on the lawn for the tenants; every countenance was gay, nor was there a heavy heart amongft the group except hers who occafioned all this rejoicing. Dejeftion marked every feature, and every effort to appear cheerful ended in a greater degree of melancholy.
CHAP.
CHAP. XL <t Afide he turn'd ; " For envy, and with jealous leer malign, «' Ey*d thera aíkaimce/" MILTON. 1 HE conftant gaiety which reigned at Hartland-Lodge, kept Matilda in a con¬ tinual buftle, and prevented her thoughts from dwelling long on any fubjeft; and Belmore fondly flattered himfelf flie was beginning to experience that happinefs he firmly believed would attend her union. Hartland's love feemed every day to increafe; he regarded Matilda as the moft lovely
lovely and amiable of women, and he con¬ fidered himfelf fuperlatively bleffed in pof- feffmg fuch a treafure; yet he fometimes felt an uneafinefs at the coldnefs with which ihe received his affiduities. Grateful in her nature, ihe could not long, however, receive fuch unremitting attentions as he paid her, without feeling a tendernefs for him, which ihe hoped was the forerunner of that fincere regard ihe now began to imagine he deferyed. While thus Matilda was endeavouring to regulate every wayward feeling of her heart, to form not only her actions but her thoughts according to the moft rigid rules of virtue, and to perform thefe duties ihe fubmitted to incur in compliance with the wiihes of others, the blackeft fchemes were forming againft her peace. Bromley,
Bromley, in the neighbourhood of Hart¬ land-Lodge, could not fail of hearing the praifes which every tongue was liberal in bellowing upon Matilda. Univerfal was the admiration her elegance and beauty excited ; and that paffion, which had for fome time lain dormant in his breaft from another engagement, was now not only re¬ vived but increafed by thefe eulogiums. Chance had thrown in his way the per¬ fidious, yet lovely wife of Howard : gay, gallant, and handfome, he foon infinuated himfelf into her favour, and prevailed on her to accompany him to the manfion his uncle had left him. But what he eafily obtained, was always fure to be flightly regarded. The paffion he felt for her was tranfient. The difficul¬ ties he encountered in his purfuit of Ma¬ tilda, had given hera degree of value in his vol. π» η eftimation
eftimation nothing elfe could poffibly have done ; and, befides gratifying his love, now to fucceed in his defigns upon her, would be a triumph ofthe moft glorious kind over Belmore, whofe fcruples he ridiculed; and Hartland, whom he detefted, from the hau^ity manner in which he had rejefted all overtures towards an intimacy. Mrs* Howard, though artful, was no match for him. He foon drew from her all the particulars of her life he defired to know 9 particularly the motive of her jaunt to the Abbey; and, in order to induce her to aft in fuch a manner as he wiflied, he affured her he was confident Howard would hfcveconfented toa reconciliation with her, had not the bkndifhments of Matilda faícirjated his fenfes : her he reprefented ?? ? finiihed charafter of deceit, on whom the heavieft puniflmients ihould fall for thus
thus caufing inquietude to his lovely Julia. Wrought by his infinuations to the moft violent rage and malice, Julia hefitated not to declare her readinefs to accede to any propofal which could effect the demolition ofher rival's peace and reputation. Bromley exulted at the fuccefs of his artifices, and refolved to try and obtain Putty as an auxiliary in his defigns upon her lady, which, from her weaknefs, credulity, and envy, he did not think he fhould find a very difficult taik. Accordingly one day, when he knew the family were engaged at a fplendid enter¬ tainment in the neighbourhood, he dit patched a note to Patty, defiring to fee her immediately, in a little wood near the houfe, and ftrictly charging her to conceal to whom flie was coming. h % Patty
Patty flew thither direftly, all ecftafy md impatience, and found him waiting to re¬ ceive her. The pleafure he affefted to feel at feeing her, infpired her with delight. After he had afked her about the events which took place at the Hamlet, fince his departure from it, and whether flje was happy with Matilda, he added, he was much furprifed to hear of her being with Mrs. Hartland, who had often declared to him, ihe confidered her a weak, aukward, ignorant girl> with whom nothing but neceffity couid have made her keep company.—Patty, with an enraged countenance, drew up her headj exclaiming, « f Indeed flie did not doubt Mrs. Hartland's having faid fo, as ftie thought her extremely ? -natured, and often wondered (for her part) how any one could like her." Bromley having thrown her into the frame of mind he wiíhed, declared his opinion
opinion of Mrs. Hartland exactly cor¬ refponded with hers. He had now under his protection a lady, he faid, who by her means was deeply injured—the wife of Howard; whom he had treated with the utmoft barbarity, in confequence pf the attachment he felt for her;, "an attachment, (added he), which I am convinced ftie exerted all her art to infpire him with, and which I am alfo convinced he ftill retains for her. As all Mrs. Howard's applications to him for fupport and attention have been difregarded, I therefore wifh, my dear Patty, you would, from time to time, throw- out fuch little hints of it, as might lead Mr. Hartland to keep a ftrift watch over his wife, and put it out of her power to give any hope to Howard, whofe paffion would then, no doubr, die away; a paffion which has involved in mifery and misfortunes the moft lovely and amiable of her fcx," ? j Patty,
Patty, vvho had implicitly believed ali he told her, fçlt fo enraged at jthe difrepeftful mannerin which ftiç imagined Matilda had mentioned her, that flic determined to take an early opportunity of letting Mr. Hart¬ land hear all flie had learned ; confident, from his jealous temper, which ihc had fufficient difcernmcnt to difeover, flic ihould, by doing fo, have the happinefs of Kholding Matilda ?? niífer¿il>!ens fac now wiflied her. This determination, however, was oppofed by Bromley, who feared an abrupt difclofure might appear too much like deiign to produce the effeft he defired. He therefore made her promife to aft as he had direfted, namely, to mention what he had difclofed to her at different times, and, as if in the courfe of cafual converfation, and alfo to meet him from time to time, to let him know the refult ofthe operations r he
he had planned, that he might inform his friend Mrs. Howard. He then prefented her with fome ornaments, as a kind of re¬ taining fee; and,charging her not to drop a hint before Belmore, of what he had told her, they feparated. The bafe fcheme he had laid, was to create a jealoufy in Hartland's mind, by artful hints, which would naturally caufe him to treat Matilda in an unpleafant man¬ ner. He then refolved to throw himfelf in her way, and doubted not, the contrait flie muft unavoidably draw, between his tendernefs and her huíband's morofenefs, would render her propitious to his fuit, and enable him, at laft, to carry her oíl in triumph.
? 4
CHAP.
WK— ¡RHUS
f
????. ??.
tf Si*c*dtn he ftaits, «' Shook from his tender trance, and reftlefá tuns * f To glimmering fli ades, and fympathetic glooms, ** Where the dun umbrage o'er the failing ftream ** Romantic, hangs j there through the pcnfive duik *« Strays, in heart-thrilling meditation loft, ·< Indulging all to Love." THOMSON.
XATTY was allowed to fit with Matilda, when no company was expefted ; fhe was alfo permitted to accompany her abroad, when no vifits were intended ¿ nor was her converfation reftrained. As flic was fitting cne
one morning in Matilda's dreffing room with her and Mr. Hartland, fhe fuddenly exclaimed, " Dear me ! Madam, you dont walk out half fo often here, ?? you ufed to do at the Hamlet; but, perhaps you have not the fame inducement for rambling here that you had there. There is no old Abbey in this neighbourhood/' (added fhe, with a look which called a deep blufli into the cheeks of Matilda). " Why, what par¬ ticular attraction had the Abbey?" afked Hartland, raifing his eyes from a book which he was reading to himfelf. Matilda, bluihing ftill more deeply, remained filent. But Patty eagerly replied, " ? dear! it was there poor Mr. Howard lived." *' Howard !" repeated Hartland, turning his penetrating eyes on Matilda, " did his refiding there then render a ramble to it fo agreeable?" η 5 Matilda
Matilda felt hcr colour change, and overcome by a fecret dread—by a painful confcioufnefs of the ftate of her heart, flie íhrunk from his haughty and fcrutinizing glances: her confufion was but too vifible; and, after a filence of fome minutes, he arofe with a frown, and left the room. The tears of Matilda now burft forth ; and fhe would have entreated Patty never to mention the Abbey again, but for the/ interpofition of her pride, and the reflexion that fuch an entreaty would be a kind of acknowledge¬ ment of feelings, which ihc had ib many reafons for wifliing to conceal. Her faithlefs companion had now com¬ menced her operations, and from time to time threw out fly infinuations of her attachment to Howard, which operated like a flow poifon upon the mind of Hartland* Na-
Naturally impetuous, and from his for¬ mer purfuits inclined to doubt the reality of female virtue, he was open to fufpicion and jealoufy; his lovefor Matilda was ofthat extravagant nature, which could fcarcely permit him to think with calmnefs of her having even a partiality for another, much lefs a ftrong prepoffeffion ; aad that ihe had fuch a prepoffeffion, from what he had heard, and the coldnefs ofher manner, he could not doubt, and confequently, that in¬ tereíled views had alone influenced her to accept him—-the thought was almoft mad¬ nefs !—His peace was deftroyed by it, and diftruft poifoned the fountain of domeftic fweets. The change in his behaviour, denoted the fufpicions he harboured—a change, which deftroyed the tendernefs and efteem Matilda was beginning zo experience for h 6 hint,
him, and made her regard him as a morofe tyrant. She was compelled to go out one morn¬ ing to pày fome ceremonious vifits in the neighbourhood: the chariot had not pro¬ ceeded above a mile when ihe faw a party of military approaching. The horfes, un- ufcd to the found of a drum, were ftartied, and fet off with a velocity which could not be checked, plunging as they went, in the moft frightful manner. Their career was at laft flopped, by one ofthe wheels being daflicd to pieces. The inhabitants of a little cottage by the road, now came out .to offer their affiftance: they were joined by an officer, who had left the party, and followed the carriage with in¬ credible fpeed : with a countenance of ter¬ ror and diftraftion, he tore open the door, and bore Matilda, who by this time had funk fenfelefs to the bottom of the carriage, in
in his arms to the cottage.—Water was the only thing which could be procured from the poor people to contribute to her recovery; with this they fpr i n kled her pale face, and by degrees' ihe ihowed fymptoms of returning life. Her furprife was great in finding herfelf in the arms of an officer ; but how infinitely was that furprife in¬ creafed, when, on looking up, flie found herfelf in the arms of Howard! Her aftoniíhment almoft reduced her to the condition from which flie had juft re¬ covered. "Oh! tell me," faid Howard, while he preffed her to his throbbing heart, " tell me to what chance I am indebted for a meeting, at once fo painful and fo plea¬ fing, fo fraught with torture and delight!'* " An unforefeen one indeed," fobbed Matilda. " Tell me," cried Howard, alarmed by her fighs and tears, " is Bel- more,
more, our ineflimablc friend» well ?—fay, Matilda, deareft of all human beings, is all peace and contentment ftill at the Ham¬ let?"—" Alas!** thought Matilda, « all there is peace and contentment, but all within my bofom is forrow and confufion !'* As foon as fhe was recovered, the fervants proceeded to the Lodge for another car¬ riage; and fhe, difengaging herfelf from Howard's fupporting arms, feated herfelf upon a little wicker chair, in an agitation and diftrefs of mind too violent to efcape his notice, or be attributed by him folely to her fright. The poor ruftics withdrew to a rdptäfni diftance, and Howard, as foon as hefaw they were unobferved, again enquired what had brought her from the Hamlet? Cf You have heard of no change then," faid íhe, "fincc your departure?"—.«No!" replied he, with an alarmed look, u I have not."
not." She was filent :—again he urged her to fpeak. At laft, in faultering accents, flie revealed her marriage ! The countenance of Howard affurned a death-like palenefs ! —his foul feemed to have received a fhock it could not fupport!—He ftarted from his chair in the utmoft emotion, and walked about in an agitation he could not conceal I When the violence of his feelings had a little fubfided, he returned to Matilda. cc Alas !" cried he, " the change indeed is great!—you are married!—and every trace ofyour unfortunate friend is obliterated! —To have lived in your remembrance was indeed my only earthly hope !—but why ihould I murmur?—you are happy;—that knowledge to me, fliould be fufficient to check each repining wiih. Oh! pure and permanent may your felicity be, moft amiable, moft lovely of women!" "Alas!"
Cf Alas!" thought ihe, " how deceitful are appearances !—he thinks me happy; but never before was I fuch an alien to felicity!" *' You arc married," continued he, " and I ihall be no more remembered !—new objects, more interefting, more attractive, will obliterate my idea;—that foft pity, which operated like a foothing charm on my grief, will be loft for ever; and while I dwell on the memory of Matilda, ihe will forget my very exiflence !"— " No, Howard," cried Matilda, inexpreffibly af¬ fefted, " change of fituation cannot produce fuch a change of fentiment; thofe for whom I profeffed a friendfliip, ftill retain it : you are amongft the number, and be affured my beft wiflies will ever be yours." He fnatched her hand; and while he preifed it to his lips, a tear fell upon it. " Yes,"
" Yes," he exclaimed, " you are the fame angel I left." Matilda withdrew her hand ; " ihe feared, íhe faid, flie was detaining him from his party," and befought him no longer to delay rejoining them. They were going to a town about a mile off, he replied, to halt till the next day, and he was in no hafte tojóin them» " I know," cried he, * " I had better depart; yet when fo unex¬ peftedly we have met, moft affuredly I think for the laft time, I cannot tear myfelf away." He íât down befide her; he afked a num¬ ber of queftions about the Hamlet—he mentioned the firft evening they faw each other—he talked of Belmore and his mild benevolence: he appeared to dwell on paft feenes, with that corroding remembrance which is felt for " joys departed, never to return." Matilda
Matilda iighed as he fpoke; the tranquil happinefs ihe enjoyed when firft known to him, recurred to her memory; and the contrail ihe experienced in her prefent iituatiori, excited a grief flie could not fupprefs, Howard was ftruck by her manner! Her face was no longer illumined by gladnefs! ? her eyes had loft their luftre; the rofe upon her cheek was pale; inftead of the elevation of hope, he faw the languor of dejection; inftead of the fmiles of contentment, he beheld the tears of affliction, which flowed with violence as he continued to fpeak of many little incidents which had paffed at the Hamlet. Shocked by her melancholy, he could fcarce refrain enquiring whether fhe was happy? He wifhed alfo to know who the enviable being was, to whom fhe had fo fuddenly given her hand; yet he could
MAID OF THE HAMLET. l6j" could not bring himfelf to aik—his foul fecretly revolted from mentioning Matilda's huiband ! She now began to grow dreadfully un¬ eafy at his ftay, as ftie expefted a carriage every moment from the Lodge, and Hart¬ land in it; and ihe earneftly befought him to depart. He WOndered at the impatience flie expreffed for his departure; but he felt more grieved than offended by it, That refentful pride which, a ihort time before, would have made him obey fuch an en¬ treaty, was loft in dejection. He lingered in the cottage, and felt, while flie remained within it, he could not leave it. " You faid," cried he, " you were not altered : you arc, or you would not wiih to drive me from you." At this moment, Matilda heard the found of a carriage : an univerfal trembling feized her : ihe had neither
neither power to fpeak nor move, and funk back in the chair, dreading the arrival of Hartland, and the morofe humour to which ihe feared the prefent fcene would give rife. In a few moments the coach ftopped ; and Hartland, as fiie had feared, .and Patty alight from it. The former, too much agi¬ tated by his apprehenfions about her, to notice any other being, caught her to his bofom, and with his wonted tendernefs en¬ quired whether ihe Was hurt? But his fond interrogatories were foon ftopped by the malicious Patty, who, half fcreaming, ex¬ claimed," ? ! Lord! Mr. Howard, who could have thought of feeing you here? it is the ftrangeft thing in the world to find you here alone with Mrs. Hartland I" At the name of Howard, Hartland ftarted, and furveyed him with the kecneft infpeftion. He was ftruck w r ith the manly elegance of his figure,
figure, the noble expreffion of his coun¬ tenance, and he thought indeed he was a rival might well he feared. The rudenefs of his infpeftion called forth all the haughti¬ nefs of Howard's foul. He frowned, and walked indignantly to the door. Matilda, in faultering accents, then ex¬ plained the caufe of the accident. Her account correfponded with that given by the fervants; yet the mean fufpicions Hart- land had for fome time encouraged, made him think, almoft againft conviction, fome¬ thing more than chance occafioned this interview. With a füllen voice he inquired whether ihe was able to accompany him home? On anfwering in the affirmative, he took her trembling hand, and led her to rhe coach, without noticing Howard in the flighteft manner. Matilda was inexpreffibly íhocked ^ She
She wiflied to bid him adieu—ihe wiflied to affure him ofher unalterable friendihip, but flie durft not look or fpeak. Patty, under no reftraint, tormented him with queftions which heat laft would not anfwer. He faw the carriage depart with a figh ; —" Is this, then," feid he, (as he looked after it) " the being to whom Matilda has given her hand? Proud, füllen, difdainful! How little qualified to render her happy ! But feldom, indeed, are kindred minds united." He rewarded the poor people of the cottage for their trouble and 'attention, and then departed. On his way to the town where the party halted, he was ftruck with fome extenfive and beautiful improvements which furrounded a very noble houfe, at no great diftance from the road. He afked a labourer who was paffing, to whom the feat belonged ? " 'Squire
" 'Squire Hartland/' the man i eplied. Howard lingered as he paffed it,—" Wealth and independence are hers, indeed," faid he; " but what wretched fubftitutes for health and content ! Her countenance de¬ noted not a mind at eafe. She is no longer the blooming Matilda, who adorned the humble refidence of Belmore." In the hilarity of the officers he could not join. The wretchednefs his conflicting paffions occafioned, he could fcarcely con¬ ceal, and retired almoft immediately after dinner. The evening was then far ad¬ vanced ; the gloom and ftillnefs of twilight accorded with his prefent feelings, and tempted him to wander from the town, and he involuntarily took the road to the Lodge: the gates which opened into the various improvements were not fecured, fo that he had free accefs to them all. As
As he wandered through the dark and mazy labyrinths of the grove, which partly cncompaflèd the houfe, a melancholy, at once painful and pleafing, diftufed itfelf throughout his foul, mingled with an en¬ thufiafm of tendernefs, " I now tread," cried he, " in the foot- fteps of Matilda. I walk beneath the trees which have afforded her flielter. Ah ! ne¬ ver will ihe think, as flie retraces thofe paths, that the wretched Howard has prayed in them for her felicity." He explored every avenue :—there was fafcination in the fpot, from whence he could contemplate her abode:—the very trees which gently waved around him, feemed to whifper the loved name of Matilda.
CHAP.
CHAP. XIII.
" Ten thoufand fears a Invented wijd, ten thoufand frantic views *« Of Horrid rivals, hanging on the charms * c For which he melts in fondnefs» eat him up ** With fervent anguifli, and confuming rage. 1 * THOMSON.
JVlATILDA's mind was now a prey to difquietude. When ihe entered the car¬ riage fhe could fcarcely fupport herfelf Hartland was too gloomy and unkind to offer her any affiftance, and Patty, pert and unfeeling, tortured her with her remarks vot. ir. ι about
about the ftrangenefs of her meeting with Howard. " So," cried Hartland, after a gloomy iilence of fome minutes, " you really had no idea of feeing him." " None in the world," replied íhe: " we never heard of him fince he quitted the Hamlet ; and to an accident, which nearly coft me my life, our late interview was owing/* " To he fure/* faid Patty, " he was re¬ joiced to fee you, though, indeed, I can't fay his joy w&$ vffifeie iti hiš countenance, for he looked quite melancholy and pale; but I fuppofe there was fufficient reafon for rfafc**4or, no doubt, you tokl him you were married." At thefe vwrds, the psdeneíš of Matilda's cheek gave way toa crimfon glow, und ihe eagerly avarøei feer head to conceal her o#nfcfirø,imd moid the towing and in¬ dignant
dignant glances of Hart land. No further converfation paffed till they arrived at the Lodge, where ihe Found Belmore in an agony of impatience waiting her arrival. He was abfent when the fervants came back for the coach, and returned but a few moments before it. Pale and trembling, he caught her in his arms, as fhe de¬ fcended from it, while a trickling tear declared the feelings he experienced at the idea of her having fuffered from the acci¬ dent ihe had met with. Affefted by his kindnefs, her drooping head fiink upon his ihoulder, and the emotions fhe had long endeavoured to fupprefs, burft forth with violence. Hartland was difpleafed at this feener¬ ne diiliked the tendernefs which fubfifted between them. I have before faid, he could not bear Matilda fliouid prefer any being to i t himfelf.
himfelf. Belmore, he was convinced, pof¬ feffed a much greater degree of her affection than he himfelf did; and, in confequence of this conviction, he diiliked him. Belmore was informed of her meeting Howard, and his eagernefs to refcue her from danger. (( Yes/ r faid he, " noble, generous, humane Howard, would riik his life for Matilda ; but who that knows my child, would not feel ecftacy infervingher?" Matilda was too much diflurbed by the events of the morning to appear at dinner; ihe was obliged to lay down to reft her agitated frame; but her mind ihe could . not tranquillize. The feelings manifefted by Howard, difturbed ahd tormented it, and deeply flie regretted their unhappy meeting. Patty attended her, with a íhow of great affection; íhe brought her up tea, which was the
the only refrefliment fhe could take, and would have fat with her, had not Matilda faid flic preferred being alone. But though unable to fupport converfa¬ tion, fhe foon grew weary of fupinenefs ; and imagining a ramble in the grove might be of fervice to her, ilie threw on her cloak, and going down a flight of back ftairs, went out unfeen, hoping on her return to be able to appear at fupper, as an exertion to appear cheerful, ftie trufted, would be agreeable to Hartland, who, notwithftanding his morofenefs, fhe wiflied to pleafe, from a conviction that it was her duty to do fo. As flic entered the grove, little did fhe ima¬ gine it contained the being who had caufed her fuch uneaiinefs j a being whom flie at once loved and efteemed, yet lamented ever knowing. The farther ihe penetrated into the gloom and privacy of the grove, the greater in- ι 3 dulgcnce
dulgencc ihc gave to the fadnefs of her foul. She refted not till fhe attained a little ruftic building at its extremity, called the mofs-houfe. Its lining was of moft ; its feat was formed of entwined oziers, and flowering ihrubs, planted thickly, almoft concealed its entrance from view. Here fhe entered, and fitting down, endeavoured to recall her fcattered fpirits, and chafe from them every recollection propriety «ould condemn. " Although Hartland may accufe me/' Jfae cried, " I cannot be quite miferable, while my own heart declares me undeferving of his accufations. Happy, indeed, I cannot be; the bofom which is taughí. to fear, cannot admit affeftion ; 4 and without affec¬ tion, how joylefs is the married ftate ! The gentlenefs, the tendernefs of Howard's man¬ ner
ncr could not be forgotten, nor remembered withou: involuntary pleafure : fenfible, however, of the impropriety of dwelling on it, flie did not long permit herfelf to do fo, and folemnly determined, whenever it occurred, inftantly to endeavour to baniih it from her mind. A fudden ruftling amongft the trees now alarmed her; íhe arofe precipitately, and going to the door, beheld the hated and unprincipled Bromley ftanding by it. The furprife flie felt was not greater than that he manifefted; with this difference, hers was accompanied* with horror, his with rapture ! She would inftantly have paffed him, but he prevented her. " No, no," he ex¬ claimed, feizing her hand as he fpoke, " I cannot lofe fuch an opportunity as chance has afforded me, of telling you I adore you! Yes, lovely, enchanting woman, the heart 14 % you
you rejected is ftill yours ; and, notwith. ? ending the barbarity you treated me with, I will venture to fay, more attached to you than his, to whom fo cruelly you gave a hand 1 almoft died to obtain." " I fliould treat you with the filent fcorn you deferve," faid Matilda, " if your de¬ taining me here did not compel me to fpeak, that I might infift upon your releafing me." i€ Not except you promife to meet me here to-morrow evening." <f Mr. Bromley," faid Matilda, in an accent expreffive of in¬ dignation, cc this infolence fhall not go unpuniihed." * € What! you threaten me with the refent¬ ment of your huiband? But as to that I am perfeftly indifferent; a real lover, you know, is ever a defperare kind of creature ;*and upon my foul, I am as much in love as ever : really 1 wonder you can be fo cruel, after
after the propofals I made you at the Ham¬ let." "Propofals!"interrupted ihe,—"Yes, fuch as excited the fame contempt and de¬ teftation their author did." " Nay, flop," faid he, " this is ? little too much. You will throw me intq de¬ fpair, and I ihall occupy the old Abbey inftead of Howard.— A propos —is it not cruel in you to add love to his other mis¬ fortunes, and bewitch the poor man from his wife?" Aftoniíhment deprived Matilda of utter¬ ance; her frame fliook with the violence of conflicting paffions; and flie felt for her - cruel infulter the utmoft abhorrence. De¬ lighted at the diftrefs he had thrown her inro, he was proceeding to add to it, when the found of an approaching ftep ftruck his ear: he inftantly dropped Matilda's hand, and darting into a thick avenue, was 1 5 out
I78 MAID OF THE HAMLET. out of fight in a moment. The mofs-houfe was the place of affignation with Patty : in hopes of a meeting this evening, he had repaired to it, and was moft agreeably fur¬ prifed by the fight of Matilda: all the pleafing emotions, however, his unexpeded meeting with her occafioned, were foon diffipated by her contemptuous expreffions, which excited fuch a malevolent ragéin his bofom, as determined him, from revenge^ whether or not he fucceeded in his defigns upon her virtue, to leave no means untried to deflroy her reputation. The terrified Matilda had not power to move from the fpot where he had left her. The perfon whofe approaching fteps had hurried him away, now appeared \ and lhe beheld Hartland, with wildnefs and rage in his countenance! Her agitation and difrnay were augmented at hi$ fight. ** So, Madam,
Madam, (cried he, attempting to fpeak compofedly), you have walked out to tran¬ quillize your fpirits; the air of the grove has fomething inexpreffibly refreffiing in it, particularly when one is alone." " I really came hither," faid the trembling Matilda, " in hopes the air might remove the languor my fright this morning occa¬ fioned." w Oh ! no doubt," exclaimed he, (fmiling malicioufly) ; " you expefted your fpirits would be much exhilarated. Bat tell me, Matilda," proceeded he, vehemently grafping her hand, " who was the perfon who jutted parted from you?" Matilda, terrified at the idea of the confequences which might attend his knowing Bromley's impertinence,,,hefitated to reply; but, on his repeating the queftion with ftil! greater vehemence, ihe faid, " it was Bromley." €t Bromley!" he repeated, ftedfaftly look¬ ing at her. She declared it was, and that 1 6 the
the meeting was quite unexpected. " Oh, no doubt," cried he, with a fatirical fmile, " all your meetings are unexpected. Well, Matilda, 1 am now confirmed in the opi¬ nion I have long been forming of you; what that is, you may probably conjecture, as I am fure you muft know the one you merit." To this ambiguous language Matilda could not reply. She accepted his proferred arm,and proceeded to the Lodge, her heart palpitating with dread, yet fecretly rejoicing he had not enquired minutely into Brom¬ ley's converfation, as ftie had no doubt, from his warmth of temper, the moft ferious confequences would have refulted from his knowing it. She tried to combat with her feelings, and forced herfelf to fit dovvn to fupper, though her inclination would have led her to
to her chamber, where, unreftrained, ihe might have given vent to them. Belmore watched her looks vvith an expreffion of melancholy in his countenance, which feemed to imply a fear that her heart was not as when with him—the foft repofitory of peace. The ill-humour of Hartland was caufe J by a circumftance which ftrengthened, or rather confirmed all his fufpicions. He went to Matilda's apartment after tea, and, on miffing her, inftantly conjeftured ihe- was gone to the grove : thither he fievv, dif¬ pleafed at her quitting the houfe with fuch an appearance of fecrecy. He had not gone far, when he heard the creaking of one of the doors which led from the grove into the road, and turning round vvith quicknefs, he faw Howard going out. From this circumftance, he abandoned himfelf
himfelf to the moft unbounded jealoufy ; and had he furprifed Howard and Matilda together, in all probability fome dreadful cataftrophe would have taken place, in confequence of the irritated ftate of his feelings : but this was prevented by their having fortunately taken different paths in the grove. In the firft impulfe of his rage, Hartland was about purfuing Howard, tbh^'ofefud- denly recollected that, while purfuing him, he might mifs Matilda, againft whom he reflected, if this was the cafe, he couldnot bring any direft charge :—in queft of her he therefore went. The agitation fhe wit- neffed, he conftrued into the terror of guilt, . and her declaring Bromley the perfon who was with her, a complete falfehood. He fo far mattered his paifion, however, as not to accufe her abruptly about Howard, left his doing
doing fo might put her upon her guard, and enable her to counteract the meafures he intended to take ror preventing another interview; but the idea of being compelled to watch her, gave the moft excruciating pangs to his heart !—be adored Matilda !— and exiftence loft half its value from the moment he thought íhe was attached to another ; and that, if even ihe preferved her wedded faith'inviolate, her heart was not hers to beftow.
ι
LaaAjT .
CHAP. ?1\? —— « ThinVft thou ?И make a life of jealoufy, ** To follow ftill the changes of the moon»' " With frefli fuimifes ! No; to be once in doubt, ** Is to be refolved." SHAKESPEARE'S OTHFLLO. JO ELMORE was no longer a welcome gueft: at the Lodge. Hartland thought he engroffed too much of Matilda's attention, and treated him with the utmoft coolnefs. Belmoie, on perceiving this alteration in his manner, determined immediately to depart for the Hamlet. Matilda, who knew
knew the motives which caufed this refo¬ lution, would not oppofe it, though the lofs of his fociety was to her the deprivation of every thing which could now afford her pleafure. He refufed ? accepting Mr. Hartland's travelling chariot, and fent to the adjacent town for one. On the morning of his departure he re¬ tired with Matilda, for a few minutes, into her dreffing-room. Here, in fhe fullnefs of his heart, he implored her forgivenefs for leading her intoa fituation fo productive of uneafinefs.— « How little do we know/* cried he, " what will really contribute to our happinefs ! I now fee the folly of being over anxious about particular events, un>- certain as we are, whether thofe events, in the end may not plunge us into wretchednefsi " My motive, it is true, for preffing you to this union, was a good one; but this reflexion
reflexion will not be able to confole me, if you are unhappy—never will peace be an inmate in my bofom, while it continues a ftranger to yours !" Matilda wept : ihe clafped her hands together, and caft a de¬ fpairing look to Heaven !— Belmore, un¬ utterably affefted, preffed her to his bofom : —he endeavoured to leffen her emotion by faying every thing which wifdom could devife, to fortify her mind againft the cala¬ mities or trials íhe might experience.— He affured her, from fome obfervations he had made on Hartland's difpofition, he was convinced her patient fweetnefs would at laft render him all ftie wiflied ; and that though her path was at prefent unpleaiant, fhe would hereafter find it ftrewed with flowers. He tried to cheer her fpirits by faying, the enfuing fpring he expefted to fee her at his
his cottage; he promifed ihe ihould find her favourite walks in luxuriant order ; he again embraced her, and tore himfelf away, leaving her in agonies of grief. Hartland felt as if freed from a difagree- able reftraint by his departure. He was affefted by the dejeftion of Matilda, and for a few days treated her with his wonted tendernefs. She retired, earlier than ufual, one night to her chamber, leaving Hartland engaged about fome particular bufinefs in his li¬ brary* Not finding herfelf inclined to ileep, flie took up the play of Othello, and opened at the affecting fcene where Defdemona is expreffing to her faithful Emilia, the fears and melancholy occafioned by the alteration in the conduft of her lord. The pathetic language expreffed the very feelings of her own foul, and drew tears from her. As ihe
ihe laid down the book upon the toilet to wipe them away, fhe perceived a fmall fliagreen cafe there flie had never before ob¬ ferved. She haftily took it up, and opened it: but what words can paint her furprife, on beholding within it the pifture of Howard ? —Never was there a more perfect refem¬ blance:—dike Bufiamo, flie,might have exclaimed « What demi-god bath come fo near creation ?'* As foon as aftoniíhment would permit her to think, a conviction that fome vile combination was formed againft her, ruihed upon her mind ;and,in a meditating attitude, the ftood with the miniature in her hand, confidering what fteps flic ihould take to counteract the infidious fchemes fo evi¬ dently formed againft her. Thus abforbed in
in thought, ihe heard not Hartland entering her chamber—her attitude furprifed him ;' he ftole foft/ behind her, and beheld the pifture in her hand. Had ihe been really guilty, flie could not have betrayed greater emotion than flie did at this moment. The pifture fell from her, and ihe funk upon a chair almoft lifelefs. Frantic with rage, he ftarriped upon it as it lay at her.feet. " Thus then (cried he), bafe, perfidious woman, you compel me to deteft you I—is this the innocence, the faith, the love 1 expefted to findin Matilda? Good Heaven! how much have I been de¬ ceived ? Thus accufed, flie fummoned all her refolution to her aid, to refute the unjuft afperfions caft upon her:—ihe told him the manner in which flie had found the pifture; but he laughed at her affertions, and affured her, her artifices were too ihal- low
low to impofe trpon him. u This, indeed/ · cried he, taking up a folded letter, which had been placed under the cafe, and unno¬ ticed by her, u I may, perhaps, believe came hither by ftratagem/' He opened it, and read the following words : cf Exiftence lofes half its charms,, while abfent from you. Let us no longer dread the world's cenfure—we can yet enjoy all the fweets of life—let our next interview terminate all fufpenfe: my heart is un¬ utterably yours, and I fiatter myfelf its fincere conftancy and truth will influence ypu to be propitious to « ? Howard."
*« {-rood God V 9 cried the íhocked Ma- tilda, " how am I enfiiared ¡—what a vile plot is laid againft me?—No 3 Hartland, I am
am not capable of duplicity; and I fwear, fctemnljff fwear, the letter and picture were never feen before this night by me." <€ Hold, Matilda," he exclaimed : € * with fuch evidences as I now have to prove the contrary, I cannot give credit to fuch an aifertion ; be affured, whatever indulgence you receive from me, muft proceed from my affeftion, not my credulity." 41 If you are then determined to treat me," replied Matilda, 4e with unkindnefs and fufpicion, let us part—let me return to the cottage from whence you took me— there I fhall find an afylum, though blackened by calumny, and wounded by reproach. *' Yet do not be focruel," continued ihe, whiie rears ftreamed down her cheeks, " as to deftroy a reputation ivhkh till this hour has heen unruiiied, I define this, for his fake
fake, who has been to me a parent. Oh I let me not accufe myfelf of bringing his grey hairs with forrow to the grave." Her ibftnefs fomewhat appeafed the rage of Hartland. « I wiih not to afflict him," he faid ; " I wiih, if poffible, to fave him from feeling fuch pangs—-fuch bitter pangs as I now experience." He then retired, in fpite of all her efforts to detain him, and íhe durft not follow him for fear of irri¬ tating paffions already too much Eaifed. She ipent the night in agonies—her peace, perhaps her fame, was deftroyed; and Bel- more, ihe feared, would fink beneath the knowledge of her fufferings. By day-braak her maid entered her apartment, and in¬ formed her fhe was ordered to pack up her clothes! Matilda ftarted from the bed on which lhe had thrown herfelf, without un- dreffing, and infifted on her going to Mr. Hartland,
Hartland, and telling him fhe wiflied tø' fpeak to him immediately. The maid obeyed her commands, and in a few minuted Hartland entered thechamber; and Matilda then with looks of terror, befought him to acquaint her with his intentions. " Matilda/' faid he, « c for this alarm there is no occafion^ you have ftill too great a hold of my heart to dread any dan¬ ger. Bufinefs, which has long required my prefence at my eftate in Ireland, has made me refolve on going thither. Patty Hiligrove I intend feuding home to her father this day* by her you may write to Mr. Belmore, and affign whatever reafons you pleafe for this unexpected journey." Though this appeared like a baniihment * to Matilda, fhe expreffed no reluctance $ but retired to her clofet -to write, merely informing Mr, Belmore particular bufinefs vol. ?. ? t took
í» * took Hartland from England. The houfe -was now all in commotion; the domeftics being all employed in preparing for the ftidden departure cf the family·
CHAP.
?~??^???*?^?????»&?*?1?*???» --
CHAP. XV; !■ . ■>■ «· Thou feront, that rtaittfc beft " Befits thee ! with him leagued, thyfelf as falfe « And hateful.** mLToit. XATTY, by Being fent back to her fkther, was^ now in fome degree puniihed for implicitly obeying the injunctions of Bromley. She felt, however, nò remorfe for her conduft, nor the anguiih ithad caufed to Matilda ; all the regret ilie felt was oc¬ cafioned by the enjoyments íhe would lofe in being fimt from- Mr. Hartland's. ? 2 Bromley
Bromley procured the letter and the pic¬ ture, which did fo much mifchief, from the perfidious Julia; the firft flie had received previous to her marriage, the latter after it had taken place: thefe were given by him to Patty, with directions for placing them in the manner already defcribed: thus was a dagger planted in the bofom of unfufpecting virtue, by the vileft ftrata- gems. After having accomplifhed her pur¬ pofe, Patty retired to bed, where flie flept as comfortably as ufual, till an early hour in the morning, when a fervant awoke her, and defired her to rife direftly and come to Mr. Hartland. Her heart fluttered at this fummons: fhe dreaded the reproaches confcious guilt told her flie merited, and with tardy fteps de¬ fcended to the parlour, where fhe was, in fome meafure, relieved by Hartland's acquainting
acquainting her he was obliged to quit the Lodge, in order to tranfaft fome important bufinefs in Ireland, and therefore uilder the neceffity of fending her back to the Hamlet. Patty gueffed the motives which made him quit it ; for, from his violent agitation, as he fpoke, it was evident to her the plot againft Matilda had fucceeded. She wifhed to inform Bromley of the fudden change at the Lodge ; but without heirar difcovered Jhe found itimnoffi^ 1 * ~1 do 10: lhe was obligea muantiy to prepare for her departure, as the carriage was already at the door, which was to convey her home. After fhe had packed up her things, (he repaired to Matilda's chamber, who was juft putting on her habit, but fo weak and ill ftie could fcarcely fupport her¬ felf; and even the callous nature of Patty ic 3 was
was affected by her altered countenance^ it was a tranfient fenfibility however, which wm foon toft in felf-concern for the many pleafures ihe might have enjoyed if ftill retained by Hartland. Though had flie heard, indeed, the Irifli were rather a v^ild fet of ¡people, flie would notwithftanding have rpeen happy to con,. tinue vvith Mrs. Hartland, fhe faid/ who was fuch a dear friend to her, that even on låte tUp ? Λ LJkiJàÁ lEïv^uirtaiij. ju«v «υ«*Μ UÇ î»·»»-*»*« ix» !%<;»8jr5fMfi^r4i«tT TAl ? í» V» « « *■ — ~~ ""-**. regarded by Manida: tho»ighÆbeiWpeftej| not the principies of Patty, ihe had Jong feen that ihe neither poflefled fteadineR nw feeling, a$d found hpr, inftead of ?? agree¬ able companion, ? heavy burden flie was gkd to be delivered from. Shcgave her a letter for Mr. Brimore, arid charged ? to^fibre km fk$ w& wdll —happy
—happy ihe would have added—but her emotions overcame her, and prevented her articulating what was fo untrue. The appearance of the maid with choco¬ late madç her check her tears ; and the carriage being ready, Patty, with fome femblance of affliction, received her adieéi, and departed. The travelling coach foon after drew up: Hartland handed her into it, and they fet off with velocity, attended by two grooms Ä n ~ A ????..,??1 Kjî 1 n nr h er carriage, in which was her maid and his valet. Hartland was more gentle than fhe expefted, and íhe endeavoured to appear cheerful; but her efforts to do fo were, unavailing, torn as her heart was, by anguifh at her removal from Belmore. " Is this the happinefs (thought fhe) he expected to derive from me, as a recom- K 4 pence
pence for all his cares ? Alas ! inflead of fmóothing the pillow of his age, I have ftrewed it with thorns; and all the grief he fufferediy my parents, is now revived by their unfortunate child !" Had ihe been in another frame of mind* her prefent journey would have been de- ? lightful to her; but now ihe paffed through a romantic and charming country,-without paying any attention to the varied and beautiful feenes it prefented to her view. Aftei'a jmirney of tbrc·* Hove i-b«n ««^-İtre/i late at night, at ———, from whence they were to embark. Worn out with fatigue* for they had travelled with little intermif- fion, Matilda was conducted to her cham¬ ber, where íhe had fcarcely power to tafte the refreftments.offered to her, and foon funk into a happy forgetfulnefs of every care.
CHAP.
CHAP. XVI.
·' She is mournful " In her fteps, and lifts her blue «* Eyes towards Erin.**
q s sia ff.
W HEN íhe awoke in the morning, fhe found Hartland fitting by her bedfide: he had long indeed been contemplating her ι and as he gazed upon her, he could fcarcely help thinking her foul was as innocent as her countenance; but when all the circum¬ ftances which had excited his jealoufy ? 5 recurred
recurred to his imagination, he fighed to think that was impoffible; and in jthe bit¬ ternefs of his Ipirit, foftly exclaimed, <* Oh ? what a woman hadft thou been, ** If half thy outward graces had been placed " About the thoughts and counfels of thy heart ?* He told Matilda the wind was favour- able, and hoped fhe was fufficiently refted to undertake the voyage. She immediately affured him flie was, and he retired to fend the maid to attend her. From the window ihe faw a new and bufy fcene: paffengers land- ing and embarking rendered the place quite alive« Hitherto accuftomed to an inland fkuation, flie felt a degree of awful aftoniíh¬ ment at behcridifig the vaft cxpanfe of waters mm ftretched before her, and which gave her ideas of the fublimity of nature, Ihe had never hefore experienced; tiie no¬ velty
velty of every thing around her, impercep¬ tibly amufed her thoughts, and ihe joined Hartland at breakfaft with fome degree of checrfulneis. They embarked about the middle of the day, and all thofe melancholy reflexions which hurry hada little diffipated, returned with full force to the mind of Matilda : fhe ftaid on deck, ftraining her eyes towards the fpot fhe had juft quitted, even when it was no longer difcernible, agonized by the uncertainty of her return to England, the idea of the events which in the interim might happen to embitter rhat return, and the grief of Beimore at her feparation from him: at length a-violent dizzinefs feized her head, and flie was compelled to retire to the httle cabin, where her bed was pre¬ pared; here flie felt the moft excruciating fickaefš, aggravated by the want of repofe, ? á which
M'hich the inceffant noife of the veffel, and the daíhing of the waves againft its fides, totally precluded. The afternoon of the fecond day Hart¬ land entered her cabin, and taking her hand, wiíhed her joy of her having finiihed her voyage: the fliip, he faid, was at anchor, and the boat ready to carry her on ihore. * Matilda inftantly rofe, rejoiced at the profpeft of being freed from ficknefs and fatigue. lt was now about the duik ofthe evening,, and, notwithftanding ihe was wrapped upin a warm coat, the feverity of the air almoft froze her; and the defolate profpeft fhe beheld of rocks and frightful precipices, impending over the fea, and which gave her a moft melancholy idea of the country fhe was about entering into, chilled her fpirits and overwhelmed her with dejeftion. On
On their landing, they were furrounded by a number of poor people, dreffed irfan uncouth manner, and fpeaking a language flie did not underftand : the only words ihe could comprehend, were " the meafter, the meafter." Hartland informed her they were his tenants, who had been in daily expectation of his coming: he had, indeed, from almoft the commencement of his dif¬ pleafure againft Matilda, projected bringing her to Ireland, and wrote to his Steward to inform him of his intended vifit. The road they were to go was too rugged to permit any carriage to go over it; fo leaning on Hartland's arm, ihe proceeded, with tottering fteps, and attended by the crowd who had met them on the ftrand. As they proceeded, Matilda was furprifed by the fight of two or three ftrange little buildings, compofed of ftones and clay, and
aadcmitting whole volumes of fmoke: ftie enquired what tbsy were defigned for, «nd was informed, habitations for the na¬ tives.—« Bkft me," thought Matilda^ ** what can fee expected from creatures in- habiting fuch places?" ** You are not," faid Hartland, with an ? -natured fittile, " to expect to find here, any ofyour paftoral cotises, covered with woodbines and jeflamme—^thofe huts an¬ fwer the purpofes óf life exfcremely well ; and I hope you will not be dáffatisfied, if yo« are brought to a dwelling not much better."—She was Aient : a fecret fear per¬ vaded her foul,, that fhe was in die hands of a man who would make her fed the full extent of his power. They at laft reached a great court-yard : the largegatewas double-locked and barred, while a fmaller one being half demoliihed, rendered
»rendetsdl the fecurity of che other, if dai^er threatened, qmu unavailing. Theœurt, like dæ field *>f the flothful, was overgrown with weeds and brambles; ænd «very ftep Matilda took flie was incom¬ moded bv briers and thiftlcs, whkh tore her clothes and wounded her feet ;—-thofe drfficaltites furmoimfced, flie gained a flight of fleps almoft perpendicular, by which ifhe afcended to the fmall door of an old building. On entering the hall, an old woman, drefied fomething like one of the witches of Macbeth, in a jargon fcarcely intelli¬ gible, welcomed her and Hartland, and faid her huiband Thady had been out in his little ikiff the whole day, a watching for them, " Aye, God blefs him ! looking out to fee them before there was a glimmer »of light·" Matilda was led into a great wild
wild-looking parlour, where Hartland killing her, bid her welcome to the Iriíh ihore.—The wide yawning fire-place was heaped up with turf, the warmth of which was very grateful to Matilda, had not the fmoke perpetually incommoded her. Hartland afked the old dame, if flie had no comfortable cordial for her miftrefs? She iaid, " by her faith and by St. Patrick, fhe bad a drop of choice whiikey, which father O'Flannaghan bought himfelf for her; and if the fweet foul would take a fop of it, ihe ihould be as welcome to it as her mother's milk.'* Hartland fmiled, but Matilda refufed the offered kindnefs. Some failors, almoft at that moment, arrived with hampers of wine and other refreshments, which Hartland, in order to prevent any trouble or inquiries, had brought along with him. From the ap*.
appearance of the parlour, Matilda formed no advantageous opinion of the reft of the manfion ; it was lined with oak which was disjointed by time, and in many places admitted a cold and whittling wind: the few chairs and tables were alfo of oak, but fo clumfy and broken they could fcarcely be moved: one glafs, ina frame, originally white, but now completely blackened, was fo hung between the heavy windows, as to threaten deftruftion on the head of any r „^„ „???. .cntureiome vanity would lead them near it. Matilda was placed in agreat chair by the fire, yet half periihed by the cold, as every door was left wide open, and the few domeftics ofthe manfion running backward and forward tn much hurry and confufion to prepare fupper, when at laft it was brought in ; the uncom¬ mon quantity of pro vifions greatly furprifed her.
her. The old woman, indeed, from the firil mformatfon of her mafter's vifit, had been preparing for his reception, fo that ihe now lent in, of hot and cold, fufficient to entertain a whole corporation. The court was crowded with peafants, amongft whom money was diftributed to procure liquor, as were alfo the provifions after Hartland and Matilda had fupped. Hartland allowed Matilda to retire early lU uer tLiainuu . It «»«t* ?#»^* v«.-^ ^«*.-JM*j was ufbered xo it by the old woman,, and followed by her maid, whofe looks were exprefh;ve of difcontent and ill-humour. The former would have entered into con¬ verfation, had jiot the latter per?tly defired her to withdraw* As foon as ihe flaut tbe door sof the room, flie exclaimed, u Dear ??.???^?????????? brought us amongft
a fet of fal vides :—blefs me, Mem, if I had a fuípection where I was coming to; I ihould have xcfufed, ¿bough to be fure I Ihould be always commenccly happy to ferve your Ladyíhip; but then one might as well live amongft Turks and Heathens, as amdhgft thefe wild Iriih, who do not fpeak a wordof Engliih.—I juft aiked for a little cordial or drops, or fomething or other comfortable to revive me, afte- my ficknefs and quaims, and they brought mt * glC«í mon creature, like themfeives ; and to be fure, Mem, I can't bear the idear of fuch things. ** Much more flbe would ???? faid, had not $ie entrance of her mafter flopped her, and me retired to e&hilarate her fpirits widi α little of the wine which lay in the hall. CHAP,
SSS33SSSS8SSS55SSSS59B
CHAP. XVII. .......... .M w Th> hall« are fdent,— " Thtn is no found in tbe wood*,— " The wave tumble· alone on tho «* Coaft. THIS Iriih eftate of Hartland's was extenfive, but in many places fo wild and uncultivated, that the income was fmall arifing from it. It was the paternal fortune of his mother: during her life-time the family conftantly vifited it, and kept up fome
fome order and neatnefs in the houfe and contiguous grounds ; but from the time ihe died thefe vifits ceafed, and it had been totally neglected. About feven miles from it was a fmall town, in which a few genteel families re¬ fided; and at the other fide, about four miles off, was a fort, where three or four companies were generally quartered. There were no familes nearer than the town, with whom any intercourfe could be kept up, fo that it was perfectly adapted for privacy and feclufion. Here Hartland defigned to fequefter Matilda till he fliould have reafon to think the dangerous propenfities he fufpefted her of harbouring, were eradicated from her mind. His own folitude he meant to di- verfify by excurfions to the neighbouring rown, where, in the fim mer feafon parti¬ cularly, he was certain of amufement. The
The next morning after breakfaft, Ma¬ tilda availed herfelf of hk abfence to ramble over her new habitation»; and, after innuw merable- afcents and defeents of winding ftone ftairs, into dark galleries, and wild, gloomy apartments, ihe returned to her chamber, glad to find herfelf With whole limbs again there. The ground about thé houfe was rugged and barren; from the front Was an extenfive view ofthe ocean and its rocky boundaries; behind was a garden and orchard. To thefe Matilda defcended, as foon a§ ihe had recovered from the fatigue which attended her preambulation about the he ufe; but again found, as is generally the cafe, the expectation of plea¬ fure, damped by difficulties: íhe could icarcely force herfelf through the walks, they were ib overgrown with high grafs and weeds, and choaked by the entangled boughs
boughs of little fruit-trees, which had hsert allowed to íhoot out in luxuriant wildnefs; the beds of flower« were fpoiled by the? fowl and other domeftic animals, which were allowed to range promifcuoufly amongft them; the wall which furrounded thcorchard and garden was broken and rug¬ ged; veftiges of bowers and green-houfeär were yet perceivable, but they only infpired the mind with melancholy ideas of that decay to which thofe to whom they hadowed their erection, were now reduced. The motives for bringing her to this 4 cheerlefs place, now became obvious to Matilda; fhe found fhe was here to be a perfect reclufe, and endeavoured to fum¬ mon her fortitude to her aid to bear her confinement without repining. Could fhe be affured of Mr. Bclmore's health and happinefs, ihe thought İhe could fupport it with
with refignation; but the ignorance flie dreaded ihe ihould be kept in concerning him, for Hartland had prohibited her wri¬ ting to him, together with the idea of his grief at their feparation, cruelly agitated her mind, and precluded all hopes of remote tranquillity. Her dejeftion at dinner did not efcape his notice. Hartland told her, he fliould ihortly cxpeft to fee her reftored to cheerfulnefs. " You know," cried he, " I am already acquainted with your paf¬ fion for old buildings; I hope, therefore, the indulgence I have fhovvn you, in bring¬ ing you to this one, will be rewarded with cheerfulnefs." This farcaftic hint drew a tear from Ma¬ tilda, but ftie difdained replying to it. in the courfe of the evening he partly revealed his intentions refpecting her, und told her flic muft be content with retirement as long
long as he pleafed to have her remain in it: her books vvere brought to amufe her, and flie might walk out whenever flie pleafed, he faid. She affured him, flie had no idea of oppofing his vvill ; " Solitude," cried fhe, tf can never be irkfome to a rational and innocent mind," He laughed derid ingly as ihe fpoke, and for the remainder of the evening refumed his good humour.
voi, n^
L
CHAP.
CHAP. XVIII. « He beggM relief ".With tears, the dumb petitioners of grief." DRYDEN, Matilda foon found herfelf totally deferted, as Hartland took up his refidence in the town already mentioned, not from inclination, but a hope of mortifying Ma¬ tilda by his apparent neglect, and thus being revenged, in fome degree, for the ?ιγ- quietude ihe made him fuffer. Spring
Spring was juft beginning, and Matilda's mind being often too unfettled to permit her to work or read, fhe fpent much of her time in rambling about : ^vhen the weather was mild, the beach was her favourite walk: flie liked to liften to the gentle daffiing of the water amongft the rocks, or fit amongft their natural grottos, and think on paft events. The wretchednefs ofthe peafants filled herewith pity, and often checked that difcontent which involuntarily arofo in her mind, at reflecting on her own fituation. " There is," fhe would exclaim, " impiety in repining, when I behold fo many crea¬ tures in the extremes of want, and even with cheerfulnefs bearing c the pelting of the pitileft ftorm ;' the God of nature has to mc been good ¿ many of the comforts of life are yet within my reach, and in my mind, I truft, are refources againft ad¬ verfity." t ? She
She was fitting, one morning, on the funny fragment of a rock, when ftie faw a youths who feemed about fixteen, approaching her, meanly habited, and with every appear¬ ance of want and wretchednefs about him; his bare legs, in many places, were wounded by the flints; he had a fatchel at his back, and in his hand an open paper, which he prefented to her; flie received it in filent wonder, and read the following lines : fftf Pity the forrows of an helplefs youth, ** Whoie morn of life is HclcHed o'er by care ! * e A heart replete with innocence and truth, " Now begs a meed to fare it from defpair. " Not for himfelf, alone» he feeks your aid ; <* The wants of others make bim plead their caufe ; ·* Year c h ? rity by Heaven will be repaid» « Then yield i oh yield t lo fweet Companion's lawat <· Tbe prayer of Gratitnde will then afcend ** To Heaven, to keep tbee from Affittitone dart} β« That Heaven wbicb frniiet wben humble Alitor» bend, <* And lovt* tke incenle of a pious heart." Thefc
Thefe fimple lines excited the fenfibility of Matilda. After perufing them, ihe afked, in a gentle voice, who he was ? He faid, "a poor fcholar/' and explained that term, by acquainting her it implied ? perfon who travelled about the country, and beg¬ ged their learning as well as their food. To his rambles, hovvever, a lamentable mis¬ fortune had lately put ? ftop.—Matilda, as ftie took out her purfe, inquired into the nature of the misfortune he alluded to. He informed her his father was a fifher- man, vvho had fupported ? large family, in peace and comfort; but, unfortunately ven¬ turing out fome months back in ? ftorm, was loft. His mother, overcome bv grief for fo great a lofs, gradually declined, till at la it flic v\as unable to leave h r bed.— The family then loft all means of fubfifting; and he, at Lift, vvith ? hope of alleviating í -? their
their wants, had penned the petition he had prefented to her, which, as yet, had not procured them the relief they required. Matilda inquired where his mother lived, He pointed to a defolate field, at the extre¬ mity of a long ridge of rocks, and íhe inftantly rofe to accompany him thither ; but firft put a guinea into his hand, and told him ihe would take care to preferve both him and his family from fuch diftrefs as they had lately experienced. He received the money with a fenfation of furprife and delight, which fo over¬ powered his fpirits, that he burft into tears. Matilda was affefted by this teftimony of feeling, and felt the moft exquifite happi¬ nefs at the proípeft of relieving the wants of others. ' They foon reached the hut: as flie put, her foot on the threfliold, flie involuntarily ftarted
t ftarted back, half fuffocated by the thick fmoke; but, refolved no inconvenience ihould impede her humanity, flie again ventured to ftep within the manfion of wretchednefs. On entering it, lhe per¬ ceived, upon a dirty heap of ftraw, the emaciated form of a poor woman, whofe head was fupported by a fickly girl; three other children, half naked, were fitting clofe to a turf fire; and befide them, on a , little ftool, fat a young woman, with an infant in her lap. She ftarted up on Matilda s entrance, and they feemed mutually aftoniihed by the appearance of each other. The ftranger, though dreffed in poor apparel, was perfeftly neat; her face was lovely, and her perfon truly elegant: the pity which beamed from the eyes of Ma¬ tilda feemed to penetrate her foul. When L 4 Matilda
Matilda had recovered the fliock flie fuf- tained by feeing fo many miferable objects together, flie faid, " I came hither, not to intrude on diftrefs, but, if poffible, to ad- minifter comfort to it." " Your counte¬ nance," faid the young woman, " is fuf¬ ficient to denote the motive which brings you hither. Here, indeed, are objects calculated to excite compaffion." She then, in ? brief and pathetic manner, recounted the little ftory which Matilda had already heard from the young petitioner :—" Pity," flie concluded, " is all in my power to be¬ ftow; and though my inclination to do good may ferverne in Heaven, it can be of little ufe here on earth to thefe poor creatures." " I hope,*' Faid Matilda, " by uniting ability to inclination, we fliall foon reftore this good woman and her family to com¬ fort," She now fluv the poor fcholar whif¬ pering
pering the ftranger, and foon learned he was going to purchafe bread and drinfcat a fmall houfe near the hut, which fupplied many ofthe ruftics vvith thefe commodities. Matilda defired him to call upon her in the courfe of the day, promifing to have a bundle of clothes, and other comfortable things, provided for him to bring to his family. She then quitted the hut, inviting the - ftranger, whofe looks and manner had highly prepoffefled her in her favour, to accompany her home, which ihe readily confented to do. In their way thither, Ma¬ tilda faid ihecould not help imagining fhe had not long been an inhabitant of this lonely place. " Not very long," replied the other, with a deep figh, and a look which evidently- proved misfortunes had led her to it. L 5 Matilda»
Matilda, whofe tender heart made her feel interefted about all whom fhe thought un¬ happy, and who flattered herfelf, by cul¬ tivating an intimacy with this young woman, ihe might be able to lighten the forrows ihe feemed to feel, expreffed a hope of often being favoured with her company. *■ You do me honour," cried fhe, " by your invitation, which I gratefully accept, sis thè idea of enjoying the fociety of fo amiable a countrywoman, gives to me a pleafure İ have not for a long time before experienced," " You came from England, then?" faid Matilda. She replied ihe did; and, after a .little defultory converfation about that kingdom, inquired in what part of it Matilda had refided? On Matilda's informing her, ihe ftarted—the colour left her cheeks—ihe clafped her hands, and betrayed the greateft émotion· u Good Heaven!
Heaven !" fhe exclaimed, " from the Ham¬ let! You are then, in all probability* acquainted with Aflimore! 5 ' " Yes," re¬ plied Matilda, furprifed at her agitation, " I know him, and think him one of the moft amiable of men."—" Amiable!" re¬ peated her companion,—" he is excellence itfelf ! and never ihall I ceafe lamenting being the caufe of fo much forrow to him!" It inftantly occurred to Matilda that this was the young perfon who had fallen a viftim to the wiles of Bromley:—delicacy, however; made her check and wifli to con¬ ceal the feelings this conjefture gave rife to— her expreifive countenance, however, betrayed them. The young ftranger, after a momentary filence, took her hand, as if involuntarily, and looking at her with a kind of mournful earneftnefs, exclaimed, L 6 «Ah'
" Ah! if am not much mifiakcri, you are not ignorant of my name—you are not ignorant that 1 am a being, whofe unhappy fate Mr Aflimore inceffantly mourns." " I believe I am not/ 9 faid Matilda, in a timid accent, and raifing her eyes from the ground,on which they had hitherto been bent. " You acknowledge then you have heard of the unfortunate Lucy Wood ville, the fource of forrow to all vvho loved her." Matilda did not attempt to deny fhe had. Mifs Wood ville now dropped her hand, and burft into an agony of tears, which feemed caufed by the recollection of paft events, while Matilda, with the fofteft pity, tried to foothe her. * When her agitation hada little fubfided, flie briefly informed Matilda, that the idea of remaining in England, where the de- ftroyer of her happinefs lived, w T as fo infup¬ portable
portable to her, as to determine her to quit that kingdom. She contrived to h^ar of, and get ac¬ quainted with a woman who was coming to fettle in the neighbourhood of Hartland's Iriih feat, of which flie had often heard from Mr. Aihmore; and, from its Ionelincfs, thought it well adapted for the purpofes of feclufion. To this woman flie pretended flie was fo reduced and embarraifed by unforefeen misfortunes, as tobe obliged to fequefter herfelf in another country. By her means flie was fettled at a toler¬ ably good farm-houfe near the Caftle, where flie obtained a bare fubfiftence by her own induftry. The diftrefs ofthe poor fiftier- man*s widow had agonized her frørt, fhe faid, particularly as ihe had not the power of relieving it. Though flie had never feen Mr. Hartland, flic faid, flie was well acquainted with him, from
from defcription, and knew he had heard the melancholy incidents ofher life. She made Matilda promife not to acquaint him of her being in his neighbourhood; to this promife Matilda made no objection, but would gladly have waved a fimilar one, relative to Aflimore: in the courfe of a little time, however, ihe trufted ihe ihould be able to prevail on the fair Lucy to let him be informed of her refidence, as the kno4vkdge of her fafety, Matilda knew, would remove a load of anxiety from his heart. Matilda now, in her turn, gave fome account of herfelf, and of the reafons which prompted Afhmore to divulge Lucy's ftory to her. " Be affured," cried Lucy* " to apologize for his doing fo is unneceffary. I know the goodnefs of his nature, and that, with¬ out
out urgent motives, he never would publifh either the vices or follies of a fellow- creature." She refufed dining with Matilda, alledg¬ ing that the poor people at the farm would be waiting for her; flie readily however confented to fpend the evening with her new friend. Mutually pleafed, they parted, not a little delighted at their unexpected meeting and difcovery of each other. Matilda was not long at home ere the poor fcholar arrived : flie loaded him with things for his family, and promifed to fettle a weekly penfion on his mother, fufficient to preferve her from diftrefs. She fat down to dinner with a lighter heart than flie had felt fince flie left En¬ gland ; elated at the profpeft of fociety congenial to her feelings, and yet more dated
elated at the idea of having filled the hungry mouth, and given gladnefs to the widows heart. Lucy came to her early ; the more they converfed, the more interefted they felt about each other. Matilda informed Lucy flie was much alone. Lucy regarded her for a few mi¬ nutes with tearful eyes—" Good heaven !" flie then faid, " it fills me vvith wonder, that a man in poffeffion of fuch an angel ihould neglect her!—but the beft of us are full of inconfiftencies." It was fettled, whenever Hartland was abfent ihe ihould be with Matilda; ac¬ quainted with every pleafant and romantic fpot about the place, they propofed many delightful rambles together. f From this time they were fcarcely afun¬ der, Hartland coming feldom to the Caftle, and
and then merely making a flying vifit:-— none ofthe fiimilies he affociatad with ever fuppofed his wife had come over with him; and he enjoyed the idea of the uneafinefs he imagined his neglect and defertion muft give her. In friendihip and benevolence, however, her innocent foul found refources to defeat the malicious fchemes he had bid againft her peace,
CHAP.
...... IM. 1 , 1 !, 1 ,. ......' î BMVfWlff*?!
α ??» VtV
Μ The white wtverdftred ngsînft iu rock« í fad Oithonafat *< on the coaíl ; (he looked on the rolling water*, and " her tear« defcend t but when ihe faw Gaul in his arms, *' fiie ftarted, and turneel her eyes away. Her lovely «< cheek is bent and red, her white arm trerabies by her *· fide*. Thrice thefhove to fiy fiora his preîence j but ** her fteps failed her as ihe went," OSSIAN,
1 HE poor famfly at the hu* ^ r ere foon reftored to health and happinefs, and the young fcholar, by Matilda's direftion, fet up a little fchool :—flie paid for the in« ftruftion
ftruftion of a number of poor children in her neighbourhood, whofe parents were unable to do fo; rejoiced to think they would now be in fome degree enlightened, as their extreme ignorance had frequently fliocked her. She thought it dreadful that a, human creature ihould be brought up without fome ideas of religion and huma¬ nity. Lucy was a moft delightful companion, fenfible and entertaining; for, though un¬ fortunate, fhe had no guilt to reproach her¬ felf with, and often difplayed a chcerfulneis which raifed the languid fpirits of Matilda. They were walking one ñne morning among the rocks, when Lucy laughing, fuddenly exclaimed—"The fringed curtains of thine eyes advance, and fee who comes yonder!" Matilda paufed, and looking up, perceived a man at fome diftance, in
in regimentals, fcrambling over the rocks. f « That (faid Lucy) is one of the officers quartered at the fort; the poor manhas certainly loff his wits, his fortune, or his miftrefs, for he is the moft melancholy creature I ever beheld, though I can affure you extremely handfome; I haveficquently met him in mv folitary rambles, wandering about the beach, or amongft the rocks ; and though you may think there was caufe for terror, in meeting fuch a fine young fellow, in a place where the Lord knows what might have happened, I affure you I never had reafon for any palpitation, as I don't fuppofe he knew whether I was a fca- nymph, or an old witch/' The gentleman had now advanced pretty near them:—-Lucy whifpered to Matilda to obferve how handfome he was. Matilda carelefsly glanced at him ; but who can fpeak the
the emotions that glance occafioned? íhe fcreamed—flie darted back—it was Howard himfelf whom ftie beheld !■—Howard, at once fuch an objeft of ¡error and eßem!— who feemed perpetually wanderjng in her path to revive ideas flie wiíhed to fupprefs, —ideas which gave to her the moft painful difquietude. Her feream roufed him from a deep reverie, in which he appeared to have been plunged. The emotions he manifefted at this moment were not inferior to thefe ftie betrayed ; his colour changed—he became motionlefs, and lookedat her as if doubting the evidence of his eyes. He was foon, however, convinced they had not deceived him—he faw the lovely being from whom his thoughts never wan¬ dered, weak, trembling, almoft finking be¬ fore him ; he wiíhed to fly to her, to fupport her
her drooping head upon his bofom, 3nd pour forth all the fulnefs of his foul ; but he checked this impulfe of paffionate ten¬ dernefs, and, after a few minutes hefitation, turned away with a lingering look, expref¬ five of unutterable agony; and defcending amongft the rocks, immediately dif¬ appeared. Lucy, fearful Matilda would faint, obliged her to fit down—tears in a ihort time, relieved her heart, but Howard's image was ftill prefent to her view. Lucy, full of penetration, inftantly conjectured this young officer had been more than a flight acquaintance: fhe would not touch, hovvever, upon a chord which flie was convinced could not bear vibration; flic therefore pretended to think it was fatigue had overpowered her friend· Matilda,
Matilda, who dreaded to mention the name of Howard, was highly- pleafed at Lucy's filence refpecting him. His pre¬ fence had given a ihock to her tranquillity, which ihe could not eafiiy overcome, and filled her with fears, left Hartland's un¬ happy fufpicions Ihould be ftrengthenecl, if he difcovered he was in the neighbour¬ hood; as ihe well knew, " that trifles light as air are, to the jealous, confirmation ftrong as proofs of Holy Writ." She determinecl to do all in her power to convince him thefe fufpicions were ill-founded; and for this purpofe, as well as to avoid the chance of another interview with a perfon whom ftie could not behojd without the moft pajnful emotions, ibe refolved, in future, to con¬ fine her rambles to the orchard and garden, which had latterly been rendered more plea^ßt by ?? remov^ pf t^e weeds and brambles
brambles that had choaked up their ave¬ nues. Here the faithful Lucy, who now began to develope her delicate fituation, flill attended her, endeavouring to baniffi her dejeftion, and make her think on days of future happinefs, A fudden change in the weather confined them entirely within doors; the dreadful ftorms filled the heart of Matilda with ter¬ ror and apprehenfions about the veffels which ihe fo frequently faw toffed upon the foaming waves. The hurricane raged one night with frightful violence. A íhip, towards the decline of day, had been feen near the coaft f for the fafety of which the moft ferious fears were entertained. The horrid idea of its danger, baniihed fleep from Matilda ; and about day-break a violent noife, both within and without the houfc
houfe made her rife precipitately, and de¬ fcend to the hall, where ihe had heard, as flie apprehended, that the veffel was wrecked, and but a few of the paffengcrs faved. Her anxiety to aid thofe miferable ob¬ jects, made her exert herfelf to overcome the Ihock which this dreadful intelligence gave her ; and being informed that fome of the paffengers were carried to the farm where Lucy lodged, ihe rolled herfelf up in her cloak, and ordering the domeftics to bring wine and other reviving refrefli- ments after her, proceeded thither direftly. In her way íhe beheld feveral of the ruf¬ tics running alternately to and from the beach in fuch confufion and difmay as fcarcely permitted them to render the affift¬ ance that was required from them. The confternation and diftrefs vifible in the countenance of Lucy, who beheld her approaching the houfe, and met her at the voi* ii. m door,
door, was naturally imputed by Matilda to the recent event; but Lucy foon undeceived her, fnatching her hand, and burfting into tears, ihe exclaimed, ft Oh ! Mrs. Hartland, how awful are the ways of Providence !— the bafe betrayer of my honour is this mo¬ ment fnatched from the rage of the fea, and now in the next room. Aghaft at this intelligence, Matilda ftared wildly at her!— u Surely," cried fhe, rc you cannot mean Bromley?"— u Yes, he was one amongft the few whom the bravery of the fi (hermen faved from perilning. I faw him borne to the next room without fenfe or motion. The poor people have fent off fora furgeon belonging to the regiment at the fort; but ere he arrives, Bromley, I think, will be tolerably recovered, for he has already fpoken." <* Wretched man!" <ried Matilda, < f wonderfully, indeed, are his fchemes fruftrated!
fruftrated ! for that infidious fchemes were bringing him to Ireland, I much fear* —His prefervation, I hope, will be followed by compunction, and a wifli of making re¬ paration for the evils he has committed.'* Deeply engaged in conj eft ures, they con¬ tinued together till the woman of the houfe, came from the inner room, and faid, the gentleman had quite recovered his fenfes ; enquired where he was; and, on being in¬ formed, aiked if Mr. Hartland's houfe waa not near? I told him it was, faid the good woman: upon which he aiked a power of queftions about you and the 'Squire, Madam, (addreffing herfelf to Matilda); and on hearing you were in the next room to him, he expreffed the greateft joy, and begged, for the love of Heaven, I would come out to you, and entreat you to let him fpeak to you for a few minutes, as he m 2 believed
believed he was dying, and had a weight upon his heart which nothing but a con¬ verfation with you could lighten. Matilda hefitated to comply with this requeft, but the woman continuing to prefs her, and Lucy joining in thefupplication, ihe at laft {yielded, and was conducted to Bromley. As ihe approached the bed on which he lay, flie involuntarily íhrunk back:—his wild and ghaftly lopks, in which life and death feemed ftruggling, added to her hor¬ ror and deteftation of him. " I wonder not," faid he, in a faint voice, rt that you ihrink at beholding me; but I am puniflied as Τ deferve, for deftroymg yoar tranquillity, and have only been pre¬ ferved from the overwhelming billows to die before y4¿j, the moft contrite of men/' Bromley,* as is often the cafe with the volatile and the wicked, had not power or fortitude
fortitude to fupport danger: the fatigue and fright, occafioned by the fhipwreck, had reduced him to a ftate of weaknefs he imagined the fore fymptom of approaching death :—his fins recurred in full force to his memory;" and to confefs the plots he had contrived againft Matilda's reputation, he hoped, would be the means of making his peace with Heaven which he had fo often offended. He befought Matilda to approach nearer to him, and when flie complied, he briefly informed her of the fchemes he had contrived, in concert with the wife of Howard, and Patty, againft her. Shocked at this narration, Matildacouid not fupprefs the indignation of her foul, which he per¬ ceiving, exclaimed, " Be not inexorable ! Oh ! let tht prayers of purity like thine, be offered to Heaven for me !—I have expofed μ 3 my
my heart to your view ! its errors were great, but its penitence is fincere: kt that penitence induce you to forgive the former." " 'Tis not fufficient, Mr. Bromley," Matilda re¬ plied, " that your errors are confeffed to røe; they muft alfo be acknowledged by you to Mr. Hartland, as the only means of reinftating me in his good opinion, which your artifices deprived me of: your doing fo, will be fome kind of atonement for the unhappinefs you have made me fuffer. Bromley, in the zeal of his contrition, pro¬ mifed to do whatever fhe defired; and Matilda rofe, with an intention of dif- patching a meffenger immediately for her hufband. Bromley, as if there was comfort in gating on her, ftill detained her. " You have not aiked me," he cried, " what brought me to Ireland? I ovvn I came elevated with the hope of at length, tri¬ umphing
umphing in the completion of my fchemes againft you. I was accompanied by a woman—I now fliudder to think of—the lovely and unfortunate Julia.—She heard that Howard was quartered near your man¬ fion, and flic refolved, if he ftill perfifted in refufing to receive her, to try and compel him to do fo, by accufing you as the perfon who prevented him: the wave that threat* ened me with death, has involved her in deftruftion—I faw her white hands extended for relief, but the billows burft over her devoted head, and ftie funk for ever!" " What!" exclaimed Matilda, ftarting from her feat, cf has Julia, has the wife of Howard periihed? Merciful Heaven! perhaps flie yet lives—perhaps 1 may yet preferve her!** Pale and wild, flie rufhed outof the room, eagerly inquiring whether any female had been taken up. She was informed that the m 4 body
body of a woman had juft been thrown by the waves upon the beach, from whence it was con y eyed to a neighbouring cottage. On their pointing out the houfe, flic flew thither» followed by the affrighted Lucy. The mom flie entered was crowded v. ith rtifticsi on a bed v^as kid the bod) they had juft found : fome women were em¬ ployed in taking off the wet garments, and others were warming blankets to roll about it. Matilda approached—flie caft a glance at the hce s and inftantly conjectured it wás the beautiful form ol Julia fhe beheld. A deadly ficknefs feized her—her foul fhuddered at the difaftrous fate of an objeft once fo dear to the heart of Howard; nie funk into a chair, and for fome minutes wás unable to møve. The attentions of Lucy at laft recovered her. She would have ltd her from thi* me¬ hrte hob
lancholy fcene, but Matilda refufed to retire: —" No," faid flie, " we will pay the laft fad rites of humanity to the poor fufferer." She affifted the women in chafing ihe body, and wrapping it in blankets; but no fymptoms of returning life appeared, and Matilda was convinced the animating fpirit had fled from it for ever. The furgeon was now announced : he was accompanied hy fome officers, whom á mixture of cu¬ riofity and compaffion had brought from the fort. Matilda rofe from the bed at their entrance, and in retiring from it, beheld Howard near the door, his eyes fixed on her. 1 he colour, which had long forfaken her cheeks, in a moment returned, and haftily averting her eyes, ihe addreffed Lucy, though in accents that were not articulate. To behold hcr was the only pleafure Howard cotdd experience; the diftrefs he m 5 faw
faw his pçefence excited, prevailed on him, however, to relinquiih this gratification; and he was withdrawing from the room, when the furgeon, by declaring the lady was pall recovery, detained htm, and fbme ex¬ clamations of admiration and pity from the officers drew him to the bed: he looked on the lovely form before him—he ftarted and turned pale—again he looked, retreated, and feemed gafping for breath—a film appeared to overfpread his eyes—he tot¬ tered, and would have fallen to the earth, had not an officer caught him in his arms, ami fupponid him toa feat. How at this moment was the gentle foul cf Matilda torn by anguiih î Scarcely could the rigid rules of propriety withhold her from flying to Howard, and aiding his reco¬ very. He raifed his drooping head in a Ihort time, and nfingaga^n, advanced to the bed ; he hung over the body with an expreffion of
of unutterable forrow, and folding his hands together, exclaimed: u 'Tis fhe, indeed! —poor Julia l* As he fpoke, a tear fell from him on her pallid cheek. The fobs of Matilda now reached his ear: he haftily looked towards her, and beheld her re¬ clining on the bofom of Lucy. This fight recalled Howard's wandering fenfes; he grew more tranquil; and turning to his companions, who were watching him with furprife, faid in an emphatic manner, the lady had been a very dear friend of his. He then defired them not to delay returning to the fort, as he wiíhed to fettle e^ery thing concerning her interment ere his departure: they accordingly accompanied the furgeon to vifit fuch of the fufferers as couid re¬ ceive benefit from his affiftance, and the room was ihortly cleared of all, except Matilda, Lucy, and two women belonging to the cottage. μ 6 Howard
To thefe women Howard then gave mo¬ ney, and befought them to provide every thing requifite fora plain and decent funeral, againft the enfuing evening, promifing, at that time to return himfelf to attend it. They affured him his direftions Ihould be punctually obeyed, and left the room to dif¬ patch meffengers to town for fuch things as were neceffary for it. Howard yet lingered in the room; he looked for a few moments irrefolute :. at laft he approached Matilda. " To an awful fcene," exclaimed he, " you have been witnefs ! a fcene which will leave an indelible impreffion of regret upon my mind. Her difaftrous fare has ob¬ literated every trace of injury and refent¬ ment. I think upon her now only as the Julia I wedded with affeftion. I mourn with bitternefs her dreadful and untimely death—-awful is the leffon it inculcates of the precarioufnefs of life:—in the career of
of youth, the elevation of hcpe and beaury, flie periihed. Unhappy Julia !—a thou¬ fand fhocking reflexions rufli upon my mind: Ah! how few, like Matilda are prepared for every cafualty. But why, (refumed he, after a paufe) why do you con¬ tinue with an object fo affeding ? Ah! let not that gentle heart be rent with witneffing calamities it cannot remedy: haften my lovely, my ineftimable friend, haften from this abode of forrow : may your's ever be the abode of peace and cheerfulnefs ! Oh ! pure and permanent as your virtues, may your happinefs be !" €t Farewell, Howard!" cried Matilda, as ihe rofe to depart, <c I fliould confider myfelf ungrateful, if I did not fay the knowledge of you r we! fare would ever yield me pleafure." She then paffed him, and returned to the Caftle, where her full heart vented its grief in
in tears : fhe feemed to forget every thing but Howard's laft words—his defpairing looks wcrcprefent to her imagination; and, finking beneath mental dejection and bo¬ dily fatigue, fne felt weary of i ife, and could that moment with pleafure have refigned it, if aflured, like Julia, fhe fhould have been tenderly mourned. Lucy, diftreffed by her fituation, vehe¬ mently intreated her" to recolleft herfelf, and recai hcr fortitude. Her words forcibly operated on Matilda, who, afliamed of the weaknefs ihe betrayed, dried up her tears, and endeavoured to throw off all appearance of languor. She now recollected her intention of fending for Hartland, and was calling a meficnger for that purpofe, when he made his unexpefted appearance. Onhis way to the Caftle, he had heard a rumour of the ihipwrecfc,
fhipwreck, and entered the parlour, juft to fee Matilda before he went out to gather the particulars of it. " So," faidhe, ihemo- ment he entered, " I fuppofe by your eyes you have been on the beach : I really am furprifed you would allow your curiofity to lead you thither, when you knew you could do no good." " It was, indeed, a dreadful cataftrope !" replied Matilda; " and one which, not¬ withftanding the happy revolution it may lead to in my fituation, I fhall never be able to think of without horror." Hartland, wirh much furprife in his looks, defired her to explain her meaning— This fhe accordingly did, in as concife a manneras poffible; and ended with entreat¬ ing him to repair directly to Bromley.— " If what you have told me be true/' cried Hartland, " I ihall indeed, be the happieft of
of men ; to think I can again efteem the object 1 ftill moft ardently love, wall be blifs beyond language to exprefs!" Full of impatience, he'hurried aw ? ay; and Lucy, coming from an inner apartment, was briefly informed of Bromley's defigns upon Matilda, and Howard's ftory. They waited Hartland's return in anxious hope, and trembling expectation: he at laft appeared in tbe court, and Lucy retired from the room : flying in, he rapturoufly embraced Matilda—implored her pardon ? hundred times for the uneafinefs he had given her, Bromley had faid every thing which could clear her fame—and the refidueof his life, he declared, fhould be fpent in making her reparation for his unjuft fufpicions. Matilda readily accorded her forgivenefs, and felt a degree of pleafure at being re¬ inftated in the good opinion of the man flie was
was bound to pleafe. He fpoke ofthe fate of Julia with horror, and, freed from the ihadow of jealoufy, did not now hefitate to mention the name of Howard, on whom he beftowed all the eulogiums he merited, declaring he ihould be happy to render him every attention in his power; and added, he meant to order the moit refpeftable of his tenants to be in readinefs to attend the funeral the enfuing evening, if agreeable to Mr. Howard. Matilda wiflied t to change the fubjeft.— She had obtained Lucy's permiffion to acquaint him with her retreat, as there was fo great a probability of his being now a conftant refident at the Caftle : flie there¬ fore, in a concife manner, informed him of their accidental meeting, and the mutual progrefs of their friendfliip. He heard her vvith pleafure, delighted at the idea of having
having difcovered a perfon, about whofe fate Aflimore had fuffered fo much anxiety and defired Lucy might immediately be introduced to him: ihe was accordingly brought in. There was a prepoffefiing charm in her looks which won efteem at firft fight, and Hartland felt and expreffed the utmoft intereft about her welfare. The principles of Bromley, he imagined, had received a total change fince his late efcape; and the prefent time he thought propitious for having juftice done to the injured Lucy. In the courfe of the day, he made known his thoughts, and the inten¬ tions they had given rife to:—thefe inten- tions were warmly oppofed by Lucy^ who declared the bafenefs and cruelty of Brom¬ ley's conducthad converted the predilection fhe once felt for him, into feelings little fhort of abhorrence. Hartland, however, would not
not rclinqnifh them, and'by his arguments and the affurances he gave her, that her union with Bromley would be a means of reftoring Aflimore to happinefs, whofe fuf¬ ferings on her account he painted in the ftrongeft colours, he at length prevailed on her to promife to be guided by him. Ar¬ dent in whatever he undertook, he fet off in the evening toBromley, whom he found much better. He foon explained the mo¬ tive which had induced him to rc-vifit him fo fpeedily. " To prove your penitence fincere, Mr. Bromley," faid ??,"??^ muft endeavour to do juftice to all whom you have injured; amongft the number, your memory,or rather your confcience, I think, can fcarcely fail of pointing out the amiable and lovely Lucy Woodville, as the greateft fufferer. I am happy to inform you, it is in your power to makeher immediate repa¬ ration
ration for your conduct towards her, as flie is now under my proteftion, in this neigh. bourhood—that reparation, which honour, feeling, humanity, all call aloud for: except you make it 9 be affured you can never hope to fatisfy your own heart, nor the world; which, however depraved or diffi¬ pated it may be, ftill looks with contempt and abhorrence upon thefeducer of female innocence. Bromley, whofe penitentials had been wearing off as his ftrength returned, felt little inclination to comply with the wiffies of Mr. Hartland. He ftood too much in awe of him, however, to declare his repug¬ nance to them, particularly as the candid confeffion he had made, and now regretted, put him fo much in his power. After a fliort paufe, therefore, he declared he was happy to have an opportunity of obeying the
the laws of honour. Hartland, much pleafed at this aifertion, expatiated on the delight he would derive from doing fo; and was proceeding to fettle the preliminaries of his marriage, when Bromley, in a faint voice, intreated him to defer the prefent fubject, till the enfuing morning, declaring he felt himfelf ftill too languid to be able to fupport a longer converfation. Hart¬ land believing this to be reaily the cafe, fo well did he counterfeit languor and fatigue, directly rofe to depart, defiring him, at the fame time, to command w hatever he thought could be of fervice to him, at the Caftle.— The moment he withdrew, Bromley, half diftrafted, fummoned Le Rogne, who had been taken up by the fiftiermen who pre¬ ferved his mafter, to confult with him upon the prefent emergency; as the idea of mar¬ rying, efpecially a woman for whom he had no
no inclination, and who had neither fortune nor confequence to recommend her, was infupportable to him. After fome conver¬ fation^ it was agreed a peafant, bribed to filence, ihould be fent to town to engage a carriage; in which, they refolved to depart at midnight, poft on to the metropolis, and from thence embark for England. This plan was aftuaily executed, and the travel¬ lers far on their way, before any intimation of their flight reached the Caftle.—Lucy could not regret it; but Hartland vowed vengeance againft Bromley, if ever they met again, provoked to think he had fuf¬ fered himfelf to be the dupe of his artifices.
CHAP.
LJrl/jLJr. ?.?.· '· Her head reclíitd, a* hiding grief fiom view, w Droops like a rofe, furcharg'd with morning dew.** DRYDEN. 1 HE church-yard, where the remains of the once lovely and erring Julia were to be interred, was within view ofthe Caftle* a melancholy fpot, as the church had long been gone to decay, and was now the haunt of ** The boding bird, * f Whkh haunts the iuin*d piles and hallowed urn«, *< And beats about the tombs with nightly wings, 1 * The
The funeral proceflion did not begin till the clofe of the evening—the gloominefsof the hour was increafed by a heavy fky, and a foaking rain, which rendered the appear¬ ance of the country ftill more cheerlefs than ic naturally was. —Howard, anxious to avoid any thing Hke parade or oftentation, declined having any other perfons at the fu¬ neral than thofe whofe attendance was abfo¬ lutely neceffary. Hartland, however, defirous of making fome atonement for his former rudenefs to him, by now fhowing him every mark of rcfpecl: in his power, joined the few attendants; and Matilda, prompted by an impulfe fhe could not refift, afcended to a window in the fide of the Caftle, accom¬ panied by Lucy, from whence ihe could have a view ofthe melancholy ceremony. The church-yard was cleared foon after it was over¿ but Matilda ftill lingered at the window,
window, and in a few minutes beheld a man returning to the dreary fpot, who with flow fteps approached the new-made grave, which was beneath the fhelter ofthe only tree that grew in the place: with folded hands he leaned over it, and feemed loft in dejection. That this was Howard, Matilda could not doubt,.and her tears involuntarily ftreamed at the idea of thofe flic was convinced he was now fhedding over the grave of his wife. " Unhappy Howard!" ihe cried, " the conftant prey of forrow and defpair! Oh, God!" flie continued, with folded hands, and in the moft energetic manner, c< look down with compaffion on him! diffufe peaccand com¬ fort through his wounded heart ! and in the grave of her who caufed his anguiih, let that anguifli now ? buried !" Lucy, alarmed by feeing her fo affefted, earneftly befought her to remove from the vol. u. n window;
window* Matilda, however, ftill leaned againft it—her ftreaming eyes direfted to the fpot where Howard ftood. Lucy then hinted to her the probability there was of Hartland's beun* returned, well aware, that to remind her of her duty was to re-call her to it. At his name, Matilda ftarted, and turning from the window with a lingering look, haftily wiped away her tears, and defcended to the parlour, where ftie found him. She^ tried to exert her fpirits ; but the late ihocks they had received, could not eafily be over¬ come, nor could Howard, mourning over the grave of Julia, an image but too much calculated to deprefs them, be quickly erafed from her mind, Hartland informed her, he had requefted Howard to return with him to the Caftle, ma tafce up his ???? there that night; this
tilist however, he pofitiveiy declined doing* — rc He appears, at prefent, overwhelmed with melancholy (continued Hartland); but time and change of fcene will, I hope and believe, difpel it by degrees. He informed me his regiment was on the point of marching to Cork, to embark for the Weft Indies, I aiked him whether he would not come to take leave of you; he faid he was almoft certain it would not be in his power to do fo, and charged me, therefore,-with his farewell compliments to you and Mr. Belmore. Matilda's heart fwelled with an involun¬ tary figh at this intelligence· She endea*. voured, however, to conquer the emotions it had caufed, and rejoiced that the delicacy of Howard (for to this motive fhe attri¬ buted his declining the invitation of Haru land), had faved her from the confufion and n ? pain
pain which flie was confident would have attended a formal meeting between them. Hartland, anxious to atone for his former unkindnefs to her, redoubled his attentions, and watched her looks with a tendernefs and folicitude, which awakened her gra¬ titude, and ftrenghened her efforts to pro¬ mote his happinefs. Certain, the moit effectual method he could take for the re¬ iteration of her fpirits, would be to let her fee Belmore, in the courfe of the evening he propofed their returning without delay to England, and vifiting his cottage. This, as he naturally concluded it would be, was a propofal received with delight. The pleafure it diffufed through the heart of Matilda, was increafed by obtaining a promife from Lucy, not only to accom¬ pany her to England, but in future to refide with her$ a promife, however, which Lucy would
would not give, till fhe had received a folemn affurance from both Hartland and Matilda, that they would never defire her to enter into company; though they declared flie might do fo, without any fearof having her feelings hurt, as her unhappy ftory was known but to few, and thofe few, fach as either from friendihip for her, or confidera¬ tion for themfeives, would not wiih to difclofe it. Preparations were immediately made for their departure; and in two days after the interment of Julia, they commenced their journey to Dublin, in order to embark from thence to Holyhead ; this paffage being not only fliorter, but fa fcr than the one they had before come. Matilda was followed many miles by the bleflings of thofe whom ihe had preferved from pcriihing, and to whom n 3 ihc
flie had fecured the means of comfort after flic was gone. Her impatience to fee Mr. Belmore pre¬ vented her from taking more than a tran- fient view ofthe Irifh metropolis, but with that view ihe was much pleafed. They had a fhort and fafe voyage; and in the courfe of the fourth day after their landing, Matilda found herfelf in the arms of Bel- more. From the hour of her departure from the kingdom, peace had been a ftran¬ ger to him; he inceffantly mourned her abfence, but ftill more the idea of her infe¬ licity, and his health gradually declined from his feelings :—her unexpected refto- ration, however, promifed a renovation of health, as well as happinefs.— <c Darling of my age!" exclaimed he, as he clafped her to his heart, " Heaven has reftored you to my prayers: I fee you before I die, and 1 urn
am bleffed." " Yes," faid Hartland," ffie returns to render you, as ftie has done me, completely happy." The various incidents which had occurred fince their feparation^ were related, as foon as their agitation had a little fubfided. He wept at the fuffering3 of her he called his child, while his heart glowed with exultation at her virtuous triumph over her enemies. On being informed who Lucy was, he embraced her with a joy fcarcely inferior to that he had difplayed on preffing Matilda to his bofom. Anxious to communicate the glad tidings of returning felicity to Aflimore, he fent to requeft his immediate prefence. The good old man obeved the fummons, and beheld with tears of rapture Hartland and Ma¬ tilda in poffeffiQii, to all appearance, of that happinefs he fo fincerely wiflied them. At his approach, Lucy waa conducted into an inner room, till he was prepared for n 4 her
her reception. When by degrees they in¬ formed him ihe was found,—that the lovely fugitive he had fo long lamented, at that moment was waiting to receive his pardon and embrace, he nearly funk beneath his feelings, and with difficulty could defire her to be brought to him. She was led to him by Hartland, not lefs affefted than he was himfelf:«-ihe knelt before him, and im¬ plored him to forgive, if pofiible, the pain flie had caufed him. He raifed her up, and, in words fcarcely audible, granted the pardon fhe implored, and welcomed her return. Tranquillity and pleafure again took up their abode at the cottage of Belmore : all the party affembled at it feemed cheerful and eafy; whether fo in reality, is not for us to afcertain. It was agreed that the bafe Patty fliould be treated with the filent fcorn flic merited; but
but Aflimore, with chriftian-like zeal, de¬ clared he would admoniih her ofthe horrid part ihe had acted. She at firft denied the juftice of his accufation; but finding the evidence of her guilt too ftrong to admit of her clearing herfelf, flie made a merit of neceffity, and candidly confeifed it, endea¬ vouring, hovvever, as much as poffible, to extenuate her conduft, by exaggerating the artifices Bromley had ufed to draw her in, to aft in the manner ihe had done. No¬ thing ihe could fay, hovvever, could excufe her in the opinion of Aflimore ; and with more feverity than he had ever before fpoken, he bade her confine herfelf at home and repent. Her father hearing íhe had difobliged the Hartland's, treated her with unufual rigour; fo, growing defperate, flic made overtures to a young farmer ihe had before difdained; and in confequence of a n 5 tolerable
tolerable fortunegiven her by her father, he married her ; and being both refolute and morofe, puniihed her moft amply for all her former mifconduft.
CHAP.
CHAP. XXI. ** Toy cfcr all men hang-s ? do«Ltfuï fa-e, #< One ^ains by what another ii bereit; " The filier. t 4efitii't€S have only kît u Λ common hank of hnppíbt.s bçîow # « M3i«tain4l, tike oalwe, by a« ebb må How.'" HÍÍWA1LD4 IM>IAN QJ*il , AFTER a refidence of two month«; with Belmore, Mr. and Mrs. Hartland, accom¬ panied by him and Lucy, proceedcu to the Lodge, where they were received with every demon tration of joy by their domeftics, and vifi^d and welcomed home by all their n" 6 neighbours.
neighbours. ' Lucy, as had previoufly been promifed, was left free to aft, and perfifled in her refolution of not going into company. —They continued at the Lodge the re¬ mainder of the m inter ; and early in the fpring paid a vifit to London Çftiü accom¬ panied by Belmore and Mifs Woodville), where they partook of all the fafhionabie amufements and gaieties ofthe place. Change of fcene, and variety of objects, but ftill more the confcioufnefs of acting right, by endeavouring to fupprefs the remembrance of Howard, diffipated by degrees the melancholy of Matilda's mind ; and the tender attentions of Hartland, re¬ vived €very tender fentiment ihc had ever felt for hira, After a ftay of a few weeks in London, Ihe and Mr. Hartknd, with their two com¬ panions, went upon a ioiig-projefted tour through
rhrough the kingdom, with which they were highly delighted. The autumn was far advanced ere they returned to the Lodge, where they meant to refide in general— Matilda, to the great fatisfaction of Mr. Hartland, who was fated with diffipation, preferring the calm and rational pleafures of the country, to the tumultuous and fa¬ tiguing ones of the town. Mr. Belmore was prevailed upon to re- fide almoft conftantly with them; they feldom let him vifit h¿s cottage without accompanying him. Lucy,on thefe occa¬ fions, was always of their party, her uncle not deriving greater pleafure from feeing her, than lhe did from feeing him; fo great indeed was her attachment to him, that could flie have hoped to efcape obfervation as well in his fmall family, as in the more numerous family of Mr. Hartland, fhe would,
would, notwithftanding her affeftion for Matilda, have gone without hefitation to refide with him. About a year after her departure from Ireland, fhe heard of Bromley's fudden death. It was occafioned by the overturn¬ ing of his phaeton: he died unpitied—and unlamented! 4. ** No friend*» complaint, no kind domeftic tear, ** PîeasM his psie ghoft, nor grac'd his moarnful bier/* His death was fpeedily followed by the return of Afhmore's fon, fraught with the pleafing hope of being now able to prevail on his beloved Lucy to reward his long- tried conftancy. For fome time ihe witb- flood all his félicitations; but at length the arguments of her friends conquered her too fcrupulous delieacy, which alone made her reluctant to their union, and with her hand ftie beftowed upon hirn a heart rich
rich in every virtue, and which had long learned to appreciate his worth. They were married at the Lodge, and imme¬ diately after the ceremony fet out for the Parfonage (accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. Hartland and Belmore), where they were in future to refide ; as Henry, who, previous to his departure from the kingdom, had taken orders, was appointed his father's curate, and the reverfion of the living fe¬ cured to him, by the intereft of Hartland· But Hartland's friendihip did not ftop here; both he and Matilda made feveral valuable and ufeful prefents, to the young couple, and continued, from time to time, to give fubftantial proofs of their regard for them. Thus, by difpenfing good, by trying to increafe the happinefs of others, promoting their, own, they enjoyed indeed as much felicity as is generally experienced· But
But, alas! fublunary blifs is tranfient and Uncertain ! our joys, indeed, may well be reckoned fugitive and deceitful; for, like the glittering dew drops that bedeck the flowers of the field, ihey often appear brighteft to our view at the moment they are about vanifhing from us for ever. * A few months after the nuptials of Henry and Lucy, the health of Hartland, their generous friend and patron, began vifibly to decline. In vain he tried the medicinal waters of Briftol. He daily grew worfe ; and, after refiding a few weeks there, felt fo convinced that the bieffing he fought there would never more return to him, that he infilled on being removed to the Lodge, anxious to prepare for the awful hour he faw rapidly approaching, and enjoy> with¬ out interruption, the fociety of his friends. Belmore, who had accompanied him to the Hot
Hot Wells, returned with him from thence; and as foon as he arrived at the Lodge, a fummons was difpatched for Afhmore and his children, which they immediately obeyed, penetrated with forrow for the-me* lancholy caufe of it. The moft acute grief fwelled the heart of Matilda, at this affecting juncture. Her attentions were tender and unremitting; neither fatigue nor felicitation could pre¬ vail on her to refign her hufband to the care of any other perfon. Hartland was truly grateful for her affi* duous tendernefs, and at once pained and pleafcd by her affliction. 'Twas foothing to.his heart to think he ihould be regretted by her whom his foul adored—that he fliould live in her remembrance long after the cold tomb had hid him from her view. Oh! vvho that poffeffes fenfibility would not
not have felt as he did?—who, that has feeling, muft not derive a melancholy plea¬ fure from the idea of being remembered with tender regret by thofe they love ? He- furvived but a fortnight after his re¬ turn to the Lodge: during this fortnight he arranged all his worldly affairs, and endea¬ voured to reconcile his friends, as he had done himfelf, to the approaching event. Long as his death had been expefted ; yet when, it did take place, it appeared fudden. As he was repofing one morning upon a couch, chatting with more than ufual cheerfulnefs, wkh his furrounding friends, his countenance fuddenly altered, and catching the hand of Matilda, he drew her to him. « All! all!" faid he with difficulty, e< in a few moments will be over !—Oh ! G^d!" he continued, " blefs! blefs my w\k\
wife ! Reward her for her virtues, by years of happinefs in this world! I know, my Matilda/ 1 he cried, looking up in her pale face, " I know that every proper refpeft will be paid to my memory—but more I do not defire—I am not felfifli:—no, Ma¬ tilda, your Hartland is cheered at this awful moment by the idea ofyour future felicity. If departed beings are ere permitted to re¬ view the tranfiivStions of this world, he will look down with delight upon"—— Here convulfive fpafms feized him—his voice failed;—he drew Matilda ftill clofer to him, and leaning his head upon her bofom, expired ! Matilda fainted ere fhe was difengaged from his grafp, and in a fiate of ¡nfenfibiiity was borne to her chamber. When flie re¬ covered, the tendernefs of Belmore, and the unremitting folicitude of her other friends, fomewhat
fomewhat abated her grief, and calmed the perturbation ofher fpirits. The Lodge was intailed; but the Iriih eftate was in Hartland's power. This he he left to Matilda to difpofe of as flie pleafed; and, added to her jointure, it ren¬ dered her income a very affluent one. As foon as the laft duties were paid to the remains of her huiband, Matilda bid a laft farewell to the Lodge, and removed to the Hamlet, where ihe meant in future to refide. By her defire Belmore added confiderably to his farm, and took a long leafe of the whole concern. Various alterations in the cottage* and additions to it, were then planned and executed under her direction, as were feveral improvements in the grounds; and in the courfe of a few months flie rendered it altogether a moft beautiful and elegant retreat. * But
But neither the amufement ftie derived from beholding the gradual execution of her plans, nor the delight fhe experienced from the fociety of her friends, and the power which flie poffeffed and moit amply exercifed of doing good, could difpel the melancholy which pervaded her mind; a melancholy which originated from the in¬ voluntary revival of long-baniihed remem¬ brances. A conftant refident in a place where ihe had paffed fo many hours with Howard—where almoft every fpot reminded her of fome word or look of his : his idea gradually regained^ its former afeendancy over her; but inftead of affording her plea¬ fure, it tortured and afflicted her, in con¬ fequence of her ignorance of his fate.— From the time flie had left Ireland, íhe had never heard of him; flie knew at that period he was on the point of embarking to a climate
climate hoftilc to the conftitution, and flic naturally feared he was no more. The emotions flic betrayed whenever he was mentioned (which was now often the cafe) left Mr. Belmore no room to doubt the caufe of her uneafinefs. He would not, however, run the riik of wounding the de¬ licacy of her feelings by pretending to know it; but anxious to reftore her to cheerful«. nefs, he made feveral inquiries concerning Howard, with whom, in confequence of Howard's expreffing ho wifli for it, he had never kept up a correfpondence. The refult of thefe inquiries was moft unfatis¬ faftory and alarming ; all the information the agent in London, to whom they were addreffed, could give refpecting Howard was, that he had left the regiment entirely, a few months after it arrived in the Weft Indies. From
From this intelligence, Belmore con¬ cluded he had relapfed into that gloom and defpair he had with fuch difficulty roufed him from ; and that, more than ever dif- gufted with life, and confequently averfe to fociety, from his hopelefs paffion for Matilda, he had fought " a folitude forlorn" to end his days in. This idea, the juftnefs of which reflexion confirmed, he refolved, in the courfe of time, to difclofe to Matilda; well convinced that, to a feeling heart like hers, no certainty almoft could be fo painful as the anxiety infeparable from a ftate of fufpenfe. When once fhe had reafon to think Howard loft to her, he trufted, from her good fenfe, ftie would exert herfelf to banifli unavailing regrets, and recover tranquillity ; and be led, perhaps, to think of fome other objeft equally amiable, and calculated to render jier happy* A
A year, however, nearly elapfed ere he found a convenient opportunity for putting this refolution into practice. At length, as he and Matilda were walking one evening in the garden, their converfation turned on paft events, which naturally led to riie mention of Howard. " Unhappy man!" cried Belmore, after a momentary paufe, " I much fear you have entailed mifery upon yourfelf." He then related to Matilda what he had heard concerning him, and the conjectures and apprehenfions it had exciu ·»* Matilda's diftrefs at this intelligence was men greater than he believed it would be ; her bofom heaved with convulfive fighs, and her cheeks were bedewed with tears. Confident, however, that he fhould rather aggravate than leffen it, by attempting to foothe, or even feeming to obferve it, he formed a pretext for leaving her. Un-
« f Unhappy Howard!" faid Matilda, repeating the words of Belmore, when left to herfelf™" Afflicting as would have been . the knowledge of thy death, I think I could have borne it better than the idea of thy living ã in lingering mifery. Oh, Howard! vain are any hopes that are entertained of my recovering tranquillity, while fuch an idea pervades my bofom !" She quitted the garden, and direfted her fteps to the ruined Abbey, a favourite haunt whenever ib^Mhought fhe was unobferved. Here fhe often foothed her fancy by think¬ ing fhe retraced the fteps of Howard ;— here ihe loved to awaken thofe folemn echoes with his name, which, ihe believed, had often returned her own to his fond ear. Her tears flowed with increafed violence on entering this folitary ruin; and throwing herfelf on a little bench near the entrance vox. ?, ? of
of the chapel, where fhe knew Howard was wont to fit and contemplate her dwelling, lhe continued to indulge her fadnefs, till the laft ftreak^f light faded from the weft, night began to caft a ind the building, which foul and quickened her
and the ftiad fearful glooni chilled her ? return home.
LHA*«
CHAP. XXII.
« When thoudeign'ft to fue,
«« Can ? thy fuit withftand ? " When thou, lov*d youth, haft won my heart, " Can I refufe my hand ?
1 HE next morning, as Mr. Belmore and Matilda were feated at breakfaft by an open window, feftooned with honey-fuckle, and commanding an extenfive view of a romantic and beautifully diverfified coun¬ try, now glowing with the luxuriance of ? 2 fummer
fummer, and well calculated to enliven a mind not faddenéd by defpair, they beheld Mrs. Afhmore tripping along the road with a lightnefs in her air which betokened a heart at eafe. She almoft flew acrofs the little bridge and lawn before the houfe, and entered the parlour, half breathlefs from the hafte flie had made— Ζζ Upon my word, fair lady," faid Belmore, ? he drew a chair to the table for her, " this fuhfhiny countenance of yours is enough ?gladden ???> heart." cf Well," replied ihe, as ihe feated her¬ felf] if if my countenance pleafes you, fo % hope will my news § but come, my dear Mrs. Hartbnd, you muft give me a cup of tea to wafe away the duft ofthe road, before I begin my goifip/' * # And pray, what is this goffip, or won¬ derful news you have coÜefled V 9 aiked Belmore. " Nothing/
" Nothing, more or lefs," replied ihe, u than that a rumour prevails throughout rhe neighbourhood of an apparition having been feen at the Abbey." Matilda felt fomewhat difcompofed at thefe words, which were delivered in a ferious voice, as flie concluded the report Mrs. A íh more alluded to, originated from her having been feen the preceding night by fome of the ignorant and fuperftitious ruftics, wandering about the ruins, and con¬ fequently, that fhe muft forbear vifiting them again.* » ff And pray/' refumed Belmore, fmiling, "when was this fbirit ft-en?" t( This morning/' faid Mrs. Afhmore. « Reaily !" cried he. « c Why this muft be fome pleafant fpirit thus to prefer the ra¬ diance of the ft; n to the glimpfes of the moon : and pray, what fliape did it affume?" o j "Not
" Not a very terrifying one," replied Mrs. Aihmore, and glanced at Matilda; " but whether its * intents are wicked or charitable/time only can determine," Matilda now became violently agitated, nor was Belmore unmoved. Mrs. Afli¬ more perceived the hopes aad expectations her words, but flill more her looks had given rife to; and, having prepared her friends for agreeable tidings, haftened to communicate them. " Henry went out upon a ramble very early this morning, 5 ' faid flie. " As he was paffing the Abbey, in his way back, he faw a young man wandering about it, whofe perfon, but ftill more whofe melan¬ choly air accorded fo perfeftly with the defcription he had received of Howard, that he inftantly concluded it was him. Anxious to know Whether he was right in this
this conjefture, he proceeded to the village, where he believed he ihould obtain the in¬ formation he required : he was not mif¬ taken in thinking fo. A very handfome curricle ftood before the inn ; and on in¬ quiring to whom it belonged, the landlord replied, to Mr. Howard, who had formerly refided in the old Abbey, and been the wonder of all the neighbourhood, from his ftrange manner of living. This was enough for Henry; he direftly flew to in¬ form me of what he had heard; aiid I inftantly quitted the breakfaft-table, where he was feated with his father, and polled hither to prepare you for a vifit which I am fure you will foon receive." She had fcarcely fini flied her little narra¬ tive, ere Henry and his father made their appearance, eager to congratulate Belmore and Matilda on the fafety of Howard, about ? 4 which
which they knew they had both fuffered great anxiety. Their fteps were followed by a fervant in a handfome livery, who inquired for Mr. Belmore* and begged to know 1 whether he was fufficiently at leifure at prefent to receive a vifit from a par¬ ticular friend. Mr. Belmore anfwered in the íirTirnurive, nnd the fervant haftened avvay. Ere they thought he could have reached the inn, his mafter was within fight of the cottage. He walked with precipitation till he came to the little bridge; there he paufed as if detained by the powerful recollection of paft events, which it revived in his mind. It 'Was there he had met Matilda and preffed her to accompany him ina morning walk, in the courfe of which he explained to her the wretchednefs of his fituation;— it was there he beheld the anguifli that expia·»
explanation gave her;—it was there he had parted from her, and almoft confeffed fhe was the deareft being on earth to him. Matilda could not help believing thefe circumftances had recurred to him. Her heart now began to throb with unufual violence—fhe became alternately pale and red, and would have retired from the room* but that ihe thought by fuch a meafure fhe fhould betray the emotions İhe felt. Belmore hurried from the houfe to meet his welcome vifiter. The moment Howard beheld him, he flew forward, and feizing his extended hand, prefied it between his, and in broken language declared the pleafure this meeting gave him. Belmore, without giving him time to make any inquiries, led him into the parlour. His eyes glanced round the affembled party, and faftened on the lovciy face of Matilda, who, for obvious ? 5 reafons
. reãfom had íhrunk ??? the moft remote comer ofthe room. * His colour inftantly changed, and he became motionlefs for a moment; then, as if fuddenly recollefting himfelf, he bowed in a confufed manner— made an inquiry after her health, in a voice that wa^ fcarcely articulate, and feating himfelf, endeavoured to enter into conver¬ fation. Belmore gently reproached hirn for his filence.—" Be affured," faid Howard, " it proceeded neither from ingratitude nor forgetfulnefs; I would have written, could I have fuppofed my letters would have given you any pleafure; but, as I knew they muft be tranferipts of my heart, that was impoflìble." " They would, at leaft, have relieved me from the painful anxiety I fuffered on your account," replied Belmore—" an anxiety which
which induced me to inquire of the agent of the regiment to which you belonged, about you." " And he informed you I had left it?** faid Howard, " Hedid." " But he could not,'* refumed Howard, " inform you of the caufe of my doing fo. I had not been many months in the Weft Indies when I received α letter from a gen¬ tleman, by whofe means I had, early in life> been left without any proviiion. My father poffeffed ? handfome independence, which this man, w ho feigned himfeif his friend, found means to deprive him of, by leading him gradually into the vortex of diffipation. Too late he became fenfible ofthe artifices ufed for his deftruction. Full of regret for the warmth of temper and credulity which had expofed hini to them, he died 06 of
of a broken heart in confequence of their fuccefs, fincerely penitent for every error. u His falfe friend purfued an uninter¬ rupted courfe of folly and extravagance for many years. Some heavy family misfor¬ tunes then awakened reflexions which had iong 4 lain dormant, impreffed him with horror for his nefarious conduft to my father, and rendered him anxious to make every poffible atonement for it. To do this, he fought me out, and earneftly con¬ jured me to refign my commifiion upon the receipt of his letter, and join him in the fouth of France, where he was then lingering in the laft ftage of a confumption, that he might have the pleafure, ere he died of foliating my forgivenefs, for the injuries he had done me, and putting me into poffeffion of the property he had obtained, or rather deprived my father of at
at the gaming table, to which alone he had led him. " I complied with his requeft, the more readily, as the fociety I was obliged to mingle with in the army did not fuit my prefent feelings. " He lingered much longer than could have been expefted from the weak ftate I found him in. I accompanied his remains laft week to England ; and having paid a vifit to the feat of my anceftcrs, fo unexpeftedly reftored to me, I came hither for the pur¬ pofe of feeing you, ere I again quitted the kingdom, in all probability for ever, to refide in a fweet and lonely retreat 1 fecured in France." " Quit the kindgdom for ever, to fettle in France?" repeated Mr. Belmore. "Pray, may I afk the caufe of this refolution ? Have yoa formed new friendfhips— new attach-
attachments, more powerful than your old ones, to induce you thus to abandon your native country ?—is your heart then entirely changed ?" " No," replied Howard, fomewhat re« proachfuily and with rather an indignant look,—" No/* cried he, fattening his dark and expreffive eyes upon Mr. Belmore, "it is not becaufe my heart is altered; but becaufe it is unchanged, that I exile myfelf from my native country." " Well,** replied Mr. Belmore, " you muft certainly know beft what is calculated to give you happinefs. I fhall, therefore, ufe no argument to diffuadcyou from your prefent plan. Since you affure me, how¬ ever that your heart is unaltered, Mrs. Hartland and I may, perhaps, fome time or other vifit your retreat," " Mrs. Hartland and you !" cried How¬ ard, ftarting, as if a fudden light flafficd
upon his foul;—" Mrs. Hartland and you!" he exclaimed, alternately looking at them. The tears of Matilda could no longer be fuppreffed. She haftily rofe, quitted the room, waving her hand to Mrs. Aihmore, who alfo rofe at the fame moment, not to follow her. Howard trembling beneath his emotions, ftarted from his chair—beckoned to Mr. Belmore, and precipitately withdrew to the garden* Here Behiore did not keep him long in fufpenfe; he not only acquainted him with the fituation of Matilda, but the ftate of her heart ; and a gufi: of tears be¬ dewed the manly checks of Howard at the fudden profpeft of felicity which opened to his view, Notwithftanding his ardent foiicitations to be conducted directly to her, Belmore detained him till he appeared to have
have regained fome cornpofure; he then led him into the houfe, and having learned from Matilda's maid, that her miftrefs was alone in the dreftmg-room, he introduced Howard into it, and immediately retired. Howard fprung forward, and threw him¬ felf at the feet of Matilda, who, at his ap¬ proach, raifed her head from the arm of the fofa upon which fhe was fitting. * ( Deareft! lovelieft of human beings !" he exclaimed as he preffed her hands to his wildly throbbing heart j t€ This moment— this moment renders me the moft bleffed, or miferabie of men. Say, Matilda! (he continued, raifing his humid eyes to hers) —fay, may I indeed indulge the hopes Mr. Belmore has infpired me with ?" The bright blufh which mantled the cheeks of Matilda at thefe words, proved to him he might. A tacit acknowledgment of
of his happinefs was not, however, fuf¬ ficient for the impetuous foul of Howard; nothing fhort of hearing it from the lips of Matilda would fatisfy him. a Tell me," cried he, " can you, who fo well know the numerous foibles, the way- wardnefs of this heart? (preflíng ftill more fervently to it the trcmbliug hand he held within his) —can you, I fay, think it worthy of your acceptance?—fpeak, deareft Ma¬ tilda—fuipcnfe on fuch a fubjeft is not to be endured." " Let my actions fpeak for me," faid Matilda; 'f let my permitting you to fpeak as you have done, inform you of what I feci and think." « You will not then, hefitate" cried Howard, " to entruft your future happinefs to my care?" " No," replied Matilda, « I will not." The
The tranfports of JHoward at thefe words,mock defcription;—to receive from the woman he loved an unequivocal acknowledgment ofher attachment to him ; — to hold her whom he had fo long de- fpairingly adored in his arms, with every certainty of calling her in a few fliort days his own, was tranfport! rapture! which can only be conceived by thofe who have been in a fimilar fituation. They remained together, till fummoned to dinner by Mr. Belmore, whofe joy at the happy iffue of their fufferings was breathed from the very bottom of his heart. They found the Aihmore's in the dinner-parlour, who, as they had fympathifed in their forrows, now participated in their happinefs,—Howard, ? who ftill retained all his impetuofity, would not quit Matilda at night, to take up his quarters at the village inn, till ihe had pro¬ mifed
mifed to give him her hand that day week: the intermediate fpace was filled up with arrangements for their future eftabliihment. As Howard's paternal manfion was in a ruinous condition, it was fettled that they ihould refide at the Hamlet, to which they were both ftrongly attached. The cottage, as I have already faid, was confiderably enlarged and elegantly fitted up, and fur¬ rounded by a handfome domain, to which was united a rich and flouriihing farm ; fo that no where, perhaps, could they have found a pleafanter or more convenient ha¬ bitation. At length the happy day arrived for crowning the virtues of Matilda, by uniting her to an amiable man, who juftly appre¬ ciated her worth. On this aufpicious morn, fhe rofe with the fun, and accompanied by Belmore, Henry
Henry, and Lucy, proceeded to the village church, where Aihmore and the enraptured Howard waited to réceive her. As foon as the ceremony was over, the whole party returned to the cottage, where a rural entertainment was prepared for them, and the day was ipent in all the de¬ lights of mutual love and friendfliip. From this period, the days of Howard and his Matilda have glided on like a fmooth ftream, calm and unruffled:— Their former forrows and inquietudes but heightened their fucceeding happinefs, and ftrengthened their confidence in that Hea¬ ven which fupported them throughout them. Bleifed with a lovely family, they derive ? never-failing pleafure irom their culture, while Belmore, in the brightnefs of his evening
evening hour, finds himfelf amply recom¬ penfed for bearing with patience, the clouds which obfcured his early profpects.
FINIS.
ansassi
hKtitS MINERVA PRESS, LEADEHU.VLL-ST&EIT.
