Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Valperga: or, The life and adventures of Castruccio, prince of Lucca
Ill W."4I M>lMI
VALPERGA.
CHAPTER L The ill ich ofthe Fot est. WHEN Baldo had been released by the com¬ mand of Castiglione from the hands of the Lucchese soldiers, he fled across tlie country ; and, possessed with horror and despair at the issue of all his predictions, hastened to the only human being to whom he evţer spoke his real ten timents, or in whom be placed any confi¬ dence. To the north of Lucca, where the mountains lise highest, and the country is most wild, there was, at tlie period those people lived concern¬ ing whom I write, an immense ilex wood, vvhich covered tiie A permine*, and was lost to VOL. IIb ß
sight in the grey distance, and among the folds and declivities of the hills. In this forest there hved a witch ; she inhabited a cottage built partly ofthe tronká of trees, partly of stones, and pai tly was inclosed by the side ofthe mountain against which it leaned. This hut was very old ; that part of it which was built of stone vv ач covered with moss, lichens and wall-flow - ers, whose beati ty and stent appeared alien to tlie gloom around; but, amidst desolation and honor, Nature loves to place the lovely and excellent, that man, viewing the scene, may ι foi get that she, the Mother, dwells every where. The trees were covered with ivy, many of them hollow and decaying, while around them the new sprouts arose, and refreshed the eye with an appeal ance of youth. On a stone near the cabin door «»at the witch ; she was very old , none knew how old : men, verging on decre¬ pitude, remembered their childish fears of her; and they all agreed that formei ly she appeared moie aged and decrepid than now. She w as bent neariy double; theie was no flesh on hei hones; andthe brown and wrinkled skin hung hugely about her checks and aims· She was
»hort, thb arid small ; her hair was perfectly white, and her red eyes, the only part about her that appeared to have life, glared within tiieir sunken sockets ţ ber voice was cracked and shrill. " Well, son," said she, when she saw Bindo arrive, " What news ? Are thine, or my pre¬ dictions most true?" Bindo threw himself on the ground, and tore his hair with rage, but he answered not a word. " You would not believe my words," con¬ tinued she, with a malicious laugh ; " but the stars are not truer to their course, than I to fate; tomorrow not one stone will líe upon another of the castle of Valperga." " This must not be," cried Bindo, starting up furiously ; " it shall not be ! Are you not a witch? and if you have sold your soul to the devil, will he not obey your will?" " I sold my soul to the devil ! " she replied in a tone, which bordered on a scream ; " Γ tell thee, thou wert happy, if thy soul were as cer¬ tain to be saved as mine. I rule the spirits, and tlo not serve them ; what can angels do
moie ŕ But one thing I cannot do ; I cannot impede the btar of Castruccio ; that must rise. n ** Aye,—you are ad alike ;—you can lame cattle, strangle fowls, and milk cows; but, when power \ъ wanted, you are as weak as tliis straw. Come, if you are a witch, act a, one." " What would you that I should do? I caa cover the rky with clouds; I can conjure iáin and thunder from the bkie empyrean ; lhe Serchio will obey mc ; the winds from the north and the south know my call ; the mines of the earth are subject to me ,* 1 can cull the dead from their graves, and command the spi¬ rits of air to obey me. The fortunes of men are known to me ; but man himself is not to be ruled, unless he consent to obey. Castruc¬ cio is set above men; his star is highest in the sky, and the aspect of Üıe vast heaven favours him ; I can do nothing with him." " Then farewel ; and may the curses of hell cling to you, and blight you ! I want no con- juioťs tricks,—but man shall do for me wha the devil cannot."*
u Stay, son," cried the witch ; " now you ■-ay right; now you arc reasonable. Tliowgh the star of Castruccio be high, it will fall at last, burst and fall like a dead stick upon the ground. Be it for us to hasten this moment ; man may help you, and be that your task; watch all that happen*, and tell me ail; let no act or word escape your notice ; and some¬ thing will happen vvhich I may wind to my purpose, ЛУе have both vowed to pursue the prince of Lucca to the death. There are no means novv; but some will arise, and we shall triumph. Keep in mind one thing; do nol let your mistress depart. I know that she desi iee to go to Florence ; she must remain at Lucca, until the destined time be fulfilled ; be it your task to keep her." " I do not like these slow measures," replied ihc Albinois sullenly , " &,nd, mclU'mks, liis waxen image at the fire, or his heart stuck full of pins, might soon rid the earth of him ; surely if curses might kill a man, he were dead ; tell ше in truth is he not a fiend ? I¿he nol one u»' the spirits of the damned housed in flesh to torment us?"
" Seek not to enquire into the mysteries uf our art. You tell your wishes; I direct their 0CCoi»pìishnient;--*-obey---yOu can do no more. Wheo death, the mower, is in the field, few plants are tough enough to turn the edge of his scythe : yet Castruccio is one of these few ; and patience and prudence alone can effect hh" tal). Watch every thing ; report all to me ; and beware that tlie countess leaves not Lucca; our power is gone, when she goes." Such was tho scene that immediately fol¬ lowed the destruction of the castle of V al¬ arga, Bindo had hitherto loved his mistress, vvith an aflection whose energy had never been failed into action; but he loved her, as the lioness in the desert loves-her whelps, who day by day feeds them in peace, but, when aroused by the hunters will defend them to the last drop of huí bluvd. He loved hei, аъ we ail love, and know not how fervently, until events awake our k>ve to the expression of its energy. He had ieldom thought upon Castruccio ; when he came frequently to Valperga, and lie i^aw his mistress happy in his visits, then these visits also made the Albinois joyful; yet he
sympathized too litde in the course of daily hfe, to disapprove of him when he came no more : but, vvhen he sought to injure the sole being whom Bindo loved and reverenced, then a hidden spring suddenly burst forth in the Albinois* mind; and hate, till then unknown, arose, and filled every conduit of his heart, and, mingling its gall vvith the waters of love, became the first feehng, tiie prime mover in his soul. He had long associated with this witch. He felt his defects in bodily prowess; perhaps abo he felt the weakness of his reason ; and tlierefore he sought for powers of art, whicii might overcome strengtli, and powers of minti, which were denied to tiie majority of the hu¬ man species. Bindo was a very favourable subject for tiie witch to act upon ; she deceiv¬ ed him easily, and through his means spread far the fame of her incantations. What made these women pretend to powers tiiey did not possess, incur the greatest perils for tiie sake of being believed to be what tiiey were not, with¬ out any apparent advantage accruing to them¬ selves from this belief? 1 believe we may find
the answer in our own hearts: the love of power is inherent in human nature; and, in evil natures, to be feared is a kind of power. ' The witch of the Lucchese forest was much feared ; and no one contributed to the spread of this feeling more than Bindo. She had no interest to preserve Euthanasia, or to destroy Castruccio; but she must feign these feelings in order to preserve her power over the Albinois. She resolved however not to be drawn into any action which might at¬ tract the hatred of the prince ; for she knew him indeed to be a man out of her sphere, a шап who went to mass, and told his beads as the church directed him, and who would have no hesitation in consigning to what he would call, condign punishment, all such as dealt with evil spirits, infernal drugs, and diabolical craft. Bindo saw nothing of the motives which actuated ' her ; and he really believed that the star of Castruccm had the ascendant : so after tlie first ebullitions of despair were calmed, he waited, with the patience of cherished haťc, for the events which tlie witch told him might
in the course of time bring about tlie sequel he so much desired. He had made calculations, and cast lots upon the fate of Valperga, whose results were contrary to the cnunciationa of the witch.; These had proved false ; and, when time had calmed his feelings, this disappointment itself made him cling more readily, to the, distant, but as he hopefJ,-eurer promises of, the witch,- and build upon her words the certain expec¬ tation of the overthrow of Castruccio, and the restoration of Valperga in more than its origi¬ nal splendour. He returned to Eutíianasia, and watched by her sick chamber, as the sa· vage mother of a wild brood tends upon her expiring young ; the fear of losing her by this sickness, at once exasperated him against the man whom he believed to be the cause of the mischief, and by the mightiness of his fear filled hira with that calm which is the con¬ summation of wretchedness. He neither ater nor slept ; his existence appeared a miracle. But his mistress recovered ; and his exhausted frame was now as much shaken witb joy, as before with grief; yet, pale, emaciated, trem- B5
bling as it vvere on the edge of life, but still living, he survived all these changes. The summer advanced ; and still Euthana- **a remained at Lucca. A number of slight circumstances caused this : her health was yet weak ; and her pale check and beamier eye shewed that life hardly sat firm upon hi" throne within her frame ; they vvere menaced with a peculiarly hot season, and it was scarcely judged right that she should expose herself to the excessive heat of a Florentine summer. Lauretta also, her cousin, promised to accom¬ pany her, if sbe would delay her journey until autumn ; so she consented to remain, although m truth she felt Lucca to be to her as a narrow prison, and cherished the hope oi ånding healthful feelings, and some shght ι ta¬ luni of happiness, at Florence, Yet the jov- less state which was now her portion, was one reason why she cared not to change; it bred within her an indolence of feeling, that loved to feed upon old cares, rather than upon new hopes. A sense of duty, rather than any other sentiment, made her wish to remove ; she be¬ lieved, that she owed it to herself to revive
from the kind of moral deatii she had endured, and to beg'm as it were a fresh life with new expectations. But we are all such creatures of habit, tliat we cling rather to sorrows wluch have been our companions of old, tlian to a new-sprung race of pleasures, whose very names perhaps are unknown to us» Euthanasia loved to sit in the desolate gar¬ den of her palace, and to moralize in her owa mind, vvhen she saw a tender ro;&e embraced «md choked by evil weeds that grew in strength about it; or sometimes to visit the tower or her palace, and to look towards tiie rock where the castle of Valperga had once stood, now a heap of ruins. Could slie endure to look upon the formless mass vvhich bad before con¬ stituted her shelter and home? where iiad stood the hall within whose atmosphere she had grown to womanhood; where she had experienced aU the joys that her imagination and heart (storehouses of countless treasure) couki bestow? Yet that was all gone, and she must begin life anew : she prayed for her fa¬ ther's spirit to inspire her with courage; but her mind was too subtle and delicate in hş
fetiir.ga, to forget its antien t atta г lm на, /a. There aie some souL, bright and preciou'*, which, like gold and silver, may be subdued by tlie fiery trial, and yield to new moulds; but there are others, pure and solid as the dia¬ mond, which may be shiveied to pieces, yet in every fragment retain their indelible characte¬ ristics. " I can never change/' she thought, " never become other than I am. And yet I am told that this obstinate sorrow is weakness, and that the wise and good, like strong plants, shoot up vvitli fresh vigour, vvhen cut down even to the root. It may be so ; and so it may perhaps be with me : but as yet I feel all dead, ex¬ cept pain, and that dwells for ever within me. Alas ! life, and the little it contains, is not wortli the misery I endure ; ks best joys are fleeting shadows ; its griefs ought to be the яате ; and those are true philosophers, who trample on both, and seek İn tbe grave for a wisdom and happiness, which hfe cannot bring us. "Why was I born to feel sorrow? Why do I not dû*, that pain may expire with me ?
viller, unread in the lessons of tho wise t and who vainly blunders over and misquotes tbnr best learning. Life has more in it than vve think ; it is all that vve have, all that we know. " Life is all our knowledge, and our highest praise is to have lived well. If we had nevei lived, vve shoukl know nothing of earth, or sky, or God, or man, or delight, or sorrow. When our Creator bestowed on us this gift, he gave uh that which is beyond all words precious; for without it our apparent forms would have been a blind atom in the mass, our souls would never have been. We live ; and vve learn all that is good, and see all that is beautiful ; our will is called into action, our minds expand Hke flowers, till, overworn, they fade; if we did not live, vve should know nothing of all this ; and if wc do not live well, vve reap sor¬ row alone. " What do we know of heroes and sages, but that they lived ì Let us not spurn there¬ fore this sum and summit of our knowledge, but, cherishing it, make it so appear that vve value, ancl ni some degree deserve, the gift of
life, and the many wonders tliat accompany iu" Euthanasia suffered røueh during tlie sum¬ mer months ; and й\ that she heard of Cas« truccio turned the fount of wholesome tears to drops of agony* He bad in truth become a tyrant. Jae did not slay hb thousands like Ezzelm of Padua; bui he had received tbe graft of vaiø-^ory iato his soul, and he now bore the fruits. He put to death remorseless¬ ly those whom be suspected, and would even use torture* either to diseover other victims, or to satisfy hi* desire of revenge. Several cir¬ cumstances of this kind happened during this summer, which made Euthanasia more, mi¬ serable than words or tears could ejipcess. It she saw his enemies, tbey uttered deep curses on his cruelty ; if <*h¡e saw those who had for¬ merly been his friends, their talk was filled with bitter sarcasms on his ingratitude, and careless coldness of heart. That heart had once been the garden of virtue, where all good qualities sprung up and flourished, like odorous and de¬ licately painted flowers; but now ambition had become ita gardener, and the weed-over*
grown inclosufe of Euthanasia's ^dâ€e was but a slight symbol of all of cruel and treache¬ rous that sprung up there, whieh allowed no rose to blow, and hid the Ыоотз of ihejessap· n/me in tbe coarse and broad leaves of worth¬ less brambles. Sometimes she thanked Pro¬ vidence that she had not become the wife of this man: but it was a bitter thankfulness« She had not been wedded to him by the church'* rites ; but her soul, her thoughts her fate·» had been married to his ; she tried to loose» the chain that bound them eternally togetner, and felt that the effort was fruitless : if he were evil, she must weep ; if his light-hearted self¬ ishness allowed no room for remorse in his owm breast, humiliation and sorrow was doubly her portion, and this was her destiny for ever. His military exploits of this year rather con¬ sisted in the slow laying of foundation-stones, than were distinguished by any peculiar glory. The Florentine army retreated in trepidation before him; he took several castles, made se¬ veral new alliances, and consolidated more and more the power vvhich he hoped one day to put to a mighty purpose. .Desire of dominion
and lordship wats the only passion that novv had much power in his soul ; he had forgotten Euthanasia; orif he remembered her, he called her s peevish girk and wasted no fu* ther thought upon her. The summer had been tremendously hot ; and all the fields were parched, and the earth baked and cracked from the long droutii. These were aU signs of a wet autumn ; and hardly had Euthanasia determined on her journey to Florence, beiore it was stopped by tremendous rains and tempests, that deluged the earth, and disturbed the sky. The lightning became as a shaffin the hands of an experienced warrior ; •ю true it seemed to its aim, and destroying so many with its subde fire: ai*d the thunder, reverberating along the hills, sent up to heaven the shout, which proclaimed the triumph and desolation of its precursor. Then came the rain; and the earth gladly received these to¬ kens of heavenVs love, wbich blessed her with fertility. The torrents roared down the hills ; and the rivers, no longer restrained within tiieir banks, rose, and deluged the plain, filling evea the streets of Lucca with water.
Bindo looked on all this labour of the ele¬ ments with a mind hovering between pbasure and fear. He believed tiiat the witch of the forest iiad caused this inundation, to impede the journey of the countess ; but, thinking thus, he trembled at the power she possessed, and at the strange company of unseen spirits, which thus, unknown to mortals, interfere with their destinies. The devil, he knew, was called prince of the air ; but there is a wide diffe¬ rence between our belief of an hearsay, and the proof whicii he now thought was pre^nted to him. When he repaired at the mysterious hour of midnight to a running stream, and saw, as the witch uttered her incantations, and lash¬ ed the waters with her rod,—that a tempes¬ tuous wind arose from the south, and tiie dark clouds among which the lightnings played, ad¬ vanced over their heads # and then the rain in quick big drops, accompanied by hail, fell on the earth ;—-when he saw this, his limbs trem¬ bled, hie heart beat quick with fear ; he dared not cross himself, nor mutter a paternoster ,· and, if love and hate bad not possessed Ыш so entirely, he would never have ventured again to witness the magical powers of his friend.
A cold and early winter followed the flood, and froze the water» before they retreated from the inundated fields. For many years so ter¬ rible a season had not been known in Italy ; and, in the jLucchese states particularly, it oc¬ casioned a great loss of fruit-trees and vines. The mountains were covered with snow ; the torrents were arrested in their course by the subtle, nets which winter cast, over them ; it was a strange sight for an Italian to see. " And this," thought Euthamia, " is what *he Trans¬ alpines mean, when tbey talk of the fearful cold of winter. Oh ! indeed, no hunter islike him, when he comes down from tiie north, bringing frost, his bride, along with him ; he huntfr the; leares from the trees, and destrovs the animals which inhabit the earth, even ia tiieir holds and fastnesses* He caste bonds upon the rivers and streams; and ever« the * sapless, fohage of the ocean,' and the mighty monstera and numberless spawn that rove through ita wastes, are all subdued by his fierce arid resistiese ravages/' Thus tho thought, as she saw the country, late so beautiful, the Earth, lovely as a young mother nursing her only care, now as wild and
forlorn as that mother if she be ruthlessly be¬ reft of her infant. The fields were hardened by frost, and the flood lay moveless and white over the plain ; the hills were covered with snow. It was a grievous change from the Miiiles of summer ; but it did not last long ; and thaw quickly reversed tiie scene* The eartii was again alive ; and the rivers and floods again filled the air with sound. Eu nasia resolved to wait only until the season should be somewhat more advanced, to make her long delayed journey to Florence.
CHAPTER П. Beatrice in the Inquisition at hucea.-^Freed by Castruccio, at the Intercession of Eut ha· nana. WHILE Euthanasia yet remained at Lucca in this luKertain manner, a circumstance oc curred which caused her to suspend the pre¬ parations for her journey. Late one night (it was nearly twelve o'clock), the visit of a stranger was announced ; a man, they said, so wrapt up in his capuchin, tbat his physiognomy could not be distinguished. Why did Eutha¬ nasia's heart beat fast, and the colour desert her warm lips ? Wbat could she hope or fear ? The man was admitted, and one glance sufficed to satisfy her curiosity, and to quiet her trem¬ bling expectation. He was one of the meaner class; aed, when he threw back his cloak, Euthanasia perceived that he was an entire
stranger to her ; but there was a kindness, a rough sensibility in bis face, that pleased her, and she gentiy enquired what he had to say to her. " Nobie countess, I come on a work of cha¬ rity, which would ruin rae for ever if my su¬ periors were to discover it« I am the jailor of the Lucchese prison ; and this morning the Dominican inquisitors put under my custody a Paterin woman *, whom it would move any soul but theirs to behold. She lias touched ше with the greatest pity by her tears and heart-breaking intreaties: she denies her he¬ resy, and says that you can prove her faith ; but she must see you first ; and I, at peril of all that I am worth, am come to conduct you to her dungeon, for I can admit you only by night. Surely you will come ; poor thing, she is* very young and fearful, and is now lying on
■" These heretics were long a principal subject of hostility to ihe inquisition; and in 15P0 a particular community vvas erected at Florence by San Pietro dì V erona, for the express purpose of their oatnnina- lion.
the floor of her prison panting with terror and expectation/' « Unfortunate creature ! Did she tell you her name ? " "She says tbat you do not know it; but she intreais you to remember a pilgrim girl, whom you once received Æt your castie, and whom you pitied ; a sun-burnt, way-worn creature who said that she was on tiie way to Rome." M I do not recollect; but if she is unhappy, and desires to see me, it is enough, I follow you." Euthanasia wrapt lier capuchin around bei, and followed the man through the dark, wet streets of Lucca : the thaw had not yet com¬ pleted its woik; the snow was deep and miry under their feet ; while the melting collections of several days dripped, or rathei streamed from the house-roofs on their heads : the Li¬ beccio blew a warm, cloud-bi inging wind» that made the night so black, that they could not avoid the standing pools thai interspeised the streets. At length they arrived at the pri¬ son ; the jailor entered by a small, low dooi which he carelully closed after them, and then
struck a light. He led Euthanasia through the bare and mildewed vaults, sometimes un. locking a massy gate, drawing back the harsh bolts which grated with mstand damp ; some¬ times they emerged into a passage open to the sky, but narrow, with tall black walls aboutit, wbich dropt their melted snow v/ith a conti¬ nual and sulien splash upon the pavement: small, glassìess, grated windows looked into these strait passages; these were the holes tbat admitted light into the dungeons. At length they ascended a small, broken, staircase of wood ; and, opening a door at the head of it, and consigning itis lamp to the countes* the jailor said : " She is ivere ; comfort her ; in two hours Ishall come to conduct you back." Euthanasia entered the prison-chamber, awe- stricken and trembling ; for the good ever feel humiliated at the sight of misfortune in othei s : the poor prisoner was seated crouched in a corner; she looked wildly towards the door; and, seeing Euthanasia, she leaped up, and, throwing herself at her feet, clinging to her knees, and damping them with convulsive
sticngili, she cried, " Save me ! You alone on eaith can save me," Poor Euthanasia was moved to tears ; she raised the sufferer, and, taking her in her arm«*, tried to soothe her : the prisoner only sobbed, leauing her head upon Euthanasia's hand: " Fear not, you shall be saved ; poor sufferer, calm yoursel'; speak, vvhat would you vvith me ? fear not, no harm shall reach you; 1 will be your friend." " Will you indeed-«indeed—be my friend ? and go to him, and bid 1/un save me? lie alane can doit." "Who: Speak eaimly, dearest; pa* ч; .white; reassure yourself, and then -speaK. Look, you are safe m my arms; I cki?p thcni ïijtmd you, do not fear ! " The prisoner sunk in Euthanasia's embrace: die was chilled, icy-cold ;—and she lay pant¬ ing, as a bleeding fawn who gazes on its death's wound. The warmth of Euthanasia'ts aims Miiinevvhat restored her, and she said,dividing the entangled strings ot her hair with her thin lingers; " You do not remember me, nor
would he ; lam as unlike what I was when he saw me, as is the yellow, fallen leaf to the bright-green foliage of May. You do not re¬ member me í " " Yes, novv it flashes on my memory ; are you then indeed------" Euthanasia paused; the name of Beatrice hovered on her hps, but a feel¬ ing of delicacy prevented her from speaking it : she continued ; " Yes, I recollect tbe pilgrim, your refusal to remain at Valperga, and tlie deep interest ï took in your sorrows." " You were very, very kind ; are you not so now? Will you not go to him, and ask him to order my release ? " " To whom am I to go ? and from whom do I come?" asked Euthanasia, half-smiling; fur, notwithstanding the prisoner recalled to her memory a scene, which made it appear tliat she was certainly Beatrice; yet so long had all trace of her been lost, that she wished for some confirmation from her own lips. " Alas! " replied the unhappy girl, " I would not have him know, if I could help it. Do you think that, if you were to tell him that a poor girl, who five years ago liad just attained her VOL. IH, С
seventeenth year, who was then happy, loving and adored,—who is now pursued for heresy -^-falsely—or if you wili—truly ; one very un¬ fortunate, who earnestly implores him as he *oves his own soul, to save her; do you not think he would compassionate me ? " " Who ? you speak in riddles." " In riddles ! Are you not Euthanasia ? You must know whom I mean ; why, Antelminelli, -—Castruccio." The prisoner hid her face with her hands. She blushed deeply, and her fast-falling tears trickled through her fingers ; Euthanasia blush¬ ed also, a tremulous hectic, that quickly va¬ nished, while her companion's checks still burned. " Yes, 1 will go to him, or to any one on earth to save you.—Yet metiiinks 1 had better go to the father-inquisitors; I am known to tiiem, and 1 think 1 could as easily move them as the prince ; he İs careless—" " Oh ! no—no ; you must go to him : he knew me once, and surely would compassion¬ ate me. Try him first with the echo of my complaints, and a ι el ation of my tear?; sin ciy
his eyes, which can look into the soul, would then be dimmed: would they not?" Euthanasia thought of Lcodino; and she was about to reply, that warriors, politicians, and ambitious ргтеез, such as Canniccio, were accustomed to regard with contempt woes like hers. But she hesitated; she would not rob him, whom she bad once loved, of the smallest mite of another's praise, however un¬ deserved ; besides, she felt that the name of Beatrice alone would move him to compas¬ sion, perhaps to remorse. She was therefoie silent ; and the prisoner continued, with a voice of trembling earnestness, " Try every argument first; but, if he is obdurate, then tell him that he once knew me,—that now my fortunes are changed,—he will guess the cause : yet per¬ haps he will think wrong, for that is not the cause. Tell him I am one Beatrice ;—*he saiv me .some years ago at the house of the good bishop of Ferrara." The poor fallen prophete.^ now hurst into a passion of weeping ; she wrung her hands, and tore her hair, while hei companion looked on her, u»ihM<* to rr-Miaiu h* t t<-ai ,. Cbtntr.
сю had described his Beatrice, so bright, so ethereal in her loveliness, that it moved Eu¬ thanasia's inmost soul to see what a change a very few years had made. Perceiving the blushes and shame of the lost girl, she conceal¬ ed her knowledge of her tale, and answered only by endeavouring to soothe her, and to азвиге her of her safety. " Am I safe ? I tell you that I fear, oh ! how much I fear! I am very young; I was once happy ; but, since that, I have suffered beyond human utterance; yet I dread death; ano, moie than all, do I fear pain. They call me a heretic ; aye," (and her dark eyes beameu fiercely) " I am one ; I do not belong to then maudlin creed ; I feel my wrongs, and I dare curse------But, hush, not so loud.—-You par¬ don me, do you not ? Alas ! if you turn against me, they seize on me, tear me, burn me ! " The two hours had swiftly passed, while Bea¬ trice thus wept with alternate passion. The jai ior camelo reconduct Euthanasia; but Bea¬ trice clung to her, clasping her neck, and in- twining her fingers in her long thick hair. " No! no! You must not go!" she cried;
" I shall die, if I am again left alone. Oh * before you came, I sometimes felt as if Ι άιύ not know vvhere I was, and madness seemed about to fall on me: you are good, consolato* ry, kind ; you must not leave me." " Then I cannot see the prince ; I cannot intercede for your liberation." " But that is many hours hence, and the comfortable day-light will become; now it h quite dark ; hark to tiie splashing water, and the bowling of the Libeccio; I had forgotten ali that; and now they come upon me vvith ten¬ fold horror ; do not leave me ! " Euthanasia could hardly distinguish the sup¬ pliant's features by the light of the jailor's small lamp; but she saw her eyes bright with teais, and felt her bosom throb against her own; again she strove to console her ; reason was thrown away ;—when the jailor urged his, her own, every one's safety—she shook lier head. " I thought you were kind ; but you are not: my cheeks are pale with fear; put up your lamp to thera tliat you may see. Sht can go early, tbe moment day dawns,—indeed ßhe shall go then, but now she rnuat not."
Euthanasia tore lierself aw ну ; though her heart was pierced by the wild shriek of Bea¬ trice, as she threw herself on the floor. The jailor led her through the melancholy passages of the prison, and then along the wet streets, until ё1ю reached her home : and she retired to meditate during the remaining hours of night on the words she should employ in her repre¬ sentations to Castruccio the following morning. The expectation of this meeting flushed her cheeks, and made her deep eyes beam, while ■every limb trembled. She had not seen him so long that his assumed power, his tyrannies, and mean politics, were lost in her recollec¬ tion ; she felt as if she should again see him honest, passion-breathing, and beautiful, as when they took sweet counsel together at Val¬ perga. Valperga ! that was now a black and hideous ruin, and he the author of its destruc¬ tion. But she thought, " This is a dream ;— 1 shall see him, and it will vanish ; there is a coil wound round me of sorrow and distrust, which will snap beneath his smile, and free me,—I shall see him ! " Why do I think of myself, ? I go to free
tino poor gni, whom he has wronged, and to whom he belongs far more than to me ; this unhappy Beatrice, who sheds tears of agony in bei dungeon. I am nothing; I go as no¬ thing ; would that he should not recognize me ! I go a suppliant for another, and I must tame my looks; they aie not proud; but I must teach them humility ; I must school my heart not to speak, not to tiiink of itself—I go for her ; and, having obtained my request, I will come away, forgetful that I am any thing." Day dawned ; day, cold, wet, and cloudy, but ever cheerful to one weighed down by the sense of darkness and inaction : cjay did not dawn this dreary winter morning, until seven o'clock, and the period had arrived when it was fitting that Euthanasia should seek Cas¬ truccio. She threw a veil over her shinmo* hair, while she hid hei form in a rich cloak of sables ; then she ttole out alone ; for she could not endure that any one should know of this strange visit, W hen she arrived at the Pa¬ lazzo dei Governo, her rich attire and distin¬ guished mien won her easy entrance, and rhe penetKited U) llu t.tlmvt oi die punce.
Her heart beat audibly; she had entered with rapid, though light steps ; now she paus¬ ed ; and, as it were gathering up the straggling feelings of her mind, she endeavoured to bind them in a firm knot ; she resolved to cahn her¬ self, to still the convulsive motion of her lips, to remember nothing but Beatrice. She en¬ tered ; Antelminelli was alone ; he was at a table reading a paper, and a smile of light de¬ rision played upon his features ; he raised on her his dark, piercing eyes, and seeing a lady before him, he rose ; in a moment Euthanasia was self-possessed and resolved; and casting back her cloak, and throwing aside her veil, her eyes lifted up, yet not fixed on him, she began in her silver voice to say, " My lord, I come—" But he was too much thunderstruck to lis¬ ten ; his сЬеекз glowed vvith pleasure ; all the anger and indifference he had nourished va¬ nished in her presence, and he broke forili in a torrent of wonder and thanks. She waved her hand,—" Do not thank me, but listen ; for I come on a message, an errand of charity ; and if you can, hear me, and forget who it is that speaks."
He smiled, and replied : " Certainly it were easy not to see the sun when it shines : but, whatever your errand may be, speak it not yet;—if you come to make a request, I shall grant it instantly, and then you will go ; but pause awhile first, that I may look on you ; it is a whole year since I saw you last ; you are changed, you are paler,—your eyes—but yon turn away from me, as if you were angry." " I am not angry—but I am nothing.-« There is a heretic, at least a girl accused of heresy, confined in your prisons, whom I wish you to free, and, for the love of Heaven, not by the shortest delay to add another moment nf sorrow to her heap : she has suffered much." " A heretic ! that is beyond my jurisdiction ; I do not meddle with religion." " Yes, you do;—you see priests every day : but 1 intreat yon not to oblige me to argue with you ; listen to me a few moments, and I shall say no more. She is very unfortunate, and fears death and pain vvith a horror tîıat almost deprives her of reason ; she is young ; and it is piteous to see one scarcely more than twenty years of age, under the fangs of the c .e С δ
bloodhounds ; she was once happy ; alas ! pity her, since bhe feeis to the very centre of her heart the change from joy to grief." " Yet no harm will happen to her, at most a few months' imprisonment: if she dread death and pain, she vviil of course recant and be freed; wdiat will she suller for ao short a time r " " Fear; the worst of evils, far worse than death. I would fain persuade you to throw aside this hard-heai tedness, which is not na¬ tural to you ; moments are years, if they are lengthened out by pain ; every minute that she lives in her dungeon is to her a living death of agony ; but í will tell you her name,—-at her request I wished to conceal it: but that will win you, if you are not already won by the sweet hope of saving one whosuflèr& toi ments you can never know." " Euthanasia, do not look so gloomily ; 1 am not thinking of your lie» etic ; 1 besi tale, thai 1 may keep you here : you hav e your will ; 1 w Щ never refu.se a request of yours." A smile of fleeting disdain passed over her countenance. " Nay, vvhen you know who
bhe is, you may grant my piayei foi her own sake. I come from Beatrice, the daughter ol Wilhelmina of Bohemia." lf the ghost of the poor prophetess had sud¬ denly arisen, it could not have astounded Cas¬ truccio more, than to hear her name thus spoken by Euthanasia, coupled with the ap¬ pellations of heretic and prisoner. Tlie tide of his life ebbed ; and, when it flowed agam, he thought of the celestial Beatrice, her hght step, her almost цюпоиз presence; and the memory of her pale check and white hps when he last saw hei, thrilled his heart. Years had passed since then ; what had slie suffered r What was she·: A heietic? Alas! ?Дю vvas the daughter of Wilhelmina, the nursling ot Magfreda, the ward of a leper, the adopted child ofthe good bishop of Ferrai a. Euthanasia «aw the great confluence of pas¬ sions, which agitated Casti uccio, and made him alternately pale and red ; she was silent, her quiet eyes beaming upon him ш com¬ passion ; for a long time his heait could not find a voice, but at length he spoke,—■"•Hapten * innen' hee hci, taka hci to von' Eutluuu-
sia, you are the angel itself of charity ; you know all her sad story—all that relates to me; calm her, console her, make her herself again, —poor, poor Beatrice ! " " Farewell then ; I go,—send one of your оШсегз with the order; I will hasten to her, as quickly as you can wish." " Yet pause, stay one moment; shall I never see you again? You have cast me off utterly; yet, I pray you, be happy. Why should you be pale and sorrowful Ì you have other friends ; must all that love me, mourn ? Surely I am not a devil, that all I touch must wither. Beware ! tear the veil from your heart ; read, read its inmost secrets, tlie eternal words im¬ printed in its core; you do not despise me, you love me,—be mine." The pale cheek of Euthanasia was flushed, her eyes flashed fire,—" Never ! tie myself to tyranny, to slavery, to war, to deceit, to hate ? I tell thee I am as free as air. But I am hur¬ ried far beyond the bounds I prescribed for my í elf, and now not a word more." " Yes, one word more; not of yourself, wild enthusiast, but of Beatrice. I destroyed her ; not that I knew vvhat I did ; but heedlessly,
foolishly, destroyed her; do you then repair my work ; I would give half my soul that she should be as vvhen I first saw her. You have heard a part of her story, and you will now perhaps learn those sunerings which she has endured since we parted ; it is doubtless a strange and miserable tale ; but do you be tbe ministering angel of mercy and love to her." Sorrow and even humiliation were marked on Castruccio's countenance ; Euthanasia looked at it, almost for the first time since she liad entered ; she sighed softly, and said neariy in a whisper, "Alas! that you should no longer be what you once vvere ! " Pride novv returned and swelled every fea¬ ture of Castruccio ; " Enough, enough : what¬ ever wine of life I drain, î mingled it myself. Euthanasia, if vve never meet again, remember, I am content ; can vou be more ? " Euthanasia said not a word ; she vanished, her bright presence was gone; and Castruccio, to whom, as to the fallen arch-angel, that line might be applied, Vaunting aloud, though rackM with deep despair,
teailess, his lips piessed togethei, sal íecalhng to mmd her words and looks, until, icmem¬ bei ing his boast, he looked up with angty defiance; and, shaking from his heart the dew of tenderness he plunged amidst the ciowd wheie he commanded, where Ьь ι ci y eye vvas obeyed. Euthanasia hastened to the prison, wheie the kind-heaited jailor led hei with a face ot joyful triumph to tbe dungeon of Beati ice; the poor thing was sleeping, the traces of teai s were on her cheeks (foi like a child she had cned herself to sleep), and several times she started uneasily. Euthanasia made a sign to the jailor to be silent, and knelt down beside her, looking at her countenance, once ¿o glo¬ riously beautiful; the exquisite caiving oi hei weh shaped eyelids, her oval face, and pointed ehm still shewed signs of what she had been ; the rest was tobt. Hei complexion wa^ sun¬ burnt, her bauds veiy thin and yellow, anil caic had already marked her sunken cheeks antl brow with many lines ; hei jet black haii was mingled with grey; hci long tie^e*- had been
cut, and now reached only to her neck ; while, strait anu thin, they weie the shadow merely of vvhat they had been ; her face, her whole person was emaciated, worn and faded. She awoke and beheld the eyes of Euthanasia, hke heaven itself, clear and deep, ga?mg on her. —"Ause, poor sufferer, you are free!" Beati ice looked wildly; then* stalling ιψ 7 she clapped her hands ш a Uauspoit of jov, she threw hei self at the feet of her delivel er, she embiaced the jailor, she was nantie, " Fice ! fi ее !" for some lime she could repeat no other woid. At length she said, 4 * Paidon me; yc&teidav 1 was rude and selfish ; 1 toi¬ men ted and lcproached vou, vvho aie all kind¬ ness. And vou, excellent man, vou will kn- give me, will you not ľ W hat was it that 1 feai od? Novv that I am going to leave my du igei .n, methinks it ь a good ceil enough, and 1 couhl sta) heie alwavs well content; it ib somewhat dark and cold, but one can wiap oneself up, and shut one*» eves, and famy one's self under the ыт of heaven." She continued piatthng, and would hive
said much more, but that Euthanasia witb gentle force drew her from the dungeon, out of the gloomy prison ; and they hastened to her palace, where Beatrice was quickly refreshed by a bath and food. But, when the first joy of liberation was passed, she sunk to melan¬ choly : she would not speak, but sat listlessly, and her tears fell in silence. Euthanasia tried to comfort her; but many days passed, during vvhich she continued sullen and untractable. In the mean lime Euthanasia received seve¬ ral billets from Castruccio, with earnest enqui¬ ries concerning the welfare of this poor girl. " God knows," he wrote, " what has happened to this unfortunate being since we parted. My heart is agonized, not only for what she stiflers, but for what she may have suffered. Slie is now, they say, a heretic, a Paterin, one vvho believes in the ascendancy of the evil spi¬ rit in the world ; poor insane girl 1 Euthana¬ sia, for her souľs sake, and for mine which mu^t answer for hers, reason with her, and convert her ; be to her as an affectionate sister, an an¬ gel of peace and pardon. I leave tiie guidance
of her future destiny to your judgement : but do not lose sight of her. What do I ask cf you ? And what right have î to bring upon you the burthen of my faults ? But you are good, and will forgive me."
CHAPTER HI. Beatrice, her Creeds aud her Love, Euthanasia was meditating on this letter, when Beatrice entered, and sat down beside her. She took her hand., and kissed it, and then said, " How can you forgive my ingratitude ? I am self-willed, sullen, and humorous ; alas ! sometimes the memory of the evils I have suf¬ fered presses on me, and I forget all my duties. Duties ! until I knew you I had none ; for five years my life has been one scene of despaii : you cannot tell what a fall mine was." u Forget, I do intreat you, poor suderei', all your past unhappiness ; forget every thing tbat you once were." "Aye, you say right; I must forget every thing, or to be vvhat I am must torture me to despair. Poor, misled, foolish, insensate Bea¬ trice ! I í an accubC mviiulf alone foi my many
ills ; myself, and that power who sits on high, and scatters evil like dew upon the earth, a killing, blighting honey dew." " Hush ! my poor girl, do not talk thus; in¬ deed I must not have you utter tliese senti¬ ments." " Oh ! let me speak : before all others I must hide my bursting feelings, deep, deep, Yet for one moment let me curse ! " Beatrice arose ; she pointed to heaven ; she stood in tiie same attitude, as when she had prophesied to the people of Ferrara undei* the portico of tlie church of St. Anna ; but how changed ! Her form titin ; her face care-worn ; her love-formed lips withered ; her hands and arms, then so round and fair, now wrinkled and faded ; lier eyes vvere not the same ; they had lost that softness Vvhich, mingling with their fire, was as something wondeiful in brilliancy and beauty ; tliey now, like the sun from be¬ neath a thundercloud, glared fiercely from un¬ der her dark and scattered hair that shaded her brow : but even now, аз in tliose times, she spoke with tumultuous eloquence : " Euthanasia, you are much deceived ; you
either worship a useless shadow, or a fiend in the clothing of a god. Listen to me, while I announce to you the eternal and victorious in¬ fiuenee of evil, which circulates like air about ns, clinging to our flesh like a poisonous gar¬ ment, eating into us, and destroying us. Are you blind, that you see it not ? Are you deaf, ihat you hear no groans ? Are you insensible, tiiat you feel no misery ? Open your eyes, and you will behold all of vvhich I speak, standing in hideous array before you. Look around. Is there not war, violation of treaties, and hard¬ hearted cruelty ? Look at tbe societies of men ; are not our fellow creatures tormented one by tiie other in an endless circle of pain ? Some shut up in iron cages, starved and destroyed ; cities float in blood, and the hopes of the hus¬ bandman are manured by his own mangled limbs : remember the times of our fathers, the extirpation ofthe Albigenæs ;·—the cruelties of Ezzelin, when troops of the blind, and the lame, and tlie mutilated, the scum of his pri¬ sons, inundated the Italian states. Remember tbe destruction of the templars. Did you never ¿ance in thought into the tower of famine of
Ugolino ; or into the hearts of the armies of exiles, that each day the warring citizens ba¬ nish from their homes? Did you never reflect on the guilty policy ofthe Popes, those minis¬ ters of tlie reigning king ofheaven ? Remember tiie Sicilian vespers ; the death of the innocent Conradin ; the myriads whose bones are now bleached beneath the sun of Asia : they went in honour of His name, and thus He rewards them. "Then reflect upon domestic life, on the strife, hatred and uncharitableness, that, as sharp spears, pierce one's bosom at every turn ; think of jealousy, midnight murders, envy, want of faith, calumny, ingratitude, cruelty, and all which man in his daily sport inflicts upon man. Think upon disease, plague, famine, leprosy, fever, and all the aching pains our limbs sutler withal ; visit in thought the hospital, tlie lazar house; Oh! surely God's hand is the chasten* ing hand of a father, that thus torments his chil¬ dren ! His children i his eternal enemies ! look, I am one ! He created the seeds of disease, maremma, thirst, want ; he created man,—that most wretched of slaves ¡ oh ! know you not
what a wictch man is, ? and vvhat a store house of munite pain is this much-vaunted human soul? Look into your own heart; or, if that be too peaceful, gaze on mine ; 1 will tear it open for your inspection. There is remorse, halı ed, grief—overwhelming, mighty, and eternal mi¬ sery. God created me : am I the woik of a be¬ neficent being ? Oh, what spirit mingled in my wretched frame love, hope, energy, confidence, —to find indifference, to be blastc ' to despair, to be as weak as the fallen leaf, * r » he betrayed by all! Now I am changed,—I hate;—my energy is spent in curses, and if 1 trust, it is to be the more deeply wounded. " Did not the power you worship create tlie passions of man ; his desires which outlcap possibility, and bring iuiu upon his head? Did he not implant the seeds of ambition, re¬ venge and hate? Did he not cieate love, the tempter : he who keeps the key of that man¬ sion whose motto must ever be ÏMSciate oçtii yeranzu voi rhe ¿nt r ah And the imagination, that masterpiece of his main с , that .^piead» hone) on the cip that
you may drink poison ; that strews roses over thorns, thorns sharp and big as spears ; that semblance of beauty vvhich beckons you to the desart; that apple of gold with the heart of ashes ; that foul image, with the veil of excel¬ lence ; that mist of the maremma, glowing with roseate hues beneath the sun, that creates it, and beautifies it, to destroy you ; that diadem of nettles; tiiat spear, broken in the heart! He, the damned and triumphant one, sat me¬ ditating many thousand years for the conclu¬ sion, the consummation, the final crown, the seal of all misery, vvhich he might set on man's brain and heart to doom him to endless tor¬ ment ; and he created the Imagination. And then we are told the fault is ours ; good and evil are sown in our hearts, and ours is the tillage, ours the harvest ; and can this jus¬ tify an omnipotent deity that he permits one particle of pain to subsist in his worhl ? Oh, never, " T tell thee what ; there is not an atom of life in this all-peopled world that does not suf¬ fer pain ; we destroy animals ;—look at your own dress, vvhich ? mvriad of living creatines
wove and then died; those sable.*,—-a thousand hearts once beat beneath those skins, quenched in the agonies of death to furnish forth that cloak. Yet why not ? While they lived, those miserable hearts beat under the influence of fear, cold and famine. Oh ! better to die, than to suffer! The whale in the great ocean de¬ stroys nations of fish, but thousands live on him and torment him. Destruction is the watchword of the world ; the death by which it lives, Üıe despair by which it hopes : oh, surely a good being created all this ! " Let me tell you, that you do ill to ally yourself to the triumphant spirit of evil, leaving the worship of the good, vvho is fallen and de¬ pressed, yet who still lives. H e wanders about the world a proscribed and helpless thing, hooted from the palaces of kings, excommuni¬ cated from churches ; sometimes he wanders into the heart of man, and makes his bosom glow with love and virtue; but so surely as he enters, misfortune, bound to him by his enemy, as a corpse to a living body, enters with him ; the wretch who has received his influence, be¬ comes poor, helpless and deserted ; happy if he
be not burnt at the stake, vvhipt vvith iron, torn with red-hot pincers. "The Spirit of Evil chose a nation for his own ; the Spirit of Good tried to redeem that nation from its gulph of vice and misery, and was cruelly destroyed by it; and now, as the masterpiece of the enemy, they are adored to¬ gether; and he the beneficent, kind and sufleu ing, is made the mediator to pull down curses upon us. " Ilovv quick and secure are the deeds of the evil spirit; hovv slow and uncertain those of the good! I remember once a aood and learn- ed friend of mine telling me, that the countiy about Athens was adorned by the most exqui¬ site works man had ever produced; marble temples traced vvith divine sculpture, statues transcending human beauty; the art of man had been exhausted to embellish it, the lives of hundreds of men had been wasted to ac¬ complish it, the genius of the wisest had been employed in its execution ; ages had passed, while slowly, year by year, these wonders had been collected ; some were almost fallina VOL, III. D
through exceeding age, while others shone in their first infancy. Well:—a king, Philip of Macedón, destroyed all these in three days, burnt them, razed them, annihilated them. Tiiis is the proportionate energy of good and evil ; tlie produce of ages is the harvest of a moment; a man may spend years in curbing his passions, in acquiring wisdom, in becoming an angel in excellence ; the brutality of a fel¬ low creature, or the chance of war, may fell him in an instant ; and all his knowledge and \ ii tues become blank, as a moonless, starless night. ! " Euthanasia, my heart aches, and my spi¬ nti flag: I was a poor, simple gill; but I have »uftered much; and endurance, and bitter ex¬ perience have let me into the truth of things ; the deceitful veil which is cast over this world, i** powerless to hi ie its deformity from me. I see the cruel heart, which lurks beneath the beautiful skin of the pard ; I see the bhght ot autumn in the green leases of spring, the w ι inkles of age in the face of youth, rust on the Ыч nished non, 4oim in the very bicabtot
calm, sorrow in the heart of joy ; all beauty wiaps deformity, as the fruit the kernel ; Time opens the shell, the seed is poison." Tbe eyes of Beatrice shot forth sparks of ine as she poured out this anathema against the creation ; her cheeks were fevered with a hec¬ tic glow ; her voice, sharp and broken, which wa·* sometimes raised almost to íl shriek, and sometimes lowered to a whisper, fell on the brain of Euthanasia like a rain of alternate fiie and ice ; she shrunk and trembled beneath th« flood of terror that inundated and coujotinded her understanding : but the eloquent prophe¬ tess of Evil ceased at last, and, pale and ex¬ hausted, she sank down ; clasping Euthanasia ш her arms, she hid her face on her knees, and subbed, and wept : " Forgive me, if I have said that vvhicli appears to you blasphemy; I will unveil my heart to you, tell you my suffer¬ ings and surely you will then curse with me the author of my being." Euthanasia spoke consolation alone; slie bude her weep no more; that she need n> longer fear or hate ; that she might again love, hope and ti jst ; and tiiat she as a tender s'bter
would sympathize with and support her. The undisciplined mind of poor Beatrice was as a ihiwer that droops beneath the storm ; but, on tlie first gleam of sunshine, raises again its head, ev cn though the hail-stones and tlie wind might have broken and tarnished its leaves and it> tints. She looked up, and smiled ; " I will do all that you ill me ; I will be docile, good and affectionate;—I will be obedient to your small¬ est sign, kindest, dearest Euthanasia. Trust me, you shall make mc a Catholic again, il von will love me unceasingly for one whole vear, and in the mean time I do not die, 1 am very teachable, very, v ery tractable ; but 1 have suffered greatly, as one day you vviii know; for I vviii tell you every thing. Now, «nod bye ; I am very tired, and I think I shai! bleep." " Sleep then, poor creature; here is a couch icadyfor you; I will watch near you; and may your dreams be pleasant," " Give mc your hand then ; I will hold 'r whi'e I rest ; hovv small, and white, and soft it h ' Look at mine, it is yellow and dry; once it was like yours; I think it was rather smailei,
but never so well shaped; the tips of my fin¬ gers and my nails were never dyed by so roseate a tint as this, nor was tiie palm so silken .4 îţ. You are very beautiful, and very good, dear Euthanasia ; I hope you are, and will bt happy," Euthanasia kissed the forehead of this chiui of imagination and misery; and soon she slept, forgetful of all her sufferings. Euthanasia feit deeply interested in her; she felt that they were bound together, by their love for one vvho loved only himself; she thought over her w i'd denunciations; and, strange to say, she felt doubly warmed with admiration of the crea¬ tion, and gratitude towards God, at the mo¬ ment that Beatrice had pain teil its defects. She thought of the beauty of the w^id ami the wondrous nature of man, until her mind was raised to an enthusiastic sentiment of hap¬ piness and praise. " And you also shall сш b your wild thoughts," whispered Euthanasia, as she looked at the sleeping girl; " I will en¬ deavour to teach you the lessons of true reli¬ gion; and, in reducing the wandering thougiit·;
of one so lovely and so good, í shall be in part fulfilling my task on the earth." For several days after this conversation Beatrice became peaceful and mild, saying httle, and appearing complacent, almost con- ti'nt; she attended mass, told her beads, and trdked of going to confession. Euthanasia was astounded ; she was herself so steady in her principles, so firm in opinion and action, slow to change, but resolute having changed, that «■he w*as at a loss to understand the variabio feehngs and swift mutations of the poor, un¬ taught Beatrice. " Confess ! " she repeated ; " you promised tiiat I should convert you in a year; but you have already forsaken your Paterin opinions ! " " No, indeed, I have not ; but it is of so little consequence ; I would please you, dearest, by f-ecming what I am not ; not tbat I am sure that I am not vvhat you desire. You know, if God is good, he will forgive my errors : if he is evil, I care not to please him ; so I shall endeavour to please the virtuous and kind of this world, and you are one of those, my best
friend. Besides, now I think of it, this world seems too beautiful to have been created by an evil spirit; he would have made us all toads, the trees and flowers all mushrooms, and the rocks and mountains would have been huge, formless polypi. Yet there is evil ; but I will not trouble myself more about it; you shall form my creed ; and, as a lisping infant, with clasped hands, 1 will repeat my prayers after you." "Why so, dearest Beatrice? Why will you not recai the creeds of your childhood, as your adoptive parents taught them you r I cannot school you better than they." "My childhood!" cried the prophetess; her eyes becoming dark and stormy, " what to become again a dupe, a maniac ? to fall again, as I have fallen? Cease, cease, in mercy cease, to talk of my childhood ; days of error, vanity and paradise! My lessons must all be new ; all retold in words signifying other ideas than what they signified during my mad, bri< ť dream of youth. Then faith was not a shadow : it was vvhat these eyes saw; I clutched hope, and found it certainty ; I heard the angels ot
heaven, and saw the souls of the departed ; can I ever see them again ? " " Sweetest and most unfortunate, drive away memory, and take hope to you. Youth is indeed a dream ; and, if I spent it not in your extacies, yet believe me I was not then as I am now. 1 am older than you, and know life better; I have passed the feai ful change írom dream to reality, and am now calm, к bave known all your throes ; sometimes indeed they now visit me ; but I quench them, cast them aside, tread on them ;—so may you." " Never ! never ! " replied Beatrice : " 1 was born for wretchedness. When the fates twined my destiny, they mingled three threads ; the first was green hope, the second purple joy, the third black despair ; but the two first were very short, and soon came to an end ; a dreary line of black alone remains. Yet I would forget all that; and for many days I havebeen as calm as a bird that broods,rocked on her tree by a gentle wind; full of a quiet, sleepy hfe. Should this state continue longer, I might become -what you wish me to be; but I find my soul awakening, and I fear a
relapse ; I fear the return of tears aod endless groans. Oh ! let me wrap myself round you, my better angel, hope of my life ; pour your balmy words upon me ; lay your cool, health¬ ful cheek near my burning one, let our pulses beat responsive ! Oh ! that once I could be¬ come less feverish, less wild, less like a dark and crimsoned thunder-cloud, driven away, away, through the unknown wildernesses of sky." Euthanasia was glad to hear her sufîèring friend talk, however wildly ; for she observed that, vvhen she had exhausted herself in speech, she became calmer and happier; while, if she brooded silently over her cares, she became almost insane through grief. Occasionally she sought consolation in music; there wa* something magical in her voice, and in the tones she could draw from the organ or the harp : in her days tif glory it had been said, that she was taught to sing by angelic instruc¬ tors ; and now those remembered melodies remained, sole relics of her faded honours. The recollection of this sometimes disturbed her ; and she would suddenly break orT her D 5
song, and peevishly exclaim, that music, like tiie rest of the world's masks, contained the soul of bitterness within its form of beauty. " Not so, dear girl," said Euthanasia; " Eu¬ terpe has ever been so dear a friend of mine, that I cannot permit you to calumniate her unjustly ; there is tome an unalloyed pleasure in music. Some blessed spiiit, compassionate of man's estate, and loving him, sent it, to teacli him that he is other than what he seem» : it comes, like a voice from a far world, to tell you that there are depths of intense emotion veiled in the blue empyrean, and the windows of heaven are opened by music alone, h chastens and lulls our extacies; and, if U awakens grief, it also soothes it. But more than to lhe happy or the sorro vv fu l r 'music i·*. an inestimable gift to those who forget all sub¬ limer emotions in the pursuits of daily life. I listen to the talk of men ; I play with my embroidery-frame ; I enter into society : sud¬ denly high song awakens mc, and 1 leave ай tiiis tedious routine far, far distant ; ilişten, till all tbe world :s changed, and the beautiful earth becomes more beautiful. Evening and
all its soft delights, morning and all its refresh¬ ing loveliness ;—noonday, when the busy soul rests, like the sun in its diurnal course, and then gathering new strength, descends; all these, when thought upon, bring pleasure ; but music is far more delicious than the^e. Never do I feel happier and better, than when 1 have heard sweet music ; my thoughts often sleep like young children nestled in their cia- dles, until music awakens them, and they open îheir starry eyes. I may be mistaken; but music seems to me to reveal to us some ot the profoundest secrets of the universe ; and the spirit, freed from prison by its charms, chi then soar, and gaze with eagle eyes on ihe eternal sun of this all-beauteous world." Beatrice smiled.—Since her days of happi¬ ness had ended, Euthanasia's enthusiasm had become more concentrated, more concealed ; but Beatrice again awoke her to words, ano the.se two ladies, bound by the sweet tic* ι î gratitude and pity, found in eaeb othei's run- verse some balm for their misfortunes. ( li¬ eu instances had thus made friends of thoM whom nature seemed to separate: they weie
much unlike ; but the wild looks of Beatrice sometimes reflected the soft light of Euthana¬ sia's eyes ; and Euthanasia found her heart, vvhich was sinking to apatiiy, awake again, as she listened to Beatrice. And, though we may be unhappy, we can never be perfectly wretched, while the mind is active ; it is inac¬ tion alone that constitutes true wretchedness. In the mean time her owm journey to Flo¬ rence was put orT indefinitely. She was too much interested in tbe fate of Beatrice, and already loved her too well, to desert her ; the poor prophetess appeared little capable of the journey, since the most trifling circumstance would awaken her wildest fancies, and fever and convulsions followed. Once indeed Eu¬ thanasia had mentioned her wish to go thither ; Beatrice looked at her with flashing eyes, and cried, " Did you not promise never to desert me r Are you faithless also r " " But would you not accompany me г " " Do you see tbat river that flows near L icca ? " exclaimed Beatrice. " I fancy that u has flowed through the self-same banks these гллпу thousand years ; and sooner will it desert
tbem, than I this town. See you that cypress, tliat grows towering above all its neighbour trees in that convent-garden, I am as firm to tiiis soil as that ; I will never leave this place but by force, and then I die." She said these words in her wildest manner ; and they were followed by such an annihila¬ tion of strength, and such symptoms of fever f that Euthanasia did not agam dai e mention her removal lo Florence, She also suffered less by her continued stay at Lucca ; for the feelings of her heart vvere so completely ab- soi bed in pity and love for Beatrice, that the pamful ideas of many years' giovvth seemed rooted out by a new and mightier power. She was so httle sclhSh, that she could easily forget her own sorrows, deep as they were, in her sympathy tor the unhappy prophetess, who had suíľeied evils tremendous and inemedi able. Castruccio often 4cnt to learn of the welfare ot this poor giri, and Euthanasia answeied his enquiries with exactness. She did thb ; for she thought tbat pei haps the fu tın e de^tinv of Beatrice was in his hands, and that he nu-dit
engraft life and even happiness on the blighted plant. One day Beatrice went out, It was the first time she had quitted the palace; and Eutha¬ nasia was vexed and anxious. After an ab¬ sence of some hours she returned ; she was clothed in a great coarse cloak that entirely disguised her ; she put it off*; and, trembling, blushing, panting, she threw herself into the arms of her protectress. " I have seen him ! I have seen him ! " " Calm yourself, poor fluttering bird ; you have seen him : well, well, he is changed, much altered ; why do you weep : " " Aye, he is changed; but he is far moie beautiful than ever he was. Oh, Euthanasia, liow radiant hovv divine he is! liis eyes, which, like the eagle's, could outga/e the sun, vet melt in the sweetest love, as a cloud, sinn¬ ing, yet soft; iiis brow, manly and expansivt·, on vvhich his raven curls rest; his upturned lips, where pride, and joy, and love, and wis¬ dom, and triumph live, small -spirits/ ready to obey l/is smallest will ; and his head, cinctured
by a slight diadem, looks carved out by the in- tensest knowledge of beauty ! How graceful his slightest motion ! and his voice,—-bis voice is here,-----" Beatrice put her hand upon her heart ; her eyes were filled with tears; and the whole expression of her face was softened and hu¬ manized. Suddenly she stopped ; she dried her eyes; and, fixing them on Euthanasia, she took her two hands m hers, and looked on her, as if she would read her soul. " Beautiful crea¬ ture," sbe said, " once he told me thathe loved vou. Did he not ? doe* he not : AV by are v uu separated ." do vou not love him ? " " J did; once 1 did truly; but he has ca« t ofl* that whieh was m v love; and, hke a flower plucked from the *talk, it ha·*· vv ithcred—a» you ьее it." " Aye, tbat is stiange, \\ hat did he u> r . ..HV' " Why will vou make me speak r He са.ч (»ft* humanity, honc*4tv, honourable feeling, aU tbat í pri/c." ·' Formt?, foi ть,— meie fonns, my n'iakcn i.uthanasia. líe unnamed, and waa not vhat
ev r ery thing ? Methinks, it would please me, that my lover should cast off all humanity, and be a reprobate, aod an outcast of hL species. Oh ! then how deeply and tenderly I shouK" love him ; soiled with crimes, his handb dri- - ping blood, I would shade him as the flow ering shrub invests the ruin ; I would cover him with a spotless veil ;—my intensity of love would an¬ nihilate his wickedness;—everv one would hate him ;—but, if all adored him, it would not come near the sum of my single aifection. 1 should be every thing to him, life, and hope ; he would die in his remorse; but he would live agun and again in the light of my love; I would invest him as a silvery mist, so that none should see hovv evil he was ; I would pour out before him large draughts of love, that he should become drunk vvith it, until he grcw r good and kind. So you deserted this glorious being, and he has felt the pangs of unreqaited aflection, the helpless throes of love cast as water upon the sand of the deseit í Oh, indeed I pity him ! " " Behove me," cried Euthanasia, " he has other affections. Glory and conquest aie his
mistresses and he is a successful lover ; already be has deluged our vallies m blood, and turned our habitations into black and formless ruins ; he has torn dovvn the banners of the Floren¬ tines, and planted his own upon tbe towers of noble cities ; I believe, him to be happy." " Thank God for that; I would pour out my blood, drop by drop, to make him happy. But he is not married, and you have deserted him; I love him; he has loved me; is it im¬ possible— ì Ob! foolish, hateful wretch that I am, vvhat do I say ? No creature was ever so utterly undone ! " Beatrice covered her face with her hands ; her struggles vvere violent; she shrunk from Eu¬ thanasia's consoling embrace : and at length, quite overcome, she sank in convulsions on the pavement of the hall. Her paroxysm was long and fearful ; it was succeeded by a heavy le¬ thargic sleep ; during the first part of vvhich she was feverish and uneasy; but, after some hour**, her cheeks became pale, her pube beat slovvri, and her breath was drawn regularly. Euthanasia watchtd beside her alone : when
bhe found that she was sleeping quietly and deeply, she retired from her bedside; and, sit¬ ting at some distance, she tried to school her¬ self on the bitter feelings that had oppressed her since die morning. Euthanasia was so self- examining, that she never allowed a night to elapse without recalling her feelings and ac¬ tions of the past day ; she endeavoured to be simply just to herself, and her soul had so long been accustomed to this discipline, that it eaöily laid open its dearest secrets. Mis¬ fortune had not dulled lier sense of right and wrong; her understanding was still clear, though tinged by the same lofty enthusia&m which had ever been her characteristic. She now searched her soul to find what were the feelings which still remained to her concerning Castruccio; she hardly knew whether it was hate or love. Hate! could she hate one, to whom once she had delivered up all her thoughts, as to the tribunal of her God, whom she bad loved аь one to whom she was willing to unite herself for ever? And could she love one, who had deceived her in her dearest hopes,
*л ho had lulled her on the brink of a precipice, to plunge her with greater force to eternai un¬ happiness ì She felt neither hatred, nor revenge, nor contempt colder than either ; she felt grief alone, and that sentiment was deeply engraven on her soul.
CHAPTER IV. Beatrice's Narrative. She was awakened from this reverie by the voice of Beatrice, who called to her to com e near. " I am quite recovered," she said, " though weak ; I have been very ill to-day, and I am frightened to think of tiie violence of my sensations. But sit near me, beloved friend; it is now night, and you will hear no sound but my feeble voice ; while I fulfil my promise of relating to you my wretched history." " Mine own Beatrice, do not now vex your¬ self with these recollections ; you must seek calm and peace alone ; let memory go to its grave." " Nay, you must know all," replied Beatrice, peevishly ; " why do you balk me ? indeed I do best when I follow my ow r n smallest incli¬ nations ; for, when I try to combat them, I
am again ill, as I was this morning. Sit be¬ side me; I will make room for you on my couch ; give me your hand, but turn away your soft eyes ; and now I will tell you every thing. *' You know that I loved Castruccio ; how much I need hardly tell ; I loved him beyond human love, for I thought heaven itself had in¬ terfered to unite us. I thought—-—alas 1 it U with aching pain that I recollect my wild dream:·:,—that we two were choeen from the rest of the world, gifted with celestial faculties. It appeared to me to be a dispensation of Pro¬ vidence, that I should have met him at the full height of my glory, when I was burning with triumph and joy. I do not think, my own jľu thanasia, that you can ever have experi¬ enced the vigour and fire of my sensations. Victory in an almost desperate struggle, suc¬ cess in art, love itself, are earthly feelings, sub¬ ject to change and death; but, when these three most exquisite sensations are bestowed by the visible intervention of heaven, thus giving security to the unstable, and eternity to what is fleeting, such an event fills the over-
brimming cup, intoxicates the brain, and ren¬ ders her who feels them more than mortal. " Victory and glory I had, and an assurance of divine inspiration ; the fame of what I was, was spread among the people of my country ; then love came, and flattered, and softened, and overcame me. Well, that I will pass over : to conceive that all I felt was human, com¬ mon, and now faded, disgusts me, and make> me look back with horror to my lost paradise. Castruccio left me; and I sat 1 cannot tell how long, white, immoveable, and in tranced ; hours, I believe days, passed; 1 cannot tell, for in truth I think I was mad. Vet I was silent ; not a word, not a tear, not a sound escaped me, until some one mentioned the name of Cas¬ truccio befoie me, and then 1 wept. 1 did not rave or weep aloud ; 1 crept about like a sha¬ dow, brooding over my own thoughts, and trving to divine the mystery of my destiny. " At length I went to my good father, the bishop; I knelt dovvn before him : * Kise, dear child/ he said ; * hovv pale you are ! wbat ha* quenched the fire of your brilliant eyes r' "'Father, holy father/ I replied, 'I will
not rise till you answer me one question/— My looks were haggard with want of rest; my tangled locks fell on my neck ; my glazed eyes could scarcely distinguish any object. " ' My blessed Beatrice/ said the good old man, ' you are much unlike yourself: but speak ; I know that you can ask nothing that I can refuse to tell." " 'Tellme then, by your hopes of heaven,* I cried, * whether fraud was used in tlie Judge·* went of God that I underwent, or how I es¬ caped the fearful burning of the hot shares.' " Tears started in my father's eyes ; he rose, and embraced me, and, lifting me up, said with passion,—* Thank God! my prayers aie ful¬ filled. Beatrice, you shall not be deceived, vou will no longer deceive yourself; and do not be unhappy, b' , joy that the deceit is re¬ moved from you, and that you may return from vonr wild and feverish extacies to л true and real piety/ " < This is all well,* I replu ' calmly ; ť but tell me truly hovv it happened.' " * That I cannot, my child, for I was myself kept m the dark ; I only know that fraud was
roost certainly practised for your deliverance. My child, we have all of us much erred ^ you Jess than any ; for you have been deceived, led away by your feelings and imagination to be* lieye yourself that which you aie not.' u I will not repeat to you ail that the bishop laid ; it was severe, but kind. First he sliewed me, how I had deceived myself, and nourished 'extacies and transports of the soul vvhich were in no way allied to holiness ; and then he told jne how I must repair my faults by deep humility, prayer, and a steady faith in that alone which others taught, not what I myself imagined. I listened silently ; but 1 heard every word ; I was very docile ; ï believed ail he said ; and although my soul bled with its agony, I accused none, none but myself. At first I thought that I would tell my countrymen of their deception. But, unsupported by ray supernatural powers, I now shrunk from ali display ; no veil, no walk ould conceal me suf¬ ficiently ; for it could not hide me from my¬ self. My very powers of speech deserted me, tnd-1 could not articulate a syllable ; I listened, my eyes bent on the earth, my cheek pale ^ 1
listened until I almost became гоагЫв, At length the good old man ceased ; and* with many words of affectionate comfort, he bade me go and make firm peace with my own heart, and that tben he hoped to teach me a calm road to happiness. Happiness İ surely I must have been stone ; for I neither frowned in deâpite, nor laughed in derision, when that term was applied to any thing that I could hereafter feel. I kissed his hand, and with¬ drew. " Did you ever feel true humility ? a pro¬ stration of soul, that accuses itself alone, and asks pardon of a superior power with entire penitence, and a confiding desertion of all self- merit, a persuasion intimate and heartfelt of one's own unworthiness ? That was what I felt ; I had been vain, proud, presumptuous ; now 1 fell to utter poverty of spirit ; yet it was not poverty, for there was a richness in my pe¬ nitence which reminded me ofthe sacred text, that says < Oh, that my head were water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears ! ' "Then succeeded to tins mental humiliation, a desire to mortify and punish myself for my vol. nî. * к
temerity and mistakes. 1 was possessed by a spirit of martyrdom. Sometimes I thought that I would again undergo the Judgement of God fairly and justly: but now I shrunk from public exhibition ; besides, the good bishop had strongly reprobated these temptations of God's justice. At other times I thought that I would confess all to my excellent father ; and this perhaps is what I ought to have done; what would really have caused me to regain a part of the calm that 1 had lost ; but I could not ; womanly shame forbade me ; death would have been a far preferable alternative. At length an i ilea struck me, that seemed to my overstrained feelings to transcend all other peni¬ tence; a wretchedness and anguish that might well redeem my exceeding sins. " Think you that, while I thus humbled myself, I forgot Castruccio? Never! the Iovq I bore him clung around me, festered on my "лш1, and kept me ever alive tti pain. Love him! t adored him; to whisper his name only in solitude, where none could hear my voice but my own most attentive ear, thrilled me with· tran'oort. I tried to banish him my
thoughts ; he recurred in my dreams, which I could not control, I saw him there, beautiful as his real self, and my heart was burnt by my emotion. Well ; it was on this excess of love that I built my penitence, which was to go as a pilgrim and ask alms of you. Eutha¬ nasia! I only knew your name; the very idea of seeing you made me shiver. I was three months before I could steel my heart to this resolve, I saw none ; I spoke to none ; I was occupied by my meditations alone, and those were deep and undermining as the ocean. " Well ; as I have said, I dwelt long and deeply upon my plan, until every moment seemed a crime, that went by before I put it in execution. Tbe long winter passed tbiľ*; my poor mother, the lady Marchesana, watched me, as a child might watch a favourite bird fluttering in the agonies of death. She saw that some mysterious and painful feeling op¬ pressed me, tbat I no longer appeared in pub¬ lic, that I shunned the worship of my admirers, that tbe spirit of prophecy was deaad within me ; but I was silent, and reserved ; and her reverence for me (Good angeb! her reverence E *Z
for me!) prevented any enquiries. In the spring the bishop Marsilio was promoted to another see, and he was obliged to go to Avi¬ gnon to receive the investiture· Excellent and beloved old man ! he blessed me, and kissed me, and with words of affectionate advice departed. I have never seen him more. " When he was gone, the labour of my de¬ parture was lightened; and in gentle and hesi¬ tating words I told my best and loved mother that I had vowed a pilgrimage to Rome ; she wished to accompany me. Those were heart¬ breaking scenes, my Euthanasia, when I left all my friends, all who loved me, and whom I bad ever loved * I knew that î should never .see them again. How did I know this ? In truth, after having performed my vow vvith regard to you, I intended to visit the sepul¬ chres at Rome; and I might then bave return¬ ed. I was no.prophetess ; and yet I felt that mine was not a simple pilgrimage, but an eter¬ nal separation from all former associations, from every one I had ever known. Thus, boneless of future good, I deserted all that yet rendered life in any degree sufferable : I did
this to satisfy my sense of duty, to do homage to the divinity by some atonement for his vio¬ lated laws : I did this ; and henceforward I was to be an outcast, a poor lonely shrub on a bleak heath, a single reed in a vast and over¬ flowing river. " I had known too much luxury in my youth ; every one loved me, and tended on me ; I had seen about me eyes beaming with affection, smiles all my own, words of deep interest and respect, that had become to me a second na¬ ture. I departed alone at four in the morning from Ferrara by the secret entrance of the viscountess's palace, on a clear and lovely day in the spring. I was dressed as the meanest pilgrim, and I carefully hid my white hands and fair cheeks, which might have betrayed my way of life during the past; except indeed when I was alone,—then I loved to throw off my cloak, to bare my arms, my face, my neck to the scorching sun-beams, that I might the sooner destroy a delicacy I despised : the work was quickly done ; a few hours exposure to the sun of noon burnt up my skin, and made it red and common.
" The first day was one oí unmixed pain ; the sun parched my frame ; my feet were blis¬ tered, my limbs ached ; I walked all day, until bodily fatigue lulled my mental anguish, for I was unhappy beyond all words. Alone, de¬ serted by God and man, I had lost my firm support, my belief in my own powers ; I had lost my friends ; and I found, that the vain, self-sufBcing, cloud-inhabiting Beatrice wasin truth a poor dependent creature, whose heaj t sunk, when in the evening she came to a clear brook running through a little wood, and she found no cup to drink, and no dainties to sa¬ tisfy her appetite. 1 dragged my weaiy limbs three miles further, to an hospital for pilgrims, and repined over my coarse fare and coarser bed :—J, the ethereal prophetess, who fancied that I coula feed upon air and beautiful thoughts, who had regarded my body but as a servant to my will, lo hunger and thirst only at I bade it, " Alone! alone ! I travelled on day after day, in shoit, but wearibome journeys, and I (dt the pain of utter and forced solitude ; the burn¬ ing мш shone, nnd ihr dewt ΙλΙΙ at evening,
but there was no breeze, no coolness to refresh me; the nights were close, and my limbs, dried with the scorching of the day, and stiff with walking, burned all night as if a furnace had glowed within them. Were these slight evils ? Alas ! I was a spoiled child, and I felt every pain as an agony. " I fell ill ; I caught cold one evening, when just after sunset I threw myself down to rest under a tree, and the unwholesome dew fell upon me. I got a low fever, which for a long time I did not understand, feeling one day well, and the next feverish, cold, and languid. Some attendant nuns at an ho&pital found out my disorder, and nursed me ; I was confined for six weeks ; and, when I issued forth, little of the fire of my eyes, or of the beauty the lady Marchesana used to Ivell upon, out-lived this attack.—I was yellow, meagre,------a shadow of what I had been. " My journey to your castle was very long. I crossed the Apennines during the summer, and passing through Florence I arrived, at Pistoia in the beginning of June. But now my iieart again faib-d ; I heaid uf your name, yom
prosperity, your beauty, the respect and ado¬ ration you every vvhere excited : it was a double penance to humble myself before so excelling a rival, ii' you had been worthless, a self-contenting pride would have eased my vvouRd-i, but to do homage to my equal—oh! to one far my superior,—was a new lesson to my stubborn soul. I remained neariy three months at Pistoia, very unhappy, hesitating,— cast about, as a boat that for ever shifts its sail, but can never find the right wind to lead it into poii. "I visited you in September; do you re¬ member my coming? do ^ α remember my hesitating gait, and low and trembling voice? I was giddy—sick—I thought that death was upon me, for that nothing but that great change could cause such an annihilation of my powers, such an utter sinking of my spirit. A cold dew stood upon my forehead, my eyes were glazed and sightless, my limbs trembled as with convulsions. Castruccio loved you ! Castruccio ! it is long since 1 have mentioned his name : during this weary journey never did his lov ed image for a moment quit its temple,
its fane, its only home, that it still and for ever fills. Love him ! it was madness ; yet I did ; —yet I do;—»put your hand upon my heait, —does it not beat fast r " Euthanasia kissed poor Beatrice's forehead ; and, after a short pause, she continued : " My penance was completed, yet I did not triumph ; an unconquerable sadness hung over me ; miserable dreams haunted my sleep ; and their recollected images strayed among my day-thoughts, as thin and grim ghosts, frighten¬ ing and astounding me. Once,—I can never forget,—I had been oppressed for several days by an overpowering and black melancholy, for which I could in no manner account ; it was not regret or grief; it was a sinking, an anni¬ hilation of all my mental powers in which í was a passive sufferer, as if the shadow of some mightier spirit was cast over to darken and depress me. 1 was haunted as by a prophecy, or rather a sense of evil, which I could neither define nor understand. Three evenings after, as I sat beside a quiet spring that lulled me almost to insensibility, the cause of my mourn¬ ful reveries suddenly flashed across me; u E ¿
stalked on my recollection, as a terrific and gi¬ gantic shadow, and made me almost die with terror. The memory of a dream flashed across me. Again and again I have dreamed this dream, and always on the eve of some great mis¬ fortune. It is my genius, my dæmon. What was it ? there was something said, something done, a scene pourtrayed. Listen attentively, I intreat; there was a wide plain flooded by lhe waters of an overflowing river, the road was dry, being on the side of a hill above the level of tiie plain, and I kept along the path which declined, wondering if I should come to an insurmountable obstacle ; at a distance be¬ fore me they vvere driving a flock of sheep ; on my left, on the side ofthe hill, there was a ruined circuit of wall* which inclosed the dilapidated houses of a deserted town j at some distance a dreary, large, ruinous house, half like a cas« tie, yet without a tower, dilapidated, and over¬ grown with moss, was dimly seen, islanded by the flood on which it cast a night-black shade ; the scirocco blew, and covered the sky with fleecy clouds; and the mists in tbe di¬ stance hovered low over the plain ; a bat above
me wheeled around. Then something hap¬ pened, what I cannot now tell, terrific it most certainly was ; Euthanasia, there is something in this strange world, that we none of us un¬ derstand. " Euthanasia, I came to that scene ; if I live, I did ! I saw it all as I had before seen it in the slumbers of the night. Great God, what am I? 1 am frailer than the first autumnal leaf that falls ; I am overpowered." She paused sobbing with passion ; a cling¬ ing horror fell upon Euthanasia ; they were for a long time silent, and then Beatrice in a low subdued voice continued : " I had returned to Florence j I iiad passed through Arezzo ; I had left Tlnasymene to the north ; I had passed through Perugia, Foligno, and Terni, and was descending towards the plain surrounding Rome ; the Tiber had over¬ flowed, the whole of the low country was un¬ der water; but 1 proceeded, descending the mountains, until, having passed Narni, I саше to the lowest hill which bounds the Campa¬ gna di Roma ; the scirocco blew ; the mists were on the hills, and half concealed lhe head
of lone Soracte ; the white waters, cold and dieary, were spread far, waste and shelterless ; on my left was a high dark wall surrounding a ruined town—I looked,—some way beyond I saw on the road a flock of sheep almost lost in the distance,—my brain was troubled, I grew dizzy and sick—when my glazed eyes caught a glance of an old, large, dilapidated house blanded in the flood,—the dream flashed across my memory ; I uttered a wild shriek, and fell lifeless on the road. " I again awoke, but all was changed : I was lying on a couch, in a vast apartment, whose loose tapestries waved and sighed in the •wind ;—«-near me were two boys holding torches which flared, and their black smoke was driven across my eyes; an old woman was chafing my temples.—I turned my head from the light of the torches, and then I first saw my wicked and powerful enemy : he leaned against the wall, observing me ; his eyes had a kind of fascination in them, and, unknowing what I did, hardly conscious that he was a human creature, (indeed for a time it appeared to me only a continuation of my dream,) I gazed on
his face, which became illuminated by a proud triumphant, fiendlike smile,—I felt sick at heart, and relapsed into a painful swoon. " Well : I promised to be brief, and I go on dwelling on the particulars of my tale, un¬ til your fair cheek is blanched still whiter by fear. But I have said enough, nor will I tell that which would chill your warm blood with horror, I remained three years in this house ; and what I saw, and what I endured, ia a tale for the unhallowed ears of infidels, or for those who have lost humanity in the sight of blood, and not for so tender a heart as yours. It has changed me, much changed me, to have been witness of these scenes; I entered young, I came out grey, old and withered ; I went in innocent; må, if innocence consist in igno¬ rance, I am now guilty of the knowledge of crime, which it would seem that fiends alone could contrive. " What was he, w r ho was the author and mechanist of these crimes ? he bore a human name ; they say that his lineage was human ; yet could he be a man ŕ During the day he was absent ; at night he returned, and his roofs
rung with the sounds of festi vity, mingled with shrieks and imprecations. It was the carnival of devils, when we miserable victims were dragged out to— " Enough î enough ! Euthanasia, do you wonder that I, who have been tiie slave of in¬ carnate Evil, should have become a Paterin ? " That time has passed as a dream. Often my faculties were exerted to the utmost ; my energies alive, at work, combating ;—but 1 struggled against victory, and was ever van¬ quished. I have seen the quiet stars shine, and the shadow of the grated window of the hall lie upon the moon-enlightened pavement, and it crawled along silently as I had observed it in childhood, so that truly I inhabited the same worid as you,—yet how diffèrent ! Ani¬ mal life was tlie same; the household dog knew, and was at last obedient to my voice ; the cat slumbered in the sun ;—what was the influence that bung alone over the mind 'of man, rendering it cruel, hard and fiendlike ? " And who was the author of these ills ? There was something about him that might be called beautiful ; but it was the beauty ofthe
tiger, of lightning, of the cataract tliat destroys. Obedience waited on his slightest motion ; for he made none, that did not command ; his followers worshipped him, but it was as a sa¬ vage might worship the god of evil. His slaves dared not murmur;—his eyes beamed with irresistible fire, his smile was as death. I hated him; and I alone among his many victims was not quelled to submission. I cursed him—I poured forth eloquent and tumultuous male¬ dictions on his head, until I changed his de¬ tested love into less dreadful, less injurious hate. Yet then I did not escape ; his boil¬ ing and hideous passions, turned to revenge, now endeavoured to wreak themselves in my misery. These limbs, my Euthanasia, have been wrenched in tortures ; cold, famine and thirst have kept like blood-hounds a perpetual watch upon my wearied life ; yet I still live to remember and to curse. "But, though life survived these rending struggles, my reason sank beneath tbem ΐ¬ ί became mad. Oh ! dearest friend, may you never know what I suffered, when I perceived the shadow of a false vision overpower me, and my sickening throes, when the bars of my
dungeon, its low roof, and black thick air, would, as it were, peer upon me with a sti¬ fling sense of reality amidst my insane trans¬ ports. 1 struggled to recall my reason, and to preserve it; I wept, I prayed;—but I was again lost ; and the fire that dwelt in my brain gave unnatural light to every object. But 1 must speak of that no more ; methinks 1 again foel, what it is madness only to recollect. " I told you tbat I remained for three years in this infernal house. You can easily ima¬ gine how slowly the days and nights succeeded one to another, each adding to my age, each adding one misery more to my list. Still I was the slave of him, who was a man in form alone, and of his companions, who, if they did not equal him in malice, yet were more vile, more treacherous, than he. At length the Pope's party besieged the castie. The many crimes of its possessor had drawn on him the hatred of the country round ; and the moment tliat a leader appeared, the whole peasantry flocked as to a crusade to destroy their oppres¬ sor. He was destroyed. I saw him die, calm, courageous and unrepenting. I stood alone near his couch of blood-stained cloaks thrown
in a heap upon "the floor, on which when he staggered into the room he had fallen ; he asked me for a cup of water ; I raised his head, and gave him to drink ; he said—- f I feel new strength, I shall be better soon/ And, saying those words, he died. " I was novv free. I arose from the floor on vvhich 1 knelt ; and dividing from my eyes my hair dabbled in his blood, I cut oft' with his dagger the long and dripping locks, and threw them on his body. I disguised me in the clothes of one of his pages, and hid myself, until by the submission of his followers the outlet from my prison should be free. As I said before, it was more a vast palace than a castle, being without towers or battlements ; but it was fortified by numberless ditches and other obstacles, apparently small, yet which, defended by slingers and archers, became al¬ most impregnable. But vvhen the chief died, these were deserted ; and the partners of his rapine and his feasts filled the air with their savage lamentations. The fortress was taken ; and I escaped to lhe mountains, the wild,
wild mountains,—I sought them as a home ufter my long and painful imprisonment. " I was novv free. The ilex trees shaded me; the waters murmured beside me; the sweet winds passed over my checks. I felt new life. I was no longer a haggard prisoner, the despairing victim of others* crimes, the in¬ habitant ofthe dark and blood-stained walls of a house, which hedged me in on all sides, and interrupted the free course of my health even in sleep. I was again Beatrice ; I again felt the long absent sensations ofjoy : it was para¬ dise to me, to see the stars of heaven, unim¬ peded by the grates of my dungeon-windows, to walk, to rest, to think, to speak, uninter¬ rupted and unheard. 1 became delirious with joy ; I embraced the rough trunks of the old trees, as if they were my sisters in freedom and delight;—I took up in my hand the sparkling waters of the stream, and scattered them to the winds ;—I threw myself on the earth, I kissed the rocks, I raved with tumultuous pleasure. Free î free ! I can iun, until my strength fails ; I can rest on π mossy bank, until my strength
leturns ; I hear the waving of the branches ; I sec lhe flight of the birds ; I can lie on the grassy •floor of my mother-earth so long unvisited; and I can call nature my own again. It was autumn, and the underwood of the forest had strewn the ground with its withered leaves; the arbutus-berries, chesnuts, and other fruits satisfied my appetite, I felt no want, no fatigue ; the common shapes of this world seemed arrayed in unusual loveliness, to wel- come and feast me on my new-found liberty. " I wandered many days, and penetrated into the wild country of the Abruzzi. But I was again lost : I know not vvhat deprived me of reason thus, when 1 most needed it. Whe¬ ther it were the joy, or the sudden change, at¬ tendant on a too intense sensation of freedom, vvhich made me feci as if I interpenetrated all nature, alive ami boundless, ϊ have recollec¬ tion.«, as if sometimes I saw the woods, the <ncen earth, and blue sky, and heard the roar- αψ of a iniphty watcifal vvhicli splashed me with 'us cold waters : but there is a blank, as of a deep, lethiii«ic *dcep; and many weeks
passed before I awoke again, and entered upon the reality of life. " I found myself in a cavern lying on the ground s It was night; and a solitary lamp burned, fastened to the wall of the cave ; the half-extinguished ashes of a fire glimmered ia а recess ; and a few utensils that appeared to have been intended for the preparing food, seemed to mark this as a human habitation. It was dry, and furnished with a few benches and a table, on which lay bread and fruits. I felt as if I had become the inhabitant of the dwelling of a spirit ; and, vvith a strange, half- painful, half-pleasurable feeling, I raised an apple to my lips, tiiat by its fragrance and taste I might assure myself that it was earthly. Then again I looked around for some fellow- creature. I found a narrow passage from my cave, which led to an inner apartment much smaller and very low ; on the ground, on a bed of leaves lay an old man : his grey hairs were thinly strewn on his venerable temples, his beard white, flowing and soft, fell to his gir¬ dle ; he smiled even in his sleep a gentle smile
of benevolence. I knelt down beside him ; methought it was ray excellent father, the lord Marsilio ; but that there were greater traces of thought and care upon the fallen cheeks and wrinkled brow of this old man. " He awoke : ' My poor girl/ he said, ' what would you ? ' " i I wish to know where I am, and what I do here ? ' " My words convinced my good protector, that the kindly sleep into which his medicines had thrown me, had restored my reason ; and, it being now day-break, he arose, and opened the door of his cave. It was dug under the side of a mountain, covered by ivy, wild vines, and other parasites, and shaded by ilex trees ; it opened on the edge of a small grassy plat¬ form, with a steep wall of rock behind, and a precipice before : the mountain in which it was scooped, was one of many that inclosed a rugged valley ; and, from one spot on the plat¬ form, I could distinguish a ma^ of waters fall¬ ing with a tremendous crash, which were after¬ wards hidden by the inequalities of the moun-
tain, and then vvere seen, a turbid and swift rivei'j at the bottom of the valley. The lower ¿ides ofthe mountain were covered with olive Woods, wliose seagreen colour contrasted widi the dark ilex, and tlic fresh-budding leaves of a few chesnuts. I felt cold, and the mountain had just begun to be tipped by the rising sun ; it seemed as if no path led to or from the plat¬ form, and that vve vvere ohut out from tbe whole world, suspended on the side of a rocky mountain, " This cavern had been an hospital for me during the long winter months. The old man had found me straying wildly among the forests complaining of the heavy chains that bound me, and the wrongs and imprisonment that 1 sufici ed. lic, poor wretch, was an outcast of his species, a heretic, a Paterin, who hid him¬ self in the woods from the fury of the prient-· who would have destroyed him. He led me tohibca r *e; be tended me a-i tbe kindet fa¬ ther; he restored me to leason, and even then did not desert mc. He lived here quite alone ; no one was intrusted with the sccict of hi*- re-
treat ; at night, muffled up and disguised, lie often went to seek for food, and again hastened back to peace and solitude. " I partook his solitude for many months : at sunrise we quitted our dwelling, and enjoyed the fiesh air, and the view of the sky and the hills, until the sight of the first countryman in the vale below warned us to retire. On moon¬ light nights we sat there ; and, while she, lady of the night, moved slowly above us, and the stars twinkled around, we talked, and, in our conversations of faith, goodness and power, his doctrines unveiled to me, what had before been obscure, and fiom him I learned that creed which you hold in detestation, but which, be- heve me, has much to be said in its behalf. " Look, dear Euthanasia, daylight has made dim the glimmer of youi lamp, and bids me remember how often I have forgotten my pro¬ mise to be bnef in my relation; it is now al¬ most finished. 1 soon gieatly loved my kind j-uaithan; he was the gentlest and most amia¬ ble of mortals, wise as a Grecian sage, fearless and independent, ile died ín torture: the bloodhound^ hunted him from his den; they
bound liis aged limbs ; they dragged him to the stake. He died without dread, I would fain believe almost without pain. Could these things be, oh, my preserver, best and most excellent of men ? It were well befitting, that thou shouldst die thus, and that I lived, and still live. " It were tedious to relate how all this pass¬ ed ; how I wept and prayed ; how I escaped, and, half maddened by this misery, cursed the creation and its cruel laws. The rest is all uninteresting; I was returning from the task of carrying the last legacy of this old man to his daughter at Genoa, when I was seized in this town by the Inquisitors, and cast into prison,——you know the rest. " And now, dearest friend, leave me. Hav¬ ing related the events of my past life, it makes me look on towards the future ; it is not enough to rise every day, and then lie down to sleep ; I would look on what I may become with firmness ; I know that no creature in the whole world is so miserable as I ; but I have not yet drained the cup of life ; something still remains ţo be done.
Cb. IV.] VALPERGA. 97 " Yet one word, my Euthanasia, of Him vvho İs the law of my life ; and yet I dare not say vvhat I thought of saying. You write to him about me sometimes ; do you not ? You may still ; I would not check you in this. In truth he is the master of my fate ; and it were well that he knew all that relates to me." Poor Beatrice then wept bitterly; but she waved her hand in sign that she would be left alone; and Euthanasia retired. Slie had not slept the vvhole night, but she felt no inclination to rest. The last words of Beatrice seemed to imply that she wished that Castruccio should know her story ; so she sat down, and wrote an abstract of it, while her eyes often filled with tears, as she related the wondrous mise¬ ries of the ill-fated prophetess.
VOL, III.
F
CHAPTER V. Beatrice resoltes to take the Feit, — Euthana* sia visits Florence. Ox the following day Beatrice seemed far moie calm. Euthanasia-had feared, thatthe reviving the memory of past sorrows, might avvalga the frenzy from which she had before suffered j but it was not so. She had pined for confidence; her heart was too big to close up in secrecy all the mighty store of unhappiness to which it wab conscious ; but, having now communicated the particulars to another, she felt somewhat relieved. She and Euthanasia walked up and down the overgrown paths of the palace-garden ; and, as Beatrice held her friend's hand, after a silence of a few minutes she said : " I do not like to pry into the secrets of my
own heart ; and yet I am ever impelled to do it. I was about to compare it to this un weed¬ ed garden ; but here all Ís still ; and the pro¬ gress of life, be it beautiful or evil, goes on in peace : in my soul all jars,—one thought strikes against another, and produces most vile dis¬ cord. Sometimes for a moment this ceases ; and would that that state of peace would en¬ dure for ever : but, crash !—comes in the stroke of a mightier hand, vvhich destroys all harmony and melody, alas! that may be iound in your gentler heart ; in mine all recollection of it even is extinct." "I will tell you how this is, my sweet Bea¬ trice," replied Euthanasia, play fully. " I will tell you what the human mind is; and you shall learn to regulate its various powers. The human soul, dear girl, is a vast cave, in vvhich many powers sit and li\e. First, Conscious¬ ness is as a centinél at the entrance ; and near him wait Joy and Sorrow, Love and Hale, and all the quick sensations that through his means gain entrance into our hearts. " In the vestibule of this cavern, still illu¬ mined by the light of day, sit Memory vvith
banded eyes, grave Judgement bearing her scales, and Reason in a lawyer's gown. Hope and Fear dwell there, hand in hand, twin sis¬ ters ; the first (Ше elder by some brief mo¬ ments, of ruddy complexion, firm step, eyes eagerly looking forward, and lips apart in ear¬ nest expectation,) would often hurry on to take her seat beside Joy ; if she were not held back by Fear, tlie younger born - t vvho, pale and trembling, would as often fly, if Hope held not her hand, and supported her ; her eyes are ever turned back to appeal to Memory, and you may see her heart beat through her dim i obe. Religion dwells there also, and Charity, oi- sometimes in their place, their counterfeits or opposites, Hypocrisy, Avarice and Cruelty. " Within, excluded fiom the light of day, Conscience sits, vvho can see indeed, as an owl, in the dark. His temples are circled by a di¬ adem of thorns, and in his hand he bears a whip ; yet bis garb is kingly, and his counte¬ nance, though severe, majestical. " But bevond all this tiiere is an inner cave, ciifficutt of access, rude, strange, and danger¬ ous. Few visit this, and it is often barren
and empty ; but sometimes (like caverns that w*e read of, which are discovered in the bo¬ soms of the mountains, and exist in beauty, unknown and neglected) this last recess is de¬ corated with the strongest and most wondrous devices;—stalactites of surpassing beauty, stores of unimagined wealth, and silver sound**, vvhich the dropping water makes, or the cir¬ culation of the air, felt among the delicate crystals. But here also find abode owls, and bats, and vipers, and scorpions, and other dead¬ ly reptiles. This recess receives no light from outward day ; nor has Conscience any autho¬ rity here. Sometimes it is lighted by an inborn light; and then the birds of night retreat, and the reptiles creep not from their holes. But, if ibis light do not exist, oh ! then let those beware who would explore this cave. It is hence that bad men receive those excuses for their crime«, which take the whip from tbe hand of Con¬ science, and blunt his sharp crown ; it is hence that the daring heretic learns stiange secret*. This is the habitation of the madman, when all the {Wers desert the vestibule, and he, find¬ ing no light, makes darkling, fantastic combi-
nations, and liveö among them. From thence there is a short path to hell, and the evil spirits pass and repass unreproved, devising their temptations. " But it is here also that Poetry and Imagi¬ nation live; it is here that Heroism, and Self- sacrifice, and the highest virtues dwell, and here they find a lore far better than all the les¬ sons of the world ; and here dwells the sweet reward of all our toil, Content of Mind, who crowned with roses, and bearing a flower- wreathed sceptre, rules, instead of Conscience, tho r dmitted to her happy dominion." Euthanasia talked thus, trying to give biith in the mind of Beatrice to calmer ideas ; but it was in vain ; the poor girl listened, and when her friend had finished, she raised her eyei heavy with tears. "Talk no more in tbi strain," she said ; " every word you utter tell me only too plainly what a lost wretch I an Ño content of mind exists for me, no beauty ( thought, or poetry ; and, if imagination live, is as a tyrant, armed with fire, and venom« darts, to drive me to despair." A torrent of tears followed these wore"
and no caresses or consolation could soothe her. Soon after, Euthanasia received an answer from Castruccio to the letter in which she had sketched Beatrice's unhappy story. Ile la¬ mented the misfortunes, which through his means had overwhelmed the poor prophetess. " I know," he continued, " of no refuge or shelter for her, if it be not in your protecting affection. If she were as when I knew her, her own feelings might suggest a cloister, as tiie last resource л* one so outraged and so miserable as she is. But she is a Paterin; and, until she be reclaimed from this detestable heresy, she is shut out from the consolations of our religion." " And he writes thus coldly of this ruined temple, which was once all that is fair anil beautiful ! Ah ! I wonder not," thought Eu¬ thanasia, " that he cast away my affection», since he can spare no deeper sympathy for Beatrice. She does not 'interfere with his am¬ bition or his designs ; it is therefore hardness of heart alone which dictates his chilling councils." At this moment Beatrice entered. To see that
beautiful creature only (for beautiful she still wasin spite of calamity and madness), was to be¬ hold all that can be imagined of soft and lovely in woman, soft and lovely, yet wild, so that, while you gazed vvith delight, you feared. Her low brow, though its fairness were tarnished by the sun, still gleamed beneath her raven-black hair; her eyes, which had reassumed some of their ancient gentleness, slept as it were be¬ neath their heavy lids. Her angry look, which vaas lightning, her smile, which was as para¬ dise, all elevated her above her fellow crea¬ tures ; she seemed like the incarnation of some strange planetary spirit, that, robed in flesh, felt uneasy in its bonds, and longed to be away on the wings of its own will. She spoke with trepidation : " Do not blush, my friend, or endeavour to conceal that paper ; 1 know what it is ; and, if you care for my peace of mind, if you love me, if the welfare of my almost lost soul be dear to you, let me see that writing." " There is no consolation for you in it," re¬ plied Euthanasia, sadly. "Nay, of that I alone can judge; look, I
kneel to you, Euthanasia; and do you deny me ? I intreat you to give me that paper." "My own Beatrice, do not torture me thu?: if I do not shew it you—Never mind : here it is ; read it, and know vvhat Castruccio is." Beatrice read it with a peaceful air; and then, folding it up, said composedly;—" I see no ill in this; and his will shall be done. It is a strange coincidence, that I had aiready decided on what he advises ; and I trust he will be glad to find that the wandering pro¬ phetess again seeks her antient path of religion and peace. I must explain these things to you, my Euthanasia. I know that you wish to re¬ move to Florence : I can never leave tliis town. I shall never see him again, hear him speak, or be any thing to him; but to live within the same walls, to breathe the air of heaven vvhich perhaps has hovered near him, this is a joy which I will never, never forego. My reso¬ lution is fixed: but you perish here; and would find loving and cherished friends there, where he can never come, I would not detain von ; 1 have chosen the mode of my future destiny, and planned it all. The convent nearest to his F ó
palace is one of nuns dedicated to San Mi¬ chele. I have already sent for the confessor ot that convent; through him I sball make my peace with the church ; and, when he believes rne sufficiently pure to become an inhabitant of those sainted walls, I shall enter myself as a novice, and afterwards become a nun of that order. I intreat you, dearest, to stay only till my vows are made, vvhen, wholly dedicated to heaven, I shall feel less an earthly separation." She spoke in a hurried, faltering voice, and dosed her speech in tears ; she threw herself into Euthanasia's arms, and they both wept. —"Oh ! no, unhappy, but dear, dear Beati ice, indeed you shall not leave me. I can be of little use now in the world to myself or others ; but to cheer you, to teach you, as weli as my poor skill will permit, the softest path to hea¬ ven, these shall be my tasks ; you shall never leave me," Beatrice disengaged herself from the arms of Euthanasia ; and, casting up her eyes, with that look of inspiration vvhich seemed to seek and find converse with the powers above, she «aid: "1 thank you from the depth of my
heart, and may God bless you as you deserve, divine Euthanasia ; but I am fixed. Alas ! my mind is as the waters, novv lashed into waves by the winds of circumstance, novv coldly dark under a lowering heaven, but never smiled upon by the life-giving sun. And thie perishable frame is to my soul as a weak, tem¬ pest-beaten promontory, against which the Libeccio impels the undermining sea. I shall soon perish : but let my death be that of the holy ; and that can alone be in the sohtude of a cloister : that is the consummation of my fate. Oppose me no more : has not he pro¬ nounced ? And I will obey his word, as if he vvere my king, my lord, my------ Speak not ; contradict me not; you see vvhat a fragile being i am." And now this Beatrice ? this Paterin, vvho had so lately with heartfelt hatred told the tale of all the miseries that arc buffered under the sun, and curbed tbe author oi' them, became аь docile to the voice of tbe priest, hs a seven« years-old child. The confessor for whom she had sent, found it no diflicult task to turn her mind to the reception of his tenets ; and prayer
and penitence became again for her the law of the day. She never went out ; she remained >ecluded in Euthanasia's palace; and, widi her beads in her hand, her wild eyes turned heavenwards, she sought for peace, and she found at least a respite from some of the dread¬ ful feelings that had hitherto tormented her. In the mean time " the mother ofthe months" had many times waned, and again refilled her horn ; and summer, and its treasure of blue skies, ori orou s flowers, merry insects, and sweet-voiced birds, again bade the world be happy. The peasant prepared the threshing floor, choosing a sunny spot which he caie· fully cleared of grass and weeds, and pouring water on it, beat it, till it was as hard as a barn- floor in the north. The ploughs, whose tough workmanship Virgil describes, lay useless beside the tilth, now filled with the rising corn : the primroses had faded ; but one began to scent the myrtle on the mountains; the innu¬ merable fireflies,*loving the green wheat, made a second heaven of twinkling stars upon a ver¬ dant floor, or, darting among the olive copses, formed a faiiy scene of the sweet Italian night ;
tiie soft-eyed oxen reposed in their stalls ; and the flowers ofthe chesnuts and olives had given place to the young, half-formed fruit. This is the season that man has ever chosen for the destruction of his fellow-creatures, to make the brooks run blood, the air, filled with the carol¬ ling of happy birds, to echo also to the groans and shrieks of the dying, and the blue and se¬ rene heaven to become tainted with the dew which the unburied corpse exhales; winter were Bellona's fitting mate ; but, no ; she hangs about the neck of summer, who would fain shake her off* as might well be expected for so quarrelsome a briile. Castruccio now possessed the whole territory of Lucca and several other circumjacent pro¬ vinces, in peace and obedience. But his eye·*. were always turned towards Florence; and his most ardent wish was to humble, if not. possess himself of, that city. He made an¬ other step towards it diiring the summer. The abbot of Pacciami got by popular favour cntir** power in Pistoia; he used this iu behalf of Castruccio, turning out the Florentine amba*- fcadors, and giving up to the prinee of Luc* ι
many of the strong-holds and towers of the Pis¬ toia!! territory. Castruccio was possessed of the fortresses placed on the mountain which overlooked the town, vvhere he hovered, like a hawk over his prey, ready to pounce, delaying only for the destined minute. During this summer also he conceived some hopes of taking Pisa. The Lead of the govern¬ ment there, vvho reigned entirely through the affections of the people, suddenly offended his masters; he was decapitated; and the various parties in the town, running to arms, entered into a bloody warfare. At this moment Cas¬ truccio appeared with his army on the hill of St. Giuliano: this sight pacified the combat¬ ants; they elected a new lord, and turned their powers towards resisting the common enemy. Castruccio retreated to Lucca; but he was so moved by the overthrow of the Pisan chief, that, resolving to trust no more, as he had hitherto done, to the afiections of his people, he erected in the same year a strong fortress within the walls of his city, which he called Agosta. He spared no expence or labour in it ; and it was considered by all as the most
magnificent work ofthose days : it was situated in that part of the town which looks towards Pisa, surrounded by a strong and high wall, and fortified by thirty towers. The inhabit¬ ants of a whole quarter were turned out of their dwellings, to make room for this new symbol of tyranny ; and here he, his family, and followers, lived in proud security. Towards the end of the month of June, Euthanasia, who had hltheito been occupied in attending to the sorrows of Beatrice, re¬ ceived information, tha. one of her most va¬ lued Florentine fiiends was dangerously ill, and earnestly desired her attendance. She mentioned this to her guest; and Beatrice, ever variable, was then in a docile mood. She had long listened with deep and earnest faitii to the lessons of 'Padre Lanfranco, the confes¬ sor ofthe convent to which she was about to ι etiie. It would seem that this old man hu¬ moured warily and wisely her disturbed un¬ derstanding; for she appeared at peace with herself and others : if she now wept, she did not accuse, as she had before done, Him who had created the fountain of her tears.
" Go, kind friend," said she to Euthanasia ; * go ; but return again. Remember, I claim your companionship, until 1 take the veil,—- then you are free. Methinks, I should like to be left now in utter solitude, I could commune more intensely with tlie hopes and heavenly gifts that I entertain. Go ; blessed spirit of Good, guardian Angel of poor Beatrice, poor in all but gratitude,—you shall not see your work marred on your return ; you will still find me the good, obedient child, which I have been, novv, I think, for more than a month." Euthanasia left her with pain, and with a mournful presentiment; but, as all wore the aspect of peace, she thought herself bound to obey the voice of friendship, and to see, per¬ haps for the last time, one vvho had been the friend and companion of her early youth; and she departed for Florence. There were fur her too many associations allied to the Val di Nievoìe, to pei mit her to choose that route. Besides Castruccio's army occupied the passes, and she feared to meet him. Sir; accordingly went round by Pisa. Nothing could be more beautiful than the count γ ; the low Pisan hi lb
covered with chesnut and olive woods, inter¬ spersed with darker patches of pine and cork (while, among all, the cypresses raised their tapering spires), and, crowned by castles and towers, bounded in a plain of unparalleled fer¬ tility. The com was cutting, and the song of the reapers kept time as it were with the noisy cicale in the olive trees, and the chirping birds. Peace, for the first time for several years, sat brooding with outspread wings over the land ; and underneath iheir blessed shade sprung joy and plenty. Euthanasia arrived at Florence. She found her friend recovered ; but all her acquaintance, who had eagerly expected her arrival, were much disappointed when they heard that it was her intention to return to Lucca. She however both loved and pitied Patrice too much, to be wanting in any of the duties of friendship towards her. After a month's resi¬ dence in her natal and beloved city, she agam departed from Florence. In tbe mean time what had become of the ill-fated prophetess ?
CHAPTER VL Beatrice meets Tripalda — is led by Bindo to the Witch's Саге. THE Albinois Bindo had been greatly struck by the appe" nee of Beatrice. There was a wildness in her countenance and gestures that excited his curiosity ; and he seemed to feel instinctively that she had about her the marks of one who dealt with unerabodied spirits. He had ventured to speak to his mistress con¬ cerning her; but be learnt nothing except that Ferrara was her native town. With this slight information he visited his friend, the witch, and they canvassed the subject together. *' Her eye sees beyond this world," said Bindo ; " if you were to look on her, you would find a companion in your art. I have discovered that there is a mysterious connexion betwen her and the prince : he liberated her when she was imprisoned by the Dominican
fathers, as a Paterin, they say, but I suspect that it was for magic." " At any rate," replied the witch, " there is a mystery in this that I will clear up. I will go to Ferrara, and learn vvho and what she is. Expect me back in less than a month ; in the mean time watch her ; watch every word and action; something may come of this." The witch went to Ferrara. She traversed the hills, and went by unknown paths, and across the untrodden mountain«, guided cither by her former experience, or by the arch fiend himself; for it required almost supernatural knowledge to trace her way among tbe heaped and confused range of the Apennines. Slie walked at night, and rested during the day, and saw the sun many times rise and set among the wild forests that covered the hills. At Fer¬ rara she learnt what she desi ι ed : Beatrice, the Aneilla Dei f the prophetess, was not for¬ gotten ; even her connexion with Castruccio had been guessed at; and some even dared assert, that she had never q* itted Lucca, or the palace of the prince, during her pretended pilgrimage to Rome. The witch returned,
joyful to tiiink tbat she had now obtained an instrument for some of her projects. What vvere her projects? They had not that settled aim and undeviating course which one object might inspire. Her desire was ma¬ lice; and her present hope, to impress upon Bindo some notion of the powers to which she pretended. She had been young once ; and her nature, never mild, had been turned to ferocity by wrongs which had been received so long ago, that the authors of them were all dead, and she, the victim, alone survived. Calumny had blasted hei name; her dearest affection« had been blighted ; her children lorn from her ; and she remained to execrate and to avenge. Her evil propensities had long exhausted themselves in acts of petty mischief among the peasantry ; but her connexion with Bindo gave her hopes of a wider scope for wickedness. To injure Castruccio, or to benefit Euthanasia, was alike indifferent to her. She saw and un¬ derstood more of the human heart than Bindo did : sbe knew, that Euthanasia had once loved the prince ; and injuiy to him she hoped would carry a double sting. She was old, perhaps
about to die ; and she thought that there would l>e a pleasure m expiring amidst the groans ot the victims of her malice. In diese days, when the passions, if they are not milder, are more resti amed, and assume a more conventional appearance, it will be doubted if such fiendish love of mi&chief evt r existed; but that it did, all tradition and his· tory prove. It was believed, that the vvitth loved evil as her daily bread, and that she had sold her soul to the dev il to do ill alone ; «//<» knew how powei less she was ; but she desired to fill in everv part the chai acter attributed to her. As she returned over the Apennines, she planned her fu tuie conduct ; sîıe thought she saw one mighty nun envelop three mattet - spirits of the human kmd, plotted hv bei alone. It was a dangerous experiment. " But I must die," she cued ; "and vvhat death will be sweeter, even if it be in the midst of flames, it so many share the torments vvitli me ? And thou, puny aboitton, wbo daie^t vvith trem¬ bling hands meddle in wmk bevond thet·, thou uUo shalt ťcV-te the poison so long withheld'
A canker cling to you all ί I have long sought for labour suited to my genius ; and now I have found it." It was on lhe day previous to the departure of Euthanasia for Fknence, that the witch re¬ turned : she met Bindo w ith a gha&tly smile. " All," she cried, " is as you wish ; the star of Castruccio will be extinguished behind the murky cloud which this same Beatrice wiil raise. Bring her to me ; in time you shall know all: but be w T aiy; the countess must be blind and deaf to our machinations/' Euthanasia had departed, leaving Beau ice far calmer than she had befoie been smce Lei release from prison. But no feehngs vvere more fluctuating than those of the poor prophetess. The day after she had palled from her pio- tectress,Padre Lanfianco had been called upon urgent business to Sienna ; and she was leit without a guide to the workings of hei own mmd. She could not stand this ; the conso¬ lations of Euthanasia, aiid the exhortations of tiie priest were alike forgotten ; and Beati ice, turned out, as it weie, without shelter, fell mto repinings and despair.
She had ardently desired to see Castruccio; but her confessor had commanded her to avoid all occasions of meeting him, if she wished to fit herself for the holy lite to vvhich she said she felt herself called. Beatrice was easily led ; but she had no command over herself; and, the moment she was left to her own guidance, she was hurried away by the slightest impres¬ sion. Castruccio had just returned from Pistoia on the news of the insurrection of Pisa ; and it was said that he would again quit Lucca on the following morning. " Now or never," thought Beatrice, " I may have my will unreproved ; if this day escape, I am again surrounded, en¬ chained ; I might see him, hear his voice; obi that I had courage to make the attempt ! Yet I fear tliat this may be the suggestion of some evil spirit; I must not, dare not see him." She wept and prayed ; but in vain. In her days of extatic reverie slie had sanctified and obeyed every impulse as of divine origin ; and now she could not withstand the impressions she felt. She wrapped a coarse capuchin
around her, and sallied forth, with trembling steps, and eyes gleaming with tears, to go and gaze on the form of him for whom she had sacrificed her all. Hardly had she proceeded two paces from Euthanasia's palace-gate, be¬ fore a form—a man—passed before her, and with a loud shriek she fell senseless on the pavement. She was brought back to the house, and carefully nursed ; but sev eral day« elapsed, while, still possessed vvith fever, she raved of the most tremendous and appalling scenes and actions, which she fancied were taking place around her. The man whom she had seen was Tripalda ; and from what she said in her delirium, it might be gathered, tbat he had been an actor in the frightful wrongs she had endured during her strange imprison¬ ment in the Campagna di Roma. She vvas attended on with kindness, and she recovered ; and such was the effect of her delirium, that she persuaded herself that what had so terrified her, was a mere vision conjured up by her ima¬ gination. She thought that the vivid image of this paitner of iier enemy's crimes, thin
coming across her while slie was on the point of disobeying her confessor's injunction, was a warning and punishment horn heaven. Euthanasia was away, and Beatrice dared not speak to any : she brooded in her ow n mind over the appearance, mysterious as she thought it, of ihis man; until her fancy was so high wrought, that bhe feared her very shadow on the wall ; and the echo of her own Черь as she trod the marble pavement of her cham¬ ber, made her tremble with teiror ; the scenes bhe had witnessed, the hoi ror*» that she lai J endured in that unhallowed alluni of enmc, presented themselves to her in their most viviu colours; she remembered all, saw all; and the deep anguish she felt was no longer miti¬ gated by converse with her fiieud. if Oh, cruel, unkind Euthanasia î ** bhe cried, " why did vou leave me: My only hope, my only trust was in you ; and you desert ma. Alas! alasi I am a broken reed, and nore* will support ше ; the winda biow, ami I am prostrated to the ground ; and, if 1 ibe again, 1 am bruised, almost annihilated. " Oh î that I could die ! and yet I fear VOI III. u
death. Oh ! thou, who wert my teacher and saviour, thou vvho expiredst smiling amidst flames, would that thou wert here to teach me to die! What do I in this fair garden of the world ? I am a weed, a noxious insect ; would that some superior power would root me out utterly, or some giant-foot tread me to dust! Yet I ask for what I do not wish. Was he a good God that moulded all the agonizing contradictions of this frail heart ? " Yet hush, presumptuous spirit ! recall no more those lessons, which I hoped had been forgotten. Father ! God ! behold the most miserable and weakest of thy creatures; teach me to die ; and then kill me ! " She sat in the neglected garden of the pa¬ lace, on one of the pedestals which had been placed as a stand for the pots containing lemon- trees ; fehe leaned her head upon her hand, while the tears trickled down unheeded. It had been her delight, ever since her arrival at Lucca, to rove in this wild garden ; and some¬ times, when the sun had been long set, and the sound of the Are Maria had died away, she would sit there, and, fixing her eyes on
the brightest star of the heavens, would sing the remembered melodies of her childhood. Nothing recalls past feeling so strongly as the notes of once-loved music ; the memory was almost too much for her ; and her eyes stream¬ ed tears, as she sang the sweetest lay that mortal ear had ever heard. Euthanasia had listened, she loved to listen, to her wild airs; and, as Beatrice saw her own deep emotions reflected in the beaming eyes of her friend, she felt soothed. But she w*as now alone ; she felt the solitude ; she felt, that she sang, and that none heeded her song : but, as the violet breathes as sweet an odour on the indif¬ ferent air, as vvhen the loveliest creature in the world bends over it to inhale its fragrance ; so did Beatrice now sing in solitude, while, her heart warmedj her imagination expanded, and -he felt a transport which was pleasure, although a sea of black despair was its near boundary. As she sang, Bindo came near her unper¬ ceived. He had never addressed her before ; and she had never observed him : she was one of those persons, who feel their own life and identity so much, that tbey seem to have.no G г
spare feeling and sense for the uninteresting events and persons that pass around them. lie now spoke in a loud voice, arousing her from her deep reverie : ťí Awake, prophetess ; it is not well that you should sleep; the spirits of the air have work for you ; ail Tuscany feels your super¬ human presence." Beatrice stai ted, and gazed with surprize on the being who thus addressed her: his dwarf¬ ish stature, his white hair and eyelashes, his pale and wrinkled face, and his light reddish eyes gave him a strange appearance ; he looked indeed like one of the spirits whose existence he asserted ; and sbe shuddered as she beheld him. " I come," continued Bindo, "from one, whose eye can .-«ее the forms that pass, to me viewless, through the air; from one, wdio has thunder and tempert like dogs in а к ash, and vvho can wind aud unwind the will of man, as the simple gii I spins thread from her distaiľ, 1 bear a message to you." " Of whom do you speak ? 1 do not under¬ stand you."
" You vviil understand her words ; for be¬ tween the girted there are signs, vvhich none etse know, but which bind them fast together/' " Are you one of those г " asked the wonder¬ ing girl. "I am not," replied Bindo; "you know that I am not, thougii I did not tell you. Are you not Beatrice, the prophetess of Ferrara ? But my words arc weak. There is one vvho lives in a cavern not far off) who was called, when young, Fior di Ligi, and now she calls herself Fiordi Mandragola; she rules the spi¬ rits who live about us, and is powerful over the seasons, and over the misfortunes and sor¬ rows of life. She bade me tell vou to awake ; this night I will lead you to her ; and she will by her incantations take off the veil which spi¬ rits of darkness have thrown over you." " You talk of nothing ; who are you ì " "lama servant of the countess of Valper¬ ga ; nothing more ; a poor, ignorant, despised dwarf, a blight, a stunt: but I am more pow¬ erful in my weakness, than they with their giant limbs and strong muscles ;— at least I have tbat strength, as long as I am obedient to her of
whom I spoke« These are the words she bade me say to you,— ť There is a cloud over you which words of power can dispel; you are that which you seemed, and not tiiat which you believe ;—come to the cavern of Fior di Mandragola ; and she will restore you to that height,.from which the ignorance of others, and your own want of faith have precipitated you." " And who is Fior di Mandragola ì " "A witch,— a woman with grey hair and decrepid limbs; she is clothed in rags, and feeds upon acorns and wood-nuts ; but she is greater than any queen. If she were to com¬ mand, this blue sky would be covered with clouds, the Serchio would overflow, and the plain of Lucca heave with earthquake; she makes men fear they know not what ; for by her command spirits tug them by the hair, and they shiver with dread. One only she cannot cpmmand j one will, one fortune, one power cannot be controled by her; but your star surmounts his.—*So, come, that you may know how to rule him." "Whom?"
" The prince of Lucca." " Away ! you know not what you say." " I obey ; speak not of this to the countess ; I will be at your chamber-window by mid¬ night." Bindo retreated, leaving Beatrice startled and trembling. She did not rely on his wild creed ; but she felt аз if it might be true. She had once believed in tiie command of man over supernatural agency; and she had thrown aside that creed, when she lost her faith in her own powers. She ran rapidly in her thoughts over all that had occurred to her of this nature^ her extacie3, her delirious and joyous aspira¬ tions,—they were more dead and cold, than the white ashes of a long-extinguished fire ;— but other events had occurred, and she had felt inexplicable emotions which seemed to link her to other existences. She remembered her dream 5 and, covering her eyes witii her hands, she endeavoured to recai what words and forms had been revealed to her oa that occasion— ·*-*->. vainly ; the attempt served only more to shake a reason already tottering. It awoke her how¬ ever from her unbelief; and she again felt those
deep and inquisitive thoughts, that had for many years been the life of her being. She resolved to visit Fiordi Mandragola ; she knew not why, but curiosity was mingled with the desire of change antl freedom ; she thought that it would be delightful to visit at midnight the witch's cave, guided by the strange Albinois. Beatrice was left alone to her own reflections tor the whole evening ; they were ever dread¬ ful, except when tbe vivacity of her imagina¬ tion mingled rainbows with the tempest. Night came ; and, wrapping a capuchin around her, she mounted the horse that Bindo had brought, and followed him across the countiy, towards the mountains which divide the Lucchese from the Modenese territory ; the dark forests extended into the valley, con¬ trasting their black shadows with the dun hues of the low country; the stars shone keenly abov e. They rode swiftly ; but the way was long ; and it was two o'clock before they arrived at tbe witch's cave, it was a dreary habita¬ tion : and now, as the shades of night fell upon it, it appeared more desolate than ever; the pines made a sorrowful singing above it; the
earth around was herbless; and a few pine cones lay about, mingled with the grey rock that here and there peeped above the soil. The witch sat at the door of the hovel. She was a strange being : her person was short, almost deformed, shrivelled and dried up, but agile and swift of motion ; her brown and lea¬ thern face was drawn into a thousand lines ; and the flesh of her cheeks, thus deformed, seemed hardly human ; her hands were large, bony, and thin ; she was unlike every other ani¬ mal, but also was she unlike humanity, and seemed to form a species apart, which might well inspire the country people with awe. When she saw Beatrice, she arose, and ad¬ vanced towards her, saying, " Wbat do you here, child of a sleeping power ? Come.you here to teach, or to learn the secrets of our art ? " " 1 come at your own request," replied Bea¬ trice, haughtily ; " if you have nothing to say to me, I return," "I have much to say to you," said Man¬ dragola ; " for I would awaken a spirit from lethargy, that can command us all. You are the mistress of those, of whom I am the slave ; G δ
will it, and a thousand spirits wait your bid¬ ding; look, like subdued hounds they now crouch at your feet, knowing that you are their superior, it is my glory to obey them,— how far do you transcend me!" "You talk in riddles, good mother ; I see no spirits, I feel no power." u And if you did, would you be here ì Here, at the cavern of a poor witch., who, spelling her incantations, and doing such penance as would make your young blood freeze but to bear it, just earns a power hardly gained, quickly to be resigned. But you could ride the winds, command the vegetation of the earth, and have all mankind your slaves. ï ask you whether you did not once feel that strength ? For a moment you were eclipsed j but Üıe influence of the evil planet is well nigh gone, and you may now rule all,—will you ac¬ cept this dominion f " "Your words appear idle to me ; give them proof, and I will listen." " Consult your own heart, prophetess ; and that will teach you far more than I can. Does it aot contain strange secrets known only to
yourself? Have you never owned a power, which dwelt within you> and you felt your own mind distinct from it, as if it were more wise than you; so wise that you confessed, but could not comprehend its wisdom? Has it not revealed to you that, which without its aid you never could have known ? Have you not seen this other self?" <( Stop, wonderful woman, if you would not madden me," screamed the poor terrified Bea¬ trice. (t That is the key, the unbreakable link of my existence; that dream must either place me above humanity, or destroy me." <c You own this power ? " cried the witch triumphantly. " Send away the Albinois, and I will teU you all. [At the beck of tbe witch Bindo with¬ drew,] Yet 1 gasp for breath, and fear pos¬ sesses me. What do you tell me of power f I feel that I am ruled ; and, when this dream comes over me, as it now does, I am no longer myself. 1 dreamed of a flood, of a waste of white, sţill waters, of mountains, of a real scene which í had never beheld. There was a vast, black house standing in the midst öf the water ;
a concourse of dark shapes hovered about me ; And suddenly I was transported into a boat , which was to convey me to that mansion Strange ! another boat like to mine moved be¬ side us ; its prow was carved in the same man¬ ner ; its rowers, the same in number, tbe same in habiliment, struck the water with their oars at the same time with ours ; a woman sate near the stern, aghast and wild as I ;— but their boat cut the waves without sound, their oars splashed not the waters as they struck them, and, though the boats were alike black, yet not like mine did this otiier cast a black shadow on the water. We landed together ; í could not walk for fear ; I was carried into a large room, and left alone ; 1 leaned against the hangings, and there advanced to meet ше another form. Itwas myself; I knew it; it stood before me, melancholy and silent; the very air about it was still. I can tell no more ; —a few minutes ago I remembered nothing of all this ; a few moments, and I distinctly re¬ membered the words it spoke ; they have now- faded. Yes ; there is something mysterious in my nature, vvhich I cannot fathom."
Beatrice shivered ; her face was deadly pale, and her eyes were glazed by fear. The witch Iiad now tuned her instrument, and she pro¬ ceeded to play on it with a master's hand. " Heavenly girl," she said, " I acknowledge myself your slave. Command me and my pow¬ ers, as you will ; they will do all you bid them ; —but that is little. There are other spirit?, which belong not to the elements, but to the mind and fortunes of man, over which I have no sway, but which are attendant upon you, Fear not ! The revelations you have received are almost too tremendous for your weak hu¬ man frame; but gather strength ; for your body and your spirit may master all the kings of the earth. That other self, which at one time lives within you, and anon wanders at will over the boundless universe, is a pure and immediate emanation cf the divinity, and, as such, com¬ mands all creatures, be they earthly or ethereal. As yet you have cen it only in a dream ; hav faith, and Сле codi -.ciousness of its presence wiU visit your waking reveries." Beatrice sighed deeply, and said : " I wa» in hope that my part was done, and that í
should die without more agitation and fear ; but I am marked, and cannot combat with ray destiny. Strange as is the tale which I have just related, I cannot believe what you say : and, though doubtless there are other exist¬ ences, of which we know nothing, yet I do not believe tliat we can have communication vvith, and far less power over them, I would fain preserve the little reason I have still left me ; and tbat tells me that what you say is false." " But if I can prove it to be true r " «How?" " Ask what you will ! Would you see the cloudless sky become black-and tempestuous 't Would you hear the roaring of the overflow¬ ing waters, or see the animals of the forest con¬ gregate at my feet ? Or, would you exert your own power ? Would you draw towards you by your powerful incantations, one whom you wish to see, and who must obey your call r If you speak, all must obey ; ihe prince himself, the victorious Castruccio, could not resist you," The burning cheeks, and flashing eyes of the prophetess, shewed the agitation tiiat this
proposal excited in her heart Poor girl î she still loved ; that wound still festered, ever un· healed. She would have risked her soul, to gain a moment's power over Castruccio» She paused ; and then said, " In three days I will tell you what I wish, and what I will do." "In the mean time swear never to reveal this visit, this cavern, or my name : swear by yourself." " A foolish vow,—by myself I swear." " Enough ; you dare not break that oath." The witch retreated into her cave; and Bindo came forward to conduct Beatrice home. She was faint and tired ; and day dawned before they arrived at the palace of Euthanasia. The three following days were days of doubt and trepidation for the unfortunate Beatrice. At one moment she utterly discredited the pre¬ tensions of Mandragola ; but then her imagi¬ nation, that evil pilot for her, suggested, Yet, ifit should be so! and then she would picture forth the scenes she desired, until she gasped vvith expectation. At last, she thought,— " There will be no barm in the experiment ; if her promises are vain, no injury will result;*—»
if true—To be sure I know they are not ; but something will happen, and at least I will try. "I know that Euthanasia, and more than she, Padre Lanfranco, wou ld tell me, that, if irue, this woman deals vvith tbe devil, and that I, who have lately saved my soul from his grasp, should bew*are of trusting myself within his reach. All this is well to children and old women ; but 1 have already tempted the pow¬ ers above me too far to flinch now. Am I not, was I not, a Paterin r Euthanasia, who has never wandered from the straight line of her duty, and Lanfranco, who has learned his mo¬ rality in a cloister, cannot know what it mos>t becomes an excommunicated wretch like me to do. " Yet I am very ungrateful and wicked, when I say this ; ungrateful to their prayers, wicked in transgressing the laws which God has promulgated. " Wiiat does this woman say ì that I shall see him, that he will obey my voice, and that, not by magic art, but by that innate power, which, by the order of the universe, one spirit possesses over another :—tbat I shall see him,
as I have seen him !—Oh, saints ofheaven, suf¬ fer mc not to be tempted thus ! But no,—the iieavenly powers deign not to interfere ; they know my weakness, my incapacity to resist,— but, like most careless guardians, they permit that to approach which must overcome me. I am resolved ; she shall guide me ; if nothing come (а-з most surely nothing will come), it imports not. And, if I am destined for one moment more in this most wretched life to taste ofjoy, others may (but I will not) dash the in¬ toxicating draught away." She thought thus, and spoke thus to her se¬ cret mind ; but every hour her resolution fluc¬ tuated, and remorse, hope, and dread possess¬ ed her by turns. She feared to be alone; but the presence of an indifferent person made her nerves tremble with the restraint she was obliged to keep upon herself. There seemed юта link of confidence between her and Bin- do; and she called for him to dispel the appall» ing sensations with whicii solitude inspired her, He came; and his conversation only tended to increase her chaos of conflicting thoughta. He related the wonderful exploits of Mandra-*
gola ; how he had seen her call lightning and cloud from the south, and how at her bidding the soft western wind would suddenly arise, and dispel the wondrous tempests she had brew¬ ed : how the planet of night obeyed her, and that, once during the full moon, this planet had suddenly deserted the sky, but that, while the heavens were blank and rayiess, its image con¬ tinued to lie placidly in the stream near which they stood. He related tiie strange eflects she had produced upon the minds of men, forcing them most unwillingly to do her pleasure ; at other times depriving them of their senses, so that for many hours they wandered about like madmen, until at her command their faculties were restored to them. Beatrice listened, half in disdain, half in fear ; her conclusion still was,—." The experiment is worth trying ; if her words be false, there is no harm done; if true*'—and then her imagina¬ tion pictured forth happiness that never should be hers.
CHAPTER VII. Euthanasia returns. — Beatrice meets the witch, aiid encounters Castruccio and Tripalda.— Dies. Ox the third night she returned to the witch. " You need not speak," said Mandragola, " I know your thoughts ; you hardly believe my words, yet you are determined to make the trial. It is well ; I should be surer of success, if you had implicit faith in my powers and your own ; but it is enough. What do you wish to effect ? " " First, mother, I must know what I can do." " Your power is almost illimitable ; but that of which 1 spoke, and that power which you prize most, is the power which you possess over the prince of Lucca. Do you wish to
sec him ? Do you wish in solitude, with none but me near, to see him come, to hear him re¬ new his anticnt vows?" " He never made vows to me," cried Bea¬ trice angrily; " he was bound to me, I thought, by stronger ties than mortal oaths ; that is past for ever ; but, except the salvation of my soul, I would sacrifice every thing* to see him once again, divested of the ceremonial of power, listening to what will never be told, consoling her who can never be consoled." " That is easy work," said the witch, vvith alacrity ; " but first swear, swear by all that you hold sacred in the world, by your life, by his, that you will never disclose this conversa¬ tion, or wbat I shall now reveal to you, or hint in any manner the work we shall undertake." Beatrice shivered ; she could no longer stand, she sunk to the ground : the witch went into the hut, and brought her a bowl of water ; Beatrice put it to her lips ; then suddenly with¬ drawing it, she cried,-«-" You have given me a poisonous drug, eitiier to kill me, or under¬ mine my understanding ; —dare you thus trifle with me ? "
Ch. VII.] VALPERGA. 14t The witch took the bowl from her hand, and drank tlie liquid it contained: "Take shame for your misti ust," she said; " this was pure water from the spring ; and, except that tlie charmed moon-beams sleep on it, even when you see not the moon in the sky, it does not differ from the waters of any other fountain. Nosv speak ; do you swear secrecy ? " Again the prophetess paused. But cui iosity aud hope hurried her beyond discretion; and with folded hand» placed between the dry and skinny palms of tiie witch, she pronounced the vow that was dictated. Mandragola then said : " This satisfies me. The moon is now on tlie wane : when she fills again, I will send Bindo to inform you vvhat is to be done. Fear not, but that all will be well." Beatrice returned to Lucca. Her glaze i eyes and pale cheeks told that the spirit which animated her now found nor rest nor hope She dicaded to look forward to the fearful tnal she was about to make; and vet slie could think of nothing else. Her rosai y was thrown aside; her pra) сгь were forgotten; and love
again reassumed his throne in her heart. Her reason was disturbed by doubt and fear ; and she often sat whoie hours, her «ye fixed upon tiie earth, her parted lips pale, her hands closed with convulsive strength, as she tried to reason herself into disbelief concerning the promises and assertions of Mandragola. It was too much for her weak frame ; if the witch had been near her to mark the wasting of her fa¬ culties, she might have wound her plot so as to inspire her vvith some courage : but no one was near except Bindo ; and he by his tales, and liis own fears and belief, only increased the combat of feelings to which the prophetess was a prey. Euthanasia returned from Florence. She was much disappointed, much grieved, to find her friend far worse both in body and mind, than when she left her. More than all wild¬ ness of words and manner, she feared lier si¬ lence and reserve, so very unlike her latest dis¬ position. If the convent, or her future plans vvere named, she listened calmly, but did not reply ; no intreaties couid persuade her to give words to that which preyed upon her mind.
She would weep ; and then, flying from the affectionate reproaches of her protectress, she would shut herself up to grieve alone, or far more dangerously to dream of the return of love andjoy. Euthanasia reasoned, persuaded, intreated, but vainly : accustomed to the ca¬ prices of this unfortunate girl, she saw nothing in what now occurred, that appeared to arise from any external impulse ; and she hoped that indulgence and kindness would in time restore her to her former calm. She reproached her¬ self for having left her ; and she resolved that, unless indeed Beatrice took the veil, which now seemed doubtful, she would never again separate herself from her. She loved her ten¬ derly, and pitied her so truly, that she was willing to sacrifice all her own hopes of future peace to soothe and restore her to some degree of happiness. Her endeavours were useless. The melan¬ choly of poor Beatrice was undissipated by the slightest gleam of tranquillity: for five days she had not spoken, and had hardly touched any food. Euthanasia tried in vain to console her, and, hopeless of good, sought to excite any
passion tbat might rouse her from her mute reveries ; she spoke not, but wandet ed restless¬ ly from room to room, or among the wild path· of tiie garden ; and thence she would have es¬ caped into the open country, but that her weak limbs sunk beneath her. One night Eutha¬ nasia slept, when Beatrice suddenly enter«! the room ; and, twining herself round her net k, and wrapping the long and thick hair of her friend around iier brows ------ "Save me!" sbe cried, "save me from madness, which, as a fiend, pursues and haunt* me, I endeavour to fly him ; but still be ho\ eis near: is there no escaper Oh! if God Le good, surely he will redeem my soul from tin i curse. I would fain presene my reason ■ iny hps are bloodless, and my bair quite gre) ; I am a skeleton without flesh oi foun ; 1 am to vvhat lives, like the waning moon at noonday, vvhich floats up as a vapoui, and the blue air ьеепи to penetrate its pale and sickly form. Happi¬ ness, beauty, love have раьыч! away; but I would fain preserve that without vvhu b 1 am as a poor hunted beast, whose sole repose ι? on the spear of the huntsman. Bieathe on
me, Euthanasia, breathe on my hands, my eyes ; perhaps some portion of calm may flow from your bosom to mine. I only wish not to be mad ; yet, if vvhat is said be true, these wonderful things may be, and I still sane. There, there, your band is cool; press m v head. I know you well; you are Euthanasia; 1 am Beatrice ; I may still be preserved from madness," Euthanasia wept; she folded Beatrice in her arms; she placed her cooi hand on her brow, and her pale cheek close to the flushed one of the poor sick girl. Beatrice rested u few moments in silence ; and then a^ain she spoke, " It has been said, that I am a witch, one wdio has power over the elements, and still moie over tbe mind of man. I do not believe ibis : once, I know, a very long time ago, I fancied mjself a prophetess; but I awoke from that dream many years since. Why then do thev madden me with these insinuations? I will tell you, Euthanasia (svveet name, dear, nutch- ioved friend), that sometimes I fancy this ь true—Oh ! that I could tell the heavy seci* i t that weighs upon my soul ! I have sworn— VOL. III. H
thev did not well, that made mc swear :—vet tliere is some truth in what they say, doubtless theie İ3 some truth, and it shall be proved. Well, wel! ; í have sworn, and I will not tell—- Ό ood night, dearest ; I shall sleep now ; so not a word more; I liave reasoned with myself, bmd am content." Beatrice crept back to her chamber; but F.uthanas'ia could not airain rest. She was аша /cd at her friend's strange words, and tried t » divine whether they proceeded from the Lcvtcd imagination ofthe prophetess, or from »ome reai event of which Euthanasia was ig- uoiant; but she had no clue to guide her in he, tunjectures ; and it appeared to her most pro- • bable, that Beatrice was moved by the sug- ■L-yvptions of her own heait; she could not gues**. the dreadful and maniac thoughts that reallv //¡-.Uubed her, or the frightful incitements that Ыа been employed to deceive her. A fortnight passed thus ; when the Albinois La ought a message from Mandragola, bidding Beatrice repair that same night at twelve, to a wood about four miles from Lucca. At thi* lime Castruccio was employed in building the
tower of Nozzano, on a small hill which was burrounded by the wood chosen by the witch. The weather (it was in the month of July) was exceedingly hot; the cattle panted beneath the sun ; the earth was herbless ; all life decayed : but delicious nights succeeded these oppres¬ sive days; and Castruccio was accustomed lo lepair, as eaily as two in the morning, to visit the fortress. Mandragola knew the spot near wliich he passed ; and she so planned her scheme, that her incantation should be wound to the desìi ed pitch, at the moment wdien he should ride through the wood : and thus, to the simple mind of the Albinois, and the ex¬ alted imagination of Beatrice, aflord a proof of the extent of her power. It is impossible to say what her object was in all this ; she inight be merely instigated by s the desire to excite respect and terror, and have trusted that this apparent confirmation of .her assertions would enable her to acquire unlimited power over the mind of her victims. She did not intend on this occasion that Bea¬ trice should speak to the prince;------that she should call for bim, and he appear, was sufb- U 2
cient m ummet y ťor one day : another time more might be done, and another step taken in the labyrinth of error and fiaud. That same night Bindo tapped at the door ot Beatrice's chamber. I'he prophetess opened it;—she looked aghast and wild, but spoke not.— <ť This is the hour/' said the Albinois. " Wrap your cloak round you," he conti¬ nued, " that you may not be known." Bea¬ trice did as he desired, moving her arms like inanimate machine's, and turning hei eye* aiound, as if she saw nothing. Bindo led lu r down-stairs; they quitted the palace by a small back door ; he made her mount a horse ; and ihey rode out of the town. All passed m silence ; Beatrice hardly appeared to know whither she was going, or why she went; the h: idle fell from her hands, and hung loosely on tbe horse's neck; but the animal mechanically followed Bindo's horse, vvhich led the way. They arrived at the wood, and dismounted. Bindo tied the hoi sei to a tree, aiul proceeded c autiousľy thiough the intricate paths of the torest. It was an ilex wood ; and Che d a t к
iobage canopied them above, while the moon¬ beams penetrated thiough the interstices oí ihe leaves, and made a chequered shadow upon the ground, vvhich was despoiled of r* gnbsy covering through long diouth. At length they came to a more trodden road; and, this led to a kind of woody amphitheatre, a a open space in the midst of the tree-, one of in** corners of vvhich the path traversed, and a. around the ilexes formed a circular bouudar. of ample circumfeience. At one of the e.\t;c- mities, farthest from the path, was a fountain, vvhich kept a soft murmuring all the still n-giit through. Near this fountain the witch sai. she was weaving two coronal» of ivy, and muttering as she wove; Beatrice and the Al¬ binois were before her, 'but she appeared not to notice them. Beatrice stood, her arms hang¬ ing dovvn, her head fallen on her bosom m л mute lethargy, her cloak had dropt fiom hti thoulders, and fallen to her feet; she was diet¬ ed, as the witch had commanded, in white sevejal vears had pas*ed since she had bee ι tinis habited, and her attire displayed the tim - iie-íbof hei fonn and the palenes» of her waste*
cheeks; ber hands were skinny and yellow, her hair perfectly grey; a few weeks ago, although mingled with white, its antieut colour was pre¬ served ; but since then it had quite changed ; her eyes were sunken, ringed with black, and ravles«. When the witch had finished her work, she rose ; and, taking some of the water of tlie fountain in the hollow of her hand, she threw it over Beatrice, and then crowned her with one of the chaplets ; she piaceri the otiier on her ow n head ; and tlien she ¿aid to Bindo :«·*- ťť I am about to sanctify this place; you must depart." Bindo bowed assent, and di?appraied. She took up a curiously fashioned evvtr of hi ass ; and, filling ii at the fount, she wtdked mund the amphitheatre of trees, spi inkling the ground as she went, and muttering her incantation?, till she came round again to the spot, wheie Beatrice stood, white, motionless, and silent. " You appear faint, daughter," she «add ; " drink of this water."—Sbe put it to tbe lips of her victim, vvho drank it eagerly ; and imme¬ diately a change took place in her appearance ;
ber eyes lighted up, her cheeks weie flusluo, the heavy chain of mortaht) seemed to fali nom her, hlit % became active and even gav ; bv de¬ grees a kind of transport seized iier, a iliunk- eimcss of spirit, vvhich made her lose all с >u- siiaiut over her words and actions, allhou^u a did not blind her to vvhat was passini*; aroumi *. "Aye, mother," she said, "1 know wa.it I come for; now let ua begin; 1 яш a¡i ui- chantress, you say ; I can conjure him to ;ì*>- pear, who before defied my powers: be it su; «let us begin," " Listen," replied Mandragola, " no ai t requires so mucli patience as ours. We will make our incantations ; and you will see iiim pass on horseback along that load : do not now seek to speak to him. Exercise your power moderately at first; and it will be greatei auu- wards: bind him now with a straw* ; in t¡aa he will be inextricably entliralled. Tonight be it enough that you see him."
" Enough ! oh ! I would lay down my life for one, one moment's sight ! " The night was perfectly still; the air wa» sultry, and noi a leaf moved : the trees, bathed. a^ it were in the cold moonshine, slept; and the eartii received their moveless shadows v n her quiet bosom. The fountain murmured on ; beside it stood the witch and Beatrice ;—Bea¬ trice, hei eyes lifted to heaven, her arms crossed on her bosom, her hair clinging iound htr faded neck. Mandragola was full of business ; she piled a small heap of wood, walking often around it, singing or chanting strange verses, and scattering water and oil about her ; she drew, w ith a wand formed of a peeled chesnut-bough, a circle vvhich surrounded the pile and the spot whereon Beatrice stood, and commanded lier not to pass the line till she should give permis¬ sion ; since that circle would preserve her from the spirits that their terrible incantations had failed around them. She then turned to the pile again, and placed on it incen.se and odo¬ riferous gums, and plants, and strange device-, cut in wood, or moulded in wax, which η«» one might undei stand : then to ciown the w au
she cut off a lock of Beatrice's hair, and tlnew it on the heap. She had just accomplished this work, when a slight sound struck hér ear ; " Novv is the time !" she exclaimed ; and she set up a wild song to drown the trampling of the approach¬ ing horses ; she lighted a torch, and cried— " This is your work, mistress of the powers ol air ; light the pyre, and call thrice on the name ofthe prince of Lucca ! " Beatrice started forward with frantic ha&tt ; she seized the torch, thrust it into the pile, vvhich caught the flame, and blazed up as «die cried aloud, "Castruccio! Caatruecio ! Cas¬ truccio ! " And then, unable to restrain her impatience, she ran towards the path in which Mamis a- gola had said he would appear. The witch called on her to stay; but she was too dc-'it*·- pid to follow swiftly to stop her : the >ound ui coming horsemen was now distinctly heard. ; Beatrice threw herself on her knees, in thr midst of the path by vvhich they muist pu— : with flaslıİng eyes and outstretched arms, -hf ea/cd eageilv forwards : the dai к wood coveud li 5
her; the moon beams fell on her; and there she, once the loveliest, now the most lost, the most utterly undone of women, kneeled in fran¬ tic expectation. The horsemen approached ; ä tnrn in the path concealed them, until they were full upon her; and then she saw Cas¬ truccio and Tripalda advance. Her brain, al¬ ready on fire with impatience, and her spirits exalted by the drug administered to her, could no longer sustain the sensations that over¬ powered her. The presence of Tripalda was to her the sign of diabolical interference ; she believed hini dead ; that it was his spirit vvhich then appeared ; and, if so, it was also an un¬ real form, the resemblance of Castruccio alone, that she beheld.------She sunk in convulsions on the road. Castruccio, surprised at vvhat he saw, leaped from his horse ; and his example was followed Ъу his attendants. The witch, who had hi¬ therto hobbled towards Beatrice, seeing them dismount, endeavoured to escape; tut Tri¬ palda, who, judging of others by himself, wa« ever ready to suspect knavery, cut off her re¬ treat, and ordered two of the servants to hold
her. She submitted quietly, but remained in- vincibly silent to all the questions that were put to her. Beatrice was carried to the foun¬ tain ; and they endeavoured, by chafing her temples, and rubbing her hands, to bring her to life : the prince liimself supported her head ; but lie did not recognize her; so utterly was she changed from what the prophetess of Fer¬ rara had been. Once she opened her еуъ; she saw the face of Castruccio leaning over her, and she smiled. Castruccio thought that he knew that smile ; but Tripalda, leaving the witch, pressed iu among those vvho were about her.—No one vvho had seen him could ever forget him : she saw vvhat she believed to be the evil genius of her life; and she again мтк into insensibility. In the mean time the Albinois, who had been linking near the spot, hearing the u am¬ plili» of hor -»ci, and the sound of man's voice*, ventured forvvaid. Mandragola j>aw him ih^i, ь he came into the moonshine from under the dai к covert of trees. She darted forward, aud cried aloud»-" Fly ! fly ! " Her words and ges- une attracted the notice of her guards, a.·» Bindo
turned about to obey her orders. They pur* Mied him, and easily took him prisoner. He wa? brought to Castruccio, wbo in- .nantiy recognized him. " What do you here r " he demanded. " Are you not the servant of the countess of Valperga : " " I am." " Who then is this lady г and bow came you here ? " " That is Beatrice of Ferrara. I can tell you no more until she" (pointin«; to the witch) ' " gives me leave." The name of Beatrice was sufficient ta transfix the prince vvith pity and renunţe. " Beatrice ! " he cried, and throwing himself on the earth beside her, he kissed her hand passionately. Her fa'mtntvs began novv ta dissipate; but her reason did not return. Tm first words she uttered uere those of madness ; f-he raved of that which ever haunted Ικτ thoughts in delirium, her prisa.* in Boninona. Tripalda heard the words, and started, as if he had trodden on a viper ; bis sallow com¬ plexion became paler,-—but Castruccio did not attend to this, or make out her speech. He
perceived her frenzy ; and, unable any longer to endure his remorse, or the sight of his hap- leis victim, he gave hasty orders that she should be conveyed slowly and carefully to the palace of the countess of Valperga, and her compa¬ nions be detained as prisoners ; and then he rode off". He rode towards Lucca j and, re¬ flecting on the fright that Euthanasia might Mutain if she saw her unhappy friend brought home in so miserable a state, he resolved to цо iirst to her palace, and inform her of what hail passed. " Anti are you come to this, lovely Bea¬ trice ť" he thought. "And is this the same creature, who, radiant with beauty andjoy, for¬ mei ly gave me her benediction at the palace of the good old Marsilio? I remember that day, as if it were yesterday ; and now I iind her with grey hairs and a wasted form, a νοαημ fruit utterly blighted, and, worse than all, her reason fallen the victim of her misery. Am I the cause of this r" He rode on swiftly, and soon arrived at tlie palace. He did not reflect that he was goi n ľ" to behold Euthanasia, the beautiful and be-
loved ; and thinking of nothing but Beatrice, and finding the gates open, he entered. It was about three in the morning. During the night Euthanasia had thought that she heaid a groan come from the chamber of Beatrice ; and she hastened thither, to discover if any new sorrow disturbed her unfortunate guest. The chamber was empty ; the bed iinslept upon ; she sought her in the adjoining rooms ■ and, not finding her, she became ten iiied, anil, rousing the house, had the palace searched, but in % ain; notrace of her vias left. She ?ent several messengers to difteicnt gates of the town to learn whether she hail been seen, and waited with inexpressible anxiety f ι then ìe- lurn. The pai nee found men consulting together in the great ball ; and the first wohK he heaid was the name of "Madonna Beatrice." u Do not be alarmed," he said, coming for¬ ward. " I know u hei с she i-*, and she will soon be lu re ; some of \ou see that her com h bc prepared, and seek a ph\ vician, for *he is verv ill. Where ib the counters ŕ " Appearing thus unexpectedly and alone, the
men did not recognize the prince; but the quick ear of Euthanasia caught the sound of his voice; and, coming out of an adjoining room, she cried, " Do you then know where my friend is, Castruccio ? " " I do indeed," he replied : " and it is for¬ tunate; since I may have saved her from evil hands. But I am perfectly ignorant hovv and why she came to a spot so far from the town." He related in a few words wb.ere and in what manner he had found her, and concluded by saying, " I leave her to your care ; I know how kind and generous you are. If she re¬ cover, 1 intreat you to inform me without de¬ lay of so favourable a change." As he said this, tlie trampling of horsemen was heard in the streets;-—he cried, " I dare not see her again ; farewell, Euthanasia ; pity her and me ! " He hastened from the palace, and in a few minutes after Beatrice was bt ought in ; her 'oimtenance was deadly pale, and her arm* hun»? lifelessly over the shoulder of one of th« men who supported her; her hair was dank, and her «varments wetted with the dew of
morning; her eyes were open, and glared meaninglessly around. They laid her on a bed; and Euthanasia, approaching, took her hand ; Beatrice did not notice her ; she seemed to have lost all sensation, and the rolling of her eyes, and the convulsive gaspings of her breath, were all the signs of life that she gave. Why should I describe the scenes that en¬ sued during the following days ? Description^ of unmixed horror cannot be pleasing; and vvhat other feelings could mingle to ¿.often that sensation, on beholding the declining state ol poor Beatrice r She never again had any re¬ turn of reason, nor did she ever sleep ; gene- lally she lay, as I have described, pale anil motionless; if ever she woke to sensation, it was to rave and scream, so that the hai dest heart might have been penetrated widi ехсезч of pity. Some have seen, most have read the descriptions of madness. She called upon Euthanasia, upon Castruccio; but,more than aii, she fancied that she was chained to her dungeon-floor in her tremendous prison, mock¬ ed and laughed at by her keepers ; and some¬ times she imagined that th^se beloved friend*
were chained beside her, suffering tliose tor¬ ments vvhich she had herself endured. She uever in her wildest aalbes uttered a reproach¬ ful word against Castruccio, although it ap¬ peared that she sometimes thought that he ac- Cuped himself; and then vvith the tenderest ac- t-ents, and most winning sweetness, she bade him not grieve, and as.sured him that he had committed no fault. These intervals of raving were short and rare; and, as she became weaker, she still seldomer emerged from her'state of insensibi¬ li ty. She was evidently dying; the physi¬ cians gave no hopes of her lite ; and the priests crowded about her. Padre Lanfranco was among them ; and he bitterly reproached him¬ self for having left her, and endeavoured to compensate for his neglects by watching day and night for some return of reason, vvhen be might ask whether she died in the faith of the church. This never arrived: butthe priest were lenient ; they placed the crucifix on her breast, and she seemed to press it; once, wiien tiie name oi'hcr Redeemer was mentíais-
ed, her eyes lighted up, and a smile seemed to play upon her lips. She was so perfectly senseless, that tiiis could have had no con¬ nexion with the words that had been used ; but the charitable priests chose to construe it into с at emernal assurance of the salvation of her soul ; and tbey administered the sacra¬ ments. She never spoke afterwards ; but day by day she grew weaker ; Castruccio sent con¬ tinually to inquire of her state; but he dared not come. Euthanasia hardly ever left her bed side ; and she became as pale, and almost as weak, as the dying Beatrice. Sucli had been the effect of the witch's in¬ cantations. Beatrice had needed the tender¬ est nursing ; and she had received instead, a shock which saner nerves than hers couki hardly have susta'med. Yet her death was smoothed to her by the aťľectionate ministry of her friend ; and she at last lost all sense even of pain. She died, peacefully, and calmly as a child; and her many soi rows and wrongs no longer filled her w ith anguish and despair. She died ; Euthanasia was beside her when she
heard a gentle sigh, followed by a fixedness of feature and rigidity of limb, which shewed that the mighty change had taken place in her frame. Tears and lamentation succeeded to her death. Euthanasia wished tliat her funeral should be private and unnoticed ; but Cas¬ truccio insisted that it should be attended vvith every circvujnstance of pomp used in those days. The room was hung with black cloth, and made as dark as night, to give brightness to the many torches by which it was illuminated, Beatrice was laid on a bier, arrayed in costly apparel, and canopied vvith a pall of black velvet em¬ broidered with gold: flowers, whose beauty and freshness mocked the livid hues of the corpse, were strewn over her, and scattered about the room ; and two boys walked about, swinging censers of incense. The chamber was filled vvitli mourning women ; one, the chief, dressed in black, with dishevelled hair, knelt near tlie head of the bier, and began the funeral song ; she sang astraili in monotonous, but not unmelodious voice: the verses were
extempore, and described the virtues and for¬ tunes of the deceased; they ended with tiie words : Oimc ! ora giace morta sulta bara / * And the other women, taking up the bur¬ then, cried in shrill Юпез : Oimc ! ora giace morta suttu bara ! Again they were silent: and the Cantatrice, Tcncwing her song, repeated another verse in praise of poor Beatrice. Castruccio had tolti her in part what ought to be the subject of lier bong. The first verse described her as beauti¬ ful, beloved and prosperous, among her friends and fellow citizens : " Then," cried the singer, " the spoiler came; she lost all that was dear to her; and she wandered forth a wretch upon the earth. Who can tell what she suffered ? Evil persons were abroad ; they seized on her ; and the became the victim of unspoken crimes : wot!*c ills followed, madness and heresy, which threatened to destroy her soul," The woman wept, wept unfeigned tears as
sbe sang ; and the hired mourners sympathized in her grief; each, verse ended vvith the words, Oime ! ora giace tnorla sulta bara ! which were echoed by them all, and accom¬ panied by cries and tears. She ended ; and, night being come, the hour for interment arrived. The censers were re¬ plenished with incense; and the priests sprink¬ led holy water about the room. Four lay- brodiers raised the bier, and followed a troop of priests and monks, vvho went first vvith the crucifix, chaunting a De profundis. The streets through which tbey passed, vvere rendered as light as day by the glare of torches ; after the priests, came the bier on which the body lay exposed, covered with flowers; many of the young girls and women of the city followed, each carrying a wax taper ; a troop of horse closed the procession, itwas midnight when tbey entered the church ; tbe moon threw the shadow of the high window on the pavement; but all shadows were effaced by the torche-» vvhich filled the church. Beatrice was laid in her peaceful grave ; and, mass being said foi the repose of her soul, tbe ceremony closed.
Euthanasia had not been present : and, al¬ though she longed for solitude to weep in peace over the fate of her hapless friend, she was obliged to receive tiie visits of the Lucchese ladies, who came to coudoie with her on this occasion, and perhaps to satisfy tiieir curiosity concerning its object. Tiie funeral feast was sumptuous and well attended, though few knew in whose honour it was given. Euthanasia shrunk from their questions, and was angry •with Ca-itruccio, that he should have placed her in so disagreeable a situation. It seemed to her better to befit the hapless fate of Bea¬ trice, that she should have been permitted to depart unmarked, wept only by those, who knew her worth, and who lamented her un- equaled misfortunes. It was the false pride of Castruccio, that made him think differently ; aad such vvere the prejudices of the times, that his contemporaries would have agreed with him, that he had in some degree compensated for the injuries that Beatrice had received from him, by the magnificence of her funeral, After die ceremony was ended, Castruccio fust thought of the two individuals whom he
had found in the forest with their victim. Man¬ dragola had preserved an uniform silence ; and no threat?, nor torture itself, could induce her to speak. Bindo was formed of frailer clay ; she had charged him not to reveal what liad passed, and bad imprecated the most ten ible curses on his head, if he disobeved. Ile ti em- bled ; but the sight of the instruments of tor¬ tai e overcame hım, and he confessed all. Man¬ dragola wab condemned by the laws which tlien existed in every countiy agaubt the dealers in the black art, and sulih cd death as a witch. Euthanasia cndcavouied to piocuie the f reč¬ nom of the Albinois; but m vain. He wa? confined in the dungeon^ of the Dominican convent; he pined for h bei tv ; and iu a few it.onths he died. The tie which bound Euthanasia to Lucca, was now broken. For man) day·» .she sorrow¬ ed, folgernd oť herself, o\qí the late of lier h lend. Bv degices howevei the feelings of aciuai life ι etui nod to hei ; and die longed to quit a town, which had been for her the theatre oi tremendous nibfoitunc. Two months after
tiie death of Beatrice she returned to Floicnee ; where she found, in the society of her fiiends, and in the cultivation of hei nund, sume alle¬ viation for her sorrow, and some compensation r >r the manv evils she Iiad endured.
CHAPTER VIU. Castruccio' s Progress in Arms.—He brings Devastation to the Gates of Florence.' — A Conspiracy formed against him. Castruccio had now been lord of Lucca for six years, and had attained his thirty-third year ; his character was formed ; and his phy¬ siognomy, changed fiom its youhtful expres¬ sion, had become impressed by his habitual feelings. Constant exposure to the sun and weather had tinged his cheek vvith brown ; vvhich, but for that, had been deadly pale; foi¬ çai e, and tlie strong emotions to which he was subject, had left their mark on his countenance; his eye had grown hollow, and the smooth lus¬ tre of his brow was diminished by lines, which indeed looked gracefully at his years, since they marked the progtess of thought; but some, more straggling and undefined, shewed that VOL. III. 1
those passions whose outward signs he sup¬ pressed, yet preyed upon the vital principle ; his eyes had not lost their fire, but their soft¬ ness was gone. He was kind and even grateful to his friends, so long as he consideied them as such; but he was quick to distrust; and cold looks and averted favour followed suspicion : if these weie answered by aught but patience and sub¬ mission, hatted quickly came, and that never failed to desti oy its object. If he only suspect¬ ed, that was sufììcient cause, that he who had become ihus obnoxious to liis prince should be loid that it was his vviil that he should in¬ stantly depart from Lucca ; and the confisca¬ tion filled the public coffers. If he thought that he liad reason to fear, the doom of that man vvhoin he feai ed was sealed : he was cruel antl unrelenting ; and the death of his victim did not satisfy him; several vvere starved to death by his command, and worse tortuies vvere inflicted upon others :—something of this was to be attributed to the usage of the times; but cruelty had become an elemental feature of Casti uccio'a character.
If he were feared by his enemies in open war, his secret policy was still more dreaded* He had not forgotten tbe lessons of Alberto Scoto ; and, as his attempt on the life of the king of Naples might prove, his measures had perhaps been influenced by the counsels of Benedetto Pepi. He had many spies in each town, and collected intelligence from every court of Lombardy. Women and priests were his frequent instruments ; and even the more distinguished among the citizens were induced through his largesses to betray the counsels of their country. Such was Antelminelli, the some time lover of Euthanasia; daring, artful, bounteous and cruel; evil predominated in his character; and, if he were loved by a few, he was hated by most, and feared by all. His perpetual wars, vvhich impoverished the neighbouring states, did not enrich his own; his artful po¬ licy sowed distrust among dear friends, and .spies and traitors abounded during his reign. in Lucca he wa·* a* an eagle in a cage ; he bad a craving that seemed to demand the empire of the world ; and, weak as he was I 2
in means and hopes, he made the nations tremble. The object of Castruccio's present policy was Florence» He proceeded by measured steps ; but he was perpetually gaining some advantage against the rival state, improving his military discipline, and preparing for the last assault. His first attempt was upon Pis¬ toia, and be carried this place by a double treachery. The Florentines took the alarm upon so disastrous an event ; and the pope sent to them Raymond de Cardona, one of the most eminent generals of the times, whom they immediately placed at the head of their ar¬ mies. Cardona crossed the Guisciana, and ravaged the plain of Lucca, which had for many years been unspoiled by the hostile sword ; but, when it became necessary for him to retreat, Castruccio by masterly move¬ ments intercepted his march, obtained a com¬ plete victory, and, after a short, but severe contest, took Cardona and all his army pri¬ soners. The battle of this day was called the field oí Altopascio. Arrigo Guinigi was among the
slain ; and his loss was grievously felt by Cas¬ truccio. The prince of Lucca had ever looked on him as a treasure consigned to him by his late father; and, amidst all his faults, Castruccio preserved his gratitude for the lessons of that admirable man, and a sweet remembrance of the days of peace he had passed with him among the Euganean hills. He had loved Ar¬ rigo, as a dear brotiier, or a son ; childless himself, he sometimes thought, that, although there was small difference between their ages, Arrigo would succeed him, that his children would be his heirs, and tiiat, if not bound to him by the ties of blood, yet they wouid look back to him witb the same gratitude and re¬ spect, that an honoured posterity regard the founder of their house. Ambition hardens the heart ; but such is the texture of the mind of man, that he is constantly urged to contem¬ plate those days, when his once over-awing sceptre shall have fallen from his nerveless grasp; the worst usurper, as he advances in years, looks with tenderness on his children, vvho, in the peaceful exercise of power, are to efface the memory of the lawless deeds by
which he had acquired it. Castruccio saw the son of Guinigi in this light, and he fell a pang of sincere and deep grief, when it be¬ came his turn to heap his grassy tomb, amidst tiie many others with which tlie plain around Altopascio was crowded, and to order the place where the remains of Arrigo reposed, to be marked with a sepulchral pillar. From Altopascio, Castruccio advanced with his army to the very gates of Florence. Tlie peasants fled before him, and took refuge, with what property they could save, in the city ; the rest became the prey of tlie Lucchese army, who marked their progress by fire and devastation. All the harvests had been brought in; but Castruccio's soldiers wreaked their vengeance upon the fields, tearing up and burn¬ ing the vines, cutting down the olive wood.% seizing or burning the winter-stock, and re¬ ducing the cottages of the poor to a heap of formless ruins. Tlie country about Florence was adorned by numerous villas, the summer abodes of tbe rich citizens, ornamented with aff the luxury of the times, tlie grounds laid out in the most delicious gardens, where beauti-
ful trees and flowers adorned the landscape, and natural and artificial rills and waterfalls diffused coolness in the midst of summer. These became the prey of the soldier ; the pa¬ laces were ransacked, and afterwards burned, the cultivated grounds covered with ruins, the rivulets choked up, and all that, a few days before, had presented the show of a terrestrial paradise, now appeared as if an earthquake, mocking the best cares of man, had laid it in ruin. The army encamped before the gates of Florence. I'he remnant of die troops of Car- dona and the remainder of the citizens capa¬ ble of bearing arms, would have formed a force sufficient to cope with the army of Antelmi¬ nelli. But more than their declared enemies, the Florentines feared domestic traitors ; so many of their first citizens were prisoners to the prince of Lucca, that they dreaded lest their re¬ lations might endeavour to secure for them their freedom even by the betraying of their native city. Day and night they guarded the walls and gates, and patroled the streets, each re¬ garding the otiier vvith suspicious eyes, and
listening with fear and horror to the sounds of rejoicing and riot that issued from the camp of Castruccio. The prince, in contempt and derision of the besieged, encouraged every kind of pastime and insulting mockery, that might sting his proud, though humbled enemies : he instituted games and races, coined money, and sent con¬ tinual defiances to the citizens to issue from their walls and encounter him in battle. The men, too ready to seize the spirit of hatred and ridicule, amused themselves with casting by means of tiieir balestri, the carcases of dead asses and dogs into the town. Woe to the Fio¬ rentine who fell into their hands; if a female, no innocence nor tears could save her from their brutality, and, if a man, if their insults were less cruel, they were hardly less cutting and humiliating; to lead a prisoner naked through the camp, seated on an ass, with his face turned towards the tail, was a common mockery. Castruccio pei haps did not per¬ ceive the full extent to vvhich the brutal fen>„ city of his soldiers, made drunk by victory, carried them; if he did, he winked at it; foj
he had not that magnanimity which should lead him to treat with respect and kindness a fallen enemy. While the Lucchese soldiers rioted in plenty, filling themselves even to satiety with the de¬ licate wines and food of the Florentine nobles, and consuming in a few weeks the provision of years, the inhabitants of the besieged city presented a fax diffèrent spectacle. The vil¬ lagers, driven from their cottages, had taken refuge in Florence, whose gates jealously closed, permitted not the means of subsistence to be increased. In consequence of tliis, of the supernumerary population of the town, and of the unwholesome food on which the poorer classes were forced to subsist, pesti¬ lence ancl other contagious fevers declared themselves : the streets were filled with mourn¬ ful processions, the bells tolled a perpetual knell of death ; the citizens invited their friends to the funeral feasts, but the seats of many of the guests were vacated by death, and the hosts who celebrated them had been invited to several similar commemorations. Every face looked blank and fearful. The magi- ί 5
strates were obliged to interfere ; they issued an order that the relations of the dead were no longer to celebrate their funeials by assem¬ blies of their friends, or to toil the bell during the ceremony, so that the numerous dead might go lo their long homes without terrifying the survivors by their numbers. Yet this law- could not hide the works of deadi that were so frequent in the town ; the streets were almost deserted, except by the monks, who hurried from house to house carrying the cioss and sacrament to the dying; w hile the poor, almost starving, and often houseless, fell in the street-, or were carried in terrifying troops to the ho¬ spitals and convent·* of charity. And this wa* the work of Castruccio. Euthanasia saw and felt this; and she ieii as if, bound to him by an indissoluble chain, it was her business to follow, like an angel, in his track, to heal the wounds that he inflicted. Dressed in a coarse garb, and endeavouring to throw aside those feelings of delicacy which were as a part of her, she visited the houses oí the poor, aided the sick, fed the hungry, and would perform offices tbat even wiv es and mo-
thers shrunk from with disgust and fear. An heroic sentiment \ os-essed her mind, and lifted her above humanity ; she must atone for the crimes of him slie had loved. Bondelmonti one day visited her; she had just returned from closing the eyes of an un¬ happy woman, whose husband and children had fled fiom their mother and wife, in the fear of infection ; she had changed her gar¬ ments on entering the palace, and lay ou a couch, exhausted ; for she had not slept los the two pievioivs nights. Bondelmonti ap¬ proached her unperceived, and kissed lu r hand j—she drew it away: " Beware!" she said. " If you knew from whence 1 came, you would not touch a hand that may cati) mfection with it." Bondelmonti reproached her for the caic- Ic-suess with which slie exposed her health md her life: but Eutbanasia mteiiuptcd bim * *' I thank you, dcai cousin, foi your anxieiv ; but vou know me of uld, and will nol attemnt to detei me from doing that winch 1 loğunla- niv duly. ------But whbt would vou non* -aia lo
me ; for I perceive weighty thought in your overhanging brow ? " u Am I not like the rest of our townsmen in that? You see, Madonna, perhaps better than any of us, to what straits our city is re¬ duced, while tiiis Lucchese tyrant triumphs ; you perceive our miseries too well not to pity them ; and I trust tiiat you are too good a pa¬ triot not to desire most earnestly toput an end to them," " My dear friend, wbat do you say ŕ I would sacrifice my life, and more than life, to be of use to my fellow citizens. God knows bow deeply I lament their defeats and their unhap¬ piness. But what can be done? An angel alone could inspire our troops with that spirit and courage, which would fit tliem to cope with the forces of the prince." " You say true ; but there are other mean** for overthrowing him. Consider, Euthanasia, that not only he conquers and despoils us, but that he is a cruel and bloody tyrant, ex¬ ecrated by the chiefs of our religion, feared and hated by all vvho approach him, one
whose death would spread joy and exultation over all Italy." " His death ! " Euthanasia's pale cheek be¬ came still paler. " Nay, you are a woman ; and, in spite of your superior strength of mind, I see that you are still to be frightened by words. Do not let us therefore talk of his death, but only of iiis overthrow ; we must contrive that." Euthanasia remained silent. Bondelmonti continued : " Call to mind, Madonna, the many excel¬ lent and virtuous persons whom he has miu- dered. I need not mention your friend Leo- dino, or any other individual ; his enemies have fallen beneath his axe like trees ina forest; and he feels as little remorse as the woodman vvho fells them. Tortme, confiscation, treach ■ ery and ingratitude have gone hand in hanu with murder. Before he came, Lucca be¬ longed to the Guelphs, and peace hovered over Tuscany. Novv the first nobles of the land have either fallen victims to his jealousy, or wander as beggars in Italy. All that is virtuous and worthy under his dominion send
up daily prayers for his downfall ; and that is now near at hand ; the means are ready, the instruments are preparing------" " For his death?" cried Euthanasia. " Nay, if you intercede for him, he may be saved : but it must be upon one condition." " What is that?" " That you join our conspiracy, and aid its accomplishment; thus Antelminelli may be saved, otherwise his fate is sealed. Consider this alternative; 30u may take a week for re¬ flection on what I have said." Bondelmonti left her. The sleep that had been about to visit her wearied senses, fled fai away,—scared by the doubts and anguish that possessed her heart. She felt witb double severity this change from tbe calm tbat she bad enjoved for tbe throe preceding years, into the fcai s and misei ics of л stiuggle to which she saw no end. The ty¬ ranny and warlike propensities of Casti uccio were so entirely in opposition to evt i y f*, cling of her heart, that she would not have lamented his fall; especially as then pei haps she would have conceived it her duty to stand ncai him
in misfortune, to console his disappointed hopes, and to teach him tiie lesson of content in obscurity. But to join the conspiracy, to become one of those vvho plotted against him, to assist in directing the blow which should annihilate, if not his life, at least all that he re¬ garded as necessaiy to his happiness, was a task she bhuddered at being called upon to fulfil. No one can act conscientiously up to his sense of duty, or perhaps go even beyond that sense, in the exercise of benev ölence and self- sacrifice, without being repaid by the sweetest and most secure happiness that man can enjoy, self-approbation. Euthanasia had devoted her¬ self for some weeks to the nursing the sick, and the feeding ofthe hungry ; and her bene¬ volence was repaid by a return of healthful spirits and peace of mind, vvhich it seemed that no passing circumstance of life could dis¬ turb. It was in vain that she witncs&ed scenes of pain and wretchedness ; she felt that pity which angels are said to feel ; but so strange is the nature of tbe human mind, that the most unblemished serenity reigned in her soul. Her -Леер, vvhen she found time to sleep, was deep
and refreshing; as she moved, she felt as if she were air, there was so much elasticity and lightness of spirit in her motions and her thoughts. She shed tears, as she heard the groans and complaints of the sufferers ; but she felt as if she were lifted beyond their sphere, and that her soul, clothed in garments of hea¬ venly texture, couid not be tarnished with earthly dross. All this was now changed. She fell again into weak humanity, doubting, fearing, hoping. When Castruccio's army removed fropi be¬ fore the walls of Florence, the gates were thrown open, and its inhabitants were relieved from the pressure and burthen of supernume¬ rary inhabitants. But where did the peasant go i he found his cottage burnt, his vines, bis next year's hope, destroyed, ghastly ruin stared him in the face, and his countenance reflected back the horrors of a long train of misery that he saw was preparing for him. Euthanasia could do little good amidst the universal de¬ vastation ; what she could do, she did. She restricted her own expenditure, and all» tbe money she could collect, was expended on the
relief of these poor people ; but this was a small pittance, a drop of w 7 ater in the ocean of tiieir calamities. She was returning from one of these visits to the country, where she had been struck with horror to perceive the inadequacy of her aid to tbe miseries around her. A whole village had been laid waste, the implements of husbandry destroyed, the cattle carried oft and there was neither food for the starving inhabitants, nor hope of an harvest for the ensuing year. She had heard the name of Antelminelli loaded with such imprecations as a father's mind suggested, when his children called on bim vainly for food, and Castruccio the cause of this misery. " If God fulfils," she thought, " as they say he does, the curses of the in¬ jured, how will his soul escape, weighed down by the imprecations of thousands ? Yet I will not consent'to the hopes of his enemies, nor be instrumental in dragging him from his beat of pow ? er. I have loved him ; and what would be just vengeance in another, would be treachery and black ingratitude in me, Ingra¬ titude ! And yet for what t For lost hopes»
content destroyed, and confidence in virtue shaken. These are tbe benefits Л have received from him; yet I will not join his enemies." On her return to her palace, she found Bon¬ delmonti waiting for her. " Have you de¬ cided ? " he asked. " I have. I cannot enter into your con¬ spiracy." " Do you know, Madonna, that in deciding thus you sign his death-warrant ? " " Nay, cousin, it is ungenerous and unmanly to use such a menace with me. Ifhe be doomed to death, which indeed cannot, must not be, -—how can I save him ? how can I, a wo¬ man, turn aside the daggers of the conspira¬ tors ? ifit be not indeed by betraying your plot to him, a deca )ou may perhaps force me to at last." " I hope not, Euthanasia. For your own sake—for the sake of all the virtue that ever dwelt beneath the female form, I hope that you will not be led to commit so base an action. You cannot harm us. If you inform Antelmi¬ nelli that there is a conspiracy formed against him, and that I am at the head of it, you tell
hirø no more than he already knows. He does not need the lessons of history ; his own expe¬ rience teaches him sufficiently, that the sword vs suspended over the tyrant's head by a single hair. He knows that he has enemies ; but he has too many to arrest them all : he knows that his friends are treacherous; but he will never guess who on the present occasion will turn tiaitor. İle cannot be surprised, nor can it do him any good to know, that I am the chief conspirator ; I have ever been his open and de¬ termined foe ; and this is not my first attempt to accomplish his downfal. " As to what you say concerning my child¬ ish menace, you much misunderstand me when you call it a threat. The persons who must act in this business are Lucchese ; I may di¬ rect their exertions ; but they are the actors. And, if you heard the appalling curses that they heap upon Castruccio's name, if you be¬ held the deep hate their eyes express when he is mentioned, their savage joy when they dream that one day they may wreak their vengeance upon him, you would feel that his life is indeed at stake, I do not wish him to die. Perhaps í
am wrong in this ; if his life be preserved, it is probable tbat no good will arise from his down¬ fal, and that no blood will in reality be spared. But I have eaten at his board, and he has been my guest within these walls, so that I would preserve his life ; and I have pitched upon you as the person who can best assist me in this. W hat else can I do ľ I cannot go to Lucca to watch over and restrain the fury of his ene¬ mies ; nor can 1 find one Lucchese to whom J dare disclose the secret of the conspiracy, and whom I may trust with the protection of his person. Indeed this task seems naturally to devolve to you. You hate tyranny and war ; you are a Guelph, and wou Id fain see the ene¬ my of your country, the author of the innu¬ merable evils under which we groan, removed from bis government : but antienv friendship, the reciprocal interchange of hospitality render his person dear to you, and your female soft¬ ness, and perhaps weakness, would come in aid of these feelings. You are free to go to Lucca ; you may mix the voice of humanity with the bloody machinations of these men ; you may save him, and you alone,"
Euthanasia was deeply moved by the repre¬ sentations of Bondelmonti. But her thoughts were still confused ; she saw no steady princi. pie, on which to seize, and make it her guide from out the labyrinth. She paused, hesi¬ tated, and asked again for a few days for con¬ sideration. And this Bondelmonti reluctantly granted. In the mean time Castruccio was engaged in exhibiting the pomp of a triumph, which was conducted with unparalleled splendour; and in which, like a merciless barbarian, the prince of Lucca, led along Cardona and all the most eminent of his prisoners as the at¬ tendants of his chariot.
CHAPTER IX. Evthariasia joins ihe Conspiracy. —Tripalda a Member. DURING this festivity at Lucca, every thing wore the face of sorrow and depression at Florence. The only circumstance that raised them from their ruin, was the commerce of the city; for, by means of the merchants, corn was brought from the neighbouring states, and tlie magistrates distributed it among the poorer peasantry. Eulhanasia had listened to the intelligence of Cas-truccio's triumph with unwilling ears. It seemed to her like the pomp oî his funeral ; and she dreaded lest his person, exposed during the ceremonial, should be attempted by some of his bolder enemies. But they woikcd vvith a closer design. Tiie tide of her sensations turned, when the conclusion of that dav's pomp brought nothing
with it, but the account of its splendour and success ; and, when she heard tbat the prince was personally safe, she found fresh reason for regret, in the want of that delicate and honour¬ able feeling on his part, which above all her other virtues characterised her own mind. But, if she were disgusted by the low pride that Castruccio manifested in his treatment of Cardona, her feelings of horror and of hatred were called forth by the occurrences that fol¬ lowed. Four days after this scene Bondel¬ monti entered her apartment; his manner was abrupt ; his face paie ; he could not speak.—- When he had somewhat recovered, his first words were a torrent of execrations against Antelminelli. u Oh, cease!" cried Euthanasia, "you hate/ and would destroy, but do not curse him ! " "Bid me rather add tenfold bitterness to my weak execrations ; but ail words mancan pro¬ nounce are poor. He has done that vvhich, if he had before been an angel, would blot and disfisţure him for ever. He is the worst of tyrants, the most cruel and atrocious wretch that breathes ! But earth shad soon be rid of the monster, Read that writing!"
He put into her hand a dirty scrap of paper, on which she deciphered these words : " For holy Jesu's sake, save me ! My mother does not send my ransom. I was put to the torture this morning. I suffer it again on Thurs¬ day, if you do not send six hundred golden florins. "Pityyour Fra NXESco Bondelmonti." The paper dropt from her hands, " Tin*- comes from my cousin Francesco," said Bon¬ delmonti; "others are in the samesituation. Those who have not been ransomed, he has thrown into the most ioalhsome dungeons, and starves and tortures them to quicken their appe¬ tite for freedom. Shall such a one reign ?" "No," cried Euthanasia, her cheek burnir.g vvith indignation, and her lips quivering vvitli excessive pity ; "No, he shall notieign; ík were unworthy to live, ifit be not to repent. Bondelmonti, here is my band ; do with me what you please; let his life be saved; but lei¬ liini be torn from the power vvhicli he имъ more like a fiend than a human creature." " Thank you, dear cousin, for tbis generous feeling: now I know you again. 1 know mv Euthanasia, who had forgotten herself a win Ic
only to awake again vvith new vigour. Caii up ait your spirits, Madonna; recollect all of noble, and wise, and courageous, that your excellent father taught you, This is no may- day trick, or the resolution of momentary indig¬ nation; it is the firm purpose of those, who see an evil beyond imagination pregnant vvith destruction and horror. Your quick conces¬ sion merits my utmost confidence; and you shall have it. To-night I will see you again. Novv 1 must endeavour to borrow money to liberate Francesco. My purse has been em¬ ptied by the ransom of my three brothets, and his mother has three hundred florins only." " í < an supply the rest/' said Euthanasia. " Poor fellow, send them immediately ; that vvith the shortest delay he may be rescued from the power of one more remorseless than the rack on vvhich he suffer*». To night I .see you again." Euthanasia spent the intervening hours m gieat agitation. She did not shrink fro* n her purpose; she had given her word, and she did not dream of recalling it. But all was turmoil and confusion in hei mind. She figured to VOL, Hl. К
herself the scenes that vvouîd ensue; she ima¬ gined the downfal of him she had loved, his life saved only through her intervention,·-----and he pei haps, knowing tbat sbe also bad joined the conspiracy to despoil bim of tbe power he had laboured to attain, would turn from ber iu abhorrence. As she thought of tbis, a few natural teart» fell; she cast ber deep blue eyes up to heaven ; and tried to collect all her fortitude. Night came, and with it the hour when she expected Bondelmonti ; but all was tumult and ипеач- nesî* m lier heait; and to all other regrets sh*· added the startling doubt whetber she wcic not on tbe present occasion quitting tbe path of innocence, for the intricate and painful one oreiror. Then she knelt down, and piayed fer¬ vents for a vvibdom and judgement that might guide her aright. Euthanasia was now advanced to the verv pt 'une of life. Ten yeais had elapsed since ¿■-he bad first interchanged vows with Antelmi¬ nelli in her castle of Valperga; but her mind was of tbat youthful kind, that, ever, as it weie, renewing itself from her own exhaustless treu-
bure of ví "udom and sentiment, never slept upon the past, forgetful of the changes that took place around her. Her character was alwavs nnpioving, alwa}s adding some new acquit¬ ments, or stiengthening those which she pos- 4>essed before; and thus for ever enlarging lur sphei с of knowledge and feeling. She often ielt as if she weie not the same bciii^ that sbe had been a few vears befoie; she often figuie d to herself, that it was only fiom such or such a period that -die obtained a true insight into the affair*, of hie, and became initiated in leal wwlom; but the*c epochs» weie conlmualK ( han«» ing, foi day bv da) she experienced the acquisition of some new power, the disco\uy oí sume now hght which guided her through ihc labyrinth, while another of the thousand- toidod veils which hide the sun of reahtv fiom fit anient spuit of jouth, iell before hci pieicmu ца/е. Yet the change that she felt m her faculties was greater than that which iuul íeally taken place; it was only the disclo- Miie of another petal of the blowing lose, but tho bud had contained the genu of all that appeared a^ it new «treated.
Л\ itii this matured judgement and depth of feeling, she was called upon to take an arduous- part in a most doubtful and perilous under¬ taking. The enthusiasm that distinguished her, had ever induced her to place a great con¬ fidence in her own sentiments, and the insta n- tíineoiľ* decision of any doubtful point; and now she did not hesitate in resolving to become one in the conspiracy : her refusal would not Чор its progress ; her consent would enable her to judge of, and regulate its nıcasuıc*. She no longer loved the prince ; his crueltv had degraded bini exen from the small place tint he had still kept in her heart. But .such \\н* tlie force of early feeling, that she desired to i ostore her afiections to him, when he should again become gentle antl humane, as he appeared when she first knew him. Adversity mi'iht biing about this change. Bondelmonti appeared. He appeared with a face of satisfaction and even of joy, as lie claimed her promise of the morning·. She leuewed it solemnly, while her serious coun te¬ ia ι nee, and the touching modulation of hei \OiCe, told how fiuni the depth of her heart u he
felt the extent and force of the engagement info vvhich she entered. Bondelmonti then detail¬ ed to her the circumstances of the conspiracy. The family of tbe Quartezzani had been that which had most assisted Castruccio in his i ise to power, and had stood by him long with fi¬ delity. But, as his tyranny became more se¬ cure, he feared their power, more than ho was pleased by their support, and supected that they only looked upon him as an instrument to fight their battles awhile, and then to be put aside at the first opportunity. He changed his demeanour towards them, from that of friend¬ liness, to the coldest distrust, and took the earliest opportunity to banish the chief among them from Lucca. Disgusted by this ingra¬ titude, they withdrew from court, and tempted by the emissaries of Bondelmonti, now entered into a conspiracy against him, joining with the Avogadii, his professed enemies, to despoil him of power, perhaps of life. Bondelmonti explained to Euthanasia ail the circumstances of the plan they had con¬ certed to get the city into their hands. Tiie
present governor of Pisa, vvho remembered, and hated the prince on account of the treason he had fomented against him, was to advance in a hostile manner.to Ripafrata; and, while the shew of force on that side should attract Castruccio and his army, a detachment was ю cross the hill of St. Giuliano, and come sud¬ denly on the city, whose gates would be open¬ ed to them by one of the conspirators. The Florentine force would hover on the banks of tiie Guisciana; and, taking advantage of the confusion which the seizure of Lucca would occasion, would pass the river, and march di¬ rectly towards the city, declaring liberty to the j.>easant, and attacking the partizans of the ty¬ rant alone. King Robert of N aples had a fleet already in the gulph of Spezia, which, on the news of the breaking out of the conspiracy, would disembark its soldiers on the Lucchese territory, and thus add to the general confu¬ sion. This was the outline of the plan ; there were many smaller' circumstances whicii Bondel¬ monti detailed. He then named their asso-
ciates in the plot. In calling over the list he mentioned Tripalda ; Euthanasia's eyes flashed angrily at the sound of that name. "Tripalda!" she cried, "Battista Tripal¬ da! Is he one of your associates г Nay then, 1 am truly sorry that I am now numbered among yo»." " Why this passion, my fair cousin r Tri¬ palda is a man of infinite talent : his counsels have been of the greatest benefit to us. I do not think that our plot would ever have ripen¬ ed into maturity, had it not been for him. Of wdiat consequence is the virtue or \i-e of -ι man on such an occasion ? Edçed tools are what we want; it matters little the evil name vvith vvhich they may be branded." " You reason ill, my friend ; and, if you per¬ sist, I foresee the failure of our plan, and the destruction of those engaged in it. I have promised my assistance, nor will I shrink from the task imposed upon ine; but 1 can no longer have faith in our success, if one so treacherous and unprincipled as Tripalda be admitted into a participation of our counsels. Accident has made me acquainted vvith the full extent of
his crimes ; it is the knowledge of them that has caused his expulsion from the palace and society of the prince, his crimes alone impel him to associate in this conspiracy, and they also ought to induce us to reject him ; that cause must be bad, which requires the assist¬ ance of one so wicked as this infidel priest," " You are strangely prejudiced, methinks, against this man/' replied Bondelmonti, "but indeed, my dear cousin, such as he is, we must now tolerate him. He is not only acquainted wiih every circumstance of the conspiracy, but has been its most active member. Many of our most valuable partizans have been gained over by him alone ; he is the tie which binds those who are personally at variance one with the other, and the stay which fixes the fluctua¬ ting/ 3 "And this then is the trap into which we are about to fall? This man hates the prince, because Castruccio İs fully acquainted with the extent of his iniquity; for the same reason he detests me------" " This expression of yours," interrupted Bondelmonti, " proves the excess of your mis-
apprehension. So far from disliking, he es¬ teems and admires you, and it was at his in¬ stigation that I first named our purpose to you." " All that you say, unfortunately increase« my distrust. But, if, as I believe, I have done well in promising my assistance, fear shall not withhold me from exerting my powers, and giving my whole heart to the undertaking. My dear Bondelmonti, you are the oldest of шу friends, you vvere the friend of my father, 1 trust much to your judgement; I confide greatly in the sense of right which nature ha.s implanted in my own heart ; I hope no false view, no veiled passion, misleads me now, vvhen most I desire to act well, justly toward* others, and towards myself: the catastrophe is in the hands of that irresistible Power which guides us all ; and, if we fail, no weakness, nu vain reproach, or worse treachery, shall tarnish my defeat. Trust in me to the death."
К .5
CHAPTER Χ. Euthanasia removes to Lucca.-—Conference z^ith Tripalda. — Tripalda tunu inj ormer. ONE of the first effects of Euthanasia's en¬ tianee mto the conspiracy of Bondelmonti, was a journey fiom Floience to Lucca, lt was necessaiy for her to be theie some tune be¬ lote the bieaking out of tiie plot, that slie might lie able to take the patt allotted to hei She quitted her native city with a hea\v heait. it was at the end of the month of No\embei ; and tlie lowering skies poi tended iam, and the baie earth, stripped of its summci omámenú, appealed chilled b> the cold blast that passed mei it. The olive and ile4 woods, and the lew coik tiees and C)presto«, tlutgiew on tlic declivities of tiie hills, diversified tlie landscape with their bobei green: but they had a fimeieal appearance; tliey were a-^ tlie pail of tlie d\ing
year, and the melancholy song of their waving branches wa> its dirge. Euthanasia's mind was no store-house of blithe thoughts. She felt deeply the danger of the project in vvhich bhe had embarked ; and vet its danger was one of the considerations ihat reconciled her to it. To have encounter¬ ed Casti uccio vvith superior force, and to hive despoiled hiui of all power with security L - » bericlri would have been hateful to her feelings; and it appealed to her that in acting such a part she would have merited the disapproba¬ tion of mankind. But she appioached llic foundations of his power by a path uicom- passed vvith danger; she groped thiough l'io uuuky air of ni^ht, and owls and bab thi4d befoie her, and flapped their w ing-> m lu r eye- ; Ik ι footing wa-> unsteady ;—a precipice yawn¬ ed on each side, and the piobable ic-.uk of htr undertaking vas ignominy and deatii. s h^ h'lt all this. The name ot Tnpalda iiad ex¬ tinguished in her bosom cvciy hope of sui ce -, She fell that the purity of liei intentions wou» I оксиде her in her own eves; n^d she muM then endure with patience all of Ыи«т and см!
that might befal her. She could not say in the words of the poet, Roll on, the chariot-wheels of my dear plot?, And bear mine eiids to tlieir desired marks ! As yet there's not a rub of wit, or gulph of thought, No rocky misconstruction, thorny таге, Or other let of any doubtfulness : As yet thy way is smooth ami plain, Like the green ocean in a silent calm*. Noi the course she followed was a slippery path, that overhung a chasm terrible as death : the sea on which she sailed was rife with quick¬ sands, and its breakers threatened instant de¬ struction. Sometimes the memory of her peaceful life at Florence obtruded itself upon her, and more than that, her charitable occupations when she attended the sick in thai city, and whence, as from a rough-hewn chalice containing necta- rian drink, she had quaffed happiness. Some¬ times she reproached destiny tliat she had not fallen a victim to her perilous exertions; but she endeavoured to shut out these remem-
brances from her mind, to look before her and not behind. Wlmt though dense clouds hid the future, and thunder muttered above ? she was borne on by a virtuous purpose, which would be to her as tiie wings of an eagle, or the sure foot of the precipice-walking chamois. And then, if the enterprise succeeded, she would save Castruccio. But for her he would be sacrificed by his insatiable enemies. But her hand would avert their daggers, her voice bid them " Hold ! "------Her imagination pic¬ tured the whole scene. He would be seized by his enemies, and expect deatii ; he would be conveyed aboard one of the vessels of the king of N aples ; and she would be there, to watch over and tend upon him. At first he might repulse, perhaps spurn her : but patient forbearance, and her meek demeanour wouki soften him ; he would see the tears of her de¬ votion ; he would hear hei defence; and lie would forgive her. They w'ould di.sembaik on some lovely island on the sea of Baiæ— ids prison. A resting-place, whose walls would be the ocean, and whose bars and iocks die ail« encompassing air·—-would be allotted to him
on the island of Ischia. Thence he would sur¬ vey the land w r here the philosophers of past ages hved ; he would study their lessons ; and their wisest lore would descend into his soul, hke the dews ofheaven upon the parched frame of the wanderei in the Arabian desarts. By degrees he would love obs-cuiity. The} would behold together the wondrous gioì ies of the heavens, and the beauty of that transparent ч?а, whose floor of pebbles, shells and v\ec(K, is as a diamond· paved palace of iomancc, •-hone on and illusttatcd as it is by the sim"s iav'3. He would see the flame aiisefrorn Ve- 4iviu% and behold afar off the «moke of the binning lava,—such was lhe emblem of Ins ibrmcr hfe ; but he would then have become, hke the land he trod, an extinguished volcano ; .uni the soil would piove more fertile, moie neh m beautv and excellence, than those cold iViüuls which had nevei ielt the vivifying heat of mi-di tv and subdued passion*. Thus-die di earned; and thus she cheated herseli into tianqudlity. She an ived at Pisa, w'heieshe was met by Oliando Qiiaitcy/ani, who explained to her much of the minutiæ ol
the plot, and besought her to hasten its execu* lion. " I pine, in exile," he said, " still to be¬ hold that ungrateful tyrant seated on a throne, vvhich, if it be not formed of our skulls, yet exists only to torture and destroy us. My bro¬ thers are tardy, those Avoggadii, lazy and inert. They are still at Lucca; they see its fertile % allies; they live among its mountains. Some¬ times indeed I dare go to the top of the hill of S<m Giuliano, and behold its toweis almost at inv feet: but I long to make one with mv tcllow-citizens tu tnter again into tlic lisb oî hie." Euthanasia quitted Pisa. She ciosscd the pLm to the foot ot the hills, and passed along thiough Pugnano and Uipaualu. She wa· vi \ melancholv. How could U he oiherw i-e - ^ho had euU'ied upon a ïace, whose pcualtv »ah death, whose pn/e was vet hidden in the mi-is of futurity ;— İt muht tum out t vt η тон· bli'ilitinii and temblé than death ibelf. But theie wa*· no room lor ictrtat' ; tiie path wa^ nanovv, and her chanot couid not tuin; she ши -t fix her eve·-, upon the цоа!, tbi he tin ">usequeucc good 01 evil, »he must arme
there, she must there seek and find the fulfil¬ ment of her destiny. She entered Lucca at the beginning of the month of December; and she went imme¬ diately to the palace vvhich iiad been assigned her by the Lucchese government, in compen¬ sation for her demolished castie. The same evening that she arrived, the two chiefs of the conspiracy, Ugo Quartezzani and Tripalda, visited her. The name of Tripalda, so often and so fearfully repeated by the dying Bea¬ trice, made her shrink from all communication vvith one who had tarnished his life with ihe foulest crimes. On this occasion she was obliged however to smother her indignation ; and lie, from a sense of his own importance* was more presumptuous and insolent than siie had ever seen him. " M adonna," said he, stalking forward vvith an erect mien, and half shut eyes, which, although they vvere not bent on the ground, yet ever avoided the direct gaze of those to whom he spoke;—" Madonna, I much praise your wis¬ dom in entering into this conspiracy. We all know that, when you choose to exert your abi-
h ties, you are the cleverest woman in Tuscany. This is a period which will shew you in your true colours." " Mester Battista, let us leave to speak of me and ray poor talents : vve come to talk of far weightier matter ; and I bear a message to Messer Ugo from his brother Orlando." They novv began to speak of the future ; but Tripalda WOuld allow no one to talk but him? self; and he walked up and down the room delivering his opinion in a loud voice. " Hush, for Jesu's sake ! " cried Ugo, " some one will overhear us, and we are all iost." Tripalda looked suspiciously around, ap¬ proached on tiptoe the sopha on which Eu¬ thanasia and Ugo sat, and, speaking in a whis¬ per, he said,—" I tell you w r e shall succeed. Look ! I have already sharpened the dagger vvhich is to stab the tyrant to the heart." " Now the Mother of God defend him ! " cried Euthanasia, turning pale : " that is be¬ yond my contract. Bear witness, Ugo, tbat I entered into this plot on condition that his life should be saved." " Women ! women ! " said f ripalda, con-
temptuously, " By the body of Bacchus! I wonder vvhat Bondelmonti meant by intro¬ ducing a woman into the plot. One way or another they have spoiled, and ever will spoil, every design that the wisdom of man has con¬ trived. I say he must die." " 1 say he shall not, sir priest. And remem¬ ber, you are not one who dares place your warrant on the life of Antelminelli, That is guarded by spirits of whose very existence you ere ignorant ; it İs guarded by devoted love and disinterested virtue ; and you shall not endan¬ ger it." " You indeed talk of spirits, of which I and aii the wise among men know nothing, In the present case I do not exactly see what devoted love has to do with a conspiracy to overthrow the party beloved ; and аз for disinterested vir¬ tue, all the v irtue 1 know any tiling about bids me stab the tyrant. He siiall die." " Nay, as you say that you understand me not, you may well leave to speak of vvhat dwells without the circle of your intelligence. Are you not a priest? a man of peace? and dare you avow such thoughts ? They shame ypur pro-
feszion ; and, i f any spark of virtue dwelt within vou, you would now blush as deep a red, a« vour hands would shew, stained with tha*; blood you think to shed." " Madonna," said Ugo, " you are now ani¬ mated beyond all prudence. Speak mildly ; and Messer Tripalda will yield." "That will I not!" cried Tripalda, com- ртс -jsìng his thin lips, and elev ating liis high brows. " 1 have doomed him to death; and he shall die. By my soul's salvation, he shall ! " " Then is your soul lost, for he shall live." The gentle modulation of Euthanasia's voice, now first attuned to command, carried with it an irresistible force, while she extended her fair arm in earnest gesture ; then, calming her- **elf/ she continued : " I entered into this con- ppiiacy on one condition; and I might well say, 'If you keep not your vvoids with me, neither will I keep mine vvith you ; if you be¬ tray me, so will 1 betray you.' But I say not this ; I have other means of silencing this man. I know you, Ί /Hpalda ; and you are well aware, that I can see througli the many folds vvhich
you have wound round your heart. You oblige me to menace you. I can tell a tale, Tripalda, a tale the knowledge of wliose ex¬ ceeding horror is confined to your own po!- luted heurt; but whose slightest sketch wouhl fill mankind with detestation, and your destruc¬ tion would quickly follow. Dare not even to imagine the death of Castruccio ; while he is safe, you are safe ; otherwise you know what will follow." " So far from knowing, I cannot even guess your meaning," replied Tripalda ; but with a subdued voice and a humble manner. " In truth, Madonna, you speak enigmas to me. But since you are resolved to save the life of the prince, so let it be. But I suppose you will allow us to secure his person." " We have a plan for that," said Euthana¬ sia, turning to Ugo, " a plan to which I hope you will accede: for Castruccio must be saved ; Bondelmonti entered into that engagement with me, before I became a party to your plot." " It shall be as you command," replied Tri¬ palda, who had shifted his place several times,
and seemed to stand as uneasily before the now softened looks of Euthanasia, as a hypo¬ crite well might before the eyes of the accusing angel. " I will leave you now," continued he, " for I promised to be with Nicola dei Avo- gadii at eight o'clock, and seven struck some time ago. Good night, Madonna; when vve again meet, I hope you will be better pleased with my iutentions, and thank me for my ex¬ ertions in favour of your friend, the prince." He quitted the room. Euthanasia followed him with her eyes until he had closed the door; and then she said to Ugo, " 1 distrust that man; and if my purpose did not lift me alike above fear and hope, I should dread him. Bui do you have a care, Ľ go; and, if you re¬ gard your own safety, watch him, as you would oue whose sword you must parry, until the deed you meditate be accomplished." " You judge hastily, Madonna; he is the í worn enemy of Castruccio ; and I believe him to be, on this occasion at l^ast, trust-worthy. 1 emmot divine vvhat you know concerning him ; it is surely something black, for he cow¬ ered beneath your words. But a man may be
one day wicked, and good the next ; for self- interest sways all, and we are virtuous or vi¬ cious as we hope for advantage to ourselves. The downfal of Antelminelli will raise him ; arid therefore he is to be trusted." " That is bad philosophy, and worse mora¬ lity, Ugo : but vve have no time to dispute now ; remember, that I tell you to beware of Tii- pakia. Now let us occupy ourselves in vvoi- tbicr considerations." Attera long conversation, in vvhich all wa* concluded except tbe exact period for tbe breaking out ofthe conspiracy, L go retired, ic piepare messengers for Pisa and Florence, tbat they might, with the concurrence of their as¬ sociates, determine the conduct of this la^-t act of the tragedy. Euthanasia was left alone. She had been roused to tbe expression oí anger by tbe insolent cruelty of Tripalda; but her nature, mild as it was, quickly forgot tha ftxiinp- of indignation, and now other thought* (oh, far other tlioughts !) possessed her. She was again in Lucca. She ascended to the tower of her palace; and tbe waning moon, which shone in the ca3t, shed its yellow and
melancholy light over the landscape : she could distinguish afar the abrupt and isolated rock on which the castle of Valperga had stood ; it formed one of tbe sides of the chasm vvhich the spirits of creation had opened to make free the course ofthe Serchio. The scene was unchanged ; and even in winter the soul of beauty hovered over it, ready again to re¬ animate the corpse, when the caducean wand of spring should touch it. The narrow, deep streets of Lucca lay like tbe allies of a prison around her ; and she longed for the consum¬ mation ofthe deed in which she had engaged, when she might fly foi ever from a .scene, which had been too de^r to her, not to make ib sight painful in her altered situation. In tbe mean time, while in deep security of thought she biooded over the success of her attempt, the hour vvhich yet lingered on the dial was big with hci ruin ; and events wbich threatened to destroy her for ever, already came so near, that th<h awful shadow began to be thrown on the p«ah of her hfe. Tripalda had left her, burning vvith all the malice of which his evil nature was so amply
susceptible. He had learned tbat the prisoner of the castle in the Campagna di Roma had survived, and had fallen into the hands of Eu¬ thanasia : and he knew that his fate depended upon disclosures that she was enabled to make. The prisoner was now dead ; but both Cas¬ truccio and Euthanasia had become in part the depositaries of her secret ; Euthanasia had heard his name pronounced, mingled with shrieks and despair, by the lips of the lovely maniac ; and, after her death, she had reveal¬ ed her suspicions to the prince, whik he in anger forbade the priest ever again to ap¬ proach his palace or his person. In disgra¬ cing and banishing him from his presence, Cas¬ truccio had incurred the penalty of his hate ; and he was overjoyed to think, that in destroy¬ ing the man who had injured him, he should also free himself from one who was conscious ofthe most perilous secrets concerning hirø. He had been loud in his abuse of the prince ; but none had listened to him, except those who sympathized in his feelings ; and Antel¬ minelli despised him too heartily to take heed to what he said.
•6t
Thus, wjth the wily heart and wicked de¬ sign of a serpent beneath a magpie's exterior, this self-named Brutus of modern Italy, whose feigned folly was a cover for pride, selfishness and all uncharitableness, fomented a conspi¬ racy in Lucca to overthrow a tyrant, wbo well deserved to fall, but who was as pure as the milk-white dove, if compared with the sable plumage of this crow. He had endeavoured to intice Euthanasia to participate in the plot, he hardly knew why, secure that, if she were persuaded to enter into it, it would be pregnant with nothing but misery and suűering for her. The scene which had taken place in her pa¬ lace, overturned all his ideas. Castruccio de¬ spised and banished him ; but he had never menaced the disclosure of those secrets, whose smallest effect would be to immure him for ever within the dungeons of some convent. He therefore hated, rather thaû feared bim ; but the words of Euthanasia had terrified bis soul, and with bis terror awakened all those feelings of hellish malignity with which his heart was imbued. To destroy her, and save himself, was now the scope of his desire. VOL. III. L
To Detray the conspiracy, and deliver over his confederates to death, was of little moment in his eyes, compared with the care he had for his own preservation, and the satisfaction of his new-born revenge. All night he slept not; he walked up and down his room, easing his heart with curses, and with images of impend¬ ing ruin for his enemies*. When morning dawned, he hasted to Agosta, and made his way into the private cabinet of Vanni Mor¬ decastelli. Castruccio was at Pistoia, and would not return until tbe following day ; in the mean time Mordecastelli was the governor of Lucca. He was seated in his cabinet vvith his secie- tary vvhen Tripalda entered : like a true cour¬ tier, he hardly deigned to look on the man who was disgraced by his prince. " Messer Tripalda," Laid he, " are you still in Lucca ? I thought some one told me that you had returned to your canonica te. Have you any business with mc? Be brief; for you see that I am occupied." £t Messer Vanni, I have business with you ; but it must tie private. Do not look thus con-
tcmptuousiy on me ; for you know that î have been useful to you before; and İ shall now be so again." # ' í do not much care to trust myself alone with you ; for they say that you have sworn destruction to ail the prince's friends. How¬ ever, I am armed," he continued, taking a dagger fiom his bosom, and drawing it from íťs sheath; "so, Ubaldo, уоч may leave us а.оье. "And, Ubaldo, do you hear," cried Tri¬ palda, "it is as much as your life is worth to tell any one that ï am with the governor. The very walls of the palace must not know it." " And are you the lord to threaten me, Mesácr Canonico? though you have a fooľs head, pray keep a discreet tongue." " Silence, Ubaldo," said Mordecastelli. "Go, and remember what he says: you shall answer for it, ifit be known that this visit has taken place.------And now, Sir Priest, vvhat have vou to sav to me? if it be not something 4/44/ О well wortli the hearing, you shall pay a rich pe¬ nalty for this impertinence of yours/' " Remember, Messer Vanni, who put you L 2
on the right scent in Leodino's plot ; remem¬ ber the golden harvest which that brought you in* Remember this ; and put aside your pride and insolence." " I remember weil the detestable part tbat you then played, and it had been well that your head had been struck off instead of Leodmo's. But you trifle now, and I have no time to waste; if you have any fresh scene of villainy to disclose, be quick." " I have discovered a plot of the highest consequence. One that counts among the conspirators the first citizens of the principa¬ lity. But I must make my conditions before I tell you further : I hold the life of your lord in my grasp ; and, before I part with my ad¬ vantage, I must be paid its full worth." "Conditions! Aye, they shall be generous and ample ones ; if you fairly tell all, you shall be believed on your word, and not be put to the torture, to extort that which craft may make you conceal: these are all the conditions a villain, such as you, deserves. Come, waste no more time ; if your plot be worth the tell¬ ing, you well know that you will not go unre-
warded j if this is aH smoke, why perchance you may be smothered in it ; so no more de* lay " Tripalda opened each door, peeped behind the hangings, under the tables, and chans, and then, approaching as softly as a cat vvhu sees a mouse playing in the moonshine, or a spider who beholds his prey unconsciously cleaning his wings within an inch of him, he sat down beside Mordecastelli and whispered : «The AvogadhV' " Well, what of them ? I know that tin v hate Antelminellij but they aie not powei iul enough to do any mischief· 1 ' " The Quartezzanb" " Nay, then this is of deeper interest. Have they turned vipers ? By St. Martin ! they have a sting ! " Tripalda in a low and solemn voice entered into a detail of the plot. a And now," said he, when he had nearly concluded, "except for one circumstance, you had not heaid a word of this from me." " You are a villain to say so;—-but vvhat is
this circumstance? the love you bear your prince ;" " The love I bear him might have made me bring the Pope to Lucca vvith thirty thousand Gascons at his heels, but not betray a plot against him. No truly it was not that; but they have admitted a woman into it; and, as there is neither safety nor success where they are, I made my retreat in good time." " A woman ! What, Berta Avogadii ŕ" "One of far higher rank; the countess of Valperga." " Nay, then, it is all a lie, Tripalda, and, by the Virgin, you shall repent having amused me with your inventions! The countess of Val¬ perga ! She is too wise and too holy lo mingle in one of your midnight plots : besides, once upon a time, to my knowledge she loved Cas¬ truccio." "The old proverb tells us, Vanni, that sweetest love turns to bitterest hate. Remem¬ ber Valperga ! Do you think she has forgotten it? Remember her castle, her power, the state she used to keep, when she was queen of tboht·
barren mountains ! Do you think she has for¬ gotten that? She might carry it humbly; but she, like the rest of those painted ruins, is proud at heart, proud and revengeful ; why she has vowed the death of her quondam lover," " I would not believe it, if an angel were to tell me : do you think then that I will credit such a tale, when it is given out by a devil like you ? Nay, do not frown, Sir Priest ; the de¬ vil loves to clothe himselfin a holy garb; and report says that you have more than once shewn the cloven foot." " You are pleased to jest, Lord Governor," replied Tripalda, vvith a ghastly smile, " do you know the hand-writing of Orlando Quar¬ tezzani ?" " As I know my own." " Read then that letter." It was a letter from Orlando to Tripalda, conjuring him to be speedy in his operations, and saying that, since the countess of Valper¬ ga appeared to enter "mto the plot with a vv ll¬ ing heart, all difficulties would novv be easily removed. Vanui put down the letter with a look c>t
mingled contempt and indignation. "And who else have ye among you ? I expect next to hear that some of the 9aints or martyrs, or perhaps the Virgin herself has come dovvn to aid you." " Here is a list of tiie conspirators ; and here are letters which will serve as further proofs of the truth of my disclosures," " Give them to me. And now let me tell you, my excellent fox, that I by no means trust you, and that, knowing your tricks of old, I may well suspect that, after trying to get all you can from us by betraying your associates, you will endeavour to get all you can out of them by assisting them to escape; so, my good fellow, you must for the present remain under lock and key." " I hoped that I had deserved belter---- —" "Deserved! Aye, you deserve the tortine, as much as the vilest heretic wbo denies the passion of our Redeemer. You know your¬ self io be an arch-traitor, and, by the saints ! you shall be treated like one. Come, there is a better room for your prison tiian you deserve : go in peaceably ; for if you oblige me to u.«e
force, you shall lodge for the next week in one of those holes under ground, of which I believe you have some knowiedge, since your fiendish malice contrived them." " Well, Vanni, I yield. But I hope that your future gratitude—" " Oh ! trust to my gratitude. I know my trade too well not to encourage such hell-hounds as you are/'
L 5
CHAPTER XL Euthanasia in Prison. HAVING thus disposed of Tripalda, Vanni sat down to study the list of conspirators that he had given him. It contained three hun¬ dred names. " What a murderous dog this priest is ! " he cried. " Why every noble fa¬ mily has one or more of its uiembcrs engaged m this plot. I shall take the liberty to curtail it exceedingly, before it meets the eyes of the prince. The ringleaders are enough for him : the rest I shall punish on my private account; a few fines will bring them to reason, and they are better subjects ever after. But Valperga ! I would as soon have believed that an ass could drink up the moon, as that that villain could have drawn her from her illustrious sphere, to be swallowed up among the rest of tbe gulls, when he wants to make merry with a few murdeis.
But, by St. Martin ! as she has sown, so must she reap ; and I hate her ten times the more for her hypocritical, angel face. Conspire against Castruccio ! He used her ill ; but a meek and forbearing woman's love that for¬ gave all injuries, is what she ever boasted, if not in words, at least in looks and manners. For thy sake, thou goodly painted saint, like the rest of them, well looking outside, but worms and corruption within,» I will never trust more to any of thy sex !—Nor shalt thou escape. Others will pay a fearful penalty for their treason j and thine, which merits much more than theirs, shall not go free. I could have staked my life upon Euthanasia ; I knew her from a child ; I remember her a smiling cherub with deep blue eyes and curly tresses ; and lier very name seemed to carry a divinity with it. I have many sins on my head ; and, vvhen my death comes, many years of purga¬ tory may be tacked on to my absolution ; but methought that, when I contemplated and al¬ most adored the virtues of Euthanasia, my soul was half-way through its purification ;—~ and she to fail ! "
Vanni, who, in the common acceptation, was truly faithful to his master, was struck with disgust at what appeared to him the depth of treachery on her part. He knew little of the human heart, its wondrous subtlety and lawyer-like distinctions ; he could not imagine the thousand sophistries that cloaked her pur¬ pose to Euthanasia, the veils of woven wind, that made her apparent treachery shew like purest truth to her. He could not judge of the enthusiasm, that, although it permitted her to foresee the opprobrium and condemnation which would be attached to her conduct, yet made her trample upon all. She walked on in what she deemed the right path ; and neither the pangs of doubt, nor the imminent risque that awaited her perseverance, could arrest her ; or, worse than all, the harsh opinion of man, his ever ready censure of ideas he can¬ not understand, his fiery scorn of virtue which he might never attain. She passed on to her goal, fearless of, and despising "the barbed tongues, or thoughts more sharp than they," which threatened to wound her most sacred feelings.
But Vanni could not penetrate the inner sanctuary of her heart, which throned self- approbation as its deity, and cared not for the false gods that usurp the pleasant groves and high placés of the world. After having vented his spleen with that sceptred infallibility men assume, and condemned her and her whole sex unheard, Mordecastelli proceeded to more active business, and before night the chiefs of the conspiracy were thrown into prison. Early the following morning Castruccio returned to Lucca. Mordecastelli met him with a countenance, in which tlie falcon-eye of the prince could read uncommon tidings. a v^ n y ¿ 0 y 0U look thus, my friend?" said he. a Either laugh or cry; or tell me wby you do neither, although on tlie verge of both." " My lord, I have cause. 1 have discovered a conspiracy which threatened your power, and that not a mean one ; so that I must wish you joy, that you have again escaped from these harpies. But, when you hear the names of tbe conspirators, you also will be sorrowful ; several of your friends are among thera ; and names, which have been repeated in your daily
prayers vvith blessings joined to them, are now written in the list of traitors." " When I took power upon me, my dear Vanni, I well knew that I wrapt suspicion about me as a robe, and wedded danger, and treachery, and most other evils. So let it be! I was yet a boy, when I prayed to be a prince, though my crown were of thorns. But who are these ? Which of шу old friends are so blind, as to see their own interest in my downfal r " Mordecastelli gave the list of the ringleaders which he had prepared, and watched the countenance of Castruccio as he read it. He observed contempt and carelessness oil his countenance, until the name of the countess of Valperga met his eyes; he then saw the expression change, and a slight convulsion on his lips, which he evidently strove to suppress. Vanni couhl contain himself no longer. " You see, my lord, you see her name. And, as true as there is a sun in heaven, as true, as she is false, this saintlike Euthanasia has spotted her soul wilh treason. I have proofs, here they are. It would make one doubt one*ssalvation, to see her with her Ma-
dona face creep into this nest of traitors- There they must have been, closeted in a cel¬ lar, or hid in, some dark hole; for else my spies would have earthed them out long ago. And i figure her to myself, with her golden hair, and eyes which illumined even the night, they vvere so dazzling,—entering a room made dark enough to hide treason ;—and to think that tire hellish bat did not take wing out at the window vvhen siie appeared 1 but no, she cherished him in her bosom." " You are eloquent, Vanni." " I am, my lord. I took her for an angel, and I find her a woman ;—one of those frail, foolish creatures we all despise——" " Peace, peace, my dear Vanni ; you talk insufferable nonsense. Let us proceed to more serious business. What have you done with these people ŕ " "They are all in prison." " The countess among them r " " Why, my lord, would you have had her spared г " " She is in prison then ?" " She is."
" Vanni, you must look to these people. I insure you that I by no -means find myself mercifully inclined towards them. These con¬ tinual . plots, and this foolish ingratitude, to give it no worse name, disturb our government too much. I will tear it away root and branch ; and the punishment of these fellows shall be a terrible warning to those who may think of treading in the same steps." Castruccio fixed his eyes upon Morde¬ castelli ; but there was an expression in them that made the confident cast his upon the ground. They glared; and hie pale face became paler, so that his very lips were white. He looked steadily on Mordecastelli for some minutes ; and then said : « They must all die." "They shall, my lord." u Yet not by -an easy death. That were a poor revenge. They shall die, as they have lived, like traitors ; and on their living tombs shall be written, Thus Castruccio punishes his rebel subjects. Have I toiled, exposed my person to danger, become the fear and hope of Tuscany, to stain with my best blood tiie
dagger of one of these miserable villains f Do you see that they die so, Vanni, as that I may be satisfied/* " I will, my lord. And the countess ?"— " Leave her to me. 1 will be her judge and executioner." " Castruccio ?" " Do not look so pale, Vanni ; you do not understand. A few hours hence I will tell you more. Now leave me." Solitude is a coy companion for a prince, and one he little loves. But Castruccio had much to occupy his thoughts, much that ago¬ nized him. "Revenge!" He clenched his hand, and, throwing his eye* upward, he cried : " Yes, revenge is among those few goods in life, wbich compensate for its many evils. Yet it is poor : it is a passion which can have no end* Burning in pursuit, cold and unsatis¬ factory in its conclusion, it is as love, which wears out its .soul in unrequited caresses. But still, it shall be mine-; and these shall sutler. They shall feel in every nerve what it is to have awakened me. I will not fear ; í will not feel my life depend alone upon the word
of these most impotent slaves. They shall die ; and the whole world shall learn that Castruccio can revenge." Thus he thought : yet there was an inner sense, that betrayed to him the paltriness of his feelings, when he imagined that there was glory in trampling upon the enemy beneath his feet. He would not listen to this small still voice ; but, turning from these ideas, he began to reflect on that which filled him with a bitterness of feeling to vvhich he had long been a stranger. "So, she has conspired against me; and, forgetful of all those ties that bound, us not¬ withstanding her coldness, she has plotted my death ! She knew, she must have known, that in spite of absence and repulse, she was the saint с ¡my life ; and that tbis one human weak¬ ness, or human virtue, remained to me, when power and a strong will had in other respects metamorphosed me. Does she forget, that I have ever worn near my heart a medallion engraven vvith her vow ? s of childhood ? She Ьаь forgotten all. And not only has she for¬ gotten to love, but she has cast aside the up-
rightness of her understanding, and stained the purity of her soul. "Itis well for me to speak thus, who, instead of the virtues that once were mine, have as mi¬ nisters, revenge, and hate, and conquest. But, although I choose to be thus, and although ï have selected these hell-hounds to drag my car of life, 1 have not lost the sense of what is just and right ; and, in the midst of all my wilful errors and my degradation, I coutd discern and worship the pure loveliness of Euthanasia. By the saints! I believed, that, if she died, like Dante*s Beatrice, she would plead for me before the throne of the Eternal, and that I should be saved through her» Now she is lost, and may perdition seize the whole worth* less race of man, since it has fallen upon her ! " But SHE MUST BE SAVED. My hands shall not be stained with her blood, nor my soul bear the brand of that crime. But she must not stay here; nor siiall she remain inTuø- cany. She shall co far away, so that I never more may hear iier name : that shall be her punishment, and she must bear it. Now I
must contrive the means ; for she shall not re¬ main another night in prison." Euthanasia in prison! Yes; she had be¬ come the inhabitant of this abode of crime, though her high mind was as far above fault as. human nature could soar ; hers, if it were an error, was one of judgement. But why should I call it error ? To remove a cruel ty¬ rant from his seat of power,—to devote those days, which she might have spent in luxury and pleasure, to a deep solitude, where neither love nor sympathy would cheer her ;—to bear his anger, perhaps his hate, and in the micia t of att to preserve a firmness and sweetness, that might sustain her, and soften him,—to quit all her friends, and her native country for ever, to follow in the steps of one she had ceased to love, but to whom she felt herself for ever bound by her wish to preserve him from that misery which his crimes wouid ulti¬ mately occasion him : these were her errors. After Quartezzani had quitted her on the night of her arrival in Lucca, she had not slept *» ehe was too full of various thought, of
dread and breathless expectation, to compose her spirits to rest. She feit eternity in each second ; and each slow hour seemed to creep forward, stretching itself in a wide, endless cir¬ cle around her. Wiien day dawned, it found her, not sleeping, but vvith open eyes looking on the one last star that faded in the west, call¬ ing to mind a thousand associations, a thou¬ sand hopes, novv lying dead in the ashes of tliat pyre time had heaped together and con¬ sumed ; she looked forward ; yet then she paused ; she dared not attempt to penetrate into futurity;—ail was эо tempestuous and dark. She arose at sun-rise., and had descended into the garden, to breathe the bleak, but, to her feverifcb spirits the refreshing air of a De¬ cember morning; vvhen, at noon, Quartezzani rushed in ; he was deadly pale, and his hair seemed to stand on end vvith fear. " Holy saints ! vvhat has happened ? " cned Euthanasia. " We are all lost ! dead, or worse than dead ! We are betrayed ! " u Tripalda has betrayed usi"*
« He has." " And there is no escape ? " " None. The gates are shut, nor will they* be opened, until we are all seized." " Then most certainly we die ť " " As sure as that Christ died upon the cross ! so surely shall we perish." " Then courage, my friend, and let us cast aside, with all mortal hopes, all mortal fear. I have the start of you, Ugo ; I was prepared for this; but you would not believe me, until now my predictions are sealed by the event. Let us die, as we would have lived, for the causeof freedom ; and let no trembling dismay, no coward tear, make us the mock of oui ene¬ mies. " Other men in various ages have died by untimely death, and vve will dare to imitate them. Others have sustained their fate with fortitude; and let faith and submission to the will of heaven be to us, instead oí that daunt¬ less spirit of inbred virtue that supported the heroes of antiquity/' Euthanasia raised her own spirits аз she spoke ; and fearless expectation, and something
like triumph, illuminated her countenance, as «she cast her eyes upward, and with her hand clasped that of her friend. He received no warmth from the pressure; chilly fear pos¬ sessed him ; and he stood utterly dejected be¬ fore her—he wept. " Aye, weep," she continued, " and I also, did not the tempest of my soul bear all clouds far away, I also might shed tears. You weep to leave those whom you love,------that is a bitter pang. You weep to see your associates sufter; but each must relieve the other from that sorrow by cheerfulness and courage. But," she continued, seeing him entirely subdued by fear, " is there no hope of escape г Exert your ingenuity; once past the gates, you would soon be out of the territory of Lucca, And Castruccio------" " Oh, that most hated name ! Bloody,execra¬ ble tyrant! Curse him ! May the fiends—— * " Cease ! know you not that a dying man's curse falls more on himself, than on him against whom he imprecates the wrath of heaven ľ This is childish; L go, collect yourself; you have a wife;-—woman's wit is ready; consult
with her ; she may devise some plan for your safety." " You are an angel of consolation, Eutha- sia« Heaven bless you ! and do you also re¬ flect on your own danger." He left her: and she (without giving a thought to vain regret ; her moments were too precious) sat down and wrote a long letter to Bondelmonti. It was calm and affectionate : she felt raised above mortality ; and her words expressed the exceeding serenity of her soul. She gave a last farewel to her friends. " It may seem strange to you," she wrote, " that I express myself thus : and indeed, when I reason with myself, methinks I ought not to expect death from the hands of Antelminelli. Kor do I ; and yet I expect some solemn ter¬ mination to this scene, some catastrophe which will divide me from you for ever. Nor is it Italy, beloved and native Italy, that I shall leave, but also this air, this sun, and the earth's beauty. I feel thus ; and therefore do I write you an eternal farewel," She had scarcely finished her letter, wben a messenger arrived from Mordecastelli« He
toid her that the conspiracy was divulged, and that she must in a prison await the orders of Castruccio. She started at the word Prison ; but, recovering herself, she made a sign that she was ready to follow the messenger; so, without a word, without a sigh, she quitted her palace, and, ascending her litter, was conducted to her place of confinement. She passed through the same streets, through whicii the jailor had conducted her to the dungeon of Beatrice. A smali and curiously carved shrine of the Madona with a lamp before it, chanced to recai this circumstance to her mind. " Thou art at peace, blessed one," she said, " tliere where I hope soon to be." The jailor of the prison, who was the same that had besought her to come and comfort poor Beatrice, received lier with a sorrowful countenance, and led her to his most decent apartment, high in the tower, that overlooked the rest of the building. There she was left alone to luminate on lier fortunes, and to imbue lier¬ self with tiiat fortitude, vvhich might carry her vvith honour througli the trials that awaited lm. Tlie circumstance tiiat pressed most pain- VOL. III. M
fully «pon ber, was tbe death which her asso¬ ciate» must sufifer· She tried to forget herself; she, dui not fear death ; she did not expect it at ibe hands of Castruccio ; and her expecta¬ tions and ideaa were too vague to permit her to dread much tbe coming events as tliey re¬ garded her. The window of her prison-cham¬ ber was not grated, and from it she could sur¬ vey the neighbouring country. A thousand feelings passed through her mind, and she could put no order in her thoughts. Sleep refused to visit her; but her reflections became peaceful, and full of pleasant images and recol¬ lections. Morning succeeded to a winter's night. It was clear, and sunshiny, but cold. The cheering beams poured into her room ; she looked upon the azure sky, and the flock of giant mountains which lay crouching around, with a strange pleasure. She felt as if she saw them for the last time, but as if she were capable of enjoying until the latest mo¬ ment those pleasures which nature had ever conferred upon her. Sbe repeated some of Dante*s verses where he describes in such di-
vine strains the solemn calm and celestial beauty of paradise. " When will it be my lot to wander there also," she said, " when shall I enjoy the windless air, and flower- starred meadows of that land ? " Thus the whole day passed; but it was quickly dark ; and she, who had watched for two nights, and was now quite overcome, looking out once upon the evening star, that star she had ever loved, and which was ever to her as the good genius of the world watch¬ ing Ыз children in their repose, repeated the Catholic ejaculation, " Stella, alma, benigna, ota pro nobis ! " then, crossing herself, she lay down to rest, and quickly slept, as peacefully and happily, as a babe rocked in its mother^ агтя*
лг *Л
CHAPTER XIL Euthanasia sails for Sicily, and is lost. A LITTLE before midnight Euthanasia's pu- bon-chamber was unlocked, and the jailor en¬ tered, with a lamp in his hand, accompanied by one of majestic figure, and a countenance beautiful, but sad, and tai nished by the ex- pi ession of pride that animated it. " She bleeps," whispeied the jailor. His companion jaised his finger in token of silence ; and, taking tlie lamp from the man's hand, approached her mattı ess which was spread upon the floor, and, kneeling dovvn beside it, earnestly gazed upon tnat face he had known so well in happiei days. She made an uneasy motion, as if the lamp vvhich he held disturbed her; he placed it on the giound, and shaded it with his figure ; while, by the soft light that fell upon her, he tried to read the images that were working m lier mind.
She appeared but slightly altered since he had first seen İıer. If thougiit had drawn some lines in her brow, the intellect whicii its beau¬ tiful form expressed, effaced them to the eye of tiie spectator : her golden hair fell over iier face and neck : he gently drew it back, while she smiled in her sleep ; her smile was ever past description lovely, and one might well exclaim with Dante Quei, cìC ella par quando un poco $otride 9 Non si può dicer , ne tenere a mente ; Si è nuovo ntiracolo, e gentile*. He gazed on her long ; her white arm lay on her black dress, and he imprinted a sad kiss upon it; she awoke, and saw Castruccio gazing upon her. She started up ; " What does this mean ŕ n she cried. His countenance, which had softened as lie looked upon her, now reassumed its severe ex¬ pression. " Madonna," he replied, " I come to take you from this piace."
She looked on him, endeavouring to read his purpose in his eyes ; but she saw there no explanation of her doubts :—" And whither do you intend to lead me ? " " That you will know hereafter." She paused ; and he added vvith a disdain¬ ful smile, " The countess of Valperga need not fear, while I have the power to protect her, the fale she prepared for me." "What fate?" " Death." He spoke in an under tone, but with one of those modulations of voice, which, bringing to her mind scenes of other days, was best fitted to make an impression upon her. She replied almost unconsciously— '' I did not prepare eleath for you ; God is my witness ! " " Well, Madonna, we will not quarrel about words ; or, like lawyers, clothe our purposes in such a subtle guise, that it might deceive all, if truth did not destroy the spider's web. I cometo lead you from prison." "Not thus, my lord, not thus will 1 be saved. I disdain any longer to assert my in-
tentions, since I am not believed. But am I to be liberated alone; or are my friends in¬ cluded in your merciful intentions ? " " Your friends are too dangerous enemies of tbe commonwealth, to be rescued from the fate that awaits them. Your sex, perhaps the memory of our ancient friendship, plead for you ; and I do not think that it accords with your wisdom to make conditions with one who has the power to do that which best pleases him." " And yet I will not yield ; 1 will not most unworthily attend to my own safety, while my associates die. No, my lord, if they are to be sacrificed, the addition of one poor woman will add little to the number of your victims ; and I cannot consent to desert them." " How do you desert them ľ You will never see or hear of them more, or they of you. But this is trifling j and my moments are pre¬ cious." " I will not—I dare not follow you. My heart, my conscience tell me to remain. I must not disobey their voice." " Ь your еошшепее so officious now, and
did it say nothing, or did your heart silence it, when you plotted my destruction Г " " Castruccio, tnis I believe и the ldst time that I shall ever speak to you. Our heat ts aie m the handb of the father oť all; and lie sees my thoughts. You know me too well, to be- heve that I plotted your death, or that oí any human creature. Now is not the time lo explain my motives and plans : but my earnest prayer was tliat you might live ; ray best hope, to make that life lesb miserable, 1еьь unworthy, than it had hitherto been." She spoke with deep earnestness ; and there v\ as something in her manner, as if the spirit of truth animated all her accents, that com¬ pelled assent. Castruccio believed all ; and he spoke in a milder and more persuasive man¬ ner "Poor Euthanasia! so you were at Ust cajoled by that aich-traitor, Bondelmonti, Well, 1 believe, and pai don all; but, аь the seal of the purity of vour intentions, 1 now claim your consent to my olici h of safety." " I cannot, indeed 1 cannot, consent. Be mcuiful, be magnanimous; aiul paidon all, banish us all where our discontent cannot Le
dangerous to you. But to desert my friend«, and basely to rave that life you deny to them, I never can." The jailor, vvho had hitherto stood in the shade near the door, could no longer contain himself. He knelt to Euthanasia, and earnestly antl warmly intreated her to save herself, and not with wilful presumption to cast aside those means vvhich God had brought about for her safety. " Remember," he cried, " vour mis¬ fortunes will be on the prince's head ; make him not answer for you also. Oh ! lady, for his sake, for ail our sakes, yiekl." Castruccio was much moved to see the warmth of this man. lie took the hand of Euthanasia, he also knelt: " \ es, my only auu dearest friend, save youi self for my sake. Yield, beloved Euthanasia, to my înticatu"*-. indeed you will not die; for you well know that your life is dearer to me than iny own. But yield to my request, byour foi mei loves, 1 intreat; by the prayers which you oiler up for my salvation, I conjure you as they shall be heard, so aUo hear me ! " The light ofthe solitary lamp fell full upon 31 5
the^oun^enance of ÇaMruc.çio J it-was soften¬ ed from «ill -severity; his еуед glistened, And a tear stole silently down his cheek. аз ha prayed .tør to<-yield. They talk of the tears of wo- ineri; but, when tbey flow most plenteously, . they soften, not the bean of man, as one içar from his eye* has power on a woman. Words and looks have been feigned ; they say, though I .believe them not, that women, have feigned teajs : but those of a man, which are ever as the last.demonstration of a too full heart, force ■ belief, and communicate to her who causes them, that excess of tenderness, that intense depth of passion, of which they are themselves the sure indication. Euthanasia had seen Castruccio weep but once before; it was many years ago, when he departed for the batde of Monte Catini ; •and he dien sympathized too deeply in lier sor¬ rows, not to repay her much weeping with one most true and sacred tear. And now. this ,sceQe-\vas present before lier ; ţhe gap. of years remained unfilled ; and she had consented to his request, before she again recalled, her .thoughts, and saw the dreary prison-chamber,
the glimmering lamp, and the rough form of the jailor who knelt beside Antebnineili. Her consent was scarcely obtained,: when Castruc¬ cio leapt up, and, bidding her wrap her capu¬ chin about her, led her by the hand dowivthe steep prison-stairs, while the jailor went before them, and unlocked, and drew back the-bolts of, tiie heavy, creaking.doors. At the entrance of the prison they found a man on horseback holding two other horses. It was Mordecastelli. Castruccio assisted Eu¬ thanasia to mount, and then sprang onhisjown saddle ; they walked their horses to a gate- of thetown which was open ;—they proceededùn silence ;—at the gate Castruccio said to his companion—" Here leave us ; I shall speedily return." Vanni then turned his horse's head, slightly answering the salute of Euthanasia, vvhich she had involuntarily made at parting for ever with one who had been her intimate acquaintance. A countryman was waiting on horseback out¬ side the gate ; " You are our guide ? " said Castruccio. " Lead on then." It w T as a frosty, cloudless night; there was
до moon, but the stars sbone intensely above ; the bright assemblage seemed to congregate from the far wastes of heaven, and to press in innumerable clusters upon the edge of the vi¬ sible atmosphere, to gaze upon the strange earth beneath. The party passed out of the city of Lucca by tlie Pisan gate, and at first put their horses to a gallop. As they approached die lulls, Castruccio came up beside Euthana¬ sia ; they slackened their speed ; she spoke thus : " I have acceded to your request, and left tlie prison ; indeed it were useless in me to re¬ sist one who possesses the absolute power that you do. But I intreat you now tiiat I see you for the last time, to have pity on my compa¬ nions ia this conspiracy. I can think only of them; and if I am to live —if ever I am again to hear of the events which will pass witliin tiie walls of that town, reflect on the sharp pang you will inflict upon me, if I hear of their destruction." " Madonna," replied tiie prince, " I will do that wbich I consider my duty : and let not these our last moments be employed in fruitless Jiscuráon."
Euthanasia felt that it was in vain to speak. Her confederates, her friends> who were re¬ served . instantly to die, stood in funereal groupe before the eye of her soul ; her ima¬ gination made present to her all that they thought, and all that they were to sufter. She looked upon Castruccio ; she saw that he was moulded of an impenetrable substance: her heart swelled to the confines of her bosom, and forbade her such degradation to the assured victims, as would be implied in her uttering one further word in their behalf to the unhear- ing, unrelenting being that stood before her. Castruccio continued : " You are about to leave Tuscany, and to take up your abode in a foreign land. You are still young. I send you from your native country ; but you may at a future period con¬ fess that I have done you a kindness. You have hitherto mingled in die embroiled politics of a republic, and seen conspiracies, heart¬ burnings, and war/* Euthanasia felt herself unable to reply. They had crossed tbe plain of Lucca, and vvere arrived beneath those hills, which, crown-
joà witb towers, and clothed widi deep forests, -were the beautiful romantic steeps thatshe best loved. Tliey struck off here from the usual road, and, fording the Serchio, began to aseead tbe acclivities on the opposite side, pro¬ ceeding one by one up the narrow path. At length they reached the summit, and viewed, stretched before tbem beneath the stars of night, a scene of enchanting beauty. The plain they had just crossed was dimly seen be¬ neath, bounded by its hills ; before them was another plain, desert and barren, through vvhich the Serchio flows, bounded by the dai к line of the sea ; and the Lago di M acci u col i, a marshy lake, was close beneath. " Here I leave you," said Casti uccio ; " theie is your destination," and ho pointed to tiie sea ; " remem bei* one with whom you bave passed your happiest days." He took her hand, and kissed it. Her feel¬ ings were strange, and hardly to be described. She could not entirely forget what he had once been to her. She could at that moment have overlooked his tyranny, his lawless ambition, and his cruelty. But, no ; the moment itself
was a bane to oblivion. She could liave fo*v gotten his past cruelties, but not those which were immediately to be perpetrated, to be per¬ petrated on individuals who had been united with her in a plot for liberty, and some of w T hom her name and her countenance bad per¬ haps prompted to the desperate undertaking, aud egged on to destruction. Castruccio spoke to the guide, recommend¬ ing haste as soon as they should reach the plain, and then turned his horse's head. Euthanasia and her conductor paused on the summit of tiie hill; and she heard the steps of Castruecio's horse, as it made its wav back through the tangled underwood. Then she also began her descent on the other side. Euthanasia, being now separated from her former connections, and from him who had been the evil genius of the scene, began to re¬ sume her wonted tone. The eternal spirit of the universe seemed to descend upon her, and she drank in breathlessly the sensation, which the silent night, the starry heavens, and the sleeping earth bestowed upon her. All seemed
so peaceful, that no unwelcome sensation in her own heart could disturb the scene of which she felt herself a part. She looked up, and exclaimed in her own beautiful Italian, whose soft accents and expressive phrases then so much transcended alî other European languages —" What a brave canopy has this earth, and how graciously does the supreme empyrean smile upon its nursling ! " " E Bellissimo? replied her guide, " ma fi¬ guratevi, Madonna, se è tanto bello sul rovescio, cosa mai sarà al dritto*? Euthanasia smiled at the fancy of one so uncouth in manners and habits of life; and she replied,—" Who know*s how soon it may be my destiny to see that other side, which you imagine outdoes this sublime spectacle in splendour ? " " Heaven preserve you long upon earth,"
replied the man ; " and make you as happy as you deserve, as happy as you have made others ! " " Do you know me then i " " I dwell in the village of Valperga. I and my family have been Aldiani there, since tlie time of the old count Goflredo, your great¬ grandfather. But, Madonna, please you to put spur to your horse ; for we have little time, and I fear that before long the heavens will be overclouded ; that last puff had something of the scirocco in it, and I see a mist in the west tbat foretels wind from that quarter." Tbey put their horses to the gallop. Eu¬ thanasia's was a noble steed, and bore her proudly on. She felt her spirits rise with tlie exhilarating motion ; the wind gathered from the west, and scattered her hair, which, as she quitted her prison, she had slightly bound with a handkerchief; and, as she faced the breeze, its warm breath brought the lagging blood to her cheeks. They approached the sea, and began to hear its roar ; the breeze became stronger as they drew near. The beach was flat, and the small
Üne of sand that bordered tlie waters, was now beaten upon, and covered by the waves. As they came near, Euthanasia felt some curiosity to know her destination ; but she saw nothing but the dim weed-grown field, and the white breakers of the troubled ocean. It was not until they were close upon the sand, that she discerned a large black boat drawn up on the be&£b, and several men near it. One of them came up, and asked the word, which the coun¬ tryman gave ; and then a man, who had the appearance of a leader, came from the boat, and welcomed Euthanasia^—" I am command¬ ed," he said, " by the prince of Lucca to re¬ ceive you, lady." ♦' Arid whidier am ï to go ? " He pointed to a vessel whieh rode hard by, —so near, that she wondered she had not seen it before. Its black hulk cast a deep shade upon the waters ; and the dim sails, increased to an extraordinary size by tbe darkness, flap» ped heavily. She looked upon it with sur¬ prize, and wondered whither it was to bear her; but sbe asked no more questions: ad¬ dressing lierself for her departure, «he took a
land leave of the countryman, and gave him the little gold tiiat bhe liad with her. The man tinued to tbe chief, and said,—" Sir knight, if it be not tliought impertinent, have the courtesy to inform me whither that vessel is bound." The man looked at him somewhat haughti¬ ly : but replied-—" To Sicily." Sicily was tben under the rule of tlie family of the kings of Arragon, who inherited from tiie daughter of Manfred, and were of course Ghibebnes. " The Virgin Mother bless your voyage í " said her guide to Euthanasia,—-" I am afraid that it will Ы rough, for,an ugly wind is rising ; but the saints will surely guard you." Euth&nasia stepped into Ню boat; ita com¬ mander sat beside ber; and die men took their oars : she wavod her band to lier guide> saying, " Farewel, may God bless you ì " slie added in a low tone, half to herself—*" They speak Italian also in Sicily," Theee were the last words she ever spoke to any one who returned to tell tlie tale. The countryman stood upon the beach ;~*~he mw the boat moor beside the vessel; he saw its
crew ascend the dark sides. Tbe boat was drawn up ; the sails were set ; and they bore out to sea, receding slowly vvith many tacks, for the wind was contrary ;—the vessel faded on the sight ; and he turned about, and speeded to Lucca. The wind changed to a more northerly di¬ rection during the night ; and the land-breeze of the morning filled their sails, so that, al¬ though slowly, tbey dropt dovvn southward. About noon they met a Pisan vessel, who bade them beware of a Genoese squadron, which was cruizing ofT Corsica : so they bore in nearer to the shore. At sunset that day a fierce scirocco rose, accompanied by thunder and lightning, such as is seldom seen during the winter season. Presently tbey saw huge, dark columns, descending from heaven, and meeting the sea, which boiled beneath ; they were borne on by the storm, and scattered by the wind. The rain came down in sheets; and the hail clattered, as it fell to its grave in the ocean ;—the ocean was lashed into such waves, that, many miles inland, during the pauses of the wind, the hoarse and constant
murmurs of the far-oíľ sea made the weli- housed landsman mutter one more prayer for those exposed to its fury. Such was the storm, as it was seen from shore. .Nothing more w 7 as ever known of the Sicilian vessel vvhich bore Euthanasia. It never reached its destined port, nor were any of those on board ever after seen. The centi- neh who watched near Vado, a tower on the sea beach of the Maremma, found on the fol¬ lowing day, that the waves had washed on shore some of the wrecks of a vessel : the? picked up a few planks and a broken тач, round which, tangled with some of its cordage, was a white silk handkerchief, such a one as had bound ihe tresses of Euthanasia the night that she h.ad embarked, and in its knot were a few r golden hairs. She was never heard of moie; even her name perished. She slept in the oozy cavern of the ocean ; tha sea-weed was tangled with her shining hair ; and the spirits of the deep wondered that the earth had trusted ьо lovely a creature to the barren bosom of the sea,
which, as an evil step-mother, deceives and betrays all committed to her care. Earth felt no change when she died ; and men forgot her. Yet a lovelier spirit never ceased to breathe, nor was a lovelier form ever destroyed amidst the many it brings forth. Endless tears might well have been shed at her loss; yeť for her none wept, save thé piteous skies, which deplored the mischief they had themselves committed;—none moaned except the sea-birds that flapped their heavy wings above the ocean-cave wherein she lay ;—and the muttering thunder alone tolled her passing bell, as she quitted a life, which for her had been replete with change and sorrow.
CONCLUSION. The private chronicles, from which the fore¬ going relation has been collected, end with th© death of Euthanasia. It is therefore in public histories alone that we ôná an account of the last years of the life of Castruccio. We caa know nothing of his grief, when he found that she whom he had once tenderly loved, and whom he had ever revered as the best and wisest among his friends, had died. We know however that, during the two years that he survived this event, his glory and power arose not only higher than they had ever before done, but that they surpassed those of any former Italian prince. Louis of Bavaria, king of the Romans, en¬ tered Italy in the month of February 13Ф7. He found Castruccio, the scourge of the Guelphs, the first power of Tuscany, and the principal supporter of his own titles and pre* tensions.
Louis of Bavaria was crowned with the iron crown at Milan. But his proceedings were tyrannical and imprudent. He deprived Ga¬ leazzo Visconti of his power, imprisoned him, and set up the shadow of a republic at Milan, which was in fact composed of a few G hi be¬ line nobles, vvho by their jealousies and dissen¬ tions served only to weaken his power. He marched through Lombar!^, crossed the Apennines at Parma, and was met by Castruccio at Pontremoli. The prince, whose chief aim was to ingratiate himself with, and to raise himself to power through the favour of, the emperor, made his visit more agreeable through the magnificent presents by vvhich he was accompanied ; and his sagacity, warlike spirit, and agreeable manners gained for him an easy entrance into the councils, and after- Wards into the friendship, of Louis. They pro¬ ceeded together to Pisa. The Pisans at first refused entianee to the emperor, but yielded after he bad besieged tbem a few days, Louis then visited Lucca, where he erected a dutchy composed ofthe towns and territory of Lucca, Pistoia, Volterra and Lunigiana, and created
Castruccio duke, honouring and exalting him as his best friend, and the firmest support of the imperial power. They w'ent to Rome together, where tiie emperor knighted him, and he bore the sword of state in the procession from the Campidoglio to St. Peter's, where Louis received the impe¬ rial crown. He was created count of the pa¬ lace, senator of Rome, and master ofthe court. He had arrived at the summit of his glory ; he was more feared and obeyed than the emperor himself; and, in the expedition which Louis meditated against Naples, king Robert dread¬ ed Castruccio alone, as his most formidable and craftiest enemy. It was then, that the proud Antelminelli invested himself in a robe of silk richly adorned with gold and jewels; and on the breast were embroidered these words— Egli e* come dio vuole. And on the shoulders, K S] SARA QUEL СНЕ DIO vgriìa\ While he was thus enjoying the maturity oť his glory, and partaking all the amusements and feasts of the capital of Italy, he received intelligence that the Florentines had possessed themselves of Lucca. Without a moment's VOL. III. N
delay, he quitted Rome, traversed the Ma¬ remma with a small band of friends, and ap¬ peared, when he was least expected, in the midst of his enemies. It was here thai he again met Galeazzo Visconti. At Castruccio's request the emperor iiad released him from prison ; and he came to yerve under the ensigns of his more fortunate fnend. Their meeting was an occasion of mutual joy; they embraced each other aiľec¬ tionateiy, and confirmed and renewed the vows of friendship and support which they had enter¬ ed into more than ten years before. Castrile- cio enjoyed for a short time the unalloyed plea¬ sure which the society of his friend afforded him ; they recounted to each other their va- nous fortunes; and, in recording the events vvhich had passed since their separation, Ga- h*a7zo found, that, if he had lost sovereignty and power, Castruccio had lost that which might be considered far more valuable ; he had lost his dearest friends ; and on his pale check might be read, that, although he dis¬ dained to acknowledge tbe power of fortune, she had made him feel in his heart's core her poihoned shafts. We know nothing of the
private communion of these friends ; but vve may guess that, if Castruccio revealed the sorrows of his heart, Galeazzo might have regretted that, instead of having instigated the ambition, and destroyed the domestic felicity of his friend, he had not taught him other les¬ sons, through which he might have enjoyed that peace, sympathy and happiness, of which he was now for ever deprived. His presence restored the state of his affairs. He possessed himself of Pisa, recovered Pis¬ toia, and again returned in triumph to Lucca. But this was tlie term of his victories. During the siege of Pistoia he had tasked his strength beyond human suffering ; he was ever in the trenches on horseback, or on foot exposed to the hot sun of July, encouraging the soldiers, directing the pioneers, and often, in the ardour of impatience, he himself took the spade, anil worked among them. He neither rested nor slept ; and the heats of noon-day, and the dews of night alike fell upon him. Immediately on liis return to bis native city, he was seized with a malignant fever. He knew that he wa« about to die ; and, with that coolness and pre- N 9,
sence of mind which was his peculiar characte¬ ristic, he made every arrangement necessary for the welfare of Lucca, and gave particular directions to his captains for the prosecution of thé war. But he felt, tliat he left behind him no fitting successor ; and that, if he were tiie sole creator and only support of the Luc¬ chese, so they would fall into their primitive insignificance when he expired. Lying thus on the bed of pain, and conscious that in a few hours he must surely die, he grasped the hand of Vanni Mordecastelli, who wept beside him, saying : Io morrò, e vedrete il mondo per varie turbolenze confondersi, e rivoltarsi ogni cosa. This consideration cast agloom over his last mo¬ ments ; yet he supported himself with courage, Galeazzo Visconti had assisted Castruccio in alt his labours, exposing himself with like imprudence, and labouring with equal energy. He was attacked at Pistoia with the same fever and the same symptoms. Hearing that the prince was ill at Lucca, he desired, al¬ though dying, to be conveyed to him. He was carried as far as Pescia, where he expired on the third of September 13*28.
On the same day, and at the same hour, Castruccio died at Lucca. His enemies rejoiced in his death ; his friends were confounded and overthrown. They, as the last act of gratitude, conducted the pomp of his funeral vvith princely magni¬ ficence. He was buried in the church of San Francesco, then without, now included within, the walls of Lucca, The antient tombstone is still seen on the walls of the church; and its inscription may serve for the moral and con¬ clusion of this tale. En vivo vivamque fama rerum gestarum italicæ milxtiæ splen¬ dor; lucensium пес и s Etru ri л?, ORNAMENTUM CaS- TRUCcitrs Gerii An- TELMINELLORUM STIRPE VI XI PECCAVI DOLCI CESSI NATURA INDIGEN¬ TI ANI MX PIJE BENEVOLI SUCCURRITE BREVI MEMORES VOS MORITI/ROS.
TUE END.
