Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The nocturnal minstrel; or, The spirit of the wood: a romance
TUS
BjAiT^ír forivr 4 ж 7УПгжг€1»т*зэрз' |пшагф^41§у§&ч1 ιι СНЛР. I. ., ,,.. π , - ,, , . ,, loceàk per ignci Su^poiiîos cincii doloso Ho PACE. al HE Baroness slept little during the night tliat the Earl kept watch in the chamber, her thoughts heilig constantly engaged and hanasscd by the subject of the day's adventure, which continued to excite in her the most uneasy fears and apprehensions. Every sound made her vol. it, в tremble.
tremble, for evei y sound seemed superna¬ tural ; she even fc,;icd to look aiouud her, lest some tenii) nig ¡diantom slumld ap¬ pear; and she more than once imagined she heard the voice of tlie spectre, repeat¬ ing the word swKAit, to remind her of the vow she had taken, and enforce her observance of it. Morning at aigth dawned ; its cheerful beams served in part to dissipate her fears; мЬс arose while it was yet early, and having heard that the Earl hud airead ν left the chamber, ■if she sent a message of enquirv bv Wini- fred, which was answered by a request from tbe Earl for * permission to sec her. This was readily granted ; and the Earl entering the room in which the Baroness was sitting, she eagerly but tremblingly demanded if he had seen or heard any thing,
thing, or had met with any aai m or ad¬ ven t uie г The Earl replied, that he had n*>t *:en the spectre» or any ouc of lhe figure de¬ scribed, which bad rendered him some¬ what doubtful of its appearance; but that he had heard sounds, for which fie was not vet fullv able to account ; aud had there* fore resolved to continue the watch till he idiould be able to discover whether the chamber was or uot really haunted-— α circum·*! шее of which he declared him- btif % vrv doubtful· The Baroness finding the Earl Ivul not hiïheito beeu exposed t* ;my extraordi¬ nary turor> or ahums, suci: cis she had her¬ self apprehended, made Httle or no objec¬ tion to his proposal of ie\ uiting the apaitmcnt on the ctbuing night ; and ac- B 4 · С0Г(!|м:;1\\
cordingly, at the same hour as before, he ¡repaired again to his station. In the morning the Baroness renewed her enquiries, and received from the Earl, with whom she had another interview, nearly the same answer as on the preceding day. On her questioning him more par¬ ticularly, she learned he had been sur¬ prised by the same noises which had been before mentioned as liaving been heard by «ome of the domestics, such as deep groans, loud and frequent knockings against the walls, intermingled at intervals with the clashing and ringing of armour ; and sometimes a noise as of something heavy falling with great force to the ground. These sounds were observed by the Earl to have been louder, and much more fre¬ quent, than on the preceding night, a circumstance
circumstance which led him, he said, to expect the appearance of the ghost, whose approach they seemed to portend, and whose presence he determined to await the next night in the chamber. The Baroness, whose most terrifying apprehensions were again revived by the mention of these extraordinary and myste¬ rious sounds, again remonstrated with'the Earl upon his imprudence and temerity, in thus continuing to expose himself to the power of supernatural horrors, painted anew, the dangers he might incur, and earnestly entreated him to abandon his design of pursuing the enterprize he had undertaken, on the following night. The Earl, although he listened with a knightly courtesy to the Baroness's aigu- ments, and was disposed to pay the ut¬ most resp.ect and deference to theopiuious 3 3 of-
THE NOCTURNAL MINSTREL. of a woman he so greatly loved and ad¬ mired, was nevertheless steady in his resolution of penetrating, if possible, the mystery that seemed to overhang that chamber; and again, at the appointed hour, though somewhat earlier than be¬ fore, commenced his third night's watch. The fire burned briskly as be entered, and a lamp placed over the chimney dif¬ fused a cheerful light throughout the chamber, exhibiting tbe figures upon the arras, as well as of the carvings of the old black wainscot, which covered one part of the room. At some distance, by the side of the bed, stood a large old chair, covered, like the rest of the furni¬ ture, with dark blue cloth of gold. The night was cold, for it had been stormy ; he drew it close to the fire, after haviug secured by its bolt the large folding doors by
by which he had entered, as also the window-shutters, and the doors of the closets, so that nothing could enter by natural means. Having secured, as he believed, every possible means of access, he took possession of his seat; and open¬ ing to an ancient legend, which chanced to lie in one of the elosets, he endeavoured to amuse himself with the history of St. Dunstan, and several other persons of like religious emirence, in what he perhaps thought, but dared not call, sacred ro¬ mance. From these subjects he was, however, frequently drawn, by contemplations re¬ specting the. amiable and beautiful Baro¬ ness, for whom his affection was too ten¬ der, to allow him at present to experience perfect peace and tranquillity· ľ 4 He
He had now been some time in the room, and hitherto all had been silent, when a gentle knocking was heard at the door, which aroused him from a pleasing reverie, "Who is there?" cried the Earl aloud. " Bless your honour, it is only I," returned a voice ; " my name is Peter ; please you, my Lord, open the door ; I have brought a little matter Or two that may be useful, and which Dame Wini¬ fred would have sent sooner, only being frightened, as one may say, out of her »ine senses, for which she humbly begs your honour's pardon, she ------" ' 4 Come in, Peter,"cried the Earl, who bad now unbolted the door, " and let me øee vhat thou hast brought 99 " Yes> yes, you shall вее," cried Peter, - setting
setting down liis basket, " your honour shall see. Oh Lord!—oh Lord! that you should ever think of sitting up all ; alone by yourself in this chamber." "Truly, Peter," replied the Earl, "I am so much pleased with my accommo¬ dations, that I think it will not be the last night I shall spend in this apartment." " Gramercy," quoth Peter, ct not the last ! why surely your honour does not mean to take up your quarters here? La! my Lord, only bethink you. Suppose now the ghost was to come from under the arras, or out of the walls, or through the ke)-hole, and stand in the middle of the room (erecting himself) as I do now, all over armour, your honour, from head » to foot/' " I am accustomed to bear arms my¬ self," replied the-Earl, smiling, "and в 5 should .
should not therefore be more ;darmed at the sight of a ghost in armour. But, Peter, thou hast not yet emptied thy basket— w hat hast thou <χοί in it Ρ (i In the first place, my Loul/* cried Peter, "a cup of bippocras, well mingled. of the best wine and honey, hy Dame Winifred's own hands» sueh, your honour, as she keeps for her own private dnuk- ¡пц :; and Master Maclawncy, the stcwaui, -weais none can be better, aud he is a good judge. 1 have biought too some fiesh logs to make up the fire, a lamp that will burn till morning, and a few cakes, all of wddch Dame "Winifred, humbly begging your Lordship's pardon, t-ends to you/* '· Well, Peter, thank Dame Winiired for her careful attention, and hcie is some¬ thing for thy trouble (giving him a noble) ;
noble); tins drink wil! heb nn» to carry on a conversation with the glubt/' " This is a nulle gifr. your honoui/' ciied Peter, who waj» a dry wit, "my dutiful thanks. Ard now methinks it ь а gieat pity that so honourable a Lord fchould run hazard with this ghost ; but saving \o».r woislrp's honour, surely уоч dv not liteau to aî>k the ghost any quc*- tiCIb ?*" * l Indeed, Peter, I do/" replied the Eari, "and if it is as courteous as the gUo.st*» of fui uur days. I liave no fear but it η г:! an^ei them/ ki i)h и '—oh la!" quoth Peter, 4 *who km,t>s h*.t if уош honour was lo speak to it, but \ou might tall down dtàd ou the vtıy spot, unless, indeed, your Lord- ihip ean talk Latin/ 4 '* M'ell, Peter, Le tint as ii may/' re* 3 б joined
Joined the Earl, " I heartily thank thee for the good cheer thou hast brought, though I probably should not ha\e felt the want of it. I will not, however, fail to take it, as I bad omitted my evening draught before I came/' Peter, thinking everv moment of his stay subjecting him to the hazard of see¬ ing the ghost, was by no means inclined to continue in the chamber, now he had finished his errand ; lie therefore, aftei laying a ¡dece of wood upon the fire, and wishing his honour s reverence safe fiom the power of the devil, bowed and de¬ parted, running with all speed along the corridor, to seek safety in the Company of his fellow-servants. A» the Earl closed the door, which was secured onl) by means of а slender bolt. the principal fastenings being on the out* 3 side,
skíc, the cattle clock struck twelve* "ine Ear! then diank to fbc health of tin* HHciy Baroness, his cup of hippocias, and resuming Im scat, a^ain sought initiscmcnt by turning over tbe piges of the legend, whicb abounded w Ή b ac~ •*i»unts of the eonlhct* St, Dm..-tan heM with evil spirit«*, all ofwhom, however, he :ifO>t mightily subdued. % ' Well/' saki the Earl, ťi ! wish I may have as good success with the «host, who diould, about tbis hour, thcy sa., make ins appearance/ The clock, however, sounded one, and nothb^ was he ml ; and the Earl, wearied as he conceived, by the tedious stories of the legend, and overcome by a drowsi¬ ness which he had long tried to resist, Mink into a deep bleep." lie was awakened by a loud noise, as of
of something falling in the chamber, and- opening his eyes, beheld the very figure that had been described to him standing. opposite to the chair, clad in complete armour, with its visor down, and holding in its hand a large truncheon, which it thrice waved,.as if in signal, for. the Earl to arise. Ormond, yet hardly awakened, was certainly much startled at this appearance, which, standing almost over him, had greatly the advantage in resisting an assault, and appeared, moreover, by the dim gleam of the almost expiring lamp and dying embers, a very formidable,. because a most gigantic object. Yet he viewed-rather with'surprise than horror this .extraordinary, nocturnal visitant. A moment made him thoroughly collected ; and mindful of the purpose of his watch, he
he started up, seized his sword, and boldly faced the strange phantom, who, seeming calmly to observe líŕm, and, without be¬ traying any symptoms of violence, made a motion for him to put by his sword. "If thou art not mortal," exclaimed the Earl, " this weapon- cannot harm thee; if thou art, speak, ere I strike, and ask mercy; declare thy name—thy pur¬ pose ; speak, I command thee." He paused in wonder and expectation. The figure spoke not, neither did it re¬ cede; the Earl raised his sword, and aimed a blow, but as he attempi*, α io strike at it, the blade of the weapon, ;is if touched by some supernatural baud, shivered and flew to pieces; the hilt only remained entire. " In the name of Heaven !" he ex¬ claimed, while astonishment seemed to have
have almost palsied every sense, €i who aod what art thou Ρ . " Follow me f cried the apparition, 11 and thou shalt be made acquainted with the secrets and wonders of this castle/' The Eail, who felt a shuddei ing seu- 5'ition creep through his veins, while the spectre pronounced these words, which were uttered in а (\а\> and hollow tone, huved and answered. 4 * Yea/* '· Hast thou courage, Sir Knight, * re· sunned the apparition, li to accompany me wherever I shall lead thee?"' -" My courage has never yet been ques¬ tioned," replied the Earl, grasping with firmuess bis now shattered sword; ť% 1 am a true knigh;; I have offended no good power, and I fear no evil one." u Thy sword is useless," said tlie snoet ГР. '
^îîf: NOCTURNAL MINSTREL. spectre ; ·* but if limn art a true knight, thou wilt m ret nothing in thy way to op¬ pose thee. Take thy lamp only, aod fol¬ low mc As he spoke, the figure, gently beckon¬ ing, mrned slowly toward the extreme y t of the wainscot, next the arras, and not toward the door, which seemed won¬ dert ul tu the Fail; nor could he conjec¬ ture how he could follow where theie was no passage, nor yet, how the phantom could have entered, when ail the doors had been fastened by himself. The whole was indeed a mystery he was yet wholly unable to solve, he hesi¬ tated ; but the promise of die sp*/e: t, and the hope of discovering the secret ïtvuns of this cxtiaordinary appearance, deter¬ mined him, and he followed the wonder¬ ful invitation* The
The speetie seeing him advance, ap¬ proached one of the pannels of the wain* ST-ot and touching it u ith the truncheon, it instantly opened, and shewed a long nairo\v passage The ghost glided on¬ ward, still invYmg the Earl to follow : almost petrified with a:>tonbhment, for a moment or two he stood ii resolute, 11 Fear not,'" said the ghost, ** L will not hann thee. Thou art the appointed instrument of unfolding, by my means, the mysterious fate of this family, and this castle ; be resolute, and proceed/' The Earl, reassured by these words, and urged on by his wish of accomplishing· what he had undertaken, entered the aperture, which was wide enough to admit him without difficulty ; and followed his ghostly conductor through a long suit of apartments. At length, they reached a nano vf.
'i.irrow stone staircase ; the apparition Mill preceding him. and оссам'НмИу mwiitur him forwird, the Earl descended the stairs» At the bottom of th*sc, they eroded а smal! spiare area, wlici the E u I ptreeivtd on either si<le two kuge stone chambers filial with valions kinds of armour. Tliey passed between them, ami reached, at length, another flight of stairs, which thev also descended. These seemed to wind for a considerable denth : when ar- rived at the bottom, the Earl earnestly demanded how far they had jxt to go? The ghost made no answer, but with an¬ other motion of his hand, invited him forward. The Earl halted, and taking a survey of his situation, concluded, from the ex¬ treme dampness of the walls, that thej- must have descended several feet beneath the
the foundations of the castle, a^l »hat they were now entering the vaults. Ihe ghost proceeded, without turning either to the right hand or the Lft, and the bail continued to follow, till they Kucbul a narrow parage, ť.i initiated by a poıîcullis, now drawn up, which led them through another passage still longer. In this were several loop*holes, through which the now dawning light gleamed faintly, while the air, with a full and keu» current, threatened every instant to extin¬ guish the lamp. The distance at which they were now arrived from the inhabited part of the castle—the deep solitude of these vaults -*-the circumstance of his being alone wiih Ьь supernatural guide, in the dead of night—the uncertainty whether they were going, and iu what manner this sin¬ gular
gular adventure might tri minate, made the Earl, notwithstanding all his courage. secretly desire the conclusion of the en¬ terprise, which was now attended, if not with danger, with horrors sufficient to appal the stoutest heart. They had reached the end of the vaulted passage, and proceeded through a large stone arch down two or three steps to a spacious vauit uhich tiic Earl, on entering, immediately discovered to be the ancient banJ-place of the family. On а low bench of black marble were placed in order rows of stone coffins, an awful prospeet at all times; but attended as the Earl now was by the phantom spi¬ rit, perhaps of one of the personages here interred, it exhibited а scene calculated to excite feelings of awe mingled with terror. The
The Earl shuddeud as he ail vaneed , his blood seemed to cm die at eu-iy "dcp. 44 Tis horrible !" cried he menially and indeed a sight more appalling, or a situ¬ ation more replete with horrors, than that in wdiich he was now placed, can scarcely be imagined. He stopped—he trembled ; a chilling perspiration hedeved his limbs ; for Ids mind had leisure to image to itself horrors ¡stil! greater than those he saw; yet his resolution forbade him to shrink» or turn hack, and determined him to go thmugh with the adventure, even though it weie, as lie almost expected, to avenge the cause of some unhappy person unjustly, inhumanly murdered The apparition moved siowly along. and the Earl followed tiil they had reached the farther end of the vault. It then stopped ;
stopped ; and. ¡»otutïng to the ground, ек* claimed, with a groan, *" Have pit} on an unhappy injured**——This, then, thought Ormond, is the grave ot the poor mur¬ dered wretch, who lies buried in these vaults. Lowering his lamp, he perceived amongst a quantity of loose earth, which seemed to ha\e leen lately dug «p. a large iron ring, fixed in a massive trip- «loor of the same metal, pat tiy Mink hi the cai th. The ghost made a sign for him to \¡¡í it up. The Earl, setting down his Ιαηγ, obeyed; and, after two or time iíľorK succeeded. Then taking up the lamp he observed several steps formed of loose disjointed stones. ** Ifa valiant knight thou art," crini the apparition, ťl and capable of p ; ty for the unfortunate, descend these steps; and than
thon shalt soon meet that which will ease all thy present grievous sufferings, and yield thee a recompence suitable to thy deservings; for when thou returnest, thou wilt hear that whieh shall render thee superior to common mor» ds ; and inca¬ pable of inniry from upen e* * endes or false friends, 1 would gladlv attend thee, but fate forbids ; nu presence would ч. .r the measure, and render my w'bhes vain/' ik But hast tliou not, mystciious spirit/* cried the Fari, "other and more ample directions for mc ?" cl None nre needed," a n «we red the ap¬ parition. u But when come to the urn, scorn tfie gold, and take only the talis¬ manic jewel Be resolute—be valiant ; and again, I say, no ouc in this cell shall harm thee/" The Earl, glad to find his adventure was
was likelv to have a speed ν termination, »г I "ľ aml burning wirh curiosirvto know what could be deposited in that place, instantly descended* He had not proceeded more than twenty steps, when a sudden current of wind extinguished his lamp. In a mo* ment after, the trap door was heai d to fall, with a sound loudly echoed, as by some deep and spacious cavern, How to act he knew not ; he proceeded, in hopes of finding the urn, but he was lost in the vast spacciato which thesteps had brought him. lie was bewildered ; and stumbled over several masses of stone, which he found, on examinât ¡on, were cofľms like those above; ami he consequently con- eluded tliat he was far removed from all Iiuman assistance. He then, calling lo recollection the vor., tb с π ceaun! а
accounts he had had aforetime of magi¬ cians and enchantments, felt that he was now subjected to severe trials of his cou¬ rage, and expected every moment to see some wondrous spirit start up, to tell his fate, and direct his progress to the mystic urm lie sat down, and waited, and listened, but nil was silence, except the occasional dropping of wet from the arch of the vault, to which he found himself almost continually exposed ; and from this drop¬ ping he gathered that the vault was very spacious indeed. lie waited, and waited long, but no¬ thing appeared ; nothing was heard, ex¬ cept the dripping wet. lie was wearied with expectation and inactivity ; he wished he had not followed this phantom, yet he wished to see it rather than no¬ thing.
thing. To obtain another sight of it, he invoked it .to appear, by every mode of address he conceived likely to have any influence over such beings. He called to it, in soft, an*l low, and humble, and also in loud, vehement, and angry terms ; but no answer was returned ; all he heard was the echo of his own voice sounded in the cavern, and returning, and then dying away in the dreadful distance* " Alas ľ' said he, " this was then one of those malicious spirits that are allowed to torment the presumptuous; and I have been presumptuous in awaiting this ap¬ pearance, and in following its devilish lures. And I, for my punishment, must sit a prisoner in this horrible dungeon. But, let me not despair. The doorat the entrance is closed ; but, surely, I may open it below, as wtil as t opened it c e abou*.
above. Idle lamentations are useless and unmanly. I will seek the door, and Heaven guide my steps, and aid my efforts ľ' He then felt his way cautiously by the wall or side of the place, and after clam¬ bering over many obstacles, thought him¬ self happy when he found what he con¬ cluded must be the steps by which he had entered. They were so, and he soon found the door \ but it was immoveable to all his efforts, however directed. He wearied himself with his exertions, but all iu vain : at length, despairing of success, he seated himself upon the steps, thinking over all the hopeless miseries to which he was now exposed. " And must I," said he, ' ť die inglori¬ ous in this horrible den, lost to the world, ¡\nd all means of serving my country and my
my king? must my bones find no other tomb than the iron harness in which I am accoutred; and no other grave than diese otepe, or the tloor of lì e cavern bJow ? unhappy mau that 1 a::i ! and death must be lingeurg and >low, aud cume v\hh all the butit iíni¿s of iaminr t í'tlt iu these abodes oť daıkıuv». Лч jet, however, I fear not death ; i)ut, shall I alwavs he thus bold? и ill not exhausted nature bring upon my mind languor, and horror, and fancied woe? Alas—alas! it may—it will! Oh, wretched Ormond! an Earl, noble and powerful, thou wert within these few hours; and now thou mayst envy the state of one of these in¬ sensible stones on whieh thou treadest. Be merciful, Heaven ! assist me, saints and angeli! Fut vet I wiil not л ic lei "till I am unite fallen ; while I have strength, I л СЗ 7 с 3 will
will use at least my voice, to pray to Heaven, and to call for deliverance* I will explore tliis den too; and perhaps 1 may find access to a place where I may be heard : nor shall any thing but utter inability terminate my efforts/'
СНЛР.
eiiAi'. п. "í hm ma** w« *«***£» ^"г ' ä Г»*уг» ^ftf - «s, And iuku.ii fCí|uicm f*« ihc de#J ; Aî.i bell« toh d out theif и*Л th γ-: Л Tot the decreed tpttíťs vet J ; And ever m the office cíc*e # Tht Цтг. ùï sraercfòSíOB шс. 5c*»rr, Thjk Baroness, anxious about the event of the Earľs watch, had slept httle during the night, and arose at an early hour in the morning, eager to make enquiries concerning him. She was surprised to find he had not yet quitted the chamber» though it was then long past the break of с 4» day.
day. After waiting some time in much impatience, she was informed that one of the Ľatľs attendants had been at the door, that it was still fastened, and it was .supposed, his Lorchhip, after a tedious watch of several hours, had, at length, f/len asleep. Another, and another hour passed on ; and the Earl not coming out, or calling any of lhe family, her impatience began now to partake of apprehension, and she gave orders that he should be called; «tddiug, that should he intimate any de¬ sire to repose longer on the bed, on which she imagined he might he reclined, she desired that he might not be dis¬ turbed. The servant, dispatched witli these orders from the Baioness, returned, after an absence which appeared to her ex- ti cuitiv
tremely tedious, in the greatest distress and consternation, declaring tti**t his Lord could not be awakened, and that he really believed he was dead. The Baroness, amazed and terrified by this intelligence, commanded that the door should be forced open, since so dreadful were her apprehensions respecting the fate of her sluest, that no certainty, she said, couki be more terrible than the suspi use she now felt. Her orders were instantly obeyed; but who cai describe the universal astonish¬ ment, on finding toe Earl was not in tlie apartment ï and! as was still more won¬ derful and mysterious, from the fastening of the several doors, it was not to be di¿- coveied how he could have passed out; for the pannel in the wainscot, whieh h'\û opened to the touch of tlie trundicon, С Ò ^ .i')
was closed, and every thing remained the «ame as on the] preceding night. - The casements in the windows, which were of the sharp-pointed gothic style,. were certainly too small to admit the body of the Earl; while the height of the chamber from the area below, precluded almost the possibility of his being able to pass through the windows, even had sueh an attempt been made, without being- dreadfully bruised and mangled in tha descent* The chimney too was examined. That indeed was wide enough, almost too wide for a passage ; but no traces were discernible by, which' way ;. and, in fact,. the chimney could only; have led to the» top of a lofty, turret,. from whence, escape.- would have been impracticable.. The general belief, from these circum*. stances, was, that the Earl had been bornei away.
away by some malignant spirit : and- this opinion, together with 1 all the corro* borating particulars, were immediately conveyed to the Baroness. The unhappy* lady was in a state little short of distrac¬ tion at the information; and her distress w*as not by any means abated, wlien Wi¬ nifred entered, wringing h^r hands, and exclaiming, íť Woe worth the dav ! the ghost has run away wdth the Earl. Oh ! —oh! that ever I should live to be the bearer of such shocking tidings ! what will—what will become of us ! it will be iaid we have murdered him, and we shall ail be executed without mercy V 1 That the ghost could have borne away the Earl, however strange, seemed not to the Baroness to be uttcily impossible; for she had both heard and read of such events; they indeed formed a pr.it of the с в creed .
creed concerning ghosts, which was faith¬ fully received in its fullest extent in the family of the castle. Still, however, she conceived it was more probable that the Earl, bewildered by the terrors of the ghost, had cast himself from the windows, and was perhaps dead under the walls, or had been tempted into the lake by the fascinations of the spirit. She ordered persons to search every where for him ; and promised an ample reward to any one who should bring her satisfactory intelligence concerning him. Meanwhile, she sent for Father Osborne, who immediately attended, with a mind fully occupied with terror at the intelli¬ gence concerning'the Earl. " He was, indeed," said the holj* friar, " too bold and presumptuous to venture on the watch, without bearing with
with hhn some heiv reifes, to defend ľiim from evil spirits ; but he did not ask fbr holy water to be used, as it ought, nor did he even sanctify himself with the sacred sprinkling, before he closed himself in the haunted apartment. So he is gone, by the power of the wicked devil (crossing h i (itself) ofa ghost—gone un- shriven ; and, of course, he- now endures, and must long endure, the most cruel pains of purgatory; and the remembrance that ail this is owing to his own wicked courage will disturb his soul, and it will come with clamorous bowlings, and bewail its sin and folly, and thus add anot lier ghost to haunt and distuib the miserable inhabitants of this castle. 11 " Oh, dreadful !" exclaimed the Baro¬ ness. " But is there no way of prevent¬ ing
ing these horrors? I have heard of exor^ Cising- - ..... "" " "Great indeed," said the trembling friar, fearing lest the Baroness should re¬ quire him to quiet these ghosts, "great is the power of tlie church over Fpirits : but the readiest way is to perform prayers, penances, religious processions, and masses, for the lepore of the dead/* The Baroness, w hose devout and eiitlm* eiastic turn of mmd led her immediately to approve these sentiments Kñd doctrines of her spiritual diiector, instantly re¬ solved that these measures should be adopted ; and that a solemn mass sliould be that evening performed in the chapel. With the coucunence and approbation of Father Osborne, it was ordeied, that all her-own people, and those of the Earl·, bhould
should attend the ceremony; and that the abbess of an adjacent convent, particu¬ larly patronized and enriched by many donations from the family of Fitzwalter, should be requested also to be present. and assist at the pious solemnities ; and that the friar would himself bear t!i3 message, and obtain permission for the attendance of as many of the holy sister- hood as possible at the chapel But be¬ fore he went forth on Ids Uiission, she retired with him to confession, and spent the greater part of the remaining day \л offering up prayers to the blessed Virgî.ı aml tlie holy saints, in behalf of the Iviri ; as also for the repose of the soul of her htc husband, Baron Fitzwalter; but espe¬ cially for tlie success of the intended idi- gious ceremonies. The monk, who, although with tlie best
best intentions, had yet rather in ¡tated than composed the bcwildeied senses of the Baroness» departed to make the neces¬ sary prepat ation for the approaching so» lemnitv, when the tit votions of the Baro* neas were inten opted by а messenger bearing a request from the youth Eilgar, for permission to take his ¿tation on the following nicht in the apartment frem whence the Earl had disappeared. The baroness, filled with astonishment and admiration at the courage and intre¬ pidity of this young man, summoned him into her presence, though with no evident intention of assenting to b.is pro¬ posal, which Hemed to her, after what had happened, to be extremely rash and madly daring. She replied to his request, which he respectfully repeated in her pie¬ sence, by representingthe terrors a;:d evm da 'î'.vrs:
dangers to wlneh he might lie exposed by SUCİJ dii umîLî varwuia; , an** ц.нЬюма^п against any fut ther attempt beiig nia^e to obtain a solution of tlie awful mystery, at least till she should have con aed with Father Osborne ; declaring s' ^ wouhl not on any account be persuadiu ;o nûyect Lim, or any other person, to a situation, as it had proved, so hazardous; and :f, on due consideration, she could ever be brought to listen to his-request, she must fust take such measures for his safety, which would exempt her, whatever might be the issue, from all grounds for that remorse she must otherwise experience, should the enterprise end as υ n happ· v ith him as it had done with the Eaıî i * Ormond, whom, she added, should it и " please Heaven to re юа\ she wouhl !· г t ver beu- ud with tears of regret and per. - tuu.U
tcntial sorrow, since she could not help considering Iierself as the unhappy, though innocent, cause of whatever misfortune might have befallen liim. Edgar, after various arguments, finding, at length, that the Baroness was not to be wrought upon by any entreaties he could urge to an immediate compliance with his request, whieh he assured her was of the utmost importance to the success of the undertaking, proposed that Motley and himself, with two or three of his Lord¬ ships attendants, should examine the castle throughout ; for that a diligent search would discover the Earl, whether alive or dead, if within the walls, where he might be detained by some accident; or by wandering in the dark, might have fallen into some of the subterraneous rooms of the towers : that this was the more
more probable, since the search of many persons tlnough the woods and dells of tbe domain hail not been able to discover any trace of bun. Though it appeared highly improbable to the Baroness, if not wholly impossible, that the Earl could be concealed in any part of the castle, yct this request of Edgar seemed, upon the whole, too reason* able to be refused ; and she gave orders that he should be permitted to search, attended in the manner he had pro¬ posed. Every apartment in the castle, both above and below, every passage, vault, dungeon, and cell, every supposed pos¬ sible place of concealment and confine¬ ment, and even the buıîal vaults, accord¬ ingly were searched, with the utmost diligence;
diligence; but no traces of the F/jjI could be found. Tbe persons tno wbo had been dispatched to make cnquiihs in the adiacent countrv, leturned with no bttter success ; ami tbe Baroness, asto- nidud and peiplexcd, ubandor.ed every hope of making any discovery concerning the sad fate of her unfortunate guest; and turned her whole thoughts to the performance of those religious ceremonies wliich Father Osborne had proposed for the repose of tbe soul of a true knight, and loyal noble, wdio Lad miserably penshui iu her service. Father Osborne returned about noon, wirb a benediction from the Abbess to the Baroness, and a promise of compliance villi her request; and soon after sunset, the party from the abbey was seen wind¬ ing
ing its way toward the castle, escolten! by a party of archers and halberdivrb, under the command of the seneschal. They were received at the gate by the Baroness in deep mourning ; and were conducted to a retired apartment to tuke refreshment. After the curfe y, the bells of the chapel tolled mournfully for vespers, and the solemnities began. Six monks of the order of St. Angustino, residing iu the neighbourhood, as confes¬ sors, and employed in that holv dutv hy the Abbess, led the procession, each bear¬ ing а large waxen taper. Father Osborne followed next, holding aloft a large cru¬ cifix. Next came the Baroness, as a penitent, supported by four of her dam¬ sels clad in white, and four of her prin¬ cipal officers clad in black surtouts of penance. Then came eight lay sisters of the
the abbey, bearing on two biers tlie images of the holy Virgin and St. Bride ; and next the choristers of the abbey, with instruments of music. Then the holy sisterhood, bearing, with downcast looks, a taper each, clad in black vests, and white hoods and scapularies, the habit of their order; and then the Abbess, mitred, and bearing a crucifix, supported by the chief officers of her monastery. Next came the attendants of Ormond, with downcast looks of grief; and lastly, the household'uf the castle in solemn train. Thrice diil tbey make the circuit of the court, the bell tolling, with chaunting at intervals, and then to the chapel, where each being placed in order, Father ОлЬогпе began a solemn requiem for the dead. In this tbe Baroness bore a con- bideuble pait, as chief penitent; she ad¬ vanced
vaneed reverently, and knelt at the steps of the altar, while the choir snug, the Abbess and holy sisters occasionally join- * All It ^ I 1™* * ï » » mg. As she киек, ine uaroness neui iu one hand a crucifix of silver, in the other her missal, and on her aim hune a rosarv of beads. Her dress, like that of the nuns, was black. A long gauze veil, paitiaJly thrown over her, shaded, but did not conceal her face; for it was thrown aside to enable her to kiss the ciuci fix, and exhibited to the mournful beholders her beautiful eves stieaming in ttais, while raised w ith a look of devotion, utmost angelic, to a large image of the Virgin, wdiich was placed in a shrine, with tapers in due order opposite. The choir had now finished the fin>t part of the chaunt : all was solemn silence ; and Eather ОъЬогпе approached, supported
f supported by two monks, to give her ab¬ solution ; when, oh, horror! a knocking - was heard beneath, and deep hollow cries seemed to shake the foundations of the chapel These in an instant engrossed the attention of all present, and occasioned a silence still more profoun d than the so¬ lemnities of devotion. The cries were now, of course, heard more distinctly, and seemed more terrible, * ς Holv mother ľ' exclaimed themonk, closing his book, and crossing himself. The Baroness seemed scarcely ίο breathe; her female attendants screamed aloud» u Our praycrr/* cried Father Osborne. tremulously, " are not accepted: tiic spiata of the dead are abroad : let us de¬ part ; hereafter, by penances and prayers wc may be prepared to meet again in this place/' T!*\ 3
The nuns arose in disorder ; the ab¬ bess raised her bands and eves towards * heaven, in silent aud awful astonishment* the monk, horror-struck and appır.îet!, hurried from the altar; and the Barone»*, more terrified und more disconsolate thm ever, was led back, almost fainting, to be: own apartments. Editar alone renuined behinti, for he alone was unappalied by the alarming sounds; and he staid with the hope of being able to leant the meaning of the cries he hcaui.
vol. r,. η ΓΙΙΛΙ».
minstrel might come again into the wood, and the ghost cease to haunt the castle ; and that we might be as quiet and as happy as we used to be. You know, my taáy, the ghost toid Sir Reginald he could not rest while the Earl remained here." 44 There was something of this kind in the dream which Sir Reginald communi¬ cated to me," said the Baroness. " The dream, Lady !" 44 Yes, the dream." c * Oh, Lady, it was no dream î Sir Reginald told you so, because he was afraid, he said, you would be alarmed ; but he assured me, over and over again, that it was not a dream ; for he was as wide awake at the instant he saw the Baron, as he was at the time he told me of it; and that it was really his appa- ritinn
rition that he saw ; and further, that he held converse with it, he thinks for neu half an hour u 44 Ah !—so long ï and what said it?" ** It said, my Lady, it should never be happy, unless you would coment to marry its dear friend, meaning Sir Regi¬ nald/' ** Surely it never could say this ľ* cried the Baroness. " Sir Reginald never im¬ parted any thing of this nature to me/* 4t No, he says he did not tell you, my Lady, all, nor half that the spirit said to him ; but he told me a great deal/' *' Indeed ! wdiat did it tell him ?" " Why, bow the spirit of the Baron was grieved at your cruelty to him ; and how much he seemed to lament that vou should be so much prejudiced against d 3 him,
hhn, who had alwavs been so dear to %■ »dm." ** It was then really a spirit that ap- ftared to him!" cried the Baroness, shuddcting: "did he declare so much ? Ol·, ! my Lord—my husband—my noble Fitzwalter, if without the sacrifice ofthat v ¡dow hood, now my heart's first wish, thou canst not know repose, let me but know- thy will, and whatever shall be the consequence, I will obey. Oh that thy spirit, while it hovers near me, would come to me in my sleep, and instruct me how I ought to act, that thou wouldst advise, console, assist thy wretched— wietched Gei í rude !" She stopped. Iicr full hea: t was re¬ lieved by а shower of tears; and, while under the influence of t!.c most lively s'mtov,
sorrow, Wmificd íuikú not ïo pk ad lor her favourite Sir Uegiuaid, When the Baroness became a tittle more composed, she desired that Fai hei Osborne might attend imn.ediately, and Winifred instantly depaited with tbis nu^age; but remained so long absent, that the Biro- n с? ь became surprised at ber delay ; and when, at length, she returned, lfc Why M said she, -*' is not Father Osborne come r'* i( Goodntss, my Latly !" cried Wi¬ nifred, " I believe all the people in the castle are bewitched! here is a'person an ived, who says he comes hither on the report of this ghost, a strange-looking old man, iu a black gown, with а grey bund, aud a iaigc cap over hia face, holding in *ii> ihnid a long w hiu* wand, tthodeck.ie^ bo can lay this ПоиЬкъотс spiiit; and craves have to be admitted d 4 into
into yoet Ladyship's presence ; just as i£ as I told them· my Lady would teve вшу thing to do with wizards, or enchanters, and such wicked creatures: la, if I had not crossed myself when I saw hint !* i4 Where is tbis man ?" cried the Baro* ness ; " and how did he gain admittance into this castle ?" The porter, my Lady, admitted htm # and Motley brought him into the hall; and there they are all talking to him, and questioning him, and, what is strangest, Father Osborne among the rest." 11 Father Osborne ! has Father Osborne then seen him ?" *· Yes; and has been shut up with hin>, they say, for near an hour; for the straiiLcr came almost as soon as we re* tnrned from the chapel ; and Motley says your Ladyship mu* с see him, and he is con/mi»:
coming to tell you so; though 1 hope* roy Lady, you will not. for who koows what he may prove to be? aud as fo his laying the spirit------ *' tl Well, Motley," said the Baroness to the clown, who entered, *· wbat news hast thou brought?" 14 Rare news—rare news, Lady V 9 eried the clown, jumping and skipping about» like a morrice-dancer on a May-day. 14 Put les3 animation into thy heels, good Motley/* ciied the Baroness; '' I am not disposed to be merry at thy fool¬ eries, and let me know what thou hast to communicate.*' 41 Yea, truly, lest my heels should am away with my wit, I will put on them the shackles of restraint, and gang solemnly like the ghost: yet, in that case \iould my heels be witty, though my head 3D 5 sliould
should lack that which my heels had stolen from it." íť Thy heels will shew* their Mit in taking thee speedily hence," resumed the Baronesa, ** unless thou comest directly to the purport of what thou hast to re- lite. Win Ín this stranger whose arrival I know thou comest hither to announce? aud what İs his business in this castle?" **To answer mathematically, that is, according to the square, imprimis. Lady, the st j anger is a man/' 44 I knew this before: I ask thee only what kind of man is he?"' "Tall, and of a seemly and well-pro¬ portioned figure/' u No matter for his verson ; л\1ю is he, I say, and what is his business here?" 44 Who he is, Lady, remains for you to discover; what he is, he is willing, with your
your I^idychip's permisión, to dkcover himself ľ* ťl What call you him :** "Ti uiy. eon^ìdciìntt ťic nature of hU profes>ion, he may be said to have many title*." ** Ah ? what are *hcy : " *' Some call liim a v.vv.v 'îın, otîsers an enchanter, otheis au a ť. ή ï^er, ol liers a necromancer, aliasa conjuıor : and some, perehaiRc, only îî).tt he is clothed in bku k, a while winh/' 4t Depend is pon ¡t, my Ladş/* cikd Winifred, 4I he ь an iınpostoı, I never vet knew a man that had so manv names. who was not an arrant knave at bottom; and we shall have good luck, unless \ou speedily send him packing, ifhe does not, by some joggling art of the devil, his master, hand oif some of \our Ladyship's d G golden
golden ewers and platters ; and then, by way of getting clear off the ground, help himself to one of your Ladyship's best palfreys/' " We will guard against that," cried the Baroness; '* but wdiat are his preten¬ sions? what does he say he can dor" u By his art, Lady," rejoined Motley, " he can do any thing, not otherwise within the compass of human ability." " Can he exorcise—can he lay the ghost ?" 41 Yea, Lady, he hath promised/' " Witchcraft I—all witchcraft!" ex¬ claimed Winifred· '* Oh, my Lady, my Lady Г <# What says Father Osborne to this wonderful stranger ?" asked the Baroness. " That he hath knowledge super¬ human/' ο Λιΐ
11 Ah ! does Father Osborne say this? What does he profess to know r'* 4i Every thiiiff.** 41 A sure proof, my Lady, he knows nothing/' said Winifred. " Peace, w rangler/ 5 cried the clown, <4 and let my Lady speak. I would thou wert fast asleep on a feather-bed, and might not awake to wag thy tongue again these three days." " By way of trial of his art, I would first demand from him/' resumed the Ba¬ roness, *' some intelligence concerning Earl Ormond/* 14 The Earl is safe, Lady/' "Safe!" « Yea, Lady/' 4t Where? has he declared this? if so, Heaven grant he may be what he pre¬ tends !"
"'An impudent and daring impostor, Lady !" vociferated Winifred, "an arrant and most cunning knave!" " Hush, Winifred," cried the Baroness ; '* say, .Motley, does he really declare the Earl is safe ?'* 44 I have said, Lady." *' How' does he say he obtained this knowdedge ?" 44 By his skill in astrology, and the study of the occult sciences, lie under¬ stands : what every planet means to say, and hears the whisper of every constel¬ lation, knows all their houses, their ingress and^ their egress, and all the gresses ; and can draw you the hieroglyphic of the year in the twinkling of an eye. All this he can do most featly; for he compre¬ hends all their motions and signs, and can call them all by their names ; can mark you
you out the star that points the toe of the right foot of Orion, trace the milky way, spy out Castor aud Pollux, and shew you Venus's girdle in the heavens!"' (i Fool, Venus's girdle was never placed there : but wdiat said he of the Earl ? be quick, Motley, I am all impatience ; said he, indeed, he was safer" t( Yea, truly, so he said." " But where—where does he say he is?" 4 44 He will not satisfy you, Lady, on this point, till he shall have had confe¬ rence with you." 44 Let him come hither then/' said the Baroness; '* I would see this wonderful stranger." 44 Oh, my Lady! my dear Lady!'* cried Winifred, " he will certaiuiy be¬ witch us all." "If
u Ifhe is, as you say, an impostor, we shall have nothing to fear from him," said the Baroness. " Ah, Lady! but what if he should prove to be something worse ; if he should prove to have dealings where he should not have; and if he has not, how can fie know more than other people?" "Tell Father Osborne," cried the Baro¬ ness, " to come hither immediately ; it is meet I should first hold some converse with that holy man; perchance he may not approve of my intention : in the meantime, Motley, go you to the stranger, and make some further enquiries about the Earl ; tell him, if he will afford me some satisfactor) information on the sub¬ ject of this nobleman's sudden and extra« ordinary disappearance from my castle, I am willing, with Father Osborne's per- mission^
mission, to require furtlier triais of his art; depart, and bid the monk he here quickly. 1 * 11 With the velocity of an arrow shot from Cupid's bow, and with more willing »peed than when it flew to pierce the heart of the beautiful Psvche, I flv, most excellent and sweet Ladv, to infuse vour delectable commands into the ear of this wise and most venerable doctor of the arts of magic and divination, astrology and conjuration ; peradventure his beard standeth not in my way, to intercept the flowing eloquence of my speech, ere it shall h?ve reached the ^nuer organ, tho ear being composed of certain iabyrin· thical windings and foldings------^ u Avaunt with thv tedious fooleries," cried the Baroness; u begone, and exe¬ cute thy commission." ť 'Verilv,
" Verily hast thou chid all my vivacity from my heels; and unless hocus pocus it come again—Oh ! how these animal spi¬ rits flit about ! now in tbe brain, now in the heels — vc rdy are they now wherej they diould be. Adieu, (jumping) adieu, sweet Ladv." ♦' Whither so fast, Mr. Motley?" cried Peter aloud, addressing himself to the clown, who, having newly recovered his leaping taculty y was proceeding as fast as liis heels could carry him, jumping and singing as he went along, from the Baro¬ ness's antichamber to the hall where he had left tlie stranger, surrounded by the assembled domestics, attended by Father Osborne. " Bate a little of tliy speed, good Wr. LightfV)ot, lest tlie ringing of thy bells should distuib the cogitations of the conjuror/' " Peace,
(t Peace, fool," cried Motley, " and .go thy way ; I would my feet were half as nimble as thy jaws," lt Halt a little, though it were only upon one foot, good Mr. Motley, aud tell us what says my Lady to this right won¬ derful man, this conjuror?" " My Lady is a most wise hdy ; being wise, she accordeth to the dictates of wis¬ dom; and in pursuance of these, she doth desire, command, and ordain, as it belio· veth her high excellence, agreeable to her prerogative, that this stranger, being, as it is supposed, and as he doth himself declare, a magician alias an enchanter, alias a necromancer, alias an astrologer, alias a wizard, alias a conjuror, this beard co! sage, tins gentleman of the black jobc, this knight of the white wand, be summoned to appear ------" 44 Before
11 Лфп her. n 11 Who bade thee apeak ?" " Marry, I do not always wait for bidding, What then, does her Grace mean Io try him by the ordeal of witchcraft, by having him thrown into the lake, to see whether he will sink or swim? Truly, 1 wish he may get well оЯГ with his conju¬ rations, and none of us be the worse for them. But what say you, Mr, Motley ? do you think he can lay the ghost ľ' 4t I wish he would first lay thee, that stepping over thee, I might be rid of such a troublesome impediment : I am not sent hither to speak to thee, but thy betters. Go on, and tell Father Osborne to attend my Lady : my business is with the con¬ juror." Motley entered the hall, " Well," cried the stranger, addressing hit», ct hast thou advertised thy Lady of my
my arrival, and the business that biought me hither ? and is she, moreover, willing to admit me into her gracious presence?* 1 11 Aye, aye/ ciied several voices at once, ** what says my Lady ?" ** Marry, that she 'n willing, with the implied permission of the most holy father, her confessor, with whom she is at this time holding converse» to listen to what thou hast to say to her; and further, to allow thee to give her a specimen of thy art, iu quieting the disorders that reign in her castle, through the turbulence of this disorderly and most unmannerly ghost. Nevertheless, supposing it .o be the spirit of her late husband, Baron F'itzwalter, she desireth he may be dealt gently with* Albeit, she first craves to know something more concerning Earl Ormond,, for whoss loss her Ladyship, though she loves him not,
not, yet deeply mournelh, being in mueh dole and trouble of heart/* "The fate of the Earl," replied the stranger, tf remaineth for the present sus¬ pended; let it suffice that he is safe; the spirit that haunts these walls must first be laid to rest." " Well then, please your worship," cried Peter, " had not vou better set about the job directly? I hen id him, just now, clattering along the chamber, rat¬ tling his old armour about ; and knocking and hammering airainst the walls, as ifhe meant to take a part of the old building along wdth him." "Τ cannot proceed to the awful busi¬ ness which demands mv attendance here/' returned the stranger, " till I have seen your Lady/' " Suppose, Mr. Steward," cried Nicho-
las, (i while mv Ladv ь dcübutitmir, we were to liedle in a woid or two foi cur- selves r w I at if 1 wcjc to cnquiie oi* hun about the steed? Sir—Sir------" " What is vour w ill?" 44 Last night, an please your worship, one of my Lady's best horses was stolen out of the stable/' <f A bay horse." ťt Vea ; the very colour.'* c< Having the near fore leg and tîıe far hind leg white/ t( The very marks " lf Standing fourteen hands and a half high." " The height to an inch/' 4t Four sears old, last grass/* " The very age to a day." " Bought at Carlisle/' "Whey
44 Whey (whistling), why, so it was, on my conscience/' " Now, pray, Mr. Conjuror, do you know wdiat became of this horse ? shall 1 hear of it again ?" " Thou wilt hear of it" "When?" " Now," " W T here is it?" 44 In the stable. Thou wilt find it in the first stall, with a halter about its neck." " Wiiurra—whurra!" cried Nicholas, " I'll go and see." " I fancy, Mr. Conjuror," said the steward, " you have made free with the steed yourself; and so having returned it to the place from whence you stole it, are come hither to make a parade of your knowledge
knowledge, and to impose yourself upon us as a magician ; I suspected you to be an impostor; and I now believe >ou to be a rogue." '* I know you to be a sot," replied the stranger, " and I suspect you to be a fool. Thou hast drank more sack and Rhenish within these three weeks, than Mould have served to drown thee/' 41 Say that again," said the stcwr./d furiously, ic and I will pluck off thy beard, and knock thy wand about thy ears, till thou con fewest tin self to he what thou art—an imposto., andan hy¬ pocrite/' 4t Peace, fellow, and he quiet/ " Do you nut know· who I ; m ?" cited the steward, striding up to the stranger, whom he eyed wiih a look of stem de¬ vo и хи ľ fiance;
fiance; "do vou not know that I have the honour to be the Baroness's stew- arar ζί Yes; and ifi have any skill in divi¬ nation, I know thou wilt not ictain thv stewaidship many flays." *' Ah, ah, ah ! (laughing) a good joke, a very good joke, upon my мш!/' tť Whuna— w huna î" cried Nicholas, who now entered; %í surely, as í live, the horse is where he said it was, in the first stall, the very place; he kuows every thing." 4i in tiOib/' cried Pcler, <ŕ a most wonderful man ! Please your worship, Mr. Conjuror, may I too a&k a ques¬ tion?" <ť What wouldst thou say F' u There is a }oung man, your honour, the
the son of one of lær Lady»hipS vassal·, of the name of Edgar/' 44 What of him?" *' This vounir man. an please von, Mr, Conjuror, has fallen hugeously in love, as one mav sav, u ith—■— v tŕ A wuiìi'ìi)." ťt Wondeiful ! how could he кпол- that? ,i il A young and beautiful maiden, p!ea>c your \\огь1н}>, who lives in this cattle, of tîıe name of——-" '· Ethelind.*' **Iler very name; a prodigious man! Now, jou nu^t know, ΛΙι. C'«ìpJ4K4\ that Edgai's fttlur, being, as one may sty, well to live, tor her Lad \ 'di i'», С*ч1 bîtss her, oppiesseth no one, he wont connut to his son's many ing this oiil, bev inse, forsooth, she is the daughier οί α |»оиг ь 2 cot« jgc i,
cottager, unless, indeed, my Lady should command. Now, what I want to ask urn, Mr, Conjuror, is whether this mamagc Mill ever take place or nor for Edgar н an honest young fellow, and beloved hy all who know him ; and the maid is α pretty girl, ami as good as she is pretty." ť< He will marry her in three days/' " Odbbodikius ! so soon! egad then, I'll go and tell Eilgar, that he may be getting ready for the wedding." At this moment Eather Osborne jc- turned, bearing a message fiom the Baro¬ ness, rlesiiing to see the stranger imme¬ diately ; the latter accoidin»ly arose; and Father Osborne leading the way, they repaired to the Baiouess's anti- chamber·
СНЛР.
СНЛГ. IV. Vgi f a the sage had т$Ы to ^ 1 ау î ,« ç%;t f 1 hat he sliou<<Î see her form vi 't e nJ i'm \ АпЦ maik if *«íi «he lov'd, and still the thought of η *n. Sc nt, The Baroness eved the stranger for a moment or two, with a aensation of mingled awe and astonishment. " I have been told, venerable Sir," said she» at length breaking silence, li that you have the power, by some unknown art, to ies tore peace and tranquillity to this castle, of late most grie\ ously distili bed and haunted by a very troublesome phantom : if to do ь 3 tiiis
this is within the compass of your ability, you will have performed for me and my household a mighty service ; and, beside my most grateful thanks, you shall receive a rich r e ward. r * 4 I shall on iay part/' said the stranger, ťí be hmhlv honoured bv vour kindnesses. But before I enter upon the important business upon which I came, most noble and revered Lady," added he, u it is meet I first hold with yo M some private converse. With your leave, Lady, u e must be alone. 1 * ** Alone ! why alone ?" Father Osborne arose : " Fear not, Lady," said he, tť I will return anon ;" and, together with the otheis present, withdrew. u Wiiat is vour will?" cried the Baro- ness, somewhat tremulously. u Vour
tl Vour castle, Lady/' said the sprang- r, " is said to be infected and mucii înnıblcd with a being of a supernatural cliar..ctr?% suppo>e*l to be the s;m.t tť ь >¡ne on departed.' i( Truly, Sir, of lute it hath been much пк. med * f ILive jon Jouistlf îıeîıehl tl /и yho^t? 'and what form or appearance hath it-as¬ sumed ?" ft It is said to have assumed various forms ; but most commonly takes that of au armed knight, bearing, it is thought, much resemblance to——", u The Baron, vour late Lord/" £< It is so reported, as you seem to have heard/* *' Hath anv thing occurred since the death of the Baron, which may be sup¬ posed to have grieved his departed spirit, к 4 and
and thus hindered its repose? Did j t ou love him ? Answer freely; you will speak to faithful ears/' " Oh, could I say how much ľ* <ť And did you mourn for him, as widows should mourn, with deep, and earnest, and long-continued sorrow for his death r" u Witness for me, Heaven, what tt^as my sotrozo /" f * Received you other lovers? this, per¬ chance, might grieve his sorrowing soul, and cause it thus to wander, seeking the rest it found not*" 44 None, by my faith/* ** You have had suitors, Lady; did none of them succeed, and win* your love?" " No, none ! my heart abhorred the very name of marriage/' "Twas
a Tuas strange, methinks ; so young, so fair, so rich too, and so powerful î what, could no knight of honourable fame ere touch that gentle bosom, and awake in it love's genial fires?'* *' Sir Г " Panion, sweet Lady, if I seem too bold. I have been answered. Your aflec¬ tions then remain unaltered ; you have never swerved, even in thought, from that virtuous constancy in love, which proves it to be more than passion ?" <( I never have; but why these interro¬ gatories ?" t£ Lady, they are necessary : these re¬ plied to, have you courage to attend me whither I shall lead vou ? Be not alarmed ; your safety is my care/* (( Where wouldst thou lead me, stran irer?" E 5 "To
*' To tbc chamber of your deceased husband." cl Ah î wherefore to that chamber?" ff T»s there, thev sav, at nicht the spirit walks ; at midnight I begin my incantations; you, Lady, must be pre¬ sent/ 4 ^ Me ! Oh, Heaven defend me! the Earl was lost, who dared------ "' 4f Courage, sweet Ladv, 'twill be but fora few short minutes: the ghost must pass along, thaťs all." il Ah i pass where ?*' ** Across the chamber/* t£ Oh, drive me not to distraction—to madness, stranger ! Think est thou I can behold my beloved husband's spirit, and live ? Ob, spare m erspare ше such a scene of horror !'* " Thou
u Thou shalt not see it. Ladv/' u How î not <ee it, though it appear, and yet be pi esen t ! sî ťí No : for ΠΙ tie around vour brow a ma^ie handkerehief, on whicli vou must not look eie it he put on ; you will hear, but .see no: h ing." *' But w hy, I beseech you, tell me, Sir, must 1 be present at this awful scene?" 44 If it is the spirit of your Lord that haunts thefe walls, it will uot rest tili it has seen thee; afterwards, it will repose in peace, and, its purgation ended, taste bliss immollai." <4 lí nothing but my presence in that chamber can remore peace to his disturbed and agitatevi spirit," cried the Baroness, after а ра\ье of terrified rumination, * l I will attend vmi.'' i( Thou hast fpoken nobly, Lady, 1 ' f G returned
returned the stranger; u and thy pro¬ mise gives me hopes of success. Adieu tlien, for the pi csent; I go to prepare for the awful moment. The reverend father may now approach. Jcar not; the issue of these events mav be most fortunate/* <v Mo»t fortunate V repeated the Baro¬ ness. (( Be comforted, my daughter, " said Father Osborne, who now entered, and observed the agitation of his Lady. " As¬ sume courage, and confidently follow the directions of this learned man.'* íť What is the hour?" asked the Baro¬ ness. " It is within one of the appointed time/' is Oh, my heart !" exclaimed the Baro¬ ness. " May the holy saints and angels guard me!—He has iaid nothing more," б at
at length added she, ts concerning the Eari, at which I greatly marvel/' tl The events of the night/* said the father, " will probably unravel all the mysteries of the castle/* ,4 Heaven grant they may f cried the Baroness; "and that we may be а i peace ! But where is Winifred ?" "Winifred," said the monk, " cannot appear/' "How! cannot! cannot appear Г if You will know more hereafter," re¬ sumed the father; £i her presence will not be necessary. Let me conduct you to a private oratory; and when thou hast repeated a few ave-marias before the shrine of St. üunstan, I will fortify thee with the holy sprinkling ; and then, when thou art thus prepared, Lady, I myself will attend thee to tbe chamber/* CHAR
СНЛР. v. She heard the midnight bell with anxious start, Wh.eh toid the mystic hour approaching nigh. Scott, Вь foke these devout performances were well ended, the great bell in tbe tower of the keep sounded solemnly to the ears of the Baroness the hour of midnight; and kanin«· on tbe arm of Father Osborne, she moved with hasty yet trembling step along the cloisters, now scarcely lighted by the expiring lamp, and ascended tbe stairs leadina: to tbe haunted chamber. All v/as silence; yet she feared sounds that
that might alarm her at every step. Even the treading of her own light feet, and those of the unahod fri ir, seemed awful. When coinè to tbe door of tbe clum¬ ber, thev halted, and overheard the magi- cían speaking bis incantations. They waited a few moments, w hai suddenly the doors of the chamber unfolding, as of their own accord, discovered the magieian sitting by the light of one solitary lamp, suspended from tbe ceiling; which, while it threw а partial gleam around, scarcely illuminating the farther parts of the chamber, served to impress tbe mind, awed by expectation as was that of the Baroness, with a darksome apprehension of mysteries already there. It served, however, well to display the dignified figure of tbe necromancer, and all the appendages of his art. Before
Before him was a large table, covered ivtfeh black cloth ; and on it lay open a large folio volume, which he appeared to be examining with the most earnest atten¬ tion. His right hand held his long white wand, his left slightly touched a dry human skull; by it stood an hour-glass; and before him a large anima! of the lizard kind, and an owl stuffed and dried. On tbe floor around him were marked in chalk, a vast variety of mathematica! figures, and mysterious diagrams. Tbe Baroness, since the death of the Baron, had never visited tliis chamber. without experiencing the most painful feelings. The thoughts of so soon being near an airy form, the only mode of being now remaining to him, oppressed her heart with a weight of woe, which dried up the source of tean ; that season¬ able
able relief to grief, and made her regard the solemn apparatus of the magician with almost insensibility ; although in other circumstances she must have beheld them with the deepest awe. Her attitude was indicative of the most heartfelt distress ; her eyes were directed towards heaven, her hands clasped as in agony ; and thus she stood for some minutes, till a heavy groan, issuing from her very soul, seemed to relax rather than relieve her pangs ; and she sunk, almost fainting, against the shoulder of Father Osborne. A single tear now marked its course down her cheek ; and she, looking towards the venerable fmurc of the magi- cian, faintly cried, " 1 am ready/' These workings of the most tender, yet steady affection for her departed Lord, had uot beeu observed by the friar with¬ out
out the most friendly interest and com¬ passion ; and while he supported her with One hand, he held out the other in an attitude of exhortation ; and gently ex¬ claimed-, with,a tone of the most sincere benevolence, " Yield not, my daughter, to these mournful recollections; trust iu the power and niercy of the Supreme Dis¬ poser of all human events ; and may you yourself experience that happiness you come here to give to the soul of your Lord !" Tîıe magician, who had regarded her with an attentive eye, from the instant of her entering, now seemed with much agitation to mutter some words to him¬ self; then closing the mystic page before him, he arose majestically from his seat, and stepping forward, took up the ker¬ chief, wliich had been, covered by the book,
book, and said, V The hour is arrived, noble Lady. All things augur well : t ! >se your eyes, and receive this magic ban¬ dage, which I alone can tie. Wearing this, none of the spirits that ever gave terror to the u ight can possibly appal or affright you/' "How long?" said the .Baroness, tre¬ mulously· (i No questions, Lady," cried the ma¬ gician; " we must be quick ; the harbin¬ gers of my purpose I already hear. Kneel at this table." The Baroness obeyed ; and with hurry¬ ing hand, the magic bandage was bound around her head. " We are ready now," cried the magieian : " support your charge," said he to Father Osborne, who took his stand close behind his Lady, ready to give her support if needed. Au
An awful silence succeeded. Low inar¬ ticulate sounds, like the murmuring of woids indistinct! ν utteied, at length cau riit hd ear. Thev ceased, and aH w«i" -л* in rilent. Suddenlv she heard a nui-c îıki the bui stime of a door, then of a nidi ι.;· iile ihe entrance of seveial proA'e at (mee, and afterwards a sound, a·» of the clattering of armour. These too died away. She trembled ; but was stili. " Take courage, daughter,"' ciied the friar; '* the awful m\»teries will soon be ended/' 41 The spirit has appeared," said the magician; * * it has already passed along the chamber/' *' Oh, my beloved, my adored Fitzwal¬ ter !" cried the Baroness, a wdien may death reunite us, by rendering me a spirit like thee?" ťí Hush!"
" Hush l'" said the magician ; " the omens are favourable; attend to what is passing." At that instant, the well-known strains of the mysterious miustrtl caught the елг of the astonished—the wonder-struck Baroness. She started—shrieked !—- tore the magic bandage from her brow, wildly exclaiming, %i It is him—it is himself!" and sunk, panting, trembling, fainting, almost dvinsr, with the wild emotions of her ioy, into the arms of the stranger, (who bad now thrown off hi* disguise) feebly ejaculating, as she fell, "It is, in¬ deed, great Heaven ! it is Eitzwalter !" " Gertrude—Gertrude/" cried the Ba¬ ron, for it was the liaron, her husband, that now pressed her to his bursting, throbbing heart, 4i my life's best, dearest treasure !
treasure î look up—look at thy Fit ζ wai¬ ter. ЛЬ! why so pale? Ob, save her— save her," exclaimed he, lí íly —fiy ! un¬ used of late to joy, ibis sudden tide, ribb¬ ing thus unexpectedly upon her senses, is too—too much for feeble nature to sup¬ port. ЛЬ, why did I expose her to so severe a trial ! But sec, tbe colour steals into her lips, and visits tbo.se fair cheeks Gertrude, my love, awake, behold thy husband, tby long, long lost Fitzwaltei ľ* ťí Met bought I saw him," said the Baroness; u but tell me, (svildly seizing lather Osborne's ana) is not all this en¬ chantment ?" then snatching up the bau¬ dage, an ciiíbioidercd haiidkc*chiei', " the same," baid she, " I gave him at tbe tournament/' " liaise your eyes, niy Gertrude," re¬ sumed
sunúci tbc Baron, u aiid h>ok around von * bi bidd you aught now that i trembles the ghost of vour husband r" * f Heavens !" exclaimed tîıe Β ι ron es s, ŕC what is it tliat I see? а figure in com¬ plete armour! Ah î (recoiling) ь not that the «host?" " Take off vour helmet, Sir КшцЫ/' cried the Baron, ** and shew yourself, in mortal guise, to this most vii t uous and much injured Lady/' %i Oii, spare ше!" n joined the Knight, t! this bated, this humiliating deckbare/' "What ilo I hear Г ciied the Baro¬ ness il tbe voice of Sir Reginald Hare¬ land !" " The same, my dear Gertrude/' re¬ plied the Baron. *' The gho»t I carne hither to exorcise wao the spin t of an unworthy knight, who, taking advantage of
of a false report of my death, endeavoured to render himself the lord of yourself and vour domain. When with faithful firm- ness you rejected his proposals, by the practice of the most dishonourable arti¬ fices, he attempted to terrify you into a marriage; and tbat he might be more free from the interruption of these his schemes, he prevented all communication on my part with you, hy deceiving me with a false account of vour death, the effect of grief, he said, for your loss of me." " My Lord," cried Sir Reginald, "you see before you one of tbe most unhappy of meu. I will not endeavour to conceal my faults; I will uot even attempt to extenuate them. I loved the Baroness, and was directed to seek her alliance by no sordid wish of encrease either of pro-
perty or power. The report of your having fallen in the ranks of the enemy, had gained universal credit and accept¬ ance, before I even saw the Baroness. I aloue knew* that you was living; but hear¬ ing that tiie ship in which you had taken your passage to the Sicilian shore was wrecked at the Straits of Messina, and that the whole crew had been lost, I veas persuaded, nay, convinced, that Ι ι elated a fact, when I asserted that you was ¿ела "The account I sent vou before the V icnortof vour ^hipw reck ι cached Endam!, that the Baroness v.\v< dead, bad a sîmiLr relativ åi t » ti nth. She vvas imbed labour¬ ing under an ilinek, attended with the most alarming symptoms of danger. At the /une I informed you of Ler death, it YOL. li. i VMS
was thought by some she could not sur- \ive many hours. Her attachment to her husband made mc love her more. *АЬ! liow faithful,' cried I, ' must she be to a living husband, \\ho can thus love one whom she thinks dead 1 She is a prize I must not, will not lose. Fitzwalter is attainted, and never can return to be hers; it will be kindness to her to render her mine/ Thus arguing, under the influ¬ ence of passion, I own, indeed, I became guilty of falshood, when I sent the trusty and well-feed messenger to say your Ger¬ trude was no more. Ere she had perfectly recovered, I bad the reasons above-men¬ tioned to believe you were dead. I loved, »■' ■* ofieied myself, and was refused. You know the rest. This detestable scheme of the ghost was contrived and recom¬ mended
mended by Winifred, whom I had, from the commencement of my love for the Baroness, secured in my interest." " But where," cried the Barones?, ,ç is Earl Ormond г " " He is safe, mv dear Gertrude/' said the Baron, " as I have alreadv assured you. The noble Ormond, deceived, like yourself, by tîıe treacherous arts of vil* lany, has a few hours only ago been eman¬ cipated »from a shocking confinement. Much yet remains to be explained.—With you, Sir Knight," continued the Baron, addressing himself to ifir Reginald, " it is necessary î *ЛюпЫ have ьоте further con vacation ; ti! ! then, you remain a pri¬ soner in ilik cahile/' he then desired that Edgar and the seneschal, who were awaiting his orders ; would conduct him аз a n/soucr to a ro^m in tho roand i. f 2 tower
tower of the keep. " Lead him out," said he, " by the way he came." Tbe Baroness, whom joy and surprise 1кч1 almost deprived of perception, ob¬ served now, for the first time, an opening in the wainscot, large enough to afford a passage for Sir Reginald and his guard. The dangers of those times when the castle was built, had induced the founder to contrive * ious passages and recesses in the walls of this apartment, cither to afford tbe means of escape from personal danger, or to conceal whatever he held most valuable. But in the times succeed- i n i>% these lecesses became useless, and were O' ' forgotten ; and no one knew of tbe pan¬ nel so aitfully constructed, as to íly open with a smina: on the slightest touch, ex- cept Winifred, who had made Sir Regi¬ nald acquainted with the contrivance; and
and he availed himself of the secret, in the manner above described, to draw Eail Or mond from the apartment, who, con¬ ceiving the sudden opening of this pannel to be the effect of supernatural power, easily fell into the snau insidiously laid for him by the pretended ujhost. As soon as Sir Reginald had departed, the gooit old Father Osborne having con¬ gratulated the Baron and Baroness with tears of joy, they repaired to a saloon, where they were soon joined by Earl Or¬ mond, whom the necessary refreshment, and a few hours sleep, had perfectly restored. The Earľs surprise, when in¬ formed that the Baron, who was univer¬ sally supposed to have fallen in battle, was alive, and iu the castle, disguised in the gai b of a magician, may easily be con¬ ceived. The esteem arul high admiration f 3 he
he entertaiued for the Baroness, allowed him not to mingle any selfish regrets with the satisfaction he felt from the pro¬ spect ofher again experiencing that hap¬ piness, of which she was so justly deser¬ ving, with the noble object of her tender¬ est affection ; nor did the manner in which he expressed his feelings on this occasion, fail to confirm the Baroness in the high opinion she Íjad conceived of liim, The melancholy situation of the Earl, on the departure of the impostor ghost, has been already described. After having made various ineffectual attempts to lift up the iron door, through which he had descended to this dreary dungeon of hor- xors, and having exerted himseif in vain to be heard, wearied with waiting, and oppressed by hunger, he had almost relin* quished
quished all hope, and had laid himself down on one of the stone enftins, pre¬ pared to meet his seeming inevitable fate, wdien be fell into а refreshing slumber, from wdiich he awoke greatly recruited, and disposed again to use bis reviving jwwers, as also to pass the dreary hours in again exploring the vault, his prison. As he groped along the wails, he can;e to a niche in which was an old lamp, and behind it а crucifix, placed before a coffin which stood on an end. He clambered up into the niche to examine if. when in reaching behind the coffin, it fell with a thundering cra^h into the area of the vault, and throwing down with it several loose stones, crumbling wdth length cf time, be was beaten down ; and had he not been cased in armour, would have instantly met the death he had expected. ж 4 He
He w -аз, however, rather bruised than hurt; and instantly rising up, and retreat¬ ing a ilw steps, he stood expecting that more of the wall of the niche might fall and crush him. Nothing of that kind however happened, ancl the echoes of the crash having ceased, and all being still again, he began cautiously to resume his examination of the niche. In groping over it, he found а piece of iron fastened into a stone, by which the coffin had been supported in its position ; he found also that this stone was very large, and, as he lightly judged, must communicate with tbe other parts of the castle. He soon came to the steps which led to the entrance into this traverse; his progress in this direction was stopped by a massive door, ίίππΚ fastened, and against wlnvh he knocked, and beat in vain, for a long time,
time. Ile left it not without intention of returning, and tried his fortune in an¬ other search. He now discovered by the sale of the passage several niches, wdiich were nothing more than small loop-holes now built up, Continuing his progress, he, at length, perceived, to his great joy, the morning habt issuing through a grated window. Approaching it, with a full persuasion that he was now certain of escape, he found, to his great mortification, that it was only a window in a low apartment of one of the most advanced towers of the castle, una looked upon the morass forming on¬ that part tbe boundary of tbe lake, so that it was not likely that any person would pass that way; and the strong iron bars, iirmly fastened, prevented all hope oi egresa to himself. J 5 On*;
Our mortifications are generally pro¬ portioned to the ardour of our expec¬ tations. Tiie disappointed and unfortu¬ nate Ormond now found, to his extreme legret, that his escape was far from cer¬ tain. The effect of the morning air was, however, reviving ; and the light cheered his spirits. He looked from the window wdth pleasure, though that pleasure was allayed by the anxious wish for liberty, which he saw enjoyed by the birds of the lake, and the deer ranging on the opposite side of it» Here he sat himself down, and conti¬ nued his survey from the window, not without the hope of seeing some person who might observe his signals. But, at length, wearied with his dull watch, and overcome by fatigue, he fell into a pro* found sleeps iu which he long continued ; and
and this circumstance prevented his earlier deliverance: for had not this wholly over¬ come him, he must have heard the call of Edgar and his companions, who under* took, as we have already noticed, to search diligently in every probable, and almost possible place, for the man, whose absence appeared to him most strange, and which· the genrra'ity accounted supernatural. Tnat tliey did not search the range of traverses and subterraneans where the Earl was immured, was owing to the cir* cumstance that these recesses were only to be approached hy trap-doors, like that through whieh the Earl had been de¬ coyed ; and these, having been generally constructed with the utmost regard to concealment, were wholly unknown to* Edgar, and the rest of the servants. TJie Earl, after a sleep of some hours, f о arouse,
arose, still languid and nnrefreshcd ; and retracing his way toward the lower dun¬ geon, endeavoured to find some other door or chasm, by which he might ascend to the upper vaults. While he was busied in this search, he distinguished the sound of voices, raised together in chorus. It instantly occurred to him that the place be was in must be under the chapel; and that the Baroness and her people were at their devotions. The shouts and loud cries of the Earl, while endeavouring ta make his bituation known, were mistaken for the shrieks and yells of the spirit, tbat was wont to haunt the castle, and occa¬ sioned tbe alarm and dispersion we have before described. Edgar, as may be remembered, alons remained in the chapel. To lum the sounds be bad beard seemed not to be supernatural ;
supernatural ; and he resolved to trace the mystery to tbe bottom. Observing the situation of the chape!, he proceeded by a door behind the altar, toward the place from whence tbe sounds seemed to issue; and j having reached the burial vault, he distinctly heard the voice of the Earl, calling loudl ν for assistance; Edgar having, with the aid of a shovel which lay in his way, cleared away a vast quantity ofloo.se earth, which was thrown over it, opened the trap ; and, in a mo¬ ment, restored the delighted Earl to that liberty he bad been long vainly struggling to regain. The Earl, when thus escaped from the vaults, complained that the sense of the danger to which he bad been exposed was become even more * /nml and oppressive than the danger itself; and as extraordi¬ nary
nary exertions are usually followed by proportionable depression, so the Earl now found himself too faint and languid to appear for the present; and he w T as ear- ncstlv desirous of being conducted to his room, where, having taken some very slight refreshment, he was left alone to his repose. Edgar, delighted with having disco¬ vered and released the Earl, hastened to acquaint Motley with the news of his success, from whom he learned in return the still more extraordinary intelligence of the arrival of the Baron at the castle, and of his being disguised in it as a ma¬ gician. Motley, who trusted Edgar with these particulars, from a full pa-suasion of his integrity, and knowing that he might be useful, to the final conclusion of the meanuvS
measures now in progress, desired him, till the denouement of all the mysteries, to maintain a strict silence relative to these circumstances, as also of those con¬ cerning the situation of the Earl in the vaults of the castle ; as it was necessary to the plans of the Baron that the Baro¬ ness, and the greater part of her attend¬ ants, should be unacquainted with these particulars. After Sir Reginald had been led away in the manner above mentioned, the news of the arrival of the Baron flew in¬ stantly through the castle ; and all the persons of the family, a few excepted, hastened with joy to behold again their long-lost Lord ; and to express, in proper terms, their respects on his return. These forms were soon over; yet the Baroness,
Baroness, eager to learn the events which had led to lier present happiness, thought them tedious delays to the communi- cation of that important intelligence, which might convince her reason that what she saw and heard was not a dream.
CHAP.
11 J , ■ * ' ■■
CHAP. VI. Breathes there the man with scui so dead, Who never to himseîf hath said, This is my own, my native Und ! Whose heart hath ne'er w uhin hi .i'd As home his footsteps he hath t uu 1, From waoďring on a foreign strand 3 U such there breathe, go mark him well, For him, no minstrel raptures swell. Scott. When the Baroness was alone with the· Baron, she gently reproached him for having so long concealed from her that he was still living, '* Oh ! whv," said she^ "did not you discover yourself to me
me on your first arrival here? why, dis¬ guised as a minsticl, artfully eluding my strictest scireh, did you so often diaw me to my wiudow, to weep and mourn anew your loss, the memorials of which, every note that vibrated ftom the strings of your instrument, I know not how, nor why, seemed to recall, and bring more afTcctingly to my mind ? Oh ! why, when it was in your power to have restored me to the happiness I had, I believed, for ever lost, did you surfer me thus to pine in hopeless sorrow for your death?*' " You shall know, my love," cried the Baron. u all my reasons for a conduct, which, I am fully aware, muet appear extraordinary, perhaps uot wholly justi¬ fiable ; fbr, oh ! my Gertrude, how, knowing thee, could I ever suspect thy fidelity, how ever cease to rely, as I ought to
to have done, on thy angel-like, thy un¬ exampled constancy I Oh, such, never sure before was there iu woman, most be¬ loved—most amiable of human beings Γ 4t And did you indeed suspect mv fide- lity?" cried the Baroness ; ** could you be so unjust to yourself and me, as to doubt it even for a moment : y ťí I blush to say I did,'' resumed the Baron : "like you, I was deceived with ap¬ pearances ; and not by appearances only, but by representations, calculated to make me wretched, even when my dearest hap¬ piness was in view. To explain this, it will be necessary that I first give you some accouut of myself since we last parted. You now know my motive for visiting Flanders. Deceived by the spe¬ cious arts of an impostor, for such the pretended Duke of York has confessed himself,
himself, I took arms against my sove¬ reign, and was obliged, by bis success, to fly my country, leaving thee behind ; for I could not wish ihc e to bear the miseries of exile ; and my title, estate, and honours were now at the meiey ofa king, whem I had offended. " I shall not pause to relate the parti¬ culars of the various fortunes I experi¬ enced, í shall at present only say that I entered into the sei vice of Burgundy, and fought in its wars. In one rencontre, I fell wounded, and fainting with the loss of blood, and was left for dead iu the field, amongst the slain. I was found by one of tliose hardy adventurers, who are wont to traverse the field of battle in search of plunder ; I won his attention, and by him was conveyed to tbe house of a Flemish mechanic, who tended me with great
great humanity and kindness. I con¬ cealed from him my quality and name; and remained with him till I was reco¬ vered from my wound, which included a period of near three months. In bis family was a young Sicilian, of a gay and sociable disposition, who, to a remarkabio fine voice, united an extraoulinarv skill in music. ť ' He often visited me, while lying soli· taiily on the pallet afforded me by my host; and amused me with the strains of his lute, an instrument on wdiich he played so admirably, as to luve acquired great fame and reputation, even in Italy. We insensibly became pleased with each other's compa n \', and he was soon my almost constant attendant. As soon as I was able to undertake the task, I wrote to Sir Reginald Hareland, inform¬ ing
ing him of my situation, and requesting intelligence from England. " I sent this letter by a partizan, who ventured to return to England, in the dis· guise oF a palmer. Consequent on my connection with the Warbeck party, I dreaded, with great reason, the severity of the king,,mingled, as it was, by his eli- creasing avarice ; on this account, to you, my Gertrude, I dared not to write; nay, I was restrained doing so, lest suspicion should attach to you, and bring you into danger. I received an answer to my letter from Sir Reginald, addressed to me by the name I had assumed, informing nie, that as* I had been returned in the lists of the slain, it was not doubted by any that I was dead. He added also, that an act of attainder had passed the Royal Sig¬ net, - wliich would subject me to certain S impeachment,
impeachment, should I dare to return to my native land ; that Lord Stanley, the high treasurer, once the friend and sup¬ porter of the king, had been already ar¬ raigned, and was then under sentence of condemnation, 'his former services being quite forgotten. The same packet con¬ tained also .the heart-rending account of your death; and the measure of my mis¬ fortunes seemed now to be full. " I know not what passed for several weeks after this intelligence was conveyed to me. Death seemed now to have ad¬ vanced nearer than when I lay wounded among the dead and dying on the field of battle. I wished not for life; I even prayed to be released, by a speedy disso¬ lution, from a situation, on whicli the prospect of hope had apparently for ever closed. Time, though it failed to sooth my
my grieft, yct gave me back to health. I determined to quit Flanders; and careless whither I went, proposed to accompany my Sicilian friend, in his purposed expe¬ dition to Palermo. " He received my proposal of accom¬ panying him with unfeigned expressions of joy ; and we crossed through France, and embarking at Marseilles, sailed for the coast of Sicily. I wrote to Sir Reginald, previous to my embarkation, acquainting him with the place of my destination, ач also my resolution of never more visiting England. " Our vessel was wrecked at tbe Strait* of Messiua, and most of the ship's ciew perished with it. My friend the Sicilian, myself, with two others, alone escaped ; but we both lost nearly our all. M\ companion now proved indeed my fiiend, fo.
for by his skill in music he earned enough to prevent mc, as well as himself, from starving. His employment as a minstrel was indeed tolerably profitable ; and it became more so, when he had taught me to accompany him in his performances. Æt By continued practice, I became a good proficient in the art ; and those me¬ lodies which occasioned such delight and surprise in you, for a considerable time won my bread. Yet though thus cm- ployed my attention, and I was much amused with the scenes and manners of the finest country, and most polished people in the world, yet neither time nor amusement could extinguish the grief I felt for tlie loss of my beloved Gertrude; and the hours passed often mournfully, and heavily along. I accused my folly as the cause of vour death; and a thousand vol. n. g times
times execrated that fatal credulity, which had drawn me from my paternal abode— from all that was precious to me on earth, had involved me in irremediable ruin, and perpetual banishment from my native soil. 'Oh, England!* I exclaimed, ( my bçloved country ! the scene of my former joys, the abode of my honourable ances¬ tors, how hard my fortune, which bids me not dare to behold you more !' 4t Such often were my melancholy re¬ flections, and sad regrets ; when, at length, one day falling accidentally into company with some English traders, who had come to the marts of Italy, to pur¬ chase the rich commodities of India, either from Aleppo in Syria, or Alexan¬ dria in Egypt, I learnt that a general pardon had been afforded to all such of the English nobility as had been attainted for^
for taking up arms in the cause of War- beck, provided they returned within a limited time, and took the oaths of alle¬ giance to King Henry. ť What pity/ said one of them, who was a North countryman, e that Lord Fitz¬ walter, one of the noblest of our Northern Barons, should have fallen into the snares ofthat impostor ! Had he lived, they say, the king would have pardoned him, as well for the sake of the lovely Baroness of the family of Broke, of which this fair widow is sole heiress, as also from a persuasion that he was not actuated by that factious spirit which induced many of the partizans óf Warbeck to take up arms/ " Hearing this, I observed, with affected indifference— * It is well your king is mer- « â ciful;
ciftil ; and that peace is restored to Eng¬ land, which has long suffered all the evils of civil war. But why should the king be inclined to spare Lord Fitzwalter on ac¬ count of his wife, who, I heard at the Court of Burgundy, had not survived the death of the Baron r' 4 In that/ said my countryman, 'you have been misinformed. She did grieve, indeed, as women always will, when dis¬ appointed in their comforts by the loss of a gvïod husband; but young widows, wkh good estates, need not mourn long ; and I dare say the Baroness cares not a fig for the Baron now ; for she is about to make up her loss, by giving her willing hantjaiul rich Barony of ľitz waiter, which, by a grant from the king, she is allowed to hold during her lire, to a gay, gal¬ lant
lant young knight, Sir Reginald Hare- laud, a kinsman ofher late Lord's/ " I started at this intelligence, though it was yet impo.Nsible to give credit to it· ť Have you/ said I, ' so recently left Eng¬ land, and know not that the Baroness Fitz¬ walter has been dead some months?* ť Indeed ľ replied ir.y countryman, sarcastically, 'bhe dead ! where, pray, did you gather that information? but let me observe, by whatever channel you obtained it, it is faUe/—* Aye, truly/ cried another of the merchants, 'for, to my knowledge, the Baroness was alive and well, some weeks since ; and the Knight, Sir Regi¬ nald, was at her castle, laying close siege to the buxom widow, 1 do assure you. But some people are of opinion that the king will not allow her to marry him, and that he inteuds to send her a husband α 3 from
Ϊ2δ THE NOCTURNAL MINSTREL. from court; and he, or any one else, I dare say, will be equally acceptable/ " It is in vain to describe mv emotions, at the moment I received this intelligence and these remarks; you, then, my Ger¬ trude, was living, strange and unaccount¬ able as it appeared ; but I was yet in danger of losing y m for ever ; and, what I felt still more cruelly, you had forgot Fitzwalter, and waited, with indelicate willingness, the proposals of another suitor. My attainder had been revoked, in common with the rest of my partizans. Nothing now opposed my return. A con¬ viction of the perfidy of the man, by whom 1 had beeu thus cruel Ι ν deceived, flashed at once upon my mind. I staid not to hear more—I flew out of the room, and taking a hurried adieu of my Sicilian acquaintance, to whom I now discovered myself,
myself, I won my way homeward, in the character of a minstrel, and embarked at Calais for England, " My heart rejoiced when I set my foot upon English ground \ and though dis¬ guised and unknown, I seemed to be among friends. But what, oh Gertrude I were my emotions, on beholding the towers of my castle, and those walls in which you resided ! I could scarce re¬ frain fiom hastening to your presence, and claiming your love ; but tlie conver¬ sation of the merchants in Italy had excited in me painful doubts and racking fears respecting you; and these were not done away, by the enquiries I made as I approached my home, I resolved, before 1 made myself known, to discover the true state of your affections and character, and of the conduct of Sir Reginald, of g 4 whose
w hose treachery, however, I could enter¬ tain no doubt. " With this view, I entered the wood ; and л\ ith the sound of my lute, endea¬ voured to chraw some one of your people, whom curiosity might direct, to the place of my retreat ; and to such one, if faithful, I resolved to make myself known. ťt I repaired, for three or four nights together, to the woe \ without seeing any but stiangeis, whom I cautiously avoided; concealing myself, on their approach, be¬ hind the boles of the trees, or beneath the underwood, or among the rocks. My im¬ patience could ill brook the delay, and I began to be weary of my nocturnal ramblings ; and was inclined to have abandoned my purpose, and make my way to the castle, and either upbraid or adore you, as I might sec occasion. " Accident,
" Accident, however, or the curiosity I }iad excited, at last befriended me : Mot¬ ley came into the wood. I, knowing the integrity of his character, discovered my¬ self. His surprise at first partook of terror; for he, like all others, believed that I was dead. He could scarcely per¬ suade himself that I was a living being: but these doubts and apprehensions were soon converted into sensations of the sin¬ cerest joy, when he was convinced that I was real I v his former master. From him I gained all tbe intelligence I could desire, and particularly he afforded me the most heartfelt delight, on assuung me that you, my (iert rude, really mourned, even then, for m j loss. *' As, however, I hud proceeded thus fur in my scheme, vnd thinking, excuse i\;e, most adored of women, that he might о 5 pussi bi ƒ
possibly be mistaken, desirous also of knowing how you would act toward the Earl of O» mond, I determined to wait the result; and therefore I continued my minstrelsy, which served as a signal to Motley, and afterwards to two or three faithful domestics, to vbit me, and com¬ municate intelligence. Motley was di¬ rected to trust my secret with several ; for by that means the communication with me might be carried on more se¬ curely. " By Motley I was informed of the departure, or rather dismissal, of Sir Regi¬ nald, and the arrival also of Lord Or* mond; and that jou conducted yourself to him exactly as I could have desired I learned also from bini, of the still more extraordinary circumstance of the ghost, which immediately, on the aipposed de¬ parture
THF, NOCTURNAL MftfSTRBÈ. parture of Sir Reginald, begat» bts»ightl/ disturbances. " I hafl some reason to suspect that the ghost was no other than Sir Reginalds and in this opinion I was soon confirmed* by the observations made at my directioa by my friend Motley, who, although bjr profession a fool, I now found to be by far the most reasonable person in tlie family. " He told me that Wini red had been ob* served to μο often toward what was called the haunud apartment; ami I desired him to watch her closeiw He did so; and fonná that the ghost entered the chamlier by э s .evtl door formed in the waiuM'ot : he found abo, what they did not know, that another door openeil be¬ hind the arras, winch hanging» in the usual manner, at a distance from, the wall, о б enabled
enabled liim to overhear a conversation between Winifred and the pretended ghost, who \vas really Sir Reginald, in whieh the base measures he took to secure your band were made most evident. One night, Motley covered himself with a white sheet, and issuing from his conceal¬ ment behind the airas, at the same mo¬ ment that a loud peal of th umler ι oiled over t lie towers of the castle, Winifred, persuaded that .she had now really seen a ghost, Come, as hhe imagined, to punish ber for her presumption, shrieked and fell into fits, *' This adventure might have been pro¬ ductive of some salutary effect upon tlie mind of Winifred, had not a disclosure of the real circumstance heen maile to her by Sir Reginald, who had the means of seeing and hearing all that passed. 3 " By
11 Bj r Motley i was also informed of the harsh conduct of Winifred toward poor Ethelind, which proves her cruel as well as base. The stuhlen disappearance of the Eail of Ormond, for which I could not account, and the knowledge of the practices of S.r Reginald, made me appre- hend some murderous mbeh'ei ; anıl the tenor it must occasion you, m\ dearest Gertrude, determined me to put an cud immediately to there imposruivs; and, Ity the assistance of Motlej, 1 cane, as you know, to ihe с\ы!е, i u the eharaetei of an cxoicist. or m .iri iau, nullified ov mv art to remove tiie Liistui bauccs raised by thb tliost. 44 Motley supplied me witli α 1тчс, м hich he took unpeıctİved fr. m the stable, aud puw.mg m\ way to —-—, I piachasctl the habit necessary to my ap¬ pearance
pearance in my new character of a magi¬ cian. With this and my beard, whh the addition of a conjur »r's cap, which pretty well concealed my face, tny dbguise wa so complete, that I could not even have known myself; I had therefore little fear of being detected till my business was concluded. *' Thus, mv dear Gertrude, have I given you a brief recital of all that passed both before and since my arrival on our Northern borders; what else n mains to be known (continued the Baron) may be gained from Winifred, who» as well as .Sir R' '¡¿inald, is, at present, detained a close prisoner in the еаьие/*
CHAP.
I» Г«", 1 , '," "," ¡'».IR,
CHAP. VIL True love** the gift wliich God ba» giv*n, To man below, benetth the hcav'n ţ It is not fantasy's hot fire, Whose wishes toon as granted die ; It hverh not in fierce desire, With dead dtaire it doth not die. Scott. The Baroness listened with surprise* and the must tendir interest, io this atfecting and extraordinary narration; and mingled tea! s or grateful joy in her pious ej icu- latiom» to Heaven, who had so wonder· full) ami unexpectedly reunited her to the object of her hist and oaly love. Tae liai on,
Baron, while he folded lier to his heart, seemed to enclose in his arms the treasure ofa world. Often as he $4zcd on her did the tear steal into his eye, while with the enraptured glances of а lover, he viewed her perfect form,, and beautiful face, to whieh a shade of sorrow had, without de¬ tracting from its loveliness, added a most alì eet i no* inteiest. To keiings sueh as thrse, no langunge can do jus!ice. Those only uho have exjicieiued them, can imagine the ьеп- sations thü·* mmualh inspiied. They were sueh as those feei who have been sudden!\ raised fmm tlie i)u¡ik of mi^eiy, to" the bight st btate of iiuman happiness and en jo j meut. Lord Onnond, wlio had really felt a fraternal interest in every thing that couki concert the Bujouçşs, was not an unmoved
unmoved spectator of that felicity of whieh she so largely partook. With all the generous good-will of an honest soldier, he congratulated the Baron on his return. " My Lord," said he, " I sin¬ cerely wish you joy ; and that I think you must have it in the possession of such a woman as the Baroness vour wife, is most evident, from the eagerness with which I myself sought her hand, wdiile I thought it m iglu be won with honour. Nor, my Lord, can your return be considered by me as the slightest reason for disappoint¬ ment. 1 cannot for a moment regret that the Latly to whom 1 ofteied my suit, is the wife, and not the widow of Baron Fitzwalter. Before your arrival, my Lord, I was fully convinced she never would ho mine. Her rejection of me, at a time when she was driven almost to frenzy, by the
the fears excited by this ghost, rendered it impossible for me to doubt that her attachment to you was not to be shaken even bv vour death. For this I could not but respect her, as even more than woman ; and though I checked mv love, it raised my admiration of her, and a wish to do her service. " Nothing, I thought, could answer this my purpose more effectually, than an investigation into the alarming affair of the ghost; and suspecting some villany was atloat, I hoped to discover whether or no my suspicions were w r ell grounded, by spending a night, and meeting the appa¬ rition in the haunted chamber. '' Wirh these opinions, my watch was not a proof of extraordinary courage; but when mv sword broke, I confess I was astonished ; the effect seemed supernatu¬ ral;
ral ; and I followed the ghost with that persuasion ; and in so doing, I confess I found I did it at the hazard of my life. It consoled me. however, in the midst of all the perplexities I experienced in the dark vaults, to reflect, that whatever I might suffer was owing to a good inten¬ tion, however frustrated, and a disinte¬ rested wish to do good, which is indeed the soundest principle of human action, and must aflbrd satisfaction, even in disap¬ pointment aud defeat. " And now, my Lord (continued the Eail), again let me express my satisfaction on the return of your happiness; and, afrer the honour of kissing the hand of your fair Lady, the hue object of my suit, I ask permission, on the morn of to-mor» row, to depart in friendship." " Äly Lord/ 5 replied the Baron, " your sentiments
sentiments and your conduct equally ie- fleet upon you tbe highest honour, and claim tiie he-.t iv;atds and gratitude of mvself and mv и iie. On a foundation such as you have now laid, aliali be built a solid superstiucture of inviolable friend¬ ship ; and every possible connection shall unite tbe families of Ormond and Fitz¬ walter. То -dav shall be a dav of festi- v v' vit ν, and \ou shall share the entertain- ment of my tibie, and behold how my friends and vassals sball revel on my return. Vai ious arrangements will for some time occupy my attention, and when tliey are over, let me hope to be revisited by tbe noble Earl of Ormond/' " It shall be so/ 1 replied Ormond ; ťí let us taste to-day the delights of friendship." The day was so spent ; nor were the thoughts
thoughts of the Eail, when he laid hini down to rest, less gratifying than the pleasures of the day. No envious jealous reflections of his having been rejected by the Baroness, dipped his thoughts in bit¬ terness. Iiis soul was the abode of that tranquil satisfaction, which results from virtuous integrity and honoiuable in¬ tention. The next morning» early, at- tended by bib train, he leit the cattle. The Baron, who knew not that the Earl had intended to depart so early, rose with a wish to shew him every courtesy and attention, suitable to his situation and rank, on his departure ; and hearing that he had aheady left the castle, he expressed much concern. But now the seneschal delivered to him a letter left by the Earl, and whieh the Baron expected would explain the reasons of his early depar¬ ture.
ture. The letter was couched in the fol¬ lowing terms : ------ " TQMKOJPFRY, ΒΛΠΟΝ DE FlTZJTALTER. 44 An affair of importance claims my immediate attendance at court With your good leave, if so be that f succeed in the business that takes .me hence, I purpose speedily to be back again. Let not the Knight, Sir Reginald, escape his durance in your castle ; neither think the duty rests with you, of calling him to account for the villany he has practised towards you and me. I hereby claim the right of proving him a traitor, base and vile. Be not offended that I offer myself the avenger of wrong, in this manner, to decide by lawful combat the justness of my cause, by the extent of his villany.
villany· May Heaven have you, and your spouse, in its special keeping. " Your's, <f Ormonb/' The Baron, almost immediately after the receipt of the Earľs letter, repaired to the apartment in which Sir Reginald Hare- land was confined. Never were shame and guilt more strikingly depicted, than on the countenance of Sir Reginald. The sight of the Baron overwhelmed him with confusion and emban assment. He could scarcely speak. Ile arose as he approached ; but his limbs seemed palsied; he reeled, then leaned panting against the chair from which he had arisen, and covering his face with his hands, remained silent and motionless. His
His feelings were apparently most pain¬ ful. The Baron, notwithstanding his full hcnse and conviction of the dishonourable and guilty part he had acted, could not utterly withhold his pity from a man who seemed to be suffeiing under tbc keenest remorse, occasioned at least by shame, if not of icpentance. The dread of shame was, perhaps, tbe cause of his present distress; for it was not to be imagined that one who, driven by passion to acts of en ormi tv, and fbe practice of tbe basest artifices, to the utter violation of all tbe rules of honour and common honestv, should all of a sudden change his nature, and abbor tbe course which be bad so steadily pursued. But whatever miırht be tbe cause of bis dis- о tress, the Baron was too humane to add unnecessarily to the uneasiness and morti¬ fication
fieation of his unhappy kinsman. Indeed, he fl read ed the effects a sense of his degra¬ dation might produce upon a mind like that of Sir Reginald, whose natural vehe¬ mence of temper, unaccustomed to con¬ troul or restriction, might, if much irri¬ tated, drive him to some act of desperation, and even urge hini to lift his hand against his life. He deemed it, therefore, prudent to en¬ deavour to calm the passions that reigned in his breast, and soothe his griefs bv an assurance of his entire forgiveness, and a promise of a speedy enlargement. Sir Re«inald, who could not but be highly sensible of the Baron's lenit v, fal- teri n gly expiessed his tli anks, adding, u It is more, much more than I deserve. Oh that my future life could atone for the pasc! but it cannot: in death onlv vol. iu и must
must I seek a refuge from my present misery, and the well deserved disgrace that I know awaits me." " Rather live," cried the Baron, " that you may prove yourself yet capable of actions truly honourable. The connection which unites our families arrests the arm of one who ought otherwise to claim fur¬ ther answer. Aecept, therefore, my pardon : prepare, however, to meet, in warlike guise, the noble Ormond, who, unrestrained by tie of blood, challenges you to combat." " Where is her" interrupted Sir Regi¬ nald, impetuously ; "yct only in the field will I meet him." " He has departed," said the Baron, " but ere long, for so -a letter he has left informs me, purposes to return. Till then, Sir Knight, you remain no longer a cap¬ tive,
tive, though an inhabitant of tbis castle, where you will be well sci ved and at¬ tended/ 7 " Oh, Fitzwalter ľ' cried Sir Reginald, with a look of deep contrition, " that with vour forgiveness I could recover also vour esteem. Oh, what a friend have I lost ! by my own fault too, my own folly." * r Do not deem itimpossible but you may some time recover it," said the liaron, " though you must first give mc pi oof that you deserve to have it. I too, in you, have lost a friend, a friend on whom I once thought I could never have placed too high a value. I have been deceived —cruelly deceived ! nevertheless, on your return to a just and honourable line of conduct, my beart is again ready to ac¬ knowledge you ; and to renew, in some h 2 degree,
degree, at least, the now broken bond of friend Пир/' " By my own sad experience," cried Sir Reginald, ** 1 have discovered, and from my own example let it be told, tbat tliere is nu happiness to be found in any path but tbat of rectit ade and honourable inte¬ grity. Had I not deviated from these, I n.ight still have Known comfort; that self-approbation, and virtuous satisfaction, which results from irood intentions, and well uhected efforts for tbe attainment of m hat is really excellent and piaisc-woithy, wouhl, at least, have been mine; and these, I now kvlj would be happiness placed oa the best and surest basis/' 41 Encourage these sentiments," said the Baron, lt a nd fear not; should Heaven piesei ve you, jou may yet attain it, se¬ cured as it will tlien be upon the best and
and indeed only principle that can render it durable.'* " Had success at tenderi my endea¬ vours," said Sir Reginald, " I should still, 1 think, have been wretched. Led on, step by step, through the violence of my own passions, to actions which I grieve to releet upon, and whieh must for ever entail upon me disgrace and infamy, it seemed utterly impossible to stop, or measure back the path in which I trôd. I could not, or I would not ^ lit in my mbeiahle career of guilty deception, even though the pang of remorse invaded my repose, and threatened constantly to pursue and torment me. Wearied with my confinement in the range of apart¬ iden ts allotted me, where I was obliged occasionally to skulk behind the arras or wainscot ; degraded too, in my own opi¬ li 3 nion,.
nion, by the mean arts I was obliged io use for the prosecution of my scheme, I was mere tban once inclined to aban¬ don it, and leave the castle with the same sťcrcov, and in the sanie disguise in which I had entered it, after my seeming public departure, before the arrival of Earl Or¬ mond. Would to Heaven I had obejed the impulse of these feelings ! for then, at kast, I should bave escaped a part of the disgiace I have incurred/* As he r «tered these words, Sir Reginald sighed heavily ; and leaning upon the arm of bis chair, remained silent, but agi¬ tated : in reply to some enquiries made by the Baron, as soon as he was sufficiently composed to be able to answer them, chiefly in relation to Earl Ormonds ad¬ venture in the chandler, be received at dif¬ feient intervals tbe following account. Sir
Sir Reginald, when informed by Wini¬ fred, who was the ouly person i u bis secret, and from wbom he received con- stab t encouragement, tbat the Earl had determined to keep watch in the chamber, doubted not but he could deceive him, as he had done the rest of the inhabitants, into a belief tbat the castle v/as haunted ; and this without anv otlier trouble than that of practising anew the same ma¬ noeuvres he had so often repeated with success; for he had uo intention of shew¬ ing himself, or of executing the rash and daring scheme he afte r svärds projected, on finding the Earl was not easily to be caught iu his snares, and might, there¬ fore, if not properly secured, till the busi¬ ness was completed, expose both him and his designs. A powerful soporific, which the Earl и 4 had
had been artfully induced to take on his third night's watch, soon threw him into a sleep, the soundness of which gave Sir Reginald ample opportunity to effectuate his oroiect. 1 и He entered the apartment with the caution requisite to his purpose. lie took Lord Onnonďs sword, and departing by the way he can \ hacked it in several places· He then pom ed upon it one of those liquids, whieh have the property of dissolving steel and other metals; this was the cause of its shivering to pieces, at the moment when the Eail attempted to strike. Sir Reginald having thus convinced him that the appearance before him was more than human, Ormond, as has been already mentioned, followed him from the chamber through the mysteriously-con¬ structed
structed pannel, and in obedience to his signals, descended the steps leading into the lower vault. When there enclosed,. Sir Reginald knew he must have expected to perish, but he was not so barbarous as to design his death. It was his intention* had Ormond not escaped himself from the vault, to- have decoyed him through a door, communicating with a flight of steps leading up into the northern turret,. and to have placed him in safety ; taking care, indeed, that he should not have the power of returning, at least for some time, to the inhabited parts of the castle. Ia. the meantime, his accomplice, Winifred,. undertook to supply him with necessaries during his confinement. To convey food, without allowing him* to suppose that it was done by human h S means,.
means, was difficult ; nevertheless, it was ^ not altogether impossible but that they might deceive him. But, at all events, as he was now, for a time, at least, in their power, they resolved to run any hazard, rather than endanger the life and health of their noble prisoner. His early release, accomplished, as it Was, by the courage and iu trepidity of the youth Edgar, would, in ail probabi¬ lity, have opened the eyes of the family to а conviction that the ghost was an im¬ postor, even if the Baron, assisted by the clown, had not discovered the trick, and exposed him to the Baroness, in t> г man¬ ner before described. Such are the troubles and hazards of villany. Sir Re¬ ginald was in constant dread of them ; but he had now gone too far to recede ; and lì
and could only hope for safety, or success, by a perseverance in his desperate enter¬ prise. To have stopped short in his career of vice and folly, required, asSir Reginald had him¬ self observed, a degree of virtuous energy far beyond what he possessed, though, like most wanderers in the path of error, he had found it so intricate and full of mazes, that he was heartily weary of it. Besides, he was continually receiving fre* h supplies of hope from his indefati¬ gable agent, Winifred, who constantly assured him, that the most favourable ef¬ fects imaginable were daily taking place in the mind of the Baroness, in conse¬ quence of their practices. She even assuied the Knight, that the Baroness was herself persuaded that the - noises and appearances, of wdiich she had u 6 heard
heard so much, and by which she had been herself so greatly terrified and alarmed, were caused by the anger of this ghost on Sir Reginald's dismission, and at her reception of Earl Ormond; and that this persuasion had been fat ther confirmed, by her having heard, as she believed, the voice of the apparition, the sound of which seemed to issue fiom without the wall ofher apartment, at a time when she was in deep conference with her con¬ fessor. To the wall of this chamber Sir Regi¬ nald had contrived to gain access, with¬ out passing through the corridor, by means of the secret door by which Edgar and the fool had entered, into what was now called the haunted apartment, on the night that Ethelind was confined in it by Winifred. Often
Often passing in and out through the pannel, which led toan unoccupied suit of rooms, where he lived secure and unmo¬ lested, Sir Reginald had already once shewn himself to this girl—a circumstance which excited so much terror and distress, that he resolved not to repeat his visit to the chamber, on the night ofher confine¬ ment in it; and, had not Edgar been her companion, would not have proceeded so far as he then did. An extraordinary dream, in which Sir Reginald thought he saw and conversed with the Baron on the subject of his marriage with the Baroness, caused per¬ haps by his mind's being continually oc¬ cupied and engaged by these and similar ruminations, first suggested to Winifred, to whom Sir Reginald had imparted it, the idea of his appearing as a ghost· By an
an artful relation, which she had partly fabricated for her purpose, Winifred pre* pared her Lady to receive what Sir Regi¬ nald, at her instigation, afterwards took occasion to unfold. This, though it bore some resemblance to the images presented in the dream, had but little found ation in truth ; and Sir Reginald, recoiling with a sensation of shame and self-reproach from the mean stratagems he was obliged to use, could with difficulty be persuaded to impose upon the Baioness with this art¬ ful relation, a'ter Winifred, with a happy imagination, hard modelled and fiited it for the purpose on wdiich it was to be em¬ ployed. Nor would he have yielded to such a persuasion, from any arguments less powerful than those used by Winifred, who confidently declared it was impos¬ sible for him to succeed iu his endeavours to
to win the Baroness, unless he could first convince her that the marriage was neces- sary to the repose of her late Lord, and that he had in some way signified this his wish and desire. This was the ground¬ work of a plan rashly formed, and on the success of which all Sir Reginald's hopes of obtaining the objt c t of his wild pur¬ suit seemed finally to rest. ľrom its purpoit, not less than the mysterious obscurity in which it was partly veiled, it was every wa\ calculated to make а strong impies¡»ion upon the mind of the Baroness— а min J too inno¬ cent for suspicion, and incapable, from its very nature, of suspecting fraud oi artifice in others. The Baroness did not entiiely escape the toil ; she was, however, so far disen· gaged as to be able to extricate herself from
from the meshes artfully woven to entrap her, ere, urged by terror and despair, she had consented to sacrifice that liberty she so highly valued, and those sentiments of aftcction for her Lord, which it had beeu long her pride and glory to entertain·
CHAP.
СНЛР. VIII. Then I am paid; And once again I do receive thee honest—— Wbo by repentance is not satisfied, Is not of faeav'n nor earth. Shakespeari. After the confession of Sir Reginald, another of the culprits remained to be ex¬ amined, namely, Dame Winifred, who, if she was not culpable in the same degree as Sir Reginald, had, nevertheless, to the great displeasure of the Baroness, been guilty of so many arts and impostures, in the pursuit ofher own interest, as must naturally
naturally have precluded every hope of being suffered to retain her present station and author ity. Fully sensible of her enormities, though, probably, without any sensations of real p u itence or sorrow, except such as were excited by disappointment and disgrace, it was with difficulty site was led into the presence of the Baron and Baroness. Winifred, once most absolute and tyrannical over all the persons belonging to the establishment, was now, in the situ¬ ation of a fallen favourite, surrounded by enemies. Every act of injustice and op¬ pression, whieh had attended the exercise of her authority, was conveyed to the ear of the Baron, either in open charges, or indirect hints, but particularly in respect to her conduct toward the orphan Ethe¬ lind, who, since her cruel confinement by Winifred,
Winifred, in the liaunted chamber, had been pitied, and much noticed by the Baroness, and on that account, whatever related to her seemed to admit of commu¬ nication, without hazard, and even, per¬ haps, with advantage. To these various accusations, indeed, except in the case of Ethelind, the Baron did not much attend. He knew enough to condemn her. Winifred was now as humble and depressed, as she had formerly been lofty and overbearing. Like all favourites, who never endeavour to gain the love of those over whom they domi¬ neer, she fell at once, and fell, like Wolsey, to rise no more. At all times, her sole dependance was upon the favour and partiality of the Baroness; and., while cunning could serve, ßhe secured it. But when the reason for that
that was past, and of the good opinion of her Lady she had ceased to have any hope, she was ready to make as many confessions and concessions as were re¬ quired, nay, even more; anil particularly to cast all possible blame and odium on Sir Reginald Hareland. Her accounts of the transactions of the castle differed little from those given by her accon plice, and were probably tine. Indeed, fahehocd, in the present situation of affairs, sbe soon perceived could afford her no subterfuge ; for truth onlv could obtain credit, and prevent ber falling into a deeper abvss of disgrace, than tbat into which ber own avalice and folly had already plunged lier. When she had ended the medlí y of her declarations, the Baroness thus addressed her:— " I find, with the gieatest concern and self-
reprehension, that in you, Winifre !, I iiave placed a culpable аш! nubt unde¬ served confidence. It has, however, taught me a lesson, which I hope ne^er to forget. It has convinced me that there is no situation of life, however elevated, that can really exempt us from the per¬ formance of our domestic duties, or any feelings that ought to be suffered to inter¬ fere with them. Immersed in selfish grief, and rendered almost incapable of mental exertion, by the mental languor it had caused, I suflered many disorders, which I ought to have noticed, to pass unhin¬ dered and uncensured ; and must there¬ fore consider myself as in great measure accessary to them. I would not know, for I enquired not into the station of my dependant people, and could not, there¬ fore, prevent them. But while I thus blame
blame myself, I must not acquit you, or treat you as guiltless : you must no longer remain one of my household. My Lord has preparai for you а place on his estates, where, as a vassal, you will not be tempted to practise any abuses of your authority. You may now retire/' Bv the firm and dignified tone of voice in wdiich these words were pronounced, Winifred found she had nothing now to expect from the former partial fondness of the Baroness. The recollection of this seemetl only to inspire in her feelings of dissatisfaction and regret. She wept— she wrung her hands—she pleaded ear¬ nestly for forgiveness. The Baroness w r as not unmoved by the distress ofher former favourite ; but she was not to be diverted from her very proper resolution, and she was ordered to retire. Th«
The steward, who had connived at Wi¬ nifred's entertainment of the ghost, iu return for her connivance at his drunken¬ ness and waste, was also placed, like Wini¬ fred, in the condition of a vassal, in one of the Baron's villages ; who thus fulfilled his own prediction, made in the character ofa magician, that he wrould not be suf¬ fered to retain his stewardship many days. Edgar, wdio had shewn himself inflex¬ ibly honest, courageous, and humane, and bad been actively serviceable in several of the late transactions at the castle, was appointed to succeed him ; and accord¬ ingly the next day received the wand of his new* office, and the furred gown, worn on solemn occasions by the stewards of the Lords of Fitzwalter. As soon as Edgar was invested with these badges of his office, he was led by bis
his benefactor into the apartment of the Baroness, where she was sitting, attended only by Ethelind. ** With your good leave, my ,Lady/' said the Baron, " I present, for your approbation and favour, this the new steward and comptroller of niy household, one who has deserved well of us ; and will, 1 know, deserve still more by future services." Edgar, whose robust figure assumed a very dignified appearance in his new dress, bowed most respectfully ; and the Baroness, pleased with the manly address, and ingenuous countenance of the young man, received him with g»eat condescen¬ sion. She mentioned with thanks the service he had performed in liberating the Earl ; praised his courage, in daring to meet that phantom, which all the Test of the family heard with fear, and presented him
him with a large purse of gold. She even held out her hand to him to kiss, an ho¬ nour which the new steward received with proud gratitude on his knee». " You have done us some service, young man/' said the Baron, " and we are desirous to reward you : can we con¬ fer upon you any further favour?" *· My Lord/' ciied Edgar, stealing a timid glance at Ethelind, who was seated by the side of the Baroness. íle bowed with a blush of honest sensibility, far more expressive than any studied answer· il 1 see," resumed the Baron, with a benevolent and indulgent tone, <c you have yet something to desire ; and indeed, something yet remains to prove my tho¬ rough acquaintance with the arts of magi¬ cal divination^ and knmvkdgc of the occult saiences. Words spoke by me then, I now vol. ιι. ι regard
regard as a promise. Here, take this sweet—this lovelv flower/ 1 added he, leading the blushing, trembling Ethelind to her adored, her adoring Edgar ; " I have gathered it for thee, keep it, and cherish it in thy bosom." Edgar took tbe hand of Ethelind, thus presented by the Baron ; tears rushed into the eyes of both ; they dropped on their knees before the Baron, in lively, grateful, silent joy. He then, taking the hand of the Baroness, added, " My ex¬ cellent Lady, let this meritorious couple be the objects alike of thy favour as of mine; I cannot frame for them a kinder wish, than that they may be as happy as ourselves/' Edgar and Ethelind were deeply affected by this kindness. Their hearts were too full to speak. It was a moment of trans¬ port;
port ; but the finest luxury of feeling was not all their own t the Baron and Baroness shared it with them; and their own happiness was enhanced by the power they possessed of communicating good to those whom they esteemed. The act of conferring kindness is the surest means of producing in the heart good-will and attachment : so true is it, that all our good qualities are improved, and almost created by practice. This was particularly confirmed in the Baro¬ ness, who now experienced an attachment to the fair orphan, which was hourly en- creasing, and was hourly improved by acts of kindness and affection. She ap¬ pointed her to the situation of the first of her female attendants, in the stead of the unworthv Winifred ; and made her rich in presents from her wardrobe. She even ι % designed
designed the dress to be worn by the fair bride on tbe occasion of her marriage. This was a robe, made in the Spanish costume, fitted to the waist, so asto shew to advantage the beauty of her shape and figure, made open at the bosom, and with short slash sleeves fastened to a boddice with silver clasps, and adorned in em¬ broidery with tbe richest pattern of needle¬ work. Her fine light hair was to be braided, without any oinament, and tied up behind with a knot of natural flowers. The Baron fixed the next day for the nuptials, and assigned them private apart¬ ments in one of tbe towers, which com¬ manded a fine view of tbe lake, and also of the principal approach to the castle ; and the happy pair immediately began, with the assistance of several of the do¬ mestics.
» mesties, to order and furnish tbe rooms of their new abode. In the mom ing, Ethelind, adorned less, perhaps, by tlie presents from her Lady's wardrobe, than by tbat expression of in¬ nocence and modest grace, which was so peculiarly her own, waited, attended by tbe happy Edgar, iu the bail, the coming of the Baron and Baroness, who had most graciously promised to attend the solem¬ nities at tbe chapel. As soon as they appeared, the fair bride, her lovely face half concealed with a veil, modestly thrown overit, proceeded thither,attended by all the female domestics of the castle in their best attire, and a long troop of the vassalage» among which were most of Edgar's frientlst and relations; Edgar himself appearing in his new garb, as' steward of tbe castle. ï 3 The
The marriage ceremon\ r , at which Father Osborne officiated, bein«: con- eluded in the chapel, the Baron gave prizes of strength and agility, to be con¬ tended for by the young men among his vassals and attendants ; and the Baro¬ ness, with the bride at her right hand, and all the women, sat, and beheld this sort of rustic tournament, often confer¬ ring additional rewards on such of the agile youths as particularly distinguished themselves. She proposed also prizes to such of the maidens as chose to contend in the race, and display those bodily powers, which, though the refinement of later, ages perhaps may scorn, the policy of these ages did not discourage. In the meantime, refreshments of the best kinds were plentifully distributed among the crowd, and added to tbe festi¬ vity V
vity of the sports; and, the prizes pro¬ perly assigned, all persons who Ind any claim upon the hobpitidity oť the castle were feasted in the hyll. Plent irul draughts of hippocias, or ale, dealt out, according to the utu к of the guests, were drank to the briile and biidegroom, ere they rethed; and the posset oftered, and other humormu» guu.bols ])K*ctiòed, by their more intimate fiiends and acquaint¬ ance. No one could be more happy on this joyful occasion than Motley, by whom Edgar was highly beloved. He sung, antl jumped about incessantly, fie seemed almost mad with delight. lie could not restrain his raptures, or the wild expression uf them ; he was even riotous in his mirth and joy, While the revelling vassals were feasting i 'i themselves
themselves long after the sun had sunk into the west, a squire and page appeared, with trumpets and bugle horns, sounding befoie the gates, and,announced the ap¬ proach of some illustrious guest; and İn less than ten .minutes, Earl Ormond, with his attendant train of knights and their esquires, alighted at the steps of the great hall. The Baron advanced in haste to meet and welcome the return of his noble friend; his own people, in the meantime, hastily arranging themselves in due order, formei! a line on either side the entrance. The Baron having received and returned the Earľs salute, accompanied him into the hall, when a message was sent to the Baroness, to announce the arrival of the Earl. These ceremonies over, the Baron cour¬ teously
tcously expressed his pleasure on the honour of his renewed visit, as also the regret be bad suffered on his having so suddenly quitted his castle. Then al¬ luding to the subject of the Earľs letter, given to him on his departure, u he hoped," he said, u tbe business, whatever it was, tiiat bad abruptly called him thence, had terminated to his satisfaction?" ťí It has ended," said the Earl, " if not above my agreeable expectations, to my most sanguine wishes, as this ma}' advise you:"' lie then gave a writing into tbe Ba¬ ron's hand, and bade him read it; adding, with a smile, 4i you see it was no trifling affair which caused my precipitate de¬ parture from your most hospitable· roof. May you both," said be, bowing solemnly, '* share the blessings of Heaven, and the ι 5 hol v
holy saints! and may prosperity attend both you and yours !" The instrument bore the Rovai signa- ture, and was sealed 'with the King's seal. It contained, beside a fiee pardon, and reversal of the attainder of the Baron, a full grant of all the lands of the domains of Fitzwalter, to be from thenceforth held free of suit and service, by him, and his heirs for ever.. "Best and most generous of men ľ' exclaimed the Baron, ıibhİug into the arms of the Eari, wdiich were opened to receive him, ťí it is to jou—to you I owe this wondeiful, this unexampled deed of clemency/' " Overwhelm me not thus with your t/ gratitude, my noble Fitzwalter,'' cried the Earl ; " if you knew what pleasure I have felt 5
felt in this opportunity of serving you, you would know the obligation is all my own; but if you think aught is due to me, let me be repaid in that which I esteem of most value, the friendship of yourself and excellent Lady/ 1 He then,, hastily turning the conversation, enquired concerning Sir Reginald. 4i Sir Reginald," replied Fitzwalter, i( is still at the castle, though not a prisoner within its walls/' The Baron then gave a hasty recital of w hat had passed between . Sir Reginald and himself since his depar¬ ture. i( Tis well," said the Earl, " that he repents. But yet, honour, and what is due to my own rank and character as a peer, and an English soldier, demand that I should dtiy him to a trial of arms. To-morrow must decide his fate and « ι 6 mine/' *
mine/' He was proceeding, but seeing the Baroness approach, respectfully ad¬ vanced to meet her. The Baron, with'all the eagerness of lively gratitude, informed her of the pur¬ port of the writing brought by the Earl. <f Behold/' said he, 4r Gertrude, our friend, and our benefactor! Oh, join with me to bless, while life remains, yes, till we both have seen our latest hour, the noble, the generous Ormond !" "The Baroness read ; then threw herself at the feet of the Earl. Tears of gratitude and joy streamed fast down her cheeks. <c Best—most honourable of men !" ex¬ claimed she : she could add no more; but her beautiful eyes spoke a language far more eloquent than tongue could utter. The Earl, with a look of the most re¬ spectful, though tender admiration, has¬ tened
tened to raise her from her posture; and then led her to her seat. The Baron pressed the hand of the Earl in speechless « transport. While thus engaged, Father Osborne appeared, and requested permission to deliver a message from the unhappy, but penitent Sir Reginald Hareland. The Baron hade him speak, and the fi Lar de¬ livered himself thus : " My noble Lords, and most excellent Lady, as it is the most important part of the office of a priest to reclaim the wan¬ dering from theif errors, I ventured to visit Sir Reginald Ilaicland, on purpose to remind him of the violations of duty he had committed, in disturbing a peaceful family, for the sole purpose of gaining un¬ justifiably his desired purpose. I had scarce communicated to him the object of m v
my visit, when he prevented what I had further to say, by expressions of sincere contrition and sorrow for tbe follies into which he had unadvisedly plunged. * I have/ said the good Father, ' аькеч!, and obtained tbe pardon of Ba¬ ron Fitzwalter ; be is, indeed, as generous as he is crood ; nor wilt he triumnh insult- ingly over a convicted transgiessor. But/ says he. * I wait to deprecate t lie wrath of another noble personage, whom, İn my practices, I have grossly abused—the Earl of Ormond. In decoying him by my false arts into the lowermost vault, I bave subjected bim to a dishonour, which, I know, as a soldier, be must seek to resent in arms. To lift my arm against the life of one whom I have injured, though ia my own defence, may be consistent wdth the laws of knighthood ; but seems iu reality
leali ty to me an aggravation of my of¬ fence ; and a <>*ross violation of all the rules of reason, and all the laws of m ν God. Let me then be spared this fresh enormity ; let not my conscience be far¬ ther wounded ; and let the Earl be told these mv reasons. He and the noble Fitz- waiter will know that I slu ink not from the trial of arms »Vom coward fears. They ki»ow that I have fought in the held of battle undaunted ; and at manv a ¡ust has my address been proved, in pointing* the spear against the most adroit and noble knights mj adveisaries. They will know this; and will acquit me of all charge against the puiity of my honour. But jet the Eail must call mc to the lists, un¬ less I receive the protection of the church. His honour cannot else be satisfied· hi me, good Father, behold a true penitent ; let
let me he shriven at thy holy knee, and k t mc, as a penance, proceed a pilgiim straight to Rome. My presence in Eng¬ land will, not then dishonour Ormonds offend the Baron, or disgust his beloved. Lady. Absolve me, and then receive my» vow, wliich I here promise, in the sigliti of God, and all his holy saints and angels, faithfully to pei form.' 4t On this, my noble Lords, and worthy-. patroness, I did not hesitate to do my» duty. With many a tear and prayer thfr Knight repented; was abbolved by the· authority of Holy Church; and is now. in sanctuary at the altar of Durham, under the protection of religion ; .and, with all convenient ¿peed, proceeds to Rome. Such is my message: may it meet your favour ľ' u VVhy, this sounds nobly," cried the< Baron. u The conduct of Sir Reginald in this
this bu&iness proves him an honest man, whatever be his follies/' "My duties," cried the Earl, lf are here arrested. I must bow to the power of the church ; and when I behold the beautiful, the accomplished, the peerless Baroness of Fitzwalter, I can paidon the extravagances, nay, the injuries, of a man, who tried so many stratagems to win her; and with this reflection, I, from my heart, forgive my enemy his wrong/' " if this resolve of Sir Reginald Hare· land/' cried the Baroness, " prevents a trial of arms between himself and our nohle friend the Earl of Ormond, I am indeed right glad of heart that he has thus determined and acted; andl cannot be sufficiently thankful to you, holy friar, for tbe part you have taken, and for the power of holy mother church, to prevent the
the mischief that might have ensued, from a suitor of one so unworthy as my¬ self. We have all reason then to be thankful ; and all may learn from the eventslately happeningin Fitzwalter Castle, that integrity and virtue can alone afford happiness; and that dishonest cunning, though \t may for а time disturb and dis¬ tress some few undeserving of suffering, yet it is always most afflictive to itself; „and asit seldom can attain, so it never can enjoy the success it madly setks." " Your remai к is indeed most just, my beloved Gertiude/' said the Baron, " and well mislit it be, would men read such lessons as these, and gather the wisdom they are calculated to teach. But it is time our noble guest took some refresh¬ ment and repose; and when to-morrow comes, we will strive to do him honour, by entertaining *
entertainins)* him in a manner suitable to his rank ; and in the midst of our revels, it will not fail to delight us much, to re¬ member the adventures of the minstrel, ghosts and conjuror/' Accordingly, on the following day, a splendid entertainment was given at the Castle of Fitzwalter, iu honour of the Earľs arrival, which was graced with tlie presence of troops of knights and ladies, accompanied by all the vassalage of the domain of the barony. The guests dined in the hall, on tables covered with the most delicious viands; and drank the healths of the noble pair, from out goblets of massive gold. While engaged in the festivities of this occasion, another guest was announced. It was Lord Broke, who yet knew uot of the return of the Baron ; for the Baroness, by
by whom he han 1 been for some time hourly expected, anticipating the joy of his surprise on seeing him, had foi borne to inform him of this extraordinary event. The delighted astonishment of the good old Lord may he easily imagined, on be¬ holding the Baron, his beinved son-imiaw, whom he had long mourned as dead ; but when, in addition to this unlooked-for happiness, he learned that through the influence of the generous Earl he had ob¬ tained not only a pardon, but the free grant of the forfeited estates of the baiony, he burst out into transports of joy and gratitude. In the course of a few years after the occurrence of the events our history re¬ lates, the favourite wish of his heart, that of living to see a continuation of the line of honourable ancestry from which he sprang,
sprang, was fulfilled by the Baroness having two sons, the elder of which was to succeed to the estates of the house of Fitzwalter; the younger, in right of his mother, to those of the barony of Broke. The birth of these sons, Gcoffry and Richard, were succeeded in some years by that of a daughter, who inheriting, to- gether with her beautv, the vii tues and accomplishments of her mother, at nearly the same age at which she had been uniu d to the Baron, formed an alliance with one of the noblest families in England. Edgar received a liberal reward from Earl Ormond, who honoured him with great attention, for the service he had performed for him, in releasing him from the gloomy cell into which he had been decoyed ; nor was the young Sicilian, of whom
whom the Ľarotťs relation gave some account, forgotten in the general distri¬ bution of rewards among those by whom they were merited. He was invited, re¬ ceived, and retained in the Castle of Fitz¬ walter; and was maintained and treated in İt as one of the most valuable or the Baron's friends. Earl Ormond resumed his visits to the castle as frequently as his duties as a soldier and a statesman would permit : and the most entire friendship and affection continued to subsist betwcea him and the Baron and Baroness. in the course of a few years after the occurrence of the events we have related, he married a lady of birth and great beauty, who, in disposition, and the vir¬ tues of the mind, bore a near resemblance to the Baroness. Beside an amiable and lovely wife; he was blessed with two chil¬ dren,
dren, a son and a daughter, the latter of whom formed an alliance with Geofľrv, the elder son and heir of the barony of Fitzwalter; thus completing the wish of the Baron, that every possible connection should unite the families of Ormond and Fitzwalter,
FINIS,
Lane, Pailmg, mù Co. LeadenbaH-Strcet.
