Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Marchmont: a novel
j i ul· ....... n i^^BKå^M^naM 'Hiin .......... I II (I I I H^MI*·**.
MARCHMONT.
CHAPTER I.
, , ,.....His poor felf, A dedicated beggar to the air! W r alka, hke Contempt, alone.
WHILE his daughter was gradually arcuftoming herfelf to the dreary fo¬ litude to whHi he had condemned her, and even learning to take in it an in¬ tetett that he little fufpected could ever arife, Sir Audley Dacres, amidft the bufy feenes of political hfe in which he was now more deeply than ever engaged, Vol. Ii. ? had
had ftill leifure to feel uneafinefs from the ccnfcioufncfs of having acted wrong. His defire of gratifying Lady Dacres, even in a point which certainly did not raife her character in his efteem ; his long-cftablifhed habits of making him¬ felf obeyed; and the various advantages which his ambition continually repre¬ sented as attending on an alliance with Mr. Mohun—advantages that feemed to juftify whatever means he had taken to bring it about—all were confiderations infufficicnt to filenee entirely thofe re¬ proaches which his confcience was fo impertinent as to make on the fubject of Althéa. —It was in vain that his wife (who failed not to perceive his un¬ eafinefs) endeavoured, by the moft art¬ ful methods, to perfuade him, that almoft any other fadier, under (infilar circum¬ ftances, would have acted more rigo- roufly. Sir Audley, though he affected to acquicfee, and faid hardly any thing on the fubject, felt his difquiet con¬ tinually
unuaîly increafe; and amidit the drud¬ gery of party cabals, in which he was deeply engaged, and which required the confiant vigilance of thofe who were admitted to them, he began ferioufly to confider, if, without bringing his tldcft daughter into the houfe of her ftep- mother, which he knew would embitter his life with continual feuds, he could find no properer fituation for her than a defertcd manfion on the confines of Dcvonfhirc ; no fociety more eligible than that of his own dilcarded fervants. This, however, on a nearer view, was lefs eafily found than might bc ima¬ gined. There were houfes of reputa¬ tion in London, where young women are received who have no proper home; but he knew the expenee would be a great objection with Lady Dacres, who muft befides, in fubmitting to fuch a meafure, feel it to be a tacit acknow¬ ledgement that flie -would not admit ind protect the daughter of her huf- » å band.
bandi — Of Althéa's own family, there was,not,one. who was likely, or proper, to aSbrd hen an afylum—nor did he know, among albthe women of his ac¬ quaintance, who might have been glad to hayc received htet, as. a temporary vifitor, apy t to whom. he. could be thoroughly fatisfìcà to entruft her.—She had now. been, more tban.a, month at Eaftwoodleigh; andlfa far frpm her ba-r niflinxcnjchavingefficaedtwhat he hoped < from.it, a,change of. fenrirnents in fa-r vour of. Motimo* ber laft. letters had borne, a .greater appearance of. cheerful refignation tban the firft. If tben, during this dçad and dreary month, her refo¬ lution had refilled.the fadnefs of fuch perfecti feclufion,, there, was but little probability that it would fail, when..the return of fpring ihould give, her the liberty of purfuing thofe. innojcen^plea* fures. for.which.he knew, ihe hac}, ??· quired, ajalle, from her education, anc^ habits of Jife.—To Jnfifti thçççfore on her
her continuihg'there, did not fcem likely to anfwer the end he propofed; but while he wifhed to relinquiih -a plan which he could not but confider as cruel and unwarrantable, he'did not be¬ lieve that the removal of his daughter to thofe feenes where fhe ought to appear would by any means accelerate his views in regard to Mohun. He knew that wherever ihe was feen fhe could hardly fail of exciting general admiration; and he did not think that the preference of others was likely, in the opinion of Al¬ théa, to give value to that of Mohun. But Sir Audley, half difpofed to relin¬ quiih a plan fo little likely to be ef¬ fected, believed that were Althéa to ap¬ pear in public, attended with thofe ad¬ vantages which other young women en¬ joyed, fhe could not fail of being ad- vantageoufly married, notwithftanding the fmalinefs ofher fortune; and fuch an lèvent was furely the moft defira ble both for Lady Dacres and himfelf. ? 3 Some
Some degree of perfonal indifpofitioii added to the painful regret with which he fometimes thought of his harfh con¬ duci towards Aithea. His views, like thofe of all ambitious men, opening as he afcended, were yet often overclouded and difappointed. The friendfliips of politicians he found, above all other re¬ liances, fallacious, and he frequently found himfelf difappointed and fup- pianted by the creatures he had himfelf placed in the way of favour. The bafe traffic ofhis confcience and his underftanding againfl the hopes of a larger income, or a more eminent poft, had not hitherto paid him as he ex¬ pected ; and fome late inftances of the imperious and overbearing temper of Mohun had internally difgufted him, though they were apparently more clofely united than ever. But however frequently his mind ad¬ verted to the fubjeci of Aithea, he could find no place of refidence which would be
be at once eligible for her, and without objection on the part of Lady Dacres.— While he confidered and re-confidered the matter, time wore away. His fons, who were his greateft objects, came home for the Chriftmas recefs, and, with the eldeft, fuch a report from the mailer of the public fchool where he had been placed, that, though it was conveyed in terms the moft confiderate, Sir Audlcy was convinced an inftant removal from thence was neceflary ; and his thoughts were immediately engroffed with fo im¬ portant a debate as of courfe followed, in regard to what was to be done with a boy fo difficult to govern, and fo con¬ feious of his own confequence.—Sir Audlcy was inclined to the Univerfity; but Lady Dacres remarking* that the fons of fome of her acquaintance, who had been there, had turned out ex¬ tremely ill, and that in thediplomaticline, for which Mr. Dacres was defigned, an univerfity education was by no means ? 4 neceflary ;
neceäart ; it was ât lengths after mycí* he ii tat ion and debaie, dc term ι ned» uut this eldeft hope of his family ihould make tbc tuur of Italy and Gcinwny, fince that of France could not now bc included ; and that he fhouid forthwith be provided inih a tutor verfed in fo¬ reign languages, and proceed in about fix weeks on ?? travels. Thefe deliberations, and fomc difi ο¬ χ cries of his fun's difpofition, which forced themfeivv* upon his obfervation, however he wifhed not to fee them t fo entirely occupied his mind, that Aithea was almoft forgotten—and the time he could fpare from his political engage¬ ments was wholly given to reprefs the •excefies of this young man, and to the difcovery of fome proper perfon w whom he could be entrufted when no longer under parental authority. During the courfe of this enquiry, it happened, by the means of Lady Barbara Newmarch, to reach the knowledge of one
MARCHMONT. 9 om of thofe women in a certain rank of life, who with fomc literature, and much preience, acquire a fort of authority in fuch matter^ ladies, uho ha\e lonverfa- t. or.- iiiñvdd of routs and aílembhc^, and ^ho, ^ukiut making too find a fcru- tuiv into their morne*, may often he allowed the p'<tilc of domg forne gm>d, b) their uicafionai patronage of obfcure meru ; thi)ugh doubts have arifen whe¬ ther ihey «Bav not CKiafioriatly have dime harm, in teaching thofe to fancy ihemfelves people of genius, who had only afluíante, and İvme powers of imitation. Be that as it ma\, Mrs. Gifborough, the lady now in queftion, having heard of Str Audìey's enquiry aber a young mm well educated as tutor to Mr. Dacres, toft no ume in entreating Lady Barbara to endeavour to keep the ap¬ pointment open till a gentleman could be written to, who, fhe was lun, would be unexceptionable.—Sir Audley rea- ? 5 dily
dily promifed the delay of a few days— and then the following letters paffed be¬ tween him and Mrs. Gifborough; "Dear Sir, €t Aífured of your ftrong adherence to thofe principles which have always diftinguiíhed our families, and which your prefent highly refpectable con¬ fections do fo much honour to, I am free to believe that the young gentle¬ man whom I have to mention to you can¬ not fail of being approved, he owing the decline ofhis family's fortune to the attachment ofhis anceilors to the Royal caufe in the trying period of 1640, Sec. and fince they have, with lefs power, always been a very loyal family, though ¡t has happened that their fortune has, from various caufes, declined. The young gentleman, on whofe behalf I write, is called Marchmont, and is the ? laft oftbat ancient family· I am affured« and I believe from my own obferva- 1 tions,
tions, that he is very well qualified for the undertaking, to which I beg leave to recommend him. I am told that his morals are irreproachable. He fpeaks the French language perfectly, having refided fome years in France (where he has refpectable connections), and has a competent knowledge of the Italian and German—a good tafle in the polite arts; and, in a word, I am taught to believe,. that en farther'enquiry you would find Mr. Marchmont eminently qualified to attend your fon. I fliall be happy in being inftnimental in procuring him fo honourable and fortunate an engage¬ ment; and have the honour to be, ·' Wilh the greateft refpect, " Sir, " Your moil obedient humble fervant, " A. Gis&ououcH. ·· Wcljwck-Strect, Jan. i;ih." To this Sir Audley returned, with very little hefitation, the following anfwer: u G " ?? d ?:;
was indíCerent to híj» own, had never appeared confeious of this unfair deal¬ ing, but had, on the cuiitrarv, endea¬ voured to conciliate Sir Audley, that he might leave the family a líale longer in poife fiion of their houle iu Surry ; but Sir Audley, notwithilandint he had not himfelf been the inftrument, filt, in en¬ joying the fruit of iniquity, that he hated the perfon injured a.s much as if he had himfelf been the aggreifor.—Strange I that the corife loufnefs ot having injured, or participated in an injury, ihould create, in the human mind, fo much malignity againft the fufferer! Yet fo ft always is. Sir Audley, however, bv no means allowed, even in arguing the matter wuh himfelf, that Marchmont had anv caufe of complaint—and he difliked him, not only for this latent reafon, which, though he repelled it, lurked in his mind, but becaufe, though poor, he feemed to con¬ fider himfelf ftill in his former rank, and
and even when afkin4 a favour, (as he did when be folicited ?? mother's con¬ tinuance in the Surry houfe) it was lefs hke a dependant than an equal, Sir Audley, accuftomed fince be had lived anions pïace-mcr> to a very different conduct from ihofe who had anv thing to aik, could not reconcile himielf to this manly bearing; and between one caufe of dii.ike and another he hated Marchmont heartily—and never fpoke of him but in terms of contempt and difpleafure. But the confequence of this repulfe %*as much more material to Marchmont than merely the lois of an appointment, which, had he known it was with a fon of Sir Audìey's, he would not have fo¬ licited, or, had it been procured, have accepted; it deprived him of every hope of fuccefs in his purfuit of a tutorfhip— for Mrs. Gifborough, vvdio, together with fome ofher friends, had undertaken to befriend him, and who were very likely to
to fucceed, no fooner canvafled Sir Audìey's fetter than they concluded that tlieir zeal was mifplaced, and that fome¬ thing was undoubtedly wrong iu the charakter of this young man, of which Sir Audley was too generous to fpeak, yet whkb was undoubtedly of a nature that rendered it impoflible for them to hazard committing themfelves by rc- ctMaa«iending hira. —When therefore he came from an obfcure lodging in Surry, where he lived with his mother and fifters, to know the event of an applica* tion which Mrs. Gifborough had in¬ formed him (he had made, without tell¬ ing him to whom, he was met by a very cold letter from that lady* who. without feeing him, contented herfelf wiih that method of letting him know, l * That her application had failed, and that íhe .vas forry to fay fhe beiieved it would not be in her power, or that of the friends to whom fhe had fpoken. to ferve ?? in tbe way they had hoped.** Marchmont
Marchmont wanted not dîfcernment to fee that this %vas only a civil way of the lady's relieving hcrfelf (mm ail farther trouble ; he returned dejected to his family, to whom, however, he made light of his dilappoin*ment, that he might not inflict new anguifh on the half-broken heart of ?? mother. But when he fat down ferioufly to confider his fituation, this difappoint¬ ment, which followed ib many others, fell cold and heavy on ?? fpirits. The rr*>«2»»nr«ï hï*d íbrcj:>*çj>£íj[ to ???^? the remains of his father as they were pro¬ ceeding towards the panfli church of Eaftwoodleigh; and Marchmont, in the agony ofhis mind, had entered into per¬ fonal engagements to ward oft fo cruel a blow: fubfequent difcoveries of the condition of his father's affairs had rendered it imooffible for him ever to 4 aequit himfelfof thi fe engagements from the effects that were left. Nothing therefore remained for him but to at¬ tempt,
tempt, by fome exertions of his own, to* fatisfy the inexorable men to whom he was now perfonal Jy bound ; and who, provoked by their lofft% declared their refolution to imprifon htm, unlefs fomc profpect opened which might enable him to difcharge the debt he had thus taken upon himfelf. To leave England therefore, and to efcape from their threats and impor¬ tunities, while he hoped to obiam, as a tutor, a falary which he might divide between them and hit family, was his moftearneft wifh. But even this humble hope was now fruftrated; and though he appeared calm and compofed before his mouler, who watched his countenance with the moil anxious foluimde, he almoft for the fiill time felt what u was to look back on the paft without having one crime with u blch to reproach him¬ felf, yet forward to the future without a hope, and almoft without a friend 1 Generous
Generous and candid himfelf, and lefpccting men only for their worth and their talents, he had never till now been thoroughly convinced thaï, with the ge¬ nerality of the world, there is no crime fo tu. pardonable as poverty ·, and that, *heii an uniuied fanu'.y fail t»> decay, their pretenfions to ance'ln, far from giving them a claim to com m ι fera u on, become ndicuhub in the opimo» «? the fuddv niy fortunale, — -líc, who might truly be laid to be ** Os" ¿caile bl3c¿» psrî faci .? hoooar f s caute,** tors. was now purfucd for the fum of feven hundred pound«, by a man who called himft.lf a gentleman, but was, in fact, a money-lender, the fon of a tavlor ; and haraffed by another for a thoufand pounds, who had been an auctioneer, but who, having amaffed a confiderable fum of money, had quitted the hammer, and was become a banker. Thefe
Theíè men, while they defpifed the indigence of poor Marchmont, and thought, like Briggs, " that a pedigree pays no debts," had yet taken it into their heads, that a young man fo well corme8ed would not be fuffered to re¬ main in prifon, and that, if ihey threat¬ ened him with fuch an exertion oi the power they had acquired over him, they fhould obtain at leaft fome part of the money for which he had engaged him¬ felf.—It was in vain that he aflured ihem, thai of his father** houfe he was the laft —whiie of the ruined fortunes of that houfe they could not be ignorant ; that as to the relations of his mother, though two of her sifters had married men of high rank, he was fo far from having any intereft with them, that he was not even by fight known to any of his maternal relations. Far from foftening the hearts of his purfuers by this rep re fen tation of hk circumftances, he found that the more defperate
defperate his fituation was» the lefs they feemed inclined »o forbearance.—Tor¬ mented every day by fome new plan of the one (who» being himíêií a fchcroer, fancied that Marchmoiu might relieve himfelf by iome project), and perplexed by the threats of the other, lie found that he muft conceal himfelf from the perfecution of both, or that they would inevitably avail themfelves of tliat moft improvident law, i*hith enables a cre¬ ditor to impnfon die debtor who cannot pay hiin when he is at liberty;—as ifan unhappv man» torn from his friends, deprived of his credit, deprefied in his talents, and probably ruined in his health, could do more to pay his debts, than when he is at liberty to purfue his intereft, or make the molt of his in- duftrv-—a law which confounds inno- cence with guilt, and equally punifhes intentional fraud and inevitable misfor¬ tune; yet which cxi Üs no where in fuch force
force as in a country boafling of its en¬ larged humanity and perfect freedom. Such was the fad fate of Marchmont, that though guilty of no crime, and though he had devoted himfelf to dif¬ trefs from the pureft motives of in¬ tegrity and filial piety, he now found himfelf purfued like a felon, and had the horrors of perpetual confinement before his eyes.
CHAP.
CHAP. IL
The tenant of a níght-haunteJ min?
Accustomed infenfibîy to fier fo- iitude, Aithea paifed her time without murmuring. Her mind compelled thus to exert its ftrength at fo early a period, and her education having been fuel as had not enfeebled while it ornamented her excellent underftanding, flie not only became reconciled to a fituation which to moil young women would have been intolerable, but every day learned to rejoice at the election fhe had made, and compare the melancholy tranquil¬ lity of her prefent fituation with the fplendid wretchednefs to which an union with
with Mohun would have condemned her* Believing that, unlefs fhe could fell her¬ felf to fome equally odious connection, the fmalînefs ofher fortune and the pe¬ culiar circumftances of her fituation (held down as fhe was by the feififh policy of Lady Dacres) would prevent her ever marrying, fhe thought of pafling her life, if not always in as folitary a manner as fhe now lived, yet certainly in a fingle (tate; and when fhe recollected all her aunt was, fhe thought of this rather with complacency than regret. Without pre¬ dilection in favour of any one (for the infant preference fhe had felt for March¬ mont could hardly be called fo), fhe tried to look forward with cheerfumefs to the few and fimple duties that in fuch a fituation, and with fo firøll a fortune, fhe had to fulfil. There İs no ftate of life in which objects for fuch dtnies may not be found î bot none more forcibly at¬ tracted her benevolence than the poor old woman Mrs. Mofely, to whofe cot* tage
tage her lonely rambles were the moft frequently directed, and who was be¬ come her regular penfioner. This little hut, for it was hardly more, confuting of only two fmali rooms on the ground, and two of the fame fize under the thatched roof, was now by the bounty of Ahhea rendeied as com¬ fortable as it would admit of, and the general condition of its inhabitant much ameliorated. Yet while this poor help¬ lefs being inceflantiy bleffed the confi¬ derate kindnefs of her young benefac- trefs, Aithea obferved fomething in her manner which indicated fome preffure of the mind—fomething that feemed not to belong to fear of future poverty, and fhe was in no immediate want ; but, on the contrary, acknowledged herfelf to be furrounded with many and unexpected comforts. There were however, at times, fuch fymptoms of a pre-occupied mind, or fome peculiar interefl affecting it, in tbe deportment of Mrs. Mofely, that Vot. II. ? Ahhea
Althéa was fometimes tempted to doubt whether íhe was not, as the people of the country believed, privy to iome fecret. Yet of what nature could it bc ? That fhe was acquainted with a con¬ cealed trea iu re buried fome w here in the domains of her ancient mafter, feemed very impiobablc ; h nee the Marchmont family could not have been reduced to diftrefs, had they poffeffed fuch a rj- fourcc; and ihat the indigence of poor Mrs. Moicly herieif was but too ical, there were proofs enough.—Yet why did ihe fometimes, when AUhea was wuh her, ftart at every found, appear hur¬ ried, breathlefs, and confufed; look ea¬ gerly from her litde window, and wuh difliculty command herieif ίο as to fhew that attention the prefence of her bc- nefaclr ^ demanded? Althca often at¬ tempted to diicover the caufe of all this, but was obliged to content herfelf with the excufes Mrs. Mofely made; that it was owing to the terrorsand hurries ihe had
had gone through during the latter part of her fenice in Mr. Maivhmonfs fa¬ milv, and the poverty ihe had fult and dreaded finrc. Befides thb folitary pen turner, AUhea had foon a hule humble circle, to whom the goodnefs ofher heart prompted her to render a thoufand kind offices : flic had not indeed much money, but for herfelf flie wanted fo little, that ihe could with¬ out imprudence clothe the half-naked infants of one poor cottager, relieve by a trifling weekly allowance the helplefs iupeiatmuated father of another, pay a mirfe for attending the wife of a third, and purcbafe ??? οι wool for the induf- trious family of a fouith. For fome flic woiked herieif, others ftie inflructed how to work; and flie was always ready to hften to the ruftic tale of forrow, and to give (what foe poor do not always fim 1 compaffion and attention, even when it was not in her power greatly to ? 2 alleviate
alleviate the diftrefles to which fhe liftened. The children of her hoft became the peculiar objects of her generous care. One of them was a little boy of about five years old, who attached himfelf to her with fo much fimple afficiion, that he followed her in all her walks, and crept continually into her room whe ι fhe was alone; where, if he thought fhe was bufy, and would not like to be in¬ terrupted, he fat himfelf filently down in acorner, and remained quiet till fhe gave him leave to fpeak to her. This boy then became of courfe pe¬ culiarly her favourite ; and fhe not un¬ frequently found in the found of his in¬ nocent voice a relief againfl the filenee of her dreary habitation^ when Mrs. Wansford was bufied in her domeftic concerns at a diftance in the houfe, and her hufband abfent, or working as he often did when he was able, in that part of
of the old garden in which he raifed a few vegetables for his family. At thefe times it not unfrequently happened that the children attended their parents, or that the elder girl was fent on metfages; and then there reigned a filenee fo dreary around the houfe, that Aithea fometimes went out merely to hear a human voice. If any founds broke this profound repofe, they were only fuch as imprefled melancholy ideas. The ancient dove-houfe, mark of former manorial dignity, had long fince fallen to decay ; but Wans¬ ford had nailed up fomc boards within the fhelter of one of the thick buttrefTes, and the boarfe cooing of the few pigeons re-echoed round them. The rooks, long fince driven from their flourifliing colony in a wood of tall elms that once fhaded the houfe, now feemed as they flowly failed over it to regret their abandoned refidence. Sometimes a flight of fea-fowl clamoured amid the billowy ? 3 clouds;
clouds; and when the wind blew from the fouth-weft, the heavy waves weie heard breaking monotonoufly on the flio**e, or diftincily in the ftillnefs of night in low and hollow murmurs;—while, within the houfe, the leaft breath of air hummed and fung along the paffages, and through the crevices of doors faften¬ ed up, producing fach effects from va¬ rious currents, and confinement,as, aided by an imagination addicted to fuperfti¬ tion, might have been magnified into low fighs and half-Rifled complaints. The füllen ν ibrations of a clock which belonged to Wansford, and was placed near the door of what they now called the kitchen, was plainly heard in the room where Aithea fat; and the melan¬ choly meafure of time was not to her the leaft unpleafant found that broke the folemn filenee of which file felt the drearinefs. She feldom, however, gave way to the dejection which moft young perfons would have yielded to, but drove it
it away, fometimes by having recourfe to her books f for fhe had now received and arranged them), and fometimes by playing one of thofe fimple airs, in which flic particularly excelled, though fhe was not a very great proficient in mufic. Now. however, arrived the very long evenings of December, and beginning of January, when Wansford happened to be confined to his bed by the rheu¬ matifm. and his wife attending on him; fo that the part of the houfe where Al¬ théa's fitting-room was fituated was of an evening quite deferted, except by the fervant giri, who remained alone in the kitchen, often trembling when flie remembered the ftories flie had heard, and looking fearfully towards the door » every time the wind íhook the old loofe boards and rufty lock. On thefe nights it was that Ahhea fometimes found all her fortitude and philofophy almofl unequal to repel the comfortlefs fort of feeling that affailed ? 4 her.
her. It was not fear, for the moment fhe began to reafon with herfelf fhe knew that every kind of fear was groundlefs and ridiculous. From fupernatural agents fhe could have nothing to appre- hend, did they really exift; but againfl their exiftence it was with her an un- anfwerable argument, that the Director of the world would never violate a known law of nature to anfwer no poffi¬ ble end. Of the intrufion of any living being there was almoft as little proba¬ bility; for what temptation could there be for the nocturnal robber in a houfe where there was very little more than the fimple furniture neceflary for a peafant's family ? Notwithftanding all this reafon- ing, however, Aithea earneftly wifhed for the return oi more cheerful days; and caft many a willful look towards the fea, which on a clear day was vifible from feveral of the windows of the houfe; and to which fhe fancied her walks might be extended. If
It was only during ihe long and gloomy evenings that fhe felt diftreffed by the lonehnefs and feclufion ofher fituation. In the day-time fhe had not a moment unoccupied; and when the weather was fuch as would not allow her to make her village vifits—· ? For "now the ficlcb were dank, the ways were mire," Milton. flic not unfrequently had recourfe to the great banqueting-room up ftairs, where, taking her little companion with her, fhe walked fomc hours for exercife. Yet it was certainly not fuch as greatly exhila¬ rated her fpirits; for Marchmont,his dif- perfed and diftreffed family, his blafted and ruined fortunes, were continually prefent to her mind; and while little Wansford, mounted on a itick, gamboled backwards and forwards before her, fhe figured to herfelf what Mrs, Mofely had formerly defenbed to her, the infancy of that unfortunate young man, when in ? 5 thefe
thefe then fplendid rooms he was the firft object of his doting parents, who gazed at him with prophetic fondnefs, as the future fupport — as one who was likely even to increafe the refpecia- bility, of their ancient family. A month or fix weeks paifed neatly in the fame way· It was late in the month of Fe¬ bruary, when the weather having been ftormy for many days, Althéa found herfelf languid and unwell ; and be¬ lieving that exercife would relieve her from an oppreffive pain in her head, fhe took the child with her, not being in fpirits to encounter the wide folitude of the apartments alone; and with a book reforted to the banqueting-room, which might indeed have been as well called a gallery. Here fhe continued to walk for fome time, till another heavy wintry ftorm coming on, it became fuddenly fo dark, that flie was returning haftilv to her own room ; when glancing her eyes towards tht
the great folding door which ltd to the flair-cafe, half of which was open, ihe fancied that fome living creature ran haftily by. It feemed to be a dog—yet there was none about the houfe but a large wdiite matt iff, ufually chained up in the yard: this, whatever it was, was not fo large an animal; and Al thea, witil fomething like fear mingling with cu¬ riofity, went to the door ; and looking along the paffage (now almoft entirely dark) that led to thofe apartments of which fo terrific an idea had been enter¬ tained, fhe thought fhe faw the fame creature run fwiftly along, but ihe im¬ mediately loft fight ofit—it difappeared down another paffage; and Aithea had no inclination tf) trace it fai ther, though ihe felt a confiderable deal of furprife. She now haftened down the ftairs, not without looking involuntarily behind her: fhe faw nothing, however, and in fome agitation reached her own room. ? 6 A moment's
? moments reflection reftored her to compofure. Of what was fhe afraid?— and how was it extraordinary that a ftray dog ftiould wander into a houfe in fo ruinous a condition as were almoft all the uninhabited parts of this? She en¬ deavoured by fuch reflections to drive from her mind a circurnftance that was certainly of no confequence: but ftill it returned to her, and flie found the re¬ collection ofit attended with fome kind of regret, for fhe no longer felt difpofed to take her melancholy walks in the gal¬ lery : and this added another depriva¬ tion to the many fhe was compelled al¬ ready to fubmit to ; for, gloomy as thefe were, they procured a fort of change in bad weather, which it was unpleafant to relinquiih. But now a dread hung about her which fhe could not imme¬ diately conquer, though ihe was afliamed of owning that fhe felt it even to her- fel£ This
This was perhaps increafed by Mrs. Wansford's telling her a day or two afterwards, that as flie was fitting up with her hufband, who after a violent paroxyfm of the rheumatifm had fallen into a dofc, flie had cither heard, or fan¬ cied flie heard, amid the profound ftill- nefsof the night, the flow light fteps of fome perfon walking about the houfe. c< Once, Ma'am," faid fhe, '- to be fure I thought it muft be you coming out of your room, the fteps feemed fo near; and I was afraid vou were ill, and 1 was going to open the door to fee—but juft at that moment my heart fomehow mif- gave me; I flopped a Hule to liften, and 1 could almoft fwear that 1 heard what¬ ever it was go foftly, foftly, and lightly along the back paffage, and go to the rooms where my hufband puts our malt and hops. Then I was fure it could not be you; and my heart w r as up in my mouth ! î am fure at the time I thought I had never heard fuch an unaccount¬ able
able noife fince I have been in this houfe.—But, after all," continued flie, paufing, " after all, perhaps, it might be only fancy." ** 1 dare fay it was nothing more," faid Aithea ; " perhaps you were fa¬ tigued, and worn with anxiety ; and when that is the cafe, we are art to give way to fears and fancies that would never at another time bc indulged." Cf I fliould not have thought fo much, perhaps, ofit," refumed Mrs. Wansford, ** but that Tiger has been fo reftlefs of nights lately, that it has been impoflible for me and the girl to make him quiet. He h^s flown round the houfe as if he was raad —then back again—and barking ready to tear up the ground. My huf¬ band was waked by him once or twice out of a found ileep; and í told him what a taking the dog was in, and ihat I was quite flighted at it, and was afraid it would fright you. But Wansford laid it was nothing but nonfenfe; that there 2 was
was no reafon for fear, and that he was iure it was only a fox, or fomc vermin about the houfe, that made Tiger rave fo. Sometimes, indeed, in hard weather, we have had foxes come quite into the houfe, as it were, after our poultry ; and perhaps it might be the cafe now." " it might be a fox that paffed the door," thought Althéa; " for why into fo lonely and deferred a place fliould not fuch an animal come for fhelter? It may be one of them that traverfes thefe defolate rooms of a night." AUhea thought of the verfe iu Ifaiah— u lìut the wild beail of ihe dcfcrt íhaH be there, and then houles ÍYuii be full of doleful crea¬ tures." " Alas!" added flie, with a figh, u what has this unfortunate family of Marchmont done, that their venerable abode, fantlified by the long fufferings of loyalty, fliould be under this cruel malediction?" The
The folution, however, that flic had now received of the caufes of thofe flisdit difturbances which had alarmed her, quieted the difagreeable fenfations flie had felt, and infenfibly the impreflion they had made wore away. Notwith¬ flanding the advanced feafon, the wea¬ ther now became fo fevere, as to take from her all difpofition to return even to the walk in the banqueting-room. From her poor old penfioner fhe was for fome time excluded; for the fnow was deep, and to reach her cottage was dif¬ ficult till the way was beaten—difficulties which Mrs. Mofely could by no means encounter to come to her. Althca, there¬ fore, was obliged to content herfelf with fending the fervant giri with a fupply of provifions, and an enquiry after the fo¬ litary inhabitant of the cottage, which fhe continued to repeat for a few days. When Aithea herfelf aflced this girl after Mrs. Mofely, her anfwers were fuch as might be expected ; but it hap¬ pened
pened that pa ifin % one day into the kit¬ chen to enquire for her return, ihe heard her fay in her Devonfhire dialeci to Mrs. Wansford, who was bufied there in preparing fonie food fur her hufband, " I declare í cannot think what iz coom to the ould wewman—ihe feems always tew much in a fluiter to fend back any mezzage to Mifs, zoomhow." *' But fhe was very thankful," faid Mn¡. Wansford, " was (he not, for Mifs' s goodnefs?*' " Yes, fure!" anfwered Hannah, **but, Lord ! mythinks fhe is vaflly odd az it twere. Then it is az hard to get tew her az if fiie was a lady herfelf. Shc've creeped away out of the rew m wher flic ufed for to bc, intCA· another little beck revvm, and the dew ce at all can I make her hear, flic's lev diff. I faid tew her that 1 had tewk'd down ever fo much of our doom *, with things as ihe had had,
and
and that yew had lent for it, fo fhe find I might take back vvhat I vvhculd; fhe coonet no he.v tell one from totber— So—" " The poor old woman is not well then?** faid Akhea, as fhe entered the room. Hannah, colouring at having been thus overheard, and afraid that Aithea might be offended, anfwered confufedly, €t No, Mifs; fhe be f ent fick, but flie feems fomehow in trouble." u I will go myfelf to-morrow," faid Ahhea; " I fuppofe the weather affects her, poor creature!" She afterwards made fome other en¬ quiries, whether fhe had fufficient firing, and whether the path to the cottage v\as practicable, and then returned to her employments. One of thefe had lately been the fludy of that period of Engliih hiilory when tbe Marchmont family had been io dif¬ tinguiíhed by its fufferings and fidelity ; foi
for this point of time had now, from her fituation in the fcene of many of the events that had occurred, and from her favourable opinion of the unfortunate fucccffor to the virtues, an.d, alas! to the misfortunes of thefe loyalifts, ac¬ quired particular intereft in the opinion of Aithea. In the courfe of her education flie had gone through the hifiory ufually put into the hands of young people. Her underft anding was equally clear and folid, and her memory remarkably retentive ; yet a very young perfon ufually reads the fucceflion of monarchs, and the hifiory of battles at a remote period, fo much more a«; a tafk than a pleafure, that now her ripened reafon gave to her prefent fludy at leaft the advantage of novelty. And that it might be every way profitable, flie began with the Saxon heptarchy. But uncertain accounts, mingled and debafed with monkifh legends, accounts of beings who,
who, with almoft the fingle exception of Alfred, were fo far from being fit to reign, that they were not fit to live, could not long detain her; nor was her imagi¬ nation much cheered by the rude at¬ tempts at pol i filing the half fa vage Anglo- Saxon by the fierce Norman invader* In following their line through, and thofe of Plantagenet and Tudor, there is but little to foothe the mind. Ambi¬ tion, the vice of great minds, is fo de¬ graded by ferocity, religion fo perverted by fuperftition, the father k fo often- armed againft the fon, the child againfl the parent, the brothers againft each other; fo few of thofe " charities** ex¬ ifted among them which alone render human nature refpecìable; and the peo¬ ple were fo continually the victims of the hateful paflions of their princes, that the reader rejoices to bring his obfer¬ vations down to later times, and hopes that when the period in which what is called the art of government becomes better
better underftood, order, and of courfe happinefs, might be its effects, But from the glorious Queen Elizabeth, fhe who is pronounced by Lord Bacon to be *' admirable among women, (¿rad memorable among princes" to the wretched and degraded penfioner of Louis the Four¬ teenth (Charles the Second), there is hardly an interval that can be read with pleafure by one who, inftead of having formed ideas from the little abridged hiftorìes fo early put into the hands of children, dares to think for himfelf. It was to this interval that the parti¬ cular attention of Aithea was turned. The firft mention of the Marchmont fa¬ mily was in the reign of James the Firft. But it was in that of his unhappy fon that they became remarkable. Aithea had borrowed of Mrs. Mofely a copy of a fort of memoir of the family begun by the grandfather, and continued by the father of Marchmont; of which a fervant had been employed to make TWO
4 o MARCHMONT. two or three copies, and one of them had been given to Mrs. Mofely, which fhe prefers cd with gieat care, and which flie had put into Althéa's pofleffion, with a long exordium on the eminence and confequence of the perfons to whom it related. To trace through the tumult of civil difcord, and the bewildering fubtleties oF miftaken polities, the bravery and perfevering loyalty of a fingle family, was a tafk fuitcd to the prefent ftate of Althéa's mind. It feemed like defign- ing the different appearances of a beau¬ tiful tree, which, though now fliorn of its moft flourifliing honouts, prefented a fine and venerable form to tlie eye of the painter, and ftill produced fomc fair and verdant branches, though its trunk was injured by time and accident.
CHAP.
CHAP. III.
His face- moll foul and filthy wis to fee, Wan kj untm¿ eyes, contrary way* extended, And loathly mouth, unmeet a mouth to be, That nought but gall and venom comprehended, And wicked vtoids that God and man offended.
r\ SECOND fall of fnow now rendered the project Aithea had formed of en- quiting herfelf after Mrs. Mofely im¬ practicable. In this weftern county in¬ deed it Uy lefs than in the more eaftern, northern, or midland parts of England; but it had drifted fo much againft the banks and hedges, that the path to the cottage was again for her impaffable.— The mild philofophy of the young re¬ clufe ftrugsded againft the heavv de- preffion
preffion which fuch perfect feclufion, at a feafon fo dreary, could hardly fail to inflict ; but her fludies were not much calculated to exhilarate her thoughts.— They led her from the detail of public calamity, to its effects on private life ; from the misfortunes of the monarch to the confequent miferiesof his fervants— and the fad confequences oi civil war on domeftic happinefs. From the then rnoft refpectable con¬ dition of a private country gentleman, that anceflor of Marchmont, who firft quitted it to attend a court, became per¬ fonally attached to Charles the Firft, while Prince of Wales; and afterwards, when thefe unhappy diflenfions broke out between Charles and his Parliament, which ended in the deftruction of mo¬ narchy, Mr. (afterwards Sir Armyn) Marchmont was one of the firft men of property in the Weft who declared for the King. In
ln the courfe of thofe fad years, which deluged the kingdom with blood, the feeond of his three fons and his only brother fell in the field. He did not furvive them long; and his eldeft fon yielding for a while to a torrent it was fruitlefs to refill, and refiding at Eaft¬ woodleigh, it became an afylum for the wandering and difperfedroyalifts; while in rendering it fuch he narrowly efcaped fliaring their fate—and only by his being perfonally inactive, and by his popu-" larity in his immediate neighbourhood. But when the fon of the deceafed mo¬ narch made his lafl effort at Worcefter, Mr. Marchmont (for, his father being only a knight, he bad no title) attended" him thither with a fmall but chofen party of followers. After the event of that day, he returned, flightly wounded, towards home, and was for fome time concealed in his own houfe. When it became fafe to re-appear, he refumed, with fome precaution, his former way of Vol. İL d living;
living; but by the fad condition to which his friends were reduced, as well as the reftraint he was himfelf compelled to live under, his fpirits and health became fo much affected, that he gradually funk into the grave, leaving his inheritance (impaired by fines, and the affiftanee he had fent the exiled King) to the eldeft of the infant fons of his younger bro¬ ther. This young man, who at the Revo¬ lution was about five-and-twenty, unable to deny or to defend the mifconduB of James, yet detefting from the influence of hereditary prejudice what he deemed the ufurpation of William, abfented -himfelf entirely from public life ; while his brother, who had entered early into the army, followed the fortunes of the mifguided monarch, to whom he had ftøom allegiance^ and, marrying in France, became founder of that family with whom young {viarebmont had fome time refided. The
The next heir, the grandfather of Marchmont, would have acted wifely, had he remained a quiet fpectator of the attempts that were made in the year 1715 to re-eflahlifh the banifhed family j but his zeal was fo unguarded, that a confiderable part of his own and his wife's fortune was hardly fufficient to fave him from the consequences of his open adherence to the " good old caufe.** But not lefs bigoted to principle, in purfuance of which he could not aet but at the rifk of his whole fortune, he educated his children in the fame ideas he himfelf entertained; and thirty years afterwards, in 1745, the family was reckoned fo decidedly Jacobite, that their horfes were fcized at that period by the neighbouring Deputy-Lieute¬ nant—and the fame precaution was ufed in regard to him as with the Catholic gentlemen in the neighbourhood, Cut off from every advantage which the re- fpectability of his family, or his own ? 2 talents,
talents, might have given him in public life, while his fortune was fapped by the loans of his predeceflbrs to their ba¬ nifhed friends, the father of young Marchmont faw himfelf, towards the middle of his life, furrounded by a fa¬ mily of three daughters and a fon, with only a nominal fortune—for his eftates were mortgaged for almofl as much as they were worth. When once this hap¬ pens, the very expedients that are em¬ ployed to ward off the ruin, bring it on more rapidly. The lafl Marchmont lived only long enough to fee the in¬ evitable deftruction of his houfe—to fee the fon he fo paffionately loved likely to become a deftitute wanderer, and his wife and daughters deftined to indi¬ gence.—His heart was broken, and his eyes clofed on this cruel profpect ; while his unhappy fon, by hazarding his per¬ fonal liberty, refcued, with difficulty, his poor remains from the inhuman gripe pi the law.-—— Such
Such was, in brief, the detail collected by Althéa from the family memoirs, to which Mrs. Mofely's narrative ferved as a fupplement. To read over the period of hiftory with which the former account was intimately connected, oc¬ cafioned, in the mind of Akh^a, vonder and pity. That there were men who adhered from principle, and ftill more from perfonal affection, to Charles thr Fiift, milled and obftinate as he was, ihe could eafily conceive; but it was more difficult to account for the infatuation of thofe who facrificed their families and their country to the degraded p enfioner of France^ and the unfeeling employer of Jeffries. Still there is fomething fo refpectable in the enthufiafm of even miftaken fidelity, fomething fo impref- five in the difinterefted generofity of facrificing every thing for an exiled and ruined family, that the anceftors of Marchmont became more than before n 3 the
the objects ofher veneration; and their unfortunate defcendant, of her pity. In dwelling frequently on this topic, the mind of Althéa turned itfelf to en¬ quire if nothing could be done to al¬ leviate the melancholy fate of a family fo worthy of more profperous fortune.^— She was hcrfelf, alasi a more ifolated being than any of thofe whofe deftiny fhe lamented, and but very little richer. Yet fhe could not help frequently re¬ turning to confider whether there were no means of befriending them ; but as often as fhe did fo, difficulties arofe that made her for a while relinquiih the hope ofbeing able to accomphfh it. How indeed was it poflible for her to addrefs her father on behalf of a family to whom fhe believed lie had conceived fome difiiké, and with any part of which Sir Audley did not know fhe had the fìighteft acquaintance? or how could flie apply to Mrs. Marchmont hcrfelf with offers
ofteis of fervice? Still, however, fhe could not wholly difnufs the idea; and as it would be doing fomething, fhe determined to write to Mifs Everfley (with whom ihe Mill, though rarely, cor- nJponded), and, making fuch an excufe for her cuiiofitv as her local fituation might well furnifh her with, afk for fomc account of the prefent ftate of the Marchmont family. Ahhea then was fet down to this let¬ ter, when, as was Mrs. Wamfiord's cuftom, flie came into Althéa's fitting- room to make the enquiries of* morn¬ ing after her health.—To thole Althéa made in her turn—the good woman anfwered—'* Ah, dear Ma'am! this wea¬ ther is very fad for my poor hufband— Me gets hardly any better, and I am afraid he will be quite confined again.— I think more of it than I fhouid ai another time, becaufe I don't know how I fhould do to get advice for him ; for I am fure Mrs. Cookfon won't come n 4 through
through fuch a deep fnow to him, if he fhould be ever fo bad------And then—to be fure I am not afraid—but if any thing fliould happen, my poor Wansford, cripple as he is, would be of no more ufe than one of the children." " If any thing fhould happen?" faid Akhea,— u Why what can poffibly hap¬ pen, my good friend?" " I thought," anfwered Mrs. Wans¬ ford, " to have kept it to myfelf; but I own I am not eafy enough, for all my huiband laughs at me, to help telling you :-—there certainly is fomebody who can have no good defign,. about the houfe of a night." *' About the houfe?" cried Aithea. ** Ye% my dear Mifs: for thefe three lafl nights the girl and I have traced the print of feet clear enough in the fnow. The track goes round to the old bow window, at the back of the council- room, and there it is not fo di fli net. I cannot imagine, for my part, what any living
living mortal can want here· I am fure there is no earthly thing for any body to take." ** It muil be fome pcrfons who come with a defign on your poultry," find Althéa. " I have never loft even a fingle chick," replied Mrs. Wansford: i€ be* fides, in the name of goodnefs, what ihould they do round there, if they came after the fowls? There is no track neither round the yard and outhoufe.— My huiband laughs at it indeed, and fays, What fhould they come for?—I don't know what they come for, but I'm fure they do come—and that is the reafon why Tyger never ceafed raving for fome nights. I Ihut him up on Thurfday night in the kitchen; but even there he did nothing hut growl all night long." <( Yet if any body had been in the houfe," faid Althéa, lc he would have d 5 done
tun to the place.*' '* No/* replied Mrs. Wansford; "hé could not do that, for he could not get into the cM part òf the houfe. The doors above are all íhut up, you know, and there h tío way below. To be fure I have nôt mtrch notion what any body Ihould do there; but I firmly believe there stre trattelkts, ot fome ftrange people, that hide about the houfe—artd I own it does fright me.** Aithea ncwrecolMtmg the dog, which fhe had certainiy feen, and feeling by no means delighted with the idea of 'fuch neighbours as her hoftefs defcribed, could not help betraying fome emotion in her countenance; yet unwilHrfg to add to the terror which fhe faw had taken pofleffion of Mrs. Wansford, fhe forbore to fay all fhe thought, and only obferved, that if fuch Was really her perfusion, it would be better to make fome
îoirne enquiry into the matter, and to take fome precaution againft the danger that might follow. " Why, fo I have been telling Wans¬ ford,** anfwered* fhe.—*' But I declare he is quite provoking—he will infift upon it, that *tis nothing in the world but my fancy— br fome accidental thing of no confequence.—I wifh, dear Ma*am, you would but fpeak tö him yourfelf— He won't tell yôû it is fancy, perhaps.-*· If you are not afraid of catching cold, do come out yourfelf, and fee if there is not a track of feet as plain às can be." To make this enquiry, Aithea con¬ fented ; and it was indeed very evident that a perfon or perfotís had £??? as far as that pun of the houfe defcribed by M ni. Wansford, but there feemed m have difappeared. Yet there was no vifîble way by which the houfe could be entered on that fide.-^Althèa how pro¬ pofed to Mrs. Wansford to make fome examination within fide thè houfe-*-b\A d 6 fiie
flie declared herfelf afraid of going, unlefs fome man could be found to accompany her—which fhe faid it was not eafy to do, as there was no perfon about the houfe who could go with her, and her * huiband, befides that he was difabled by the rheumatifm, became impatient when¬ ever fhe infifted upon there being any occafion of alarm.—Aithea, though far from feeling at this moment any extra¬ ordinary portion of courage, yet of¬ fered herfelf as an auxiliary: but the poor woman was too ferioufly frightened to explore the uninhabited rooais with fo ilender a guard ; and A'thea felt that on the approach of night fhe fliould be cxžremely uncomfortable, in the idea that tbe r ü were near her beings of whom it was much more reafonable to be afraid than of the departed family of the Marchmonts, who were the reputed inhabitants of that part of the houfe. Night however came, and with it a fudden thaw that obliterated at once all
all evidence of the fact of which Mrs. Wansford was fo folicitous to convince her huiband :—but the impreflion it had made on her mind, and on Althéa's, was not fo eafily effaced ; and Althéa found it impoflible to go to reft without having recourfe to an expedient to which fhe was generally averfe—that of the fer¬ vant girl bringing her bed into the fame room. The door was then as well fe¬ cured as their united contrivances could effect, and Althéa lay down without un- dreffing herfelf,-—The hours, however, .pafled quietly—there was no unufual noife about the houfe—and towards the middle of the night, though her thought- lefs attendant was in a profound fleep, fhe went foftly to the window, and by the light afforded by the moon, almofl at full, yet often obfcured by wandering clouds, fhe could fee to fome diftance around. The view was not indeed on the fame fide of the houfe as that to which the footfteps had been traced, but it was difficult
dïfficuU for any perfon going from ihe «eareft villages to reach any quarter of ihd building without faffing along fomfe ?? of the ground- me could now fur¬ vey. She few, however, neither animal nor human being—and fuppofed that, With whatever defign thefe intruders had before approached, the lightnefs of the »ight had now deterred them.—Again me wearitd herfelf with conjectures, and again defifted; for ?? found no way of accounting for fuch an appearance, but by fuppofing that the defign was to rob : yet Why fhould fuch a rifk be in¬ curred, where there was fo; certainly no* thing to take ? Her apprehenfions kept her fleeplefs ?1 the morriirig broke : (he then funk Into forgetful nefs ; and it wás riot till §cmc timfe after her ufual hour that ihe went down into her parlour to breakfafl. Aa ffee feldom rang the bell that Hansford had contrived to mend for her, fhè was going herfelf into thè fort
fórt öf kitchen where he and his family ufually fat> to afk for her breakfafU when fhe was met in the paffage by Mrs* Wáhsfördi whOi with a look of difrnay, fdld— u Dear Ma*am¿ I Was coming ta¬ fee for you. There are two fuch ftrange- looking mén along with my hofbánd !— ánd they are afking fuch a number of ödd queftions !—-I canfiot fr for my life, imagine what they wanV* Althéa, whofe imagination was ?И ftfll of the track that had been feert in the friow, fancied that thefe might be the perfons who clarídeftinêly vifited the houfe; but as their coming now was a direct contradiclioti to their mo¬ tives for coming before, fhe recollected herfelf, and aiked Mrs. Wansford what fort of people they were? ** That is more than I can tell you¿ I'm fure," replied the good woman.-^ " Fòt my part, I do not know what to make of them-, and I can fee Wansford fcnows as Rule: however, hè keeps civil t to
to them.— I wiíh you would come in, my dear Mifs, as 'twere by chance.** ** 1*11 come, certainly/' faid Aithea, alarmed, though fhe knew not why.— u But they cannot be people that want me?'* Then, impelled by fear and curiofity, ihe entered the room, but inftantly fhrunk back, for the figures of the two men, who fat oppofite Wansford, ter¬ rified her. Neither of them arofe at her en¬ trance, though her appearance was cer¬ tainly fuch as demanded that mark of refpect from perfons of theirs.—One of them was a fhort mean figure between fifty and fixty, wrapped in an old blue great coat with a red cape, and he wore a carroty fcratch wig pulled forward over a face which could not, without an affront to the fpecies, be called human. Squalid and defpicable as this wretch was, he feemed to be invefted with fome authority over the other; whofe great athletic
athletic figure imprefled terror, while that ofhis companion raifed abhorrence* This feeond man had a broad red face, deeply fcarred with the fmall-pox, with a black patch acrofs his forehead ; greafy fhock hair, and a fhabby coarfe furtout, which altogether anfwered fo completely to the idea fhe had formed of a ruffian, that Aithea had, at the moment, no other expeOation but that one of thefe men would confine Wansford, while the other robbed the inhabitants of the houfe. Such were the alarming figures that, on the appearance of Aithea, feemed, with renewed eagernefs, to purfue the enquiry, whatever it was, that they were making of Wansford; who, confufed and alarmed by interrogations he did not underftand, feemed very defirous of getting rid ofhis unwelcome vifitors, yet afraid of offending them. Aithea, unable to fuftain for a mo¬ ment the iniolent looks of the man laft defcribed,
defcribed, hurried back into her par¬ lour—Mrs. Wansford, in increafed dif- may, following her : ·* Dear Ma'am," faid fhe-*-* f what do you think of thefe men ? what can they be?—and what can they poffibly want?** " I have never feen bailiffs, or their followers," faid Althéa; "but I fliould fear, from the defcription I have heard of fuch people, that thefe are fome fuch men.** <c Bailiffs !" exclaimed Mrs. Wans¬ ford, turning as pale as afhes, " what can bailiffs want with my hufband?— Mercy upon me!—He does not, I am füre, owe any body five pounds in the world—and I am as fure he has never done any harm in his life.—Oh, my God! what is going to happen to him?" The poor woman, who had eagerly feized on this alarming notion, was now fo overcome with it, that fhe could not ftay in the room ; but notwithftanding the terror with which the fight of the men
men affected her, fhe was haftening back to that where they were with her huf¬ band, when in the paffage, feeling his way with his cane, for he was half blind, the elder of the horrid-looking wretches met her.—Wansford, with a mixture of fear and indignation in his countenance, followed him, though fo lame that he went on crutches.—Shocked and amazed at his approaching her, Aithea had no power to move from the place where (he flood. The man, flalking flowly up quite clofe to her, while íhe ihrunk from his approach, in a loud and flow voice, whofe found would alone have con¬ veyed a perfect idea of the hideout monfler that uttered it, thus fpoke— u I underftand, Madam, that... you. , · are ... the .. , daughter ... of. «. Sir Audley . . . Dacres, . . . Ba-ro-net,—- proprietor of this houfe.—Thefe people then are your fervants ?" " And who are you, Sir,** faid AU thea, collecting all her courage, t% that> knowing
knowing to whom Ulis houfe belongs* and who ƒ am, take the liberty of thus intruding?" ** My bufinefs..." began the wretch again. <fr Your bufinefs cannot be with mc, nor with Sít Audìey's fervants—They do not know you—I beg you will go from hence/'—The man, who found by the trembling of her voice that fhe was terrified, now thought that he ihould prevail by mere dint of fear: ftriking therefore his cane againft the ground, he faid in a ftill louder tone—" Underftand, Madam, that I am authorifed in what I demand, and .. . . " «For God's fake!" cried Akhea» fpeaking to Wansford, " what does he want?" " He infifts, Mifs, upon being al¬ lowed to fearch the houfe. I have re¬ fufed him; for why?— lm fure by his looks he don't feem an honefter man than they he pretends to fearch after-— and
and what if he was?—He has got no right to fearch here—or if he has, why don't he fhew it mc ?—why don*t he fhew his warrant ?—But, inftead of that, he won't even tell me who he looks after!—Come, come, Mr. Whafs-your- name, come out of my young lady*s room, or 1*11 fhew you that, lame as Γ am, Γ 11 not let any fuch fellows fright her." " I would explain to the lady,** faid the difgufting wretch, regardlefs of this remonftrance—" firft, what my demands are—fecondly, the authority with which I am invefted—thirdly, the grounds of my proceeding—fourthly, the confe¬ quence of refi fling.'* <c I will hear nothing, Sir,** exclaimed Althéa ; " I will not hold any converfe with you. I am perfectly convinced that a perfon of your appearance can have no bufinefs in this houfe, and I muft infift upon your leaving it.** «My
** My appearance!" muttered the hor-« rid fiend-«** my appearance î I fee, I fee how it is ; here is collufion.—1 fay, item,** {turning to Wansford) «* that I will execute my duty·*—I will examine the other part of the houfe. 1 * ** And I fay," cried Wansford, feizing him by the collar with one hand, while he fupported himfelf with the other, ff that you fhall go out of that part of it where you are already«" So faying, by tbe application of all his flrength he jerked the man into ihe paffage; Mrs. Wansford, dreading left his follower fhould fail upon ber hufband, followed trembling and crying; while Aithea, who had never fuffered fuch an alarm in her Hfe before, fhut the door of her room, and bolted it wiibin. She liftened, and heard a fcuñle in the kitchen, which increafed her affright} yet fhe knew not, in the confufion of her thoughts, whether file feared theíè people as common robbers, or as ruf¬ fians
Bans authorifed by law to hunt fome unhappy perfon to deftruction. The lat¬ ter, though fhe knew not whom they fought, feemed to her more deteftable than the former. Her prefent agitation, however, permitted her only to liften in breathlefs fufpenfe: ihe beard Wans¬ ford loudly infift on their leaving the houfe, declaring he would foe them if they dared to flay ; while the old mif¬ creant preached aloud of bis authority, and his power; and his follower, half- ridiculing and half-menacing Wansford, feemed determined to fupport his em¬ ployer. After this had hited fome time, to the increafing terror of Aithea, ihe heard other voices isiterpofe, which very plainly, but fomewhat roughly, took the part of Wansford, and, as it feemed, added more forcible arguments than he had himfelf been able to bring forward j for the enemy were now expelled, and ihe heard the governor «*f the fcrt*eô engage
engage his auxiliaties to celebrate their victory in fome of his beft cyder. When they were fet down to do this, Mrs. Wansford appeared at the door of Althéa's room, which was readily opened to her. «' Oh ! my deareft Mifs," cried fhe, as fhe entered— Sf Sure I never in all my whole life have been fo frighted— and I am fure you too muft have been terrified 1 «-Dear! how pale you look!— Let me get you fomething." " No," faid Althéa —" I am very well now.— ?? tell me who thefe people are?—and how, at lafl, you got them out of the houfe ?*' ** Ah! as to who they are, I know no more than you do, Ma'am, but I know they wanted ?? good. Did any mortal ever fee fuch a frightful-looking wretch as the ruffian that came in here ? My poor Wansford, cripple as he is, would never have got rid of them, if I had not bethought
bethought me of fending Hannah down to the men at plough in lower park croft; I knew they'd foon clear the houfe of 'em; and fo they did.—» John Hedbury fays they*re both bai¬ liffs—^or one's a lawyer, and t'other a catchpole, 'tis much one; and he knows they've been about this country, and fome more along with them* for three or four weeks—creeping about, and afking this man, and afking t'other man, what ftrangers there were in thefe parts? Some of our neighbours were talking about thefe bad-looking fellows at the Nag's-IIcad, John fays, but laft Satur¬ day night ; fome faid they were excife- men, and fome that they were fpies—- but another again faid he knew one of thcni—that old one ; and he is a lawyer at Plymouth: John Hedbury mentioned' his name» but I can't think of it now^ Some thought, it feems, that the perfon they are hunting for is one that has run away with money from his maftex; ano- Vot. IL e ther
ther gueffed that it was a Jacobine, or Jacobite j I don* t know, not I, what they call 'em i but Miller Clayfield faid he was fore as could be, that it was fome man in debt, and that this lawyer fellow had got a writ againfl him, and tother was a bum bailiff/' " Still,*' faid Aithea, " I do not com- p end why the fearch of thefe pur¬ fuers fhould be ib particularly directed to this houfe?'* " Nor I neither, I am fure. ï can¬ not think why they fhould come here indeed !—As my hufband told them, an Engliíhmatts houfe is his caftle, and he fliould not have thought of their pre¬ tending to fearch this; for though he was only a fervant, he had as much right to keep out any fuch dirty fellows as the firft Lord of the land. We are no likelier than ^thejr folks to harbour bad people, and I*m fure there are no people here ; though, if there were, and it was ¿mly a poor man hiding for debt, I'm fure
fure Ld never tell fuch as them; for to help fuch a one out of their clutches would be another thing." ** And do you know any body likely," faid Althéa, " to want fuch a friendly concealment? Perhaps Wansford does; and, unknown to you, may have taken fome unfortunate perfon, thus purfued, into the houfe ? ???????, whether the noifes you have heard, and the print of feet traced in the fnow, which alarmed you fo much, might not have fomething to do with the perfon that thefe bailiffs fay they would fearch for?" " Blefs me! fo they might, indeed!— And yet I cannot think, neither, that Wansford would do fuch a thing with¬ out telling me. Befides, who does he know ? Here we live from one month to another, and not a living foul ever comes near usi —Befides, how, if Wans¬ ford had done fo, how could he carry the perfon victuals without my knowing it? Indeed, how could he carry it e 2 at
at all? I never mifed the value of a bit of bread. Where could fuch a perfon, if one was hid in the houfe, wjiere couid he ieep? There is no bed, ?? fure, in it—as you mufl have feen, Mifs, when you went over it. Befides, Vm certain my huiband would never dö fuch a thing without telling me." u You remember, however," faid Al¬ théa, " that your huiband laughed off all your fears, and would believe no¬ thing about the noifes that you talked of—as if he had fome reafon for wiihing to avoid enquiry.'* Struck with this remark, yet un¬ willing to believe that Wansford could poflèfs a fecret he would not com¬ municate to her, his wife now left Al¬ théa, determined to find out the myftery, if there was one; while Aithea, who could neither ^eafe her conjecture«, nor åx on any that were probable^
probable, and whofe fpirits had been flrangely hurried by the people fhe had feen, with difficulty compofed her mind to follow the occupations of the day.
? 3 Cif ΑΡ.
CHAP. IV.
€reat enemy to this } and all the reft That in the garden of Adonis lpringj, Is wicked Time, who with hi» fcythe addreft Doth mow the flowering herbi and goodly thing») Aod all their glory to the ground down flinga.
İN the courfe of the day Wansford related to Aithea the converfation thefe men had held with him. ** They began," faid he, <( hy afking me whether I knew this perfon and that perfon in the neighbourhood, aiidtüAo lived in the houfe? and who came to the houfe ? and fuch a number of queftions, that I could not tell, not I, what they would be at î Thinks I, you ???? have any good reafon, my mailers, for all this inquifitivenefs ?
inquifitivenefs? You look very Uke catchpoles; ï don't half like you, fo you'll not get much out of me! From one thing to another, they began to tell me that they were employed by fome very worthy gentleman to difcover a perfon who had done him a very great. injury, and was, they had reafon to be¬ lieve, concealed fomewhere in this neigh¬ bourhood. The old fellow then faid, that, if they could find, and fecure this * man, but vvhat his name was they did not choofe to tell, they were to have a very confiderable reward; and hinting that if I would help them, I fhould have a ihare, they defired I would let them fearch the houfe. For my part, I hate all attornies, having fuffered enough once by one of them ; and as to your bailiffs, and bailiffs* followers, I*d fain have fuch rafeáis dragged through the horfepond. So I told them that, whoever the perfon was that they wanted, I was very fure he could not be at Eaitwood-* e 4 leigh 5
leigh; but that, if he was, I'd fee the whole tribe of fpies and iheriffV officers at the devil, before I'd help one of them to take any poor fellow to prifon. Upon that, the old fwivel-eyed chap began in his profing way to perfuade me, and, when he found that would not do, to threaten me. Then you, Ma'am, came in, and the impudent fellow thought, I fuppofe, he could frighten you into or¬ dering me to do it. I never faw fuch a ruffian. I believe, for my part, that it is jack-Ketch himfelf: but Hedbury fays his name is Vampyre; that he is an attorney, and has been the ruin of a great many families, for that he is the greateft rafcal in all the country! If I catch him or the other blackguard about the houfe again, I'll fliow them the way through the low r er pond—that they may be lure of." Aithea now very ferioufly enquired i)f Wansford, whether there were any grounds for believing that the unfortu¬ nate
nate man, of whom thefe fatellites of the law were in fearch, was concealed about the houfe? Wansford, with every ap¬ pearance of fincerity, declared that there could be no fuch circurnftance, he be¬ lieved it impoflible, and could not ima¬ gine what had given rife to fuch a no¬ tion. Aithea then mentioned to him the tracks of feet that had been feen in the fnow. "Yes," replied he, <c my wife fright¬ ened hcrfelf flrangely about it; but, after all, what was it owing to? Thefe very men, depend upon it. Indeed, they as good as owned to me, that they had been about the houfe once or twice. I pro¬ mife them, if they venture again, I fhall fhew them that there is more in the houfe than they bargain for. Pd no more mind fliooting fuch pefls to the world than a couple of mad dogs.** Aithea thought that the bravery of Wansford was a little mifplaced, and ? 5 that
that it vvould have been better had he fhewn more refolution in preventing the elder of the men from the impertinence of addrefling himfelf to her. Concealing however her thoughts, flic di í miffed her hoft for the prefent, and attempted to lofe the uneafy impreflion that this ftrange circumflancc had left: but it flill recurred to her mmd ; nor could flie for¬ bear fpeaking of it, and fuggefting fuch ideas as arofe about it, to Mrs. Wans¬ ford, who, after another day or two had elapfed, told her, that flic had taken every poflible means to diicover if Wansford was really engaged in con¬ cealing any one in the uninhabited parts of the houfe, and that fhe was convinced he had not. Another and another day paffed, in one of which Aithea vifited lier ancient friend at the cottage. The poor woman told her fhe had kept her bed, and expreflcd in the warmeft terms her gratitude for all the kindnefs flie had received, Aithea obferved none of that confufion
confufion and Angularity in her ????? ? , of which the fervant girt had fp »ken. She was low and languid; but, in İo me¬ lancholy a flate of defertion, with only the darkening prolpccts of age, poverty, and fiekneis before her, fuch dejection was but too natural, and too common. Once or twice flie feemed to wifli to fay fomething to Aithea of more import than common complaints; and at length, on being encouraged to do fo, fhe faid, that as flie wab fure íhe fliould not out¬ live the winter, fhe wiihed fhe could fee her nephew, the only relation fhe had, and that Althca would piomile her, that, lnflcad of being intened among the pa¬ nili poor, flic fhould be laid as near as poffible, 01 as would be ¿flowed, to the family bui ia! place of the Marchmonts and near her dear mafter, of whom when ihc i.ow fpoke, flie feemed more afliet cd ihan evei ------But the old fel¬ dom weep ! e G Whatever
Whatever was in Althéa's power, flie promifed with that genuine goodnefs of heart which marked all her actions. She offered too to write to the relation whom Mrs. Mofely thus named with fo¬ licitude, but learned that he was at a great diftance in the fervice of a gentle¬ man, who would probably be unwilling to fpare him; and that, if he wouid, the journey would be fo expenfive, that it w r ould be impoflible for him to under¬ take it. To this unfatisfied wifh, there¬ fore, Akhea could apply no remedy; but, leaving her penfioner in better fpirits than fhe found her, returned to her folitary home, with that felf-content which always follows the confeioufnefs of doing good. On entering the parlour fhe found a letter on her table. It was from Linda Everfley; and after fomc details relative to pcrfons and affairs much lefs intereft¬ ing, the family of Marchmont was thus mentioned--— « You
t( You enquire after thofe unfortunate people the Marchmonts. I know but little of them, as my brother is always hurt if they are fpoken of; but when I received your letter I fhewed it to him. He faid, « Tell Mifs Dacres, that if my poor friend knew how generoufly flie cxprefles an intereft in his fate, I am perfuaded he would forget half its bit¬ ternefs—for very greatly did he admire her, as indeed who does not ? However, you may tell her too, Linda, that I hope be is fomewhat lefs unfortunate than he has been ; for after feveral unfucccLful applications to become a tutor (one of which was to Sir Audley, offering to undertake the care of Mr. Dacres), he has at length found a fituation in Ireland, not as a tutor, but with a nobleman who is improving and planting a confi¬ derable eftate, which he has engaged Marchmoiu to fuperintend. He is gone to Ireland, as 1 hear from his mother, who, with his fifters, remains where flie ι did
did in Surry.' So far my brother's information goes.—Poor Marchmont ! I agree with you, my dear Althéa, that himfelf and his family are worthy of a better fate; for I am afraid Mrs. March¬ mont and her daughters are in very un¬ eafy circumftances. You know that my brother has more will than power to ferve them, for his domeftic unhappi- nefs is not at all mitigated.'* Mifs Everfley then went into the hif¬ tory ofher fifter-in-law's vulgar tyranny. Althéa hurried it over, as one of thoie incurable evils on which it is painful to dwell, and returned to lament the fad deftiny of Marchmont and his family. " Mow could my father," faid flie, t * refufe to accept him for Mr. Dacres ? Where would he have found a man bet¬ ter qualified ? Her concern, that he was rejected, was equalled however by her furprife that he fhould apply to her father; and when fhe reflected on the former repulfe he had met with, her heart
heart bled to think how cruelly fevere that preflure of adverfity muft be which had reduced his high fpirit to fubmit again to afk a favour of Sir Audley. If it had been poffible to add to that undiminifhed and acute regret with which Althéa always thought ofher loft friend, her more than mother, it would have been increafed by her now reflect¬ ing, that limited as was that excellent woman's power of giving pecuniary af¬ fiftanee, yet that her active humanity would probably have found the means of alleviating ihc fufferings of Mrs. Marchmont and her children. Althéa, in imagining all the mortifications, de¬ privations, and forrows of that extreme indigence in which they were repre- fented to be, looked from the window where fhe ftood on the pile of building, of which only a part was feen, but a part magnificent even in ruins; fhe caft her eyes over the domain before it, denuded and changed as it was, and then
then tried to conceive what muft be the virtue of thofe who bore with patient fortitude fo cruel a re verfe. To thefe thoughts fucceeded that re¬ gret, which what are called the pleafures of life had never the power of exciting in the breaft of Ahhea—that regret which arofe from her inability to relieve the diftrefles fhe deplored. Sometimes fhe almoft determined to write to Sir Audley, and befeech him to be a friend to thefe unhappy people. Then fhe dreaded his item repulfe ; and recol¬ lected how improbable it was that he, who would condemn to a kind of impri- fonment his own child, only for refilling to facrifice herfelf to profpects of af¬ fluence and ambition, fliould be pre¬ vailed upon, by any interceifion, to in¬ tereft himfelf for perfons who had no other claim upon him but that poverty which feemed in his opinion to be a crime. Among
Among the various plans that Aithea thus thought of and rejected, in regard to the mother and filters of iMarchmont, it at length occurred to her, that fhe might obtain fomc information at leaft about their prefent fituation, if Mrs, Mofely would write to them; and this flie determined to propofe, offering to act as her fecretary—a means by which flie thought flie might introduce herfelf, without impertinence or impropriety, to their kno .\ ledge. This benevolent pro¬ ject fhe put into execution the firft day that was favourable for her walk: fhe found on the part of Mrs. Mofely rather acquiefcence, than any expretfion of pleafure. " It was long,** flie laid, %< fince flic had written to her dear ladies—fhe knew not whether her doing fo might not be troublefomc." Aithea, however, over-ruled every flight objection; the letter was written ; and flie returned home, flattering herfelf that fome means would be found, by which flie might be¬ come
come ufeful to a family in whofe deftiny fhe felt fo deep an interefl. While fhe expected an anfwer, which could not arrive in lefs than a week or ten days, Akhea returned to her folitary amufements. The weather was fine and mild for the feafon; and her fpirits were revived, even by that diftant promife of returning fpring, which is given in fhel- tered fituations fo early as the middle of February. In that piece of ground which had once been a well cultivated garden, Althéa had hitherto been de¬ terred from walking, by its generally melancholy and ruinous appearance, when the bleak ftorm of mid-winter, or its chilling fnows, added to the gloom which neglect and defolation fpread over the place. But now the faint tinge of frefh green, which the fpurges and fome other early leaves lent to the fpots of uncultivated earth (though mingled in many places with maffes of fallen walls 4 , were cheering to the fight, and templed her
her to enquire if any of the ornaments of the garden had refilled '* Stern ruin's ploughjliart" which had fo deeply paifed over almoft all the reft of the place. As no temptation had urged the fpoil- ers to bear awav the fruit-trees that lined the thick walls, they ftill exifted; and neglected and grown heavy with wood, as they were, a few red buds, neaily ex¬ panded, weie here and there vifible. The furface of the broad gravel walk that encompaffed the garden was now covered with mofs ; and the borders, which were divided from it by box, grown into a low ragged hedge, pro¬ duced only weeds, unlefs in two or three patches where the warm {helter of the projecting buttreflcs had induced Wans¬ ford to fow fome carlv vegetables. The efpaher trees were almoft timber; and the fhrubs which had once been planted in a quarter behind them, as in a fort of nurfcry, were grown fo large astoover- ihadow them. At the corners of the crofs
crofs walks flood ancient heads of rofe- mary and lavender, overgrown with gray mofs, and ferving as a fort of fpccimen of the ftate of gardening in England when fuch plants were cultivated with almoft as much care as is now given to the tendereit exotics. In the centre of the garden was the carved pedeftal of a large fun-dial, but the plate was gone. From thence, a broad ftraight walk, bordered with evergreens, of which only a few were alive, led to the ruins of a green-houfe, which Al¬ théa had been told opened into a pavi¬ lion, where, in tbe days of their profper¬ ous fortune, the family of Marchmont ufed to entertain their company, or amufe themfelves in the fine evenings of flimmer; for it looked into the pleafant- eft part of the then park, where a fmall river, pouring down from a high ridge of woodland, wound away to fupply two large ponds within fight of the windows: but the coppices were now cut down, and
¿md the inconfiderable ftream to the right toft among tangled brufh-wood, furze, and broom. The doors that led into this pavilion were now locked: the grccn-houfe windows had been taken out and fold ; and of the old orange- trees, and other plants fo fondly cherifh- ed by the late owner of the place, no traces remained, fave two or three broken cafes producing fu ngu fes, and moul¬ dering into touch-wood. The few gar¬ den tools that Wansford poffeffed, and fome parcels of garden feeds and dried herbs faftened to the wall, were now all that was to be feen in this fpacious place, once the abode of innocent pleafure. Al¬ théa, comparing its appearance with that of a magnificent modern confervatory, the property of a great contractor whofe houfe near London fhe had vifited widi LadyDacres,leftkwithafigh,andcroffed what once lay before the front windows as a parterre. Among the grafs and mofs that were now fpread over it, a few crocufes
crocufes and hepáticas ftill forced thcİr way, and in two or three places the fnow- drops had fpread themfelves fo thickly as to filver the ground in defpitc of öbftructing weeds. Penfively philoso¬ phizing, Aithea gathered fome of them; they were hardly blown ; but one of the little Wansfords, now running up to her, afked her leave to gather a few alfo, and then to dig fome up, and put them in a pot to carry into the houfe. This childifh project Aithea, who loved to fee any creature happy, rather encou¬ raged. The child called her brother to help her; the garden pots were collect¬ ed, rilled with earth, and not without fome labour carried into the houfe.— Their mother, how 7 ever, objecting to this portable garden being placed in rooms where the purpofes of her family oeco¬ nomy were carrying on, the children propofed to put them up in the banquet¬ ing-room, where they had fometimes been permitted to play. This, after fome oppofition
oppofition from their father, they were allowed to do, and immediately pro¬ ceeded to arrange their new green-houfe, aflifted by the maid ;—-while Aithea, for whom the fimpleft pleafure had charms, and who was not forry to take this op¬ portunity of vifiting once more a place of which flic had fometimes thought with f carî» that fhe was now half afliamed of, went up with them, and even direct¬ ed their operations. She now again í urveved the room, which her imagina¬ tion had lately filled with beings more terrific than fpectres. It gave her no other idea than that of folitude and ruin. She obferved that the cornices of this room, as well as the ivy that had crept into the hall beneath, wouid foon be peopled; for the fparrow and the robin had already begun to build among them. From hence flie defcended with her party, for fhe was by no means courageous enough to go alone, to that part of the building where Mrs. Wans¬ ford
ford had fhewn her the footfteps in the fnow: but within there was no appear¬ ance that any perfon had been there ; though Althéa thought that this room, lighted by a window projecting from the thick wall (and where an old helmet, a halben, a pair of gauntlets, and a rufty pike over the great chim¬ ney, were the only movables that ap¬ peared), was the rnoft defolate and gloomy pai t of the whole houfe. She was now fatisfied, however, that all the fears flie had entertained in common with Mrs. Wansford were unfounded; and that the dog fhe had İeen was, as Wansfoid hadaflured her, a brown terrier which belonged to fome of the neighbours, and which he had often feen about the build¬ ings. " He comes, I fuppofe,'* faid he, care- lefsly, when Althéa mentioned the cir¬ curnftance, " after the vermin, of which theie is enough about this old place befides rats, which make it impoflible for
lor me to keep any thing in any of thefe rooms, there are floats or w caíeis that breed about the holes in the battered walls. I faw one of them t'other day run acrofs the paffage." Aithea remembering this, and finding not only the appearance of the animal fhe had fcen accounted for, but the noifes alfo which alarmed the lurking fuperftition of Mrs. Wansford, no long¬ er felt any reluctance to renew her walks in thb great room. Here the good woman c f the houfe, on Ahhca's report, agreed again to hang her clothes after a great walb. " It diics s " fays flic, "there, as well as if 'u as out upon the green; and then no wet can trouble us—fo that it would be a thoufand pities to give up fuch a convenient place." From this period the gardening of the children, and the œconomy of their mother's bleaching operations, occafion¬ ed the room to be frequently vifited. Vol. IL e Some
Some days pafled without any re¬ markable occurrence : Althéa vifited her old friend Mrs. Mofely, and was furprifed to find that no letter had been received from Mrs. Marchmont. In converfation with the ancient woman, Althéa related the ftrange circurnftance of Vampyre's inquiry at Eaftwoodleigh. Mrs. Mofely anfwered coldly, that ftie had heard of it; and immediately trans¬ ferring the difcourfe, from the oddnefs of the vifit, to the character of the man who had made it, flic faid, that he was accounted the greateft rogue within three counties—" Aye, Mifs, and as I believe in all England—I hope it does not produce his fellow." With the ufual garrulity of her age, Mrs. Mofely then began to tell feveral ftories about him that had happened within her own knowledge; by which it appeared, that certain ruin followed wherever this difgrace to his profeffion and to human nature once infixed his empoifoned
empoifoned fangs; and that his infidious friendfhip was not lefs faiai to his em¬ ployers, who were always his dupes, than was his enmity to thofe againft whom they engaged him. If Many," faid fhe, tf aye, very many are the poor people whom he has un¬ done—who have died in jail—and whofe children have been turned out to beg¬ gary, or have gone to the parifh. But, alas-a-day ! nobody had more reafon to knowr what a cruel villain he was than my late dear mailer; and fure 1 am, that Sir Audley Dacres could never know what a hard thing he did when he put any matters againft Mr. Marchmont into the management of this man. If it had not been for that, perhaps—but what is the ufe now of talking? What is to be, is to be; and what Godpleafes to direct is for the beil.** Althéa was too much hurt at the idea that her father had accelerated the ruin of Mr, Marchmont's family, to continue f 2 the
the converfation. She bade her folitary friend a good evening, therefore, and walked penfively homeward, refleBing how ftrange it was, that, in a country ce¬ lebrated for its equal laws, a fet of men fhould exift, who, when they are dif- honeft, contrive by means of the abufe of thofe laws to inflict more miferies on individuals than can otherwife be pro¬ duced in human life, fave only thofe which follow the abfurdity, madnefs, and wickednefs of war.
CHAP.
CHAP. V.
One out of fuiti wuh fortune.
1 HOUGH fpring now vtfibly ad¬ vanced, there were ftill many difagree¬ able and variable days before it was probable Althéa could make thofe ex¬ cursions into the country around, which promifed her the only pleafure it was likely to afford her.—The after¬ noons now grew long, but tlìère was little temptation to walk—unlefs in the banquedng-room or gallery, taking a book with her. Thither fhe was ge~ nerally accompanied by the little Wans- fords, whofe cheerful voices as they ran about relieved (without difturbing her f 3 meditations)
meditations) that mournful ftiilnefs whkh would otherwife have reigned in the de¬ ferted rooms—ftiilnefs, unbroken but by the evening fong of the robin, or, at a diftance in the fields, the firft low chant of the thrufh, which at this feafon is heard almoft fingly to fing his faint vefpers to the yet remote fun. It happened that Aithea had one day received a letter from Linda Ever¬ fley, who, having very unexpectedly been carried to London by a relation, was intoxicated with the pleafure and diffipation into which, during her fhort ftay there, ihe was permitted to enter; and ftie wrote to Aithea a long detail of all fîie had feen, with a lively de- fcriptio» of the parties file anticipated. Far from feeling any thing like envy, Ahhea rejoiced rø the fatisfaction ofher friend; yet, as fhe traverfed the gallery, ihe could hardly help fome involuntary compari fons between her fituation and that of moil other young women. It
was
• was true that it was her own choice; but fhe could fcarce refrain from think¬ ing Sir Audley cruel, in having given her no other alternative than this dreary feclufion, or a marriage with a man flie detefted. Her reflections were not cheerful; the afternoon was cold with a north-eaft wind; and fiie was on the point of returning to her parlour, when the eldeft of Wansford's children, a girl between nine and ten years old, who had been hiding about in tbe empty rooms with her brother, came running, on tiptoe to Althéa, and, pale and trem¬ bling, whifpered to her, that looking through a window in one of the clofets which had a view into the end room, of that fide where flie thought her bro¬ ther was feeking for her, flie faw a man, who ftood leaning near the chimney.— Aithea, at once recollecting, or fancying, that this was the room of which fo many ftories were believed, turned as white as her little alarmift~~ tí Surely, Nancy," r 4 · faid
faid Aie, " furely you fancy this? — Whe/e is your brother?—Perhaps you merely faw him, while he ? ' 1 to fur¬ prife you ?" M Oh, no; indeed,*' cried the child, if it is no fancy. I faw the man as plain as I fee you, I am fute I did.—Obi let us go call fomebody.** u I believe indeed,'* faid Aithea, " we had better go—but, let us fee for your brother firft—he mult not be left here.'* " Oh ! perhaps this man will kill bittV* cried the girl.— ff Oh, dear Mifs, I am fo afraid! Pray call my bro thei— pray let us go,'* Confufed and harafled by the wild expreflions of fear which the child very naturally uttered, Aithea knew not whether to go or flay. She was by no means weakly timid, yet her courage was unequal to the undertaking of verifying whether the apprehenfions of the terri¬ fied girl were well founded.—She now liftened a moment in breathlefs filenee ; and
and then they heard the boy cry, Whoop i— as a fignal to his fifter, that, wearied with looking for her, he was hid, and that it was her turn to find him.—Nancy now cried out, as loudly as her apprehenfions would let her, that fhe could play no more, and that they were going.—The boy heard her, and came running down the op* poflte paffage to that from which the clofet opened where his filler had been; and Aithea, bidding them both go down flairs, was following them as faft as her trembling knees would permit, when ¡he diftincily heard a door open—and then footfleps follow her towards the head of the flairs.—She haftened on, not daring to look behind her—but was hardly got to the landing-place of the great flair-cafe (while the two chil¬ dren, for the girl had communicated her alarm to the other, ran fwiftly through the hail) before ihe heard a voice, which faid in a half whifper—" Madam! Ma¬ s' 5 dam!
?omç 7 > Mifs Dacres!— hear me but a alarme^ 1 be § of ? ? not to bc Alih»* looked * holdin 8 ? ? the balufter, top of i U P* ^ be ^ aw ' ^ an ^ m g on d\e his ba C | ftairs ' a figUre ' of whicb> as from tl? was to tbe ^^ bt wmctl came could te °^ en door °^ tbe ^ ? ^ ?? ?* ?? .,^ e ^ wot diftinguifh tbe face.—She was îitv ° childr a l° ne hi the houfe (for the and in ^ Were alread y out of hearing); k -, 4 flate of mind difficult to de- ih fh* ^ c ner ^ tate ^ a nioment whether , ? Aiid flop to hear what this man had to f> ι, ? ^?* or Ay- ^ was evident that _ W her—his voice and manner werefiY r j -j- ., j tn as feemed not to indicate any , S gn. Rapidly thefe ideas pafled ? ? her mind—while the perfon, percei γ; * Γ mg that fhe wavered, approached , * , 4lthea flill defcending the ftairs, , with lefs fpeed— he fpoke to ner aga %t .,.^Λίη.— tt Mifs Dacres," faid he» \t furely refufe to hear r for one χ moment,
moment, an unhappy man, whofe life i$, perhaps, in her power?" She now faw his face, and became riveted to the place where fhe flood; for through fome change, which fhe was in too much confufion to confider, fhe recollected the features and voice of Marchmont. The immediate terror for herfelf was now fufpended—furprife, and fear of forne di fa fler to him-—a thoufand fenfations, which it was impoflible to inveftigate, prevented her fpeaking; but as fhe no longer teftified any in¬ clination to efcape from him, March¬ mont defcended tbe reft of the ftairs, and, approaching her with the air of a man ftill afraid of offending or alarm¬ ing her, faid—** The children, whofe ? larm I heard, will probably bring fome perfons hither before I can explain myfelf. My fituation is as extraor¬ dinary as it is diftreffing; nor is it, Mifs Dacres, the leaft painful of many fad t ? reflections,
reflections, that I have occafioned to ymt, as 1 know I have, uneafinefs and alarm. You will, however, I am fure, do me the juftİce to believe, that í am not concealed thus like a robber, amidft the ruins of my father's houfe, with any ill intentions—rbut through misfor¬ tunes that have driven me from fo¬ ciety." He was proceeding, when voices were Tieard without the great entrance.—** I fhall be difcovered," cried he, u and the evils which for the fake of others I have fuffered fo much to avoid mufl now come upon me !" «* For God's fake, Sir," cried Aithea, ** do not hazard it—return, I implore you, to your concealment—! will en¬ deavour to divert whatever enquiries may be made/' *« You are all goodnefs," faid March¬ mont.—" I have feen enough to con¬ vince me that your humanity, your ex¬ cellent heart may be depended upon*
The higher my admiration of fo much virtue arifes, the more ardently I wifli to vindicate myfelf from the fufpicions to which this ftrange concealment may give occafion. 1 believe it is in my power effectually to efcape from any prefent purfuit, by ways known only to myfelf; but I cannot go till you conde¬ feend to promife me the honour of five minutes converfation once again. Tell me—may I hope for it, Madam?*' The voices became louder and nearer, calling Mifs Dacres!—AUhea, hardly knowing what fhe faid, and dreading to fee this unhappy young man liable to the misfortunes that muft follow his detection, anfwered, with a trembling voice, tf That fhe would be in the ban¬ queting-room about the fame hour the next day.*' Marchmont, thanking her rather by a look than by words, inftantly difap¬ peared; and Aithea, who imagined, by the voices of the people of the houfe, that
that they were afraid of entering the hall, ? rolled it as fwiftly as fhe could, and near the door met Nancy, who with the maid, and a labourer they had called from the neighbouring barn, were waiting without the effect of repeating her name, for tb enter the houfe was an undertaking they dared not venture upon. Her countenance was evidence enough, even to fuch obfervers, of the terror flie had been in—but making an effort to aflume compofure, fhe enquired what was the matter? Hannah then explained, that, fright¬ ened out of her wits by the report of the children, who faid tbey had fcen a man in the houfe who would certainly kill Mifs Dacres, flie had called Thomas from the barn, and they had come to fee how they could help her. Akhea, who could not help thinking what fuch affiftanee would have done for her had there really been danger, now attempted, as the only mcaib to prevent
prevent a farther difcovery, to perfuade the child to believe fhe bad been mif¬ taken,— u You are fanciful, Nancy," faid flic, " and muft learn not to give way to fuch filly fears. There was no man where you fuppofed. I went my¬ felf to fee, and I am foiry you have fo needlefsly called any body."—She then walked quietly into the other wing of the houfe, obferving that Thomas, who remained behind to faiten the great door, trembled as he did it, and haftened after them as quick as poffible, looking up to the windows with every mark of fear and confternation. When he over¬ took Aithea, he feemed to furvey her with marks of aftoniihment, as one who had more courage than belonged to her; and he whifpered to Hannah, that, what¬ ever Mils might fay, he was fure little Nanny had feen fomething.—" I know well enough," added he, *' what my own mother have to uld me, of ftrange things flic
fhe knewed —when flie lived ous~maìd with the Mquire." . Althéa, ftill breathlefs, as w r ell from the effects of fear as from her endea¬ vours to hide her emotion, haftened to her own apartment, and, fhutting herfelf in, recalled, with increafing aftoniih¬ ment, tlie circumftances of a difcovery fo extraordinary. It happened that neither Wansford nor his wife was at home; the former, having fome bufinefs at the town about five miles off, had gone thither early in the day, and on account of his lamenefs was accompanied by his wife. They were now, however, every moment ex¬ pected to return; and Ahhea had to confider how fhe was to aci to conceal from them what fhe doubted not their daughter's account would engage them to enquire into. Over the fimple fpirit of fuch a child fhe imagined it poflible that fhe might have influence enough, to
to convince her flie was miftaken ; but as it was not likely the alarm the child had received, and communicated to oi hers, fhould not be known to her mother, Althca thought it would be dif¬ ficult, if not impoflible, long to evade her enquiries, or appeaie thofe foars to which the good woman was naturally prone. Leaving this therefore to fettle itfelf, Aithea began to reflect on what March¬ mont had requefted of her, and on the extraordinary circumftances of his con¬ cealment and appearance. There was now no doubt but that, in confequence of thofe debts fo unhappily though fo pioufly incurred, Marchmont was re¬ duced to the fad neceflity of feeking this dreary afylum againft his mercilefs creditor.-»; and it was equally certain that it was of him, Vampyre and his myrmidons were in purfuit. A thou¬ fand fears for his final fafety now mingled themfelves with deteftation of that ruffian who molefted him, and pity for
for the forlorn coi. dition to which he was reduced. Sometimes fhe doubted the propriety of her keeping the hafty appointment fhe had made—yet her ge¬ nerous fenfibility would not allow her to evade it: flie confidered, that March¬ mont would hardly have afked it if he bad not believed fhe could render htm fome friendly fervice, and fiie remem - bered how anxioufly fhe had wiihed for means and opportunity of relieving his unhappy family. As to the latent par¬ tiality fhe had felt for him, flie had yet hardly trufted herfelf to afk what it meant; or, rather, fhe imputed entirely to pity for his unmerited misfortunes, that complacency with which fhe had accuftomed herfelf to think of him fince their accidental interview at ????????. She determined then to keep her pro¬ mife, which fhe thought it could not be improper to do. It was impoflible Marchmont could have any evil defign; and whatever might be the imprudence of
of meeting thus a perfon almoft a ftranger to her, fhe had no fatirical remarks from others to fear, and her own heart told her, that flie meant only to obey the dictates of humanity and benevo¬ lence. It was true, that young women of her age are not, according to the eftablifhed rules, to truft themfelves with perfons who may prefume upon their vCondefcenfion:—but Aithea con¬ fidered herfelf as placed in a fingular fit^uLİvm, where mere forms might be difpenfed with ; and file looked on Marchmont as a young man who could not have any other claims to atten¬ tion from her, than thofe which every human creature in diftrefs has on his fellow being. Having calmed her mind, and taken her refolution, fhe awaited the return of her hoit and hoftefs; who no fooner ar¬ rived at home, than their little girl began to tell her mother the terror fhe had been in—and to relate alio, that Mifs
Mifs Dacres feemed fadly frightened at firft, but afterwards went herfelf to look, and faid it was nothing-—no, nothing in the world but her fancy ! Wansford, who had invariably dif- couraged fuch fears, and who had come home fatigued and out of humour, fcolded firft at the girl, and then at the mother, who had, he faid, put fuch a parcel of nonfenfe in the poor child's head, that ihe would grow up fit for nothing at all, and never be qualified to earn her bread in the world. He then fternly bade her be filent; and his wife, as well as his children, knowing the neceflity of obedience, the ftory feemed likely to be ftifled for the prefent; but before Mrs. Wansford w ent to bed, fhe could not help gliding into Althéa's room, to hear what fhe faid to Nancy's ftory. After fhe had related what the child had told her, with many exagge¬ rations, Aithea quietly anfvered, that it was very true ftie had been at firft alarmed
alarmed at the little girl's report; fi for I fancied," faid flie, " that thofe horrid men, who were here the other dâv t might have got into the houfe ; but, on going to the place, I was convinced there was nobody—I am perfuaded fhe faw only her brother. — It w 7 as dufk, and lome of the fiories fhe had heard were in Nancy's head. You had better not encourage her in any of thefe fears: in this inftance, I aííure you. they are groundlefs, for I examined into the foundation of her apprehenfions myfelf." Mrs, Wansford fhuddered at this ex¬ ertion of courage, and left her—far from being convinced that Nanny bad been miftaken.
CHAP.
CHAP. VL
lo sol, fra viventi L afilo, non ho!
the hour approached on which Al¬ théa had promifed to meet Marchmont, fhe became fo apprehenfive and uneafy, that fhe could not for a moment re¬ main in the fame place, but traverfed the inhabited rooms with fuch vifible inquietude, that, had not Mrs. Wans¬ ford been at that time bufied more than ufual, ihe muft have obferved it. At any other period fome contrivance would have been neceffary to ihake off the attendance of the children, who were accuftomed to follow her when flie
As
flic went for her evening walks in the garden or gailcrv; but now the impref¬ fion of lear v,Hi fo recent on their minds, that, inftead ol imp ^tuning her for per¬ miffion to accompcuiv her, they kept clofe to their mother, and Althca, with a beating heart, walked flowly and un- obferved towards the g r eat door of the old hall, which was« fhe believed, the only entrance to the deferted buildings. On reaching it, however, fhe flopped; recollecting, at that moment, that fhe neither knew how to open tbe door, nor probably had ftrength to do it. She hefitated; but not long, for footfteps were heard within, and the door was opened by Marchmont. Aithea ftepped haftily in, but flie could not fpeak. Marchmont clofed after her the great heavy door, and the noife of its fhutting re-echoed through the vacant rooms. Amidft the deep dejection that vifibly hung over him, a gleam of pleafure lightened
lightened in the eyes of Marchmont; yet hardly did he venture to exprefs what he felt, before it feemed loft in fad reflections on his condition, and how different a reception he was giving to Mifs Dacres from what he might have done under other circumftances. He was in the place where his anceftors had dwelt in affluence and in honour; but he was himfelf a wretched wan¬ derer, concealed like a culprit ; receiving a vifit of charity and compaffion from a young woman, in whom, as he plainly faw by her countenance and manner, commiferation was not unmingled with terror. Senfations fo full of pain and mortification he endeavoured to fubdue ; and in a manner the moft refpeclful, though his voice trembled as he fpoke, he thanked her for her goodnefs and con¬ defcenfion.—" In this wretched fcene of defolation," faid he, " where can I afk Mifs Dacres to honour me with her attention ?" Aithea,
Althca, who perceived how much he was affected, anfwered, with a faint at¬ tempt to look cheerful, that place was altogether immaterial: adding— u If you, Sir, have, as I fufpect, refided here fome time in the prefent condition of the houfe, İt cannot furely be any great bard fli ip for me to remain, at leaft as long as may fuffice for me to hear how I can be fortunate enough to do you any fervice.** " 1 will not,** replied Marchmont, as he led the way up to the great room vsdiere Althca ufually walked—" I will not attempt, Madam, to exprefs how deeply I am fenfible of your goodnefs and condefcenfion. The firft moment I faw you, I believed all I have fince found to be true of your character.— Your charity to the poor old fervant who has fhared the calamities of my family, made the deepefl impreffion on my mind. With her I found a temporary afylum ; and from her I heard, that Vot , IL o Mifs
Mifs Dacres had even the humanity to intereft herfelf for my mother, for my fifters; who, in common with myfelf, have no other recommendation to her than what we have acquired by misfor¬ tune!—Do not, however, imagine that my knowledge of this your tendernefs of difpofition has engaged mc to intrude upon it. I know your fituation: 1 ho¬ nour, I reverence the noble principles on which you have preferred a refidence in this now dreary and fequeftered fpot, to the higheft affluence and profperity. Long, long may that courage, fo con¬ fiftent with female tendernefs and female dignity, fupport you in ) our honourable refiftance!" The vehemence with which this fon¬ tenee was fpoken, rendered it very un¬ like what would have been uttered by the calm voice of difinterefted friend¬ fhip. Marchmont feemed himfelf con¬ feious of it, and, as if he had been betrayed into an indifcrction, paufed to
to recover himfelf.—Althca had nothing to reply—and, after a moment's filenee, he proceeded in a lower tone: " Too well affured, notwithftanding that rectitude of mind which will fup¬ port its poffeflbr under almoft eveiy inconvenience, that you could not Ía\\ t Madam, to have uneafinefs enough, amid deprivations fuch as you muft endure here, and fuffering perhaps from Sir Audìey's difpleafure—I fhouid never, no, believe me, 1 ihould never have prefumed to attempt relating to you a detail of afflictions, (f behove I may fay) unmerited afflictions, of which, fince they cannot bc relieved, it muft diftrefs a mind like yours to hear! But I find that my removal from this wretched afylum is, from fome late circumftances, become neceflary. I know not what will be my final defliny; but as long, very long iniprifonmem it vsili be hardly poffible for me to avoid, as î may never again enjoy the honour of fpeaking to g 2 you,
you, I could not determine to throw myfelf upon my fate, without attempting to appeafe thofe alarms which my en¬ forced concealment, added to the le¬ gends which always belong to fuch houfes as this, have very naturally con¬ tributed to give, even toa mind guarded, as 1 am fure yours, Madam, is, by rea¬ fon and reflection. I cannot render this forfaken place worthy of one who vvould be the lovelieft ornament of a palace; bur a by explaining what I know mufl have given you occafional in¬ quietude, I may at leaft prevent thofe apprehenfions which muft lend addi¬ tional gloom to thefe forlorn feenes. May I alfo without prefumption add, that, amid the misfortunes which I go to meet, I fhall feel a great fatisfaction in knowing that my conduct, which I know has been, and will be ftill more mifrepre fented, is at leaft explained to one on whofe good opinion I fet in¬ finite value? and that, perhaps, while I am
am condemned by many, unpitied by others, and neglected by all, Mifs Da¬ cres will not think that misfortune ? guilt, and will remember mc with fome concern."—His heart feemed now al¬ moft too full for utterance; but he re¬ covered himfelf inftantly, and went on: ** It is not to many people I would appeal for their pity—it is not from manv people I would accept it. But yours, Mifs Dacres, will be moft footli- ing to a heart which is even at this early period of life outraged by a cruel world. And alas, Madam! driven as 1 am from my family, not allowed even to afford^ them the proteftion they want; an exile fiom fociety, and compelled either to hve as a wretched vagabond, or fubmit to fee my whole life waited within the wails of a prifon — it is long fince I have dared to feek the fad confolation of relating my forrows; long fince "I have heard one fiiendiy fen tence, unlefs írom that helplcf& fohtaiy old fervant g 3 whofe
whofe wants you have with İo much hu¬ manity fupplied. I believe you are ac¬ quainted with fome of thofe circum¬ ftances which have reduced my family, from affluence as great as is often enjoy¬ ed by private gentlemen, to the ftate we are now in. Since the death of my poor father I have lived in a continual ftruggle with adverfity. It will, it muft at length overwhelm me. But if I could have faved my mother, my fifters, amidft the wreck, I fhould not have devoted myfelfm vain ! Believe me, Mifs Dacres, no intereft lefs dear than theirs, fhould bave compelled me to fubmit to the dif¬ grace of thus ignominioufly fkulking from the purfuit of the harpies, who have a legal right to take from me—almoft all i poifefs—the privilege of breathing the air, and feeing the light of Heaven. but I have been flattered by hopes; I hive been lured into this degrading con¬ cealment by the expectation that a little time might appeafe the malignity of my pin fuer^ ;
purfuers; that they would be prevailed upon, by the interpofitionof Mr. Ever¬ fley (the only friend who has, as far as was in his power, adhered to me), to give me time to try what 1 can do for their fatisfaction by my induftry. To await the event of his attempts I fub- mitted to hide myfelf, though he was not himfelf acquainted with, or even fufpected, the place of my retreat. But my poor mother, who alone was privy to it, has very lately acquainted me that the two creditors who purfue me with fo much rancour are now more invete¬ rate than ever. And indeed I knew I had little to expect from their merc) f , when í found that, while they appeared to liften to the mediation of Mr. Ever¬ fley, thev let loofe upon me that fiend, who, in the fhape of an attorney, embit¬ tered the laft fad moments of my father; and, before his poor remains were Con¬ veyed to their place of reft, had taken meafures to turn into the world unlhel- c 4 tered
tered and pennylefs his widow and his children------ that mifcreant (for it debafes the fpecies to call him man), who ad¬ vifed them to flop the cold afhes of my parent in their way to interment; and to accept no terms but thofe of my binding myfelf for the debt, which he believed my friends would pay rather than that I fhould be hurried to prifon." if Aiid this wretch/* iaid Aithea, tak¬ ing advantage of a fhort paufe, " this Vampyre was, ï fear, β rfi empowered to purfue and opprefs you by my father, by Sir Audley Dacres ?" " Not exactly fo," replied March¬ mont. '* The villain was one of many of thofe agents whotm the father of the pre¬ fent Lady Dacres was ufed to employ in His money tranfactions, one of which you know put his heirefs, and in her right Sir Audley, into pofleffion of this houfe and eftate. I do not blame Sir Audley himfelf, becaufe, had he from any motives of generofity been difpofed to
to remove the affairs that concerned us from the harpy talons of this venomous reptile, he might not have had it in his power; for never yet was the wretch known to relinquiih an employment, while he could by chicane and fraud extort a guinea from his employer. And indeed, had it been otherwife, I had no claim on the forbearance of Sir Audley Dacres. He never gave me encourage¬ ment to hope for his favour; he faw me unfortunate, and it requires more time than he probably had to fpare to diftin¬ guifh imprudence from misfortune. There are, to whom poverty always wears the femblance of blame." Aithea fighed deeply, but did not in¬ terrupt him. ** I do not however mean to fay/* continued Marchmont, ï( that Sir Aud¬ ley is of that difpofition. His being fo nearly related to Mifs Dacres would for ever make him refpectable in my eyes. ? 5 But
But pardon me, I wander from my fub- jea----- " Vampyre, this attorney, was em¬ powered to arrett me; and he muft, I believe, have employed under fome falfe pretence, and engaged by the promife of confiderable reward, the myrmidons of the police, or he could never have traced me as he did to the cottage of Mrs. Mofely ; where I had hardly been concealed a week, before I found it was befieged by that unfeeling fpecies of the fatellites of law who live on the miferies of tbe unhappy debtor. I had no coun¬ fel but a fick and feeble old woman, who, when fhe found that to be fafe in her little hovel was impoflible, advifed me to have recourfe to the parts of this houfe which had been contrived to conceal fugitives of a very different de¬ fcription. I knew them well, and was„ perhaps the only pei fon who did know them. Ah ! how little I ever thought, ia the happy days of my childhood and eail y
early youth, that I fliould ever linger about the paffages which 1 had frequent¬ ly explored with a fort of melancholy curiofity, as the afylum of the ruined Cavaliers, and even the unhappy exiles of royal blood, whofe hiftory I have often confidered with pain, mingled ^ ith a degree of that hereditary pride which my father had perhaps too much pleafure in encouraging; while 1 reflected on the fhare my family had in feenes chicli I do not now fee quite in the fame light as I was then taught to behold them ! iC I dared not then, Madam, I dared not implore ^oîirafliftance, though from your humanity to \ ards poor Mofely I believed I fhould have found it; but to fecure the coincidence of Mr. Wans¬ ford u as abfolutely neceflary. Hehad the character of an honeft man—1 knew he had been a faithful fervant in your family during the life of your mother. Somethmg was to be hazarded ; and I w T as fo belet by the followers of Vam- G 6 pyre,
pyre, that no other efcape appeared practicable. I ventured then to entruft to Wansfoid the truth of my firation. The man heard it with that difpofition which belongs to an unadulterated Eng- lifh fpirit. He detefted the malignant tyranny of the two rich men, who with¬ out any poffible advantage to themfelves purfued me merely to gratify the rage of difappointed avarice. He had him¬ felf fuffered from fome of the lower re¬ tainers of the law. He knew enough of Vampyre's character to hold him in that fort of abhorrence whieh an honeft mind feels towards cunning and cruelty; and he faw no prejudice that could happen to himfelf from affording me the afylum I afked, which was merely permiflion to bring a mattrefs and bed-clothes into one of thofe fmall re ceñes (for they can hardly be called rooms), which have been contrived amid the thick walls of this old building. There are three of them, wide of each other, but commu¬ nicating
nicating by paffages fo narrow as to ad¬ mit but one perfon at a time, and in fome places by Heps fo fleep that only an active man could pafs them. Into the leaft damp of thefe I contrived, by the affi fiance, or rather the con¬ nivance, of Wansford, to convey fome ítraw, a mattrefs, and fuch other ne- ceffaries as might fecure from the effects of great cold and humidity a man brought up to a more delicate manner of life than he has lately been accuftomed to. Adverfity is an excellent and radical cure for the errors that fond parents often commit in the education of an only fon. * c By the fame means the faithful fer¬ vant who was brought up with me from a boy, and on whom I cannot prevail to feek another mafter, conveyed to me requifite food. He equipped himfelf in a round frock, cut off his hair, and ex¬ changed his ufual clothes for thecoarfeft of thofe worn by thepeafants; and thus changed
changed in appearance, he paffed for the nephew of Mrs. Mofely, and took a lodg¬ ing in the next village, from whence he ufed to creep of a night with fuch food as he could purchafe without fufpieion, going, or rather pretending to go, during the day, to his labourin a diftant parifh. " It is now a month fince I embraced this manner of life, rather in compliance with the wifhes of my mother, than be¬ caufe I preferred it myfelf to the im- prifonment that awaits me. But the vifit that about ten days fince that blood-hound Vampyre paid to my hu¬ mane protector Wansford, left hardly any doubt but that I had been traced hither: and though the refol ute refufal of Wansford to admit thofe wretches to fearch the houfe has made their fuccefs rather more remote and difficult; yet, having once got fcent of me, I know it cannot be long before I muft either quit mý concealment, or be taken in it." Althca
Althéa now, in a tremulous voice that marked how much fhe was affected, enquired whether, fince the private paf¬ fages and retreats in the houfe were fo fecure from the vifits of thofe who were not acquainted with them, he might not ftill remain undifcovered? Marchmont replied, " I poffibly might, though the exiftence of fuch hiding- places is too well known to make them very fecure againft a ftrict fearch; but I fear,** added he, with a faint attempt at cheerfulnefs, (f that the fiege would inevitably be turned to a blockade, and that tbe garrifon would be ftarved into a flirrender; fo*· my poor purveyor, Fen¬ church, has lately been alarmed with an account, that as he is a ftranger he is be¬ lieved to be a deferter from Plymouth; and that a man who is employed in the imprefs fervice at a village on the fea- coaft has declared it fhall foon be feen what he is. This mufl be a manoeuvre ofVampyre's. The poor fellow, though there
there is no difficulty or danger that he would not encounter in my fervice, is terrified at tbe idea of being forced away, and detained on board fhip—-while, my fupplies failing in his abfence, I muft quit my concealment, and yield without farther refiftance to my purfuers.** Althca heard with increafing concern this threatened accumulation of cala¬ mity. Marchmont continued to fpeak. *' Already, perhaps, my unfortunate companion in adverfe fortune may have fallen into the fnare; for fince the even¬ ing before yefterday he has not appear¬ ed/* « t Good God!** exclaimed Althca, '* you have been, and are then, perhaps, without neceflary fuftenance ?** u Not altogether fo—I never was fo improvident as to bc wholly without; for 1 forefaw that many accidents might happen to impede punctual fupplies. 1 have not, it is true, fared very fump- tuoufty : but why fhould not I, who am reduced
reduced to a condition even below that of the peafant who labours for his daily bread, but who is free and independent-— why fhould not I learn to live as fcantily as he does ?" Though he faid this in a cheerful voice > Aithea, looking at him as he fpoke, could hardly refrain from tears. * c Will you allow me," faid fhe, " to fend you (unlefs I may invite you to fhare it in my parlour) a part of my fupper? I beg your pardon for ufing the word faid —I would not for the world hazard any thing of that fort—but will you fuffer me to bring you fome kind of food, better than I fear you can now have ? Confider me, Sir, as one of your fifters, and'believe that neither of them could be more rejoiced than 1 fhall be to contribute fuch relief as can now be found in a fituation fo painful, and which you fo little merit.'* While fhe fpoke thus, Marchmont gazed at her with an expretfion in his countenance,
countenance, to which words can do but little juftice. * f It feems," faid he in a low voice, " it feems as if the heavieft evils of life are mitigated and foftened—perhaps that they may bc the longer endured. Your generous compaffion, Madam, would be a panacea for greater evils than / en¬ dure : but, when it becomes painful to you, as I think 1 plainly perceive it is, 1 dire not afk its continuance. I ought rather to withdraw my Iclf, and to in¬ trude upon you no more....." As if unable to go on, he now paufed —while Aithea, who fancied ihe beard footfteps below, and trembled left he fhould be furprifed, befought him eager¬ ly not to think of any thing but hb own fafety. " If," faid flie, * c your fervant fliould have been taken, as his long abfence, makes but too probable, may it not lead to a difcovery?—At the very idea of the wretch whom I faw the oilier day, my
my foul recoils. Every thing is furely to be endured rather than that you fhould be in his power. Tell me, Sir, I beg of you, what you propofe ?—what 1 can do for you ?" The voice of Aithea betrayed her agitation, and Marchmont recovered himfelf. " I am afliamed," faid he, u of my weaknefs; and flioeked that ï have thus difturbed you. You afk me, mott amia¬ ble Mils Dacres, what is my defign? Alas! I would afk counfel of you; for in truth I know not how to act. For my mother's fake, whofe heart will be quite broken by my im prifonment, I would avoid it—but, alas! how?—If Fenchurch is taken, as I very much fear, I cannot remain here—and even if he has been detained only by fome accident, I believe my concealment is now too much fufpected long to avail me. I would quit it, therefore, m the night, and, making my way to the neareft fea-port, endeavour
endeavour to efcape from the inhuman purfuit of men, with whom my furrender can gutify no paffion but vengeance.— Yer even to this there are objections, . .. Indeed í know not how I could loavs England but as a foldieror a failor; and to my becoming either one or the other, it feems as if my mother had almod as ftrong objections asagainfb my incurring the horrors of perpetuali confinements* Aithea too well underftood, however he evaded naming, the reafons that pre¬ vented his quitting England otherwife than in fome military capacity—that he had neither means of paying for bis paf¬ fage, nor his fupport, whitherfoever he might be driven. She now ran over in her mind, though in a hurried way, the poffibility of her affifting him in this cruel exigence—bub again fancying fhe beard perfons walking beneath the windows of the room, and feeing it was already evening, and that it would be impoflible for him u> deter¬ mine
mine on any plan that night, fhe became folicitous for his prefent fecurity, and that he might not be longer a fufferer, from the abfence of his fervant, as to the actual neceftaries of life. Collecting, therefore, all her courage, flie faid, " Allow me, Sir, to propofe to you to return for this night to your fad cell— to-morrow morning I will do myfclf the pleafure of feeing you again, if you will permit mc ; and in the mean time pray tell me, if you can devife any fafe way by which neceflary food may imme¬ diately be conveyed to you ?" " How very good you are," faid Marchmont, ** to be my purveyor! and how little do I deferve fuch kindnefs from you, to whom I know I have long been a fource of fear, and am now likely to be the caufe of trouble ! Be not alarmed," added he, feeing by her countenance that fhe apprehended fome intrufion, " I believe 1 am pretty fecure for this evening; and fince your long ab¬ fence
fence may perhaps raife fome uneafinefs in the good woman of the houfe (from whom, for what reafon I know not, her huiband feems very anxious to keep the fecret of my concealment), I will rnoft thankfully accept your generous pro¬ pofal of half an hour's converfation to¬ morrow morning: and now, if you have courage to truft yourfelf with me, I will ihew you a way by which, without going through the hall, or any of the vifible paffages; this part of the houfe has a communication with that you inhabit. Althéa profeffing her readinefs to follow him, fince fhe thought it lefs hazardous for him than her being let out at the hall door, he removed the damaged piå u re, which, as has been mentioned, refted againft the wainfcot in the banqueting- room; and, pufhing afide a pannel of the lower part of it, a dark and narrow paffage appeared, juft capable of admit¬ ting one perfon at a time. Marchmont defcended intoit by two deep fteps; and Althéa,
Althéa, not without fome dread, which, however, flie was afliamed of, followed him. He led her along an avenue, equally dark and narrow, into a room which was not among thofe ihc had been fhewn by Mrs. Mofely, but more gloomy than any of them, and the evening was now clofing in. Marchmont felt her hand tremble as he held it, and faid— ' c How much I am obliged to you for your noble confidence ! I fear this way is very unpleafant to you ; but, however, it is very fliort." So faying, he opened the door of what appeared to be a large old wainfcot prefs ; and urging with fome force his foot againft the fide, it gave way, and delivered them into another obfcure but fhort paffage, and from thence into the room where Wansford kept his fmall flores, fuch as malt, winter roots, and wheat, which he had by various con¬ trivances
t riva nees fecured from the vermin that the houfe was infefted with. ' c You fee," cried Marchmont, " that I am not fo deftitute of the power of procuring provifions as you imagined; and that here, like a true prodigal, I might feed on hulks and on roots," Aithea could not anfwer his plea- fantry, fo deeply was flie affected by his fituation; but fhe eagerly enquired whe¬ ther, by this avenue, Wansford could not convey him food ? " I have never yet propofed it," an¬ fwered he, <{ becaufe I have never yet been quite deftitute ; and I knew it was hardly poffible for him confiantly to fupply me, without betraying to his wife a fecret which he feemed to dread her knowing." " But to-night," faid Akhea, " may I leave here what you have undoubtedly occafion for ?" ct I certainly fhall not die of reple¬ tion," anfwered he, * c if I do not re¬ ceive
cei ve your bounty; for my fare has been to-day and yefterday rather harder than ufual: but if I go fupperlefs to bed, fate will not deal worfe with me than flie does continually with thofe who have toiled all day.'* Aithea however, finding that fhe could thus fuppîy him, infifted upon his re¬ maining concealed near the room till fhe could return, and then with a palpi¬ tating heart haftened to her own bed¬ chamber ; where taking off her hat and cloak, fhe affected to go down to her parlour, as if juft returned from walk¬ ing, and, ringing the bell, ordered her fupper. Mrs, Wansford, who immediately at¬ tended, exprcfïêd fomc wonder at her flaying out fo late, and ftill more that flic had not heard her come in. Althéa gave {light anfwers to her qucflions; and faying that fhe had been for along walk, which had given her an unufual appetite, Mrs. Wansford beftirred hcrfelf to pro- Vol. IL h duce
duce fuch cold provifions as fhe had. Althéa having concealed as much of them as fhe could, font the reft away, and under pretence of fatigue haftened to her room. Then, after a moment's paufe, w ith light but faltering fteps, flie hurried towards that where Marchmont waited for her; for, knowing that Mrs. Wansford's fears prevented her ever vifiting this room, he had not concealed himfelf. He vvould have thanked his trembling benefactrefs; but fhe entreated him, in a whifper, not to fpeak, and glided as fwiftly as poflible away : fear¬ ing left her hoftefs, whofe bed-room was at the oppofite end of the paffage, ihould difcover her before ihe could make good her retreat.
CHAP.
CHAP. VIL
Povera affetti miei ! Se non fdnno impetrar dal tuo bel core Picta, fc non amore !
ALONE in her own room, Ahhea collected her confufed and diffipated thoughts. The firft furprife flie had felt now gave way to the pity, refpect, and apprehenfion for his fafety, with which the manner and the narrative of Marchmont had infpired her, mingled with a fenfe of the impropriety of her own fituation ; of which flie would pro¬ bably have been lefs painfully fenfible, had ihc not been confeious that there was fomething more than compaffion in h 2 tbc
the extreme concern flie felt for March¬ mont. Befides the too great probability there was, that the fiend who Iving with fuch unappeafablc rancour on the purfuit w 7 ould foon force him fiom his conceal¬ ment, Althéa dreaded left even from tliat remote fpot the whifpcr of malig¬ nity might reach her fadier and Lady Dacres; and fhould that happen, it might be of the utmoft prejudice to March¬ mont, and create in regard to herfelf fufpicions and opinions which it might never afterwards be in her power to obliterate. A young man of Marchmont's de¬ scription concealed for a long fpace of time in a houfe of which fhe was the oftenfible inhabitant, muft give rife to much fcandal were it known; and fince it was fufpected by Vampyre, it was but too probable that he would aflert it, and convey the aflertion fomehow or other to Sir Audley (to whom indeed he was known),
known), in the hope that by the means ofhis interference Marchmont might be driven from his afylum, and, by the dii- pleafure his feeking it might create, raife another powerful and vindictive enemy in the perfon of Sir Audley Dacres. Tormented and perplexed by thefe thoughts, Althéa could not determine what advice fhe ihould give to the un¬ fortunate fugitive. It feemed beft to propofe his quitting England—yet where could he obtain money, and whither fhould he go?—The latter queftion it was, perhaps, eafier to anfwer, even in the prefent confufed ftate of affairs on the continent, than it was to fay, where he fliould find the means of conveying h im fei f thither— fince, though he did not confefs it, ihe was convinced by his manner that his pecuniary exigences were fuch as made his attempting fuch a journey impoflible. h 3 With
With that timid deference to the opinion of the world, which is an amia¬ ble feature in the character of a young woman, Ahhea had alfo that ftrength of mind that enabled her to bc decided when her undcrftanding and confcience told her fhe was right. In confidering, therefore, how far fhe could in this way aflift him, fhe put afide every other re¬ flection but that of the pleafure it would give her to refcue a fellow-creature from fo cruel a fate as that which hung over Marchmont. For any deferving perfon fhe felt that fhe would have made the fame exertion : yet flie did not deny even to herfelf, that the perfonal merit of Marchmont, the promife of profper- ous fortune fo cruelly difappointed, his filial piety, and the fair expectations of his youth unhappily blafted, contributed to produce in his favour a more lively intereft than fhe would have been fen¬ fible of for almoft any other being. On
On examining her flock of money, which fince her refidence at Eaft Wood- leigh flie had but little diminifhed, ihe found it confi ftcd of twelve guineas and two Bank notes of twenty pounds each (the remains of fifty poundsj which fhe had been paid out of Mrs. Trevyl- lian's property), and twenty-five which Sir Audley had given her for the ex¬ pences of her journey : fince which he had never fent her any fupply, fuppofing (if he thought about it at all) that at Eaftwoodleigh fiie could have no occa¬ fion for money; and it was true thai, except her little charities, fhe had neither wdfh nor opportunities of indulging in any expenee. Of the fum then in her poffeflion Al¬ théa could well fpare five-and-Forty guineas, which fhe thought might, with fome fmall fum he probably poffeffed himfelf, be fufficient to fecure the retreat of Marchmont to Holland or France. But ftie forefaw, that to offer it to him h 4 would
would bc a matter of extieme delicacy. She doubted whether any thing could engage him to accept it; and ftie fore¬ faw that, if he did not, the fuppofition that remaining where he was, was dif¬ agreeable to her, would haften his quit¬ ting Eaftwoodleigh at whatever hazard; —an apprehenfion which acquired new force, as fhe recolIecied fome of thofe broken fentences which, half uttering, he feemed fuddenly to reprefs. Thev were indeed the effect of that unde- fcribable variety of fenfations which pafled through his mind. He knew that, as far as related to Althéa, his fituation under the fame loof was altogether im¬ proper; and to hazard any injury to her, no confideration that had for its object only his perfonal fafety could have en¬ gaged him. Yet ha\ mg once yielded to the pled fure of feeing her, and nov of converfmg «iih her; htaring her voice, and reading in her intelligent eves that flie was even more inteieftcd for him ihc'pv
than flie wiihed to avow, he had not courage to tear himielf away, though confeious that to ftay at all was impro¬ per—to ftay long impoflible. While this conteit continued in the breaft of Marchmont, Althéa was on her part ftudying how fhe might induce him to accept what flie was fure he muft greatly want; and no other means oc¬ curred to her, but to contrive that Wansford iliould convey it to him with¬ out his knowing from whence it came. This, however, was an expedient which flie could not think of adopting without reluctance; and fo many were the ob¬ jections to it which arofe, that at length fhe determined to poftpone any arrange¬ ment of this matter till ihe had açain feen and converted wirb Marchmont. She haftened therefore, to this con¬ ference with every precaution that was neceflary to miflead tne curiofity of Mrs, Wansford, who believed her going to make one of her charitable vifits at the ? 5 cottage.
cottage. Marchmont was impatiently ex¬ pecting her; and fhe was let into the hall unperceived by any of thofe whofe obfervation fhe defired to avoid. The comfortlefs ftate in which he had now fo long remained, and anxiety which every hour increafed, had occa¬ fioned, even fince Althéa parted with him the preceding night, a great altera¬ tion in the appearance of the unfortu¬ nate young man.—His eyes were hol¬ low and funk, his face pale, and Aithea thought he feemed perfonally to fuffer, though he did not complain. He ad- drefled her with a melancholy folemnity, thanked her for this additional proof of her goodnefs of heart, and then faid— " It is not fit, Mifs Dacres, that fo un¬ fortunate a being as I am fhouid trefpafs thus on that goodnefs. Since I had the honour of feeing you laft, 1 have tho¬ roughly confidered my fituation; and I have determined to fubmit to the igno¬ miny of it no longer.—If fuch are the laws
laws of my country, that from even an unoffending debtor as í am, nothing will fatisfy thofe laws but that I fhould termi¬ nate my life in prifon, there will be lefs difgrace furely in yielding to rny deftiny, than there is in the mifery of thus fliifting from place to place—a burden to the few who have humanity to be interefted for me—a burden to myfelf, " My mother, my dear unhappy mo¬ ther ! will fubmit with fortitude when flie knows the worft, and knows it to be unavoidable. To inevitable evils they iay that the human mind moft eafily ac¬ commodates itfelf; and when I am con¬ fined fhe will learn, that our refiftance is vain, and that our projects are at an end. She will be wretched, I know, but uncer¬ tainty and folicitude will be no more. I fhall vet exift—I may fee her and my poor fitters. Perhaps I may find means to fubfift in confinement, as hundreds of others are known to fubfift; and one chance will yet remain, towards which π 6 my
my family may look with hope. At fome· period or other, if humanity fliould touch· the hearts of thofe who have the power, at the inftance of that generous * man< who is the pride and honour ofhis coun¬ try, an aci: of infolvency may teleafe me—releafe me,** added he with a deep- drawn figh, *' to the privilege of being a beggar in the world at large !" Aithea heard him with the deepeft concern, yet was by no means pre¬ pared to controvert his reafoning. After a moments filenee, however, fhe ven¬ tured timidly to enquire whether nothing could be thought of to avoid fo painful, fo fad an experiment, as that of putting himfelf into the hands of thefe pitilefs men, to anfwer no poffible purpofe. ' c Surely/' faid ihe, " your friend M r. E ve r fley might and would affift you.' * For at that moment it occurred to Al¬ théa, that by his means fhe could con-
vey
Vey to Marchmont the pecuniary help fhe wiihed to engage him to accept. " Everfley !" repeated Marchmont, with quicknefs—" No—that cannot be. Everfley is an excellent man. I owe him a thoufand obligations, but they have coft him too dear. I know how much uneafinefs I have been the occa¬ fion of, and nothing on earth ihould in¬ duce me to repeat it—Befides, there are other reafons........ My friend is affluent indeed, 4>ut I do not envy him : Poor fellow ! he is rather an object, of pity. Deftitute as I am, the fate of Everfley excites my compaffion. He does not know, for I had manv rea- fons for my concealment, where I now am." Althéa was on the point of betray¬ ing herfelf, by faying that fhe heard he was in Ireland from Linda Everfley. But recollecting herfelf, fhe continued filent. Marchmont renewed the con¬ verfation,»
verfation. He even forced a languid fmile as he faid— *' And fuppofe that the inveterate ma¬ lignity of thefe men, who, like Shyíock, İnfift upon their bond, which they know I cannot pay—fuppofe it urges them to the greateft extremities ? I am of a race, of which many members have been imprifoned, though not indeed for quite the fame caufe. You recollect, perhaps, a beautiful Uttle piece of poetry*, written by
by a Colonel Richard Lovelace, who was imprifoned^ in the Gate-houfe at Weftminfter for adherence to his un¬ happy mafter. He was the brother of my father's grandmother. He died in great obfeurity, and poverty. My fate and his may probably in many inftances be alike/' Aithea inftantly recollected the lines, and the name of Aithea, b ν which the unfortunate Lovelace celebrates his mif¬ trefs; a coincidence which ftruck her witha thoufand indefcribable fenfations; When I he tangled in her hair, And fetter'd with her eye, Tht birds that wanton in the air Know no fut-h liberty.
ÍHone walls do not a prifon make, Nor ..ran. bais ? cage*. Minds innocent and quiet take That for an hermitage : If I have freedom ? my love, And in my foul am free, Angels alone that foar above Enjoy fuch liberty."
though
though it was, fhe thought, poffible that it was not on account of that coinci¬ dence brought fufward by Marchmont. She felt, however, her cheeks dyed with blufhes ; and to conceal her confufiort fhe pafled lightly over the ??????, and recurred again to Mr. Everfley. €f Since you are fo good," faid fhe, " as to allow me to take an intereft in a fituation which even thofe who have not the pleafure of knowing you mufl lament, fuffer me to confult with Mr. < Everfley. I am no ftranger to the re¬ ftraint he labours under from the un¬ happy temper and narrow prejudices of his wife; but by means ofhis fifter I am fure we may corre fpond on the pofti bi- lity of ferving you, without rendering him liable to her ill-humour.** " I cannot exprefs, Mifs Dacres/* in¬ terrupted Marchmont, " how much I feel your goodnefs; but there are ob¬ jections—invincible, unconquerable ob¬ jections......It is impoflible," added he,
he, " to trouble you with them : but be aflured, that if 1 had any thing to hope from his friendfhip, without committing my friend, I would not hefitate ;—as it is, 2 muft take my refolution, and already I feel that I ought not to have given you the concern I have done. I am confeious that I have acted wrong—and yet, perhaps s if I dared relate at length the circumftances that have led me into this, the narrative might, to fuch a mind as yours, plead my apology." '* None is neceflary, Sir," faid Al¬ tlica in a low voice ; " 1 beg you will not think of me, unlefs it be how I can render you any fervice 'm regard to your prefent difficulties. I am very much afraid, from the detention of your fer¬ vant, that they may multiply around you; and I own, my horror of the man, they call Vampyre is fuch, that nothing would give me more pain than that he fliould make another vifit here more fuc- ccfsful than the laft." " For
" For that reafon,** replied March¬ mont, " it were on all accounts wifer to meet, rather than to await the evil; and I truft I have, by reflection, fo far fub- dued the rage and indignation that this villanous fellow ufed to excite, that I fliall calmly acquiefce in an inevitable misfortune, without too much confider¬ ing the infamous agent." " Surely,** faid. Althéa, " it would be better were you- to attempt efcaping to the continent till forne fettlement can be brought about. I think I have heard you have relations in France?" *· Yes,** anfwered Marchmont ; <c a branch of my family are naturalized there. But if you confider, Madam, the anceilors from whom the Baron de La- vergnac is defcended, you will imme¬ diately conclude, that if he ftill remains on his eftate, of which I have many doubts, it is but little in his power to afford protection to a ftranger—and a uranger, whofe country alone would now render
render him liable to imprifonment. And whether I am to pafs my life in the Fleet, or the Abbaye— whether I am to exift under the tyranny of Robefpierre, or a victim to the chicanery of Vampyre, feems to me a matter fo immaterial, that it ought not to induce me to crofs the water to embrace the one, or efcape the other. Indeed I have another objec¬ tion, which is, that by going to the Baron de Lavergnac, admitting it were poffible to reach him, I ihould, perhaps, difturb the fecurity which, from his age and re¬ tired habits of life, it is poflible he may have been able to preferve, notwith¬ ftanding his decided abhorrence of the prefent rulers in France. It is now fo many months fince I have heard of him, or any part of his family, that perhaps while I fpeak of them they exift no longer. His fon was in Spain when I had the laft news of them. His grand- fon, a young man of two-and-twenty, had, till then, remained at Lavergnac: but
but notwithftanding all the inducements» he had to continue at home, the anxious folicitude of the venerable old Baron, the agonizing fears of a mother who< adores him, and probably uVtender and feducing affection of a very lovely young woman, to whom he was feven or eight months ago on the point of being united % notwithftanding all thefe ties, I cannot but believe my younger relation has either joined his father, or found means to get into Italy or Germany. Would I knew where he is ! I had rather join him, though our principles do not exact¬ ly accord, than wander about without any fixed purpofe, or give to the kind- hearted old Baron another caufe of an¬ xiety.......But indeed/' continued Marchmont, after a fliort paufe, tt togo· into the army as he is probably gone is in every man's power; and if my mo- ther could be prevailed upon to hear cf it with patience, why fhould it not be in mine?' 1 Altlica,
Althéa, from a certain uncomfortable feeling about her heart, doubted whether even the rifk of long impnfonment was not preferable. The longer this con¬ ference lafted, the lefs profpect there ap¬ peared ofher being able to execute thofe friendly projects on which fhe had me¬ ditated before they met: yet, while her hopes of being inftrumental in faving him giew fainter, her wifhes that fhe might do fo acquired new force; and notwithftanding all there was to fear fliould his prefent abode become known to Sir Audley, fhe could not without extreme pain think of his delivering him¬ felf to the mercilefs men who purfued him. His uncertainty whither to go s if he could for a while efcape them; the fituation of every part ofhis own family, who in times more tranquil would have protected him; the unfeeling dereliction of his relations on the fide of his mother, who had fo much the power to befriend him; even the fortitude to which he endeavoured
endeavoured to give the appearance of calm indifference, while he prepared to meet the deftiny which awaited him; all combined to increafe the intereft Al¬ théa took in that deftiny. And why fliould it be concealed that the greateft, perhaps the only error he was guilty of, had no power to weaken this intereft ? Marchmont, far from faying it, did not certainly even acknowledge to himfelf, that the ftrangenefs of his comfortlefs fituation, as far as related to his con¬ cealment at Eaftwoodleigh, was íather fought for on his part than avoided : and though he knew every circurnftance relative to Althéa's fortune, and thai nothing was lefs likely ever to be within the reach of poffibility, than that he could be liftened to as a lover; yet fo far had the flrength of thofe impreffions he had received in their former inter¬ views got the better of his reafon, thai he could not forbear availing himfelf of an
an opportunity to be near her—and adding to all the other misfortunes of his life, that of indulging a paffion which he knew ought not to be fuccefsful. When he had firft confented to hide himfelf among the fecret paflages ofhis paternal houfe, he perfuaded himfelf that he had no purpofe in concealment but to efcape from his perfecutors, and to contemplate,without her having any idea of his being near her, this charming girl, in the exercife of all thofe virtues, of which he had already heard fo much even before the grateful loquacity of Mrs. Mofely had made her the confiant fubject of panegyric. Marchmont ima¬ gined that it was poffible to confider hei¬ as fome being of a fuperior order, alto¬ gether out of his reach, but whofe benefi¬ cence and beauty it was gratifying to con¬ template. Confeioufnefs of the impro¬ priety ofhis being thus concealed under the fame roof, was only an additional inducement to the ftrict vigilance he otherwife
otherwife meant to obferve. He was fure of Wansford as lonç as he could pay him, nor indeed had he any rea¬ fon to doubt his honeftv or huma- nity; and he had almoft exhaufted his laft refource to inflame, by the moil powerful of all arguments, his natural averfion to attorneys, and the particular antipathy he knew Vampyre muft create wherever he appeared. For fomc time he had refolution enough to adhere to the condu6t he had determined upon; and for a while, the drearinefs of his con¬ finement, amidft the rigours of winter, was fweetened by a tranfient view of Aithea from a window, by hearing her voice in the fpacious paflages, as ftie came into the deferted building, or by catching at a diftance its fweeter found, as fhe fang to her own playing amid the filenee of a ftill evening. But infen¬ fibly he found, that the more he in¬ dulged this growing attachment, the more importunate were its demands ; and when,
when in confequence of lier alarm aiifmg from the fight of his dog, fhe for fome drivs forbore to renew her walks in the gallery, his concealment became fo in¬ tolerable to him, that he was on the point of leavmg it ; but Ahhea appeared again, and again the defolate apaitments which he had fomtith reafon to contem¬ plate with an aching heart, appeared to him to be irradiated by the prefence of an aiiücl. ? E lib faithful terrier, which had onlv once broke from the command lie had ovci it, was then moie ftrictly kept to bib obedience; and Marchmont finding that Aithea refumed her fohtaiy exer¬ cife, determini d to be fo much on his guard, that nothing fliould betray him, while he might flill be giatified by the pleafuie of healing bei fpeak, ot even bv a ddtant view as fhe pafled the end of the paflages into which he had the means of looking a> he lay hid. For this Vol. IL 1 purpofe
purpofe he had on the day he was dif¬ covered taking his fiadon in a room whither he knew the legends of Mrs. Mofely would prevent her coming. The circurnftance of the children's playingin a clofet which had a window looking into it, he could not fore fee: the alarm (which be dillmctly heard) once given, nimibcrlefs reafons, or what appeared to be reafons, concurred to determine him on appearing. The abfence of his fervant indeed made it a matter of fclf- prefervation; but that alone would pro¬ bably have influenced him lefs than the fear of having terrified Aithea, and of feeing her no more ; while her kind¬ nefs in regard to his mother and fillers, of which Mrs. Mofely had informed him; the generous pby fhe had ex¬ preflcd when they met in the park at Capelftoke; her general character, and, in fhort, an impulfe too ftrong to be re- fiiied, were united to conquer all his prudent
prudent refolutions, and determined him to throw himfelf at her feet. In the firft converfation that followed, the tender compaffion whieli fhe feemed to feel for him, and the ingenuous con¬ fidence fhe placed in him, were but too well calculated to increafe a paffion, which, as he never intended to fpeak of it to its object, he indulged becaufe he thought it could hurt nobody but him¬ felf. This feeond interview had nearly overcome his refolution ; and nothing but reflecting on the cruelty and ingra¬ titude of giving pain to that bofo .11 which already felt fo keenly for him as a friend, could have deterred him from following, with fomc more pofitive decla¬ ration of his fentiments, what half invo¬ luntarily efcaped him about Colonel Lovelace. While he yet fpoke to Al¬ théa, or liftened to her compaffionate propofals, his heart fmote him for the concern he had thus inflicted on her. 1 2 But
But it was now too Lite to recede ; yet fo uncertain was he what he ought to do, or indeed could do, that after a cotncr- fation of near two hours they parted, without having come to any deteimina- tion, except that Aithea fliould that evening let Wamfoid know fhe was ac¬ quainted with Marchmonts conceal¬ ment, concert with him the means of fupplying him vwih neceffary foud, and confult with him by whdt means Fen¬ church could be tiaced—for nociicum- ilance was í o aíanmng as his abfence. Akhea, after fome debate, at length be¬ lieved ihe had convinced Marchmont that he ought yet to dela) any final de¬ termination for a few days. They then, with viLble reluctance on the fide of Marchmont, and with almoft equal, though ftifled concern on that oi Aithea, parted for the day—but not till fhe had engaged to leave for him in the ftoie- room of their hoft fome books, with which he might beguile the long, long hours
hours of his iinprifonmcnt î for every horror that prefent anguifh, or recol¬ lection of the paft, could accumulate, returned lipon him the moment he had clofed the door of the hali after Akhea.
ï 3 CHAP.
CHAP. VUL
Why, Courage then!—What cannot be avoided, •Twere childiih weaknef* to lament or fear!
required fome contrivance on the part of Aithea to obtain a long confer¬ ence with Wansford without the know¬ ledge of his wife. She effected it, how¬ ever, and with hefitation and reluctance difclofed to him the knowledge flie had gained of Marchmont's conceal¬ ment. Aithea was, unft ruinatei) perhaps for her, a great reader of countenances—■ decidedly a difciple of Lavatcr's ; fhe fancied that, as far as her fmall know¬ ledge of the world allowed her to judge, his
IT
his feience was by no means fo chime- ficai or ill ufi ve as Sir Audley and many other men of the world held it to be; and fhe believed fhe had often difco¬ vered the thoughts of thofe with whom fhe converfed, when they leaft intended flie fliould have any idea of them. At¬ tentive therefore to tbe expretfion of the man's face to whom flie was now talking, fhe imagined, amidft all the re¬ fpect he expreifed for her, that there was a lurking fneer, when he found how well flie was acquainted with March¬ mont's hiftory, and how much intereft flie evidently took in it. This might be, and probably was, fancy; but Al¬ thca felt mortified and uneafv. She failed not to recollect how grofs are the apprehenfions of the lower ranks of people, and that, e\ en w ith greater pre¬ cipitance than influences thofe but a little above them in ftation (and often not at all more refined in underftand¬ ing), they decide, that it is impoflible 1 4 two
two young people of different icvlh can converfe together otherwife than as lo ve is. To obviate this impreffion, which fiie faw, or believed flie faw, that Wans¬ ford entertained, Λ ίι1:οα fpoke with pe¬ culiar earneftnefs on the ncccflhy of Marchmont's going; to which Wans¬ ford heartily afleiued.— c * Aye, my dear young lady !" faid he, u you doitt know half the dangei. 1 heard laft night that Vampyre was at 'p****·**^ which is, you know, but iewen miles off, or fo—* and what can a want there? I don't know, for my part, what's to be done! The poor young man cannot be hid much longer, that's for cci tain; but if he offers for to go—ah! he'll be taken by fome of that old villain's followers, as f u re as I am Î." As all this was not more than the fears of Aithea had already fuggefted to her, foe did not fuffer any new alarm to miflead La fiom every enquiry thaw fhe
flie thought might give her light as to what was the beft courfe for her un¬ happy friend. Wansford had too ftrong¬ ly marked the common traits in his cha¬ racter, í le loved money, and hated tricking attorneys ; for he had owed to the chicane of one of that defcription that he had been turned out of his farm. His avarice thus counteracted, the ho¬ neft feelings of humanity had room for their influence; and though he might have made money by betraying his un- tortunate gucft to his purfuers, he re¬ fitted the temptation, and was eagerly anxious for his fafety. Althéa, who had the faculty, uncom¬ mon at her age, of reading the fenti- ments of thofe wuh whom fhe con¬ verfed, faw, with fa d sfa8 ion, that Wans¬ ford might be depended upon ; fhe there- foie entrufted him, though not without much hefitation and confufion, with her wiihes as to affording to Marchmont fuch pccunhiy affiftanee as might enable ï 5 him
him to quit his prefent comfortlefs abode, and convey himfelf out of the reach of his perfecutors. At the mention of this Aithea thought fhe faw all thofe half-formed fufpicions arife in the mind of Wansford, which flie wa& fo unwilling he ihoulcl harbour. He found it difficult to imagine, that a young lady or any other perfon vvould give their money without iome parti¬ cular liking to thofe on whom it was beftowed. Of that intereft which com¬ paffion for his fingular fituation, or mere friendfhip, could raife in his favour, Wansford was incapable of forming any notion. Whatever were his ideas, he endeavoured carefully to conceal them, and told Akhea that he thought he could, by means of Mrs. Mofely, con¬ vey to Marchmont whatever flie defired, without his knowing from whence it came. She directed him to proceed to do fo with the utmoft circumfpection ; and having thus done all that was at prefent
prefent poflible, flic endeavoured to quiet her fpirits, and to think of other fubject s befides the merits, fufferings and danger of Marchmont. But her tranquillity had been too much diftutbed, and her imagination too much affected. Secluded fo long from all fociety and every fcene of adive life, the ftrange circumftances under wdiich fhe found hcrfelf had doubly the power to affect her, whiie to the firft favour¬ able impreflion fhe had received of Marchmont was added all that intereft which pity could excite in a generous mind. However earneftly fhe tried to check fuch thoughts, fhe could not help fometimes regretting (what had never given her ari ν concern before) the fmali¬ nefs of her fortune, and reflecting on the happinefs it would afford whoever had the power to refcue from his fad deftiny a young man of fo much merit. To her flie knew he never could owe this obligation, yet flie felt a comfortlefs ι 6 fenfation
fenfation when flie endeavoured to wiih that he might receive it from another.— Two days now pafled, in which fhe knew nothing but what flie gueffed from the nods and ill rugs of Wansford, who cither could not or would not find an opportunity of converting with her.— He was abfent twice during that tune, and Aithea concluded he was fettling iomething to effect her prefent purpofe with Dame Mofely. In the afternoon, however, of the thiid day of her fufpenfe, fhe faw him under her window, which, on the figns he made, fhe haftily opened. lie gave into her hands a letter. Akhea did not know the hand ; but the countenance and manner of the man awakened fo much appichenfion, that íhe had hardly courage to read it.- — Cailiug her eyes on the fignaure at the bottom, fhe faw tiie name oi March¬ mont, and trembled as flie ran over the following lines-------- *' Madam,
" Madam, " Every hour, fince I firft dared to intrude myfelf and my forrows upon your notice, has increafed my refpect and admiration, by affording me fome new inftance of an exalted mind and an excellent heart ; but the laft proof you have given of your gencrofity calls upon me for all my gratitude, though I cannot, 1 dare not accept it. " Notwithftanding the contrivances of the poor old woman nt the cottage, and my friend Wansford, 1 know the oífe r I have received of pecuniary af¬ fiftanee could come only from you. I will not enter on the reafons that ab¬ folutely forbid iny accepting it; Mifs Dacres is too candid to impute it to ill-placed pride, when I picfume to add, that if ihe can, in any \\'¿y not pre¬ judicial to herfelf, bcfncnd my dear unhappy mother, my young and unpro¬ tected fifteis, flie will find that the Marchmonts
Marchmonts are not too proud to be grateful. ** Alas! Madam, thofe victims to mis¬ fortune can never more than now want your pity—for I muft leave England. The fon, the brother whom they fondly wiihed to retain in the fame country (though he has long been deprived of the power of protecting or fupponing them), mult yield at iait to an inevitable evil, and make his election between im- prifonment and exile. " I prefer the latter—for Mifs Dacres condefcended to give her opinion that it was the moil advifable. There is no time to hefitate, for the fiend who par¬ ities me is again animated to my dc- ftruction. My faithful fervant Fen¬ church has efcaped by fomething like a miracle from the toils this wretch laid for him, and, as good is fometimes de¬ rived from evil, has, in his flight, dif¬ covered a means of my getting from hence by fea —and the opportunity is likely
likely to offer fo foon, that I fhall quit my paternal prifon in the middle of the approaching night, and conceal myfelf in a place on the fhore well known to me in happier days ; from whence, with the tide at noon, a boat is engaged to carry me oh board a veffel bound to Guernfey: from thence I ihall crofs to France, and endeavour to diicover what is become of the ? iron dc Lavergnac and his family—to whom it is poffible I may be ufe ful. *· I would refrain from expreffing, becaufe I am confeious that I ought to do it, the pain I feel at the idea of feeing you no more. I am not fo weak and vain as to prcfume on the kindnefs you have condescended to fhew me. I know I owe it only to the tendernefs and humanity of your nature^ nor am I capable of forgetting the diftance to which fortune has thrown me, from all I might once have afpircd to. Perhaps you ought not to forgive me the ufelefs weaknefs
weaknefs of owning, that thus to reprefs fenuments which under other circum¬ ftances it wouid have been the pride and glory of my life to avow, is among the moft fevere of thofe trials to which my defliny condemns me. '* I fubmit, however—for 1 have no right to hazard giving a moment's pain to others ; I fubmit—but will not that generofity I am already fo greatly obliged to, pardon me for afking, even, though it cannot perhaps grant, the only favour I will now venture to folicit? " It is, that before I take a long, per¬ haps a lafl leave of my country, I may fee the only friend who is within my reach.—(My mother, my fitters are afar off!)—Is it too prefumptuous if i name Mifs Dacres as that friend? if I en¬ treat her, to allow me to attempt ex- preffing by words all that gratitude I owe her—and to recommend to her the dear unhappy family I leave? Bcl'cve me, Madam, J never will intrude upon ycu
you again ; but it will mitigate the an- guifti which 1 feel when I confider how I have left them, if I can affine myfelf that they have fo great an alleviation as jour humanity can bedow—and if you will deign to fee me before I get into the boat which is to carry me from this now inhofpitable fhore, my poor mother, opprefled with too many for¬ rows already, will at leaft know from you that I departed with fortitude ; and to her you will appear as a guardian angel, whofe prefence and whofe wiihes íhall fecure the fafety of her fon. " The information Fenchurch has brought me, as well as what I have re¬ ceived to-day from Wansford, convinces mc diat Ili fk much by remaining ano¬ ther night beneath this roof. If I did, 1 dare not again folicit an interview here, but to-morrow the tide does not allow me to depart from my wild retreat on the fhore till about twelve o'clock ;— it is little more than a mile and a half from
from this place. Wansford tells me his eldeft girl knows tbe road.—Ah 1 Mifs Dacres ! I am confeious how little right I have to afk fuch a favour of you ; but if your goodnefs extends fo far as to forgive my prefumption and indulge my weaknefs, be aflured I fhall efteem fuch an obligation greater than any of thofe I already owe you. There may be im¬ propriety in your granting me fuch a requeft; but if you knew how many reafons combine to make me aik it, how grateful I fhall be, and how much fuch condefcenfion will foften the feverìty of my defHny—I dare venture to believe you would not refufe it.— Ah! Madam! . were it poflible to convince you of the veneration, the refpect I feel for yoar virtues, you would not fufpect that I would aflc what would be derogatory to that gemle dignity, which is one among the thoufand graces that fur- round you. I et me not, however, adopt a ftyle which müy offend, even from
from its fincerity. I know not how to conclude, though confeious I have faid too much. Allow me to affure vou of the gratitude and efteem with which I muft ever be, " Madam, " Your moft devoted fervant, " Edward-Armyn Marchmont." The thoughts of Aithea were never fo confufed as after the hafty perufal of this letter. Indeed fhe read it in fuch diforder of fpirits, that, when fhe came to the end, fhe hardly underftood what was its purpofe ; and it v\ as not before a third perufal that fhe was enabled to confider, with fome degree of ealrnnefs, whether file ought, or could comply with the requeft it con ained. It was impoflible to mi flake the mean¬ ing of thofe half explanatory fentences; or, if they had admitted of any other interpretation, tbe former conduct of Marchmont left little doubt of his at¬ tachment
tachment to her.----- ?????? part fiie had, from their earlieft acquaintance, been confeious of a favourable opinion of him, ν hich, without pretending to combat (becaufe to think well of him was met el/ juilice), fhe had endea¬ voured to confine within the bounds of friendfhip. The objeBions to any more intimate connection between them were infurrnountable ; they never appeared otherwife to Aithea: and fhe had been taught fo well to regulate her mind, that flie was hardly fenfible of the pre¬ ference fhe gave Marchmont over all the men flie had ever İeen, before flie endeavoured to check the wiihes which involuntarily arofe, that he had the for¬ tune poflefled by this or that fafhionable acquaintance of Sir Audley, who neither deferved or knew how to be happy with the great incomes they pofiefled. The very effort not to think of him, but as an unfortunate young man of un¬ common merit, brought him more fre¬ quently
qucntly to her mind. Then occurred the benevolem hope of being able to promote his intereft with her father; and when that hope vaniihed, fhe found herfelf flrangely fixed, by her father's orders, in the very fpot where the mis¬ fortunes of the Marchmont family were continually prefent to her, and where fhe met a faithful chronicler of their virtues. The mcetmg him in this fcene, the perfecution of which he was the obje-t, the comfortlefs ftate he was re¬ duced to, his fordtude and filial tender¬ nefs— dli combined to complete her pre¬ dilection though obftacles to their being ever any other than friends were rather increafed than removed. With all her underftanding and com¬ mand over her reafon, Aithea was ftiil but a woman ; ycung, and poffeflcd of a degree of fenfibility which the attentive friend of her early years had fcen with fomc pain, and invariably endeavoured to correct. To
To her it appeared as ifLMarchmonts having thus taken Íheher4ft his paternal houfe, of which fhe was by fuch odd circumftances become an inmate, was an accident that feemed providentially^or- dered, to engage her friendfhip, and promote his relief. Though no one could be lefs difpofed to that daring violation of the common rules of fociety, which fets at defiance the opinion of the world, yet fhe faw not why fhe fhould fo far enflave herfelf to a narrow pre¬ judice, as to deny that friendfhip to a worthy object, only becaufe he was a young man. She aflced herfelf, why ftie fhould refufe to act otherwife in regard to Marchmont than if he was her bro¬ ther? Her heart accufed her of no ill, nor even any imprudent intention ; and he had, on his part, explicitly declared he had no hopes of engaging more than her utterly friendfhip. This was pro¬ bably the lafl time they fhould ever meet—and fhe enquired of herfelf, what ι woukl
would be her future feelings, if flie fliould hear that this unfortunate young man perifhed far from his family, with¬ out having had an opportunity of fpeak¬ ing to one friend, before his departure, of all that muft neceflarily lay on his heart in regard to the mother and filters from whom he was driven ? Befides, as he refufed the pecuniary affiftanee which Wansford had awkwardly betrayed to him her intention of offering, flie could not be eafy without knowing how he had obtained what made that affiftanee uimeceflary. The lafl queftion Ahhea made in this monologue was, how Mrs. Trevyllian would have ordered her to act, could fhe know of the circum¬ ftances flic was in?—and recalling to her mind the univerfal benevolence of her aunt's mind ; her difdain of thofe narrow and grofs prejudices which often check the innocent and honeft purpofes of the heart; and again repeating that Marchmont could never be to her other than
than a brother, the queftion was finally decided, and flie determined to go. Nothing then remained but for her to contrive the means of letting him know it immediately. For this pur¬ pofe fhe fought Wansford ; whom luckily meeting alone, as he either was or pre¬ tended to be fettling his farm accounts, flie wrote a fhort note to Marchmont, which was foon conveyed to him.— Wansford, returning, was about to tell her at what hour his perfecutcd gucft was to depart iu the night, and much other intelligence, which Althéa cer¬ tainly defired to have; but as his wife was heard at that moment to come in from the village, all he had time to fay was, that his eldeft girl ihould be or¬ dered to fhew her in the morning to the head-land, under which was the con¬ cealment of Marchmont.—** You had better, Madam," faid he, " tell the child that you can find your way back ; and fend her away. Indeed, if you come along
along upon the fhore, you will fee Mai- bourne church juft upon the brow, a f quarter of a mile ot foj and if you keep up towards it, you can't mifs the path that brings you over the fields on the left, for you prefently get a fight of Eaftwoodleigh." Althéa, who thought a great deal more of the interview with Marchmont than how fhe fliould herfelf return home from fo ihort a walk affured Wansford flie could eafily find her way back, and then left him—trembling at the idea of her having given a promife, yet not wifhing to revoke it. For fomc hours, fleep abfolutely re¬ fufed to befriend her. The vague in¬ telligence fhe had received, as well from Marchmont's letter as from the obfcure hints of Wansford, imprefled her with dread. She imagined that the fatellites of the brutal Vampyre lurked round the houfe, and that, even amidft the darknefs of the night, Marchmont would Vol. IL a find
find ií diílicult to efcape. Full of thefe fears, ihe liftened .o every node—at. d imagined more tiv. n ftie heard. A low wmd fig bed along the paflages, and íhook at intervals the great old laih ha" <,s of her window—then funk en¬ tirely away; an f !, in the flill paufe that followed, íhe fancied there w eie per¬ fons pafling flow U' and lightly beneath, among the weeds and grafs which co¬ vered what had once been a great court¬ yard. Startled at this idea, fhe left her bed, and went to the window : but the night, though without rain, w<b dark, and fhe could not difcern even the remains of two lions cut in ftone, which (having once been placed o\cr the gieat gates) were left among other maíies of ftone-work when the iron was fold, and, from their being white, were diftinguifhable when darker objetts were loft in obfeurity. Still a fancied noife tormented her—it might, however, bc the footfteps of Marchmont himfelf and his
iitsfaithful fervant.—" Ah!" thought flie, u what a comfort it would be to know he was fafe ! To-morrow I may, per¬ haps, be fatisfied—but how many hours mufl iirll pafi!" She now opened the window flowly; but nothing appeared, nor was any found heaid, favo the owls, who inha¬ bited, in great number, the old barns and ruined offices which weie on the other fide of tlie manfion. Attracted bv the light in Althéa's window, one of them flowly vw'Ktod its way round the building, and piflcd very near her.— She fhuddered, not from any abfolute fear, hu<- from the uneafv fenfation that anv animal, to which iupc.-ftirion has attached the notion of being ill-omened) gives even to minds the moil free from its influence. But Alth?a, after fomc reflection, imagining that the füllen whifpcr of its heavy wings might have Veen the noife that <- armed her, clofed κ ζ die
the window, and once more retired to her bed. The dawn, however, found her watch* ing its approach with an anxious and uneafy mind. Before the uiual hour fhe wem down to her brcakfafl; Mrs. Wansford, who attended with it, faid her hufband had gone out ve t y early upon bufinefs, and had told her that Nancy was to be ready at eight o'clock to ihew Mifs Dacres the neat eft way to Hafcombe-Strand.— Althéa found that the good woman, who had not been ac¬ cuftomed to fee things otherwife than they were represented to her by thofe about her, made no remark on this un¬ ufual walk; and, again half-doubting whether fhe ought to go, yet impatient to fet out, haftened her Hule con¬ duciréis, and began her expedition. She now found herfelf at a greater diftance from Eaftw r oodleigh than flie had ever been on the fide next the fea, and
and on the other fide the cottage had hitherto limited her walks. The way was through lanes bounded by elms, which, though not yet in full leaf, were ib clofely interwoven in the bank with a luxurious growth of holly, that nothing was to be feen beyond them—till on a fudden the road, afcending a fteep hol¬ low way, opened to a kind of common field, forming the top of a high pro¬ montory, commanding an immenfe ex¬ tent of fea, aud, for many miles, the indented cliffs of the weftern coaft.— Such was its elevation, that Aithea had no notion how it was poffible to de- fcend to the water. With anxious eyes foe forvcyed tbe expanfe of ocean ; it was incLcd a " flrp'efs fira," neither boat nor any lai ger velici was to be fcen, and íhe feared the people Man lb mont had expected might have difap¬ pointed him. The child now fhewed her a narrow and rugged defcent, made by cutting
the red clay and ftones, of which the cliffs are here compofed, into a fort of rude fteps. Here Aithea dihi i fled her guide, bidding her return immediately home ; and then, with lefs fear than flic might at another time have felt, de¬ fcended to the margin of the fea. C n reaching it, fhe found herfelf under an almoft mural range of rocks, compofed of dark earth, and broad ftrata of reddifiVcoIoured ftones. horizontally arranged, as if by the hands of man. The place where flie had defcended feemed the only practicable part; for a lutie farther on the height became tremend¬ ous, and the face oİ the rock perpen¬ dicular towards the top, while beneath it was eaten by the water into deep caverns; from one of thcfc flic expected to fee Marchmont appear—but, for fome time, flie looked around her in vain. Vaft m a fles, fallen from the cliffs, were fcatterccl between them and the water at the tide of ebb. Widi the tide of
of flood, thefe pieces, worn into gro- tefque and giant fhapes, were half- covered by the waves. Already the rifing water broke rippling round ¡be moil remote craggs—to tneir rude fur- face, clauw, li'iipets, and mufcles ad¬ hered, ïuiiong tbc fea- weed that gie*.«/ ftreaming about them. All was wild, folitary, and gloomy ; the low murmur of the water formed a fort of accom¬ paniment to tbe cries of the fand-pipcr, the puffi ti-aibk ; while the fi reaming gull, and the boarfe and heavy cormo¬ rant, were heaid, at intervals, flill louder, Aithea, as fhe fat on ι frag¬ ment of flone, furveying the fcene and liitcning to thefe noifes, could have fancied herfelf thrown by fliipwrcck on fomc duen coaft, where ihe was left to folitude and defpair. The tide rofe flowly in fo calm a morning, yet it was now fo high, that it feemed certain the hour could not bc far off when Marchmont ex- K 4 pected
pected the boat. Again fhe feared fomc difappointment, fome accident; and, quitting her rugged feat, went on to¬ wards a part wheie the view along the finds was lefs impeded by broken rocks. Two perfons foon after appeared, one of whom fhe knew to be Marchmont. As foon as he perceived Althéa, he fprang forward to meet her; while the other perfon, who was, flie thought, hij» fervant, retired oní of fight.
CHAP,
CHAP. IX.
Lcco quel liero iílante !
ÍN iippioaching Ahhea, the various emotions that agitated the mind of Marchmont were vifible on his coun¬ tenance and manner.—" How very good you are, Mifs Dacres, thus to honour me !" laid he—'* But I muft not attempt to cxprefs my gratitude; indeed to do fo is out of my power:—I am afraid I have made you wait ?—I ought to account for fuch an additional intru¬ sion on vour time and humanity— but the boat w lue h is to take me from hence, perhaps for ever, will ?. 5 very
very foon be here: I lave directed it to wait for me behind thofe project¬ ing rocks," His hefitation, the confufed and un¬ eafy manner in which he uttered thefe abrupt fentences, and the anguifh fo un¬ equivocally marked on his countenance, deeply affected Aithea. She trembled, and knew not what to reply. Afraid of expreffmg all fhe felt, yet equally afraid of appearing cold and repulfive by her filenee, fhe meditated how to avoid either; but Marchmont, after paufing a moment, proceeded : " I foliated this honour, Madam, that, in taking my laft adieu of my na¬ tive country, I might——Pardon me Ι¬ Ι hardly know what I would fay ! My fate, however fevere it has appeared to me, never till now was fo I >j· up-portable! It is no time for diffimulation; yet I am but too fenfible, that when I diflimulate no longer, I ri ík the forfeiture of the lafl hope I have on earth. Can you, ought
ought you to forgive the prefumption of a man, who dares to avow his ad¬ miration, his love? knowing that he ought not to expect any return—and that his hazarding to fpeak, may defervedly fubject him 10 the lofs ofthat generous fnendfhip with which you have ho¬ noured him ?" All the courage that Aithea had been collecting w ?? infufficicnt to enable her to ai acuiate an anfwer. — It was now to bc decided, whether flic fhould for ever relinquiih an aflcthon which fhe had infenfibly chenfhed for fo many months, and ro the indulgence of which nothing could be oppofed but mere worldly prudence, or avow thofe fentiments that were the natural effects of uncommon merit on an ingenuous and generous mind— fentiments whicn, however fhe might endeavour to conceal them, were too deeply imprefled ever to be effaced. Marchmont was indeed poor—a fugi¬ tive, and an exile ; but, was he there- is. 6 foie
Fore lefs eftimable? —The caufes of his poverty and diftrefs rendered him in¬ finitely more refpecìable —and was it for her to drive him from her. merelv becaufe he poffeffed not thofe pecu¬ niary advantages which flie contemned? Could fhe bid him go with an impref- fion that her heart was mercenary and narrow?—Could fhe fay, '* You arc un¬ worthy of my regard, becaufe you are poor : your merit, your birth are no¬ thing, for ƒ know no real advantages but money?" It was true, that to en¬ courage his paffion would be imprudent in the opinion of the world ; but, had not her father taught her to renounce the world—while, in fending her from it, and bamfhing her his houfe, he had left her without any connection to attach her, any duty to fulfil? All thefe thoughts paffed with rapidity through her mind—they were lefs overwhelm¬ ing, becaufe many of them had been canvafled before ; but far from yet having
having the power to cxprefs even that part of her fenrimcnts which fhe had determined not j difguife, fhe awaited with a palpitating heart for the con- clufion of what Marchmont had to fay, who, apparently encouraged by her man¬ ner, after a fliort paufe, went on------- " I know, lovelicfl Mifs Dacres, all the circumftances of your fituation — I know that to avoid a dctefled marriage you fubmittcd to the melancholy fe¬ clufion of Eaftwoodleigh—and í am well aware, that Fortune has been as nig¬ gardly ofher favours to you, as Nature has been bountiful. God forbid that 7 fliould aik you to fhare fuch a deftiny as mtiie ! —I have alrcadv felt too fe¬ verely, in the perfons of thofe I moft love, all the humiliations and inconve¬ niences of indigence, to entertain fuch a thought as that of your becoming a party. If the definition of true love be, that it prefers the real good of its ob¬ ject to every other confideration, I dare aflert
alfert that 1 feel its rnoít powerful in¬ fluence.—Yet, may 1 not hope to be fpared the cruel neceflity of ι eli ncjui fil¬ ing ail profpect of hearing from you ? — of being accounted, whatever may bc my deftiny, among the numbet of your friends? I will not, hou ever, a fleet to fay, that I never mean to afk more than your friendfhip. Whatever may hi¬ therto have been my difappoint ments, a man of my age ought not to defpair— happier fortune may yet give him hopes of afpiring to your favour. But I moil folemnly aflure you, I will never in¬ trude upon your pity till thofe better profpects ihall open to me ; and if, be¬ fore that time arrives, ibmc enviable man, in a fituation more worthy of you, fhould be deemed defet ving v, our fa¬ vour, the unfortunate Marchmont fhall never be heard to interrupt your fe¬ licity with his complaints." Aithea now took courage to fay, in a low voice— f< Alas! Sir, to what can our
our correfpondoncc tend, but to render us both unhappy?" " If it will have that effect on you," cried Marchmont, eagerly interrupting her, <r I renounce my hopes : but for mc—Ah! I have, till this moment, had ihe prefumption to flatter myfelf..... Yes ! I did believe that the generofity of which I have had fo many proofs would have been extended to this lafl inftance of pity and regard. It will foften to me the horrors of that cruel exile which is the only alternative to a prifon;—it will give me courage to en¬ dure a life that I have been fometimes half-tempted to efcape from. To you, deareft Mifs Dacres, how can it be in¬ jurious?—If the unfortunate object of your compaffion is indifferent to you, your peace cannot be difturbed by this act of humanity—If he be not .... but 1 dare not hope it." Ahhea, in increafed diftrefs, knew not what to fay : to refufe feemed inhu¬ man—
man-—to confent, imprudent,- —March¬ mont faw flie hefitated, —He puifued his argument with all the ardour kni him by the hope of fuccefs. He re¬ presented that, whenever fhe found any inconvenience from the receipt of his letters, flie might deprive him of the happinefs of correfponding with her— that flie was accountable to nobody, fince Sir Audley gave himfelf no trouble to direct her.—He then went on to fay ------ u Of the perfon, Madam, vriio pic- fumes to folicit fuch a favour of you, it is fit you fliould know what has been the courfe ofhis days. Allow me, ftnce I may never again, or not for a very long time, enjoy the happinefs I am now admitted to—allow me to relate the fhort hiftory of my life fince I have been a wanderer in the world. To a mind like that which you poíicfs, I am perfuaded that to have endured adverfity with fome degree of refolution will not appea;
appear lefs meritorious, than not to have abided profperity." Althéa, whofe agitation this prelude was calculated to increafe, did not truft her voice with an anfwer; but fhe feemed willing to give her attention to what he propofed relating-------and Marchmont thus proceeded : " I believe you have heard from my friend Everfley, and perhaps fince from the poor old fervant, the former cir¬ cumftances of a family lefs fortunate than known. I will not dwell on the confequence and fortune it once pof¬ feffed ; for Jùme experience and many mortifications have done away what I was once taught to eherifh—pride, on account of tht days that are gone. —- The moft painful pari of a life, of which none has \et been very fortunate, was that when I faw my father vainly ft nig¬ gling with the preffure of adverfity; and, towards the clofe of his life, facrificing his own cafe and quiet, which he might in
in a great meafure have poffeffed, in the hope of preferving for me the remain¬ ing part of my patrimony, and that great houfe of which you are now an inha¬ bitant. I faw the hopelcffnefs of the attempt—I knew, that if to fave the ??? of our fortune bad been poflible, í hoy could never have enabled me to live at Eaftwoodleigh. But my poor fa¬ ther heard all my temarles on this fub¬ ject, whenever he fuffered it to be dif- cuffed, with fomething like refentment at my want of what he thought proper and laudable ambition ; and it became a point of duty, that I fliould remain a filent though wretched fpectator of the Sifyphean labour to which his tender¬ nefs for me condemned him.------it was under a fort of diflimulation of ny i^al purpofe that í obtained pcruiiîîion of him to go, about two v cars fince, to France. When I was theie, I thought that a favourable profpett opened for mv entering into bufincfi» at ßuuideaux; buc
but two things were neceflary—my fa- thei 's confent, and fonie money—neither of which ï had much hope of pro¬ curing. However the change of ideas, which was then rapidly making progrefs in France, helped greatly to facilitate my fcheme. The Baron de Lavergnac, notwithflanding the principles of his fa¬ mily and the habits of his life, was rea¬ fonable enough to liflen to my argu¬ ments ; and he not only offered me his purfe and his credit, but undertook to conquer the prejudices of my father. He in a great degree fucceeded; I u as received into an eminent mercantile houfe at Bourdeaux. You knowhowthe Revolution in France, which at its be¬ ginning wore, 1 thought, a more au« fpicious appearance, has overturned in its progrtL the piofpcrity of trade, which it affected to enlarge and to protect; the houfe, into which I bad b en re¬ ceived as one of the younger partners, and whofe commerciai intereft I thought myfclf
myfelf likely to promote hy my Enghfh connections, was one of the firft that was fwept away in the increafing tem¬ peft.—-! returned to England, without any other advantage than that of having acquired fuch an additional knowledge of a language I was before a tolerable proficient in, that I might perhaps pafs as well for a native of France as of England." " Alasi I came back, dif Appointed myfelf, to witnefe the more bitter dis¬ appointments of my ???? lather—who, during ray abfence, had been making new efforts, every one of ivhich was eventually injurious not only to his temporary tranquillity, but to the wreck ofthat property he was fo folicitous to keep together. It \s ould on!} be giv ing you pain, Mil's Dacres, were I to relate ail that I tben went through. 1 now reflect on it with fenfanoib fo uncafo, that i ?? glad to avert my thoughts from every recollection, but the only one «hat
gives me any comfort—that every mo¬ ment of my time was given to fm'ooth for my unhappy parent the downward path of life.—Ah í Mifs Dacres, he was driven prematurely thither by diftrefs of mind ! by the cruelty of..... ." Ahhea fhuddered :—the idea that Sir Audley had by his feverity contributed to the fad clofe of the life of this unhap¬ py father, was more than flie could calmly bear. Marchmont faw her emo¬ tion—and inftantly guefling the caufe, repented of v\ hat he had faid, and haf¬ tened to relate other circumftances that might carry her mind from it. tt I loft this venerated and lamented parent—with what anguifh of heart I need not fay. It was neceffary, how¬ ever, to check my own feelings, or at leaft to conceal them, that I might not increafe the fad fufferings of my mo¬ ther, who, ill as fhe thought of the fituation of her family, knew not the extent of the evil ; my father having always
always concealed the worft from her, with impolitic affection— w hich was,how¬ ever, at leaft an amiable weaknefs. lie could not bear to fee her unhappy; and my mother, in die fame view of faving him from pain, concealed how far her knowledge of the truth went, or how much ihe was affected by what flie knew. 4i It was upon the fame principle of concealing, what it would quite have killed her to have known, that 1 haftily -agreed to any propofition made me by the villain Vampyre, to İave even a mo¬ ment's delay, left the inhuman ftep he took in flopping the remains of my fa¬ ther on the day of his burial fhould be known to her. I have fince heard that ail he did then was entirely illegal. But I was ignorant myfelf of all the chi¬ canery of the law ; 1 had no friend near me whom I could at that moment con¬ fult, for Everfley dared not appear, or aflift me, on account of his wife; and when
ív hen a ceiuiii time had paffed after thefe illegal acts, 1 found all my attempts ?t rcdrcls fct afide by certain rules and forms, of which I underftand no more than I do of the caufes, why the beft of all poffible laws are often abufcd, to the very worft of all poffible purpofes. i( In this cafe, as indeed too often happens, niy intentions were wholly counteracted, and that which was done to fave my mother from one diftrefs, brought upon her another—another, which has never ceafed to prefs upon her Π nee—for from the engagement I was then compelled to enter into I have never fince been able to difengage mv felf.—It has driven me firft into con- cealment, and now into exile.*' A paufe, that feemed to be the effect of the bitter recollections which arofe in his mind, now gave an opportunity for Aithea to fay, " But your friend Everfley ?—Could not
not he have come forward in fo trying a moment?—Ought he not?'* c< Ah ! Mifs Dacres, my friend Ever-* fley had already done but too much for me. The friendly affiftanee he had af¬ forded my father had almoft exhaufted the refources that were peculiarly his own, and I knew had embroiled him with that vulgar and violent woman his wife—who, having been unable during their marriage to find any other caufe of reproach, had fixed upon his gene¬ rofity to my family as an unfailing fub¬ ject of remonftrance and rage. To fuch mifery on my account 1 could not determine to expofe a man fo finccrely my friend, and to whom I already owed fo many obligations,-—Yet fuch was his kindnefs, that, when I abfolutely refufed to fufFer his pecuniary interference to an amount fo confiderable as would have releafed me from the inveteiate nMice of Vampyre, he employed the fum
fum he had prepared for that purpofe, or at leaft all he could raife, in re- purchafing for my mother an annuity of eighty pounds a year, hers and my filter's fole dependance, which in the lafl days of my father's life fhe had fold, as the only means that offered to pre¬ vent thofe fad days from being embit¬ tered by the intrufion of bailiffs and attorneys into the very chamber where he lay dying!" Again the voice of Marchmont failed him, but in a moment he conquered his emotion, and went on— (t On the noble humanity of fuch a friend, I determined, whatever I might fuffer, no farther to trefpafs. Could I indeed have got over my reluctance to accept, what I knew coft him all the domeftic tranquillity which he had made fo many facrifices to preferve; I could never have confented to exhauft for my own convenience that friendly af¬ fiftanee, whkh might hereafter be ne- Vou II. l ceífary
ceflary to thofe whofe eafe was infinitely dearer to me than my own. I was young, and active,- my fpirit was yet unbroken by perfonal difappointment, for I had hardly on my own account entered the world. I am naturally of a fanguine temper; and though I bad al¬ ready been enough initiated into the fchool of adverfity, to have difcovered that there Were villains among mankind, fuchas in the happy fimplicity of early youth I had not fuppofed could exift ; yet, I rather believed we had been par¬ ticularly unfortunate in the perfons with whom we had had dealings, than that many fuch were to be found in the great røafs of fociety. " With thefe impreffions,and with per¬ haps a prefumptuous reliance on my own powers, I courageoufly began a career, in which, though I knew many others had failed, I for a while believed I might fucceedj ajad by dint of roy ow-a efforts refcue my family from pe¬ can.ary
euniary diftrefs, and myfelf from the wretchednefs of dependence. You will fmile, perhaps, if I tell you that I was fo new to the world in which I was to ftruggle, and fo confident of the buoyant powers of my own mind, that I believed thcfc important purpofes might be ef¬ fected by authorfhip. You have un¬ doubtedly read the life of the unhappy Chatterton, which, with that of many other lucklefs projectors in the fame vifionary purfuit, ought to have ferved as a warning againft thefe prefumptuous and airy hopes. But, though confeious that I had lefs genius, I thought I could guard againft many of the errors young authors have fallen into ; and 1 even flattered myfelf that the friends of my family, who would not come forward before, would promote my intereft when they faw my exertion; while others, I fuppofed, would efteem me for the mo¬ tive by which that exertion was induced. In thefe fpeculations I was not wholly L 2 difappointed.
difappointed. Some who had intereft in the world of fafhion were not unwil¬ ling to chaperon my firft appearance; but among thefe were not to be reckoned any of my own family—for, if any thing could have roufed the avaricious apathy of Lady Silchefter, and fome of the reft of my mother's relations, to give me either their intereft with governmentjOrtheirp^- cuniary help, it would have been their difiiké to having an author among their relatives. However,as they loved money better than even the indulgence of this ri¬ diculous pride, they firft endeavoured to divert me from my purpofe by promifing, if I would turn my attention to another line, that they would try to get me fome fmall place. I had heard, and been thoroughly convinced, of the futility of fuch promifes before : I refufed, there¬ fore, to lofe a moment in liftening to them. They affected anger at my doubts of their executing what they promifed, and againft the fiiamé of being related to an
an author, found a ready refource in wholly neglecting him. Indeed, from the hour when the fortunes of my father began evidently to decline, the relations of my mother, who never had fhewn her much attention, began to withdraw from any connection with her or her chikhen ; and till I was once moru forced upon the notice of Lady Sil- chefter by one of her acquaintance, fhe had affected to lofe fight of us for fome years. Whatyfø did not do, the reft of the family who were one degree farther removed, thought themfelves happily exempted from undertaking. I found others, however, who had, as I bclieved t more power to forward my views in the line I had adopted. I was confidered as a young man of great promife by fome of thofe perfons zealous fox lite¬ rature and the arts, who love to have their names often appear as protectors of infant genius; but, to the advantage Ì was to derive from their countenance, ι 3 I found
I found fome condirono annexed not very confiftent with the fpiiit of inde« pendente which I had determined to preferve— - for it wr.s neceflary, if I would avail myfclf of literary patronage, to facrificc my own opinion to the judgement and experience of thcfc my protectors; which I was not always mo- cleft and diffident enough to do without reluctance,and it haprenedunfortunately that no two of them thought alike,— However, as an experiment how far ufing their fagacity was preferable to trufting to my own inexperience, I con¬ fented to follow the advice of him who feemed to me the belt judge of literary bufinefs, and he undertook to fhew me how I might lengthen a trifling jn¿ d e] py it that had met with fonie appîaufe, into a long poem. It coft me a good deal ο? labour; but when it was pub¬ lished, inftead of the profits on which I had calculated, I found myfelf con- fiderably indebted to the plinter and publiiher;
publiiher; and was teld, what I was foon convinced was true, that nobody now ever thinks of reading a poem of above twenty lines—-that poetry is quite out of faihion—and that the ihelves in the bookfellers' warehoufes are loaded wilh ρ ie try unread and unknown: that theie has not been above one futcefidai poem for the laft ten years; and that a party only agreeing to praife his works, or fome unaccountable caprice of fafhion, gives a poet the leaft chance of popularity, even if he is lucky enough toefcape the blight of criticifm, which often withers his poetical laurels before they are even unfolded. " My good Sir,'* faid the perfon, who from experience gave me all this infoiv mation, " my good Sir, this is not a poetical age*—1 aflure you, that, what¬ ever may be ) our talents, nothing can be done in that way, and I verily believe the very beft poems will not pay for the printing. If you have no turn for po- L 4 litici:,
lides, which indeed is a line now almoft over-occupied, turn your thoughts to novel writing—narrative, let it be about what it will, is read, becaufe the mind quietly acquiefccs, and it requires no trouble to think about it. On your pau it \\ill demand much refs care in the eompofition. Never mind improbabi¬ lities —put together a fufficient number of fads—the more unlikely the better. If you are too idle to choofe the trouble of inventing, collect eight or nine of the moil popular works of that fort; take a piece of one, and a piece of another, and put them together, only a little al¬ tered, juft to difguife them : never mind whether what the painters call keeping, can in Üiis motley aifemblage bc attended to; nobody thinks about that: fprinklc the whole plentifully w ith horrors of fome fort or other, to ftimulatc the lan¬ guid attention, and you will have a cer¬ tainty of a fide at leaft among the cir¬ culating libraries, which, after all, is the pi incipit'
principal faie that can be expected ; for who buy novels?—Who indeed buy books at all in thefe times? unlefs it be men of feience who cannot do without them. However, if you can produce any thing tolerably new in this line, you will do ptctty well, and you will hnd bookfellers who will deal with you." e · The proipeft thus offered me," con¬ tinued Marchmont, (i was not very flat¬ tering; but I had very little choice, and I fct about what is fometimes called an epic in profe, and acknowledged to be, when well managed, a confiderable ef¬ fort of the human mind; and fometimes ftigmatifed as a fpecies of work calcu^ lated only to enervate the mind, and inflame with falfe reprefentations the imagination of youth. I went on (as I believed myfelf) pretty well at firft; but when my hero was fairly launched into the hiftory, I found myfelf fur- ι ounded with difficulties, and in danger, as every page proceeded, of going againft i. 5 fome
fome of thofe rocks which my inftructor had taught me to beware of. Without incident nothing was to bc done, but almoft every poffible event was already in print,- and notwithftanding what my advifers had faid, I was too proud to borrow. Improbable and forced ad¬ ventures, events that never yet hap¬ pened on tbe habitable globe, and never could happen by any chance fhort of an abfolute miracle, difgufted mei and profing converfations, or circumftances but little elevated above the daily occur¬ rences of life, would, I thought, difguft my readers. As to characters, I had not yet feen enough of the world to imagine them, from the faint fketches I had made; and I found that, if I re- prefented fuch as had come within my obfervation, I fliould be accufed of per- fonality. If I made my hero an unfor¬ tunate wanderer, exifting by his own efforts, I underftood that I fliould be accufed of egotifm, and of having re- prefented my own adventures. If I made
made him too long or too fuddenly prof¬ perous, nobody would care about bira at all. If he were painted with too many perfections, he would be called a poor imitation of Sir Charles Grandifoo—a faultlefs moniter: but if I gave him a proportion of thofe errors to which higli- fpinteu youth is particularly liable, J fhould then be accufed of having pic,- tured an agreeable libertine, whofe ex¬ ample, like thofe of Ranger, Charles Surface, or Tom Jones, could not fajj of being pernicious. " Nor was the landfcape of my piece lefs difficult to decide upon than the figures. If my fcene lay in other coun*· tries, I muft give to my characters the manners of thofe countries, which of courfe rendered them lefs interefting to the bulk of my intended readers in this ι I might indeed have cariicd my ftory to the reigns of our Edwards and Henries—· but befides that this fpecies of writing was already fuccekfully occupied, I h 6 could
could not reprefcnt modern mannets as exifting in the perfons of our ances¬ tors in their heavy armour, and fierce prowefs; or in their fofter moments, in fatin doublets and flafhed fleeves. I found too the prefervation of the unities a work of fome difficulty. I was told, and indeed I faw from fevcral examples, that neither time nor place was much minded, and that I might hazard being equally carelefs of chronology and geo¬ graphy; but I piqued myfclf on having ftudied Ariftotle, and fcrupuloufly at¬ tended to the probabilities of time and place. I turned my eyes to the feenes that were paffing almoft before them, and thought,, by relating without much addition from fiction fome of the many events that were paffing in private life in a neighbouring country, that I might unite intereft with truth: I was foon, however, turned afide from this experi¬ ment, by hearing that novel-writing has in one refpect an affinity to die drama— that
diat time and diftance are required to foften for ufetheharihcr features that may be exhibited from real life ; that it was almoft impoflible to bring forward events without touching on their canfes ; and that any tendency to political difcuffion, however liberal or applicable, was not to be tolerated in a fort of work which people took up with no other defign than to bc amufed at the leaft poflible expenee of thought. In this cafe I was to be like the courtly preacher, who deemed it altogether fhock ing to tt ------mention Edl to ears polite." <c Thus, in a choice of difficulties, I laboured on—with what fuccefs, it now matters not. At fome other opportunity (if indeed I dare indulge the hope that, at fome future time, I may be al¬ lowed the happinefs I now enjoy) I may trouble you, Madam, with the hif¬ tory of ray progrefs with the encouragers of literature, among whom indeed I found
found it- to be true, that the fraternity of Bookfellers are, for the rnoft part, to be relied on, and with them at leaft I fo fuccefsfulty made my way, that I was enabled to affiti my family though by no means to the extent of my wifhes), and to fupply myfelf. I believe indeed I fhould have done better in time (as on my foi-difant friends of every defcrip¬ tion I ceafed to depend), bur to carry on this bufinefs in obfeurity was impoflible. No fooner was my name know n as being in fome degree a fuccefsful candidate for literary emolument, than mv addrefs was procured by Vampyre from my publiiher, and I became more than ever the object ofthat monfter's perfecution. He himfelf ventured, flickered as he believed by the armour of his pro¬ feffion, to prefent his own hideous libel on the human form in my lodgings— attended, as he almoft always is, by a miferable fneaking being of a clerk.-— 1 liftened for two or three minutes to his
his infolence— and then, though I think I am not of a very choleric temper, found myfelf fei zed with an impulfe to kick him down flairs, fo irrefiftible, that I immediately fhewed him that manner of dcfcending with great velocity, and then handed his clerk after him into the ftreet—where the mob, who in a feeond of time gather in a populous thorough¬ fare, hearing, from the people where î lodged, that the reptile they faw fo fuddenly fpring out of the door into the middle of the coach-way was a vil¬ lanous attorney who had ruined a fa¬ mily, determined to add an epilogue to my figure-dance, by no means to the tafte of Mr. Solicitor Vampyre; whofe zeal for his clients might well have been cooled by the difci pline he received under the next pump, had it not beetà re-animated by refentment for this ???- fonal difgrace. He now had added a frefh caufe of vengeance to his native diabolical malignity, and to his defire to
ω find new excufes for getting money from his itupidand wicked employers*— From that time he redoubled his per¬ fecution, and 1 was compelled either to fubmit to imprifonment, or to fly.— Though this fcourge to individuals, and difgrace to tbe fpecies in general, often pra eti fes and refides in the neighbourhood cf a great fea-port not far from the place where we now are, it was here—that— on account of Mrs. Mofely . .. (March¬ mont hefitated, and feemed to be con¬ fufed) and for other confiderations, I determined to conceal myfelf. Of the fequel I believe it is unncccflary to fpeak." Aithea, though her countenance bore evidence how much this narrative had affected her, did not immediately find words that anfwered to her meaning.— Marchmont availed himfelf of her filenee again to plead for permiffion to write to her : and his eloquence was perhaps aided by the circurnftance of the mo« ment ;
ment ; for a fignal was fuddenly given from behind fome high rocks to the left of that where they fat, and the boat, with Fenchurch and two feamen in it, immediately appeared from beyond a promontory. Marchmont, unwilling to expofe Akhea to the gaze of thefe men, now tore himfelf away, having at length obtained the permiffion he io ardently folicited—and, hurrying from her, made a fignal to Fenchurch to bring the boat on fhore farther on, where high cliffs ran out into the fea, and ihut out all near view of the fpot where he was now compelled to take a reluctant leave of Aithea. When he was gone, flie fat down breathlefs, and with a beating heart, on her former feat ; hardly daring to re¬ collect what had paifed, or to enter on any felf-enquiry as to the propriety of her conduct. With eyes fixed on the fea, flie waited in an undefcribable ftate of mind for the fight of the boat, and fancied
fancied that, amidft the low and almoft imperceptible murmurs of the tide, fhe heard tbe dafhing oars. Nor was fhe deceived; in a few moments flie faw it flowly appear beyond the promontory. Marchmont was ftanding in it, his looks apparently fixed on the place where he had left her—but- the diftance was foon too great to allow her to diftinguifh his features. She faw, however, that he ftretched his arms towards her, then clafped his hands together as if offering a prayer to heaven for her fofety. The dull haze that had been long gathering over the fea, now thickened fo much, that the boat, and the palfengers in it, became indiftinct; appearing only like a dark fhapeiefs fpot amidit the wide expanfe of water; and it was foon after¬ wards hardly to be feen at all. While Aithea could trace, or fancy fhe could trace it through the mift and intervening diftance, fhe remained on the fhore, then reluctantly and flowl) returned by the
the nigged fteps to the fummit of the cliff j and from thence again furveyed the fca, now undiftiiiguiihablc from the fley, all being alike overclouded. She thought, however, that fiie ftill faw the boat move through the diftant waves — till the head-land which forms one fide of Torbay* feemed to intervene. It was there, as Marchmont had in* formed her, the veifel lay that was to receive him.—The heart of Aithea, re¬ cently awakened to new fenfations by the certainty that Marchmont loved her, now funk in fick and languid defpond- ence; for ihe reflected that it was more than poffible flie had loft fight of him for ever. Hardly diftinguifiling her way, fhe now looked around her to be certain that fiie was in the right road back to the houfe of Eaftwoodleigh, which, large as it was, could not be diftinguiíhed
even
even from this high ground, becaufe of the numerous tall elms every where lining the lanes of this country, which in many places appeared like a con¬ tinual wood. Fortunatelv ihe had re- marked a ungular bank of red-coloured earth in her way, which now ferved her as a guide to the fteep la tie flie had afcended ; and afterwards her road lay entirely along it, till ihe came to the ivy-clad ruins of one of the lodges of the difparked environs of Eaftwood¬ leigh. When Althéa entered the houfe, flie haftened immediately to her own room, fancying, as ihe pafled Wansford and his wife, that they both looked at her as if they knew flie returned from meet¬ ing Marchmont—fo much poiver has the imagination when the confcience is not calm. In fact, it was in the prefent cafe merely confcience that raifed this idea ; for, though Wansford knew it, he carefully avoided looking at her as ihe ????
eamc in—and his wife had no certain knowledge that Marchmont had ever been in the houfe, and was free from every fufpieion that related to Aithea. To a young and ingenuous mind there is nothing fo painful as the firft idea of having committed an error.— Althca, who had always accuftomed her¬ felf to enquire whether what fhe did w r as perfectly confonant to the maxims fhe had received from Mrs. Trevyllian, thus eitablifhiriGf a fort of feeond confcience ? as her guide, now trembled to make this appeal. Yet, when once it was made, many reflections arofe which helped to reconcile her to herfelf. Though fhe had died unmarried, Mrs. Trevyllian had none of that prudiíh referve which often degenerates into ridiculous aufte- rity at a late period of life. She had not indeed taught Aithea, that the firft purpofe of her life was to attract a man of fortune for a hufband, but had rather endeavoured
endeavoured to give her fuch principles as would make her pafs a fingle life in cheerful content, if fuch (as was very probable) fhould be her lot, notwith¬ ftanding her perfonal advantages, and the fweetnefs of her manners ,· for Mrs. Trev\ llian knew, that to confiderations merely interefted flie never would facri¬ ficc herfelf; while it was very doubtful whether fuch a man as united the advan¬ tages of fortune to thofe of a cultivated mind, would ever fall in her way. From this manner of thinking during the courfe of her education, Althéa had acquired an ingenuous fimplicity of cha* racler. She had no defign on the hearts of the men fhe converfed with, and was therefore always eafy and unaffected, without familiarity or flippancy. But ihe had never been taught to believe, that it was right to fly from or avoid any man becaufe he was indigent; and flie knew that Mrs. Trevyllian herfelf had
had been much attached to a gentleman of very fmall fortune, whofe death alone prevented their marriage. Though un¬ acquainted with the particular eh cum- fiances which had thrown a f h ade of melancholy over the life ofher aunt (for ihe had never courage to fpeak of them), Althéa was aflured, from this in fiance, that,had her aunt been living, fhe would not have condemned her partiality to Marchmort, though flic might have thought mairiage very imprudent under the prefent circumftances of both their foi tunes. Nor could Althéa help re¬ flecting, that the obfervation Marchmont made was but too juft, when he faid that flie was accountable to nobody; for her father feemed entirely to abandon her, and fhe had no other relations who had either inclination or right to direct lier. Her fituation, therefore, was altogether different from that of a young woman directly under the protection of a pa¬ rent,
rent, or of immediate friends. She broke through no duty ; and the tender compaffion and perfonal preference with which flie thought of Marchmont, and which had induced her to confent to correfpond with him, interfered with none of thofe principles of conduct which her propriety of mind would never have allowed her to violate. Having thus reconciled herfelf to the paft, fhe ventured to look forward to the future; but her courage and hope failed when ftie thought of the fitua¬ tion ín which her unhappy lover had left his native country to go he hardly knew whither, but probably to another where danger and diftrefs were likely to meet him. He had evaded all expla¬ nation on money matters : but there was every reafon to fuppofe he was but flenderly fupplied with the means of exiftence; and it appeared very uncer¬ tain, whether on his reaching France it would
would be poffible to make his way acrofs the whole kingdom to the fouthern coaft, where, not far from Toulon, bis relation the Baron de Lavergnac refided. If be did reach that fide of France, from all prefent intelligence there was too much caufe to apprehend that Monfieur de Lavergnac was involved in the general ruin that menaced the royal party, to which he decidedly belonged. With all thefe apprehenfions con¬ tinually prefent to her, Ahhea now tailed no moie peace than when flie knew Marchmont to be within a hun¬ dred paces of her, and to be in momen¬ tary danger of being dragged away to end his life in a prifon. Yet diftant and uncertain dangers ap¬ peared lefs hideous than the perfecution of the ft end Vampyre ; and when fhe re¬ membered that another day might have put Marchmont into his hands, the aflurance of his efcape feemed a gratify- Vol. IL m ing
ing reflection, and the gloomy uncer¬ tainty of what w 7 as to come appeared lefs terrible. A long interval was yet to pafs before any intelligence of the poor wanderer could arrive; and Akhea was confeious how tedious and forlorn her defolate fo¬ litude would appear. Though flie had never been accuftomed to confidantes of her own age (for Mrs, Trevyllian had always difliked that giiliih caballing which frequently corrupts the minds of young people), fhe ???- felt the want of fome one to whom fhe could fpeak of Marchmont without reftraint. Her thoughts again turned towards his mo¬ ther and his filters. To them alone could fhe hazard naming him. But they were far from her; and as Marchmont had aflured her that his mother intended, as foon as he w T as in a place of greater fafety, to acknowledge all the kindnefles that Aithea had intended, or that March¬ mont
mont had received; flie w T as compelled to wait for this overture from Mrs. Marchmont, before fhe could venture to exprefs the ardent defire fhe felt to love and ferve her.
m 2 CHAP.
CHAP. Χ.
" Ah ! dû not think thou art alone unhappy !"
IHE day after the departure of March¬ mont, the calm ftiilnefs of the morning tempted Althca to revifit the fhore, which was in fome meafure a new object to her, and would now, fhe thought, afford her a melancholy pleafure. From thence fhe propofed walking to the cottage of Mrs. Mofely, with whom fhe wiihed to converfe ; and having procured fuch a direction from Wans¬ ford as was likely to be a fufficient guide, fhe fet forth about one o'clock, intending to take a cold dinner at her return. The
The fame fpot, where for perhaps the lafl time Aithea had feen the only man fhe had ever thought of with approba¬ tion, and who might be called indeed almoft the only perfon in the world who felt an Intereft in her fete, or for whom fhe was herfelf interefted, could hardly fail of infpiring her with mournful re¬ flections : but with them a degree of pleafure mingled itfelf, and the fort of day was weil calculated to encourage the melancholy yet foothing reverie fhe fell into. As on the day preceding, a gauzy mift hovered over the unruffled fea, fpreading from thence to the land, and foftening every object of the rich coaft on either fide. The quiet folemnity of the hour and fcene was not broken by the gay and lively verdure of May, for the diftant landfcape was foftened by the hazy vapour; yet, as fhe wandered flowly m 3, along
along the broad margin of fand, which ihe had been told led to an eafier acclivity of the cliff, from whence her walk to the cottage might be con¬ siderably fhortened, fhe remarked fome of thofe plants, inhabitants of the bor¬ ders of the fea, of which her aunt had taught her the names on a former vifit to the coaft. ~ The * fea reed grafs, covering many of the broad beds of fand, waved its yet feeble fpires in the hardly perceptible breeze; within the immediate fpray of the waves the fea f holly put forth its gray and thornv leaves; and where the more inidifiuibcd furface of the lands allowed them to bc clothed with a flight coveiing of turf, the fmall yellow itars of the J ladies' bed-ftraw were juft opening among it.—The fairy nofe-
gays, which with this and the beautiful convolvulus*, peculiar to the weftern coaft, a native alfo of the arid beach, fhe ufed to delight in making, while walking with her dear protectrefs, came to her remembrance, and, foftened as her mind was before, filled her eyes with tears. But the recollection of Mrs. Trevyl¬ lian was always falutary. In recalling thofe fimple pleafures, the admirable leffons with which every enjoyment was accompanied recurred to her. Among thefe, fortitude was a virtue on which her aunt had confiantly dwelt with pe¬ culiar energy; as if fhe had forefeen how much occafion her beloved AUhea would one day have to exert it. In¬ ftead, therefore, of allowing herfelf to du ell on ideas which ferved only to de- prefs and enervate her mind, fhe turned
m 4
it
k towards the means of fulfilling the parting wiihes of Marchmont, who had entreated her to allow his mother and his filters to be known to her, and to transfer to them all that active benevo¬ lence of friendfhip of which he could not avail himfelf. The poor old ^rvant at the cottage, too, he had warmly re¬ commended to her humanity ; and aroufed by thefe recollections íhe íhook off that pleafing but ufelefs penfivenefs which was ftealing upon her, and quick¬ ened her pace towards the cabin of Mrs. Mofely, which fhe found with lefs diffi¬ culty than fhe expeHed ; for, though concealed by the rude inequalities of a common, which was at the weftern ex¬ tremity of the grounds of Eaftwoodleigh, it was hardly mile from the fea. She found the folitary tenant of this lone cottage full of trouble. Whatever terrors flie had undergone for <: her dear child, her dear young maßer" as flie called Marchmont, while for the courfe of feveral
, leverai months be had been hunted by the blood-hounds of the law, they were now forgotten in the cruel idea, that he was "gone beyond fea ;" which amounted, in the opinion of Mrs. Mofely, to a certainty that fhe fhould fee him no more. Wild and vague ideas of feenes paffing in France, horrible enough, and ren¬ dered more flrangely hideous by her long-rooted prejudices, had taken pof¬ feflion of Mrs. Mofely's mind—but itili the predominant impreffion was, the danger of < c going beyond fea." Althéa for a moment attempted to ftifle all fhe felt herfelf, to combat im¬ preffions fo painful to a mind already enfeebled by time and calamity; and though to all that flie could fay the poor old woman gave no other anfwer than a- deep figh, and a motion with her head that expreifed hopelefs incredulity as to the fafety of her " dear mafier f * Al¬ théa began to flatter herfelf that fhe íhould
fhould reafon her into more tranquillity, when a quick ftep was heard near the cottage door. Altlica ftarted without knowing why; and Mrs. Mofely, accuftomed to be always on the watch ftnce Marchmont's pei fonai Lkt\ bad beai m queftion, moved lo the door as quick iv as her ln- fiimiaes 11 imuttd. and, look* .« out, to- turned to her kat, laving it was only poor Phoebe. tt And who is poor Phcebe ?" enquired AUhea. " Poor unhappy girl P' replied Mrs. Mofely, u ihe is a godchild. Madam, of mine; and never any bodv met with greater misfortunes for her ftation. Iler poor biam is hurt by all fiie has gone through; but fhe is very harmich, and fometimes her fenfes return again for a time. I am afraid, poor creature! fhe is in one ofher wandering fits now—for flie feldom comes at other times. In¬ deed,
deed, I have not fcen her before thefe two months.** Akhea had no time to enquire farther as to ihe object that had alieady excited her pity, when a young woman of one or tw 7 o and twenty, pale and thin, her dreis clean but coarfe, and without a hat, entered the room with a hurried ftep; and not feeming to obfetvc that Ahhea was theie, ihe came up to the old woman, and, taking her hand,fmiled — but it w r as a melancholy fmile—-then looking ftcadily in her face, faid, " I have got to you at laft, my dear friend ! They would have hindered me agii n : but I have ftolc away from them; arid you will let me ft«y with you, will } ou not ?" 11 Ves, Phcebe," faid Dame Mofely, ft if you wiil ftay in the houfe, and not leave me without telling where you aie going to. But there is the young lady that ufed to fend me fo much help when vou was here laft." « The
tft The young lady !" cried the un¬ happy girl, (< I am in the way then—I am forry I came. Pray forgive me; I did not know the lady was here. Pray be not angry— í will go home again-— indeed I will." u No, no," interrupted Ahhea, "you fhall ftay here, Phcebe. I am myfclf going prefently; and till I do, it will diftrefs me if you do not fit down and talk to your old friend juft as you ufed to do." Phcebe looked at her with an un« fteady yet expreffive eye; then, turning lo Mrs. Mofely, fhe faid in a half whif- per, " She is like the angels I ufed to dream of once, when I had hopes of going among them aivay from this bad world; and I thought they had juft fuch voices." ** That lady is as much of an angel as ever was in this world," replied Mrs. Mofely aloud. Phcebe
lhcebc anfwered only by a deep figh. Dame Mofely again fpoke to her. She heeded her not, but, fixing her eyes on the window, fighed again as if her heart would break. Then, after a mo¬ ment's paufe, fhe turned quickly, and faid, "You remember! So now, as you are bufy, dear godmother, I will go." " Not down to the fea-fide,** an- fweied the other. u Why I I have not been there a long, long time, till to-day, indeed ! and I am better, a great deal better for it." ** Well, well, Phcebe, you muft not go again—you muft not, indeed. Come, if you do not mind me I fliall be angry, and will not let you come to fee me again.'" *' Wont you ?—Oh! that will be very cruel. And will you, my oldeft and laft friend, be as cruel as all other people are? Well, if you will, Ji? then ! make me be íhut up again, and make me to be beat
beat and punifhed by that cruel....." (another deep figh burft from her fad heart, but fhe went on), " by that cruel ..... Ah î well, it will be the fooner over! If nobody, nobody at all, is left, who has compaffion for me—perhaps it may not be fo difficult to die, as I find it now !—But I tire you. Pray, Ma'am, excufe me," (turning to Aithea, with a half courtefy) t( I am a poor miferable creature, without a friend left in the wide world." Ahhea was fo affected that fhe could not anfwer her, otherwife than by turn¬ ing to Mrs. Mofely, and begging her to footh the poor girl rather than contra¬ dict her* " Come, Phcebe," faid the old wo¬ man, " if you have been to the fea-fide, you cannot defire, you know, to go again. You fhall go and lie down upon my bed ; for I am fure your head aches, and that you are tired. Come, be a good
good girl, and then you fliall flay with me a day or two." It feemed as if the unfettled mind of tbis unfortunate being was tremblingly alive to the voice of kindnefs ; for with¬ out farther oppofition fhe gave her hand to Mrs. Mofely, and fuffered her to lead her out. When flie got to the door fhe turned towards Althea,and, with herhead mourn¬ fully declined, fighed out, " God blefs you, young lady !" Mrs. Mofely returned in a few mi¬ nutes.—■" I've made her lie down," faid flic, if and perhaps fhe may forget herfelf while I make her a little tea, which is the only thing flie will take." <c Let mc aflift you, my good woman/' faid Aithea ; ' f and do tell me who this poor young creature is, and by what misfortunes flie has been driven to this pitiable ftate." tc Ah! dear Mifs, it is a long ftory, and
and you know old folks are apt to be tedious—it will tire you, I fear." " No, no—on the contrary, I fliall not be eafy without hearing it. Make her tea, and carry it to her. I will have fome too, for I am fatigued this morning, and while fhe remains quiet you fliall relate to me all you know ofher. Juft now there is nothing I would fo willingly liften to.**
BND OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
