Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The confessional of Valombre: a romance
THE
Confessional of Yalombre.
W#0$
CHAP. I. Far trom men» ïblîVmorM Ъу ancìtiit pines from the wîntî, \ h'ììvìy pile txiub its heutl; bat» 4 fK'kťíl İH tttC ïlunib ť>f ttitì UOríh« ΟάοΙΛΝ. Kcííbu>c hiuì pity ^' ' -ïï-am* rs to ľíer hvin-ti. VV here *er they ]»1сл<1 1* t V ť athi:i¿íuit : wt-cpmg it ť no vor к lo w ; \:it-.u i^ ı*>tHMİ .·ϋ!».ί>4Ϊι; mul мпсе btern Turtune I *ì \.* * .,'i' h« r ts*->t bìv-si»i; í power arri nebe») lì e \Μψ*> iMiul \^ar witì» tbeir pu^atasors. ROM the immense moat by which the outworks of the building were sur- *^ ". β rounded,
rounded, it appeared to the eager eyes of Theodore more the bulwark of strength, than the sacred retreat of pious fervour; more the hostile symbol of resistance, than the meek emblem of zealous faith. Irregular were its juttings ; turret ed bat¬ tlements rose at every angle, and thick and heavy walls, black from the rust of time, towered, the bold supporters of its ramparts. Oft had the trumpet's shrill charge sounded the din of battle; oft, from the loopholes of its strength, had the blasts of death been levelled : tumult and confusion had echoed within its boundaries, ruin and desolation had marked the havoc of its frowns ; yet now did it hold fori h a sanctuary, now did it smile the promise of repose. Theodore stood irresolute; all access into the castle was barred, for the draw¬ bridge
bridge was up, and the moat was too deep to be forded. The haven of rest was before him» but the pass to its at¬ tainment inaccessible. Alas ! how often does life pourtray the same picture ! how often, in the eager completion of our hopes, when fancy almost grasps the gilded phantom, does some new obstacle, some undreamed-of barrier, obstruct the promised joy, and freeze the zest of bliss! Theodore, whose wistful eyes had mea¬ sured each angle of the castle, drooping with the languor of disappointment, was about to turn from its inhospitable walls, when a light flashing from a casement in one of its towers, convinced him it was r.ot entirely deseried — fť Compassion will plead my cause/ 1 he exclaimed, springing towards the tower, and then, в 2 tottering
tottering upon the very brink of the moat, he hallooed with more than wont¬ ed strength. The casement was thrown open, and a voice demanded what he required ï " Shelter," replied the youth. " Stran¬ ger, I have strayed from the right path, and have no guide to direct me." €< Are you alone ?** questioned the voice. " Yes, unattended, and unarmed," an¬ swered Theodore, entering at once intb his suspicions. The man eyed him attentively for a moment, then resumed— u Stay, and I will lower the drawbridge." The casement was reclosed, and the man disappeared. Immediately after, the same clanking of chains, which had befője roused Theo¬ dore from abstraction, marked the low¬ ering
ering of the drawbridge ; and the massy gate of the castle being thrown open, disclosed the gigantic form of the inviter. A sensation, if not of fear, yet of suspi¬ cious caution, checked the eager haste of our hero. It is true, he had nothing to lose ; but yet the dark scowl of ma¬ lignant scrutiny, which succeeded his expressions of gratitude, spoke more than common import, ** You are a young traveller," said the man, as he reclosed the gate, and htmg the key upon his girdle. * f By the mass ! you look as though the breath of heaven would blast your freshness/* 4( The looks are not always conclu· sive," boldly remarked Theodore. " Else," said his host, ' f you had not tempted the hardships of these wilds· Come on t my youthful hero, don't в 3 linger;
linger; you craved a shelter, and you shall find one. 1 ' u Better have trusted to the shelter of the forest/' thought Theodore, follow¬ ing across an immense court-yard, and entering a long piazza, leading to the interior of the castle. ** 'Tis a solitary habitation," said the man, stooping to regain the lamp he had left at the entrance of the passage. (t Are you its sole inhabitant ?" de¬ manded Theodore. The stranger eyed him for a moment ; then, with a significant smile, answered -— " Come on, and I will introduce you to my companions." The passages through which they pass¬ ed were long and intricate, willing in mazy labyrinths, and lined with the damp mildew of neglect—" Here is plenty of space,"
space/' observed the man, pausing at the entrance of an immense hall, and extending high the lamp. An involuntary awe bleached the fea- •f tures of Theodore; his heart fluttered with unknown emotion, and a tear trem¬ bled in his eye— ** Who owns this cas¬ tle ?" he demanded, minutely examining the heavy range of pillars which sup¬ ported the ponderous roof. " Alas F what pity is it to see the devastation of time courted by the apathy of neglect!" " I reside in this castle," said ť e nan, smiling ironically ; " nor would its lord venture to dispute our privilege." "Our!" eagerly repeated Theodore, and then he paused ; for he saw, by the lowering contraction of the stranger's brow, that the questions of curiosity were oflensive« A long dark passage opened в 4 from
from the extremity of the hall; it" wa* narrow, and arched. Theodore silently followed his guide ; but, ere he had pro¬ ceeded many paces, he started. Horror âhd amazement filled his mind ; rooted to the spot, he listened; for the blast of a horn, shrill and piercing, echoed along the passage. It was such as had ever marked the approach of the mysterious stran srer in the garden of Valombre. * s Jesu Maria !" trembled on the lips of Theodore ; and then again was he awak¬ ened to exertion, for the harsh voice of his conductor impelled him forward. The light flashed faintly. A sharp an¬ gle in the passage had hid the man from sight ; and as Theodore paused, irresolute ч whether to proceed, or whether to re- race his steps, and seek an escape from the castle, a form swiftly glided past him. He
He could trace the outline, but the note¬ less step marked not the intruder; swift as thought it had fled, and now was lost in darkness. Theodore numbered the beads of his rosary ; but scarce had his lips concluded an Ave Maria, when a low, whispering voice, pronounced — (e Murder !" and a deep and broken sigh succeeded. Whether to conjecture it a ng of his own fate, he knew not; yet the peculiarity of his situation, in league with the suspicious appearance of the man into whose power he had so in¬ cautiously fallen, warranted the conclu¬ sion— " Who are you," he demanded,. * f who in such mournful accents breathe sounds so threatening ?" " Be wary," softly replied the voice, and then again it ceased; for the lambent в 5 flame
íiarae of the lamp, flashing in distance, marked the return of the man. He ad¬ vanced but slowly; then extending the light, looked with fear and caution into the passage. " I am here," said Theodore, in answer to his loud halloo; and then, muttering an oath, the man bid him follow. Theodore, in silence, complied ; for he found resist¬ ance would but court the fate which ap¬ peared already to await him. That he had fallen into the snare of banditti, he could no longer doubt; but in whose bosom he had awakened commiseration, and why he should be so mysteriously forewarned of his danger, he had yet to discover. To be deprived of life, almost in the mo¬ ment when its anticipations had received a new colour; when lo\e> fanning the embers
embers of hope, gilded the fairy visions of futurity, and stamped the past years of existence but a prelude to coming bliss, saddened every feeling of his soul, damp¬ ed every energy of hrs nature. To die without confessing the tale of enthral¬ ment, without breathing the sigh of ado¬ ration, to expire with the name of Ja \ liette upon his lips, and the idol image in his heart; to foil by the merciless hand of an assassin, in the ignoble bon¬ dage of slavery—" Oh God !" he aspi¬ rated, and then again he shuddered ; for his guide, turning fiercely round, de¬ manded what he saw г " What should I see r'* questioned Theodore, if save our own reflecting shadows? The flame of the lamp----- " tc Boy, what did you hear ?" inter¬ rupted the surly guide» e & « Naught
" Naught but the echo of our own footsteps," replied our hero. " Come on then," muttered the stran¬ ger, and then he opened a door leading into a long range of chambers; but paused at the entrance ; for a voice, loud and inharmonious, demanded, " Who passed ?" ** 'Tis I, Randolphe," exclaimed the guide. ** Came you through the passage lead¬ ing from the western hall ?" asked the inquisitor. u Yes, from the western hall," 4 ' And alone ?" * f No; a stranger youth here, who craved shelter for the night." " But the passage, Randolphe; say, what met you in the passage ?" *' Nothing appeared to meet, and yet something
something passed me, for î felt the ga¬ thering current of pircas with noiseless steps it fled/* * r Could you not see the form r " " What form ? Gaspard, you are 21 boy, and scare yourself with idle sha¬ dows/' " 4 boy !" muttered the half-offended Gaspard ; cf shadows may scare, but sub¬ stance find me man. I can dare death in the onset's heat ; but this ghost, this de¬ vil ------" * f Scares ihe mind of guüt" said a voice, " and stamps the sinner coward" Randolphe and Gaspard, with vacant stare, gazed on each other; while Theo¬ dore, cased in innocence's adamantine breastplate, boldly reentered the passage. Darkness was spread around ; yet did his dauntless step brave the mystic maze; yet
yet were his arms extended to intercept the intruder. Scarce had his eyes lost sight of the lamp*s reflecting rays, scarce had his form mingled with surrounding darkness, when a low, rustling sound, checking almost the impulse to breathe» rooted him in the attitude of listening attention. Theodore's heart fluttered, not with fear, but with expectation ; a religious awe, a pious inspiration, stole upon his faculties, and cased them in the resistless armour of fortitude. A footstep softly sounded, and then the rustling, and then the footstep alike ceased. c * Mysterious being," said the undaunted youth, " who, shrouded be¬ neath the shadow of night, plays on the sickly brain of guilty weakness, know, that the mighty Power, whose unerring hand led me unarmed within these walls, now,
now, with unshrinking firmness, nerves my mind, in bold defiance of these seeming horrors/* He ceased. The sound of approaching footsteps again broke the stillness; they seemed to advance within a few paces, and then all became hushed— u Be wary, be wary, be wary," thrice repeated the voice that had before warned him, and then distinctly it whispered— €€ Blood seals the compact of secrecy.** " Blood! secrecy !" echoed Theodore; « all-seeing Heaven !" for the myste¬ rious controuler of his actions arose to his mind, filling him with horror and dismay, * f point out the danger," in accents of imploring fervour, "and teach me to avoid the snare." " You are entangled/* softly replied the
the voice ; u ensnared, entrapped. L»- ten, for murder is^------" It ceased ; a door slammed violently, and the noisy bustle of approaching num¬ bers deadened every lesser sound. Theodore, unarmed, defenceless, con¬ tinued leaning against the damp, cold wall of the passage, his mind actuated by that firm, unbending courage, which neither courts danger, or shrinks at its approach, and his eyes fixed on the com¬ ing light, which marked the approach of the banditti. Loud and discordant were the voices, blasphemous and profane the debate— * f You are a hero, truly," exclaimed one, with a laugh of jocose irony. *· Why, Leonard, if your hand had been alike nervous in the forest, the blow would have
have been less sure. Was it indeed the devil ? or did it onlv borrow the devil's semblance?" cr 'Tis no matter," angrily muttered Leonard ; " if the devil lights among our troop, you 11 find no quarter." Theodore shuddered with horror. The light reflected on his figure, yet he moved not ; nor even when a loud shout betrayed discovery—when unsheathed weapons pointed at his breast, did he weakly supplicate for mercy : 'twas the moment of fate; but 'tis life which clothes death in terrors. Theodore fear¬ ed not the future, because he shrunk not from the past; no temptations had lured him from rectitude, had violated the blessed calm of self-assurance. A pious aspiration trembled on his lips, as the seraph smile of resignation evinced his thoughts
thoughts had fled to heaven.— " For¬ bear," exclaimed a voice, in the autho¬ ritative accents of command. Instantly, as though by magic-spell, the shining blades were sheathed, and the murmur of surprise filled the pause of submission. " Protect his life," resumed the chief, €< and be your charge his safety." Theodore started. The sounds were familiar to his ear. He looked doubt¬ fully towards the speaker, but naught could he distinguish, save the dark out¬ line of his figure, as quickly he receded down the passage. Not a moment was left to conjecture—was left to inquiry. Theodore was hurried forward, through intricate passages and neglected cham¬ bers, robbed of their panoply of stare, and black with the mantle of unsocial night.
night. His guards spoke not, but the fierce, unbending scowl of curiosity marked their narrow observation. Re¬ sistance was vain ; obedient, passive, he ascended a flight of spiral stairs, nor shrunk at the darkened chamber into which ferocity and power forced him. He heard the harsh bolts grate forth the knell of freedom ; he heard the echo of retreating footsteps; they ceased, they died away ; his own sighs filled the pause, and his own thoughts peopled the gloom. Gratitude, in the form of father Betsolin; Love, in the angel image of the sister Mo¬ niques officiating attendant. Unmarked, save by the pang of crude reflection, the hours glided, and night, with slow, unvaried revolution, yielded her reins today. Gradual was the bnrst of glory ; Theodore watched its bright ascent,
*■ ascent, even from the faint grey glimmer • of morning, and saw, through the grated bars of his prison, thè misty vapours rolling over the coned peaks of the mountains. Often, in the garden of Valombre* had he listened to the matin hymn of awak¬ ening creation, when the rude melodies of morn, in grateful tribute, poured to nature's God the incense sweet of praise! Often, there, had he mused over the calm monotony of existence, and sighed, with¬ out knowing why, at the profound ob¬ scurity of his own destiny ! Lost in thought, musing over the chequered contrast of past and present ; then, con¬ tent with negative calm and joyless apa¬ thy, living in the redundant exercise of infliction, and smiling at the abstruse documents of faith, alive but to the cal r of
of devotion, and emulous but to the ex¬ ample of forbearance, now bursting anew into life—for what is existence, stamped with the languor of inanity ?—his hopes, his thoughts, his wishes, all glowing with the fairy tints of anticipation, all guised in the magic garb of bliss; every energy of his soul wrapt in the exuberant flights of fancy, every impulse of his nature tranced by the rosy wand of youthful passion, his eyes wandered from the win¬ dow, but not in peering scrutiny ; quickly they scanned the mingled outline of the scene, nor paused in wonder, nor dwelt in admiration. It was the affianced bride of age, the lady Juliette, who skimmed along the mountain's top, lingering over rock and forest, softening the cataract's loud roar, and robbing even heaven's bright rays of half their splendour ; for Fane/,
Fancy, uncurb'd, love's soft illusions paint, And e'en at distance scoffs. Suddenly he started—suddenly the vi¬ sion fled ; his features saddened into dire expectancy ; for a foot-fall in the pas¬ sage recalled the conviction of his own captivity — " Perhaps to murder !" thought Theodore, shrinking from the turret-window, and listening in all the agony of suspense. The footsteps ceased, and then a low whispering succeeded ; and then, in the warmth of argument, the caution of se¬ crecy vanished, and the voices swelled into louder cadence. " Ue talked as though, subservient to his nod, our hold could boast no firmer claim than his authority ; nay, said hh йчшл could banish us the shelter of these walls." "Talked!"
" Talked î" with an ironical laugh, was the response ; fť weak fool, he dare not ; his threats are vain ; for o'er his head 1 hold an iron rod, which blasts his cou¬ rage. I tell you,Bernardine, the child, who wanton holds his fluttering prisoner by a silken string, boasts not a greater power." fi Why should this power be hid from your long-tried colleagues?" demanded Bernardine. tf Surely the pledge of faith, so long preserved, merits unbroken confidence. Should Fortune frown upon the eager strides of your high courage, this secret told ensures us safety; but, dying with you, drives us with coward caution from Yermandois* walls," f * Why, then, the cavern beasureasv- lum. Buried İn the earth's deep bowels, who can the secret spring disclose ?" " Yermandois/' muttered Bernardine; " he
i( he knows each hidden pass, and, arm¬ ed with hellish hatred, may on our fort¬ ress dart." " Then ie his life your surety." " His life !" repeated Bernardine, and fiend-like was his pause ; then suddenly resuming—"Your hand,) our hand, brave Montauban ; blood be the register of our security !" " Blood ! blood ! and life !" repeated Montauban, " but not whilst 1 can wield this sword. Mark me, Bernardine; 'tis when chance, aimed bv some çiant * -О strength, shall lay me low, that your sure dagger's point must seal his lips. Lure him hither; tell him some beauty courts his warm embrace; and when once here £—you know the rest. These walls can tell no tales, nor can the dead rise up in accusation. Now go you to the council- hall ;
hall; ГИ forthwith follow; and bid Ran¬ dolphe prepare to guide our prisoner hence." " Why so careful of this you*! 'r'* de¬ manded Barnardine; " why, when out- swords were raised to silence the bold intruder, did you so firmly check our just revenge ? Our secret cannot be safe, when pr\ ing eyes have pierced our sane· tunry, and numbered e'en our strength/' '■'Question mc not. This youth, thi> '-•ov, thi ; fou udii n ir oí Valombre'"—The- odorv Ь>!е:!л1 ; Theodore could scarcely b.vathi;— t% unk*niwi:ig, owns a firm, un- f í}i·:.: ек : <:ь More precious than our i\\L^ L*e íu> rafei}*. Vly t Ibrnardine ; beì4eii:uh the pledge of secret faith • h::ll млтр him oui>\ Fly, »ly^ and speed ihe î-îi'ps of Kandolphe; till sale within v · ,f ·^ e his
his cloister-prison, nor enterprise nor glorv be our care." " First own the secret tie," said tîıe reluctant Harnardine ; " explain why souls L!.e ours, bold, unshrinking, dar¬ ing, must to this unknown bov submis- sive yield? Tell us------" " No more," interrupted Montauban; " my wish alone must give the mandate force. Go, send Randolphe hither ; then wait me in the council-hall." The steps of Barnardine had ^aice ceased reverberating, when the harsh bars of detention were withdrawn ; and Theodore, watching the opening door, recognised, in the gigantic figure of the intruder, the being who had so fre¬ quently, and so mysteriously pieiced tîıe sacred seclusion of Yalombre's monas¬ tery.
tjffy. The palsied start of amazement, i\nd the high flush of indignant horror, gave evidence of his feelings. The con¬ versation he had just heard, the warning he had received in the passage, together with the threatened murder of his pre¬ ceptor, father Betsolin, all rushed upon memorv, and filled him with dismav and doubt. Why his own life should be so carefully preserved, he knew not ; and whv the enterprise and glory of a ruffian b-unl should wait upon his safety, wateh- itX the progress of his every action, r-u, i** n-;>tin^ hi* line of conduct, r;a lUiiho.itativcl) claiming the guidance «if ! ч\ future life, he could not deter¬ rà tn\ He stood, h:se\es rivetted on the ¡iinidcr, and his heaıî sickening at the ι — r-sity of acquiescence. " Why so thoughtful?" demanded i *¿ Montauban;
Montauban; " the threat of life is passed, and gratitude should mark the favour felt." "Gratitude!*' repeated Theodore, in the energy of his feelings, " gratitude for what ? for the vile privilege to breathe, tied down in bondage to your tyrant rod." " Beware, rash boy : patience is a short-lived virtue, and best lays claim to pious dotage. The time will come, when even you will doff the badge of saint, and smile at past fanaticism. Come, boy, confess which suits your ardour best, the trumpet's clarion, or the monk's dull whine." " My ardour glows in the award of virtue," replied Theodore; " and my soul pants to trace the tract of rectitude and honour. Give me but liberty to quit thcöC
these walls, restore me to my youth's blest guardian, from my actions take the vile restraint of your authority, and, from the sacred candour of unìmpeached ve¬ racity, securely rest, that time, nor chance, nor fate, nor power, shall eer the fatal secret glean of our mvsterious compact." Contemptuous was the smile which marked the features of Montauban— ** Your life is in my hands, your fate, your being, all my own," he exclaimed; " and think you I'll forego the purchased right, and blast my deep designs ? Go, idle dreamer ! pursue the phantom Vir¬ tue ; it is a ghostly search, and best be¬ longs to frantic zealots. But remember, when called upon to action, you must the thraldom break, and own my higlt command." с 3 " Take
tff Take back the purchase/' eagerly exclaimed Theodore; u the pang of death İs mercy from this accursed bon¬ dage. Think not Vìi shrink. Come on ; behold me firm, prepared to meet the stroke that severs the coercion of self- assumed authority." ' c The moni: Iìttsolin" muttered Mont¬ auban, pointing to the dagger in his girdle; ' f Tis there the aim's most sure." Theodore shuddered, and the pallid hue of his features armed with new force the powers of torture. (f 'Tis there," pursued the bandit, *' that heroism dies, and yields the reins to Nature.** fi Nature.»" repeated the almost gasp¬ ing Theodore; íť no, gratitude and mer¬ cy. Nature holds forth no smiling claim to lure the heart of orphan sorrow." ft Sav
€f Say not orphan/* rejoined Montau¬ ban, fixing his eyes, in scrutinizing ear¬ nestness, on the varying expression of our hero's countenance; "a parent yet may claim the right of your obedience/* "A parent!'* echoed Theodore; "a parent î a parent's arms enfold me ï a parent's love sustain me V' '* A fathers?' ejaculated IVfontauban, grasping the arm of Theodore, and hur- rvins: tf)wards the door. 4t Stay yet a moment/* implored the youth, struggling for freedom. " First lead me to the feet of him who can the tie proclaim. Interest—Nature will the election make, and bend me at his feet, a humble suppliant for his blessing. Tell me------" <c Peace, boy/* interrupted the bandit, с 4 starting
starting at the entrance of Randolphe "Behold your guide: you must away. and leave to time and chance, and my con¬ currence, all hope of farther knowledge, Remember well your oath, and be, as heretofore, the signal of our intercourse preserved. Randolphe will guide you through the intricate passes of the fo¬ rest, and then your path is straight. Re¬ member the pledge of secrecy." u Marry !" muttered Randolphe, as the bandit descended the turret stairs, " I hatea fasting journey. What say \ou, boy? are you for braving the keen air of the mountains upon an empty stomach ?" * ( Let us away," exclaimed Theodore, regardless of the question; " let us quit these walls; the very air is tainted ; vice stalks unmasked, and tyranny reigns with u n hal-
unhallowed latitude. Oh that I had never quitted Valombre ! that I had ne¬ ver seen------ ** " Pshaw, boy," interrupted Randolphe, * % * regret is but a shallow wind-up of a story ; 'tis like remorse, and that's a coward's virtue. Come, avaunt with care and sighing sadness ! Let's away, first to break our fast, and then to tramp the mountains. Marry 1 I know each pass, and can scale the rocky heights, as though I'd trod the footings of a guide/* Theodore silently followed from the turret; his heart was sad, and bitter sounded the jocose ribaldry of Ran¬ dolphe. His eyes wandered, in musing melancholy, o'er the deserted chambers through which they passed, for neglect had hung her mildew on the time-in- c 5 crusted
crusted walls, and faded the scattered remnants of splendour. iC Why, boy," exclaimed Randolphe, laughing at the expression of thought he could not decipher, " you look as gloomy as though you were ordinary confessor to a convent of penitents." " Is it long/' demanded Theodore, unmindful of his remark, u since this castle was deserted by its owners ?" (e Who told you it was deserted?" questioned Randolphe. " Observation," replied the youth. " Observation has deceived wiser heads," rejoined the robber. " By the mass ! if vou could see our revels, vou would not аьк ifit was deserted." " By its owners?" again repeated The¬ odore. " We
(( We are its owners, for we boast pos¬ session," said Randolphe; " and the de¬ vil must aid him who dare dispute our right. Peeping from their graves, me¬ thinks the old dons would stare," point¬ ing to the full-length portraits which, in gilded frames, hung around the gallery, i{ to see the change. Why here, where they used to confess their sins, we drown ours/' appK ing a huge key, and throw¬ ing open a folding-door. <c Look ye, I am butler to the troop, and here we stow the grape's rich nectar." f * Impiety, profanation, sacrilege !" burst from the lips of Theodore, in be¬ holding the stores of plunder, piled even on the dismantled altar of the chapel. Randolphe laughed in derision, as he watched the eves of Theodore, w ? ander- с 6 ing
ing from the scriptural allusions which stained the high casements, to the de¬ faced aîtarpïece, and the tattered rem¬ nants of its decorations. " Why, boy," exclaimed the ruffian, " it is but the %vork of man." " True," murmured the shuddering Theodore, ec but it was dedicated to the worship of God." <* I query," rejoined Randolphe/'whe¬ ther the holy brotherhood, with all their boasted forbearance, wouldn't absolve the sin to be made free of the privilege: Aye, aye, let them alone ; they love the luxuries of the flesh, and compromise at will with the doctrines of the spirit. What say the monks of Yalombre ? Come, unbend, and say what you have seen besides praying?" u I have
c< î have seen," said Theodore, " what stamps on vice a die so black, as robs it almost of the reach of mercy." €t Aye, boy, whaťs that ?" questioned the robber. * ť Its contrast, virtue" firmly replied our hero, following once more into the gallery. Theodore partook but sparingly of the rich profusion of plenty, nor did his lips touch the luscious nectar, sparkling from the flask. Impatient to snap the fetters of detention, to hail once more the pri¬ vilege of enlargement, he awaited the conclusion of Randolphes repast, and saw him drain the flaggon's dregs with pleasure, because it was an item of de¬ parture. His heart beat high as he re- crossed the drawbridge; for,in his" mind's eye,"
eye," the calm serenity of his convent was already restored, the rough, ungentle sway of guilt had ceased to torture ; for though his looks were fixed on the harsh features of the robber, his thoughts, his soıû, had flown to the early sanctuary of his worship. Gradually the picture changed, and Juliette flashed on his men¬ tal vision in all her pristine beauty. Sweet was the smile which marked the heart's soft flight, tender the sigh which rose spontaneous to a first emotion ! * c My orders are to conduct you through the foiest," said Randolphe. Theodore started. The voice, with gorgon power, annihilated the rosy spring of bliss, dissolving her fairy flights, crum¬ bling her unsubstantial fabrics; reality's void returned, and
Mountains
Mountains tow'rhig to lhe horizon's Üne, Knew but tlw tbaııge ofpmc fortet* drear, and Time-worn battlements. ft To guard you in safety," pursued the robber, ft nor to leave you till within the path you last night strayed from." (t Last night," repeated Theodor with a heavy sigh ; " would I had tarried in the forest !" " Marry ! you have no right to com- plain of our treatment," rejoined Ran¬ dolphe. " I should like to know," gaz¬ ing inquisitively in his face, " who and what you can possibly be, to excite the interest of our chief. Come, disclose, my little hero,** grasping the arm of the youth ; " where have you seen the noble Montauban ?" " í came a sojourner from Valombre's monas-
monastery," replied Theodore; t( the world I have seen has been upon these mountains." " And yet you know Montauban?" Theodore was silent. " Come, boy, confess,*' continued the robber, whom the contents of the flag- gon had robbed of his taciturnity ; " tell me why I am made your guide, and what you have done to excite the atten¬ tion of our chief? Some daring enter¬ prise, I warrant. By the mass î he has a noble spirit ; brave as though he had ten lives to lose, instead of one. I have seen him attack the armed as well as the unwary, and hew his way in spite of dan¬ ger and death. In the field, he would face the devil ; but in the dark ------" *'What of the dark?" eagerly interrupt¬ ed
ed Theodore, upon whose memory the mysterious voice in the passWe flashed. (i Why, in the dark," resumed the lo¬ quacious Kandolphe, nodding, signifi¬ cantly, (C he is little better than a cow¬ ard. I saw him once------but yonder is the boundary οΐ my march. See, we have passed the forest, and the path lies straight before you/* " Stay yet a moment," importuned Theodore, eager to elucidate the mys¬ tery ; " say when and how you saw him a coward, Randolphe ?" " A coward—in the dark—mark that/* rejoined the robber. fr I saw him once rush through the passage, as though the devil had come to claim him, his features all convulsed, his eyes extended, and his very hair erect upon his head ; and when the clock in the council-hall told one,
one, he hid his fa.e, and madly called out murder! 4 * " Jem Maria ! murder î did he call out murder?" demanded Theodore, " Aye, boy: but why should the soi.nd bleach your cheeks, and palsy e Vn ş our limbs?" ** No matter," faltered the youth. ie Proceed—what else did you see ? what else did you hear ?" <f Ko more," replied Randolphe : " next morn we left Yermandois, and for three nights Montauban kept a guard within his chamber." <( Did it teach him mercy ?" ques¬ tioned Theodore, pausing on the verge of the forest." " That your own safety can best re¬ solve," replied the robber. Freed from the restraint of observa¬ tion*
tion, Theodore, with gratitude, heard the retreating steps of Randolphe, and saw the darkening forest close upon his giant form ; he felt as one who, from the brink of danger, sees the path οΐ peace and safety open ; as one who, tossed on seas, forlorn and jovless, hails the blest har¬ binger of his sanguine hopes. Elated» grateful, he breathed his fervent thanks to Heaven ; and then, with tread as light as mountain-goat, or playful doe, brush¬ ed swiftly o'er the thymmy herbage. Unmarked by accident, or the lingering protraction of delay, save the chance stoppages for repose, Theodore, at length, beheld the turretted spires of Valombre, peering amid the age-rooted umbrage of embowering trees. The sun was slowly sinking, and the \csper hymn of nature flung her melting echoes to the
the breeze ; sweetly did thev linger, now ceasing, now reviving, now dying in the soul-thrilling cadence of a last exertion. He paused for a moment; his eyes fix¬ ed on the agitated waves of the Garonne, and his feelings catching the sad infec¬ tion which departing day diffuses— if To¬ morrow thy glory will revive," he arti¬ culated, slowly moving towards the con¬ vent, and gazing from the perturbed wa¬ ters to the last golden beam of splen¬ dour; 'Mo-morrow creation will smile beneath thy invigorating rays: but man boasts no awakening impulse; the night closes on his labours, and the dawn finds him buoyed by fallacious hope, or writh¬ ing beneath the pang of disappointment. Qh, Nature! Nature !" and fancy fíed to Bena Copia and to Juliette, " why hast thou vested my soul with the sen¬ sitive
sitivé throb of feeling, if thou with- holdestever the tender bliss of sympa¬ thetic intercourse ?" He reached the gate ; the bell echoed to his pull ; the heavy bars were with¬ drawn ; it flew open ; he rushed across the court-yard ; he sought the presence of his friend ; and whilst the monks, with eager questions, muster around him, hailing his glad return, and Joading on his head the pious offering of their blessiiigs, be it my task to introduce to the notice of my readers, the lovely object who, at the profession of the sister Monique, in the chapel of the convent of Bena Copia, put to flight the stoicisms of our youthful mission¬ ary, and, in one moment, stamped him an apostate to his former credence.
СИАР.
CHAP. IL Ambition ! сюье art thou leagued with nibVy ; For thou doit poison peace, nay, e'en the spiin^ Ut' hope, to reah/c thy aim. Not in The ^oilil -Aime be traced thy fearful strid-; Eiuhrou'd within the parent hei'i't, frroziiig Tlie йЧгмш oí' nature and of pity, thou. Riilöst alt the sweets of early love ! PaiDE, man's deadly foe, the bane of peace, the never-slumbering engine of the souľs destruction, marked in youth's earliest dawn the actions of the marrnis de Lurenville. He became a courtier, because distinction attends the s.r.ile of princes; he became a hero, because Fame spreads aloud the exploits οΐ the brave ; he became a husband, hern use splendour courted his acceptance: in every im¬ pulse, in every resolving period of ex¬ istence, the phantom pursued, ,ικ jab
ed, inspired him ; he lived but for the exaltation of his name, he sighed but for the promotion of his honours. Prospe¬ rity smiled upon his steps, Fortune la¬ vished the rich award of her favours. A son, the promising heir to his posses¬ sions, blessed his union ; a daughter, fair as Mahomet's fabled houris, held forth the lure of speculative aggrandize¬ ment. He was a husband, yet was he a siranger to the tender transports of con¬ nubial sympathy, to the dear, the match¬ less intercourse of mutual conciliation: he was a father, yet was he a stranger to tlie anxious, sensitive, thri!l ; "g emotions whif h idi a father's sou!—to the mingled sensations ci hope and apprehension, whose eternal warfare stamp* the preemi¬ nence alike doubtful. Hurried awav Щ the darling charm of ambition, which, like
like a fiery meteor, dazzles the eyes of adventurous perseverance, nature's pre¬ rogative of feeling became annihilated, and beneficence and philanthropy were but lesser springs in the great wheel of action. He was suspicious where ho¬ nour's sacred rule was threatened; yet was he open to the snares of the crafty, yet was he subtle and persevering in the performance of his projects. Piety held no rein to check the strides of human frailty, for the marquis was too much ч man of the world to' suppose reli¬ gion necessary to the soul, when heal í h organized the active energies of the body. The partner whom destiny had given him was happy in the sphere of submission, because she possessed that J^ftness, that pliability of disposition, which, yielding to the pressure of cir- cumstanccSj
cumstances, gradually converts habit into nature. The meek conveyancer of princely wealth, her virgin heart yielded to the blandishments of professed adora¬ tion ; and she accompanied the marquis to t\\e altar, untincturcd by one repining* sigh—uninfluenced by one sordid mo¬ tive. Bigoted to the tenets of her per¬ suasion, her greatest sorrow originated in the apostacy of her lord: at times she had ventured to implore, nay, strength* med bv the arguments of her confessor, сея to ndmonish; but her zeal ever ;;'.vakm;\l the casual smile of contempt, or aroused the shaft of jocose satire. De¬ moted to her children, and striving to liide them from the dangerous infection cf example, she doomed her heart to the painful prhation of her daughter's so- fitly; and prevailing on the marquis to усл.. ц. n coincide
coincide with her wishes for education, placed the lady Juliette at the convent of Пепа Copia. She knew the abbess, she knew the nuns; for she herself had «rkancd the rudimenti of knowledge in the same cloister. The count de Montelion<5, four years the senior of hi* sister, rich in the cul¬ ture of absinke science, and polished in the circles of refined lifo, had already, beneath the banner of his sovereign, sig¬ nalized himself in the fiv Id. Bra\ eleven to the verge of rashness, animated with the patriotic fire of almost Kom n n en™ ťniibiasm, proud of the \irtues more than the diiinitv of his ancestors, actuated bv the love of freedom, alive tö the slightest shadow of oppression, and espousing ever the caibe of the oppressed, he had risen into manhood, with that fervour of spirit,
spirit, that glowing energy of soul, which stamps a hero's characteristic. His figure was of that proportion towering into ma* jesty, which the artist covets in his deli¬ neation of an Apollo ; his eyes were blue, yet they possessed all the fire of intelli¬ gence, softening into the languor of sen¬ sibility ; his complexion fair, yet did each strongly-marked feature reflect the flash of mental genius. Early in the rimp í·.. id he imbibed the patience of eni'.uiaiice, ihe m.murmuring perseyc- лкч c t f irne ( ouragť ; а soldier, with aH а ч ! Jbï's gìrv.i'nj^ aiti ibi» tes—- dbinte- ìv^ed, bent \ols}i\t, ingenuous, he marked »tud síiudikred ai ihû growth of that раз- • : iìti, whiiî), sidxining a fathers softened fvct:ngs, liutatened the o\ erthro w of Hi¬ tam peut·. \ot for himself, but for the Ľ h£ n;u;.: stiimped a candidate for ь -ï love
love —for Juliette—for his sister, tlut sister, who, rich in expanding charms, whilst yet the playful dawn of infancy tinged with the fairy-finger of unclouded bliss the exuberance of fancy, had been affianced to a man whose vear* had num¬ bered thrice her own, and whose advan¬ tages were summed up in his dukedom and his wealth. The duke de Yermandois, the cotem- porary of the marquis, the being ambi· tion had fixed on for the husband of t lie lady Juliette, existed a pro* f that Na¬ ture, perhaps in sport, sometimes vio¬ lates her own bump of pei lection, by affixing to man, the image of his Creator, the blackening dye of a corrupt heart. ЯКе had neither gifted him with externa! charms, or internal qualifications; for h**s feat··res, the direct index to his mind, bespoke
b^poke him proud, morose, unbending; ¿4 sl ;vc to his passions, yielding ever to their wild controul, and violating every Intruding btirricr to ensure their gratifi¬ cation ; a sceptic 'in religion, he laughed at the denouncements of purgatory; an apostate to true honour, he yet artfully guised his flagrant deviations under the mask of worldly form. To the few up¬ on whom fortune had lavished her fa¬ vours the wily softness of the courtier glossed over the coercion of authority ; to the thousands whom the iron rod of adversity had already levelled, mercy claimed no transient reign to check the strides of tyranny. No soft conciliation ere mourned the lapse of feeling, ere chased the tear of woe ; heavy was the yoke which vassalage imposed; for 1'<ш cht ек. 'ii tiu 4 сшы 1 \\Ь*ы- Iutii opprimi, m ownM. i>3 ία
In early youth the snakes of en'.y coiled around his heart, crushing the germ of moral virtue. His father died. One step alone re¬ mained to intercept hh hopes, t\nd blast ambition's visions—that step a brother, «lifted with health, with vigour, with discretion, with honour ; not idh lavish¬ ing inheritance and fame in joyles» dis¬ sipation, but labouring in the cabinet of state to erect the bulwark of his country's triumph ; labouring to dis¬ charge the trust integrity imposed ; la¬ bouring to add individual honour to the long, long list of his forefathers' virtues. Vermandois traced the rising obstacles to splendour; he saw connubial bliss crown the transports of virtuous prepos¬ session ; he saw the dear, the treasured pledges of nature cement the bond of hallowed
haKowcd love; he raw, and, like the demon o[ discord, breathed the heavy cur>e of hatred and malice. But transient is the breath of life; the innotent instigators of that hatred, like the summer flowers, perishing beneath the lightnings blast, vanished hom the Lee of dav, leaving the ducal seat of hb ancestors open to his ambition, and to his wishes. The world paid him ho¬ mage; for man, blinded by the dross gold, forms, on the presumptive basis of his own conception, the standard of action. He was despised, but courted; hated, but endured; splendour solicited his alliance, and youth and beauty alike spread the soft blandishments of their smiles. The duke, alive to their fasci¬ nation, revelled in the luxurious lap of pleasure, but preserved inviolate the n 4 boasted
boasted privilege of liberty : a lover, without forging the chains of Hymen. he ranged 'uì the wild latitude of his sen¬ sual nature, nor once paused in com¬ passion, or relaxed in conscience. Hut Juliette, the lovely origin of nn dereli tion * True, gentle reader, in de¬ lineating the chirac ter of the duke de Yermando; 4 :, 1 ha.I forgot fen I left mv hero surrounded by the monks of Ya¬ lombre, for the specified purpose of in¬ troduc ing to your notice the innocent author of the missionary s enthralmenf. the gentle Juliette, who, as the officiating friend of the sister Monique, strewed the path to immolation with new-blown roses, little suspecting that, in the same mo¬ ment, she planted in the devoted heart of our hero, the sharp, the corroding thorn of hopeless passion. Pardon then the
the exuberant flight of fancy» and pa¬ tiently unfold the page, destined to bunch her on the busy theatre of action.
Ci FAP. ΠΙ. ï syrnet nies do bťt^-.e, and sutneltmts ď> n**t ; As Utoac liuti tear, they lupe, and ki>ow thr) tear. Lïke the golden seeds of harvest, sowed by the hand of industry, and nurtured in the earths luxuriant bosom, example, once engendered, spreads, unfolds, ex¬ pands, and crowns the labourer and the parent's toil. Such were the hopeful prognostics of the marchioness de Luren- ville, as she taught the infant Juliette to lisp the credo, and murmur the ave^ maria; such the anticipations of bigoted zeal, as she traced the brilliant eye of ex- n 5 pectatîon»
pectatîon, fixed on the hoary visage of her souľs confessor. *' She will be a saint," whispered father Anselme, watching the glowing counte¬ nance of his benefactress. " Grant it, Heaven!" aspirated the enthusiast ; and then would she strain the wondering child to her bosom. ** Holy Mary ! infuse thy sanctity," pursued the monk, u and gift this little candidate with heavenly grace." The chi id smiled in play ful dalliance, and the mother thought her already inspired. " She will save the soul of her father ! she will be a pious offering for his incre¬ dulity P' she would exclaim; and then, flying to her oratory, pour forth the fer¬ vent thanksgiving of her grateful heart. " What if she become a nun ?" ques¬ tioned the confessor ; " what if her soul, elevated
elevated by divine inspiration, forswear the allurements of the world, and prac¬ tise the forbearance of immaculate faith?" " Ah ! but to part with her," faltered the alarmed mother; "father, to forego the rich reward of all my pains, and all my trials. 5 ' I£ 'Tis for the salvation of her soul !" rejoined the confessor. <f Lady, some sacrifice is due to virtue." " True ; but I would fain retain the privilege of beholding her. Father, I would watch her growth, I would trace the gradual expansion of intellect» Tear her hence, and time effaces the powers of meni, ry, and blots the tender record of her mothers care !" " Ah, my daughter!" said the confes¬ sor, <f how little do you estimate the powers of the scul ! Gratitude is its pre- D (> dominant
dominant sentiment—is the very essence of its being—is the first, the social, the tender tie nature implants; or why do we see the smile of recognition brighten the downy features of infancy ? why do we see the first ray of reason emitted in the acknowledgment of a mother's carer" " 'Tisin the acknowledgment of kind¬ ness," rejoined the marchioness, " the mother claims the awakening smile, be¬ cause duty, affection, nature, cementing the tender bond, bends her in patient expectation o'er her precious charge: 'tis not the relative tie ; for the hireling, whom indolence, fashion, or caprice substitutes, oft gleans the rich reward the parent heart should covet. Ah, fa¬ ther ! a mother's fears give birth to a thousand, thousand sensations, which none else can picture." " True,
" True, lady," replied the confessor: " far be it from me to limit the force of nature; yet would those fears be les3 sensitive, the dangers less apparent, if screened from sensuality and tempta¬ tion. Numberless are the snares laid to entrap the foot of beauty; rank, riches, both alike combine to arm the tempter. Ah ! think how dazzling, how fallacious are the pleasures of the world ! think of the sophistry, the delusion of its pur¬ suits, and shield the infant Juliette from a test so fatal ! Think of her innocence, think of the salvation of her yet unpol¬ luted soul ! think of the apostasy of tli2 marquis, and resign her to the sure se** curity of never-slumbering zeal." "Ah, father!" faltered the marchio¬ ness, "never will my lord second the de¬ cision. Far other prospects, far other hopes,
hopes, colour the ardour of ambition ; he pictures, through the medium of his children, the promotion of his honours τ— the aggrandizement of his name/* The man of God meekly crossed his bosom, then, with a labouring sigh, re¬ joined— tr Dangerous anchor of reliance î dangerous presumption of human pride and human error î Alas î how often does man mistake the road to happiness ! how often does he labour hard to attain the summit, whose close is misery \" i( How can 1 resist the wishes of my husband ?" demanded the marchioness. " Speak, holy father; instruct me how to act. Aid me with your pious doc¬ trine ; teach my soul to combat or to yield." " Obedience is the beaten track," re¬ plied the confessor ; a when the incen¬ ti ye
tive owns no criminal motive, to con¬ quer İs to yield.'* Cf As how, father ?" eagerly demanded the marchioness. fi By conciliation, by entreaty," re¬ joined the monk. " Nature installs man the lord of the creation, but she arms woman with resistless weapons; man sways b ;* author' ty, but woman enslaves the soul — woman rises triumphantly through the meek humility of submis* bion." The marchioness forced a smile of in¬ credulity; then, with a heavy sigh, arti¬ culated— tc There arc dispositions------ *' and then thoughîfulfy she paused, fearful of casting the slightest shade of repre¬ hension on the conduct of her lord, ' r There are characters," observed the confessor, entering at once into her feel· ings,
íngs, " who, guided by this world's rule # own no sway but interest, admît no in¬ citement but ambition. Yet, daughter, the hour of conversion will arrive, and the prayers of piety will hasten the pre¬ cious impulse. Uncea^inii be our ori¬ sons to check the dangerous prevalence of example, and to awaken t'. e number¬ ing soul to the e\c''c:se of holiness." But vain were the pious offerings of zeal — vain the ceaseless expiations of religion ; the marquis, buried in the ab¬ straction of worldly pursuits, admitted no plea to rouse him from the toil. His study w T as the pinnacle of worldlv great¬ ness, and his hopes the passive submis¬ sion of his family. He ridiculed the saintly raptures of the marchioness, but suffered her to indulge in all her pious inflictions, as it interfered not with his pursuits i
pursuits; but the unguarded smile of contempt, the castul inucn.lo of iticrc- duli t j', pished not in harm less ineiTicacy »—died not in unnoticed oblivion. The little Juliette, the stay, tli: Uvrjc of the marcine jess s \Lionarv cntlut- ^iasm-—the imagined missionary of an jiereaftcr calling, betrayed the seeds of scepticism, and awakened the horror of doubt ; she neglected the lemons of the confessor, she shrunk from the restraints of devotion, nay, she broke the string of her rosan, and, with sacrilegious pro¬ fanation, scattered the beads in idle sport. (i She will be denounced of Heaven," exclaimed the confessor, gazing with dismav on the infant culprit. The marchioness uttered a fearful shriek, and clasped her hands in shud¬ dering fjrebodance. From
-ОМВПВ. From this period, the long^projcctcd plan of conventual education was reviv¬ ed, and Juliette was destined to the care of the holy mother of Bena Copia. " There the pernicious influence of example will be eradicated," said the confessor, " and the pure doctrine of faith restored." Hope chased the tears of maternal af¬ fection ; and the innate approbation of conscience, the never-slumbering incite¬ ments of duty, aided the eloquence of her appeal. The marquis listened, for it threatened not the overthrow of his own schemes ; he acquiesced, for it held forth no pros¬ pect of future resistance : submission he knew to be the groundwork of faith, and obedience the great law of moral duty. Thus guided by different motives, the resig-
resignation was acceded to; and Juliette, ere she had attained her seventh year, was removed from t lie parent roof, and consigned to the charge of the instructor of her mother's youth, the abbess of the convent of Bena Copia.
CHAP. IV. О, what authority unit show oť truth Cua cuim.uj: -на cover йьсИ withal ! Л'/ч', like the tenant Oí'Mime iii¿;ht-huunud »ula, bore aa aspect ih horror, worn to hubàtuíie. Mï^i Fuior* AloTHtn. So slight was the shade of apostasy, so transient the prevalence of example, that Juliette
Juliette forgot the tenor of her fit her 4 incredulity, and soon imbibed the enthu¬ siasm of her instructors. Surrounded bv the offîciaûno; members of faith, her every idea became tinctured; and when the marchioness de Lurenville, yielding to the urgent call of affection, \ bited the sacred retirement of her child, her every fear was banished, her every wish con¬ firmed. Securely resting on the promises of the mother superior, she ag.Jn bade her adieu, without one apprehension for the future, one regret for the past. With an intellect comprehensive, with a mind ingenuous, with spirits uncurbed, Juliette progressively surmounted the la¬ bours of study, and imbibed the rich cul¬ ture of education. Docile to the com¬ mands of her instructors, the playful fro¬ lic of youth obtruded not on the hours dedicated
dedicated to knowledge, neither did the gloom of cloistered sadness o'ercloud the season of cheerfulness. She li>tened to the philosophy of the aged, without imbibing the tincture of stoicism—to the trials of those whom affliction had driven for refuge to a cloister, without che¬ rishing a disgust for the world. She knew her prospects in life wore a far dif¬ ferent colour; she knew herself destined to fulfil the contract of ambition-—des¬ tined to tread the path of grandeur—des¬ tined the bride of the duke de Verman¬ dois; yet she felt no joy in the exalta¬ tion, no pride in the coming elevation : rather would she have remain d within the walls of tue monasten, ntîur have embraced the negative calm of religion. But duty urged obedience to a father's will, and aroused sensibility started nb barrier ;
barrier ; her heart slumbered in calm security. She had heard of love, but she had never felt its power. The duke de Yermandois was little calculated to awak¬ en its glowing energies; and save the duke de Yermandois, the marquis, the count de Montelione, and the father confessor of Bena Copia, her knowledge extended not beyond the pious sister¬ hood. Hegret ever mingled with her anticipation of a removal from the con¬ vent, because that removal was f o be succeeded by her marriage. She looked forward to the moment of sacrifice with a gloomy forebodance, with a sadness w hieb o'crelouded the serenity of the present, and spread a black, an Indescribable dread o'er the future. To her bosom-friend, the novice, skier Monique, she would dwell on her nanic- 1еь
less terrors, envying her the coming hour of profession— " Your life will be so calm, so uninterrupted/' she would say ; "" while I am combating, perhaps vainly, the world's innumerable evils, you will be quietly slumbering in the lap of religion and of peace.** ** My sorrows are passed/* replied Mo¬ nique, wipir.g the tear which remem¬ brance extorted ; fi at least the sorrows which the malice of man can inflict; but, though passed, thev are not tiVrxed. Ju¬ liette, yours has been a life r^f quiet; mine, alas î of agifition ; ;ou have known no uneasiness but what oweubirth in the mind; I have iVlt t -е poisoned arrow of perfidy ; í have been driven from the world, for its busy haunts vield* ed no safeguard against destruction." 1 \ ou ï
" Y~üu !" exclaimed Juliette, gazing on the interesting countenance of the speaker ; " you, so young, and so unfor¬ tunate." (r No, not unfortunate/' resumed the novice; "for I have escaped the snares of vice. Ah, Juliette ! the heart plead¬ ed against me, vet did I resist her coun- sels; Heaven aided me in the contest, and aave me strength to stem the so- phibtry of the deluder." 4t And vet vou fi ν for safety?" observ- ed Juliette. fí Yes, from myself," eagerly rejoined Monique; " í fiy beyond the possibility of recall, beyond the reach of tempta« tion ; I fiy from man ; I take refuge within this cloister, where, in thç exer- th>e*of religion, in the calm of reilec- tioib
tion, the remembrance of the evils I have escaped will be a healing balm to existence.'' " Would I could tarry with you !" sigh¬ ed Juliette. " You!" demanded the novice; " alas ! what sorrow would you fly? what danger would you shun ?" " I would fly a sacrifice my heart re¬ volts at," replied Juliette ; " I would shun a marriage which excites detestation and regret. The duke de Yermandois is not the being I would picture, is not the being 1 am love, lie has rank, he has riches, but boa«ts not one charm beyond ; besides," and her snow-white bosem heaved with a labouring sigh, " beside?, lie is as old as the marquis, my father," " True," said the novice ; " but your heart violates no compact, pants with no vol, и, ж hidden
hidden prepossession ; as a wife, you will burst upon the world, and the tie of duty will restrain the wayward flights of fancy." " And will the tie of duty make me happy ?" artlessly questioned Juliette ; " will it make me contented in my sta¬ tion ? will it make me grateful for my lot?" <f It will make your lot tobe endured/' replied the novice ; " nay------" " Is that all?" interrupted Juliette ; and her features betrayed the saddened expression of melancholy. " Yes, more," resumed her friend ; <f it will arm you against the force of flat¬ tery, and the dangerous influence of de- lusion." " Ah ! but it will poison the spring of hope/' murmured the desponding Ju- ** liette,
Hette, <( and leaden the galling fetters of bondage/' fi Say, rather, that it will soften the fet¬ ters of bondage," observed Monique, cí and reconcile the local ills of existence. You may be happy, for you may live for the bliss of others; exalted charity, un¬ curbed benevolence, is a rich store of peace, which individual evils can scarce destroy. Had such a field been mine, had such a claim withheld me, the world had not been renounced, society had not been deserted. I was left alone, unbless¬ ed and unblessing; no· tie claimed the office of endearment, or the conciliation of regard ; my feelings were untaxed, for the grave had left no candidate for favour, My father fell in the field of ho¬ nour; and my mother, writhing beneath the stroke, gave me an orphan to the e 4 world.
world. She had prayed for death, but the cry of helplessness awakened the dormant feelings of nature; she had prayed for death, but maternal solicitude combated the fell powers of calamity, and roused her thoughts e'en from the con¬ templation of a husbands tomb." " Unhappy widow !" sighed Juliette, and a trickling tear indicated the force of sympathy. r * You judge rashly," mildly resumed the novice; t( religion tempered her sor¬ rows, nay, compressed them within the calm current of resignation. She was not unhappy, for every thought was in¬ nocent ; her life passed in the unvarying exercise of duty, in the calm philan¬ thropy of beneficence. 'Tis true, her features wore a pensive cast of care ; but frequently would she relax them, for she fe:t
felt that the repining murmur of discon¬ tent was a reproach to the ordinations of Providence." ft She must have been a saint," exclaim¬ ed Juliette. " She is a saint/* rejoined the novice, " for she is in heaven !" Her voice fal¬ tered; memory called forth a tear, which piety vainly essayed to repel. " She left me," struggling to regain composure, " without a guide; at an age, too, when danger threatens in a thousand shapes, and the heart boasts no security." ** And yet you triumphed," said Ju¬ liette. t( I triumphed/* replied Monique, " because I fled. Under the guise of friendship, the temptations of love as¬ sailed me. I was scarce eighteen, unac¬ quainted with the snares of the world, e 3 and
and a stranger to the artifice of man. voice of kindness revived my droop¬ ing spirits, and tilled me with a hope that 1 was not altogether destitute. Gra¬ titud? aroused eve γ faculty of mv na- turc, and the assiduities of friendship kindled the energies of love. Mine were no common feelir-gs ; thev were strong, thev .re decided; uninfluenced by worldly motive*, unrestrained bv cold reserve. 1 dreamt not deceit, for 1 felt incapable of treacherv, and 1 weighed the heart of St. Aubin İn the same sejle. The p.'ignancy of grief had subsided ; my mother was remembe/ed with tenderness, but not with that bitterness of regret which marked the first hours of her loss. Then the arguments of reason seemed an instiît to mv feelings, and the soothing remonstrantei of attention a quickening spur
spur to sensibility. St. Aubin marked the change—marked the smile of new- awakened hope—marked the sigh of new- awakened affection—marked me for his \ ittim," shuddering ; i4 but I escaped the snare." ťŕ His victim !" repeated the attentive Juliette; ts ah, sister î docs the world contain hearts so ba^e, so relentless?" ** Alas ! the world teems with bein »rs of a similar stamp," said the novice; " beingb who, with oaths and pernicious counsels, violate the confidence of inno¬ cence, an \ prey on the peace of the un- WtttV '/* " How are the\ to be discovered? how are they dibtingubhed ?" eagerly ques¬ tioned Juliette. <* Deceit lies in the heart," replied e 1 Monique,
Monique, " and often mocks discern¬ ment."' "And yet the mask will drop," said Juliette/ " The mask did drop," rejoined the novice, " and Heaven inspired mc with fortitude—with resistance. St. Aubin knew me destitute ; no friend to resist, no refuge to protect ; he watched the growth of iniluence, he ma.ked the force of love ; he saw m, young heart ensnar¬ ed beyond the power of recall ; he saw the delusions of sopiiistry had sank deep; and then he dared——he------" She he¬ sitated; a quickening blush mantled her cheeks ; and turning away her face—" he would have seduced mc, but I fled, and these walls became my sanctuary." " And vou forgot him, you renounced him ?'* observed Juliette. " Yes,
** Yes, for ever," fervently exclaimed :he novice; "forever!renounced him. B .íí"? strength of memory baffles the residui: ч s> of thesoul: the heart, once enslaved, i*!o.*/ ere it regains the exercise of its turner,, "Does it ever regain themr" a>kv\t Juliette. "Yes, where pride aids the ríľ.4t," answered Monique, " for then do». s rea¬ son, then does virtue contend for the mastery of passion. My retreat has been discovered, has been assailed ; St. Aubin has been at the grate—has pleaded re pentance and reparation; but, though sensibility yielded, resolution remained firm. From the mother superior 1 heard the tale of remorse ; but not for one u: j~ ment did 1 suffer my eyes to behold the being who had once so fatally deluded my senses. He wrote to me. His lan- fi à guage
gnage was pathetic, his colouring highly wrought ; he pleaded the force of edu¬ cation, and the prevalence of example. By blackening the world, he essayed to screen his own deformity; but vain was the casuistry of deceit. Secure in the temple 1 had chosen, î transcribed the revolution in my ideas, and affirmed, that the world possessed not one charm which could cost a sigh in the renun- (iatjon. I tendered my forgiveness; I poured forth prayers for his happiness ; and concluded with my unalterable reso¬ lution of seeking peace beneath the im¬ penetrable veil of concealment." *' Did the resolution cost you no pain?" questioned Juliette; " did the sorrow, the remorse οΐ St. Aubin awaken no lingering tenderness?" ' c No," replied the novice. " My re¬ solution
solution was not the vagrant flight of anger, or the transient conclusion of re- venge ; it was formed on reflection, ¡t was the decision of reason. Could I hope for happiness with the man who had for¬ feited my respect ? Could I rely with se· curity on the man who sought to degrade me? No: though superior in birth, though exalted in rank, I felt he was un- worthy of me, and the struggles of com¬ panion vanished at the denouncement of pride. ! hul loved him with an enthu¬ siasm alone my own ; with an ardour which mingled with my existence — which formed almost the principle of my nature—which would have defied the lap^e of time, or the force of affliction. I would have watched him in the hour of calamity, I would have attended his wan¬ derings, and shared his cares; but he к 6 cast
cast away the heart of a faithful friend, and staled the fiat of separation." * f And no existing scruples, no linger¬ ing tenderness, pleads the cause of St. Aubin?" asked Juliette. The novice breathed a half sigh ; her averted cheek glowed a deeper tint, as softlv she articulated— te The magic of prepossession often defies the arguments of reason, but the privilege of action yields to the controul of resolution. It may be long ere the name of St. Aubin can be heard with indifference; yet, could he penetrate this retreat, could he appear before me, could he, armed with the eloquence of love, essay the winning arts of entreaty, I would spurn them all. My tongue should breathe no reproach, neither should my manner betray indeci¬ sion ; I would tell him, Virtue, once frightened*
frightened, had sought a sanctuary, which artifice could not tempt her to forego/* (f Heroic girl !" exclaimed Juliette. ** Ah, no, my friend," rejoined the novice, ťt short would be the reign of heroism ; with the necessity for exertion would it fly, and tears perhaps might record the return of weakness—might ** Tears, but not of regret," inter¬ rupted Juliette· " Ah, no," resumed Monique, and the sparkling animation of her eyes betrayed the energy of her decision, " tears of outraged feeling. Tyrannic love may be dethroned, but thought will stray ; thought will, with torturing minuteness, revive the painful past. Three years have fled since I became an inmate of Bena Copia ; St. Aubin has ceased to per¬ secute·
secute. X\ ith the lapse of time, my ideas and my hopes have undergone no ebanite ; established on the basis of de¬ votion and faith, mv heart feeis grateful for its escane from worldlv temptation, I rf i ' and calmly awaits* the moment which shall install me a humble candidate in the sa¬ cred vocation of my railing." " Would I, too, possessed the liberty of a free election ľ* sighed Juliette. " Retract thaï wish, unthmkir.g girl/* replied the novice; "parents, kindred, situation, stamps thr.t wish with irreli¬ gion and ingratitude. To me the world holds forth no lure to tempr me from my cloister; to you it teems with gay scenes of coming happiness. Thousands will court your favour, and hang upon your smiles; thousands will bless the hour which gave you to society, rich in a heart
heart expanded by benevolence, supe¬ rior to the contractions of prejudice and pride." Sweet was the smile which lightened up the countenance of Juliette, as she listened to the praise o*f her friend — praise, not the unmeaning polish of flat¬ tery, but the genuine tribute of disinte¬ rested affection—praise, which sinks into the heart, which cherishes the noble per- severance of emulation and virtue. Such was the friend, whose gentle and im¬ proving converse lightened the mono¬ tony of time, and endeared the hour? of seclusion. But as in society, so is the monastic life varied bv a diversity of cha- racters ; the same passions harbour not in different breasts, neither does the pur¬ suits and propensities of human nature, more than the human countenance, de¬ pend
pend on one regular standard. Alike necessary to the well-being of each other, the epitome of life may be traced in a contracted circle, where a contemplative mind may read the turbulence of pas¬ sion, the never-dying energy of ambi¬ tion, the thirst for glory, the persever¬ ing conquests of application, and the subordinate meekness of submission— To clash, to mie, with opposition dire; Some sway the heart, while others kindle iire. To minute the inmates of the convent of Bena Copia is not my intention, nei¬ ther toscan the motives of self-immola¬ tion. As in most religious societies, the effect, but not the causes, assimilated; and the timid virgin, the contrite sinner,. the persecuted matron, and the heart- rived widow, sought peace beneath the shelter of the same habit. One
One nun alone must infringe upon my sistem of procedure—a nun, whose ac¬ tions, whose pursuits, whose habits, nhose occasional disclosures, teemed ever with the thickening vapours of mystery. This nun was the si^er Laurette, the repining inmate of a narrow cell, the condemned \ictim of power, the singling prisoner of coercive authority. In the meridian of vouth, when Nature's kindling hand hza stamped in mortal u ould the breath¬ ing semblance of immortal beauty, when cverv grace combined to deck the wo- man in the angels form, she was severed from the world, severed from the ho¬ mage of admiring man, and destined to the cold, the iov less anathv of prayer. It was night when the convent-gates closed upon her, when the convent-walls echoed the phrenzied shrieks of her despair ;
despair; but the mandate was despotic ; the royal signet stamped the fiat which destined the prisoner to a living tomb. Her rank, her name, her crimes, her sor¬ rows, ali alike were hid, and no coming mercy dawned a respite to her fate. Racked with contending passions, her feelings uncontrouled bv piety or forti¬ tude, violent were her efforts of resist¬ ance, prophane the exclamations of her wrath. She vilified Heaven, she vilified man, she cursed the callings of Chris¬ tianity, and breathed the bitter execra¬ tions of a relentless spirit. Subdued na¬ ture yielded to the paroxysm of rage ; but, even when her frame was exhausted, even when fever preyed upon her strength, imagination knew no cessation of quiet. Fearful were the flights of her delirium, and frenzied the shrieks of her de -»pair.
despair. It was then she raved of blood ! —it was then she whispered murder I— it was then, the pious sisterhood, with looks of horror and dismay, blessed the calm of innocence, and prayed for future mercy. Charity harboured in the breast of the sister Lucille. 'Tis true, she was a fanatic ; Tis true, the pollution of sin, elowing on her faded cheek, sought in vain to check the reign of soft compas¬ sion ; but Pity, like a lingering cherub, firmly kept the field, and wept the lapse which bigotry condemned. Never, for a moment, did she steal from the side of the forlorn one—never shrink from the task humanity imposed. She smoothed the thorny pillow of disease, and watched the electric flights of phrenzy ; she trea¬ sured the wanderings of extraneous thought, and oft conjoined the unformed start
start of madness. The object of her care revived, but with strength returned the fire of unbending pride, the defiance of persevering obduracy. No smile of gra¬ titude spoke the acknowledgment of fa¬ vour; rather did her manner betrav re- proach, for having snatched her from the freedom of the grave. Tears marked not the hour of compulsatory profession, nor did one sigh heave the white bosom of beauty. Cold was the glance she cast on heaven, doubtful the smile which hailed the psalmody of the sitters. With un¬ daunted step, majesty on her brow, and grace in every movement, she proceeded through tlie choir. The solemnity of prayer relaxed not her features, neither did it soften the bent of her resolves. She heard the closing admonition ; she felt the death-fraught veil enshroud her bi ow'j
brow, yet did no start betray her feel* ings. Firm, even to apathy, she return¬ ed to her cell, and there buried every intruding weakness from the eyes of the sisterhood. In vain was she dragged to the confessional— İn vain were the pious exhortations of the lady abbess essayed; never would she breathe the tale of con¬ cealment—never disclose the secret of past enormities—" You have made me a nun/' she would reply, to the threat of eternal denouncement, " but not the tortures of inventive tyranny can unseal my lips ; you have buried me in this so¬ litude, biit the prhilege of self-examina¬ tion shall be mv own.*' Years wore away without producing change. The s'btcr Laurette proudly defied the authority «»: *he superior, and treasured the seeming mystery in her own breast ;
breast; but the canker-worm preyed up¬ on her peace, faded the roses on her cheeks, and dimmed the lustre of her eyes, Sometimes would she exclaim against the coercion of power, but oftener would she sit in moody abstraction. With repellent coldness ever would she meet the advances of tenderness; with impa¬ tience, but oftener with studied con¬ tempt, the arguments of piety. Wrapped within herself, she parried the prying questions of curiosity, and lived, as it were, estranged from the members of her own community. Strict was the watch upon her movements; never, for an in¬ stant, was she permitted to approach the grate; and at given festivals, and public inaugurations, she was banished the pri¬ vilege of the chapel. No soul was to be¬ hold her charms; for the letter of her commit-
commitment ran— <f Thai the sister Lau¬ rette, condemned to a life of penance and self-mortification, was to be dead to every eye, save the inmates of tne con¬ vent of Bena Copia."
CHAP. V. Ail day,— tb'Sift tbrth aro «fjunì î To-morrotv, and ine next, and f ach that iolUnvs, \\ ill umhsţinjţuish'd roli, and buf prolong one ihm d Unti of amre extended woe. Cox grev f. Thou hast a grim арреиаьсе. and thv face Bespt-ak:> command ia it. SiiAkESťF.AHS. Changed was every object within the dark walls of Valombre ; gloomy melancholy seemed there to reign, and dissatisfaction and regret to colour the sigh of peni¬ tence
tence —at least, in the eyes, in the ears of Theodore, No longer was it the со· veted haven of repose—no longer the desired barrier against sin and tempta¬ tion ; futurity was seen through the me¬ dium of love, and the world panted after as the Elysium of bliss. Every former pursuit gave place to the all-conquering impetuosity of passion ; and the uncon¬ scious Juliette lived in the brain, rioted in the heart of the inexperienced mis¬ sionary. What before had constituted pleasure, could no longer boast an at¬ traction; books, horticulture, nay, the charms of nature, became tasteless and uninteresting. The pursuits of his for¬ mer recreative hours were neglected, and every energy of his comprehensive mind sank into inactivity and despondence. The corroding worm of hopeless enthral¬ ment
ment gnawed upon his peace, and the mysterious tenor of his own destiny yielded to the destiny of another. H* could think, he could dream but of the affianced marriage of Juliette—but of the blank, the hopeless void which futurity opened to his perception. i% What new change do I behold ?" in¬ quired father Betsolin, starting at the /ngui?.hcd ài »h which heaved the bosom 14 Irs ¡ ι riL ] he \ (H.rh started ; the vivid glow up- ;П hib ι bock hcighreneJ, and his dark t;*os san!> beneath the scrutiny of his !V.rmí4 % !чцч1}/' pursued the monkj «· some i-fluence, Ьоч/е to peace» colouis voar t\ery а-* нэп, and Magnates the опсе^агг naie stream of existence." voi, it, e «· Father
u Father ------ " faltered Theodore. u You quitted our retirement deject¬ ed/' resumed father Betsolin, <e you re¬ turn to it dissatisfied: before your depar¬ ture, the offices of friendship appeared painful, because they were felt as a re¬ proach to reserve ; now they are become irksome, for they violate the courted privilege of thought. 'Tis in vain you would assume a mask the ingenuous can¬ dour of your nature prohibits. Theo¬ dore, from the earliest dawn of infancy I have studied your heart, and marked its every movement ; some local charm supersedes the influence of Valombre, and binds it in the ready chains of en¬ thralment." Theodore sprung from his seat— (t Fa¬ ther!" he exclaimed, in quick and agi¬ tated
tated accents, " by what charm—by vrha hidden spell do you dive into the secret» of the soul?" " I boast no talismanic power/* said the monk, forcing a languid smile ; * r mine is but the common foresight of experience. 'Tis an easy task to read a heart unschooled in the artifìce of the world ; yours, my young friend, requires no interpreter.", t( And can you, indeed, trace the strength of its feelings ?" demanded the energetic Theodore ; " can you indeed peruse the colour of its future des¬ tiny?" " It is not for man to pierce the veil of futurity," observed father Betsolin ; ' f the womb of time, with wise and gra¬ dual protraction, unfolds each coming change." f δ " True,
' ť True, father, but yet you decypher the hidden spring of action." " I can decypher the rosy hopes of expectation," rejoined the monk. <ť Though cold, and dead to the world, I have not forgotten the energy of a first impression. Nature, unerring in her de¬ cisions, forbids youth the supine calm of indifference; some attractive form has lightened the gloomy path of your pil¬ grimage, and whispered that life holds forth no enjoyment in dull, unsocial so¬ litude/' S£ Attractive," repeated Theodore, vieldin« to the warm ardour of his feci- ings; " oh> father, it was a vision, so bright, so heavenly !" " A vision !" exclaimed the credulous father Betsoîin. " So young, so spotless, εο angelic !" continued
continued the enthusiastic Theodore. <f Ah ! what emotions, what sensations did she inspire ! Till then, my happiest moments had been but a negative exist¬ ence— а tasteless, vapid blank ; till then, the powers of life had been suspended; till then, the faculty to breathe had alone been mine.** * f And from then," exclaimed the monk ; ťť sav, bov, what from then ?" t( From then, father," pursued the youth, fi I may date a new being; a be¬ ing full of transport—full of hope—full of bliss------" " Full of anxiety—full of apprehen¬ sion—full of sorrow/' interrupted the monk. Theodore turned hastily towards him. He spoke not, but his features indicated his belief in the conclusion. f 3 « Fatal
*' Fatal consequence of confiding te¬ merity !" mournfully pursued the monkj; "fatal exertion of influence! fatal lapse of reason ! Alas! in the glance of a mo¬ ment, you have coloured the coming years of life ; through the o'erpowering indulgence of your senses, you have hoarded a store of misery and woe. Ill- fated object of my persevering solici¬ tude ! difficulties and dangers crowd up¬ on your path, and every object is decked in the sombre livery of sorrow." *' No, father !" eagerly exclaimed the youth, <( every aspect is decked in the glowing livery of delight; a new soul swells in my bosom, expands my facul¬ ties, and actuates every impulse of my nature. I breathe, I exist, I inhale the magic thrill; the past is a blank; the fu¬ ture------'' "Illusion i'*
íf Illusion î*' interrupted the monk. ft Be it so," rejoined the energetic Theodore ; " it is an illusion which can¬ not pass away—an illusion which black¬ ens the barren contrast of past apathy» Ah, father ! surely woman, the bright ec- type of excelling perfection, the existing image of vestal purity, the sw T eet sem¬ blance of heaven's angels ! surely------ * ff You are enthusiastic, boy,'* said the monk. Theodore paused ; his cheeks were flushed with crimson ; yet was it but the hesitation of a moment—" Father," he resumed, u to have seen her once, is to behold her for ever ;** and then, with all the warm fervour of youthful passion, he recapitulated his first visit to the convent of Bena Copia, the inauguration of the f 4t sister
sifter Monique, and the matchless graces of her voting attendant. Father Betsolin attentively listened ; every sentence sank deep m his heart; he trembled for the peace of his pupil, yet he knew not how to arouse him from his" trence. His were no common feelings, neither did the casual start of infatuai ion iiivc strength to his expressions; his was ihe wv.vin Ian^uajre of the soul, awakened by ihe impulsive powers of sensibility. A new, an arduous task called for the excitions of the monk — a task, from which the frigidity of the cowl shrunk in apprehension, but which dauntless, per¬ severing friendship hesitated not to per¬ form—a task, which by gentle, almost imperceptible degrees, was to extract the barbed arrow of festering passion, and
and revive the salutary dawn of long- banished cheerfulness. Every hour,snatch- ed from devotion, at once became dedi¬ cated to social intercourse; and father Betsoîin, banishing the austere gloom of abstraction, courted the insinuating smile of cheerfulness, to charm his beloved pupil into exertion. Grateful for the effort, eager to ex¬ press his lively sense of obligation, Theo¬ dore also became an actor in the same drama ; but though he smothered the in¬ truding sigh, and checked the melan¬ choly indulgence of his feelings, yet his heart glowed with the sume fervency; and memory, faithful to a first impres¬ sion, tinged his sleeping hours with the delightful dreams of approaching bliss. Sometimes the delusive visions of slum¬ ber levelled every obstacle;, sometimes f 5 ^ it
it snatched him from the gloomy walls of Valombre, and transported him into the Elysium of her society; then again the gathering clouds of calamity would intervene, and the flitting image of Ju¬ liette shrink from the extended reach of his embrace; sometimes, perturbed, rest¬ less, he would brood o'er the tale of fan¬ cied coercion, and weep the imagined stretch'of parental authority; sometimes, in his ** mind's eye," he would behold lier dragged ш the hymeneal altar, and fettered with compulsatory chains. Days and weeks wore away in painful protrac¬ tion, yet was he unable to snap the bonds of restraint—yet did the peerless image retain all its fascination. The moon had twice, in full-aUaincd splendour, mellowed the face of creation with its mild and heavenly radiance, dap¬ pling
pling the wood-crowned summits of the mountains with the light and shade of her reflections, yet Theodore visited not the ruined archway, nor in thought re¬ called the image of the mvsterious stran- I ger. It seemed as though every percep¬ tion waá absorbed in one; as though love, admitting no secondary thought, tyrannically swayed the sceptre of autho¬ rity. His once eager search to elucidate the hidden secret of his birth appeared suspended, and the very name of parent had lost the magic spell of attraction. Such had become the shapeless tenor of existence, such the apathy of a mind once alive to energy and exertion ; for Love's subtle poison, midat the soul intWd,, SrvAtfhes trotu NvİMİom the rein oí action, And scoff* at idle struggles. Luve rules o*er Man omnipotent. To reason's cogent JPowers—to arguments profound—to threats— ι & To.
Ίύ рготлеъ —to апцгу поИэ —to î* а;ъ —■ TopLtiuts— tu woe— he )itíivb nu tillie uť Ihb high authority. h was long past the hour of Nature's respite from labour, when each narrow dormitory contained the sleeping form vÎ'iU inhabitant, and Death's drear sister, Silence, reigned within the walls of Va¬ lombre, that Theodore, stealing from the stained casement οΐ his cell, from which had long watched the dark volume of clouds roiling o'er the disk of the wan- Lig moon, stretched his wearied limbs en his hard and solitary couch. He had mused o'er the unvaried blank of his prospects ; he had exhausted imagination πι groundless hopes, in futile promises; . he had journeyed o'er agan his mission to Bena Copia, arid Ungere J o'er the ma 0 k charm of first enthralment—when every
every blissful dream, nay, the fairy image of Juliette, was put to flight, by the opening of his cell door. A cautious hand reclosed the latch, and the next moment, starting erect, he beheld the gigantic figure of the stranger, habited as before, in the borrowed garb of Va- lombre's order. Doubt, horror, appre¬ hension, froze every impulse of speech, and chased the rosy bloom of health; his eves were rivetted on the intruder, and his hand pressed upon his throbbing heart. *' Rise, Theodore," whispered the stran¬ ger, " and repair to the ruined archwav: you have neglected the sacred tenor of л our oath ; but justice yields to mcrcv/* The vouth shuddered. i( Theodore, arise, and fly to the ruined archway," authoritatively repeated the stranger.
stranger. " I will await you beneath its sheltering gloom. Remember, though slow to execute the threatened deed of wrath, resistance entails death." The stranger fled from the cell ; and Theodore, trembling at the heavy denun¬ ciation of vengeance, prepared to fol¬ low. With slow and measured footsteps he passed down the passage, fearful, by disturbing the deep repose of the bro¬ therhood, of incurring questions he was unable to resolve, trembling at the slight¬ est sound, and starting as the lengthened shadows of the cloisters chequered his path· The night air blew cold and cheerless, gathering amklst embowering shrubs, and dying in melancholy cadence. Theodore, impelled rather than willing» turned not one glance towards the mo¬ nastery, but hurried to the appointed rendezvous.
rendezvous* The towering outline of the figure receded as he advanced ; he saw it shrink within the shelter of the archway, and then heard his own name pronounced in a whisper—" Yes, it is I," replied the youth; '* Valombre's bre* thren suspect not my uncourtly visitor/* . " 'Tis well," exclaimed the stranger. " Theodore, your own negligence has brought me hither. Think not to escape the o'crruling sway of my authority ; the grave alone can loosen the fetters you have forged/* Theodore shuddered—" Ah, that its influence would indeed dissolve the thral¬ dom !" he articulated, and then he breath¬ ed a long and labouring sigh. " Foolish boy!" resumed the un» known. f ' In the flower of youth, in the dawning spring of bliss, when the world holds
holds forth the dazzling lure of pleasure, and fancy revels in the region of delight, would you blast the energy of action ? would you turn untasted the intoxicating draught? would you------" i( No, no" interrupted the ardent youth, every idea absorbed, devoted τα Juliette and to love; " İ would love to share the bliss of sympathy, to breathe the sigh of adoration.'* " You would visit the world ?" said the wily tempter, eager to solve the clue of enthusiasm; u you would awaken from the lethargv of abstraction ?" Theodore hesitated, u I will lead you forth," continued the stranger ; (( I will be your guide to bliss/* smothering the smile of exultation, and rudely impelling forward. But Theodore shrunk from the touch ; the
the deceptive char:n-va;iîsïictî ; arnK^îrh a look oï horror, -he r.riivülate'ıl — v< Ne¬ ver!'* Anger marked the cl«inge în the fea¬ tures of tiie unknown—'* Ï have rea¬ soned, when force mi^ht Have compell¬ ed," he exelaime;! : 4t now, even now, can î drag you from this retreat, and boldly defy the ve n^eante of fanati^l·»^ ; nav, í ca;i work in the ц1<ют of con- cealment, and biienee those who dare ab¬ jure my sw'v'tv. Theodore," and hcîïirew aside the dark folds of his habit, ft be¬ hold thlb dauber î remember the oath taken on the-s?ei> of the altar— remem- ber the threat the forfeiture of that oath ensures." u llolv M;;rv У he eiacubtetb as the danger of hh revered preceptor chased every 1еь.-:ег idea. ťí The
" The monk lives," resumed the stran¬ ger, " though in part the stipulated bond has been abused. Had I been the strict observer ofthat bond, murder had sprin¬ kled the shrine of Valombre, and the monk's spirit now beyond the reach of recall. I have been lenient ; but mercy staggers: be wary, or it expires." " To fly I" faltered Theodore; " to brand my name with ingratitude—to stig¬ matize my actions with guilt and mys¬ tery—to be held up by the protectors of my infancy as a monster of deformity and vice------ ** " Or to remain," interrupted the un¬ known, 4t and verify man's misjudging conclusions—to remain, and sign the death-warrant of confiding friendship." ''Torturer!" burst from the lips of our hero* " Can
fť Can prayer," pursued the stranger, (i subvert the throes of conscience ? c-xn it absolve the bitter pang oí ingratitude? can it lighten the burdened soul of cor- röding thought?" " Is it you to ask me ?" demanded The¬ odore, with an emphasis so striking that the stranger involuntarily started and shrunk, as though a blasting vision had froze the spring of action* Long was the pause which ensued. Theodore stood undaunted, and a proud superiority marked the expression of his features. " Boy," at length said the stranger, and then he paused, and then banishing the dark cloud of overwhelming rage, and summoning a smile of deep-fraught meaning, continued—" I would leave you to your fate, but pity at its gloomy tendency propels me— d would leave you to
to breathe and die tn cb-curitv, ti linger out a life of depri vr^ion aid mi¬ sery, did not more than comir.cn feelings \)rgc the office of dei'verance—1 would leave vou to tlie nutri in<r influence of priestly interposition, hi: t aiì'e-tìon, c/er- ruling destiny, swavs m v actions. Has Nature indeed lobt her impulsive con¬ troul? has she sacrificed all her energies to the blank of fanaticism r has she ceded every br:ght, every gay, every alluring expectation to monkish apathv ? Mis¬ taken bov ! the world holds forth ties of resistless power—ties which, stealing on the heart, claims the soft fervour of in¬ stinctive homage—ties which the sacred bond of nature stamps indelible and holy. Once the name of parent------" Theodore grasped his arm ; the magic chord vibrated to the touch : quick was the pulsa tion
pulsation of his heart, \aried the expres¬ sion ofhisfeaturcs,as, with aching, gasping impatience he implored an explanation. " Tis I alone can solve the seeming mvsterv of ν on r birth." said the un- known ; *'■ 1, whom von releet, whom vou despise; I-——** ¿ You ! von í-" exclaimed the panting * l чтя Theodore; and wild was his action, for 1ш arms grasped the cloak of the Uranger, as he knelt imploringly at his feet. ί -легу threat was obliterated, every past apprehension lost, t-vcry dormant feeling awakened, every cherished ho »e revived—" Лгье," &aid the unknown. -' Theodore, be subm^sive, and the unì shall be removed; íly frum detention, and a father's arms shall enfold vou.*' ¿t tead me forth/' exclaimed the \ oudu '' Lead me to my father, Amidst a hosr, instinctive
instinctive nature will point him out. My father ! oh, righteous Heaven ! 'tis duty urges to submission." " Come on, then," said the stranger : but the quick eye of our hero, perusing the smile of triumph, rivetted him to the spot; a cold, a chilling pang darted through his heart, and dangers of un¬ known, of shapeless tenor, rose to his imagination—dangers so black, so threat¬ ening, that his scared soul shrunk thud- dering from the brink. Expectation's flowery verdure vanished; the budding roses died; and from their withering leaves crept forth the serpent-sting of guilt. Life would he have relinquished, to have purchased the past calm of free¬ dom—to have escaped the perils of the stranger's influence; but vain was the sigh of regret, vain the indignant start of
of reluctance; wishes effaced not the re¬ cord of the past, nor lightened the diffi¬ culties of the future— (t Urge me no fur¬ ther/' exclaimed Theodore ; " here ever will I tarry. Guilt lures beyond this boundary, and gratitude urges me to pause. Go, fly, mysterious being ! rea¬ son, honour, conscience, all bid me be wary." " Then nature is neglected, and duty violated," said the disappointed Mont¬ auban ; * f the prying incentive of curio¬ sity forsworn, and the offered blessing of a parent shunned. Theodore, reflect : the power to retract will soon be over, and regret, and unavailing repentance, will rack every hour of your coming life. Fate smiles but once, and obstinacy, or misplaced generosit), blackens all her prospects. The authority of a father may
may yet------" He paused—he started; he motioned Theodore to depart from> the archway ; for the shrill tinkling of the ma 1 in bell proclaimed the monks to have arisen— i% Curse on the busy rites of faith!" he muttered; then quickly added— <ч To-morrow, seek beneath von tablet the guide of action." Theodore fled, nor paused till he had regained his cell. His absence had beo unnoticed, and he joined in the ?j a. - tomed rites of devotion, without ex*.!·!. , the slightest shadow of еигшь^у. Γι. r though no external appearance ua. í the agitation of his mind, raticcd, ;<·.- t и red with irresolution and ae^pondc ч * were bis internal feelings». Image, oi horror rose to his imagination, and de\ pair cramped every energy of hLso^. Alive to the inflictions ufbclf-tonure, lu- .71 SÏ tU .*„
shrunk from the converse of father Bet- soli n, and carefully avoided the society of the brethren : he felt incapable of thinking but upon one subject, and that subject necessity confined to his owu breast. On either side, misery and regret baffled every hope of comfort—banished every prospect of repose. To remain, was to seal the doom of the exemplary father Betsolin ; to fly, was to be entan* ¿led in the ma.<e of guilt and woe-—" Oh! w hen, when shall I enjoy ilu sweet calm ot **!>liv¡on y * he exclaimed, plunging into •;ne deeptst геа-тч of the gaiden ; £ί w hei h. *e th.\ hea\y, this oppressive weigh? ol thought and tare? whrn, when, oh Гл- ťiur of lKav^u ! submit to thv doticeli vt u hout breathing the repining murtuu»' ι·ί* discontent У* líc turrut ıha t man, amid t h U vase ν Ί 1* .. crcuüon é
creation, is the only being who adjudges the mercy of Omnipotence—who poi¬ sons everv blessing with new and ceasc- less desires-—who complains, where he ought to be thankful—who weeps, where be ought to rejoice. The picture of his own unknown birth, his own estranged destiny, arose to imagination, and a sen¬ sation like reproach closed with the ne¬ glected form of a parent, whom he had refused to seek ; a parent, who perhaps laboured under affliction—perhaps from his hands could alone regain the cairn of peace ; what sacrifice could be too great in such a cause ? what power sufficiently strong to withhold him ?—" Yes, I will io, Ì will Mv whither duty urges me," he exclaimed ; " every tie will I snap, every bond will I sever; in search of thee, my father, 1 will pierce the worlďs extre¬ mity,
mity, nor repine at accumulating dan¬ gers ; youth, strength, all in the pursuit shall be essayed ; and when my courage falters, when my energy expires, fate will have exhausted the last lingering effort of existence, will have silenced the throb¬ bing impulse of nature/' Anxiously he watched the revolving hour?, anxiously he pined for the ap¬ proaching day. lie saw the sun sink beneath the horizon ; he saw its bright reflection tinge the ethereal canopy of heaven ; he saw it tremble on the stained panes of the monastery, and then shadow into grey. His mind caught the infec- t'on of sadness, and his heart drooped in the foreboding gloom of despondence ; tears streamed from his eyes, as piety up¬ raised them in supplication. He whis¬ pered a pi aver for fortitude, and their, с 2 wondering
wondering at his feelings, returned to the convent. The monks had met in the refectory. He joined them, to silence suspicion ; and having sparingly partaken of the evening's repast, eagerly resought the seclusion of his cell. The night was long and cheerless, for sleep but transiently bestowed her salutary powers; palsied starts broke his casual slumbers, and hor¬ rid dreams realized his waking anticipa¬ tions. The stranger led 1dm through dif¬ ficulties of appalling horror, and bound him in the galling fetters of perpetual slavery. The morning arrived; the cheer¬ ing sun enlivened the face of creation; it seemed to awaken joy, save in the breast of Theodore. He arose; he lis¬ tened to the grateful chant of praLe; ho saw the feathered choristeis to wc. ing in r - mid
fr mid air," and envied them the latitude of liberty. Alas ! save in mind, he could boast no similarity ; circumscribed had ever been his ways, and limited his sphere ofaction. The day wore away, and Theodore, with restless impatience, awaited the moment for visiting the archway. It ar¬ rived. The vesper hymn was chanted, and the monks retired to their cells. He stole into the garden ; no ray of light gleaming on his path, pierced the gloom of surrounding darkness. Groping his way with caution, he reached the ruined archway. Thrice he struck the tablet, but no sound was returned; he raised it, he thrust his hand into the aperture, and drew forth a folded paper. Panting with agitation and curiosity, he hurried to his cell, where, by the light of his « 3 taper,
taper, he perused — " No longer by threats will I intimidate; 'tis to the heart the voice of Nature must appeal. Theo¬ dore, you are not an orphan. The bre¬ thren of Yalombre have deceived you ; they wish, under the plea of being friend¬ less and destitute, to keep you to them¬ selves. If you have courage to sever the bonds of thraldom—if you have art to elude the canting hypocrisy of spiritual advisers—if vou have fortitude to search out the adventure, a father remains on earth to enfold vou. At the hour of twelve, deposit beneath the tablet the de¬ terminations of reflection; and at one, seek in the same spot its acquiescence or its refutation." Theodore snatched a leaf from his fa· blets ; his determination was made, ere reflection was courted»— " I have cou¬ rage,
rage, I have fortitude," he wrote, tf but not art. Stranger, if hypocrisy must blind the eyes of assiduous alfeclion, I own myself incapable of the undertaking. From earliest infancy I have been taught to shun the path of disguise, and my heart cherishes its lessons. If my father lives, let him claim me of the abbot, let him openly assert his prerogative, and the gates of Valombre will be unclosed. If my father lives, if he is such as my youthful fancy pictures, together shall we pour the grateful tribute of praise on those who have taught me to estimate his blessing. Stranger, I dare not quit Va¬ lombre under the ambiguous shadow of mystery." At the hour of twelve this was depo¬ sited beneath the tablet ; and at one* tme to his appointment, he sought the о 4 response
response—" The oath still exists—the secret still must be retained/' wrote Montauban ; " the slightest infringement calls forth the threatened vengeance, and insures destruction. Theodore, when the clock is on the stroke of three—when the moon shall have arisen, prepare to quit the monastery ; meet me İn the garden. Remember, I doff entreaty, and assume command. If you delay, if you hesitate, I'll pierce even into the heart of the sanctuary, and tear you from your fan¬ cied security ; yes, in the face of the abbot, in the face of the monks, I'll stamp the preeminence of ray power. Theo¬ dore, greet me as your friend, and let your heart ce(}e to the yearnings of na¬ ture. If you are obedient, if you are grateful, mine promises never to abandon you. I will watch o'er your fortune, and elevate
elevate you to a height far exceeding the most daring flights of your ambition. Theodore, you shall become as a rod of iron oVr the dastard soul of him who would destroy you. Court me as a friend ; once an enemy, know me im¬ placable. At the hour of three, remem¬ ber, be punctual, be resolute; no start of indecision, no expression of reluc¬ tance, must mar the enterprise. The life of the monk Betsolin merits some sacri* fice, the restoration of a father some exertion. Mark me, Theodore, this step rejected, this offering spurned, never more shall the eyes of the monk Betsolin behold the glory of the rising sun—ne¬ ver awaken to the coming day. His blood be on your head, a blasting monu¬ ment of ingratitude; his pangs a damn¬ ing prelude to perdition. And the fa- G 5 ther
ther who gave you being, Theodore, o'er his head ï wield the dagger of fate ; break you the chains of his bondage, or become his curse—his bane—his mur¬ derer." The paper dropped from the nerveless hand of the vouth—" God of heaven !** he ejaculated. Every instinctive feeling, every genuine affection was awakened. " To fly !" and fearfully he paused, and despairingly he pressed his hand upon his forehead. " Under the shelter of night, when affection slumbers, to steal from the arms which fostered my years of helplessness—from the roof which shel¬ tered me in the hour of desertion !" The doubts, the anxiety, the suspense of fa¬ ther Bctsolin, rising to imagination, . phrenzied his thoughts, and racked him 'with the gnawing tortures of regret of appealing
appealing tenderness. With hurried steps he paced his cell, his hand grasping the fatal paper, and his eyes swimming in tears. The clock tolled two—he started, as though an asp had crossed his path. In one short hour, Valombre would be for¬ saken, and himself under the guidance of a being, who ruled with the tyrannic sway of power ; in one short hour, the possibility to retract would be passed. Alas ! it was already passed ; for the mo¬ ment that enchains the mind deprives us of the privilege of action. Awed by threats, impelled by compassion, Theo¬ dore had long since yielded to the yoke of bondage, and felt too late the ineffi- cacy of resistance, A tame submission, an unmurmuring acquiescence, was all that remained ; no alternative offered it¬ self, through which he could escape the «.' G threat-
threatened evil. Sorrow was a weak, a vain indulgence; without lightening the heart, it expended moments, which ex¬ ertion claimed for the last effort of affec¬ tion. He could not explain the motives of his conduct; he could not point out whither he was going, or whether he should again return ; but he could tell his friends that his heart was unchanged, that his gratitude was undiminished; it would throw some light upon his disap¬ pearance ; it would relieve the anguish of incertitude. Chasing awav the almost blinding tears of regret, he penned to his beloved preceptor, father Betsolin, this short transcript of his feelings. ri A strange fatality pursues me ! I am impelled, without the power of resist¬ ance;
ance ; I am hurried from Valombre, withr out the privilege of choice. While your senses are steeped in the calm, the balmy trance of f orget ful ness, mine are racked with every pang, save guilt. Father, I dare not solve the seeming mystery—I dare not divulse the source of action : yet condemn not the mind you have moulded, the heart you have formed ; it may be crushed, but not subdued ; it may be destroyed, but not infected. Vice mav allure, but rectitude cannot be shaken ; the soul may be assailed, but its principles of honour are immaculate. Fa¬ ther, my reliance is not upon myself, but upon the lessons you have taught me, but upon the Power you have led me to invoke. The privilege of prayer may be snatched midst the den of vice ; the fervent offerings of piety accepted, though о
though outwardly deadened by the pro¬ fane blasphemy of sceptics. Father, the being ------1 dare not say more ; I have sworn secrecy, and murder closes the crime of perjury. Think of me in the solitude of your heart's communion—· pray for me in the hol v sanctuary of \ our worship. Should tinie remove the \eİÎ, shouid Heaven will the chain ; of slavery to be severed, then, in the p reí ious mo¬ ment of liberty, will í íly to Yaîombre, will 1 revisit the haunts of mv infancy, the friends of my youth, Should the ambiguous clouds of fate o'erwhelm me, should existence yield to persecution and calamity., father, I will die in the path of duty, with the precepts of immortal truth upon my lips."
Carefully
Carefully he placed this vague expla¬ nation of his conduct whither the eye of affection would penetrate; and then, with a pang almost mocking the dissolu¬ tion of nature, descended from the dor¬ mitory, and hurried into the garden. Montauban awaited him beneath the shadow of the archway—" Be resolute/* he whispered : (I one more exertion of courage, and our escape is insured." He extended his hand, but the youth shrunk from his touch. i( What do you fear?" he demanded. " Глету thing/' replied Theodore. <c Beyond these walls no security can be Îouı\d. u '· Within these walls," ironically ob¬ served the bandit, t( pleasure is u n felt, and freedom unacknowledged. The time will come, when example will thaw the frigidity
frigidity of education, and restore to Nature her long abused privilege of ac¬ tion ; the tir e will come, when the past years of infatuation will seem as a blank in existence, as a cheerless epoch, from which naught but misery and restriction can be dated." " Alas i" articulated Theodore, with a sigh of desponding sadness (s the time, I fear, is fast approaching, when, from drear contrast, the past will hold forth the only hours of peace 1 am doomed to know." <( You are a fanatic," exclaimed Mont¬ auban, drawing a fillet from beneath his cloak. Theodore started. The bandit smiled—" It is but a tem¬ porary darkness," he observed, attempt¬ ing to place it o'er the eyes of our hero; but
but the youth struggled, and regained hie freedom. "Theodore," said Montauban, in a voice which forbade objection, " the lkht of the moon must for a few moments be shut out ; your eye: must not behold the path we traverse.*' fi The oath of secrecv shall extend even to my removal from Valombre," said the indignant Theodore; ť< surely then------ ,г <( It must Ac,'* interrupted Montauban, f( Mv word I pled ее for vour safet v." " I fear not for my safety/' exclaimed the \outh. ft Then be submissive,'* rejoined the bandit. Si Theodore, I command obe¬ dience, lîemembcr my threat—remem¬ ber ni ν power." The youth yielded a reluctant acq u ies* cence. The inlet was placed bifore his exes, and the vigorous arm of Montau* ban
ban led him forward. Suddenly a sound, as if the falling back of a door, succeed¬ ed ; and then, warned by the caution of his guide, he descended a steep iiignt of steps. The path was long, rocky, and uneven ; but the arms of Theodore were fettered by the giant grasp of Montau¬ ban ; and though he frequently tripped o'er loose and projecting stones, still, with unyielding perseverance, they con¬ tinued to advauce.
VÜAV.
СПЛР. VI. Уц yc\ -------- ------ L· un atU'ibutc »o God hinkelt'; Aa:í caribi \ ; uu* r doüı tUeti >Uo\\ í$ke¿t Uj i's, nüeiv uicu \ bcuc^ib jt^iice, İ5U \Ы ril Atv İ . ff Theke is a strange mystery overcloud¬ ing the actions of sister Laurette/' said the nun Lucille, seating herself by the side οΐ Juliette, " an inconsistency of character, which baffles all our attempts at elucidation. Sometimes the tear of penitence hangs trembling in her eye; then the fiery gust of passion distorts her features, and betrays the undying influ¬ ence of revenge : sometimes depressed, even to the sombre gloom of melancholy, she shrinks from iho obtrusive kindness of compassion, and buries her sorrows
and her plaints in joyless solitude ; then again she bursts forth in the language of reproach, accusing Heaven with injus¬ tice, and man with barbarity. Nay, often ------" " Unhappy Laurette !" interrupted Juliette; " is all her life thus spent in misery ? does no intervening hour of content lighten the lingering horror of inaction ?" tf Oh no!" rejoined the sister: " tur¬ bulent and ungovernable, she exists the slave of passion, or the sport of woe. Religion softens not the bitterness of her complaints ; for her soul scoffs at the pious exhortations of faith, and spurns ever the doctrine of true holiness." * r And yet she was professed," said the astonished Juliette. Sister Lucille cros&ed her bosom, theo, in
in a low voice, continued— t€ True, she was professed, but ------" * r But what ?" importuned Juliette. " Alas ! my daughter, there are crimes —there are actions—-" ,Sf What crimes, what actions blacken the life of the sister Laurette ?" demand* cd Juliette, grasping the hand of the nun, and looking imploringly in her face, ' f God reads the heart/' ejaculated the devotee, raising her eyes in pious reve* rencc. u Absolution lightens not the burden cfsin,' for» wish sacrilegious ob¬ stinacy, ever has she rejected the atoning offering of confession. She savs—™* 1 * f Then are hex tenets unfixed/* again interrupted the horror-struck Juliette. fi 'Tis her mind which is unfixed/ 1 sig* nificantly whispered the nun, €{ Surely
" Surely the seeds of heresy have been engendered," pursued Juliette, regard¬ less of the remark, " and her soul im¬ piously breathes doubts of salvation. But what does she f sav ?" €( She says," rejoined sister Lucille, " that God, not man, shall be the judge and the awarder. And when our holy mother argues with her feelings, and pi¬ ously essays to stamp conviction, she sometimes weeps, sometimes sits in sul¬ len silence, but oftener breaks forth i it unbecoming violence, vowing, that though coercion binds her in innvillinr slavery, its bitterest threat shall never extract the secret of her woes." u Was it coercion which brought her hither?" demanded Juliette. " The saints convert her ! she calls ¡t coercion," replied the sister, (t but it w T as mercy ;
mercy ; she calls it the arbitrary stretch of unjust power, but rather ought she to hail it the blessed instrument of salva¬ tion. She was brought to Bena Copia to repent." " H repentance comes not from the heart," observed Juliette, " 'tis unavail¬ ing." **" True," rejoined the nun ; " but to be snatched from the malign iniluemeof sin, is surely a step to the souľs conver¬ sion ; to be removed from the dire infec¬ tion of guilt, is a quickening pass to mercv." " We ought to think so," said Juliette. " We w ust think so," pursued the sis¬ ter ; f£ for rhe corruption of the heart is too often owing to the prevalence of example. The world is a sad, sad theatre for
for youth ; its temptations are so strong, and its sophistry so deluding : blessed are those who escape its snares ! Sin often borrows the garb of innocence ; and our own hearts, lured by its delusions, com¬ bat to undo ns." rf Our own hearts ! M repeated the asto¬ nished girl. " Yes, lady, where sensibility fakes the reins from reason ; Ш then are wc hur* ried away by instinctive feeling, thon are we guided by the wild energy of ран- " Surely/' exclaimed Juliette, with & heavy sigh, <' against so many assailants mi»n enn boast no safeguard. 1 * " Alas! my daughter," replied the ««ftj " there exists his chief dauger : tin- presumptive Ът§\ of self-security Jeadü hita
him info the vortex of temptation, and hurries him into sin, when flight might have ensured safety." " Yet how can we resist the impulse of nature?" asked Juliette; "when the heart pleads against us, how can we hope for conquest ?'* (t In evasion, not defiance/* replied sister Lucille. (t In a security like ours, the passions slumber, and virtue fear; no lapse, bet anse untried.'* " Then can she claim nò pra! se," ea¬ gerly opened JirieUe; ŕí for c ai>*v ßleaned bv inacuon boosts not merit." The nun was dient ; v he si: izgled to repress a frown, she pined to substantiate her own hypoílíťáis, yet she felt the ar- gumeiit'of her young opponent corîcîu- sive— <f And you," at length she observ¬ ed, forcing a smile of doubtful birth, vol, u, n {í vou
ct you would Aıin brave the danger eo obtain the praise ; you would pa^s the fiery ordeal, and barter peace to martyr nature/' ** I would engage in the active duties of life,'* mildly leplied Juliette; ir nor shrink with pusillanimous fear, because the task appears arduous." ťt You would expose \ our heart ro the delusions of love," mournfully sighed the bhtev, (ζ Ah, unthinking girl ! you would giunge Ì! into a sea ofwoe» bî.vîin« aH ir<* ht'pes, stagnating aU ín гпег^ч-·.." '* lîow erroneously do j on judge my meaning!" eagerly replied Juliette* ki in truth sigter, í would but fuliil the man¬ date of mv father,'* ** Do )ou think the heart so раыпи iM asked sister Lucale, *' Гоог child I do you think its jojs, İU hopes, its antict* pation^
pations, all under the guidance of autho¬ rity ? Do you think the effusions of sen¬ timent, the sympathy of prepossession, smothered, or awakened, by the voice of duty ?" ri Alas ï I know not/' artlessly replied Juliette. u You will find not," resumed the nun. tC kove scoüs at the chains of compul¬ sion, and sua} s the soni, in defunge of ι caso n 4 * ' ζ Ahí hur noi ii!wa\s/' saM Jubrtíc; ţ íoťe bìsL-r, iiiv4 aí the ab.ir of pe- KonC v\u}j!i!4tl?,t the alfar of pro. it .^uui,*' rejoined tbr nun, :\nd а *\^^:^ у bin »h dappled tht* palliti hue cf her co · * jd^vion. *· 'i hen u valram thought v. dl piere r\cn u-u Lr« пег ul sm/* *:iid Jgh'ette, í. : pointing
pointing to the outer walls of the mo¬ nastery. " Human nature is imperfect," so¬ lemnly rejoined the devotee, e * h\\eii t debased ; save in the interposing mercy of Providence, it boasts no reliance." ft True,'' snid Juliette, li and that mercy extends beyond the walls of Bena Co¬ pia," " That mercy/* obtened the nun, "extends to the gĽbc'b utmost limib; nay, 'lis unbounded, 'tis omnisiieut '" *' Then," quickly rejoined Juliette grasj;iug the hand of the /j-ter, 41 wliy Hiould the world be so fearfully shun¬ ned ? why are its busy scenes so full of peril ?" * r Because," replied the nun, (C its in¬ habitants are dissolute; because, tl·? slaves of passion, biassed by the laxity of opinion,
opinion, they sink under the seductions of bin and sensuality." "Notali, ьЫег/' again observed Ju¬ liette. " Surely the world boasts some examples of moral rectitude." " Many," rejoined the nun ; " yet mark, and shudder at the perversion of its principles. The just, the conscien¬ tious, who bravely stem the mania of corrupt infection, are satirized, are ridi¬ culed, nay, often shunned, as scarecrows to mirth, as antidotes to pleasure. In? the world, the innocent too are assailed by the designing; anil though virtue may not slumber, yet peace too often sinks the victim." " Surely," questioned Juliette, " the innate consciousness of right, the early instilled principles of rectitude, must be f i 3 a safe-
a safeguard, a shield against the random arrows of vice," i( Alus ! too often does \ice assume the similitude of virtue," replied <чЧег Lucille; "too often does she deck her¬ self in a fascination so wilv. that the senses become entranced, and the powers of action donnant. Where then is the security for youth ? where the safeguard for innocence ? Juliette, too credulous girl ! the heart, assailed by sentiment, softened by sensibility, know T s no socu- rity in itself, Îor the very chains of its slavery are illusion. Propelled by a new, by an indescribable fascination, it hopes, ft fears, it acts > it lives but under the instigation of its possessor; external ob¬ jects become attainted, the magic charm breathes in every zephyr, fans the rosy hopes
hopes of promis*, nay, heightens the emerald garb of nature with the vivid colours of poetic fancy : 'tis then------" i{ Surely," interrupted Juliette, her cheeks glowing with the enthusiasm of her ideas; " surely, sister, your heart must have felt, ere it could thus deli¬ neate the force of passion." if It has felt," mournfully replied the nun ; " it has done more than felt, it has bled from it. Time blunts not the pow¬ ers of memory, nor recalls the season of cheerfulness: the feelings of the heart once betrayed, the spirit once broken, where exists the balm which can soften the pang of retrospection, which can allay the anguish of corroding thought?" " It exists in the offices of devo¬ tion," mildly observed Juliette, " in the never-dying mercy of atoning faith." « 4 « True/*
" True," rejoined the rer luse, in token of conviction, " religion ¡s the sure anti¬ dote to woe ; Tiò the firm staff 1 which up¬ holds affliction, the best, the ooiv re¬ liance that the soul can hope !" ,ť But it must be voluntarilv prawned," exclaimed sister Laurette, who unob- ^erved had entered the cell; " it must be the souľs free election, the heart's unbiassed choice, else does hypocrisy stamp the colour of its fervour, and re¬ gret jaundice the sighs of imagined faith. Heed not her pictures," impul¬ sively placing her hand on the shoulder of Juliette; c< 'tis mistaken zeal, 'tis rash, 'tis deluded bigotry that decks this living sepulchre in the garb of content* She would catch you in the toil, she would condemn you to inaction and list¬ less solitude; she would remove you; from
CONFESSIONAL O? VALOMBRE. from the world, and enrich this com¬ munity with an unvitiated offering. Poor child ! poor novice ! she would fetter you with chains, so heavy, so corroding, that liberty, man's best bequest of Hea¬ ven, could be attained but in the grave." " With what unhallowed latitude do you judge my motives !" said sister Lu¬ cille. (i I would make converts, not en¬ shrine victims; sister, 1 would lead a vo¬ luntary offering, not pollute our altar with a bleeding sacrifice." The flush of passion momentarily ting» ed the faded features of Laurette, as, with a glance of ill-repressed anger, she re¬ plied— S( 'Twould boast no novel charm: these hollow aisles, these cîoîsteral pas¬ sages, could but reecho the plaints of dissatisfaction and despair; for I, alasîï и 5 exist"
exist a living monument of monastic clemency !" " You !" exclaimed Juliette, and the mysterious, the untold secret of sin was forgotten, or at least was effaced by the pleadings of compassion. " Beware, poor girl ! lest they should enshroud you," resumed sister Laurette : " they will name it piety, and then your shrieks will be unheeded; they will say 'tis in the cause of religion ; thev will say 'tis for the salvation of your soul, and the struggles of the flesh must yield. Oh ! 'tis a coercion the most oppressive, a power the most abused. They chained mv body, but not my mind ; they drag¬ ged me to the confessional, but compul¬ sion could not tear the secret from my lips/* " Say,
<f Say, rather," observed sister Lucille, numbering the beads of her rosary, "say that the yielding mercy of our most holy mother has kindly foregone the severity the relentless laws of justice would in¬ flict." A mingled smile of contempt and de¬ fiance marked the features of Laurette— " Self-interest is a never-slumbering plea," she exclaimed ; " a plea which marks the actions of faith, which decks power in the garb of mercy. Ah ! Tis a sad world to live in ; and this is but its epitome ; all that are banished hence are its joys. Poor child ! believe the cxa«- gerated outline, invest yourself with the hideous garb; and when the delusion ceases, when the infatuation fades awav, quick follows the rankling pang of re¬ gret. Oh ! Twill corrode* 'twill embit- и β ter,
ter, 'twill poison the sweet springs of life, and blast every cherished hope of enjoyment." "Ah, si&ter!" emphatically observed Lucille, " to you it might open a field for hope, through the office of repen¬ tance." " To me!" fiercely exclaimed the nun ; then, with a vain struggle for compo¬ sure, she continued—" hope expires in the moment of slavery: liberty is man's rightful privilege; he inhales it with the first breath he draws, and with his latest effort does it expire." " Then should it be used as the boun¬ teous bequest of Heaven," said sister Lu¬ cille, " not degenerated into the pander of lawless irregularity." " It should be free from the coercion of self-arrogated authority, not subject to
to the invasion of tyrannic will/* rejoin¬ ed Laurette. " Was it Virtue that drag¬ ged me to this living tomb ? Was it Re¬ ligion that chained me here in reluctant captivity? Say, was it Piety that barred the gate? was it Mercy that turned a deaf car to my cries ?" " If the crime was heinous, mercy sa¬ vours the award," answered Lucille. " What crime ?" sternly demanded the nun. " Let Conscience answer," mildly re¬ sponded the sister; ( ' it is a power which owns no controul, which sways in spite of human effort, and speaks midst guilt's unhallowed clan. In vain the volup¬ tuary, midst riot, seeks to drown her voice; in vain the casuist at substance. scoffs, and to mere shadow clings; she will, she must be heard. Years are as yesterday ;
yesterday ; she dives within the pale of | man's remembrance, and stains anew the deed of blood." Palsied was the start of sister Laurette; thrice she essayed to raise her shrunken hand, and thrice the eíľort failed—"Dlood! blood!" she faltered; i( 'tis false! here is no stain ! ,f then raised her sunken eyes, and snatched, with phrenzied grasp, the arm of her reprover " Not to the outward eye," resumed Lucille, " but in the heart, sister, the tax of guilt is conscience." The nun retreated ; she drew her veil over her face, then paused in doubtful musing— ft Can prayer atone ? Can man absolve ?" she whispered : " no, no, vain are the rites of superstition, vain the pos¬ tulate strength of human power." tf No, not vain, sister, not vakn/* re- plied
plied Lucille; "Heaven hears, Heaven sanctions------" But the nun had fled, the cell was deserted. Sister Lucille dropped the beads of her rosary ; she raised her hands in mild devotion—"Eter¬ nal Father!" she apostrophized, ' s 'tis thou alone canst sooth the struggling spirit, Tis thou alone canst ease the tor¬ tured soul !" " Some fearful act preys on her mind," observed Juliette, " and poisons every hope of peace." " Fearful/' reiterated sister Lucille; u ah me ! 'tis worse than fear, Tis the corroding sting of guilt. Marked you the palsied slart which followed at the sound of blood ?'' "Yes, and the fading hue of her com¬ plexion," replied Juliette. " You touch¬ ed
ed the string; you held to view the mir¬ ror of her former deeds," c< Poor sinner!" sighed the nun, (i may Heaven change her heart, and give her to repentance ! Pain and woe have failed, and human aid and human counsels : the spirit οΐ perverse, uncurbed will, has stemmed all efforts, and baffled all re¬ solves. Omniscient power alone can bring a change, and speed the blessed hour of reparation." " If murder marks the deed, that power, alas ! is passed," said Juliette. " Re¬ morse cannot awaken the dead, neither can repentance blot the fatal record." " That power is never passed/' eagerly replied sister Lucille ; ťf that power is. ever open to the penitent, is evera heal¬ ing antidote to guilt, is ever a sure award of
of future mercy : but it must be sough t¿ it must be solicited; the bending knee, the broken spirit, the contrite soul, must mark the humbled crest of sin, and the- firm hope f /i favour. Even on the grave's cold brink, salvation shrinks not from expiring nature, and man, though late, may yet repent and live—live for here¬ after. Oh, would she but consider, would she but reflect upon the slight, the pe¬ rishable tenor of mortal hold, conviction then would conquer, and pride, subdued, dethroned, would lead her to the pale of our confessional/' " Pride !" repeated Juliette ; " alas ! sister, can İt be pride which marks her stubborn silence—which wars against her soul ?" " Too irue.; 'tis pride and shame," rev- joined the nun, " false shame, which braves
braves the w г га h e r er i tal, to screen fro rn human eye* the catalogue of мп. l'n- happy intidei !" The prayer beil sound¬ ed. " We must away,*' pursued the sis¬ ter, moving towards the door. {< Ju¬ liette, guileless, inexperienced child, when in the bu:;y scenes of action, when on the worlds wide Ыадс, guard well vour heart; yield not to the siren call of pleasure; list not to the delusions of temptation, neither let example sap the firm citadel of virtue. Kemcmber. peace consists in moderation, happiness in tran¬ quillity of mind; remember, midst the bluffs of adverse fortune, innocence shrink« not from our hold ; remember, self-approbation is superior to the bright¬ est gems of the east—to the preeminence of ambition—to the adulation of man."
CHAP.
СПЛР. VII. О ht »rroi ! honor ' it .rr η I ЪчЛ i.tu^ue, nor he k <t, v.uui *t coa<.five, nor «ia*ut, ';.·„·* » Sil vív· ' \M - Hïavy was the dismav, deep theconster- nation of Theodore, as the fillet was re¬ moved from his e\es, as the blaze of torches, emulating the meridian swn, dis* cío. ed surrounding objects. He saw him¬ self ensnared, cut off from succour and from hope, buiìcd in a cavern, hollowed bv ihe chissel of nature, and encompassed bv beings garbed in the harsh outline of о о ferocity. i% Theodore," said Montauban, mark¬ ing the start of horror, and the expression of despondence which pervaded his fea¬ ture^ "\oti have nought to fear: my friends
friends are your friends; rr»v home alike »shared, no comfort shall you want, no indulgence shall yen cravo ; nor, till example has JLsipakd thecontractcd pre¬ judice of education, shall theewrtions of active service bo requited. Accustomed to the limitation of Valombre's cloister, the lots of liberty can be no deprivation ; and sase liberty," ciancino; around the cavern, ť< naught cise can be sighed for." **" Yes, every thing else/* unguardedly exclaimed Theodore; r * everv thins that is dear, that is valuable in life, that makts the past pleasing, that decks the future in the garb of hooc." О X ťl Does the cloister's fanaticism, does the cowl's forbearance give birth to hope ? ' demanded Montauban ; ie docs it suit the spring of youth ? docs it coin¬ cide with the heart's wishes?" Juliette
Juliette arose to imagination, and the heightened flush in the cheek of the youth betrayed more than his lips ut¬ tered. ,f Theodore," resumed the bandit, sof¬ tening his vo'ce to a whimper, " the hearts of men are not impervious. Ï havessen the world in its busy nia/e, í have traced the spring of action ; example mav in¬ fect, but it cannot destroy the principles of nature." fi True," eagerly observed Theodore, reverting to the coercive restraint upon bs actions; " neither can и destroy the prin.iples οΐ second nature—the force of ed u» 4 ? t ίο n " Mon Luì ban smiled in deribion—'* it cannot destroy," he rener» ted, " but, bv contrat, it can п ч аке the past more driary, TheoJore. you are not the first fanat it,
fanatic vvho has forsworn his creed, and quaffed the intoxicating cup of pleasure. But no more; fatigue requires some ces¬ sation, and nature courts repose," He then led thç jouth into an apartment, separated from the outer cavern, and pointing to a couch,- soft as the cygnet* down* " Sleep in quiet/ 1 he said ; ť - Ы lia intruding care §t?d on the rest of v.¿ ture, for tima will p-odiue no ih,n^;e. w ve the inciense of your authority "" <* Authority '" repeated fluent s re ; rţ a ias ! whr»t authority eau í Ьо$>*. ^>н ι ο watch i s ^*t wpö 11 ΠΊ ) P cí * 0|1 >> v íU * ^'V * p,,\ loqks $re const п/пкч1 ?" *» 'f hat waîrh uhni I be rpmov^d, 4, ít 4 piled die bfţudîb ŕí wht-n your ^|ц,ч;% speak concordate to my piaiig Listen, misguide Ь«>у ï pur Interest and ui.ţ powťr *Mll)tì л» oue, иИЬ.е field, v^
will admit of no division ; in the cavern, to our colleagues we will set the example of unanimity." " What plans, what purpose am I des¬ tined to fulfil ì" demanded our hero, fi Say, enigmatical controulcr of my m* ttom, (or what hidden end was í so sç* с reí îy conducted from Valombre?'* ' f The end h worthy of the mind which formed it," replied Montauban í ťí dive not into my motives, pe content to knQW å tî»:»T, it? infancy, î was the fat*? that check¬ ed the stroke of death, and gave you to f he shelter of security." Theodore's check unned pale, hesta« 1 * gcred, he dvv.u to t h f rocky side of the cavem ; the murdered fo-m of the abbot rose to imaginpiion, and ïhe hands» i?f МопгпиЬдп seemed as though dipped in blood» if What
" What marks this change ?" ques¬ tioned the bandit ; ťt what new impulse freezes the life's stream of existence ?** - " The confesional of i alambre" mur¬ mured Theodore, burying his face in his hands. Palsied was the start of Montauban ; for a moment, conscience seemed to subdue the native ferocity of his dit po¬ sition—seemed to bind him in the galj* in 2 fetters of self-accusation; but strug- gling against her usurping power, he forced a fiend üke laugh, and demanded if hb iiioughib were ever to be biassed bv the infection of overstrained nietv r "' M^ thoughts »re the never-slumler- jnç elK;sior.ä cf a grate ful heart/' seid Theodore, u enshrined amid the clolsten of Vnfoinbre as within the citadel of he* iie\olcnce. 'The powt4.J of my mind t the
the strength of my feelings, the rectitude of my intentions, all, all do 1 owe to the interposing mercy of charity—to the ceaseless lessons of example." "And nothing to Heaven?" sarcasti¬ cally asked the bandit. Theodore meekly crossed his hands up«* on his bosom, as piously he answered— " Yes, all, every thing to Heaven ; but next to Heaven, to Heaven's servants.'* " And nothing to the author of your being ? Ungrateful boy ! nothing to the parent who gave you life ?" " Yes, honour, obedience, love," ea¬ gerly replied the youth, whose pure mind ascribed to his ideal parent the rec¬ titude, the virtues, so preeminent in his guide, father Betsolin ; " 1 would let my actions speak the fervour of my feeling·«, Stranger, from the earliest dawn of <<-- VOL, H. % mClubľAi.a-,
membranee, it has been the cherished spur of anticipation; it has been the medium through which futurity has been viewed. You have said my father lives, that you alone can lift the veil of con¬ cealment, that you ------" " He lives," interrupted Montauban, u but the hour for disclosure is not yet arrived. Mark me, Theodore, he must feel himself no secondary object ; he will admit no superior sway ; he must be the first to controul, the first to instigate; without appearing to rule, he must guide the reins of action ; and then, and not till then, will the mask be removed." " He shall rule, he shall guide," ex¬ claimed the energetic Theodore, spring¬ ing forward to stay his steps ; " he shall find my heart tender, tractable, panting for the bliss of his affection. Tell him, stranger,
stranger, tell him the precepts of the monk Betsolin have fed the flame of filial affection—have ever honoured the principles of «ature." ff Again the monk Betsolin/* mut¬ tered the bandit, pushing open the door of the chamber. " Oh yes, my father must, my father will bless him/ 1 pursued the youth. 1 Stranger, stay and hear me. Tell him ------" lint Montauban had fled, the door was reclosed, and he was left to the solitude of his own reflections. Long did he pace the cavern, long did he muse o'er the singularity of his situation, on the self- assumed authority of the bandit, and his own total inability of regaining freedom. Complicated and disturbed, imagination conjured a new form of torture, a form ι 2 which
which leadened the dire chain of deten¬ tion. It was gratitude — gratitude the most lively, the most predominant sen¬ timent of his heart — gratitude, which picturing the grief, the dismay of father Betsolin at his supposed desertion, filled his eyes with tears, and his spirits with despondence. In vain he courted sleep, in vain he stretched his wearied limbs upon the downy couch of luxury; the fancied lamentations of the monk fright¬ ened the reign of slumber, and left him but the horror of corroding thought. The dark, ambiguous hints of Mont¬ auban, his avowed knowledge of his fate, his promises οΐ favour, his declaration of a parent's existence, agnin succeeded—· again, with successive influence, fanned the light flame of hope, and swelled the iigh of blank depair. Never, for a mo¬ ment,
ment, did he admit the possibility of dis¬ honour, never pictured his birth derived from loose, unhallowed vice. His father was a prisoner, was afflicted, persecuted ; but he was innocent, he was noble, he was reviled. Scenes crowding upon scenes, mocked almost the sway of ra¬ tionality ; the cavern was transformed i.Uo an ideal du >geon, and the image of his fuher btretched upon the straw; he heard ihe clank of his chains, he saw the iron coiroJing in his flesh. It was for him to sever those chains, it was for him to ~emo\e that oppression. Montauban **a> his guide, Montauban was the light v.« », л pointed out the dungeon. \ <.s. Heaven is all-sufficient," he ar- . j :\ in the wild energy of his feel- Lx 0 \ .t!id I shall live to bless the hour i3 of
of thy controul, Montauban, friend, con¬ ductor !" He threw himself from the bed; he rushed to the door of the cavern, he pushed it open, he gazed around. Pro¬ found was the stillness ; the torches still burned, but the outer chamber was de¬ serted. The delusive visions of hope vanished; his spirits fell; his energy yielded to conviction ; he reclosed the door; he returned to his couch. Heavy lingered the hours of repose and deser¬ tion. Theodore anxiously awaited the reappearance of the bandit—anxiously listened to each coming sound. The yellow radiance of the sun no longer spoke the return of day—no longer, as through the high casement of his cell, cheered, invigorated creation; the arti¬ lle ial
Acial glare of torches admitted no vari¬ ation, and day, as night, wore a long unchequered blank. To minute the cir¬ cumstances which progressively shocked the senses of our hero, to particularize the blasphemies of a lawless troop, or the arts with which Montauban sought to corrupt and gain ascendancy, would be trite and uninteresting in the detail of the history. Theodore shrunk from each species of dishonour, parried ever the allurements of sensuality ; he combated without irritating, and maintained the flnnness of decision, in spite of the shaft of ridicule, or the prevalence of exam¬ ple. His principles and his faith were erected on a foundation which vice could not circumvent, nor temptation destroy. He had seen the blessing of virtue in the pious uniformity of christian meekness; ι 4 he
he could maintain the track of rectitude, even midst a throng of impious pro¬ faners. As yet, the moment of elucidating the seeming mysteries of his birth had been protracted; eager importunity, never- slumbering hope, had marked each inter¬ view with the bandit; but with a policy which baffled the ingenuous mind of Theodore, ever had he broke off in mo¬ ments of interest, ever had he withheld the dear, the prized information. It was on the seventh day of his de- ten t io n in the cavern, when his thoughts, wandering, knew not where to rest, that Montauban joined him in his chamber— *' Theodore/* he exclaimed, " this life of inactivity suits not our calling; this torpor must be renounced, this lethargy broken. Interest summonses to Yerman¬ dois;
dois ; our actions are quick, our move¬ ments scarce thought of. We fly in se¬ cret—in silence. Intruding eyes scan not our route. This night we quit the cavern, and to-morrow------'' tc This night !" interrupted Theodore, starting in horror : " this night, Mont¬ auban ? Alas ! what hidden interest blends our fates, that 1 must still be dragged re¬ luctant to your hated haunts?" ' e Our fates are one," replied the ban¬ dit. íť Think you a common claim could swav mv actions, or colour the hidden spring of my unwearied influence? No, Theodore, í boast a power which fortune cannot wrest, nor malice circumvent—> a power, which on the pinnacle of high ambition can a favourite place, or blast his hopes, low as the slave of great¬ ness," ι 5 * f What
" What act of sin must this high ľavour purchase?" coldly demanded the youth. " Tis but submission 1 require," re¬ sumed the bandit ; « 'tis but a pliant ac¬ quiescence to my counsels. Theodore, I stole you from the slumber of inaction, to try the strength of my dependance; to probe the soul my mercy snatched from death," u Mercy !" repeated Theodore ; " talk you of mercy ? The lion shows more mercy to the lamb, when, yielding to the instinct of ferocious nature, he im¬ molates its being. You have spared life to martyr honour; you would seduce my youth to acts of degradation, and coloivr the black deed with mercy ! You ------" " Ungrateful boy !" interrupted Mont¬ auban. У Nay, hear me out," pursued the un¬ daunted
daunted Theodore ; " hear the sandy te¬ nure of your vile dependance. 'Tis no false start of courage, no painted shadow of imagined virtue. Heavy are the tram¬ mels of your boasted power; for know, that pride, that feeling, honour, all de¬ spise the wily stealth of your authority. First, by a dastard threat you gained the oath of mv obedience; then, under the false knowledge of a father's fate, wrought on my feelings, and lured me from the friends who would my cause have right¬ ed. Nay, further------" " Boy !" burst from the quivering lips of Montauban, and then he paused in deep abstraction, and struck his hand against his forehead. " Theodore," at length he exclaimed, <( no other being had lived so long to brave me. Forbear, for even you may overthrow the reign of ι 6 patience.
patience, and rue the deadly blast of fresh-awakened vengeance. 'Twas no vain threat which first your oath extorted ; nay, even now, the passage lies as open, and no intruding obstacle bars me the entrance to Valombre*s cloister. Neither did I a tale of fiction com, to tempt you from your sanctuary; for now 1 could the truth disclose, and point you out the author of your being, such as your fancy decks him. I------" " Ah I does he live ? and is he indeed the being I have pictured ?" eagerly in¬ terrupted our hero. " Say, torturer í does he brave persecution with a soul un¬ daunted ? does honour shine in all his actions, and valour in his deeds? does he soar above the common ills of for¬ tune, and scorn the empty threatenings #f your rage r does he------" "He
* f He lives to claim obedience," ex¬ claimed the chief, in a voice of thunder· " Lives!" echoed Theodore. <f Yes, within this cavern lives/* re¬ joined Montauban. Theodore glanced wildly around ; he would have sprung to the door, had not the powerful arm of the bandit withheld him, " Whither would you fly ?" he de¬ manded, (( To the dungeon of my father/' con¬ vulsively sobbed the youth. " 'Tis the same chains which bind us, the same fate which pursues us, the same soul which inspires us. Oh ! do not hold me ; 'tis duty, nature------" (t The same soul," interrupted Mont¬ auban, with a laugh of demoniac meaning. Theodore started. He looked doubt¬ fully
fully at hira ; then, almost gasping for breath, with hands clasped in the attitude of supplication, " speak," he implored; " speak, if you know ought of my fa¬ ther ; speak, as you value my senses." " Ï said your father lived/' replied the bandit ; " but I said not he languished in a dungeon.'" " Then wherefore is he withheld from me ? wherefore is he so carefully hid from my sight ?" " Hid !" repeated Montauban ; " who says he is hid ? Tis your own wild fan¬ cies, your own bewildered dreams. Boy, he breathes this air in freedom, he inha¬ bits this cavern uncontrouled." Theodore writhed in torture ; his limbs shook, as though blasted by a deadly palsy, and fixed and ghastly was his stare. " Disgusted with the world, at enmity with
with man, swearing vengeance, and strongly leagued with------" Theodore darted forward : he placed his ice-cold hand upon the lips of the speaker, and, in accents almost stifled from the violence of his feelings, bid him desist. Montauban essayed to support him; even his heart felt a sensation like pity for the misery he had caused : but Theo¬ dore shrinking from his proffered ser¬ vice, as though his touch conveyed pol¬ lution, clung to the flinty side of the cavern. He felt as one transfixed by lightning—as one blasted in the moment of anticipation—as one retaining the fa¬ culty of remembrance, and yet dead to the influence of hope. No sound broke from his lips, no tear escaped his eye, no sigh his bosom: his hands were wildly tlasped,
clasped, and every power of action ap¬ peared suspended. Long was the con¬ flict between wounded pride and nearly- subdued fortitude, agonizing the strug¬ gles of reason and feeling : every hope he had formed, every air-built fabric of ambition, every coming promise of great¬ ness, every anticipation of honour, was destroyed — was annihilated. Ignoble, degraded, tainted with shame and guilt, to a ruffian, a midnight violator, a rob¬ ber, an assassin, wab he indebted for existence ! Montauban, who had long in silence traced the workings of his soul, who, in respect to Nature's outraged feelings, had forborne to interrupt his agonizing struggles, again essayed to o fler consola¬ tion ; but his efforts were as scorpion stings to peace; for when, with ill-re¬ pressed
pressed anger, he exclaimed— (< Armed with a father's power, I might enforce obedience ; but be aifection, not seve¬ rity, my rule;" the youth, with phren¬ zied wildness, again sprung forward, again grasped his arm, and in quick de¬ spairing accents articulated—" Your son İ yoiB-son! God! God of mercy ! your son î Oh î give me air, or I shall die. My brain burns ! my heart is on fire ! Air! air!" gasping, struggling. " Your son ! your son !" and pale, exhausted, he clung for support even to the shoulder of Montauban. From the moment that resolution and reflection regained their empire o'er the mind of our hero, a new sentiment seemed to animate, seemed to inspire bim ; it was the salvation of a father's «oul ; it was to snatch from the trammels of
CONFESSIONAL OF VALOMBRF. of vice the author of his being, and dis¬ sipate the clouds of guilt with the awak¬ ening sunshine of repentance ; it was ta pursue the track of duty, in spite of every danger, in deíiance of every obstacle ; it was to attend the vile haunts, even of the chief of a lawless brigand, and watch each moment of dawning conscience to offer the truths of conviction. Such was the new impulse which ani¬ mated the energetic soul of Theodore» and such the enthusiasm οΐ his nature, that it superseded every other considera¬ tion, and bound him in willing capti¬ vity. Had he been led to the gate of Valombre, he would have returned, he would have rejected every incitement of pleasure, to have performed the arduous task of self-imposed duty— ts I am ready,"" he exclaimed, when the bandit again joined
joined him in the cavern ; " I will ac¬ company you to Vermandois." " And will you," eagerly questioned Montauban, *' will you embrace our ven¬ turous occupation, and share the glorious triumphs of our arms ?" " No, never," fervently replied The¬ odore. The bandit frowned; but suddenly checking the impulse of displeasure— " Time and example," he observed* ** will dissipate the mists of prejudice, and restore the free powers of action." <ť Time too is nay reliance," thought the youth, gazing with melancholy sad¬ ness on the fierce countenance of his fa¬ ther, " time, which changes the hearts of men, and Heaven, which spares them to the trial." i( The brave spirit of emulation will awake
awake your dreaming soul," pursued the chief, " and kindle the flame of valour. Theodore, I prophesy the trance of inac¬ tion to be succeeded by the dazzling ex¬ ploits of true courage/* Pride flushed the cheek of Theodore, as with shuddering horror he exclaimed, " Alas î what dazzling exploits can the life of a robber pourtray ?" ¿r You are a novice," rejoined Mont¬ auban, with a smile of irony. fi Boy, in the world men pray upon each other; 'tis the practice, 'tis the pursuit of exist¬ ence : we but change the colour of de¬ sign, and openly take what others extort by arıífìce. ,, " Thank Heaven," ardently repeated Theodore, " I have been shut out from the world ! I have ever mingled with the benevolent and the virtuous, with souls grateful
grateful for existing blessings, at peace with themselves, and zealous but for the benefit of their fellow-creatures." tc And in that retirement you was hap¬ py," said Montauban ; " in that retire¬ ment, you felt no inquietude, no desire of change." Theodore's eyes sought the ground ; his breast heaved with a labouring sigh, Tor his mission to Bena Copia recurred to memory—" I was ungrateful," he re¬ plied, " and forgot the real value of hap¬ piness, because it was in possession." " Then murmuring discontent finds en¬ trance even within a cloister's hallowed wails ?" said the bandit, t( Nature is imperfect," observed The¬ odore, tc and tranquillity unalloyed ex¬ ists not upon earth." "And must Nature bear the brunt of your
your presumptuous wishes?" questioned Montauban. Theodore started. Juliette filled his tnind, and explained the ambiguous meaning of the chief; yet how he should possess the knowledge of his enthralment was a cause of new wonder; how he should dive within the heart's sanctuary, and rille its treasured secret, was a mys¬ tery not to be resolved. Yielding to the unguarded energy of his feelings, the name of Juliette arose to his lips, and with it the confession of his passion had been revealed, but for the time! ν en- trance of part of the troop. Theodore, with recovered thought, felt grateful for the interruption, and watched their de¬ parture, to prepare for their removal, with a feeling like pleasure. Alone, and unchecked in the flights oi' Fancy,
Fancy, reason yielded to her fairy reign, and glowing were the dangerous pictures of delight; it was friendship, it w T as love, which, giving colour to his feelings, ex¬ panded every sensation of his heart. The parent he had found, the conduct he had prescribed, for a moment was obliterated, and Hope admitted no darkening cloud to scare her brightness. How delightful are the allotments of time, portioned by the sanguine anticipations of youth ! how vivid, how unalloyed the budding promises of existence ! Alas! wrapped in the intoxicating trance, Theodore had forgotten life isat best but illusion, and happiness a phantom, beckoning as it ilies, evading as it is pursued. Towards evening the troop departed fr-om the cavern. An oath of inviolable secrecy substituted the fillet which had before
before blinded the eves of our hero: and with a burst of thankfulness, which awakened but the smile of derision, he inhaled the freshness of unclouded space. Brilliant was the light of heaven, grateful the sight of vegetation ; the rising slope, the wood-crow T ned valley, mellowed by the sun's dying rays, seemed decked in more than their wonted beauties, as he gazed on their variegated contrasts. He heard the cataract's loud roar, as quick rebounding from its rocky base, it threw its feathery surf; then turned to scan, with eager haste, the loved direction of Valombre's turrets. Alas ! fancy alone could pierce the barrier, fancy alone could raise those walls which nature and which gratitude endeared: an envious forest rose, and intercepted e'en the view of his once-peaceful home. Sharp was
was the pang of disappointment, bitter the tear which trembled in his eye. He was going far from the being whom his heart valued, far from the alleviating balm which friendship's power supplies, without one spur to deck his prospects with the zest of hope, without one anti¬ cipation of coming recompence. His eyes rested on his father, and a sensation of horror iced bis blood. Condemned to such a society, chained to such a fate, to owe the dutv of a son, vet to struggle with contempt and abhorrence, his fea¬ tures betraved the colour of his thoughts: for Montauban sternly bid him substitute exertion, nor to the troop betray dissa« tjsfaction and regret. Theodore bowed submission,* \x\i Theodore's heart refused the mask of cheerfulness—Theodore's spirit spurned at the policy of restraint ; vol. и. к he
he shuddered at the boasted triumphs of courage, at the anecdotes of rapacious plunder; he heard the yielding softness of mercy stamped with the degrading die of cowardice, and forbearance and mo¬ deration laughed to scorn ; he heard the plaints of the bereaved traveller repeated, mocked, and the maddened shrieks of terror drowned by the loud bursts of unfeeling laughter. " Can these be men ?" thought cur hero. €( Saints of mercy ! can these have been born with the same reason, with the same intellect, with the same feelings as the brethren of Valombre? Can the evil propensities of the world have marred the intentions of nature, and changed to a barren waste the once social properties of the heart?"
CHAP.
СНЛР. vur. What means all this? Why alt tbis stir to plague a singî· wretch? От way. Tim saíľron hue of day shone faintly from the east, as the troop, emerging from a narrow defile, pierced the darkened boundary of a forest. Theodore spoke not; with spirits broken, with heart de¬ pressed, he moved by the side of his fa¬ ther, insensible to his observations, and lost to the coarse jests of Leonard. He was musing o'er a visionary plan of re» form, o'er the possibility of arousing the slumbering conscience of the bandit« of establishing the dawn of repentance ; iie perceived not their approach to Ver- mandois, nor till the shrill blast of the horn severed the thread of reflection» did h 2 h 9
he awaken to external objects ; then he recognised the heavy walls of the castle from which he had before departed, and the thick entwining pine forest, ob¬ structing the glance of observation. Echo's distant reverberations of the well- known signal had scarce died away, had scarce restored the native reign of silence, when the drawbridge was lowered, and the same uncourtly object who had pro¬ mised shelter to thè exhausted missionary, threw wide the castle gate, A smile re¬ laxed the ferocity of his countenance, as he extended his hand to welcome his companions. Loud was the shout which marked the thrill of pleasure, as the troop halted in the court-yard. "How fare ye, Randolphe?" asked Montauban, taking the arm of Theodore, and leading into an extensive chamber, warmed
warmed and lighted by the cheerful blaze of a wood fire. *' In troth, ray noble chief, well/' re- pliedjiandolphe. " Buta curse upon the old walls, say I, for strange doings have marked your absence." " As how ?" demanded Montauban. t( Why," replied the robber, ff the devil has taken possession of Verman¬ dois, and so obstinately retains his hold, that Pierre and myself have threatened to fly the field, and join our forces at the cavern." Theodore's eyes were rivetted on the features of the bandit ; he traced the deep cast of care lowering on his brow; he remembered the words of his guide through the forest— iC In the dark he ij little better than a coward;" and believing conscience the only power which could к 3 daunt
daunt a spirit so daring, hailed the infor¬ mation with delight. Montauban guessed not the feelings of his son, guessed not the virtuous hope of reformation which fanned his nightly and his daily dreams. For a moment he was abstracted; fora moment he was lost in the labyrinth of his own iniquities, when suddenly starting, with a forced laugh he exclaimed — " Y'ou a hero, Randolphe, and own yourself subdued?" ** Let me face my enemy," resumed the robber, u then name a stouter heart: but in the dark, why, man, what sword can pierce a spirit, or combat the devil's pranks ?" " A spirit !" echoed Theodore. " *Twas but the coinage of a heated brain," observed the bandit, directing at the speaker a look importing silence. « Wine
·* Wine possesseth incredible qualities; possibly the potent powers of the grape transformed your own shadow into an ideal phantom. Say," with forced jocu¬ larity, "did it fly as you pursued? or did it tread upon your heel when you heroically retreated?" ** Shadows cannot speak," replied the half-angry Randolphe ; (< besides ------" ** Speak/' interrupted Theodore, grasp¬ ing his arm, and looking steadfastly İn his face, tc say, did it speak? did it warn you of murder ?" * The bandit started ; he half unsheathed his sword, then, checking his own im¬ petuosity, breathed a «mothered curse, and relinquished his hold. But Theodore, lost even to the vary¬ ing countenance of Randolphe, alone re¬ membered the voice he had himself heard к 4 in
in the passage ; and, with increasing agi¬ tation, again repeated— " Did it warn you of murder?" " I never peach," at length answered the robber, catching the eye of Montau¬ ban, which again imported silence. Theodore shrunk dismayed. The loud clang of the newly-assembled troop checked all further inquiry, and with restless impatience he awaited the privilege to retire. The chamber in which our hero reposed was at the fur¬ ther extremity of the same gallery which opened from Montauban's; its ebon wainscot, sombre midst the golden ra¬ diance of a meridian sun, wore, through the lamp's partial blaze, a lowering shade, which scarce its furthest ray could pene¬ trate. 0*er the couch, black as a funereal bier, waved, in the time-worn canopy, the
the raven plumes of former state; wbi!> thinly scattered, might be seen the worm ■ eaten fragments of high-backed chairs and mouldering furniture. Thcodoiv, exhausted, fatigued, more in a mood for rest than contemplation, cast but a cur¬ sory glance around, then strove to lure the slumber of forget fu İn ess, and blot the present from the page of thought. Bu¬ ried in the trance of repose, he noted not the fleeting hours ; and when he awakened to recollection, with grateful heart he blest the sight which broke up¬ on his view—a sight long, long shut out —a sight which heedless man neglects to rate, because the lot of all ; prized midst a dungeon's gloom, and doubly valued in the pang of deprivation. Long in the earth's cold bosom had he slept, and waked to artificial radiance, long cut off к à from
from the bright glare of day had he pin¬ ed to hail the invigorating sunbeams ; now those sunbeams pierced into his chamber, now they burst upon his gaze, in all the splendour of unclouded ma¬ jesty. Theodore bent his knee in hum¬ ble prayer; and 'then rising, rich in the blessed calm which true piety ever in¬ spires, approached the window. He be¬ held the deep moat beneath, and beyond the dark verge of the forest. Scarce a breeze was stirring ; the dew glittered on the high grass, and the wild flowers hung pendent from its moisture. To the call of Montauban he quitted his chamber, and joined the assembled troop in the hall below\ Day succeeded day, unmarked by any change of occurrence, save the exploring ranblcs of Theodore, who wandered midst
midst the pine forest, unwatched and un¬ attended. No limits were prescribed, for no flight was suspected ; his word was the pledge of submission, and his word the bandit knew to be a strong, an invinci¬ ble barrier. He had accurately examined the interior of the castle, he had sighed over the wreck of past splendour, he had inspected the lonely chambers, and climb¬ ed each separate turret; but to the ques¬ tions of curiosity, to the eager solicita¬ tions of awakened interest, he could ob¬ tain no solution. Montauban knew not, or would not own, the tale of its deser¬ tion ; it was chance which had invested him in a possession, which neither oppo¬ sition or inquiry had sought to subvert. . Sf 'Tis strange that the present owner should suffer a domain so princely to fall to decay/ 1 said Theodore. ко " The
fi The minds of men are hard to re¬ solve/' replied the bandit. *' Possibly the duke de Vermandois prefers a social to a hermit's life. 'Tis for the jaundiced gloom of disappointment to sink within a solitude so obscure, not for a pro¬ mised bridegroom, rich in the glowing prize of youth and beauty." u Alas! how opposite his lot to mine !" sigbed the youth, his thoughts wandering to the lady Juliette; " the one cut off from every joy, the other blessed with the matchless charm of reciprocal affec¬ tion." " Learn better to estimate your own fortune," replied Montauban. <s Tell me, foolish boy, can youth and age assi¬ milate? can reciprocal affection subsist between the timid disciple of religious enthusiasm and the aged cotemporary of
of a father's ambitious election ? can
But Theodore heard him not — he started ; he grasped his arm ; he al¬ most gasped for breath: it could be none other than the officiating attendant on the nun of Bena Copia —Juliette, whom memory had faithfully cherished, whom memory had eternally recalled. His heart throbbed, his eyes were suf¬ fused in tears: it was the same mournful tale Javotte had revealed, in the glowing moments of flrst impression ; the same assurance which had nipped the dawn of hope, and rifled the spring of expectation. " Theodore, what means this burst of mental passion?" demanded Montauban, scarce daring to credit the whispers of suspicion, " Teil me, enigmatical boy, what am I to conclude from this emo¬ tion?" «Sav,
" Say, must she yield submission to a tyrant's will ?*' asked Theodore, unmind¬ ful of the question of the bandit ; rt must she ratify a compact nature and convic¬ tion shrinks from ?" " Unless," artfully hinted Montauban, u a lover should the fetters break of her obedience." (( A lover !" echoed Theodore. " Yes, a lover," resumed the bandit. " Where is the barrier which obstructs a lover's passage ? blest with the smile of beauty, where lies the obstacle which * daunts a lover's hopes ? You have seen the lady Juliette?" Again Theodore started, and the crim¬ son tide of rapture rushed to his cheeks. "Isiftnot intoyourconfidence,'resum¬ ed the wily bandit : " as a parent I might command, what, as a friend, I will·fore¬ go.
go. Theodore, follow my counsels; be guided by my experience, and you shall win— yon shall possess the prize." <( 1—Î," faltered the youth : " Father of Heaven ! I become the husband of the lady Juliette !" ** You have seen her then ?" said Montauban, fi Yes," replied the energetic Theo¬ dore, <f and wear her eternally in my heart. It was her image which put to flight the frigid stoicism of education ; it was her image which, changing every impulse of my nature, obliterated the once-cherished wish of the cowľs invest¬ ment, and aroused all the genuine warmth of sociality. I saw her as an angel of peace, kneeling on the step of the altar, at the mournful inauguration of a sister of Bena Copia." (t You
u You are a lover," observed the chief, smiling at the ardour of his ex¬ pression, " and the misty vapour of pas¬ sion is as a film before the eyes. Cradled in the school of romance, successive in¬ fatuations charmed, and each alternately swayed the mind of indecision. * You would have become a monk, because in¬ experience nominated friendship a suffi¬ cient security for happiness; you would have martyred the feelings of the heart, because the dreary walls of Valombre en¬ shrined but the pious instigators of your faith. Theodore, the kindling ray of beauty was but wanting to arouse the never-dying flame of preposses¬ sion, to stamp you a slave and an ido- îator." * { You then have loved," exclaim¬ ed the youth, grasping the arm of Montauban,
Montauban, and gazing in his face with an expression of tender interest. " I am your father," rejoined the bandit. Theodore shrunk in despondence-*- shrunk in dismay ; his head drooped up* on his bosom, and the varying change in his features indicated the struggles of duty and pride. " Boy," pursued Montauban, hh brow contracted hy the lowering frown of dis¬ approbation, " the lineage is no degra¬ dation ; what I have been------" " No, no, not what you have been,** interrupted Theodore ; " 'tis what you are which stamps the blackening die of misery on all my prospects—on all my hopes ; heading a clan of lawless bri¬ gands, existing on depredation, closing oh the rage of pillage with the blood of the
the unwary. Sweet saints of mercy ! better from the lowest peasant, whose honest cheek ne'er felt the flush of guilt, than from a prince derive exist¬ ence, coupled with dishonour. Nay, nay, I care wot," for the hand of Mont¬ auban intuitively grasped the hilt of his sword ; if take back the life you gave ; I am no coward ; my soul shrinks not at death. Father, 'tis duty urges, and my tongue dares e'en the brunt of your fierce rage." " Ungracious boy !" exclaimed the bandit, struggling to repress the violence of passion, "does'duty warrant insult? does she forswear respect ?" <( Father, she warrants every effort that filial love and filial influence can essay. Hear me," he implored, sinking on his knee before him, <( I would reclaim, 1 would save you." Mont-
Montauban smiled in derision. " I would lighten the pang of vice, and hasten the hour of repentance." t( Go on," said the bandit, ironically, " I would teach you to seek the pro¬ mised hope of mercy ; I would place you beyond the infectious reach of your col¬ leagues." ť< What ! in the monastery of Valom¬ bre ?" questioned Montauban, in the as¬ sumed seriousness of attention. " There, or wherever inclination points," rejoined Theodore ; " I will your footsteps tend, will share your wan¬ derings, lighten all your cares; yes," yielding to the energy of his feelings, and picturing naught but the desired vic¬ tory of religion and honour, ff this realm, this country, all, all will I fore- fí And
" And Juliette?" asked the bandit, willing to probe the strength of enthu¬ siasm. Theodore started ; for a moment he hesitated ; then, with burning cheeks, and averted eyes, continued— (< Yes, Ju¬ liette, the peerless Juliette ! to save your soul, my father, to snatch it from per¬ dition, to give it back to God, I will forego—my life, my being ; renounce each darling hope, and perish ш the ex¬ ercise of duty." if Strange boy I" articulated the ban¬ dit, moved, in spite of the force of cus¬ tom, and the ferocity of nature ; " not for the ransom of a thousand souls would I one passion— one pursuit have marred." He paused; he mused ; then suddenly added— te Your recompence be my award." No
No change marked the actions of the banditti ; no yielding indication of mercy in their chief, augured the awakening dawn of repentance. The days passed in rapine, the nights closed in intemperance. Ín scattered parties, each alike spreading consternation, the troop infested the country, sometimes plundering with wily caution, sometimes overpowering with bold and undaunted freedom, sometimes rifling the rich and prosperous, sometimes snatching even from industry the scanty pittance, Theodore shuddered at the boasted triumphs of courage, and saw with hor¬ ror the glittering spoils which usually crowned their incursions. Often he spoke of mercy, in spite of the laugh of rude derision ;*often pleaded for the unwary traveller,
traveller, arid dared the brunt of jests and inuendoes. * r Join you our party," muttered the surly Leonard, (C and see whether oppo¬ sition will not freeze the stream οΐ your compassion." CHAP. IX. Ä Sleep, tranquil, cairn, flics tho lone couth of guilt, Kor stillai the heart vihein rauk l es rcorpou bin, Shouid vice oblivion woo, shu only ¡¿гп&фц The tallitale uìirror, which, rtilfctiujţ !*¡ick Jue patt, colours tho future iu ihe \*v,ho Midnight advanced ; the last quarter had chimed, and Juliette, lingering o^ér tho supposed crimes of the sister Laurette, was unable to compose herself to sleep, 'Twas true, all she had .gleaned was but frota
from the suspicious whispers of the sis¬ terhood—all she had imagined, founded but on the casual starts of a brain, if not dethroned, at best jaundiced by the heavy load of consuming care. Was it charity to denounce, was it justice to condemn on grounds so shallow ? Her heart reproached her—her heart whis¬ pered she had oppressed one whom op¬ pression had already humbled, one whom sorrow had levelled even to the earth. Tears streamed at the conviction, and re¬ gret pictured a thousand conciliating modes οΐ reparation. u Unhappy being !" she articulated, " whether the bleeding victim of sin, or whether laden with the false accusation of another's transgression ï but Heaven* who sees, who weighs, that Heaven——~** She paused, for she heard a light foot- step
step in the gallery. Alarmed at a sound so unusual, for silence had long reigned within the narrow dormitories of the sis¬ ters, she listened, and the next instant beheld the latch raised, and the door of her own little cell pushed softly open. Curiosity and fear, alike commingled, riveti ed her glance ; scarce aid she dare to breathe, and yet she wa r ched for the intruder. e( Montauban ! Montauban !" whis¬ pered a voice: "hist! hht ! tread softly, Who can say you did it ? Water will cleanse the stain, and ail will be well !" Juliette sprung from her pallet ; she heard a retreating step, and followed into the passage. (i Why so tardy ?" pursued the well- known acre-nu of the sister Laurette; *' fív, üúú I will await you—love never it J "* tires.
tires. Fly, Montauban ! and when the deed is done, when all is over, I will calm, I will ------" A shuddering sigh closed the sentence, and turning,she unconsciously approach¬ ed Juliette. Her veil was thrown back; her dark habit folded around her; ht r features appeared stiffened, as though in death ; no change marked their expres¬ sion, or gave to her fixed, unmeaning - stare one ray of animation. She was asleep, she was under the dominion of й\псу ; yet that fancy did but recall the past, that fancy did but act o'er again t( the deeds of other years." (i Blood! are you afraid of blood?" and then again her voice fell to a whis¬ per, as softly she articulated«—" Poison is as certain." Juliette started; horror faded her check vol. H. L ;p
to the pallid hue of the spectre-form up¬ on whom her eyes so steadfastly rested : trembling she clung to the side οΐ the gallery, for the nun again advanced. (t Ah, Montauban ! what, still doubt¬ ful ? You know the signal ; be deter¬ mined, be resolute, and the prize is all your own/' She paused ; she raised her hand to her forehead, in musing atten¬ tion ; then, with a smothered laugh, re* joined— (i What do you fear? have Înot sworn to love you ? did I not fly when <mv secret was discovered ? Ungrateful ! lake this ring------" But in the effort to draw the imagined olfering from her finger, the taper droppe! upon the floor. Instantly the sound dissipated the \bdons of sleep; instantly the spell was broken, the delusion vanished. She started ¡# wild horror—she would have fled ; but Juliettes
Juliette, snatching her veil, restrained her—" Sister, fear not," implored the trembling girl; " 'tis I—'tis Juliette." The nun clung to her shoulder; she gasped for breath; she closed her eyes in horror—" 'Tis all imagination," sooth¬ ingly whispered Juliette. " Sister, suf¬ fer me to lead you to your cell." But xhe mm moved not; nay,she clung tighter to the arm of lier supj orter, as though to stay her steps— f < Holy Mary !" aspi¬ rated the shuddering rrirl, tma then aaain f>he essayed consolai ion and entreaty. Sister Lamette raised her head from t iae supporting shoulder of Juliette : in- ñíaníiy she seemed to awaken to all that had passed, and sîeadfıstlv fixing her e\ e>: on the pallid features of her voun^ companion— " Do not befrav me." she #ул ] л\кл\\. Swear, pronii >e never
to divulge the secrets sleep has laid open." " Fear not, sister," replied Juliette; t( your wanderings were wild and shape¬ less." (< Could fancy form no combination?" eagerly questioned the nun. fi Say, was there no link, no coincidence of mat¬ ter?" Juliette shuddered— - <c Ah, sister ! mis¬ guided sister," she »said, gently leading to her cell, t( that link, that coincidence or.ee confided to the ear of a confessor—- once------" She paused ; for the stern glance of the nun awed her. " Proceed," said Laurette. " Yet stav; first tell me, how <an a sinner's prayers give peace to a sinner's soul ?" (i Though all are prone to error," mildly observed Juliette, « yet our sins, sister,
sister, are not of the same die : some yield to the venal trespasses of human i ty y while others------Ah ! surely the tempted and the tempter come not within the same class." " You are a nice casuist, though but a young convert," said the nun, with a smile of mingled satire and derision. £c Sister, you mistake me," warmly re¬ joined Juliette: "Heaven can witness I am no convert, for my ideas never \va* vered." " Then, daughter, you are an enthu¬ siast," resumed Laurette; ff and, like sis¬ ter Lucille, will die a martyr to the faith/* Juliette raised her clasped hands to heaven, as softly she answered— ff Ah ! would that the same enthusiasm—would that the same conviction could be in- L 3 fused !
fused ! Sister, reflect, what but the sal¬ vation of your soul------" " Peace !" interrupted the nun, point¬ ing to the door of the cell. " Leave me, child ; my secret woe admits of no alleviation." " There are antidotes to poisons the most deadly," remarked Juliette, linger¬ ing, as though unwilling to depart. The nun started. Shuddering she bu¬ ried her face in her hands; then hastily rejoined—" Leave me; my heart is al¬ ready probed." Jtdiette took her taper, and quitted the cell. How could she offer consolation, how could she breathe the hopes of peace to a mind so desolated—a mind racked by the keen tortures of reproving me¬ mory—a mind beset by the scorpion stings of past enormities! Her prayers were
were all she had to offer, and her prayers were despised ; but, in the lonely hour of meditation, she could remember the sinner, she could breathe the pious peti¬ tion for coming grace. The remaining hours of night were un¬ disturbed ; yet though no intruder, breaking upon her solitude, dissipated the repose of nature—though she closed her eyes upon the cares of the world, and, rich in the undying calm of inno¬ cence, felt neither the pang of disappro¬ bation or regret, still she lost not the spectre-image of the sister Laurette, but acted o'er again the horrors of the past hour. Another's woes called forth the sigh of commiseration ; another's crimes coloured the visionary flights of fancy. In the morning, wrapt .in sullen ab- L 4 straction,
straction, laurette fled at the close of devotion, nor e'en in the refectory joined the assembled sisterhood ; nay, the pitying solicitude of Juliette seemed wormwood to her feelings, nor relaxed her stem brow r with one approving smile. ' f Heed her not/' said sister Lucille, perusing in the features of Juliette the expression of sadness; "she is ungrate¬ ful for kindness, and dead to the soft al¬ leviations of friendship/' " Ah ! but she is alive to misery/' re¬ plied the sympathizing girl, fi and sink¬ ing beneath a load of hidden grief." " True, my child, but that misery is of her own creating ; that misery, in com¬ munication, might find relief." Juliette shook her head in doubtful silence.— " Hers are not the sorrows of the heart," pursued the nun; " alas! hers
hers are but the maddened conflicts of unruly and disappointed passions: even now*, the insatiate fury of revenge ran¬ kles, and banishes every transient indica¬ tion of remorse." " Oh, no, no !" said Juliette ; " sister Laurette is alive to remorse ; now, even at this moment, it tears, it consumes her." ie The Virgin grant it !" aspirated the sister; tc I could wish to see her bending beneath the unrelenting penance of self- iniiiction; I could wish to see her hum¬ bled to the lowest ebb of mortification and endurance !" Juliette, shuddering, grasped the arm of the nun, and snatching the rosary wdiich impended from her girdle, held to view the cross — c< Sister," she de¬ manded, " is not this the type of cha¬ rity—the type of forgiveness? If she had ĺ 5 wronged,
%vronged, if she had injured you, then, even then------" " I would pardon—I would pray for her," interrupted the nun; " but she wrongs her own soul—she wars against the,tenets of our most holy worship. In¬ dividual injuries may be forgiven, may be obliterated, but profanation------ *' Juliette raised her fìnger to the lips of the speaker — ff Stop, sister," she ex¬ claimed ; " let the Power offended mea¬ sure the transgression. look into your own life, recall the early season of youth, when the heart elated, when the spirits, buoyed upon the tiptoe of expectation, beheld the coming years of promise, rich in the glowing colours of fascination; ah! think------" " Daughter," interrupted the nun, " the saints be praised, my life and the life
life of the impenitent Laurette bears nq similitude ! she was dragged Пот sin, an unwilling sacrifice; mine was a volun¬ tary renunciation; she forswore not the poison of the world's sensuality, nay, even now riots in the latitude of unli¬ censed thought." " The heart, the scat of thought, defies the eye's scrutiny," said Juliette. * f True," resumed the mm, ft but the actions, uncloaked by hypocrisy, betray each hidden impulse. Sister Laurette's tears are the tears of disppointment, the gallings of a spirit which spurns controul. Now would she fly her prison ; now, could she snap her chains, would she re¬ turn to a bondage more coercive—the bondage of sin. Yes, her mind is an alien to virtue and to piety, or why, with ĺ 6 cold.
cold, with chilling apathy, receive each studied proof of interest and favour?'* et Perhaps 'tis pride," remarked Ju¬ liette; fe pride which, spurning compas¬ sion, classes contempt with pity." u Pride alone would yield to convie- tion," replied sister Lucille; <f pride may hoodwink the judgment, but it hardens not the heart ; besides, pride does not stain with blood the visionary flights of fancy, neither does it start aghast and pallid at the sound of murder." Juliette was silent ; her powers to de¬ fend were lost : she remembered the scene she had witnessed, the words she had heard, when sleep had banished re¬ serve ; and though compassion checked censure, conviction condemned. " You are silent," pursued the nun. " Sister,"
tf Sister/* replied Juliette, " my de¬ fence was not grounded in jusíification ; for, alas ! I must admit the eíľort una¬ vailing " " It was grounded in philanthropy," rejoined sister Lucille, as, with an ap¬ proving smile, she extended her hand. il Would that the instigator, alive to the warm thrill of gratitude, would feel— would repay the motive ! But her heart, my child, cast not in the same mould, owns not the same sway ; and though we condemn its irregularities, though we la¬ ment its obduracy, still be our prayers offered up for its conversion." " Ah ! may those prayers be heard ! may those prayers be acceptable!" fal¬ tered Juliette; tc may she yet live to see her error ! may she yet live to atone for the past !" " Mav ψ/
" May she die in grace!" concluded the nun, raising her clasped hands to heaven. " May her soul, recalled to obedience, to submission, acknowledge —repair its manifold transgressions! may prayer gladden its pass to eternity ! may peace and mercy soften the last føint struggles of nature !" " Amen !" piously ejaculated Juliette; and then, overcome by her feelings, she fled from the cell.
CHAP. X. I've heard, but not believ'cl, the spirits of the dead May walk again. Shakespeare. j Twas on the eighth night of Theodore's sojournment within the gloomy walls of Vermandois,
Yermandois, when the lamp flashed a last exertion, and, dying, mingled all alike in darkness, that his slumber was broken by the sudden opening of his chamber- door. Quick was the breathing of the intruder, heavy his step as he tottered towards the bed— (( Save me ! save me ! " he exclaimed, and then he sank, exhaust¬ ed^ panting. Theodore started. It was the voice of Montauban—" Save you !" he repeated, " from what ? from whom ?" " From conscience," lingered a voice in the corridor. Montauban groaned in horror. Theodore sprung from the bed ; he would have rushed to the door, he would have sought the mysterious speaker ; but the imploring accents of his father re¬ strained him. " Stav !
f ' Stay! stay!" he faltered, and his palsied hand firmly grasped the arm of the youth. " Wherefore should Istay?" demanded Theodore ; u 'twas from the corridor that the voice proceeded. I fear it not ; suf¬ fer me then------" (i No, no," fell from the lips of the bandit. '* Thrice beneath this accursed roof has it burst upon my sight. Theo¬ dore, 'tis the spectre of---------" He paused; then, in broken accents, mur¬ mured— " Stir not ; yet for a light I would give the universe/' " Repentance and atonement is thine io giver' breathed forth the same terror- striking accents. The nerveless arm of the bandit drop¬ ped powerless; and Theodore, lost to every fear, alive but to the impulse of curiosity,
cnriositv, hurried i:ıîo the corridor. Darkness was spread around, si ve the lamp's partial ray, which still burned in the distant chamber of Montauban. The door was half open, and, as a saffron road, its reflection crossed the gallery. Theodore paused involuntarily ; for sud¬ denly it became darkened, a shadow quickly crossed it, and then succeeded the light tread of careful footsteps. He press¬ ed forward, he gazed o'er the balustrades ; but the stairs being spiral, the object of his search was lost. Entering the apart¬ ment of the bandit, he snatched the lamp, and eagerly advancing, without hesitation descended the stairs. Their flight termi¬ nated in a stone passage, long, arched, and narrow. He waved high the lamp, his eyes pierced the darkness with eager solicitude, but as far as they could pene¬ trate,
trate, appeared silent and forsaken. Still his resolution was unchanged ; and with a heart firm in the cause, uninfluenced by local apprehensions, he attained the extremity of the pas age. It separated. In a transverse direction, it branched off; the one led to the court-yard, the other to the interior of the castle. He paused irresolute, but instantly his election was decided, for the sound of a closing door pointed to the outward entrance. Theodore reached the low portal ; he pulled it with incautious haste, for as it yielded to his strength, the gathering current of external air extinguished his lamp. At first he felt not the privation, for the moon's silver beams pierced into the court-yard, and reflected the gigantic outline of the building. He saw the tall pines waving o'er the battlements, and the
the turretted watch-towers, peering, as it were, amid their shades Undetermined ' whether to advance or to retreat, his hand still grasped the door, and his eyes still wandered in search of the object of his pursuit : suddenly he sprung forward, for beneath the gloom of an archwav, opening at the base οΐ an outer watch- tower, to command and defend the rocky pass to the main entrance of the castle, he distinguished a human form. It ap¬ peared wrapped in the garb of some re¬ ligious order. It was tall, it was thin, it was almost shadowy ; and as it leaned against the rude wall, the cowl darken¬ ing o'er its features, it conveyed in its appearance a something terrific—a some¬ thing superhuman. Theodore's eyes seeded fixed upon the figure, yet, when he reached the archway, it was gone. He
He heard no footstep, he saw no trace ; and when he called, the echo of his own voice alone responded. His pride spurn¬ ed at the weakness of superstition, yet did the faint flutter of his heart, the sud¬ den agitation of his feelings, give name to his sensations. That the mysterious object of his pur¬ suit had shrunk within the covert of the archway, he felt assured; for the light of the moon prohibited the possibility of unnoticed egress; but whether to pierce its gloom, and pursue the adventure, or whether to leave it in obscurity, was a strong debate between reason and curio¬ sity. The one argued the danger of teme¬ rity, the other pictured the probability of gratification. Reason boasted no empire o'er the mind of our hero; for though his judgment was strong, and his mind compre-
comprehensive, yet his feelings were alive to impetuosity, and his heart ever governed by impulse. The reflection of being unarmed, of being cut off from succour, of throwing himself into the very fangs of unknown power, biassed not the deliberation ; and when a slight noise from above aroused the eagerness of attention, he darted beneath the arch¬ way, and, spite of darkness, gr< pcd his passage. Carefully he stepped, for he had proceeded beyond the light of the moonbeams, and frequently he paused to listen. Once the sound of a footfall spurred on ίο the pursuit; and once the quick breathing of nearly - exhausted strength spoke his approach to the un¬ known. He sprung to the supposed spot, rich in imagined triumph ; but hjs searching hand met but the damp wal!, and
and the breathing itself ceased— íť Search no further," exclaimed a voice, 4t for danger and peril lurk around," (i Speak/' implored Theodore, " and explain your mysterious errand." But no answer was returned. " Speak," he continued ; t( point out the danger I should sh un/* fi Monimtbanr* softly rejoined the voice. s * M v father ! Merciful Heaven! my father'/' faltered the youth. i( Fijj Ыт? к rejoined the warner ; <f ac~ curaca and fatui as the blaat of (kaili ľ* Theodore gasped for breath ; he leant 8PainM τ he wail, and not till the rustling, &s of a garment, betrayed the flight of the intruder, did he recover his self- command. Again he vehemently con* jurcd an explanation; but she stillness of
of death prevailed— £í Stranger," he ex¬ claimed, " if you have mercy, stay and answer me." But the intruder was gone, at least surrounding darkness baffled all attempts at discovery, and no sound be¬ trayed his continuance. Still at a loss how to act, he again paused, for he had reached the termination of the passage, and stood at the base of a spiral staircase* leading to the chambers above. ei You are sought after," articulated the same voice; Cf tarry longer.» and the power to save will be lost." " What power?'' again demanded The* odore. * ť That uhich Heaven rests in the bands of innocence," was the response, and the** «gain it ceased« ff How can J exert that power?" ques¬ tioned
tioned our hero; (i how can I discover the object who would claim it ?" (( Seek her beneath the archway," re¬ plied the voice. (S To-morrow night, when, wearied with excess, the troop shall be lost inforgetfulness, watch the opportu¬ nity, and repair hither" " For what ? for whom r" implored Theodore. " Fly,'' whimpered the unknown ; " Ш not the eye of suspicion glance upon y oar movements ; Jly to the castle; elude tiie vigilance of Mailanhan ; disobedience is virtue, f or you al./ne can ward the blow of murder." Theodore shuddered. " Fly" continued the voice. * f Fc* member to-morrow s mku.igìit : be punc¬ tual; be diligent" Theodore
Theodore heard no more. Embarked in a new project, he yielded to the coun¬ sels of an unknown guide, and fled the archway He paused not in the court¬ yard. He had been warned of the ne- cessity of caution ; and, with a mind oc¬ cupied with the mysterious occurrences of the past hour, he reentered the castle. His own name, vociferated by the ban¬ dit, was the first sound which met his ear; and to his response succeeded the mut¬ tered curses of anger. Theodore, un¬ daunted, met the gathering tempest of his rage, and blunted e'en his fury by the forbearing quiet of endurance. " Did you see it?" demanded Montau¬ ban, when the first burst of reproach gave place to inquiry. " I saw the outline of a figure/' re- vol. и. m plied
plied the youth, " muffled in a monk's cowl and scapular/' The bandit shuddered ; he looked fear¬ fully around—" Did you see the face?" he again questioned. " No, he fled as I pursued ; and, when I thought to grasp him, he glided past- me with a facility scarcely human." Again Montauban started; he feared to betray too much, and yet he longed to question further. " I am not superstitious," pursued the youth, "yet my reason almost yields to the whispers of credulity. Why it should haunt my quiet, I have yet to learn; it cannot come in reproach, for my con¬ science records no deed to warrant the suggestion." Again the life's-blood fled the cheeks of
CONFESSIONAL OF VALOMBRE. of Montauban ; his eyes glanced horribly* on the youth, and his lips murmured in¬ articulate sounds. " Father, are you ill?" demanded the alarmed Theodore; " or may I hail the blessed epoch of remorse ?" The bandit answered not ; he shrunk from the piercing glance of his son, and folded his arms in acep abstraction. The¬ odore attempted to speak, but Montau¬ ban motioned silence. The youth watch¬ ed him with anxious solicitude; no glow of affoction marked his feelings yet did pity and sorrow occupy his heart ; pity, for the perpetration of crimes which barred the reach of reparation ; and sor- roWf-for the claim which nature held up¬ on hi*? feelings—-" He wore the cowl and scapular of a monk," at length faltered Montauban, scarce daring to glance m 2 around
around the chamber. s< Say, did he fly in silence ? did he not speak his er¬ rand ?" " The monk proclaimed the errand of peace/' replied Theodore. " Hah ! what else did he proclaim ? Goon; explain, boy; did he linger o'er the deeds of the past ?—did he say ought of the confessional of Valombre? did he say 'twas his resistance which unsheathed the dagger ? did he say 'twas his obdu¬ racy which provoked the stroke ?" " Oh, no ; he comes not to arraign," replied the shuddering Theodore ; " he comes to admonish : he comes, on the mission of love, to point out, to enjoin the blessed clause of repentance* Fa¬ ther, heed, attend, yield to his counsels, and he will redeem, he will save you ; he will soften the keen reflections of the pastj
past, and the future he will deck in peace. Say, may I hope, may I hail this visitation the happy prelude ------" te Peace, boy !" interrupted the ban¬ dit, and as he snafched his hand from the imploring grasp of Theodore, the chill¬ ing frown which lowered on his brow en¬ forced command. Disappointed, desponding, the youth moved towards the door. His heart was full, yet he wished to veil his feelings ; for the tearof sensibility ever excited the brutal laugh of derision. " Stay," thundered Montauban, whose coward soul shudderingly anticipated the return of the spectre-monk. " Heard you no sound in the corridor ? Hark ! again ; sure 'tis footsteps.*' " 'Twas fancy/* replied Theodore ; *' her powers are unlimited." m 3 * True,"
" True," said Montauban, still listen¬ ing, and then with a half sigh he con¬ cluded— (t Would all alike were fancy !" (< The past?" eagerly questioned The¬ odore ; but the bandit answered not. Again did his hands shut out external objects, for the door cf the apartment opened; and not till the voice of Ran¬ dolphe indicated safety could he again look up. i( Merciful Powers!" thought Theo¬ dore, when, left to his own reflections, he could recall the past, " how t} rannte is the sway of vice ! how galling the fet¬ ters her despotic reign imposes í and yet thousands, unresisting, hurried away by subduing passions, are borne down the stre am of infatuation, are overwhelmed, are destroyed. 'Tis the first step which jouth should shun; for often, alas! often
often is the first deviation, the first lapse conclusive. Yes, dear, tender, excel¬ lent friend of my inexperience, thy counsels are prophetic : a parent lives, the sad memorial that vice, like a hardy plant, spreads a thousand, thousand t hoots in the lone heart which gives it entrance."' From the calm satisfaction which ever accompanied the reflection of father Bet- s>olii/s parental care, his mind, reverting to the strange events of >the past hour, dwelt, with new-awakening conjecture, on the enterprize in which he had en- 34 a i; ed. To account for the mysterious circum¬ stance bail] ed all his endea\ours; and the more he reflected, the more was he lo&l. it was the same voice he had heafd on bis first entrance beneath the roof of m 4· Verman-
Vermandois : then it warned him of dan¬ der to himself, now it solicited mercy for another. How mercy should be in his hands, how the possibility to save should be vested in one so powerless, filled him with wonder and conjecture. His imagi¬ nation awed, his curiosity excited, by the veil of mystery which shrouded the move¬ ments of the unknown, prepared him for some event beyond the reach of com¬ mon conjecture. His understanding was sufficiently strong to despise the mere whispers of superstition ; yet had his mind so early imbibed the tincture of ro¬ mance, that he could not trace the im¬ pending incident to any natural expla¬ nation. The broad glare of day dissipated the apprehensions of Montauban : spectres glide not beneath the sunbeams; for it ь
is conscience which decks night in ter¬ rors. He joined the marauders in fresh enterprises of danger, and wandered amidst their usual haunts, with a spirit apparently unbroken. Not so the sen¬ sitive mind of our hero; he, alas ! expe¬ rienced no variation ; the cloudless fir¬ mament, the brilliant sun, cheered not his sadness, nor snatched from care one thought ; for the heart, absorbed in its own sorrows, lingering o'er the cata- logue of its own difficulties, feels dead alike to external charms and external al¬ lurements. Left the uncurbed range of the castle's vast extent, for, save Ran¬ dolphe, the banditti had quitted the fort¬ ress, Theodore, with listless inquietude, wandered o'er the desolated chambers, often pausing, with eye attracted by the burnished glare of some defaced orna- M 5 ment,,
ment, and often straying from his own peculiar fate, to muse with wonder at Vermandois' strange desertion, once the favoured residence of a titled race, now the rude haunt of fierce and lawless rob¬ bers. He had reached the extremii y of a stone gallery, extending along the east front of the castle, and decorated with the rich exuberance of the artist's fancy. One form, one countenance, the most attracted his attention ; it was the beau¬ teous semblance of a matron, on whose white bosom a sleeping boy reclined. The smile of maternal exubaiion glowed upon the canvas, as her snowy hand seemed in the act of parting the golden ringlets on the forehead of the child. e ' Ah !" exclaimed Theodore, as he gňzed upon the picture, " how nature speaks in every perfect feature ! Thrice blessed
blessed cherub ! rich in a mother's love, thy hopes, thy opening years, thy gilded promises------" And then he paused, and starting at an unusual sound, turned quickly round, and beheld in the dark¬ ened corner of the gallery a battle- piece, agitated as though by some sud¬ den gust. Scarce knowing what he sought, he sprang towards it, and, as he pushed aside the gilded frame, disco¬ vered, by an iron hinge, the concealed secret of a door. Pale with the antici¬ pation of some new horror, yet eager to explore the hidden entrance, he remov¬ ed entirely the encumbering obstacle, and pushing back the door, passed through its narrow archway, and again closed it. The passage in which he found himself was lower and narrower than the gallery he had quitted; and the lights m 6 faint
faint unequal rays, but sparingly admit* ted through a high and strongly-grated casement, now darkened, and thickly mantled with the spider*s ingenious web. Drear and unsocial was the aspect, cheer¬ less and disheartening its termination ; for a second door, iron-incrusted, barred his passage, and alike yielded to his strength. The apartment beyond was furnished with every care which could add comfort to its inmate ; naught, save liberty, appeared to have been wanting; and of that, alas ! the stronglv-barrica- doed door betrayed the dire banishment., Theodore shuddered, Theodore sympa¬ thetically felt the prisoner's pangs— —" Ah ! how bitter is the captive's lot ľ' he thought, as seating himself on the low couch, he fixed his eyes on the grated casement. " Often on this same couch
couch hast thou reclined, poor mourner! and watched the lagging flight of hours,. which could bring no change ! often mused o'er thy sorrows ! often, with in» dignant start, cursed the fell power which chained thee down î often prayed the saints to give thee freedom, even leagued with death ! and yet a captive still." The¬ odore's tears dimmed e'en the little light which found an entrance. " Perhaps/' he continued, dashing the truant drops. from his cheek, " perhaps rich in the so¬ cial claims of kindred—a father—a hus¬ band—perhaps------" The thought was too painful : he started from the couch ; he traversed the apartment. Ah ! how did his horror, how did his commiseration rise, when casting his eyes on the floor, he distin¬ guished the track of the murderer, he marked
marked the trace of blood ! it died the threshold of a door, which till now had escaped his observation. His heart sick¬ ened, but his resolution did not relax ; and with that desperation of feeling which dares, which braves the worst, he burst it open, and entered the chamber. Its appearance spoke it the sleeping- room of the ill-fated prisoner; but that prisoner was not, as imagination had pourtrayed, a father, a husband ; that prisoner, for the scattered garments be¬ trayed the sex, had been armed in a fe¬ male's pleading helplessness; yet unpi- tied, unaided, had she fallen beneath the murderer's stroke— <e God! avenging God !" burst from the livid lips of the youth, as, rivetted to the spot, he gazed upon the crimson-stained coverlet, which, rudely torn aside, showed e en the im¬ pression
pression of the form, which, from the sleep of wearied nature, had passed to the sleep eternal. Fain would I paint my hero's quick- revolving thoughts ; fain linger o'er the burst of indignation, the thrill of horror, and the subduing tide of soft compassion, but that the power of lan¬ guage would the effort mar, and spoil the interest I would here excite. 'Tis for the pencil to perpetuate the gust of pas¬ sion ; the pen, with lesser strides, must be content to trace effect. Forgive me, lady, for claiming then our sex's genuine fancy ; nor blame an author, when she taxes theme, to save the imputation on ability. Theodore turned from the bed : every glance he cast around the chamber in¬ creased the sadness of his thoughts. A rosary
rosary lay upon the table, as also an ink¬ stand, and near it a torn paper. He flew to seize the imagined elucidation, for in¬ terest whispered the name, the sufferings of the murdered prisoner alike revealed. The ink was pale, the characters scarcely legible; yet, with eager eyes, did he peruse the contents. Ah! no; it was no compilement of injuries, no transcript of a heart's unvarnished sorrows; it was more in the style of a confession, and seemed to breathe the pure spirit of pe¬ nitence— <€ One more revolving year, and these eyes shall no longer behold- this scene of terror, shall no longer gaze on this record of transgression. And will thy pale ghost be appeased ? Lady— murdered angel ! will thy appalling voice no more be heard in the thunders ? will thy shade no more pursue my steps ? no more
more pierce the gloom, and hover o'er my wanderings? will this brain becahn? will this heart be still ? will the past yield to the future ? will mercy gild the open¬ ing scene ? Ah, say î ah, tell me ! will penitence ****** Xo, no ; accursed wretch î thy doom is cast, thy life is waning ; and when in death, when mouldering, thou art laid * * * * •4* »τ* *p ^P ^f "*p *F *^P φ φ TFT З^Г Blood ! they say blood will be washed away ; that prayer and infliction will bleach it white as the mountain snow ; yet, yet is the stain still crimson * * *-*^ifcífc3ŕufr*íiŕ T-Jolv and blessed saints ! I have wept, I have watch¬ ed, I have prayed, I have mortified each rebellious thought, until my spirit, and my health, alike is broken. Yes, on my knees have I watched the live-long night ; when nature craved, have I resisted food; when
when fever scorched my lips, havel turn* ed from the tempting cup. * * * #*###·&## * # * ,1, * * * * Oh God! oh God! aid— give me one token ol' returning favour ! *********** * * * * * j h ave wandered from the haunts of men, í have plunged into soli¬ tudes where misery alone could enter. At night, stretched upon the earth, have I watched the return of morning ; and then have I arisen, wet with the pendent dew. Ah ! what did it avail ? Nought but sickness, pain, and suffering. Fool ! weak fool ! it was the spirit, not the flesh, which wanted humbling; it was the erring heart which needed the bridle of restraint. Here have I sought it ; within this chamber—by the side of the bed where last reclined------" The paper dropped from the hand of Theodore.
Theodore. It was torn, it was rudely severed, where anxiety sought solution* " Unhappy wretch !" he murmured, re¬ treating from the appalling scene. "Slave of irremediable, of gnawing woe ! Biesfc be thy victim ! Keener, keener far on thy black soul, rankles the stroke of death, than what ihv murderous hand didst unrelentingly inììici : one moment closed the pangs, the struggles of the prisoner, while thine through ages are protracted." Sympathizirg in the wrongs, in the sufferings of its late unfortunate inmate, shuddering at the coercion, the abuses of power, and the hopeless, the lingering inaction of captivity, Theodore returned to trie gallery, replaced the picture, and again paused to examine the portrait, which had before fascinated his attention. Each
Each succeeding glance augmented his interest; it was more than common ad¬ miration, it was more than mere curio¬ sity ; his heart seemed absorbed in the contemplation'; and ever and anon, when time warned him to quit the gallery, did his eyes linger a reluctant adieu. Yet did not the features bear the slightest similitude to the lady Juliette; they were soft, they were interestingly lovely, but the same peachy down of youth mantled not their expression ; the one was as the vernal bloom of spring, the other rich in the mellowing tints of summer. On returning to the inhabited cham¬ bers of the castle, Theodore found Ran¬ dolphe still alone, still awaiting his asso¬ ciates. « By St. Benedict ! I thought the spec¬ tre-monk had spirited you from Yerman¬ dois/*
d^is/ 1 exclaimed the robber : " in truth, 'tis a strange taste to go moping, and exploring, and telling beads, and mut¬ tering cred oes, as though your soul was black with sin. Why, boy, if Montau- ban's was as white, I query whether his sleep would not be sounder." Theodore breathed a heavy sigh. <f Come, shake off that cast of care," pursued Randolphe, laughing ; <f a peni¬ tentiary savours death, and death savours the devil." Theodore shuddered. 4i A cowl and a shorn crown, and, by the mass î father Theodore stands before us," continued the robber. i( Come, be lenient, and name the purchase of abso¬ lution ?" " Repentance and atonement/' mourn¬ fully replied the youth« (C Ah, mistaken Kandolphe í
Randolphe ! the hour will come, when, owning the fallacy of sin, you ¡will la¬ ment, vainly lament the undying record of transgression ! Remember, to contri¬ tion Heaven promises favour; but man, persevering in his crimes, bars the clause of mercv." " Preach on, and be installed an ab¬ bot," replied Randolphe, in an ironical tone. <f Who shall compose the frater¬ nity ? Say, to what office will your reve¬ rence nominate me ?" Theodore turned from him in disgust. <( Nay, you are a strange boy," pur¬ sued the robber, et to prefer lhe stale re¬ strictions of the fathers, to a life which owns no law but inclination ! Marry ! many a monk would doff the cowl to share our freedom ; and for our sacristy, we could more than purchase a release from
from purgatory, for every soul who has bled in our cause," " Think you," demanded Theodore, " the accumulated treasures of a life of plunder could bribe one ray of favour?" The tears, the blood, the sufferings of the injured, forbid all purchase, save long years of penance," " Then do they bar the effort," re¬ joined Randolphe. " A calling like ours warrants no dependance on a month, much Jess vears. Hard blows are often dealt, and who can name the head that's ίο receive them ? I have fought some years beneath Montauban's banner ; and though, save this scratch," drawing his band o'er a deep scar on his forehead, " I've been dame Fortune's favourite, yet I've seen spirits who dared the devil, bumbled, chop-fallen." " Did
* f Did not their fate awe you ?" inter¬ rogated Theodore. "Awe!" contemptuously repeated Randolphe; íť no, no, they nerved our courage, and bid us seek revenge." " Nor e'en the ritual of religion gave them burial," mournfully observed the vouth : <ť lost, wretched beings !" *" Dost think," interrupted Kandolphe, with a half-smothered laugh, " that the muttered psalmody of a friar would speed their flight to heaven ? what a jot the better is the soul for all the masses and requiems which credulity chants, and su¬ perstition offers ?" Theodore's spirits rose in indignation, yet did he maintain silence. What could he substantiate, by entering the lists with one so profane, so hardened ? Kot the faintest glimmer of conversion promised to
to second his labour; and to hear the loose ribaldry of abuse levelled at riles he had been taught to worship, filled his soul with sickening disquietude. Again he sought security in flight; for solitude was preferable to an intercourse with a mind so uncongenial. The day wore away, and still the ban¬ ditti returned not. Theodore felt no uneasiness, for he felt no aifection ; and where but with affection does anxiety dwell? It was his mysterious appoint¬ ment, his intended visit to the watch- tower, which most occupied his atten¬ tion; he panted for the moment of elu¬ cidation, and watched the progressive flight of the hours with an impatience which spoke his interest ; yet was the sun but slowly setting, and midnight wa^ ihe period. voi,. II. n l) ;ţv
How long the space whicb expectation mourtťd í Theodore descended from the battle¬ ments. He sought a change of scene ; he fled the castle, he wandered beyond the pine-forest, he mounted the craggy steep, from whose giant height he had first beheld the grey turrets of Verman¬ dois, and gazed on the far-spreading landscape on the opposite side. His eyes, ranging o'er the mingled outline of mountains, cliffs, and forests, wan¬ dered from the awful grandeur of stu¬ pendous wildness, to the mellowing gra¬ dations of vegetation. Shagged with pine and darkening cypress, he beheld precipices of granite, scowling o'er glens of aromatic herbage, dotted by the soft blowing cystus, and shadowed by thickets of olives, almonds, and olianders. He traced the impetuous velocity of gather¬ ing
ing streams, foaming, fretting midst im¬ pending rocks and broken fissures, now rolling in glassy mildness—now, by re¬ sistance, swelling into strength, and dashing high their misty columns of spray. Impressed with wonder, with awe, with admiration, Theodore continued to gaze upon the almost insurmountable ram¬ parts of Nature, till each fantastic sum mit, losing the golden tint of sunset, mingled into one long line of shade. The profound silence, the deep repose, which, with the dubious tints of evening, mantled each feature of the landscape, impressed with solemn sadness the thoughtful mind of our hero. Often, at this same hour, had he listened to the deep, full swell of holy praise; often shed the tear of piety, in the solemn n 2 pauses
pauses of soul-moving minstrelsy. Again the vesper choir seemed to swell upon his ear, again it seemed to linger, as midst the cloistered arches of Valombre. Alas! 'twas fancy all — fancy, which peopled the twilight gloom, and habited ideal images in the dusky garb of reli- gion-^fancy, which recalled the past, and blotted out the present from re¬ membrance. Ko fear marked his descent from the mountains, though sometimes tottering on the brink of perpendicular preci¬ pices, sometimes passing beneath exca¬ vated rocks, whose gigantic masses hung threatening overhead. Deep was the gloom of the pine-forest, awe-striking the sombre shadow of its close-intwining branches; yet Theodore, wrapped in the thoughtfulnessofreflection,passedquickly on ;
on ; and when, by the given signal, the drawbridge was lowered, he entered the court-yard, panting but for the coming hour of explanation.
END OF УОГ,. ii.
Piinted by Lane, Darling, & Co. Leadenhall-Srreet, Lcndon.
