Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The siege of Kenilworth: an historical romance
THE
SIEGE OF KENILWORTH.
CHAPTER I.
Why dul í not pass lu-vay m secret, bke the flower or the rock, that hits its fair head unseen, and strews its withered leaves on the blast? Ossian. ОТ on the plains of Sharon, rich in every sweet which the horticulturist most values, spangled with the dews of heaven, and fanned by the gales of the south, bloomed a more lovely, a brighter flower, than lived and blossomed within the walls of St. Mary's* monastery! Isabel was fair to look upon ; but Isa¬ bel's heart was beyond ought of earthly price, was a jewel, rare beyond the vol. п. в rarest
JS
rarest jewel which man stamps precious ; for she was pious, gentle, meek, gifted with the talismanic virtue, with the un¬ sophisticated charm, stilling the storms of life, and eliciting peace from the very dregs of bitterness. " Dearest mother," she would articu¬ late, when listening to the trite exor¬ diums and gloomy prognostics of her fa¬ natic grandam, " if the world be so thick set with briars, if life be indeed steeped in nought save privation and endurance, better to anchor in this calm haven, than thoughtlessly brave its tem¬ pests and its frowns." "And could you, my child," asked the nun of St. Mary's, " forego all the il¬ lusions of youth, all the splendid dreams of imagination?—could you," gazing on the dewy eyes, on the raven hair, on the rival lilies and roses mantling the peer¬ less features of her granddaughter, " con¬ centrate all your hopes, and all your heart, within the narrow limits of these walls ?
walls? content with the holy service of lauding and of thanksgiving, could you forego without a sigh, could you re¬ nounce without a struggle, all of extra¬ neous, all of terrestrial claim ?" The distant towers, the peaceful haunts of Hanslape, like fairy visions swam in the fancy of Isabel ; she tliought too of her father, of her brother, of Hu¬ bert, and the rose outvied the lily. " I see the links are not so easily se¬ vered," pursued the aged devotee, " and heaven admits not a divided heart. At your age, Isabel, I too was alike luke¬ warm in the calling of grace: it was sorrow, it was widowhood, which dissi¬ pated every lingering illusion, which snapped every slender ligament." "And but for sorrow, and but for widowhood ?" softly asked Isabel, bow¬ ing her lips on the hand of her revered relative. A slight convulsion blanched the features of the baroness ; all which had been prized, and valued, and passed в 2 away s
away, revived ; it was the dream of other years, and even her bankrupt heart glowed in the reminiscence: but it was the dream ofa moment; her hand drop¬ ped upon her beads, and as slowly she numbered them, as her lips murmured the Ave-Maria, the cast of care, like scudding vapours before the sun's efful¬ gence, faded, leaving her brow uncloud¬ ed as her hopes. It was the dream of earth yielding to the reality of heaven \ —it was the security of the saint, tri¬ umphing over the snares, and the decep¬ tions, and the false joys of the flesh! " I have lived," she pronounced, with a firmness derived but from prayer, " with the holy Eliphaz to exclaim : * Happy is the man whom God correct- eth; for he maketh sore, and bindeth up; he woundeth, and his hands make whole." " Ah ! my mother," said Isabel, "yours is the judgment of experience; yours is the resignation of faith !" " Mine,"
44 Mine," pursued the pious sister, 44 is conviction in the omniscience of Di¬ vinity—is the consciousness of my own nothingness. Once, in affliction, I mur¬ mured, because my heart was proud and ill fitted to the scourge; because ray spirit rebelled where it should have bowed in acquiescence; because the tares of dissatisfaction had choked up the flowers of hope. When, iu Palestine, my husband served beneath the stand¬ ard of the gallant Ilichard Plantagenet, I sickened almost unto death;—when, in Normandy, he sunt into his gory bed of honour, the sunbeam of grace broke quick through the shroud of despond¬ ence—I arose as it were from earth—I shook away every trammel of mortality —I clung to the glorious promise of re¬ union, and laid my griefs and my soul upon the altar of my worship. It ivas then I felt, that, but for misfortune, we should have no call for patience and for resigna¬ tion ;—we should ill estimate religion, в 3 our
our prop in adversity, our salutary tem¬ porizer in prosperity, our sole balm in affliction !" " And I, my mother ?" asked Isabel, warming with the like enthusiasm of her saintly grandam. 44 ï ou have duties of earth to fulfil," rejoined the baroness : " you have a fa¬ ther; you have a brother; you-^ -----" "Brothers" interrupted Isabel, every feeling thrilling to the remembrance of Hubert. " Be it so, my child : the virtuous be ever our brethren." "Not so; not as in the common class," eagerly pursued the ardent girl ; " not as in the mere acceptation of genial phi¬ lanthropy : no, no ; Hubert is far nearer, far dearer than ought of common claim. In truth, I love him, and William loves him, and my father too loves him as though he were his son." The venerable mother of Hanslape sighed heavily ; she remembered when her
her love lay freighted in the like perish¬ able bark, and she remembered also how that bark had been wrecked, 44 Human existence," she observed, " hangs by a thread, fine spun as the hair-ligament of the spider ; a thread, ex¬ posed to every casualty, shaken by every blast which gathers : and shall we rest our hopes upon a thing of clay ?— shall we anchor felicity upon a shadow, as perishable, as flitting as youth's wild¬ est day-dream ?" 44 Alas ! we cannot cease to love," said Isabel, timidly. *' Surely, dearest lady, such a mighty sacrifice, such a total de¬ spoliation of heart, cannot be required at our hands." 44 No, not cease ; not altogether become apostates to nature and to habit," resum¬ ed the nun : 4< but we must temporize our love; we must model our love to the standard of submission and of holiness ; we must estimate every earthly blessing as lent, not given ; as consigned for a в 4 period
period to our keeping, not yielded up as our own." " Must we—must we indeed blunt the keenest edge of our sensibility?" asked the alarmed Isabel ;— i? must we eternally wrestle with our feelings ?" 44 Yes, if we would make ourselves acceptable unto grace. If we would live with God in our hearts, we must ex¬ punge the toils and the limetwigs of this world from our affections : the struggle is heavy, my cliild ; the labour welinigh overwhelming ; but faith for our breast¬ plate, prayer becomes our unvarying re¬ source." As she spoke, she seemed to gather zeal and resignation ; no sign of weak¬ ness ruffling her placid brow ; no tram¬ mel of human growth betraying ought of indecision. Isabel beheld her with wonder and awe : yet did her own heart forswear the ice-cold theory ; and long after she had lost sight of the ghostly as- cetick, did that heart tremulously vi¬ brate
brate beneath the dream of valued frtťiids and distant home. It was a dream, a contemplation, familiar and treasured, conjured in the deepest depths of monachal gloom, softening all of sys¬ tematic austerity, dappling with hope the very blank of despondence: for though years had worn away, since from the warders tower, De Maudit and Hubert had watched the litter bearing Isabel from Hanslape, yet had memory faithfully registered the last tear, the last look ; and Isabel had embalmed that tear, had clung to that look, with more than a sister's tenacity. Often, for wliole hours, had she lingered over the past, had she lived over again the season of happy childhood; chasing the gilded butterfly ; seeking spring's earliest pan¬ sy; shrinking from the rude gambols of William, and craving support and aid in the gentler offices of Hubert. (i Can it be crime," she would articu¬ late, when musing on the rigid rule of б 5 the
the fanatic baroness—" can it be crime to love, to cherish, to remember ? God- God forgive me then!" humbling her¬ self before the cross ; " for as well mav I seek to exchange the glory of the heavens !" Thus did tender preference, did infant love, glow in the oft-recalled virtues of Hubert ; thus, stealing into the pure bo¬ som of Isabel, in seductive softness, would it linger over the occasional do¬ cuments of remembrance passing be¬ twixt Nuneaton and Hanslape : fbr the only change, chequering the long blank of her seclusion, and relieving the in¬ tense labour of study, was the coveted vellum, enriched with the spontaneous feelings of regard, and bearing from heart to heart, the prized and dear assurances, of health, of welfare, and of interest— assurances, extracting the sting of sepa¬ ration, imparting to necessary absence, the sole balm it can admit. Blessed me¬ dium of our fears, our doubts, and our anxieties î
anxieties ! in it must we joy ; on it may we rely : for be the chasm ever so wide. the link ever so extended, the tear, the sigh, the hope, becomes wafted to the remotest corner of the globe ! The struggles and the perils incident to ought of revolt, reached not the in¬ mates of St. Mary's: beneath her sa¬ cred roof, the wild throes of anarchy, and wilder passions of men, were unguessed at ; the turmoils, the strifes, the jealou¬ sies of party unfelt ; a life of holiness, of charity, and of goodwill, was the limit¬ ed line of faith, w T as the beaten track 'twixt eartli and heaven : and every member of the sacred community, given to vigils and primes, studied the fur¬ therance of religion, and laboured dili¬ gently for universal peace. Isabel mark¬ ed the dead calm of monotonous ob¬ servance; sighed at the rhapsodies of spiritual zeal ; witnessed the solemn rites of fanaticism, and mourned with grief of heart, tlmt inconsistency, which scat- B 6 tering
tering charity with lavish favour, denies to self the mere award of comfort. " Surely, it cannot be the will of hea¬ ven," she would muse, when noting the hollow eyes, the wan cheeks, the care¬ worn form of penance ; " surely a rigi¬ dity, wasting to the bone, and macerat¬ ing ought of humanity, cannot be an acceptable offering to the God of gra¬ ciousness and mercy." But carefully did she smother the dar¬ ing query ; diligently did she strive to expunge the growth of arrogant pre¬ sumption : hers was the flash of reason piercing the ebon shades of bigotry, was the impulse of a sou!, trammelled, not blinded, by the murky mists of super¬ stition: the voice of the church had thundered agamst her; the whole con¬ clave of cardinals had anathematized an apostasy so flagrant. Among the few varieties chequering the spirit-wearing gloom of the cloister, and imparting the feeble tints of plea¬ sure
sure to negative existence, was the con¬ verse and association of a being like un¬ to herself; young, lovely, amiable, ba¬ nished her nearest ties, and consigned to the cold guardianship of the superior of St. Mary's. Years had transpired since the lady Margaret de Burgh had become a board- er at Nuneaton ; since, in all the attrac¬ tion of helplessness, in all the simplicity of childhood, she had sapped the hearts of the sisterhood, through the double claim of innocence and misfortune. Heavy was the storm wliich had wreck¬ ed the fortunes of her house, which had scattered mildew on the brightest hopes of promise; and banishing her noble fa¬ ther from patronage and favour, had hurled hitn from the highest pinnacle of prosperity into the deepest depths of persecution. But the wrongs of the earl of Kent are as lasting testaments of hu¬ man caprice—the services of the earl of Kent
Kent bear crying records of the ingrati¬ tude of princes ! The sable tissue of an hideous dream —the shrieks of a tortured mother, lin¬ gered spite of years and spite of circum¬ stances: confused and mournful images· crowded the nind of the youthful Mar¬ garet; she could not methodize reality, yet she could think and shudder at an association too faint to embody. Some¬ times, the magnificence of almost royal splendour would rise in contrast to her narrow cell; sometimes, the accents of conciliation would tingle on her ear, the caress of tenderness, glow, as it were, upon her lips ; then again all would be¬ come confused and lost; all would mingle in the fearful blank of reality. She remembered somethmg of a friend, something of a soother, amid the dire crush of happiness : but that friend, that soother, came not: year rolled upon year, and she knew not, whether her ra¬ ther, whether her mother, watched over her
her as angels of light, or whether they still sojourned in this veil of tears and of calamity. Once she had questioned the lady abbess, but she had been urged to pray ; once, yielding to the natural im¬ patience of affection, and deprecating vengeance on the relentless persecutors of her family, she had been told that spi¬ ritual arms were better than iron and steel. 44 It may be so," she articulated, sob¬ bing on the bosom of Isabel: " forgive¬ ness ofinjury may be an enjoined duty; but where exists the heart to forgive whilst yet the wound rankles ?" Isabel kissed the cheek of her weep¬ ing friend.^— 4i 1 am sure," she whispered, 44 1 can scarce forgive our holy mother for probing you so deeply. She thinks, dearest Margaret, because she is half saint, that we ought to be alike perfect and resigned." 44 1 wonder," said Margaret, 4C if she ever smarted beneath the scourge of un¬ just
just and arbitrary power; if she ever writhed beneath the inflictions of tyran¬ ny and rage. Woe—woe is me ! 'tis one thing to talk, and another to feel." But though the heart of the hapless daughter of De Burgh was thus tremu¬ lously alive to the storm which had shrouded the sun of her splendour— though the crowded and imperfect haze of the past too often obscured the lighter eth^r of the present—still, there were times, there were seasons, in which the buoyancy of youth prevailed ; in which hope, bright and beamy, kindling in her eye and in her smile, piercing midst this pass of strife, triumphed o'er each con¬ tending obstacle ! Times—seasons, w T hen every rose was divested of its thorn ; when perception was fanned with the sweetest odours of promise ; when futu¬ rity's rich garner teemed with frankin¬ cense; and joy, and bliss, scattering blossoms, thickened the mists of illusion ! Times—seasons, when divorced from thought
thought and eare, the gloom of the clois¬ ter faded ; and the calls, and the ties, and the pleasures of the world, like the pro¬ methean fire, warmed every hope into action ! 44 Ah ! and it mav come-—and it will come," said Margaret, linking her arm within Isabel's, and pacing the long ave¬ nue in the garden. " I cannot fancy— I cannot believe, ivith such feelings, with such perceptions, we can be destined to live and to die within these walls." 44 No, no," exclaimed Isabel, pausing, and raising her dark eyes to the glowing face of her companion ; " heaven wrills not the sacrifice of us poor maidens : we may be caged for a season ; but anon, we shall break our trammels and escape." 44 Escape !" echoed Margaret. " Dear¬ est Isabel, when may that be?" 44 Tarry till my father summon me to Hanslape," rejoined Isabel, " and see whether I journey alone." " Think you," fearfully questioned Margaret,
Margaret, 4ť the lady abbess will trust me in a world so full of snares? Think you------ n " We have no snares at Hanslape," in¬ terrupted Isabel. 44 Ahi but she thinks all snares be¬ yond the limit of her own cloister," pur¬ sued Margaret : " and I dread the livery of the cloister, as I do the pains of pur¬ gatory. God forgive me, if it be sin ; but I pray against it, at matin, and at eventide ! Nay, when the sun, as now, dips behind yon wall—-when I lose its last burnish, and cling to its fading beams—I cannot fancy it meet, that all the glories of this world should be re¬ linquished, for a spot, lone and solitary -is St. Mary's." 44 1 cannot fancy it meet," eagerly ex¬ claimed Isabel, " that the season of in¬ struction should be thus protracted. Come the 19th of May, the night of St. Dunstan's fast, and I shall have numbered sixteen years, yet still am I here,
here, stitching tapestry, and driving the distaff." 44 1 sliould be very—very lone with¬ out you," sighed Margaret. * 4 Alas ! í should wish myself in heaven, more heartily than now I wish myself in the world." Isabel saw the tears gathering in the blue eyes of her friend, and she felt them a reproach to her own murmurs. " Not alone—I leave not Nuneaton alone," she replied. 44 No, no, Margaret. I remember the indulgence of my dear father—I have only to petition my dear father, and you, my friend, must bear me fellowship." 44 1 remember no father—no indul¬ gence," sobbed Margaret. 44 And yet you remember something of the world," rejoined Isabel, willing to divert her ideas. Margaret raised her white hand to her forehead, as though to converge every truant recollection.— 44 1 remember," she pro-.
pronounced, " huge towers, and long corridors, and high mountains, and trees mingling with the clouds, and gay reti¬ nues, and palfries, bedight with baubles and with genis :—and í remember sport¬ ing amid flowers and pastures, and ca¬ ressing a beautiful lady, and climbing the knee of a gallant noble. Alack î if it be other than a dream, I have never seen the like since." 44 Nor ever will at Nuneaton," sighed Isabel. 4 * But proceed; I would hear all, whether reality or fable." 44 And I remember," pursued Marga¬ ret, " warriors shining in bright armour, and plumes waving in their helms, and shields on their arms, and lances, swords, and battleaxes ; and the roar of drums, and the blast of trumpets, and------" 4C I can remember nought of warriors," interrupted Isabel, "forwe had ever peace at Hanslape. But I remember the falcon- bells, and the shrill bugle, summoning to the chase; and the neighing of horses, and
and the yelling of hounds: and I re¬ member, my dear, dear brothers, in their hunting-suits of green, crossed by their rich baldricks ; their cheeks glowing, and their eyes sparkling, like dew in the sun¬ beams! Would to heaven—would to heaven," she fervently ejaculated, " we were at Hanslape now, with my father, and William, and Hubert ' for till then, and not till then, will my kirtle cover a light heart. But I cry your mercy, dearest Margaret: 'tis of your remem¬ brances I would fain question." 44 My remembrances at best are faint and imperfect," said Margaret ; " some¬ times I could almost believe theni vi¬ sions to cozen and beguile: yet suream I, my father was high in the favour of our royal Henry, and my mother was daugh¬ ter to the king of Scots : but the abbess tells us, save virtue, there is nought stable under the sun ; and that I came here, and that I am here, is but the con¬ firmation of her words." 44 Have
** Have you never sought explana¬ tion ?—have you never wooed enquiry ?" asked the sympathizing Isabel, " Yes, on my knees ; in tears, almost in frenzy," rejoined Margaret. " And what said the abbess ?" " She reproved my tears—she ehided my impatience—she told me these walls were boundaries beyond which she knew not, that the veil shut her from the world ; that all appertaining to the world was profane and irreligious; that man toiled out his own misery ; and that af¬ fliction and woe might be traced to the fitfulness ofhis own passions." " And did she pour no balm?—did she offer no emollient?" " She told me," sobbed Margaret, her hands clasped, her streaming eyes fixed on heaven, ťť that if I possessed wisdom -—if I lived to gratitude—I should wear my knees in thanksgiving to God fbr snatching me from the rank infection of sin." "Ah,
" Ah, cruel ! cruel !" and Isabeľs warm heart rebelled against doctrines so cold. " Perhaps 'tis right to think so," ob- served Margaret, after a pause of deep thought; " perhaps we may think so ourselves, when we have lived as long, and gathered as much experience as our holy mother : but as yet my very spirit clings to my kindred; and I would pur¬ chase, with whole years of ray existence, some knowledge of their fate." " Tarry until we reach Hanslape," ex¬ claimed Isabel, kindling into hope—- " De Maudit and Hubert will embark in the pursuit, and my father will aid us with his counsels: fear not; we shall re¬ solve the mystery ; we shall pluck the rose of happiness, spite of the brambles of the world. But see, the shades of evening thicken, and the stars brighten in the heavens. Let us return: anon we must hie to prayers." Margaret spoke not ; Wrapped in her own melancholy musings, she moved forwards,
forwards, insensible to the soothing whis¬ pers, and gay prognostics of her friend ; her heart labouring with care and grief; her spirits sunk and crushed by the leaden pressure of despondence, Isabel drew her from beneath the deep shadow of the trees, and ascending a little knoll, pointed to the west.—" The last bur¬ nish has faded," she said, " and gloom usurps the world : but to-morrow, the mn will return in all his splendour; to¬ morrows creation will smile anew in gladness! Margaret, dearest Margaret, 'tis an epitome of life : night, the gather¬ ing clouds of misfortune ; day, the re¬ suscitating beams of joy aud hope!" 44 Night, the tomb," faltered Margaret —* 4 dav, the resurrection of the blessed !" " Be it so," quick rejoined Isabel ; * ť and with the glory in view, be the thorny pass unthoiight of" Margaret tried to smile, but the effbrt died in the birth; tears again ringed the roses of her cheeks, and sighs fanned the
the snow of her bosom. They quitted the garden ; they silently threaded the cloisters: not a sound was stirring; not a shadow dappled their gloomy path. It was the hour, when veiled in misty in* distinctness, fancy bodies out of nought, forms and shapes, dear to the heart and to the memory ; the hour quickening il¬ lusion; the hour, when « .------------- s u }, eT ete-îHnsţ rukes Ikr wonted ¡station in tlie røiddle air, A thousand ¡shadows «t her beck." 44 Let us away," urged Isabel: 44 sad¬ ness becomes infectious." Margaret paused abruptly—she threw off her bonnet—she bared her ears to catch the breath of sound ; every limb was palsied ; every feature convulsed.— 44 Hark ! hark !" she exclaimed, " 'tis the like clash of arms—'tis the like fearful din which knolied the knell of our pros¬ perity. Holy Virgin ! there needs but the shrieks of my mother !—I remember it well ; it was the death of my parenťs vol. п. с splen-
splendour;—it was the grave of my earthly hopes." ** What mean you ?" questioned the alarmed Isabel: but Margaret, pale as moonshine, snatching her arm, dragged her into the court-yard. It was not fancy—it was not the heated coinage of imagination ; a wild din of commingling sounds gathered on the breeze ; groans, and shouts, and ex¬ ecrations; the clash of steel, and the harsh roar of combat. Each instant swelled the tumult; each instant mag¬ nified the threatened danger: all was dismay within the convent : terror and impelling fear drove to the sanctuary : the nuns lay prostrate before the altar ; the abbess, grasping the crucifix, strove to inspire a fortitude gendered in the true spirit of devotion.— u If it be thy will, oh God ! she pronounced, ét that thy altars-be this night polluted by blood, and desecrated by acts of violence—thy will be done !" The pause was long and solemn ;
solemn; every spirit was enwrapped; eve¬ ry soul tranced in holiness : fortitude su¬ perseded terror ; resignation and pa¬ tience grew and strengthened in prayer. It was as when the last intonation of heaven's thunder ceases, and veils the earth in fear and awe ;—it was profound —it was deep—it iced the brow, and it enchained the tongue. Again the voice of the mother-superior arose ; again she grasped the symbol of salvation ; again she exhorted trust, not in an arm of flesh, but in the mercies of the Saviour. Dan¬ ger and threatened ill yielded to faith and firm reliance. She prayed for the erring, for the oppressed, for the sore laden; for universal peace, and for uni¬ versal pardon: she prayed too for the prosperity of the church, for the state, for all conditions of men ; for veal in ho¬ liness, and for patience in tribulation :— and then she ceased, for a peal at the outer gate, loud and long, called her back to earth. She arose—she reproved с 2 the
the start and the shriek—she struggled to inspire by confidence and embolden by example : and quick invoking bless¬ ings on the heads of her trembling com¬ munity, and rallying into strength and into action, she proceeded to the grate. The murmur of voices arose—the pleadings for succour were distinctly au¬ dible; yet still did fear chain the hand of the portress; still did she cautiously withhold admission. w In the name of the blessed Jesus, what crave ye?" demanded the abbess, " Aid, and charity," was the response : 44 a largess in behalf of a christian knight." * 4 Throw wide the gate," pursued the mother superior t " be the church ever open to her followers."—And the next instant, on a litter, hastily constructed, and surrounded by a grief-struck retinue, a warrior, senseless, and steeped in blood, was borne into the court-yard.
CHAP-
CHAPTER II.
What ıs tt that you wottiii impart to ιπρ 5 if ¡t be ought toward the general good, ^et ho mm t in one eye, and death i'the other And I will look υπ both indifferently. SHAhFSrE-irtE. Hubert, fearless and eager, plungad in¬ to the thickest gloom of the copse-wood : nighťs silver crescent, chequering the pathway, spread many a fantastic sha¬ dow : the breeze sighed in the foliage ; and balmy with a thousand blossoms, shed myrrh and frankincense on nature's altar. He brushed the dew r s from the bent bush—he pierced amid the knotted angles of the thicket—he glanced around, but he saw r no form ; lie listened, but he heard no sound ; he spoke, and his oivn voice died in echo.—" Strange !" he с 3 mused,
mused, breaking through the interven¬ ing branches, and courting the broad ex¬ panse of moonshine. The lengthened turrets of the castle reflected on the sward beneath ; the huge portcullis, the warder's tower, rising in giant mould, frowned in the distance. Thwarted. disappointed, and perplexed, willing, yet unable to attribute all to the coinage of fancy, he turned to re-seek the chapel, and then again, swift as »------'Ihe luthtmn«, which doth cease to be, Eie оле с-лп ьа>, it lightens," he caught a glimpse of the same form, cowering beneath the sombre branches of one of the cypress-trees. He darted forwards, and as before, the figure fled ; —he followed—he gained upon it—he snatched at the muffling cloak—he grap¬ pled it with a nerve of iron. It strug¬ gled.— it resisted —it combated with a strength as Herculean as his own : yet the more it struggled, the more it resist- ed*
ed, the more it combated, the firmer was his hold. Corporeal, like unto him¬ self, nought could stay the energy of his spirit; nought could quench the fire of his resolution : they fell upon the sward ; together they lay, as though tangled in the links of fate: it was systematic, de¬ termined evasion ; it was zealous, ar¬ dent perseverance.— 44 My life on the scuffle," exclaimed Hubert, panting and eager. 44 Loose me ! loose me !" urged the stranger, " lest I commit a deed to bring damnation on me." It was not the words—it was the voice, which relaxing the nerves of Hubert, transformed his giant strength into the puerile hold of childhood : it seemed as though the spell of witchcraft lay on him; for though his opponent sprung upon his feet, without words, without power, he could only stretch forth his arms in palsied agitation. The resolu¬ tion of the stranger appeared to falter; he turned round; he hesitated for a mo- с 4 ment
inent, then, with a bound like light, he precipitated himself upon his neck. " Hubert ľ Hubert !" he whispered* " to-morrow, at daybreak, in the chapel, when all within the castle sleep." It was the accent of De Maudit, and Hubert wildly clasped him to his breast. Blinding, bewildering, overpowering, was the rush of strong surprise : it was pain—-it was agitation—it was thrilling pleasure—it was a something betwixt mi¬ sery and delight : yet when he thought of the baron, all of delight vanished ; when he thought of the mysterious movements of De Maudit, nought save misery re¬ mained. " What am I to think?" he asked — " what am I to hear? Dearest William, why cower like a guilty thing ?—why visit the home of your heritage, in dis¬ guise and in caution ? Return with me to the chapel ; cast yourself at the feet of your father, and gladden his heart with a sensation like joy. Come—come be yourself, my friend ;" and he linked his arm
arm within the arm of De Maudiťs, and strove to urge him forward. 4C This fast of St. Dunstan—this day, so ominous in the annals of your house, be you the harbin¬ ger of good tidings—be you the surety of a brighter morrow. Come on—come on ;" and again he strove, but William burst from him. 44 I dare not tarry," he exclaimed ; <4 this night, I dare not face my father: to-morrow, at the earliest crow of chanti¬ cleer : in the chapel ; let me see you in the chapel, and all may be well." 44 Dare not Γ repeated Hubert«- 44 dare not ! ah, William !" and his accent, and his glance, spoke the utter desolation of his hopes. " I pray you, defer judgment," said De Maudit, with a faint flash of his wonted spirit: " hasty and premature decision is ruin to a cause." " Ah, William !" again burst from the lips of Hubert, and tears swam in his eyes, and sobs choked articulation, с 5 " Hang
" Hang grief," pursued De Maudit» struggling down his own emotion ; 44 'tis idle and profitless ; like afterthought, serving but to arm repentance with a double edge." 44 'Tis nature's best surety for amend¬ ment," faltered Hubert ; 4i 'tis the hearťs genuine pledge of quick returning grace." De Maudit passed the back of his hand across his eyes—-he spoke not—he turned aside his face. 44 Let us to the chapel," urged Hu¬ bert, catching at the rainbow-tint of hope ; 4ť let us to the feet of the baron : the altar of God be our indemnity for peace." 44 Not to ransom a world," exclaimed De Maudit, struggling and again burst¬ ing from the trammel of his friend's hold. " Ere I dare the presence of my father, I must fashion my words to his prejudices. Meet me to-morrow, Hu¬ bert ; in the chapel, at daybreak t come alone ;
alone ; come unmarked and unattended, fbr the admonitions of the holy Gilbert would grate dreadful discord: ere the sun drink the dewdrops, remember : but no monk, no preacher"—And quick wrapping his cloak around him, and waving his hand, he fled, and bounding across the park, the next instant was in¬ volved in shadow. Hubert, for many moments, remained rooted, spell-bound, growing as it were to the spot; his hands pressing down the throbbings of his heart; his eyes fixed and straining, to catch one more glimpse of the friend of his youth. 44 Gone—gone!" he articulated, and the pang was almost mortal: sorrow, dread, anxiety, horror, alternately wound¬ ing, alternately struggling for mastery ; every limb quivering ; every pulse in his frame swollen and beating: quick revived the known woes of the baron, and each trial of his own vanished in the poisoned arrow destined for his bosom. с 6 "Holy
" Holy God !" he aspirated, " is it for me to aim the death-stroke !—for me to wound, where I would hem in with my own life !" He mused in silence—he bared his head—he turned to face the breeze-— he gasped down the breath of heaven ; yet he could neither inhale comfort or composure; for his actions defied the mould of form, and his feelings the rein of subjection. The well known voice of the baron, calling upon his name, aroused to exertion : it w T as necessity, it was des¬ peration, which smoothed his ruffled brow, and impelled him back to the cha¬ pel; yet he approached, as one laden with guilt and crime, as one, conscience- stricken, bending beneath the weighty cognizance of festering ill. " You return, my son, unsatisfied, un¬ convinced ;—-you cannot solve the mys¬ tery·" Hubert's heart smote him; there was but one line of conduct to pursue» yet
yet his lips trembled, as he pronounced — 4i I cannot solve the mystery." 44 In God's good time," exclaimed the baron, leading again to the altar; and there, upon his knees, in reverence and in adoration, did he pour out the freewill offering of his bleeding spirit. Hubert, prostrate at his side, prayed for strength, for conduct, for resolution, for guidance, through the mazy laby¬ rinth; and when, at the turn of mid¬ night, together they returned to the castle, he felt more collected and more assured. Without ought of converse, ought to distract the mind from holy things, enriched with the nightly béni- son of father Gilbert, they parted in the hall ; and Hubert, in the solitude of his own chamber, revising the chequered destiny of man, mused o'er the event which had marked anew the fatality of St. Dunstan's fast. His couch was restless ; his pillow sfrewed with thorns : it was not the my steriou s colour of his own fortim e*- it
it was the threatened peace of De Maudit -—it was the endangered happiness of De Maudit, which lived in every fancy : he tried to banish thought ; he tried to expel conjecture of the coming explanation ; he tried to sleep : but sleep, which oft i< -----.—Upon the high and giddy mast Seals up tlie ¡Лир-Ьоу'***** е^еь, and rocks his Ьгшпь In cradle of the rude imperious surge," awaited not his beck ; his heart was too full; his mind too busy. The lapse ofa single moment ivas peopled with terri¬ fying images : it was tlie quick exchange of reality for fiction; and scarce could the wildest flights of fiction sharpen the pang of reality. He dreamt of De Mau¬ dit; he dreamt of the Knight-Templar; he dreamt of the mysterious being, who in the copse-wood, at the foot of the cross—ushered as it were upon the very wings of the tempest—consigned him to the guardianship of Hanslape. Quick, in all the inconsistency of vision, losing- sight of the castle, and of every being fami-
familiarized by habit, was he tangled in difficulties and perplexities, surrounded by strange images, and involved in all the horrors of strife and w r ar : he heard the clash of arms, the clarion of tram¬ pets, the wild, the incessant din of hostile sounds: groans, and shouts, and shrieks commingling ; and blood, and death, and ruin, spread around. Suddenly, he beheld De Maudit, combating in the midst; his morion, hacked and battered ; his face, wdiite as moonshine: struggling amid a host, he heard the rebounding axe upon his shield; and next, the deadly lunge; and then he saw him, stretched at his feet, crimsoned in warm and welling blood, and gasping out his spirit. He awoke with the nervous start of agony ; con¬ vulsed, panting, his pulse quickened, his respiration laboured ; he glanced around —he recognised his own chamber—and he blessed God it was but a dream ! Morn's grey eye peered through mist and vapour, and soon was the east dap¬ pled
pled with streaks of radiance, and soon did the sun drink nectar from each blade of grass : gemmed in liquid beauty, crea¬ tion smiled beneath the growing efful¬ gence; the blossoms were steeped in dew ; and the breeze, fresh and balmy, came freighted with a thousand odours; yet Hubert, lost to external objects, to all which wooes the eye, and captivates the sense, thought but of William- thought but ofhis perplexities, his threat¬ ened difficulties, and pined for the mo¬ ment of solution; thouglit but of the blight pending o'er the hopes of the baron ; a blight, as sudden, and as fatal, as e'er nipped the mellowing buds of promise, as e'er banqueted on the sweets of spring ! Wrapping himself in his serge cloak, and descending from his chamber, he quitted the castle unperceived, and with hasty steps, and an aching heart, proceeded to the place of appointment. True as time and fate, De Maudit stood beneath the arched entrance of the chapel;
chapel ; absorbed in thought ; his arms folded, and his eyes bent upon the earth : he started at the light footstep of Hu¬ bert, and the hectic of strong emotion flashed o'er his cheek ;—it was the flash of a moment—it faded, and care, and grief, and wan despondence, spoke in each feature. Hubert grasped his extended hand ; he gazed upon his faded counte¬ nance, and then he cast himself upon his neck, and their tears mingled. It was long ere ought of composure returned— De Maudit was the first to struggle for voice and power—-he broke from the trammel of affection, and he led into the chapel. 44 What a meeting—what a meeting, is here !" sighed Hubert. 44 A stolen meeting," observed Wil¬ liam, striving to rally cheerfulness ; 4i but nought to lament, dear Hubert ; nought to bewail." 44 A meeting of disguise and myste¬ ry;"
ry;" and Hubert's eyes, rather than his lips, betrayed wonder and enquiry* " A meeting of pure policy," quick rejoined William ; " a meeting extract¬ ing every thorn, which prejudice and misguiding zeal scatters." "Prejudice-—misguiding zeal!" echoed the alarmed Hubert. "Hear me out," pursued De Maudit, ** nor fall yourself into the weakness I deplore. I would win you to our cause ; with hooks of steel, I would grapple you to our purpose." u What cause ?—what purpose?" and Hubert stood in aching agonized sus¬ pense. " The prosperity of England," said Wiiliam, lowering his voice to a whis¬ per—" the manumission of England's sons. Know you not, liberty is the pre¬ rogative of man? Dearest Hubert, I have sojourned among patriots, until the yery name of despot sickens me." " You speak in strange wild riddles," said
said Hubert, unwilling to give credence to his fears. 44 1 speak the sense of my feelings," hastily rejoined William — " I body nought save the impulse of my soul. I have gazed on the vaulted sky—I have watched the airy flight of the birds, the free, the uncurbed sports of the tenants of our wilds and of our forests, until I have wondered, how man, possessing reason, and boasting independence, can stoop his neck to the yoke—can volun¬ tarily forge the rivets of his own slave¬ ry; until------" 44 Hold, De Maudit !" burst from the lips of Hubert, snatching at, and impul¬ sively grasping the arm of his friend: 44 remember the principles of your fa¬ ther—respect the prejudices of your fa¬ ther. Habit—nature------" 44 Not nature—say not nature," pur¬ sued the impetuous William— 4S Nature owns nought of despotism—Nature re¬ sists the scourge of tyranny, forswears, baffles»
baffles, despises, spurns, struggles against the bent of arbitrary rule ! Would you have us hug the chains of the proud Henry?—smile upon his foreign min¬ ions?—yield our rights and our heri¬ tage, to the locusts buzzing around his splendour ? Would you have us curry fa¬ vour of the alien crew, glutting on our treasures, and bankrupting all our re¬ sources?" u I would have the mind tempered," firmly pronounced Hubert ; "the judg¬ ment cool ; the heart alive to its boun¬ den duty. Submission to dignities------ " " You speak like one," eagerly inter¬ rupted De Maudit, " who waning away life in retirement, seeks nought beyond the blank placidity of his own narrow circle." " Would to God," feelingly ejaculat¬ ed Hubert, " you had never escaped that circle !—you had never passed the virtuous boundary of habit and educa¬ tion! Recall the blessed calm of our past
past years, the peace-yielding recom¬ pense of submission and of conformity. Nay, turn not away : look at me : tell me, dearest William, has the blast of rebellion, the mildew of disaffection, the poison of sophistry, recompensed the pang of this one hour?" 44 A patriot," said William, forcing the mock show of indifference, " has many links to loosen, many ties to sever, ere feeling be martyed to public weal." 44 A patriot," raournfully T repeated Hu¬ bert. " Alas ! alas ! the innovator of order, the subverter of rule, the grace¬ less renegade to divine ordinance, veils the shameless defalcation, under the blazing epithet of patriotism." "Hubert!" thundered De Maudit; but Hubert heeded not the tone of ire, the eye of flame. 44 Hear me out," he pursued, firm and resolute ; 4t it is necessity ; it is the spur of affection, wdiich tempts me to the hazard. Answer me, William ; an¬ swer
swer me, as you crave peace in your dying hour; where exists the law, to authorise the proud Leicester, the rebel Gloucester, in their mad acts of defi¬ ance?—where the law, of God, or of man, to sanction treason ?" The hand of De Maudit fell on the hilt of his sword ; but his wrath was the wrath ofa moment; he met the stead¬ fast glance of the dauntless Hubert, and it faded on the beam of remembrance. — " Once my brother !" he articulated, and a tear gathered spite of the obdu¬ racy ofhis opinions. *' Ever—ever your brother !" mur¬ mured the subdued Hubert— " ever your soul's friend! Oh, William! let your heart speak for me: you cannot spurn me—you cannot hate me—you cannot wilfully abjure the principles of your youth—you cannot ------" " I would wed you to the interests of our country," interrupted De Maudit ; " I would link you to me ; I would tempt
tempt you to freight your hopes and your strength in the selfsame bark ; to snap the rivets of systematic observance, to denounce the league of cold comput¬ ing tyranny." " And the principles of your youth?" asked the shuddering Hubert. " Is it, because we are immersed in fog and mist," quick rejoined De Mau¬ dit, " that the pure ether of heaven be¬ comes less valued ?—because we are clogged, hoodwinked, bound down in darkness, that the sun's glories shine less resplendent? No, believe me, no: the contrast is but the more dazzling ; hea¬ ven's breath more acceptable; day's ra¬ diance more coveted." 44 You speak in metaphor—you speak a language I know not how to deci¬ pher," said Hubert. 44 I speak the dictates of truth and justice, gleaned from observation and experience," eagerly responded William. "When sojourning here at Hanslape, I dreamt
dreamt not the links of iron in whieh misrule and blind infatuation shackles degraded England. Come forth, my friend ; rouse from your trance ; look around; behold the wretched state of our bleeding country : her resources drained—her coffers emptied—her lands, her benefices, all bestowed on alieris. What have we to hope—what to expect, írom a ruler, so dead to law and justice? In vain we dole forth grievances, we sue redress, we supplicate favour: 'tis his foreign minions sway the reins of go¬ vernment, not Henry ; 'tis------" " Wretched, pitiable state of earthly grandeur !" ejaculated Hubert ; " where the native bond of consanguinity kin¬ dles jealousy and ire ; where the mild virtues of the heart, weighed in the jaundiced balance of prejudice, becomes swollen into crime." " A king," resumed De Maudit, "should live for his people; should combat all of human weakness, and leave the
the world a model of his justice. It is not prejudice, which bandies the mis¬ rule of Henry, which trumpets the in¬ dignities, the wrongs of our legitimate nobles ; 'tis fact ; stubborn, unvarnished fact;—fact, as blazing as the meridian sun ;—fact, positive and crying, in the election of Boniface, archbishop of Can¬ terbury ; of Peter of Savoy, created earl of Richmond ; of William de Valence ; of Geoffry—Guy—Athelmar de Lusig- non ; all enriched, all laden with honours and with treasures : nay, the offices of church and state, the very services of the household, bestowed and squandered upon foreigners." 44 The archbishop of Canterbury, and the earl of Richmond, are uncles to our liege lady the queen," pointedly remark¬ ed Hubert : " and William de Va^nce, and Geoffry, and.Guy, and Athelmar deLusignon,are sons to the earl of March, are half brothers to our sovereign lord the king." vol. il d « And
" And as such," sarcastically rejoined De Maudit, " are licensed to ravish all the honey from the hive. Hubert, yours is the bigotry of mere custom : you have sojourned with the baron my father, un¬ til, like him, you own blind obedience to legitimate power." " I pray God, I may ever tread in his footsteps!" said Hubert, mournfully: " be wary, William, lest, in wandering from their straight and beatened tract, you murder peace." William forced a smile, although his cheek faded. " If the king would conciliate," he re¬ sumed;" if he would only sooth the gall¬ ed spirits of his people; if, instead oi the probe, he would administer balm, there is no subject, no noble, in the realm, who would not yield him fealty ana homage : but he goads to despera¬ tion ; he plays upon the best feelings of man ; he neglects his friends, and trans¬ gressing, like a caded child, puts away wrath
wrath with gilded promises. If he pos¬ sessed consideration, or principle, or re¬ ligion, or honour, could he renounce his oath ? — could he break his plighted word ?—could he forget the solemn cere¬ mony, when surrounded by his prelates, he swore, as he wae a man, e christian, a knight, and a king anointed and crowned^ to confirm the charter of Li¬ berties ?" " VVilliam, you are poisoned, grievous¬ ly poisoned," warmly exclaimed Hubert. " This is a subject, I cannot—I must not—I will not discuss." " Would I too could shut my eyes to its conviction," said De Maudit, "but the radiant heavens are not more clear. Hubert, if like me, you had listened to the wrongs of the earl of Kent;—if you had heard the tale of his sorrows, his indignities, his persecutions, you too would doubt whether Henry possessed a heart." "The judgment of kings," replied Hu- Ώ 2 bert,
bert, " is often blinded, and their best feelings turned against themselves : frail and perishable, misled by evil counsel¬ lors, and hurried into error, they call forth our pity, rather than our condem¬ nation." 44 All minds," remarked De Maudit, 44 are not alike prone to patience; neitlier are all men rich in the spiritual lore of forgiveness. Henry, repaying his faith¬ ful servants with ingratitude, blights all their hopes, ivith cold neglect, and stu¬ died persecution : it is his shameful ne¬ gligence, his systematic deceit, his unna¬ tural alienation, which arms his subjects against him." 44 Say, rather, it is the self-willed, ar¬ bitrary, ambitious spirits of those sub¬ jects, spurning the check-rein of law, and defying all of subjection," exclaimed Hu¬ bert ; " it is headlong, intemperate pas¬ sion, goading into crime, and plunging into the rank complottings of treason. Would to God"—and he raised his eyes and
and his clasped hands in fervent invoca¬ tion— 44 the thick film, now before your eyes, the fetid vapour, obscuring the straight track of your duty, would drop, would dissipate, would vanish, before the all-searching truths of enjoined obe¬ dience! Dearest William, in pity, in mercy to yourself, recall the counsels of father Gilbert; recall the strict line of early education : submission is the sacred mandate of the Eternal ; is the funda¬ mental basis of holiness, breathed in the words of the righteous Paul: < Let eve¬ ry soul be subject unto the higher power. Whosoever resisteth power, resisteth the ordinance of God : and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation." The pause of a moment ensued ; the shudder, as though of the grave, passed over the bleached features of William ; yet he struggled down the rising weak¬ ness—he even dared the searching glance of his sorrowing friend. 14 'Tis prejudice," he articulated, <4 blind, d 3 wilful
wilful prejudice, which thunders forth anathema. Henry himself, furnishes an ensample of neglected duty and violated faith : did he possess gratitude—did he fulfil the offices of his high calling—not the tongues of sirens, could tempt from loyalty, could arm his nobles against him" Was it the flush of consciousness which burned on the cheek of De Maudit — which quickened the pulses at his heart, and drove him to cling for support to the light tracery of one of the shrines? Cer- tain it is, the lightning flash of memory spoke volumes to his feelings; rapture, hope, despair, nay, almost madness, lin¬ gered in his eyes. " You are ill—you are not youiself : let me lead you hence," soothingly im¬ plored Hubert ; " to the castle, to the still calm of your own chamber; let me 44MWW But De Maudit shrunk away. &ť No>
" No, not to the castle ; never more to the castle, unless------" He paused—he raised his spread hand to his forehead—he stood communing with himself 44 Unless what ?" pressing to his side— 44 mysterious, inexplicable William !" and Hubert took his hand in all the endeared freedom of early association. 44 Unless you will aid me," pronounced William : " unless you too will embark in the like cause." Hubert stepped fearfully back—he folded his arms—he stood in aching ex¬ pectancy. 44 Have you pity for a man, persecu¬ ted unto death, loaded with opprobrium, with scorn, with mortal hate ?—have you a tear of sorrow, and not an arm for re¬ dress ? Listen to me, Hubert ; give me your attention, till I rivet your sympa¬ thy. In our earthly trials, in the stress of fortune, in accumulating ill, does not the warm friend, the unshrinking adhc- D 4 rent,
rent, the faithful counsellor, merit grati¬ tude and reverence?—does not the man, who boldly adventures life in our cause, who devotes his youth and his strength to our prosperity, claim our blessing and our unwavering regard ?" " Assuredly," said Hubert, and then he paused, doubtful whither the acknow¬ ledgment might hurry him, " I well knew that your heart would side with me," pursued the exulting De Maudit ; " that your whole nature would class on the side of humanity ; that the tale would excite your detestation and your scorn. Ingratitude, my friend, is so hideous, so deformed, so hateful in it¬ self, that the soul loathes it> that the eyes intuitivelv shut out the monstrous abor- tion ! Yet answer me further : if kind¬ ness, if faith, if zeal, if long tried service, merits blessings and unwavering regard, what merits the man, ivho dooms the grey hairs of his active counsellor to scorn
scorn and to derision—the winter of his life to bitterness and to despair?" 44 Your allusion is too darkly hid," said Hubert ; <6 your colouring too glowing to boast of reality." 44 It is reality—it is fearful appalling reality," warmly rejoined William, 44 for it stamps the depravity of the human heart. The oppressed and the oppressor lives — The earl of Kent to suffer : — Henry Plantagenet to tyrannise !" 44 The earl of Kent," repeated Hubert, and then agam he paused, for his know¬ ledge was too slender to dare even an opinion. 44 Yes, De Burgh, earl of Kent," ex¬ claimed De Maudit ; " the martyr to per¬ severing loyalty ; the victim to intem¬ perate malice: shut from the light of heaven, the earl of Kent lives to feel the emptiness ofall human trust." 44 Possibly, 'tis rumour or the voice of galled and irritated feeling, which shapes the seeming persecution." в 5 " Να,
< ŕ No, no, 'tis unvarnished, 'tis dispas¬ sionate truth. Henry is the slave of wild caprice : sapped by the artifice of the bishop of Winchester, he heaped op¬ pression where he should have lavished favour: but though years have passed away, the wrongs of the earl of Kent still live in the faithful register of friend¬ ship." <c Granted, that a victim has fallen to misrepresentation, jealousy, or political cabal," observed Hubert, 44 should the state be threatened? — should a mere disapproval furnish the cloak for trea¬ son ?" " Hear my uncle enumerate the in¬ juries of the earl of Kent," eagerly re¬ sumed De Maudit, 44 and wonder not though he leagued with devils to libe¬ rate his friend. He would rouse every feeling of your nature; hewould rend your heart; he would draw tears from your eyes; he ivouid dwell upon the an¬ gukh of the royal Margaret, until her wrongs
wrongs would become your wrongs— her sorrows your sorrows. Guarded by the letters patent of the king, and more —far more, by the blessed consciousness ofhis own integrity—escaping for a brief season, the wild cabal of infuriate foes, and anxious to assure and to solace his hapless partner—on his journey to the abbey of St. Edmund in Suffolk, he was overtaken, he was baited by the wretch¬ ed hirelings of despotism : and the ser¬ vices, the unslumbering zeal of years, repaid with ingratitude and cruelty- Alone, disguised, defenceless, panting to preserve life, spite of the stress of for¬ tune, at Brentwood he sought refuge in the chapel of St. John the Baptist : but the judgments of Omnipotence scares not the base and the vile :—though grasp¬ ing in one hand the crucifix, in the other the cup of salvation, sir Godfrey de Cran- cumb, and his armed ruffians, dragged him from the altar of God ; reviled, in¬ sulted, tore him from the very sanctu- D 6 arv
ary ; spurned his supplications ; scoffed at his prayers; derided his tears. They •NMMMMM» Hubert snatched at the arm of Wil¬ liam—he trembled—his life's blood fad¬ ed.—" Not—not with the sanction of the king," he gasped out— 44 not^—not ------" he ceased«—he wondered at his own emo¬ tion. " The earl of Kent," continued De Mau¬ dit, " was dragged from the sanctuary ; and more effectually to bend and humble him to the dust, to shackle liim past all power of escape, a smith was called to rivet the chains of his slavery : but the humble artificer had a heart (a); —he spurned the paltry bribe ; and the wretch¬ ed prisoner, bound with cords and thongs, and placed on a sorry horse, was conveyed, with every external indigni¬ ty, to the Tower of London. He——' 44 I would not be the secret enemy of the earl of Kent," ejaculated the heart- struck
struck Hubert, " for the ransom of an empire !" " I would not be Henry Plantagenet, thus to requite the zeal ofa faithful ser¬ vant," firmly pronounced De Maudit, " for the ransom ofa world ! But hear me out, Hubert, and your very principles will side with the justice of the calling; hear me out, and your humanity, and your honour, will conquer the adamant of prejudice." " I must not—I cannot hear ought im¬ peaching the sacred majesty of the king," said Hubert. " I------" " Hear me out," interrupted the im¬ patient William, " and if Henry stand acquitted, then perish all my hopes of aid or interest. Nay, nay," waving to silence, " no reluctance—no forestalled sentiment ; hear me out, Hubert, and if your heart be flesh, it must weep blood fbr the incarcerated De Burgh. Though many years have passed away—though the hoar frost of age has bleached his brows-*-
brows—the tax of cruelty, the black, the damning blot of ingratitude, must live, as long as the faithful pen of history in¬ dites the services of the minister and the requital of the monarch." 44 Saints of paradise!" exclaimed Hu¬ bert, clasping his hands in consternation, 44 if my friend, if my benefactor, if the baron of Hanslape could hear this !" " He would hear the voice of the king¬ dom," calmly pursued De Maudit ; 4Í the general, 'the spontaneous language of truth and candour." 44 He would hear, what would astound* what would perplex, what would well nigh kill him," sighed Hubert. i4 But proceed, William, I would fain learn the uttermost rancour of the poison." William forced a smile. 44 It would prove itself a salutary poi¬ son," he remarked : " believe me, neither subtle or malign, for it would flow for the universal manumission and benefit of mankind. If Henry would banisli from
from his court, and from his favour, the Poitouvines, the accursed enemies of our glory ; if he would take to his councils, the natural subjects of his realm, every sword would lie sheathed, every heart throb in unanimity. Our cause is jus¬ tice—liberty—public good:—we wage not war with the king, but with his per¬ nicious counsellors." 44 Baleful flowers of sophistry !" said Hubert ; 4i dangerous, beguiling snare, to mislead the judgment, and vitiate the heart! William, the foundation-stone of the fabric is rotten ; the whole super¬ structure, empty and corrupt: you are tangled in the wiles of artful men, who glossing their shameless defalcation be¬ neath the prostituted colouring of public service, would hurry you into the vortex of their own monstrous turpitude." 44 And you," said De Maudit, yielding to the mad impetuosity of temper, " are weak, pusillanimous : a mere baby in the leadingstrings of power : the shadow— the
the echo—the—the—Hubert ! Hubert ! why pour oil upon fire ?-—why drive me to wound you ?" - It is not the first, De Maudit, but it is the deepest wound you have ever inflicted" — and Hubert, impulsively, passed his hand over the scar in his fore¬ head. That scar touched the finest chords of the human heart—vibrated on the sen¬ sitive nerves of William even to agony ; that scar " Opened all the cells where memory si» j pt," and the transition of a single moment, mellowed his anger into tenderness. It was the companion ofhis infancy—it was the prized friend of his riper years—it was the being, whom as a brother he had ever loved; whom he had ever met with transport, and from whom he had ever parted with regret : rancour, opposition, melted in the tears which dimmed his eyes : the king, the hostile barons, alike faded, alike yielded to the individual claims
claims of affection. Hubert read in the nearly convulsed ieatures of William, the passing struggle ; he saw the strong yearnings of reviving interest, and his arms opened, to clasp his subdued, his almost weeping friend. But alas! the tremulous fluctuations of hope, flutter¬ ing in the tacit proofs of awakened feel¬ ing, vanished as the passing sunbeam : the clouds of care and of apprehension gathered ; for William, with one despe¬ rate effort, breaking every restraining shackle, looked as thougli rallying all his pride, and all his firmness. 44 This must not be," he said. " I came here, to act the man, not the in¬ fant ; to lure to one common standard ; to strengthen the glorious cause of our liberty." Hubert only sighed. 44 When the еагД of Kent tenanted a a dungeon in the Tower," pursued the ardent patriot, " he seemed forgotten by the world, left to his own sorrows, to his
his own despair : his long services, his faithful adherence to the fortunes of his master, his zeal, his perseverance, drew on him the mighty ruin : he had awa¬ kened the jealousy of the courtiers ; and the smile of kings is as evanescent as an April sky, as baseless as a flitting sha¬ dow!" He paused, but Hubert continued silent; he dared not trust himself to speak ; his heart wept blood for the woes of the fallen favourite, yet a word, a look, threatened to impeach his loy¬ alty. " Amid the malice of destiny, one friend breasted the breakers," resumed De Maudit ; " one friend stemmed the storm : it was Luke, archbishop of Dub¬ lin, who during the anger of the royal Henry, with tears and with prayers, besought his justice and his clemency." 44 And did he award it ?" eagerly questioned Hubert ; " did he feel, did he evince, the godlike attribute pity ?" 44 Yes,
4v Yes, as the wild tiger of the desert, as the ravenous wolf, seizing the first¬ lings of the flock," answered William. 44 The ban of ecclesiastical anathema withdrew the bars of the dungeon : but when, through the remonstrances and threats of Roger, bishop of London, jea¬ lous of the church's privileges, the hap¬ less De Burgh was borne back to the chapel of St. John the Baptist at Brent¬ wood, it was hemmed in, it was closely invested ; and the sheriffs of Essex, and of Hertford, on pain of being hanged, were ordered to prevent ought of escape, or ought of scrap or of largess, passing within the sanctuary." 44 Holy God !" ejaculated Hubert, and his very lips waxed as bloodless as his cheeks. 44 Such was the rancour " pursued the energetic Wilham, " such the virulence of Henry, towards the man, who had lived in his bosom, who had shared his confidence, who had devoted all the rich powers
powers of bis mind, to his glory, and to his renown." " And did he die before the altar ?" asked the shuddering Hubert. " No; conscious of integrity, and zea¬ lous for Hfe, the earl of Kent yielded himself a voluntary prisoner; and fet¬ tered, chained, dragged to London, he was again committed to the Tower." Hubert stood with his arms folded, and his face half bent upon his breast : the bright rays of the sun pierced into the chapel, yet he heeded them not ; the balmy zephyr breathed upon his cheek, yet he felt it not : he was ab¬ sorbed ; he was lost, in busy, aching con¬ templation: but it was the injuries of De Burgh, rather than the justification of the royal Henry, which chained all the powers of his mind. " Hubert," said De Maudit, stealing to his side, "does humanity speak in the persecution of the oppressed ?—does gratitude
gratitude live in the actions of the op¬ pressor ?" Hubert raised his eyes to the face of his friend ; his lips moved, but no sound escaped them. "Your heart sides with me! I see your heart sides with me!" resumed the exulting William : " you will snap the gyves of prejudice !—you will toil for the emancipation of mankind !" " I would hear further of De Burgh— I would learn further of the earl of Kent," faltered Hubert, struggling down the pang within. " You shall hear all—you shall know all," said De Maudit —" you shall judge the just grounds, upon which we stake our honour and our lives. The earls of Leicester and Gloucester, alike firm ; alike urgent ; alike ------" " To the dungeon in the Tower—to the earl of Kent," interrupted Hubert. " The foes of Henry have nought to claim from justice." "The
" The earl of Kent," rejoined the dis¬ appointed William, 44 for no offence, for no shadow of crime, agamst the law, or against the state, was condemned to ac¬ knowledge himself a traitor ; or, to per¬ petual imprisonment ; or, for ever to ab¬ jure the kingdom." " And did he fly ?—did he escape the mesh spread for his undoing?" " He purchased a remission of his sen¬ tence, with the riches lodged in the trea¬ sury of the Knights-Templars," replied De Maudit ; " and from the Tower of London, he was consigned, a prisoner, to the castle of the Devizes." " And now—where is he now?" ques¬ tioned Hubert, thrown offhis guard, and anxious but for the safety of the earl William pointed upwards— 4t Perhaps in heaven : the fate of the earl of Kent, for whole years has been left to guess at." There was a solemnity, a prophetic inspiration, in his words and manner, which palsied the limbs of Hubert ; his heart
heart felt to die within him, and tears of sadness and sympathy coursed each other down his cheeks. 44 You do not—you cannot hesitate," said William, joying in his strong emo¬ tion. " I knew the wrongs of De Burgh would fester round your heart—I knew the ingratitude of Henry would loosen the rivets of your allegiance." Hubert struggled down the choking sob ; for a moment he was silent ; for a moment he seemed to combat the war within ; till conquering all of indeeision, triumphing over all of lingering weak¬ ness, " No, De Maudit," he firmly pro¬ nounced, " I do not—I cannot hesitate : —my loyalty and my life must end to¬ gether." He met the lightning flash ; he traced the crimson tide of anger, flushing the very templesof thedisappointed William; he dreaded the total annihilation of his affection, yet could he not falter in his known duty. It was principle ; it was not
not pride, which tugged at his heart¬ strings, which defied even the strength of past ascendance : he saw him stride down the aisle; he saw him about to quit the chapel ; and with one impulsive bound, he cast himself before him—he intercepted his passage—he stretched himself on the door-sill. ** We part not thus," he exclaimed ; " not in anger—not ín enmity. William, dear William, though you spurn, still will I cling to you. Think—think of the links of our childhood ; think of Isa¬ bel ; think of your kind good father— your father, who would droop—^who would die—who would fade away, in this known defalcation. William, I ad¬ jure you, stay ; listen to me : entail not a curse upon your youth—break not the heart of your father." The struggles of William became fainter and fainter, till all of resistance ceased ; he averted his face, yet he stood passive within the wild clasp of Hubert. " What
" What would you of me ?" he at length demanded. " Be brief: I dare not—I must not tarry," 44 1 sue humanity—I sue common mercy," sobbed Hubert. 44 If you would be ought save parricide, return with me to the castle." " To the castle," echoed De Maudit. " Mother of God ! bear care into the bo¬ som of peace; engraft misery on the heart of contentment." 44 No, no, no," eagerly pursued Hubert: 44 banish all of care in the duty of obe¬ dience ; forget all of misery in the mi¬ nistering of joy to others. Affrighted happiness wall rally ; the bonds of the world will be broken; the flowers of hope will redawn !" He looked up, light, buoyant in the hope he so fondly elicit¬ ed :—alas ! one glance withered that hope —one glance, nipped ail its germs, and all its promises ; for the blank, the utter despondence, which met him in the eye vo*,, il e of
of De Maudit, opened a volume of tragic meaning. "Time—time," he murmured, sicken¬ ing beneath the chill of dire anticipa¬ tion. " Now to the castle, dear William, and God direct the future." " Not to-day—I dare not meet my fa¬ ther to day," said William, shrinking from his impelling arm. 44 And why not to-cïay?" urged Hu¬ bert ; " why defer the flitting hour of happiness ?" 44 Flitting," repeated De «Maudit, and every feature was convulsed. " Life itself is flitting," pursued Hu bert ; " and peace, dear William, more evanescent than even life." "True,'tis a shifting scene; a com¬ pound of contrarieties ; an olio of plea¬ sure, pain, perplexity, and sorrow : the holy Gilbert has sketched it in many a homily ; but no matter, I cannot emerge from obscurity to-day." 66 To-morrow then," said Hubert. " Per-
" Perchance to-morrow," after a pause of deep thought. " But our meeting must be the meeting of friends long parted: no recognition; remember, no intimation of the present : much remains to be thought of—much remains to be done. Farewell, Hubert ! think of me— pray for me. To-morrow, ere the sun gain its meridian, I will openly visit Hanslape." 44 Stay ! stay !" implored Hubert—but De Maudit was gone;—he had fled from the chapel—he was lost amid the sur¬ rounding foliage.
e % CHAP-
CHAPTER III.
" They went t >rth in ati thťir heanty ; hke The aiuoli ironi the cloud of the eas>t Lo veli neb*» shone around tiiem a·» light. Osstan. The fear and wild horror, which had pa¬ ralyzed the sisters of St. Marys, quick yielded to compassion and exertion : even the timid Margaret ceased to trem¬ ble; and Isabel, the impulsive hand¬ maiden of charity, pressed to the side of the wounded knight. * The litter was borne forwards; and soon despoiled of his corselet of steel, the rivets ofhis helm were unloosed, and his death-wan face bared to the night-breeze : yet he moved not ; breathed not ; every function of life appeared suspended, and expectation and hope fast yielded to consternation and dismay. Impelled with one desire, and living
living for the offices of christian love, re¬ gardless of the companions and retainers of the wounded stranger, the nuns ga¬ thered around the seeming death-couch, essaying every known specificând watch¬ ful for the slightest pulsation. 44 Hath hebeen shriven?" questioned the lady abbess. One universal groan was the sole response. « Fly^—fly then," she continued; 44 summon hither our holy confessor, that in the struggles of the flitting spirit he may drink of the cup of salvation and live." It was the agile Margaret who vanish¬ ed on th# mission of philanthropy ; and when, piloting the man of God, she re¬ appeared, she hailed the accents of gratu¬ lation, and caught the first glance of the unclosing eye : alas ! 'twas the glance of a moment; for power and strength fast waned ; the life's stream oozed from the gaping wound, and the eyes again closed in night e 3 " Woe—
« Woe— wœ to the house of Glouces¬ ter !" ejaculated the knight, upon whose breast the head reclined—" woe—woe ------" But the confessor waved to si¬ lence ; and soon, by aid of stipticks, and a powerful elixir, something like hope re-dawned. " We are all in the hands of Heaven," he piously pronounced, in reproof of the wild burst of untempered grief: 44 all of earth is vain : a giant's strength weak¬ ness.*' "Will he live? say, father, will he live ?" urged the knight. " Man's breath is m his nostrils," re¬ joined father Clement; "perishable as thè grass of the field, he may wither be¬ neath the first blast which gathers." " I would speak of my friend—I would speak of the earl of Gloucester." " Were he ten times earl—were he an anointed monarch, yet were he but man." <# True, holy sir; yet would I fain know,
know, whether his widowed mother may rejoice, or whether she must sink to the grave childless ?" 44 And who art thou," demanded the confessor, 4i who wouidst thus presump¬ tuously solve the mandates of Omnipo¬ tence?" A crimson blush dyed the cheeks ot the knight ; he placed his spread hand upon his breast, and bending in modest dignity— " I am the friend с " De Clare, earl of Gloucester," he pronounced: <ť by name, Ralph de Hernigande: and for my banner, it waves on the side of jus¬ tice." 44 Justice," echoed the monk, his looks, rather than his words, betokening doubt and suspicion. 44 Be our parley at a fitter season," said the baron ; " now, alone of the earl." 44 And his followers ?" asked the holy man. 44 1 will bestow them in the nigh ham¬ let," answered De Hernigande : * 4 'tis for e 4 the
the earl of Gloucester, and myself, I tax your hospitality." 44 The church be the sure sanctuary of the unfortunate," replied the confi or. 44 In the name of the blessed Mary, of our saintly abbess, and influenced by the beneficent spirit of our pious foundress, we accord succour and welcome ! Hie to rest, my lord : the wounded noble be my care." " I shall not sleep to-night," said the baron : * 4 the awakening eye must recog¬ nise the familiar features of a friend"— And then again, all his thoughts, and all his hopes, turned to the suffering Glou¬ cester. " We will pray the blessing of God upon our endeavours," observed father Clement ; " beyond, we list not." tf4 Pray and watch," whispered the ba« ron, creeping close to the side of the couch. Night, her 4i foul, black, pitchy man¬ tle," spread o'er all created nature : the pages,
pages, grooms, and retainers, were dis¬ patched to the nigh town of Nuneaton ; and the chamber in ivhich reposed the wounded earl, was hushed in profound stillness : one solitary lamp flickered on his wan cheek ; he lay in the deep trance of exhaustion, yet was his breathing calm, his pulse tempered. The baron de Hernigande, the com¬ panion of his exploits, and the attached friend of his fortunes, sought to unravel fate in the venerable features of the con¬ fessor ; he saw doubt yield to hope, fear to assurance ; he watched the ameliorating effect of every cordial draft, nor once suf¬ fered sleep to surprise his senses. And sleep too, throughout that livelong night, was banished the pitying Margaret ; her pillow was strewed with thorns ; her couch uneasy : she had caught the apparently dying glance of the wounded knight ; and that glance, and the name of the knight, had awakened a volume of re* collections; faint and flitting images, E 5 vague
vague hopes, and vaguer fancies, mocked all of composure ;—it was a mingled, an astounding confusion, which like every dream of distant years, is enveloped in mist and indistinctness. " It seemed a look, familiar, and long known," said Margaret, pouring all her thoughts into the ear of Isabel " The dark eyes!—the open brows!—Glouces¬ ter!—Gloucester! As I live," and she started as though into conviction, " it must be the same De Clare of Glouces¬ ter, who was the ward of my dear fa¬ ther." " Blessed Virgin !" aspirated Isabel, catching at the wild hope which irradiat¬ ed the gentle features of her friend. " It is the same f —it must be the same !" pursued Margaret, " or why this strange flutter at my heart ?—why this tumult in my feelings? His fiither," musing, " was the friend of my father ; —his father died, and my father became his father. Yes, yes, it is the same ! I must
must see this earl of Gloucester—I must seek conviction at his lips." 44 Alas ! you forget he is stricken al¬ most unto death," said Isabel, Margaret awakened to reality; the helplCüS, the wan image of the earl, wel¬ tering in blood, and lost to all surround¬ ing objects, brought fearful conscious¬ ness.— 44 If he die," she faltered, and tears and suffocating sobs arose, 4 * with him will die, all rny hopes, ancl all my reliance." " Say not so," urged Isabel. " Take heart: have I not bound Hubert and William in your service? Let us seek sleep to-night, and look with confidence to the dawn of morning." " Not to-night—I cannot sleep to¬ night," replied Margaret—-" neither can I rest : the hours of this night, must be passed at the foot of the cross ; passed, in praying for grace, and supplicating health and favour upon Gloucester. Bless¬ ed Mary ! if he should shed light upon e 6 the
the sorrows of my family—if here, at Nuneaton, I should learn the fate of my parents !" " You are so sensitive," said Isabel; 44 so tremulously alive to ought of ill ; so little fitted to encounter trial; so-^ -----" " And yet," interrupted Margaret, 4i I feel that within which dares the venture. I may be weak and timid, but called upon, methinks I could play the he¬ roine." 44 A poor play would it be, truly," re¬ joined Isabel î " no, no, Margaret, nei¬ ther you or I are fashioned for adven¬ ture. I pray we glide through life in a calm, for ought of storm, would crush and bruise our spirits." 44 How little—how very little do you know me!" exclaimed Margaret, her blue eyes flashing the fire of enthusiasm. 44 Now, at this still hour, amid gloom and darkness, gladly, alone and unsup¬ ported, would I crave my fate from the lips of Gloucester." "And
44 And die at the hearing," said Isabel Margaret shuddered, and turned aside her face. 44 Why not seek the medium of the lady abbess, or of father Clement ?" 44 What," said Margaret, proudly, " and be ehided for earth-bound curiosity. Know you not, the abbess yields no in¬ dulgence to the weakness she has herself outlived?—and for father Clement, he acts but at her bidding. God grant me favour î I will seek this Gloucester my- self, and tell him, it is the daughter of the earl of lient, who sues some know¬ ledge of his guardian." As she spoke, her voice gathered strength ; her figure seemed to grow in dignity ; her cheeks outblushed the maiden-rose ; her features emanated intellectual spirit ; all of bash¬ ful diffidence, all of indecision, vanished* leaving her firm in courage, and resolute in daring. " A heroine already !" observed Isabel, forcing
forcing a smile ; " but, dear Margaret, think you the heroism will last ?" " It will bear me to the couch of the earl of Gloueester—bevond I list not." " And when at the couch of the eari of Gloucester ?" asked Isabel. " Why then," answered Margaret, 44 though my heart bleed, will I pour out all my sorrows." " Should the mother superior—should father Clement, guess the venture, may they not think—-may they not infer -----" " Nought to my dishonour," inter¬ rupted Margaret : ** my thoughts rest upon my parents, and neither the risk, or the penalty, can scare my resolution. Think how many years have passed in incertitude and suspense ;—and shall the blessed hour wane unprofitably—shall the opportunity, which Heaven accords, be sacrificed through false fear and fan¬ cied danger? No, no; even the frail courage of woman will bear me through the struggle—I would hear all ; for my heart
heart tells me, however I may mourn the trials, I shall ever glory in the prin¬ ciples of my father." 44 1 would I might bear you fellow¬ ship," said Isabel : " sure am I the arm ofa friend will be needful." 44 The presence of a friend be ever grateful and encouraging," rejoined Ma¬ garet; " but here the peril must be my own. I would seek it in spite of death —I would dare it through a thousand dangers." Isabel stood irresolute; she read de¬ cision in the countenance of Margaret, yet still was she unwilling to relinquish her design. 44 1 too will pray for the earl of Glou¬ cester," she pronounced ; " I will pray, that every herb, and every simple, culled by the skilful hand of father Clement, flow as balm into his wounds." 44 May his ear be open to my voice !" sighed Margaret—" may he have strength and power to silence all my cares !" 44 Should
" Should Heaven will it otherwise- should the morning dawn upon his corse." Margaret spoke not, but she clasped the hand of Isabel with a convulsive pres¬ sure. " May not his friend—may not this baron de Hernigande — nay, may not his very domestics, be enabled to resolve your queries ?" pursued Isabel. " In the world, the occurrences of the world can¬ not lie hid : it is only in a retirement like St. Mary's, that rumour does not penetrate.'* " It is truth I would seek to elicit,'* said Margaret; " truth, pure and unvar¬ nished, not garbled and misshapen ru¬ mour" " Yet often does rumour gender in truth," remarked Isabel " Ah ! but it becomes so swollen, so monstrous, so deformed, by malice and biting envy," rejoined Margaret, " that recognition cannot follow. Are we not told
told the lieart is deceitful above measure ; that however the sun of prosperity bear myriads on its beam, adversity's chilling shadow chases all trace of their being? Are we not told------" " You are a very cynic," interrupted Isabel ; " yet methinks, the friend of the earl of Gloucester, cannot be the enemy of the earl of Kent." " I will seek the baron de Herni¬ gande," exclaimed Margaret, after a deep pause ; " he cannot judge the errand un¬ seemly, when he learn the tie which in¬ stigates." " Let us seek him together then," urged Isabel : " the imputation on one, extends not to two." " I scorn all of imputation," said Mar¬ garet, firmly ; " my heart and my con¬ science sides with me, and what should I fear from man ?" " Yet is there a tribunal of earth as well as of heaven," eagerly rejoined Isa¬ bel ; " nor can we marvel, that error im- puteth
puteth error. No, no, Margaret, you must not go alone: if you love, despise not røy bidding : fashion every outward act to seeming prudence, and the rich guerdon of peace, and joy, and gladness, be ever your own !" The hours of night waned betwixt friendly contention and acts of piety : Isabel once sunk to momentary forget¬ fulness ; but Margaret, alive to the anti¬ cipation of the morrow, suffered not sleep to seal her eyelids. " I will watch the faintest streaks in the east," she mused, " that when father Clement repairs to his earthly devotions, I may steal unsuspected to the dormi¬ tory of the strangers." Yet when the east did break in efful¬ gence ; when the swelling glory, bright¬ ening, dispersed nighťs murky vapours, it found her wan with anxiety, and worn with watching. " We must away," whispered Isabel, "if
" if we would advantage the absence of the confessor." " I like not this seeming stealth," ob¬ served Margaret, hesitating and abash¬ ed : " how is it that we should borrow disguise, when treading in the path of duty?" 44 Perchance the lady abbess might not class it duty," said Isabel. 44 The lady abbess," rejoined Margaret, 44 looks not to the duties of earth. Her own heavenward track, dazzling in brightness, expunges ought of mortality ! If she would only enter into my feel¬ ings; if she would grant allowance for my impatience, and respect my anxiety, I WOuld not thus cower like a guilty thing—1 would not descend to subter¬ fuge, or own ought of concealment." 44 No more—no more," urged Isabel : 44 let us to the venture. God weighs our motives, and reads our hearts." Every pulse throbbed, as silent and cautious, they descended from their own chamber,
chamber, and crossed to the quarter set apart for the wayfarer and the stranger. The chill breath of morning, and the inward pangs of struggling emotion, chased every vestige of colour from the cheeks and the lins of Margaret: and when clinging to the firmer arm of Isa¬ bel, she approached the door opening to the dormitory, she looked like the droop¬ ing emblem ofher own purity—like the modest lily, coveting the shelter of its own umbrage ! and for Isabel—to com¬ plete the metaphor—Isabel was as the maiden rose-bud, gemmed in morn's ear¬ liest dewdrops, and rearing its bright head yet a little above its sister blossom I Her cheeks wore the blush of mingled diffidence and expectation; her dark eyes flashed o'er her perfect features, the light¬ ning beam of confidence and hope. Thus armed, in twin loveliness and twin in¬ terest, can it be wondered, that on the brain of the baron de Hernigande, they broke as golden visions, as kindred spi¬ rits
rits of the sky. descending to bless and to imparadise ; that lost, bewildered, doubting the evidence of his senses, he could only gaze, in transport and in winder, Isabel timidly questioned of the wel¬ fare of the earl of Gloucester, and Mar¬ garet's heart vibrated 'twixt pleasure and pain, 'twixt fear and thankfulness, when listening to the report of past rest¬ lessness, and now unbroken slumber. 44 Were he striken nigh unto death," pursued the baron, his eyes resting on the dappled features of Isabel, 4fi yet would the sympathy of such angel beau¬ ty, fill men's hearts with envy !" It was a language, new and inexpli¬ cable ; it was the language of the world, and to the perception of our youthful no¬ vices, the worid was as yet veiled in misty indistinctness. Isabel blushed without knowing why, yet she repressed each ad¬ vance, and withdrawing her hand, step¬ ped proudly back. 44 Our
' 4 Our errand lies with the earl of Glou¬ cester," she said; "'tis with him alone, шу lord, we wish to parley." 44 Yes, now this very instant," urged Margaret : £ " my peace, almost my life, hangs upon the conference." The baron turned on the speaker a glance of suspicion and wonder. 44 You know—vou have seen the earl of Gloucester?" he asked. 44 Yestcr-even, senseless and bleeding, 1 saw him borne through the court-yard ; and now, would I know hirn," ardent! v pursued the artless Margaret, 4t as neces¬ sary to my wellbeing." " The earl of Gloucester," observed De Hernigande, ce is young, handsome, and gallant! he—" " I know not—I care not," interrupt« ed Margaret—" 'Tis his compassion—'tis his interest, I would crave. De Clare of Gloucester, my lord, is the arbiter of my fate." " Happy, thrice happy Gloucester ! And
And with you, gentle maid," still ga¬ zing upon Isabel, "owns he the like sway? 1 ' " I would fain hear of his wellbring," said Isabel. "In truth, our thoughts and our prayers, have tended him throughout the night." " Would I were in his place !" whis¬ pered the baron. " Enriched with such- thoughts, imparadised in such prayers, life becomes too poor a bribe." " Alack ! you judge unwittingly," re¬ plied Isabel ; " what can thoughts be¬ tide, when prayers fail?" " But the prayers of angels never fail " eagerly rejoined De Hernigande ; " as¬ cending as the full choir of the seraphim, they bless and they restore. Sweet lady ! 'tis such prayers, rather than the simples of the pious herbalist, which have pour¬ ed balm into the wounds of Glou¬ cester." " The saints be praised !" ejaculated Margaret ;
Margaret; but Isabel looked disconcert¬ ed and incredulous. " 'Tis time we parted hence," she said ; " such credence, forsooth, savoureth of profanation." The baron smiled—" You are new to the world," he remarked ; " you------" ". And I pray God I keep so," inter¬ rupted Isabel, " if humility become the forfeit." " Nay, fair saint, I beseech you, judge more leniently : 'tis neither lightness or declension which fashioneth my words : trace them to your own matchless per¬ fections ; to the fairy charm, which lives in your eye, and hovers in your smile ! Not the wildest dream of fancy; not
But Margaret cut short the rhapsody ; for impatient of delay, and dreading the return of father Clement—" We parley here, when time should be given to weightier matter," she exclaimed. " If you know ought of pity, sir knight, suffer
suffer me to speak to the earl of Glou¬ cester." 44 Pity," repeated the baron. " Ah, lady ! 'tis the boon I would crave upon my knees ; 'tis------" " See," urged Margaret, pointing to the east y te the mists are fast fading, and day breaking in all its glory ! 'Tis only for a moment—'tis only one question I would ask—If our holy mother—if the confessor—if—if——" 44 Suffer me to bear your message to the eari/' said De Hernigande : 44 he re¬ vives, lady, but 'twould be death to agi¬ tate." Margaret burst into tears. 44 What have I said ?—what have I done? Alas!------" Isabel motioned silence. 44 You have destroyed hope—you have blighted expectation—you have nipped every bud of promise " « I—I," repeated the baron—" Ah ! vol. il f teach
teach me then how to expunge the tres¬ pass—how to refute the charge ?" Margaret struggled down the sobs of her bosom ; she raised her fair face from the shoulder of her friend ; she turned impulsively towards him.—" 'Tis no light influence— Ъ* no vain curiosity which impelled me hither," she ex« daimed—" I came on the mission of du$y, of filial hope, and filial love : sir knight, I came to solicit at the hands of the noble Gloucester, his knowledge of the fate of the earl of Kent." ** The eari of Kent," echoed De Her¬ nigande—" alas I lady ------" Isabel sprung to bis side—she laid her hand upon his arm—she looked implor¬ ingly in his face.—" It is the daughter of the earl of Kent who questions," she emphatically pronounced ; a»d then she stepped timidly back, her checas out¬ vying the rose, her eyes sinking beneath tbe admiration she elicited. The baron stood irresolute, gazing al¬ ternately
ternately upon tlie fair beings before him. " I can hear all—I can bear all," urged Margaret. Isabel implored caution in the light¬ ning glance of her dark eye. The baron placed his spread hand upon his breast; it was compassion, it was tremulous pity, which spoke in every feature. " Lady," he pronounced, " I would I could resolve your query ; but the earl of Gloucester can best speak of his re¬ spected guardian. Tax my services where 1 can serve, and judge my zeal by my obedience." Margaret turned aside her head ; $he chased away her blinding tears, but she spoke not. " Will you bear to the earl of Glou¬ cester, the wishes of the lady Margaret de Burgh ?" asked Isabel. " Will you, my lord, with due allowance for a daugh¬ ter's feelings, doff all of unnecessary de¬ lay? And will you"—and her very F 2 temples
temples crimsoned— " preserve silence upon this interview ? The lady abbess might chide ; and for father Clement—-" " The silence of the grave," inter¬ rupted De Hernigande. " Lovely lady, repeat but the visit, and the rack shall not extort it from me." " Perchance at a fitter season," said Isabel. 44 But will you not pray for my friend?" urged the baron, striving to detain them. 44 In the chapel—in the common rites of devotion—say, fair saint, may we not kneel at the same altar ?" There was a pathos in his tone, an enthusiasm in his manner, which alarm¬ ed every slumbering caution. " Perhaps we have done wrong," mu¬ sed Isabel ; yet when she glanced at the anguished features of Margaret, every doubt vanished—-" no, no, exertion in such a cause cannot be wrong : his may be the manners of the world ; and oft- times, are the manners of the world, crooked
crooked and hard to unravel." Then addressing the baron : " Yes, at the same altar, my lord," she firmly pro¬ nounced, " The God we serve, erects but one altar upon earth !" 44 We shall meet again !" exclaimed the transported De Hernigande. " An¬ gelic being ! thy words are balm !—thy smile the foretaste of beatitude !" She would have fled, but snatching at her flowing mantle, he held her back; he dropped impulsively on his knees; he pressed his lips to the hem, as though to a saint's reliquary. She struggled—she broke from the thrall— and the succeeding instant, the recol¬ lection of her beauty, and the dread of her frown, alone remained.
f 3 CHAP-
СНАРТЕВ IV. I womld bring balm, aud pour it in your wounds, Cure your distemper'd miud, and h ¿al your sorrows. Dayden. The day which restored De Maudit to the home of his childhood, restored not peace to the perplexed and agitated mind of Hubert ; the past interview Hved in his brain, and care, and blank despondence, hung like a mildew on his feelings. He saw William clasped m й father's warm embrace; he heard the murmured blessing ; he hailed the smile of rapturous welcome : but not the high flush of his cheek, not the fire of his eye, not the seeming buoyancy of his spirit, could expunge the fearful re¬ cord of defection : the flowers of pro¬ mise veiled not the lurking thorn ;—half hid
hid beneath the smiling surface, he traced the yawning abyss, and bis con¬ science smote him as an abettor in the drama of deception.—" I must wear a mask upon my features," h· mused-~ ** I must keep a check-rein он шу feel¬ ings. Holy Heaven ! from my benefac¬ tor, from the honoured preceptor of my youth, I must hide the secret care which preys upon my quiet." He turned—he met the eyes of William rivetted upon him : there was a mean¬ ing,, an intensity in the gaze, which sharpened the sting of known collusion» and the startling sigh which followed, excited even the attention of the baron. " Hubert," he exclaimed, *· the re¬ turn of William surely calls for a g*y er greeting. Marry, my son ! in lieu of smiles, thy face wears the frost of four¬ score." " Hubert, iu our home circle, misses Isabel," remarked De Maudit ; " and the lack, my dear father, is mournful." f "True'>
"True; I would the little moppet were here !" rejoined the baron. " But the joys of this world are leavened with privations, and the present good must not be rejected, because it might admit a brighter colouring." Hubert could not answer—he tried to rally—lie tried to assume the mere show of content ; to join in the light jest, to echo the laugh of hilarity ; but he was a wretched counterfeit ; and the hour which dismissed him from the tor¬ turing necessity, felt as the remission of a-weighty sentence. He was alone— he was unmarked—he could arrange his ideas—he .could dwell upon the past— he could fashion something like conduct for the future : the peace of the bar^r was as a mighty stake ; to hide him from sorrow, to shield his heart from the barb of woe, was the coveted harvest of all his labours. " Yes, with my own life will I guard thee,** he fervently pronounced ; " with my
my youth's best hopes, will I hem thee in from the killing conviction of a son's apostacy." Day after day dawned and closed, and William, in outward-seeming, was the William of happier hours : he hawked; he hunted; he wandered in the woods ; he promoted all the agile sports of health-yielding exercise ; yet at times, wns there a hurry on his nerves, an indecision in his actions, a bravado in his spirits, an abstraction in his man¬ ner, wdiich escaped not the searching eye of friendship, " It is mere show—it is the similitude of happiness without the reality," mused Hubert : 44 affection like mine cannot be cheated : no, no, De Maudit, the surface may be smooth, but it hides not the shallows. In the world, thou may¬ est pass dross for sterling gold, but the tenacity of friendship is not to be co¬ zened." The baron was lulled to peace: the
whole household tranced in the halcyon culm of security : not an anxiety, not a casualty, ruffled the placid stream of time: the strife and the turmoils of party were unknown ; the jars, the struggles, and the threats of civil discord. unthought of Father Gilbert lived in the strict exercise of his calling : the re¬ spected Geoffry, dwelling on " the days of other years," fancied himself young in the promising maturity of ию two friends. Alas î little do we know the storm gathering for our undoing !—little do we guess the canker lurking in the brightest buds of our felicity ! The last vibration of the matin hymn had died away, and the pause was follow¬ ed by the impressive tones of father Gil¬ bert ; he was descanting on the beauty of boliness, on the duty of order, on the mys¬ terious, the propelling link, connecting all of Goďs creatures. The household were assembled in the chapel, and every ear was wrapt in listening attention :— De Maudit
De Maudit sat with his faeş half bent upon his breast;—tbe baron, contem¬ plating the grave of thç departed Alice; —-Hubert, with hands clasped« and eves rivetted on the companion of his youth, " The planetary system, the animal world, the vegetable kingdom," pro¬ nounced the holy man, " all proclaim regularity, all evince conformity to be the fundamental basis of our being. The concussion of a straw, the opposition of a single atom, and wild confusion, and overwhelming ruin, must ensue. Tbe Power which guides us ! the great and mighty Spring of our hopes and of our lives í the beneficent Author f ...... ■ ■" He ceased, for the clamorous blast of a bu¬ gle rang through the chapel. William sprung upon his feet ; he tarried not for reflection ; he heeded not the prohibition of his father;—with a bound like light, writh a celerity like thought, bß parted down the aisle, and disappeared through tbe door of entrance. Father Gilbert f 6 regained
regained the thread of his homily, but the thread of attention was severed ; all alike awaited the closing benediction, but all alike owned, that the casualties of this world bear strong drafts upon the feelings. De Maudit greeted them in the hall; he wore his accustomed smile of cheerfulness ; he took his seat at the dinner-board, but he spoke not of the intruder. " Why so tardy of explanation ?" questioned the baron. " Thinkest thou, William, that curiosity harboureth no breast save thy own ?" A transient blush crimsoned the cheek of De Maudit, yet hib was the hesitation of an instant. " Marry ! had Isabel borne me fellow¬ ship," he replied, " I might have shel¬ tered beneath her sexual weakness : г s it is, I can but shame at myself." " But the bugle ?" said Hubert. " Nought, save the random blast of a hunter,
hunter, passing with the speed of the wind." " No more ?" asked the baron. " No more," repeated William. " Curiosity," observed father Gilbert, " as the rebel to order, calls for plenary infliction. Your defection, my son, was ill timed." " I cry your mercy, dear father : mine be the error of temperature, not of pre¬ meditated irre wren ee." " And as such," concluded the monk, " needing the rein of judgment, and the call of admonition. Wc will adjourn to the oratory, and in lieu of pastime and merriment, pray the furtherance of God's grace." The paly shadows of evening fast ga¬ thered, ere De Maudit was liberated from the penance of self-communion : but whether his reflections were shac¬ kled by the bigotry of custom ; whether his mind and his thoughts were confined within the narrow limits of restricted ob¬ servance,
servane©, is not for us to determine: he quitted the oratory, with flushed cheeks and glazed eyes ; with a puke, with a heart, throbbing in wild irregularity ; with feelings waging war, and passions ill qualified by the prosing homily of his ghostly counsellor. Excusing him¬ self from the meal of even, he courted the solitude of his own chamber :—and Hubert too, the slave of inquietude and conjecture, hailed with joy the privi¬ leged hour for repose. Night came: the castle was tranced in stillness: every sound hushed; every light extinguished ; the pursuits, the avocations of the day, forgotten, and even the shrill blast of the horn, break¬ ing on the matin service, quick passing from the busy brain of Hubert, when a slight noise in the corridor, roused him into being. He started—he listened— he smiled at the suspected cozenage of his own fancy, and breathing a pater, ím the repose of the baron, the safety of
of Isabel, and the happmess of William, was calmly resigning himself to the world of dreams, when a clarion, like un¬ to the morning, but faintly borne on the wing of distance, again dissolved the spell. The slave of impulse, seeking eluci¬ dation, yet knowing not what he sought, he sprung from the couch ; he mounted to the casement ; he gazed on the far- stretching chase. The moon, cloudless in majesty, climbed the heavens, mel¬ lowing creation in her silver beams, and chequering all of earth with alternate light and shadow : the trees waved in the breeze : the grey turrets of the cha¬ pel, relieving the deep tints of embo¬ soming foliage, rivetted the wandering attention. Hubert gazed on the holy edifice, until an awe, a sadness, stole o'er his senses ;—it was the resting-place of those who had been ;—it was the si¬ lent sanctuary of departed nature ;~it was the last home of the flesh, when the turmoils oflife were ended! He thought of
of the sainted baroness—he thought of the woes of the baron—he thought of his own mysterious destiny :—and then he thought of the Knight-Templar, who at the grave of Pembroke, had warned a- gainst the sin of omission. An ice-chill froze his hearťs blood : it was not fancy —it was not the illusion of'vision—he saw the figure of a man emerge from a back postern, and pass swiftly across the sward beneath. Brave to the venture oflife, yet was he held down, and tram¬ melled in the numbing bonds of super¬ stition—he had perception—he had judg¬ ment—he had reason : but religion sanc¬ tioned bigotry : and bigotry—that hydra of a hundred heads—subjugates every power of the mind. He lived in an era. in which the belief of witchcraft, spells, incantations, and ghosts, were general : for two of the charges instituted in open court against the earl of Kent, were, " that by sorceries and enchantments, he had drawn the kmg to favour him above
above all other" —secondly, that " he had stolen out of the jewel-house, a pre¬ cious stone of wonderful value, whose virtue was to make him who had it in¬ vincible in battle ; and that he had giv¬ en that stone, to Lewellen, prince of Wales, the king's enemy." But to return from this digression. Rooted to the spot, every hair on end, every pulse throbbing, Hubert watched the receding form ; fashioning it a spirit of the night, enwreathed in mist, and vanishing on the gales of the morning : suddenly he lost it amid the deep shadow of an opposite coppice; and the revolving instant, he noted, not one, but two—not cowering amid gloom and darkness, but mounted on fleet char¬ gers, and galloping with all speed from Hanslape. A mist fell from his eyes— an obscuring muffle from his under¬ standing.— 4i Mistaken, unhappy Wil¬ liam !" he apostrophised, " what sorrows art thou heaping up—what troubles art thou
thou storing for a futnre moment ! Pity him, óh God! pity him, ^o owns no pity for himself !" Perplexed, almost frenzied, with jar¬ ring doubts, with alternate hopes, dreads, and conjectures, he slept no more ; he sought no more his pillow : insensible to the chilly air, and lost to all care of self, Ъе watched at the casement, his eyes straining in the direction of New¬ port Pagnel ; his ears, sensitive as the blind mole, magnifying into sound the very throbbings of his temples ; nor till long after, a ——The wheels of Phœbus round about, Dappled the drowsy east with spots of grey," did he descend from his station. He stole softly down the corridor; he paus¬ ed at the door of De Maudiťs chamber; his hand pressed the latch, yet he feared to enter ; he feared the astounding blow of conviction : all as yet was doubt and mystery ; all alike involved in obscurity and
and disguise: another moment, another step, and the veil might be withdrawn, and the fearful, the appalling reality, admit no deeper colouring. " The horn," mused Hubert, " was the corresponding signal with that which lured from the duty of holiness. Ah ! and it will snap every duty, and it will poison every hope, and it will desolate every vir» tue of the heart. Wretched—wretched William ! where subterfuge and disguise commence, ruin and overthrow must terminate." He drew back ; he passed swiftly down the staircase, and with flooded eyes and harrowed feelings, quitted the castle, by the low postern, through which the supposed De Maudit had emerged. The morning was bright and beamy ; the dew hung on the bent bush, and every blade of glass sparkled like gems in the sunbeams ; a thousand blossoms glowed in freshness ; a thousand choris¬ ters warbled the hymn of praise : Na¬ ture
ture had assumed her richest colouring : 'twas summer's infant blush, mellowing the latest tints of spring ! Yet was all alike lost upon the possessed and ab¬ stracted Hubert : his eyes wandered o'er the landscape; his thoughts were full of the fugitive ; he passed the boun¬ dary of the park ; he struck into the waste leading to Newport Pagnel :—it was the direction in which he had lost sight of the horsemen, and he pursued it, spite of brake and bush, spite of every intercepting obstacle. Moralizing, even to the distaste of life, all of occu* pation, all of hope, all of promise, faded into gloom : the world was thick set with snares and precipices ; man, at best, deplorably blind, depraved, and fallen ; in prosperity, overbearing ; in adversity, abject : nay, the brawling brook, bab¬ bling at his feet, and battling every stone which intercepted its passage, but an epitome of human existence ; combating, struggling through the summer
summer of life ; congealed by winter's frost, and stilled in all its progress! A. sudden curve in the road severed the wanderings of fancy ; he trode himself upon the yawning brink of a morass, and he saw" beyond it, the like horsemen, ad¬ vancing with the like rapidity. It was a sight, little to be wished, though un¬ expected ; a sight, astounding his better judgment,and rending his inmost heart; —he saw De Maudit spring from the saddle ; he fancied the start of recogni¬ tion ; he saw him yield the bridle to his companion—-and the next instant, he knew him at his side. Every muscle, every sinew, felt to collapse and lose its vigour; yet did William wear the ready smile, and summon the jest of [confi¬ dence. 44 What has chanced that thou look- est thus gravely?" he demanded. " On my troth, Hubert, thy pallet must have been strewed with thorns." "And
" And thine," faltered Hubert—" thine, boasts of ought save roses." " The rose and the thorn grow on the same stem," quickly rejoined De Mau¬ dît : " those who would pluck the one, must compound for the other." 44 May the thorn never pierce into thy bosom !" emphatically pronounced Hu¬ bart ; and raising his eyes to the face of William, he deciphered care beneath the surface of hilarity. For many moments both were silent; both were buried in profound thought—Hubert, clouded in sadness— De Maudit, the slave of feel¬ ings inexplicable to himself. 44 We are entering the park ; anon we shall have readied the castle," at length observed William, willing to break the pause, yet scarce knowing what to say. " The sun has not exhaled the dew- drops, or the mists faded from the up¬ lands," said Hubert 44 And yet are we as restless as two unblessed ghosts tarrying the return of Charon's
Charon's packetboat," rejoined William. " Beshrew me ! but I would give a gol¬ den bizantine, to know tbe weighty re¬ cognisance which has divorced you your pillow." Hubert replied not—William forced a laugh.—" Come, confess," taking his arm, and impelling from the beatened track, " has some bestriding nighthag frightened sleep ?—or did chance direct the road to Newport Pagnel ?" " Do not question, unless you woo explanation," firmly pronounced Hubert. " I would dare explanation, if I knew how," jocosely answered William. " 'Twas anxiety then which made me wakeful," said Hubert, fixing on him an eye of mournful searching expression ; " and observation, my friend, rather than chance, which led me on the road to New¬ port Pagnel." For a moment, the firm strung nerves of De Maudit appeared to waver, and the frequent fluctuations of his cheek were
were evidently the effects of strong emo¬ tion; but rallying all his courage^— 44 Anxiety fashions its own scourge," he remarked ; 44 and for observation, 'tis of¬ ten the ycleped name for conjecture." 44 'Tis a bitter scourge, truly," ex¬ claimed Hubert, with a sigh : 44 but con¬ jecture, however Svild, cannot fashion signals or forestall reality. William, I scorn equivocation or disguise:—in the stillness of night, I heard the correspond¬ ing blast which drew you from the cha¬ pel;—and mounting to the casement, by the light of the moon, I beheld you, in company with another, depart from Hanslape, and take the road to Newport Pagnel." " 'Tis well," said De Maudit, after a pause of deep thought ; 44 you have dis¬ covered the effect, now fbr the spur. Think you, is there ought at Hanslape, to rivet the interest and inclination of youth ? The baron studies nought save book and breviary : father Gilbert lives for
for the mortification of the flesh : and old Geoffry, nay, all the household, from the seneschal down to the lowest lackey, bear on their brows, the snow of age—· in their countenances, the die of mor¬ tality." 44 Time has been," reproachfully ob¬ served Hubert, " when the inhabitants of Hanslape, were in themselves, a host of dear and tender association ; time has been— ---- "' 44 No reflection—I pray you, no re¬ flection," interrupted William. 44 Time is feather-heeled, and nature imperative. We may respect, we may reverence, but youth craveth more to fill up her mea¬ sure of felicity. Come, confess," forcing a laugh, " does the flesh never buffet with the spirit?—does the feelings never lead blindfold ?—does inclination never stray beyond the frozen boundary, en¬ joined by my good father, and the holy Gilbert?" " You speak in riddles, De Maudit." vol. il g " Rid-
" Riddles, whicii nature may speedily resolve," pursued the incorrigible Wil¬ liam. 4I Know you not, 4 it is not good that man should be alone?' Say then, are there no bright eyes, no rosy cheeks, in the nigh hamlet, to melt your frost?" Hubert stepped fearfully back.—- 44 Ho~ ly God ! what a wreck—what a dreadful wreck is here! Why, De Maudit — why, William, sure, some fiend, some devil lias possessed you !" Again De Maudit burst into a loud laugh.—" Think you," he asked, 4i that love is engendered by the devil? or do you suspect, all the witching daugh¬ ters of Eve, to savour of the first trans¬ gression ? By the rood, you must be re¬ modelled, ere you emerge from the her¬ mitage of Hanslape! But avaunt, all of jest and raillery ! I would bu, point the beckoning star which lured me from my pillow." " Jest, or earnest," mournfully ob¬ served
served Hubert, " your words are too am¬ biguous to tranquillize my feelings." 44 Your feelings are so opposite to my feelings," rejoined William ; " your per¬ ceptions so differently awakened ; your conclusions so widely dissimilar; your ______« 4 * Ah, William !" interrupting him, ·* they had not wont to be so." 44 Nay, and I would they were not so !" eagerly— 44 1 would we were kneaded out of the same clay ! But though you are cold, as the icicle pending from Dian's temple, sure you may make some allow¬ ance for the frailty of others." 4 * Alas! we are all frail, woefully frail," bigbed Hubert ; " we are all laden with crime; all weighed down by the weight of our own trespasses," * ť There spoke the sage Gilbert!" ex¬ claimed De Maudit. 44 Beshrew me ! I would give an eye and a limb, to see you transfixed by Cupid's arrow-—to know you as fairly shackled as myself" g 3 « Me-
" Methinks you judge but lightly of the evil," said Hubert. " Consistently of the bliss, however, for I would fain share it with my friend." **" Consistently inexplicable," remarked Hubert. " And you may say, consistently de¬ voted," replied William, assuming all the wild rhapsody of passion ; " for I woukl freeze beneath the snows of Zem¬ bla, for an eye-beam—I would dare the scorching sands of Arabia, to win a smile —I would journey to the Antipodes, to reap one token of graciousness." " Then why condescend to stealth and to stratagem ?" asked Hubert—" why bury a passion, so fervent, within the hid¬ den folds of your own breast? Remem¬ ber the treasured memory of your mo¬ ther, and fear not a father's opposition." " The early love of my father is no surety for grace," answered William. " Time congeals the warmest springs of the
the human heart, and even passion's self it métamorphoses into policy." " This of your father," said Hubert, re¬ proachfully. " Aye, of every father of the race of Adam," exclaimed William. " I know the venture too well to dare it." " Then would I infer some fatal blot —some deadly snare to fame"—and Hu¬ bert rivetted on him an eye of piercing scrutiny. He turned away for a moment —he seemed to hesitate—but rallying back all his wonted courage, and braving the glance, " What though I loved the daughter or the niece, or the ward, or -— no matter who—what though I loved an angel, directly counter to my father's prejudices?" " Ah ! is it so, my friend ? Is love the subtle snare which lures you from your duty ? Is it love—is it woman's love, which scatters tares amid the seeds of promise ?" 44 Say, rather, which invigorates, which G 3 inspires,
inspires, which nerves me on to glory Γ exclaimed De Maudit ; " which rouses røe from the dull, the stagnant dream of indecision, and gives my hopes, and gives my arm, to nobler, brighter efforts !" " Ingeirica Fitzparnel!" pronounced Hubert, and he groaned in the bitterness of his feelings. The start — the glance of fire—the crimson flush, spoke the wild tumult within—" Know you ought of the lar?y Ingeirica Fitzparnel?" demanded Wil¬ liam, in a tone—ah, how unlike his native gentleness ! " I know her, as the being we are- doomed to curse—as the being, who crosses your path, and scatters rue and nightshade o'er your promises. I know her------ n " Hold ! even friendship may go too far." " Friendship, may mourn, may droop, may weep blood," sighed Hubert ; " but friendship can ne'er be scared from its duty.
duty. I know her, William, as the sub¬ tle Eve, coiling around your heart, and luring to perdition—I know her, bale¬ ful as the deadly upas, withering all around it : nay, and I recognise her in the inflated sketch of your own pen. Recall your fatal sojourn at Kenilworth ; recall your lavish praise, your wild and fevered panegyric; recall your weak and frenzied imagery— Like a dazzling star in an ebon sky ! — like the tints of Iris skirting the shower ! Said you not so ? And more—said you not : She cast the magic spell of witcliery around? — Said you not, and felt you not, that her smile, as diffusive as Heaven's favour. beamed alike on all f De Maudit writhed beneath the heart- pang—he spoke not, and all of bravado, all of forced gaiety vanished : he stood, as one suddenly plunged from imagined security into perplexity and perturba¬ tion ; his arms folded ; his eyes cast up¬ on the earth ; his very spirit, muffled as Gé it
it were, in the toil of self-conscious¬ ness. " My memory, dear William, is pain¬ fully accurate," resumed Hubert : " and when I find, that the earl of Leicester heading the rebel legion now levying against our liege lord the king, is the guardian of this enchantress, marvel not, that my fears and my cares seek no fur¬ ther resting-place. It is to her that w r e Stand indebted for the perversion of your principles;—it is her malign, her fatal influence, which divorcing you from self, stamps you ñu apostate to every enjoin¬ ed duty. Nay, frown not. I know your beart, tangled as it is, in sophistry, delu¬ sion, and error—I know its genuine vir¬ tue, its sterling worth—I know, that when awakening to reality and convic¬ tion, wofully will it rue the mighty ruin it may cause—I know you plunged, into a fearful, frightful labyrinth, yielding your better judgment to the designing and the base; lending your name, your strength,
strength, your influence, to a cause, which dares not face the open front of day— which seeking the cover of midnight darkness, hides from every honest eye, its monstrous, its astounding crest, Nay, and ftirther I know——" " Hubert ! Hubert Γ interrupted De Maudit, "you take advantage — you build upon our long and close associa¬ tion:' " I build upon the rectitude of my cause—upon the purity of my intentions —upon the known integrity of your heart." " It may deceive you," faltered Wil liam ; " have a care, it may disappoint your trust." " No, no—not if you give it rein,'* anxiously pursued Hubert—"not if you leave it to its own pure workings: it may, it wiU escape the wily шаге of the tempter ; it may, it will return to hope and peace. Go no more to Newport Pagnel; mingle no raore in the haunts g 5 of
* of wicked men ; join no more the foul complottings of treason ; and your sun of glory will re-dawn—your chance of felicity ------" " Never—never ! My sun qf glory ! — my chance of felicity ! You are blind, besotted, hoodwinked, else might you peer into my brain ; else might you read ; else might you see ------" Then forcing a wild hysteric laugh—-" But how guess you my errand to Newport Pagnel ?<— how know you, but Venus, borne by her doves, and fresh from Paphos, there holds her court?" V Sure, you are mad ;" and compas noa and wonder spoke in the glance ol Hubert. 44 Sometnnes— only sometimes: we are all mad sometimes—and now Uic moon's at full." " William^—dear William, this man¬ ner, these false spirits, ah ! how ill do they become you !'/ u Well then, J^bert, to be gravely sad,
• sad, and sadly grave"—and he tried to smother down a sigh— " think you, my wits are distraught, because I cry not, yea, yea, to all your wondrous conjec¬ tures? Is there no errand to bear me to Newport Pagnel, save the errand of crime ?" 44 Time has been," said Hubert, feel¬ ingly, " when I would have felled the man who dared to draw such an infer¬ ence: but circumstances, sii eng, corro¬ borating, convicting circuiDitances ------ De Maudit, God be my witness, I vvould give my blood, drop by drop, to know you firm in your duty; to see you cleansec from every imputation, which mystery and ambiguity can excite." Strong emotion flushed the very tem¬ ples of William.— 44 1 believe you"—he¬ sitating— 4e I know—I feel—I acknow¬ ledge—But why of the past? We must look to the future now, or, like the world, think only of the present. In the world, g 6 Hubert,
Hubert, people cease ta wonder, because wonder never ceases " " Then divorce me from the world," said Hubert; Ä separate me from its hate¬ ful policy ; give me your confidence, and let me judge, how far the world debases the heart it fascinates." * Hubert,* replied William, drawing close beside him, and lowering his voice almost to a whisper—" it is not the world which has fascinated me: my own heart is a paradox ; my own feelings, too vague, too wild, too complex, for reason's self to analyze. Perhaps I am not so happy as when I quitted Hanslape ; but the path lies straight before me, and now I must not diverge right or left." " Where exists the power to shackle your better judgment?—where the in¬ fluence, to hold you thus in bonds?" ** Here—^here'*-*-striking his hand against his breast—" 4is the bond of ho¬ nour—4is the impelling sense ef reputa¬ tion which enslaves me. Toil not, my friend ;
friend; waste not your precious time, your precious labou n —as well may you seek to cool the Phlegethon stream, as to turn me from my purpose." " Then God have mercy on us all !" aspirated Hubert, in an accent, and with a look of such utter despondence, that it seemed to strike at the very root of De Maudiťs assumed fortitude ; he stretch- ed forth his hand in conciliation, and tears of impulsive feeling flooded his eyes. " You would tent the wound you have inflicted," murmured Hubert : " but this bond of amity, cannot rob me of my griefs, cannot chase away the hi¬ deous fiend suspicion. If the offering of courage, strength, resolution, life itself, can turn away this cup of gall, tax me, William* 5 —precipitating himself on his neck— ** tax me, and prove me." William clasped him with a nerve of iron, but he spoke not—he could not speak ;-*-it was self-reproach ; it was prey¬ ing,
ing, gnawing anguish, which chained his tongue. 44 If you have been beguiled into im¬ prudence," continued Hubert ; 44 if you have been hurried into difficulty; if youth, and inexperience, and passion, and misrepresentation, have lured you into snares, snap the fatal rivets, abjure the thraldom, and peace and tranquil hope will quick return." De Maudit struggled in the arms of his friend, then striving to smother down the heaving agony, 44 Would you, 1 ' he asked, " impel me headlong?—would you plunge me into the bottomless abysí> ? yawning to engulph me. ? « ]No—no; I would but pacify—I would but lead you back to innocence and honour. Dearest William, let us seek the holy Gilbert; let us------" He ceased, for the start, the look of De Mau¬ dit, was frenzied; his fa ί wan unto death — his teeth clenched—«his eye& wildly distended. " You would urge me r
me, body and soul, into perdition," he gasped out; " you would quicken the vulture, already gnawing on my vitals^ Then pavt«ir. & for thought, and chasing the death-dews from his forehead : " Hu¬ bert," he pursued, in a low stern voice, almost sinking to a whisper— 44 breathe suspicion into the ear of my father— breathe suspicion into the ear of the monk Gilbert—and by the God of my salvation, you drive me for ever from Hanslape !" 44 Unkind! cruel! barbarous!" mur¬ mured Hubert; but William tarried not the reproach ; without one qualifying word, without one atoning look, he fled towards the castle:—and Hubert sub¬ dued, astounded, his feelings outraged, his very senses scattered, stood, with the grasp of almost mortal grief pressing cold at his heart.
VvJTx/jlJl -
ШАРФОВ V ^^AJ-AjLjl· JL JEU ¿İr ▼ .
-----«»_---- ~ц е fell degraded, H;$ glory tarnish'd, and his fame undone. Oh, bounteous recompence from royal hands f The Earl qf JEsstx Time, the " moveable image of immove¬ able eternity," stays not for man : day- succeeded day, yet still did the earl of Gloucester, and the baron de Herni¬ gande, sojourn at St. Mary's ; still, out¬ wardly chained in imbecility, did they partake the freewill offerings of pious trust. It was Margaret—it was Isabel —who had shed o'er their future desti¬ nies the magic tissue of enthralment ; who, breaking Uke visions of light, stole upon their senses, and gave thdr hopes to inquietude ! Margaret, in the chapel, armed in the beauty of holiness ! Isa¬ bel, in all the witchery of innocence and love-
loveliness, flying the admiration she eli¬ cited! What ä change—what a won¬ drous change, arose in the bosoms of the warriors ! a wild, a doubtful, a perplexing change; a sensation, 'twixt misery and transport ; a sensation, not to be defined, not to be relinquished, for all the peace of the past. De Hemigande had thought of, had dreamt of Isabel, long after she had vanished from his sight ; her dark eyes ; her provoking smile ; her artless naivete, had pursued him in every vision: he would beeome a penitent ; he would live on the steps of the altar ; he would wear his youth, in prayer and in thrift, to win another glance : and whilst the skill of father Clement cicatrized the wounds of the earl, bared to the remorse¬ less darts of the blind deity, he yielded his heart, without reservation, and with¬ out struggle. It was his praise—it was his almost idolatrous panegyric, which broke upon the reviving senses of Glou¬ cester, and dared him to all the hazard of
of curiosity :—he listened to the tale of enthralment; he smiled at the mad rhap¬ sodies of passion, until rallying into strength, and into exertion, under the plea of thanksgiving for grace, he re¬ solved to brave the honeyed poison. Alack, the versatility of choice ! That honeyed poison, lurked in the soft, the melting, the dovelike eyes of Margaret ! Isabel was lovely; but Margaret was se¬ ductive :—Isabel rifled the palm of beau¬ ty ; but Margaret sapped the tenderest interests of the heart ! He saw her, and he forgot the fancied claims wliich the world held upon his sword;—he gazed upon her, and he blessed the chance skirmish which had cast him a suppliant at the gate of her convent ;—he listened to the cadence of her voice, and the ves¬ per-hymn became as the melody of an¬ gels: his wrapt soul hung upon each dying vibration; and long after it had ceased, did fancy yield back the rich tones, and bask in the sunshine of her presence !
presence ! What boded it, that the day was fixed for departure—that the reti¬ nue at Nuneaton were warned to readi¬ ness ! a new shadow beckoned to exer¬ tion and to perseverance : and Glouces¬ ter, luring back the languor of debility, drew a further draft upon the indul¬ gence of father Clement. In the chapel, supported by the arm of De Hernigande, pale, wan, almost spectral ; armed in all, to win and woo the interest, to thaw the " weeping blood of woman's heart," he had stood, he had knelt, he had looked like one, quick passing from the vale of the dying—as Matthew Paris beautifully expresses it— into the vale of the dead; as one, whose rest on earth was nearly ended ; whose pass to eternity was well nigh signed : —and the baron, he too condescended to the double part of policy and deception ; he too beguiled and played upon the self-love of the unsuspecting confessor-— for where is the discernment wliich art cannot
cannot blind ?—where the human being, deaf to the deluding incitements of va¬ nity ? 'Tis the passion, gendered in our birth : 'tis the first spark which warms to emulation—'tis the last spark which sets in the tomb ! Apparently softened, by the rhetoric of piety, and the ensample of devotion and of holine ¿s, the glossy baits of this world seemed to fade away, the charms and allurements of temporal good to lose their colouring : to the homilies of father Clement, was attributed the merit of conversion ; and father Clement, on his bended knees, his shorn crown bowing down to the earth, fervently and impul¬ sively thanked his God that his labour had not been vain. Neither had been vain the labour of deception ; it opened a free pass to the chapel ; it close sealed the eyes of watchfulness: worship be¬ came the mask of other feelings ; and De Hernigande, for the weak indulgence of a brief season, bartered the peace of his life.
life. His was a love, passing show ; a love, fanned by indulgence, nurtured by enthusiasm ; a love, planted by the Hand divine; budding amidst the ice of disappointment; blossoming beneath the faintest glimmer of hope;—like the snowdrop, lifting its cold head from the lap of earth, when rallied by spring's earliest sunbeam ! The light v/as stealing away, and the grey mists wee rising, when in passing to the chapel, the lengthened shadow of the baron de Hernigande, crossed the path oí' Label. She met his eye; and bowing her head, in token of recogni¬ sance, woukl have hastened onwards, hud not his words detained her. 44 If the peace of the lady Margaret de Burgh be precious," he whispered, 44 withhold not your presence. Our so¬ journ at St. Mary's draws nigh to a close : and once, lady, you expressed an inter¬ est in the fate of the earl of Kent," 44 Once," repeated Isabel ; " say, ever, my
my lord ; for fain would I chase all tears from the eyes of my friend." " Yours, be the attributes of mercy and of gentleness," said the baron—" may they ever flow, to assure and solace! The earl of Gloucester, lady, is the same De Clare, ward to the injured De Burgh : but this is neither time or place : much remains to be told, and opportunity is tardy." " True, we must away to our devo¬ tions," rejoined Isabel : " the holy sisters have already assembled. Another time —another place." " Name it," eagerly importuned the baron, " that I may bear the precious hearing to my friend." Isabel looked alarmed. " Fear me not—fear us not," pursued De Hernigande, recovering all of reserve and sanctity. " The earl òf Gloucester departs not'from Nuneaton, till satisfied of the remembrance of the lady Margaret. Perchance, his commu¬ nications be ill fashioned to the feelings
ofa daughter :—but ought is better than suspense." 44 Poor—-poor Margaret !" sighed Isa¬ bel. 44 And will you not bear her fellow¬ ship?" questioned the baron ; e4 will you not blunt the keen edge of sorrow, by the healing balsam of sympathy ? The pass to eternity is brief and thorny :— ah ! will you not scatter flowers to cheer the toil ?" 44 I would pluck away every thorn, if I knew how," said Isabel ; 44 1 would-----" and then she paused, for she read, in the sparkling eyes, in the flushed cheeks of the baron, a volume of expression. 44 You would impart happiness—you woukl bestow peace, as genial to your own nature ! I .ovely maid ! you wouid infuse, in all of earth, the calm heaven of your own bosom!" 44 Yes, I would know all happy," said the artless Isabel, " alike without as with¬ in the convent." « And
44 And think you, happiness reigns within these walls?—think you, lady, content harbours the stone-cold breast of profession?—think you, the warm, the glowing, the social bonds of fellow¬ ship, can be snapped, martyred, without a struggle ? God forbid that you should think so ! God forbid"—and he spoke ivith energy and feeling—" that you, of all created beings, should become the dupe of mad enthusiasm !" Isabel looked all doubt and wonder ; her own heart sided with hini, yet the confession passed not her lips. 44 Promise me," he continued, in ac¬ cents of entreaty, " never to yield to the persuasions of fanaticism ; never to ex¬ change the joys and the bliss of hope, for the vain dull show of acquiescence ?" 44 1 have a father," said Isabel, earnest¬ ly, " who sways all my actions; kind, considerate, indulgent, a father------" 44 Then will he not immolate you in the springtide of your life," interrupted De
De Hernigande ; 4ť then, watchful of your felicity, will he suffer no false lure, to beguile you of freedom—to steep the years of maturity in regret and in gloom." Isabel, even against her judgment, would have advocated the negative vir¬ tue, the calm contemplation of a life of holiness, withdrawn from the strife of the world, living in 4i the distant mur¬ mur of the passions, while all is peace and silence in the soul;" but the loud swell of the organ summoned to the cha- pel, and starting into action, and blush¬ ing at her own indecision, she would have proceeded, had not the baron thrown himself before her. 44 Not, lady, until you graciously ac¬ cede to my request. The earl of Glou¬ cester would himself season the sorrows he has to disclose." 44 You part not hence to-morrow ?" asked Isabel. 44 Heaven forefend ! yet ere to-mor¬ row grant me favour, lest circumstances, vol. ιί. η and
and pressing interest, crave time and counsel" Isabel mused fbr a moment ; it was the cause of friendship; it was /eal for the peace of Margaret, and all of reluctance, all of fastidious scruple vanished.«—* 4 At the close of the vesper-service,' 1 she pro¬ nounced, i4 we will linger in the chapel." It ib not fbr us to analyze the feelings of the heart ; to recount the varying emo¬ tions, combating and dissipating the en¬ joined cahn of duvutiou ; tu portray the impatience which leadened the harangue of father Clement, or the tumultuous joy, the ungovernable wishes, filling the breasts of the luvers. Tlie parting ben ison was given, and the lady abbess, the nuns, and the con¬ fessor* departed in peace: not so, the hapkss Margaret, the anxious Isabel: they tarried in fevered expectancy; they clung to each other fbr favour and for .support: and when Gloucester and De Hernigande stole swiftly up the aisle, their
their limbs trembled, and their hearts waxed cold within them. 44 What need we fear?" sighed Marga- ret; fi tis duty, 'tis the warmth of filial love, which dares to the venture. Ah, my friend !" and then she paused, for Gloucester lay at her fevt, hi.s respira¬ tion laboured, his face pale as the wan beam piercing through the easement. Margaret recalled the moment, when ghastly in wounds and in blootl, he was born senseless into the court-yard ; when stricken ahnost unto death, he lay as one felled by the icy dart of the tyrant: she bent over him ; she looked down upon him; she met his eyes, and 1кг own beamed with gladness:—it was the lan¬ guage of her soul ; it was the tremulous, the impulsive spring, of iiãimv and of sympathy. 44 Daughter of De Burgh Г articulated Gloucester— 44 daughter of my revered, my honoured guardian Г " Friend of my father!" murmured H 2 Mar-
Margaret, and tears, streaming down her cheeks, fell upon her clasped hands. 44 Yes, the friend, the avenger of the earl of Kent," exclaimed Gloucester, 44 Ladv, nıv ü'ood sword awaits but tht 1 moment for exertion; awaits to fly its scabbard in the cause of justice." 44 Avenger" repeated Margaret, all of hope withering at the sound. 44 The avenger ofhis wrongs—the vin- dieator of his honour," pursued the earl 44 Already have I sworn on the Evange¬ lists :— ond here, in this house of prayer —in the presence of God himself; here. do í repeat the oath ; here, do I bind myself; here------" The wild sob of Margaret checked the solenni asseveration ; she stood marbled though in life; tintless as the sepulchral slab against which she rested :—it was no common feeling, it was no passing in¬ terest which lagged the pulses of her bosom: emotions, transient and slight, may call the blood into the cheeks ; but it
it must be emotion, profound and deep, which drives it back into the heart ! " Lady," said Gloucester, laying his spread hand upon his breast, " 'tis gra¬ titude and affection which weds me to the ruined fortunes of your house ; 'tis the warmest impulses of the soul, which bind me eternally to your services." As he spoke, he bowed his face upon her hand, and soothingly sealed his lips upon it, vvith an expression, with a sympathy, whieh from gall changed her tears to balm. A new, an unknown, an indescribable sensation, pervaded her whole being; it was gratitude for favour—it was firm re¬ liance—it was infant love! Unthinking Margaret ' she gazed upon the manly form before her; she list ened to the ho¬ neyed pleadings ofhis accent, until every pang of the past, became absorbed in the magic of the present ; until, all of hope, of expectation, and of bliss, became con¬ centrated in his approval. и 3 " Time
"Time wears, dearest Margaret," whis¬ pered Isabel, " and anon our absence may be noted." Gloucester turned on her a glance of reproach, for not all the sophistry of De Hernigande could lull her into security. " Tarry yet a moment," implored Mar¬ garet, rallying into exertion, and press¬ ing down the heaving agony of her bo¬ som. 4t I would question of my parents, my lord. Alas! I remember nought, save confused and gloomy images, save the wrath of the royal Henry, and the overthrow of hope" 44 You have been immured within these walls for years," said Gloucester, thoughtfully ; 4i you have been sheltered from ought of outward peril" " Ah ! and I have been withheld from my dearest ties," sighed Margaret—" I have been estranged, cast off, torn from the parents that gave me being—I have been here, as one dead, as one, lost, for¬ gotten." 44 And
44 And would you go hence?" eagerly questioned Gloucester — 4< would yon brave the inconstant world? — would you, sw r eet maiden," and his voice soft¬ ened to entreaty— 4ť would you trust the ward of your noble father ?" 44 If ¿ather—if mother, remained to shelter my helplessness," replied Marga¬ ret : " yes, my lord 3 I ivould fly, I would journey, barefoot and alone—-1 would endure every hardship-«-! would smile at every i lì, to gain their blessing." ci Angelic ivoman ! lovely, heroic Slar- ifarct!" and Gloucester, clasping her pas¬ sive band, looked more than his lips ut¬ tered. 44 We must away," urged Isabel : ·■ think, should we be missed in the re- fectorv—sliould we be sought for—should we be found------ '* 44 Should it be so," rejoined the earl, 44 then will I proclaim, and glory in my zeal for the happiness of the lady Mar¬ garet de Burnii." н 4 " And
44 And I ?" asked Isabel. 44 1 will be your champion, lady," ex¬ claimed De Hernigande, " and shield you with my life." " God wot ! I thank thee," said Isa¬ bel ; " but I need no companion, my lord, for I would steer clear ofall peril." 44 The peril lie with us," gallantly ob¬ served the baron ; " alack, ladv ! the ' * tf peril of eyes, rather than the peril of tongues." " Out upon thee!" replied Isabel, 4i though 'tis but the wages of our own hardihood." And then again address¬ ing the lady Margaret—" Be brieft I pray thee, if thou wouidst question fur¬ ther." Margaret turned on Gloucester a look of supplication.— 44 You hear, my lord," she faltered : " let me not part in igno¬ rance; doom me not to incertitude and suspense : already does my spirit fail me, for sure, had my parents lived, they had not forgotten their child." 44 Adverse
44 Adverse circumstance;??," remarked the earl, 4< often counteract our dearest plans : man, at best, is the creature of circumstances, and hurried down the stream, his own struggles are vain and futile." 44 What mean you, my lord?" 44 1 mean," pursued Gloucester, 44 that however hope may be clouded, her hea¬ venward ray has not quite set." 44 My father !—my mother !" and Mar¬ garet, panting and eager, cast herself on her knees before him. 4i Oh ! tell me, does my father—does my mother live?" Gloucester snatched her from the earth.— " Not so," he murmured. 44 An¬ gel !—lady, kneel not to me ; to me, who craves no brighter glory than your service." Margaret bent her burning face upon lier bosom, till rallying into exertion and courage— ťí Fear me not," she ex¬ claimed ; * 4 however weakness appertain to woman, I can bear, with more than H 5 woman's
woman's strength, the blow of mortal ill." " First, body your remembrances/' said Gloucester; "tell me, lady, to what point you can woof the web of crooked destiny ?" 44 Alas !" sighed Margaret, " memory is treacherous, or rather, the memory of early childhood, like the ignited vapour flickering and beguiling, is too evanes¬ cent to rest upon." 44 Then you know nought beyond your tarrying in this convent ?" 44 Yes, I remember something, oí woods, and mountains, and green pas¬ tures ; and the blue heavens, floating on a stream of silver ; and------" 66 The castle of Grossmont," interrupt¬ ed the earl : " the river Monnow ; the Hatterel hills." " And I remember, too, climbing the knee of a brave warrior, and seeing my own face in the bright bosses of his ar¬ mour." 44 Your
44 Your father f your »rallant fiither r exclaimed Gloucester. è * And a kind fair lady/ 7 pursued Mar¬ garet, *' decked in a farthingale of sable velvet; her partiet, rivalling the snow ; her pantofies of azure," " Holy (rod ! your mother! your royal motlier! in grace, in loveh ness» scarce se¬ condary to yourvlt'" " But say, lady"—with almost breath¬ less interest—** remember you nought beyond '<*—nought of reverse—nought of »orrow ?** " Alas! ìis all vague, all misshapen," »»¡¿»lied Margaret; ** yet surely, reverse and sorrow, speaketh in my sojourn at St. MaryV' 44 Know you ought of sir Thomas Lau¬ rence ?" asked Gloucester ; * 4 of the Knight-Templar, who so zealously ad¬ vocated your father's cause; whose mys¬ terious disappearance, thickened, even to ebon darkness, every cloud gathering around vour house?" n 6 " No
44 No, nought, my lord—nought, be¬ yond the shrieks of my mother—nought, beyond the fea dul absence of my father/* " Nought of the royal Margaret's so- journ at St. Kdinonďs-Bury,** eagerly re¬ sumed Gloucester: " nought of the in¬ tercepted visit of the earl of Kent—of— of------" He ceased; he turned aside lm face to veil his feelings. ** No, the saints bear me witness," re¬ sponded 3Iargaret, 4 * nought appertain¬ ing to the world since I became a boarder at Nuneaton. But pri>ceed, my lord : tell me nil ; tell me who to bless, and who to pray for*»*" *· To bless—to pray for," repeated the earl. * 4 I would bless my father's friends," 4iud Margaret—** I would pray for my íatheťs foes." ·* Exalted, noble girl f would you pray for the foes of your house?—for the foes of your country ? * * 4 1 would pray for their conversion," sighed
sighed Margaret ; * 4 I would pray God, to grant them favour, to renew a right apirit within them." " Then pray for Henry Plantagenet, 4 ' pronounced Gloucester; ** pray tor the tyrant uho wields tlie sceptre of this realm. ** " The king! 1 alike ejaculated Marga¬ ret and Label. "The king," repeated the earl; " the nephew oí the magnanimous Richard— but ah ! as unlike to Richard, as the sick¬ ly taper U) the mid-day sun î Nay, even his father, e\en the cruel and malicious John, withheld not the grant of our rights, the charter of our liberties." ** W t will—we do pray .for Henry Plantagenet,' said Isabel, firmly : 44 but ought we not, my lurd, rather to pray for those, who rebel agaiibt his sovereign authority ?" 44 How, lady, is it crime, to curb the growth of tyranny, to sue for justice, to vindicate the oppressed ?—is it crime, to seek
seek redress, when worse than weakness leagues against our freedom ?" " My father has taught me to think so," replied Isabel, " and my religion en¬ joins obedience to the Lord's anointed." The earl bowed his head, yet his look was vexed surprise, as his cheeks varied from pale to red. 44 Perchance," observed the baron de Hernigande, " in this holy sanctuary, ought of the worlďs currency has been excluded. Lady, the inmates of St. Mary's, can ill judge, can ill guess, our cause of provocation." 44 'Tis of small import," said Isabel, coldly : and then addressing Gloucester —" The lady Margaret, my lord, awaits the promised explanation." But the lady Margaret, confounded, sorrowing, stood, with her white hands crossed on her bo¬ som, and her eyes bent upon the ground. Gloucester too was ill fitted to the re¬ cital: he feared to awaken alarm in the breast he pined to soften ; he feared to confess
confess himself leagued with the hostile barons, lest the timid, the sensitive daughter of De Burgh, firm in her fa¬ ther's principles, should condemn his de¬ falcation : policy taught him first to sound those principles, and then might he act as occasion suited. 44 Lady," he said, 4t your noble father, was the staunch friend, the zealous ad¬ herent, the faithful counsellor of the royal Henry; was his defender iu every ill, his supporter through every exigence. But mark the fickleness of power ; mark the shallowness of profession : your fa¬ ther, through the accursed malice of fo¬ reign minions, fell from his high station: he was banished the court ; he was strip¬ ped of his honours: his very treasures, consigned to tho keeping of the prior of the Knights-Templars, were demanded, were seized, by the harpy fangs of des¬ potic power. The king, with base in¬ gratitude, yielded himself the tool of party : for however his ear might have been
been poisoned, his heart, had honour, had principle, had common feeling, pre¬ vailed, had not been steeled to the con¬ viction of former service. Your father, lady, was persecuted, welinigh unto death ; he was torn from every tie which man holds precious ; he was reviled, de¬ graded ; and though so many years have elapsed, now, even now* ------" Margaret snatched at his arm; she looked, wildly, imploringly in his face; her temples aching—her pulses throbbing —her every feature convulsed.—" Now —now," she urged; and sobbing, would have sank upon the earth, had not his arms sustained her. " Fear not, sw r eet maid," he said— 44 your father lives : and England, brave¬ ly unanimous in the cause oťthe oppress¬ ed, uniting heart and hand, will yet force the bars of his prison ; will yet restore him to the bliss of freedom : fear not : the earl of Leicester has sworn—I have sworn—Albemarle—Norfolk—Hereford De
De Gray — De Espenser—De Verdun— all, all, have sworn ; nay, and a hundred others; the heir of many a noble house; of Warwick ; of------" 44 My uncle !" interrupted Isabel, start¬ ing in wild amaze. 44 Aye, lady ; and perchance, the ba¬ ron your father." <b Never," exclaimed the energetic girl : 44 breathe not a calumny so monstrous. No, no, my lord, my life would I tax on the fealty of my family." 44 You are sceptical, fair lady," forcing a smile ; " but the mists of prejudice of¬ ten vanish before the bright sun of con¬ viction"—And then again turning to Margaret, he read in her mild and beamy countenance, ought save disapproval : his own heart wildly throbbed ; his own spirit rose in buoyant exultation : he traced preference; he deciphered love's magic hieroglyphick, in the stolen glance of her eye, in the swelling sigh of her bosom. — " Daughter of my revered friend,
friend, of my honoured guardian," he whispered, 44 teach me how r to sue—how best to win your favour." But Margareťs thoughts had flown to her father—to his lone prison—to his cheerless solitude.—"So hopeless, so hap¬ less, so persecuted/ she faltered. " Л esu Maria ! does my rather live ?—does the brightness ofhis fame—does the meridian ofhis glory, set in chains and in woe?" 44 The earl of Kent lives for revenge," exclaimed Gloucester; " lives to call down reprisal on the head of his perse¬ cutors ; lives in the castle of the Devizes —and dire for his foes will be the hour of his enlargement." ifc And my royal mother?" asked .he anxious Margaret, A slight convulsion agitated the fea¬ tures of the earl—he hesitated—he turn¬ ed aside his face. " What mean you?" eagerly demand¬ ed Margaret. " Say, my lord, ivhat of this fearful prelude?" Still
Still Gloucester spoke not; neither did he raise his eyes from the lap of earth, till roused by the pressure of her soft arms, clasping his knees in urgent suplication.—" Of my mother," she sob¬ bed out— 4 ' what—what of my mother?" 44 Hope the best," implored the earl, striving lo raise and to т cassure: then after the pause of a moment, " The countess, your mother, lives, lady ; but plunged, as ï have been, in the turmoils and the pursuits of the world, to me the place oť her sojourn is unknown." Long after Margaret had regained the solitude ol' her own little chamber, did the words of the earl of Gloucester dwell upon her ear; did his looks, did his man¬ ner, "milise a softly stealing poison o'er her senses. It was passion in its infant state—it was the illusions of love, ere yet love had learned to tyrannize ! She thought of the wrongs of her father— she thought of the sorrows ofher mother -—yet more did she think of the moment V» of
of parting in the chapel, of the warm sigh, of the ardent prayer for a second meeting. She had smiled at the whis¬ pered assignation ; and now did she bury that assignation even from the know¬ ledge of Isabel ; bury it deep in her own heart, as too sacred, too precious for dis¬ closure. Her rest was perturbed and broken ; her imagination crowded with a thousand fantasies : she had heard some¬ thing of rescue ; something of a lawless combination of strength and power ; Gloucester had acknowledged himself an active partizan; he laboured íbr the en¬ franchisement of her father: ancl could her young mind hai Lour ought of sus¬ picion against his honour?—coukl she, for a moment, tax him with disloyalty and crime? No—it was humanity, it was gratitude, it was heroic godlike pa¬ triotism, which spoke in his every ac¬ tion : he would but file awav the chains of slavery; he would but ligiiten the burden of a groaning land ! Unthink¬ ing,
ing, mistaken Margaret! she dreamt not, that self-aggrandizement, the love of rule, or the restlessness of fitful and daring spirits, laying the train of civil discord, ever fans the blood-red flame of anarchy ; that the hardy fomenter of strife and mischief, rousing, instigating, luring from submission and from fealty, yields to the spur of individual interest, rather than to (night of public service! Isabel, too, retired with thought in her heart; retired to meditate, not to sleep. She had listened to the acknow¬ ledged defalcation of Gloucester and De Hernigande, and horror and aversion augmented as her fears gathered. There lurked no interest in her bosom, to qua¬ lify the heinous crime of disloyalty ; no absolving medium, to mask treason in subtle guise : she saw it as it was, strip¬ ped of all its colourings, bare, deformed, monstrous ; she saw it, and she trembled : she recalled, among the swollen list of the disaffected, the enumerated name of War-
Warwick's heir, and she wept beneath the sting of wounded pride and morti¬ fied feeling. " The brother of my mother, leagued with the enemies of the king," she eja¬ culated : " confounded in one swollen mass, abetting, weaving, the black and garbled mesh of treason : but not my father—not William—not Hubert ! ,God be praised* 1 —and the wild flush of joy dried every tear from her cheek—" the honour, the unblenched fanie of my fii¬ tlier's house, is yet untainted !" Long and feelingly did she deplore the sufferings of the earl of Kent; did she muse o'er the tale of his hardships and his sorrows; yet they yielded no plea, where vvith to absolve Gloucester from his sworn allegiance; no sanction, for the mad venture of public tranquillity, " Doubtless," she mused, 4 * he has augmented the seeming injustice; he has magnified the shadow of wrong, more effectually to soften dereliction ; he has played
played upon the sensitive heart of the daughter, to extort acquittal, to blanch the black die of his own deeds. Poor Margaret ! she has listened to the in¬ flated policy, and she needeth nought further of these artful men. Would to Heaven, they had never crossed the threshold of St. Mary's !—w r ould to Hea¬ ven, they had never borne within this pure haven of peace, the rankling worm of rue and hate í Already has it tainted her gentle spirit, and given her to dis¬ satisfaction and to sorrow ; already has it poisoned the promise of her youthful days, and hung the holy calling of reli¬ gion, in a shroud of the deepest gloom ! Yet, Gloucester, yet, De Hernigande, will I pray for thee; will I pray for par¬ don on thy trespasses, and grace on thy backslidings : for the cold and deliberate system, with which thou wouidst let loose upon us, the fiends of civil discord, and pour out the quenchless fire of party hate·—the deadly crime of conspiracy— the
the black and garbled complotting of treason, craveth all the prayers of the pious and the peaceful/'
CHAP-
CHAPTER VI. ---------- -»Oli, lite, vvhere Jb thv pleasure ? —, ---------- ()h, w oi ld, w hei е ь thy glory ! Leľ.
——------1 lime set my hie upon a ca¡>t, And I will btaiid the hazuid^of the dye. bHAKEsPEARfc, Тш: return of father Gilbert, from a vi¬ hit to the brethren of bis order at Tick- ford, dissipated the dream of peace, which had long paralyzed the feelings and the actions of the baron of Hanslape. Plunged in the trance of negative exist¬ ence; wrapt in profound obscurity; de¬ voting time, and strength, and spirit, to deeds of holiness ; labouring for heaven through prvation, endurance, and self- infliction ; striving to aone for the omis¬ sions of youth, in the rigidity of hea tth- consuming penance ; spnding the mid* vol. n. ι night
night oil in lonely vigils; feeding the early prejudices of bigotry and educa¬ tion, and living, with the fatal denounce¬ ment of the Knight-Templar knolling the death-knell in his ear—he had pic¬ tured in the world, nought save peace and acquiescence among men ; nought save submission and uniform conformitv. Astounding, overwhelming, was the blow, lurking in the wan and care-worn countenance of the pious Gilbert : ere his tongue proclaimed the tale, his brow, " —— --------------- Like ïi . a tnU-li;.î', I í'jť'í-rfitl t Lc и .luve uť i; íííbjyí.' volumi .'* He strode into the chamber; he stood. spiritless, motionless, statue-like, before the baron, and William, and Hubert; he glanced alternately upon each, and then hc uttered a groan, as though his very heart-strings were cracking. 44 What am I to learn ?" asked the ba¬ ron. William rivetted his eyes upon the confessor—Hubert impulsively sprung to his side. 44 Satan
êi Satan is let loose among men," ex¬ claimed the holy Gilbert : (i the dove of peace is fled : and troops of turbulent, and dark, and wicked spirits, scatter guilt, and blasphemy, and woe, and ruin, throughout the land.'' 44 Sure, father, the lying tongue of ru¬ mour has welinigh crazed you,' said the incredulous Hanslape. 44 Not so—not rumour/' rejoined the confessor; i( but proof, sterling, stub¬ born proof. The king has sought sanc¬ tuary in the Tower—the Londoners are in arms—prince Edward, ill abh* to breast the raging torrent :—and Eng¬ land, convulsed as by a mightv earth¬ quake, heaves and throes, beneath the labours oi* her rebellious sons." The baron stepped fearfully Lack— " Mighty God !" he ejaculated, ·· the king, abandoned, outraged : the king — ι —" Then slowly numbering i\L· beads, and meekly crossing his breast— 4i If it be thy will, oh Father, thy will be done !" ι 2 «The
44 The king," pursued the scared and terror-struck monk ; 44 the kind, the gentle, the pious father of his people i the meek disciple of the lowly Jesus ! tlie patient follower of virtue and hu¬ mility-— c visiting the poor and feeble ; dealing large alms, nor refusing to kiss the sick and the leprous'—the king— the Lord's anointed !—Alas ! alas !" and he wrung his hands in anguish. 4i Pious men, with heart-breakings, tears, and deadly groans, declare, 'tis better to die, than to see the miseries of the nation," Hubert trembled ; for Hubert traced the infuriate passions, like internal fires, boiling» bubbling, bursting in the breast of his friend ; he saw, in his convulsed and agitated features, the ivild workings of his distempered mind ; he saw him, tremulous as the aspen, wan, tintless as fabled fear. 44 In every corner of wretched Eng¬ land," resumed the confessor, lost to all, save his on n appalling story, " the trai¬ torous
torous nobles, caballing, complotting, are spurring on to deeds of violence and blood. At AA r olverton, the baron de Longville harbours a locust herd: at Newport-Pagnel, the hot-brained earl of Albemarle, together with the reprobate Simon de Montford, treading in the steps of his rebel father, now sojourns with the lord Fuik de Pagenel :—aye, and ihe sun veils not his face, and the stars of heaven wax not # paler. Fatal laxity of all that is moral ! dire overthrow of all that is good ! The devil is let loose upon the earth, and man, left to wallow in the filth of his own misdeeds." Here was explanation, dreadful ex¬ planation, of all that was mysterious in the actions of De Maudit —of his night visit to Newport-Pagnel—of the cau¬ tious stealth of his return. Hubert glanced towards him, and fearfully did he shudder, for he saw him proudly un¬ bending ; he read bold and daring defi¬ ance, in the now-crimsoned glow of his ι 3 cheek,
cheek, in the smile, the sneer, curling his lip. 44 The mischief spreads like subtle poison," continued the holy Gilbert, af¬ ter a pause for breath ; 4 · it steals into every hoi el; it jaundices the lifeblood of confo! mitv -md Mibordinatiom Well rnay the king rally to his aid, his foreign friend« and relatives : God wot ! he needs their swords, to defend his crown and realm, to force his proud rebellious subjects to obedience' Oh spirits ot the just ' matriculated saints and mar¬ tyrs * so meek, so pious so unearthly! Even his mortili foe, Lewellen prince of Wales, confesses, ť he more fears the alms-deeds which the king docth, thau all the men of war which he hath, and the whole clergy put together/ And shall his native subjects born to obe¬ dience and to honour— diali the nobles of England, high in courage and renown —shall they blot away their ancient glory—shall the}, like death-doomed parricides,
parricides, raise their arms in defiance— shall they, like rank and worthless trai¬ tors, war against Omnipotence, in the majesty of tiieir king !" A hundred, and a hundred times, in listening to the fearful recital, to tb.e ifiant strides of disaffection and insubor- dination, did the baron drop his beads ; did he cross his breast and forehead ; did he groan in the bitterness of his spirit : yet he spoke not; he filled not up the fearful pause of the confessor; he stood, confounded, horror-struck, turned as it were to stone; snatched back from his dream of heaven, and plunged into all the turmoils, the strifes, and the vices of the world. Was it the voice of his son—was İt the voice of his own Wil¬ liam, whieh quickened ihe pulses ai his heart—whieh taught him, that indi¬ vidual woe ivas yet more pungent ? " Nought of blot can sully the ar¬ chives of a true patriot," said De Mau¬ dit, glancing fire on the moak. " Father, Ι ·4 I would
I would take up the gauntlet in face of worlds." Hubert had long traced the storm brewing in the turbulent passions of William : he saw the first electric flash burst on the sensitive nerves of the ba¬ ron ; he saw his start of agony ; he de¬ ciphered his look of indecision, of com¬ bating doubt and horror, and his owrn heart sickened, his own spirit quailed for the issue. 44 You," ejaculated the confessor, in an accent of stern inquiry. " Yes, I," rejoined De Maudit " My own experience, my own observation, tells me------" Hubert grasped his arm.— 44 Forbear ! forbear !" he implored ; 4ť the subject is too tender to be lightly handled." * 4 Were it tender as woman's repu¬ tation," exclaimed William, " yet would I affirm prejudice to be ill fitted for judgment. My lot has been cast among the nobles so heavily arraigned. I know the
the earl of Leicester: I joy in the friendship of his sons, Simon, and Hen¬ ry, and Guy de Montford : I know Al¬ bemarle and Gloucester, and the lord Fuik de Pagenel: —and though the king be pious ; though he purchase the prayers of beneficiaries ; though, in his house of converts (b), he has reared up a pile unto holiness—in his hospital at Oxford (c), he has ensured the good¬ will of the ailing and the wayfaring— still they exempt him not from the crime of misrule ; they purge him not from the foul taint of injustice and ty¬ ranny." 44 Misrule — injustice — tyranny Γ e- choed the amazed confessor— 4 * God fore¬ fend us all ! Vain boy, better read your breviary, than wantonly meddle in things so sacred." 44 Tis but the random speech of thoughtless youth," observed the baron, willing to uphold the culprit, and anx¬ ious to soften down the rising ire of the ι 5 monk:
monk î then addressing De Maudit : " Your terms are unseemly, my son : the king may be misled, but he cannot be unjust." " De Burgh," pronounced William, and he shuddered as he spoke. " The king may be misled—perhaps, he has been misled," replied Hanslape : " but the Lord's anointed ; to rebel a- gainst the Lord's anointed, is to rebel against Heaven." " The king is but man," said William, turning his face from the keen and searching glance of his father. " The king is more than man," ea¬ gerly resumed the baron. " God's vice¬ gerent upon earth, he bears a solemn, a holy ministration ; he ----- -" " And he must answer it hereafter," interrupted De Maudit. " But his defalcation will not soften our defalcation," pursued the baron, wil¬ ling yet further to try him ; " neither, will his talent, idly squandered, yield one
one tittle to our store. The policy of wicked men, my son, is too darkly in¬ tricate, for youth and honour to deci¬ pher :·—we must leave them to them¬ selves, my Wiliam, and pray God to grant us discretion and conduct." William smiled sceptically.—" We may drag the chain until we feel not the rivet," he remarked. " England groans beneath her bonds. Heedless of his legitimate subjects, the king, the misjudging Henry------" William—William, this is a lan¬ guage, I must not hear, I cannot tole¬ rate; a language, filling me with dis¬ trust and dread. I pictured it the idle banter of opposing argument : withdraw not then the fillet from before mine eyes." " The language of truth and feeling," solemnly pronounced De Maudit ; " of strong conviction, my father, and of de¬ liberate choice." « Do I liver asked Hanslape, start- i 6 ing
ing as though an aöp had crossed him. " Do my ears mock my other senses, or is the poisoned barb aimed by the hand I trusted ? God !—God of omnipotence and justice ! be there a curse more subtle ; be there a recognisance more weighty; be there a judgment, more summary, more awful than another— visit them—heap them—pour them down upon the disseminators of treason, upon the abettors of treason, upon——" " Hold ! hold, my father !" and De Maudit, with one bound, stood, blood¬ less, gasping before him. " Why this agitation ?—-why this anxiety in a cause so reprobate?" " You know not who you curse," said Wiiliam, emphatically. " Be it my own blood," firmly pro¬ nounced the baron, " in life, and in death, still do I curse the rebel to his king!" Electric was the start, was the shud¬ der of William ; his every limb quiver¬ ed;
ed ; his breath became laboured ; his fea¬ tures dreadfully convulsed ; he tried to fly, but he could only stagger a few paces, and then he fell senseless on the floor. The first impulse, was terror, was lin¬ gering tenderness, was nature tugging at the heart-strings, was paternal affec¬ tion, which bent Hanslape over the un¬ conscious form of his son : but the lapse was momentary ; the indulgence, flitting as thought : he snatched his hand from the damp cold forehead ; he shrunk away in wild horror ; he closed his eyes against ought to seduce and weaken re¬ solution. 44 St. Dunstan is passed," he muttered, 44 yet is this the heaviest day of my life; the bitterest ill ; the most irremediable sorrow !" Then turning to the astound¬ ed confessor—" Aid him, father," he solemnly continued; " through Goďs grace, awaken him to consciousness ; for he needeth whole years, to bleach, by repentance,
repentance, the crimson dye of his sins." He east noťone glance ; he lingered not the twinkling of an eye-beam ; but hur¬ rying from the chamber, he fled to his own oratory, to seek peace, or rather re¬ signation, in the solemn rites of his wor¬ ship. Hubert, with a tortured spirit, saw the dire mildew, the deadly besom, sweeping o'er the peace, the honour, and the hopes of Hanslape ; saw every pro¬ mise blighted, every prospect humbled to the dust; and his tears streamed upon the wan cheeks of William, and his sighs mingled, with the woe, and the lamentation, of the holy Gilbert. Throughout the castle, dismay and consternation reigned : the aged Geoffry tore his grey locks in despair ; and every servant in the household, partook of the general wretchedness. It was cold du¬ ty, severing the father from the appa¬ rently death-bier of the son :—it was the soft, felled and sf rieken, by the awfu! anathema
anathema of the father :—4t was wrath —it was divine wrath, scourging with undeviating rigour, the early negligence rt-í 1 fka ία f II л*· * ___·■*" чхмс 4"\ъжь -РгигалУкпЛчПгГ QI ЬПе laXilç* .——ιν ψψ tía %,\ж%* *vivmv/uj4j¿ annunciation of the Knight-Templar, magnified through the medium of su¬ perstition, and heaping red-hot coals of retributive fire, in the mourned defalca¬ tion of the son. A vein was breathed, and many a specific essayed, ere De Maudit broke the bonds of temporary death ; ere he revived to exertion ; ere he met the pitying glance of Hubert, and the stern frown of the confessor ; nay, even then, his memory was confused, and his fancy fevered ; images of horror flitted around him ; appalling reality deepened the inky dye of his fate. " I would be alone," he murmured-— " I would be left to my own reflections." Hubert quitted not his station. " Go to my father, holy sir," addressing the confessor: " brace his mind to fortitude : exert
exert your province : teach hira, acqui¬ escence and resignation, under the judg¬ ments of Heaven." ** It m the corrupt and festering wound, which craveth the probe and the plaster/ replied the monk. 44 The son of grace, beareth grace in his heart : it is the backsliding, the renegade to order, who needeth the prayers of the church." ·* I woulei be alone, father," repeated De Maudit ; " my røind, at another season, may be better fitted for exor¬ diums." " God grant it !" aspirated the monk, yet still he lingered. " Leave me—leave me," urged Wil¬ liam, writhing in the gall of his feel¬ ings. Father Gilbert moved towards the door.—" God prosper your just efforts !" he solemnly pronounced—" God, in his mercy, restore to us again, the blessed peace you have frightened Γ " Amen !"
" Amen !" ejaculated Hubert—Wil¬ liam only betrayed impatience. Scarce had the door closed upon the receding form of the monk ; scarce had the echo of his footsteps sank to silence, when casting himself from the couch, De Maudit, with cold and frightful calmness, stood before Hubert.—" The ban is pronounced," he exclaimed ; " the awful ban of my father :—he has cursed me, and fate has nothing worse in store." " Say not so," implored Hubert. " Dearest William, it was but the ebul¬ lition of wounded feeling, of disappoint¬ ed hope : anon, will your own submis¬ sion revoke the curse ; and your father —our father—my brother, in his heart's tears, will wash away, all its bitterness, all its rancour." William broke from the trammelling hold of friendship.—" It is too late— much too late," he said, solemnly : " on ray brain—on my soul, lie stamped the issue
issue of this day : not all the waves of ocean can wash out the record." " Will you not humble yourself to your own fatlier?" fearfully questioned Hubert— <4 will you not submit yourself to his mercy ? Cast yourself at his feet ; confess, deplore your errors, your fearful lapse." " What, and lie to cheat him into peace ?" " Lie," echoed the astounded Hubert. 44 If I speak him truth," pursued De Maudit, * s he may load me with a curse yet heavier than before. No—no, Hu¬ bert, I must creep away with the pre¬ sent curse upon my head ; or, I must forget it, I must drown it, in the busy cares of the world." *' Whither would you go ?" demand¬ ed the agitated Hubert. " To Newport-Pagnel; to those friends, for whom I have bartered the blessing of my father. Stay me not : by the souls of the
the just, I pass not another night at Hanslape !" Hubert cast himself before him ; he grasped his knees ; he looked imploring¬ ly in his face.—" If you value the life, the reason of your father, I adjure you stay," he exclaimed; " if you have a heart; if—if------" 44 1 have no heart—my heart is turned to stone," interrupted William—" I am all over ruin ; plunged to the very ears in plot and treason—I am------" 44 Yet is there way to escape," eagerly rejoined Hubert: " the blow, not struck, may be repented of." " But the blow is struck," wildly; " the blow was struck, in the curse of my father." 44 No—no—no ; repentance, atonement, restitution, may expiate all." " As how ?" and De Maudit, looked doubtfully, anxiously towards him. " By acknowledging the fearful lapse; by
by unravelling the black and garbled mesh, which hell itself has woven." " What," in a voice of stern reproach, " and betray my friends, and perjure my¬ self in the sight of heaven ? No, Hubert, not to save my body from tbe rack—not to snatch my immortal soul from perdi¬ tion." Hubert shuddered. " You know me not," with determined firmness. " 1 may be weak, but not treacherous; I may be the slave of feeling, but not the selfish betrayer of confidence and trust. No more—I pray you, no more: the physician"—and he forced a sickly smile — ťť who traces not the deepest fibre of disease, may tamper with, but cannot heal his patient. Now, leave me, dearest Hubert : in an exigence like the present, time and reflection, can alone restore the healthful temperature of the blood;— leave me; your thoughts, and your pray¬ ers, be my coveted guerdon." Still Hubert lingered ; still his heart clung to the companion of his youth ; still
still compassion, affection, betraying ten¬ derness, combated all ofhis better judg¬ ment.—" I cannot leave you thus unsa¬ tisfied," he exclaimed ; " I cannot depart, with my mind goaded by the scorpions of suspense. Promise to do nothing rashly, William, and I will strive to tran¬ quillize my feelings?" " I promise to act but upon due deli¬ beration," said De Maudit. " Now, go to mv father : sooth him ; lure him back to peace. Tell him·------" A sob arose— it choked—it silenced, spite of the strug¬ gle for fortitude: fora moment, he hung around the neck of Hubert ; for a mo¬ ment, he strained him with energy and feeling; then suddenly starting away, " Now leave me—leave me ; if you va¬ lue my honour—if you value my re¬ pose." 44 A moment—only a moment," urged Hubert. "What shall I tell him?— what healing balsam shall I convey ? Sa¬ vour it with words of promise, dearest William,
William, for sorrow rankles in your fa¬ ther's heart." William trembled in every limb.— 4i I need no further probe," he murmured— 44 1 feel it—I know it all : 'tis gall, worm¬ wood—but no matter. Say to my fa¬ ther, that I love, respect, reverence; that I deplore—that·—that------ Hay to him, my heart weeps blood fbr evu y tear he Jheds:—say to him, that I wv.uid crawl upon my knee**, that I would grovel in the dust, to blot away his curse-—to win back his blessing." Alas ! it was but the exchange of woe for woe; it was but trial treading upon the heels of trial î Hubert lieard the low plaints, the lamentations of the baron, ere yet he reached the door of the oratory ; and when he entered the oratorv, he found him, with every nerve racked, every feel¬ ing tortured : he was pacing the narrow space with a hurried stride; his arms folded ; his face half bent, and the quick¬ ness of his respiration, and the alternate fading
fading and flushing of his cheek, speak¬ ing the powerful agitation within. He turned to Hubert, and he fixed on him an eye of anguish ; he ardently strove to rise above the cares oť earth, but earth- bom afiection clogged and held him clown in bondage. — " What of the wretched boy?" he asked. Hubert murmured something of his revival — something of humbleness of spirit—something of mortal grief: but Hanslape heeded hhn not: AVilliam Ii л ed, and the lapse and the guilt of Wil¬ liam became deepened :—for such, alas ! is human nature, forgiveness too often lingens, until the culprit is snatched be¬ yond the boon. ťí I could have seen him, stretched, gasping, dying, before ше," groan od forth the tortured father; " I could have felt the welling blood, upon my hands, upon my heart : ail, all, I could have borne— all, all, but his dishonour. Leagued writh the traitors to his king ; warring against hib
his liege lord. My son— De Maudit — my son—no, no,"—and his start was frenzy—" I have no son—I have but one child now; one natural blameless ehild. You shall hie to Nuneaton, dear Hu¬ bert"—in all the rapidity of despair— 44 you shall bring hither my Isabel, that I may bless her and die." Hubert wept, and wdien he could find words, when he could urge consolation, the baron shrunk awav in horror. 14 Preach not of comfort," he exclaim¬ ed ; " comfort and I have parted fbr ever, William î AVilliam i would that I had never suffered thee from my presence î would that I had never exposed thee to the poison of infection ! Oh God î Oh God !" wildly pacing the chamber, " do I live to curse the brother of my Alice ! to curse the son——" "Not—not William," and Hubert precipitated himseif on the neck of Han- slape. " Benefactor ! friend ! more-— more than father! revoke the hasty curse: it
it was your lips—it was not your heart which framed it: yield back the coveted blessing, that Heaven may smile upon the gracious boon." " Think you," and the baron spoke with bitterness, " I can separate the ac¬ tor from the action ? —think you, I can uphold the traitor, and execrate the trea¬ son ? No, Hubert. AVilliam has dared the forfeit ; he knew loyalty to be wrought and fashioned in my very mar* row, and yet he has blasted the fairest hopes of promise ■ the crown of martyr¬ dom may be won, but the palm of earth¬ ly triumph, has passed away, is gone in his apostacy.'" " Oil ! talk not thus, my lord ; talk not thus, I beseech vou." "Nay, I must more than talk — I must act, dear boy, be the effort ever so painful : henceforth, I must forget all claim; henceforth, I must pluck away all of betraying nature: 1 must stand forth the champion of outraged majesty, vol. il к and
and wield the sword in lieu of a youn¬ ger man. Perchance, destiny raay cross our weapons ; perchance------" The thought was too agonizing; he moved quickly to the step of the little altar, then bent his knee, as though to pray against himself. Long and solemn was the pious com¬ mune of the baron ; he noted not the stifling sighs of Hubert, neither did he perceive the entrance of father Gilbert : and when he did arise, it was with re- strimg fortitude, with fresh tempered re¬ solution ; he seemed to have divorced all of misgiving tenderness, to have rallied back, all the fire, and all the heroism of his days of glory ; he seemed to awaken to the fearful storm of the times, to sink every vestige of human weakness in the energy of the warrior. 44 Father," he exclaimed, turning abruptly to the confessor, 4t we must unfurl the blood-red banner; we must man Hanslape; we must rally all our strength,
strength, from the stripling youth, up to the beard of snow. God wot ! the ene¬ my may darken our portals ere even¬ tide." " De Maudit be our indemnity," said the monk. The baron gnawed his lip.—" We need no indemnity, holy sir: we will meet them with right tempered steel ; for, by the gage of my knighthood, the greeting shall be a warm one !" "As yet," observed the confessor, "the dog does but bay. The cockatrice need¬ eth the ripening sunbeam, wherewith to escape the egg-shell. No, my lord, treason, lurking in holes and dens, shews not her shameless front, until she attain full vigour : trust me, many a midnight meeting must ensue, ere the field be taken." " And shall I sufler one firebrand to escape?" exclaimed Hanslape, actuated by sudden thought—" shall I strengthen к 2 the
the hellish league, by weakly yielding up a known auxiliary ?" Father Gilbert—Hubert, alike looked anxiously toward him. " William de Maudit," pursued the baron> with firm decision, " here, be¬ neath the roof of his ancestors, shall be holden as our prisoner: we will hem him in ; we will retain bim, in despite of him¬ self." " Think you," questioned the monk, awakening from profound thought, "that the poison extend not beyond the poor misguided youth ?—that the vassals, that the members of the household------" He ceased, for the eyes of the baron flashed a fire almost scathing; he looked indeed the champion of the cause he advocated ; his heart felt to swell, his spirit to tower into defiance. " Should it prove so," he pronounced ; " should ought of treason shew itselfi though it involve the oldest, and the best,
best, and the most trusted of all my fol¬ lowers, ere the sun set on the plot, I swear, by bell, book, and candle, his body shall waver from the castle battle¬ ments !" Hubert turned death-sick~he clung to the firmer arm of father Gilbert—he gazed, with wonder and awe, upon the changed features of the baron : nought of languid inertness remained ; nought of shackling muffling bigotry : 'tis true, he still wore the coarse serge of penance, but exertion and vigour marked every gesture. 44 We must do nought in rashness," said the confessor, willing to check the rein of seeming decision ; " let us pray Goďs blessing on our just intentions, and wait a further hearing from the bro¬ thers of Tickford." 44 Be it so, father: but time tarrieth no man's leisure, and an hour lost, is an hour not to he regained: we must man our walls; we must furbish our arms; we K S must
must pluck down the garnish of our hall, and case ourselves in steel." " What if I journey to Newport-Pag- nel," asked the monk, ** and gather anew the flying rumours of report?" " And fall into the wiles of the confe¬ derates?" " Not so, my lord : my garb be a pass¬ port to their very councils. I will but gleam some knowledge of their strength, and straight return to Hanslape." ** I would hear of the king, of the prince Edward, of the royal cause," said the baron ; fi aye, and on my life, I would journey, barefooted to court, to warn of the treason !" '* The king," observed the confessor, " now sojourns in the Tower of London, where, doubtless, he knows all that man would wage against him." " Tarry until the morrow," said the baron, " and then do as thou listest." 44 What, if this even I commune with the poor prisoner?" asked father Gilbert; " strick-
" strickened in mind, and humbled in spirit, wot ye, but he unfold the whole plot." 44 No, no," sighed Hubert; " stickling on the point of honour, William would die, rather than betray his trust." 44 Perhaps," remarked the monk, with an expression, not far akin to the self- importance of the laity— <4 he may yield, to my experience and my arguments, á confidence, not to be imparted to youth." 44 God grant it be so !" aspirated tbe baron—" God, mercifully fashion him to repentance and to holiness ! Tell him," and his voice sank tremulous as he spoke, 44 that however my pride be blasted, however my hopes be bankrupt, his re¬ turn to duty, his known abandonment of evil, will yield somethmg of comfort to the winter of my life. Tell him," and manfully did he strive agamst his blind¬ ing tears, ťí that the arms of a fond fa- к 4 ther,
ther, can never be closed to a penitent son* 5 * " I will open to him the page of his duty," said father Gilbert—" I will ad¬ jure him, in the name of all we hold most holy : and armed in the full autho¬ rity of the church, to renounce the evil emissaries he has taken to his counsel, I will set before him, life and death, ho¬ nour and dishonour, glory and condem¬ nation ; so that, if he waver, he waver not unwarned ; if he sink, he sink not uncounselled." " T Tis his passions which wage against him," sighed the baron ; " dear father, 'tis his passions must be taken captive." " I will wrestle with him at all points," confidently rejoined the confessor : " na¬ ture gifted him with a soft heart, and if evil communication has not hardened it to stone, with Goďs favour, I will bend it, to sue pardon at your feet." As he passed towards the door, the baron snatched at his hand, hope and fear struggling
struggling in his bosom, auflud shing and fading in his cheek.—" Alack, father," he faltered, " nature is imperative, and all our boasted strength weakness ! Tell De Maudit, beyond my children"—and he cast a kindly glance on Hubert—" I have nought to do with life. Say to hini, the fatted calf shall be killed ; say to him, rejoicing and gratitude, and per¬ fect and entire concord, shall expunge all record of the past ; say ought befit¬ ting the purpose, ought to bring him to the point we wish : and the pure spirit of mercy, and the grace of God, and of our Lady, wend with you !" Father Gilbert departed, but his re¬ turn spoke consternation and dismay; his step was hurried-—his gesture wild. On the mission of peace and conciliation, bearing the olive-branch, and freighted with charity and good-will, he had as- scended to the chamber of De Maudît ; —he had knocked thrice for admission ; he had called aloud for favour:—and к 5 when,
when, with the firm nerve of authority, he lifted the latch, and crossed the thresh¬ old, mortal panic gave him wing, for the chamber of De Maudit was unte¬ nanted.
CHAP-
CHAPTER VIL Uere, here it Неь; a lump of lean by day ; And in my short, distracted, nightly ¡»lumbers, The hag that rides my dreams. Dryden.
The time is full of danger and distrust, And warns us to be wary Kowe. The seeming fortitude, which had tri¬ umphed over ill, and supported the baron of Hanslape through the exigence of the moment, yielded to the persevering si¬ lence of his fugitive son. In vain he strove to rally, to awaken all his pride, and all his resolution ; he looked to the dawn of every morrow, and every mor¬ row closed in disappointment and woe : no message, no token of grace, dappled the black and murky tempest ; he felt himself deserted, and that desertion, к б pressed
pressed as a mound of lead upon his heart.— 44 It is from God alone I must sue confort," he would say, in answer to all the arguments of Hubert—" not from man—not from ought of my own kin. William has blasted fame and hope —.William has levelled our honours to the dust." Sometimes, he ivouid gird on his sword; he would mount the battlements; he would superintend the hasty prepa¬ rations for defence; but oftener, would he shrink away from occupation, would he yield to the listlessness of despair. The return of father Gil bert from New¬ port-Pagnel, shed not one ray upon the gloomy mind of the mourner; he listen¬ ed to the fearful state of things, and he shuddered at the wide extended treason. He heard of the daring hardihood of the earl of Leicester :—of the federate nobles. under the plea of enforcing the statutes of Oxford, commencing open hostilities and carrying desolation and ruin in their stride :—
stride :—of the baron de Clifford and sir Roger de Leyburn, besieging the castle of Gloucester:—of the city of Worces¬ ter, and the town of Bridgenorth, yield¬ ing to their arms:—he heard too, that war and ruin raged in the marshes of Wales ;—that the castle of Haye and Brecknock, had surrendered to the forces of the king;—that retaliation saturated the earth in tears and blood ;—that the whole of the Cinque-Ports had revolted from their allegiance ;■—that prince Ed¬ ward had shut himself up in the castle of Windsor ;—that the royal Henry still continued in the Tower of London ;— and that the earl of Leicester, heading a powerful army, lay encamped in the park at Thistleworth. 44 And the lord Fulk de Pageiiel," asked Hanslape, wishing, yet unwilling, to name the being nearest his heart: " say, father, gleaned ye ought of the viper-nest at New port- Pagnel ?" 44 They have fled—they have one and all
all decamped," replied the confessor; " nought remains, my lord, save the con¬ viction of their treason." The baron breathed a shuddering sigh. —"Gone to dim their swords in the blood of their countrymen," he articu¬ lated ; " gone to stamp the damning die on their own fame." " Gone to swell the legions of the arch-fiend Leicester,"rejoined the monk; ťť gone to aid in the bloody feuds of civil discord." " Gone, and without one adieu," sigh¬ ed - Hanslape, forgetting at the instant, all, save the flight of De Maudit : then quick recovering himself, " God a mercy on my poor addled brain," he continued, " for too sure are my wits distraught !" " Talk we of things better fitting," urged the confessor, willing to lure from the indulgence of sorrow. " It seemeth long, my lord, since we have received tidings from Nuneaton." " Aye, poor Isabel !" and tears started into
into the eyes of the afflicted father—" I would she were now at Hanslape, that I might reap solace in her gentleness ! methinks, father," and he tried to smile, 44 the present load would be far less heavy." 44 Then why not summon her hither?" asked the monk ; " why not seek con¬ solation in Heaven's gift ?" It was an Ш -timed observation, for it recalled the death-struggle of the baroness, and it swelled the heart of the widower almost to bursting. 44 Your pardon, holy sir, I am more than weak to-day. Once, I felt myself very rich in Heaven's gifts ; nay, even now, forsooth, I am richer far than I me¬ rit; but perverseness and repining are inherent in human-nature : we dare the judgment and then we murmur at the scourge." 44 'Tis the infirmitv of the flesh," an- swered the confessor : " conceived in sin, and reared in error, we know not what is
is best fitted to ourselves; but the Lord loveth whom he chasteneth ; and remem¬ ber, through much tribulation, we must enter the kingdom of heaven." 44 Would that the chastening had met me in any other form !" sighed Hanslape, his thoughts reverting to the grievous load of existing ill. * 4 Methinks, father, I could have acted the philosopher, had my station chained me to the death-bier of both my children : our parting on earth, had yielded to the glorious hope of reunion beyond the skies : but now r ------" he ceased, for the reality was too pungent 44 Now, the prospect is not altogether desolate," said father Gilbert. The ba¬ ron raised his eyes in mute inquiry. 44 Mercy is held forth through repent¬ ance," pursued the man of God ; 44 and however hurried away by example, how¬ ever tangled in error and plunged in sin, however the slave of mad intempe¬ rance, and the easy dupe of daring de¬ pravity,
pravity, the scales may yet fall from the eyes of the deluded William." " But memory—but remembrance: father, father," and the baron spoke with trepidation, " we can never forget." 44 True, my lord, memory, and man's powers of ratiocination, are the peculiar gifts of God : forgiveness too, is the Chris¬ tian's attribute, is enjoined as a funda¬ mental basis of our faith, is the absolving medium, wherewith we supplicate grace upon our own transgressions." 44 Forgiveness! oh, that it were come to forgiveness !" sighed Hanslape—" oh, that it were come, to weeping, mourn¬ ing, drooping, sorrowing pardon ! I would take him to my bosom—I would cherish him in my heart—-I would pro¬ cure his return to honour, with the will¬ ing sacrifice of my life ! But blood— much blood, I fear me, must be shed : this wretched, this degraded country, become divided against itself; the father against the son ; the son against the fa¬ ther:
ther : all, to be strife, anarchy, and ruin : the peaceful must creep to their graves for rest, for humanity will smoke a vic- 4m to discord, and nature's self be rent in twain." 44 'Tis a direful prospect," observed the confessor ; " but, alack, true as deadly ! The malice of man is of the devil, and the devil ceaseth not to persecute our fallen race." " I would we eould project ought of remedy, ought of check, to stay the mon¬ strous evil !" said the baron. " By the rood, I would become a second Brutus, and yield up the head of my own son, to give back peace to England !" " A thousand heads would not crush the hydra," rejoined father Gilbert : " it has crept into the very church ; for some of the brothers of Tickford — I shame in the avowal — justify the fell prac¬ tices, and adhere to that arch apostate, Walter de Canteiupe." ** The bishop of Worcester !" ejaculat¬ ed
ed the amazed Hanslape, his very lips fading to the ashy hue of his forehead. 44 Aye, the bishop of Worcester," re¬ plied the monk : " he has broken his or¬ dination oath ; he has changed his crosier into the staff of defiance; he has leagued with the enemies of his king ; and now, quickens the judgment of Heaven, by his blasphemous defalcation." The baron uttered a groan of agony and horror. — " Mighty Powers !" he aspirated, " this of a catholic prelate ! this of a right reverend father in God !" " There are wolves in the pen-fold, and vultures in the dovecot," said the confessor : " who can limit the back- slidings of the unholy ?—who can put away wratii from the children of disobe¬ dience ?" 44 These—these, the boasted friends, the prized associates, of my misguided, mv lost William," faltered the wretched father. 44 Virgin Mother, gift me with patience to the end !" He stood, with his
his arms folded, with his face half bent upon his breast ; then suddenly starting — " What though I follow to the rebel camp*—dare their swords—penetrate to their secret councils-—bare my bosom to the death-stroke-—grasp, madly grasp at the knees of William, and bid him pierce his victim! Time has been," and his voice became broken and disjointed, 44 when one tear, from my eye, would have penetrated his heart ; when one ap¬ peal for pity, one single look of suppli¬ cation, would have bent him, yielding, weeping at my feet. Oh ! so changed ! so lost ! so hardened ! De Bellamont«— cruel De Bellamont ! spells, and fiends, and devils, must have forwarded thy rank purpose!" 44 How know we, my lord," said the monk, 4fi to vvhat quarter the policy of Albemarle may have veered? belike,to the standard of the rebel Gloucester ; or to the marshes of Wales, to aid in the mad venture of the sons of Leicester ; for
for report scatters them over the face of the whole land, burning, ravaging, and destroying." 44 Woe is me!" groaned the baron, if for thy words, father, casteth deeper shadows o'er my hopes. Whither can 1 turn, wdien all is blank uncertainty ?" 44 If my poor judgment may pro¬ pound," returned the confessor, " be thy stand here, at Hanslape; neither seeking foe or urging friend ; surrounde»! by thy own tried vassals, and diligent in the fur¬ therance of tliy souľs immortal health." 44 And no effort—no single effort, to reclaim the fugitive—ah, father!" 44 No ef ¿rt save prayer," resumed the holy Gilbert : ťí 4is our best auxiliary, in need, as in peace; 'tis our sole anti¬ dote to sublunary ill; in this vale of tears, in this narrow pa^s of endurance and vicissitude, 'tis our main solace against the woes of our own hearts ; 'tis as a breastplate of steel, against the fear¬ ful phasrns of headlong despair. Pray— pray,
pray, my son, and the rich unction of di¬ vine grace, will heal every wound, will uphold every infirmity." But though the baron of Hanslape, was thus exhorted to cast his burden on 44 the rock of ages ;" though the native bias of his own bruised and broken spi¬ rit, was perfect faith, and unmurmuring submission, still the pressure of circum¬ stances, the gnawing worm of imagined dishonour, the agonized pang of consci¬ ous desertion, the dread, and the pertur¬ bation, and the maddening conflicts of hope and of fear, sapped all his strength? and beggared all his fortitude : his pe¬ nances became more austere; his rigi¬ dity more observant; he stole on the hours for repose ; he macerated health at the instigation of bigotry ; he lived by lenten rule; he lived for the mortifica¬ tion of the senses, for the martyrdom of the flesh : and soon did the flesh droop ; soon, did the sinewy nerves lose tlieir vigour; the grave seemed yawning to receive
receive him — the grave, delved by the hand of a graceless son. Alas ! it was grief, and mourning, and bitter wailing, ivhich reigned throughout the castle: the note of joy was heard no more ; the jocund smile, no longer pierced the ga¬ thering haze of melancholy. A whole fortnight elapsed, and the dead calm, succeeding the flight of De Maudit, was still unbroken : each mem¬ ber of the household, groaned beneath tiie pressure of his own estre : the grey¬ headed Geoffry, mourned the heir of his lords hopes, and wept, «'ith bitterness of heart, the desolation of his glory. Hu¬ bert too, vainly strove to stifle the sigh of his bosom ; every feeling warred with¬ in him ; pity, dread, outraged friendship, spiritless despair, alternately raging, al¬ ternately subduing.— 44 This silence, this cruel unnatural alienation, must destroy my benefactor," he exclaimed, dashing the grief-wrung tear from his eye.·— 44 Grant me your sanction, holy father, and
and I will seek De Maudit, in despite of fate." 44 You would find him changed, wo¬ fully changed," said the confessor : " sur¬ rounded by cold computing counsellors, and waging against the pure fountain of his own honour." 44 Spite ofa thousand counsellors, yet will I probe his heart," rejoined Hubert ; 44 will I kneel at his feet, and humble myself in the dust before him. He can¬ not spurn me, father—he cannot gainsay the dictates of his own reason." " Alas!" sighed the monk, 44 his rea¬ son is hoodwinked ; his judgment besot¬ ted; his sentiments perverted; his very heart, turned Jo stone," 44 Not so—not so, holy sir : he may be entangled, trammelled, the dupe of others: but not so base—not so lost." 44 It is the actions which speak tlie in¬ ward man," remarked the confessor. 44 William is not the first, who has been lured on to ruin, by specious and sophis¬ tic
tic argument: blinded by some demon in human mould, he sacrifices to a false bias, his true and legitimate duties." " And when the scales shall have fal¬ len from before his eyes," said the shud¬ dering Hubert ; " when he shall have awakened to shame and to consciousness." " Jesu grant," aspirated the confessor, " it be before his hands be imbued in the blood of his kindred î The horrors of civil war ; the rage, the mad passions, engendered by an evil so accursed ; the gathering ruin, the universal overthrow, leaves no room for the every-day prin¬ ciples of moderation and justice : doffing ought of humanity, man assumes the impress of the arch-fiend, who goads him on to disobedience and to death." " Think yoti," questioned Hubert, 4 * the kindly virtues of our nature, can be so easily vitiated—can be so effectu¬ ally subdued? Think you------" " Beset by temptations," interrupted father Gilbert ; " environed by peril ; as- VOL, il L sailed
sailed by numerous ills—the most dead¬ ly springing in our own hearts—where, but in faith, and in true holiness, rests our sufciiu rd г Α ν truth, hive De Mau- dit, may be dazzled with command, maj be betrayed by false and beguiling co¬ lours : strong passions, needeth strong reins: correctly tempered, they lead to honour; left to their own pilotage, they founder amidst rocksand shallows. Per¬ chance, in hib jaundiced eyes, already does e\il assume the dangerous garb of heroism." ** Then nmst mv heart bleed for him," exclaimed Hubert; *· for sure, the plea¬ sure, cased in flowers, must ever be the peril most deadly." Another week, and another week, roll¬ ed awav, and still De Maudit wooed not the balm of л fatheťs pardon: the swollen catalogue of rumour gathered into giant iuould: every messenger from Tickford, every communication with Newport-Pagnel, speaking the defalca¬ tion
tion of thousands, confirmed the gather¬ ing legion of treason. Hanslape groaned in tlie torture of the spirit: lather Gil¬ bert shuddered at the turpitude of man Hubert, prayed with fervour, that the eyes of William might be opened, that the life of William ш ¡¿¿h t be lengthen- ed, for the purpose of true and genuine penitence. 44 (¿od grant, he die not the enemy of his king'" he wouid exclaim, and very studious attention, every care, every ten¬ derness, towards the baron, would re¬ double, in dut}, and in pity. It was a fearful period in his shoit existenee: he pined for aeth it), but he knew not how to be active: the whole castle assumed the livery of strength ; the nightly watch set—the passes barri¬ caded ; yet nought of hostility threaten¬ ed; the thunder of conflict roared in dis¬ tance, and anxiety and suspense magni¬ fied the real ill. 44 Peradventure," said the confessor» L 2 raising
raising his head from the attitude of deep musing, " Walter de Mantel upe, will lavish absolutions amid the ranks ot his partizans; will deepen his own mon¬ strous wickedness ; will profane the sanc¬ tity of his pure calling, by malign and impious subterfuge." hi In sueh an ensample," eagerly ex¬ claimed Hubert, * 4 the darings of youth fade almost to snow," 44 In sueh an ensample," pronounced the shuddering Hanslape, * 4 the turbu¬ lent, the self-willed, and the disaffected, midit learn obedience: no words, nu deeds, no sophistry, can gloss an apos» tac у so base : in outraging the ordinances of Heaven, the cloven-hoof stands un- oilded and unveiled." 44 Man," observed father Gilbert, " the slave of self-love, and proverbially in¬ dulgent to his own errors, frames rea¬ sons, and substitutes necessitv, for his voluntary acts : he breasts not the stream, till hurried into the vortex ; he stems
stems not the current, till too late for opposition." " What force of human reason—what mighty stretch of necessity, can tempo¬ rize the baekslidings of guilt?" asked the baron, " or, soften down the mon¬ strous crime of disloyalty ? Holy saints ! " and his shudder seemed almost death- fraught—" I, who would bleed for my king—I, who would die for my king— to have imparted life to a being, whose strength, whose abilities, and whose in¬ terests, are cast into the scale with trai¬ tors." "It is a heavy trial," rejoined father Gilbert, " and calls forth all the exer¬ tion of pious trust; it is as wormwood in the cup of existence: but (¿od wills the draught to he bitter, and submission is the corner-stone of faith." " The conviction, the preying thorn, will goad me to the grave," said Hans¬ lape, struggling down tlie choking sen- sution within ; ib will crush rne to the L ii án^t,
dust, ere yet the limited years of life be numbered. Alas !" and his voice and his look was utter despondence—" let what may betide, I stand firm to the direst blast of fortune. I feel my own isola¬ tion, rny own solitary loneliness:—the wind.*' and he tried to smile, " can ivrest no leaf from the withered branch* winch storni, and which winter, has stripped of its fbi i nife. '' Sí lutìnl^ emphatically pronounced Hubert, preying to his side, and grapp¬ in if his hand, %> babel—aiid thou too, my son ' both -— Ïîot!» m\ children* my precious— ш\ dutiful children 1 ' and the <ub. Ion if struggling, cheeked u ttf ranee, and he wept aloud, Hubert clapped tlu» trem- lilintf bf»nd between his own—he raised it I*» Ьь lip·*—he he<Iei\ed it with hi< tears* :ii»4Ín îhe confessor would have poki*n t but the liaron motioned silene* 1 . "Gue nature w u\" he faltered ; " a little >еам>п, yet a little чмчик and ail шау lit* wei L
well. Pardon me, Heaven—not—not rebellion :—my faith, my reliance, in thy promises, in thy mercies, awaken in my soul, the tranced duty of resignation :— not my will, oh, Father—not my will, but thine be done!" The night waned in self-communion, in the pious revisai of every support and every joy held out to holiness ; in argu¬ ing down the stubborn wilfulness of hu¬ manity, the perversity of the yielding heart» the wrestling efforts of sin-fraught nature ; in nerving every trust, in chas¬ tening every warring propensity : the pangs oťthe martyrs of old, the ensample of saints and of patriarchs, filled up the awful measure of fortitude: the visions of this world faded, and the morning dawned upon a contrite and a humbled spirit ; he had bent it to the very foot¬ stool of grace 1 , and he felt, and he owned, that liowever overwhelmed by the wa¬ ters, of aliliction, Faith, as the dove, light- eth on the olive-branch of promise ! L h Exhausted
Exhausted with care and long watch¬ ing, day's roseate blush, painting, and bursting the bosom of the east, fell upon the close-sealed eyelids of the baron : and when Hubert, seeking him in vain in his chamber, cautiously pushed open the door of the oratory, he found him stretch¬ ed at the foot of the cross, his form shrouded in his penance-garb of serge, and lis head pillowed on the stone step of the altar. For a moment, terror usurped every faculty, for the face was as tintless as untenanted clay, and the breathing, so low, and so inward, that the bent ear could scarce be susceptible of sound. 44 He does but sleep," mused Hubert, and then he bent over him, as the mo¬ ther bends over the darling offspring of her bosom ; he breathed forth the aspi¬ rations of his grateful soui; he petition¬ ed Heaven for the prosperity and com¬ fort of his benefactor ; he prayed too for the fugitive William ; he picture Ί him in
in distance and in danger, beset, over¬ powered, yielding, and tears of real an¬ guish flooded his eyes. He tried to quench his tears, but they fell the faster for the effort ; they fell upon the cheek and the brow of the sleeper, and with a slight convulsion, with an inward shud¬ der, he awoke. 44 Is it thou, Hubert ?" he asked.— 44 Alack ! thou hadst not wont to be the raven of rny quiet ; but thou hast scared the sweetest dream." Hubert only sob¬ bed. " A dream, of peace and of security," pursued the baron ; 44 a dream, something like happiness, for I seemed to hold my Isabel in my arms—to bless my Isabel ; as I hold thee —- as I bless theo, my son." Hubert dropped upon his knees, and in solemn and deep invocation, Hanslape placed his spread hand upon his bending head. " The blessing of Heaven be upon thee !" he pronounced — 4i the rich blessing of conscious inno- L 5 cence!
cence! the pure blessing of an uncor¬ rupted heart ! Be thy life prosperous ! be thy hopes here, an earnest of uncloud¬ ed bliss hereafter!" Hubert arose, his features glowing, dimpled with the magic smile of satis¬ faction ; even William was forgotten in the blessed consciousness of favour ; yet was it a consciousness, pure, as the purest beam of Heaven ; a consciousness, spring¬ ing from the goodly source of genuine integrity.— <4 Why not realize the vi¬ rion?" he said, breaking the long pause which had ensued — " why not claim from the ready duty of Isabel, the best solace to a parenťs heart ?" The baron stood doubtful and irreso¬ lute.— ťí I could almost wish it," he pro« nounced, as though speaking to himself —* 4 1 could almost dare the spell^—al¬ most brave the hazard." 44 What spell?—what hazard?" and Hubert's piercing gaze was rivetted upon him. " The
" The spell of her pure affection," re¬ plied Hanslape ; " the hazard of the lime- twigs entrapping heart and nature." "Oh, my lord!" and Hubert spoke with energy and feeling, " the sweet, the delicious springs of love and interest ; the precious links of concord and una¬ nimity, so wisely ordained, so deeply implanted, cannot need a discipline so austere—c:*nnot merit a scourge so des¬ potic." " I thought so once—I believed so once," exclaimed the baron, " Like yourself, I was a voluptuary in all of the hearťs best feelings :—it lured me into negligence; it tranced me in inertion. Forget you the Knight-Templar ?—ibr¬ get you, Voices to heaven savour not qf the vows of this ivorld ? Oh, God ! oh 3 righteous Providence!" and every limb shook with irrepressible emotion, " it will glow upon my memory, it will linger in my brain, untii the gripe of death, shall have marbled, every sense, and L 6 every
every feeling." Hubert felt the like thrill of inward horror, curdling his life- blood ; the like benumbing influence of superstition, distilling its baleful poi¬ son through his veins: the fast of St. Dunstan, seemed as a portentous epo¬ cha to every member of Hanslape; and he crossed his breast and forehead, and he piously thanked Heaven, that nearly a whole year must revolve, ere the fate- fraught period could again scatter ruin and woe. 44 Hubert," said the baron, recovering· voice and exertion, 44 you have conjured up a picture, which 1 scarce dare con¬ template. Tell me, boy, is it the action of a father, to purchase peace at the ex- pence of his child ?" 44 As how, my lord ?" and his look was all expectancy. 44 If I recall Isabel from her dream of heaven,"resumed Hanslape, "how know I, but fate may sting me in her forfei¬ ture of happiness:—if I bring her here, into
into the world, what dare I wage, that the next fast of St. Dunstan, scatters not the blossoms of her brightest hopes." 44 Think you," eagerly questioned Hu¬ bert, " a cloister can bound the warm heart of Isabel?—think you, the studied duties of holiness,, the chilling blank of mere observance, can crush, can curb, can fetter, all the dazzling spring of her youth's promises?" 44 Explain," urged the baron, gazing on his glowing face, on eyes irradiating the energy oťthe soul within. ik Isabel," continued Hubert, yielding to his feelings, and actuated by all of brother s love, " in distance, in absence, İn estrangement, may feel submission, but not content. Isabel loves us, my lord ; and though time has passed away, may she not sigh fbr the blessing of her fond father?—may she not covet the cloudless home ofher infant years?" 44 You are a warm advocate ! you are a most dangerous pleader !" said the ba¬ ron,
ron, and he dashed away the tear which trembled in his eye. " I would be a successful pleader, good, my lord ; I would but bring back the dream of the past." " The dream ! tlie dream !" repeated Hanslape, his look betraying the vibra¬ tion of a chord whose thrill was agony; then shrinking away, and folding his arms in blank absorption : " Pleasure is a dream," he articulated ; ťi pain is a dream ; life itself is a dream : all, save death : —death is the dream, from which there is no awakening." " Is the harvest of virtue," said Hu¬ bert—" is the haven of the Christian's life!" <ť William —AVilliam !" ejaculated the baron, and every nerve shook in the tor¬ ture of remembrance. " Let us alone of Isabel," implored Hubert : " the sunshine rides upon the tempest, and oft it pierceth the darkest cloud :—
cloud :—let us of Isabel, dear, dearest sir ■—let n s alone of Isabel." st Of Isabel—of my darling Isabel," faltered Hanslape; then, starling and shuddering, " The venture savours of selfishness," he pursued : " I expose her to the risk, to pour out my own griefs upon her bosom." i% Say, rather, to awaken in her bosom the bliss of solacing," said Hubert; " to call forth the dearest attributes of wo¬ man, tenderness and pity. Isabel w411 beam upon us as an angel of light! Isa¬ bel will sooth every woe ; vvill sympa¬ thize, v\ here she cannot heal !" " But should her peace be sacrificed," observed the trembling father ; " should she be destined another bleeding victim to my sin of omission. Saints of Para¬ dise! should she-——" " Torture not yourself шу lord," in¬ terrupted Hubert : " her innocence, her gentleness, her virtues, be an indemnity for all." m Hanslape
Hanslape writhed beneath the ago¬ nizing pang which struck at his heart- he was paler than death—he was wild almost to frenzy.—" The chaste, the un¬ erring, the useful life of her mother," he gasped out, " might have ransomed the souls of the damned : but she fell in the springtide of her usefulness ; she feil, and cumbered me in the mighty ruin; she fell, and left me, most hapless, most ac¬ cursed." He turned away ; he buried his face in his spread hands, and stifling sobs, and suffocating sighs, succeeded ; every wound seemed to bleed afresh : every pang, which time, and reflection, had welinigh cicatrized. Hubert, in si¬ lent, sorrowing sympathy, stood beside him ; he feared to speak ; he feared al¬ most to breath ; he suspended his own tears; he checked each impulse of feel¬ ing ; he watched him, with more than a son's love :—and when again he saw him rallying into self-possession ; when he felt the fervent grasp of his hand ; when he traced
traced life's animating fire, kindling anew in his eye, he inwardly thanked God fbr the blessing—he hailed it, with a thrill, and a smile of joy. 44 I cry shame at this weakness," said the baron, deciphering his eloquent look: 44 your pardon, dearest Hubert, I am again myself; again alive to the past and the present, and submissive, I trust, to the dispensations of that Providence, whose wrath I deprecate. It was of Isa¬ bel we were speaking—of Isabeľs return to Hanslape." Hubert's Heart beat al¬ most audibly : in Isabeľs presence, he au¬ gured comfort to his benefactor :—and the CD comfort of his benefactor, and the peace of his benefactor, felt as his prime duty. 44 I bore her niyseif to Nuneaton," con¬ tinued the baron: (i alack ! I then pic¬ tured, a younger, and an abler escort, to have reconveyed her hither : but Heaven is all-sufficient! and though the avenues to the grave, wind amidst thorns, the broad pure light of its inercy, beameth upon
upon the track of our duties." Hubert saw his thoughts veering to his fugitive son, and he feared to speak, lest again he might roughly touch the chord ofhis sorrow. ťí The colour of the times—-the fearful turbulence of faction—the awful dariim-s of wicked men," resumed the baron, af¬ ter a pause of deep thought, * 4 call for a strong arm, and a bold spirit : my arm is welinigh nerveless; my spirit almost quenched ; my substitute departed from me. Standing, as it were, alone—I—I ------ ;i His voice quivered ; it sunk tre¬ mulous as infant weakness. Hubert pressed to his side, his spread hand upon his breast; his inward soui beaming in every feature.·—" My life, my strength, iny hopes, my exertions, 1 ' he faltered, " devoted, dedicated, to thee—to thine." The baron snatched him to his bosom. — ^ Child of promise ! son of my adop¬ tion ! I read it all—I feel it ail : but it cannot—it must not be. The world— the
the tongue of calumny—Dearest Hu¬ bert, it needeth the colour of a brother's tie, to dam up the biting gall of slander: the judgments of man are base and cruel : the fame of angel purity, insufficient to blunt tlie shafts of envy." Hubert's face flushed crimson, even at the instant, when an ice-bar seemed to rise betwixt him and Isabel : hereto¬ fore, he had remembered her, but as the tender child, the interesting playmate : henceforth, must the colder limit of po¬ licy, restrict the intercourse of love, the endearments of intimacy. His was a cou n tenance, like unto a mirror, reflect¬ ing each fugitive impression; and the baron, read the impression, and traced the numbing chill upon his feelings, " Isabel quitted as a mere child," he observed, striving to palliate, where he could not retract: "returning to us in the ripening glow of womanhood, we must forget the pigmy sprite, who used to cull the earliest pansy :—we lose her, dear
dear Hubert, as the plaything, to find her the companion, and the friend." Hu¬ bert only bowed; his lips murmured somethmg of acquiescence, but his forced and melancholy smile was equivocal.— " We wiii consult father Gilbert," said the baron, moving towards the door; 44 we will cast the burden of our pre¬ sent difference upon his unbiassed judg¬ ment. Think me not ungrateful; think me, rather scrupulously tenacious upon what concerns us all. I would trust with you, my honour, and my life; but we must not, by the mere neglect of outward seemliness, arm the censorious and malign." " Enough, dear sir," implored Hubert ; 44 doubtless, my request, savoured of heart, rather than of policy : perchance, the world may ere long teach me a dif¬ ferent lesson ; but its coldness, can never stagnate, its caution, can never bind, my motives, and my feelings, to thee." The judgment of father Gilbert did indeed
indeed side with the scruples of the ba¬ ron: and again did Hubert hear, the cold computing inferences of the world, descanted and explained; did he listen, to that necessity, which too often de¬ mands the sacrifice of inclination to ap¬ pearance; to those narrow, those jaun¬ diced principles, vvhich, casting shadow upon the brightest actions, gives to im¬ pulse, the colouring of design, Hubert was not the tenacious adherent of his own opinions, yet it cost him a pang, in perceiving that his inexperience had decked society, in a false, and a too high¬ ly varnished burnish : alas í he owed it to the kindly feelings of his own heart, rather than to the existence of frail and fallible reality. " Time will verify my hypotheses," observed the confessor ; " and ere age shall have scattered his snow upon thy brow, thou wilt have gleaned policy, and gathered wisdom, in the school of expe¬ rience." Then turning to the baron, "God
"God willing, my lord," he continued, " I will be the bearer of the summons : cased in the authority of my spiritual calling, I will journey to Nuneaton ; I will demand the lady Isabel at the hands of the superior of St. Mary's ; I will con¬ vey her back to her paternal shelter, in the full persuasion, that her obedience, will shed oil and honey on thy green and festering wounds." " Thou, holy father!" and the wan cheek, and the sunken eye of Hanslape, beamed with the momentary flush of transport. " Yes, I, my son. Upheld by the firm staff of a good cause, and the purity r of my intentions, old as I am, and feeble as I am, what need I fear from man ?— what need I fear, from all the armament, rank rebellion wields?" e * True, father ; but strength best copes with strength ; and a retinue, not of pride, but of defence, shall attend thy bidding; to
to provide against evil, is sure the wisest foresight of man." " And all his wisdom, and all his fore¬ sight, is but folly" said the monk, meek¬ ly crossing his bosom ; * 4 his strength,fee¬ ble; his labour, vain; his proudest bul¬ wark, levelled with a breath ; his firmest earthly trust, perishable as his own brief existence !" 44 The picture is humiliating," sighed the baron. " Yet," replied the holy Gilbert, " may we trace it in every perishable memento. The very seasons hold forth the epi¬ tome of man. We read, in every germ which shoots, in every bud which opens, in every blossom which withers—his rise, his perfection, his decline : nipped, like the canker in the bud ; or, in the full burst of his usefulness; or, like the yel¬ low leaf, falling into the sere." " Alas !" remarked the baron, 44 and yet are we busied with the nothings of this worid ; and yet, do the cares, the chances,
chances, the casualties of human exist¬ ence, pervade our minds, and rivet our affections," " It is wisely ordained," resumed the confessor ; " it is one of the high mercies of God to man. Unless the spirit rally from the scourge, it would surely break beneath the second chastening. It is not the use, it is the abuse, of the good, vouchsafed us, here below, which calls for condemnation: as pilgrims, we are here, bound to one great service: the mighty ocean of eternity lies before us, and we know not how soon, our frail barks may be launched upon its fathom¬ less waters. Let us pray then, pray, long and unceasingly, for the grace of the Spirit :—and though the grace of the Spirit be mystery ; though, like unto the wind, we feel it, but know not whence it cometh, or whither it goeth, still, in the vigour of yoçth, in the vicissitudes of life, in the hour of death, it will up¬ hold, it will console, it will sustain us !" Hanslape
Hanslape bowed his head in meek conviction—Hubert, kindling with the fire of holiness, remained, with his eyes rivetted upon the spiritual counsellor of his soul, every warring feeling subdued to kindly emotion, and mentally acknow¬ ledging, that none, living, save father Gilbert, was worthy to act as the repre- scntative of his benefactor. " As soon as may be, my lord," said the confessor, returning, as it were, from heaven to earth— " I stand in readiness to depart for Nuneaton. Counsel your mind, I pray you, to consolation and to hope : on the mission of recall, and cased in the armour of Almighty favour, I fear, neither the sword of Leicester, or the peril of his myrmidons." The baron stood silent and thought¬ ful ; more than meeting the eye passing witliin the soul : it was doubt and ap¬ prehension of his daughter's safety ; it was perplexity and distrust—not in the venerable agent—but in the hardihood vol. il M of
of the design : fear magnifying existing ill ; and the lawless daring of revolt, and the scathing lightning cf man's venge¬ ance, appearing, on the jaundiced dream of his fancy, to be at once universal and overwhelming.— 44 I eould wish," he at length said, 44 more than a letter borne Ly mere respect—I could wish a retinue —Surely, holy sir" —and the love of the parent thrilled in his accent—" a well-chosen, well-armed retinue, is but fashioned to the peril of the times." " Be it so, my son," rejoined father Gilbert, entering at once into his anxie¬ ties and his fears : ** the sheaf, well bound, may not easily be broken;*
CHAP-
CHAPTER VIII. **HF*rfW ^*^^Ш-01 &г*гл*+
Sure there's contagion in the lean-, oť friend:»; See, I have caught it too. ßthe\e nie, T ti;> not Fur mv own íinei4 but thiac. Drydent,
My rftboluMon's piacM, and I ha\e nothing Oť woman in ше. Яшльл spéakä The grey dawn rose o'er the turrets of St. Mary's, and gradually did the va¬ poury mists yield to the growing bright¬ ness: the birds carolled their gladsome lay, and creation, dappled in gems, bright as the brightest tints of Iris, smiled în renovated lustre : it was the season, when <( -------------,-------Reiuigt'nt sutPtucr тлпс^
- —-—'Attended by the sultry hours, And ever-fanning tree¿esj— ~——
While from Ьь ardem кнЛ, tht turning spring Averts her blushful face, and eartli, and skies, AU~ţmilipg, to his hot dominion leaves"-— M 2 the
the season, when even the narrow bound¬ ary ofa cloister, borrows the rich burnish of vernal beauty ; when decked in va¬ riegated charms, the teeming earth, in richest promise, smiles the earnest of luxurious harvest ! Isabel had long forsaken her peaceful couch ; had watched the earliest glimpse of radiance ; had descended to the gar¬ den; had brushed the dew from the grass, and scattered its pendant drops from many a clustering rose-bush ; yet still the lady Margaret came not; still, alone and lonely, she hurried through the neat-trimmed walks, wondering, and musing, and casting many a lingering glance, to that quarter of the building, expecting, as heretofore, to behold her, with light and airy step, glide down the firm-bound terrace ; to hail her voice of niuric, and her smile of gladness. Vivid was the blush, mantling her cheek, and tinging the snow of her bosom, as the events of yester-even rose to memory : her
her pulses quickened, but not with plea¬ sure; her eyes sparkled, but not with delight : the baron de Hernigande had lain at her feet; had wooed her with words of softest passion ; had aimed at her young heart, througli the steal» ing medium of pity—pity, the sister twin oflove! had called himself unhap¬ py ; had called upon her for comfort. 44 Be my sojourn at Nuneaton, the bliss, or the curse of my life," he had pronounced, yet still had Isabel shrunk away in terror. 4S To-morrow, I go hence," eagerly perusing her features; 44 to-morrow, I dare all the hardships of war, all the perils of anarchy; to-mor¬ row, I quit St. Mary's. Angel-—lady— grant me the boon of hope." Isabel trembled, but it was for the disasters of her country—it was at the threatened ruin—it was at the fast- gathering overthrow.— 44 What crave you of me, my lord ?" she asked. m 3 " Com-
" Compassion— favour— love," sighed De Hernigande. Isabel turned away her face; she tried to disengage her hand, but he grasped it the firmer.— 44 Give me way," she im¬ plored : 4% profane not this holy place, with words so unseemly." 44 Unseemly," echoed the baron. " By the saints-—by thy matchless self, fair maid, I swear, Heaven is not more true than my affection * I love you—I would win you, at the risk of my life." Isabeľs hear*", swelled, with a pride, with a feeling, till then unknown.— " Stay me not," she exclaimed : i4 the partizan of rt bell ion, can have nought to say to the daughter of a loyal baron. My father, шу lord," and her cheeks glowed, and her eyes beamed exultation, " is the liege subject of our gracious king !" De Hernigande gazed upon her with doubt and wonder; her look was majes¬ ty ; her frown imposing,—" Can the friend
friend of the lady Margaret de Burgh," he asked, " condemn the champions of the earl of Kent? Let fancy pierce within his dungeon : strip him of his greatness ; strip him of his renown : let gentleness plead his wrongs; let com¬ passion enumerate his sorrows. We wage not war with Henry, but with the murderers of Henry's glory." " Doubtless," observed Isabel, " the plotter lacketh not argument, wherewith to uphold the plot. God forefend us all ! 'tis foul, most foul, and craveth a goodly mask to cloak its rottenness* Belike, my lord," and she spoke with irony, " the league is fashioned in jus„ tice." The baron gnawed his lip ; it was mortified pride ; it was struggling an¬ ger, whieh flushed and paled his fea¬ tures.—" \ es, justice, lady," he replied ; " justice to the state ; justice to the crushed and groaning people. The king, misguided, hoodwinked, led by m ê artful
artful wicked counsellors, weakly ne¬ glectful of his mighty trust, outrages the bond which links him to his sub¬ jects.—But what has crooked politics to do with love ? Avaunt the hateful theme, and give the envious moments, to sweeter, gentler subject ! Lady," and again he barred her passage, * 4 if mercy live not only in your look-—if meek-eyed pity harbour in your bosom —suffer not cold and killing prejudice to mar my humble pleadings. This so¬ litude suits not your virgin-bloom ; this living mausoleum accords not with youths opening promises—I would bear you hence—I would transport you to a soil more genial-—I would share with vou, røv hoiies, mv honours—I would devote to you tlie homage of my life—I would—" " Not so, my lord," interrupting him : ** my lot is cast in a fair ground, and I lack no alteration: no, no; my lack, is the will of my father ; my fatheťs lack, the
the will of his king ; beyond, we list not" " Nay, hear me, fair one," implored De He migande. But LsaM's look was cold denial.— 44 There is nought, thou wouidst say, can shake my duty," siie pursued. " I must go hence, my lord, or I must needs acquaint the lady abbess." * v So young, and yet so firm! so love¬ ly, and yi t so cruel f Teach me, lady, how best tt> win your favour, for joyful¬ ly would î barter tins world's hopes, to hail a willing .smile." 4 * Λ prisoner never smiles," said Isa¬ bel, eagerly ; ** good, шу lord, give way, or шу favour waxeth vaiueìe&s." * ť Your favour is the universe; your lavour, is lite, health, joy: tarry, I be¬ seech, I supplivate: yield some token of grace : say» aliali we meet again ?" ** It may chance so, w said Isabel. " Chance;" reproaclifully. ** A luckless chance for me* 1 — and M å snatching
»latching away her bmå, she darted past him, A\ p ith cheeks glo wmg, heart throb¬ bing» eyes beaming indignation, she sought the chamber of Margaret; slit- found her seated on iter lone couch, wrapped in moody contemplation, her hand*» clasped, lier foce halt buried in her boMxn. " What means this tearful gloom J asked Isabel, closing the door, and springing to the side of her friend. Mar¬ garet looked up; the hectic of a inti¬ ment tinged her t heek, and then it íkúeiL and left her as listless as betöre. " AVe cannot always look carele^ aml gay," she murmured. " True, but we must not encourage sadness and sorrow. Dear Margaret, these strangers have ran away with all your spirits. By our Lady," with play* ful archness, " they have broken into the sanctuary, and pilfered the rare jewel content !" "Man el
* 4 Marvel not" må Margaret : " have they not acquainted me with the inju¬ ries of my parents ? Ah, Isabel ! my whole heart, my whole nature is chan¬ ged. I feel, that the daughter of the earl of Kent, should not remain the passive mourner of the earl of Kent's sorrows." ** Alack ! how unwittingly you talk Γ rejoined Isabel * 4 What can a poor maiden* caged in a cloister, do, save pray Τ ** I have taken no vows—1 have made no voluntary sacrifice," said Margaret : и mû though this week, I be a boarder at Xuueaton, the next week------" ** Week,'* interrupted the amazed Isa¬ bel. m% Aye, or month, or year," quick re¬ sumed Margaret, ,fc tor space is hard to limit. Man cannot aolve his own des* tiny, or woman either Γ and she tried to smile. Isabel read more tlian the lips uttered : it was perplexity, agita¬ tion, struggling confusion, which erim¬ li б soned
soned the cheeks, and bent the eyes of Margaret ; it was genuine candour, com¬ bating the necessity of concealment ; it was a pungent pang at heart, a labour¬ ing consciousness, warring against ought of disguise, "At day-dawn," remarked Isabel, " the partizans of the earl of Leicester quit St. Mary's." Margaret spoke not, but she drooped in sickening perturba¬ tion ; the blood forsook her lips ; she trembled ; she panted ior respiration. " I would they had never crossed the threshold," pursued Isabel, wondering at her emotion : " I would -----" " Say not so !—oh ! say not so !"' fal¬ tered Margaret. " Had Gloucester ne¬ ver visited St. Mary's; had----- had -----" She paused, and the vivid blush of the full rose, chased the alabaster whiteness ofher face and bosom. " AVhat then?" urged Isabel. " AVe were at peace ere the arrival of Glouces¬ ter, and now is peace sadly broken." " Though
44 Though peace were fled for ever/ sighed Margaret, " ne'er could I call his sojourn a curse." 44 Well, it will pass down the stream of time," said Isabel ; " it will fade like a dream ; it will speedily be forgotten." 44 Never ! never !" and Margaret spoke with energy and feeling, " Ah, Isabel!" her voice sinking almost to a whisper, * 4 the hour which led the earl of Glou¬ cester to Nuneaton—the chance skir¬ mish, which cast him, wounded and bleeding, on the charity of St. Mary's, was the hour pregnant with my fate; it opened like a new creation to my senses; it imparted a charm, more precious than life or health !" 44 Mother of God !" ejaculated the shud¬ dering Isabel—" you love the earl of Gloucester—you love the sworn foe of the royal Henry." 44 1 love the ward, the friend, the cham¬ pion of my father," firmly exclaimed Mar-
Margaret : " and when I cease to love him, my heart will cease to beat." " Unhappy, wretched prepossession !" and Isabeľs warm tears flowed in anti¬ cipation of Margareťs sorrows. " Alas ! know you the mad venture ?—guess you the dizzy brink on which you totter ?" Margaret only sobbed. " Tell me," pur¬ sued the energetic girl, " has Gloucester breathed the tale of passion?—has he read-—has he deciphered the fatal sway of interest ?" Margaret raised her burning cheek from the throbbing bosom of her friend ; her glance was reproach, was wounded dignity, was outraged pride ; then strug¬ gling down her warring feelings, " The eari of Gloucester knows that I love him," she pronounced, " yet have I yielded my heart but İn exchange for his own." " Forgive me* Margaret," implored Isabel. ** In such a seclusion«—shut out as we are from all of uitercourse—how could
could I suspect, ought, save hopeless pre¬ ference, save hidden preying love?" Fluctuating and vivid were the tints of Margaret's cheek ; her blue eyes, too, emitted the lightning fire of inspiration. —" Love," she murmured, casting her arms around the neck of Isabel, "impar- teth force and energy to character ; love, maketh the coward brave ; love, curbeth the darings of the hero ! Here, beneath the cloister-roof of St. Mary's, Love cheateth the Argus-eyes of vigilance, and poureth to the willing ear, the rieh meed of reciprocal interest; spite of fasts, and prayers, and vigils—spite of the thunder of the church—spite of the cold rigidity of cloisteral rule, Love, establish¬ ing his own altar, smiles on the ready homage of his votaries !" " Methinks," archly observed Isabel, " thou hast proved thyself an apt scholar to the blandishments of sophistry. Tru¬ ly, 4is De Clare of Gloucester, not love, which has seduced allegiance." Mar-
Margaret turned aside her face; she tried to smile, but the ready tear gave evidence of deeper feeling.— 4ť It may be so," sue replied ; " yet blame not -me, though my heart be sensible to the me¬ rits of my father's ward. Gloucester is a hero; and the track of the hero is glory !" H Not—not a hero," warmly rejoined Isabel, " where the daring be dark, ille¬ gal, and unholy ;—neither, be it glory, when the track, wind amid turmoils, and complottings, and treason." " Our ideas, our sentiments, our con¬ clusions, vary," said Margaret ; " upon this one point, perchance, w r e are alike the slaves of prejudice; let us discuss it no further, lest losing sight of past con¬ fidence, we weaken present reliance." Then drawing close beside her, with cheeks flushing a deeper colouring, and eyes bent upon the ground : " Isabel," she emphatically pursued* " whatever time may unravel—-whatever fate may impose :
impose : though distance cast her dark mantle o'er my movements, and ab¬ sence dissolve the charm of intercourse; never brand my actions with ingratitude —never trace my motives to coldness or neglect." The energy of her accent, rather than the import of her words, filled the heart of Isabel, with wonder and apprehen¬ sion.— " What mean you?" she ques¬ tioned : 4i dear Margaret, this strange ap¬ peal, awakens prognostics, almost as gloomy as your own." " 'Tis hard to unravel meaning," said Margaret, rallying back exertion. " God's truth, I scarce know myself! There are times, there are seasons, when the spirits war against us : but alike the creatures of circumstances, 'tis fitting we glide quietly down the stream of chance. I would but bind you to hereafter charity, for surmise opee let loose, slender be the hope of acquittal." 44 The serpent-fang of surmise, assails not
not the broad bright deeds of innocence," remarked Isabel ; " iind for acquittal, ever does it await integrity." " No, no, not ever," eagerly rejoined Margaret : " in the world, there are false mediums, false impressions, false colour¬ ings ; in the world------" " You quitted the world," interrupted Isabel, " ere suspicion, or even obser¬ vance, could note human actions. Con¬ signed to the sisters of Nuneaton, you _________ î> ** Nuneaton is but a sample of the world," exclaimed Margaret ; " İs but an epitome, of the stripes, and the bick¬ erings, and the turmoils, disturbing so¬ cial concord: in caprice, in temper, in tyranny, may we trace the like way¬ wardness, turning their sunshine into storm." " Yet has Nuneaton been the cradle of our infancy," said Isabel, reproachful¬ ly, " been the home of our most inno¬ cent joys»" Mar-
Margaret hesitated for a moment ; a cast of care stole over her features, and a tear swam in her eye.— 4ť I have passed many—very many happy years at Nun¬ eaton/* she faltered ; 4i and there are those at Nuneaton, whom I honour and love : but"—and she tried to lure back a smile — " 1 would fain find a grave elsewhere than at Nuneaton. Fallible and fitful as an April sky, peace itself may tire." 44 Not where content fashion the mind," observed Isabel ; * 4 not where modera¬ tion and grateful piety bound the wishes. Nature may be imperfect, but misery comes but at our own bidding." 4i Ik it for me to pray for content then," resumed Margaret ; " to suppli¬ cate moderation and acquiescence in all hereafter trials." 44 Aye, and I will pray the like/* said Isabel, rising in adieu. Margaret precipitated herself upon her neck; she clasped her with almost pain¬ ful earnestness,— 4< Pray for røe/ she im¬ plored ;
plored ; " at matins, at vespers, pray for me : promise me-—" 44 For why ?" asked Isabel. 44 1 shall sleep the sounder—I shall be the happier. Promise me, dearest Isabel, off, and on your pillow ; in the chapel, and in your cell; promise me—think of me—pray for me." 44 Pray for you, and pray with you," replied Isabel, kissing her cheek and forehead, " but it must be at another season :—and now r to bed," gently with¬ drawing herself, " and the peace of an¬ gels tend you !" Thus adjured, and feelingly impressed, Isabel sunk to sleep, with a prayer for Margaret on her lips—awakened with the dejection of Margaret still glowing upon her fancy. She arose—she passed down the gallery—she lingered at the door of her friend's chamber; yet she raised not the latch, lest, however illu¬ sive, she might dissolve a slumber sa¬ vouring of peace. The breezy balm of morning,
morning, the hum of bees, and the cheer¬ ful carol of gladsome nature, exciting gratitude, cheated her into admiration ; but the lapse was transient; the gloom of the parting hour dimmed the brightest burnish of the present, and every move¬ ment, and every step, redoubled her anx¬ ious care. It was not the empty flat¬ tery oťthe baron de Hernigande; it was not the departure of the earl of Glouces¬ ter;—it was the tears, the pensive sor¬ rows of Margaret, which crowding upon memory, curbed every elastic spring of hope; she saw her bereaved and spirit- worn, her mind enervated, her expecta¬ tions blighted, her happiness destroyed ; living on the flickering sunbeam of pro¬ mise; wasting out youth and strength, in repinings and suspense.— 4 * Ill-fated friend !" she murmured— 44 dear, misjudg¬ ing Margaret ! madly hast thou yielded up thy trust ; madly hast thou bartered peace, without one chance of rescue." She paused—she turned abruptly·—for startling
startling was the sigh which echoed her own : it was not the form of Margaret —it was her venerable grandmother who stood beside her—her placid features more than usually impressed ; her eyes, in penetrating earnestness, fixed upon her.—" Thy brow weareth thought, my poor child ; perchance, thy dream savour¬ eth not of reality." " I can scarce give it body, dear mo¬ ther ;" and Isabel, bending upon the wi¬ thered hand, hid beneath her dark and glossy hair, the fluctuating tints of her cheek. " Not of the world—it could not be of the world," pursued the aged fana¬ tic, perusing each perfect feature, " else, had perturbation chased every line of quietude : and if of this blessed haven, how soon, alas ! will the dream be dissi¬ pated." Isabel started: her lips mur¬ mured, but it was her looks, rather than her lips, which spoke amazed enquiry. " Bid adieu to all within this cloister," resumed
resumed the nun ; bid adieu to security, perhaps to quiet:—my son, and thy fa¬ ther, wills the close of thy sojourn here ;" —and then she tendered a vellum, and stood silent and observant. The guileless nature of Isabel scorned ought of disguise ; she traced the well- known characters of her honoured sire; she deciphered the mandate of her recall to Hanslape, and her bosom palpitated with blissful expectancy, her features glowed with transportând delight.—" How kind! how thoughtful !" she exclaimed. 44 Fa¬ ther Gilbert journeys to Nuneaton ; in three days, father Gilbert claims me at the liand of the lady abbess. Dear, dearest mother"—casting her arms around the neck of the baroness, and burying her half-erying, half-laughing face, in the dark folds of her habit— 44 congratulate me—joy with me—I shall reap my dear father's blessing—I shall see William, and Hubert, and old Geoffry ; and all— all, I have so long, and so dearly loved !" "And
" And wilt thou feel no pang in part¬ ing with those who have contributed to thy comfort?" asked the sister—" wilt thou journey hence, without one pang of regret ?" " Oh ! can you think so?" and the thrill- ing glance of her eye refuted the seem¬ ing tax of ingratitude. " No, no, my child, my foolish Isa¬ bel, I t\ mot, do not think so; but I could wish to see less exultation on a step so fate-fraught. Knowest thou not, that I once lived in the world—that I once lived for the world -.-—that like un¬ to thy own, my hopes were buoyant, and my prospects gay ;—that I mingled with courts and with courtiers ;—that a monarch's smile greeted my approach, and kindling like the sun's rays, warm¬ ed me into favour? But where is that smile ?—where is that splendid crowd ? —where, all the witchery, wedding the heart of pleasure? Gone—quite gone. The monarch, in the springtide of his fame ;—
fame;—the clustering circle, like unto the halo, fringing the lunar glory, and borrowing the burnish of its brightness —all vanished—all sunk—all lost !" Isabeľs smile changed to gloom : there was a something, in the look, even more than in the words, of her venerable rela¬ tive, which shed ice on all her glowing expectations ; which cast upon every ge nuine spring of youth and gladness, the dull presentiment of possible ill,—"Alas! dear mother, is it sin," she asked, 4i to joy in the meeting with my friends?" " Not sin, but error, grievous error," replied the nun. íť Life is illusion, and God wills the season of youth to be darkened Thou fanciest, all perfection, all happiness ; thou picturest the world, one vast, one unvarying scene of plea¬ sure and of content. I know the world— I know the customs, habits, manners of society ; yes, though so many years have elapsed, I tremble at the snares await¬ ing the unpractised heart : tarry but a vol. ιί. N brief
brief season, my poor Isabel, and the rose will have shown its thorn." " I remember," said Isabel, timidly, 44 when at Hanslape, my joy, was in the smile of my father, in the love of my brother and Hubert ; my recompense, in the approval of my father, and the bless¬ ing of the holy Gilbert : surely then, such joy, such recompense, can never fail." 44 It is a deep, deep spring," rejoined the baroness, " and may its sources ne¬ ver dry : but there are woes, which thy young heart as yet cannot picture ; there аде trials, which thy inexperienced fancy cannot paint. I could have wished to have kept thee in this sanctuary ; to have dedicated thy spring and thy summer unto holiness; but it cannot be: like thy mother, thou art called hence, as in¬ nocent, as highly gifted :—may thy life be as useful, but less brief Г She turned away as she spoke, for she feared to betray, in the tear which start¬ ed to her eye, the lingering evidence of human
human feeling: by habit, and long, and strict, and persevering discipline, she had schooled herself into the belief of perfect acquiescence in every dispensation : was it pride then, which thus wrestled with the one poor fugitive token of frail hu¬ manity ? If it was pride, might it not serve as a monument of iron or of brass, whilst in the flesh, to warn against the vain hoţie of annihilating all of fleshly weakness ? The cast of sorrow, dimming, like a passingeloud, the vivid sun of expectation, faded with the retreating steps of the baroness ; and Isabel revived to all that was gay, and bright, and promising : a thousand pictures of ideal happiness quickened the visions of fancy ; a thou¬ sand hopes, a thousand anticipations, known but to inexperienced and ardent sensibility. The blessing of her father, glowed upon her heart, lived upon her ear, sounded in every sighing breeze which gathered ; her prospects were rich N 2 and
and bright as budding nature : not the mildest beam of an April sky, could be more ripening, more teeming; yet were ihey not solitary, not selfish : she should live in her father's bosom ; and her first petition for a fatheťs favour, should be to sue the promised society of the lady Margaret. — " And yet I linger," she mused, " when I might impart happi¬ ness to thee, dearest Margaret"—and her dark eyes irradiated with transport, and her transparent cheek glowed with brighter beauty—" 1 will woo thee hence —I will steal thee from the sickly taint of contemplation. William, Hubert, will I bind in the scheme to lure thee from the thought of Gloucester." And swift as light, her heart bounding be¬ neath tlie joyous dream of her fancy, her spirits all exhilarated with the magic thrill of hope, she fled through the gar¬ den, her eye in every direction seeking Margaret, and wondering at her long and tedious delay. The
The matin-bell had rung for prayers ; the nuns had assembled in the chapel, yet Margaret appeared not : the whisper of enquiry arose ; it gathered, it grew into reproof: a lay-sister was dispatched to seek her in her chamber; and the return of the lay-sister spread confusion and dis¬ may. The lady Margaret was nowhere to be found ; her chamber was deserted ; her pillow was impressed: it was evi¬ dent, through the livelong night, sleep had not tranced her senses : she had es¬ caped from Nuneaton; and conjecture and horror quick sprung out of alarm and consternation. Heinous and deadly was the crime; summary and implacable the threatened vengeance of the church : the earl of Gloucester, and his retinue, at the first blush of day had quitted St. Mary's, and no doubt remained upon the mind of the incensed abbess, that the rash and venturous boarder had escaped at the same hour. A thousand incidents, before unmark- N 3 ed,
ed, were now recalled, and freely can¬ vassed : Margaret had long worn more than her usual thought; since the so¬ journ of the strangers, she had been heard to sigh more frequent, and her tears had often contradicted her murmured affir¬ mation of submission ; she had been seen to speak to the earl of Gloucester ; she had been known to linger in the chapel long after the service had been closed ; and the very night preceding her flight, shunning all of the sisterhood, she had shut herself closely within her own chamber. In part Isabel could have unreaved the mystery of that courted seclusion ; could have explained it, as the last strug¬ gle of a heart, torn and tossed betwixt contending interests : but her tears fell fast as the rain drops, and her sobs were the sole responses to ought of enquiry : she knew the secret of Margaret's affec¬ tion ; and though stung with the seem¬ ing want of Margareťs confidence, she could
could not—she would not betray her up to power. Long after every search had ceased within the monastery, and the name of the graceless fugitive was coupled with all that was opprobrious, did Isabel en¬ ter the chamber in which she had part¬ ed from her the last night, her fancy teeming with those signs of deep dejec¬ tion, which had then excited her sym¬ pathy and her wonder; her own bright prospects cast into shade, or rather, yield¬ ing to the local ill which preyed upon her spirits. All remained as when she had bid her adieu; as when she had urged her to seek comfort in repose. ťí Alas ! and wilt thou ever find eom¬ lbrt?—wilt thou ever know repose?" she articulated, yielding to a fresh burst of grief— 44 will thy wild imprudence«—» ivill thy rash credulity, reap ought save sorrow ?" Fears, for the happiness, for the safety of her fugitive friend—fears, even for N 4 the
the honour of Gloucester, assailed her sensibility : she shuddered at the league which confessedly bound him to the for¬ tunes of the rebellious Leicester; and firm in the principles of her father, con¬ sidered the ill-starred Margaret, as every way lost.—" Had I guessed the pending flight ; had I known the threatened trial," she sobbed, 44 1 would not liave left thee, Margaret—I would have stay¬ ed with thee—I would have saved thee from thyself." A small missal lay upon the table— Isabel took it up with a sensation of utter despondence : doubtless, it had last been in the hand of Margaret ; perhaps, steeped in her tears ; perhaps, the sole comfort in her bitter heart-throes. An ivory tablet fell from among the leaves : she snatched it from the fioor ; she open¬ ed it, and beheld characters, traced with a trembling and unsteady hand, and evi¬ dently addressed to herself. s< I greet thee with a bleeding spirit," wrote
wrote Margaret, "and yet have I well pon¬ dered on the step I am about to take. It is decided—it weighs on the side of duty : were it instigated by other than love, it would still nerve my vagrant resolution : my thoughts rest in the prison of my father :—I would break the bonds of my father, at the expence of life. When I lost sight of thee, a busy meddling host, of self-reproach, and cruel torturing re¬ grets, assailed me. I was silent, because I would not implicate thee in my ima¬ gined transgress:.on : perhaps I shall be¬ hold thee no more;—behold no more, St Mary's, or St. Mary's sisterhood. 44 Thou didst bid me to bed—to sleep. Virgin Mother! couldst thou not deci¬ pher the maddened sensation with which I clasped thee ? I felt it as a last clasp, and the remembrance of our childhood, of our confidence, of our affection, rush¬ ed like an o'erwhelming flood upon my senses: I grew dizzy—I lost even the impress of Gloucester : hadst thou tar¬ ried
ried another moment, where had been my secret ? 44 At daybreak, I go hence : I cast life and reputation in the scale ; yet fear not for me; heed not the malice ot tongues : where'er I go, whatever be my destiny here upon earth, I shall live —I shall die, as becomes the daughter of the earl of Kent: De Büro h may hereafter weep at my endurance, but never blush for my actions : 4is the roy¬ al blood of Scotland which flows in my veins—-'tis the spirit of both my parents, which impresses with a die of iron, the glory of honour, the immutability ot fame. Adieu í adieu ! when thou pray- est for the wayfarer, the wanderer, and the wretched, think oi* vť Margaret de Burgh." On another leaf was inscribed : fci How is, it that thy heart is so soft, thy preju¬ dices so strong? In my eyes, Glouces» ter is a hero: m thine—ah! even in thme, can Gloucester be other than hero ?
liero ? His banner waves on the side of oppression; his soul yearns to redress the injured! If thy father, for his fide¬ lity, and for his long services, groaned in the chains of capricious tyranny, wouidst thou side with his tyrants? — — Thou sleepcst î are mother superior, and the pious sisters of St. aMary 's, sleep also : if they awaken, it is to tell their beads, to breathe thanksgiving and prayer. I am inre** cent—1 am free from intentional of¬ fence·—1 too can pray, but I cannot Jeep ; I cannot even court repose : шу spirits are all wild ; my brain bewilder« ed : the past, the present, the f lit ure, press¬ eth heavy. My eyes turn towards the cast : I watch fbr the first streak of morning·—I watch the hour for decision and for action.—-Bless—bless the in¬ mates of this house of peace ! Its walls no longer seem a prison, or its rules, the
the clogging shackles to liberty and indulgence. Bless—bless St. Mary's! Bless all, and every member of St. Mary's ! — — — —
— — — — Lie still, my heart! away, these blinding tears, these boding terrors, these inward strug¬ gles! The grey mists disperse before the opening dawn; the brilliant stars fade in the firmament ; the breezy east fast grows into glory ! Hark ! 'tis the promised signal ! True—true as fate ! Perish all of woman's weakness ! I doff the trembler, to act the heroine. God bless thee, Isabel ! God bless this house of peace! God bless us all! Again that sound ! Be it for joy, or woe, I come—Gloucester—Gloucester, I come Γ
NOTES.
