Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Treachery: or, The grave of Antoinette: a romance, interspersed with poetry
'T — **m**m*m~*ä
TREACHERY.
CHAP. I. io boly ар d so perfect iş A« lo vie, Aml ht iu buch a poverty of grace, That Ac vvuld think ita лю^ plenteous vrop To glean ţ!ie Urokeu enrs afier the man That the maia harvest reaps; loose now p.ud thc-a A bcatter'd bmtle, and that he'd live upvm.
If is my oaly suit, That you weed your belter judgment* Of all opinion that grows rank in them« \f RAPPED in the trance of her own reflections, encouraging the fiiry flights of fancy, and erecting the fi baseless fabric/' which, crumbling at a breath, vol. iv, a * { leaves
" leaves not a wreck behind," Comande had long paced the cloisters, had long, uninterrupted mui unseen, held secret commune with her own heart, had ana- lized its feelings, had sifted its hope" had discovered, spite of duty, spite of struggling pride, that Louis, unmarked, unknown, was the despotic magnet which held her mind in bondage; that every sentiment of her nature was tinged, that every anticipation of earthly bliss teemed with his image ; that a cloistered life promised no security, for that in the cell or in the chapel, in the nightly hour ofseH-communion or midst the midday blaze of splendor, the same enihuMamt reigned, the same wild glow of roman¬ tic passion. Shuddering at the fatal con¬ viction, summoning resolution and ba¬ nishing it ¡n a breath, wondering at the inertness of her 'own mind, and then resolving every weakness in the fancied attractions of her enslaver, she marked not the approach of Micheline, nor w hen
she heard her well-known voice, did she trace fhe arch smile upon her features. tť Lady," exclaimed the intruder, * ť ! have sought you in the refectory, in the cell of sister Mathilde, andin your own chamber. Do exchange this gloomy spot for the mild, pure air ofthe terrace : the evening is fine, and the garden inviting; besides/* lowering her voice to a whisper, " 1 have got a secret for your private ear." i( Be it quickly told then," said Cori¬ sande ; " 1 have no time for guessing." í: Ľni plenty for thought," signifi¬ cantly rejoined Micheline. " No, no, mv чес ref must be guessed ; though, per¬ haps/' with affected gravity, " I shall but incur your displeasure. Scarce a week ago, when I only told Louis that vou were wearv of solitude, and that 1 thought the interference of the moun¬ tain- h un ter would——----- *" ** Vou are always speaking of Louis," interrupted the blushing Corisande ; Bv í í f i r
ff îs there no other theme for discus¬ sion ?" "None but what are worn thread* bare," replied Micheline : " wonder has died away, for every object at St. Hono¬ rée has beccme familiar. Besides, ifl hint the injustice of my lord marquis, you will chide ; and if Ido but smile at the precision of the holy sisterhood, you will tell me they are not fit subjects for satire. But do let us hasten to the terrace. I have many things to tell you ; though if you will not guess my secret, it must rest quietly in my pocket/* " in your pocket !" echoed Corisande; S( say, dear Micheline, is it a letter ? Has a messenger arrived from the chateau ? Tell me—onlv tell me of mv mother !" and tears of tender interest started to her eves, st Oh no ! my lady marchioness has nothing todo with my communication," rejoined Micheline. " I know of no messenger from the chateau; no recai for
for us. Όο guess then what I can pro¬ duce, to chequer the monotony of your life ?" *' indeed î cannot," said the disap¬ pointed Corisande, mounting fhe terrace steps: tc if it convey no information from my mother, believe me, it can boast no sway on my interest." Micheline smiled incredulously. u I love my father/* she said ; fi I would give my best holiday suit to see him; and yet," archly, t( I could guess another source of happiness ; query whether half the girls in France would not name it first/* " Name what?" asked Corisande. "Why, love, forsooth," replied Miche¬ line. *' Peace and content may flow from oiher sources, but iove is the main-spring to happiness : without it we may exist, but without it we cannot be happy. î am sure 1 would not exchange my cottage prospects of comfort to be daughter to my lord marquis de Roussillon." « 3 Corisande
a heavy sigh ; she turned from the un¬ conscious inflicter of pain, to veil her feelings, if was a chord which would not bear vibration—a chord which evinced her destinv miijht be brilliant, but not enviable. She foo had reflected upon the birth of Louis, until she had coveted its obscuri t ν : she too had vielded to the enthusiasm of affection, untila mountain hovel, cheered by the genial sunshine of love, had been preferable to princely state—until fhe unreserved confidence of a sympathetic mind, softening the pains and trials of existence, had become the best boon of promise. '* Hârk, niy lady," exclaimed Miche» Ííné,cŕŕaWing her to the further extremity öt the terrace, " how sweetly the birds iiftg ! Do warble one of your plaintive ditties, and I will show you the contents ot my pocfcet." 4 ' I must ite it without a bribe," said Corisande,
Corisande, " for in truth I ara in no mood for singing " ° Nay, your voice would float so softly on the night-breeze," urged Micheline, " I am sure it would extend beyond the wall ; it would cheer me, it would cheer —Do, lady/* hesitating, f< if you have one jot of curiosity, do oblige me." "Wait till midnight mass/' said Cori¬ sande, smiling, "and you will hear me in the chapel " <r Ah ! buf in the chapel 'tis all sacred strains," rejoined Micheline : f * besides, your voice isdeadened by the organ, and the chanting of the nuns. îtisforone ofthe little sonnets you used to warble at the chateau that 1 petition ; only try one stanza, and Ì will disclose the whole secret/' Corisande, if she possessed not spirits to sing, possessed not spirits for resis¬ tance. The first effort appeared the lightest; and heedless of the delighted smile, auguring in Micheline ыоге thai* в 4 self»
if gratificación, she essaved the folio w- g sonnet: u Xy.tUcotnr, tbe Uçak ^uìds ^bsstle O'er jion OľCbt iíe n |) and ( ìrt*u ; ^ene.'ril.^ W 'iii: t Кг bť^fdeil thľ-íl**, Vet v\! trt ft re 'N.rî, My cow arti t.eart ? *lÍ5ĽníÍt> not darkne^ 5 points the 'i.srt * Ciut, which t/tr num, with tyrv.it icii, Scorpioti st'i.g, aua haüüaríicyc, Presuiíitb to doubt thcsovVcign nod, Brave? riie threat, anti dares the die; Guilt wieliU the pow'r, To arm the hour Of miduight's gloom— л fearful dow'r Eest, then, rest, nor sad and wearv, Listtn to the quarter's chime ; linger not oVr prosptctb dreary, Poison not the lapse of time ι For virtue arms, Fiom dire itlarn.s. And btrtwb life's path with ш'Члкзз charm*.* Sl There/*
"There/* said Micheline, her every featme glowing with exultation, "I have kept my promise, and Louis may now depart in peace !" 11 What mean you ?" demanded the half-alarmed, half-doubting Corisande ; and quick as thought was the mystery resolved, by the soff flute of Louis echo¬ ing the strain so newly swelling on the gale of evening. Ama/ed, offended, Corisande would ha\c tied, had not .Micheline thrown herself before lier-— "It is I, only 1, who am to blame," exclaimed the terrified girl, (i în mercy breathe it not to the mother superior—breathe it not to the ы.Лег hot» d ! If my lord marquis should hear í —I—" and panting, she burst into tears. '- Yen are \ cry wrong, very indiscreet/' said Cori\ande, attempting to proceed* u Weak« i rl ! s ou know not to what vou ^* oose ше," - -t в 5 €ť Only
9Í Only stay/* implored the sobbing Micheline, fC only promise to forgive, and I will tell you all/* i( What î stay to have my words over* heard, my feelings guessed at ! no, no, Micheline ; I have staid too long already/* and eagerly she hurried down the terrace, as though fearful to brave the syren strains. Micheline moved silentlv bv her side, nor till they had descended to the gar¬ den, did she pause even for breath ; then she demanded an explanation, and then Micheline drew a folded paper from her pocket. Corisande received it. She held it imonened in her hand ; her eyes rented upon it ; her cheek blushed a deeper tint. " í will take it to sister Ma¬ thilde," she at length articulated, strug¬ gling against the inclination of her heart. u Bo so," said Micheline, petulantly, *' and ruin Louis, and ruin me, fur sim¬ ply studying your comfort/' " No,
èi No, î will neither ruin Louis nor you/' replied Corisande ; <s I will give itin toníidence, and be guided by the counsel of age and experience." ŕí Do hide the m^iy frightful paper/ muttered Micheline, as they approached St. Hono.ee. if 1 wish Louis had turn* bled down the cataract ere he had made me his messenger." Corisande shuddered. (f What am î about to do?" she mentally asked, pau¬ sing involuntarily, il Do, my sweet mistress/* implored Micheline, temper yielding to alarm, *' do have pity on Louis ! do have pity on me İ SKter Mathilde is too old to make excuses for love, and poor Louis, and poor luckless me, will be condemn¬ ed v\ i thou t mercy. I am sure he meant no harm ; besides, what sin, or what mischief, can be contained in that simple bit of paper? Mother of God ! lex* pected you would have hid it, and thank¬ ed the bearer. Do let us burn it ; в ti thouffh
^ though! know if is full of good wishes, and offers of service." Corisande spoke not, but she led to her own chamber, nor did she venture any further inquiry till she had secured the door, then, with a grave and se¬ rious air, she demanded when she had seen Louis, and how she had been tempfed fo an act so incautious ? 4t Se arce an hour has passed since í parted with him at the grate/' replied Micheline. ** None of the nuns were in sight, and Louis lamented and wept without interruption. He did so pine to behold you î He v**v:ed he was the most unfortunate of a!! created beings, and called the saints to witness that he had never fell one moment's rest since I told him that you were banished from the chateau, because my lord marquis had discovered the lines written on the mar¬ ble slab in fhe boat-house. Poor Louis ! had you beheld his sad and care-fraught countenance, ýou> my lady, would have urged
urged all vou could to have given com- fort. He said he was going from St. Honorée, and he would but beseech you not to curse the luckless being who had penned those lines. Well, I said all that I could possibly think of, and still he was not pacified ; and then í promised to deliver that letter into your hands; and then----------" Micheline hesitated, arid hung her head upon her bosom. * ( What then ?" urged the attentive Corisande. ·· Proceed ; 1 would hear all the story.'* ** Why then," timidly pursued Miche¬ line, ťí í told Louis, that though î could not bring you to the grate, Ì would en¬ gage, if he would station himself beneath the wall at the furthest extremity of the garden, that he should hear your voice; that—that Ì would assist to speed him on his journey. (Corisande blushed). And then he loaded me with blessings, calling mea ministering angel of comfort, and beseeching
beseeching me to hasten and fulfil my promise. And now, lady, that you know all, surely you will acquit me of intentional wronç ; surely vou will screen both me and Louis from the an¬ ger of the mother superior ; for should Louis never return, 'tis hard I should suffer t or his transgression." " Fear not/' said Corisande, breathing a heavy sigh ; fi the holy abbess shall not hear of this breach of decorum, un¬ less disclosure be urged by its repeti¬ tion." But though Corisande had thus pledged her word, her determination of consulting sister Mathilde was not weakened ; nor till she sought the nun in her narrow cell, did she venture to unfold the little billet ; then did her heart throb high with the praises of her friend ; then did her cheeks glow, her eyes beam with exultation, as she reaped the reward of her forbearance. *< Dearest Corisande !" exclaimed the nun.
nun, a daughter worthy of my beloved Hortense ! de Roussillon is indeed un¬ just ; for the being who can thus triumph over self, who can thus conquer the in¬ citements of inclination, merits not the harsh decree of banishment. You tell me, thatin this romantic Louis, this pupil of our confessor," pursued the sister, ' f you have recognised the mysterious visi¬ tor ofthe boat-house, the— forgi ve me, my child—the invader of your repose. Let us see/' pitying her confusion, " what he can have to offer in extenuation, for thus bewildering the judgment, and sapping the duty of Micheline/' " Shrink not aghast from the wretched cause of your persecution !" wrote Louis; ft injured lady ! beauteous Corisande ! deign but to point out the track which can restore you to liberty, which can -give you back to that mother from whose arms, through my presumption, you have been severed. Explain to me how
how to soften injury, how to lighten displeasure. I will not dwell upon my feelings ; 1 will not tell you how often I have visited these wilds, how offen I have gazed upon the outline of St. Ho¬ norée, until night, mingling all in one unvarying blank, left not a ray fo guide! Then 1 pictured misery; but never did X feel misery, until I learnt why you were doomed to a religious cell. Tax my fortitude, tax my exertion ; fell me, on¬ ly tell me how to appease the vengeance of the marquis; and though you point to banishment, to a total renunciation of my native land, instantly will I be¬ come a voluntary exile, existing among «trängers, existing in penury, existing in despair, nor deem even life's blood too dearly shed, in purchasing peace for y»u í Lady, to-morrow I cease to breathe tbe.air you inhale; I fly at the call of duty ; yet, ere I depart, soon as the mar tin hymn of thankfulness shall cease, i wiU
will tarry at the grate, panting to receive the covered order for expia¬ tion." 4t Alas ! what h to be done ?" sighed Corisande, as sister Mathilde re-closed the paper. " í wish poor Louis was Jess sensitive, was less active in self-torture. Heaven knows, his banishment could not add to my peace: besides, he accuses himself unjustly, for the displeasuie of the marquis was alone excited by my rejection of the duke de Briançon." The nun mused in silence; her eyes were bent upon the ground, and her hand still grasped the letter ; suddenly starting, "I will repair to the grate/' she exclaimed ; " I will speak to Louis; I------" " You !" interrupted Corisande ; " ah, sister ! how can von soften—how can you—*' and confused, hesitating, she hung her burning cheek upon her bosom.
(t I will teli Louis* he may depart in peace/* resumed sister Mathilde* pitying, yet appearing not to observe her agita¬ tion; ** I will tell him that you ¿.either upbraid nor even suspect him to be the cause of your banishment; that you would own no control or influence over hb actions." "Yet surely, sister/ J faintly articula^ ted Corisande, f< fhe offer, fhe disinte- tested generosity c f Louis, demands some attention, some—some acknow¬ ledgment/' ťť I will try to frame all tbat is right for you to say," observed the nun, smiling: "remember I act but as your friend, your messenger." cf There can be no harm to tell him that I wish him happy then," rejoined the blushing girl ; " no harm, surely, no harm to say that his despaiF, that his misery, cannot give me peace. I am sure/' with an energy all her own, " I would
would not wish the misery of an enemy, how then can 1 wish the misery of Louis/' u Youth is often enthusiastic, love figurative/* remarked the nun; <f you must not go by the letter; you must not yield to the flights of imagination ; it is an unstable guide, a guide which will lead into labyrinths and difficulties. Oh no, Corisande ! you must let me dismiss this Louis from St. Honorée, and then you must strive to dismiss him from your own thoughts/'
CHAP.
CHAP. IL ï^fe '\% \n thy face, îmd from thy îıaggftrd eyet Look? wildly o«f,aad threatens ere thou speak*st. DllYDES. Tbe pale assistants ou each other star'd, With gaping mouths, for issuing words prepared; The still-born sounds upon the palate hung, And died imperfect on the falt'ring tongue. Lle. Again insnared by fhe blissful hope ofre- turninglove, Gabriellesnafched the paper, hereyesbeaming with new-kindled fíre,her cheeks glowing with wild emotion. That fire drooped, that colour faded ; the cha¬ racters were strange ; it was not fhe hand of Mortaigne, it was not the announce¬ ment of ¡oy ; it was the warning of danger. " This night, enter not the defile/' тзп
ran the mysterious billet; "pay not your accustomed visit to fhe grave. The plotters of iniquity are ripe for action ; worse than death threatens temerity/' * f Let us return to fhe cottage/' im¬ plored the dame, clinging fo the arm of the terrified girl, "The saints and martyrs guard us î perhaps even now—** She paused to listen. Gabrielle shud¬ dered, fear magnifying the sound of a falling leaf into a pursuer. ** What can it mean ?'* said Gabrielle, as they retraced their footsteps. " Who can be thus sedulous in my fate? Alas! what new trial awaits me ? Worse than death threa¬ tens temerity," she repeated, as her eyes again glanced on fhe paper. The dame would not suffer her to pe¬ ruse it; trembling with a thousand name¬ less terrors, she dragged her forward, nor did they again pause, till safe within the shelter of their dwelling. " Now we may sift fhe contents of this Btrarrge letter/' said the dame, breathing in
in something like security. €í Wlïat cati it mean ? and how can gentleness like yours have excited the enmity of any human being? Alas ! Heaven aid and make us better! How weakly I talk! your poor lost mother, though so mild and so unoffending, was persecuted even unto death/' " And yet I murmur!" sighed Gabri¬ elle ; " tutored by such an example, î dare to complain !" <r if we were always to give ourselves time to weigh our woes against those of our fel Io w -creat u res, we should find ample source for gratitude," observed the dame. t<r I have told Louis so a hundred times; but youth is not the season for conviction." (( True," said Gabrielle ; u human na¬ ture, prone to selfishness, writhing be¬ neath the stroke of disappointment, looks not beyond itself." " Yet what is the disappointment which can have overthrown the peace of Louis ?"
Louis ?" rejoined the dame, 'attentively gazing on hei\ " lie never knew a high¬ er station—he never shared the luxu¬ rious ease of prosperity. From his youth upwards, have his eyes been bounded by yon chain of mountains, has he climbed the tracks of hardi í jod and toil, his reward health, his cessation enjoyment." She paused ; but Gabrielle spoke not ; and when the dame pursued-— (i I would g«ve the universe to dive within his sorrows!" she could only answer with a sigh. The day wore^away in vain conjecture, and the-shade of evening fast gathered in doubt. Gabrielle, perplexed and un¬ easy, watched from her own casement the gradual decline of radiance. She ¿aw the troubled surface of the Rhone blight with the reflection of the heavens; she saw the distant heads of the moun¬ tains capped, as it were, in splendor; her ejes wandered towards the inter¬ dicted
dieted defile; but though she attentively likened, no sound broke upon the btiil- ness, sa\e the distant gurgling of the wa\cs, no moving object spoke the pro¬ pinquity vif a human being. "Ah, with what different sensations have í beheld these objects f " thouplu Gabrielle, as the tears unchecked streamed from her eves. ** How often have ï contemplated yon river, and marked its swift meandering fertilizing the plam, aH nature seeming to flourish all nature seeming to expand ; for 1 was happy, and external objects «arching the colour of internal feelings, cl )thed all in content: now——"she shuddered, u alas î now the genial sun, which warmed me into gladness, Is down, and üke von arid rock, í rear my de¬ fenceless head,, a prey to the gathering tempest." Gain ielle, in conformity to the wishes of the dame, quitted her solitary station, and was once more seated in the little parlour, listening to the shapeless flight* of
inexpHcable contents of the mysterious billet, when the lifting of the garden btch, followed by a supplication for admission, changed that conjecture into fear. Gazing on each other, they moved not, breathed nof ; nor fill a deep groan, preceding a more enfeebled call for succour, banished all save humanity, did they start into action. Gabrielle, with a fancy wound up simo t to a maddened pitch of horror, rushed to the door, picturing nought save Mortaigne bleeding—Mortaigne ex- pii ing. The dame lollowed close behind, and when 'the bolt was removed, when tiie door was thrown open, when the light reflected upon thestill-muffled-up form which in the morning had delivered the billet, they both started in dismav. The stranger tottered into the passage* he breathed the name of Gabrielle, t\ná *hen leant, fainting, aimosi dying, against the wall, *'Oi.. 3 V -' ·· Who
(f Who can it be ?" thought the trem¬ bling girl, as she sprung fo his side, as she offered the support of her arm. The stranger groaned. His hand, which till then had closely grasped the folds of his cloak, relaxed its hold ; the cloak fell from his shoulders; and Ga¬ brielle, breathing a wild shriek of horror, attempted to fiv, for she recognised, in the bleeding, wounded object before her, fhe bandit Leontine. *' Oh,stay,stay !" implored the robber. ' ( Gabrielle, 'tis for thee 1 die ! Stay, stay, and aid me ľ' Gabrielle struggled against her feeling ; she returned to the station humanity enjoined ; she assisted the dame in sup¬ porting him to the parlour, she upheld his fainting head upon her shoulder ; and forgetful of past injuries, aided in his revival. ** Angel of merev ľ' he articulated, as he unclosed his eves, as he fixed them mournfully upon her, " here, here is the
pang/* his breast— (f olv, sustain me î hold me ! I die, Gabrielle,! die in preserving you/' i( Preserving me V* echoed the shud¬ dering girl, (S Alas ! where was the danger?" But the faintness of death had returned and the fast-ebbing wound again ceased to flow. " Hdly saints! what can we do ?" exclaimed the dame, chafing the clay- cold temples of the sufferer. ft . If Louis, if tay lord the count were here—-— " *' I have murdered him/' murmured Leontine, one more reviving. i( Murdered whom ?" shrieked the almost-maddened Gabrielle ; í! murdered the count ! murdered Mortaigne î oh, >:ionster! monster! murdered my hus¬ band !" She shruhk from hisside; she sprung toward the door, but Annette withheld lier, '- i ~ iet
ΎΙίΠΑΟΠΈΠΥ.
** Let me go—let me seek him in the defile Ϊ" she implored, panting, gasping for breath, " I must go 1 . ï must save, or perish with him !" " Hold her! hold her!" exclaimed Leontine, starting up with momentary strength ; " if she goes, if she enters the defile, «he is lost. Though past the power to move, his emissaries^—the moîik —the—the—Oh, hold her ! hold her!" and straggling, convulsed, he fell upon the floor. The blood ^gain gushed from the ga¬ ping wound, for the effort had torn 3side the bandage which the hand of compassion had fitted. ** What monk? what emissary ?" de¬ manded the tortured Gabrielle ; and then rushing to his side, and sinking on her knees, she besought him, as he hoped for salvation, to explain his dreadful meaning ; but scarce had he pronounced—" The pbt was deep laid, .the
the accomplice active," when a thunder¬ ing summons to the outer door shook the cottage to its foundation. "Jesu Ilaria!" aspirated the dame, stili sustaining the nearly-expiring tornei of Leontine. Gabrielle, lost to every thing but the explanation she sought, bent over him, eager to catch his laboured accents; and Annette, dreading she knew not what, Hew to the casement above. i( Be quick, and open the door/' said the well-known voice of Louis. "There has been murder in the cypress-grove/' Annette hesitated not a moment ; she descended to give admittance, and be¬ held Louis, who, pale and agitated, had preceded a mournful band, which now halting at the garden gate, seemed It* convey a kind of litter* The trampling of feet aroused even Gabrielle, but not the presence of the men who crouded the chamber could withhold her from approaching the litter. Her garments с 3 were
were stained with the life's blood of life bandit; her look was wild ; her features marbled ; and when her eyes fell upon the countenance of a stranger, a stranger more than twice the age of Mortaigne, the weighty anguish at her heart fdt lightened, and sinking on the shoulder of Loms, she burst into a flood of tears. Confusion and dismay spoke irr the faces of the attendants ; the monk, too, who vainly busied himself in the recovery of the apparently-dead stranger, seemeci plunged in horror and regret. He heeded not the deep groans of Leontine, he heeded not the steadfast ga2e of tbe darøe; it was his patron, the marquis de Roussillon, whoocetipiedall his thought who claimed all his care. f< Mother of Cod V* he ejaculated, ** who shall convey the fatai story ? Almost within his own precincts, unoffending, unresisting, to be so barbarously, so wantonly mur¬ dered I м " Hypocrite,
** Hypocrite, Tis false !" exclaimed Leonfine, attempting fo raise himself upon his elbow, and glancing fiercely af the monk. Fai her Sf. Pierre fumed towards me speaker ; he started as though a spectre met his sight, and the countenance of the bandit became blackened with a mo¬ mentary convulsion, A feeble groan from the mafquis now recalled the attention of the confessor. Gabrielle, too, relieved from the terror of suspense, resumed *he heroine ; she saw the struggle for returning life, and' bending over the litter, would have chafed the hands of the father of her husband, but he withdrew them with a shudder almost death-fraught. He closed his eyes against the vision which seemed to blast them, as inwardly he articulated' —" Take her away ! take her away !" '* My lord the marquis likes not the attendance of strangers," said the con¬ fessor. с 4 Gabrielle,
Gabrielle, Louis, alike withdrew ; buí when the marquis again raised his head, the wild glance of his eyes darting in every direction, as though to seek an object to rest on, defeated the politic solution of the monk. u Was it Antoi¬ nette ?" he exclaimed. u Say, father, did she escape you too ? Fool ! why say she was dead ? Why lull me info s. airify ? To be so duped, to be so tortured !" "Alas! my lord the marquis raves,** said the monk ; and quick turning fo the dame, tf Is there no inner chamber r M he demanded. " The flights of fever are too often misconstrued, and Heaven inows, the sight of so much blood is enough to give colour to delirium/' 4i The chamber above is mine," said Gabrielle, returning; and taking a light, she led towards the door— vť Surely, with care, the marquis may be conveyed thither; surely---------- " A heavy groan burst from the lips of the
the marquis de Roussillon. The monk snatched the light from her hand, he rudely pushed her behind him ; but the exploit checked not the ravings of frenzy. The marquis had caught sight of the form, had marked the features, more clearly revealed from the strong ray which had fallen upon ihem. Every nerve seemed to thrill, every pulse to quicken ; again he pronounced the name of Antoinette ; and again, with hair erect, and eyes almost starting from their sockets— (i Shade of Antoinette, away !" he exclaimed ; ** spirit of Antoinette, come not to damn me !" " You are ill, my lord," said the wily confessor. " Trust me, Tis nought but fever which conjures these strange fan¬ tasies." " Fever ľ* repeated the shuddering marquis; "is it indeed fever which embodies the dead, which breathes life and action into mouldering clay ì Oh с 5 for
for a fever to expunge the record here !" placing «his hand upon his heart. ť< We 'will remove my lord marquis to the chamber above/' said father St. Pierre, beckoning to the wondering attendants. Instantly the litter was in motion, but as they proceeded along the passage, the voice of the marquis deadened every other sound. tc I tell you it was avarice, it was ambition/* he raved, " coupled with the incitements of the devil, which urged me on. I felt not mercy, í thought лot of mercy, and yet now I would lain pray/' The accents died away as they ascended the stairs, and the calm which succeeded -was awful. Louis and fhe dame were busied in attending the wounded Leontine ; Ga¬ brielle stood with her arms folded, tireading, yet listening for returning Sound, Complex were the ideas which rushed
rushed upon her mind, harrowing the' pressure of her feelings. Could this Antoinefte be the parent upon whose grave she had so often wept'r' Could the father of Mortaigne, the father of her husband, be fhe relentless persecutor of ht r mother? If so, who was the holy man within whose cell, fhe night of her escape from the banditti, she had so¬ journed ? He too had breathed the name of Antoinette ; he too had gazed upon her features, had traced a simi¬ larity which had rived everv feeling of h is nat j re. He had named no persecu¬ tor, he had accused no human being ; vet in a moment like the present, what; but conscience could shape the ravings of the marquis ? Tottering between life and death, his soul upon the verge of· eternity, why should the frenzy of delirium breathe nought but accusation ? —Why should the ghosts of the departed- be summoned to torment ? " May God forgive him Í" murmured Gabrielle, for- e β getful
getful of all save his present bufferings ; ** may angels whisper peace to his pas t- ing spirit 1" " And vet he would have injured vou/ 1 tf ι» _ ' feebly articulated Leontine; íť he would have destroved your peace—he would have blasted vour fame," % - Λίαν God forgive him !" again qui¬ vered on the lips of the agitated gii I. " Oh ! teach me your virtue," im¬ plored the bandit, raising his dim eyes to her face; f ' you forgive him who practised not forgiveness. Gabrielle, íorgive me also !" He extended his hand—he struggled against o'erwhelming weakness. With that Christian philanthropy which breathes nought but peace and good will to man, she took his hand—she s unk on her knees beside him. " it is not me, it is of Heaven you should crave forgiveness," she replied; "Heaven, which vouchafes to sinful man theatoning balsam of repentance." « Alas '
*' Alah ! repentance can atone me bttle," faltered the terror-struck Leon¬ tine. *' Cut off in the career of guilt, the future is too shorf, the past foo blackening. Л thousand crimes marshal alunit meî \ioIence, murder, rnpine, all—ail bar me the reach of pardon î" ťv Oh no, no !" eagerly rejoined Ga¬ brielle ; íŕ the mercy of Heaven is, as its space, boundless ; if is not for man to weigh its forbearance, it is not forman to limit its power." ' ( I huve lived upon fr:n\d, f ' said fhe despairing Leontine, M upon the misery of m v fel low-beings— í ha\c drowned thought in riot and intempérance —I have shut my еагй to the convicting whispers of ι emorse —I Ime perverted every gift of nature, and yielded, unresisting, to the wild v.hirlw ind of passion; say then, can the angel lips of Charity join in pravcr with a soul so black r" 4 * Perfection is not for man/' exclaim¬ ed Louis, " and the charily of a saint would
would become impeached were he to turn from the pleadings of repentant sin. We will pray with you—we will pray for you." " Stay," said Gabrielle, springing from her knees, and approaching the door, "first let us summon the monk ; his be the office to sooth the son! to —" "The monk !" interrupted Leonfine, with a shudder which pa.sied his whole frame, " that fîend î that monk ! Stay, stay, Gabrielle, sweet ministering angel! cali him not hither. Hell is not blacker than ishis heart i Stay í stay ! î tell you he is the devil in a holy guise. ît was he who was to have torn you from the defile; it was he, the vile emissary of a vile employer, who but for my avenging arm, had ere now borne you hence, and blasted every hope on this side heaven." He paused—he gasped for breath ; the convulsions of death seemed to press upon him, and yet eager to pursue, anx¬ ious for strength, he sipped the cor¬ dial
dial which the dame held fo his lips "Had it been any other vie пт," heat length articulated, his dim eves rivetted on the bleached features ofthe attentive girl, <( I had left her to her fate ; but the name was as a spell upon my senses; 1 listened to the description of that Ga¬ brielle until í ceased to doubt. Favour¬ ed by the gloom of night, 1 stole to this cottage—-unsuspected, I gazed u pon y ou— î recognised the being I had so long sought, the idol of my daily, nightly, hourly worship — her for whom I had forsworn every bond of fellowship·— her for whom 1 had deserted my compa¬ nions in peril—she who held my very soul in vassal lage." Gabrielle shuddered, and yet did the tear of pity tremble in her eyes ; so true is if, that gcnileness weeps the 'misery it inflicts. Again the sufferer paused, and again his pangs seemed fo threaten an eternal silence. Gabrielle snatched the cross from her bosom ; she held it towards
towards him ; he extended his hand, he grasped it with a feeble pressure— if Oh God !" he murmured, (( had I served thee with half the fidelity, had I laboured for Heaven with half the zeal, now hadst thou not forsaken me !" " Despair not/* implored Louis; "the voice of penitence is piercing, the ear of mercy never closed/* Leontine forced a ghastly smile; he raised the sacred emblem to his lips ; and even when the door opened, when fa¬ ther St. Pierre entered fhe chamber, no discordant passion ruffled his brow. " See that the murderer escape not," exclaimed the monk, ίο the servants who had followed through the passage. " The caution is needless," observed Louis, pointing to the prostrate Leon¬ tine ; " fear itself may rest secure/' The confessor shuddered ; he turned away from fhe dying bandit. " I would fain dispatch some messenger to the cha¬ teau," he said, (f yeti know not whom to
to entrust with a disclosure so mournful. The absence of the count de Mortaigne is unfortunate, for the depressed spirits ofthe marchioness are but ill aualified to cope with so much horror/' " Is the count de Mortaigne absent? has he quitted Provence ?" demanded Louis. " Yes, the count de Mortaigne dreams not the fatal occurrence/' rejoined the confessor. " The lady Corisande too— " " I will fly to the chateau," eagerly interrupted Louis ; ,f if worthy the in> portant mission, I, father, will reveal it to the marchioness/' ** Heaven prosper you V' exclaimed the confessor ; i( Heaven prosper the pious undertaking ! Go, my son ; my wishes, my prayers attend you !" "Mayi say there is hope, father?** cjuestioned Louis. The monk shook his head. (t Say there is life/' he at length resumed ; " say that tiie sufferer has twice breathed the name of
of Hortense ; and likewise say, tfrsf 'tis duty atone which chains me here." The monk approached the door. " $Щ> father/' implored Gabrielle; *'does not duty point to the relief of suffering nature t how then can Heaven's servant turn from the throes of expiring penitence with duty on his lips ? Is it not outrage to the term ?—is it not pro¬ fanation to his sacred function ?" Father St Pierre paused for a mo¬ ment, then observed— t( When gratitude peints to the murdered, nature shrinks from the murderer" " But your habit boasts the conquest over nature/' pursued the importunate girl, " boasts the subjugation of feeling ; your habit------" The monk frowned, and again he turned away in shuddering horror, for deadly was the groan which burst from the livid lips of Leontine. His heavy eyes rested on the darkened features of the confessor, and a convulsive struggi* succeeded*
succeeded. Gradually his hand relaxed its hold ; the cross fell by his side ; his head sunk back upon the supporting shoulder of fhe dame; and ere the pitying Gabrielle could regain it, could extend it to his view, every pulse, every mortal pang had ceased.
CHAP.
CHAP. HL * Death on the guilty soul irapresses Ictir; To the innocent, death ï* the gentle, Soothmg opiate, the recipe from vue, Th« absolver from the stings, the careï of Life, the slumber from the toils ofiabour."
The midnight clock Lis toíľti ; and hai к ! tbe beil Of death boats slow : heard }e the note profound ? It pauses now, and now with rtijing knell, JHm¿b to the hollow gale its sulien Súund, ¿VÏ\Ï>Ü.N, Tu ε gradual decay of strength, which had long, likethe insidious canker, sapped the once-hale constitution of father Eustache, became but too visible in his hollow eye and shrunken form. He could now barely reach the extremity of the
the garden, he could now barely per¬ form the accustomary rites of the chapel ; yet he shrunk not from his duties ; for religion gave him fortitude, and hope lightened his relaxing hold on life. In pain and infirmity he dragged his listless limbs to the altar of his devotion ; in pious exordium he besought patience and submission under every ill ; he did more than beseech, for he set a living precedent in his own example; he in¬ structed the hearts of each member of St. Honorée through fhe undeviating meekness of Christian love. At peace with all mankind, forgiving the oppres¬ sor, praying for the oppressed, the trials of his own life were recalled but as a beacon for others ; and when he dwelt upon past afflictions, it was but to reconcile the drooping spirits of sister Mathilde to the approaching close of his own fate. <f Igo," he would exclaim, " and the power to wound is past. The sione will press lightly on my bosom, the tear
tear of respect will embalm my bier. Had I lived to passion, had I yielded to the once-warm *ärďour of imagination, this bleèsed ^aìm had fie*er been purcha¬ sed ; had I followed thè màd incitements of revenge, had 1 been unmoved by the tears of innocence, this coul, this scapu¬ lar, had shrouded a heart torn, tortured by remorse and shame. As it is/' and gratefuPy he raised his hands to heaven, " the chastening of my youth has gilded my age with tranquillity and peace ; the evil 1 have suffered has been good in disguise ; the seeming good I weakly coveted, no doubt, had proved evil, from which a gracious Providence has secured nve/* 4( Oh that all could think like you 1" whispered Corisande, gazing upon the saintlike placidity of hr «eatures. ** AlPuttgb* to think so/* said the con* f|Sbr; (f thought alas! hurried away by jtşssion/.fiMR^^feUîîîgto^ the passing tün % íL-AS¡fém ûo \ ' gust,-
gust, burden the weakness of nature with their own untoward actions/' " Many, deceived in their estimate of IKlL/pillV/Oikll, IIIVVn.1 j vrt^UVi 1 » »»V« \^VliUUIIUV| ''labour for their own undoing." " True, røy child, rejoined father Eus- tache ; *' created with generous, noble qualities, with minds capable of distin¬ guishing, with hearts prone to feeling, man, to his own false judgment, hrsown erroneous conclusions, may too fre¬ quently attribute the weighty cares of his life. In youth, led by impulse more than reason, he sifts not the real from the false desires to which his heart in¬ cessantly gives birth ; he pauses not to consider whether the fruition will pro¬ duce pleasure or pain, regret or appro¬ bation ; he grasps the painted lure with that avidity which forbids deliberation, which defies control/' *' And for a season he is happy/' said Corisande, "Oh
"Oh not not happy/' pursued the confessor; "say only gratified; for there is that void within, that aching, pungent pang, which the pleasures of the world cannot silence, which gives the true colour to oar actions, to our motives. To be virtuous isto be happy ; to be happy is to live for others, not ourselves ; to fulfil every relative duty, to discharge every social claim. All the advantages of prosperity, all the parade of grandeur, all the power of riches, unattended by self-control, un¬ qualified by meekness of spirit, are but as toils to catch the soul, are but as flower-bespangled quicksands, beguiling the pass to destruction/* i( And yet/* remarked Corisande, ** those sole qualifications deaden the heart to justice and humanity. My father---------" The confessor shuddered* She hesitated for a moment ; she mark¬ ed the transient flush of his cheek, then timidly
timidly pursued— <c Tell me, my friend» my counsellor, does virtue demand im¬ plicit obedience to a parent's will ?'* i£ Not un con d it i ona ny," replied father Eustache. (( If a parent urge against the convictions of reason, against the appro¬ val of conscience, in resistance, not sub¬ mission, lies the virtue." " Then,"eagerly exclaimed Corisande,. "you acquit rae, father, of a breach of duty in opposing a union with the duke de Briançon ?** u 1 acquit all opposition to unj ust tyranny/' said the confessor ; " but though the ambition of the marquis dc Pouvdllon releases vou from passive obe- dienco, it íanetions not an uncurbed latitude ίο \ cu 'own wilb" ·* Uhat mean you ?" demanded Cor!- .sande, gü/. ;,i g fearfully at the confessor, " í тели," resumed idther Hustache, íť that however the heart may play truant, I atienee, and passi v r acquiescence to i ! :e painful alternative of conventual * ч ! - ^ seclusion,
seclusion, is all that remains to be prac¬ tised. Love, my daughter/' and he spoke with an emotion which thrilled his whole frame, " like every other passion which swavs the heart of man, unless nipped in fhe bud, swells into a devouring flame—a flame which ravages every princi¬ ple of our being, which becomes the fyran t despot of our feelings, of our thoughts, of our actions. Guard it, smother it, lovely child of Hortense î lest it grow into that wild, that fearful whirlwind, leaving, as it has done here," placing his hand upon his bosom, i{ nought but the wreck of its fury. Alas ! " forcing a melancholy smile, " upon that subject lean speak but too feelingly; for the mad indulgence of youth perpetuated a maturity of misery, an age of regret." " Yet have you nought of self-re¬ proach to embitter reflection," observed thesympathizing girl: "'sister Mathilde has told me the actors and the actions. Alas!" and vainly she strove to repress her
hertears, '* it is not you, father, who demands, who excites pity ; for does not religion bid us pray for the oppres¬ sor more than the oppressed ? Philoso¬ phy too——" ff Religion, my child," interrupted the confessor, ic teaches us to triumph over misfortunes, philosophy only to endure them. Long ere Christianity dawned upon the world, men died heroes, or rather they died through rashness and false courage ; for like the unlettered Indian, they feared not the denounce* ments of vengeance. Heaven be praised, we live in an era in which the plea of ignorance would vouch like an anathema against us—in which the divine ray of truth, beaming as the refulgent sun, pierceth fhe inmost corners of Creation— in an era in which the true Christian, the disciple of heaven, views the allure¬ ments of this world as a chimera, yields to privations, to the endurance of su¬ blunary ills, bends to the yoke of suf- β % ferance,
ferance, views e'en affliction as a bene¬ fit ; and when, in submission to the frailty* of tins mortal state, he feels the approach of death, he considers the close c f life but as a passport, a pass¬ age to one more happy—to one eternal," ( ' Such be thy translation !" thought Corisande, as she marked the wan cheek of fhe confessor. Davs wore awav, and the growín» weakness of father lvustache became more apparent. With the as>.btance of his staff, he could now bai elv drag hi; wearied limbs through the cloister. The hectic flush of internal fever glowed upon hissunken cheek; and often, almost gasping for air, did he bare hib shorn crown to the opened casement. The breeze of heaven wafted a temporary enjovment, for it cooled the scorched form which wooed its freshness. Sometimes, aided by the arm of аыег Mathilde, he would aspirate his faith and hîs hopes; sometimes, cheered by the solicitude of Corisande,
Corisande, he would hail her soft sym¬ pathy as the peace-offering of de Rous¬ sillon. Not a care ruffled his pure spinta ; § at peace with man, at peace with hte own soul, be awaited, in patient submis¬ sion, but for the moment of release, but for that eternal mandate which dissolves every mortal coil. Cheered by the pure essence of devotion, he h ľ: n bled him« self to the divine will, and besoin ht, in the last expiating struggle, the same Almighty support which had upheld hitn in every earthly trial. If was after the close of vesper service, when the hymn of thanksgiving had ceased to swell, that Corisande, summon¬ ed, by the mother superior, with trem¬ bling apprehension repaired ίο the cell of the confessor» She beheld him stretch¬ ed upon his hard mattress, sister Ma¬ thilde kneeling by his side, as was also a monk ot an adjoining convent* A pla¬ cid smile irradiated the features of the dving Eustache. His hand grasped fbg i> 3 crucifix,
crucifix, as his lips motioned fojoin in the rites of devotion ; but sound and power were alike fled; for though his eves still beamed expression, the livid hue of death fast spread o'er his countenance. Every lineament spoke hope and resig¬ nation ; no pang seemed to rankle, no fear to intrude ; guilt had never infused the ba.efi,. poison of its venom ; am! where guilt harbours nof, the struggles of mortal su flerance may be heavy, but the struggles of the mind are light. It was near midnight when father Eustache sank fo sleep ; he sank to sleep upon earth—he awoke in heaven ! Melancholy was the dawn of return- irg day, deep the gloom which hung upon the brow of each member of St. Honorée. They met in the chapel, they met in the refectory, yet each fch a sadness of heart, for each mourned a friend in the confessor. Corisande, unu¬ sed fo the cold precepts of submission, shrunk from the mild counsels of the mother
mother superior—shrunk to hide her swollen eyes in solitude and meditation. To repine may be impious, to regret must be nature ; Corisande was all na¬ ture, and hurried away by thai tender thrill which pines ťo feed its own woes«, she sought each haunt which could most recai the form of the departed father Eustache. Alas ! how often do we cherish in¬ dulgences which rive every feeling of our bosoms! how often do we muse o'er the past, when the past can only awaken woe ! It is a propensity to which the human heart is prone ; a tax upon me¬ mory; a weakness, which reason, which fortitude cannot exterminate ; it hurries us back to the haunts of early peace ; it re animates the forms of friends we have lost ; it iingeis o'er again the bliss of past enjoyment, for the grave veils but the external form of its tenants. Merit dies not; ah no! it lives in the grateful mind, it awakens those sensations which the в 4 world
woridsfyîes-ïte^w^, which nature stamps »cr чЫШу ! . Night a third time had spread its dark mantle over the earthi when the deep .toiling of the funeral bell, and tbe smothered sobs of fhe assembled sisters, .aumnmced the hour of interment. Bi- .goffed to the holy roof which had shel¬ tered the youth of Hortense, which still jftfacfrered the age of Mathilde, the con¬ fessor had in health marked oot his narrow bed of rest, and, as the last lingering wish in life, had petitioned to mou ider beneath a lone cypress tree in the burial ground of St. Honorée. Shrouded in a veil of the order, Corb safide joined in she procession, swelled by the attendance of some of the brothers of a neighbouring convent. She listened to the sacred peals of the organ, to the pious psalmody of fhe nuns and fnar¿, Kôw swelling info full cadence, now dying in low reverberations, now paus¬ ing, and then again breathing notes so so f t,
soft, as thrilled on the ear of religious enthusiasm like the choral chant of an¬ gels. A thousand consecrated tapers blazed upon the altar of the chapel ; the nuns and the monks too each bore a lighted taper in their hands, which beaming on the sable pall, on the me¬ lancholy memento of mortality, snatched as unholy every thought from earth, tranced every soul in deep, in awe- fraught sadness. Impressive was the voice of the officiating monk; from the fal tering thrill of lingering sensibility, i* gradually resumed, it gradually recovered those deep, those full tones, which give so* lemnity to expression. An exordium ίο survivors was delivered by the bier of death; and not till the beauty of holiness had been portrayed by every grace of eloquence, not till the inseparable at¬ tendance of misery upon immortality and sin had been ably explained, not till the virtues of the newly emancipated %ya\ of the confessor had been held up* n о for
for imitation, was the body, once ani¬ mated by that soul, removed fo its cold sanctuary. The coffm was lowered, fhe hst impressive prayer was pronounced, the earth fell hollow upon the lid; in a little moment it was hid from mortal eye, and the mournful train returned to reflect and to pray. Corisande supported the trembling form of sister Mathilde ; she heard her convulsed sobs, yet she could not offer consolation, for her own heart told her time and self-communion were the only specifics. At the door of her cell, the nun waved her hand in adieu. Corisande understood the motion ; she pressed that band in silence, and hurried to her own chamber. Too much impressed to woo the re¬ pose of her pillow, she dismissed Mi¬ cheline, and yielding to a train of sad reflections, mused o'er the awful scene she had witnessed. She recalled the last «ooments of father Eustache, the strug-
gling sighs, the half-heaved sobs of his mourning sister. A«;ain she fch fhe fer- vent pressure of her hand, again she shuddered at the almost-palsied tremor which had convulsed the drooping form of the nun, which had betrayed, spite of the boasted subjugation of feeling, the never dying force of affection ; nor did she extinguish her laper, until fancv, swayed bv the warmth of friendship, perpetuated a weak memorial to his praise. *' YWejj not ! he ď.ed as saints have dieti-, I i ib ev 'ry рапц, ins ev'ry cure is fio w u. Ali.uin not ! he hv 'Ί to nian a guide; Лп I th'íHj/Ji b:s w m is set, Lu ίυηη is '¿ν ¡ut Tv Γ.4ΐ!_ Γ Κ· w uh itb kindred tin. R f -í.gi ju Joliul bi hiivJ я iustini: deathlcíS ray - λ r^y v\hií..h c..a*eu> bkmk fies}tnii, » Л ¡<'у wLivh İ'iüuts tbc íuiig υ£ ruthless deíith, V\'L.th cht'wí 1 ' the cauL'rjiig s \ay o ť care, ΛΐιΊ I^'htetia e'en tli« atrugghng parting breath,
Foi ah í when earthly friendships dır, Udicou gneb îhe hope whjch quella the mumi*« imgbigh. Bend not, poor mourner î o'er the tomh; Woo not at mid n d.tS bour a spot so lone ; Set к no¿ the chill bepuîchıai gloom ; Pour not od echo's voice the fear-fraught moa». Cold lueditation'b sad'mtig sway, Banqocb on ev'ry joy, and dims the brightest dny, 'İ ijou 0 h í tas "d tí e ujuiiinOiì partrng kotli, 'li OM^iı l usi/ i îlit chant í f hob fo w 'iul nti?, S If iıt Un oi¿a»/¡> mfcîtnıg s} tii, And d гк thoghue oftaţi f J tapfres' íigl.t, At matai bright, at vebper grey, Vv r €*U stek Ιίιε haìlow'd btonc which шлгкз h s inoníd'riiig clay, Jlis lift alone ahs^un iiaagbt, lhe иг native £>ouí wot'id laeiki) truct } Hi» tile, v/k.ch bad t *.лт\, e ΐ. u^ïit И.5 hie wh.ch bak a№ ctioa picture grace ; Kot în the world's ha?->h ·~οι fl»ctf wild, Hut gVean'd by imck sulm'bfcion, wrcught by j.ft~ tie uce unii,
Vi m ρ not ! :t ъа.т F.u.-tat'ii.o died; Mourn oot í úit k..idrod soul bib angeb cUira; Full oft las a u ¡Terinas} ľ-it sigb'd, Pantu. g ti e (lestinM poit of reît ta gain î VV f ep n*>t I to шап a balm is gi v'n ; ' Γ ís resignation wings the pious thoughts tohetu :Л
CHAP.
*Е=
CHAP. IV. Oh, d'ibiwû spectacle ! How humble now Lie* that ambitiou which was late rø \ .oud ! Sai oli ι- г . Ever active in the cause of benevolence, Louishastened from the cottage; theda**k- ness of night impeded not his progress; fhe pressure of his own feelings checked not exertion. 'Tis true, a thousand fan¬ cies crouded upon imagination, a thou¬ sand remembrances familiarized every step; and though the twinkling firmament yielded but an imperfect light, yet did his eves wander along the meandering course of the Rhone, nor pause till they rested on the copse which emboaomed tbe boat-house. But to expound the start, the
the agitation of Louis, when mentally exploring this copse, when conjuring the stone grey walls which rose beneath it, would be, at a period like the present, foo long a digression ; we must there¬ fore speed him through the extensive park, nor dive within the sacred fold of feeling, till we pause with him at fhe chateau gate; then if vve have ever known the weighty tax of softening a ta!e of ill, if we inve ever been doomed the heart riv ing mission of lightening a death-fraught story, we may, by retro¬ spection, conceive the painful combina¬ tion oí sensations whieh checked his hand ere vet it grasped the announcing bell. Perhaps he was about to plunge security Ín woe, to clip the dream of fond re¬ liance, to sever the thread of sublunary hope. Alas ! how could he mould the dire disclosure? how parry the frenzied start of suspense ? how meet fhe anguish of a fond, a despairing wife? The pic¬ ture was too mournful ; he shrunk back cibmnvei.
ďismaved ; tears started to his eves ľ nor till the words of father St. Pierre re¬ curred to memory— u The safftrcr has tzvice breathed the name of Hortense,'* à\d indecision yield to courage. Confusion reigned within the interior of the chateau ; all appeared terror and dismay ; guards were stationed in the courtyard, and the egress of every living being was forbid. Louis started, for scarcely was fhe gate re-closed, when his passage was barred by a sen fi nel, who abruptly demanded his business. " í would speak to the marchioness de Roua- sillon," replied the youth. '* Know you ought of the marquis r' questioned the soldier. " Alas ! it is upon that mission í come," said Louis. <f Counselled by father St. Pierre------" íŕ Come on then," interrupted the soldier ; and Louis, following, soon found himself, not in the dreaded presence of the marchioness, but in the presence of a шап
a man who appeared, by his afc* of autho¬ rity, to be the commander of the guard. ** Who are you ?" demanded the offi- , ter, narrowly ектигпП^ tue youlct. t% 'Tis of no import/' proudly re¬ plied Louis. "Time is not хо be lost ; mv business is pressing; 1 would speak f о the marchioness ele Roussillon." ' 4 1 must know first the nature of that business," observed the officer. " Have you to learn, thatin the name of the kisig, the marquis de Houssillon, when found, together w i ith his confessor father St. Pierre, are our prisoners?" " The marquis de Roussillon ľ' echoed the astonished Louis. *' The father of tiie count de Mortaigne, of the lady Corisande ?" ft The same," rejoined the officer. *' And novs be brief, and explain vour * · mission/* i! What ifl repoif the marquis to have escaped vour power r" asked Louis. TheofmerMVl·· g towards the door. "Stav/* *
" Stay," he continued ; " the marquk seeks not—cannot escape. The hand of Heaven is on him, and though death free him from the foil, his body remains a witness for me." *' And the confessor ?" urged the officer. *' Is with his patron," replied Louis^ ** ignorant of the snare, therefore un¬ conscious of the danger. Now suffer me to behold the marchioness." The officer paused in thought. " You swear to the veracity of what you have uttered ?" he at length exclaimed. Louis spoke not, but the lightning of his eye flashed indignation. " I would not impeach your word," resumed the officer, "but the very shadow of connivance must be sifted." " You are righr ; you do but perform vour duty," replied Louis, temporizing with the native pride of his feelings. " 1 am a stranger ; lead on." 44 First promise to become our pilot/* said
said the officer, « and I, in my turn, en¬ gage that your interview with the mar¬ chioness shall be witnessed but by the holy man who accompanied us hither." " í care not though it be witnessed by the whole world," exclaimed Louis, if my motive being but to spare the already· harrowed feelings of the marchioness." '* If you are such an advocate for mer* cy," observed the officer, " you cannot object ίο aid in a cause in which injustice, inhumanity, and craft, are but too ob¬ vious; you cannot object to direct usto the spot where we may arrest the mar¬ quis de Houssillon, and his abettor, the monk St. Pierre/* ' f I he father of the count de Mortaigne, the father of the lady Comande, 1 * faltered on the lips of Louis ; yet was his fhe hesitation of a moment. If unjustly accused, if cruelly, if maliciously arraign¬ ed, he judged by bis own feelings, grate¬ ful must be the privilege of justifica¬ tion ; and if guilty, why should interest, why
why should rank, shield from cogni¬ zance? " Ye»," he exclaimed, addressing the officer, " I will be your pilot; con¬ ato et me to the presence of the marchio¬ ness de Rouesfiîîon, and then prepare to depart/* They waited in the antiroom until the hermit was summoneJ, Louis noted not his approach ; absorbed in his own reflections, musing how best to unfold the mission of calamity, he stood with his arms folded, and his eyes bent upan the earth, nor till an exclamation of amazement met his ear, did he start into being ; then he encountered the fixed gaze of the holy father ; and then, with wonder and doubt, did he trace the quickly-varying expression of his melan¬ choly countenance. " Blessed saints I what new mystery is here ?" articulated the man of God, <% in the lone dwelling of my choice, did the worshipped form of Antoinette pursue me, and here» too, in the chateau of de Roussi lion,.
Houssillon, do î behold the same never- to-be-forgotten features/* ŕť I too would crave an explanation," said Louis, <f but time presses, and the waning Iffe of de Roussillon forbids delay. Father——" He paused, for the hermit sprung for¬ ward ; the hermit hung upon his arm. i£ De Roussillon dying \" he exclaimed» " God of justice ! de Roussillon hum¬ bled, fallen ! Oh lead meto him, thatin the awful struggling throes of dissoluiion, I may snatch the words of truth !" iC It is on the marchioness that dc К onssiI Ion calb," said Louis. " Ala* î he ìtdì her hist h in health ; now fallen beneath the stroke of an a^sasdn, if is nt her hand he craves the last sad oiììces of affection," "We will apprize fhe marchioness, we will hasten together/' eageriy rejoined father Augustin ; "a soul burdened as is de Roussillon's must need consolation. Come on, my son," and he led to an interior
interior apartment, in which they found the marchioness. She rose at their entrance, she closed the missal she had been reading, she gazed inquisitively on the dejected coun¬ tenance of Louis ; and when he spoke of fortitude, almost breathless, she pro¬ nounced the name of Mortaigne, the name of Corimnde. "Fear not, lady; the barb pointeth not there," faltered the youth. ' ( Heaven be praised !" murmured madame de Roussillon, and then with a calmness which dared every other ill, she listened to his recital. She wept, but they were tears of com¬ passion, not tears of tortured feelings. She besought an immediate removal to the cottage ; but it was in the energy of dufy rather ihan the spontaneous flow of affection, rather than the anxious, aching interest of love. Unconscious of the crime for which he stood arraigneel, and Utile doubting a speedy acquittal, she had
had heard of a guards arrival at the cha¬ teau without terror, and was patiently awaiting the return of the marquis, when the fearful recital of Louis announced his summons to a higher tribunal—a tri¬ bunal from which there is no appeal. Her agitation increased as the carriage approached the cottage, and when it stopped at the gate, she pressed her hand upon her heart as though to allay its throbbing. She clung to an arm trem¬ bling as her own—she gazed on a face pale as her own, for father Augustin himself existed an evidence that the feel¬ ings, the weaknesses of human nature, cannot be exterminated. He too trem¬ bled ; but it was from a different source ; he trembled lest the power of disclosure should be passed, lest life should have flown,ere the fearful mystery was revealed. Father St, Pierre advanced to the gar¬ den gate ; with an exordium of submis¬ sion on his lips, he stretched forth his arm to aid the marchioness; that arm was
was seized, not by the marchioness, bttt by the officer of the guard. The confes¬ sor struggled, but he struggled in vain ; the demand, the explanation, were alike momentary. Ail passage to the chamber of his patron was barred against him, and terror-struck, dismayed, he was conveyed »prisoner to the chateau. The dame met them at the entrance. <* My lord the marquis sleeps/' was the reply to their inquiries. C( The holy father St. Pierre has bound up the wound, and says every thing depends upon quiet/* '* I must see him/' said the marchio- neiss, shuddering. <ť Alas! whilst now í hesitate, perhaps he feebly calls upon m v name." Louis had already stole up the stairs, and now returned, followed by Gabrielle. She bowed upon the ex.ended hand of the marchioness ; a vivid blush glowed upon her cheek, a heavy sigh swelled her bosom: vet she led to the chamber, her fìnger
linger raised to her lip, intőken of si¬ lence. The marchioness approached the bed. Her eyes swam in tears, as they rested on the death-wan cheek of the marquis, that cheek so late flushed with pride, that fallen port, so late towering in all the authori¬ tative crest of power. She knelt by his side; she listened fo his short breathing; and so deeply was she absorbed by the melancholy object before her, that she noted not the entrance of father Augus¬ tin, nor the start of surprise, the smile of suppressed rapture, which marked his recognisance of Gabrielle: she noted not the noiseless step of the lovely girl, as she crossed the chamber, nor the grace¬ ful bend with which she supplicated the hermit's blessing. Ah ! what a thousand pangs did that recognisance inflict on the heart of Ga¬ brielle í When last she beheld him, when, drooping with fatigue,» she craved the shelter of his dwelling, the wiles of vol, iv. ä love
love had not beguiled her peace; the almost mortal pang of desertion had not outraged her feelings. Sick almost to fainting, she hung her head upon her bosom* she clung to the bed's foot for support, yet did the groan which burst from the awakened marquis recaí her to exertion. She looked up—she saw him raised upon his elbow, his eyes nearly starting from their sockets, as they rested upon her. "Antoinette," he exclaimed, *' whv come you here ? why haunt me even unto death ? is it to upbraid, is it to call for condemnation ? Go, go, ac¬ cusing spirit ; thy pangs were nought compared to mine !" Gabrielle motioned to depart, but father Augustin grasped her hand, and forcibly detained her. * c What mean you, father ?" demanded the marchioness. " I.mean to avveken conscience," so¬ lemnly replied the hermit. " I mean to extort the tale of murder ! Lady, arm your
5*otir feelings ; the marquis best can tell by whom------" ŕŕ iMurder! who talks of murder? who dreams of murder?" raved the tortured marquis. «* The charge is false—she died a natural death—no blood was shed, and the infant------" He paused. The hermit was all ear; he still grasped the arm of Gabrielle, he still held her firmly at the bed's foot ; he called her Antoinette, and then he stroked back the ringlets of her glossy hatr, and bared her polished forehead. The marquis writhed in agony ; the bed shook with his palsied agitation ; swollen drops chased each other down his forehead ; and still were his eyes, as though spell-bound, rivetted on the ob¬ ject of alarm, " Have mercy ! have mercy!" im¬ plored the weeping marchioness. ** Why thus wantonly harrow the last struggles uflife?" Éí This be my mercy/ 1 said father Au- e 2 gusti ñ é
gustin, striving to suppress the bitter sigh of memory. " Daughter, I would probe the heart of guilt ; I would fan the newly-awakened promise of remorse ; ï would aid the self-condemning spirit ; I would teach yon fallen sinner, that repa¬ ration points to the only hope of mercy. What are your prayers, what are my prayers, what the prayers of fhe whole church, unaided by the inward grace of penitence ? I would mourn over a fallen foe, I would bathe his wounds in tears, holy saints í I would do more, I would rouse him to the chance of pardon/' " Alas i father, you rave/* sobbed the marchioness; "how can de Roussillon be your foe ?" <f Guilt is ever the foe of innocence/' solemnly rejoined the hermit. " Daugh¬ ter, view him well/' pointing fo fhe marquis, whose eyes, still in sfatue-like earnestness, were fixed on Gabrielle; "what but guilt produces this agony ? what but conscience, too late awakened, poisons the
the approach of death ? Is there ought here to scare ?" gazing on the distressed sir! : " ou<rht in those anarel features to intimidate ? Oh, no, no ! here is the phantom/' pointing to his breast ; (i here, in his heart, in his brain, does it rankle. Heaven has given to the sweet offspring of Antoinette a semblance to awaken/ remorse to appal a murderer !" " Murderer !" echoed the livid lips of the marquis; "'tis false, 'tis a calumny most foul î Who dares accuse me ?" and then, shuddering, gasping, h^ shrunk from the meek eyes of Gabrielle. " 1 clare accuse you, I do accuse you/* exclaimed father Augustin ; ťf you 3 by whose crimes every chance í e*er possess¬ ed of bliss has been blasted— you, whose avarice, whose insatiate ambition, has withered the roses once glowing in my path— you, who have bared their sharpest thorns, and strewed them on my pillow !" "Who are you ?*' demanded tht .nar- £ 3 q 11 ' 3 *
quis, raising his head wiih the rallying start of desperation. The marchioness too looked up ; she gazed in a^ful dread upon (he hermit, »л**, »uv. vìi ti.u -э ки uiíjCi V 4íSj; SaiO father Augustin ; " look into your own soul, then tell me the being whom, next to Antoinette, vou have most injured !" 7 h e rø 'u quis groaned; he buried hi;s face in his hands. The marchioness, shuddering, almost pronounced the name of Everard. " Look into that heart which lured you on to evil," pursued the religieux . 14 look upon those black, those damning deeds, which fears of blood can scarcely expunge/ 5 " Still, still! know you not/'muttered de Roussillon. " Know 3011 Drusiiie? know you the vornan who, leagued with banditti, be¬ came your activ e emissary ?" questioned iatlvr Angustili. ** Holy Virgin !" aiticulated Gabrielle,
ft her who called herself my mother 5 ' but the hermit heeded her not ; his whole thoughts, his whole attention was claimed by tne marci ui s who, blacken e I by inward convulsions, appeared strug¬ gling in the agonies of death. The marchioness sprung from her knees ; she bent over him ; every past injury was forgotten ; she beheld him but as the father of her children, and tears of regret and pity streamed down her cheeks, "Cruel! cruel !" she mur¬ mured ; buf the hermit retained his bta« tion ; still did he stand at the bed's foot, and still did he detain the trembling Gabrielle, " Go not, my child/* he whispered. " Oh, go not in a moment like the present ! the dissolution of man ¡s awful—the dissolution of guilt is appal¬ ling. Sta\ till í probe him even to the quick. Slay, daughter of Antoinette, si >y, and strengthen my resolution/* Gabrielle felt that he needed support, i: 4 r 'eh
shoulder; and even when he strained her, with frenzied fervor, to his bosom, ^shen she felt his warm tears upon her i heek, she struggled not for freedom ; я sensation fill now unknown thrilled at her heart ; her eyes were withdrawn from the ghastly object before her, only ίο fix upon the pensive features of the hermit. She saw them agitated, even to wiidness, yet she guessed not, she dreamt not the cause; she saw his bosom heave with suffocating sobs ; she saw his cheek bleached to marble whiteness, ** God of mercy 1" he aspirated, " lighten the horrors of von stricken sinner \ bend, mould his hardened heau to justice, to repentance !" <ť Drusiiie ! where is Drusiiie ?" feebly asked de Roussillon, once шоге rallying the waning powers of exertion, and labouring hard for breath. " Summoned to the world of spirits," replied
replied father Augustin ; tŕ yet she died not unaided by the atoning offering of confession ; she—" l^Ri \Ul» tlUÖUt^C ilCl ι retati ¡y *ίι* terni p t ed the marquis, ί( I prayed for her," solemnly rejoined the hermit ; " I will pray for you." The marquis tried to smile, or rather it was a ghastly grin of mingled den- aure nud contempt, which convulsed his iı\ İd features. " Murderer of Antoinette!" said the «•hiiddei ¡ng father Augustin, "Drusiiie died a penitent; Drusiiie poured into my ear the teeming measure of your—of her transgressions. She told me that a brother's smile veiled a deviľs heart; she told me that avarice, that ambition— Jesu Maria '" and again he clung to the shoulder of Gabrielle. * 4 Who are jou?" rallying every remnant of strength, springing erect from the pillow, and gazing steadfastly on his uemK palsied accuser. v. 5 «« In
If In me behold a man whom vot/ crimes have stricken even u n f о madness/' replied father Augustin ; íf in ire behold St. Sauverne, the once powerful heir of the duke de Fontainebleau, the опее happy husband of Antoinette !" * My father ! saints of Heaven, my father !" shrieked Gabrielle, shrinking from his arms, and dropping on her knees before him. The hermit snatched her from fhe earth ; he strained her with a convulsi* e grasp to his heart ; he pressed his quiver* ing lips fo her colourless cheek, yct>t:ll were his eves directed towards de Uoib- sillon —still did he hope some rioing in¬ dication of remorse ; and when he hailed a tear,, when he hailed a sob oí doubtful birth, hesprung even f rcm the caresses of his new-found child to fan the dawn of penitence. The mari} u is buried his Lice in the pillow ; he breathed a shuddering groan. Lead to self, zealous in the cause of vitti t\
virtue, fhe hermit bent over him; he blessed the labouring struggles oï his mind, he pravcd for awakening grace ; he waved his harui for the marchioness and Gabrielle to depart, and when alone, when kneeling bv the couch, he besought the tortured marquis, in the soul soothing accents of true pitfv, to unburden his mind, to lighten lus troubled spirit, to snatch fhe fleeting hour, which a kind, which an all-merciful Providence had offered to hb acceptance. With the name of Antoinette on his lips, de Roupillon ventured to look up, he ventured to meet the mild eves of her i r j. í red ii tibba n d ; yet he í raced no angry passion, no sign of brooding malice; he saw but a ministering angel of peace, he heard but the reiterated assurances of comfort. His pride, lately so inflexible, Ьегчг.е subdued ; his feelings, Iatelv so discordi!!!, became harmonized. íl Hus- baud of Antoinette," he feebly articulated, r« 6 stretching
stretching forth his clasped hands, " prav for me—pray with me !" Vague and inefficacious would it be to trace the struggles of newly-humbled bin, to linger o'er the bitter conflicts arising in a death-bed confession. The most acute pang which the regenerated mind can endure, is the sting of con¬ science, is the internal register of crimes, which a midday sun suspects not. Alas } 'tis a gangrene which festers even fo the grave, which darkens the shadows of fu» turity, which poisons that awful hour of separation, in which man's flitting spirit needeth the aid of conscious innocence, of unbroken faith, of pure integrity. Permit me then, gentle reader, more effectually to unravel the close-spun web of mystery, to lead you from the scene of de Roussillon's death*, even to the dawn of de Roussillon's early life.
CHAP,
CHAP. V. Il.ere was a laughing devil in his sucer, That raisM emotions bothof rage and наг; And when his Гголп of hatred ílarkty feli, Hope withering fled, and mercy sigh'U fare well ! Byron*
Λ n tvil soul, producing holy witness, Is lkea \ Hain with a smiling cheek, A goodly apple rotten ai lhe heart. Shakespeare. At a period almost too early to date the die of character, did the rapacious avarice and quick-spreading seeds of injustice, fraud, and ambition, lurk within theheari of the young count de Mortaigne, the hope and heir of a confiding father. Gifted by nature with a mind high and aspiring, wiih
with passions strong, with a judgment comprehensive, the f sise bias of educa¬ tion had changed the current of first impressions, had transformed every nobler impulse (into the rank weeds of malig¬ nancy afnd sin. For eight years Mon¬ taigne was the only darling of his parents' hopes; Jat the age of eight years, Mor- taigne Recarne a brother; but in this new tie was the tenderest link of nature se¬ vered ; for in giving being to a hapless, helpless daughter, the marchioness tie Roussillon paid the forfeit of life. Loud was the plaint of lamentation, bitter the pang of regret ; the rich mourned a friends the poor a benefactress. But the marquis—alas ! the bereaved marquis, rived in the moment of accumulating comforts, knew not how to .sustain the blow ; his worldly prop was lost, and health, and vigour, and even peace of mind, seemed fled for ever. Mortaigne stood by the coffin of his mother, and yet his heart yearned not tu w ards
towards fhe innocent price of her exis¬ tence ; he saw his father caress the infant Antoinette, and jealousy infused its ma¬ lignant poison in his breast. Taught to behoid each rich possession as his own, torturing was the thought of participa¬ tion, and each year which rolled over his head ripened but the seeds of male¬ volence. The marquis, too indulgent to interpose the curb of restraint, guessed not t!.e e\ìl ; nature seemed to glow in the subtle specionsness of design ; and wanting nof the bias, but simply the lure to evil, Mortaigne burst upon the world. I will not outrage the ear of delicacv. by describing his licentious career; î will not linger o'er the scenes of profli¬ gacy and vice into which, by example and inclination, he was alike hurried, for St. Pierre, the guide his. father had chosen, a ft iar by habit more than in¬ clination, wore but the external garb of sanctity, it was in Paris that the close cement
cement of interest began—in Paris that the bond of obligation was rivefted. Father St. Pierre, though he had exter¬ nally renounced the weaknesses of the flesh, yet in secret defiled the purity of the spirit. From his tongue flowed the language of truth ; in his breast raged the tempest of passion. The pleaded infir¬ mities of nature covered the excesses of his young pupil, or rather, in the exam¬ ple of indulgence, they threw a thickened veil o'er his own. It wasduringthis sojournment at Paris, that father St. Pierre, rivetted by the lure of beauty, worshipped an earthly saint. Drusiiie was young, and Drusiiie had listened to the incitements of interest, the murmurs of compassion, with more than pify. The tyranny of parental power was execrated, the strictness of monastic laws deplored ; yet Drusiiie smiled upon her lover. His habit gained him a free admission, and often in the áarkness of night did he steal within the dwelling
dwelling of her father ; nor till &Ы whispered the prospect of becoming a mother, did he awaken from the trance of delirium. Softened by her tears, fôr she clung around her seducer for succour and protection, father St. Pierre infrin* ged on the prescribed limits of policy ; he was seen descending from the cham¬ ber of Drusiiie ; the flagrant breach of trust was reported, and.the anathema.of vengeance pronounced» In an exigence so fatal to safety, nay, even to the Hfe of the culprit, he sought the presence of his pupil ; he threw himself upon his mercy ; he supplicated his exertions ; he besought him to shield him from the dreaded thunder of the church. ''.Con¬ sider my sacred calling/* said the terri· fìecl confessor, " consider the vow I have impiously profaned/' The count did consider, but his was a consideration which began, which ended in self. If he lost his preceptor, where could he find another half so indulgent, half
kalf so'blind fo his transgressions ? Not an erro?./ not a vice had ever been trans¬ mitted to* the marquis: upon paper, Mortaigne was all that the parent heart could desire; in deeds, Montaigne was planting thorns to goad.a father's feelings. ** What if we fly ?" demanded the count. * f .Aias ! flight will avail not, for France yieldeth not one spot of shelter to r. wretch so denounced/' ° How then can I aid you?" asked Mortaigne. (f Tax my interest ; tax my fortune/' The confessor folded his arms in deep thought, he ñxeá his searching eyes upon the features of his pupil—" What on me entails death," he rejoined, <ť in you is but a venal transgression ; such is the ordinance of man, such the sub¬ tle paradox which fetters judgment, which ------" ** What though I own the crime, what though
though I brave the danger ?" interrupted the count. t " Kind, generou^friend ľ' exclaimed the delighted St. Fiche, < f rivet but this rhain of eternal gratitude, and command me as your own mind. The fife you save shall be devoted to you ; unlimited as the expanse of heaven shall be your power." "But Drusiiie?'* questioned Mor« taigne. '*Fly to her, my friend," eagerly resumed the confessor; ft whisper our project, and all will be well. Stay, stay; be this vour authority," and snatching a paper, he penned the following lines; " Save me, Drusiiie ! Discovered, lost, death becomes the forfeit of my outraged \ow. The noble, the generous» being who seeks your presence will ex¬ plain all. Drusiiie, my Dru-sille, if the words of your lips sprung from that mine
mine of Jore, the heart, then am î safe ; if not, be death a welcome balm to fond, though blasted reliance !" Drusiiie read that hasty sketch, and reso* lution was formed ; she braved the cen¬ sure ofthe world, the scorn of friends, the malice of enemies ; she boldly pro¬ nounced the count to be the transgressor, and vowed that he had often assumed the garb of sanctify to veil his crime. St> Pierre was acquitted, and with Mortaigne removed from Paris. Such was the first league which bound the confessor to the interesfof his pupil. Drusiiie, the unfortunate, the guilty Drusiiie, was remembered but as the favourite of an hour, whose short reign past, returns to charm no more. Drusiiie ------1 transgress, 'tis the pupib 'tis the tutor, who claim my notice. Practised in all that art could e'er assume to veila devil's meaning, flying on the wings of seeming
seeming dufy, Mortaigne and the con¬ fessor repaired to the chateau de Rous¬ sillon. The marquis, guileless and un¬ suspecting, joyed in the presence of his son ; the lady Antoinette foo, but late returned from her maternal grandsire's, sought by every means of conciliation to obtain his affection. Alas ! little did she guess the heart whose friendship, whose fraternal love she coveted—little did she guess the fiend-like malevolence which rankled in his nature ! Had she been ought save sister, he could have worshipped her angel form—her form, more like the wild sport of poets' fancy, than one who breathed to die ; for she was a Ctc.ľ oí'huc, and fiir more beautiful Than precious bi,rJmi}x, or purple ror:I. s Of ametbybts, or glistering hyacinth '' But she was his sister—she was the envied sharer of a father's wealth ; and avarice, in tbe breast of Morfaigne, was grown
grown tu second nature ; gold was his goå t for every other passion to it was feeble. But if interest swayed each in¬ ward feeling of the count, different were the dreams of the confessor : what was Drusiiie to Antoinette ? what all the charms his eye had ever scanned, to her light grace, to her soft smile? A saint ¡n garb, a voluptuary in fancy, he watch¬ ed, he sued the unsuspecting girl ; he unfoldeď the rieh store of science—he entangled her in the light web of dispu¬ tation. Panting for knowledge, she shrunk not fàom the lure, -and nature's mvste- rious mine was delved to furnish matten Hapless Antoinette 1 she saw not the adder coiling beneath the rose ; she traced not the glance of lire which spoke the secret impulse. Lured by the teeming harvest of information, she loitered near the precipice, nor once in thought im¬ peached the minister of Heaven. Father St. Pierre was a scholar, was a philosopher ; what was he not ? Father St e Pierre
St. Pierre was a Proteus,, to suit his pur¬ pose. Soft, even to fascination, he conld blind the unwary, he could steal within i£ thp pasv heart, and hug it into snares." It was in the calm solitude of the boat-house, where nought was heard save the bubbling ofthe Rhone, nought seensave the broad, blue canopy twink¬ ling with innumerable stars, that Antoi¬ nette, her summer cloak folded lightly o'er her bosom, stood at the opened case- ni eut, listening to the astronomical lec- tu-es of the confessor. With him did she mount to unknown vvoilds; with him did she pierce each little sfar, and muse in pious wonder o'er the mighty order of creation. Quick was the translation from heaven to earth ; the confessor spoke of Nature, spoke of her strong, her immutable decrees, from fhe blade which drinks the morning dew, fo the gigantic palm rearing its head on high—from budding spring to blossoming summer— from ripe and mellow autumn, even to the
the death cold trance of devastating winter. (t In every thîhg whieh grows, in every thing which breathes, the system of oider may be traced," said the confessor ; t( and yet man, arrogant and presumptuous, would counteract that system, would overthrow the sweet, the social law of order/* *' Is man the only rebel ?" asked the unconscious girl; ss is man, born to appreciate, the only apostate to grati¬ tude Γ The confessor mused ; for a moment his eyes were rivetted on the placid fea¬ tures of Antoinette ; his heart beat high with unhallowed passion ; he took her passive hand ; he trembled as he held it. " Man would, but cannot o'erthrow the system," he at length articulated—" oh no î man is born weak, man must be weak, even from his cradle to his grave/' Antoinette withdrew not her hand ; she even felt compassion for the confessor, for
for she thought that some hidden wee pressed heavy on his heart. (i Lady/' he exclaimed, " in you 1 behoid no apostate to the system, for your mild eyes beam now with angel pity/* ťí Yes, for the unfortunate," timidly pronounced Antoinette. " Is not he unfortunate/* eagerly re¬ joined the confesor, Ci who feels a com- pulsatory chain gnaw into his inmost soul — who f^els himself bound, trammel¬ led, when his thoughts, when his hopes, ъ1сп his whole being, pants for enlarge¬ ment ? Angcte inhabit not this earth, and man digresses from the system of nature when he apes divinity." t( What mean you, father?" question¬ ed the artless Antoinette. " is my meaning still incongruous?" replied St. Pierre. <f Abs í never, even m thought, has the sacred vow of duty been infringed ; yet there are creatures- there are maïferpieces of nature, whom to known, to r iee t ís·— İs— When the
eye wanders, the heart plays false, anel —and—" He paused ; he trembled. " You are strangely agitated," said Antoinette, moving towards the door; if surely you are ill." Si Yes, ill, very ill/' faltered the confessor. " Your shoulder, lady," and he tottered as though he w r ould have fallen, Antoinette sprung towards him ; she believed the seeming plea, nor till she felt herself clasped to the bosom of the arch fiend, did she awaken from the trance ; then she spurned him from her, then she would have fled to the door, but kneeling at her feet, he barred her passage. {( Kneel not to me," exclaimed the indignant girl ; ť£ 'tis to God vou should sue for pardon. Detain me but tin in¬ stant, and quick ï uncloak you to my father.** ·* Hear me, only for a moment hear me/' supplicated the confessor. íť Sweet saint
saint of mercy ! though from your eyes I have drank the poison which consumes me—though, spite of my vocation, spite of my cold and joyless vow, I love, madly love you, yet at your bidding shall my heart wither in my bosom, sooner ihan mv love shall again pollute your ears. Lady/' and he arose with seeming meek¬ ness anil contrition, " through the false prerogative of parental authority was I doomed a victim to monastic rule» W'ihour the power to oppose, I, even I, with a heart tremblingly alive to sen- bibiliiy, a heart prone to the reciprocity ofaffeetion,a heart studying, worshipping the warm attributes of nature, was chain¬ ed, wn> /.estined to a living death/* He paibed, but Antoinette continued silent ; she pined for freedom ; sha nen/olca with fear, horror, and detes* ¡at ion. " With feeling thus warm, thus sen- hive," at length pursued the wily hypo- c riv, ·· do ) ou not pity a wretch whom r í! the
the coul might enshroud, but could nol freeze ? whom------" t( I must return to the chateau/' proud¬ ly interrupted the shuddering girl. ť! Thi-; is a doefriir í was little prepared fo hear." "One moment, lady, only one mo¬ ment/' implored the disappointed father St. Pierre. " If vou cannot pity, vouch¬ safe to pardon what despair, what frenzy has alone extorted, fro not in anger ; remember this bosom bleccU with a thousand fears—fears of voi r dis¬ pleasure—fears ofthe world's contení] t '—fears of ecclesiastic vengeance." "The scorn of the world, the ven¬ geance of the church, are fears which vour own conduct may remove/* sai I Antoinette; * f he that conduct as befits your habit, and my lips shall ι еЧ r betrav your secret/* 4ŕ You promise me ? ,J exe'aimed ilic confessor. *'I do," solemnly replied Antoinefte. '* Unless
ť ' Unless you again forget all respect to virtue, this humiliating interview shall never be revealed." Antoinette quitted the boat-house, and the confessor followed in silence. But though he wore t- : semblance of humbled depression, his heart was the i port of a thousand angry passions : ma¬ levolence, revenge, blasted hope, morti¬ fied self-love, alike struggled for preemi¬ nence ; and when alone, when left fo the throes of the demoniac fiends which had long harboured in his bosom, he vowed yet to humble the pride which had spurned his petition. Antoinette returned fo tlie castle of her maternal gr:»ndsire, and Mortaigne and his friend wandered under the deno- ::ii г:ЛгА plea for knowledge.
ΠΪΛΡ.
CHAP. YL GK)iiuus h\potrisy ! what fo<)ls are they, W ho, finught with iabtfui vt ambitious Vitw«j Wfr„r not tl>y çpeuüu« mask ! 1 клл<.1"
They ktv"U---------- r I wrrs iriftuUhip, hťigí.tcti'd ìy the mut' л) w¡-r , 'íi 'i tiťl.antiiig bupí- tini svinj iithtUc nit»'". t^Éram'ii trom the íi-ufuai cv* ý dtvutJü; Ji Ί υ loví , cajbh w ns to *a< L a deal ei ь< 1% >û|IMi,f4 '««H') Hi îti' ΔΛ,.*ί>.' i {ΟΛ i Ol ¿Л »l;^. Τ Uu M f 'f«' It was at Venice that chance conducted the count de Mortaigne in time to r ave Everard IVArancourt from the death- aimed stiletto of an assassin. He lacked r.ot courage, and the treacherous snare of
of murder im nel led even his arm to л rescue, Long after sunset, when the dar¬ kened shadows of night were stealing fast upon the grey of twilight, in return¬ ing from the place of Sf. Ma.k, hesaw a cavalier struggling against the superior strength of two armed bravoes. At his approach the ruffians Ücd ; and though wounded and bleeding, the grateful heart of D'Arancourt poured forth thanks f o his preserver. Thus commenced, ac¬ quaintance sprung into intimacy, inii - тагу ripened into friendship ; for Mor¬ taigne, as I have before expressed, pos¬ sessed the art of seeming what he was nof—of hiding what he was. At this period, the death of the count de Beauville, the father of the late mar¬ chioness cle Houssillon, recalled the count to France. His absence was short ; he returned to italv with a heart teeming with malice, envy, and disappointment. Antoinette, ever beheld with a jaundiced f 1 eve,
e) e was now doubly hated ; for f o hef Vk! the count bequeathed all his princely domains, all his hoard of wealth, simple enjoining, that should the ladv Antoi- r.ette die without ibsue, those estates were then devised to his grandson, Max¬ imilien, count c!e Mortaigne. Alas! che bcautv of Antoinette forbade almost the possibility of such a hope ; for though, alike by gratitude and affection, she was chained to the couch of the infirm coun¬ tess, still the charms, the wealth of the heiress, once whKpered, would soon swell Fame's loudest trumpet. f< It must net be/' exclaimed Mortaigne, confiding bis fears to the ear of his friend ; " father, we must avert the threatened evil." " We ъсШ a\ert it/ 1 replied the con¬ fessor, actuafed by a hidden motive he chose not to reveal. The count extended his hand— (c We bave —we must aid each other," said Mortaigne. "Let me but once possess this dotard s wealth, then tax my grati¬ tude.
inde. Antoinette must never become a ^ifc." ίζ Xcvcr / ,5 emphatically prononnced the с ο η fe sso r ; the η ρ a u s i 11 g , as î h o u g h i π deep thought— ιί What if we make her a mm : " he suddenly demanded. Mortaigne smiled—" Hoa '.en prosper fhe good intent ! ' he exclaimed. " Pre- Oent Antoinette as a chaste offering, and if ambition point that way, do you be¬ come an abbot." St. Pierre replied not ; he chose not to betray the height of his ambition ; but ш a lew d.ajs a spy was placed on the actions of the innocent Antoinette. Lagerte maintain an external appearance of dutv, on the announcement of indis- position from the marquis, the count, bidding adieu to his new friend, Everard D'Arancourt, repaired on the wings of seeming a fleet ion to Paris. Tliere he beheld the marquis hh father; and there he learned that Drusiiie had been banish¬ ed by her family, and that the hapless * 5 offspring
opspring of crime was at nurse in a distant province. The marquis, aided by the ghostly counsc!^of f.'ther St. Pierre, and support¬ er! by the présence of hjs son, returned by Ciisv stages to the chateau. The gay sun of 4i -imer see »ned to cheer the drooping intirmitics of pi emature (Ιο¬ ί av; he even anticipated coming \cars, '»id talked of a thousand scheme** of fa¬ irre pe.i.'e. Antoinette s. !! wr.tehrd tîıe imbecile form t.-f Lergrandiufither, nor ft It a pang, for >she /rcünt m>t ;he war.nv ^Т'еп^лЬ i;f Ler fiïi.-vr. At that age ^hca t J .e H.ïwüv" bližali qv, ck mantlto at the luw/s warm îVeîmp 4 , v ht n ď.thu i".^;n panis vrifh :ìg\ e; hone?, and the ïmnd becomes î-t^mped with a new chancer, she had :ir>* beheld a heilig, giftest by nature not \>л '.uc. but to comn.md. in ι he ίοΓ -Uîdc ot the rustic de Eeau- MÎle, A.ìtoinetie had many rebor.rces; tier «***ν·ί *■ ásw<l! Jcicd, and she ρν,/4 -ss- t.d
ed that happy zest for employment» which robs retirement of the languor of inanity. But though her harp, her loom, and hei embroidery, va.ied tiie intense ness oí' study, still health needed other relaxa¬ tion ; aiul often, mounting her pal fry, and attended bv a domestic, she wander¬ ed b(4'ond the boundary of the park, to woo the freshening breeze. It was in one of these excursions, that, startled by the report of an arquebuse, her horse took fright, and bounding o'er ** brake and bush," but for the Herculean grasj of strength, bad plunged, with his half- f .:int í .\g burden, into a rapid stream 'i he uidden jerk precipitated the trem* biing girl to the earth, and when reviving to recollection, when capable of exer- t.oij, slie found herself in the arms of a чглпдег, whí^c countenance beamed with ?olicitudc and interesu Aid'\l by lier preserver, she returned ίο the ensile, and from thai period, s-Jľ.ree a day pa'sed without the count f íi ъг. Sa u v ¿mt
c "i tic- manneis of Antoinette. Alas I i 4tw her in achaiacfcr the most dan- ge.ous io a feeling heart; he saw her г/и. blistering to the wants, waiching iho ott ídir g progress of infirmity—he saw J! «4inb sportive smile softened into solidity at the call of duty—he saw beauty of no con. mon stamp submitting, without a sigh, to an extlusion of the woi Id's homage. What was the obstacle which tuchii hue would not ha\e surmounted i what the dliTiculfy which a r dent love w : li wo\ t.eP ** 1 .e j et ^ьг Λ- tt S.,>i\in.e îwiî^ct his (\,1мп, ι In. ii.!yAii\.4, ..nd when ίκ· reim '» f dìo г* tn.rei η 'J hoi.^e, t! e í'ibí*e d.' Pocï.tii.cbïf au, it was with a c c ť /v d brow and an ah traí ted r.jti J. Antoinette too drooped in his rd.se n te, he knew not why ; jet she felt St. b¿u- \t\vc peccs-ary tc her peate, bissa/. sned wi:h wîaf i. ..d heietoíoie ií/jiàtii pica¬ ba re, the lingered midst haunts endeared 1л hit ir.eïîiorv. 'Tis true, she fehruî.k r, O t
not from her duties ; but her tapesfry loom war» neglected, and her harp, sa\e her morning and evening hvmn to the Virzin, was untouched. A chaste though rapturous jo) beamed in her do\e-Iike eyes, when St. Sauverne again present¬ ed himself before hei ; r.or when she iisui.ed to the avowal of his lo\e, to the ta'e of his difficulties, did she sht ink from the necessity of temporary con¬ ce aiment. she beheld the blasted project of the duke de Fontainebleau, in the total overthrow oí ihat fond hope which anti¬ cipated the union of his eldest born wiih the orphan daughter of his bin ied sister ; but when she thought of that daughter, she-huddercd, yet she с cm Id not urge a compliance of the compact, for to know St. Sau\erne the husband of the lady Aglaie, was to doom her own life to \Mt ti lied n ess. 14 Never fill now did I know my father unju t/ v s„id the count ; (< never before did
did I tax his tenderness, or impure his actions w the sway of prejudice. But he has not beheld my Antoinette/* he conti¬ nued, with eyes beaming exultation and japture ; **' he has not seen the being who u*-gps to rebe'lion. Wait till he knows the charm, and then is my triumph se¬ cured P* " ï hope Sf)," faltered Antoinette, for¬ cing a smile, yet she trembled as she сроке; she kh a presage which damped cì cry effort at spirits. "Think so—believe uo," eagerly re- iumcçi the e<»unt; "dear, timid An¬ toi nette·, apt renate you* own virtues, and give some credit to my father's discernment. He loves Aglaie, because he has cherished her from infancy ; but his is a capacious heart—^ heart exalted', generous— ·α heart which will receive, wül estimate the wife of his son." * f h not lo\e the most bigotted of rdl Drei udice ?'* arehiv demanded Antoi* bette; *'does it not level every diiS- cultv, * *
ciiltv, absolving even the violation of duty ?" St. Sauverne sighed—"The sway of love is indeed despotic/'" he observed ; " yet so varied is the passion, so mingled with pleasure and pain, that not to possess the calm of past indifference would I fuego its chains. Oh no, Antoi nette ! í will wear them through life : r or the inoment which expunges )our image will be the last moment of my existence/' Tears trembled in the eves of An¬ toinette ; she clasped the hand of her lover ; slie raised İt with enthusiasm to her lips, " Next to Heaven be my t r < ï - 1 in thee/' she articulated, and then blush¬ ing at the warmth of the expression, shy drooped her face upon her bosom. iC Re ever that trust in\iolatc!" resu¬ med the transported St. Sauvetne. 14 If the heart could be searched, if it could be bared to inspection, mine would be iound to merit this confidence, this soul s joti/ing reliance. Fear me not, An¬ toinette;
toinette ; bound beyond the reach of change, true as the needle to the pole, in absence, in dista - , no earthly ob¬ stacle can—shall intervene to part us." * " Fear you !" repeated Antoinette, with a smile which spoke its birth in faith; " no, no, my friend ; not if desìi η ν were to pronounce the die of separation should I fear the estrangement of vour heart. Passion ma\ be dissipated by the adverse breath cf fortune, but love, ι eared on the basis of friendship, ce¬ mented, strengthened by s\ mpathy and je.ir.on —love cannot be dethroned." <( Never/'concluded the count, yield¬ ing to the native energy of affection. *' Pasrion, like the flame Ín explosion, expands its power ; but love, the subtle spark, fed in silence and in secret, sips, undermines, envelops, defying the power to extinguish or subdue." Antoinette smiled ; her heart acquies¬ ced in the metaphor ; Antoinette smiled, and future evil was unthought of. Kith in
in the mutual assurance of fender, of eternal regard, they dreaded not its threat, they scarcely admitted its possibi¬ lity. Months wore away in tlie soft, the harmonizing interchange of affection ; the infirmities of the countess de Beau- ville gradually increased, and Antoinette found consolation butin the vows of Sf. Sauverne; she ratified the bonds of secret faith by th£ most sacred promises ; she silenced e\ery rising doubt, every pain¬ ful intrusion. To alleviate the pang, to lighten the blank of approaching ab¬ sence, an arrangement for occasional communication was concerted; and when again policy urged his л isit to the castle de Fontainebleau, when the ago¬ nizing moment of adieu advanced, he tore himself from the spell of his attrac¬ tions, with a mind confiding, depending, with a fear' trâxbig more than life from ì rr civica· ^
CHAP.
CHAP. \'IL Ibu tf ι t>tratt MÜ.un, m i.ufoi/ivyn^t lo-J.. W tjo jputtSt a gloss uťviiiC'íť. on mahfe, A. ul &ťem'st io weep, and seem'bt fo prnv ior those- 11. ы wouldbt destroy. I'i3 ijlï ips. VA un sr thus the lady Antoinette and the count St. Sauverne were mutually yield¬ ing, mutually rivettino the soit) et im¬ perious sway of interest, the count dc Niortaigne and his colleague, father St. Pierre, were racked with a thousand fears, for their emissary had not been idle; and the name, the s.sits oí the handsome stranger at the castîe de Beau« \ille, had been duly reported. The con¬ fessor fell a pang ar.sing from jealousy ; he had dared to rare bib hopes to the beauteoiu
beauteous form of Antoinette ; he had dared to profane her pure ear with the pleading of his impious passion ; and í hough, spurning the offender, she had in mercy concealed the offence, he pos¬ sessed neither generosity nor gratitude to appreciate such clemency, and oppor¬ tunity was alone wanting to revenge the wound his self-love had received, Mortaigne, writhing beneath the gnaw- ings of insatiable avarice, also pictured the total overthrow of his schemes, pictured the tich possessions of his sister, in tlii'; dreaded union with the stranger, eternally wrested from his hands. With a brain teeming with mischief, a heart o'ei flowing with malevolence, he con¬ fided his d reads fo the arch-fiend who diligently abetted all his evil practices. fhe fertile ingenuitv offancv was a^ain taxed for new projects ; and while they were plotting devices to avert the threa¬ tened mbciiief, the sudden death of the marquis dc Houssillon gave a new colour to
to their proceedings. Ere yet his breath¬ less corse was hid from mortal eye—-ere yet, in all the pageantry of state, he was removed to the mausoleum of his ancestors, the new marquis, spite of the garb of woe, thought but of the promo¬ tion of interest, planned but the means of forwarding his designs. The absence of Antoinette was hailed as an auspicious omen, and a letter, couched in the characters of the late marquis, was soon produced, as though written under the pressure of pain, under the influence of extreme dejection. After expatiating on the miseries, on the vicis¬ situdes of life, on the hidden quicksands which wreck the peace, on the subtle snares which sap the virtues of society, artfully did they insinuate the calm de¬ lights of religion—artfully, in the name of a dying parent, did they beseech An¬ toinette, glowing as she was in youth and beauty, to woo the grave-like shelter of a monastic cell. Carefully sealed and directed*
directed, this important packet was con- veved to the unsuspecting girl, nor can it be wondered that her innocent and duteous heart should bleed at the perusal. Alas ! how did the almost-worshipped image of St, Sauverne rise in opposition to this last request of a departed father ! how did she struggle between her duty and her feelings î and while attending the couch of infirmity, and bun ing the new source of sorrow in her own bosom, we wili revert to the movements of de Roussillon. Not vet sufficienti ν hardened în guilt to sin without contrition, the solitude of the chateau became irksome even to melancholy : in his (beams, the form of his father rose in reproach ; and Antoi- uettv\ the intended \ictiin of injustice ;md fraud, appeared a^ though repugnant fo îhesacîiiice, vainiv snuggling against ' J ™ o o iri the hydras of his own creation. lie de¬ termined to seek in the busy world a resource for ennui; aud tlad in all the out waul
outward trappings of woe, he journeyed once more to the capital Thither also had chance, or evil destiny, conducted Everard D'Arancourt, and there again did past ac¬ quaintance and past intimacy become re¬ newed. The peerlesssfranger, still sought, still unfound, and who, since the moment of encounter in the church of lì Sepolcro at Venice, had lived in the enthusiastic fancv of D'Arancourt, resolved the cloud of cares which hung upon his brow. The marquis rallied his friend's roman¬ tic passion, yet still he lent that ear of indulgence which saps the guileless heart. Yielding to his request, he ac¬ companied him to the residence of his father, and there, in the very bosom of peace, innocence, and security, did he behold the young and lovely Mathilde* The hours, the days wore swiftly away, for never till now had de Roussillon felt that he possessed a heart; till now, his eve, not his feelings, had owned the charm of beauty— till now, he had gazed upon the lure
lure of female loveliness, with that inanity which knows not the pang in parting, or the rapture in return. For _ -________.. L.-4. ..l^U».] + n »Un /Lnniv. ^.C Cnr· U ъеаъип UC yıcıucu iv> me; tu unni \jı lua- cination—nay, more, he beguiled the hopes of innocence by the pleadings of new-born passion. Mathilde guessed not the snare ; she pictured every human being pure as her own chaste mind ; and when de Roussillon dwelt on love, how could she dwell on ìrcachery? Long was the trance, fatal the delusion ; yet interestand ambition did but slumber; for when roused into being, they trampled on every bond of honour and of love. De Roussillon heard the repinings, the despair of Everard D'Arancourt—heard the objections of the marquis de Ilautenville. He had seen Hortense ; and though she possessed not the same timid softness which spoke in the mild eyes ofthe all-gentle Ma¬ thilde, she too was rich in the meridian bhzcof a thousand beauties; she glowed with
with the additional charms of wealth ; and to a sordid mind, what other charm can be put in competition ? Had Ma¬ thilde been rich, the slightest hesitation had not existed ; but Mathilde could boast no lure beyond her own virtues, and de Roussillon was too much fhe crea¬ ture of this world to sacrifice liberty at such a shrine ; yet he confined his sen¬ timents to the perfidious heart which gave them being, nor once lost sight of his systematic policy, In his mental reve¬ ries, he beheld the fruition of everv ' «ŕ scheme ; he beheld Antoinette a nun, Hortense his bride, and Mathilde poi¬ soned, debased, by pernicious sophistrv. Such were the designs which he had dared fo frame—such the guilty vi¬ sions of his pillow. The death of the count D'Arancourt opened the field for ar-'ion. Mathilde removed to the convent of St. Honorée, and the marquis redoubled his offers of ser- \ice to the coniiding l>erard. Pouring the
the balm of seeming pify, he offered him¬ self to assail the callous feelings of the marquis ele Ilautenville : and whilst the deceived D'Arancourt was numbering the hours of his absence, he was preferring a we 11- con ned tale of Treachery and fraud. The marquis de Ilautenville was lured by the rich possessions of de Houssillon, and became himself a ready actor in the perfidious drama. The marquis returned ; he represented the father of Hortense as inflexible; and with apparent interest, planned the fatal snare which the sister Mathilde confided to the ear of Corisande. A huntei's cabin, sited in a hollow of the mountain, became the haunt of concealment ; and father £t. Pierre the zealous agent. His nligious garb secured him the ear of the portress, and when in the person ofthat portress he recognised Drusiiie, the frail partner of his guilty passion, the suc¬ cess of his mission felt secured. A.ssu- VOL. IV, G Pilil* 1 *
ruing every outward sign of fond, cf rapturous joy, he vowed that peace had been estranged from his breast since the cruel hour of separation ; that wretched «Hid desponding, feeling nought but woe r«nd self-remorse, he had journeyed over France to seek her, to crave her pardon, and to die. Drusiiie wept at fhe pretended suf¬ ferings of the confessor; an absence of two years had not sfccled İrer to fhe past fascinations of love ; mid whilst òhe gazed upon the ensnaring fiend, every pang felt repaid in his ardent protestai ions of tenderness. Condemned, b v the seru- pulous honour of her incensed family, even to the menial oflicc of a religion; community, her babe torn from her arm**, and placed at nurse in a distant province, Urui-ille had pined in sufferance, No remorse had been awakened, notcaaof penance had bedewed her cheek : rag'*, disappointment, and despair, had steeped her pillow; malevolence, hatred, aiul iese"s f :<\
revenge, had quickened the pulsation at her heart. The bait of liberty then was as the reprieve from death, and assailed by the joint promises of de Roussillon, and the fervent protestations of St. Pierre, she became their willing agent. Gold, which pays e'en the price of blood, "soon guided the assassin's poniard; and Eve¬ rard, removed to a lone chateau of the marquis de Uautenviîîe's, marred not the demoniac scheme. Father Sf. Pierre was the officiating priest, and Drusiiie, a* has been before expressed, the wily pilot from St. Honorée. Useless vvould it be to linger o'er a^a'rn π О the horror which for weeks had nearly dethroned the sanity of the unfortunate Hortense, or the rage which racked the frame, of the bereaved D'Arancourt ; alas ! mine be the office to dive amid new scenes of guilt, to .nfold the gradua! ρ rog ress o f i n i q u i f y . TìembliiH'Iv alive to the o'erwhelminv •rngeani e of tliechurc b, Drusiiie felt not r ' ? tenir**
secu reeven under the powerful protection ofde Roussillon ; she dared not encounter the eye of the injured marchioness, neither did she dare return to her former haunts. Denounced, as it were, by God and man, the rustling of a falling leaf became magnified into a pursuer ; so true is it, that " Suspicion haunts the guilty «mn i : lhe thief still ít?ar¡» each btiah an oncer." France promised no permanent safefv, and Drusiiie, spite of the reluctance of father St. Pierre, resolved to abandon Prance rather than die the lingering death of terror. Panting fo behold her infant Leontine, for nature sometimes swavs lhe hardest bosoms, empowered by the bounty of the marquis, and escorfed by the bravo v. hose arm had felled the hapless Everard, she commenced her venturous journey. Diligently avoiding the beatened haunts of men, and courting the trackless wilds of blank and cheerless solitude.
solitude, they rested but beneath the crags, nor ventured once to crave the boon of hospitality. But though so deeply versed in wily caution, though, moving like the subtle fox, they left no trace to note their wanderings, still the lynx-eye of plunder was not fo be misled; it pierced amidst the tall, fantastic steeps, which, pitting over head, and deepening the sombre shades of twilight, promised a sure se¬ curity from man. Drusiiie started at the shrill whistle ; she trembled at the death- dealing arquebuse ; instantaneous was the assault and the resistance. Surround¬ ed, her companion bleeding, powerless, «he sued for mercy; nor till, within the fortress, she felt herself the prize of banditti, did her ferrors cea^e ; then new ideas occupied her waking fancy, and the dread of convening < ^nisance yielded to the promise of temporary security. The cheek of 1) inssille still glowed о 3 wirb
with fhe downy blush of youth ; and though her form was gigantic, her fea¬ tures were not unpleasing. She had a smile to lare where the effort to lure was exerted, and soon did that smile esta¬ blish her in the favour of the captain of the band. Honour she had not to pledge; but gratitude, if one fugitive virtue could harbour in abreast so vile, soon bound her to the fortunes of the bandit. She shared with him his security, and wel¬ comed ever fhe rich prize of plunder: persecution's sharpened edge seemed blunted ; and Iivini' in defiance of every law, they waged eternal war with their fellow- beinas. Their haanîs were the ruined piles of former sta'e ; sometimes they lurked ¿Anul the mountains, and -»ometimes, se¬ parating in marauding parties, they tra¬ versed the neighbouring province*. Soon was the little Leontine stolen bom the bosom oí his nurse ; soon, ι e ¡no ved from the humble thatch of innocence, did he thrive
thrive amid the infectious atmosphere of vice. \e\cr did the blessed precepts of virtue meet his ear—never did the mild sway of philanthropy harmonize his feel¬ ings; hardihood and toil braced the Herculean nerve of sfrength, and exam¬ ple led to nought save \Iobnce and murder. Quick was the tale of this new a^ocia- tion conveved to St. Pierre and his pa- iron ; the marquis blessed fhe sway of gold; fhe confessor augured future be¬ nefit. But w hikt they were exulting iit the success of a scheme which had secured fhe vast possessions of the heiress ofde Ilautenville, the tortured Antoinette was writhing beneath the stroke of their deep* concerted policy. To become a wife, appeared a violation of a parent's dung request ; f о become a nun, was to re¬ linquish St. Sauverne for ever. " Bef ter, better to die," sobbed the distressed «rirl : and then ^'ould she seek to resolve the cause f an y'unction so fatal. Mehn о 4 cholv
choíy despondence soon rifíed the roses of her cheeks, and the count found her the slave of doubt and inquietude. it was long ere he could sooth the jarring conflict of her fecîings and Ion* per st r H ere he could induce her fo listen to the wishes of his heart. The struggle was henw, hut love cLimed the victory ; for ere St. Sauverne returned to Fon¬ tainebleau, Antoinette, in chmdesnnely becoming fm bride, silenced e\ erv intru¬ ding dread. Confiding in the secretly- plighted bond offikh, he rev'vireJ his paternal home, smiling at tîıe prejudi¬ ces of the duke his father, and úef\ ing tn every other shape the malice of oppos¬ ing fortuue. Antoinette was lus own, and hope craved no higher b!essing t fancy conjured no brighter charm. Shrinking from the proffered hand of his cousin, the lady Agíale, as though the very touch was an outrage to his absent bride, he tied ht r presence, and in one of the lung gallene* of the castle V»2$
was met by his brother. (t Is this reluc¬ tant e feigned, fo increase the srcming value of the sacrifice?'* questioned tîıe count Eugene, "orare vou indi ed in- sensible to the charms of our little cou- •.ii bill t " Oh no f not feigned." eagerly re* plied St. Saíneme. iŕ Aglaie, neh in charms, po^esscs no charm for me." *' She lo\es you," said Eugene fear¬ fully. " ilca\en forbid!" c\claimed the coi.Tit, · fur í ha\e no love to offer.' 1 An exjihmation followed, and alb sa'. e his union, was confessed. "Nut for the unherse tnibt this un- toward pre [^o^esoiori be acknowledged Xii tl e du*,e," observed Eugene, " Акь ' iv\ biother, though, till now, :dl gen- îihe-S ши Either will but ill brook the ιΐινψϊ ointment of his hopes. Sav, is iheic no po^ibditv of change ?" tixin^ I - e ; es intently on the features oí the ( > ¿ UnSUSriCCíit) ' # ~
unsuspecting count, ( ' no chance foc Aglaïe ? ÏJ ťr Oh no !" said the ardent St. Sauverne; et nature's self will change before my love/' Falling at once into the snare, he yield¬ ed to the guidance of his brother; he carefully concealed his passion for An¬ toinette, and by assuming the veil of disguise, established the groundwork of bis future misery ; for Eugene, a brother but in name, harboured two secret springs of action: he loved the lady Aglaie; be was jealous of a father's fondness; he thought, by playing on the credulous feelings of the count, to bend them to his own peculiar purpose. Warm were bis professions of service, and St. Sa α¬ ϊ erne, actuated by a blind reliance, depended implicitly on his exertions. Gradual was the relaxation of the once lirm bond of confidence, Taught to be¬ lieve bis father inimical to his every wish, be
Íve ücheki him with n prejudiced eye ; whilst the duke, jaundiced by fhe insi¬ dious whispers of Eugene, attributed fhe objections of tiie count to the too frequent capriceof over indulgence. In the passing occurrencesoílüc, daily, hourly, do wesee îhe seeds of dissatisfaction, once engender¬ ed, burbling, spreading into ail that is destructive to common harmony and social peace : can it then be wondered, that the count St. Sauverne should soon feel a stranger beneath lhe paternal roof— that, confiding in a brother whose pro¬ bity he judged by hi* own, he should become an actis с ai'ent în his own de- í. ' btniction ? But while sojourning at the castle de Fontainebleau, he was diligently com¬ batting against the candour of his own nature, and \ ielding to the admonitions of another. Antoinette, his absent bride, was mourning over the departed form of her grandmother. Surrounded by spies, by whom every action had been (j о canvassed
canvassed and reported, her anguished struggles, upon the receipt of the forged billet, her suppressed tears in the pre¬ sence of her lover, his anxiety, his ten¬ derness, his frequent visits, all were known to de Houssillon ; and fear pre¬ ponderating over every other sensation, on the death of the countess de Beativi lie, St. Pierre was dispatched, as though on a mission of comfort, to the castle. He found Antoinette a thousand times more seductive than when, at the cha¬ teau, she bloomed in cloudless chearfu Ι¬ η ess. The fear which trembled in her eye gave softness to expression ; tîıe sigh which swelled her bosom conveyed an interest to the heart. To the con¬ trasting sable of her garb, dazzling was the swandown hue of her complexion ; and though her cheek scarce reached fhe tint of the maiden rose, its faded blush sapped not the spring of beauty. Pleased with a visit which spoke fra¬ ternal interest, Antoinette welcomed the confessor.
confessor. She spoke of her father, she listened to the detail of his expiring mo¬ ments ; she wep f in agony, as she breath¬ ed the purport of his last request. Sf. Pierre pleaded ignorance, and then he insinuated the surety of peace, gleaned from the never-failing consolation of strict obedience. íŕ Had vou infringed the sacred request of a dying parent/' he continued, ťí had you impiously violated his last commands, had you pursued the dictates of fancy, in opposition to con¬ science and to reason, then might you shudder at the pa^f, and shrink from the future: but------" Antoinette motioned her hand to stay him ; she could not speak ; she sobbed with hysteric violence ; every word spoke daggers ; and not even the imaged form oi St, Sauverne could allay the tumult of I er feelings. The pitiless heart of the confessor ex¬ ulted in the agony he caused, vet care¬ fully he hid that ex ui tation, as in accents of
of tempered gentVness he resumed— ŕi If jour heart, my daughter, rebel pgaiibt the wishes of the late marquis, ifit pic¬ ture happiness in a different form, if it bhiink from ihï deathlike veil ofpiofes- sion. the «reiter be the vii tue of submis- sion. The conquest over self is iran'a best boas! ; ani the mme arduous the attainment, the more glorious the \rc- ton/* Antoinette raised her mild e\ es to his .face, wîi-hedi\ed not amid the rrr-ng tlač of pardon which a ¡)lacul b»o\v it.* 1 - ceaîed ; shebe!ie\ed him as he a[)peartd; the past lapse of а томегЛ w.iS forg T f en; rnd she bowed to hím, as though to superior excellence. if ]Уоеъ the hite marquis name ain particular order r'' asked fãiher St. Pierre, attenti\elv noting lur features, " or does he indulgently lea\e the election to jour own choice ?" Auto'net t с drew for 4 n the fatal letter —she held it towards aim* The confessor took
ί. ok it; he read ît with seeming atten¬ tion. "Alas!"' he pursued, raising his hand as though fo chMi away the subtle fear, ' r in every line do the feelings of the parent stand confessed. If is v our peace, it iii your happiness he seeks ; he vvould but hide )ou from the snaies of a delusive world." Antoinette breathed a heavy sigh. <l My late noble friend was no stranger to the vicissitudes of this sublunar) pil- "iînıa-e," he continued; *' he knew that -treiiLth and vigour ward ni>t off aiïliction ; well then might he tremble for a form, sensitive and gentle as vour own." 44 And vet," faltered Antoinette, " in his life time, nevei did mv hither bicathe *w h a \\ İsh— never hint such an idea." li The minds of men vary with out- waul circumstances," lejoined the con- feitor; tv alive to local influence, their H-ntinci.ts and their actions change, it ¡ь ivr ub ίο adhere ίο the кы impression, nor pí€t>umptuotrJy
presumptuously fo cavil, when death has silenced all possibility of explanation " "Tell me, father," urged the trem¬ bling girl, i( are there not circumstan¬ ces, are there not situations which render fhe síi let observance of such a request more pernicious than tbe breach ?" (( No," solemnly exclaimed the con¬ fessor ; " not on earth does a plea e\ÍA which can supersede the dving request of a father. For a season, the false reason¬ ing of inclination may silence the inroads of conscience, but a tíme will con 1 с when-------" îl paused, for Antoinette, g'ispî ng, half-fainting, looked as though some gho4 had crossed her; her c\es weie ι abed towards heaven, ariti кет ham*"». wildly clasped, denoted what her lips could not utter— Supplication. " The struggle is indeed heaw," said the confessor. " Alas ! who has scattered thorns in the path to peaee? uho has rendered the task of dutv so bitter?" 'e Antoinette
Anfoinetfe owned there was a being who barred all entrance to a religious eel!, yet carefully did she conceal the »Λ rt »'V 4 » rt j У ŕ Uní· l -ь л · .ч ^ 1^гче· *-э #Л./-Ч \\ Г\С İ ЧГ i un и t οι tuai uci ıı ц j i с ai а 11) О inniv disclosure should irritate the feelings of the duke de Fontainebleau. Long and torturing was the exhortation which ensued. Father St. Pierre, fearful of betraviuíí his meaning, carefullv cloaked bis discouise in the persuasive enthusiasm of zeal ; he seemed to be actuated but for thc^alvation oí her soul ; and gifted as he was with the flow of eloquence, soon did he swell the lapse of dufy, the dereliction from blind obedience, into ciime of almost damning hue. Antoinette felt her spirits depressed, her mind unhappy ; .she pined for the return of Sf. Sauverne, for the support of his presence; and when lhe secret enemy of her repose quitted the castle, û\e struggled in vain to subdue the steal¬ ing encroachments of melane hoív.
CHAP.
CHAP. VUL· 'Tis odd Whiüi innb admitían, e . nìi tt do'h; \t.>, г í <^ D .ana's rangra talee tbemn'he^, and \itlu i.j 'i beír det r to tlie '•tand oí ti¡t sttakı .nut . t · < mì Which шакеь the true m.ıııkıluî, a-id si\f ъ l\u tii.er, Л'ау, sometimes hang* hot!» Unti aud true ludn . ul Ί Сап it not do, and undo ?
Ju natui с there's no ЫеаньЬ but the mind ; Л'опе can be cali'd dcťorm'd but the unkind- \ и tue ib beauty ; but tlie beauteous evil Aie empty trunks o'trflouibh'd by the dtui. ¿ Ц İLİ 1 · I í Л Г ŕ. Глтпеи St. Pierre journeved w»íh a mind brooding hatred and revenge, with a heart, with the feelings of an t( Ate hoi from hell." The dazzling charms of An- temei te*
toinette, devoted, as it were, to the poi- r^ession of another, fanned him on to action; and harbouring nought but ran¬ cour and malignancy, he turned from the beatened track, znd sought the haunt of lawless plunder. The lure of gold, t lie bait of promised reward, soon bound the whole troop to his interest ; and ere be quitted the ruined watch-tower, the plan of proceeding was arranged ; thi¬ ther was the hapless Antoinette fo be ι onve\ ed, and there, strictly watched, was she to sojourn, until some safe and eternal sanctuary was selected. The con¬ fessor felt gratified in tearing her from a ï-dspected rival— de Roussillon would feel gratified in the realization of his own sordid plans. It was two nights after the inh-rment of the countess dc Beauvilie, that An¬ toinette, expecting the return of St, ■Sauverne, closely wrapped in her man- tie, her head sheltered bv a lenjeik glowing with roses of her own embroid¬ ery,
erv, stood af an open casement, watch¬ ing the long avenue which led immedi¬ ately fo the castle gate. The sun gradually sunk beneath the horizon ; the last tints of splendor ùdcd ; the golden tissue of the clouds darkened into gloom ; and the lonsf line of external ob'u-cîs became mingled, became indistinct ; yet she retained her station, yet she listened for each coming sound, catching the zephyr as it floated, and lulled by the softly stealing magic of seductive fancv. Every flight glowed with fhe burnished breath of love—everv fond illusion teemed with bliss; mystery no longer wrapped the stolen bond of faith in dull obscurity; and the smile of infant pleading, though it summoned the burning blush, siili held forth the promise of a father's par¬ don. She started at the sound of ap¬ proaching steps, and quick did fhe loud peal of the castle bell dissolve the airy fabric. She leaned from the casern enf-—she listened
listened to the almost breathless announce¬ ment of seeming horror—St. Sauverne, the partner of her soul, the husband of lier worship, thrown from his horse, lay in the avenue, senseless and bleeding î Scarce pausing for thought, she ileci from the chamber ; wild, almost maddened, she would have rushed by the porter, but with a grasp of gentle violence, he restrained her. **' Slav, stay, lady !" he implored ; but Antoinette, till now soft as the dove of peace, was not to be withheld ; she besought, she struggled, and all that the faithful Clement could do was, to shadow her footsteps. Alas ! soon, very soon, was the fatal stratagem explained. Luved beyond the shelter of security, the strug¬ gles, the resistance of her unfortunate guard were soon silenced; and Antoi¬ nette, half fainting, was lifted before one of the banditti, and the murdered body of Clement left to proda isn the tale, I ong
Long wasit ere the powers of memory revived, for though she breathed, the faculty of thought seemed lost, it was no horrid dream, no conjured fantasy of the brain : she looked up ; her eves rested on the harsh features of the robber; she shuddered—she mentally pra) ed that she might soon close them for ever. The mountain track was wdd and cheerless * in vain the hapless prisoner looked around in search of human habitation ; nought but lonel v desolation could she tiacc — nought but forests tinned with the saffron гал s of morning. The ci vstal gems of night hung on each spray ; the blithe carol of creation chanted the hymn of gladness; yet An¬ toinette felt as though dead to hope ; her heart sickened, her spirit died w itimi her. In vain she questioned, in vain she strove to move the feelings of her ra- \isher; he was deaf to teais, to entrea¬ ties, to expostulation ; and ii for an instant he relaxed the reign cf tacitile- n ny ,
niî\, it was fo exhort submis/ion to a destiny inevitable. Exhausted with fatigue and wretched- iic?% \ntoinette beheld the time-woin turrets of her future prison. The shrill· sounding horn was fhe signal, and the forni of Drusiiie presented itself at the postern. She sprung towards her—she hailed her as a heaven-born minister— she clung to her for succour and pro¬ tection : her spirits rallied, her heart swelled high with reviving hope ; for ah ! she dreamt not that the native ^enilene.ss of her sex could be trans¬ formed i..to crueltv— -that the barrier of honour once broken, the gradual in¬ roads of \ice harden fo fiend-like apathy. Too fatally did she find the fallacious staif of her reliance ; Drusiiie was more than an inexorable jailer, she was a relentless, a malignant torturer, who delighted in probing the wounds of afíliction ; she enued the peerless form
form of beauty, and she hated that in¬ nocence she had herself forsworn. Days, weeks, months, wore away, and Antoinette could not even guevs tîıe name of her persecutor, in vain she called upon her brother ; in vain she called upon her husband ; the one ex¬ cited the smile, the other the iron ν of Drusiiie. She dared to doubt î'jC vali¬ dity of the marriage ; she dared exchange for lover the sacred name of hmband ; and then, riving the breaking hevt, she would hint that lover the contriver of the plot. Goaded almost to madness, Antoine? ie would shrink for relief even to her osv η miserable thoughts: she pictured tl\e moment of her approaching confine¬ ment as ìli e moment destined for mur¬ der ; and so subdued, so broken were her spirits, that nought but the safety of her babe could have fanned exertion lor escape. It was at this period, that, attracted
attracted by the sound of voices, she arew near to the door of her chamber. She soft h raised the latch—for the lone situation of the ruin, together with the never-slumbering vigilance of Drusiiie, rendered a lock unthought of. Distinct¬ ly did she hear the arrangement for a new enterprise. Drusiiie was dissatis¬ fied, for she and ber son Leontine were to be left alone in the tower. Should they return jn the night, she murmured at the cilice of answering the signal ; : ni í astanti y, to sa\e an infringement on r¡er hours of repose, was it settled to leave the low portal, immediately at the base of ι he watch-tower, unfastened ; •iirough it the banditti could return to í he ir sanctuary, and from it no danger {-onId be feared. Drusiiie seemed satisfied, and Antoi¬ nette, with a light and cautious step, retreated from the door. Anxiouslv did vhe pant for the moment of exertion, diligently d:d she watch the movements \QL. V. t Ы Uf
-ofthe band. At sunset she saw them quit the tower ; she traced them down tiie mountain's side ; she lost them in the forest, that forest which ied to liberty, which waved a beacon fo lier hopes. With a disguise from which innoume recoiled, but which stern necesMiy warranted, did she plead indbpoMiiom eiid she recline, аъ though m Jassitiub upon her bed. Her sit! anon ga^e colour to the plea, and Dru-ille, lullrd into f-ecuritv, at an earlv hour r* t »r«* I with ber \outhfui Leonídio, ^¡\ n«; the ion - pined-for opportunity lor action. Л lì Antoinette, fearful that ¡»rei ipít r.w*.* mii>ht ruin all, ¡»cai cely dared to m >v г, scarcely dared to breathe ; she [>rcsvjJ her band upon her beai*, ..ь ι! il·, qui^k tin ub- bing^ would autken her {ader ; i.or η . she distinctiv tiaeed tlie heavy biea/i,; . of slum her, did she venture to des^cv. ! írom tiie chamber. She thought not о covering unt d she felt the chi/ иамр о niüht, and then, had she sliuddeied be- neat'
neãih the freezing blast of winter, she would not have returned to seek it. Oh no ! for what are privations, what the pressure of local inconvenience, when put it competition with the îo^s of life --with worse, with the threat of eterin! thraldom
L; /*»
CHAP.
^в!тш1тв>аятй!шптштч*яте?пы1в***10»
CHAP. ÎX. .ľ' hadó ti 'Jurij ! MV ľii' ) .ti' )У pì.icVJ, .nul í b.c. ť : : ;* Of v, . n. ή m me n .v fr¡ -¡ t ι ta i in r ; >t r am in.irbU cc «♦ ní nc^ tbc ikt»., g ιιι·>υη ílas гк ught to .M.prebtnd Írom íínpiou^- m* n П.И. jt*j* Γ.ιπ stars twinkled on the lone path of Antoinette, the moon lent an ocea^İonaî gleam, and with the written mcmoıiaî οι her sorrows in her pocket, and the ruby heart, the prized gift of Sf. Sauverne, Lid in her bosom, did she brave the danger \
¿angers, the fatigues of flight ; she paused not even for breath, till the dark¬ ened outline of the ruin was no longer \isib'e, and then, combatting against the premure of weakness, praying for forti¬ tude, praying for strength, did she dash away the blinding tear, and pursue her venturous ¡ournev. Reared in indulgence, cradled in ten¬ derness, Antoinette heeded not fhe rough briars which dung fo her light garments, which lacerated her wearied feef. Timid as the sensitive hare, she listened to each passing sound; and panting for the gay beams of returning day, oft did she cast •in anxious glance fo the faintly-tinted east. It came but to teem with new ier/ors, for in serving to point out a smoother track, might it not also betray her to the lynx eye of pursuit ? The thought was worse than death ; it filled her with dismay ; if iced every power of exertion. She sought the thickest shadow of the foicsi ; she shrunk beneath the m d underwood \
underwood ; and existing upon wild berries, and slackening her fevered thirst at an adjoining spring, she reposed tili the sun was again declining. Antoinette could sleep spite of every accumulating trial, for ^mlt weighed not in the balance; upon the earth's green surfa- e, her head pillowed bv a stone, her canopy the azure vault of heaven, Antoinette could sleep sounder than her persecutors ; for innocence plants the cygnet's down, as conscience strews sharp thorns to goad the sinner. For two successive nights she journeyed, and not till the morning of the third day did she behold a human habitation : then she feared to cra\e admittance, for ir cachi r tj having entangled her in its snares, had made her suspicious of her fellow-creatures ; but honesty spoke in the ruddy features of the cottager ; and when she saw his wife and sportive off¬ spring, she ventured to steal from her hiding-place. hi
In this dwelling her harassed form wooed repose, and her mind, restored to Kometliing like calmness, revolved fhe past, and planned for the future. To return to the castle de Beauville was to bia\e the power of her unknown perse¬ cutor ; to seek protection beneath the roof of de Fontainebleau, was to involve one dearer than life in new difficulties. What then remained but ίο crave succour aí the hands of her brother, to reveal to him her marriage, and the cause of i-ecrecy, to claim from his interference л hope of the duke de Fontainebleaus approval ? Hapless Antoinette ! such often are the blind conclusions of human wisdom ; incompetent to judge, beguiled, deceiv¬ ed, we seek tiie very path which leads to ruin, 1 will not linger o'er her wan¬ derings, or paint the many heart-aches whieh tended her comfoi 1 1 ess journey, but will hasten her to the chateau gate, where, animated with hope and antici- и 4 pated
pated succour, she sought the presence of her brother. The marchioness and her infant son were absent on a visit to her father, and the marquis, at sight of the wretched fugitive, started back in horror and alarm. ïn a moment all his plots seemed frustrated, and guided by the instigation of the devil, he spurned her from him, accusing her of dishonour, and swearing that the paternal roof should ne'er be polluted by the offspring of crime. Ια vain she implored, in vain she protested innocence, calling upon every saint in heaven to witness that she was a wife ; de Houssillon unfeelingly ridiculed the existence of a clandestine union, loaded her with the most opprobrious epithets, and commanding her to prepare for an immediate departure, quitted the room, and secured the door. Insta ыл* did he seek the counsel of his confessor, and almost with the \elo- city of thought, was a plan arranged between
between them, St. Pierre was himself to conduct her to a lone estate, which the marquas possessed near Castelnaudary, and there, with every seeresy, was she to sojourn, until c< Nature's inevitable hour" pasr, she could be conveyed to some distant monastery, where, through fhe aid of a plausible tale, she might be immured for ever. "And the infant?" asked the confes¬ sor. The mnrquis gnawed his lip in silence -— (i The infant may never .sec the light/' he at length muttered ; and then re¬ commending dispatch, he summoned to their aid the long-trusted spy upon her actions. Soon was a tow vehicle prepared, and soon, notwithstanding pleaded pain and indisposition, was the half-fainting vic¬ tim removed from the chateau. In vain would 1 portray the despair, fhe anguish of her mind: in any other situation, the tears of beauty might have bribed f π 5 compassion ;
compassion ; but the heart of St. Pie-re was turned to stone, for each time that his eye glanced upon her altered figure, did it kindle the í t re of vengeance; she had spurned his love, and the indignity could not be pardoned ; she had viclded to fhe passion of another, and that pa-uon he had sworn to blast. The night was dark; the track was rouy.i and broken : half Liming, half dving. the tortured wife of the count 4. Чш\емт.е sunk to the bottoni of the c^rir.e. The conflict within had hastened other pangs, and the heavy moans which swelled her bosom, excited something like alarm in the confessor. He feared to witness the struggles of death; he (bred not brave alone fhe agonies of one he liad so deeply injured ; and letting down the glass, and gazing anxiously around, he bidthe man drive slowly towards a distant light, which twinkled from a cottage window. Alighting at the garden gate? he assisted the suffering Antoinefte, and С ГЦ V'HIT
v ,,Ε,Λ ►
iruing aJmi,tance, ^he became ;ьш· recited bv tlie ¿мт to Gabne.U, 4 mother a· i \a c t r^c. The in!a..tb%y 'ла adopted m cht , *аьс uî тле ut »»arici 1 »ih, and the ίίΠίί^'α ¿i.¡ alone l*- k o w кч' ic l ¡о :!ч* í oi te ^or, w no ve, kei; t\er\ , tei. /. retî'.n' in the v.u 1* a ι
ii
ο ρ ur.dcr "-ome ρΙ.κ.-»ιο'ο ptíeiíí\ j j:i »ι -eiå< ľvd tlie b br. rv u e > ¡ .ti > ι I'e II - ' vt ! < ,; !„ » , ^ e *i»tencd * > i .v .. * _ u ι eeaîıi о! .¡ ( ч per^e- i t . i ' ; t к s .e r t v\ 4 »s « cii,;ih! i,, ч íiat-c i*i»epi^t í, r looi ' Л 1 л 4 * ίο t. e . ч*е . 'ty of ¡.ti o.>.î a .ubiti > » • co ci In. He f'ihbd ir. arin^ upon h¡, l.\.,- ť , he mu ed tn deep abstractul , s . leu', starting, fí Our pui pose и bat h ι. f a. vonìpii^hed/ 1 he exclaimcu ; ' ρ osseci -> n but ha If secured." ^ t. Pierre spoke not. Again the eve: oi tae marquU weie bent to the ground, ¿ml again im knit brow bespoke the : * fi inteibir
intensity of thougbf. *· A liîv," he at length resumed, 4 * half crushed. Lai! broken, soon withers/' líc r <* ¡sed h К eves to the face of the confessor—he rivetted them in piercing scrutiny—*'iht; infant must not bitnem a^nnsf u» " * e The inbnt i> sirong, is healfhv/' said father St. Pierre ; hi no natural we.k- ness favours a prospect uf release ; her L:n<rs ------" ** What is the breath of a baby yf %ig- mñcantly asked de Houssillon. ** You was g nee a baby, I was once а baby/* observed the cor*fessor. " Tuie, ' rejoined the marquis: u had ле died babies, we had gone to heaven ; if ibis d.e a baby, it will ¿ro to heaven ; whereas if if lives, if it mingles in fhe world, it may hereafter, l:ke ourselves—" "Merit hell," interrupted St. Pierre, shuddering with momentarv horror. De Roussillon started ; he dared not trust himself to speak—he dared not break fhe profound pance which ensued. The
The form of Antoinette rose to his ŕí mind's eye;" again he saw her, as he had seen her a few hours preceding, inb pîoıing· mercy and succour; alas ' he had spurned the suppliant, and now had death frozen the power to aid. But though for a season he endured all the horrors of despair, all the poignancy of .elf-reproach, all the keen thorns which s.u.at goad the conscious record of past ir.ia.nke, \et did fhe fallacious reasoning of a corrupt heart soon blunt the new- c.med baib of conscience. Antoinette u a- ut vis* ; ant! because no blood had been shed, because no apparent violence had mancd n.e spring of life, he tried to think that the will of Hea\en had alone .shortened her sublunary pilgii* b.age. The infant, too—if she lived, reared in a cottage, unaccustomed to the luxuries of life, how could she hereafter need what she had never known? how crave possessions which had cost the rich barter—honour ? Such was the sophistry of
of injustice, such the beguiling doctrine of an avaricious mind, such the visio¬ nary dreams of an uncle. Oh, fatal proof of man's frailty, of the despotic sway of the arch fiend to evil î an uncle, fhe onlv brother of an entombed parent, he who ought to have protected, he who ought to have shielded from the iniquity of base and sordid im¬ position, he to become the imposer, he to snatch the heritage from helpless hands, to withhold the right of birth, to trample on the laws of nature \ —Oh, shame î shame ! shame ! De Houssillon, on mature deliberation, found that the life-offering oí his orphan niece might be dispensed with ; and a·; soon as caution had closed the earth o'er the form of the departed Antoinette treacherously wa» the babe removed bom the protection of the dame, and by the emissaries of Drusiiie, hurried to a ú\¿- taiît province ; there, under the name of Gabrielle, was she committed to fhe charge
charge of her who had been the footer- mother of Leontine ; there, in innocence, did che earl ν years of life fly swift away ; and there, taught fo believe that the obedience of filial duty might yet be claimed, often did her lips pronounce the pra}' er for a parent's safefy. But though the marquis, in having surmounted the obstacles which once intervened between him and the pos¬ sessions of Antoinette, spoke nof, ap¬ peared to think not of her banished daughter, Drusiiie was differently ac¬ tuated : hers was a deep, hidden spring, which even the wily St. Pierre guessed nof. Still sojourning with the bandirti, notwithstanding the death of him who bad been their chief, she maintained an authority, a mysterious influence over the fate of the orphan. It was through her remittances that Gabrielle had re¬ ceived the benefits of education ; it was through the politic substance of her oc¬ casional
casional letters, that the hope of a mother's existence was kept alive, Dru¬ siiie artfully personated that mother; and through the influence of assumed autho¬ rity, was Gabrielle, at a given period, committed to the charge of Leontine and Baudouin. Her intention was to awe the orphan info submission, and by wedding her to Leontine, long since the acknowledged chief of the brigands, fo confide to him the important secret of ber birth, and by so doing, to com¬ mand the interest and exertions of the marquis de Roussillon in any futu r e exi¬ gence. Leontine, without guessing a prize richer than beauty, seconded herschemes. Fierce as he was by habit and by nature, love moulded him to submission ; and even when his sword had silenced the presumption of Baudouin, when, in lone and dreary solitudes, his enraptured gaze hung upon her charms, even then did iove awe him into respect. He shrunk before
before the majesty of virtue ; he dared to supplicate, hi I he dared not to pro¬ fane. Thi* <ич\\пе>Л IVirrr#*cc tr% whir'Vt rhíínfí» had conducted the steps of D'Avignon, was, from its bordering the stream which flowed amidst their principal haunts, an occasional rendezvous of the ban¬ ditti ; it was their artifice then which en» trapped the intrepid friends, which» fearful lest observant curiosity should mark their departure, first lured, and then confined them in one of the dun¬ geons of the fortress ; and whilst Mor¬ taigne and D'Avignon were heroically combatting for the dein era n ее of the other, their insnarei*) relating the inci¬ dent to his companions, was joining in their loud lough, at the success which had attended his personating a ghost. Already has Gabrielle spoken of her recepţionat the ruined tower; already expressed her horror and despair at the assumed affinity of Drusiiie. The mantle and
and ved, æft by the martvred Antoinetic, and found bv her iniared daughter anions the ruins, was as an appalling j)hantom to the Ltuilt-charoed mind: \сч still did Drusiiie treasure tlie mvsterv, still did she persevere in the promotion of her designs. Gabrielle, as the reader already knows, in the ab ence of Leoni ine, threw herself upon the honour of Mor¬ taigne, andin flight alone defeated their fulfilment. But not long had die res: led at fhe dwelling ofthe supposed mother of Louis, when the confessor, noting the frequent absences of the count, watched and traced his wanderings. He marked the unequalled beauty of the attractor ; he gazed ппЛ shuddered ; for he recognised the living image of An¬ toinette, inhabiting the same chamber in which the injured, the murdered An¬ toinette had expired; yet clivi he attri¬ bute fhe similitude to chance ; for Dru- sille, more eílecíualiv ίο strengthen her own secret motives, had lonsr since told hil I
him the orphan niece of de Roussillon had voluntarily become a member of the sisterhood in which she had been edu¬ cated, lie saw the strides of love ; he saw the overthrow of his patron's hopes. Long did he conceal the discoverv in O tf his own bosom, content to excite the jealous apprehensions of Mortaigne > but that jealousy confirmed the extent of passion; and during the visit of the unguessed-at bridegroom to the castle de Fontainebleau, St Pierre's discovery of the letter, together with the mysterious conduct ot Louis, wrought from a true principle of honour, in the supposition ol his own inferior birth, furnished hiui with strong and apparently unquestion¬ able evidence. ikit the breach whit h thus banished the almost-maddened Mor¬ taigne from the chateau, might be but temporal, and tîıe fascination of the cotfagc-siren might still bind him in ada¬ mantine chains. More effectually fo counteract the possibili! v,
possibility, at the return ofthe marquis, the tale of hidden love wasrevealed, to* gelher with the proximity of their dan¬ gerous neighbour. De Roussillon raved; he cursed the weakness, the degeneracy of his son ; and imploring the succour of father Sf. Pierre, sufficiently smothered the intrud¬ ing qualms cf remorse, to seek fhe ob¬ ject of fascination even in the defile in which his injured sister lay buriccL But the exertion was ineffectual, for Gabri¬ elle came not. He could only see the cottage in distance; and upon fhe verge ofthe cypress grove whn-h waved over the humble grave of the hapless Antoi¬ nette, and which effectually screened the hidden form of Leontine, was a plan arranged to tear Gabrielle from her sanc¬ tuary, and to place her beyond the possi* ble discoverv of Mortatene. The tale of elopement was to give colour to the btory, ai:d time and outraged pride was the dependance for cure. Tne
'The bandit listened unobserved ; the name of Gabrielle thrilled every fibre of ids heart ; he heard her description ; he heard the power of her beauty ; bis feelinas told him it could be none other than the Gabrielle besought ; and though as а rival he hated Mortaigne, still did be swear to counteract the plot against her safety. He thought thru gratitude might work in his behalf, and last of all, he felt that violence would ensure her to him. To have discovered her retreat was almost to have regained her, and joy and exultation rioted in his bosom. Torturing had been his feelings since the knowledge of her flight: wounded, ill, be had returred to the fastness ; he had listened to the recital of his mother. Fever and delirium had ensued ; he had cursed that mother—he had threaten¬ ed death to all whose v : gihmce had numbered ; and soon as returning strengf h admitted, spite of her pra ver«, lie withdrew bra elf from the band, w cai ¡г,?
swearing o'er earth to seek for Gabrielle, Having mysteriously warned her of her clanger, he took his station in the cypres^ grove, and there did he impatiently watch the sound of approaching footsteps. < The shades of night deepened ; the emissaries of injustice lay lurking in the defile ; the marquis himself, impatient of delav, accompanied the confessor ; and when Leontine, wrapped Ln his cloak, forced a passage through the foliage, when de /oussülon, eager to seize fp/ victim, sprung forward, he groaned, he fell—for he received the dagger of the bandit in his bosom. St. Pierre, nerved by the fall of his patron, losing all deference for his holy function, alive but to vengeance, snatched from the side of the wounded marquis his half-unsheathed blade. The aim was sure, LeoDinie, in flight, evaded the repetition of the stroke, but he couid only totter towards the cottage, and Sr Pierre, stained bv the life's blood of his own
·■ ,*ï^ sillon, The fi mel y arrivai of Louis, from a ron annc visitation to the convent of St, Поп. ».ее, a ro U' ed the confessor f о ексг- tie; 1 ; and in the hope that assistance tnijţht vet be administered fo the sense- les í marcjť.is he was berne, as has been rehifed, to the cottage. But though í ίηΐΛΐ vax c iförts have in part unravelled the clüí»e->pun web of iniquity, in de- l.iiling tîıe buíferinus of the mother, í ììuist not forget the father of the twins. í 'ai. 4 , ful i,s the task to linger over misers ; but order is a so\creign rule, and Solu¬ tion the grend furte of a romance-writer ; í must therefore supplicate the indul¬ gence of my reader, and hurrying her back fo the castle de Fontainebleau, explain how the heir of the duke became the solitai y tenant of an hermitage.
CU\l\
CHAP. К. Γ 4.ϋί fato ΙΟ o lili i,n¿ vuorit. У ь,· 4 * 0 » V^ ík) luug ν *th ν ,mt-> ¡íJ ,\oe.> î ?s ^ü en, li^ human ρ:. di u ct.í.r ,nz dr.v^ii, Ίθ Ul , 'Г,\ 'и i'. . Gr.ii% Like pokern спел Kj v^Aïk ^'.»t Li'iie iťtor, Bites tÍK J U><l!U~>!¿ i|4ut. Sh\1 Ebi'I i?J S\VA\FD bv the apoarentlv disinterested affection of his brother Eugene, the count St. Sauverne often chained him¬ self toa continuance at the castle, even though his heart, plav ing truant, wan¬ dered to his absent )oxc. Often aid le speak of confiding his weighty secret ίο a father's ear ; Luí ever did the fallacious remsor ir»?
reasoning of his treacherous adviser, check the impube. He behaved with seeming courtesy to Aglaie, but hi* thoughts, his whole soul was devoted to Antoinette. Sickening as the destined period of sacrifice advanced, he again flew to de Beauville ; he found the ob¬ ject of his idolatry agitated, drooping beneath the injustice of a parent's last request ; nor did he leave it until the persuasive prayers of love had placed their fates bevond the power to alter. Glowing with rapturous delight, his spirits elated at the insuperable obstacle which now intervened between hirn and the projected union with his cousin, he reached the seat of his ancestors. He found bis father surrounded by friends, bis brow illumined with the smiles of joy and cheerfulness ; for Eugene had been active, Eugene had spoken without doubt of a brother's conformity ; he had calmed the suspicions of the duke, and had taught him to believe that the cere·* vor* iv« ι monv
mony once performed, more than peace would ensue. His aim was to produce an irreparable breach, was to banish St. Sau¬ verne the presence of his father, and then to trust the completion of his own wishes to the hereafter dexterity of art. It was he then who recommended flight as the only expedient to avoid the reproaches of an incensed parent ; and binding him¬ self as the future mediator, St. Sauverne fell into the snare. He penned an adieu to the duke, beseeching his patience and his mercy, and leaving it in his chamber the night previous to the projected tmion, withdrew himself from the castle. Disappointment and despair quickly banished the reign of hilarity. Eugene successfully played the hypocrite ; he mourned the absence of the ungrateful St. Sauverne, and watchful of the strug¬ gles of the duke, tried to lure him info comfort. But alas ! while he was thus, like an unwholesome gangrene, undermining the
the interest of a confiding brother, that brother, stricken almost unto death, was mourning the mysterious loss of Antoi¬ nette. Dreadful was the intelligence which awaited him at the castle de Beau- \ille, agonizing the torture of suspense. Weeks wore away ere he was capable of exertion, and then did Antoinette occupy his every thought. No trace could he discover, no single clue to whisper hope ; and yet he fled in search, till strength, too feeble for exertior^ welding to the conflicts of his mind, beneath a stranger's roof, stretched him once more upon the bed of sufferance. Raging was the fever which ensued, almost uninterrupted the flights of wild, of terrifying delirium ; and when nature, successfully struggling, rallied once more, in spite of prayed-for death, he recom¬ menced a search which even hope whis¬ pered fruitless. Not a province of his uat»ve country but he diligently scruti- i S nized,
íii/ed, not a monaslerv which came not under his observation ; and passing into the adjoining states, five long years were spent in wandering: but, alas! time, tîıe grand speciiic of sublunary ill, the only balm to woe, expunged not one sorrow ; and the wonders of art, the beauties of nature, extorted but a transient gaze. Probed to the quick, he shrunk from every social call ; the smile of joy was poison to his feelings; the contrasting cheerfulness of bis fellow-men an out¬ rage to the perpetual gloom of misery. Living but on the memory of her he had lost, encouraging the wildest ex tra \ aga n- cies of grief, frightful were the occa¬ sional paroxysms of despair ; and often plunging into the deepest solitudes, he wooed an encroaching melancholy, al¬ most amounting to insanity. Sometimes the image of his father would obtrude, then would he start as though to íly to de Fontainebleau, then smile at his own inconsistency,
ínconsistencv, and shudder at the dis tance. In these wild and unsettled habits, did the count St. Sauverne re-visit France, sometimes olanning a total renunciation 1 о of the world, in the assumption of the coul, and then shrinking even from the anticipated society of the brotherhood. Changed almost beyond recognition, through sickness and endurance, he so¬ journed in the neighbourhood of the castle de Fontainebleau, and there, by letter, did he petition all he craved on earth—the pardon and the blessing of his father. This transcript of his feelings, under сол er, was intrusted to his brother, whose persevering art and cruel inven¬ tion were again successfully excited, Stealing to the presence of the unsus¬ pecting St. Sauverne, even when clasped in his embrace, when gazing on the wan shadow of an injured, of an unhappy brother, Eugene, the perfidious Eugene, i 3 dared
dared pursue his system lie wept \w¡¡. treacherous tears the pretended obduracy of the duke, spoke of his own efforts to conciliate, of his frequent prayers, of his vain expostulations. f ' Nothing—no¬ thing can soften the severity of our ndstaken parent/' he concluded ; "no persuasion, no argument, avert the in» exorable decree of banishment. He vows lieber to behold vou more; he savs— alas! my brother, how can I tell you what he says ?" St. Sauverne folded his arms upon his breast ; his features seemed fixed in dire despair ; yet when Eugene paused, he raised his eyes from the earth, as though eager to hear the almost annihilating conclusion. " He says," continued the apparently subdued Eugene, u that to force vourseli into his presence, is but to extort the curse which has long hung threatening over vour head ; is ------ " (t Hold, my brother !" intciruptcd
the count, " never, never shall that eurse be extorted. May Heaven bless, prosper my father ! even though I, bowed to the grave, mourn to madness, his decision. But vourself," after an agon ; ?ing pause, " why do I see this sable garb ΐ why do 1 trace this brow of ¿ad η ess ?" Eugene owned himself a mourner. Wedded to his cousin, Heaven had taken her from him, and now was he left a solitary wiJower, with one innocent cherub, one infant model of his lost Aglaie. The brothers parted, Eugene to im¬ pose on tîıe feelings of theduke*—St. Sau¬ verne, in obscurity, to bury himself and his sorrows. It was chance which con¬ ducted him to the forest of pine and cy¬ press fringing the lone hermitage of father Etienne; he raised the latch, he pushed open the door. The silence of death prevailed. He passed through the re* iectory, and entering the chapel, be* ι 'í held
held the devotee kneeling at the foot of the altar. Wrapped in the enthusiasm of true piety, the man of God spoke not, moved not, nor till the light of day had declined, did he join his desponding Sliest. His discourse flowed as manna to the. breaking heart; he led the mind beyond tiie corroding indulgence of past voes ; he led to the anticipation of fu¬ ture blessedness—to that promised re- eompence to which theChristian mourner clings—to that haven which wipes the widow*s tears, and quells the orphan*s sighs. St. Sauverne listened ; he did more, he hailed a cessation from toil, re respite from labour. Пете was the sanctuary he had sought ; here the wild which offered obscmlty from the world ; here might he live undiscovered ; here might he die un¬ known. Embo.somed by woods and mountains, vegetation might become his studv. if nature his book." Here then It was the title of courtesy exchanged for
the gaib of religion, and here did the once-glowing hopes of the count St, Sauverne concentrate in the meek and humble dutiesof father Augustin. Labour and affection reared the monumental tablet ; and in the same solitude in which îhe injured Antoinette had lingered ont .so many months of misery, did her suf- S mt íenng husband daily, almost hourly, in- voke her ger.tle spirit. blind and weak are the decisions of hrean i Hgmcnt î once did ?Л. Sauverne, in rejection, shrink from the society cf a religion ^ order. It was the dreaded intricou:, e with .narı wh : ( h wai»ed against the con! ; : "d \ct t when blind zeal, wrouy' í bv rs midnight dream, urged the old and infirm fatner l· tienne to а 1ом' iu, d arduoiib '>:1дг1;:1а*те, he sîırunk from the moment of parting. "If I live," ¿rud the devotee. " to these mountai::? will 1 return to die : should Heaven will İt otherwise, sl.o dd you behold me no more, on the btep of th'taltar on which i "' ' V/t;
w T e have often knelt together, offer up a pra ver for fhe repose of my soul." Father Etienne, supported by his staff, struck into the pine-forest ; he vanished^ from the eves of St. Sauverne, fo "lad- den rhem no more. Month rolled upon month, year to year succeeded; it was evident father Etienne rested anions stranger-, and numerous were the mas¬ ses which father Augustin put up for his rcpoic. Often, as be reclined upon the rushy couch of hiis predecessor, did he recai those arguments, those admonition«?, which had blunred the acute ]vmg of - iterance, wliich had excited the mild -.way of resignation. The past could not be retraced without bitterness ; but the future gradually assumed the cheering ii verv of hope ; gradually did it pierce the boundary of this world, did it extend beyond those wild, tho.se destructive storms of Lie, which wreck the peace of man. But while St. Sauverne, in this little hermitage,
herm^ía^e, braved the heaís of summer anel the blasts of winter, the politic and relentless Eugene, unmoved by the heartfelt «rief of the dukede Fonfaine- bleau, penning up in his breast the im¬ portant secret, bid adieu to his paternal home, and leaving his innocent daughpïr to the care and protection of his deceiv¬ ed parent, joined the standard of his prince. Enduring the hardships of war, he shared each enterprise of danger, nor till wounded and disabled, he Jay amongst the slain, did conscience conjure the form of his injured brother. Then, had the power of reparation been his, that reparation had been made; but ins groans were dinned by the roar of cannon, his efforts checked by enervating weakness. Heavy was the conflict of mental mi¬ sery, slow the gradual encroachments of dsath. His closed eyes could not ex- duds the scenes of his past life ; his late- breathed prayer could not extract the t G thorn
thorn from memory. No arm supported his drooping head ; no voice conveyed the soothing accents of peace: the va¬ pours of night iced his disabled limbs, and the heavy shroud of darkness quick enwrapped each outward object. Deep ss as the calm which succeeded the late din of action, prophetic the silence which reigned. Once, the promise of succour seemed to approach ; fhe sound of footsteps coud be heard ; the buzz of voices distinctly traced. For a moment hope fluttered in the breast of the hum¬ bled Kulene, even though his life's blood fast receded ; but though alive f о perception, he was dead to exertion ; and without the power to move, without the power to articulate, mocked by the thorough conviction that one little effort •vou Id secure assistance, he was left in iiifrerance; and when the broad bright glare of day re-dawned, all aid, all alle¬ viane n had been useless—Eugene was Cold
cold and senseless as the clod upon which he rested. Thus, alas ! in the moment of imagined triumph, do we often see the crest of iţuilt humbled, furnishing an appalling lesson to erring man. The string of life become^ severed amidst the giant snides (d'injustice, and burdened with the load vf sin, the soul, which dares infringe the bounden rule of du\\\ i< snatched be\ond the aid of transient repentance. ľoo lon<r have we lingered o'er the С» чГ> insidious foe of a brother's peace ; haste we then to the lone solitude v>f St. Sau·« лете —a solitude which olien echoed the sigh ofg?ief, but ne\er was tilled withthe moan ol remorse. In the culture of hü little garden, in devotion, and in reflec¬ tion, did the j ears of life decline. Sti- dom did the foot of man invade his terri¬ tory ; no spoil lured the marauder—no aim invited the traveller. Senseless to the thrill of pleasure, patient under endu¬ rance, his haunt was the lone pine forest, " W.V4V
l * W Itert bitter bud mg meUacboly reigii'd, O'er htìaVjr &*ghs ami care-diaorder'd thoughts ;" where the erected tablet, perpetuating the name of Antoinette, was as a sacred fane, from which his prayers and his praise ascended. In a heart thus actuated, thus living upon the remembrance of the past, thus clinging fo the blessed promises of the future, violent, almost agonizing, was the conflict which the sight of Gabiielle —the breathing, moving image of her hi deplored, vested in the mantle, in the Ned, wrought bv the findeis of Antoi- nette herself, produced. ILs brain felt maddened, his feelings rived ; he gazed upon her as upon a being of another world ; and though so closely wrapped in mystery, he questioned of the past and of the future ; though on the mission of seeking a shelter at the convent of Sr. Honorée, he saw her depart with a sensation mocking all effort at calmness ; and often, midst his saddest hours, without knowing
knowing 1 w hv, did her form arise to «heer him. She seemed to smile upon his sorrows; she seemed, as a destined comforter, to lighten the burden of age; what then must ha\e been his feelings, when, summoned to the couch of the dving, the tortured, the late repentant Drusiiie, he heard the teeming measure of iniquity —he heard the tax of murder attached f о the name of de Roussillon— when, in the confession of the wretched woman before him, he disco\eit , d that Gabrielle to be the offspring of his wed¬ elet!, his excr-lamented Antoinette î But, alas! the numbing torpor of death per¬ nii! ted not a full disclosure ; and father Augustin, fainting under the fide of feeling, revived but to find the corse of lier he sought to question. Torn bv a thousand new emotions, he quitted the ruined tower, he returned to his little dwelling, But vain were his efforts at cumposure, vain his pnvers for
for calmness. He pined to convict the guilty, to redress the persecuted, to behold once more the innocent chill of Antoinefte, the babe who had been spared a wreck so dire, to snatch her from indigence, to proclaim her to the world, to enrich her with his blessing— with his love. Rapturous were his waking dreams, transporting the forms which crouded upon fancy ; fears steeped his rushy pillow ; but they were tears cf gladness, different, far different, to the tears he had been wont to shed. Actuated by that hope whirh nature never lose-s, the possibility of Antoi¬ nette's existence lingered ; and ere vet the morninir dawned, nerved with new strength, glowing with new anticipations, Sf. Sauverne quitted his hermitage, and journeyed whither fhe aid of lega' in¬ terference could be procured, His de¬ position made, the order for arrest was issued, and accompanying the guard desi ín ed
destined for the detention of the culprit, with feelings baffling all possibility to delineate, he reached the chateau de ««„„„ai««
CHAP*
CHAP. Χ. ^\ hat equal tormetït to ihat griffe of minde p And pytung anguish hid in gentle heart, That inly feeds itself with thoughts unkmde, And nourisheth her ο-,νη consuming smart ? Spenseb, Oncb more impelled by the imperious svstem of order, we return to the couch of de Roussillon, not to note his last moments, but simply to observe, that those moments were calmed by repen- rance ; that St. Sauverne, actuated by true piety, forgave and prayed for the culprit; that the marchioness, foratini of her wrongs, that Gabrielle, that Louis, alike joined in the pleadings for mercy. Yet did the heavy eyes of the marquis n\ vain wander around the chamber
chamber in search of Mortaigne ; he spoke not of Corisande, but in feeble accents he implored the presence of his son. In vain was every exertion used to summon him to the couch of a dying father; in vain was a messengerdispatched to announce the tale, to speed his pro¬ gress ; ere that messenger had numbered ten leagues of his journey, a breathless corse alone remained of the lafe proud de Roussillon. Humbled in the act of injustice, in the very stretch of arbitrary power, he fell an awful conviction of the inefficacy of riches, of the impotence of human judgment. Stricken through the vile tool of his enormities, wounded by the son of St. Pierre,and, Drusiiie, even upon the grave of a sister, of one he had chased from life, did he receive the retributive fiat of justice—was he, whilst planning, almost executing, a new sin, u Fent to his account, Willi ali hn miperiectiüib on h$ bead." The
Ine marchioness mourned his fall, but vo fear flowed af his loss ; for where the actions impress no value upon life, death inspires awe, not regret. Ahs ' how couid îhe regreta being whoseassumption ofthe character of husband bad been through treat ¡itn} and fraud—who had severed the softesr,earliest linksofaifeciion.had tramo- ied on every law of honour and of friend¬ ship? No art had bound the broken reed, no bland, no conciliating tenderness had sought to cha«e the cloud of sorrow ; secure of what he most coveted, world! v wealth and worldly prosperitv, he had studied but the show of bare civilitv—· nay, scarcely that ; for in defiance of remonstrance, in defiance of entreaty, he had banished the daughter of her bosom, he had doomed her to mourn hi childless solitude. " Perhaps it was the counsels of his confessor," mused ma- dame de Roussillon, as she gazed upon lhe wan form of him who had been her husband ; u perhaps, left to the guidance
oì lì is own heart, he had been less ar¬ bitrary, less Ппшгдс;" and then she would deplore hb blind submission to the dictates of another, and the ι supplicaîe merev for his injustice, for his transg-res- &İOUS. Davs wore away, vet still Mortaigne was a4ent. lhe body of the marquis was removed fo the chateau, Leontine was intened, and father St. Pierre con- \eved fo prison; yet spite of these iv.ouriuul e hanges, spite of the sable- í kid chamber oí death, and the panoply cd pompous mourning, father Augustin W...S happi» r, ftr happier ihan his heart had ever pictured lie had beheld, he had embraced, he had acknowledged о the oppring of his worshipped Antoi¬ nette ; he had listened to the tale of her sufferings he had knelt by the side о I her gi.ivc, he had bt dewed the sod w hi í h pressed upon her bosom, and watet cd with his tears the flowers planted by the bwnpathizing Louiá· Uh, Naftne î how m ; stelloni
mysterious are thy ordinations! how wonderful thy secret links ! Be it to in¬ stinct, or be it to compassion, it was a filial hand which had piucked away the weeds, which had reared the evergreen emblems of mourning î Most affecting, most impressive was the first hour of cognizance ; St. Sauverne, Louis, were alike prepared ; and yet when clasped in the embrace of each other, the word father, the word son, could alone find articulation. Gabrielle too shared in their emotions, shared in their joys; she forgot her ой n domestic sorrows ; she forgot all but praise and thanksgiving, for this great, this important discovery. A father was spared from the wreck—a father lived to ble ^ her ! To him she unfolded every feeling of her heart, to him she confess¬ ed her clandesîine marriage ; and the cares, fhe desertion, the misery which had succeeded, did she deplore as a just correction for predpifancy. The
The count pressed her to his bosom ; be mingled his tears with hers, yet he condemned not his artless child ; he even tried to exculpate, to palliate, what at most could be styled the error of depen¬ dance. Led away by the impetuous promises of youth, by the vows and protestations of passion, thousands better accpiainted with man, better versed in the artifices of the world, had been lured in the same snare, " The count was insi¬ nuating, was attractive/' said the indul¬ gent parent; (( he stole upon the guile¬ less susceptibility of youth ; he beguil¬ ed the heart, ere vet reason, ere vet judgment, had time for play. Alas î 1 trembled for your peace, while yet you sojourned in my little dwelling. 1 saw you depart with fear; 1 augured danger, in fhe evident e-nthralment of your com¬ panion/'' «Gabrielle's eyes filled with tears ; she grasped the arm of her father, she gazed mournfully in-his face—·'If Mortaigne had
had loved/' she at length articulated, (ζ oh, my father ! could he have flown ? could he have condemned me unheard ? could he have doomed my days to sad¬ ness, my life to mourning ? could he have harrowed me with suspense, tortured ще with dread, torn me with apprehen¬ sion ? could he------" " Yes, all, could he—has he clone/* interrupted St. Sauverne ; " and yet, or perish my boasted knowledge of mankind, he loves you, Gabrielle —nay, more, it is the fervor ofthat love, which, through the false medium of a persecuting fiend, has rendered him deaf and blind to con¬ viction. Jealousy is one of the most destructive passions which ravages the human heart. Kindled by the faintest spark, it becomes, as it were, a raging element ; it exterminates all that is so¬ cial, all that is humane.** " In a dwelling like this/' asked Ga¬ brielle, " where exists the plea for jea¬ lousy ξ where the jspark which malevo¬ lence
lence itself could kindle into being? Secluded from the world, hid from every eye, how could suspicion's self augur ought to grow on ? Heaven can bear me witness, on him alone have my thoughts rested, to htm alone do my hopes turn/* íÉ The secret insinuations of calumny are as arrows aimed in darkne-ss," thought¬ fully observed St. Sauverne. ' f The foe which dares not face the light cf day, beneath the mask of fellowship shoot» forth the sting to peace and character.'* u What foe, my father ?" demanded Gabrielle. ťí Whom have 1 offended ? whom have í injured ?" *' Virtue and innocence are often suf¬ ficient cause for envy/' replied Si. Sau¬ verne ; íť and envy is an internal spring which sways the actions." 4< Углу f' repeated Gabrielle, (i alas ! bow coni λ envy be excited by a being ¿o humble znd so helpless as myself V " It was envy ofyourgrowing influence vol, iv% «r over
over the heart of de Roussilbíťs heir/* rejoined the count; "what else could have excited the bitter hatred of St, Pierre? what else have planned your secret "removal from the home of your choice?'* Gabrielle shuddered ; she raised her clasped hands. ťŕ Holy Heaven ľ* she articulated, " pardon and receive the soul of the misguided Leontine ! but for him my fame had been branded ; but for him my peace had been destroyed." "An agent in the hand of Heaven, Leontine has snatched you from immi¬ nent peri!/* solemnly replied St. Sau¬ verne. " Fear not, my child ; injustice may triumph fora season; but ultimately innocence will prevail. No longer in¬ stigated by the foul whispers of St. Pierre, Mortaigne, now de Roussillon, will awaken to conviction—will revive to a sense of injustice." « Say not injustice, røy father/* im¬ plored Gabrielle. u If for a moment he could
could believe me false, must not honour have stamped the decree of separation?' * Sf. Sauverne smiled : he saw in the Hushed cheek, in the sparkling eye of his daughter, a confirmation of her eter¬ nal en t hral men t ; he saw in her eager desire to exculpate the conduct of her husband, asure earnest of ready pardon. u Yes, she will be happy," he mused, as he gazed upon the resemblance of his io^t Antoinette; "no cruel brother wíl! war against safety, will interpose to blast felicity. De Roussillon will estimate the virtues malice has dared to impeach ; sad I, even I, shall parfake of peace, in the known prosperity of my children." Such were the anticipations of the count St. Sauverne ; but spite of such anticipations, the hoped-for calm of peace seemed far distant, when listening to the detail of the dame, when perusing the wriiten fragments, when examining the ruby heart found in the bosom of «hedeparted Antoinette—that heart, the * 2 blushing
Wushing emblem of his own feelings, fhe timid offering of infant love—that heart <which Antoinette had cherished even tinto death, which had harboured in her bosom, until her bosom had ceased to palpitate. Again and again did he ques¬ tion the dame, did he cling to each little sentence, did he implore the repetition of each incoherent expression, did he bless the subterfuge which had veiled from the knowledge of fhe confessor the birth of the twin brother of Gabrielle ; and then, in pious gratitude, did he pour forth thanksgiving for divine favour. Deep was the dejection, painful the anxiety of the marchioness ; de Roussillon came not: the messenger too, dispatched to the convent of St. Honorée, lingered. A thousand fears crouded on each other ; accident, illness, successively arose to torture—her daughter chained by sick¬ ness, her son the victim of banditti. The melancholy objects around deepened the gloont of reflection ; the awful em¬ blems
blems of death, bespeaking the perish¬ able tenure of existence, had banished the smile of cheerfulness; for though the late marquis had been too little loved to be deplored, the suddenness and nature of his fall had spread the sadness of thought throughout the household. Father Augustin, or rather, the count Sf. Sauverne, was a constant resident at the chafeau ; Louis too devoted much of his time to the mother of Corisande ; but Gabrielle's visits were short and seldom. She feared, yet pined for the return of her lord ; she dreaded to be an unwished witness of his arrival ; to be again spurned from his arms, was f o be hurled from hope; to behold him cold and changed, was a misery which threat¬ ened madness. Sometimes (% Fancv's rainbow ray" teemed with brightness; sometimes it conjured fairy visions of bliss; then again catching the infection of fear, it augured nought but woe. Sometimes she beheld him a suppliant at к 3 her
ber feet ; she traced the tear of contri¬ tion, she heard the plea for pardon ; then shuddering, despairing, the allure¬ ments of the world seemed to have wean¬ ed him from her, to have dissolved the spell of attraction, to have doomed her future days to the dull cold blank ofde* sertion. íť May he be happy!" she would exclaim ; íť may he never know the pang 1 feel ! may the being who supplants—who—" and then, writhing, as if were, beneath a new feeling, would she weep in the bitterness of her heart. She too trembled for his safety—she too join¬ ed in the apprehensions of the marchio* ness. A host of hydra dangers rose to "new, a world of cares to threaten ; for u Гансу enervates w hübt it soothes the heurt, And, while it dazzles, wounds themental sidif , To joy each heightening charm it с<чп impart, Bat wraps the hour of woe in teniuld night !" But whilst Gabrielle was thus the ac¬ knowledged slave of fear and hope ; whilst
•whilst with difficulty, in the presence of her father, she hid the canker-worm which preyed upon her quiet, and checked the rising sigh of deep despair, that sigh was echoed by the self-tortured Mor¬ taigne, that pang rankled alike in his bosom.
í í С11ЛР.
CHAP. XIL Ъзге, sorrow, iiubtjiiutiütj, Stir raad contusion in hiblub'ımg Ь;еаь? л And he is aH o'er cl.ao?. flowï'. Were my whole life to come one heap of tioubit s, The pleasure ortlub moment would suffice, Aud sweeten all my gneis witb us remembiauce. Lu. It was in the gaieties of Paris that the count de Mortaigne, writhing beneath the corroding inflictions of jealousy, sought to expunge reflection ; it was there that in the intoxicating whirl of dissipation, he thought to banish his wedded Gabn» о elle ; but, alas ! though the invidious tale of father St. Pierre had poisoned the glowing hopes of îove^ had blasted îhe
the spring of confidence, had changed every gentle feeling, had outraged his dependance and his peace, still was the task too heavy; still, spite of pride, sp/ite of resolution, did his thoughts return ίο Provence—did \m dreams hover over the dwelling of his bride—did his bosom feel a fearful vacuity, a gnawing inquietude, which defied every effort. In vain besought the aid of reason ; in vain he wooed the charm of society ; the sound of mirth was irksome ; the smile of lean ty insulting. The being who alone entranced hissenses was unworthy, yet she rivalled the combined graces of lier whole ьех. ; no complexion was half so vivid, no form hull' so perfect, no features half so animated· If for a moment his eye was attracted by ehe Hebe smile of youth, it was but to draw comparison ; if he lent a yielding ear to the insinuating- whispers of pleasure, is was bur to blunt the pang of memory, but to cheat fhe sway of disappointment, к 5 Awakening
unwilling to acknowledge e\en to lam- self the strength of nis feciiii 4S, the sanic power fettered his hopes, the same canker preyed upon his quiet. Often would he reflect upon the Lt4 parting, until the very possibility of deception seemed to fade, until tiie accusation of fa t ík r ^^ Vit пс up p eu ι ed а η outiadé to cï »/. с .ι ι у and to natine. Ihcn he wot, LI >'ai', »v ihoujh to h) to the be:.,,; he k.d . ^ur^d, us though to сгл\с follia r .fc-s, íuü. pa¬ tate for merev and f r I.íe ; (..jn ť.·* f4,j e ao.iihhMÍiu ,; k.ur w., t M j,:n .^ an»: thought, íaüliii.lly rc 0 K:t.in 0 с... » f ч pression, " ( 'cíivM t i his bit ..-vt, Aiul u ¿'J rtuuíiibf u.« t tii! it "»ung ht>n ín ",<· In vain, fatigued a*;d wretched, he ccveted the Leihe of lepóse ; in \ain, drooping be n caí h lhe e\ertions of r he dav. he wooed the balm, of slum be* , Cîabn«Hc had kidded Lis pilow unn ΐ *· . ♦
thorns; and fancy, never wearying, oft moulded new forms to torture. Louis, his envied, bated riv?l, Ьке a demon rose fo view, trampling on honour, violating every right, steeping each thought in poison. Sometimes, starting from his bed, he would pace the chamber ; sometimes tears would cool the burning fc\er ofi/ibi\iin; sometimes, gasping, hbouniiii for brejih, he would lean from the opr pec! < cement—he would face the night-brc ,/e, evintili ıî> cbìily damps crept li .e hi iucL to his lľ*ait. C h и /,t î t .ì -v, t b^v ond tlie pou er oí r u h ii' e, t iì ч 'ht мл of his mother, .s * th''*' 'hî î Л <i hi hom^ ; his ^-ibter, th ■ ς οί, v п.. rate í f a rc f l, ю с е not in тс <„t e-itag .!..,! , ji'iii; oh no' the d u. u w рал t h ».»s merciful ; iho w л! 4 teem í w ťa elect ption arni woe; Ък ü\\\ .cl l w .λ bvit a 1 1 iva lV for trear hery* ^ -'*«'*· * w 3 etii.t an^i.ihh of his soul, ] u Oìtr* v,ti^ j;enned in seeming ease- ;, i » ita tì.,tnesì. lie wrote to tîıe mai- '*< о ch" one ^
to the chateau—nay, he evaded all her entreaties, by pleading a thousand causes for absence; now his duty to the king gave colour ro denial; and now friendship, in fhe hoped-for discovery of D'Avignon, resolved his excursions from the capital. Twice, with pretended interest, had father St. Pierre intruded on his quiet; twice had he written to the heir of his patron, as though anxious for his happi¬ ness vtnd his honour. A voluntary spy upon the cottage siren, his reports were mingled with gall ; ** Çabrielle mourned not the absence of the-ccunt ; supported by the arm of Louis, she wandered by the Rhone's broad stream, she smiled upon the whispers of passion. Be had overheard the insinuations of love ; and parked the stolen glance of prepossession. 1ли. had become an inmate of the cot¬ tage ;" and the confessor concluded, by auguring the probability of Gabrielle s soon becoming bis bride. ** Impossible l"
"Impossible!" exclaimed Mortaigne, with a sensation which for a moment flushed his cheek with exultation. But quick did that exultation die, quick did it fade ίο death's pale livery ; for his own slavery constituted that impossibility, bis own vows, pledged to a being who had deceived, who had betrayed him* who, instigated by ambition, had laid the toil which had caught his guileless na¬ ture ; aid yet she had long resisted, long co m bat ted his importunity ; she had argued upon the sacred bond of dutv, until half assured, he had worshipped her as an angel of light·—nay, the stolen pledge of faith had been an outrage to her principles, had been the apparent award of sensibility, not of conviction. * ( Art, damned art !" muttered fhe count, as he recalled the hour of his ill-starred marriage, as again, in imagination, he beheld the timid bride, shrinking, almost fainting from his hopes. Such was the perturbed sfate of his mind,
mind, when the marquis, in league with his confessor, was planning the re¬ moval, the total ruin of the deserted Ga¬ brielle ; such the reflections from which he strove to fly, when the messenger conveying the tiding of de Roussillon's danger arrived at the hotel. The count was absent from Paris, and three whole days elapsed ere he received the melan¬ choly summons. Alive but to the hope of yet beholding his father, he delayed not a moment. The sorrow, fhe afflic¬ tion of his mother, filled every thought, and even Gabrielle was banished. Panting to share each mournful office, to lighten the pang of anxiety, to remove tbe torture of suspense, almost flying through the country, he hailed with delight the well-known beacons of home ; and ere yet the sun's parting rays had ceased to mellow the landscape, the carriage pausedat the gate which opened mìo the park. Too ardent in his feelings to endure the pressure of restraint, and sickening
sickening, from the long and circuitous roa Ì which wound to the chateau, he alighted, aud sought a well-known path leading immediately across the park. Мог* дне sighed as he pierced the um¬ bi; .eons recesses, as he gazed upon Siino .nding objects—objects fani i liar to телюи — objects which excited thought almost tu fre: ¡zy. It was the pai h through which he had often btolen to the dwelling of Gabrielle. lie turned, he gazed in the direction of the cottage ; but e\en the mountain prospect was hid from view. The path was gloomy ; the trees met overhead, impeding even the light of heaven, lie breathed a heavy sigh ; he raised his hand to dash away the in trusu e tear, when the sound of approaching voices broke the stillness, He listened, and when distinctly he caught the name of Gabrielle, every faculty seemed turned to ear. " Weep not/' Sdid a voice of per¬ masivi
saasi ve softness; tf dearest Gabrielle, your suspicions are injurious ; love cannot be dethroned/* He heard Gabrielle sob, but he heard not her answer: jealousy andrage mad¬ dened his brain. Torn by the whirl of passions, he darted forward ; he paused nof for thought ; if was enough tobehold her leaning on the arm of his suspected rival-—it was enough to have heard that rival speak of love; nought else was wanting ; the tale of father St. Pierre seemed confirmed; and with one bound, he would have levelled the unoffending Louis to the earth, had not Gabrielle, wiih a wild shriek* sprung between them. tf Oh ! spare him î spare him 1" she articulated, and then lost alike to terror and exertion, she fell senseless at his feef. " Spare him ľ* echoed the shuddering Mortaigne, and yet he stooped to raise the prostrate form of Gabrielle, nar till he
he supported her on his arm, did he venture even a glance at the agitated Louis. Wild, frenzied was his start—bis lips quivered, his whole form became con¬ vulsed. "D'Avignon !" he exclaimed— " Saints of Heaven ! D'Avignon the seducer, the destroyer of Gabrielle ! íly, iest 1 forget the past—fly, lest vengeance expunge all record of gratitude/' u Never !" rejoined Louis. *' Mor¬ taigne, you are deceived. Some wretch, some demon, has imposed on your ge¬ nerous nature. I am no seducer—no destroyer ! Oh, no, no ! in me behold the friend —the brother of Gabrielle !" Mortaigne could not speak—he could only gaze in the face of Louis. Con¬ vulsed, shuddering, his arms relaxed, he dropped his death-pale bride—he stood as one entranced, as one touched by the power of magic, marbled, turned to stone. Louis sprung forward ; he bent his knee
linee —he upheld the senseless Gabrielle* The effort seemed to awaken recollection, seemed to arouse exertion. Mortaigne snatched her to his bosom—he extended his hand to Louis-—he breathed the name jîf D'Avignon —he burst into a flood of tears, 4t Alas, my lord !" exclaimed the dis» tressed Louis, " this indulgence is dange¬ rous, is destructive ; whilst we yield to Æeeling, mý hapless sister dies/* The mere possibility roused the reso¬ lution of Mortaigne ; he stifled every sigh ; he chased every tear ; be tore off the bonnet of Gabrielle ; he bared her beauteous face to the night-breeze ; he chafed her hands, her temples ; and when returning life dappled her wan cheeks, trembling for her sanity, he shrunk behind, he resigned her to the support of Louis. Useless was the precaution ; Gabrielle breathed, but she noticed not surround¬ ing objects ; nought save a labouring t>igh
sigh escaped her lips; her ideas were confused, her powers suspended; a wild palpitation fluttered at her heart, an o'erwhelming dimness shrouded her eyes. She clung to the shoulder of Louis ; he raised her—he almost carried her for¬ ward. Mortaigne pined to aid, but he; feared to obtrude upon her presence ; yet when he heard her enfeebled voice call upon his name, when he heard her supplicate mercy for her brother, the native impetuosity of his feelings pre¬ vailed ; he rushed to her feet, he threw himself before her—"bear me, Gabri¬ elle/' he implored ; " worshipped idol of a fond, a faithful heart, hear me ex¬ plain, hear me—— " He paused ; the agitation of Gabrielle was terrifying ; one moment her eyes appeared closing in death, the next they were fixed immovably upon him. "Hear me, Gabrielle/* he continued, folding her hands in hi% and gazing intently npon her, iC you who, in imagined per* iid)\
fidy, ï have so madly loved, forgive me, recaí me ; condemn me for a weak, rash fool, a jealous idiot ; chide, buf do not spurn me. Think, fo a heart so fond, so devoted, was not credulity natural?" Gabrielle withdrew not her hands; she forced a smile; and when Mortaigne sprung from his knees to support her, she drooped her head upon his shoulder. Long gaspings at length restored fhe powers of speech, and then exulting in the certainty of being beloved, she confessed that, sorrow, not anger, had been the jnmateof her bosom ; that her lone and melancholy nights had been passed in lamentation, not in railing. « Did not your heart condemn me ?" asked the grateful Morfaigne. " Tell me, my own Gabrielle, did not even your gentle nature shrink from a being so unjust? Did you not execrate the mo¬ ment of our meeting, and tax me with all that was treacherous and vile ?" ' ť Oh ßol" eagerly replied Gabrielle ; <f 1 thought
u I thought you in error, no more. If for a moment my lips breathed reproach, quickly did î make expiation by my tears. It has been an age of sadness, but now-------" ir We will part no more," interrupted the count ; " yon cottage shall no longer shelfer my bride ! Oh no í we will go together/' grasping her hand, and hurry¬ ing forward ; " all shall be revealed, all shall be explained ; the secret of our love, the secret of our marriage. We will kneel at the feet of my father; soft¬ ened by disease and sufferance, he will not withhold his blessing; he will pardon, he will receive the wife of my choice. D'Avignon, too, the brother of my Ga¬ brielle ! the preserver of my life í Holy Heaven ! how am I rewarded for all past sorrows V* But when he gazed on the features of his bride, he saw not the termination of sorrow; he saw inquietude strongly depictured; he saw her gaze on Louis with
with that melancholy expression which filled him with dismay. " Alas ! what remains to be told ?" he exclaimed. "My father—say, D'Avignon, what of my father ?" Louis continued silent ; and when he gazed en Gabrielle, he saw her eyes surcharged with tears. Instantly did the truth flash upon memory. Too late lo close a father's eves, he had come too late to share a father's blessing. The reflection was mournful. He turned towards the chateau, he was softened even to weeping. Every object was familiar; every tree, every shrub, bloomed as he had left it ; the breeze, stealing o*er the dîsiryıt parterres, came laden with new sweetness. He wooed its freshness, but it soothed not his drooping spirits. The sky was cloudless ; a rich burnish still lingered in the west; and when they emerged from the trees, the bold broad front of the chateau lay before them. Every window was closed ; every exter¬ nal
nal object spoke the stillness of dissolu¬ tion. Mortaigne shuddered ; he hurried forwards, Gabrielle and Louis moving silently by his side. To offer consolation was an insult to feeľmg, for the rived heart spurns at the hackneyed precepts of resignation. Sud¬ denly pausing, ff Did he chide my seem¬ ing tardiness ?'' he inquired ; " did he reproach my apparent want of duty >'" " Oh no !" replied Gabrielle, " disap¬ pointment and suspense were unfelt, for my lord the marquis was no more ere the first intimation of danger could have reached you/' " And my mother?" questioned the count; ťŕ tell me, Gabrielle, know you о ^ght of my mother ?" " Scarce an hour has elapsed since we quitted the apartment of the marchio¬ ness/' answered Gabrielle ; " we left her composed, mourning, not reproaching the absence of her son/* " Strange !" observed the counts gazing alternately
alternately on Gabrielle and Louis ; lc, vou admitted to the chamber of my mother ? Does she know our affinity ŕ does she know theexecrable slander which. banished me from hope and büss? Sav, Gabrielle," and he grasped her hand, and looked with imploring earnestness in her face, ' f as the wedded partner of her de¬ ceived, her too credulous son, does she acknowledge—does she receive you ? does she estimate your virtues? does she prize you as the dearest gift of Hea\en ?" <e .Much remains to be explained/* whispered Gabrielle, as they entered the hal!. * k Your mother is my mother—my father will be vour father P' (i Your father!" repeated the astonished Moi taigne; but Gabrielle placed her finger on her lip, in token of silence ; she pressed his hand w ľ th tender interest, then leaving him to the charge of Louis, she fled to announce his arrival to the march'on еь«. CHAP
CHAP. ХШ. Tu be ¿οηά îi to be happ y ; azteci·· :\τν happier than теч, because the/re bfttifr (Jajt ,- lhe source of sorrow; Чи the ùeiid, I h' avellali» tio ml, tlicit lailovİâ tis beh'iıd \Vtth w lup» and stings : th-ì Liest к: л none oí thi-, Hut ΐ?*ΐ in ei ella .¿ting peace of* mmti, Λι Ί bud the height of-UI then luaven ь grKjdiif-H, Hon* i. W tien moïiiurst ťamtljr dr^ws hôr 4Silver line, Ot eve's* ^revelou. U descend to drink the wtu<», W bon bea and sky in midnight darkness jom, btjll, «till iht views the partas look he gave. Кооьйч ν\Ίτΐί deep and unaffected regret did the marquis de Roussillon deplore the melan¬ choly fatl of his father, did he listen to voi iv. t. ihr
the last solemn close, and weep the fatal misapplication of talent; yet did he .struggle to repress his feelings in the presence ofthe mare' 'oness ; he dreaded to wound the aching heart, to sharpen the pangs of anxiety. Madame de Rous¬ sillon mourned the absence of her chuiih- fer ; for the lady Corisande, weakened Ьл illness, still sojourned at St. Honorée. 1 he messenger had returned the bearer of ill news ; Corisande was confined fo tier chamber ; and si^U r Mathilde, watch¬ ing with never-sUmberino; care, v.rote to alhv a mother* 1 · torturing «-olit iunie. The marchioness wept, jet she dared r.ot follow the impube of her f:cling, ; ber own beibe of duly chained her to the bier of her lord ; und though inclination . *" "ívd, vet was ¡die ontwaidiy con- u nt with the irequent message^ о f fric ·ι i- ьш*). Coi isande was better ; Con .aï*. J'» would soon be enabled to fly to l^r ?rn^; lleuven lud heard her prajer-, and aìììh - liv,:i tL-a^cd to threaten in h: 1е?.\\ел
child ihi'nned, as hhc unfolded the short trans- (iipt of dutv flowing from the pen of С orisande. fi Blest with two such daugh¬ ters, two such sons, the last hours of my life will be passed in peace !" Louis started ; his breast swelled high vv ι h hope ; ;uu\ when he beheld de Rotr- /I'on ;.nd (iabtieiic bending the knee of M.'eetion, he sprung to the feet of the ι îrchione.s. "Yes, you too will be ! ippv/' idie pursued, cha-Jng away the ť ¿r ui (eudernesj ; if you will give n.e : „;>» mes lor you will constituie the h'ppinebs af tny child. Gabiielle has î.'îu ine «li ; fhe struggles of hono.ir, f' e d. -interested sacrifice of self Loui*, ν orlhy pupil of a .»aimed preceptor, v..t!i lapture, v/uh exultation, i pio t > !i. η v sju will be lupp) ; for the Uelns , mì luve v; long woishipped iu .»euet — C'*i L. ndv, loves vou/* İ ν f ¿L f oul'l noi leply ; he co d J ť */</ - i
press the hand extended to his heart, to lm lips. fi Alas ! why/* demanded de Roussillon, " was ï barred a secret, whose disclosure had saved such a world of pain, such a world of injustice ? Why, dearest ^Gabri¬ elle, in whispering * brother/ did you not disarm the malignancy of your ar- raigner ?" ** Honour bound me to silence/' replied Gabrielle ; " beside?/' archly smiling, ť * conscious innocence dreamt not of suspicion ; and Louis, too sensitive, spumed an indulgence which gratitude be thought could alone enjoin. He gave no credit to your discernment to his own merit ; he felt himself inferior by birth, and he scorned to own even the favour of Corisande to the valour of DAugnon/* «' F& fai, fatal pride !" sighed de Rous- infiori ; 4i what misery, what mischief bas φι guise of mystery produced ľ* "Ob
" ! Oh no, not fatal !" exclaimed the grateful Louis. f( Had I selfishly wooed the cover of your friendship, had I visit¬ ed the chateau distinguished as your de¬ liverer, had 1 sapped the confidence, the love of your angel sister, then could I not, as at this moment, experiene* happiness without alloy." " And yet," observed the marchioness, faintly smiling, " the poetic effusions in the boat-house, seconded by a warm, ro¬ mantic imagination, bound duty and 'mdgmünt captive, Corisande, at the marble slab, imbibing a lesson, neither time or circumstances could obliterate." " True, most true," rejoined Louis his cheeks vìeing with the crimson rose ; f ' I thought but to portray my own feelings, little dreaming that the effu¬ sions of an entranced heart could involve the peace, the hopes of its entrancer. ît was accident which first presented the lady Corisande to my view. Glowing with a thousand charms, I saw her climb L· 3 the
the heavens, her eves beaming intellect as thoush srrateful for the rich store of «Л CJ >egetatien teeming at her feet. Wasit in na í n re for an imagination like mine, ciadied, reared in enthusiasm, to hehoU such a being urmo\cd? Oh no! that сч.е L^acice wi.sdtfmi{i\e, that ore с ? ьп<е poisoned t я cry hope of pea^e, tlo^-ncil e\ciy future hour to sadness li nuo n ir y p; I low, the 41 me form puisutd mv ; it l lin <*e:\d or. the RhoneO uccn inrn-'i 1 , if 1 | ierced the toiest, ^r v> led f^ iho mountain's summit, ^till ï beheld h; r as ť. e íToddcss of the scene, 1кг ra; en lock, disi. e\e.led by the bree/e, Lerpu.:*!. cd ľciciii.a'1 dr/./dieg in cor.'iasting u.«ıîe- r e-s. intoxicated Ь) the bright Л'г- l·] ¡n, L"ltie drea-UM^ й\,Л \паи\:(псъ t if a eds \n de'-ťuetioii, thou ;h consv io·*-. i,{ infeiioiitv, í daicd the oanger, and exer on the watch, <dt mur! ed the stepi c í the mu Mbcfi.s Cor^^ande. The bout- LoùbC Ьечг.те :сл fa vo iu i te haunt,because it
H was the fa\ orai te haunt of Corisande. Often did I lose her amichi its solitude, ?.nd then anxiously waiting her icturn, would í fly to the spot she had hallowed. Herr, lingering till even midnight ¿.-looms o'eidiadowed the earth, I would muse upon the disparity of our fortunes, Lİ1 e\ery îtıîc cherished blessing faded into insigniih-ancc, till wild and shapeless projets tempted di-cretion, tili melan- ch^iy, vs'joed almost to madness, nur¬ tured the wormwood mildew of ingrati- tiKfe. My dis,' osiiion, mv heart seemed 'hanged ; the pursuits of early life no longer possessed the powers to animate ; my n wn boundless imagination, once thereat of cheerfulness ^nd peace, beca ine inn* : anıl 1 w α« fa^t falling into that piti'ıbîe Mate of languid inanity, whei the awakened fears and suspiciotb of my Mij^poseJ mother roused me to exer¬ tion* The dread of endangering fhe peace of one so respected, one so bel j /- с J, recalled e\ery \e tige of recluti ni ; ι 1 a.ıd
and doubtful of my own firmness, I resolved to fly the scene of danger, and in the change and new pursuit of arms, to chase an image which, like subtle poison, sapped all the springs of life." " Good Heaven V s exclaimed de Rous¬ sillon, (t how in one instant is the mys¬ tery revealed Ì Ah, my friend ! yours is indeed a lesson of firmness, resisting alike inclination and importunity. Even when Corisande reigned despotic in your heart, you preferred her honour, her worldly interest, to every selfish wish." u Oh, no, no Ι ï deserve no merit/' rejoined Louis; "actions were not al¬ ways amenable f о duty, for headstrong passion, oft combatting with reason, hurried me to the very verge of expla¬ nation ;" and then without hesitation, he explained h\& visits to the convent of St. Honorée, his conversations with Miche¬ line, and his despair at the discovery of the lady Corisande's imprisonment, through
through the luckless lines penned by him in the bpat-house. f *Say not luckless," eagerly exclaimed the marchioness. " But for the influence thus clandestinely attained o*er the feel¬ ings of Corisande, subdued by persuasion or menace, perhaps she had now been lost to the present promise of felicity ; perhaps despotic power—perhaps au¬ thority^——" The marchioness hesitated, paused ; she feared to impeach the actions of her departed lord ; and in what other sense could her words be taken? Louis too shuddered as he recalled the once dread¬ ed dukede liria n çon ; while de Roussillon, smiling at his evident emotion, demanded what step heroism had pointed out on bis return to the cottage? " it pointed out a total sacrifice of self/' replied Louis, *' a renunciation of every hope—a banishment from í ho bcenes of my infancy." " And could you have trod in sucit a ι 5 ¡nulii
path ? could you have fulíilled such a decision ?'' questioned the marquis. " Yes, í would have pursued it," an¬ swered Louis, "though health and life had yielded to the trial. Remember the happiness, the enlargement of your suf¬ fering sister was the spur ; and for such a rccornpence, what sacrifice could be too great? I quitted the convent of Sr. ìlonorée with the desiini of unfolding O kJ my whole heart to my supposed mother, of confiding to her ear the long-buried secret of my presumptuous love ; from thence 1 resolved to crave an interview with the marquis de Roussillon ; and lor the petitioned boon of the lady Cori- sande's restoration to favour, ίο pledge my sacred honour never more to intrude within her presence, never to pass the limits he should deign to prescribe." i( Was stich indeed your design ?"ques- îioned St. Sauverne, gszing *ith grate¬ ful pleasure on the animated features of hU son : "did you frame your heart to a dC( 1Л1УЛ
decision so honourable, to a forbearance so uncommon ? iC Yes, my fa t her," resu med Louis; ζί my heart was framed to what I conceived the common principle of justice. An alien indeed should I have proved to the example of my exemplary preceptor, had 1 hesitated one moment on the side of self." " Heaven bless him !" piou. -Лу aspi- ritcd St. Snu verne. (i The son of my sainted Antoinette is worthy hia coun¬ sels Г Louis gratefully raised the hand of liis father to his lips then with an exulting smile continued—"The pressure of fa¬ tigue was unfelf, for I journeyed with a mind surcharged wiih thought, wit Ί an imagination busied with plins of fu¬ ture heroism. Gabrielle would lichtet the pang of my desertion, and my fcbfer- mother, in losing a son, would find a daughter. Yet spite of all my boasted re¬ solution, the spell of local affection could ь ( J not
not be dissolved ; and when I reached the defile, though every trace of day had vanished from the heavens, my feet in¬ tuitively sought the cypress-grove which embosomed the lone grave of my perse¬ cuted mother. Judge then my feelings when I heard the cry of murder—when í found the marquis de Roussillonstretched upon the sward which pressed upon her bosom------" t( Hush í hush, my brother ! the rest we already know," said the shuddering Gabrielle ; but de Roussillon was not so easily satisfied ; he followed Louis from the saloon, nor did he rest until he had resolved the whole mystery, until he knew the heavy tax of crime and injus¬ tice which blackened the fame of his father—which threatened the life, of the imprisoned St. Pierre. Racked with a thousand fears, panting to snatch from opprobrium the fame of the buried marquis, he resolved to visit the dungeon of the culprit, to hear from
his lips the slow progress of guilt, and, in conjunction with the count St. Sau¬ verne, to use every stress of interest and power to avert the threat of public exposure. Accompanied by St. Sauverne and Louis, de Roussillon, on a mission harrowing to his feelings, bid adieu to the marchioness and Gabrielle. From the gloomy prison of St. Pierre, it was arranged for the count and his son to return to the chateau, whilst the marquis, eager to emancipate bis sister, purposed hastening to the convent of St. Honorée, and claiming fhe lady Cori* sande from the hands of the holy supe¬ rior. In vain Louis remonstrated, in vain he petitioned ; de Roussillon was peremptory, reserving exclusively tø himself the joy of explanation. It was evening when they descended to the dungeon in which the confessor St. Pierre was confined. The parting rays of the sun still glimmering, pierced степ fhe massive bars, falling athwart his
his livid countenance, líe lay stretched upon some scattered straw. Lis limbs manacled, his features clnd in defiance. lie started at the approa« h of de Rous- billon, but he spoke tiot ; he deigned not one token of salutation ; he ца^лЧ as thouch in curioşii ν on the agitated firm of St. Sauverne, and from him his looks mechanically wandered to the face of Lo ni s*. The marquis spoke of lì is murdered father, vet still was the confessor un* moved, still did he maintain the sune unbending tinn ness, st İH (i id his e\c% scowling beneath their dark and bushv brows, rest on the intruders. De Rous¬ sillon dwelt on the heietofore unble¬ mished honour of his hoibe, on his ardent w Uh of sheltering fiom oppu.Lrium the inemorv of his father. lhe ionftssor gnawed his bp— iť If I am guilty /" he at length exclaimed, <ť doubly euiltv was mv instigator ; if mv actions merit this dungeon and the e ch«in*>,
diainó, the actions of un coiieague w.erit damnation/* The marquis shuddered, Sf. Sauverne raised hisejcs in pious appeal to Hea¬ ven. <l In him the ties of blood were out¬ raged/' pursued St, Pierre ; tf in me hu¬ mánny could be alone impeached ; he, wi.h unbending hate, persecuted a con¬ fiding sifter ; 1 triumphed o'er a defence¬ less woma'i/' (i Monster !" ejaculated Lou's. The ce>nfev;or smiled in deri,>:on-— î{ Pride wcnild avert the tax of disgrace/' he continued, snil add reding de. Iloibsil- len ; i( pride w^uîd с ч punge the record of a father's guüî ; win], t !—" u I wouhl sik, trh )ou from thepena!:y o r the bw," interrupted the marquis ; ík i would shield vour ацес1 head írom íhe i ι ; n o m i n y o f a s- ; · a ff.> li." <ť Pride ! all príde-/' muttered St, Piene. u W u pride/' rej.ïji·. 1 tl·· Lou ľ! ¡я; u iht*
,ŕ fhe action, not the motive be consi¬ dered, í would second the merciful de- cisian of yon respected man," pointing to St. Sauverne, "of him who was the husband—of him," glancing at Louis, " who istheson of the injured Antoinette." " Son ľ* repeated the confessor; " 'tis false ; Antoinette left no son ;" and even when Louis attempted explanation, he smiled incredulously. fC Heed not/* said St. Sauverne, affec¬ tionately turning to his son ; " blessed, doubly blessed am 1, in the kind inter¬ posing hand of Providence, who shield¬ ing my children from the o'erwhelming flood of calamity, gives them as the balm to my latter days. We come/* addressing í he confessor, u on the mission of Chris¬ tian charity ; we would avert lhe stroke of fate, the decision of common justice ; we would spare you to repentance, for the die of crimes so black craves the ameliorating span of whole years. Ke- kntle^s persecutor of the saint we mourn, bhow
»bow but an indication of remorse, let the heart express but the genuine lan¬ guage of contrition, and quickly ba¬ nished fo a distant cell, no worldly lure shall henceforth tempt your thoughts from the zealous labour of salvation. As yet, your habit has been the guise of falsehood, the cloak of hypocrisy and fraud ; you have toiled for the destruc¬ tion of the innocent, you have diligently laboured for your own perdition. Re¬ flect, in mercy to your own soul, re¬ flect ; view well the path you tread ; weigh the fatal perversion of talent, the heavy tax on profanation, the appalling denouncement upon sin. Remember man is here but for a season ; he dies, and his deeds go with him/* The confeSsSor shuddered, not from the conviction of guilt, but from an internal pang, which seemed to rack his whole frame; his complexion blackened, his features became convulsed. St. Sauverne grasped bis ana—" Snatsh tl'.Q
oíTered," fi humble yourself in the sight of Heaven, and bone all from its merev/* The confessor withdrew his arın ; h\*> rves shrunk from the piercing L,?ie of «I e count's. (C The power of m^n с\аг rc'íher harın nor aid me/' he a'/iciJited, Cť I"2\e me ' \ел\е me î the p-ngitury . г Га rv üt İoı s cell comes too hîc '* л Too \:e f " echoed de F·",« îî!o:î, * î \phî , tu:!; p;)v man ; wî^ut vsou'd } « cv w. uls impîy *'* Åj:\i the «¡nie kcnînır ¡^r, x 1 s^efpain »'i te 'ted the fern cf líe pi'.-onci ; hİJ J re», t h *cemc î laboured, ?ıJ (!,c b\.'k- ne-s of convi/.Mon dee; e:/d. " Cïod of mci. ' * e' »л/а'сЛ t' <* Lorror-struck L( î/ , ť< 1 . ,ч tîıe h <· i ŕ f i*o'"i:ie^s d n cd г. i m »í tl-^seut of bf ' 4i Polion ! p')i on f s rr * í r s 'v У I ie: re, 'ni t/c n h.e wa e» h '. Ι Г' ·* them fo depart ; but St. 5 È -.гг.е not to be shaken fiom Li «ί ·γ . gion points to fui ¿i ve. ι. si of i.j »;.. t>
patience, meekness, endurance; for year; had St Sauverne been the lowly disciple ťf religion ; and even for the desfroyer cf Antoinefte could his lips name a Tira ver. ile knelt b ν fhe side of fhe tortured Sf. Pierre ; lie fried fo :/""к^п horror at tiie crime ; he pictured ьиг ;ac as the blackest act in nature, a^ an *vt wh:oh c-dls for condemnation^ becaui-o ir t! ^cì the power of appeal. "Porn, cradled in sin, manlfo! ; T' 4 the transgressions of mm," re^fjtuc ! îh' 1 count; íŕ \et is pardon beid iu./i through the meed of r^pei.f'ir "е." r< Kepentance!" repeated the conic:· sor ; *' repentance can avail me nothing ; mv 1 fe lias been onemenej of crime, and hou, by my own hand, are mv houis numbered. Cìo, leave me, stringer; if indeed the husband of the murdered An- toMettc, pia\ for, but shun me/' " No, 1 will pray with yon," qui« î.ly r* joined Sï> Sauverne. **Tiue piety barbou:-» not icvvU' f *», harbours not í . ι Ли 1 *«
malîce. I can reflect upon the past without execration ; I can see the hum¬ bled foe of Antoinette, and supplicate his souľs pardon. Look up, unhappy man; confess what lies most heavy ; ex¬ plain the swollen catalogue of sin ; and most of all, acknowledge and repent this last foul murder." i( What murder?" fiercely interrogated St. Pierre. if Look on my hands; no blood is here. No, no," wildly ; " think not to trap me ; Antoinette died a na¬ tural death ; no violence was offered» She died, and was buried—and the infant — ï stole away the infant. Go to the den w' of robbery ; seek out the haunt of plun¬ der ; ask for Drusiiie, and the will tell you all." " You wander,'* said the count, with- soft compassion ; " collect your scatter¬ ed senses ; Drusiiie has teased to jivo, *'f was her confession which brought* me to the chateau, which chained vou in this dungeon/* €i Corse
^ Curse her! curse her P' muttered St. Pierre. The count shuddered—" Alas!" he exclaimed, " how little do you know the tenets of that faith you have so long profaned ! Wretched being, better that the few short moments which impiety has left be pa.ssed in self-arraignment, in humiliation, in remorse, than, through a weak and wicked violence, deny a fellow sinner what you dare to suppli¬ cate." St. Pierre raised his glazed eyes to the faceof his reprover ; the pang of approach¬ ing dissolution eonvulsed his whole form ; a terrifying wildiiess prevailed ; a smile, which gave a demoniac expression to his features. " Fool ! fool!" he muttered; ' ( what though ï lived on roots and berries, what though I slept in a hollow tomb, ga/ed upon death*s heads, and heard of nought but wailing ? would that ensure me heaven ? would that seal up the mouth of fell reproach, and blot away the list pf
of crime and horror? Go ; 'tis a vain trust ! my hope rests on annihilation, on death, on deep and eternal death." ťť Dreadful ! dreadful !" alike burst from the lips of St. Sauverne, of de Roussillon, and Louis. Appalling ы the life which clings fo annihilation uh its final hope—appalling those deeds whieh shrink from the cognizance of an eternal judge ! " Go," pursued St. Pierre, raising himself upon his elbow, and gaz mg wildly round the dungeon ; i( mock me not with idle shadows. 1 have long, long tried to believe thai man is nothing. What have I to do with remorse ? it comes to gdh not to aid me." "Think of Antoinefte/ 1 solemnly re- toined St. Sauverne ; ** recai the ima«jre of her you have injured, then ask not what have you to do with remorse. But for your relentless cruelty, Antoinette had been a happy wile, a happy mother : \oit persecuted her evento the«* rav e, »í ч* 'W' Ulu
and on the cold, still bed of your xictim, did yen plot the destruction of her child. Oh '" shuddeiing with mingled horror ¡Г) О and dbgusf, iC ask not what ha\e you to do with remorse." '- ï tell you Antoinette died by fhe vwll of Heaven," wildly e\chimcd Sf. Για re. ť Go, preach to de По usuilo n ; nnab/e his actions, si r » in hi4 heart the ^♦ound of hatred. lie would have mur- *¡ei ed fhe child ; 'twas I who saved her/' "."?y Lıîhcr '" ariiiuhted the mar¬ cii/ «, bur' ing his i\ce in hi hands. * l'ave mercy '*' Implored Louis. The tot i ni ed Ч. Pierre was not ίο be '/deuced. ÍC Λ sk de Uoussillon," he continued, ŕŕ whatall his hoatd of wealth 'ívjiís? - Ju lem whether it ha^ofti nul ou· 1 m ,,f '-- ».I < ther it has extracted <л>а rh ί. n ("oui hi^p'IIjvv ? ask him whether he would noi foicgo all his coveted îî ca- •ure, to pu ι Lese fhe bairn of a pure con* 'lence? 'Tuas avarice, all t f» uíco v..,h h«uì ; wiih me *ť. as je. lousj ; I low cl t!«o
the lady Antoinette, and slighted kve was turned to hatred/' "You—you loved Antoinette !" ex¬ claimed St. Sauverne ; but a deep and fearful groan was all that burst from fhe lips of í he сол fessor. Stretched as though upon the rack, he gasped for breath, and when the po^er of speech returned, vague and incoherent were his wander* ings. * f Be wary/' he muttered; fhe gloom of night best suits our purpose. Drusiiie will conduct you from St. Ho¬ norée» Remember the bridegroom speaks but in a whisper. The plan is welt laid ; suspicion slumbers. Prepare the ring ; at ten I will await you in the chapel. You have nothing to fear from Everard D'Arancourf ; he is a confiding fool ; he believes you what you seem. Let him once pen the letter, and the prize becomes your own* Give me your arm, åe Roussillon. ï have been dreaming of a deep black gidph, until my head h ¿hzw* Why ihmild you or I fear to tread
tread upon the precipice ? Antoinette, though she came from another world, cannot shove us down^—our hands are free from blood ; how then can they tax us vrith murder ?" " Ilolv Heaven! what a specimen of sin is here!" articulated St. Sauven.e. " How does fhe sophistry of the world beguile ihc iudtnncnt of man, leading him blindfold to perdition î would that the w;'\ward, would that the erring could but stand as we do, could but mark the throes of conscience, could but regisfer fhe deathbed horrors of a guilt-charged mind ' tlæn would their hearts be adamant against the lure to evil, f lien would they shrink from the first slight step which swerves from the track of virtue. Imperceptible are the gradations of vice. Youth sees not, feels not if* danger, fill da/zied by the/lower- bespangled surhce, honour become? ei.snared, purit ν dethroned/' St. ^ π \ erne piused, for the confessor, foi . w. ч ¿leaf
deaf to what he uttered, started erect from the straw on which he rested. The melancholy clank of his chains recalled him not to recollection. For a moment his eyes were fixed on vacancy ; it was but for a moment, for his features assu¬ med an expression of contemptuous re proach. " I tell you there is nothing to scare," he exclaimed ; " Uvithing but a little hillock, covered with long grass, and shadowed with cypress; you will see no name, no stone, to mark a grave. Follow the mountain path ; the grove terminates the deíile ; 'tis true, the wind blows cold through that defile—cold as is Ler bosom^—but why should you or I fear the wind ? At night she says her prayers at the grave : 'tis easy to steal Ler thence, and my lord the count is already jaundiced to our purpose. The letter ensured success. How easy, how <very easy is credulity duped ! We need but say she eloped wiih Louis, and time %Hldo the rest/* De
De Roussillon started with horror ; the guilt of his father was but too appa¬ rent ; y^t did hebend forward, yet did he eagerly catch at every senCeace, for every sentence disclosed the flimsy ground¬ work of past jealousy. Each instant did Gabrielle rise superior ; and when he re* called the period of past sufferance, ming¬ led contrition and regret prevailed ; yet did he check each ebullition of anger, for the late busy instigator tp mischief was sunk almost beneath fhe reach of pity. His reign was indeed closed, hissting extracted, for hisdarkeyes were distended nearly from their sockets, and the chilly ague of terror palsied his whole frame, Imagination conjured nought but ghostly forms, nought but frenzied visions. If he sunk to stillness, it was but the lapse of a moment; his groan spoke despair his start madness; for conscience racked the mind, c\en asthe subtle poison sapped the life's bloud. Bribery had procured m 2 th"
the draught of death—desperation had urged its application. Checked by no principle, unsupported by the balm of internal acquittal, St. Pierre had tried to believe what he wished, had pictured death as the torpor of annihilation, had cloaked all its ghastly terrors in the france of eternal sleep. But now that the veil of delusion was rent, now that sophistry had faded beneath the broads bright blaze of truth, now that in every breath¬ ing atom conviction spoke the future^ he would have snatched, 41 The .uitrit «md ιικ -bt ««..ihed wurhliv ] |V ? í bat а 0 с'. ache, }»uu ! y, ¡m^ii^mmti.t. Could ! ty on numr.', "5 » v ...vl.b.,' Tu what he ftuî'd ji**]ť.tí..." Persevering in the painful task of duty, the count Ы, Sauverne quitted not the dungeon; he watched to catch each gleam oí sanity, to rouse the wan¬ ing soul to late icpcnunce. The mar- tiuisaiid Louis too were stationary; they marked
marked the raging paroxysms of the cuí* prit, and shuddered at the wild horrors of his delirium : now they sustained his convulsed form, and now they mingled prayers for mercy. Towards midnight a heavy stupor steeped his senses; but though his eyes were closed in seeming calmness, and his breath had gradually become less laboured, still did the same mortal blackness dye his features* St* Sauverne watched every change ; afïect* ed almost to weeping, he tried to alle¬ viate the pangs of corporeal sufferance; forgiving past injuries, he essayed every art fo lighten the throes of nature. Heavily did the " inaudible and noise¬ less foot of time" advance, for nought save fhe melancholy monotony of the quarter's chime disturbed the stillness, livery breath threatened dissolution, yet was every breath succeeded by another; and not till long after day had " dappled the drowsy cast with spots of grey/* did the worldly pangs of the guilty St. Pierre m ,i terminate.
termrøafe. Trrte would be my effort to¬ pen lhe moral which, to the reflecting mind, the fall of sin ever eonvevs. A?a^ ! the frailty of man needs no comment; ¡t h felt, if is deplored—it is the sting of life— ï: is the poisonous mildew to happiness. Awful is the sway of death, even w T hen moulding the saintly features of placidity ; but when horror closes the scene, when despair speaks in everv tortured lineament, rectitude may con¬ demn, but pity» mourning the defalca¬ tion, weeps tears of bitterness. Leaving the reluctant Louis to return with the count Sf. Sauverne ίο the t ha* tea«, the marquis journeyed to the clois¬ tered prison of his sister, his mind iu~ pressed bv the faîalscene he had witnt",- êd, his imagination haunted by the deathbed agon v of the confessor. In vain he tried to ba ish the sad conviction ofs father's guilt, to reca! nought save bis penitence; the intended destruction of Gabrielle would recur, would chase every stasa! lezi
sensation but horror; and not till the time-worn turreb of St. Honorée rose to view, did his feelings assume a new colour ; then did anticipation conjure the form of Corisande; and soon, toiling up the steep, was that anticipation re¬ alized. While he held her fo fhe bosom of fraternal love, while he gazed upon the soft blush oí dtii^ht which flowed on her cheek, he traced nof the ravages ol b.tkness; but soon divi that colour fade —ioon did it yield ίο the pale hue of mq-uctude. He saw with alarm the lan¬ guor of illness ; he heard with pain the smothered sigh of dejection. Corisande viewed the preparation for departure wah mingled joy and gncf —joy m tie pictured restoration to her mother— ¡nu f at n reparation fromma f *y of tîıe memberi of St* Honorée ; and a* fhe hour üd%mıced, as *he traversed u 'tf each w ι ll-kt.own haunt, the smile and fhe и 4 lear
tear alternately struggling for ascendancy, her features resembled ** TV »itK· r ¿an filmy «uf aa Лрг.1 da\. я % h th ï * » uho« β „li ihe !x^ üî* »jí ι*λ sy», And ш itn s-t v й < йм!а| rakt* í.il л v» «í v ľ* * f Strange/* said Micheline, asshe mark¬ ed fhe emotion of her young mistress ** t ;...►: delight should betray ıt^eİf in fc*urx ! You must be delighted to quit your prison, and yet) ou weep." ** I am not delighted ίο bid adieu to my friends/* replied Cor\amie ; "my heart is grateful for kindness : be.dde*, bister Mathilde has been a second mo¬ ther ; and fhe holy superior, and—" ** Ah ! but you are going to voor 11 ii mother/* interrupted Micheline, ,ŕ and io your new skrer, and to the boat- houre/* The sensitive heart of Consande shrunk from the chord tims rudely touched. '* Yes, I return to my beloved mother, ' she faintly articulated ; â * but ior iht boat*
boat-house, Micheline —talk no more of the boat house. Alas!" and again her tears flowed, '· but for that boat-house, had at tended, perhaps soothed, the last struggles of my departed father." '·' Ináeeá, indeed î meant nothing so mournful/' rejoined the distressed girl. t% Yoo ?.rc *o melancholy and so sad, 1 wished to awaken anticipation ; I wish- e.f— tp S!ïc hesitated, she paused; she feared to trust herself ίο speak; for though bhe deplored the affliction of her young m stress, she mourned not the death of iht marquis. Li ŕ tie formed for con.iliauon, he had lived to die unla- mented, for pride and ambition had been the polar star of every worldly action, in the moment of adieu, sister Ma¬ thilde чгиц^еЛ with fier feelings ; but the sob of Corisande died not away till long after she had lust sight of the con¬ tent of Sf. Honorée. She loved her mixihcr, úw clung to the scenes of hei ¿uf«iuvy, nor could nature'* self be jea* m S k m
lous of the pang which friendship extort¬ ed. It was de Roussillon who had des¬ tined her waning years to a religious cell ; it was de Roussillon who had blighted the hopes of youth ; and now, bereaved of the stay cf friendship, was sister Ma¬ thilde left alone to visit the grave of her injured brother, to brood o'er the tale of his sufferings, and weep the pathetic close of his existence. Melancholy was the reflection ; and not till the marquis bad spoken of Gabrielle, not till he had dwelt on his own promise offelicitv, diet he recai her attention; and even then,, the pictures of bliss, sketched by the glowing pencil of love^ excited but the sigh of fond regret—regret at the contrast existing between his pros¬ perous hopes and her own rayless pros¬ pects ; and as the image of Louis rose to memory, the canker-worm of peace clothed every feature in dejection, She saw him as at the moment they had first met, as at the moment they had last parted ;
parted ; every word, every look was registered ; and when de Roussillon spoke of the son of the count St. Sauverne as the brother of Gabrielle, when he pane- gyri¿ed his virtues, and declared his hope that the bond of affinity might yet be closer cemented, Corisande started аз though in terror— (< No, no, my brother, * she exclaimed ; IS your expectations are wild, their completion impossible : my hopes are fixed—my thoughts can never varv. Rejoicing in your happiness, I will live in the bosom of my mother ; I will watch her declining years ; and should Heaven will it so that 1 survive my only parent, then, in the convent of St. Honorée, in the pursuit of religion, will I seek a resting-place." " Methinksyourdcchion ispremature," obsen cd the marquis, smiling. "Stay till you have mingled in the wond ; stay, at least, till you have seen my filena, and then-------" "Your friend cannot weaken my re« w (i solve/'
solve," interrupted Corisande, with at· impatience foreign to her nature ; " it i founded on—on—" hesitating, fi it и founded—" and again she paused. i( Be¬ lieve me, my brother^ be this friend ever so amiable, be he ever so attractive, still will my heart remain invulnerable." " Has your heart ever been invulner¬ able ?" asked the marquis, with a look which crimsoned the cheek of his sister. Corisande sighed ; she turned away her face, and bent her eyes to fheground. ťf Love is a spontaneous emotion/' pursued de Roussillon, u an emotion which sages cannot resolve, which phi¬ losophers cannot conquer. Come, con¬ fess, my sister, who possesses the em¬ pire of your heart ? who is the being who has rivalled my friend ?" Corisande gazed from the window of the carriage, she poi n fed to the dis¬ tant mountains, she spoke of the pine- clad summits of the rocks; but the atten¬ tion of the marquis was not to be arrest¬ ed ;
cd , \\ith anarch playfulness he repeated the question ; and then gazing in her blushing face, he vowed that the veil of profession would be an outrage to feel¬ ing, " No, no, Corisande; tarry till you see the brother of my Gabrielle, and my life on it but he avert the decree." "I trust, as the brother of the mar¬ chioness, your friend will be entitled to my esteem," coldly observed Cori¬ sande. f( lie will possess more than esteem/' resumed de Roussillon, " or perish my powers of discernment. Believe me, he was not formed to plead in vain ; and esteem, to love like his, will be too small a tribute." " Love Ukc his /" repeated the haîf-of~ fended Corisande ; iC surely you do but banter; surely you would play on the credulity of the novice." " No, my sister," pressing her to his bosom, and kissing her glowing cheek ; ** sooner would 1 die than seriously trifle with
with a feeling heart. Yet stav fill von know the son of Sf. Sauverne, then if you reject his hopes, at least be it in favour of the gallant preserver of my life, for d'Avignon himself awaits us at the chateau." "D'Avignon î" repeated the astonished Corisande: (l ah,my brother! f o him indeed do I viel Л the esteem and gratitude of my whole heart ; for D'Avignon* unmind¬ ful of his own safety, has twice given vou to us/' Quickly succeeded a hund reti ques¬ tions, as to where the vouth fu I hero hail so long concealed himself, and how, and by what means he had become an inmate of the chateau ? but the marquis, parry¬ ing her inquiries, reserved the expla¬ nation, simply a iding, that D'Avignon, lotv T labouring under mental inquietude, now at the chateau sought the balm for woe. An unclouded sun shone on the verdant groves of the chateau as the carriages drove
drove into the park—Corisande sighed ; her eves mechanically traced the per¬ turbed waters of the Rhone ; and as they descried the pale, grey turrets of the distant boat-house, the unchecked fear of sensibility stole down her cheek. De Roussillon's too pursued the same direc¬ tion ; he dived amid her feelings, yet did he not withdraw the veil which t( man¬ tled her clear reason ; he traced the mo¬ ment of explanation as the moment of bliss ; and when he saw her folded in the arms of the marchioness, when he saw her starr, as he led the happy Ga¬ brielle to her notice, he breathed noî the name of Louis. In vain Corisande strove to rally ; her feelings mocked composure; her eyes sought but one direction, sought buí the face of her new sister. In each lineament did she trace the softened sem¬ blance of the mountain-hunter, of ih'àt Louis whose image warred against her peace ;
peace; yet though the arch smile of she marquis occasionally flushed her check, not once was her mind awakened to suspicion. Tne evening dawned, yet neither D'A¬ vignon or the brotherof Gabrielle appear¬ ed. Corisande threw open the window, she gazed upon the enamelled lawn, she inhaled the balmy breeze laden with the fragrance of a thousand blossoms. De Roussillon approached. *' You look de¬ jected, Corisande/' he whispered : "come, rally your spirits, or Ì shall indeed suspvc í some rival f о my Π ionel." Corisande forced a smile—"Can nought but love give colour to drjection?" she inquired. " Alas ! where can I seek a wider field, than in the events which have transpired since 1 quitted the chiteau ? This sable garb alone proclaims α tule of woe." (t You mustthinkof the future/'said the marquis struggling with i' e sigli which h;di
half swelled his bosom. ťt Come, descend with me to the shrubbery, and I wili in¬ troduce a new anchor of reliance." Corisande tied on her bonnet, but her heart fell incredulous. The marchio¬ ness feared the evening air, and the count St. Sauverne and Gabrielle remain¬ ed with her. ft Why, my dearest sister," implored de Houssillon; leading towards the river, is will you exclude me your confidence ? why lock me from the treasured secrets of your bosom ? Tell me, is there ought which can give you happiness, which can effectually banish the scheme of pro¬ fession ?" Corisande trembled, They had reached the banks of the Rhone, and the turrets of the boat-house rose before them. " í am very happy/ 1 she at length faltered; and then she would have turned in a different direction, but her brother withheld her. " 'J bat is the point we seek," he t оч - ť.lľ'.O,
finned, drawing her arm through his, and pointing to the boat-house ; " the murmur of the waves is soothing ; be- sides/tis the favourite haunt of D'Avig¬ non. In the mid day's sun, in the evening's gloom, he alike wooes its shelter." He paused for a moment, then gazing steadfastly in her face—" Guess you, my sister, why this boat-house owns attraction ?" "How can I guess the motives efa being I never saw ?" timidly asked Corisande. " D'Avignon," pursued de Roussillon, approaching the steps, " is the slave of sentiment, the hero of romance. He fi ies from the great world ; he shrinks from the call of pleasure. His hours have ever been devoted to study and rural pursuits. H h flute breathes melan¬ choly music, his poems teem with love. Sometimes he hunts upon the mountain, sometimes he guides a little skiff upon the wave------" " D'Avignon i'*
" D , x\vbnon !" murmured Corisande, and eiery vestige of colour ilea. ''Ym. D'Avignon." reioined the mar- quis, " the son of St. Sauverne, the brother of Gabrielle, ihe pupil of father Emtache, the------" He hesitated, for faint, lifeless, but for his extended arms, Corisande had sank to the earth. Louis, by appointment stationed in the boat-house, rushed down the steps ; he would have snatched the pallid form of Corisande to his bosom, but de Roussillon besought fortitude. Swift as thought, he dipped hib hat in the flood, he sprinkled her marbled forehead. The breeze blew fresh upon her face, and soon awakened to recollec¬ tion, did she find herself supported by her brother, did she trace the form so long, and so fondly cherished, kneeling at her feet. She withdrew not her hand ; she suffered him to pressit to his lips, to his heart ; and when, with rapturous delight, he whispered his entreaties for exertion,
exertion, she smiled accordance to his hopes. Soon alive but to gratitude and joy, Corisande listened to the full explanation of every mystery. In each action she traced the noble generosity which swayed the soul of her lover. Her full heart gloried in the precious trust of his peace ; and when shfc regained the chateau, when she received the congratulations of the count St. Sauverne, of the marchioness and Gabrielle, not one discordant thought harboured in her bosom.
CHAP.
CHAP. XIV. W' h;» t then reaudnb, but, after past armos. To take th'· good vicissitude of joy, To thiUik the gracious godb for whut tht-y £i\e, i'obatbS our souls, and while we live, to lue ? Scaî.ce had the marquis de Roussillon listened to the recital of the twins* mys¬ terious birth, scarce had he mourned the fate of his unfortunate aunt, scarce acknowledged in the grief-worn form of father Augustin fhe once happy, once gallant count St. Sauverne, than his visit f о the castle de Fontainebleau recurría » İd to memory, brought with it the convic¬ tion of some fatal svstem of treachery having been successfully practised, some deep
deep and subtle design, to perpetuate a breach which had so inauspiciously begun; and as, in his " mind's eye/* he again traversed the matted galleries of the castle, he listened to the discourse of fhe lady Aglaie, to the melancholy nar- ráfion of the housekeeper, suspicion fell upon the count Eugene—suspicion, strengthened by the known conduct of his father, convinced him that a brother's actions did not a?ways assimilate with a brother's name. *' Oh no !" he exclaim¬ ed, as he thought of the wrongs of the hapless Antoinette; fe ambition too often hardens the heart, avarice too often, btagnating the principles of justice, turns a deaf ear to the plaint of the op¬ pressed." Eager to bind the wounds ofdissension, to conciliate 'twixt parties so long and so lamentably estranged, he hinted his conviction that the duke de Fontaine¬ bleau wasdeceived, was even unconscious of a sons exigence. '* If I thought ** so/*
so," exclaimed St. Sauverne, his pallid cheek flushed bv an emotion he once thought extinct, "ifí could only hope so-------" " Ľo think so—do believe so/* in¬ terrupted de Roussillon ; " for my own observation tells me, the heart of the duke de Fontainebleau has never lostsight of the father. He has mourned your absence with tears of the bitterest sorrow; he has anticipated the possibility of your return as the earthly good he coveted." St. Sauverne wtpt— ťŕ Cruel, cruel Eugene!" he articulated ; ťf alas ! how could í suspect treachery in a brother V' The marquis shuddered. " í will íly to the feet of my father," he continued; íť ív\ill return to the home of my heritage. Just God ! to behold his arms encircling the oíí^pring of my Antoinette—to hear his blessing poured forth upon their heads! Tell me—tell me, my son, how spoke—how looked my father ?" " lie
,f He looked like one oppressed with care, not racked with that mortal passion, anger," replied the marquis. íť Some¬ times he wore the saintírke hue of re¬ signation ; sometimes that resignation evidently struggled against the lingering tide of feeling ;" and quickly he recapi¬ tulated his midnight visit to the apart¬ ments once occupied by St. Sauverne, his discovery of the picture of Antoi¬ nette, the mournful tale repeated by the lady Aglaie and the housekeeper ; and concluded with his firm belief of the duke de Fontainebleaus never-varying affection, and his strong conviction that the letters penned by the count had been suppressed, had been carefully concealed from a father's knowledge. The heart of the count was wrung even to agony. Tis not the pressure of grief alone which causas the tears to flow ¡ alas! no; joy mingled in his sen¬ sations; yet were his feelings softened almost to woman's weakness, ( * Dear father .**
father:** he exclaimed ; ťí dear, injured*. deceived father ! so many, many years,, in vour eye, to have bornean appearance of cruelty, of disobedience, of ingrati¬ tude ; so many years, while toiling in sufferance, to have been blackened with ?i dye so hateful ! Barbarous Eugene î what misery has this subtle policy in¬ flicted ! Treacherous guardian of a brother's secret ! selfish, unjust—but thou art gone," checking himself, '* and may Heaven remit thy transgression ! may Heaven vouchafe pardon to my of- fences, as I forgive thee !" <ť The count Eugene died in battle/* said the marquis; "'tis possible a mi¬ nistering friend might have snatched the record of awakened conscience ; but unaided, imsoothed, his groans mingled with the wind, bisconfession owned not fhe solace of a listening ear." ťí Poor Eugene /* sobbed St. Sauverne, imbibing at once the melancholy reflec- f«on, " poor Eugene í perhaps in the ■w. ι χ . * awful
a%vful moment of dissolution, whilst struggling with the numbing torpor of death, you remembered 'your banished brother—you deplored the actions of injustice ; perhaps you recalled the image of onr father ; perhaps, when too late, your flitting soul would fain have offeied reparation* Oh God í pity the weakness of fallen man ! admit, as an expiatory sacrifice, the last struggles of a stricken spirit ! My brother I my lost, my erring brother!" Studying nought save the feelings of the duke de Fontainebleau, trembling for his safefy in a discovery so little hoped, the marquis de Roussillon pro¬ posed himself as the joyous herald of a sons return ; and soon, the messenger of a letter flowing from the heart of filial love» did he bid adieu to the happy circle at the chateau. Im patience marked the hours of his absence. St. Sauverne» even at the grove £-f АпЫМШе, thought of his father, and pined
pined for his embrace. The marchio¬ ness spoke of her son ; Gabrielle sighed for her lord's return ; all save Louis and Corisande ; they owned no influence equal to the charm of each other's society. They tarried in the boat-house ; they wandered midst the groves ; they toiled up the sedgy sides of the mountain, oft lingering on the spot where first they mcf, oft visiting the peaceful shelter of infancy. The dame, full of joy and gratitude, ever hailed their approach, ever hailed the prosperous fortunes of Ler lute acknowledged son. To them would the wicker gate fly open, on them would she gaze with mingled wonder and delight; now glo¬ rifying the mysterious Power which had wrought to such an issue his long cheer¬ less destiny ; now recalling past struggles, and weeping in the full ne ,s of her hea í L 44 Yet did Louis not suffer alone, my good mother/' would the happy Cori- к 2 л sande
sande exclaim, 4t fori fco laliourccl with a task as heavy. He strove to banish me, undera principle of honour ; I strove to banish him, under a principle of »luin " - "ЛЬ, Heaven ľ if von had succeeded î * búd Louis. " If you had «ucceedcd/* m u ι mured the blushing Coi bande. ** The first glance rendered that success impossible/' rejoined Louis. Corisande might again have echot d bis woîds, but though deîicacv checked the i .npulse, the smile of love whub p'aved upon her fea'ures could not Lc nii c coniti ned ; it conveyed a world cf hjppiness. it spoke a volume to the heart« Micheline too exulted in the blits of lier }oung m h tress; archly vvould she propose a return to the convent of Sf. ¡lonorce, and then seem fo question the stability of a resolution so newly formed. '* You thought you could be happy ¡n ť e
the fiiendbhip of sister Mathilde," she would observe ; ci you thought your heart would crave for nought beyond pacing the terrace, and nravins in the JO"" ' İ I* W chapel ; you thought------'' "Inever hinted the cravings of the heart/' interrupted Corisande ; ťí ah, no î î pictured nought but simple content within the walls of Sr. Honorée." if 'P»«- saints be praised, you have not sought content within the walls of St. l!ono»ee !" ardentlv rtjoiued Micheliné: * k f,r t ? -e hea*-t is ticachcions, it owns no bounds, and the Image of the boat- home poe r would have mocked its attain¬ ment. Besi les, it would have entailed a load of si u ; for ajfectlou would Inve bound me 'r ï the same chain;, and luie would have mged tne to the saute fnms- &геьэ1оп. ifolv liarivrs' í could no more have banished the image of Arnaud,, í luin í could îu\c banîohed sleep," " And vet vou often accused Arnaud of iK¿lect," observed Coi ¡batide; " because λ ί» be
he visited not the grate of St. Honorée, you often impeached his constancy." * f ï was a simpleton," replied Miche¬ line, tf and pined for impossibilities. Arnaud vows he has never known happi¬ ness hi absence; and Arnaud vows he can never know happiness till past the power of separation." ** May Arnaud soon know happiness then !" said Corisande, " for life is too short to sport with its promises/' The arrival of a messenger from the castle de Fontainebleau awakened the necessity for exertion : in the broken and long-harassed spirits of the count St. Sauverne» the tide of joy wa^ almost overwhelming ; he was recalled to the bosom of his parent, to the quiet harbour of his long banished home. '* Fly, son of my heart ! son of my never-vary ing affection P* spoke tbe well known, but unsteady characters of the duke de Fontainebleau ; " hasten to the father your presence can alone cheer, iir¡n¿
Bring with you your children— røy children ; let my arms encircle all ; let me partake of bliss, ere I descend to the grave/' The short dispatch of de Houssillon conveyed comfort unutterable ; he spoke of the duke de Fontainebleau as possess¬ ing almost the vigour of youth, as a being formed for love, formed for vene¬ ration. He dwelt on his eager impa¬ tience to behold St Sauverne, and then he portrayed the anxiety of the amiable Aglaie, who, yielding to the sanguine enthusiasm of youth, anticipated in her newly-found relatives a fund of friend¬ ship and of peace. He excused his own return to the chateau, on the score of attention to the duke; and concluded by beseeching the marchioness and Co¬ mande to accompany the count, Louis,, and Gabrielle. Vain would be my efforts to picture the delirium of joy which marked the first moments of meeting, puerile the attempts
attempts to transcribe the feelings of nature ! The duke gazed on the altered form of St. Sauverne, even until his eyes were dizzy ; he marked the deep furrows of affliction, and traversed o'er again the blank, the fearful bpse of mis¬ fortune. Unconnected were the fond expressions of delight, piercing* the w r ords of gratulation : looks f tears, be¬ trayed ^haf the lips could not utter ; and when Loui$¿ when Gabrielle, were alike clasped to the bosom of the duke «—when the count St, Sauverne beheld the arms of his father encompassing Uh offspring, he clasped his hands in pious demotion» and raised his eyes to the Father of aH. ' f Merciful and righteous Judge ľ* he articulated, "how, in every breathing atom, may we trace thy un¬ erring rule İ The son of the persecuted Antoinette lives to inherit the posses¬ sions which cost the price of honour; lhe daughter of the persecuted Antoi¬ nette,
nette, cloaked in mystery, became the ar if wife of fhe heir of de Roussillon !" Despair nof, ye who are oppressed, atid are sore laden ; despair not, ye who toil i n suffe ranee and sorrow; for Heaven, knowing thesecrets of the heart, watcheth over the etestinies of man ; chiding in mercy, Heaven pcrmitfeth iniquity to prosper for a season ; but the day of re¬ tribution cometh, and heavy is the fax of gvAlt ; the day of retribution cometh, and t lie aggressor hideth his face in the dust; foras the sun emerging from a dark cloud gathers, redoubled brightness, so doth the aggrieved, when triumph¬ ing over the pressure of injustice. And now, gentle reader, sulfer me f о close thefalc of Тиглсп'жл The measure of guilt has been full, the reward of innocence complete. Affliction presenta a field for volumes, but happiness scarce admin of a single page; for so untenable i'» our hold on bins, that the substance h
is scarce attained, ere, like a shadow, it again flits. So perishable are the joys of human life, so unstable its hopes, so de¬ ceptive its promises, that fo linger with the offspring of Antoinette would perhaps entail on my pen the painful task of recording less than perfect felicity»
Fl MS·
aja/. 1 )''a !! «LÍ44^^
f*n.tcibt¿ İîaiLajr* Uaárafcail-btrtct, looi'*.
