Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Margiana: or, Widdrington tower: a tale of the fifteenth century
mjbkx »,w iza&tM&^Bnm^mta&B^aa^n^^mnm
CHAP. I. M Barying-Place, and a mysterious Writing* iVlARGIANA spent the night in wild and fruitless conjectures on what had passed; a'nd Joyce 5 who had necessarily been i?v- formed of the occasion of her removal from her own chamber, gave her no a- ^stance how to direct them ; on the con¬ trary, she seemed more sullen and out of humour than ever, which sometimes madi Margiana suspect that the celerity of her -sight had actuallydisappointed some wick--'I purpose of her tmcle's, md that Joyte p-r - * 0J " m » ' tici|v* -\
ticipated in that disappointment; whilst at others she believed her simply vexed at having had her rest disturbed. si For to -what end/' thought she, " should Bertram form any project against me ? Completely in his power, as I am, of what avail to him would be the infliction of any punishment upon me, or even my death? The ap¬ pearance of the man, it is true, and the hour of his intrusion, were suitable enough for a murderer; but why should Bertram wish to murder one whose union with his son he has always considered as so desirable an event?" Once it occurred to her, that Ethelred might have declared to his father his reso¬ lution never to marry any other woman, as he had once said something very like it to herself; and that Bertram might therefore be desirous of her removal, as a means of breaking off his son's hopeless attachment, and forcing hi$ views into some other di¬ rection* But this idea she presently re¬ jected
jected as wild and improbable; for ever* admitting Bertram could be capable of such atrocity, to produce so uncertain an effect, h was very unlikely indeed that ha should meditate any violence against her before the time appointed by her father's will for her determination. She earnestly- wished her friend Harold had been at the Castle, as his abler means of information might have fixed the vague and wandering suspicions that now fretted her mind, while his presence would have given her addi¬ tional courage. But the next morning, when she beheld the extreme anxiety of Bertram to have her apartment rendered secure, she felt more at a loss than ever to account for what had happened. She wondered, if he was indeed solicitous for her safety, why she was not removed into some other cham¬ ber, which he knew offered no unfair means of access; and she could not ima¬ gine how this concealed entrance into her b 9 * own
*dwn, had been contrived, unknown to him or his spies. She herself examined it with Joyce befpre Genevieve arose; and she saw the partition made good, and strength* ened with thick oaken boards, by Scruton and one of the workmen of the castle, over¬ looked by Bertram himself, who was not absent a moment while their work conti¬ nued. But this extreme caution in her uncle produced in her mind a very dliferent ef¬ fect from what il would have done, if she had observed it in any other person, Re¬ collecting what Harold had said of his con¬ stant habits of crooked dissimulation, and that if there was a rule whereby to judge af his real sentiments, it was the rule of contrary, she became firmly of opinion, upon after reflection, that the whole of his behaviour was the result of hypocrisy; and that whilst he was apparently insuring her safety by every possible means, he was .in reality meditating her destruction. This
This painful suspicion was not only strengthened, but confirmed, by his in¬ creased civility during that and many other succeeding days, and by her being re¬ moved back again the very next night to her own chamber; but principally by a precaution which Joyce now thought pro¬ per never to omit, that of constantly se¬ curing her into it every night, by locking, the door of the armoury after her when: she retired to rest herself. Margiana thought it was hard that all the fastenings should be on the outside of this door, while she was left wholly de¬ fenceless within; and therefore ventured to solicit her uncle, though entirely with¬ out hope of having her request granted, that she might be indulged with th& means of securing her chamber herself. To her great surprise, he made no objection ; and' the same day she had the pleasure to find .a- very strong bolt fixed withinside her door*, a. 3, which*
•which gave her a much more lively sense of safety than all the repairs of the parti¬ tion, and the oaken boards applied to it. She now, with some sensation of comfort, could lie down to sleep, though she per¬ sisted not to mention the mysterious cir¬ cumstance that had occurred to Genevieve, who was already too much disposed to de¬ liver hcr<clf up, without struggle and without reserve, to the deepest despev dency, and the most gloomy prognoptica' tions of their mutual fature lot. Margiana regretted it was now no longer in her power to satisfy her curiosity, thai had been awakened by the noise she had heard when in the brown tapestry cham¬ ber, and by the alteration in Joyce's conn* tcnance and manner upon the occasion. However, she sooihed her impatience by the hope, that perhaps at some period not very distant, she mi^at find means to cxe- cute he* scheme of exploring the apart- incut
ment above ; the existence of which could not have been denied by Joyce simply through mistake. In the mean time, the situation of the two sisters, and the tedium that, at inter¬ vals, almost subdued even Margiana her- self, bfvimc greatly relieved by a change in the weather. After lasting for a period of untiiiual length for that season of the year, and a situation so contiguous to the coast, the frost broke up, and the snow gradually shrunk from its mountainous and grotesque appearance; though for xnany days alter its ikial dissolution, the country continued no flooded by its meltings, and the overflowing of the river Coquet, swell¬ ed by the surcharged Cheviot streams, that they could not with any satisfaction extend their walks far from the castle, Towards the end of April, however, the frequent breezes from the sea, though they pro¬ longed the coldness of the season, dried the face of nature; and a few warm days b 4 afterwards
afterwards presented something like the welcome appearance of spring. They now lengthened their walks every morning and evening, and felt the full va¬ lue even of this imperfect shew of liberty, of which they had been so long deprived; though Joyce, continuing her unremitting vigilance, never lost sight of them for a moment, except during the hours allotted to repose, or whilst they were with their nncle. " Do you not recollect, sister," said Ge¬ nevieve one morning, " how we were pre¬ vented from going to see the burying- place that day the snow began to fall ? Let us prevail upon Joyce to conduct us there this afternoon, I feel a strong desire to Visit it," ' Margiana said she wished the same ; aril the woman making no opposition, they set out after dinner, leaving Bertram and Ar¬ thur
thur usual though it was this day more lively than or¬ dinary, owing to the latter having, been several days absent at his farm, where he had collected from a few low-bred neigh- hours, a variety of anecdotes, which he now related to his patron, with as much ap¬ parent relish as that with which they seemed to be listened to : for Bertram, besides that the natural contractedness of his heart made him delight iu such communications — a common case with narrow-minded* people, who invariably love to know how their neighbours are employed—had, more¬ over, no objection to let his nieces sup* pose that his thoughts were principally oc¬ cupied by trivial subjects. Arthur Wallop had been complaining bitterly of the slovenly appearance of his household, fold-jard, and fields, owing to the long-delayed return of his nephew—a complaint that induced Bertram to pro¬ mise he would ride thither with him the b Si £ex£
jiext day, to assist him in the inspection of his out-door concerns; while Margiana and Genevieve good-naturedly told him, that if they could be of any service in regulat¬ ing the interior of his family, he might command them, whenever their uncle would permit their accompanying him to Warkworth Grange. Arthur Wallop laid down a wedge of beef he was carrying to his mouth, to say, " Thank you, thank you kindly ;" and Ber¬ tram seemed much pleased with his nieces for making this offer, though he did not positively declare whether he intended ever to suffer their going so far from home. They found it a pleasant walk to the bit - rying-place, with respect to prospect as well as distance: the direction to it was south-eastward, across the park; and the rays of the declining sun, red and vivid, glowed upon the calm German Ocean, of which they commanded a fine view over 3 the
the fiat coast; for Widdrington Tower Mood on She acclivity of a hill crowned •with lofty woods above the building, while the park-grounds occupied all below it to the very base, and even a part of the level domain. These grounds were also well wooded ; and the sisters, as they proceeded, admired the variety that was presented to them by their walk, sometimes conducting them through masses.of old oaks mingled with beech and ash, and at others along open spaces that afforded a view of scenery at once, grand and romantic. The tower* raising its stately pile above, was a sub¬ lime and commanding object, with which the sea aild the rocky heights to the north, brought by a bend of the coast into the picture, were wholly in unison; while to the south-west a more enclosed country, with thick hedge-rows, scattered cottages, and the winding Coquet, offered a simpler and more rural prospect. b 6 At
At the back of a tuft of trees which the sisters perceived nearly in Ihe center of these cottages, Joyce informed them stood Warkworth Grange, only a short distance from the burying-piace whither they were going, and which, after they had passed over some rising ground, appeared in view, adding a beautiful feature to the • land¬ scape. a Is it not amazing," said Genevieve, a that our dear father should not wish to live at such a place as this, instead of be¬ ing always buried in the smoke of London, except when he was actually bearing arms? His dislike to a residence here seems diffi¬ cult to account for/* " I fear," replied Margiana, " his early habits of life but too readily account for it He was fond of gaiety, and of the most polished society he could obtain; smd here are only solitude, iine as that so¬ litude is, and the conversation of Arthur Wallop." ef Bnt/' t
" But," said Genevieve, " those who have no internal cause of unhappiness may be gay in the country as well as ih London. I have heard you say you were all verv gay at Edgehill; and my father surely needed not to have been confined to the society of the gormandiser you have mentioned, with the house of Percy so near him at Alnwick/* " Would to Heaven/' exclaimed Mar¬ giana, " he had lived here, and had been attending to his own domestic concerns, when he engaged in that last fatal scheme, which only served to destroy his own and many other valuable lives, and precipitate the sad fa*e of Richard!" They now entered a grove of trees, in¬ termingled with, many shrubs, that were al¬ ready venturing forth their- tender buds, and presently approached the burying- place, which was situated in the- midst of them. It was a rough building, composed of
of huge masses of dark-grey stone, some¬ times fantastically piled, so as to give the whole a rustic appearance; and moss and ivy plentifully covered the low Saxon arch that formed the entrance^ which stood al¬ ways open. On one side, rudely sculptured, were the arms of Winburne; on the other, those of Percy; frequent intermarriages having taken place between the families. Mar¬ giana and Genevieve entered the building with awe, and traversed a small square space that intervened, until a second SaSon arch, not so large as the former, discover¬ ed to them the interior beyond it, Here, in their several arched receptacles, lay, in last repose, the remains of the no¬ ble ancestors* of the Widdrington line; and a little chapel occupied the remotest end, with a plain altar, before which the requiems were wont to be chanted, and the
the prayers offered up for the souls of the departed. The sisters reverentially knelt down, and put up their devout petitions to the Al¬ mighty for the repose of him who had been so dear to them upon earth, and whose bones had not been suffered to find a resting-place with those of his forefa¬ thers. They melted into tears at the re¬ flection, but the tears of Genevieve flowed from more than the ostensible cause. " Oh when/' sighed she, " may 1 be ad* mitted herebeyond the reach of sorrow !" ^he stretched her arms across the altars and laying her head upon them, sobbed rs if her heart was breaking. That of Margiana bled for her grief; and as soon as she had finished her own prayers, she begged her to rise and quit the place. Joyce, who had continued standing at tlve entrance, gave them no disturbance, and Margiana's soothing ten¬ derness
derness* in some degree recovered her sis*. ter. Genevieve fell on her neck, but could not speak for some minutes. " Let us return, my dear Genevieve," said Margiana; ( r this place is too much for us both. And yet, eouid we here weep over my beloved father's remains, what a relief would it be to our full hearts!" Genevieve dried her eyes, and holding Margiana's hand fast clasped in her ow£, they both rejoined their guide, who seem¬ ed, with most unwomanly hardness of he.m *, utterly regardless of their melancholy tones and altered countenances. Frequently they turned back, to take another and another look at the spot where their father ought to lie^ as if they had supposed they should never see it again; and they had walked more than half their way home before even- Margiana's well-regulated mind was suffi¬ ciently restored to its usual state, to admit of
of her conversing on any subject. At length, observing Genevieve's deep de¬ jection, she painfully exerted herself to cheer it. " There was a chapel," said she, " at EdgehiH/' and she related to her sister that night's adventure, which originated in Clara Castles's intended frolic, of locking her up with Harold. " Times have altered with us since then," said Genevieve. " How happy would you now esteem yourself, were either Ethelred or Harold here, even though you should be locked up all night in a damp chapel with one of them 1" " I cannot say so much as that," replied Margiana. " No doubt I should be gbd to see them again, Wallop particularly , but I prefer a walk with you in the opeu air, to being locked up with any one." Cf Even with Ethelred ?" said Genevieva in a low voice, that Joyce might not over^ hear her, " Even
* f Even with him, sister." ** How! has not the clause in the will given to your thoughts a new direction?" " Yes; it has put me upon considering how 1 may avoid it's alternative." " And caw you, can you/' said Gene¬ vieve earnestly, te avoid the monastery, without punishing yourself?" " I will try for it, my dear sistc ." if What are you talking oi?" rudely cried Joyce. " No whispering, ladies! What secrets can yon have that require your walking so near together?" and she pushed herself between them. Margiana calmly observed, *' You forget yourself, and the respect you owe to the nieces of your lord. Though he may au¬ thorise you tv be a spy upon our actions, he probably does not order you to be insolent. If you are so again, we will acquaint him with your behaviour." " And see what you will g\iin by that," said the woman sullenly, casting a wicked look at her. Margiana
Margiana disdained to reply, and both &isfcrs preserved an indignant silence till ?hcy reached the castle, when they imme¬ diately repaired to the room where their nncle'sat. But there finding Arthur Wal¬ lop reading a letter from his nephew, whirh spoke of his own and Ethelred's journey into the North as likely to take place soon, they too entirely forgot both Joyce and her impertinence, to make any ii:eiiiion of either to Bertram, who did not express so much satisfaction at the near prospect of seeing his son again as might have been expected. Margiana and Gene¬ vieve testified, i.i a natural manner, all the pleasure the) really felt; and Arthur Wal- I'jp rejoiced so earnestly, and drank so heartily, that the potations he indulged in soon overpowered his faculties, and he was led away earlier than usual, by Scruton, who was the only domestic ever trusted to be with him when he was much intoxi¬ cated. He might, when bereft of the little judgment he at any time possessed, have .said
said more to the other servants than Ber¬ tram chose them to know. Poor Genevieve's spirits appeared greatfy recruited this evening, by the welcome trv- telligence they had received. Margiana^ for months, had not seen her so cheerful; but the ugh she sympathised in her satisfac¬ tion, die could not help fearing much of it arose from the hope of soon hearing news of Lord Lothian. Joyce still continued to look very much irritated when she conducted her wards to their apartments; and in particular deigned not t j speak to Margiana, a favour which was thankfully received by one who never wished to hear the sound of her voice again. After she had lighted the lamp, she almost threw it upon the table, and rudely pulled the door after her, locking it with a louder noise than usual, as if to make a display of her power and au¬ thority. Margianat
Kargiana only smiled at these proofs of her vulgar malice; and after drawing her strong bolt, quietly laid down to sleep; hut happening to awake towards the mid¬ dle of the night, she was astonished and alarmed by a shrill and piercing shrieki that was instantly succeeded by a loud noise, as tf something heavy was thrown to the, ground. "Heaven defend us!" cried Margiana, " this must be certainly murder/' She raised herself, and listened; but nothing more was to be heard. She then arose, and went to the door, for the sounds she fancied had proceeded from the armoury, into which it opened ; and there, after waiting some time, and redoubling" her attention, she distinctly heard a person groan. She called aloud to know who it was, but received no answer; and the deathlike stillness that ensued lasted so^ long, that, cold and wearied, "she returned to bed, with all her painful suspense and 1 imalkviated terror; the night wearing away
away without oflering any circumstance either to direct or remove her dreadful conjectures. * * At length the day broke, and she hoped soon to be released from this irksome situa¬ tion. At the usual time she heard Joyce's footsteps advancing towards her door; but suddenly they stopped short, a rustling noise ensued, and they retreated. Pre¬ sently they were heard again, advancing, and others also, of a heavier tread, as if a man followed her. Margiana's heart beat quick; but a second time the footsteps stopped short of her chamber, and the rustling noise recommenced louder than before. Again she heard a heavy groan ; and then th<e persons retired, and she lost all sound of their feet. Total silence once more teazed and terrified her. An hour, twft hours elapsed, and no Joyce appear¬ ed. At length she recognised her step approaching for the third time, but the
^ first it had ever been welcome. She had previously unbolted the door; the woman now unlocked it, and entered. Margiana started at the sight of her. She looked pale and haggard; trembled, and seemed as if overwhelmed with suppressed terror. "Holy Mary!" said Margiana, "what is the matter with you r" what has happen¬ ed last night?" " Nothing to give you any uneasiness/* answered Joyce. " Indeed, it gave me considerable un¬ easiness and alarm too. A dreadful shriek was uttered in the middle of the night." " When you ought to have been asleep, Lady. But no more of this. I heard no shriek. Breakfast is ready/' She turned from her, and led the way -towards Genevieve's closet; but as Mar¬ giana crossed the threshold of the outer t door
door of the armoury into the winding passage, she observed the floor was spotted ^Mi blood. Finding, however, that no explanation was to be expected from Joyce, she proceeded, without saying she noticed it; and they joined Genevieve, whose countenance did not betray any un¬ usual alarm. They went down into the hall, which they found empty; and where Joyce informed them they must take their breakfast with her, their uncle being in¬ disposed, and Arthur W T allop not yet arisen, Thev ate it in silence, for Man/mtu could not converse, and Genevieve had not forgiven Joyce for what had passed the evening before—to an angry recollec¬ tion of which she attributed her sister's re¬ serve. As soon as their unpleasant meal was finished, Joyce imperiously bade thrm fol¬ low her up stairs; and directing her course tnynrd?
towards Margiana's apartment, she cpened a door very near the outer one of the armoury, ,and ordered Margiana to ad¬ vance. She was preparing to obey, when, perceiving a bed-chamber, and a man in bed, she refused to go any further, till she heard Bertram's voice, desiring her to come forward. She then approached, while Joyce led her sister away ; and per¬ ceived her uncle lying with a cloth bound over his forehead, and a face as pale as death. " Margiana," said he, '* I am very ill. Did you not hear a noise in the night ?" " Yes, my Lord." " What did you hear?" " A shriek—a piercing shriek, and then a noise as if some person fell." Vf It was I," said Bertram; (f I was in dreadful agonies—I thought I had been poisoned.—-And you heard me groan, did you not?" " I heard a groan^ my Lord." VOL. ill, C « it
" It was mine—I imagined I was dying* —And was that all you heard, my dear niece?" "That was all, my Lord." <* No person spoke to you through your closed dbori" She looked at him with eyes so pene¬ trating, they shot through his brain. " No person whatever, my Lord." " Why don't you call me uncle, as you used to do?" She made no answer. " Margiana,'* said he, half raising him¬ self on his elbow, " I do not choose any one should know I cannot bear pain with resolution. Do not mention to any living soul the cries that anguish forced from me/* "Well, my Lord!*' *' Swear to me you will not/ She
She hesitated. " Why should you deny mer" said he. ""Why, indeed!" thought Margiana: " here is something wrong; but how should any thing I can say avail to clear up the mystery?" and she bound herself as he desired her. ** I am satisfied/' he exclaimed; f * but it should have been worse fcr you, had you refused/' ft That menace, however, sooner thrown out/* thought she, " would have ensured my refusal." He now dismissed her. She found Joyce waiting in the passage; and rejoined her sister, with whom she returned to their usual avocations of walking, reading, and needle-work: and Bertram, though still looking extremely ill, was abte to sit at dinner with them and Arthur Wallop; n&r was any alteration, excepting that of his personal appearance, discernible in him. Genevieve simply supposed him unwell; c 9 and
and that the wrapping about his head was there, as he told her, on account of the ncad-ache. As to Margiana, she felt no temptation to terrify her sister by breaking her word to him. Alone in her chamber, at night, she re¬ called to mind all that had passed, and en¬ deavoured to trace some connexion be¬ tween the events of the preceding night and the figure in the cloak she had seen in her apartment. As she ruminated, it occurred to her, that at the moment of that first alarm, she had thrown down the bookshf; had been reading upon the table, and had never seen it since. She had now the curiosity to go into the Httle closet, and examine whether it had been returned into its place. To her surprise, she found it there; and taking it down to be certain it was the same, a small piece of paper fell from between the leaves. Observing there was some writing upon it, she took it up, and with astonishment read these words:— " Lady
<* Lady Margiana, if it be possible, go down, on any Monday night, into the eastern vaults of the castle. The steps leading to them are under the great stairs. You will there find a friend, whose bust* ness is urgent, and who has important communications to make; but who dares affix no name to this writing. Every Monday night, till you appear, you will be anxiously expected/ 1 Margiana was strangely surprised by these lines. She was equally unable ta guess who was the author of them, and for what purpose they had been written; but had little doubt of their containing a snare, which she would do wisely to avoid* even was it in her power to comply with the request they conveyed. That, how¬ ever, was out of the question; for her door still continued to be locked every night, and in the day-time Joyce or her uncle never lost sight of her, c 3< She
She examined the hand-writing very particularly, but to no effect; it was ut¬ terly unknown to her. At length, after bewildering herself with a variety of con¬ jectures, and finding that she could not fix on any one that appeared at all probable, she resolved to pay no regard to the in¬ junction of this unknown friend, or ene¬ my, and to dismiss it as*much as possible from her thoughts until the arrival of Ethelred and Harold Wallop, to whom she should unreservedly communicate what¬ ever had appeared to her unaccountable, si ace ^he first came to Widdrington Tower, save only what her promise to Bertram bound her to conceal. They, she knew, would, without hesitation, encounter her incognito in the eastern vaults, who, it was very evident, was the same person whose appearance had caused her so much alarm; and who, it seemed, on her leav¬ ing him, had slipped this paper into the hookas it laid on the table, and had then replaced
replaced it in the closet, whence, as he stood concealed behind the hangings, he fead probably seen her take it. Her won¬ der and uncertainty were very great; but when she reflected on the circumstance of her being so cautiously secured into her chamber every night, she at least felt con¬ vinced that this attempt to lure her into the vaults o7 the castle, however its pur¬ pose might be to ensnare, could not pro^ ceed from any agent of her uncle's.
c 4
CHAP..
chap. a. An Iron Cage. A pew days after this occurrence, which, from the same motives that had actuated her before, Margiana did not reveal to her sister, Bertram seemed quite recovered from his indisposition, though he still complained of the head-ache, and still wore the binding across his brow. Mar¬ giana, who had strong reasons for her in¬ credulity, did not believe it was retained from this cause ; and one morning, when she happened to be standing beside her uncle in one of the courts of the cas* tie, as he was looking at a horse, a very slight
MAKGIAKA. slight circumstance confirmed her suspi¬ cions* Bertram going close itp to the animal; that was young and unbroken, it shied at him, and throwing up its head, hit him with it over the face in such a manner as to raise the bandage. The appearance be¬ neath indicated a very severe outward in* jury having been lately received ; and Bertram, who, instantly raising his eyes to Margiana, beheld her's fixed upon him,. promptly restored the fillet to its former situation, and turned to speak to hisdo- mestics concerning the horse, as if he had not observed her. But Margiana. had now both heard and,seen enough to convince* her, that her uncle had been not only struck down, but wounded, on the night. of the disturbance; and she believed the groans had in reality proceeded from him; though from whop the first shriek had. issued; itf was impossible for her to guess. She made no doubt the mystery concealed c 6 some
some dreadful affair; but a mystery, in all likelihood, it would remain. Joyce pre¬ served an inviolable silence; the stain of blood had been immediately effaced from the floor on the outside of the armoury; and she had engaged herself not to com¬ municate what 'she had heard to any hu¬ man being. Upon the whole, she repented having taken this engagement, which would prevent her reposing entire confidence in her favonrite Harold ; and contemned the menacing expression of Bertram, who had said it should have been worse for her had she denied him the gratification he asked. She feared she had been almost conniving at some wicked action ; and the only con¬ sideration relating to the whole affair that afforded" her the least satisfaction, was, that Genevieve's peace was undisturbed by any consciousness of svhat had happened. On the same day that the shyness of the horse had discovered to Margiana what her uncle had been at such pains, and at the^ 1 - expence
expence of so much falsehood, to conceal,, he stopped her, as, on their receiving a summons to dinner, she was preparing to follow Genevieve and Arthur Wallop into. the great hall. " I find, my dear niece/* said he, " that you are to be trusted with a secret, and that you have faithfully kept the promise you made me. 'You shall be rewarded for it; as it is only just you should be. Pro* bably it is not very agreeable to you that Joyce should persist in locking you into your room every night; I will therefore direct her to discontinue fhe practice; for your inside bolt is sufficient to defend you, in case your nocturnal visitor should .think proper to disturb you again—which, how* ever, I believe, will not be the case." Margiana wondered at this belief, and would gladly have known whence it arose, But she knew that Bertram hardly ever, by any chance, gave a direct answer to a c Q question;
question; and had it been otherwise, he gave her no opportunity of asking any ex* plantation at present, as he went imme¬ diately forward into the hall, where Gene¬ vieve was quietly waiting for him and her sister, though Arthur exulted in having, as he phrased it, secured a good start with Ihe boiled beef before the rest of the com¬ pany had even sat down. As soon as Lord Widdrington was able entirely to lay aside his fillet, and chose to say his head-ache had left him, which he now gave the sisters to understand had been occasioned by his hurting himself against a door that stood open in the dark, he revived the subject of his intended ride to Warkworth Grange, and actually spent a whole day there with Arthur Wallop shortly after, Hrs nieces, wearied by the perpetual sameness of their existence, and the tedious attendance of Joyce, would jflost gladly ha^e gone with them ; but as Bertram did not make them the oner, they concluded
concluded that silence* upon- the subject would be most advisable, by making "it ap«* pear to their uncle they were not impa¬ tient of the restraint under which he held them ; and by that means they hoped they should render him more disposed to in¬ dulge them with a little enlargement. No symptoms, however, of such a bless¬ ing were yet discernible. Joyce watched them the whole of the day their uncle was absent; though, as the weather was fine,. she paid dearly for her officiousness; for they took such long walks, partly for their own amusement, and partly for the satis¬ faction of wearying their tormentor, that she, who was advanced in years, and very subject to rheumatic pains, complained loudly and acrimoniously of fatigue. Margiana once feared she might be tempted to take her revenge, by locking; her up again at nights; bm she was agree* 3 ably
ably dkappointed, for her door was nevee* nfter fastened on the outside. This portion of freedom recalled to her thoughts her former design of endeavour¬ ing to find her way to the room above the Kown tapestry chamber; but it was not very easy to execute it, owing to Joyce's cunning practice of leaving her every night so little oil in her lamp, that it was frequently exhausted before she could quite undress herself; and it was impossi¬ ble she could explore her way through the intricate labyrinths of passages at Wid¬ drington Tower without a light. The at¬ tempt in the day-time was utterly imprac¬ ticable ; and Margiana for some time hardly knew by what measure to obviate the difficulty that Joyce's caution placed in her way ; till at last it occurred to her. that by saving a little oil every night lb: a week or two, she might amass a hoard sufficient to carry her through the adven¬ ture
ture she meditated. This idea she pur¬ sued, but the accumulation proceeded so slowly, it was many days before her stock amounted to what she thought adequate to the undertaking. In time, however, her little cruse be¬ came so well furnished, that she believed she might venture, without risking the dis¬ agreeable chance of being left at a distance from her own apartment/ to find her way back to it in obscurity ; and she resolved no longer to delay satisfying those vague sus¬ picions that the circumstances had given rise to. IIa\ing, therefore, waited one night till an hour she relieved sufhYi^r-rly bite to ensure her actions from being observed, she took up her now wcll-'iiilfd lamp, and cautiously entered the armoury closet. With ^cry light steps she proceeded through it, for she knew how near she was
was to her uncle, when, having just reached the Winding passage, she discerned some dark-coloured object on the ground, close to his chamber-door. Lowering her light to distinguish what it was, a faint growl gave her the information she wanted ; and she recognised Martin, an ill-tempered terrier dog that frequently followed Ber¬ tram. He held some meat under his paws, and looked up in her face with such a me¬ nacing countenance, that she stepped aside to shun him, leaving to him nearly the whole width of the passage; by which means she avoided stepping on a broad loose flag, that so inconveniently occupied the middle of the space, she had often wondered her uncle did not order it to be fastened. Very much afraid of Martin*s barking, she soothed him in low accents, as she went by, that he might know her voice, and he suffered her to pass unmolested. Encouraged
Encouraged by this first escape, and soon beyond the danger of being heard from her uncle*s apartment, she advanced with diminished apprehensions, but still with the extremest caution, till she reach¬ ed that part of the castle where she knew the brown tapestry chamber was situated. She then counted the doors, as she had done when she formerly quitted it with Joyce; and carefully observed the turns of the passages; but she was presently surprised to find herself arrived at the tapestry-room, having counted one door above her number, and without having seen the little staircase, of which she had taken the most particular notice, as be¬ lieving it would conduct her to the place she was anxious to arrive at. *' I know it was on my left hand," said she mentally, "and a very little way from hence. It must, surely, be now concealed by a door that stood open when I. was here last,
last, and which is the additlonaLone I have reckoned/* She felt convinced of this; but un¬ luckily could not be certain how many in¬ tervened between the tapestry chamber and the stairs; and therefore very much feared opening a wrong one. Yet thus far advanced, she was extremely unwil¬ ling to relinquish her design. The at¬ tempt was hazardous/ for she was igno¬ rant where any of the domestics of the family slept; but this hazard it was ne¬ cessary to brave, if site would proceed. After passing, therefore, two doors, be¬ yond which she knew the steps must be, she stopped at the third-, and listened for some minutes, but no sound met her ear; At last she ventured to- open it. All be¬ yond was darkness, but not perceiving the object she was in search of, she instantly closed it without noise, and proceeded to the next. Here she listened again; and was
was again encouraged by the stillness that prevailed to look beyond it. But no sooner had she cautiously opened this se¬ cond door, than she distinctly heard a per¬ son breathe as if asleep. Very much afraid of being heard, she softly and quickly shut it again; but now felt such considerable alarm, lest a discovery should ensue, that she was on the point of abandoning hef project, and repented ha\ing undertaken it; when, chancing to cast her eyes for*- ward, she observed that the bottom of the third door, now only a few paces from her, did not reach the stone flooring, but seemed as if it met the top of a step. This gave her new courage to proceed, and with renewed confidence she drew it towards her; for, unlike the two preceding ones, this door opened outwards. Her perseverance was rewarded by the wel¬ come sight of what she had been in pursuit of; and closing the door after her, she began to
to ascend, though not without fear of dis* turbing the person whose chamber ad¬ joined, and whom she concluded to be one of the servants. The stairs were winding ones; and so very steep and narrow, and even in some places so broken, that her progress was not unattended with danger. However, after four complete turns, for she took care to be extremely certain what direction she faced, she attained the summit, where the end of a passage, similar to the one she had quitted, formed the landing; and she ob¬ served three doors precisely correspond¬ ing with those below. At no loss, there¬ fore, which way to turn, as she had appre¬ hended might be the case, she passed by the two first, and, with a beating heart, stepped forward to the third, which, from its situation, she knew must open into whatever room was above the. brown chamber. She
She paused on the threshold with Inde¬ scribable emotion. " O my dearest fa¬ ther," said she softly, " is it possible that my doubts may here be changed into a joyful certainty?'* Her half-formed hope sunk on finding the door only nearly closed, but not shut. She gently pushed it open. A large apart¬ ment, totally dark, except from the ray of her own lamp, presented itself to her view; and looking around, she was imme¬ diately convinced no person inhabited it at present; though, on her advancing a few paces, she saw some indications of its having been lately occupied; but by whom, unless by some person confined in it for their punishment, she was not able to ima¬ gine. Two small loop-holes, discoverable by the pale beams of a waning moon, were the only passages for light or air, save that the latter might find its way through a chimney,
chimney, the entrance of which was nar¬ row, in proportion as all the others she had ever seen in the castle were lofty and expanded. A few extinguished embers were strewed on the hearth. In the re¬ motest corner from where she stood, a straw mattress was laid on the floor, partly concealed by a coarse and scanty coverlid ; and a heavy stone bottle stood beside it. On approaching these, the only articles of furniture in the room, she perceived ano¬ ther door opposite to that by which she had entered; and passing through it, found herself in a closet, so very small as to be nearly filled with an iron cage, of a size just capable of containing a human figure; though the position of any full-grown per¬ son confined within it must have been re¬ stricted even to torture. Margiana had heard of such infernal in¬ ventions; and shuddering with dread, and a horror that seemed creeping through her chilled veins, she was about to turn, and leave
leave the place, when her foot stumbled over a hard substance. Stooping to exa¬ mine it, she discovered what in fact was a thumb-screw, though she was ignorant of the purpose it was intended to serve; and laying it down again, her eye was caught by the appearance of something white, projecting from underneath the iron cage. Holding down her lamp, she found it was a torn fragment of paper, which, through her anxiety not to neglect any chance of obtaining information, she drew out; but, perceiving some writing upon it, in a very bad hand, she put it into her bosom, to examine it at her leisure, unwilling to stay longer in a place that filled her thoughts with the most dismal images. Yet before she went she looked round, to observe if any more fragments of paper were in sight, and returned not till convinced there were no other. Leaving the doors then closed, exactly as she had found them, she retraced her way, almost trembling as she descend¬ ed the broken staircase, lest a false step might
might awaken the neighbouring sleeper; nor did she breathe with freedom till she came within sight of the outer iron door Of the armoury. But here, where all her fears of disco¬ very subsided, she found they ought to have been most alive, to warn her into caution. The dog was no longer lying where she had left him. He had crept, for a warmer situation, into a corner of the armoury; and Margiana now having no motive for avoiding the centre of the pas¬ sage, trod upon the large loose flag, which, eommuricating by a bar beneath the floor¬ ing with a heavy wooden machine that stood in Bertram's chamber, to act as an alarum in the night-time only, occasioned such a noise as awakened him, and even startled her. The dog, aroused from his slumber, rushed past her, loudly barking, and she had only sufficient time to extin¬ guish her lamp before her uncle's door opened; and in a voice she fancied half terrified
SerriHed and half imperious, he demanded who was there ? lt Be not alarmed,, my Lord/* replied she, in a calm tone, and without hesita¬ tion; " it is 1, Margiana, Hearing a strange noise, that I could not account for, in the armoury, as I supposed, I ventured out, and finding nothing there, advanced into the passage, where I discovered it was the growling of your dog over some meat. I am sorry I have been the means of disturbing you/' " You are very courageous, methinks/ 1 said he, i{ considering how lately you have had reason to fear for your own safety. I like cowardice in young women. Leave bravery to us. But perhaps you w r as com¬ ing to ray door, with a view of alarming mc in case of danger?'* " No, my Lord. 1 did not apprehend any danger. I merely wished to remove a troublesome noise, and regret 1 have not done it with less disturbance. But I really . vol, ni, i? was
r:as not aware of the purpose the loose flag is designed to serve." <s There is no great harm done," said Bertram, ^n a milder tone, satisfied from not having heard his alarum before, that she w r as only now leaving her apartment ; fS return to your room ; and, if you do not disturb me any more, Martin shall not again disturb y@u," Bejoiced to receive such a direction, Margiana bade hrm good night, and quickly retreated behind the security of her strong bolt; no longer now at a loss to conjec¬ ture why„ after the apparition of the cloak¬ ed figure, she was not removed into a dif¬ ferent chamber, since it was so improba¬ ble she could ever quit this, during the night, the only time she %vas not closely - observed, without being detected by her artful uncle. But for the dog, she must even now have been not only prevented f»om an undertaking that had long en- ga^sd her attention, but also left wholly destitute
destitute of an excuse for coming out of her apartment. Not that her anxiety wa.i in any degree relieved by what she had seen. In fact, a secret hopa had taken posses¬ sion of Margiana's mind, almost uncon¬ sciously even to herself, that her father was not dead, and that he was in some way connected with the mystery of the cham¬ ber she had been visiting. Avowedly he hid occupied the room beneath. Joyce hid denied that any apartment was above it, and had trembled and changed colour when a slight circumstance proved her as¬ sertion false. Margiana recollected with shuddering dread the iron cage, the com ] tbrtless mattress spread on the floor, the stone bottle that had probably held water for its wretched occupier, and perhaps had been purposely thrown down when the cough with which she had been seized iu the tapestry chamber proclaimed fhe neigh¬ bourhood of a fellow-cre. t ire. b ~ Then
Then the strange clause in her father's will, of a nature so discordant from his former indulgent love, so aptly suited to her uncle's views, rushed on her mind. Her ideas became confused by dreadful images. Kneeling down by the side of her bed, she laid her head upon it, and prayed for judgment how to conduct her¬ self. —* And I have a paper/* thought she, w in my bosom, that perhaps possesses the power of relieving me from this agony of suspense, without a possibility of reading it before break of day !" After an hour of distress, relieved at length by pious confidence, she sought the indulgence of temporary oblivion; but short, interrupted slumbers, were all she could obtain. With the earliest dawn she awoke; and starting up, endeavoured to read the writ¬ ing
ing she had secured. But the faint light was insufficient for her purpose, and ano¬ ther tedious half hour held her fluctuating between hope and fear> At length she became able to de cypher the letters; and with some difficulty read these sentences, unconnected with each other, owing to half the paper having been torn off:— « You inflict tortures in vain. I will — Not all that you and the infernal Geoffry— shall ever force me to ——-------------- ~~— Whatever human nature can endure ------ - Know, 1 fly to preserve the innocent ------* ------and far from the reach of-------——— —while maddening remorse wrings'* —— " Merciful Heaven!" exclaimed Mar¬ giana, dropping the paper, and clasping her hands together, <f what can this al¬ lude to ?—Is it my father who has sufiereA tortures ? oh no, the writing bears no re- d 3 semblance:
semblance to his. And what innocent peri son is to be preserved ? Is it Bertram who is threatened with remorse ?— Alas, there has been much of suffering in this fatal place; much, I fear, of guilt—guilt, too, shared by Geofifry, the confessing priest of the castle ! Can Lady Rachel have been the suiferer? If so, Harold will know this writing; but as the tyrant can be no other than Bertram himself, it is too shocking to be shewn to his son." Hearing now Joyce advancing with her sister, to call her down to breakfast, she hastily concealed the paper; and with as much appearance of tranquillity as she _ could possibly assume, received them with the customary salutations of the morning, and accompanied them to the great hall, where Bertram met her with his wonted smiles; bait began immediately to con¬ verse with Arthur Wallop, though his ci¬ vilities to herself never remitted—-civili¬ ties which., from that knowledge of his character
efraracter she had gained from Harold, and her own experience, had always made her mistrust and dislike him, more than a to¬ tal want of them could have done. But simple dislike was now a term that fell far short of her sensations, when she thought of ail she had seen the preceeding nights and of the strange contents of the paper; and her impatience for Harold's return,. to clear up the dreadful doubts that op¬ pressed her mind, became proportionably. stronger. Father Geoffry she had only very occa¬ sionally seen since her arrival at Widdring¬ ton Tower, and of late he had not made his appearance at alb; having been long labouring, as Bertram said,, under a severe indisposition. He now again, at times,. occupied a seat at table; and it may be imagined with what feelings Margiana be¬ held him, though in his exterior there waa nothing to create disgust, as he merely answered to the common description of a o 4 plump,,
plump, well-fed friar. Nevertheless she fancied theve was a certain disagreeable expression in the cast of his eye, that in¬ dicated a hard, unpitying nature. " It was not until the latter end of July that Lord Delancey and Harofd were re¬ leased from such of their duties as detained them near the person of the King, Mar¬ giana md Genevieve were strolling onO evening towards the burying-place, attend¬ ed, as usual, by the persevering Joyce* when they were descried at a distance by the two friends, who immediately put their horses at speed, to come up with them> and never was there a more joyful meeting. Ethelred looked every thing, and said little ; while Wallop declared he could dance for joy. On the other hand, neither of the sisters attempted to conceal the> pleasure with which they greeted their old acquaintances; and Margiana even forgot at the moment that Ethelred had ever pro¬ fessed for her more than that friendship which
he now actually possessed any interest in¬ ner future fate. But anxious as they all were to asL sr thousand questions, not a single word could be said of a nature that required'se¬ crecy ; for Joyce, though she somewhat retreated at the presence of her young Lord, still persisted to remain within hear¬ ing. Ethelred, taking notice of her in¬ trusion, bade her retire ; but she replied, that his father having ordered her to attend the \ oung ladies, she dared not make any alteration in her conduct towards them, until he retracted his commands. Lord Delancey looked at her with sur¬ prise; but Harold, who had seen prognos¬ tics o^ this evil before he left Widdrington Tower in the winter, only coolly said, as he turned to his friend, " There is an ap¬ propriate punishment, my dear Ethelred; for every offence under Heaven. Now as x> 5 this
this woman's offence against us, voluntary or involuntary, is, obtrusively listening to our conversation, let us adopt the corre¬ sponding mode of chastisement, by dis¬ coursing on subjects that can give her the least pleasure to listen to," or to report. ,My dear ladies," continued he, (f you have not been used to this thraldom perpetually, have you?" " Yes, indeed/' said Genevieve; "Joyce has .never left us a moment since you was here last, excepting when we have been asleep, or with my uncle/' * f No, indeed ! Such care puts one upon suspecting there must be weighty reasons for it. Did any particular ones ever occur to you ?** * f Whv, if Margiana and I were much together, you know, we might communi¬ cate our thoughts to one another." " And the communication, probably, would hot be much in favour of this trusty dame.—Pray, have you seen Arlette yet?" " Oh no! I enquired of Joyce once, if
tf an introduction to her were possible; and she chid me severely for presuming toi ask the question." " Nor heard of Lady-Rachel?" " Nor that either. No stranger in the.- castle could know whether she was alive or dead." <£ Who the vengeance have you kept company' with then i" (c Your uncle/* replied Genevieve, in a tone of simplicity; " and sometimes Fa-i ther Geolfry." "Father Geoifry and ray uncle I Well,. they may be honest men and true, and I believe neither of them has any harm icu him; however, they are not company for young ladies of your breeding. But have you never seen Lord Percy ? he has been in the North some time." u Lord Percy!" exclaimed Genevieve; " we might as reasonably have looked for a. blazing star. But is he really at Alnwick. njpw I and is he married ? " x> 6 "-Both,"
u B6th/* replied WaHop; (i and yoti have never seen either him or his Lady I Your uncle must be mad, as I shall tell him before I sleep; and it k that cursed woman and her husband who turn his head. I hope your sister will marry Debncey, if it be only to get out of their clutches/' While this dialogue passed, .Margiana was asking Ethelred after little Hengist and his mother ; for since the latter .had been beloved by her father, she felt almost as anxious for the propriety of her conduct as for the health of the former: but Ethel¬ red had not so favourable an account to give o^ Lady Rothes as of her little boy. ' tr I saw your pet/' said he, "not many weeks ago. He is a lovely child, %nd his mother seems as fond of him as she ought to be. She told me, as the weather was growing ^extremely* hot, she feared he might suffer from the co*nfmed air of Lon* 3 - doa,
don, and was therefore about to send him with a person, upon whom she could en¬ tirely depend, into the country." " Into Scotland ?" asked Margiana. u I should have liked to have seen him as he went by/' " I know not whether so far as Scotland. She did not say that, though you would have been better pleased to hear how much she found to say about him, than at the general tenor of her behaviour since she has been released from her long confine* ment/* ** I am \ery sorry for it. Surely she Las net so soon wholly forgotten him she last loved, nor disgraced his memory by any unworthy choice?" " I cannot resolve either of those doubts to your satisfaction. Lady Rothes is a wo¬ man so little likely to practise the virtue of constancy, by cherishing ideas of those who are gono for ever, that you will he much more vexed than surprised'at hearing she has renewed her acquaintance with the handsome
handsome William Scroope, and treats him with a degree of encouragement, which, however, he bears with such equa¬ bility of mind as gives room to conjecture his head is not so easily turned as it was a year ago, or as her's still is; though, from what little I have seen of the party, I have been led to suspect he has found a counter- charm, that preserves him from the spells of Lady Rothes. Your old acquaintance, Clara Castles, has been much with her this year; and to an observer who did not take extraordinary pains to develope the truth, it appeared as if they were in a state of actual rivalship for this beautiful youth." * c I am a good deal surprised at that, ' said Margiana; " for whatever the insta¬ bility of Lady Rothes may be, I thought Clara, promised fair to become even a vic¬ tim to her fidelity* Was there,no counter poison, or countercharnl* as you call i% to save her from the spells of Willianv Scroope r** " Lady Eothes," answered , Ethelredy without
without noticing this allusion to Clara's former partiality towards himself, " is un¬ reservedly and severely censured for her conduct respecting this young man; not so much on account of his being so many years younger than herself, as because it is the general opinion she was actually married last summer at Edgehill. I am one of the very few who do not believe this to be the case, though Lady Rothes herself; instead of contradicting the report, really encourages it." " How ! and does she then pretend that Hen gist was my father's legitimate son ?" (e Indeed she does. With me she has always forborne the subject; but to seve¬ ral others she* has positively asserted that he is the true and lawful Earl of Widdring¬ ton at this present time." " lie is not," replied' Margiana firmly. * f I have the testimony of my father him¬ self to guide my opinion; and it is not likely he would have deprived his own child of the honours that were his due/' She
She then repeated to* Ethelred the strong expressions her father had used, when conversing with her on the sub¬ ject of his reputed union with Lady Rothes. " I am not married to her," said he; * f nor ever will be. She shall never have dominion over you." Ethelred declared Lord Widdrington had spoken to himself in similar terms. " But it is not surprising/' continued he, " that Lady'Rothes should say this; for, wishing to captivate another lover, she is still in¬ terested in the preservation of her charac¬ ter; and Lord Lothian is too much en¬ gaged in his own pursuits to interfere in the concerns of his sister, lie has been the devoted slave of at least half a do- zen fair ladies since you left London, and at present is proclaiming himself undone by the wit and vivacity of Clara Castles." When Ethelred said this, he and Mar¬ giana W€*« so near Genevieve and Harold, that
that he Was distinctly heard by them both ; and the effects his information produced, were a blush of the deepest dye on the lovely cheeks of the former, and a stolen? glance at her from the eyes of her com¬ panion, which immediately after met those? of Ethelred and his cousin. But none of them spoke an additional word on the sub¬ ject of Lord Lothian, for all were equally grieved to observe, that the very sound of his name still excited as much emotion as ever in the breast of this engaging girl. To relieve her manifest distress, Margiana was beginning" some discourse of an indif¬ ferent nature, when Ethelred, suddenly quitting her side, where, having given his horse to an attendant, he had been walk- injr, hastened forwards to meet his father* whom they perceived advancing towards them from the castle. And now, for the first time, Margiana beheld the genuine impulses of Bertram's souL Here was no need of assuming a character. Nature, for once, was suffered to appear without disguise;
disguise'; and Bertram embraced his son, with a rapture that deprived him of all power to express it otherwise than by his actions. With a fondness that gave ani¬ mation to a countenance naturally pale and inexpressive, he gazed at him in a way that spoke how much he admired every word and gesture. Genevieve, less prejudiced against her uncle than Mar¬ giana, even thought he looked amiable; and Margiana herself would have given him credit for the strong paternal affection he shewed, had not the causes of her dis¬ like been too potent to leave her unpre¬ judiced. She mistrusted his having a vir¬ tuous motive for any one of his actions; and attributed rather to the pride of fa¬ mily, than to a natural love, the ardour with which Bertram welcomed home tho last remaining support of the Widdring¬ ton name. All particular conversation with the sis¬ ters was now, of course, at an end; and the
the rest of the evening was spent in the discussion of public affairs, and in do¬ mestic communications between Lord Wid¬ drington and his son, and the elder and the younger Wallop.
CHAP.
sas*.
C1IAP. IIL Fight Watches in the Vaults After so long an absence from both, Ethel¬ red was happy at being restored to the home he delighted in, ar.d to the presence of Margiana; but his happiness was far from being complete. Bertram answered his enquiries concerning his mother by in¬ forming him, that she persevered in the most rigid adherence to her vow—sufTcr- in«- no one to approach her but her own female attendant, who lived nearly as much secluded as herself, and was never seen, excepting by Scruton or Joyce, when they delivered
delivered to her, at the door of Lady Ra¬ chel's apartment, the necessary provisions. " At least," said Ethelred, « I will write To inform her I am here; and perhaps, for my sake, she will mitigate somewhat of this strange austerity. If she would only ad¬ mit me to see her for one quaiter of an hour, the indulgence would afford me greater pleasure than I can express/* " You can try/* replied Bertram, "and T wish you may persuade her; but I own I have no hopes." Ethelred wrote thus:—- f< MY DEABEST MOTltKR, " I am just returned to Wid¬ drington Tower, and learn, with the deep¬ est regret, that you still seclude yourself From your family and friends: but will you not permit your son, who never volun¬ tarily
tarily gave you a moment's uneasiness/ to throw himself at your feet and implore your blessing, after so tedious a separa¬ tion ? Deny me not, I conjure you, most beloved of mothers, het me but see you, but once hear your maternal voice, and I will retire the instant you command me.'* Not choosing to trust either Scruton or Joyce with these few lines, Ethelred en¬ quired what apartment his mother occu¬ pied; and being directed to one adjoining to that where Margiana, the first night of her arrival, had seen Arthur Wallop un¬ dressing, he carried them himself to the door; when a person he had long knouu as his mother's favourite woman, and brought up by her from a child, appeared at his summons. He asked to see Lady jRachel, and was told she had locked her¬ self into the small oriel chamber beyond, on hearing the approach of footsteps: "but," continued the attendant, observ¬ ing
Ing the paper in his hand, " though I dare tiot disobey my Lady by admitting you, I will convey to her any message you think fit to send." Ethelred delivered his supplication, and said he would wait on the outside of the door for his mother's answer; upon which *he servant retreated, and in less than ten •minutes returned with this reply :—
" Think not you are less dear to tne than you ought to be, and always have been, because I refuse your request. I love you, my excellent Ethelred, beyond the power of any language to describe; •but not even you shall tempt me to in¬ fringe a vow solemnly sworn at the foot of the altar. Any repetition of your de¬ sire to see me will be an oflTence.—Your uncle died in rebellion. May my self- inflicted punishment expiate his guilt! s< I give
u I give you my blessing, hut come not near my door. Strive not to render me perjured, and odious to myself Fare- veil!"
Ethelred sighed deeply at this convic¬ tion of his mother's steadiness to her pur¬ pose; yet, while he lamented a vow, the consequences of which were so painful to himself, he respected the piety of her mo¬ tive, and submissively withdrew, with as¬ surances of obedience to the woman, whose mournful countenance excited his compassion. He related his attempt, and the ill suc¬ cess of it, to Margiana and Genevieve, who were both tenderly affected by Lady RacheVs note, and commended him for yielding to what she deemed an obligation so important, With
With keen attention Margiana examined Lady Rachel's writing; but it was a fair, clear, and excellent hand, bearing not the most remote resemblance to the scarcely legible characters on the paper she had found in the mystenons closet. fc Not yet, then," thought she, " will that dreadful secret be explained/' Jn his desire to see Arlette Ethelred was immediately gratified. Lord Wid¬ drington suffered him and Wallop to visit her together; but he was deaf to their en¬ treaties that she might also be allowed .1) see her cousins. * ' U ft**/' sud he, rr h verv merry and loni-vrd where she is; bhr vill be rcn- dt jv i ^till more so by the occasional bigiit of )ou two : but an acquaintance with } ount; women so highly bred as my niece,, would tend to make her dissatisfied with hei-\e!f and her situation ; and I should hear of nothing in future but repining ^" ; * ti' i. . and
and tears. Yet thus far, Ethelred, to oblige you, 1 will promise—she shall be permitted to appear below, and at times form a visible part of the family, as soon as Lady Margiana has determined favourably for you, in the alternative to which she is confined by her father's will." This part of Bertram's answer Ethelred did not choose to repeat to Margiana, when he informed her his sister must still be deprived of the pleasure and advantage she might receive from her's and Gene¬ vieve's society. He had derived no satis¬ faction from the early intelligence his fa¬ ther sent him of the clause in his uncle's will, so cruelly restricting the woman he loved; for his generous nature abhorred whatever wore the face of compulsion, even though it was likely to operate in his own favour. And how that, for the first time, under their present citcum- staftces, he was established with her under the same roof, on no occasion, either by action
'stronger expectation of obtaining her hand than he had done before* In fact, when he coolly considered her character, he hardly felt more secure than Formerly. The monastic lffc would, he believed, have been preferred by her to the married one, if the choke depended on her own simple preference; and only the consideration that her determining in Favour of the former would condemn her sister also to it, encouraged him to indulge any hopes at all. These, however, as well as his fears, he suppressed; and Margiana, favourably.as she had always thought of him, never esteemed him so entirely as now, when his delicate forl>earance of the subject proved to her the sincerity oP'his affection much more than the most ^ehe- inent expressions <®t passidn could ;have $one. In addition to this, it laay be ob- * served, ; that Ethelred never appeared to so ^htich advantage'tts'when with his father-^ v 9 who a
when his liberal, unsuspecting disposition was contrasted to the reserve and mistrust of Bertram ; and his real, unaffected good temper with the other's assumed and la¬ boured smiles. Yet still, though sensible of all his me- rit, and feeling, as well as professing for him, the sincerest friendship, still Mar¬ giana was so far from being enamoured, that she resolved, the firat time her uncle spoke to her on ihe subject of his son, to discover if he, and through him if Ethel¬ red, would be unconquerably a\crse tu the-substitution of her sifters name in¬ stead of her own; since such a measure, she believed, could the two parties chiefly concerned be induced to adopt it, would answer every intended purpose, by ce¬ menting the alliance between the two branches of the family, at the same time that it preserved Genevieve alike from Lord Lothian and from a cloister; and herself from a ceremony to which total seclusion
seclusion from the world would, in her estimation, be preferable. At present, however, all her attention was eutfa^ed in devising means to con- verse in private with Harold Wallop ; but, from a variety of causes, which a stranger might have considered as springing from: chance, but which she easily discerned fo be the effects of contrivance, this could not with facility be accomplished. Nei¬ ther of the sisters were ever left a moment alone with Harold, though they were fre¬ quently committed to the care of his friend ; and when Harold was not engaged either at Warkworth Grange or with Lord Widdrington, and might have joined them, they were always with their own uncle or his, or under the vigilant eye of Joyce. Ethelred often entreated his father to free his cousins from the restraint of this odious woman's presence; but he was deaf to every argument he could urge, i\nd only s 3 said,
said, f< She for whose sake you plead thu&<* can have liberty enough when she is Lady Delancey ; nay, even after her promise is passed to become so, we may venture to leave her somewhat more to herself: but at present, while she is bound by no en~ gr»gement, every thing had better go on as it has done. Women of her early age are like water or smoke; if they are not confined^ you never know where to have tt*em ; and in concerns of moment, it is hest to trust nothing to chance. Besides, I have more reasons, my dear Ethelred, for what I do, than I think it necessary to ac* quaint even you with/' Thus, though the situation of the sisters was considerably enlivened since the ar* rival of their friends, yet time wore away without giving Margiana the wished-for opportunity of shewing the written frag¬ ment she had found to Harold. She might often have produced it to Ethelred, and have related to him her adventure in the remote
remote chamber ; but she was withheld by an invincible reluctance to disclose to the son circumstances that bore such dreadful presumptive testimony against the father; and she never could proceed farther on the subject than once to ask him, "What his opinion was of the fnar Georfry >" " Neither very good nor very bad," re¬ plied he. if He is correct enough in the performance of his duties, and regular in his mod** of living; though less, perhaps, from principle than from want of energy in his character. What he did yesterday, he will do to-day, only be^au^e he did it yes¬ terday ; and ho plods onwards in the same path, not on account of its being the right one, but because it never enters his head to step aside from it: and these negatively e:ood sort of men are not the worst of our Sovereign Lord's liege subjects." Margiana, hearing Ethelred talk thus, was half inclined to become a predestina- rian, and fancy that it must have happened e 4 through
tiuough some strange fatality, that she who had not been many months in the castle, .should know more of the secret histor »f wh.Tt was passing within its walls than him- f,cU, Another paper, however, she had in her possession, that no delicacy called upon her to conceal; and she determined, the first time she could speak to either of the young men unheard by her sister, whom she was unwilling to alarm, or by Joyce, who was ignorant of the sequel of the ad- venturej to inform them of the intrusion of the cloaked rigure into her apartment, and shew them his wiitten request to mee\ him in the vaults. It was many days, nevertheless, before she could even effect this purpose. The two IViends, boon after their arrival, spent a fortnight with Lord Percy at Alnwick ; and when they were at home, various con¬ cerns constantly summoned abroad every morning
mowing, not only Bertram himself, but also- hb son and Harold. The former al¬ ways passed the heat of the afternoon in the great hall, with his nieces ami Arthur Wal¬ lop ; and frequently walked with them in the evenings, that he might enjoy the plea¬ sure of his son's society, whom he delighted to see by the side of Margiana: so that It was only.seldom she could converse with Lthelrccl without restraint, and with Ha- r>ld Wallop never, At last, one evening, as they were stroll- ing towards the sea-side, some opinion ad¬ vanced by Harold, who was walking with (jenevievc a few puces before the rest, engaging Bertram's attention, he quitted Lord Delancey and Margiana to join and answer him; and the latter quickly ob¬ serving him In conversation, was unwil¬ ling to lose an opportunity that might not toon again recur, "Wilhout loss of time, therefore, she re- ^ v» counted
counted to Ethelred all that passed on the night when the mysterious stranger ap¬ peared to her, and put into his hand the paper she had found left by htm in the t>oOk, '&esrrrng him to conceal it for the present, and read it when ] he was not li¬ able to observation. litidh surprised at'L^r story, he professed hirnself utterly unable to direct her suspi¬ cions to any particular person; but cast¬ ing his eye over the writing at a moment he saw his" father engaged in discourse with Wallop, he declared he rather conjectured the writer to be a'frrend than a foe. " Be that, however, as it may/* continued he, " a mystery that we are furnished with the means of clearing up so speedily, 'need not give us any uneasiness. This is Thurs¬ day. Four days more, and if your unknown suppliant keeps his word, or his patience be not exhausted, I hope I shall be able to inform you of his name, and of the motives
motives that have influenced him thus to address you." " You will go down to the eastern vaults then ?" said Margiana. « I am Auch obliged to you for undertaking a discovery which 1 am not ashamed to own 1 want re¬ solution for myself. But I must conjure, and even insist upon it, that you do not go alone. Keep that paper; shew it to Harold, relating to him what I have told you ; and suffer him to accompany you, m an expedition which, however, I hope will not prove a perilous one to either of you/' He promised to observe her injunctions, and was proceeding to say something fur¬ ther on the subject, wlien she abruptly asked him if he thought Father Geoffry might not be the person in question ? "Father Geoffry!" exclaimed Ethelred; " oh no. It is very unlikely he should. What induces you to think of him?" s a * "I know
" I know not, unless it be that mystery implies evil, and that I have an ill opinion of him." "And why have you so?" asked he, surprised, and intently looking at her. Embarrassed for a reply, she avoided giving a direct one; and only saying she had always been subject to the whims of a physiognomist, strove to turn the con¬ versation. "You conceal something from me, Mar- »inna," observed he; fe I am sure you do, However, I have no right to enquire far- ther than you choose to explain; I with therefore, content myself with endeavour¬ ing to deserve your entire confidence next Monday night, by acquitting myself to your satisfaction/' When he repeated her communications to his friend, Harold was no more able to divine than himself who this nocturnal in¬ truder
truder could have been ; though he was wholly of Ethelred's opinion, that Father Geoffry had no concern in the affair. W T Ith a painful degree of impatience, they waited until the ensuing Monday night; when, between eleven and twelve o'clock, having assured themselves that all the other inmates of the castle were gone to rest, they descended the steps below rhe great staircase, leading to the indicated spot. Being aware that blasts of wind fre¬ quently rushed along these subterraneous caverns, whenr vr rny of the doots that divided them weie opened, thev had taken care to provide ihcmsclveswith two lighted. torches, that they might not be left in darkness, in case one of them should be blown out; and sometimes one and some¬ times the other advancing first, they pro¬ ceeded through all the vaults with which the passages beneath this side of the build¬ ing communicated ; and in every one held their torches in different directions, to discover
discover if any person was lurking there who would not speak. Kepeatcdly they enquired aloud if any one lav concealed, and encouraged them, if ^o, to appear, <n>pe they themselves came as friends: but all their labour was fruitless. They were answered by no w>und save the low echo of their own \oices, and of their footsteps on the damp stone floor. Supposing they mx»ht have come too early in the night, the°y sat down on a heap of straw that had been accidentally left in one of the vaults, and had the patience to wait there a con¬ siderable time. " Now," said Harold, « if, by j^y chance impossible for us to guc&s at, your lather should take a trip to this delectable place to-night, and find us lurking here like two Italian assassins in a den, I wonder what punUhment he would devise for us; for be loves mystery in no one but himself. ■ You, perhaps, as the pet of the family, might escape with a short lecture; but I p l ' suppose
margiana/' suppose I should be enclosed, without mercy, in the iron cage where your an¬ cestors, of inhuman memory, used to tor¬ ture their poor vassals, whenever they look¬ ed to the right or to the left contrary to or¬ der, or wickedly hunted down a deer, or inaimed one of the wild white cattle." " I hope/' said Ethelred, " no part of the affair will ever come to my father's knowledge. Had he had the least idea of our intention to-night, he would have walled up the passage, rather than let us have had a chance of acquiring more in¬ formation than himself. Besides, I cannot divest my mind of the belief that Mar¬ giana has received this strange invitation fi om some friendly hand; and even if we do not now meet with any one to satisfy our doubts, I shall feel tempted to return here every Monday night while we remain at Widdrington Tower/' "Then I think you have the prospect of a charming pleasant seventh night for some lime to come; for suppose this mysteriou', man,
MA:»f7nvA. man^ or hobgoblin, should not choo^t- uz appear to any one but the fair lady he has invited, and has the means of informing himself that we come without her, you will own we must grant him the merit oi discrimination, if he refuses to accept of u" two as substitutes for the soul-enslawnp Margiana/' u If you are of that opinion," replieu Ethelred, musing, ** I do not doubt we might persuade her, cool and resolute a-, she is, to accompany us the next time ; though I should be half afraid of venturing her, 1 confess, even protected as she would be/' Their torches now, fast consumed bv the wind, that flared them in ever} direc¬ tion, were burning so low, that they were reluctantly compelled to yield to necessity, and quit the vaults, without having either seen or heard any object to satisfy their curiosity, And greatly was Margiana dis¬ appointed, when Hthelred the next day iji- forme'.
MARGIANA. formed her what a total blank their ex¬ pected adventure had proved. vShe instantly adopted Harold's opinion, that the stranger, aware of her absence, li.id therefore cither refrained from com¬ ing, or had concealed himself; and she de¬ termined to \enture, the following week, into the vaults herself, under the guardian¬ ship of her two friends, since she now knew how to avoid springing the alarum in her uncle's room. But the following week Ethelred was ab- beni in the western part of the county, on business for his father ; and Arthur Wallop took that time to employ his nephew iu domestic concerns at Warkworth Grange, tlut detained him from the Monday morn- in ' till the ensuing Friday. The third op- port unity Margiana herself was prevented making use of, by indisposition that ren¬ dered it unsafe to encounter the confined a : r of the damp vaults, so dangerous after the
the heats of an autumnal day; but on the fourth Monday, a little before midnight, she descended, preceded by Harold, and closely followed by Ethelred, who feared her being surprised from behind, and could not have felt satisfied she was safe, unless she was under his eye. Margiana was, however, nearly hope¬ less of seeing the person who had occa¬ sioned her so much anxiety. As the'time approached, her expectations of the wi&hcd- for and promised intelligence had become more faint; and now, when on the actual spot the unknown had appointed for a conference, she was more inclined to smile at her own credulity, and blame her&elf for the trouble she had given her friends, than to look for any gratification a meet¬ ing could bestow. Her present opinion, that the whole had been a deception to frighten her, was corroborated by Ethel- red's observing to Harold, that the few objects to be seen in this unfrequented place.
place, even to the heap of straw they had sat upon, were exactly situated as they had left them three weeks before. "- And yet/' said she, " if I was to come here alone, perhaps------" i( Do not think of it," interrupted Ethel¬ red. " I had rather inform my father of the entire concern, and let his people discover the person who entreated you hither/' " If you attempt such a rash step,," pur¬ sued Harold, <* I will teli your governess, Joyce ; and then we shall all be whipped, and all crammed together into the iron cage to boot." Ethelred just then fancying he saw some- thins stir in a corner of the vault, mo\ed towards it with his light, to discover what U was. " The iron cage 1" exclaimed Margiana, in a low voice, and shuddering. " Do you know any thing of the iron cage?" " I know
" rknow tiicre is such an accursed thing in the castle," replied Wallop, startled by her manner. f( What do you know of ir, that you mention it in a tone of so much horror ?*' n O Harold !" she whispered, " there is a dreadful tale coiHfrninif'it, yet incom¬ plete and unconnected, which I am anxious fo reveal to you, and you only, for Ethel¬ red must :iot hear it; and vainly I have long endeavoured to see you alone for that purpose. Tell me by what means I can be enabled to reveal it to you?" '''Write it/' he returned; "you may easily convey a paper to me: but I see plainly that Bertram fears your conversing with me in private/' Margiana could make no reply, for Ethelred at that instant came back to them with something in his hand. * "See here," said he; "my attention was drawn to this by the current of air gently
gently moving it." He held out a long- black cloak. " The very cloak," cried Margiana, " that I -beiieyc the man was wrapped in when I saw him 1" " Surely," said Harold, < k it must have been lately left, or we .should have per¬ ceived it when we were here last." '■* Yet it seems .as if -it had been l>ing b-u; u lo-;; lime," observed Ethelred ; f( it is d-r.:n;>, and cohered with mould. Tho short space of three weeks at this season c t the vcar could not have ivincecl it to r;i!s rondirk'ii." " i'-i-i he h»ft no o:\izv vesiitjes ?" ok chiimed H'-n-oki, st.iriing up to n:ake a iik nuter search. " Siay here with Margiana till I examine the other vault»/.' ** Oh no/* said she, " do not let us se- paiate.. It is (it I should encounter the same hazards tlv.it you do /' and taking hold of Wallop's arm, she proceeded with them both as far as they could go: but nothing more was to be found, though not a cornet
a corner escaped their sejfrtti. In vain they waited till the dread of wanting light obliged them to retire. " Let us go then/* said Margiana, *' since it must be so, and leave it to time to clear up what at present is so perfectly unaccountable. Were it not for the evi¬ dence of this cloak, and the Writing yoa have both seen, 1 should be afraid of your treating me as a visionary, who cannot in¬ habit an old castle without fancying won¬ ders that never existed, and supposing the commonest occurrences alarming and su¬ pernatural/' "We have not known you thus long/* replied Ethelred, " to fall into such an er¬ ror ; nor are we, of all men, likely to do vou injustice. Some circumstances may, perhaps, at present detain the man from \eeping his appointment; but, at least, by constantly returning here, Harold and myself will not neglect any chance of meeting him at last/*
5
They
They now cautiously reascended into the great hall; and having seen their fair com¬ panion safely within sight ol her own door, the two friends left her, and retired to their apartments ; Ethelred determined to continue his night-watches with unabated \igiknce; arid llarold, filled with the per¬ plexing ideas that Afargiana's mention of the iron cage had inspired him with. No longer than until the approaching day-break, did she defer pursuing the plan he had suggested for obtaining the in* formation she wished to give. In as few words as a full explanation of the case ad¬ mitted of, she related the short conversa¬ tion she had held with Joyce in the brown tapestry chamber, where her father hnd slept; the circumstance of the noise over¬ head, and the woman's subsequent per¬ turbation * her own visit to the apart¬ ment above, and what she had there seen; enclosing within her letter the written fragment for Harold's inspection; with a strict
Strict-charge that he should not shew it, but return it to her by the earliest opportunity. She had scarcely finished her narrative, and concealed it in her bosom, resolving to carry it always about her till she could put it into his hands, before a call to breakfast summoned her into the hall, whi¬ ther she knew *it would be of no avail to descend at an earlier hour in this hope of meeting Harold, as she was aware that her uncle or Scruton was always in it the fit st of any person in the cattle. 15 u t sh e had n o L ma u y d a *,.- r o a it c: ^ a favourable occasion oilered her the Mean she wished for. Ethelred one morniu- expressing a desire that hU cousin in^;hi see the romantic beauties of Warkworth Grange, Lord Widdrington, who never de¬ nied him any request he believed he nughi safely grant, immediately proposed that all the party should walk thither that sam/ di\y. Af a rgiana, secretly delighted, ai-
Fected to come into the scheme with in¬ difference, lest her uncle should change his mind, which he probably Avould have done, had she shewn more satisfaction than he could account for, and soon after they set out—Genevieve, in consequence of a whisper from her sister, taking hold of Ethelred's arm. Lord Widdrington, con¬ tent with his own and Arthur Wallop's pre¬ sence, forbore with Joyce's attendance; but he stationed himself at Margiana's side, and closely adhered to her the whole way. It would have appeared to her a delight* ful walk, had not the anxiety of her mind almost prevented her noticing any object; and her apprehensions that her uncle would never quit her for a moment, became stronger at every step. Arrived at the Orange, however, the stiles, and the nar¬ rowness of some of the gates, forced him occasionally to quit his post; but even then, instead of advancing forward, he vol. n. f alwa'.-j
always dropped behind her, with a watch¬ fulness which, at any time, and all suspi¬ cious circumstances out of the question, could not have failed to strike her as re- markable\ Genevieve, on the other hand, naturally expressed fo her companion the enchant¬ ment she felt ai all she saw, and declared she could gaze a whole day without weari¬ ness at the beautiful windings of the Co¬ quet, the groves that shadowed its banks, and the luxuriousness of the surrounding enclosures, now only just past their fullest profusion of harvest scenery. i( Oh," cried she, " how delightful it would be to inhabit such a.lovely spot as this, unobtruded upon by the world, and enjoying only the calm society of a few, a very few friends!" * c Or even of one alone, fair Gene¬ vieve/' returned he, smiling, ""provided that
that one was a favourite/* Delancey thought of Lord Lothian, Genevieve dropped her eyes, and was silent. After they had admired the external ad¬ vantages of his pretty farm, Arthur Wal¬ lop entreated his visitors, in a style of greater civility than was usual to him, to walk into the house, where a decent wo¬ man, apprised of their coming a few mi¬ nutes before by Harold, had prepared for their reception in a small neat j arlour. Vruit, cream, and some cold game, were spread out on a shining oak table; and the rough, uncouth-looking llarold appeared in a new light to the two sisters, as he did the honours of his uncle's house, to save the latter a trouble he seemed nowise anxious to monopolize. " Honest; worthy creature,'* thought Margiana, as she looked smilingly at him, " how glad should I be to see Arlette, even the high-bom Arlette, presiding here with thee !" r 5 After
After every one had partaken of this slight refreshment, Harold insisted on shewing his fair friends over the house. No person opposed him; Margiana least of all designed it, hoping that in such a ramble chance might befriend her inten¬ tion ; and she w T as accordingly the first to rise and join him, before Bertram observed her move. They gaily ran up stairs toge¬ ther, the rest following; and he opened the door of a room that afforded a charm¬ ing prospect of the river,, and a distant pne of the sea. He was beginning to say, t( Pray look out here," when she interrupted him— <( Oh, I have no time to look, they are close behind us. Take this—be quick/' He instantly caught her letter, and slip¬ ped it within his vest. "Well," said he, deliberately, "admire the
stenery of Warkworth Grange, and then talk of the tamer beauties of Edgehill, if you can." Bertram now entered with the others* " The next room," pursued Harold, 01 is called mine, and commands a different view, looking up to Widdrington Tower. Surely I ought to have the privilege of shewing that myself." He led the way, and Margiana followed him, " What patience you have," cried he, * to endure the persecution of that odious man ! Was I in your place, it would be the charm of my existence, my cordial drop of life, to torment him. How he spies your every word and action ! I hope he will meet with no better fate to reward his mean mistrust, than to be worried by f 3 his
his own hounds. With what delight I could urge them to the repast!" <* Hush V said Margiana; i( he w-here, you will be overheard." " Here again ! Argus was a blind man, compared to him. Never mind, I have your packet safe/' They now traversed the few remaining rooms; and after commending the com¬ fortable appearance of them all, set for¬ ward on their return ; but not in the same order they came, for Bertram bade his son attend on 'Margiana, keeping himself so ; closely behind, that she recollected with much pleasure her purpose was accom¬ plished. Not another word all that day had she the power of exchanging with Harold, ex-> cept in public conversation; but a few mornings after, he contrived to give her the following lines, re-enclosing the frag-. meat she wished to preserve: . - "X HAVE
u X ha vs attentively read your strange story, and would give the world for. a key to it. The writing resembles none I ever beheld. For a king's ransom I would not shew it to Ethelred, whom it would acutely pain without advantage. He has not a thought unknown to me, and therefore I am certain his ignorance on this head equals mine. All, however, that can be done, I will do; that is, 1 will nar¬ rowly watch Bertram and Father Geoffry. Pray Heaven the King spake not truth, when he said of your uncle, ' That man is a villain—mistrust him/ I waited not for the King's opinion—1 always mistrusted him; yet, until now, I have rather sus¬ pected Scruton capable of guilt than the priest. " Whenever I think of the mysterious paper, I am lost in amazement, and wild and vague conjectures, that can only be- r 4 wilder,
gilder, without satisfying. I will not dis¬ tract athelred with them, be assured. Yet your father, I ,hink-I have no doubt-is certainly dead. "Providence be with us, and enlfcht- ycurV- J ' Wj " SUreIy Pr ° tec£ Wr,h lifee
CHAP,
CHAP. IV, Professions of Friendship* As the winter advanced, Bertram, in con- traduction to the season, assumed the ap¬ pearance of a more genial nature. The usual parsimony that prevailed through his household, the consequence of habit, and his own native meanness, gave way to something resembling a sfyew of hospita¬ lity ; and, at fhe particular request of Ethelred, he even entertained his kindred of the house of Percy for a week, with a< degree of rtuk splendor that surprised Margiana and Genevieve, without affording f 5 them
them thz satisfaction of any relief from the restraint they had so long submitted to; for, except when mixing with the company in general, they continued to be as vigilantly guarded by Joyce as ever. Bertram was always present with his guests; and it was easy to observe, that no atten¬ tion he ever paid them took off his notice from his nieces, especially Margiana, whom he never beheld in particular conversation with Harold, but he joined, or otherwise interrupted them. Gaiety sat awkwardly on his features, which, from long habit, seemed only formed to express suspicion; and while actually engaged in discourse with one person, he often appeared listen*- ing to that of another. Margiana's acquaintance with Lady Percy had hitherto been very slight. She now, on further intimacy, found her gentle and amiable; but observed, with a good deal of regret, that she seemed to possess the- confidence of Genevieve without limitation, Queen-
Queen Isabella had hinted to her, that, this young lady had always soothed Gene¬ vieve in her ill-placed attachment; and the recollection augmented that pain which the affectionate heart of Margiana naturally felt, at seeing another preferred to herself as the confidante of a sister, to¬ wards whom she had never practised any, reserve on the subject of her own con¬ cerns. She perceived that silence, or an immediate change of subject, was the cer¬ tain consequence of her joining them, whenever they were discoursing together; which convinced her, to her surprise, that the Queen's conjectures had been well- founded ; for as Lady Percy was neither deficient in sense, delicacy, nor discrimi¬ nation, it appeared unaccountable that she should encourage her lovely friend's par¬ tiality for one of the most dissolute young noblemen of the realm. Yet, reflecting that the time of Lady Percy's stay would be short, and that it was probable Bertram j? 6* would
MARGIANA.* would not permit herself or her sister to accept of any invitation to Alnwick, she of at last entirely forbore interrupting their conferences, which took place as often as they could with civility retire to a remote corner of the hall together, or separate themselves, when walking, from the rest of the company. Not tin frequently Genevieve appeared in better spirits than usual after these pri¬ vate conversation*?, and it was not difficult to guess by what means her too-indulgent friend endeavoured to raise them, as Mar- giana once accidentally heard her say to Genevieve, "Do more justice to yourself than to suppose it possible he can always continue insensible to merit and beauty euch as your's," "Dangerous and ill-judging adviser!** thought Margiana. " Must that dawn of ceturning peace I was beginning to dis¬ cern^
cern, the effects of a ten-months absence from the unworthy Lothian, be destroyed by false hopes and foolish indulgence ?" She communicated her fears to Ethelred, whose opinion agreed with her own ; and he even, presuming on his intimacy with her husband, and his near kindred to Gene- neve, spoke to Lady Percy on the sub¬ ject, and in plain terms said, " No real* friend of his cousin's could encourage her in so ill-advised an attachment." But he obtained no advantage; Lady Percy laugh¬ ed at him, and told him he only envied her; who was more in his fair kinswoman*^ secrets than himself* The unusual sound of festivity at Wid- drington Tower brought the idea of the secluded Arlette more forcibly than ever* to Margiana's mind. "What a shame/' said she, one day to Ethelred, <l that your father will not allow her to associate with her equals! Is it utterly impossible for you
t® persuade him to relax a little from his ie verity ?"' Ethelred shook his head. ** Think you/* faid he, "I have not urged every argu¬ ment that my conviction of his being wrong, and my regard for my sister, could suggest? ft i s a point upon which, of all others, he is the least persuadable; and every attempt to move him only hardens his mind to more obstinacy." ** Since, then, you think his system so blamable, so unreasonable in itself, and m cruel to your sister, are you of opinion it would be a heinous sin to instruct me f»ow I might find my way to the Black Tower ? I confess I have a thousand times tried to discover it, but always in vain; md surely, if Wallop is admitted with you to see Lady Arlette, there can be no harm in my receiving the same indulgence." u I leave it to your own judgment," re¬ plied Ethelred, " to surmise, with what alacrity i would do any thing to oblige you; md this m particular, because it » would
would render Arlette the happiest creature! in the world, for she raves to know you. Imagine, then, what a penance it is to me to confess that my father has bound me not to promote your acquaintance, until— ----" i{ Until when?" said Margiana impa¬ tiently. " Let me not offend you. I do not speak it presumingly, as perhaps my fa¬ ther did. Until—if ever 1 am so fortunate as to see that time arrive^—there is a certain prospect of your becoming more nearly allied to my sister than you are at pre¬ sent." "And not till then?" said Margiana;. "alas!" " Now," returned Ethelred, '* you no longer wish to see her." " It is difficult to know what to wish, of how to act, strangely circumstanced as I am. I wish your father was of a different character from what he is. That I can say without any hesitation." * f So can J, Heaven knows! Neither is
hold a change in." The departure of Bertram's guests did not reduce Widdriaeton Tower to the^ same state of gloom it had been involved m the preceding winter. The presence of Lord Delancey and Harold, who were fre- quently visited by the neighbouring young men of their acquaintance, still maintain¬ ed it an abode of c hearfu In ess; and hunt¬ ing parties were often made, in some of which the sisters were prevailed on to join for a short way, being always escorted home, when they chose to quit the sport, either by their uncle or by Scruton. Meantime Ethelred and his friend con¬ tinued, with the same fail ure v of success as before, their weekly watch in the eastern vaults ; till at length convinced their trou¬ ble was of no a. .il, they desisted, though not till long ^ ter Margiana had ear¬ nestly desired ti*ey would do so* • ft a/ i.: Harold
llarold was also an attentive observer of Bertram's conduct, and of Father Geoffry;* but no circumstances appeared to him, re¬ specting either, that could point any for¬ mer doubts, or awaken any new ones. And thus the winter wore away, till the anniversary of Lord Widdrington*s death gave Bertram the signal to enquire into the future intentions of his eldest niece. ^ He took an opportunity, when they w^re in private, of reminding her that six months only were now wanting t&> complete the time when, in compliance with her father's will, she would be called^ upon to make known her resolution—ei-- ther to become the wife of Lord Delancey, or to condemn herself and her sister to a cloister for life. " I do not/* said he, *' at present de¬ mand of you what are your designs; but I esteem it my duty, as, your oldest and your nearest kinsman, to remind you, that whatever
whatever your averseness ^ marriage in general, or to Lord Delancey in particu¬ lar, may be, you will not be justifiable even to yourself, upon after reflection, if, supposing your a (lections are not else¬ where engaged, you sacrifice the happi¬ ness of your sister to the indulgence of an unaccountable whim, or, rather, an inde¬ fensible perversity/* Margiana replied, " that she had already attentively considered the subject in tha' point of view—the only one in which it could be distressing to her/' " And I hope," returned Lord Wid¬ drington, ** the result of your considera¬ tion will be such as reason and unpreju¬ diced good sense would dictate/* " I mean, my Lord, no offence to you, nor any slight to Lord Delancey, of whom I have the most exalted opinion, and whom I would more readily entrust with my fu¬ ture happiness than any other man I know. But my own free, unfettered choice would lead me, of two evils* rathefc to the mo¬ nastery
nssfery than to the altar; for an evil either of them must surely be, if imposed on us against our inclination. Nevertheless, for worlds I will not sacrifice my sisters since she does not partake the prejudice, that I have imbibed from having seen much of unhappiness in the married state.— Might it not be possible for me, with your concurrence, to become, not the wife, but the sister, of Lord Delancey, who, if he would buf open his eyes to the perfections and matchless beauty of Genevieve, might soon overcome the fancy that has hitherto attached him to me ? By this means the family alliance would be completed; and I would retire with willingness, if it is your design to enforce to the utmost the conditions of my father's will, to any con¬ vent vou shall make choice of forme." €( Lady Margiana," said Lord Widdring- ton, " we will not waste time and words upon this subject. It is my design to en¬ force the strictest observance of ray late brother's will; and therefore I shall not propose
propose to my a son a measure not therein mentioned, which I know would be most repugnant to him, however it might be agreeable to you, who believe your sister to be in danger from her partiality to Lord Lothian. Of this you, perhaps, thought I was not apprised ; but I have long known it; nor are you a stranger to Lord Delan- cey*s resolution to marry no other woman than yourself, so long as you are alive and single. What I demand, therefore, is, that at the appointed time you! declare whe¬ ther you accept or refuse his offered hand; and to preserve you from the trou¬ ble of any future applications, with a view of evasion, I solemnly swear that from what I have just now said, I will not re- Bertram spoke this in a tone that would have forbidden reply, even had Margiana been disposed to make one; but her mind was turned to abler resources than an idle contest of words. Making a slight obei¬ sance
sance to her uncle, she silently left him, and repaired to her chamber, where she wrote as follows to her sister:
" My dearest Genevieve, <( Lord "Widdrington just now, for the first time since the opening of my father's will, has been speaking to me of the alternative therein proposed; whereby I am enjoined either to become Lord Delanceyts wife, or, with you, retire for life to a cloister. These conditions are so very hard, I have strong doubts of their originating with mv father; and I shall deem it no sin, if, for both oursakes, I endeavour to avoid them. Surely this may be done! Have we not a friend in France, our kind and royal patroness, who promised us an asylum with her, in case our father's house ever became an abode we £ou!d not endure ? and shall we not be justifiable
justifiable if, withdrawing ourselves from the power of a tyrant, we now claim her protection ? We shall be poor, my dear sister, it is true, and even dependant on her bounty; but we shall be free and un¬ divided. Half a year is yet ours to reside here in peace. During that long period we shall surely be able to devise some means of accomplishing our escape to the nearest town on the coast, where we may embark for France. Say, therefore, that you approve of this measure, and will ac¬ company me, and I wiil dismiss every un-* easy thought from my mind, and look for¬ ward only to a life of quiet retirement, far from a man under whose dominion, while we remain, we never can hope for -happiness." It was not long before Margiana found an opportunity of giving this to her sister, desiring
desiring her to burn it as soon as read; and a few days after she received the fol¬ lowing reply :
" I will go any where in the world with you, my dearest Margiana. All places are alike to me that do not offer the prospect of perpetual confinement, which I own I have not sufficient firmness of mind to think of without dismay. Could we have remained quietly here, I should have preferred it to a residence in France; but since that cannot be, we must submit to eircumstances. You shock me by the sus¬ picions you express concerning the au¬ thenticity of my father's will. How can you possibly suspect Lord Widdrington of a deed of villany, of which only the most atrocious character could be capable ? " I have burned your letter as you de¬ sired. Fear no indiscretion from me, who am V
am equally interested with yourself to ob* serve the profoundest secrecy/'
Margiana, whose mind was now per- fectly at ease, found no difficulty in pre¬ serving the appearance of a tranquillity which secretly filled Ethelred, and, on his account, Harold also, with the liveliest hopes. They rightly judged she could not have been at rest, had she mentally devoted her sister to a life of gloom and discontent, for they were no strangers to Genevieve's averseness from monastic se¬ clusion. Yet stiil the former maintained his wonted silence on the subject that en¬ grossed all his thoughts, well knowing he .should thereby give more satisfaction to Margiana than by any other behaviour he could assume. But Harold's endeavours to restrain his delight were not always equally successful. The warm emotions of his friendship
at his eyes, where pleasure deuced when¬ ever he beheld Margiana speaking to his friend, with the mpdest confidence, as Jhe fancied, of one who considered Jfcftm ?js the, future partner of frer Ufe. But while he and Lord flelancey ^ere n indulging in these pleasing vision^ $n$ Bert^m looked forward to his son's a,p-. proaphipg marriage, as the reward pf all the pains fee ^ad taken to ensure it, tliey were all three summoned to e^ert them¬ selves in quelling a new insurrection. against King Henry, which was beginning; to inanifest itself in Wales. The priqci- pal malcontent was Owen Gleudower, ^ popular chief in that principality ; but this was only the commencement, or raiher^he forerunner, of that celebrated .rebellion which Refuged the fields qf Shrewsbury, with blood a few years after; for the tur xnultuous and unappeasable spirit of the vot. in. o house
house or Percy had not yet mazed Forth into open revolt. Appearances, nevertheless, were sufifici- eritly serious to oblige Bertram to call his vassals to arms; at th head of whom, ac¬ companied by Haroid and his son, he join¬ ed a considerable body of forces, and inarched into Carnarvonshire, leaving a charge with his devoted creatures, Sfcntton and lovce, to keep the strictest'watch over his nieces, especially Margiana, whose calm and resolute temper held him under per¬ petual apprehensions of her escaping frori him before she was bound to his son—an event peculiarly desirable to him for vari¬ ous reasons, to which even Ethelred him^ self was a stranger, who believed his fa¬ ther anxious to promote the alliance only from "being aware of his own resolution never to marry at all, unless Ine married Margiana. An
An event that released her from the odi¬ ous presence of her uncle could hardly excite her serious regret, though it also deprived her of the chearful sor/ety of her two friends. She had now full leisure to revolve the means of executing her medi¬ tated plan. Genevieve had, ever since 1 T ' her mention of it, appeared in consider¬ ably better spirits; Arthur Wallop, who had returned to his own house, forbore to molest them ; and the approach Of spring, as early and genial this year as in the pre* ceding one it had been the reverse/afford* ed both sisters the constant amusement of walking out. Their usual direction was towards Wark¬ worth Grange, or the burying-place; but during a week of remarkably fine weather; thev extended their rambles so far bevbnd the abilities df Joyce, that she was seized with a fit of the rheumatism, winch con¬ fined her several days to her bed. Re¬ proaching themselves as the* J 6l5ca^ibn-o > f it; o 2 they
foregoing their walks to sit with her; and after she was again able to go abroad, they assisted and supported her alternately, with a kindness she did not seem wholly insensi¬ ble to; though Scruton invariably main¬ tained a savage ferocity of aspect, that in¬ spired Margiana with aversion and Genc- 1'ieye with terror. During his wife's con¬ finement, his vigilance had been so active d persevering, as to preclude in Mar- na's mind all hope of rendering the resent % favourable opportunity of ef- cting ^heir escape. He never lost sight of her by day, when she was not in Joyce's aparinfisent: and at night the ancient cere- ST O owny <&f locki»g her into her chamber wa$ revived, and scrupulously continued, ewm lill Bertram's re ton.
and his young compuniions had been r<ee weeks from Widdrington Tower, ©ne evening, Margiana, being im- i as mm% ia?as surprised to see the
book of Italian tales, which has already been mentioned, lying On her table, though she had never taken it from its shelf since the ni^ht when she had found in it the invitation to meet the unknown in the eastern vaults. From the connection of images., his idea instantly recurred to her thoughts, and she took up the book, and curiously opened it, almost expecting te find within a second address from the same mysterious person. Yet, after turn¬ ing over a few leaves^ she started in astonishment at actually beholding a loom paper* whereon was some writing in the very same hand ; and looked cautiously and fearfully round the robrft, half dread¬ ing lest hei* eye should meet his dismal figure, enveloped in fhe long black cloak: but no figure was there, She ga2cd at the hangings—all was still; and then, reas* $ured, though with a beating hearf, she read these words, dated that same day, thg 13th of May; c 3 ViUGNty
fi< Vainly many nights 1 watched for you in the vaults, Why did vou fear to come? You would have met a faithful ami a devoted friend, Since then, unforeseen misfortunes have long de¬ tained me, far distant from you; but I am now returned, to watch over, and, if pos¬ sible, release you from the most detestable &f men. I ans forced to strict conceal- nr, as my life would be the forfeit of co very;. nor dare I sign a name well known to you, lest this paper should ne- Ter reach your hands: yet something must be hazarded. I have observed you often walking towards the burying-piace. Come thither, if it be possible, any evening, ulome, and sing the whole first verse of that song you used to practise in London; inning, * Sit awhile and hear me sing,' I shall
I sharl not then be deceived by any person imitating your voice who may chance to read this, and will instantly appear to you and dissipate all vour fears." » r i " Surely, surely/' said Margiana, " thte cannot be the language of an enemy. I am powerfully tempred to trust myself to him, if indeed it will ever be practicable for me to deceive the vigilance of my spies." Then, casting her eyes again over the paper, it struck her fancy she had some¬ where seen the hand before. " The song I sung in London '/' cried she. <( Who can it be that knows me so well ? that knew me there in my dnvs of happiness ?—a faithful, a devoted friend I 1 * g 4 Once
and after .a strict examination of it, and a *ta£eftf! recollection of the hands of all her acquaintances, she laid the paper down, and went to bed, convinced the mysteri¬ ous stranger could be no other than Lord Lothian.
* i , - *
CHAP.
CHAP. V.
How tu alarm a Friend,
FEiuiArs, if Margiana: had been at full li¬ berty to repair whenever she chose to the burving-place, either her resolution or her inclination.'mi'gbf have failed her for going thither? but, unable as she was to stir from the ; castle unobserved, she la¬ mented h£r confinement, and fancied she eould courageously have braved the pos¬ sible chance of falling into the hands of an enemy or a siranger, or willingly have accepted the assistance of Lord Lothian, supposing if was really he who had written l>fi » O D
to her, towards accomplishing her own and her sister's escape. Of freedom, however, there was now less likelihood than ever, for advices were received from Bertram, with in¬ formation that the royal forces had been so successful in Wales, and the tumults were so far appeased, that he hoped to be again at Widdrington Tower wifchin a fortnight; and then,, as the fatal time approached when she should be obliged to declare her decision, Margiana apprehended he would trust to no vigilance but his own for se¬ curing her during the. short space that re* mained. * She was of opinion, thit if she by pro¬ mise engaged herself to; conclude the wished-for alliance,, rooret*liberty might probably be allowed her; but the utter¬ ance of any meditated falsehood she was extremely anxious ta avoid-; when a cir¬ cumstance, as simple as it wa& unlocked: for, revived her hopes of extricating her¬ self without wounding her integrity;
•; She was one dayKfollbwing Joyce and her sister, from h#r e\m chamber through the armoury, when a part of her dress caught the; large key of-the outer iron door, and .drawing, it out of the lock; it fell to'the Hoot As she stooped down to replace it, she. observed it was a remark¬ able one, and took particular jnotice of the wards, meaning to compare them with those of the key of the inner door, which Was now every"night used to lock her in>, and was-carefully taken away either by Scruton or his wife, till the next morning, when it was usually left.in the lock, and continued there during the day-time, \ • ' • ' ' ; . Soon after,'being for a few moments alone inhe^ chamber, sheiiastily took both the keys out;< but seeing a di&erencc, was about to return them to their respective locks iMespair-, when> thinking it worth while tOitnake the trial, she put the key of the outer doo# it&to* that of her ow« chamber, 'j.ixnl » go ana
^nd with ; . delight and ^irprise founid it acted np0!i th® lock as well' as its own. Without a moment's delay she restored It to its place. A discovery so valuable was 1*01 to* be Immrrfed by any itnpru* de-nce i and ^se returned thanks to Pro-^ tidence for furnishing her with so snre a mean* of qtiilting, at least, her own room, while the thoughts of it escaped the recol¬ lection of her gaolers. The difficulty of procuring Genevieve's liberty now alone disturbed her, as the closet where she slept WaiA within Joyce's chamber. But Margiana trusted Hcftvea- would n©i desert her in tho hour of need; and by the aid of her un- known friend, if n friend he realh? "whs, sotii^ method might perhaps, fee struck out for her relief. Yet* destroys as she wa!s of seeing him, md now, armed with the power of leaving the- castle any »ig.ht>. f©r she believed there would be no difficulty in* escaping fr«n th* lower apartaieBts dujsing;. a time 5
ja time of prbfotind peace with the Seots> when the fortress was not guarded, nor the drawbridge taken up at nights, she never* theless quite shrunk at the idea of travers¬ ing the park, and undertaking so long a :walk as to the burying-place in the dead of night. - t- ■ A week only wife now wanting of the time Bertram had named as likely for his return, and Joyce was so far recovered as to be able, with a little assistance, to attend her fair prisoners nearly as.usual, when, as she was slowly ascending the great stairs ©ne evening,, leaning on Genevieve's arm, Margiana> who had advanced several paces before thenv suddenly saw a door open in the winding passage, where she had neves suspected a door to he. With solemn; steps; .eyes ;cas&; on th.e ground, and hist beads in his hand, Father CeoHry advanced fro.rn it, and was closely followed by four <$§ the in fer ior donaesf it s, bear ing a coffin. $&:$oon as they had ail paired through, s j.'- a fifth
Mlh closed the door after them, which" in appearance exactly resembled the dark oaken^ pawn els on either side; and the friar leading the way, he, the coffin, and bear- *.r*, all descended into the haM, where Margiana lost sight of them. But she was not unobservant of the secret, issue from the passage; and ro a careless tone en¬ snaring ©f «k>yce what member of ihe fa¬ mily was de&dr her suspicions that it con* ducted towards the Black Tower were con¬ firmed by the woman's replying it* was Lad$
. The acquisition of a certainty m long* wished for, was an allurement Margiana, mth all her prudence, fouiul herself un+ able -$d< withstand; a«d withaofut hesitation* she determined tamake us« of her friendly kev towards attempting a*i, acquatntanfi3sr
_ __ »
w Sight, walked before her to heEichamb#^ she
she drew it from the outer door without noise, as she slowly followed him through the armoury; and concealed it so promptly within the sleeve of her r'obe, that his sus¬ picions were m>t a wakened/'Yet she tremr-' bled lest he should perceive it was missing as he returned. ' The sound of his retiring footsteps re« lieved her from this,dread, and she sat pa¬ tiently down to wait at least an hour before she ventured forth; for since the precaution? of fastening her into her room had been re** newed, she had always been allowed a suf¬ ficiency of ©if to enable hvv to take the; diversion of reading, if; she preferred it ton seeking immediately to re^t; andahej knew tfial Scruton usually went to bed as soon m herself and her sister were enclosed in them several prisons for ihc night, >., >r * &fter readings thjejefore, 4 tilh ^ast>-tei» o'clock, a late hour in those times, when! Ihe human race was wise euough to prefer - •'■■' A natural
ttawrtl to arfifici&l light, hearing no sound whatever in the csstle, she arose, and taking her lamp* with a tamirnful recollection or her last BOCturnal ramble, she let herself out;- and carefully locking the door after her, and securing the key, hastened with* ]ight steps to that part of the winding pas¬ sage she had particularly remarked, and where she now readily discovered the oaken door. To her pleasurable surprise, it yielded to her efforts, arid she found her¬ self on the inside, in a dark passage, which grew wider and wider as she advanced. At the distance of about twenty paces were several steps, which she ascended* and then- am tipfer fia^age, of * contrary direction? from that below, brought- het to the foot m$ ©ther steps terminating as before; an$ ill thm .eonstttivtfy reversed line* she pro-* ceeded, till, having mounted nearly se- ■venty steps, she concluded herself to be the region inhabited^ A is-
*
A wider.
stairs encouraged this belief. She fancied .she had now no farther to ascend, and stopped and listened at every step; but heard nothing. At length her progress was suddenly ar¬ rested by an unexpected and apparently an insurmountable obstacle; this was a pair ■of iron-barred folding gates, stretching strait across the passage; and #heft she at¬ tempted to open them, she found they were locked. <f Alas, then/ 1 thought she, is f am dis¬ appointed after all, and must tiow give up the ho vie of ever seeing Arlette V Ye% 'as if loth to relinquish so favourite a scheme, she rested her hand 6vt one of the bars, and, without knowing what she did, shook it The gates jarred, and instantly a dog was heard loudly barking. Fear of a discovery, and the idea of a punishment in the dreadful cage, now appalled her imagination,
imagination, and she was thinking speedily to depart, when the dog she had heard, at^ tracted by her light, came running down ,the passage till it reached the inside of the barrier that divided them. She endea¬ voured to sooth the animal, but it barked the more, and she judged that to retire would be her safest measure, when the sight of another lamp, held on high by the hand of a female figure at a considerable .distance before her, inspired her with the fud^egi.hope-that she perhaps beheld Ar- lette herself. The dog, now,no, longer noisy, ran to and fro between Margiana and the stran- ger, who, coming deliberately forward, asked who was there, and what was wanted at an hour so undue ? ■ ' I wished to, speak to I^ady Arlette," answered Margiana, finding it now too late to recede, and trusting that none might be with her cousin but the young
girl, who she had learned from Harold was her constant companion. " What can you possibly want with her at such a time of night as this ?" said the stranger, coming forward, and discover¬ ing a very juvenile countenance. <r Who are you, for 1 never saw your face be¬ fore?" Margiana, evading this question, asked if Lady Arlette was alone ? fS Why yes, she is sure enough of being alone when I am not with her" was the re¬ ply, in an accent of levity, however, ra¬ ther than impertinence. " I should be very glad lo see, her," said Margiana; "and since lean advance no further, perhaps she will not. object to come to these gates, if she is not,particu¬ larly engaged." " Oh! but bheis." " She is retired to rest, perhaps/' u Lady Arlette at rest ! One may tell you are a stranger to her. No, she is fighting/' "Fighting!"
" Fighting!" " Yes, fighting the Scots. She has just taken the Earl of* Fife prisoner when I came away." f< Bl'ess me," thought Margiana, tr what a strange girl this must be! But if you told her one of her cousins was here, long¬ ing to be acquainted with her, would she hoi trusr her prisoner for a few minutes to your keeping ?" ■ " How/* said the girl> staring, " are you One of the Lady Win burn es ? O Ge¬ mini stars ! my yowng lady will be ready to break her neck to come to you /' and Away she scampered at such a rate, that she did not even hear Margiana f fc question, whe¬ ther they were able to admit her through the gates; for; next to Arlette herself, she most wished to see her apartment and occu* pations. The next sound she now beard was a loud scream of joy; and presently, rush¬ ing down from the remotest end of th£ passage, appeared the lovely rigure of .a boy,:
boy, apparently about sixtecfn years of age, fantastically dressed, with a few pieces of light armour flung over the upper gar¬ ments/ In a feminine voice this agile Mer* cury exclaimed, " One of my cousins, did you say ? Now blessings light upon her heart forever and ever for this good deedl Cousin—I know not which to call you, and it does not signify ; but you are welcome,* welcome, welcome, to my dominions, a. thousand times. Come in, that I may en¬ tertain you at my court, for I am queeifc here—sovereign lady paramount." : *' Sovereign lord, methinks," said Mar¬ giana, laughing at the odd contrast between. her dress and her expressions. "Ah 1 I had forgot. I have just been acting Hotspur, and Maud here was Doug¬ las; but we have only one suit of armour between us, so that poor little Maud is fain ty fight in her petticoats. Alas, though, what shall we do to get you through these great ugly gates? There is 1*0 chance of climbing over tfcm; * hwe tried *hat work fiftv
Mty times, but the spikes at the top atfe as long and as sharp as spits/* "Indulge me then with your company here a few-minutes, if yon apprehend no danger of being discovered." ' " Oh, 1 have it, I have ic t If vou have strength worth a farthing, we three mav lift them off their hinges, for this little bit €>f a creature and I can raise them only b\ our two selves." u 1 will do mv utmost," returned Mar- giana; " but shall we not make such a noise as to disturb------" • Arlette interrupted her by laughing aloud. '* A noise ?" cried she * " why, if the .good people in this castle did not hear me make a rto?se, they would conclude I Was dead. If they are not reconciled to my noises by this time, it is a pity ; so to work, to work ; we have no leisure to waste in idle word*?!" Savin<r* this, and ■ throwing down the atword'-and- buckler she-had-a!! this while > *'*•' beer.
been brandishing, she grasped the iron bars, and set her shoulder against them, with a force that astonished Margiana in a little figure a head shorter than herself. But Arlette, though diminutive for her age, was strongly formed across the cheit; and her efforts were so vigorous, that, with the assistance of Margiana and the repre¬ sentative of the gallant Douglas, one of the gates was fairly lifted off its hinges, and then with ease drawn back from the lock that connected it with its partner. "There, odious thing!" cried Arlette, throwing it passionately against the other gate for support; " I wish I had the cram- > ming of Scruton and Joyce with you for a month to come ! they should never want any other food as long as they lived. But well done, my girls, you have worked ably ; now come in and rest yourselves, and we will presently strike up an* ac¬ quaintance, } coz, that i shall last. for life.. Tell me though;.-are you *Margtana or Genevieve?
fyen^vleve ? and put no trick upon me— nobody must play tricks here but myself." i " Which do you think 1 am?" saiii Mar¬ giana, smiling. , " I don't know— let me look at yon- why, Genevieve, 1 suspect." *' And why do you suspect so?" " Because you are so very handsome; and even Ethelred, though his brains are turned topsy-turvy about Margiana, con¬ fesses she is not so beautiful as her sister." " I must confess so too, though I am Margiana; and if you was to see my sis¬ ter, you would be of his opinion." " I don't &now that—you would not be easy to beat. 1 can see you make me look like nobody, and yet Harold Wallop says I am.personable enough. Bo you know Ha¬ rold Wallop?" *' ¥©s, cousin, very well." 5* And what do ymx think of hjm ?" ■** I think excellently well of him. He is ihe best-hearted creature in the world." ■i< Ob! kst I muly imzftt his looks, and whether
whether most other men were like him ? They must be desperately ugly, if they are. I do think he is more hideous than my father, or even than Scruton himself." " Your father, mv dear Arlette ! Lord Widdrington would by most people be reckoned a good-looking man/' " Say no more-—I can't abide him.—-- Here we are ; here is Fairyland, as Ethel - red calls it; this is mv Jtnti-rooin; and this," pulling Margiana by the arm, as she skip¬ ped forward, " this is my presence-cham¬ ber. Come, come along ; how slow vou arc ! you have no life in you." "Your presence-chamber!" cried Mar¬ giana, highly amused by the oddities of her cousin, and the singularity of her do- minions; (e whv, it looks more like a camp;" and, in eOect, a spacious apartment into which she was now inhered, presetL.\i the prospect of a variety of erection';, composed of long poles and wearing ap¬ parel, so arranged as to resemble tents in an encampment,
i*-' " Yes, we have a field of battle evcy now and then, and sometimes we are old women, and sometimes Maud is the Queen of Sheba,"and I am King Solomon. But to-night I ordered a grand engagement, to keep the poor little soul's spirits up," whispered she; " for vou must know her grandmother, dear old nurse Travel, died Yesterdav ; and I thought a little sjood fishtintr, and a few kicks and cuffs, would prevent her from being melancholy : and, to give her her due, she fought very well, considering. It was a long time before I could take her; and she dealt me such a knock, my head sings with h yet/* " You are very happy, my dear Arlette, to be able to divert yourself so well in your confinement. And pray what are vour other amusements?'* ** Oh ! I can work charmingly at my needle, and I like reading and writing. My mother taught me all those niceties. And I can sing, and so can Maud too. Not but that I hate being kept up so, though there
there is nothing I lament so much as never seeing Skirmish now. I suppose you know my brother's grey poney, Skirmish. I have not been upon his poor dear back, 1 be¬ lieve, these two years." " And does the want of exercise, cou¬ sin, never affect your health ?" " Want of exercise ! Lord love vou, IF where can you have lived? Why, I work in the garden like a fury, and in all sea¬ sons too. * < What care T for \vi:ul or weather, Rain ot temj-c;t, hail or srxw ? Lijhtrr titan a cy? net's fmher. i Thicugh the stormy v.oikl I'll blow/ Little Maud and I leave Scruton scarce any thing to do in it.'* "A garden! What garden?" enquired Margiana, who now almost.began to. fancy herself really in fairy-land. " Here, here, out-of this trap-door. Fol¬ low mc, and I wiil shew it you: but mind
MASGIANA.* you do not break your bones." With U.ese •words, opening a sort of shutter behind one of her tents* Arlette jumped upon the roof of a considerable part of the building, that was covered with soil; and Margiana, with the imperfect assistance of a star-light nio-ht, discerned what her cousin informed her were shrubs, fruit-bushes, and flowers. 4( A clever place/' said she, " if you rould see it in the day-time. The worst of it is, it has no shade; so that in sum¬ mer one is all in a lather in ten minutes " te And does your mother sometimes come here now to see you V* (< Ah! no, I have not seen her dear face of many and many a day—not for months —though I cannot tell very exactly, for my palace is a bad place for keeping a reckoning of time -hv But is not she a charming woman? I do not suppose there is such another creature in all this whole world as my mother. She and dear Ethelred are as like each other as two bul¬ rushes. But pray, now, tell me something . * " in
in your turn. Why did not you bring my cousin Genevieve with you ? She must be rarely worth looking at, if she is prettier than you/* Margiana replied, that her visit to the Black Tower having been suddenly re¬ solved on, Genevieve was not apprised of it; and a torrent of interrogations then ensued, that afforded her abundance of employment fo answer ; such as/ Whether she and her sister were at full liberty in the castle £ How Bertram, whom Arlette fa¬ miliarly called by that name, behaved to them ? Whether Margiana liked Lord- De¬ lancey ? Whether she meant to marry him ? and whether she could not be the means of procuring mare liberty for Ar¬ lette herself? After having answered some of these questions, and evaded replying to Others, Margiana: believed it was time for her to think of departing; and telling Ar¬ lette she hoped before long to see her . • h 3 again*.
^gain, proposed they should restore the ^barred gates to their proper order. Arlette readily sprung up, and taking Margiana*s lamp, danced through her anti- room and down the passage, followed by her cousin and Maud, who stopped at the barrier, white the other frisked merrily on, totally regardless of Margiana's calls to re¬ turn and lend her assistance. " I can do that an hour hence/* cried she. ■" There is nobody stirring in the cas¬ tle now but ourselves, and a ramble I must have, that's flat. If you had been shut up as long as I have been, your impatience to return to prison again would be very mo¬ derate ; so follow, follow me; come, fol- low'Mab, your Queen !** " Ah !"■ exclaimed Maud, " now my young lady is got to her capering and singing, there will- be no guiding her. She is the wiifullest little creature V* added she
she in a whisper ; " and sometimes one would think she was not in her right wits/* . Margiana began now to fear she had suf¬ fered a captive to escape who would not easily be retaken, and her voice spoke her alarm ; but this had no other effect on Ar¬ lette than to increase her merriment.. "Why,, what a tame pigeon you must be, coz, to be frightened at such a trifle! I warrant you nobody will see us. I only want just to look about me a little in the great hall, snd a few of the rooms; and since you are such a coward, I promise you I will come back in a quarter of an hour, and set ali to rights as much as you choose/* *' It will.save time to let her have her own way at once/* again whispered Maud* "She would sooner be killed than not have it at last/* * F 1 Yexed to .deaths and secretfy resolving u 4 that
that the gates, once more secured, should never again with her concurrence be dis¬ turbed, Margiana yielded to necessity ; and stifling her resentment, lest it should ren¬ der the wild girl still more ungovernable, she silently followed, though scarce able fd'kcep pace with the rapidity of her mo~ tions. Arlette, dancing on, now bearing the lamp aloft, now swinging it almost to the ground, and then capriciously flou¬ rishing it In the air, resembled a Jack- 0'•lanthorn flying over a morass, till she passed through the oaken door, and then her steps became rather more measured, &ri& she proceeded with less noise towards the .great stairs, which she descended, and paced about the hall, taking up and ex» amining every the most trifling object. The same ceremony she repeated in the adjoining parlour, Margiana following her in silence, determined that no conversa¬ tion should induce her to prolong her stay, and hoping she would soon be weary oT so -<otfinteresting a process. -At length, : - "Well,"
seen* all herei Now? there ts only one place more I want to look into ;" and^he scndded away, recrossing the hall to a stone* passage'that was terminated by a door opening into the stable-yard, which she had unbarred, and escaped through be¬ fore Margiana was aware of her design. Foresight, however, %vould have been of no avail. Arlette had formed a design^ and was resolved on its execution. Away she flew across the court-yard, and 4 looked into several stables* till; making a longer stay in one of them than the rest, Mar- giann, now mest seriously alarmed, fol¬ lowed her with Maud, intending fo urge her return by the most pressing entreaties. But what was her astonishment, when, at *the stable-door, she was met by Arlette mounted on Skirmish* the grey poney, without ei¬ ther a saddle or any other bridle than the halter she had unloosed from the stall! ■ * «■ * * * ^ t "Heavenbe merciful to us l'^*exclaimed a 5 Margiana,
Margiana, " what a?0 vou about to do h whither are yon going ?*! , ; " Only just to take a little bit of a gal¬ lop in! the park, co«. Dop't be uneasy, I will iiot be away ten minutes. Wait for sne, that's a good girl/* Any attempt, to detain her was prevented by her instantaneous disappearance. She $et oi'f at full speed, and leaped Skirmish ©verthe low hand-gate,,of the wall that di¬ vided the, court-yard from the park, leav¬ ing Margiana in a {error, that even exceed¬ ed her.surprise. Maud also, though more accustomed to witness these frolicks, seeifi- $d very uneasy; bow ever >. s hc gave it as her opinron that the scamper would not be a l.jpg on©.,. • . . r . If r " For at? her brave talking/*: observed une, " my lady is sadly afraid of Scrutpn, and would be in a fine pucker if he was. t$ catch her. Never fear but she will come 3 . .■''..,„ vhack
back time, enough to get up stain he is stirring/' ■.-,».* " Only .in time for that I" said ,Mar^ giana; " why it cannot be much past mid¬ night now, and he will not be stirring these four hours. Surely,, after jwhat sheh^s promised, she will not keep us waiting half that time?" > . , " Oil! whenever she has a scheme, ia her head, she does not care what she prq^ nrnes, if only my Lord and Scruton<ai>e| out of the way; and I love herso/w.elL that I never have the heart to tell of lien strange pranks; for she would, fae very good, ir she was only a little less,wild f Why, the last time she was let. out, she coaxed poor grandmother and. L tp.tymig her to walk in the great court-Wd, pro^ raising she would not stay five minute^ | and before we knew where we were, i^sh^ did not pop down into the moat; for tho drawbridge was up then, and sc^ajnblc, out ' at the other side, as wet as. a %b, f and,set off a running as hard as ever she could h 6 pelt!
1&& MARGUNA. |ielt<! Tt was above an hour before we could get her in again. Another time she slipped fro;a us, and we sought her all oyer, till I had not a leg to stand ttpon, and grandmother laid down for very weariness; when we heard her latiffhinsc over our heads, for she had somehow or other contrived to scramble up a great tree 3 and! was balancing herself as merry as a monkey, upon one of the branches. Oh ! she is worse to catch than a squirrel, She only missed Scruton that time by a few seconds; and when she played the other pTarik, a very little more water in the moat would have drowned hcr/ J This account of her cousin's adyenturous disposition was not calculated to tranquil¬ lize Margiana. •■"Well," thought she, "if ever again I give way to idle curiosity as I have done this night, 1 think I will resign¬ edly sw&miir to any punishment that can be inflicted oa me/' ' - ■ ' But 4
But reflecting now that the lighr'o'; the': lamp, which Arlette had placed on the $ta*' ble-floor, was liable vo be perceived- from the castle, she took if up, and desiring Maud to wait where she was for her young lady's return, told her she herseir would carry it' back into the hall, and there stay for thent both. The girl promised- to obey her di^ rections ; and then hastening to-the castle, Margiana deposited the lamp in a remote corner of the hail, where it could diffuse the least light, 'and'sat down, praying for a speedy issue-to this unpleasant, yet ridi- : cnlous, adventure. She had not been thus sitting above a minute, .when she heard a voice gently calling, " Lady Margiana!" in an under¬ tone. V "" O Heavens !" she cried, starting \xm u : Scruton ! We are discovered." j r -••• i( Only by one who would die to serve* you," replied the same voice; and: front. behind the great staircase came fcrth a figure
a fjguye. that instantly she beheld at her feet. .... " Be not alarmed," it continued. "Do you not know mc ? I am Lothian." Overcome with fear and amazement, Margiana sunk back breathless upon her seat, and he caught her hands, which he rapturously pressed to his bosom.. <k Soul of my life !" he exclaimed, " how long have I watched for this blessed chance ! Ever since I r .understood you was to be compelled into a union with Delancey, I have hovered round this gloomy dungeon, in .;;;»es of obtaining a sight of yon, to c *er xij services towards your release ; but , -ough I often observed you walking §1 a distance, you : was always accompa¬ nied either by a man or woman, whom I knew,to be spies upon your actions, and I feared lest any alarm given to them might occasion you to be more rigidly confined. Several mornings, at an early hour, I have vainly endeavoured to-slip into the castle ; and
MARRXANA, and I was loitering now near the stab!e$ with that view, when I beheld your adored ikurc coming out of a side entrance with two other persons, and glided in, tmper- ceived, when you were all passed. Oh ! delay not a moment; tell mc what I can do mi for you. I will scale, walls, swim moats, subdue dragons, fight or die, to procure, your freedom." Margiana, now much reassured, and re¬ covering, in a great degree, her com- po^::re_. desired Lord Lothian would rise, a;m frankly told him, that, in case she {'.mud herself likely to be driven to ex- tremitics, she would gratefully accept his oifcr; and asked him if he was not the person whose sudden appearance in her own chamber had so much alarmed her a twelvemonth before ? " No," replied he,* " I have only been six weeks in the North, for -the first time in my life. The instant I heard the report 1 have just; named, I set out from London, but
but never could accomplish an entrance Into the castle til! just now." ** And was not you the person who* wrote to me?" * r I never wrote to you since you came here." "Not to ask me to meet you in the eastern vaults ?*' " Never, lovely Margiana.** " Nor lately—-a few days ago—naming the burying-place? " u I have not written to you at all,'my angel K How could I'have 'gotten a -letter into vour dear-hands, if I had ? But let us now deliberate on the means of your escape j or, rather, what need-of delibera¬ tion 1 at all? Why should you not seize thiB opportunity, perhaps the most auspi¬ cious one that will ever occur, for quit¬ ting \ our tyrant, and his dismal den, for fever? Me boasts, i'k'now he does, that f&* ha§ 'now secured you in his toils, and thai you will 1 assuredly rather marry hts tton'than submit to be iaimured f6i* Ytre ih *i yi asepukhrt,
a seputehre, and condemn' your sister td the same horrid doom; and do not flatter yourself he will relent. He is of opinion Delancey will marry no other, and the continuation of his family is the first wish of his proud, yet mean heart. Oh, do not lose a chance that you may ever after re¬ proach yourself for neglecting. Come, sweet Margiana, let us see for your sister. I suppose she was one of those 1 saw with you, and before the break of day, we may be far beyond the reach of yoiir enemies. Bertram's absence, every circumstance, fa¬ vours us " •' Alas! my Lord, I wish to Heaven you was right in your conjecture; but nei* ther of those whom you saw was my sister. Were she here, I would not hesitate an in¬ stant; but, unfortunately, she is where I cannot join her, without awakening our spies." " Then trust yourself alone to me. By all that is sacred, the instant I have seen you in a place of safety, I will return*for Lady
Lady. Genevieve; and there is no doubt hut during the confusion your absence will create, I shall be able to bear her otf, and bring her to you. Come, clearest crea¬ ture, come ,* we have not, perhaps, an in¬ stant to lose." * f No, no, my Lord, I am obliged to vou for vour readiness to serve us; but at i- present you plead in vain—without my sister I will not move." " You drive me mad !" exclaimed Lord Lothian. " Through your own pernicious obstinacy, you will be lost to yourself, to the world, to me, forever ! What hopes can you have of escaping, if you forego the present hour ?" " Lord Lothian/' said Margiana, after some consideration, (i I will not deny that I am anxious to leave this place, and there¬ fore would gladly accept your assistance, or that of any other friend who could af¬ ford it to me without inconvenience; but I am-not so wholly destitute of the means ^liberation as my sister. iSince Lord ^ Widdrington'*
Widdring'fon's absence, we have been, if possible, more strictly guarded than be¬ fore ; and therefore I am in hopes his re¬ turn will give us some additional freedom. Then, if, through your mediation, we could be enabled to embark for France, a sure and honourable protection awaits us, near the person of the Queen Isabella ; and vou wo'dd indeed entitle yourself to our everlasting acknowledgments." Margiana, on account of her sister, spoke these words with such reluctance, that she hesitated; and Lord Lothian mis¬ took the cause of her hesitation. His per* isonal vanity, ever awake, fancied a mean- ing she was far from having harboured. (i Is there on earth," cried he, " a task I would not undertake, a danger I would not encounter, for your sake? You shall have, not a ship, but a fleet, to carry yon over to the Court of France, and there
the. happy Lothian shall spend the remain¬ der of his days at your feet/' M Do not mistake me, my Lord ,• I would on no account mislead you. If your offers are made as from a friend, I accept; but if as from a lover, reject them. Be they withheld, if made with a view of obtain¬ ing any other reward than gratitude, for no other can I ever bestow. I had rather remain here a prisoner, and endure any penance my uncle may fancy I deserve, than escape from his power at the expence of deceiving you." "Well,well,** cried Lord Lothian, impa*- tiently, " this is all very fine; but I can be as fine as you, and serve you without any certain hope of reeompence.** " Your good intentions be vour reeom¬ pence then," returned Margiana. " Rnt it is now time you should go. Those you saw with--me were of my uncle*s family, and ought not to .find you here. For my ows •sake,* therefore, I will entreat you to leave JL 9%
ec To leave you is death; yet I go, if you will only tell me how I may hear from you, and learn when 1 may prepare for your de* parture. Have you no means? Other- »vbe, I shall become insane, and raise an alarm in the country." *' 1 have a page of my own here/' re¬ plied Margiana, "* an intelligent youth, named Maurice Through him I can ap¬ prise vou of what befalls me, and how I can be obliged by your kind offices." Lord Lothian, in raptures, bent one knee to the ground, and kissed her hand, exclaiming, " Farewell then, angel of light \ sovereign lady of my captive heart, farewell ? I will await the coming of thy page, as I would the divine presence of the god of love himself/' " But where are you to be found, my Lord?'* said Margiana, interrupting this rhapsody. " Are you a resident in the neighbourhood ?" *' In what neighbourhood can Lothian. . reside^
reside but in that of the enchantress Mar¬ giana ? I have found a place of conceal- ment, fair disposer of my fate, in the vil¬ lage of Warkworth, at the house of one John Eversham; and I pass for a simple esquire, by the name of Henry Lonesbo- roueh. Under that appellation I will re- ceive vour commands with the submission of devotee, and execute them with the promptness of magic." " Enough, my Lord ; vour stay becomes £5 * ^ * it too long, and endangers yourself, as well as me Retire through the court-yard, if possible, without being seen. 5 ' To be certain of his departure, she ac¬ companied him to the door at the end of the passage ; and there, after he was out of sight, looking around her, she felt much distressed at seeing nothing of Arlette, But Lord Lothian, had hardly been gone a minute, when Maud came running to her from the stables. « Is
^Is vour lady not vet returned?" said she to "the girl. " Bless me," cried the other, <{ have you not seen her ? She came back, and went into the castle very soon after you. I have been fastening up the poney." "She came not into the hall " replied Marg?ana ; " where can she have concealed herself?" " I *vn here/' said a melancholy voice; and immediately Arlette was discovered is- suing from ada;k corner of the hall, where a large oak table, and the-obscurity of the place, had screened her frotr. view. Her gestures were the reverse of what they had been before, and her eves were fixed on the ground, with an expression of languid discontent, " Bar the passage-door, Maud/' said Hiurgiana ; " and let ,us be gone, dear cou¬ sin. It is very late, and more than time vou should return/' ; i e Yes, I suppose I musk go, and be perched up again*" " Why,
* s Why, de^ar. Arlette, what ails vou > vou talked not thus just now." " ^Because I had never seen any thing. Maud, go up before us; I want to speak to my cousin.—So that was Lord Lo¬ thian, and a lover of your's ? You need not look so frightened—I shall not tell any body. Besides, you were not to blame for his coming in. But it is surprising you should reject his love, and only accept \\u services as coming from a friend; for I heard most of your conversation. You must be very difficult to please, I think. Certainly he is the finest creature that ever was born. Lord, how different from that shaggy Wallop! how handsome! how graceful! and how he talked ! I should have gone out of my senses, if he had talked so to me." " My dear Arlette, if through your means it becomes known that he is con¬ cealed near here on my account, you will tndanger his life, for your father would spare no p*ims——— " My
•" My father! Do you suppose I ever * tell my father anv thins; ? Who would be : the fool then ? But what I mean to say is, that if you and Genevieve escape with this charming Lord, I wish you would take me with you; for, perhaps, when he grew quite sure you would not have him your- self, he might take a fancy to me. Oh, how happy you are to be so beloved, while I am shut up, and never see a human fea~ ture but Maud's little ugly snuh-nose !" , " Alas I" thought Margiana, '* it will be an evil day for thee, pretty . ^ette, when thou leavest thy cage to swim along the stream of the world, with all thy wilfulness md inexperience about thee I But take comfort," said she, observing she had burst into a violent passion of tears, " your bro¬ ther will be at home soon, and then vour situation will be improved; and perhaps I shall be allowed publickly to see you be« fore long." *'' Heaven grant it! and then we can talk it over about Lord Lothian." vol. hi. i " But
** But in the mean time you will- not say a word to Maud." " If the devil himself was to come, I tell you he should not worm a syllable out of me/' " Good night then/* said Margiana* *' and bless vou till we meet again!" The two cousins embraced each other, for they were now arrived a? the confines of the Plark Tower; and after helping to restore the gates to their proper situation, Margiana, who had resumed her lamp from Maud, sped hastily away to her chamber, where she locked herself in, thankful to Providence for being once more in secu¬ rity after the vexations and embarrassments of the night
CHAP. VL A cordial Welcome* <* If the certainty of having a friend near at hand, able and willing to forward her pro¬ jected flight, abated much of Margiana» uneasiness in one quarter, the knowledge of that friend being Lord Lothian, consh derablv augmented it in another. To her- self he was now, as he had always been, an object of complete indifference; but on Genevieve's account she lamented the ne¬ cessity that would probably oblige her id have recourse to his services*: when there could be xi© question he would insist oru , > : i 9, being
being the companion cf their voyage to France; and those wounds in her sister's heart, which time and absence, she hoped, had nearly closed, might be re-opened and bleed afresh. The dislike to be indebted to him, that followed these rejections, led her thoughts towards the person who had made her of¬ fers of assistance equally fervent, and per* haps equally sincere. But his name was siow a more inexplicable mvsterv than be- fore, and her ever being able to unravel it was so uncertain, that she was vexed at mot having thought of desiring Lord Lo¬ thian to repair the next evening to the "burying-place, and endeavour to effect fhe discovery for her. One only method she believed there was likely to afford,her the satisfaction she wished for, and- that was to stroll towards the place in question as soon as Joyce was sufficiently
sufficiently recovered to extend her walks, when, by advancing at a quicker pace, she might reach the little building before her. At the worst, it was but waiting till the return of Lord Delancev and llarold, who would be as anxious as herself to develop the secret. But if, after all, the person proved to be one able to further her scheme, a private conference with him herself would be most desirable, for to neither of them could she think of en¬ trusting it. Not that she doubted the ge* nerositv of the one or the other; but to a>k Lord Delancey to promote her escape, she thought would be too tyrannically put' ting his regard fo her to the test; and Harold, she was of opinion, would under¬ take nothing he believed contrary to the interests of his friend. ■ But Joyce recovered so slowly, that when Bertram and 'he vcunsy men came home, she still continued unable to move i 3 above
above a quarter of a mile from ihe castle. Nevertheless Margiana determined to wait a iutie longer, before she mentioned to her cousin, or his friend, the second invitation she had received to meet the unknown, ■Still less would she have ventured to name Lord Lothian, had she had the opportu¬ nity of so doing. But Lord Percy had ac* companied his kinsman back to Widdring¬ ton Tower, as well as several other chiefs of inferior note; and for many days she scarcely ever saw either of her friends but in a numerous company, which the pre-occupation of her mind led her to avoid a^ frequently as she could. Another cause also made it peculiarly unpleasant to her to appear in public. Bertram had in a ^reat measure dismissed the gloom and rcxrve that were usually predominant in his character, and appeared in spirits that reminded her cf what Lord Lothian had said, that he boasted of having at jength secured her in his toils. He drank cheerfully with his guests, talked of a large company
company whom he had invited to meet them on a certain da> in the ensuing week ;■ and even once, in Margiana's hearing, spoke of the festivity he meant should prevail throughout the ca»tle during the ap¬ proaching month of August, which she, involuniarifyshuddering, recollected would complete the year and the hall year ensu¬ ing since her lather's death. For a mo¬ ment her eyes wore turned on Ethelred, but hii svere bent to the ground, though the brilliant glow of hope suffused his coun¬ tenance. Constantly apprehensive of Ber¬ tram's reverting to this subject, which evi¬ dently engrossed his attention and delight¬ ed hk heart, sSe came into his presence with reluctance, and quitted it with ala¬ crity. But convinced by all these appearances that it- time was to be lost,, she was seized with an impatience to confer with her mys¬ terious friend, that remitted neither night nor day"; and she rejoiced at the uncom- i 4 mon
mon' of weather, her wishes, by greatly contributing to Joyces recovery. By degrees the woman was persuaded that moderate exercise was beneticial to her health, and every even- inir Margiana drew her on a little and a little further in the park, sometimes assist* 3up" her with Iu?r own arm, and sometime; cor;si^nin«- her to the care of Genevieve till at length thev crane within two hun- dred paces of the spot whers more than half of Margiana's hopes were centred. Joyce had for some time complained of futbjrue, but Margiana persuaded her to advance, that she might rest h^r.Hf within the buiidin?. an<l now ran swiftly forward, saving that she would bring out eve of the benches th:»t v?ood in the vhap-c], iv \ place it for her in the sun., on the outside of the entrance. To such arriiicr-s was the ingc* nuousMarsiana driven l.v illiberal and im»- merited confinement. Pantin^ with hope, fear, and expecta- tion, she quickly passed under the two arches,
arches, and, penetrating to the interior of the place, cast her eyes around; but no¬ thing was visible, save the a'tar, the cru¬ cifix, and usual furniture of the little cha¬ pel. She then recollected the enjoined precaution of the song, and with a lov, tremulous voice sang thii verse of a ballad which had formerly been popular against King Richard, and which, when a child, she had been taught to sing in jest to h n r father* who ivsvd to make her laugh, by calling her a wicked little rebel, whenever he heard it : " Sit awhile and hear me $ine> How the treacherous Komaa King Sued tor gold in store ; < Thirty thousand give/ said he £ An* if peace be btoug.it by me Back to Wyndesoie, Ruhaid, though so trait'rous now^ T;aitor shalt thou be no more/* A rustling breeze, that, as she concluded; waved the leaves of ivy with which the i 5 building
bulding was overhung, made her fancy the person she expected was approaching, and s' e shook in every limb: but the sound died away, and all was silent. She looked out, and beheld Joyce nearly where she had Lft her, standing: still, and rest- ing on Genevieve's shoulder. Encou¬ raged by this sight to venture a second attempt, she sung the second verse of the same ballad : ** Oh, ho^ preatly they did sis, Who bade the bold Eaii Warynne < Quit fai* England's shore I Betic* ha'* thty sent o'er sea TreasurM goll andjewelrie, Froai sad Wymiesore. Richard, though so trait'rous now d Tiaitcr shalt thou be no mure." The instant she ceased, a rough voice, the tones of which penetrated to her liearf, sung these words, advancing nearer and nearer as it proceeded;
** Simon Moumford, be did swear> Had he now Earl Warynne here, He should back no more; Nor with sword, nor spear, nor shield, Nor with other weapon, yield A'it to Wyndesore. Aichard, though ' ■•* "' * Here the !ong-looked-for figure appear¬ ed, ascending some steps that connected the chapel with the sepulchral vaults be¬ neath. Still, as before, it was wrapped in a long dark cloak, that concealed the lower part of the face, while the upper was en¬ tirely veiled by a Scottish cap, oversha¬ dowed by a feather, that added darkness to the terrifying figure before her. Margiana started, and expected to be¬ hold a murderous weapon drawn from be¬ neath this ruffian garb ; she had even turn¬ ed to fly, when the sound of her name, ut¬ tered in a sorrowful accent, arres ed her attention;. The bonnet was raised, the i § mantle
mantle was thrown open, and she beheld one whom she had long thought moulder* in? in a soldiers grave-—the honest, faith¬ ful, find affectionate Kendrew, Margiana clasped her hands together in speechless extacy. u O beloved Lady," he cried, <e child of mv dear, dear master! is it granted to your poor old servant to see this day, and your blessed face, once more ?" He cast himself on the ground and clasp¬ ed her knees. " For this/' he sobbed out, t{ I would have crawled hither, though it had been only in the hope of dying at you' feet. Ob/ I am rewarded now for eery suffering, every tedious expectation, richly* richly V - *'Dear Kendrew/' said she, tears of joy streaming ^rom her eyes, " you are the welcomest sight ; have beheld since I last cm aced my -amented father. How little diu I suspect it was you wfou wr^te to me ! hut,
But, oh» tell me, and quickly, ere I am pursued, bless me with the sound that be is not dead, tliat your dear master still lives r The old man mournfully shook his head. " Oh no," said he; " I have much, much to tell you, but no such news as that/' ' Alas, then, how have I deceived my¬ self! Though he might have suffered tor¬ tures, yet I hoped'------" t( Tortures!" repeated Kendrew. Jovce was now heard speaking very near them. He started. "That accursed woman here/ cried he. " If Bertram but suspects me living, he will hunt me down with his dogs, like a wild beast. Can you not come again, with only your sister?" " U possible, I will, for It is my utmost desire to escape from hence,, and through your means------ »'* Joyce
Joyce now approached so near, her words might be di»tir niished. u Buf when, when r" said the old man impatiently. " Here is a subterraneous passage," pointing to the steps, " with va¬ rious issues from it, whither cnttle tire driven during the border wars, and hence you might escape with ease." tc On this day week Bertram entertains a numerous company of guests; he and Scruton will therefore be much engaged, and perhaps we may be able to fea\e the castle unobserved when they are going into the hall to supper.'* "Sister," said Genevieve, speaking from the outside of the building, " you have forgotten to bring the seat here." *' I am coming with it," replied Mar¬ giana, " but it hi heavy," " On the evening of this day week, then, dearest Lady, I wiil expect you both—Oh, liow anxiously V She
down the stairs, onlv just in time to escape the observation of Jovce and ScVuton also* who, wondering at the long absence of his infirm wife, and the fair prisoners en¬ trusted to her charge, had informed him¬ self what direction they had been seen to take, and had followed to hasten them and assist her back. Joyce sat down In the chapel. Scruton, insolently reproaching the sisters for bring¬ ing her so f^r s said they should hencefor¬ ward either not walk at all beyond the courts ©f the castle, or be attended by himself. ijenevieve wept at this harsh language, and the dismal prospect of closer confinement; but Margiana, who had more urgent rea¬ sons for dreading it, and deprecating Sera- Ion's wrath, pleaded the goodness of their intentions, which wer * to promote Jovcek restoration, by exercise in fine weat net, promising, nevertheless, never to come so far again, if it was contrary to tneir un- *■ cle's
cle's %^ishes; for Margiana just then, like Arlette, would have promised any thing. She appealed to Joyce's own feelings to declare whether she was not always better after exertion ; and, for the first time, the woman spoke in their defence, and said she believed both the ladies .meant kindly to her. Thus peace was restored, and no complaint made to Bertram, which was what Margiana most apprehended. On their return to the castle, she found means, by taking her sister aside for a few minutes, to impart to her the joyful intel¬ ligence of that strong ray of light which now broke upon their prospects; and re¬ lated the unexpected appearance of Ken- drew, and what had passed between therm though without entering, into a detail of foregoing events, or naming the letters, which might have rendered their con¬ ference so long as to draw observation; and the ever-suspicious Bertram was con¬ stantly anxious to prevent any private cumin unicuuon
communication between his nieces, lest they should agree on some project for escaping from his power. Genevieve received her sister's wel¬ come news with as much pleasure as it was imparted, but doubted greatly whe¬ ther thev should be able to *?et to the burying-place at the appointed time with¬ out molestation, " Let us have a good heart/' said Mar¬ giana ; " our most formidable spies, Ber¬ tram and Scruton, will assuredly be occu- pied in attending to the guestu; and if wc can but draw Joyce half way thither, we shall be able, by pinning away from her, to reach the place before she can spread the alarm at home/' " A desperate measure!" said Gene vicve ; * f and if we are seized and brought back, what may we not expect!'" " It is a desperate measure, and, there¬ fore, only to be had recourse to in case of absolute
absolute necessity. If possible, we must slip out o^ the castle unobserved.'* Margiam's mind now felt relieved beyond ^expression. She had reasonable grounds for considering her own and her sister's escare as nearly certain ; and the idea of not heing obliged for it, or accompanied by, Lord Lothian, enhanced her aatwlac- tion. Her countenance became so chear* ful, her conversation so animated and en¬ gaging, that she unconsciously-redoubled Lord Delancev's love. Her uncle believed her entirely reconciled to ihe prospect of becoming his wife; and a few decrees more of happiness bestowed on Harold, would, as he himse^ averrcd> have re&* dered him a maniac. But poor Harold's philosophy was soon put to a trial the least expected/either by himself or his frtendsi The morning after Margiana's i a ten few with
-with Kendrew, Lord Percy and all the other guests, the two Wallops only ex¬ cepted, repaired to Alnwick Castle, with intent to stay theve i'^ree days, and then return to meet the conpany invited to Widdrington Tower. T'.e evening before they were expected back, ILrtr.-iii, con¬ trary to his usual ru.st'tm, began to spoak of hk daughter, and asked Margi,*n.i an-i Gene vie e if they were not curious to see her? They readily acknowledged they were; and he proceeded to say that they themselves had been the occasion of her having of late been more closely confiiud than usual. " For,'* pursued he, '* I ap¬ prehended that a sight of your polished manners might have mortified her, bv in*- ducing comparisons between you two and herself. But now that her ideas will neces¬ sarily be diverted into another channel, I have no fears of that sort. Her approach¬ ing change of situation will suggest oiher subjects of thought. Arlette will speedily be married." " Arlette!"
"Arlette!" exclaimed Ethelred, greatly surprised; \\hi!e Harold Wallop, towards Whom Margiana instinctively turned her * <i eyes, sat uneasily upon his seat; " So yofihg rs'n-y sister is, so utterly ignorant of the world ?" " 5?o much the better! All men are alike to her, having seen none of them." A smile \h\\t here escaped from Mar* giana was observed by Lord Widdrington, who asked her what excited it ? She would have excused herself from answering:, but he insisted. ' . '• I was only thinking, my Lord/' said she, •" from what opposite sources indifference in young women may spring. Lady Arlette •sets no value on any man, because she has seen nothing of men in general^ and those who have lived much in the world, run a cliance of falling into the same predicament, from having seen too much of them/* • ". Your sentiments will alter/' saidvBer- '- traim
tram coldly, " after you are married, niece/* " They must alter before/' thought she, "artel very materially too, or I shall conti¬ nue Margiana Winburne, and rest in peace/ 1 *• And how soon," enquired Ethelred, though grieved at what he knew to be the feelinys of his friend, <% how soon is Ar- lette to be engaged?" 14 At the same time that you are, my son/' Fehrcey's colour rose, and Margiana turned pale. " And my mother, my Lord, does she know ?" " She does, and thinks, as I do t that Arlette will be committed to the protec¬ tion of the worthiest of men, if, jndeed, he will charge himself with so wild a little animal. Ent,° continued he, " as we are only a small domestic party this evening, we
we young men, and bring her to us." Hthelred instantly arose, but Harold he¬ sitated. " Go thy ways', Honesty/* cried Lord Widdrington. " IT she is in one of her wild humours, she may require two of yon to steer her steadily hither. Have a care, though, you do not let her get from yon into the park ; we may not catch her again all night, if you do." This caution gave no surprise to Mar¬ iana, but Genevieve's looks bespoke the utmost astonishment, and she could scaivciy credit her own senses at hearing a human being in a-civilised country, and that be¬ ing, moreover, a well-born young lady, spoken of as a creature just caught in thw woods, and not yet tamed. Her attention was directed towards the* door
door her cousin was to enter at, with an intenseness and an expression of expecied wonder that amused iMargiana, who had never had an opportunity of telling her sister she had already seen Arlette : but she began almost to doubt whether that really was the case, when the young recluse ap¬ peared; for so entire was the alteration in her look, her voice, and her deportment, assisted bv the change in her dress, that Margiana could with difficulty persuade herself she had ever beheld her before, A close, strait, white garment, tightly drawn tip to her chin, fell below her feet; and her long dark-brown hair, that before had been twisted under the horseman's beaver, now fell in profusion over her forehead and her shoulders. The same countenance that appeared unnatural when disfigured by disguise, became her female garb, and the wildness of her tresses, to a charm. Her rich, dark complexion glowed with health; and her eyes, when she raised them 6
them from the ground, were two black brilliants, that gave life to the high co~ loured picture. But those eyes were veiled by their long lashes on her entrance; and with demure gesture and measured step she advanced to the door, where she made a low*curtsey, and stopped. " Come hither, fairv ! M said Lord Wid- drington." Have vou travelled all the way at that pace ?*' " No, faith," replied Ethelred, laugh¬ ing, '* I believe, at a moderate computa¬ tion, mv sister's fee? ha\e touched about one step in seven, from the Black Tower to this hall." " Little hypocrite," cried her father, as he ht Id out his hand for her to advance. ••' Look up, and see what company you arc- in' She curtsied again, though without rais¬ ing her eyes, and said deliberately, *• Thank vou, papa, a for this great indulgence/' ff Be
" Be a good girl, and you shall often be so indulged. But now tell me who those ladies are ?" ■ "I don't know, papa; I never saw ei¬ ther of them before, any day, in my whole life." " I am aware of that, but who do you suppose they are ?" " I never think of any thing, papa, but what I see in the Black Tower, as vou bid me." "Thev are your cousins, Arlette. Go to them, and ask them to be your friends." Affecting the utmost bashfulness and rp- luetance, she tiirned to approach them, .when they both rose to meet and envbnicc her. She received their caresses ifr silence^ :md without motion; but when her face was averted from-her.father, an arch stiiile .stole over her. feat arcs, arid'she-looked-: at them from;.the corners, of her*,eves with a drollery, of countenance that nearly over- ■came the gravity'.oLihem both/* ' ; vol,, III V ,c KOW
*< Kow Arlette/' pursued Bertram, # * what bave you to say to the rest of the company r Here is an old acquaintance of your's/* pointing to Arthur Wallop, ** whom you have not yet spoken to/* She went up to him. He shook her by the hand, and asked her how she did ? * e Pretty well, thank you," answered she, 1 oking comically in his face. " Have -you had a good dinner?*' Then proceed¬ ing to her brother, who sat next him, she put her arms round his neck, and kissed
&
* Very well," said Bertram; ** now go and do the like lo Harold." Immediately she stepped up to Harold, JBrh© looked foolish and surprised, wonder¬ ing what she woukl do next; but she con¬ tented herself with going behind him, and with both her liands *mming hk shaggy hair
moment after, to a seat that was vacant between Margiana and Genevieve, and fa¬ miliarly laying a hand on the knee of each. All this childishness was accompanied with a wild and natural grace, that lent a bewitching charm to every motion, " I perceive it will not be your fault, Arlette,' 1 said Lord Widdrington, "if you are not soon intimate with vour cousins. But now we will put your penetration to the test. Look at them both, and tell me which of them you think will be Lady De¬ lancey." Arlette gazed at each in turn ■; and then, after a little well-acted hesitation, kissing Genevieve's hand, said, " I think my bro¬ ther must marry this lady." " Why?" said Ethelred, curious to know her reason. " Because the other is so like you* she is fitter to be your sister. You must not 2£ *& t)G
be angry with me," continued she, in a low voice* to Margiana, <e for saying you are like him, for I assure vou we reckon him a surprising creature here. I wonder we ever shew him, excepting on Sundays and holi/avs/' " You have guessed wrong, httle one," said Bertram; <( the ladv on vour ri<jht hand is your cousin Maroiana, and it is she who is to marry vour brother." " 1 am surprised at that, papa." u Why do you think it surprising ?" " Because thev say you are forcing het to marry him whether she will or no, and that is enough to make her hate him." . " You are wrong asjain—there is no force in the case—your cousin will act as she chooses," " Then she will soon be at a distance from you/* replied Arlette, in an under¬ tone, which could not convey her words to Lord Widdrington, though Margiana feared they were overheard by every one else, Wet
Her father, who wished to shew her off - to advantage, now asked her so many questions concerning her amusements and various occupations, that she soon dropped all her pretended reserve, and talked with a freedom that seemed much the most na¬ tural of the two. Margiana enquired after Maud r i *' She is just dead," replied Arlette, coolly. •' Dead, cousin !" '* Yes; she was King Richard in Ponte- fract Castle, just now, and 1 was Sir Piers Ex ton ; and so, after a little struggling, I billed hew She gave me a deal of trouble first though/' " You make choice of terrible rough games,'* whispered Margiana; " you are always killing and fighting.** * % I never told her a word, however, about you know who; though I have thought of nubodv else ever since, cither
aeath. Bear Margiana, what is become of him 3# Surprised to find even thus lasting what she had considered merely as a childish and transient fancy, Margiana cautioned her to i\--:,ke no mention to Genevie\e of the person to whom she alluded, assuring her tha?: his being in the neighbourhood was a cW: timstar.ee known only to them- selves, arid that she had heard no more re¬ specting him since the night she had spoken to him in the castle. Ariel!r replie-1, she wished he might tie spoken t? every hour in the castle, for that she never could like any body else as long as she lived, " What will vou do then, cousin, if vour father chooses you should marry some other?* « Let
" Let him talk till he is hoarsej, and then choose for myself." Genevieve appeared to be rather amused than pleased with Arlette; her manners were too rough, and her language too blunt, when she kid aside all restraint, for the gentleness of Genevieve's disposition; while Margiana, naturally endowed with tnore vivacity than her sister, and a quick¬ ness of understanding that gave her a keener relish for whatever was singular, or other* wise interesting, entered into the full spi¬ rit of her oddity, and was in the highest degree diverted by particularities, and a whimsicality of deportment, that Gene¬ vieve thought rendered her more suitable to be a tenant of the woods and wilds, than a member of polished society. When they walked out, Bertram gave Arlette in trust to her brother, with a charge not to let her slip from him, and was deaf to her entreaties that she might £ 4 be
be indulged with a ride upon Skirmish; " For," said he, <f you would probably gallop off; and we should see no more of you to-night; whereas your presence at supper is absolutely necessary, as l shall then have something to communicate to you, of the utmost consequence to your* self. 0 " I wish/' muttered she to her brother, t( he would let me have my own way a little sometimes; that would be of more consequence to me than any thing else. But he thinks nothing right that is riot cf his own ordering, There never was such an obstinate old tyger! if once 1 can escape out of his nuaty paw-'*, 1 will lead hiuvsuch a dance jb shall not leave a bit of breath in his body/* 4 Then composing her features to a deco¬ rous gravity, she heaved a deep sigh, and said aloud, in a hypocritical tone, "Poor dear Skirmish, what a long time it is since 1 was last upon his back!" CHAP.
isggrgsrgg^r^
CH.VP. Vli. More than was expected Pooe Harold, more seriously unhappy thar*. he himself had imagined the news of Ar¬ lette's approaching nuptials, whenever com mumcated, could have rendered him, framed an excuse for not walking with the rest of the party, and, l<?ft alone, struggled to regain the appearance of a composure he did not wish Bertram to perceive had been at all disturbed : but vainly he endeavour-, cd to argue himself out of his own feel¬ ings, and asked his heart what it had ever x § expccted >
pointment f * e I never for a moment/* thought he> es supposed her father would dream of be¬ stowing her on such an one as 1 am; and yet, who will love her half so well as the only man who has known her from her infancy ? who will make half the allow¬ ance that I should have made, for those peculiarities that result from her strange education ? But it is all over now: I must adopt Margiana's system—make my friends as happy as I can, myself as easy as pos¬ sible with them, and think of marriage as a thing not meant for me, or I for it." The regard entertained for this worthy young, man by Margiana and Ethelred, rendered their regret little less severe than his own ; and when Arlette, on promise of good behaviour, quitted her brother's arm to walk with Genevieve, with whom, as she phrased it, she insisted on scraping abetter
a better acquai«tance, they lamented t@ each other the pain they believed him to be actually enduring. Ethelred declared he had no idea who was the person selected for his sister's hus¬ band, though what his father had said of Lady Rachel's approbation, gave him more pleasure than any other circumstance could have done, short of an actual preference of Harold. " Pray suffer me," said Margiana, <( to obtrude a question I have long intended asking you -the first opportunity. The twelvemonth I have always understood Lady Rachel vowed to devote to solitude has been long overpassed, and yet we see her not. What is her present motive for cstrano-tna: herself from her family ?" (< When we were called into Wales/* re* plied Ethelred, " my father informed me she meant to prolong her privacy and de¬ votions until our return. When that took k a place,
place, she forbore to join us;-an aoeouftte of the numerous guests who accompanied us home ; and the other day, when we were once tnore reduced to a domestic circle, and I wrote to her, entreating she would at length put an end to her austere penitence and confinement, she returned me an an¬ swer that, studious as 1 have been to avoid any reference to your peculiar situation, I should not have presumed to shew you, did not your present enquiry demand it as an explanation/* He then put into Margiana's hands a short note from his moiher, wherein she told him, that, as the time approached, which would either confirm his happiness, bv blessing him with the hand of Margiana/ or condemn him to celibacy and regret' through her final rejection, she had deter--. mined to continue her self-inflicted se¬ verities unseen bv every human eye, until- tlvdt important period; when she wouldi quit her solitude either to embrace her new
n, ew ^aug^ t er> ^on her ret urn from- the air tar, * or to *. take an everlasting -. farewell of her, when she quitted Widdrington Tower for the cloister. Lady. Rachel.-concluded by fervently invoking, every blessing on? the head ;of her beloved son, and,by as¬ suring him that her constant prayers were offered up to Heaven for. his happiness,, and the consent of his cousin to ensure it, by uniting her destiny with his." Margiana returned this letter in thought¬ ful silence. "It is impossible for me/' said Ethelred, " 10 reconcile this.-most un¬ accountable proceeding either with my mother's general character^ or any partir cular of her former conduct?: but so it is;; and it belongs not to me to make com-' ments, much less to condemn one whom hitherto I have had reason tO; look up to- as cue of the first.of human beings; a-s well for liberality of mind and excellence ef judgment, as for an exalted and en- tightened piety, far, very, far removed front sense L-ss
MAS#I-Atlai ■ sei»seli^3' ^Lipefstifion. M&ny> $%&?efow»- are rtie causes ©f anxiety thatj at this juncture, oppress me.- Uncertain of the fete reserved for myself, and which, under Providence, is in your hands, I know not whether in happiness or in grief I am des¬ tined to meet my mother again; and the present blow inflicted upon my friend* leaves me only to wish that Arlette might be mistaken when she said that you would hate tne/" ■ ** Heaven forbid,** saic? Margiana, ' ' that one whom on so many occasions you have laid under obligations never to be forgot¬ ten, should be guilty of so much injus¬ tice, so much ingratitude ! Were I capa¬ ble of hating you, for whom should I re* serve my esteem ? or by whom, indeed* could it be valued? 1 * "Oh, do not talk of obligations that it is m yenr power to cancel by a single word, ©r rather by changing a single word: but esteem is still your favourite phrase; and
far from sharing my father's sanguine hopes, I despair of ever hearing one morej tender fall from your lips." "If you never do, my Lord, foe assured no other ever shall." " Then you confirm my fears. Obdu¬ rate Margiana, what can you apprehend ? what cause have I ever given you to be alarmed at the idea of entrusting your happiness to me? Is it possible you should now, after so long an acquaintance, mis¬ trust my real character, or doubt the sin¬ cerity of appearances?" " Oh, no, no, Delancey ; do me not so much injustice as to suppose it. I have the highest opinion of you ; nor can your fa¬ ther, or even your partial friend, think you more deserving of every felicity. Had I a heart for love, it should be your's, and your's alone; but whilst that heart re¬ coils, how can you blame me for not de¬ ceiving you ? Ah, Ethelred," continued she, gently pressing his arm, from the fer¬ vency with which she wished what she said, « ah,
%t ah, that I could be vour sister 1 that you could remove vour affections from me to the more lovely, and, perhaps, more yield¬ ing, Genevieve !'* " Had I never known you,'* he returned, " and had 1 believed ncr »ieart disengaged, she would, indeed, of all others, have been the Ject. of mv choice: but who <ai think of Gene\ieve who has once loved Marganai*. No; if ai the approaching crisis you persist to reject me, never, I swear, while you are living ------" &< Bind vourself by no oaths, my Lord. If you persevere in your present senti- luciits, they are useless; if you do not, you will repent them/ 4 " Would to Heaven," said Ethelred ear¬ nestly, " I could conquer either my own ■a * 1 * /V 1 i ' * love or your indnierence ! " 1 almost wish you could/' replied Mar-, giana, hardly knowing what she scud : %i but let us change the subject. The e\ il day of. decision is not yet arrived, why should we. foi-estall it?'* .
>tr Have you determined what that deci¬ sion shall be?" She hesitated; but at length said, " I have my doubts, Ethelred/' * r Of what* Margiana ?" t!r Of the authenticity of my father's will. But/* speaking rapidly, " I shall know more ere long; and from the ac¬ quired knowledge of circumstances I must be guided. Be the event, however, what it may, no time, no chance, nor any thing short of change in yourself, shall ever abate my friendship for you," As she concluded these words, afraid of saying too much, she hastened on with Ethelred to join her sister, and they soon returned to the castle, where they found supper ready in the great hail; but Harold did not appear to take his seat at the table till he was summoned. On his entrance, Margiana made room for him to sit beside her, and felt at that moment
piness as her own. Her attentions were Involuntarily so much directed towards him, that he gratefully felt her meaning, and exerted himself to receive her civili¬ ties as he ought, till Bertram, on the at- tendants having withdrawn, told him he should take care m fature not to allow him si place next to his niece; "For," said he, u when you have won her heart from Ethelred, what benefit wiil it be to your-
tP
" You need be under no apprehensions, ry Lord ; it is not likely any lady should estow her heart upon me." ** Whence thfl sudden fit of humility,
" I hope it is not a sudden one, my ,ord. I hope T never was presumptuous/' ** There can be no presumption in tak-
ing what is offered
»
Harold dropped his eyes under what he
alarmed
alarmed him 3 lest Bertram had penetrated the secret bias of his affections; while Ethelred, to relieve his embarrassment, ob¬ served that few offers could be made him superior to his deserts. " That is high praise," said Lord Wid¬ drington, " and well-merited. Will you, Arlette, join in it 3 and since Harold can¬ not marry your cousin, who is engaged, undertake to reward his good qualities by becoming his wife yourself?" " My father!" exclaimed Ethelred, in doubt whether what he heard was seriously meant. " 1 foresee no objection from you, De¬ lancey ; but I speak to your sister, Ar¬ lette, consider Harold Wallop as your fu¬ ture husband, His affections, I know, have long been your's, and you can never be united to a worthier man. Harold, Arlette is your own. The same day that unites your friend with Margiana, shall join my daughter and yourself/* One
■r One less modest, or less in love than Wallop, would instantly have been at the feet of Arlette or her Hither; but, as ii afraid of crediting the testimony of his own senses, he sat with a countenance of mistrust and wonder, not daring to look at either, till a load huz%a from his uncle re¬ called his recollection. Raising his eyes then to Bertram, he said, "Are you seri¬ ous, my Lord?'* " I am," was the answer. " W T hat have I done to deserve so much blessedness? But is it possible Lady Arlette can consent to ratify such promises? 0 " Arlette knows her dutv, and that I am a father who will be obeyed. Margiana, Gene¬ vieve, Ethelred, congratulate your friend/' " Congratulations, Lady Arlette/' said Harold, " are of no value to me till you have sanctioned them, I can never make a suitable return to Lord Widdrington, for his intention of bestowing such a gift upor* me; but all my future life shall prove my gratitude to.you, if you confirm it/* Arlette
Arlette hung her head, and was silent; he continued. "I find my Lord has penetrated those sentiments I was far from daring to reveal; but now, with equal pleasure and pride, I confess you have been the beloved cf my heart ever since I fet knew I had one. Unworthy as I am, suffer me to hope you will not be less indulgent to me than your father has been/' Arthur Wallop repeated his huzza, and filled his goblet to Lady Arlette's health. ic My dearest Harold/' said Ethelred, re this is the happiest day I ever knew in •my life." f " That you may soon know a happier*, dear Ethelred, is the best wish I can form in return for your kindness/' {j S Margiana, as she sat next to Harold, strove to speak congratulations; which >he ■mingled feelings of her heart denied her the
hand on his arm, and emphatically said* " You deserve it all."
enevteve, more composed, because less interested, quietly wished him joy ; and turning to her cousin, felicitated her also. Arthur sounded a third huzza, and again filled his goblet to the health of his nephew ; whilst Arlette sat as she had done ever since tier first surprise was over, with her fingers twisted together, and her eyes fixed on the oor. Her silence, however, by all but rgiana, was thought the natural result of bashfulness, and therefore passed un¬ noticed, till, on the rising of the party, Harold, approaching her, bent one knee^ £o the ground, and would have taken a hand which she withheld from him.
44 That is right," cried Arthur Wallop; ,^u^ht not to be sppikd. He will
ivtll value vour kindness the more here- after. Here's to your better understand¬ ing ! * and he filled his goblet a third time, and once more made the hall resound with Jus huzza. Stunned with the din, Arlette looked at Margiana ; and meeting a reproving, though a friendly glance, which she imme- diatelv understood, she stretched out her hand to f-Tarold, with hesitation and an ill grace; but neither were perceived by him. He caught it with fervour, and held it to his lips a moment, for no longer was it accorded to him. The instant Arlette could recover it, she fled to Margiana, and threw herself into her arms; every other person present be¬ lieving her overcome with timiditv, though Margiana, without any surprise, heard her say, ** Now mv father really imagines I in¬ tend to have this porpoise ! Poor old man! who would suspect his being so very silly ? You and I know better, Margiana—-some fine moonlight night, remember?" A dispute
. A dispute that now arose between Lord Widdrington and Arthur Wallop, prevent¬ ed her saying more. The latter insisted on going home to Warkworth Grange that evening, and the former was trying to per¬ suade him to stay where he was. " 1 would not but go," said Arthur, "and overjoy my household with the good news to-night, to be made your son-in law my¬ self, had you another daughter to bestow on me to-morrow morning. My horse, my horse s directly, I say; I will be gone, though I return bv day-break/' " My dear Harold/' said Lord Delancey, "\our uncle will be making anoihei viti^, from Rothbury of it, and visiting the bank* of the river, tenite he is <o bent uoon go* ing, you know there is no ci«an;:e of slojv ping him, so vou or 1 had better order our hor->e and ^o with him, for it .will he mi- r»oS"iible to follow him qn fool at the rau he will ride at " . « "•/,' •' ' " .* ' '•"•*•. vi 1 will tet of/ im^acdiateJv,' 1 returntU II** Oil;.
Harold. "Thank you for reflecting for me* for all my own recollection is gone/* The two sisters now added their solici¬ tations to their uncle's, seeing how ex¬ tremely unfit Arthur Wallop appeared to guide, or even to sit his hone ; but, as is usually the case with men in a state of ine~ briation, or of dispositions radically ob~ stinafe, the more they said, the more he declared himself resolved to have his own way; and with some anxietv, till they *■ * *■' found hr; nephew meant to go also, they went wiih him and their uncle into the court-vai\L wh?re, the moment he found himself on his saddle, lie plunged his spurs inio the sides of a high-fed horse, that had doni' no work for the preceding six days. Aorceable fo the expectation of every one present, this insult made the animal unrulv ; but Arthur, to the surprL" of *'!, !Tut!!-t,'.i?H*vl his seat. The horse now .■eared,, now L '?:cd, til!, wearied by hi*.
own efforts, he seemed disposed to stand still ; and Genevieve, good-naturedly alarmed for his rider's safety, seized the interval to advance a few steps, and en¬ treat him to return into the castle: but Arthur no sooner guessed her design, than, rashly and violently using his whip, he made his steed suddenly wheel round,, strike out with both his hinder legs, and then start forward at full speed. Harold, not aware of any mischief hav¬ ing been done, kept close by his uncle's side, determined not to lose sight of him; hut poor Genevieve in the meanwhile, though she appeared beyond all possible reach of the horse's stroke, had received such a blow on one knee, as occasioned her to fall senseless, from the pain, into the arms of her sister and Ethelred, who in¬ stantly ran to support her. The latter carried her back into the hall, whence she was immediately com eyed to bed, and pre¬ sently recovered from her fainting; but though
though she had sustained no injury that could be called material, she was quite disabled from walking for several days. ,j, Margiana bitterly lamented this'Xfm- timely accident, which rendered it impos¬ sible to think of escaping with Kendrew on the evening that, of all others, seemed to promise tiie most favourable opportu¬ nity. She forbore, however, to utter re- pinings that would have fretted her sister, without answering any useful purpose; and, on the contrary, soothed her by re¬ presenting, that owing to having now more leisure for reflection and contrivance, a better plan might be constructed than be¬ fore. " To this end/' said she, <e I will see Kendrew, if possible, at the appointed time. Singly I do not fear being abb to quit the crouded hall without observation: and even if I am missed before I can reach it again, my voluntary return will con¬ vince my uncle he need not mistrust me; h '-' and
and ^re shall hereafter, perhaps, %e in« dulgedwith additional freedom/' 0encv : eve, unupd to the exertion of jlffging for herself/implicitly adopted her sister's Opinion, as she shared her anxiety to learn the import of Kendrew's promised communication; and both, trusting to Providence, resigned themselves fo cir¬ cumstances, though Margiana secretly re¬ gretted the necessity she was under of still holding Ethelred in suspense. On the dav following Genevieve's acci- dent, Lord Percv returned to Widdrington Tower, and with him the Earl and Countess- of Northumberland, Lady Percy, the re¬ nowned Douglas, once Henry's foeman in arms, but now one of the most valued of his friends, and all those who had gone with him to'. Alnwick so lately before. The satisfaction expressed by this young hero at the honourable alliance promised
of Ethelred; but Arlette,, when not under her father's ve, turned, with a reluctance she attempted not t<f-'"disguise, from the congratulations offered %& her. Even in hb presence, Margiana caught her putting up her saury lip; and as often as she named Harold Wallop to her, when they were unheard, so often did Arlette exclaim, i- " Oh, when shall we see Lord Lothian agz'm e Dear coz, let us be gone the in¬ stant your sifter can walk/* She was now freely suffered by her fa¬ ther to join the company ; but the estima¬ tion in which she saw her lover held, made no impression on her young mind. " I believe he is a worthy soul, and a good fighter/' she would say ; " but what signi¬ fies that to me, while he is as ugly as sin ?"' Harold could not but observe her cold¬ ness towards him, " With this unfortu- l 3 nate
nate rough figure of mine," said he to Margiana and Ethelred, " how could I ex- pect her behaviour should be otherwise at first ? Pray Heaven she may ever become sufficiently usedtct.it, to behold it without dismay P J When the Bay appointed for the grand entertainment arrived, and which was the twer.tv-fourth anniversary of Lord Delan- cev's birth, a new scene was exhibited at 'r Widdrington Tower. Three long table:? were plenteously covered in the great hall, at which sixty persons sat down to dinner, wtile minstrels, stationed on the large staircase, made the walls re-echo to the sound of martial music, Arlette, en- chanted by a spectacle so novel to her, said she thought Heaven could not be much finer; and Genevieve, who had been v assisted down stairs, to partake of, at least, the sight of so much iestivitv, observed to her sister, that, with the help of a little imagination.
r imagination, they might fancy themselves at Windsor Castle, at one of King Henr) *s splendid feasts, In the evening the minstrels awakened a more snrightlv strain. The tables were re- moved, and all present, save Genevieve and Lord Percy, whose particular favou¬ rite she was, and who chose to pay her the compliment of sitting by her, joined in the dr.nce. Even Bertram prevailed on the Countess of Northumberland to ac¬ cept of him for her partner; and Margiana welcomed a sight so favourable for her me¬ ditated short evasion. She herself was dancing with Ethelred, when, complaining of the heat, she beg¬ ged of a young lady, whom she fortu- natelv at that moment saw discnpaired, to supply her place for half an hour; and, unseen by her uncle, whom she observed at the remote end of the hall, and by Scru¬ ton, who, with the other domestics, was
busily employed in offering refreshments of fruit to the company, she passed under the great staircase into the stone passage leading towards the stable yard; but, avoid¬ ing that public quarter, she turned through a little gate that opened into Lady KarhtTs flower-garden, and from thence, with ea^e, got into the park, where she ran with tha utmost fleetness, hardly stopping to take breath, till she had reached halfway to the burying-place. It was then necessary for her to look around and ascertain her road, for one of those heavy sea-fogs prevailed, so often brought to that side of the island bv an east wind. There was no beaten path; bur, well accustomed to walk that way, she thought her^lf sure of being ';;ht, and a:mH ran swiftly and fearlessly for- ward, till she distinguished the thick hedge¬ rows and tall trees that furnished the en¬ closed country surrounding Warkworth village. Shaping then her course a little
more to the left, from which she had top much deviated, and with unabated speed, she soon (bund she had ccovered the right direction; and a few minutes more brought her within sight of the grove, in the cen¬ ter of which the burying-place was situ¬ ated. Ker heart flevs forward to meet the faith¬ ful Kcnlrew. " Now/' thought she, " I shall learn if indeed I am In filial duty bound to cbsencwhat is called mv father's V* ^ i i - I.i^ht as wind she sprung into, the grove,, and had ncarlv reached the outer arch of ihe building, when from, behind some bushes two mon rushed forth, one of whom sc ; scd htv iii his powerful.grasps v/./ilc the oilv r i'are.w a thick cloak*over ;,cc i'.cnd, tu btuie her crico; and with the r,,/;.i:v <-f t:KiH-j;ht they both lifted her (..- I,. •,•:■■: I tc!, I'< lore a thivd. whti wurc- dut'Jv, al u fV.eiu pace, icii\ing die grevt^ x, i> quilted
quitted the pa k, and struck into a lane that ran westward, behind Warkworth Grange. Fruitless were Margiana's efforts to dis¬ engage herself. The man, a savage-look¬ ing figure, whom she had never seen be¬ fore, held her tightly with his left arm, while he guided his horse with the right. Th$ cloak was twisted nearly to suffoca¬ tion across her mouth, and she had the free use of her eyes alone; but the mist was so intense, even these were of little use to her, except to discover that they were almost immediately overtaken and joined by one of the other two men whom they had left on foot in the grove, but who was now ably mounted, as well as the ruf¬ fian who held her.
CHAP,
CHAP. VIII. Less than was expected. The dancing was continued an hour after the departure of Margiana, when Ethelred was alarmed by her long stay into a belief , she was ill. Hastily quitting the hall, he called for Maurice, her page, and bade him enquire after his Lady. The youth repaired to Joyce, who* dreadfully fright¬ ened, hurried to Margiana's apartment and not finding her there, sent for her husband, and asked if he had observed her leave the hall ? lie flew back lo see if she was not there; but when Lord Delancey h & informed
informed him she had been gone above an hour, after complaining of indisposition from the heat, his heart misgave him that she had escaped. Without a moment's de¬ lay, he communicated his suspicions to Lord Widdrington, by whom he knew he rould not be blamed, since he, as well as himself, had been present at the time of h er leav in "• thc asscmb 1 y. Berlram turned pale at the intimation t)[ new?; as un thought of as thev v,rvc un- w 11 c o sue a 11 d a' a r m i n g ; a n d t o m m a 11 d i s i g horses fo be saddled, gave immediate or- d; j rs for i:unui;i.'>- a variety of dire .lions in sc-'in cf his nk-ce. while lie- caused the f-tricts-u scrutinv to be made in and about the ca.flc, and closely questioned Gcnc- ^icvo on the subject of her sister's ah- sl nee T-»n r-enevieve's verv timiditv made her f.wiiii'uilv preser\c ihe secret known only to herself. She trembled lest Bertrams suspicions-
suspicions should lead him towards the bu¬ rying-place, though the slightest intima¬ tion of what had really happened would have made her reveal all she knew to the whole company, in the hope of Margiana being recovered. But at length, as the night advanced, and as it wore away, her own alarm became intolerable. Fears, for which she "ould find neither name nor ut¬ terance, filled her heart with anguish, which ihe absence of Ethelred and Wallop forced her to conceal, for they were both gone in. Dursuit of the beloved fm irve; and to them only could she think of com mil ni- eating what she had been toi J concerning Kendrew. Arlette, in the mean time, was occupied with very different thoughts. All her ideas flew towards Lord Lothian, concealed in the obscure village of Warkworth ; and making no doubt Mardunn h:\-X iicd ta him, ihe glowed with rcs< ntment at bein»- left behind, after having confided to her cousin.
cou-in her favourable sentiments towards him, and her wish to escape from Wallop. An ordinary character would, in the same case, have published what appeared most likely to betray Margiana's destina¬ tion : but'Arlette was no ordinar) charac¬ ter ; and a very different, and a far wilder project, took imperious and irresistible hold of her imagination. Every word she had overheard to pass between Lord Lothian and Margiana, on the night he had so fascinated her juve¬ nile fancy, now rushed to her recollec¬ tion. Margiana had acquainted him with her wish to seek refuge wh Queen Isa¬ bella at the court of France; and had in¬ timated a design of sending him instruc¬ tions concerning herself by Maurice, her page, whom she had appeared to speak ©fas one not known to Lord Lothian, On the other hand, that nobleman had given her ample directions how and where he
was to be found. Arlette knew he went by the name of Henry Lonesborough, and was at the house of one John Eversham, a yeoman of Warkworth. This was more than sufficient for her daring, capricious, and resolute temper. She thought of Lord Lothian with all the admiration of which a ytfang, ardent, and inexperienced fancy w# capable; and this predilection made her detest the thoughts of an union with Harold Wallop. The one appeared to her romantic imagination an angel of grace and oratory, such a being as she could not have believed to be in existence—the har¬ binger of freedom, with whom to live, would be liberty, variety, and delight: the other, however deserving, as no more than a plain, honest soldier, rough and unpolished, who might, perhaps, restrict her as severely as her father had done; and whose residence was so contiguous to Wid¬ drington Tower, that if she accepted him, she must sfill, in a great measure, conti¬ nue under her father's eye* The
The confusion that reigned throughout the castle, and the preoccupation of mini that left to none of its inhabitants any lei- sure to think of her, powerfully operated to determine Arlette's measures, and in¬ duce her to grasp what her ignorance and want of judgment-led her to believe a -slot mo us opportunity, which, if she neglfj||^ ed, her whole future life might be wasted in the repentance of not having secured. Her father and Scruton were searching every vault, turret* and tower of the cas¬ tle. Ethelred and Harold had mounted their swiftest horses; the one to pursue the London road, tue oiher to trace the fugitive, if possible, io the coast. More than* half the domestics were dispatched different ways, and the remainder were engaged in attending the astonished guests. At this period of tumult, hurry, and confusion, Arlette determined to cast thev die for her future destiny, She
a remote part of the building; and know¬ ing in what room ihe pages usually slep*-, she hastened thither unseen, eNchan^d her dress for one that would enable her lo juv^ for Maurice; ntul sitting fire to bur own cloathsj which she left burning in the chimney, she extinguished her lamp. Hew down stairs, out of the castle, and, wiih the swiftness of some mh ] animal, to whh h her father had so justly likened her, sped by the shortest path to Warkworth village, familiar to her when a child, and arrived breathless from haste and agitation at Ever- sham's house. Her repeated calls for Henry Lonesbo¬ rough soon awakened all the family. Lord Lothian, hearinir a youthful voice at an* hour so unusual, readily admitted the hope of its proceeding from Margiana's mes¬ senger, and hastened to dress himself and meet the enquirer. Arlette's
Arlette's heart bounded at the sight of him, ^aiid she now believed herself free and happy for life I . " My Lord," said she, assuming a hoffrse, boyish tone, i4 Lady Margiana is surely here ? My name is Maurice, I am £ her page," Lord Lothian, with astonishment, de¬ clared he had neither seen nor heard of Margiana. u Oh, then," returned the young and ready impostor, " if I did not find her here, I was to implore your assistance for her. She has fled this night from the cas¬ tle, and bade me tell vou, unless she was already with you, that she would hasten to France. Ere now she is doubtless at the sea-side; let us not lose a moment in re- pr/irin«; thither, and we may chance to overtake her before she can embark. Lord Delancey, Harold Wallop, and all Lord Widdrington's*
Widdrington's domestics, are sent in pur¬ suit of her, but none of them suspect the way she is gone/* ->*■ " W T e have then no time to trifle/* cried Lord Lothian ; " not an instant shalj be wasted; we will fly like the wind: but what port did she make for?" " I know not that," replied the pretend¬ ed p^ge, who, how r ever, really was of opi¬ nion Margiana had directed her course to¬ wards the sea; " but she ordered me to tell you she would, if possible, avoid all towns, and rather trust herself for the pre¬ sent to a fishing-boat, than risque her suc¬ cess by ?.ny delay. If you do not readily find her, she begs you will embark and join her at Calais." In a very few minutes, Lord Lothian and his infatuated follower were on horseback, and far from Warkworth. No*Mart>iana rould they hear of, though in several vil¬ lages they found various enquiries had been made concerning her to no pur-
pose. On the coast, she had not been seen : but the false page insisted on his- lady's directions. Lord Lothian hired a small coasting-ves.?el, to convey them to France; but calms and contrary wind.>, which set in on the third night, and con¬ tinued to blow strongly, detained them on the water eleven days. The impatient lover, therefore, wis far from surprised afc not finding his idol at Calais ; however, he proceeded with his faithful adherent-.tc* -Dieppe; but no English-lady having been> /•lately heard of there, he resolved to hasten* immediately to Paris, and was sanguine in his hope of discovering Margiana unde$ ^ the protection of Queen Isabella. All this time, not a suspicion of having. been imposed upon ever entered Lord Lo¬ thian's imagination. Arlette's complexion, her intrepidity (for whether at sea or oa horseback, she appeared without sense of d.mger), and her perfect ease of deport- Slant, beneath a garb which, in her wild' if QK CSy.
frolics, she had often been accustomed to assume, all enabled her to personate *so exactly the character she had undertaken, that no doubt was excited of her beinr what she seemed. Yet her manners indi¬ cated to Lord Lothian an education supe¬ rior to her apparent station in life, and he sometimes questioned her respecting her parentage. It was a subject she led him from as often as he recurre# to it; but thft very circumstance, as well as some expressions she at first unintentionally dropped-concerning her father's rank, in^ duced an opinion either of her havino* sprung from some now decaved family. formerly of superior distinction, or of her being more nearlv allied to Margiana's fa- ther than even tha* gay and gallant noble-' man had ever chosen to avow. The cunning Arlette perceiving thl-i, nnd that she was in consequence, treated with more respect, as well as more regard, che¬ rished the mistake, and promoted, it by eve* y
every appearance likely to suit a well-born youth reduced to servitude. She affected mystery* would own to no other name than Maurice, and intimated that the late Lord Widdrington had bestowed- on her an education that would not have dis¬ graced a son of his own. Thus she en¬ sured to herself a treatment perfectly de¬ corous; and by the tale she told, which co-operatec%with foregone circumstanceSi Lord Lothian was completely deceived. & Though he had hitherto failed to discover If any traces of Margiana, no question could arise in his mind of he; having really quit- ■/ ted Widdrington Tower. The search mak- ing for her on the coast of Northumber¬ land by a person whose description corre¬ sponded with that of Harold Wallop, con¬ firmed the report of her own page; and that page spoke of her intentions as if in¬ timately acquainted with them. He now burned with impatience to reach Paris, where he made himself certain-of finding
, finding her; and imputed only to the waste of time at sea, the loss of that delight he should have felt at escorting her thither. Meanwhile Arlette trod on air, and fan¬ cied, and even felt herself, too happy for a mortal. What, indeed, must have been the feelings of one to .>hom simple free¬ dom, or a scamper on Skirmish roend Wid¬ drington Park, was felicity, on being sud¬ denly brought out into the world, taken to a foreign country, and placed in the center of the gave-.t and most polished. city in Europe, with uo one to controul her actions, and no other companion but him who, to her idolatrous ianey, appea ed the most perfect, as well as the most en¬ chanting ot human beings? Well might Arlette experience a delirium that over¬ powered every consideration of prudence, forecast, and decorum ; for though con¬ science and instinct convinced her there was impropriety in her actual situation, yet, as may naturally be ^supposed, her ideas
ideas of delicacy were by no means so de¬ cided as those of any other young woman brought up in the usual way ; and Lord Lothian, moreover, anxious to create, if he could not be said to preserve, esteem in Margiana's breast, was studious to suffer no incorrectness of behaviour to escape him within the knowledge of a modest youth, whom he -considered to have been almost her confidential attendant, durinsr the time she had suffered under her uncle's tvranny. His first concevn on arriving at Paris, where he had vTten been be P. re, was to furnish himself with domestics suitable to his rank; and the verv first cl-v tV»t he could appear properiv ox co:srt, he pre¬ sented himself to the Frer-ch mo.-K-rch. Charles the Seventh, as an Hi^>li.-!» Mrble- man who wished to pay hisdutv to the rvzl Oueen of England. The courteous Isabella readily admitted
him ; and, perhaps from a tender recollec* tion of Iter husband, and the country over which he had reigned, gave him a more favourable reception than she had ever vouchsafed him in England, where the pro¬ fligacy of his manners excluded him from any share in her favour. But when she understood what event had brought him into France, and that he expected to have found her favourite Margiana under the shelter of her protection, at her brother's court, her uneasiness was serious and severe. Of Margiana she had received no infor¬ mation since her own departure from Lon¬ don, above eighteen months before; and she now partook of Lord Lothian's alarm, and feared some misfortune h:\d befallen her, in her attempt fo escape from V.mr. land. The only conjecture that seemed sufficiently probable to sooth her appre¬ hensions, was, that Margiana might have altered her original design, and taken re- \ C I. * ill* %l If icr** 4 A 3{^tt #Uh *^p
fuge in some convent, either in her own country or in France; and Lord Lothian believed this so likelv, that he determined, after mating enquiries at the monaste¬ ries of nu>at note tin and near Paris, and towards the English Channel, to return, in case the) rroved unsuccessful, and re¬ new his search throughout the religious houses in England, But when, on leaving the palnce, r.e was met by Maurice, who with a lace of un- feigned anxiety came running fo receive the earliest intelligence he con d obtain of her he called his beloved lady, the dV- tress he inflicted by a recital of his ill suc¬ cess, endeared to him more than ever, the supposed faithful page who felt it. They mingled their expressions of disappoint¬ ment, and, indeed, Arlette's regret was at least equal to his own. The natural goodness of her heart made her deplcre the strong probability there
was that Margiana had encountered some. fatal mischance ; and besides, she now be¬ gan to look forward to her own future .prospects, with a degree of troublesome anxiety. If Margiana was not soon discovered, what would become of herself? she could *iot alwa\s continue to live with Lord Lo~ thian as Maurice, the page; and her cheeks glowed with confusion af the idea of re- veaiin-j to him her real name. Now, for r.'ic l.;ht time, it occurred to this thought¬ less child of nature that she had embarked m a romantic ad'-cnture, without at all coi-sideriivr v ^at the end of it might be, md hawser m;::ht provide against the exi- 'icniic-; t!v;t tr.i;rht occur. She had be- Mowed a refieuion on nothing beyond t<caping from paternal restraint; whereas bhe now suspected, that to have achieved that was the easiest part of the undertak¬ ing. However, it was still delightful to live with Lord Lothian, lie seemed now m 4 i more
more disposed to treat her as a friend and companion, than as one who had ever filled a menial station; and therefore she %vould endeavour, at least for the present, to dismiss all embarrassing ideas. Besides, Margiana might soon be found, and then her prudence and judgment, of which Ar¬ lette, with all her giddiness, was very sensi¬ ble, would no doubt devise a means of properly discovering to Lord Lothian what she could not explain io him herself with¬ out expiring with shame. While experience was thus forcing re¬ flection upon Arlette, and the dread of difficulties till now unforeseen made her look back with less exultation at what was past, Lord Lothian was indefatigable in his enquiries after the lost Margiana. Nei¬ ther within the walls of Paris, nor within ten leagues around the city, did there ex- ist a holy sisterhood of nuns where he used not the rhetoric of words with the abbess, and of gold with the portress, to gain the wished-for
wished-for information. Many listened to his tale with patience, a few appeared in¬ terested in his distress, and others, amazed at his vehemence, and a volubility capable of astounding even the ears of a French¬ woman, believed him deranged in his in¬ tellects. But every where he received the same answer—No young English lady had be¬ come a member of their community ; and after every excursion, he returned to. the house he had taken, of which, in his ab¬ sence, Sieur Maurke was the ostensible master, with abated confidence. Instigated, however, by the supplica¬ tions of the interesting page, the next morning his investigation was renewed ; and whole days, and often several days tor gether, were spent in a search productive^ only of disappointment and fatigue. Arlette now had time more than suffi- m 3 cient
dent for meditation. Ker thoughts bore her back to the home and kindred she had left; not, indeed, to her father, whose treatment of her had never been such as to conciliate her tenderness, but to her mother, her brother, to Margiana, lovely as estimable, and now perhaps the victim of some disaster, that had snatched her for ever from her anxious friends—to Gene¬ vieve, whose mildness and elegance had easily created an interest in her young af- fections—and even to Maud, the little part* ner of her childish studies, the chearful companion of her playful gambols. On-the images of these she dwelt till the tears gushed from her eyes, and she wept till Lord Lothian's return obliterated the recollection of ali bur himself; and he, when he perceived she had been crying, gave her credit for an attachment, that, as it spoke an interest more lively than is usual with domestics, confirmed his opi¬ nion of her ^consanguinity with Margiana. ■* ■• The
The most consolatory endeavours to sooth ber uneasiness followed, and he could not but love one who so entirely partook of his own feelings. Again Arlette's fickle heart began to waver: it was true she should rejoice to see her friends again, but at any time she could return to them; whereas Lord Lothian, once lost, perhaps might be lost for ever, at a juncture to.T when, if he knew her real name and rank, as distinguished as his own, his heart,* now fixed on one insensible to his passion, might probably yield to her as its unri¬ valled enslaver, These considerations determined Arlette still to have patience; yet, weary of be¬ ing left so much alone, she one day begged to accompany Lord Lothian, who having for the first time heard of a convent about six leagues from Paris, was preparing to go thither, to make the customary enqui¬ ries. This request being readily consented to, they set off together on horseback; $$ 4 and
and the fineness of ihe day, the pleasant* ness of the ride, and, above all, the charms of her companion's conversation, soon made Arlette forget every mortal care. They were both discoursing in a strain so lively, that no stranger could have be¬ lieved the anxiety of either very oppres¬ sive, when the sky becoming suddenly overcast, threatened one of those heavy showers that are so frequent towards the latter end of summer. They had rode about half way, and were on a large open plain,, where there was no habitation nor any shelter in view, excepting some high old trees discernible near half an English mile off, which Lord Lothian said he knew overshadowed the walls that surrounded a very ancient monastery of Ursuline nuns, which had been one of the earliest objects of his search, concluding that the solitude of its situation might have recommended It to Margiana* "Let
" Let us make for those trees," said he; " they stand, I remember, very close to¬ gether, and will keep us dry from a longer shower than this is likely to prove." They were presently there, and found a respect¬ able-looking old man had already posted himself beneath the cover of the as:ed branches. As the rain fell, they entered into con¬ versation with him, and finding he lived in a small habitation hard by, they civilly commended the beauty and verdure of the surrounding scene, and particularly its se¬ questered? appearance, so near a populous city. " Yes/' replied the stranger, (t it is a very secluded spot,* yet, quiet as it usually is, we had a terrible topage here, even in this very place where we are now standing, only a few days ago/* " How happened it ?** asked Lord Lo¬ thiaa. m 5 "Whv,
" Whv, it was a scandalous sort of a bustle," returned the old man ; " it was occasioned by a surly Englishman, who chose to put a young lady, his niece, into yonder convent, whether she would or no. I chanced to be passing by at the time, and saw them both, though at some little dis-, tance. She was a pretty personable lady,; and se|med resigned enough at last to do what he would have her; but a croud pre¬ sently gathered round him, hearing he had forced her there, and he w T ould have been roughly handled, had he not been admitted jo take refuge behind these high walls till the mob dispersed, and then I saw him come out again, for I staid till it was over. But she, alas, poor soul, was no more seen ; and several persons heard her cruel uncle say, he hoped he had now secured her for life. It was a piteous sight to be¬ hold a fine young woman shut up in such a dismal place for ever, and against her wilLtQC, A son of mine, who caught a glimpse of her face, said it was a very comely
comely one. But the rain abates now. Messieurs; I must be going, for I have a long way to ride before night." "O my Lord!** cried Arlette, clasping her hands together, as soon as the old man was out of hearing, « what must be done? this can be no other than my dear, dear lady ! How shall we release her ?" "Heaven be praised/* *aicl Lord Lo¬ thian, " for the discovery ! This rain has been a blessing sent from thence; for hav¬ ing already been here, I should not have thought of repeating my enquiries, but for this lucky encounter/' " But what must we do ? how must we proceed?'* interrupted the impatient Ar- Jette. " The first step necessary is to establish some communication, if possible, with Margiana herself By what means that m.iv be accomplished, requires some con¬ sideration. We must exercise our in^e- nuity as we return to Paris, for after what We •
we have heard, it is needless to proceed farther." >• Arlette, rash and inconsiderate, was for going immediately to the convent, and endeavouring to obtain an audience, or,; at least, a sight of the young English lady; but Lord Ldthian, more.aware of the ob: stacles that crossed their path, would not listen to so wild a project. *^No/' said he, ft now that V hope we have sure grounds to proceed upon, such imprudence would be insanity. Furnishr ©d with the intelligence that we have re¬ ceived, it is worth our while to be cau¬ tious. Even I, for once in my life, will depends wholly on prudence, and leave no¬ thing to chance that can possibly be guard¬ ed against/' • •* . The pretended page was compelled to aubmit,. though, in. addition to her strong desire
desire of seeing Margiana, she dreaded re¬ turning to Paris, where it was now not improbable she might be met and recog¬ nised by her father. But her fertile ima¬ gination soon provided her with a scheme, the very mention of which Lord Lothiaa hailed as an omen of infallible success.
" Since I have been living with my lady/* said she, " at Widdrington, I have frequently, for the amusement of Lady Arlette, her cousin, who is a very whimsi¬ cal girl, been dressed up in woman's clothes; and every body told me I looked as natural in them as if I had never worn any other. Now, could not I, by having recourse to this disguise, obtain a free en¬ trance into the convent? and then my dear lady, being provided with one friend without the walls, and another within them, will surely be able once more to avoid her uncle's persecution." Lord Lothian was so enchanted with' this stratagem*
^ratagem* which he complimented Sieor Mau ice by calling the most ingenious of all human devices, that he rode back with the utmost speed to Paris, impatient to behold the transformation pf the pretty page, that he might with his own eyes judge what chance there was of imposing him for a female on the holy sisterhood; and his immediate care, upon reaching his own house, was to provide various changes of raiment proper for the experiment. Equipped in one of these, Arlette looked so pretty, and, as she had assured him, so natural, that he declared little Maurice was the handsomest girl he had ever seen ; and in a frolic, giving her a hearty kiss, swbre he would try what sort of a lady he could make himself. Seizing then one of the suits, he ran off with it into his own apartment, leaving Arlette delighted with a vivacity so like* tier own; but when, after changing his dress,
dres^s, he returned, she was equally sur^ prised at his feminine appearance, and ter¬ rified at his determined resolution of en¬ deavouring to gain an entrance into the convent himself. "" If ydu can be admitted," said he, " why should not I ? I am very little older than you, nearly as slender, and, if any thing, your complexion is the darker of the two; besides, your hair is almost black, and mine is a light brown : for stature, many women are taller than I. Why, I tell thee, gentle Mauritius, I shall be thought the likelier lady of the pair. The frolic will be a celestial one, and neither mortal nor demon shall dissuade me from it. To-morrow morning, therefore, be in readiness. We will be respectably at¬ tended; Pierre and Claudien shall be sworn to secrecy, and go with us to the convent gates, while plenty of English gold shall secure our admission. To-morrow, oh, heavenly thought! I shall be at the feet of the
Ihesoul-suJbduingMargianai! I will foo*- ■toyi her sister's name, and call myself -S&tiF Genevieve. What appellation wilt thou bestow on thyself, my wondrous pretty page ? *' " If it would not be too presuming," feturned she, casting dowi* her eyes, " I would make free with that of hef cousin, and be called Sceur Arlette. But J hope you will not think of executing so pro¬ fane a scheme as that of going into the convent yourself?'* . *' Sceur Arlette then let it be/* inter¬ rupted Lord Lothian; " but not a word against my project; I would not relinquish It Ibr the kingdom of France: and what greater pro fan en ess shall? I be guilty of than thyself? O thou young hypocrite '/' Poor Arlette, distressed, confused, and feewildered, knew not what to reply; and the next morning Lord Lothian, persisting in his inexcusable plan, put it in execu¬ tion as h;i bad contrived. v ., According
. According to Ms eKpectation, he ob¬ tained ready admittance, and a chearful welcome, from the devout Ursulines, who 5 were charmed at the prospect of having their society enlivened by two handsome young women of genteel appearance; while the abbess, and the old ladies imme¬ diately next her in authority, gazed with admiration at the rich contents; of Sosur Genevieve's purse, which was drawn forth to advance the price of a week's board for herself and her friend. Lord Lothian now thought he was verging to the summit of earthly felicity : he had ensured, he imagined, a residence under the same roof with the woman he persuaded himself he was madiy in love with ; and he felt certain, that, however she might condemn the unwarrantable step he had taken 'for her sake, she had too much humanity to discover it. But, alas! hardly had he solaced him¬ self
self an hour with these entrancing visions, than he made the dismal discovery, that mor- tal hopes are often only empty air-bubbles. On enquiring of a pretty young pen- sioner, named Sceur Clothilde, if any Eng¬ lish ladies belonged to their commu¬ nity ? she replied, fi Only one, a charm¬ ing young woman, who was brought here a little while ago by her uncle, against her inclination: but I know not whether we shall ever see her again ; for three days ago, by the help of a curious contrivance, -she was dextrous enough to slip past the portresses, and through the gates; so we have lost her, at least for the present; and 1 much question our recovering her, for though her uncle has been informed of her escape, and is doing his utmost, we are told, to trace and bring her back to us, yetshe is so witty, and so clever, that I think she will be too many for him at last, wih all his cunning." ">''*. ' ' : EWD OF VOL* III. ■ > :
