Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Don Raphael: a romance
^ ■ ■» ■ ■ ! ' 'l niiniini 1Л11тш*штеш—~<тт» DON RAPHAEL. CHAPTER I. The Pangs that Ibarpeft ilung were in my mind ; There defolation reign 'd j and there, cut oif From focial life, I felt a confiant death« Thomsonê r< ΓΊΓΛ X HOUGH you fee me difguifed in this ftrange disfigurement, and holding no communication with mankind, I am a Grandee of high birth and fortune, and my name would immediately make me known ; but this I fupprefs, having been long fuppofed dead, even by many at the court of Madrid.
vol. hi. в lam
2
"I am the eldeft fon of our houfe, and fince ï have retired to this foreft, my eflates have all devolved upon my younger bro¬ ther. He alone is privy to my retirement, and bound to fecrefy by the poffeflion of eftates he muft otherwife give up. <( I cannot, I dare not touch upon the various incidents which attended the fatal paffion I entertained for Lady Sempronia. My.difappointment at the preference flie gave a man fo much beneath me, entirely unhinged my reafon ; and mofl certainly, if this misfortune had not overtaken me, I ihould have executed fome fcheme of terrible revenge ; and I have been told, that my greatefi flight of phrenzy, wheri I was chained naked upon a bed of ftraw, was the fancied acìion of tearing the Mar¬ quis piece-meal; and I muft acknow¬ ledge, that even now, nothing would give me greater pleafure than to trample him beneath my feet. "When I recovered from this greateft of human calamities, (as it levels our nature to that
3
that of brutes, or even below them) my favourite amufement was forming fchemes to embitter the life of thofe who had de¬ ftroyed my happinefs ; but the Marquis had fufficient prudence to quit the court, and avoid my prefence. tc A lady of independent fortune, whofe father had been governor of Lima, and whofe name was Donna Almedia de Valajos, was left the fole heirefs of his immenfe property, he having died on his paffage from America ; and her beauty on her arrival at Madrid, became the theme of every tongue. Her riches were the ob¬ jeci of univerfal attracìion, and even fome Grandees of the Empire, overlooking the obfcurity of her birth, offered her their hands. Amongft others was the Count de Pandolfo, younger brother to Mirandula, —a profligate and a fpeñthrift. " The circumftance of his being brother to my former rival, determined me to oppofe him. In a word, though I had no particular inclination to the lady, I married в 2 her,
4
her, to be revenged, in fome degree, upon this hated family ; and 1 felt no Hide pleafure in heaping on the head of one brother,the vexations the other had brought on myfelf. " Perhaps there is not beneath the fun, a greater foUy than for a man to marry a woman with indifference in his heart. If fhe has beauty, it becomes infipid ; if fhe has wealth, where is the value to a man who has already more than he can prudently expend ? The charms of this lady foon cealed to pleafe, and domeiiic life became irkfome, becaufc Almedia had no pride in any accomplifhments but thofe of her perfon, and fhe was, of all women, molt unfit for a companion to me: yet I dif- guifed my indifference, from pride, and all Madrid believed that I was happy. I experienced fome pleafure in promoting this opinion, becaufe it leffened the triumph of the Marquis^ and increafed the chagrin of his brother, whom neceffity compelled to enter the army, I had
5 ·' I had fome inclination myfeîf to re-af- furne this profeffîon, which 1 had exerci fed during my minority, as ï hoped it would ^ amufe my attention ; but the birth of a fon led me from thofe deftgns, and bent my thoughts to his education, intending to form him upon a plan of my own, which fhould inure his body to every fatigue» and his mind to ewy noble чггше. The ma¬ levolence of my ftarsforevtT thwarted all my projecìs, conftantîy raiftng up fomè objeci to deftroy me. I had a friend whd had been my fellow foldier, and the lharer of all my fecrets. There was nothing, however dear to me, that he did not know, and I valued his txrancils and company before that of my only brother. " The name of this man was Alencaftro. His family was noble; but he inherited none of the virtues of his anceftors, being deceitful, treacherous, and malicious, tik fpeeches flowed with infinuating mildnets, and his external behaviour was a pattern of piety. He knew my indifference to Al- B 3 media.
6 media, and hb treacherous heart fought to take advantage of thefe circumftances, which his comffamt intercourfe at my houfe rendered extremely eafy» 4 It was by accident my jealoufy wa§ roufcoV he having fo fecurely blinded me, that I Ihould as foon have fufpecled my own brother ; but gomg by chance into a gallery, which led to Almedia 's dreffing room, 1 faw him prefs her hand to his lips; and hearing my fteps, he turned fuddenly away in fome confufion. " This incident was like a fpark of fire, upon dormant combuftibles, and if I had not with fome difficulty fmothered my firft refentment, they would both have perifhed on the fpot. Yet, though I fupprefled the firft rifings of my rage, it was only that I might have more flagrant convičiion, and more powerful ftiraulantsto the moft fignal revenge my fancy could fuggeft. I re¬ membered that it was Alencaftro, who had firft prompted me to this union, and nego- ciated
7 ciated mv introduction, and 1 faw no date to my dííhonor. " Mv fon, whom I commanded the nurfe to bring to me every day, became an object oí doubt, and his fmiles could not move me to kindnefs. I examined his features in different points of view, with the moft: gloomy regards, and perfuaded myfelf that he bore a greater refemblance to Alen¬ caftro than I. " * Shall this creature/ faid I, * receive my protecìion and n u rtu rage ? fhall he be¬ come the heir of my eftates, and call me by the name of father ? Shall people look to him as the prop of a noble houfe, hitherto untainted in its lineage, and I not blufh at the profanation of names, and not fink into fhame at the prai fes they will beftow?* " ( Take him,' faid I to the nurfe, '* rear him at my palace, on the banks of the Tagus. Never let him be brought again into my fight, or his name be pronounced in my prefence.* 1 в 4 ŕf I mide
s
" î made no one privy to my fufpiciom ; and without appealing jealous, I myfelf became a fpy upon their aciions That fecurity, which fo often proves fatal to thofe who have, for any length of time praciifed evil, afforded me more than fuffi¬ cient proof of my own dtfhonor. " ï perceived my wife one evening, flip into one of the fervants' apaitments; nor was it long before my perfidious friend fol¬ lowed the fame road. My fury was kindled in an i n liant ; I hafte ned after him, deter¬ mined that his blood fhould waft out my difhonor. I found hire entangled in his cloaths, and inftantly ftabbed him to the heart. He fell upon the beds ftreaming in blood, and had fcarce time to acknowledge the many wrongs he had done me, before he expired. " I turned from him, to wreak my ven* geance upon Almedia, but fhe had efcaped, and without giving any alarm to the feiv vants, retreated with fo much fccrcfy and difpatch, that from that hour to this, I have never
*$β?
never been аЫе, with the ©tuoa vigilance, to difcover her retreat ; though &c con¬ trived means to receive her private for¬ tune, which î had not power to touch. She knew too well the violence of ют dif- pofition, to attempt a recondEatkm, or to place herfelf i« my way. " Wheu I reflecied that î had committed murder, however excufable, and that with¬ out a witnefs to the provocation, I began to fear that fome fcrutiny might take place, from the effecìs of which, even my power might not protea me, the family of Aleir- cailro being eonfiderable. <·' I was obliged to make a confident of a tru fly fervant, who provided me a cheli, in which the body of this perfidious friend was placed. " I circulated through Madrid, my own difhonor, by proclaiming the flight of my wife with her paramour, offering very large rewards, for the difcovery of both, or either. My fervant- Giles, alone wás in the fecret, and to him I trufted the conveyance в 5 oí
ία of the chea to this esáilcv Ыштж myfelf Ibortiy after. ťI fte gloony defo^io® e^ : ery chsmber pcefeBted, fluted the difpofitioa of my mind ; the peculiar and romantic 1кш£кш, and above all, the many tales G ile* had picked up at Leom, attncbsd my atteetsoe. ît was then 1 conceived the plar», which J af tern ards execmttâ- 1 caufed a gbfs renin to be made for the body of Alen- caí tro ; and to gratify my hatred, 1 v ifi ted it every dav while I remained here, that I might contemplate the prog«* of hb decay. "It was at this time that my acquain tance with that mifcreant Filelfo commenced. Undone by his extravagance, and ban i ih ed fociety for his crimes, he had fought a flicker in the thick fhades of this foreft, and probably, when he could without danger, he ventured to attack the unprotected tra¬ veller. It was fuch an occafion brought him to my notice. I was walking one evening alone,
11 аЗЬ»е, wfca Ъе îmààtmiy fprang шр©ш me } àtmznémg œy mo&tj . éi I wM farprìzed, bot I iromediatery re¬ membered to have hsd kmt pointed out to me m ^ gusbkr at Madrid, «md calfín^c haa bv hk real паше, ( for that of FììelJb k af- fumed} I requefted him to paofe a »omen t before he proceeded, for I had two fer¬ vants, not twenty paces behind, though the buihes hid them from fight. " lie was ftarted at this intimation, and begging my pardon, inquired by what means I knew him. {£ I faw at once, that this was the man I flood in need of, if I could fecure his fide¬ lity. This was not difficult, as he knew himfelf in my power; and that, indepen¬ dent of his prefent outrage, I had only to declare his retreat to bring him to punifh¬ ment for many crimes, he having been de¬ clared an outlaw, and a reward offered for his perfon, dead or alive. fr l beftowed upon him fome prefents, and promifed him others, if I found him faith ful.
" 4 Шт/ ùàà % to mj ШС, ť Kmc wil 1 be ampi v re\e-nged щюж ту евеш*е«. Here m a retreat fecure fro» al mvz&om ; this caftk contains ferret ckarabers v and tremeíidü^ dungeons; fro® whence, whoever к immeried, can newer efcape. In orne oí thefe, I will conine mv fai t ii lefs wife, with the putrid body of her lover be¬ fore her. In another, I will fecure the perfon of the Marquis, a fid their neareft relatives fhall never know the termination of their doom/ " İ left my fervant with orders to repair the walls, and fecretly to furnifh the cham¬ bers I had marked for my habitation ; nor did I fear tbe prying eye of vulgarcuriofity, fuperftition having drawn an impaflàble barrier around this place ; and it was with difficulty, Giles procured workmen from a diftant town, to undertake the labour. "This caftle had been for fome years in¬ habited by an enthufiaftic reclufe, whofe fudden death, as he was exploring the vaults, loaded with putrefcent air, gave rife
to 'пшишегаМе abfurdities, froia which f f urßifeed ¡h trexaeíadotís tale, which Fiielfo tool; care to circuiate. - I repaired w iffe thb mar^proíeíttc: by the appelktíon of my fermant, to Madrid, where he made every poffible inquiry after Almedia, employing all the water- carriers in the town, but to no purpofe. " You will wonder, no doubt, that a man of mv characler fhoukl be led into mea- fures like thefe ; hut yet, after what you have known of me, you muft ceafe to won¬ der at any thing. " During this period, my fpirits were kept in perpetual agitation, the mofl Outrageous extravagancies pleafing me. The fon of Almedia haunted me night and day, and I wavered long, as to the manner I fhould difpofe of him : " Shall I Tuffer this rep¬ tile to live," faid I, " till he ftings me ? ïf he inherits the perfidy of his parents, he will not be held by the ties of gratitude, fhould I even fuffer him to live in obfcurity» Better that he fhould at once die, than for
ever
ever remain an objeA of hatred and fear. So great was my abhorrence of this wretch, that í fhould wiih fatkfacìioa have de¬ ftroy ed him myfelf but I hsd no oppor¬ tunity, without hazarding detection ; and, though I did not regard either the laws, or their puni ihm ents ; yet to have died ίοτ a viper, the offspring of a perfidious villain, would have ftung me to the foul. To Fi¬ lelfo I delivered this tafk, and I recoHeci with what infernal alacrity he received it. " ť There is át this moment in Madrid/ faid he, ť a choice fpirit; he has been a bravo at Rome, and he was afking me, if I did not know of a job: we can manage the whole with the utmofl care, but we fhall not be able to appear for fome time/ " I gave him a confiderable fum, and they fet out for my palace, on the banks of the Tagus. At the dead of night, they broke into the houfe, and proceeding to the chamber I had marked for them, they filently entered the room. The boy was aileep
15 äfkep in the arms of his faithful nurfe. who awoke on the lighten tread, fcreammg for help, aï the fight of two ruffians, who muled forward to tea? her charge from her " I confefs that my foul was mocked at the detail Filelfo wrote me afterwards. The poor girl being murdered by feveral wounds, as ue wrapped the boy in her arms, and both together were thrown from the window into the ftream. The fer¬ vants were alarmed at her cries, and thefe rumäns efcaped with the greateft difficulty from the fame window. So daring an out¬ rage created eonfiderable alarm; and though I offered immenfe rewards for the detec¬ tion of the offenders, fufpicion was raifed, that I myfelf was guilty ; and though my rank confined it to rumour, I obferved that my company was fhunned, and my recep¬ tion every where cool. " ' I hate, I defpife, I deteft all mankind,* would I repeat, ' and I will quit them for ever.* ' "The
Iß
€C The body of the atrrfc was found tî,e next day» and fom« days after, pürt of the boy's drefs, and a handful of his hair ; his mangled body being, no doubt, entangled amongft the rocks. "The rapidity with which î had been fti- mulated from one crime to another, left no time for remorfe ; but now, when I had fatiated my revenge, my mind became tor¬ tured with doubt. I became abforbed in the moft gloomy melancholy, and my countenance too certainly informed the world of the troubles that preyed upon me. I recollected the many infantine carefles, the fweet fmiles, and the fchemes I had formed for this boy ,* and I would have given my domains, again to have reftored him to life. In this fituation I was found by my fer* vant Giles, on his return from fitting up the caftle. I heard his arrangements with gloomy fatisfacìion. ť Giles/ faidì, ť you know the reafon 1 have for hating life. You know that I am the moft miferable of human
17 hatean beiof&, and that »either power, nor riches, mm MeaMka^ mm love, nor family connexion s, imk me to fociety ! Y ou are aa orphan and a widower, ana the wc rid to you can kav« very little value, What iky you l· Wäl you quit it with шс, and live in al the foMrude, which nature and retirassent сап give ?' ίΛ ' ' Moft willtngly, yowr Excellenza/ re¬ plied Giles, ' provided you will not forTer a woman tocóme near us. Afi mifchief rifes from them/ " From that time Giles became more my companion than ferrant; and having turned over all my eftabli/hments, I reared to this caftle by fo diftant a route, that no one knew of my retreat, and it was be¬ lieved, that I had died fuddenly on a journey. "I had not been long fettled here,beíbre a companion of íilehVs, the fame whom you faw buried the night of your arrival here, came to inform me that Filelfo had fecreted himfelf in Catalonia; that for a fum
lam of money îfcey wontó lewe Spaiti it r ею, and undertaàe ro do me яоЫе juf- lice hďmt their departure, bv еНшт'тш. both the Мтщтт mê his lady. My hžart fåod»fereii at thm in&raal iwopøiltton. * ж The fire of ш? refeatment had been еж* tiis^HÍÄcd in the i vlood oí mv own farøifv. I firicHy charged diem not to injure an hair of Aeir heads ; but if they áeíigneá to ferve me, to convey ro Fiielfi»'* cmtmge one of the daughters of the Margots, which fhould be moll like her mother. Accident conduced Cornelia to his power, and flrange ж it may appear, fhe paffm« I had had for the mother, f now placed upon lhe in Emt daughter, and with a degree of ro¬ mantic madnefs r conceived the áeíign of educating her, at fome future period to be my wife ; fondly hoping, that never know¬ ing any other, her affections would all centre upon myfelf. I confidered my marriage with Almedia as completely fet afide, and had fufficient influence to pro¬ cure a difpenfation from the court of Rome,
19 Eome, when Cornelia fhotiM arrive at fuf- ficie»t age. Mow are all my proýečb blafled ? How am ï become oto fubjeél of perpetïiaî mafa&ciáaa ? No phis tltat ï form (wcceefk. It appeajs as if the judg¬ ment of heaven hung öpon me! And thai like Czm, I am become a mark for vengeance ? My fervant Giles, died fome vea» fince. ------ Bot î йта, Lorenzo, fo «ucà »ifey «-* upo» шу foul, that I caaaøt procaeá. ------Some other ťlISBiP»-»* ..... ri " ff Ш fl2ürted up at thefe words, and ft^ug· ging to conceal the tears which fwelled to his eves, he darted out oí the room, not however forgetting to turn the key upon me. I remained for fome urne abforbed in refleciion. The fufierings of Don Raphael excited my pity, but it was difficult to fay whether he was more a madman than a high fpirit fighting with misfortune. I lamented the fatality which had brought me
m me within the circle of hh power, ma from whkh I faw no means of efcape. Would anv ether man have entertained a project fo abfurd as that of rearing a child to become h'm wife? Did he forset t hírt y eats wouJá change his countenance, smú time deftroy the ûnuaûmeh of hk forehead? Ша he know L· fittk of die fex, after fuffering diH%hts of άβηριαβης, and tbe treachery ď Almedia, m sot to know the powers of externau appear**^ and that a man more young, and more gay than himfelf, might deftroy, in one in- flant, all the hboer of years? Alas, how truly has this been exemplified î The very innocence and ignorance of Cornelia contributed to difappoint his aim, and difiblve the illufion of many felicities* What man then inali, hereafter, plan fchemes which depend upon the inclina»» tions or affections of the fair ? a founda¬ tion of land would be more fecure. But why do I reproach them with inconftancy or want of difcernment, when ourfelves are equally
21 equally erroneous, and equally fickle. Love Ы a phantom of imagination, created in the mind by the reflection of a pleafing objecì —an objeci which ftrikes us in a powerful manner ; and we inftantly deco¬ rate it with alî the fancied perfection with which we wifh the partner of our choice to be endowed. Can we wonder if this fame object fees with diffèrent eyes, and fancies that ano¬ ther poffeffes thofe qualifications flie her¬ felf is feekingr after ? Sould we then upon rejection flv into thofe extremes which Don Raphael in¬ dulged, as if we had received fome capital injuries; when in hči it is only our pride that is hurt: for where is the man, or where is the woman, who does not imagine himfelf or herfelf equal fo the objeci in view? Who does not think rejection an infufferable affront to their felf-love ? It is thence arifes that ardour of purfuit which will not be overcome—that deep refentment when a rival is preferred—be¬ caufe
22 caufe h fea declaration of our inferiorii ν: r a declaration of all others the leaft to be brooked by that haughty and imperious animal-—man. φ Ah ! thought I, had I reafoned in this manner formerly, all might have been well. I fhould have married Chriftiana, who in fo many accomplifhments is fuperior to her fifter, and Don Raphael might, unrivalled, have infpired Cornelia with thofe fen tí¬ mente, her refpecì for him as a father, would for ever have banifhed. How calmly and judicioufly do we reafon when we have not the power to alter cir¬ cumflances. It is then that paffion no longer clouds our intellecìs, and we per¬ ceive every thing that we ought to have done; but till this period arrives, we might as well attempt to argue with a ftorm, or repel the wind with our breath, as to turn a man from his purpofe. Thus it is that the wifdom and experience of ages will never make wife the prefent generations of the earth. You
23 You rauft excufe my recounting to you my reflections, fince I had no other mode of am u feme n t ; and fortunate it was, that my mind found a never-failing fource of employment within itfelt which fet at de¬ fiance the impregnable walls of the caftle, and foared free and unconfined over all matter, and through all fpace. It is almoft incredible that after this fingular vifit, and ftrange confidence of Don Raphael, more than a month eiapfed without his once fpeaking to me. He then paid me another vifit equally abrupt, and without touching upon any circum- fiance of our mutual misfortunes, he en¬ tered into a long difquifition upon philo¬ sophical fubjeeìs ; and I more than once faid to myfelf, " Can this indeed be Don Kaphael?" I was charmed with the profundity of his thoughts; and from the fafcinating manner of his expreflions, I felt the fame defire of friendfhip arifing, which at firft fo powerfully attracted me. "How much is
к it tø he lamented." faid I, after his depar¬ ture, " that he fhould poffefs two charac¬ ters fo extremely oppofite. His under« derftanding к elegant, hts fentimënts ше poli fhed» hut hh patitomi are a whirlwind accompanied by fire," Affer thb converfatton, Don Raphael feemed to take increafed pleafure ín my company. I carefully avoided touching on thofe fubjeeìs that might lead m to jar» with the diftant expecbtion, that time might rela* his rigour; and if once he permitted me the range of the caftle, 1 fhould eafily find means to efcape. But how little did I know him to entertain fuch a hope ; for after three months, when f ventured to hint that mv health fuftered from the heat of the weather and the want of air, his countenance changed, and ftarting up» he left me without uttering a word ; nor was it till he had ptmiftied me fome weeks with his ufud filent vifits, that he condefcended to become again fa* miliar. Thus
fii Tht», with intervals of calm, and feafons of ftorm, the days glided away, and the long nights oí a fécond winter clofed upon me. 1 dared not to make any inquiries con¬ cerning the flate of things in the world; «or would I fhew, by impatience, that I Mt the galling bondage that opprefled me.
you «f· e CHAP»
26
CHAP. И.
X HE gloom of the weather infpired us with gloomy fubjeeìs, when we met. The wretchednefs of man, the tranfcience of his exiftence, the certainty of his death, and the uncertainty of his future ftate, were exhauftlefs themes ; and as if we had not in our own individual misfortunes, fuffi¬ cient fubjecl for melancholy, we were for ever conjuring up dark ideas, tifi fuperfti- tion had acquired the afcendant, and the mind enfeebled, ftarted at a found. It was in thofe difpofitions, that I tmm* bled at the midnight breezes, which fighed ал they entered m ƒ cel ï where, chcerlefs and alone, I lay upon a bed of ftraw. The
£7 ! vnoanings of the winter's wind acrofs the mountains, feemed like the complaints of fpirits in the air. And why, thought I, may it not be • given to thofe etherial forras, to wing the realms of fpace, and vifit invifiblý the planets of many worlds ? Our religion does not forbid us to think; for it hath not en¬ tered into the heart of man to conceive the fituation or happtnefs of celeftial fpirits. . Thefe flights of imagination often led me fo far, that I was tempted to believe that fupernatural founds wandered through the caille ; and for fevers! night», I araufed my¬ felf with Mening to the fleeting noife», which in thefe ancient buildings a breath of wind may caufe. One night the wind was unufually bud« The tempeli was turbulent without, and f lelt the beams of the caftle move beneath me as ! lay. Sleep was a Uranger to me» and I traced over from my ßrii remem* brutee the variations of my fate, e £ The
ÜB The wind roared along the turrets of the caftle, and 1 fancied that fome ftonefc were ftiaken from the building by the ïioife í heard. After a few minutes, all again became ftlent. I liftened to the wind as it blew in gufts, oi 4 fighed gently my window, till I f^âcied that İ could hear thediftant found of footfteps. Surely, thought Ï, Don Raphael will not •vifit me at this late hour; perhaps he fears the ftorm will approach this building, and bury us in its ruins. Again the wind fli ook the tower, and liftening attentively, I became almoft certain, that fome ftep moved near mc ; a deep figh convinced me 1 was not deceived. ï raifed my head from beneath the pall, which in this cold weather 1 ufed as a coverlid ; but all again remained hlent, except the wind, which died away, to rife with greater fury. Sud¬ denly I perceived a ray of light dart through the darknefs of my dungeon ; the black hangings facing me, were cautioufly lifted up, and a female in mourning robes, holding
S9 holding a dim lamp, moved forward, with a flow and doub%g pace. My attention was rivetted to this aÜonifhmg v i fi t an t, wifh fear and wender. The vifton looked round with a cautious fcrutmy, and fear feemed ílrongly impreifed upon the pale features of its face, which I fancied bore fome refemblance to Donna Christiana. I refrained almoft from breathing, that I might not caufe this beautiful fhape to va-« niíh ; and wondering what could be the purport of this viiiti I endeavoured to collècì my reafon to my affiibnee. This figure paufed for a moment, and feemed breathing forth a mental prayer; then fiowly moving into the room» it ftarted at the fight of the black pall, covered очет tbe body of a man, whofe face was «early as pale as its own. Then ilowly Hooping ta read tbe characters, it fighed forth the ' name of Lorenzo, and immediately fell to the ground. I ftarted up, being now convinced that what I beheld was no fpečíre ; and ileeping с 3 aa
so * as 1 always did, in my cloaths, I ran firil to preferve the lamp, which was nearly expiring, and then haflened to fatisfy my¬ felf in the reality of this extraordinary vifitor, who had fo ílrongly reminded me of Chriftiana, I found fo little fpirit remaining in this beautiful body, that I feared it had fled for ever ; and preffing her in my arms, I en* deavoured to recall her to life, by every endearing name; for however I was to account for her appearance, I was now cer* tain it was indeed Chrifliana. I was little lefs furprized, that Ihe ihould be yet alive, and find means to enter my chamber, than if it had in faft been the celeftial fpirit of this amiable maid. The finali quantity of water which re* matned in my pitcher, contributed to her recovery, and after fome time, flie began to recollect her fituation. ** Lorenzo,*' faid the, in a murmuring voice, ** do you t hen Jive Ì I though t j uil now, vou hail been dead, and the garments of 0
31 \* ï '' f t r \ of the grave over you. But are you not a prifoner like myfelf ? " " Can it be poffible, my beloved friend," faid I, " that you are confined in this caf¬ tle ?—By what right does Don Kaphael de¬ tain you ?" " By the right of power and of out¬ rage/' replied fhe. " I have been kept in this difmal place, fince the time that you left me at Leon ; when 1 fuppofed my fa¬ ther had fent two ruffians to conduci me to Portugal. But I did him injuftice ; they were the agents of this terrible Don Ra- phael, and they eonducìed me hither ! " " Waf Don Raphael one of thofe ruf- " No/' anfwered fhe. " He met us upon the road, and it was plain from the anger he expreffed, that feme miftake hud been committed* He appeared ftruck with aftonifhment at firft feeing me, making many inquiries of the men which I did not hear, and apparently with very great in tereft. The Шие trunk which thefe men c é had
S2 had brought with them he opened upon the ground by torch-light, and no fooner glanced his eye upon the letters, than he clofed the box, and after fpeaking a few words with great agitation, to one of thefe men, whom I heard him call Filelfo, he mounted and rode with the other towards the city. ' f Filelfo conducted me to this caftle, where a poor frightened old woman, he called dame Sylvia, was ordered to attend me ; but, poor creature, fhe had more occa¬ fion for attendance herfelf; being fo ill, that ihe was, evidently, near death. " I was conducted to the chamber in the tower heneath this, and dame Sylvia ap¬ pointed to attend me. Fortunately fhe had fupplied me with a liberal allowance of proviftons» for fhe came no more, and Don Raphael has fince informed me that flie died fuddenly the next day. " I knew not the danger I was in of re¬ maining ftiut up till 1 died of hunger; till on the fécond day I was furprized by the entrance
за entrance pf Don RaphaeL I had only feen his figure faintly by torch-light; but now the griet horror, and rage, which was printed on his dark features, infpired me with the greateft fear. He fat down, and af* fuming- an air qf fcindnefs, apologifed for the violence of his people, afking me a thoufand queftions. I anfwered him with¬ out tinger* requeuing him, fmce it was a uiiftakøj to pernii! my return." " ' Lady/ replied he, ' that is not in my pow,er to grant. Every thing but. liberty you may afk of me.—Your table ihall be fupplied with all that the feafems can be- ftow—mufic and books fhall be at your command: and if you pleafe in my com¬ pany to tafte the frefh air of my gardens* I fliali be happy to attend you. U is the deftiny of providience which has brought you hither, to fupply to me the place of your fifter/ " You may believe that I was »ot a little furprHed at this, action, replying с 4. that
34 that ftill he was under a miftake, for that I had no fifter." " ♦ To your knowledge perhaps/ replied he; e but you had a fifter, though her crimes have brought her to the grave. Yes, lady Chriftiana, I know you, and your family. The fate of the Marquis, your father, is in my hands. In this caftle your lifter Cornelia was reared from in¬ fancy by my care, but íhé fled from me to the arms of an impoftor—a wretch with¬ out a name. It was her I expečied to find when I found you. I have fince feen her, but it was in the amis of death—the con¬ fequence of her crimes.' « I cannot repeat to you, Lorenzo, half that he faid to me; nor all the Angu¬ larities of his behaviour. He has kept me here near two years, under a confinement as light as was confiftent with that name, and treated me with as much kindnefs as if I were his own daughter. When the weather is fine he permits me in his com¬ pany or his fight to amufe myfelf in the gardens.
35 gardens. He provides me all the poems and romances that Madrid produces; and he fometimes liftens to my poor perform¬ ances on the guitar, till the tears will roil down his cheeks, and he will then fly from ray prefence. Yet with all this;he never will attend to my requeft of liberty." "Don Raphael," replied I without com¬ ment on this narrative, " is the moft ex¬ traordinary of men. With fo much care, how have you been able to find the means of entering the chamber? Had you any knowledge that I was detained here as a prifoner like yourfelf, though treated with much more rigor? " " No," replied flie, " I have never feen any other than himfelf, nor has he once hinted to me, that any one eKe was within the caftle. It was, perhaps, more than ac¬ cident that has eonducìed me hither. " The room which I inhabit, beneath this, is larger and better furniflied; but it is hung round with old tapeftry, fo deftroyed by
36 by rfme and damp, thai it can fcarce fup- port its own weight. if I have been frequently alarmed by a difmal grating noife, when the wind Ыщ been loud, fomething like the low working of а Ше, and my mind has often given way to fuperftitious apprehen fions. ί( This night, when the wind raged with unufual fury, and fwept howling acrofs the fret-wörk of this gothic old caftle, I was afraid to fleep, left 1 ihould be buried in the ruins. The fame grating noife filled me with a thoufand fears, and I almoft ex- peeled to fee fome unufual form ileal from behind the hangings, whence the found came. On a fudden the wind roared with unufual fury, and was followed by a tre¬ mendous crafh, as if fome part of the build¬ ing had fallen. At that moment the hang ings were rent from the top to the bottom, a door flew open, and a large ftone rolled into my room. At firft I was fo terrified* and my heart beat fo violently, that ï thought I fliould faint; but recollečbng myfelf^
37 myfelf, I confidered that the founds I had fo often heard, muft have been occafioned by the moving of this door on its rufty hinges» and it was evident the fall of this ftone down a narrow ftaircafe had forced it open, with a violence that had tora down the hangings. I fummoned all the courage I poffelfed) find recommending myfelf to the power which has hitherto proteeied me, I took up my lamp, and began to explore this ftaircafe^ the fabric of the caftle fhaking beneath me. On one of the fteps I found the blade of a fword* probably broken in forne fkirmifh. " The flight of narrow flairs were only capable of admitting one perfon at a time. They commenced in my chamber, and terminated with a door fattened by bars fo rufty, that they were half eaten through, and required only a little care not to make a noife. " I was about to retreat at the fight of the crucifix, and the coffin, which filled me with fearful apprehenftons ; but confider·*
38 ing that I fhould perhaps never have an opportunity like the prefent; I ventured to raife the curtain—but, holy virgins! I fhudder now at the horror that thrilled through every vein, when 1 perceived the body of fome perfon ftretched upon the floor, and covered with a black pall; but when I read your name it was too much to be endured, and your voice alone could have brought me to İife." At thefe words flie remained filent, turning her eyes upon me with that look which always gave her face fuch inexpref- fible intelligence. " Chrifliana/' faid Г, " this is, perhaps, the only opportunity that will ever occur for our efcape from the power of this re- lentlcfs man. in the morning he muft certainly difcover the damage done to the tapeftry in your apartment, and this com¬ munication will be again clofed. Lend me the lamp, and while you remain here I will examine if no other paffage can be found/' I took
39 í took the lamp, carefully examining the wall as I defcended, but no other open¬ ing appeared, till I was turning into Chrif- tiana's apartment, when I found that to the right opened another door, but this was fattened on the outfide. Hope was not now to be deftroyed by by trifling obftacles. I haftily afcended again, arming myfelf with the fword blade, which lay upon the ftairs, and which I propofed to ufe in cutting through the door. Chriftiana attended me, and not fearing any interruption from Don Raphael at this midnight hour, I began to labour, the ftorm without concealing the noife I was obliged to make. It was more than an hour before I fucceeded in cutting an opening fufficient to admit my hand, and then with much labour I fo loofened the old rufty bolts, that in an hour more we had another flight of ftairs before us. With great caution we ventured to de¬ fcend, not knowing into what place we might
40 might be led. Ï almoft flcketťed at the fight of another door, terminating thfcfe flairs ;< but fortunately it was locked in the infide* and with very Utile difficulty: I thrufi back the bolt. Chrifliana carried the lamp, preferving her ccmipoiure with admirable refolution, fortified by her en¬ tire dependence upon the protecìion of heaven. We now found ourfelves in a fmall apartment, the four fides of which were flone ¡ no other door was vifible but that by which we entered; and ftrong fu^ pies in the walk informed щ, without words, of the purpofe of the place, There was no window in this dungeon, but I was fatisfied we could not be fo foon under ground, my chamber being on the third ilory. Upon the floor lay a ladder broken in two, and i confidered that it was poffible this might have once been the means-of entrance· I raifed the light above my head, to ex¬ amine the roof, which was low, and form¬ ed of uppoüfted planking ; aj&d after a mi- nu te
41 nute furvey, Chriftiana pointed out to me the appearance of a trap-door, but how to aicend to it was a difficult taik, and I was . obliged to leave Chriftiana in the dark, while I returned to my own room for the pall, which, cut into flireds, ferved to tie the ladder. It was f о rotten, that I feared it would break beneath my weight, but there was no choice, nor any other chance for efcape. I planted if againft the wall, and was about to endeavour to raife the trap-door, when I heard the found of a ftep above me. My fpirits fo much for-< fook me, at this unexpected accident, that I had difficulty to prevent myfelf falling from the ladder; and Chriftiana, paler than before, trembled without power of fpeech» All again remained profoundly filent, for in this place, even the wind was un¬ heard ; and after waiting fome time, I de¬ termined to venture every thing, in hopes that I had been deceived by the noife of the ftorm. I ventured gently to raife the trap-door, and had nearly Jet it fall again, with
with a noife that would have deftroyed us, at perceiving a light in the room above. My motions did not feem to have given alarm, and hoping that fleep might have clofed the vigilance of whoever might be there, I ventured to take a more exaéì fur¬ vey of the chamber ; but my eyes had not traced half round the room, before they were fixed upon an objeci, that fhocked my foul, and filled my mind, with dif¬ may, · I beheld Don Raphael himfelf upon his knees, his lips moving as in fervent devo¬ tion ; and his eyes wildly fixed upon a pu¬ trid body, which was inclofed in a glafs coffin. I was fo much fhocked at the firft fight of this dreadful objeci, that I did not re^ member what Don Raphael had told me of the faithlefs Alencaftro; and hot daring to ftir or fpeak to Chriftiana, who flood beneath me with the lamp, I remained gazing on the objecì before me. Don
43 Don Raphael in a few moments caught the light that reflected from the floor, and breaking from his devotion in confufion, he ftarted up, gazing upon me with a look of horror and fear, fuch as I had never be¬ fore feèn expreíľed on his features. This vfas not a moment for hefitation, and I immediately advanced.^ ------ " Who, or whatever thou art," faid he, in a folemn tone, "know that I am Don Raphael, and fear thee not. What then is the purport of-thy-: errand?'* I remained filent, with my eyes fixed upon him, that Chriftiana might have time * f to follow me. "Is thy meflage fpeechlefs ?" faid he/ "or art thou come from the infernal re¬ gions, to witnefs my remorfe, and my re¬ pentance of a crime I have never ceafed to regret. If fo, thou mayeft return, and re T port that thou haft feen me—me, Don Raphael, kneeling.before the remains of my enemy, and performing the annual deed
44 deed of my penance ? Haft thou any other meflage ? Speak ! ------" I was aftonifhed at the intrepidity of his manner ; and not lefs fri, at hii not recol¬ lée! ing me. " Don Raphael/ 1 faid I, endeavouring to imitate his firmnefs. " My meflage is, that you immediately proceed to the grave of your infamous inftrument, in the court-yard, and there------ " What ?" cried he, "What?— Ha î —* Lorenzo !—by the Great God of Eternity it is you ! How were mine eyes deceived ? Return, inftantly return ! or you will not have the power.—What ! Chriftiana too ! How is this ? But you will neither of you efcape ! No ! * added he, with a farcaftic ímUe K "Were I to leave you in this chamber, with this perfonification öf death for your companion; you could never efcape! Innumerable doors, with innumerable bolts, yet confine you ; and never, never, can you return. I have fworn it before this bodv, and before that crofs !" « Don
45 ' ς Don Raphael," replied I, <( liften for a moment to your own inconfiftency. Have I not but now found you kneeling, and praying to heaven, for the pardon of a crime ; the inftigation to which was an excufe ? Yet you fcruple not to continue in the practice of greater crimes than that î Who has given to you power over the perfons of your fellows ? and by what claim do you deprive us of liberty ? Per¬ mit us then to depart, and your own heart mull receive its reward, in the tranquillity it will then enjoy." " Irapoffible," replied he. " The man who leaps from a rock, muft defcend ; though hehe.dafhed to pieces—he cannot return. Do you think, that after I have confelfed to you my crimes ; after I have acknowledged to you, that I have been guilty of murder with my own hands, and by my inftruciions ; that í would ever fuf- fer you to enter the world, to blazon my ac¬ tions, and impeach me at a public tribunal \ No —Never—Here you fhall live, till death
46 'л death dilľolves my power ! Had you been as guilty as myfelf, I might have permitted you to efcape ; for your criminality would have been my protecìion." " Then murder is to be the price of my liberty," cried I. "Be it fo, Don Raphael— Thou ihaU die !" Leaping fuddenly upon him, in the frenzy of indignation at his barbarous eoolnefs, I raifed the fword blade to his face; his hand feized the handle of his poignard, which he ftruggled powerfully to unfheath, and in the ftruggle, we both fell to the ground, Fortunately, I di fen- tangled myfelf from his grafp, and without refleciion, thruft him down the trap-door, which I clofed upon him, immediately fe- curing this unexpected fuccefs, by heaping feveral articles of furniture above the opening. I feized the trembling Chrifliana by the hand, and opening the door of this cham¬ ber, hurried her through feveral others, till we
47 we entered a bed-room, adorned with fc veral little drawings, in water colours, " This has been the chamber of fome female/* laid Chriftiana, " by the deco¬ rations, and who knows but it was the pri ion of my unfortunate fifter!—Hea¬ vens, Lorenzo, what is the matter with yon? Did you know my fifter?" " When we have a fitter opportunity/' replied I, fighing and looking ha ft Ну round, " I will tell you,—Wc have not a moment to lofe. If Don Raphael is not much hurt by his fall, he, doubtlefs, has the key of your chamber; and knowing, as he does, the labyrinths of this building, may be round upon us before we are yet free." The next chamber that we entered was the bed room of Don Kaphael, where I armed myfelf with the dagger which had once fo nearly been fatal to him ; and having unbarred the door, we haftened through the echoing, and dark winding paflages, and at length once more breathed the free air of the heavens.
43 The ítorni continued to rage, accompa¬ nied with fnow, and the wind ranged at liberty through the leaflefs foreft. How different. this from the laft time of my flight with Cornelia, when all nature feem¬ ed to welcome us with lu fire, and wc were almoft tempted to linger amidft its beau¬ ties. The froft was fo keen, and the wind fo high, that after io long a confinement we had fcarce ftrength to move through the fnow, which lay in drifts, anu render¬ ed the foreft extremely dangerous. We had alfo to fear that Don Raphael would infallibly trace us by our fteps; and to in- creafe our defpair, we were fo bewildered in this tracklefs wild, that I knew not whe¬ ther we were purfuing the way to the mountains or the plains. " I am fo ill," faid Chriftiana, panting with exertion, and leaning upon me, <e that I am certain I cannot proceed much further. I fear we fhall be either fmother¬ ed with the fnow, or frozen to death. Ah ï I know not which was molt terrible—tliat night
49 night of our flight from home, with all the horrors of war behind us, or th'm That was the beginning of forrow, and 'tis likelv this will be the ending." I endeavoured to infpire her with a hope I did not poffefs ; and more dead than alive, we faw the difmal dawning of a win¬ ter's day, without a track to lead us or a flielter to protecì. The wind was dropped, the fnow ceafed, and the fun glittering upon the foreft, difplayed a thoufand re¬ fractions. We were very diftant from the right road to Leon, but now that the fun chearcd us with its rays; the cold enabled us to purfue our way : and by about noon we reached an obfcure inn, were we found reft and refrefhment. The fame night we reached Leon, in a country drefs, and in company with fome common carriers, who had refted at our inn, and following their courfe, we took up our abode in the city, in a quarter dif¬ tant from that where I was known. \oh, ui. n I fent
I fent a meffenger the next day to the "žhoufe οΐ the widow where I had formerly yeflded, and where many of rny things re* mained, but fhe was dead, and the houfe in poffeffion of others. I learnt the Cátalo- alian inlurrecìion was fupprefled, and the indépendance of Portugal eftabliftied. The regiment, to which ï of «right belonged, Was removed to Madrid^ -and fo many changes had taken place, in this fhort pe¬ riod, that I feemed to myfelf ^is if rifinir from the dead to vifit another generation. I dared not hazard any inquiry concern¬ ing the Marquis ! de Mirandula, to ever ven* turing from the houle; and it was then I determined *o difclofe to Chriftiana the twhole of my ftory; when ftie Would learn that her unfortunate fifter had engaged my heart, and received my hand, though death had divided us for ever. This detail took trp fome time, and Chriftiana attended to my words with a iilenee and intereft equal to that of a cri¬ minal in expecìation of the Ünal lenience. When
$1 When 1 had ended ihe uttered a deep fighç and wiping away thofe tears that had fre* silently ftarted from her eyes, ftie endea* Voured to conceal her emotion. " How particularly unfortunate hits been our family," faid flie. " The lofs of this •dear and unknown fifter imbittered to my tirother the brigateli days of her profpe> rity ; and when fhe was fo near difcover- ing this long loft daughter death united them ki a better world. Λ wretched con¬ fufion of politics has funk our houfe from fpiendor, into utter ruin and poverty. My father, if living, is an exile; and J--«-I am «lone with none to pity me." " That exipreffion," faid I, taking her hand, t( is unkind. You know, Chriftiana* that I more than pity you." " I know it," returned the, trembling, at the fame time withdrawing her hand and concealing her face. x< But—»-but- 1 —I know not what I would fay. This I Imow, I am completely wretched/* ¿ ^ d * Her
m Her words and deep fìghìng grieved me to the foul. " O, heavens !" faid I, inter¬ nally, " that I could take up the resolution of offering myfelf to this amiable girl. But how can I offer her profefîions I have this moment told her were onlv made with fíncerííy to her fifler? True it is fhe no longer lives, but love has not expired in m ν bofom." During thefe reflections we both re¬ mained in the moil embarraffing filence: then fuddenly withdrawing her hand from her face, " Lorenzo," faid flie, with a firm though mournful voice; " my irrevocable determination is now taken, and which I will not change. Liflen to me then with patience, for you fhall not long be troubled with me. I am certain that you have al¬ ready penetrated the fecret which my lips fauller to difclofe. You have indirectly told me more than once that you are not ignorant of my regard: but I knew not the reafons you had to treat me with cool politenefs. I have now no further defire to
53 lo live, than once more to fee my father, and to-morrow morning 1 will enter a cloiller, that I may hence-forward look to that flate where the heart fhall be no more torn with paffion, and the beating pulfe fhall reft " " Chriftiana," replied I, fcarce knowing what 1 faid, u would to heaven it were i« my power to prevent your refolution ; if it were to make you happy." '* What fhall 1 fay ?—«-You know my fttu~ at ion ; I myfelf intend retiring to the ftill and peaceful fhades of a monaftry ; und to my laft hour, 1 fhall remember y oí t with morethan gratitude, with more than friend« fhip ; with a fervent and holy love." ·. I embraced her at thefe words. My re¬ folution wavered^ and I fhould have offered her my hand, in fpite of the difficulties that furrounded us; for in thofe moments, I almoft fancied my love for her fifter was transferred to herfelf ι had not her fufcep« tibie feelings totally overcame her ; md η 3 dotting
M darting from my arms, flie flew to give vent f о her fenfafions in her own room. On fhe following day, I received by fhe hands of otïr hoftefis« a tender letter of fare- well, fhe wanting refolution to fee me any mote. «She had formed a retreat in the йте fancluary, where her mother's remains were depofifcd» and 1 fpared both her and myfelf f he confufion of another interview. Alone má < hcerlefs, I looked upon the world m & bourtdtefs ocean, where I might be tolled about for ever, by every wind of admfity ; and rerolleelittg that father Ti* mofhaii might poflibly have «Craped on ıtüt fatui night, which threw me into the power of Don Raphael, 1 determined to frek for him at Toledo, after 1 fhoukl have hem Mt Madrid» where 1 hoped to gam the proferlion of my early frien4 »nå hy hi· m tarn to clear up my characler »t a foídžer, before 1 fought to eitahltfh myfelf, I no longer deJmi to find myfelf allied to the great* l шШеа only to be allowrd to live independent s»d obfeure, and to chini
claim an equal fecurity from the Jaws of my country, with the reft of my feU low creatures, which at prefent was fo far from fhe cafe, that î dared not renttwe into the ftreets by day-iighf, and trembled at any found, left Don Raphael fhould have difc-oveml me. 1 difguifed myfelf in a low attire, leaving Leon in company with a troop of mule« teers, who were carrying variou« metchan- dize, and forne davs fince arrived İn thh city, I procured a lodging at the houfe of a poor woman, in a dirty itreet ; remain« îng at home, without even venturing to fend a meflage to you of my exiftence. Lafl night was the firft time J ventured to traverfe thefe flreets ,* it was then* m if fortune had determined, that my life ihould be crowded with fmgu britten, that I wat the mean» of running away with your miftrefs ; and afterwards having difguifed myfelf in thofe monkifh robep, which fo well became me, of reeert Ing the eonfef- fmn of a dying lady, which wa» to me one n 4 of
об of the moft ifttereftimj accidents of my. life, and which cannot but ftrike you with furprize» when I tell you, that this lady was no other, than Almedia, the guilty wife of Don Raphael. I have informed you of the mi í lake which occafloned my introduc¬ tion to the bedflde of this lady ; who, after all the fervants were withdrawn, befought шс to repeat to her feveral prayers, after which, (he appeared more compofed. ** Liflen, reverend father/' faid fhe, " to the laft confeffion of a dying fumer, and pray that the Almighty may not punifh to the uttermofl, my offences, for they are many ; and I fear that it is now too late lo make an earthly retribution/' 44 Be comforted daughter," faid 1, "our faith teaches us» that there is joy in heaven at the repentance of a finner. —He who died for finners, m\\ not refufe to hear/* She anfwered only with a groan, and after a few minutes, gathering more fli eng ıh, fhe continued——- But
57 But, my dear Count, the clock 'ftrikes two; it was the fame hour kit night, when I heard this important confeflion. It is the hour that I have been fummoned again to attend; and if you knew the ex- treme intereft I have in this affair, you would not wonder that I cannot delay it ' Here Lorenzo abruptly arofe, having brought his long narrative down to hk ar¬ rival in Madrid, and to which the Count liftened with attention and indignation. Then taking the hand oí his early friend, he afîured him of his fervkes, and offered himfelf to attend him. Lorenzo declined this offer as unne- ccflary, "I fufpecl," faid he, " from the words of your fervant, that it was father Timo¬ theus who fent rue the note, and I cer¬ tainly have nothing to lear from Don Ra¬ phael, in the houfe of his wife/* " 1 hope it may be to," anfwered the Count, " I have eonfiderable defire to fee this flrange character, whofe vindictive ti 5 fpirit
m fpirit Ilas brought him to Madrid. I fuf¬ pecl» however, that he has not all that power and authority he affumes, or why fliould he take up his abode in one of the meaner! ftreets in this city ?" Lorenzo fhook his head ; but having no. time to lofe, he haftily departed.
59
СПАР. Ш.
АО the intricate flreets of Madrid, lorenzo was wholly a Uranger; and İt was with the greatefi difficulty he could difcover, at this hour, that to which he had been conducted the preceding night, nor could he inquire for it by defcrtption, the ftreets being deferted by pafľengers. It was but at very diflant intervals that a folitary lantern, fhed its twinkling light,, and he began to fear that he fhould not only m if* the appointment, but be unable to difcover the houfe where he had heard this important con fe ilion. After paíľmg feveral flreets, he entered one whit h he believed to be that he fought, and ob- ferving
ferving a light from the window of one of the houfes, he examined the entrance, making himfelf certain that he was now right. He knocked at the door, which was quickly opened by a gay Cavalier, in ele¬ gant attire, and a long toledo trailing upon the ground. ' r Ah, Ah, father," faid he, laughing; " you ate come at laft : what detained you fo long ? We have expecled you for more than an hour;—the company has been wafting with impatience." , <r The difficulty of finding the houfe delayed me," replied Lorenzo : " but now that I am right, be fo obliging as inform ' me, whe^e 1 ihall find the perfon. Have youperufed the lady's will?" " She has not much to leave, I believe/' cried the other, in a gay tone of voice. **' Come—I will introduce you myfelf; we Ihall not want you long*—Follow roe, father!" Lorenzo
6Ь Lorenzo followed, in fome furprize> at the gay appearance of his conductor, very ill fuited to the folemnity he, expected; but imagining he might bé the heir ex¬ pectant* he felt no alarm.- They entered; á large room on the firft floor, very well lighted. Preparations for a grand fupper were difplayed upon the tables, and about a dozen Cavaliers, with long whiikers, and trailing rapiers, were gathered together in a groupe, at the fur¬ ther end, feemingly in earneft debate. " I fear," faid Lorenzo, flopping within the entrance of the room, " that here has been fome miftake. It certainly was not in this that I received the confeflion of a dying lady, about this hour laft night." " That I will engage," faid his conductor, laughing aloud. t( I do aflure you, father, we are all living here, and hold confeflion in abhorrence: Heaven be praifed, we are not come to that yet ! We have got a little job for you in a legal way. Ho, there ; why do you not receive the arch-biihop of
62 of Madrid ( that is to be ) with becoming attention." The company, at thefe words, arofe, and with over-ftrained compliments and bur- lefqued civility, welcomed Lorenzo, who demanded the nature of the fervice they required. " 'Tis neither more nor lefs," replied one of them, " than to unite in holy matrimony a gentleman of our company to an honeft lady, whom he has long admired : but as he is a devil of a fellow, you had better be mafked, left he ihould know you hereafter and play you fome fcurvy trick." " But if he is enamoured of the Lady," faid Lorenzo. " Hold there ;" cried one, " We are not going to difpute :—We deteft con- troverfy, father—depend upon it we have reafon. Here is a mafk for your reverence,, and a g!af» of good wine to waíh out your fcruples. " Loreuzo clearly faw, that without dif- covering himfelf, or performing the cewv mony
63 mony required, he fhould not be able fo> extricate himfelf from this adventure : and ■· knowing that he would have power at any time to nullify the acìion, which he fup¬ pofed was compulfatory, at leaft on the part of the gentleman, he put on the maflc, and fignified his readinefs to obey them. One of the Cavaliers then threw open the door to an interior apartment, the whole company following. On a fopha fat a gentleman,, maíked, with two men near, carelelsly playing with their fwords, but Lorenzo, was not a little furprized to find in the lady, the perfon of Ippolita. " Proceed, Reverend Father/'cried one of the men, in a taunting tone, " make two people happy, and bind them as faft as holy Mother Church can do for the life of her." Lorenzo, with difficulty, avoided be¬ traying himfelf during this fcene, and fearing to be detecied by Ippolita, he hur¬ ried over the c^vemony in a voice almoft inarticulate. The fervice was fcarcely read
64 read óver, when feveral of them fhouted aloud, '- Long life to Lady Pandolfo, and may the Count enjoy many years felicity/* " Is it credible," faid Lorenzo, to hiin- felf, " that the Count fhould at length be brought, by any means, to marry a woman of this defcription, and how much more incredible that I fhould be the inftrument of a punifhment, which before the event of laft night, would have given me pleafure/' The fame perfon who had introduced him, now lighted him to the door, and pre¬ fented him with a fmall prefent ; at the fame time thanking him for his ready com¬ pliance with their humour. As Lorenzo turned from the door, he was accofted by a monk of another order, who inquired if he had come from that houfe, and if a fick lady had been con- fefTmg. Lorenzo fmiled, at this ftmilarity of incidente, replying, that he himfelf had entered the houfe upon an errand almoft f imilar, and had been under the neccfľity of repeating over the marriage ceremony. " It
65 ," Η It is a famous gambling houfe/' re¬ plied his new acquaintance, "but we cannot refufe, you know, brother, doing a deed of charity, let the objccì be ever to unworthy. Your adventure reminds me of what happened to myfelf only laft night. İ was returning about half paft one o'clock, from adminiftering extreme unction to a poor gentleman juft in the emergency of death ; when a lady, fwiftly running, and in extreme agitation, caught me by the arm. ' Protecì me, holy father/ cried fhe, feveral times, ftill panting for breath. ' Be calm, lady/ faid I, ' no harm can happen to you while in my care/ ' Ah, father/ faid fhe weeping, ' I cannot be calm. I am an unworthy creature; I have within this hour fled from my father, whom I have killed ; and I am going to hide myfelf for ever in fome convent/ 'But furely you have not been guilty of fo enormous an often ce againft God and man, as the murder of your own father/ faid I. ť My difobedience has been the caufe oí his
66 his death/ faid fhe. ' Leadme, I befeech you, to fome fancluary, where I may linger out my life in penitence and prayer/ í immediately eonducìed her to the convent of Mercy, where! am well known to the Superior, and lhe porterefs, who remains all night upon the wr.tch, as you know, and recommendi n s: her to them, flie made me promife, that 1 would not mention to any one the place of her retreat, for flie did not wifh the world to know that a daughter of the houfe of Arragon, could fo fwervc from her duty. Now, brother do not you think this adventure cqttah yours ?" " Not only equals, but far exceeds it !" replied Lorenzo, fmilmg at the fimplicity of the monk, and İn reality, not a little furprized at fo unexpected a difcovery. " I was certain you would acknowledge h ro' be fo," faid the monk. " What part of the town are you now going to ? «To my convent," replied Lorenzo^ (t Brother, I wifh you a good night. lie- member me in your prayers." Lorenzo
67 Lorenzo haftened away, and being now too late for his appointment, even if he had been fucccfsful in difcovering the houfe, he returned to the palace of the Count, who was waiting his return with impatience. Lorenzo immediately inform¬ ed him of the accident, which had difco¬ vered to him the retreat of Lady Agnes, whofe refentment at the fuppofed inatten¬ tion of the Count, had no doubt as much fhare in her reiolutions, as her repentance for having confented to meet him. " But, my dear friend," added he, " you have in* formed me of your love for this hdy r yet you have not told me what could occafion your neglecì of fuch an affignation, even contrary to your will." The Count fmiled. " You will laugh at me," replied he, " but we have each of us. our particular weaknefs, and you cannot have forgot the bias of my ftudies at Toledo, when real fcience had not fo many charms for me, as the curious myfteries of alche¬ my, aftrology, and magic; the latter of which,
Bíilir" I" "Ì ι
бяг which, peculiarly fuited the wildnefs of my fancy. All my leifure time was em¬ ployed in thefe find ies, which fo fafcinated my fenfes, that I had not prudence to forego them, though all my experiments failed, and my fpells diifolv ed of themfelvcs. After the death of my father, when I be¬ came my own mafter, I followed this fludy with increafed avidity, though my attention was at times interrupted, by my increafing affècìion for Lady Agnes. " About a twelvemonth ago, a ftranger came to my palace ; his features and his drefs were foreign, and he introduced him¬ felf to me, by faying, that his knowledge of di liant events, had informed him, that I was a fearcher alter truths and poifefted a mind capable of penetrating the fecrets of nature. His learning and his eloquence, fufficiently ingratiated him into my good opinion, and his taks confirmed my be» lief. ** The grand objccì of my inquiry was the poflibility of rai fing a fpirit; for though
69 though I had no defire after either riches, honor, or power, I had an infatiable wiilt to behold an immaterial being, and hold intercourfe with the celeftial world." " Leave/' faid he, " the trifling toys of fpells and charms, and chikliih conju¬ rations; they are either wicked, or at leail foolifhly prefumptuous. There isa fublimer /tudy before you, which will exalt you above the earth you tread upon, and open to you the paths of the heavens. It is not at once that-we are to arrive at fuch perfccYton, as to expect that thofe pure fpirits, which roam at large through ail the infinite re¬ gions of fpace, will condei rend to. become vifible to our impure organs. We muft pafs every day a portion of our time in prayer, and divine contemplation ; wait¬ ing with unwavering patience, thofe im- pulfes we mail receive in various ways." Difcourfes, fuch as thefe^entirely charmed my fenfes, and if it was an illufion, it cer- 4ainiy was plcafing, (< Mahmut
TO ** Mahmut is the name of this inimita¬ ble man. His dočlrínes captivated me, and I expeéìed with impatience, when I fliould be confidered as worthy to hold community w ith the etherial beings of invifibility. My enthufiafm perhaps caufed me to believe^ that 1 fometimes received impulfesin a mvflerious wav ; and more than once I have fancied that I diiiinguiflied whifper- ings in my chamber, though ï could not be certain of any* difiinčl founds. Thefe, fymptoms,my new friend affured me, Avere certain fore-runners of a more open inter¬ courfe, and he would congratulate me on my approaching felicity, when I fliould be¬ hold the prefent and future world at once, ·" This man is a Georgian by birth. He has been a Have in different climates, and feems to poffefs all the knowledge which man can attain. He converfcs in almoft all the living languages. He is mailer of all the dead ones, and you wHl find him a prodigy/'
71 4t By what means does he live?" faid „Lorenzo* " I almoft expeci that he is an İmpoftor who contrives, by his wit, to live upon the wealth of others." (C You do him great wrong/* replied the Count. " I know not his refourcesj but he has never accepted from me the fmaileft prefent, refu/ing all my overtures of this fort with a gracious fmile, afluring me that when I fhould attain to the fum- mit of my wiflies, I fliould defpife not only wealth but every thing which men call pleafure." " He muft be a prodigy* indeed," faid Lorenzo. " Procecdi if you ploaie; this is a fyftem of which 1 never had any know¬ ledge, and to the perfeclion of which ï cannot conceive that man can altain." " 1 fee," replied the Count, " that you are not far from becoming a convert to thefe principles. I will introduce you to a fociety we have founded in Madrid. We are obliged to meet with the utmoft fecrefy, left the holy office fliould difcover lis.
7Ž tıs. There are only myfelf, Mahmut, and four others. On our next meeting à no- vice will be introduced, whom I have not yet feen . It is neceíľary, however, that y on take a foîemn oath before 'I' introduce you, not that Î have any doubt in your honour, but it is an indifpenfable preface. After what I have now told you, and after what * vou have yourieîf experienced, you will give me credit for not being impofed upon b v mv own fancy. té ■ 4f * u I was fitting, ready prepared for my ap¬ pointment with lady Agnes, watching with impatience the flow motion of that tabic clock, when I heard three diitinci raps upon the door of that clolet where I ileep, and where no one can enter or return without paffing this apartment : I arofe to open the door, when 1 heard "the fame fîgnal at the outer door behind me, and a flight noife evidently paífedby me, like the ruft- ling of fi Ik, though I could fee nothing. A pleaiing kind of fenfation, mingled with expečiation, thrilled over my nerves, and I fat
73 I fat down, every moment in hopes that fome celeftial being would appear before me. 1 muft acknowledge that Lady Agnes was forgot; and it was not till the clocks of Madrid ftruck one, that I fummoned refolution to leave my fludy; after this firft token of celeftial regard, which I con- 2 fider as the forerunner of more particular favours." Lorenzo fupprefled his inclination tö hugh r.t the credulity of his friend, whom he could not but confider as in fome .way the dupe to Mahmut, and he propofed in his own mind to give attention to what might enfue, that he might expofe, if pof¬ fible, the fallacious expecìations of the Count, On the following day Count Aranda drefled himfelf with the greateft tafle, and haftened to prefent himfelf at the grate of the convent; but he was very much chagrined, to find that Lady Agnes was denied to his inquiries; and though the porterefs* would not abfolutcly fay, that vol. uu e flie
74 ftie did not reftde in their convent, ftie hinted that her ueaieft relations would not be permitted to fee her. The Count was much difappointed at this reception, urging all the argument* he could invent, but with no further ad¬ vantage than getting a note conveyed, to which the meffenger returned with a ver¬ bal anfwer, that Lady Agnes would be obliged to quit fhe convent if flie could not be free from interruption; and that it was evident that bisexcufes for his neglecì, were palpable evalione to colour over the truth, To this the Count would have replied, could he have prevailed on the meffenger to deliver his note, but all his perfusions were in vain, and he was obliged to return, overwhelmed with di ('appoint men í, to his palace, where he related to Lorenzo the ill fuccefs of his errand. " Never defpair, my friend," faid Loren¬ zo, " iţ is evident her heart has forgiven you, or ihe would not have commented on your
your reafons of abfence, with which fhe ¡s not fatisfied. Would it not be better to declare the truth ? She would fooner fore¬ give your folly than negìecì; and I will be the bearer of your correfpondence. My inonkifh habit is fo familiar to me, that I do not fear detection, and when fhe is told that a perfon of my defcription is waiting, me will naturally conclude that it is the fame who procured her admiffion, and wilt not fcruple to appear, to return her thank». rt The Count was well fatisfied with this propofal, requefling Lorenzo to put it in execution before flie could either have time to change her fituation, or recover from the furprize of his vifit. Lorenzo im¬ mediately dreffed himfelf, and haflened to the convent, where, after waiting a few minutes, he had the fatisfacìion of feeing «Lady Agnes leaning on the ärm of another lady, enter the parlour, both covered with long black veils. At firil Lorenzo deemed it prudent not to betray himfelf, by entering upon the e 2 purport
7b purport of his vifit; but the moment he fpoke, his voice caufed a vifible emotion in the ladies, and Agnes would have with¬ drawn had not her companion compelled her to remain. if I perceive/* faid Lorenzo, in a low voice, " that habit cannot conceal me from the penetrating obfervations of you ladies ; but my errand is òf fuch a nature, that I am certain you will lend me your attention/' "You are, undoubtedly, an impoftor/' replied Lady Agnes, turning away. « If you are importunate, I will expofe you as you merit. " "Hold, my dear friend/* faid the other lady, in a whifper; "you know not the important reafon I have, to requeft your attention/' " You will be aftonifhed," faid Lorenzo, " if you will but liften to the mofl fingular accident you ever heard in your lives; the parlour is vacant, and if you will take
77 feats, I am certain you will not oonflder the time as thrown away." Thefe words .aroufed the curiofity of the ladies, and together with fome argu¬ ments ufed -Ъу the other lady in a whifper, prevailed upon Lady Agnes to fit down. " You will be furprized/* faid he, ff that a friend of; the Count Aranda, who had never feen him from his youth, and who had not been in Madrid many days, fhould, by the guidance of fortune, be the perfon who fhould convey away his miftrefs without previous intention, himfelf being confined by fupernatural means; for cer¬ tainly Lady Agnes muft know too well the power of her own charms, to fuppofe that any human means could have detained fo ardenta lover as the Count/* " Whoever you are/' replied fhe, " you do not want boldnefs, in thus venturing yourfelf within thefe walls, in a characler you evidently a flume. What you have re¬ lated, concerning the Count, excites my fear for his reafon. I confefs he has fome- E 3 times
78 M times chfcourfed to me on thefe fort of things; but that his mind ihould be fo weak as thus to be impofed upon, is truly ridi¬ culous; andif I could be prevailed upon to forgive him, I ihould fear that fome vi¬ ii onary fair one would rival me in his af¬ fections. Tell him then, that tül he has feen this daughter of the air, that he is fo anxiouily looking after, and determines be¬ tween us, I moil pofitively forbid him to trouble himfelf concerning me." "'I thank you/* replied Lorenzo, "i will carry to my friend thefe tidings of your forgivenefs, for I am very well fa tis* tied that bis preference will not be given to a ihade." " You «lay do as you pleafe," replied the lady; "but while my father remains in danger, I will never quit thefe walls." The ladies then aroie. The perfon who had remained filent then waved her hand« in token of adieu to Lorenzo, and haftened Lady Agnes to depart, that ihe might con·· ccai
79 ceai thofe tears fhe appeared unable any longer to fupprefs. A nun entering the parlour, Lorenzo was obliged to haften away without daring to inquire the meaning of this emotion ; and when he reflecied upon all the actions of this kdy, he concluded it muft be Chrif* fiana herfelf, who had followed him to Madrid. The Count was in raptures, at the fue* cefď of his friend, and determined to fend his fervant wţth a letter, containing a thoufand tender expreffîons, and an äffu- rance, that the Duke, her father was faft recovering. The next obječi of confiderafion was, fo free Lorenzo from the fears which con fined him todifgutfes, and at leaft clear his public characler from imputation. A fervant was difpatched to inquire for Count Pandölfo, but he returned with word, that the Count had been miffing two days from his lodgings ; where it was whifpered, that he was obliged to fly from e 4 his
80 his creditors, his fortune being entirely diffipated in play. *'"' It will be a matter of no confe¬ quence," faid the Count ; " ï will apply perfonally to fuperior authority. Mean¬ while you will only have to remain within my houfe, where 1 flatter myfelf, even Don Raphael will not be able to difcover you. If it be as you fufpecl, that Chriftiana isin Madrid, I muft infiftonyour overcoming thofe fcruples which are ill calculated to promote our happinefs. " You are planning the projects of a gay heart," replied Lorenzo ; (i one of the moft entertaining faculties of the mind, is projection ; as faft as one air-built tem¬ ple falls to the ground, we raife another from the ruins, with additional decorations. But here is fome perfon coming to vifit vou." * " It is fix o'clock," anfwered the Count, and by the ftep, it is my old friend Mah¬ mut." Loren 20
81 Lorenzo looked towards the door with expectation, and was not a little furprized to fee a perfon enter, not more than four feet high : but the expreffion and vivacity of his countenance made fufficient amends for the lownefs of his flature ; and the rapid penetration of his eyes, which might have given pain, was foftened with fo much mi Id nefs, that he feemed enlivened with a fpark of celeftial genius, and before he fpoke, Lorenzo found himfelf interefted. The Count introduced him, with re¬ marking, that between them there need be no difguife; and they immediately entered into difcourfe on interefling fub¬ jeeìs, in which Mahmut feemed acquainted with all the properties of nature, the me- chanîfm of things, and the tranfacìions and wifdom of the paft, and prefent* gene* rations of man. He entered with fo much candour into the philofophy of celeftial influences, and intereourfes, that Lort n/o began to think, that there might be much of truth in what he advanced. e л ** But
Ш t ♦ * ** But how/* cried fie, ** can it be pofllble to fee an immaterial being, and (tow can it he poffible any being can be tmmaee- rbl r* ** Tfiere^ is no being immaterial/* re¬ plied Mahmut, 'Ъгл the Creator of aH brinp ; it b from İtim all ettftenct« tma~ т%е,шшешт the brraıh ofhmpojrer, From the ши^еа ind denfeft particle of mat- # ter* to Ac рш« aml ctleftiaî angel, who dwell« in perpetual rapture ; af! Ы matter* tbe votline of Ac ocean, fo comprcflcd, Ш1 к fMttef evaporat b as h«rd ami impenetrable at msirhk : Wfce» it b ralfad imo waptHir ; when it is rarlfied inn» air, aod ^BfutAer» into Am» it ш ШИ material. So man, wheAer fie groreb on Ae earA» whrïhef he тттш luto che тжЬт et' ino* ther caiflence* or b jet »«re hi$hrj e*· ahed« ШШ b mııcrîıt We know Aera шт wiw*? ge^fri of mfeik w*ich Ae htnmei rve шмннг petiiriw, eeverAefcfis Aey tun, mtåweé® mt Ы1 ïhem immmtrhl, - Att we the dimt of creation? Are alî A bebp
0.1 beings too minute for fight, material, and thofe éme em knowledge, and above щ, immateriali No; whatever be the form» and form fhey certainly have, thej are material ; though we may not be able to grafp them with our hand» any more than we catt catch die breesses of the fpring, or ftay the ftafites of the pregnant еЬшк Ko doubt, when we (hail have fiîflkîcnîîy purified our foul», fo at to be capable of withdraw bijt them from an im* oteüate rottacelo» wirb groffrr mailer, we Atoll b» thofe being«, a»clearly as when tihe fun filine« we ca» behold million» of mote*, which are ofherwtfe 'hid from mm eye·. * bomuo was charmed at thri lami fol bypo^M«, ** If/* faid he, ** it were роШ Μι for te in oor preİVnı ftate of е*Шеже Ю hoü any iuttftrtiurf«? with ршее fpirit», ihmk yem we саш behold mt éetmrné шгшшт? Но they wander at large* шщ| pbnet to planett Do they hover aromé me #r » к mdy а еШтШ ci& of letup*
84 one di grec temmeà ttom ourfelvea, whom we шт capable of pen citing* By the way r 1 have ime objecTtion to make againft tbc dofìmic of a ^ood and evil attendant upon man, as that would fuppofe twice the number of fpmte conftantly employed, one to preicrve» and one to écflroy thb atom of martahf ν /' " Yonr obj^iionk jufl/' replied Mahmut # looking at the Count, with a fmile, * Man i* b} no means i being of fo much confluence m Ш pride teaches htm. Frue w m flattering ferpent, eonflantly whifpeting pratfe in hb ear, what doeţ thb link repele Uy to himfelf :—'Am not ! tord of thfcı creation, the paramount maf- irrcif alltbe bctnpfhst move on the fer- bee of Лт етЫ The fun which мтеш thwieh the keemm by ifaqr—«the moon which ^volvr* r#ttnd tbecMtb by night«- »re tmtäé Фт my .eoni^^ienct? !— *lbe m~ foite bot «f Лага, whkh gitter in tèe utmmemì, wm m ¡mamme ту шШмт* må thtû f Mr ipaitks upon pianti msá
minerals for my ufe, and my pleafure; ind whether I am ileeping, or whether I am waking, fpirits «miner around ;—the great ana tremendous fpirit of evil, is ever on the watch to lead me into ettor/ But liften, О ma», to thine own infigniflcance, for thou art as the fand apon a mole-hill* or the infecí of an evening ray ! What art thou to the earth that thou inhabited ŕ What is that earth compared to the fun» the centre of ito revolutions» and the fource of light to a fyfiem which thine imagi* nation can frarrely traverfe ? This f y item itfelf, is but a point, compared to the myriads of burning funs which blaze in the regions of fpace, and around which planets revolve, in number and magnitude unknown : and if thou tanfi elevate thy reafon, even to farther depths of fpace« ihm whole conHeUatio» oí fyAems« íum* and world**, may ctreumvoive round an infinite centre, where dwelkth the author of aU things, in incomprehensible glory Î— - Th«» foy, O mm, whit art thou t f> the
9$ flit Count wit a« enthbfîaft ki thefe d offrine», and Lorenzo took finTicktit in* tcrcft, fø deüre that he might be prefent at the next meeting of their fociety, which wan ίο fake pbre the following evening. fmm mciq%lks t^y defended to po- litiCf, and f^rrnspo prrceivcil that Mahmut «»as a mail of ü^im! optniom, though ex« freutet ежиш*· in ht§ words, ranking ufe of their e * prefittati which wottld allow ei éWemiï tmÊkmBImm *n¿ defeinting орт nifwr âiı^ «mvetíd bcecfolence*
CHAP.
Sf
chap, m
ENZO wat furprized that he had not received a tetona mefíhge from the monk, concerning the death of lady Almedia, and he confulted with hk rriend what ftep* he ihould purfue; without coming to any concluflon : as he appre* hended that Hon Raphael could not have remained fo long In Madrid, without having information of this event, in which cafo there could be no doubt but he would come forward and tøke an aéìive patt. On the following evening, МшЬтт called to accompany Lorenzo and frk friend, to the temple of Ccfefttat Influence» ** You muft not be furprized/' faid the Count,
88 ■à Count, as they paffed along the flreets, ·· that a perfon of my rank mould defcend fo enter places like thefe. You know the vigilance of the police, and the hazard we run from ihe Inquifition/' They were by thb time amongfl fome of the moft wretch¬ ed aîîe>s in Madrid, inhabited by the lo weft claftbs of fociety. They proceeded through a winding and narrow paffage» totally dark» with the houfen fo clofe to¬ gether» that a mm might reach from one to the other. At the further end of this place» Msftmut rapped at the door: a %*oice from within detitäiidcd who was there i Mahmut rcpîM, by giving ilte watch word of the fociety, and ihe door wat opened, without any one appearing. Tbe Çfiutit шие hk frìcmk proceeded in fi îr ni e âtiddaıune& # through feveral room«, fill tbey entered one unirli wat without other furniture than a large cheli» and an irøn lamp depending fro» the ceiling. iítťťatiíii tma, from the then a plain white
89 white linen garment of fingular form ; and giving it to Lorenzo, he informed him, that all ftrangers who were not initiated into their fociety were obliged, by their rules, to cover themfelvcs with this habit, which bad much the refemblance of that former¬ ly worn by the pricífe of Delphi. Lorenzo complied with this rule, laying on one fide the monktfh gown which co¬ vered his military drefs, ** You will excufe us," faid the Count* " we have to dre& in another apartment« Remember, that whatever you fee and hear, you muft not break filence, or call any one by name." Lorenzo fmiled, but when he had finifh¬ ed robing himfelf, he flood in fufpenfe, whether he friends were to return, and conduci Mm into thb temple, or whether he was to look for the entrance himfelf; though the dim light which the lamp above fhed through the room, did not allow him to fee far around.
t
He
90 İle fat down upon the cfteft to wait for the Count, when a voice, from a perfon unfeen, demanded who he was-—Lorenzo- was perplexed—he could not reply a friend of Count Aranda 's, without breaking his inftručtíons, and he replied, "I am ft Oranger/* ·· What then is your bufmefs here?" faid the fame voice, " I came to be initrucied in the doctrine of celeflial influences/' replied Lorenzo. ** Кате yon ao ardent defire to learn ?" demanded the fsme voice, " 1 luve/* replied Lorenzo* without re** Herí* on, ** And yon hme fwor» t® be eternally filem tm the fubjeík you may difcover r'* ** I lure/* anlWen d Lorenzo, w ho Го ctirioïïty was coníjderabjy inílarocd by thefe prrparatiotti, ** ^mtcié the«,** fa Ш the fame voice, - and learn that the tirit ftep m happineti h difcrefion/* botenm
9t Lorenzo looked round him for fome one to conduci him, but no perfon was to be feen, only a fmall lamp, like a ilar, appeared at the farther end of the room, with thefe words in tranfparent characters, " JVe have seen his stat in the east, and are come. 1 * Lorenzo reflecied that this muft be an intimation to advance; and as though every thing had been performed by magic, a door beneath the ¡nfcrtption was gently opened, and he entered into a temple moft admira« ably adapted to ftrike the fenfes. The room which was thus fitted up, was a long fquare, at each end oí which was a cluftre of cry Aal lamps: the walls of the temple were hung with tapeftry of a light aisure colour, which was gathered along the roof tn the manner of cloud», and fprtnkled with fpanglea of ßlver: in the centre of the ftoor wa» a fmall elevation, on which ΰοξ^ά an altar of the Jewith model, and from which arofe clmsds of frankincenfe, at опее gratifying the fenfes, and obfeur*
92 : ng the fight Lorenzo took hh feat as near the railing of the altar as he could, i m pre Ш d with the air of profound myfte¬ ry, which every thing around infpired. Atı organ, that was unfeen, began to play a mourufid ¿irabı in a minor key. The hangings at the further end were drawn up, and four perfons entered, habit¬ ed in purple filk, fringed with gold; and infteid of the Spanifh hat and feather, they wore tiaras of purple, fprinkled with golden fian; Lorenzo cafti v recollecied his friend and .Mahmut, who took their Hâtions tn liknee. In a few minutes en* tered a perfon, clothed fuperbly in a flow¬ ing garment of green filk, worked with emblematical devices in gold and fiber ; on hts head he wore a tiara of the fame colour, åudded with jeweb, which fhed their efiblgencf when he moved. Thh» perfon wat to oficiate m prìeft. and W£i followed bv two Ьщш eurioufh clothed. * * w He took hit Ibtion at the alur, atid the fuddvil
95 fudden ftroke of a drum feemed the fignal to commence the ceremonial. Lorenzo was ftruck with awe in fpite of himfelf, and remained anxiouily re¬ garding every thing that paffed. The drum was ftruck at intervals of half a mi¬ nute, and the eftecì was truly folemn, lead¬ ing the mind to the deepen and moft ferious reflecìions. In the midft of this mournful fymphony, entered a man clothed in fcaflet, with a drawn fword in hb hand, after him followed a perfon in black robes, and a black crape over his face, and the proceffion was clofed by two men dreffed in purple tike the Count. "Who have you there?" demanded the priefl, in a ftem voice. u Л man/* replied the perfon in fcarlet. w Then whv 'm he caft down ? and where- fore docs he hide his countenance? " " Becaufe he η polluted with mortality ; his foul m beneath a fhade, m hb bodv Ы beneath a covering* md the fear of the fword hangi over him." fi Um
94 " İla» he then attained to the years of man ?" faid the prieft, ** and has he not teamed that moft of his fentiments proceed front préjudice f This fword m the emblem of future ptmifhmente.*—Ah ! take care-— k h falling upon lm head/* The perfon who was thus played upon waf» unable to fee» for a Iwiuhge t lia t co¬ hered his eyes; and ftartittg to avoid the fancied Wow, the prieii laughed aloud; Imt LoreoEo became more ferions. What к meant by this, thought he, but a ridi¬ cule of future ptiiiîfhıneut«. Thefe men have iònie intention ï do not at prefent perceive* and my friend к the dupe of their tmpofturc. the ceremony proceeded ; if wai a mix· mre of Cbrifttantiy. ludiifm, and Faga· tiiím t after whîih tlie ptiefl pronounced ι bete word«;— 1С* fiid he, -we feek to he confidered worthy the i»eflbhte pmilrg* of celeftial cnftifiiüttttmtton, whut re^^id ought we Ш |м^ tii our шый and loclal dittir^* But though
db though we fliould not afpire fo high as to community with the inhabitants of the inviftble world, the grand arcana of our docìrine teaches us the true way to happi¬ nefs, and wholly changes the formation of our nature. The grand fecret of our fo¬ ciety İs the knowledge of the pure and genuine principles of Chriftianity, which have been handed down to us from the apolli«, and preferred by the appointed fern. The whole is befőtted with dream», with chimeras, and with fables. When we /hail be able to fpread the glad tidings to all nations, and the grand principles we pro-» fe&, war lhali be ban i ih t d from the earth, and even law itfdf lhali become unknown ; for there will be neither crime nor the «eeellity of punifttment The golden age of the poet* will no longer be а Шоп ; and though the lion and the lamb might not herd together, mutual benevolence would link the whole circle of mankind, and the angels from the heavens would defcend to dwell among us/' After
m After this fpeech, followed feveral cere¬ monies that might be termed a mockery of ihe chriflian my iter i es. and which pro- p ri ei ν ought 10 burv in eternal filence : the black robes were ftrîpped off the initiated, and he was habited in green ; but even Lorenzo*!» indignation at the ceremonial was fufpended by furprke, when he beheld in the novice, the Marquis de MiranduiJi, Lorenzo reílcikd how he fhould make himfelf known to the Marqua, being obliai to Uhmce, nhen a fudden flame broke (mm brnrath the altar, and qttirklv ratcbtnir the dmperv, the temple was in- vohrd în fmoke and flame, The danger was imminent* evcrv one endeavourine to fave themfelvrs without any regard to brotlierly kindtieâ. ¡mnuo and the Marqua«, had the prefenre of mind to Imve their releflial r«bes to the mefrv of the t weft rial flimre ï but the Count, un- ufed to dì with decifkm on emergeiiry» had much diuk'tdtv to (ave himfelf with the
9Т the а fli flanee of Lorenzo, who called upon the Marquis by his name, and together made good their retreat into the narrow tourt. " How is it poffible you have found your way to Madrid," whifpered Lorenzo* ·' Are you aware of your danger?" ** Knough," replied the Marquis, pref¬ fing his hand. ·' Another time—Where do you live ? Where can 1 wait upon you f ** Call upon me, or even now go with m to the palace of Count Aranda, my friend here. I have a thoufand things to tell you " The Marqui» replied, with a fmile, u Per¬ haps not fo many as you imagine. My daughter Chriftiana has informed me of ííiery thing, to the time of your leaving Leon : her obligations are very great to you/ 1 There was a turn of meaning in thefe word», which called the colour into JLoren- ¿o'a iMjUŕ III« W
98 20% race. " Is your daughter in Madrid r'* inquired he-~" in the convent of Mercy ?" ** Yes ; M anfwered the Marquis, ·* flie has taken fhcltcr there for the prefent/* " Then 1 was right/* faid Lorenzo to himfelf. " It was the charming Chriftiana that I beheld, when I viftted Lady Agnes. I have certainly acled a fool i ih part to re* fufe fo much beauty and merit/* They had by this time paffed through feveral lanes, when they were flopped by Ле appearance of a procefTion, compofed of a king åle of torch bearers, and a train of mutes, who attended a hearfe, decorated in the uioft pompous manner. The glare of the torches againft the houfes, and the flow motion of the prore Шоп was folemnly impreffive; mingling with the crowd, they determined to he witnefľci of * fu¬ neral* celebrated under fuch unnfua! ciirtimftaitccs» and they proceeded to- wardfc the church of St. lames, ** Who it Ле perfon that h going to he intened?* 4 feid the Marquis to a byftander,
99 fŕ ít is a lady," replied the perfon. "It is at her own requeft fhe İs to be buried by torch light. Nobody knows what family ihe belongs to, not even her own fervants. They would have had rare doings indeed, when fhe died, had not an old monk popped in upon them. They fay fhe has left a vafl fortune in ready coin, good piftoles and dollars I warrant, to fome perfon whom nobody knows. Aye; there; that is the monk following the hearfe ; I will engage he was deep in the lady'a fecrets." Lorenzo was fo much agitated, during this information, that he had not power to reply, and tuni ing away, he whifpered to the Count-^-" Ah, my dear friend, which way am I now to proceed; thia is the funeral of the Lady Almedia; now would 1 give all I poffefs to know the truth of that confeflion which I heard.—Let us, however, proceed; but can you not contrive to rid yourfelf of this oftentatious habit ?— every perfon gazes at you/* t 'Л " Let
100 ff Let them fatisfy themfelves," replied the Count ; " I do not value their thoughts." While they thus converfed, and were following amongft the crowd, a noife and confufion behind, caufed them to fland ιψ againil the houfes. They perceived the glittering of halberts and fuiils, at a diftance, and the Marquis de Mirandula trembled with fear that he might be the objeci of their fearch ; fo apt arc the truiltv to f tarile at the appearance of danger. ** Make way," cried a number of voices, " make way for the officers of the holy llermitianded.-—They have taken a fpy, an infidel, a traitor !" lie will be hanged, drawn, quartered, and broken alive- make way. M This uproar i n creating, Lorenzo and his friends began to be under no little ap¬ prehenfion» but they hoped trom the great nefs of the throng, to efcape obser¬ vation, How were they aftonifhed when they beheld the virtuous and thrice ex¬ cellent
ΙΟΙ cellent Mahmut, in the hands of the offi¬ cers of juftice. "Heavens!" cried the Coutlt, turning pale, " let us attempt tò refcue this inno¬ cent man." "Innocentor guilty," replied the Mar¬ quis, " it would be fomething worfe than rafhnefs to attempt fuch an enterprize. By St. Peter, I wifh we were fafe out of this adventure ; fhould we be recognized, we fhall be feized as accomplices, and whatever might be your fate, I know few queftions would be afked about me." " Whether this accufation be true or falfe," faid Lorenzo, " the fire which has by this time levelled the temple of Celeftial Influences, has done us the moft efïential fervice, as it will leave behind no traits όΐ the fociety." The majority of the crowd were more interefted in the fate of the fpy, than the folemnities of the funeral ; probably be¬ caufe it was the neweft objeci, and having patted away like a torrent, the procefTion f 9 was
102 was not long before it reached the church. The doors were open, and the people eagerly flocked in, Lorenzo and Jii« friends turned afide into the dark aifles that the Count might difengage himfelf from his celeftial garments, which were now become fo dangerous. While they were thus em ployed> they perceived a man, with folemn ftep and agitated air, ftealing amongft the pillars. Sometimes he flopped, as if liftening to the chaunting of the monks, and then again he paced the dark aifles, wrapped in thoughts that feemed abftracìed from the paffing ceremony and affembly. The glare of the lights rendered it dan¬ gerous for Lorenzo or the Marquis to approach »ear enough to be remarked, and lean ing againft one of the pilfors, tbéy watched the fteps of this folitary perfon, , till they loft him in the obfcurity. " It is not a little wonderful," faid the Count, " that you ihould have whrteiTed the death of this lady by accident, and ihould
юз « fhould this night have been led to her in¬ terment without intention. You have more than once mentioned to me the con¬ feffion that you heard, but I know not why you have never yet related to me the par¬ ticulars." " It is oftliat nature," anfwered Lorenzo, (t that this is by no means a place fitting for the detail. Heaven grant that the deceafed may receive pardon. She cer¬ tainly had many crimes to repent, par¬ ticularly her inconftancy to Don Raphael," A deep groan from behind, caufed them to ftart, and turn round ; but they could not perceive any perfon in the gloom. f( Had I no other reafons than thefe/' added Lorenzo, in a low voice, " I would fupprefs my refentment, but had you heard this confeffion, you would learn that I cannot profecute Don Raphael." " You cannot, indeed, profecute Don Raphael," faid the tali perfon whom they had obferved, and who now fuddenly flood г 4 before
104 before them. " Don Raphael has purfued thee even to the fanciuary, and fends thee this!" Immediately he darted a blow with a poignard at Lorenzo, which the obfcurity alone prevented being fatal. He inftantly ÍJed amongft the pillars, but the Marquis purfued him, and catching him by the cloak, the affaftin, to extricate himfelf^ turned fuddenly round, and buried his poignard in the breaft of the unfortunate Mirandula, who fell upon the pavement. The torch bearers quickly came up, Lorenzo and the Count having feized the arm of the affaffin, who now remained without attempting to efcape; and drawing his cloak from his face, Lorenzo funk back with difmay, when he beheld the well- known features of Don Raphael. '/ The deed is done," faid Don Raphael, with extreme eoolnefs ; " I perceive that I have revenged myfelf beyond my defire. I furrendcr myfelf with fatisfacìion. Mar¬ quis de Mirandula, you robbed me of all that
105 that I valued':—I have been revenged in the deftruciion of your family and your¬ felf;. and, O moil fingular deftiny ! you fall, as I may fay, upon the grave of my faithlefs wife, whofe funeral you came in triumph to witnefs. And you, Lorenzo, even now, though I am going to be chained in a dun¬ geon, you fliali not efcape my vengeance— a murderer dragged along by wretches. Learn, and tremble while you learn, that I am the. Duke of Arragon ! " The abjeci crowd now ceafed their hold, and flunk back. Lorenzo and the Connt, from different motives, were too much confounded, to wonder at. this affer- tion, and if the monk Timotheus had not left the obfequies of the Lady, Don Raphael would have walked away unmo- lefted, for his voice and imperious frown ftruck terror into all who beheld him. " Let the gates of the church be clofed," cried Father Timotheus. <e If no man is found to call upon heaven for juftice, I will ftand forward ;—Detain this man ; I p S charge
106 charge you in the name of the church, and of the Inquifition, feize him : he has com¬ mitted murder, blafphemy, and facrilege ; and if he is fuftered to eícape* your lives fhall anfwer." Again was Don Kaphael feized, and being delivered over to the civil power, he remained fiiilenly filent. Father Timotheus immediately returned to finifbthe funeral, which had been thu& interrupted, without faying one word,, * either to« the Count or Lorenzo, who were ßn £ a ged in attending the Marquis, who was already fpeechleis, and neither of them knowing hi; bode* the Count gave direct tiotis that he fliould be conveyed to his own palace, and his furgeon fent for to attend him« Lorenzo, overwhelmed with the events of the evening, haflened to his own chamber, if poffible to arrange the con« fufion óf his thoughts, and confider by what means he might avoid becoming a witnefe againfi Don Raphaeli The
107 The furgeon who attended upon the Marquis, fpoke very doubtfully of the cafe, hinting to the Count, that if the pa¬ tient had any worldly alFair to fettle, he had better arrange it in the morning, that fo he might be free from anxiety of mind, and prepare himfelf with refignation for the event. The Count perfecily underftood this language, and took upon himfelf the un- pleafant and melancholy talk of Warning a friend that his days were numbered. In the morning he waited upon the Marquis, whofe fpirits were evidently declining. " You fee how fail I am going/'fata he to the Count, " believe me I have very little to regret in leaving a world, where there is a m neh greater portion of evil than good, and where I have performed a very fool i fli part. Had I been contented with the retired pleafures of a country life, where I ought to have been fee tire from the madnefs of politics; I might have paífed my days in tranquillity ; have feen my
Ï08 my beloved daughter, united to fome de¬ fervi ng man ; at:d my wife would have lived to foothe the declining years of my life. But you fee to what rebellion has reduced me, though in the caufe of juf- tice, (the Count fmiled.) What is indi¬ vidual power, and particularly when that power is founded upon a people, unliable as the fluid ocean, and dreadful as the deep, when the wind roughens the billows. I am utterly undone, my eflates are fequef- tered, my houfe burnt to the ground, my family defrroyed, and myfelf a vagabond. Liíe under fuch circumflances, cannot be very dear, and 1 fhall leave the world with little regret." "But you will leave your daughter/' faid the Count; " have you any directions that you wifh to give.—Is fhe eflablifhed with any fecurity ?"' " There you have touched on my only regret," faid the Marquis, with a figh. u I leave behind me my Chrifliana, and I leave her unhappy and unprotected. Count Aranda,
109 Aranda, î would make a friend of you. I fttfpeéì that her heart is engaged to Lo¬ renzo. He is a young mm, in whole honor I have the g rea te ft confidence, but he is poor, and I believe ignorant of hh birth. Yet how ridiculous in my eyes ought this diftinciion to be, once fo dear to me as a Spaniard and a nobleman. 1 knew not whether he would accept the hand of my daughter, and for me to öfter and re¬ ceive a denial, would be an infufletable humility." " I am perfecily fcnfible of thefe diftl- culties/' anfwered the Count, fmiling at the ftruggle oí prejudice and habit, which yet remained in the breafl of the d)ing man. " Do you know that lorenzo has already been married г " " No /' replied the Marquis, " yon fur¬ prize me/' The Count perceived by thb, that Chrif¬ tiana had not informed her father of the difcovery of her fifler Cornelia, and now that fhe no longer lived, and his life hung upon
по
upon a moment, he conceived it prudent to be filent on the fubječl ; but this lead¬ ing the difcourfe to Don Raphael. The Marquis fighed at the mention of his name. t( It was the firft misfortune of my life," faid he, ff to have this madman for my rival. No man but myfelf, dared openly profefs hh efteem for the lady, from a dread of the power and revengeful temper of this man, who though one of the greateft noblemen of Spain ; while yet a youth, forfook his father's houfe on a trifling pique, and entered himfelf as a common foldier. AU his aciions, from his earl ì eft infancy, have been tinčiured with madnefs. He was infane for two years after the mar¬ riage of Donna Sempronia ; and when he discovered his wife's infidelity, he kept his chamber for feveral months, fuffering his beard and his nails to grow, and ileeping upon the floor. None were allowed to fee him but his brother, the prefent Duke, and his fervant ; and his conftant declaratioa was, that all mankind were favage beafts> and
llî and m on ft ers of ingratitude. It was fome* time after reported, that he was dead, and thofe more intimate with the family, be¬ lieved that he was privately maintained, being v :< Hout power to govern himfelf; but I ha v с learned from Chriftiana, his fin¬ gular retreat, and the manner of her falling into his power/* Lorensso, extremely pale with want of reft, and agitation of mind, now entered the chamber. He fat down befide the bed. ** Marquis," faid he, u I lament to fee yon in this fituation; there appears an unavoid¬ able fatality attending all who are related, or any way connecied with Don Raphael. You cannot be ignorant of the ftrange fpe- cies of confinement, in which he held your daughter, but perhaps you do not know that his infatiable hatred againft myfel£ is on account of my marriage with her/* €t Your marriage,** faid the Marquis, faintly, w Good heavens, can this be true l· Are you married to my daughter, and fhe conceal it from me ? But I guefs the pro¬ mife
mife I exafted from you that night of our flight, had made her fear my anger—but I forgive you. Give me your hand, my fon. ——" " Ah," replied Lorenzo, mournfully, " I perceive that you have m i flaken me ; it was not to Ladv Chriftiana, but to that daughter whom you loft in childhood, and who is now loft for ever, that I pledged my vows." "Am I dreaming?" faid the Marquisi raifing his eyes from which the tears itole filently down. " Am I permitted, before I die, to learn the fate of that darling child ? Proceed Lorenzo." Lorenzo then related the outlines of the education and unfortunate fate of Cornelia, but was himfelf fo much aftecied, that the Marquis catching the contagion, appeared on the point of expiring. " The love and hatred," faid he, when fomewhat recovered, "of a revengeful and fanguine man are alike to be dreaded; there is no afylum from his power but the . ^ grave»
из grave, to which I am quickly approaching. It grieves me that I leave Chriftiana behind me poor and forlorn. I wifli once more to fee her, but if I do it muft be to day." The furgeon now entered the room to examine the wound, and the ftate of the patient, and when he retired, the Count and Lorenzo attended him. " The opinion I held laft night," faid he, " I muft to day confirm. This gentle¬ man will not fee over twelve hours. The internal parts are mortally touched ; the cavalier knew better how to take his aim than the bravo that wounded my Lord Duke, though at firft he was in a terrible fright, and fent for his confeflbr." " Do you attend upon the Duke of Arra¬ gon then?" inquired the Count. " I have that honour," replied the fur¬ geon, and I will anfwer for him he will be a found man in a very few days. I muft iay'I never faw a neater thruft in my life." Lorenzo and his friend rejoiced to hear that the Duke was no longer in danger, which
П4 which permitted a greater freedom of cor- refpondence with the convent where his daughter boarded; and the fame perfon who took the meflage requefting the at¬ tendance οΐ Donna Chriftiana, conveyed a letter to Lady Agnes, which fhe received without anfwering, and the meffenger brought word that flie was extremely ill, to the great grief of the Count, who yet drew for him ('elf fome degree of fatisfac- tion; as he judged by her agitation that he was not fo indifferent to her as flie pre¬ tended. So quick a fucceflion of misfortunes had overtaken Chriftiana, whofe delicate con- ftitution, and foftnefe of difpofition, was fo ill calculated tobuflet with the miferies of life, that fhe feemed very faft approaching the termination of all her forrows. Lorenzo could not beholds with indiffer¬ ence, the fixed dejection that was written upon her features; and though flie faw, without a tear t the near diifolution of her
115 her father, it was vifible that flie more deeply fullered. In the courfe of lhe day the Count had been himfelf to inquire after father Timo¬ theus, and the Count Pandolfo, but with¬ out fuccefs; and he was not a little fııfpİ- cious that the monk, having poffeflion of the lady's will, would confider the intereft of his convent. He learnt, with furprize, that Don Raphael had efcaped from the prffon, and that the jailor was confined on fufpicion. " I fhall myfelf be afraid," faid he, when he related this information to Lorenzo. "This man is a dangerous being in fociety, and beneath the mafk of madnefs may commit any outrage unpu·* nifhed/** 'f This is the reafon,'* replied Lorenzo, " of the monk's abfence. I will pledge myfelf upon the honefty of father Timo¬ theus. It is not the open-hearted, the free and mirth-loving part of mankind, we have to fear; it is the outward fhew of par¬ ticular
116 particular fancìity, and the pretention to more than ufual virtue." During the day Chriftiana remained be¬ fide her father. In the evening the Mar¬ quis requefted that Count Aranda and Lo¬ renzo would favour him with their pre- i* nee." " I have fent for you," faid he, in a faint voice, l( that Γ may leave you the ex¬ ecutors of a verbal will, which is Amply, that you will not permit my orphan daugh¬ ter to become deftitute. No doubt the government, after my death, will confer upon her fome eftabliflıment: and I leave to you both the ungrateful office of foli- citing in her favour. Such is the utter ruin that has overwhelmed our houfe, that our ancient grandeur is now departed for ever." "This duty which you have left us/' replied the Count, <f will be a painful pleafure: but will not Lorenzo be jealous of my interference? He to whom you firft committed vour daughter in truft, and who
117 who has fo long been her guardian. Me¬ thinks he has a natural claim to that office, and ought to inf ure to himfelf the right, by a ceremony that alone is wanting to his happinefs." . Lorenzo, in fomc confufion, endea¬ voured to check the Count bv his looks. Chriftiana raifed hæ* eyes to Lorenzo, and blufhed, but the tinge was fo faint that it fubftded in a moment, and fhe fupprefled her emotions with a figh. An impreffive filence fealed up the lips of the company, nor did any one appear willing to interrupt it. Near half an hour thus paffed away, when Lorenzo, as if acied upon by a fudden impulfe, ftarted up, and taking the hand of Chriftiana, preffcd it to his lips. *' Amiable and ineftimablc friend," faid he, ff you are already related to me—may I hope that you retain thofe fentiments which once fell from your tongue. My whole life is of too little confequence to do you fervice—but here I am, poor, naraclcfs,
118 narøelefs, and unknown-—will vou then receive me as your lawful protector, and fliare with me thofe misfortunes fate has yet in flore ?" Chrifliana had not power to utter her confent, but finking into the arms of Lo¬ renzo, her feelings found fome relief in fighs and tears. τ· " 'Tıs enough/' faid the Marquis, endea¬ vouring to raife himfelf to exprefs his fa- tisfacìion: but overcome, he funk back «pon the bed, and immediately expired. The Count, being the leafl engaged,- immediately perceived the event which had taken place, and the fhock of which he feared would in thefe moments be infuffer** able to his daughter, " Your father has funk into fleep, my deareft lady/' faid he : <c your fpirits are exceffively difcompofed> and now that you two, who are alone worthy of each other* have come to a right underftanding, I entreat you to leave this room, if only for
ПО a few minutes, that you may be more tran* quii. I will watch in your abfence." The Count made a fign to Lorenzo, which he perfecily underftood, and com¬ manding his feelings, he entreated Chrif¬ tiana to accompany him. By this means he had an opportunity of preparing her for the fatal cataftrophe fhe was fo foon to hear ; and which he endeavoured to foften by a thoufand endearing expreifions; for though he experienced not thofe ardent tranfports, with whieh his paffion for Cor¬ nelia had infpired him; he regarded Chrif¬ tiana with that unchangeable efteem which is more permanent than love, and perhaps a more fol id bafis for future happinefs. With fome difficulty he prevailed upon her to retire to her own chamber, haften¬ ing to meet the Count. c( l thank you, my friend," faid he, "for obliging me to take that leap, which was fø neeefthry for my happinefs; and which yet I feared to per¬ form. I know that if pleafure is to be found in the fociery of a virtuous womar, it
13(3 it muft be with Chriftiana.—But is the Marquis certainly dead ?" " Moft undoubtedly," replied the Count, folemnly ; " but his daughter muft not know it till the morning. I have no doubt but you will be happy with this amiable and beautiful lady, who has fo much inte¬ refted me by her appearance, that I ihould have been tempted to öfter her my hand, if you had longer played the fool." " Ah !" replied Lorenzo, " if you are fo pleafed with her, what would you have been had you beheld Cornelia, as I firft faw her, with all the health and beauty of a fylvan nymph, and the innocence of an angej." ff Perhaps," anfwered the Count, (i flie might not have fo much interefted me. It is the expreffion of the countenance I ad¬ mire : it is not a certain regular propor¬ tion of features : there muft be a foul of intelligence to enlighten them. This is not, however, an hour for us todifcufs the merit of beauty ; matters of importance hang upon
ш upon our heads. 1 have ordered a trifling fupper in my library ;—you muft accom¬ pany me ; it is now eleven, and at twelve I have made a folemn engagement." Lorenzo fmiled, and attended the Count to his library. " I fuppofe," faid he, " I am to underftand that Mahmut has recovered his liberty, and is to be with you at mid¬ night." " No ;" replied the Count, " my engage¬ ments are not with Mahmut, who has fcarce been in my thoughts,fince fo many more in¬ terefling incidents have arifen. I have made a folemn and ferious appointment, which I now would willingly forego, as the time draws near.—But let us fin i İh our repaft, and when the fervant has retired, I will explain myfelf, and if you have courage, I only requeft you to remain with me till twelve o'clock, when I promife you upon the event, to form my opinion in future " Lorenzo very readily acceded to this requeft, which he hoped would explain to the Count the fallacy of his expecìations, vol. m. с and
m and induce him to abandon a chimerical purfuit, that rendered him unfit for the common duties of life. They quickly finifhed their fupper, and the fervant placing upon the table three wax Hghts, retired. *' Now/' fays Lorenzo, * f let me know the nature of your appoint¬ ment, and whom you expect?" " It is many years,'* anfwered Count Aranda, folemnly, " that I have been addicted to the fhidy of occult fubjeeìs, and I have defi red nothing fo ardently as to be affured of the nature and exiftence of the immaterial world. Hitherto all my expectations have proved delufive; and the event of this night will determine all my doubts. This morning when I was converging with the unfortunate Marquis, our difcourfe turned upon the immortality &Í the human foul, its nature, and the poflibility of its independent exiftence, exprcfting a ftrong wifh that it were pof- fibfe to be fatisfied by the re-appearance of a departed friend. The Marquis, who looked
looked upon death with a fingular calm- nefs, nearly amounting to contempt, fmiled at my earneftnefs. ς I wifli/ faid he, ' it were pofïible to gratify you. What would you fay if I were to pay you a vifit ? Would you not be too much fhocked?' 4t is a folemn thing/ anfwered I, ' to trifle with thefe fubjeeìs, or to have an im¬ pious curiofity of prying into myfteries, ordained to be concealed, but certainly if without crime, I might wifh and you could grant, every doubt muft vanifh at once.* ' Well, then,' replied he, e I give you the promife of a dying man, that if it be per¬ mitted that the real and felf-fame fpirit of a man ihould vifibly appear, retaining the powers of will and of acìion, when the clock ftrikes twelve the ftrft time after my departure, be it at midnight or at noon, expečl my appearance, or at leaft fome token of my exiftence, that fhall fatisfy you/ c I accept the engagement with my whole foul/ anfwered I ; ( and remember you have promifed/ Such, Lorenzo, is my с 2 appoint-
124 appointment, andin a very fhort time* it will be determined. Do you rind any inclination now to remain ?" " I find both inclination and impatience," faid Lorenzo, looking at the clock ; s< it wants now ten minutes to twelve." The Count made no reply, but fixing his vyes upon the hands of a fmall clock, which iiood upon a bracket, he remained in the moft anxious fufpenfe,and the falling of a flake of wax from the taper, caufed his countenance to change. О Lorenzo leaned his arms upon the table, and his head upon his hands, thinking lefs of the expečied appearance, than of the efcape of Don Raphael, when the ftriking of the clock caufed him to lift up his eyes ; but he became fpeechlefs with confter- nation, when he perceived a door, which was behind the Count, and led into his bed-chamber, open ilowly, without vifible caufe. A low fymphony, like the notes of a flute, founded from fomc little diftance. The Count faw the door open, by its re¬ flection
125 flexion in a glafs facing, and turning pale; he moved his chair half round; but he had no power to rife, remaining, like Lorenzo, an immovable fpeciator of the event. The door again clofed, and after a paufe of a moment, was again opened. A figure, wrapped in black drapery, glided fiowly into the apartment, followed by another in white, but their robes were of a fafliioii more like grave clothes than any thing human. The flute continued to play a mournful fymphony, more like the breath- ing of the wind than a regular air. The firil fpeclre, dreffed in black, paufed when it came into the centre of the apartment, and waving its hand with a nryflerious motion, removed a veil, on which the upper robes wholly fell back over the flioulders, and the Count beheld the exact refem- blance of Donna Agnes, pale, and dreffed in a fhroud. Her lips were without colour, her eyes moved not, nor did fhe utter any found. The Count changed countenance every moment, and had fcarce power to g $ breathe»
126 breathe, much Iels to interrupt this tre¬ mendous filence, which was only broken by the fighing notes of thediftant mufic. t( О God !" faid the Count, in a mourn¬ ful tone, as the viikm again lifted the veil and moved away, " Agnes is dead Í" The fécond form followed the fleps of the firft, but as it paffed Lorenzo, it with¬ drew, for a moment, fhe long veil which de¬ fcended nea sly to its feet,and expofed to him the palid features of Cornelia. She fmiled upon him, then again covering her face, paffed on after the made in black, into the fame chamber : the raufte ceafed, and the door clofed fiowly, without vifible hands. Lorenzo was nearly fainting away ; the Count was little better ; nor could they for fome time utter a word. In this con- fternation they remained, till the clock flruck one, which folemn found feemed to recai them to reafon. " Now," faid fhe Count, turning to Lo> * f renzo, are you fatisfied, that what I have endeavoured to impiefs upon you, is no vi fiou·
m vifionary phantom of a heated mind ? The Marquis has not himfelf been permitted to appear, but he has fent thefe fair viftons in his place. Alasi I have no doubt but Lady Agnes is dead ; but late as it is 1 will fend to the convent." " It İs, I fear, but too true," replied Lo- renzo, mournfully ; " <M you obfcrve the pale countenance of the btt bright form ; that was the prototype of Cornelia, but how were the rofes vanifhed from her cheeks, by the mildewing fingers of cor¬ ruption !" Both again beeame filent. A kind of bufili ng confufion in the inner chamber, filled them with new apprchenfions ; and turning their eyes in fear towards the door, two ladies ha fi ily entered, and threw them- f el ves feveral ly i n to the arms of the gentle¬ men, who were too much confounded to fpeak, and could fcarce believe that fome delufion did not play upon their f enfes. "Have you forgot me ?'* faid the lady to Lorenzo, in a toft complaiumg voice. с 4 "Arc
m " Are you no longer the fame Lorenzo, that 1 efpoufed, or am I different from her whom you led away from the foreft of St. Helma ? Has time cooled your heart to¬ wards me ? Or have my features vaniihed from your memory ?" " Neither! Neither!" cried Lorenzo, extremely agitated. " How—What—Can 1 believe my fenfes. My mind is d i fordered, 'and iiiuíions move before me.-—Are you indeed, Cornelia? By what miracle are you returned ? Did not I behold you dead upon the ground ?" Lady Agnes, who had played this extra¬ ordinary trick upon her lover, to ridicule his credulity, now gave way to a fit of laughter, which occafioned the Count to look ferious, for he did not feel altogether fatisfied at the adventure. "Forgive us," faid Donna Agnes, "for this innocent ftratagem, which is my con¬ trivance, in revenge for the flight I received on another occafion ; when the Count's etherial miftrefs fnperfeded me. Our fcheme
129 frheme could not be carried into ef¬ fect, without the concurrence of one of your pages, who played upon the Utitt*, If h not an hour fince we came to vour houfe» and we had but juft taken our Hâtions, when vou entered thtsfiudy. Donna Cor- nelia knew Lorenzo, when he ventured himfelf fo much to become your advocate, and we confidered our plan would thus anfwer a double purpofe, by introducing her to Lorenzo/' Then afľuming a ferions air, " I hope that this little incident will fhake your belief in thofe abfitrdities which haunt you, by convincing you that thefe chimeras dwell only in a varm fancy : and where we meet with well authenticated talcs» believe that thev have arifen from fome fortuitous circumfiances, which palled by undetected ; for anfwer me—-Would not you have been ready to confirm upon oath, the flrange apparition of ourfelves, if we had remained concealed, and who would have dared to doubt your vera¬ city ť* c $ ťť It
130
" It is moil true/' replied the Count, "I am aihamed of acknowledging that I have been guilty of fo much folly. From hence¬ forward I promife that no fair fpirit, but that of my deareft Agnes, fhall interrupt my plans. But, however I rejoice in your prefence, I am unable to credit how Donna Cornelia can be alive, after what Lorenzo has related/* €t Let Donna Cornelia anfwer for her¬ felf/* replied Lady Agnes; "herhuiband has certainly a right to demand an account of her time/' Cornelia fmiled, and replied : " I was feverely wounded, and fell deprived of my fenfes, by the horrid fpecìacle which the arrival of Don Raphael and his two accom¬ plices had created ; and when I opened my eyes, I beheld you ftretched upon the ground, father Timotheus bound to a tree, and one of the villians Handing guard over us. I uttered a loud cry of defpair, at feeing you dead, as I imagined ; and again fainted away. My voice had however reached the car
131
ear of a gentleman, who was travelling the road, and turning his horfe, galloped down the lane ; the monk called upon htm for affiftance, and the ruffian commanded him at his peril to retreat, for if he moved a ftep nearer, he would fetch him down from his horfe by a bullet." The only reply the ftranger made was by firing at the robber —the ball pierced through hk heart, and he fell without a groan. The ftranger who had performed this fervice, then difmounted, and unbound the monk, who informed him of our ad¬ venture, without mentioning our names ; and finding that I was not dead, he placed me acrofs his horfe, and bidding the monk provide for himfelf, he galloped away. The motion of the horfe brought me to myfelf, but I loft fo much blood that the Count—" (t What Count ?" cried Lorenzo. tt Count Pandolfo," anfwered Cornelia,
i'that
132 "that, he told me afterwards, was his name." Lorenzo concealed his furprize, defi ring that ihe would proceed. " Count Pandolfo," continued flie, " was obliged, after riding fome time through fome intricate lanes, to alight at a little cottage, the good woman of which examined my wound, and told the Count, whom flie feemed to know very well, that I fliould be in no danger if left to her care. ' She İs a charming pretty giri/ faid the Count, c and I would not have her die for a trifle.' When I began to recover I in¬ quired after you, and the Count told me you were certainly dead: he was not a little aftoniflied when he heard your name, informing me, that you were his compa¬ nion in arms; and complimenting me, be¬ fought me to allow him to fill your place in my heart. I know not how many ten¬ der expreflions he made ufe of whenever we met, and I began to think that all men were obliged to admire me; as Don Ra¬ phael
{»hae!, you, and this grand looking Count» all fpoke the f«me languie» but though he was fcnfible and witty I did tint like hb mannens, »tid he wm befide afmott ¡ss old as Don Kaphael.** Lorenzo felt himfelf extremely cha· grined at thefe words. Heavens* thought he* to himfelf, what utility ш there in ignorance like this. I am fatt&fied of the innocence of this fadv, but anv one who did not know her education» would think her a fool or worfe, ** How long did you re» main at thk cottage with the Count "" fatd he. ** Kot many days" replied Cornelia. ** ! was fcarcely recovered* when he was obliged to leave me on particular buttiteli When he left me he requefted that 1 would wait his return, which indeed 1 could not refufe; for how was it potlible I fhould do other, knowing nothing of the world? 1 feared to walk to anv ditiance, left I fhould lofe myfelf in a witdernefs that had no end; for my eyes had been ufed to the homi-
1S4 boundaries of lhe mountains! and 1 was al¬ inoli afraid to look upon fo wide a region. Count Pandolfo had not been gone moro than two days, when there came up to the cottage a moll gallant and hand fome young man. I was fitting at the door with the old woman, wbo entertained me with vari· ous flortes, and was perfectly aflonifhed at the fpiendor of this gentleman, whom I took for a prince at lead, for I had feen nobody in Leon like him : he was dreffed in a green doublet, flafhed quite through, and lined with white fatin, and covered over w il h gold points: his cloak was the fincft fcarlet cloth, his hat was adorned with a gold buckle and feather, and fet on one fide of his head with fuch a comely air, that I was delighted at beholding him. He had, befides, a chain of gold round his neck, and his bofe were of the fìnefl crini- fun filk. He was followed bv two fervants on Arabian couriers, and riding tirait up to the cottage, gazed at me fome moments without fpeaking, which created m me fo much
much confufion that he fmiled at my dif~ lieft: and perhaps feeing that my clreE was bv no means eommon, * Truly» fweet lady/ faid he, * thb m a piare unbefitting your apparante— -do you relide here» or are you only in thefe parts for ihe plea¬ fure of the country.* * Neither/ anfwered I. * I am kept here by a gentleman that it gone to Leon.* He fixed hkeyes upon me with a look, as if he would have read my thoughts, which made me colour and turn away my eyes« * Has he detained y ott long, madam ?* faid he. I replied that he had not. c And do you wifh to Hay any longer, my claiming creatures fatd fw% bending over hia herfe ; * Will you go with me?* " "And what anfwer did you make?" eried Lorenzo* peevUMy, and hlufhmg with apprehenfion. * s I returned him mv thanks." "You did!" exclaimed Lorenzo; while the Count and Donna Agnes broke into a laugh which not a little Irritated him ; " and what then ?" " Then
136 f< Then he began to talk fo me about my beauty, and the extreme love that he had alrcadv for me, which caufed mc to laugh, for he even made finer fpeeches than yourfelf or Count Pandolfo. The old woman that fat befide me, began to be angry at my freedom as flie called it, and turning to the ftranger; ' Senor/ faid flie, f you muft form a very ill opinion from appearances, but I affure you this young lady is not what you take her for.* f I take her to be a perfeci beauty/ cried he, bowing ; ( and fo, my good mother, you fee I am not deceived.—The ladv, I am fure, will accept my protecìion ; but as you may fear to lofe by her departure, there is a trifling compenfation. Here, Soto, take up the lady behind you, and convey her to my fifliing-houfe:' then turning to me— f Excufe me, dear angel,* faid he, in a foft voice, 4 cannot attend vou at this moment ; I am on bufmefs I cannot delay ; but this evening be certain I will throw myfelf at your feet, to learn your
137 your commands, and to fee if my houfe can afford you proper accommodation/ The old woman wanted to have detained me, but I thought the company of fo lively and handfome a young nobleman, much preferable to that of Count Pandolfo, and I gave him my hand, while he helped me to mount behind his fervant. Having bade me adieu, and recommended me to take care of myfelf twenty times over, we fet out different ways. Soto ran on in the praifes of his mafter ? who I found was not a prince, but a noble gentleman, named Don Guzman, an only fon of a Grandee of the Empire, with whom I ihould lead the life of a princefs, and a great deal more he faid, which I did not underftand. About an hour after noon we entered a delightful grove of chefnut and fycamore trees, in- terfperfed with myrtle and flowering fhrubs, and if I had feen anv mountains near us, I fliould have fuppofed we were again in the foreft of St. Helma. We were obliged to difmouňt, a..d Soto leading the way, we
ÎS8 we foon came to a pleafant little building, on. the bank of a deep and fmooth-gliding, ftream, and íb/ embowered with trees, that only part of the windows were vifible as we approached. * This is the fifhing- houfe/ faid Soto, ' where Don Guzman retires from the world to âudy. He hasa paffion for fííhing, and keeps a little boat for that purpofe» You will find my maf¬ ter has am excellent tañe, and is the moil generous man in Spain/ " I have found all men ready to ferve ще^ thought I, fitting down on an elegant feat.—The world is not fo bad as Don Eaphael would have made me believe.-«* He himfelf has been the only man who endeavoured to hurt me, while he painted all the reil of mankind deceitful and cruel. -é ' I looked round upon fome elegant paint* ings and beautiful furniture. Soto left me, after fetting before me forne fweetmeats, nuts, and wine; and charmed with the ftillnefs of the place, I went and fat down in, the window, which hung over tlie water. The
139 The delightful fcenery which formed the diftant fubječis of the view, enchanted me; The water reflecied the trees in vertedry on the oppofi te íhore, and I watched the clouds, as they feemed to glide through the tran¬ quil ftream, When I was tired with this trifling amufement, and had gazed upon the landfcape till I was weary; I took up a volume of Ariofto, and fastening back the lattice, I fometimes read a few lines, then gazed upon the country, then thought upon you, Lorenzo, and how you would kave been charmed with fach а fituation ; and then wondered Don Guzman did not appear. " The fweet ftillnefs that furrounded me, was ftolen upon by fome diftant ftrains of mufic, fuch as î had never heard before ; they feemed to draw nearer, and float along the water. I liftened with attention to this pleafing concert, which evidently drew nearer, and it was not long before a light veflel, with a covered awning, rowed gently along the ftrcam. Three or four people were
140 were playing, while an elderly gentlemans fat reclining upon a cufliion of velvet, in an open cabin of great rich nefs. He looked up towards the window where I fat, and no fooner perceived me, than his countenance changed, and he faid fome words to the rowers, in a very angry tone, and in a mo¬ ment the boat ihot out of fight. In a few minutes, I heard fome perfon run up the ftairs, and throwing open the door with violence, the fame gentleman I had îeen in the boat, entered the room, and threw himfelf in great anger upon a chair, while he fixed his eyes upon me, with a mixture of furprize and vexation." f By whofe authority, madam/ faid he* 'are you here?' I replied, tf that Don Guzman had fent me hither, with, his fervant Soto, and I ex¬ pecled him here every minute." e 'Tis well—^tis.yery well/ cried he, ( I will foon terminate his ftudies. My houfe was too noify—he haçl the head-ache; but if you remain, I fhaU huve the heart¬ ache.
141 íache. You mtìft remove hence ; Don Guz¬ man is my fon, fo you muft pack up your baggage, and look out for other quarters." _________ У " I have no baggage," replied I, trem¬ bling, for his roughnefs frightened me. " Don Guzman promifed me his protection, and I have no place to go to." ' He deceived you then/ cried the Condé, c he has r power to protect you, he has betrayed you, and feeks your de¬ ftručlion. —Who are you ŕ* ·" I am the wife of Cavalier Lorenzo de Ferara," replied I. ' You a wife/ cried he, x fo young, fo handfome, and in this fituation. Has my Ion been fo abandoned a villain V t( Senor," anfwered I, " Don Guzman %as not injured me. I do not underftand What you mean ; but it feems to me, that all the men of your years would make me bélieve, that thofe who are »younger, are all ready to deftroy me, while all the young flattes and ftrive to do me fervice." if He
ш "He gazed at me fome time, without re¬ ply. f You tell me you are married,* faid he, in a tone of тогетотрЬсепсу, * where is your huiband ?' i( In the grave/' anfwered L 'Dead!' cried he: 'How long have you known my fon ? and how long have you lived in this place ?' ( ' I have known Don Guzman," replied Î, "'only about ten minutes, as he fat upon his horfe, and a handfome gentleman he is, and I have been in this place three or four hours expecting him.'* * There is fome myfiery/ muttered he, afking me innumerable queftions, and he was feveral times in aăonifhment at my anfwers- ' Well, my dear Cornelia/ faid he, * though you feem to have a particular predilection for young men, I who am neither very old nor very young, will ven¬ ture a propofal to you, which if your in¬ clinations are virtuous, as your words lead me to believe, you wall not hefitate to ac¬ cept. I learn that you are an orphan, and unprotected,
143 unprotected. Your finguîar expreffîons ex¬ cite my aftonifhment; a young lady like you, cannot be feen without danger, and a tlioufand plans will be laid to deftroy you, which your want of fufpicion would not dete6t till too late. I will fend you to Ma¬ drid, and penfkm you in a fociery of amia¬ ble and pious ladies, where you will be pro- tecìed from every infult, and lead a life of happinefs and virtue. Do you accept my * propofal, and promife me you will not wil¬ lingly fee or converfe with my fon ?' (( I gave him my promife without hefita- tation ; then rifing, he took me by the hand, and conducted me to the boat. The Condé gave me many inftručtions as we failed along the river, and I blufhed at find¬ ing that I knew little more than a child. He directed me how to behave at Madrid, and if I behaved with propriety, he would regard me as his own daughter. Under his direc¬ tion, I was entered as boarder in the con¬ venti where I have remained ever fince, and where, attending Donna Agnes the other day,
144 day, at the grate, I had the pleafing fatis- faction to find that you lived." Lorenzo felt much fatisfacìion at the conclufion of this detail, which had caufed in him various emotions, and the moil im- pleafing apprehenfions. The paternal and generous conduci: of the elder Don Guz¬ man, was an example, rarely to be paral¬ leled. (( You are extremely fortunate,'* faid the Count, u that you met with fo difinter- efied a friend, and now, for the firft time from a young man, learn that you were expofed to imminent danger, and you would have found in the gallant Don Guz¬ man, your worft enemy. I know him per- fecily, he is one of the moft licentious young men in Madrid, and at the fame time the moft enterprizing. Had he known where his father had concealed you, I know not, whether the walls of a convent would have been fufficient fecurity. But now let me beg you will inform us, by what man¬ ner
145 ner vou contrived to come here, and at (^o unfeafonable an hour." " That fhall be my tafk," replied Donna Agnes ; " and I think it will be fufficient to inform you, that our governefs is ac¬ quainted with our hifiory,and has lent us her affiflance. We muft полу, however, return/ and I doubt not your gallantry to accom¬ pany us. The porter waits for us, and we have below two difguifes thatwill eíľecÍually conceal us.'* The Count and Lorenzo affecled to ad¬ mire their courage and enterprize, but in their own minds they were very far from approving fo hazardous a fcherne; a fcheme, which in the moments of good fortune and cafe, they might have fmiled at as a trifle ; but their minds had been ill prepared for levity, by the preceding events of the night; and Lorenzo felt himfelf embarrafľcd be¬ yond extrication, by the fituation he now flood in, between thefe fifters. Itwas im- poffible, under this impreffion, to behave ¿towards Cornelia, with that animated rap-· vol. ш. к ture
146 ture her return might claim, and while he attempted to fay thofe things, his pleafure in her prefence infpired, his thoughts in¬ voluntarily recurred to the Marquis, her fa¬ ther, who lay breathlefs in the houfe, and the unfortunate Chriftiana, in whofe breafl remained but one ray of earthly hope, which was now to be extinguiihed ; and he ihuddered for the confequences. Ignorant as was Cornelia of the world, and its manners, fhe wanted not penetration to perceive that Lorenzo ačled under fome reftrain t, and that his words did not accord with a certain air'of coldnefs, which hung upon his features. He did not entreat her ťo remain beyond the time themfelves pro¬ pofed, and twice he hinted that that time was nearly eiapfed. The Count who fhared in the feelings of his friend, checked his own defire of detain¬ ing Lady Agnes ; and having informed her of her father's rapid amendment, they returned in company to the convent, pro¬ teeied
147 tcéìed bv two fervants, well armed, carrv- ing lanthorns. After the Count and Lorenzo took leave of the ladies, the latter could not conceal his opinion of this adventure. <e lam not altogether pleafed myfelf/' replied the Count ; " but I know Lady Agnes has a fpirit for thefe exploits; any other woman would have loft my efteem, had ftie con¬ fented to leave her father's houfe, notwith¬ ftanding circumftanccs.' But this lady has, from her birth, been uncontrouled, and her fpirit is high and romantic. As to Corne* lia, ihe appears to me to have no formed characier. In this world, flie is little above a child, and it depends on the fociety with which ftie ihall live, to ftamp upon her the impreffion, which will give features to her mind. Native goodnefs, ihe certainly pof- feffes, and for thofe who can be charmed with uncultivated beauty, ihe is a gem fu¬ perior to price. I remarked, however, that exterior íhew hasa powerful attracìion, and when you remember, that moft things u 2 are
148 are new to her eyes, you will not wonder, though you will have fomc unpleafant fenfations to fupprefs, till you have intro¬ duced her into life." "Bather fay," replied Lorenzo, "till ihe is again carried back to the retirement of an obfucre retreat ; for how fliould I, without any eftabliflıment, fupport myfelf in Madrid. I had intention of feeking out Count Pandolfo, and by revealing myfelf to him, claim his protection ; for 1 have too much reafon to believe, thatmv fate is in his hands. But if he could acİ fo meanly with regard to Cornelia, when he knew her to be my wife, what moral tie might be fuppofed to bind him ? Even Don Ra¬ phael, with all his irreconeileable fpirit of revenge, and inborn hatred of mankind, ¡s to me a preferable character. His foul is fuperior to thefe low and contemptible vices which degrade the fpecies, and his er¬ rors arife from too exalted an opinion of virtue, and a difappointed mind. Fortu¬ nate, indeed, would it have been, had I never known his name."
149 "I perceive," faid the Count, "that the ardour of y our paflion for Cornelia is cool¬ ed, but you do her eonfiderable wrong. I confefs Chriftiana is greatly to be pitied, if pity would adminiiter relief. I think that it were to be wifhed that you fhould not meet any more. I will take upon my¬ felf to make her acquainted with this un- forefeen event ; and I will accept your office of guardian, and become refponfible for her eftablifhment, in whataver way fhe fhall prefer." Lorenzo had fcarce time to thank his friend, before they reached home, when they immediately retired to reft, or to re¬ flecì on the fhifting feenes of fortune.
CHAP.
150
CHAP. V.
VV HEN Lorenzo arofe in the morning he haftened to the library, where he expecled to find his friend, that he might inftruci him in many things he wiihed to fay to Chriftiana. He found the Count fitting with melancholy on his countenance, and his arms folded. " I am come— M faid Lorenzo. * f Don't fay a word/' cried the Count: " It is all over:—you have loft an angel, and found a woman,—Heavens, Sir, I would have siven half m ν fortune that it had been my fate, fo to be loved by her. Even now I might be tempted (if flie would not con¬ fider my addrefles as an infult) to forfakc Lady
ш Lady Agnes, and offer her my hand. I tell vou, vou have loft an angel, and muil have been ílupid or blind." "I know it," replied Lorenzo; "but why this warmth ? " " I am chagrined," replied the Count, who had taken up this tone that he might bear down the grief which ftruggled in his brea ft. " Tell me what this lovely creature faid, and what ihe intends to do," faid Lo¬ renzo. " She, faid what did her honour, and will do what alone remains for her to do !" anfwered the Count. Lorenzo knew not how tò underftand this anfwer ; he perceived that fomething greatly difturbed his friend; and feeling himfelf hurt by this eoolnefs; "I am igno¬ rant," faid he, " of the interpretation you intend me to make of thefe words. If my aciions have forfeited your efteem, I at leaft have a riííht to aik how." π 4 " You
tŕ You have no occafion for this ques¬ tion," cried the Count, ftretching out his hand to him. " I confefs I am flrangely nffecled by the virtues of this excellent lady, and am ferioufly còníidering, whether I have not been, like you, blinded in my choice of Donna Agnes; whether it is her virtue or only the beauty of her per¬ fon, and a certain attraction of manners, that has led me into an engagement, which, perhaps, will be no fo fooner formed, than 1 fhall wiilvit diflblved for ever." " Do you fee any parallel between vour cafe and mine ?" faid Lorenzo. i( I do," replied the Count. " You were engaged by the beauty of Cornelia; vou could only have a fuperftcial know¬ ledge of her viri ues; but her image haunted your-fancy, and your whole foul bent to the attainment of its object. Pre- poifefted and blinded as you were, you had no eyes to behold in Chriftiana not only fimiliarity oť features, but thofe fea¬ tures finiflied by the impreffive. touches of an
153 an heavenly mind ; poflefling at the fame time all the known perfection which can render a woman the real obječi of a pure and durable affection.—Yet you wanted resolution to overcome the prior impref- fions; and how know I, but at this mo¬ ment I am led away by the fame delufion ?" " But Cornelia is ftill the objeci of my regard/' faid Lorenzo. " And may flie always merit to be fo/* anfwered the Count: " far be it from me to depreciate her value in your eyes : there are not many women indeed who would bear a comparifon with Donna Chrifliana." He then informed Lorenzo, that Chrif- tiana had declined to fee her fifler, being too weak to fland fo great a fliock, and that fhe had finally re fol ved to retire to fomc convent, where flie propofed to take the vows, but what eflablifhment flie fhould prefer, flie had not determined. Their d i fco uri e was interrupted by a fervant with a billet, and faying, that a mei? enger waited for an ani wer. The из Count
154 Count immediately broke the feal, and was not a little perplexed at the contents. "It is a letter from the Duke of Arragon. Bufmefs, fays he, of a particular and pri¬ vate nature requires my immediate attend¬ ance in company with a Cavalier Lorenzo, and excufing himfelf for not waiting on us by reafon of his ilinefs. " ľ know not," faid the Count, " what can be the purport of this meíľage : whe¬ ther it relates to his daughter or to Don Raphael, with whom you have had fo inti¬ miate a conneciion. I am of an opinion, there can be no danger in complying with his requeft." f( Certainly not," faid Lorenzo. " I am perfectly indifferent—let the meffenger know we will quickly follow." They waited only to make a flight breakfaft, haftening to the palace of the * Duke, to whom they were introduced» He was fitting upon a fopha, with many writings fcattered about him, and yet pale with his wound. The colour flufhed into his
155 bis cheeks at the Count's entrance ; but while Lorenzo prefented himfelf, he gazed upon him with vifible furprize. " How are you, Aranda?" faid he, ' f let me beg you to be feated—is this your friend Lorenzo ? May I inquire from what part of Spain you are?" This queftion threw Lorenzo into fome confufion, and he replied, (t of Toledo." " My note would furprize you," faid he, turning careleffly to the Count, without taking notice of Lorenzo's confufion. <( It is a matter of fome confequence to the honour of ray family, which induced me to fend to you." " Give me leave to hope," faid the Count, " that my admiffion to any family in Caftille would be no difgrace. There was a time—" " I was not faying—I did not mean to infuniate any thing on that fubject," inter¬ rupted the Duke. " Let it fleep for the prefent : I have received information that the
156 the Marquis de Mi rand u la is actually dead, and that he now lies at your houle." " It is unfortunately too true," anfwered the Count. " Were you both prefent when this tran iacii on took place ? It was a lingular hour for the church to be open, and equally fo that you three fhould be within its walls. Had you any connection with the funeral of the lady ? Do you know her name?" inquired the Duke. The Count anfwered that it was by accident that they were invited by the pomp of the procefhon ; but he believed that Lorenzo was better informed. The Duke had repeatedly call his eyes upon Lorenzo, with no little tokens of wonder, and now turning to him, he de- fired him to fay if he knew who the lady was. Lorenzo admired this precaution, but having no particular defire to conceal his knowledge of circumflances, which the abfence of father Timotheus prevented him
157 him fooner from difcloftng, he anfwered, that the natne of the lady was Almedia, and that he had but too much reafon to know her rank and con neci i ons. The Duke betrayed fome confufion, fiii ft ing his feat, and changing colour. * f May I inquire, then," laid he, u what was her rank and conneciion ?" " She was the wife of Don Raphael ; and I have too much reafon to believe fhe was—" "What?" cried the Duke; for Lorenzo found that he was expofing his own fecret, and checked himfelf. ** Say what!" "She was my mother!" " 1m- poift ble !" cried the Duke: "I am well aware that this Don Raphael has no chil¬ dren." "' Your Excellenza, perhaps, is better informed than myfelf," replied Lorenzo. " Though I have every reafon to believe that this was my mother, I have not the fame motives to fuppofe Don Raphael to be my father. If you are acquainted with the private life of this lady, you may readily
158 readily conceive my reafons for believing myfelf her fon." ** This is a little myfterious," faid the Duke, biting his lips, as if ftudying what he fliould fay. " Then you are in fail ignorant of your parents ?«—I alk your par¬ don for my abruptncfs, Cavalier Lorenzo, but I am interefted in the affairs oí this madman, Don Kaphael. " " I know," anfwered Lorenzo. ** You have very wonderful knowledge," replied the Duke, pecvifhly. ** Pray how came you to know fo much? particularly the private life of a lady who has been for fo many years feduded from fociety ?" íť Itwas bv accident fhe confelfed her- felf to me;" faid Lorenzo. "Impoffible!" exclaimed the Duke; "" a mother, and fuch a mother,, confefs herfelf to her fon!" " It is not lefs true than ftrange," re¬ plied Lorenzo. ** It was by a fingular accident, I was eonducìed to the fide of her bed as fhe was dying. I knew her not till
m till that moment. I had no fufpicion of my birth ; having been held in ignorance, and fupplied by unknown friend«,** ·' And who are thofe friend« ? M faid the Duke« " 1 am impatient— İ am interefìcd in this bufinefs, m it concents my elder brother.** " Your Exceller««»** faid the Count ** hasdifclofed to us your own íccret, and confirmed our fufpictons ; but be certain you have nothing to apprehend. Lorenzo has fullered from Don Raphael the outrage and perfecţii ion of inveterate hatred; and were you acquainted with the lingular concatenation of events which have at length thrown fome ray of light on the darknefn of his fate, you would perceive the powerful cflecl of in vifible influence." The Duke fmiled—" You have not» then/* faid he, ** overcome thofe ridicu¬ lous fancies ì I fhoukl have thought the apprehenfion of Mahmut, and his expo- fu re, would have fatisfied vou of fuch tmpofture. This man has been long ob¬ tened
160 fened by Government. His exterior of virtue was a garb for the bafcft of pnr- pofes-—the frductlon of men's minds from the eflablifhed Refigion and lìeguhtìom of their country ; and the mifchtef was the more to be dreaded, as he had mofl power over men of virtue and eccentric genius. I was well informed that you were one of hh votaries. 1 knew that your mind was only biaftcd by the ftiblimc and fplendid hypothefts, which he fpread before hit difciples, like a garden of fkmen» to lure their fteps to deliruction ; and thti, my dear Count, was my fecret reafon for denying you my daughter. This Mahmut h a fpy ; he aflèch religion, virtue, morality, phi¬ lanthropy, and uiuverfal benevolence ; but how do thefe virtues agree with the moft dcteflable of human charaélers ?—a man who prj% into the councils of nations* and undermines the principle« of ¡ndivi- duab;—he who leek« privately to ruin his neighbour, is an angel to him who would undermine nattons» ai;d involve king-
161 kingdoms în bfoodflted. Such is a pni He fpy; and fuch Is the filver*tonguitl Mahmut."* ** I acknowledge my folly/* faid the I Count: "your charming daughter has I been my phyficran ; but who would have believed that fo much venom was kdgetl beneath fo fair an estertor P* <f Hie water h moft ¿сер where the fur- fke b fmootteft/" replied the Duke. iÉ It was known that your principles were found, though your fancy might have corrupted you; and your general character produced you exemption from arrc#:—* not fo with your high pried ; he b an arch villain« and b delivered over to the Inquifition. Thefe» however, are only fubjefh for future dìfctifllon» Matters of much more moment are before tti. It est* rttes my furprbe how your friend mould have gained fa intimate a knowledge of Don Raphael ; 1 believed that no man in the world but mvTelf, knew hh lltnatton and concaio«*.··
162 "1 have heard," faid Lorenzo, ŕŕ the whole hiftorv of his life.—He made me his confident unafked." " Wonderful ! then you have been in¬ habits of friendfhip ? were you ever at the caftle of St. Helmar" t( I have refided there for nearly two years !" The Duke looked aftoniflied : " You will not wonder," faid he, (( that I am not a little furprized that any man could fo far unbend the haughty Don Raphael, (formerly Duke of Aragon) fince you muft know him. But now if you dare place confidence in me, 1 would aik you to re¬ peat the confeflion of Lady Almedia ; and if you will add to it a fkctch oí your own life, it mav turn to more account than at prefent you imagine." Lorenzo had admired the manners of the Duke, which exhibited good fenfe, pene¬ tration, and the eafy dignity of confirmed nobility. fr 1 cannot now," faid he* "take υρ fomuch of y our Exccllenza's attention, as to enter deeply into my own hiftorv ;
163 nor might it otherwife in tereft you, but as it may relate to your family, of which, till lately, I had no idea of the moft diftant relationfhip." He then tranfiently glanced over the heads of his narrative till the time of his arrival in Madrid, with his firft ad¬ venture in carrying off Lady Agnes. " Then it was^w//* exclaimed the Duke, w who did me that favour ? I had placed it to the account of Aranda, till I had certain information of his innocence. In truth this would almoft tempt me to believe in fecret influences myfelf." Lorenzo proceeded without remark on the Duke s exclamation, till he led them to the chamber of the dying lady. " You muft perceive," faid he, that my own fafety was involved in betraying myfelf, and this laid me under the neceífity of at¬ tending to a confeflion, which ñxed me with aftonifliment to the fide of the bed, and you will readily believe my emotion, at hearing thefe words : ' Holy father/ faid the lady, ' I cannot diç in peace with¬ out
164
out making full confeffion of my fins ; but alas ! I fear my repentance comes too late. I was the wife of a nobleman~the heir of Arrogan, a Grandee of the Empire, and Knight of the Golden Fleece. I had a ton by my firft huiband, whofe bed I betrayed, though not till after the birth of that fon. The cruel rage of his father, deftroyed my feducer before my eyes, and afterwards murdered my fon. I was obliged to fly to a diftant part of Spain, and to aíľume á fictitious name. My fortune remained entire, and I received it through the hands of an officer, whom I had known abroad. My fecret he made the foundation of his prefumption, and prefented himfelf to me „ as a lover. I acknowledge with fliame, Ъо1у Father, that I yielded to his perfua- . fions, and thus, a feeond time, betrayed the honour of a huiband, who was become a moniier in my eyes. To this in fidi ous lover, I had a fon, named Lorenzo. The fecrefy with which I was obliged to live, to avoid the vengeance of my huiband, obliged
165
Obliged mc to place this boy with a cottager, from whom, I was informed, he was foon after ftolen, and î have never feen him fince. My faithlefs lover, whofe name was Pan¬ dolfo, contrived to plunder me of my for¬ tune ; but finding that I would no longer ftip- ply his extravagance, he left me. My hufband. died, as 1 learnt, raving toad, though I dared not trufl the report fo far as to appear again in public. Near two years fince Γ received a leiter from Count Pandolfo, which in¬ formed me that my fen yet lived; that he had been placed by him in the convent of Benedicìincs ; that after fludying at Toledo, he had entered the army ; and that being himfelf very much embarrafted, he had no money to fpare him, and fliould leave him in future to my generofity. * I confidered this tale as a mere fabrica¬ tion, to lead me to fupply his own wants, and for fome time I remained inactive. ' Chancing to travel near Toledo, f had curiofity enough to inquire at the men¬ tioned convent; and to mv aftonifliment learnt
166 îearnt that fo far the information was cor¬ rect Struck with remorfe, I immediately difpatched a monk to Leon, to examine into the fituation of my fon; but he re¬ turned only to overwhelm me with griet by detailing to me a horrid narrative of his having been murdered before his eyes, by that deleitable wretch. f But, holy Father! how great are my crimes, and how wonderful the royileries of providence! this very Don Raphael was my huiband. * As I journeyed from Toledo, and before the return of the monk, I was flopped at the fide of a thicket by two ruffians, who when they beheld me remembered my per¬ fon, and declared they would convey me prifoner to my huiband; unlefs I would engage to fend to this very place a large fum of money, equal to what Don Ra·* phael would give for my perfon. *' Ah ! " faid I, " is that villain yet liv¬ ing !-r-I would give double the money to be rid of him for ever." "-Say
" Sáy nó more," faid one of them, with a favage grin, and a low voice. "We will bring ýóu his head fo this very fpot, and that moft willingly; for we have an ac- count to fettle. Ten days hence we will meet you." I agreed to this horrid compact, and they fet out; but by the monk's account he muft muft have found means to detect, and to árreft their purpofes, for it could have been no other than thefe two mif¬ creants who aíľifted him to deftroy my fon. " O God ! " cried I, unable any longer to attend in filence. " Am I then your fon ì Is Count Pandolfo my father? and is Dòn Raphael the injured huiband? whofe every outrage to me, was a judgment of retri¬ butive juftice." " Ah!" cried flie, wildly ftarting. " Whom do I fee?-—0 hide me-^-O Don Raphael !—mercy—" Her voice funk away beneath her ef¬ forts to fpeak ; her eyes clofed ; and find ing
168 > ing myfelf ready to faint with a ftrange ílupoľ which fwam before my eyes, I funk back in a chair, where for fome time my fenfes wholly failed me, and when the fer¬ vants recovered me, the lady was dead." Here Lorenzo remained filent, and the Duke regarded him with a fixed and earn¬ eft attention. " This, then," faid the Duke, " is all the evidence you have of'your relationfhip to Count Pandolfo ? What benefit do you expeci from the fuccefs of your claim ? I fhould conceive that İt were better you funk your knowledge in filence. I know Count Pandolfo—he is overwhelmed in debt, and has been lately tricked into mar¬ riage with an infamous woman, who has more than doubled thofe debts. He has been the principal means of traducing your cha¬ racter, and at this moment I have a charge from him againft you for high treafon. To my knowledge Lady Almedia has left you the whole of her fortune, by a deed which is dated before fhe fuppofed you dead,
169 dead, .and immediately upon her firft ar¬ rival at Toledo. This teftament iş in the hands of father Timotheus, whom I have feen, but who cannot appear till after the fate of Don Raphael is determined. On this account it is that I have fent for you, and I have a plan in train which will ar¬ range every interefL For political reafons Don Raphael cannot be brought to public retribution. The honour of our family will not permit it. But we muft engage that he ijiall not again have power to per¬ form thefe mifchievous exploits. We have alfo fufficient teftimony that he is not maf¬ ter of his reafon." , " That no man can doubt," faid Lorenzo. f'J myfelf would bear witnefs, that his mind is actually deranged. But I thought he had efcaped from the officers ofjuftice." The Duke fmiled. " We manage thefe tiling," faid he; " but it is not for all the world to know how. I ihall difcharge the order for your arreft, and you may remain perfecily fatisfíed that Don Raphael mail VOL· m. ι not
İTO not iuterrupt your repofe. Count Pan¬ dolfo is at prefent concealed from his wife and creditors ; but being ftill on our lift as an officer, I am acquainted with his - refi- dence. What can be more eligíanle than giving him apartments at the caftle of St. Helma, where he will be reieafed from all his ties, and may keep Don Kaphael in fafety ? It remains only for both of you to fign this proteftation, that you believe his infanity; as you were witnefs to the deplorable cataftrophe of the Marquis de Mirandula, who, by this event, has been faved from the more unfortunate tragedy of a public execution ; his fteps being watched, and all his aelions known. Thus you fee how abfurd it is for men to plot againft the fíate in fancied fecurity, when our watchfulnefs is fueh that their very thoughts are gueíTed at." Lorenzo had heard, without furprize, of the warrant for his own arreft, and felt himfelf relieved from a eonfiderable τιό»* ble, in the fecurity that he might now ex~ peéì.
171 peci. The behaviour of Count Pandolfo, and the advice of the Duke, determined him to conceal the illegality of the Count's mar¬ riage with Ippolita, and with a heart much lighter than he pofleffed fonie hours be¬ fore, he took leave of the Duke in com¬ pany with his friend, who received a polite invitation to renew the vifit; and his hopes were not a little raifed towards a reconci¬ liation. On their return, they learnt that Lady Chriftiana, with a compofure and fortitude which rofe above the weaknefs of her fex, and of herfelf, had taken a farewel of the remains of her father, and retired, without leaving a note to fay where. The funeral of the Marquis engaged their attention ; and after fome days Lo¬ renzo was furprized by a vifit from the monk Timotheus, who informed him that he had been * fuddenly arrefled, and con¬ fined, by order from the Duke of Arragon^ but had been reieafed, and all the papers belonging to Lady Almedia returned to ι % hŕm:
rø him : that his arreft had prevented his pub¬ licly appearing againft Don Raphael, whom he found had efcaped. ^ Lorenzo could not but admire the po¬ licy of the Duke, and without hinting at his own knowledge, lie fuffered father Ti¬ motheus to remain in ignorance of Don Raphael's fituation; receiving account of Lady Almedia's fortune with fatisfacìion, as it fct him at once above want, and al¬ lowed him the liberty of'following his own inclinations in his choice of life. Meanwhile Count Pandolfo, with the utmoft fecrecy and difpatch, conveyed Doh Raphael to the caftle of St. Helma, without whole walls he was not to fuffer his prifoner to pafs; a degree of reftrain t but ill fuited to the boifterous paffions of a man accuftomed to implicit obedience. But it was not long that he felt this re- Itraint, which had urged him to feveral ex¬ travagant ačis of outrage, and more than once endangered the life of the Count. The fever of his blood, the frenzy of his paflions,
173 paillons, and the remorfe of his confci ence, altogether confpiring, very fhortly deranged his underftanding; and one of the moft fingular chimeras, which poffibly ever fixed itfelf in the mind of infanity, intirely overcame him. His eyes were conftantly bent upon the ground, and his brow contracted with the darkeft frown. lie fcarce regarded any thing that paffed around him; and he beheld the Count with a contemptuous and filent gaze, as a creature infinitely beneath him. He be¬ lieved that his foul had forfaken his body, and rambled at large over the mountains of Leon, like the ftrange and myfterious phantom, Lorenzo had feen, or fancied that he had feen, fleeting with the fhades of night upon the wings of the wind. But while his foul was thus rambling at liberty, he fancied that his forfaken body, doomed % to live for the expiation of his crimes, was become a mere animal, capa¬ ble only of animal funčiions ; and thus he had two exiftences at the fame time. ι в Bewil
174 Bewildered in this profound abfurdity, he took no pleafure in any thing that was offered to his view; and if he was con- ducìed into a chamber, he made no at¬ tempts to remove. He took no delight in the beauties of nature, when for the fake of his health the Count led him into the garden ; for while he was thus a prifoner he believed himfelf at liberty, and that he en¬ joyed the mofl unbounded freedom. While he remained balking in the garden, with his eyes fullenly half clofed* he would tma~ gine himfelf traverfing the hills, fometimcs li /ten in g to the whifpers of the grove or the falling of water: fometimes watching Uh é flocks, while the fhepherd told his love to fome maid of the valley : or fitting on a fragment of rock torn from the brow of the mountains, he Mened to the tremendous florm, undifmayed by the lightning, iuid unwet by the rain. But while his fpirit enjoyed this excefs of imaginary delight, he confidered his body as nothing fuperior to animal and confined exiftencé, and that
175 that it was incapable of all enjoyment and all rational exertion. If he ate, itwas becaufe all other animals did the fame; and the beams of the fun were, to him, the extreme of enjoyment. Notwithftanding this habitual convi£lion, he would at times converfe with the Count in the moft ra¬ tional manner, on any, and every fubječl; and an uninterefted perfon could not have detecied the turn of his mind, but by the füllen look of his eye, and the fallow gloom of his countenance.
1 4 CHAP,
176
CHAP. VI.
.х\т Madrid the Duke fpeedily recovered from his wound, and at the repeated in- treaties of Count. Aranda and his daughter, confented at length to their union, which he determined fhould be celebrated with fpiendor fuitable to her birth. Lorenzo, already happy in the certain pofľeífíon of the lovely and engaging Cor¬ nelia, had taken a fmall houfe on the banks of the river, about a quarter of a league from the city, where he hoped to diverfify foli tude with the charms of foci¬ ety, when he fhould be fo inclined: but he found himfelf under the neceffity of fre¬ quently mingling in the gay circles of life at
m at the inftigation of Cornelia, who was far more delighted with thofe fplendid feenes than he either wifhed or defired. This propenfity he thought it would be better to fatiate than reftrain. Nothing could be more natural than for a lively girl to wifh to fee all the varieties of that world to which fhe was fo new, that it appeared like thofe tales of enchantment fhe had read at the old caftle. Lorenzo was in hopes that a very fhort time would fuffice to expofe the folly of frequently entering aíľemblies, where the eye and the ear were the only fenfes gra¬ tified, and from which the mind returned with difguft and ennui. But he found him¬ felf deceived; and he beheld, with regret, that a day paffed alone with him, at his lit¬ tle retreat, feemed facrificed from exift ence, and was clouded with filence. The marriage of the Count and Lady Agnes approached, and Cornelia would talk of nothing elfe but the fplendid pre¬ parations, and the elegance of the habit ; ι £ her
17В her friend was to wear. To gratify her, Lorenzo beftowed upon her a eonfiderable fum in jewels, propoftng in his own mind that he would fhortly retire into fome fe- queftered fituation, where, at a diftance from temptation, he might lead her mind to more worthy purfuits. The day arrived which was to accomplifh the wifhes of the Count, *nd the ceremony was performed with the utmoft fpiendor before the facred altar, and the prefence of that inviftble Being, who beholds all things, and who, by creating an equal divtfion of fexes, has ordained, beyond controverfy, that but one woman fhall be the wife of one man. A fumptuous enter* tainment was prepared at the palace of the Duke, and in the evening ihe am u femen ts began with a ball brilliantly and nume¬ rou fi у attended. The Count, after opening the ball, de¬ clined farther exercife, propoftng to Lo¬ renzo to accept his lady for a partner, while he entered into .conversation with the various
179 various nobility that graced the room. Cornelia was thus left to the converfation of ftrangers, who having feen her familia¬ rity with this noble family, were ready to pay her every attention. Amongft others, advanced a gentleman in the moil gay attire the room could boaft, nor were his perfon and manners inferior to his appearance. All the young men of faihion gave him the precedence, and the whifpers of the ladies endeavoured to catch his attention ; but he had for fome time iixed his regard upon Cornelia, and after making a few inquiries, he approached her with a look of confidence, and a fmile of infmuation. Cornelia blufhed, to be thus addreíľed, and more fo, when Hie recollečied the voice of Don Guzman, who took a feat bciide her, with aflumed familiarity, and entered into converfation, partly by whif¬ pers, aad partly by fmiles. It was eafy to perceive, tliat his prefence was not unplea- fant; and whether by chance or defign, he inquired
180 inquired if Cornelia could inform him, who that awkard perfon was, who was danc¬ ing with the new married lady. " His countenance," faid he, " is enough to ftrike all the company with melancholy, and he walks this lively dance with as much gravity as a criminal at an-acì of faith." " That gentleman," faid Cornelia, half difpieafed, and half fmiling, " is my huf- band. fie whom I thought had been dead, when I faw you at the old woman's cot¬ tage door." /'It was an unfortunate thing for me," replied Don Guzman. " Why did I not know you earlier, or not know you at all ? Have you been long in Madrid ? . Do you refide in town ? Shall I fee you again ? I have been wandering all over the world in fearch of you." Any woman converfant with the world, and pretending to raodefty, would have been alarmed, and offended at thefe quef¬ tions, but unfortunately the ignorance of Cornelia, laid her open to the moft glaring flattery,
181 flattery, and the fénfe öf her own inno¬ cence prevented her detecìing the ill in¬ tentions of another. Tó all the queftions of Don Guzman, fhe replied with the un- guarded fimplicity of a child, and before fhe was joined by Lorenzo, he had learnt all that he defired to know. He left her when the dance ended, taking care that his perfon fhould not be out of fight, and which every way he moved, was attended by a levee of feveral ladies. He direcied many glances towards Cornelia, and vanity tri¬ umphed in his laughing eye, when he faw that flie returned them with fmiles. Lorenzo remarked the familiarity of this ftranger, and was not a little alarmed, when he learnt his name. " I fee," faid he to himfelf, (t it is necefiary that I fhould withdraw from the circles of glitter and fafcination. I muft cut off at once, the temptations of general company, by se¬ lecting fome retirement, fuited to my own feelings, and the education of Cornelia. Her mind has received its charaőler, and the
182 the impreffion will be durable. In the caftle, in the foreit of St. Helma, I was the moft engaging perfon fhe had feen, and on jme fhe placed her fancy ; but in Madrid, where thoufands equal and furpafs me, what certainty have I, that ;her mind will not waver in its choice, and without ac¬ tual guilt, I may become indifferent in her eyes. Let us then retire to fome narrow circle, where I again may fhine, and no doubt Cornelia will centre all her affec¬ tions,on myfelf,'* Thefe thoughts naturally fpread unea- finefs upon his features, which was by no means a favourable contrait to the volatile and gay Don Guzman, moving round the room, with a compliment to every one, and joining in the dance with fo much vi¬ vacity and fpirit, that Cornelia was cha¬ grined at her .own incapacity, and looked upon his partner with envy. The company departed very early in the night, and Lorenzo with Jbis bride, accom¬ panied the ¡new married pair to Ae houle of
183 óf the Count, where they had a fet of rooms always ready for their reception, when oc* c a íl o n obliged them to be abfent from their rural villa. Cornelia made no concealment of the pleafure fhé had taken at the ball, exprefľ- ing a wiíh, that every day in the year could be paffed with fo much delight. " Truly, Lorenzo/' faid fhe, tf while I lived with Don Raphael, in that difmal old place, I knew nothing of life. One day was juft the fame as another, and no party of pleafure, ever exhilarated the depreffion of our fpirits. A ramble in the foreit was an exceffive favour. The books that I read were a few old romances, and lumbering homilies, and the mufic that I played, was all without fpirit." " And were you lefs happy then, my dear Cornelia ?" faid Lorenzo. " What a queftion !" replied fhe, " Όο you not remember that you told me your- felf, how much more happy I fhould be in the world ; how many wonders I fhould fee,
184 fee, of which I had no idea, and did not you laugh at me, when I mentioned the dangers Don Raphael had taught me to ex¬ pect from acquaintance with man ? You have fliewn me that all my fears were foolifh, and I thank you for making me fo happy." # " But aik yourfelf," faid Lorenzo, " if this be real happinefs, or only the fleeting joy of a moment ? For my part I fee no¬ thing in it, but what is very agreeable at times, as a relief to more ferious purfuits." " Where is the ufe of thefe ferious pur¬ fuits ?" anfwered Cornelia. " Do they make you any happier ? To lay truth, I do not think you look fo well ferious as gay, and I am fure my heart is never more happy, than when free from care." "You will, however, foon tire with plea¬ fure, whofe famenefs will cloy, and then you will figh for the tranquillity of retire¬ ment," faid Lorenzo. " It may be fo," faid ihe, with a carelefs air, "but I think it will be a long time firft." Lorenzo
185 Lorenzo was aware that gentlenefs alone, would be the means of pointing out the folly of thus fpending time. Her candour convinced him of the goodnefs of her heart, and the purity of her intentions. Without appearing to place himfelf as a cenfor of her conduct, he determined to watch with vigilance over her fteps, and by the ftričtnefs of his attendance, to cut off the hopes which Don Guzman might form. In purfuance of this plan, he never at¬ tempted to reftrain her acceptance of any invitation, ftill taking care to be of the party, which fruftrated all the defigns the artful Don Guzman contrived, to gain the ear of Cornelia, to whom his eyes explain¬ ed all that he meant, in a language fo plain and uni verí al, that all generations of men have underftood it. The difficulty this obftacle threw in the way, was a frefti ftimulus to the ardour of Don Guzman, and having been pro¬ voked at the trick his father had put upon him, confidered that his character for enterprize
186 enterprize was concerned in the accora- pliíhment of his defigns. Count Pandolfo, when he undertook the charge of Don Raphael, kft behind him his fuppofed wife Ippolita ; who» though now in the wane of years, contrived by being ufeful to a fociety of aiffolute young men, to fubftft, and even move in many circles of genteel company. This woman, Bon Guzman made the the confidant of his wifhes, and fiiraulated her invention by the promife of a eonfiderable prefent. " What you exači of me," laid ihe, w ш a trifte, I will engage that this ignorant girl will fly into your hands, in lefe than n month. M ** That is by no means my .4eflgn/* re¬ plied Don Guzman. " No man of fenfe would burden him felf wit h married women, when he has one already to take her off his hands. Cannot you contrive to gain me admiffion into the houfe ?" " I have it," replied the infamous Ippo¬ lita, with a laugh of malicious triumph. « This
187 "This Lorenzo, was once a captive of mine« and for particular reafons I would have married him, 1 could even now raife him to a rank far above his prefent fitua¬ tion, with a tingle word, but he once flighted my charms, and a woman »ever can forgive fuch an outrage. I wíllen« deavour again to attrae) him» either by fen¬ ti men is of fcindnefs, or hints of the fecrets I poffefs. He will certainly attend my fummons, and you mall improve the ad¬ vantage as you pleafe.** Kot many boms after thm league of iniquity, Lorenzo received a letter at hi» country houfe horn Ippolita, couched ia the mofl tender and prcflmg tenna: con« juring him to fly to her» that fhe might convince htm of his former error in fuf» peeling her conduci, Lorenzo fhuddered while lie read thb referable epifite. f * This depraved vuomaa/* faid he, " muft be ignorant of the fecret of my birth. She к nou* not that 1 am the fon of Count Pandolfo. Unfortunate wretch,
IWÎ Wľcuh, and wicked as unfortunate, to at* tempt, by this means, to interrupt the do- tneflic happittes of a family, Little éom fite think that I was prefent at fhe impo- ftiion played upon Count Pandolfo, whom 1 will certainly inform of the deception he labours under/' To this letter Lorenzo made no reply, and the next day produced another iti α very different itile, hi titing that fhe could inform him of the real fecret of his birth, and threatening to expofe his former con¬ nection with her to his wife. if Poor creature/' faid he» m he laid the letter down on the table before him ; ** flie ели have nothing new to tell, though flie thinks me ignoraţii*— Cornelia, read that letter, and give me your opinion on the fubjeeV* Cornelia did not wait to be twice re- quefted, for fhe had wondered at the filence and chagrin of Lorenzo the preceding day on a iimihr orralion» and little as fhe knew of the world the could not avoid fome unpleafant
189 tiiipieafatit fears. The fótigttd^e md №»ν of Ippolita were altogether new to her, ami Ihe beggtd f.orciiio to explain what fhecotttd mt tmderibiul· lie immediate!)· mhtnî to her hk former «Muflon, when ignorant of the r fa tatler οΐ thh woman* and before he hat! vtfifed the vallev of St Itelma : bv whieh meam he prfvenfed lhe mifrhîef that would un¬ doubtedly have enfttcd* when the next thy brought a letter to Cornelia herfelf, coniaining- ihe gtollell fîilfehootb. A% ît ısrîtt. Contrita no fooner received the tetter than fhe gave it into the hand« of Lorrnzo iti the prrfence of fhe mellenger» faying with a fmile, that having no correfpon« dent«, he mull tale «pon íiimíVlf to an¬ fwer this unknown friend« Don €*ttgman and Ippolita» when they found that thm frheme was frtillratcd» were for fome time in fufpenfe* before they contrived means to renew their attack; but ш the wicked are more aflive in fug»» gefttng and executing their machinât tout« than
190 than the good in repelling them : they had little fear to fucceed by fome more power¬ ful means. Don Guzman refolved over various fchemes, like Satan when he envied the happinefs of our original pa¬ rents, and it was not long before chance threw in his way an opportunity he imme¬ diately embraced. Don Guzman contrived means to gain over Lorenzo's fervant, who was a youth of very bad character; to this youth he committed a letter for Cornelia, in which he openly avowed his paffion, declaring it was impotfible he could fur¬ vive her refentment. Lorenzo detecied his fervant İn the acì of giving this letter to Cornelia, and as a reward for his fervices immediately turned him from the houfe. Don Guzman, to whom he haftened with¬ out delay, rejoiced at the accident, and by the affiftance of Ippolita fent, one after the other, halfa dozen fervants to inquire for the place, all of whom poffeffed forne infuf- ferable
191 ferable defection—one was deaf; another blind of one eye; another he Π tat ed in his fpeech; and in fhort each had fome de- feci that was certain to procure their rejec* tion, which wearied the patience of Lo¬ reno, who very readily engaged a decent dreffed civil fervant who prefented him- felf This was Don Guzman himfelf, dif- guifed by the hands of Ippolita, and having the talent of mimicry, he would not have been eafily detected, even by thofe with whom he had lived in habits of intimacy. Lorenzo received him without fufpicion, and his diligence and affidili ty foon re¬ commended hím, particularly to Cornelia, whom he attended with officious care, and and fought every occafion to be near, without hazarding fufpicion. He poffefíed an excellent voice, and fome fkill on the guitar, upon which inurnment he would perform, when he had an hour of leifure, fhunning the company of the female fer- vants, and affecting an air of tender melan- chol y,
192 choly, which excited the curiofity of his lady. He would frequently figh, when he* could do fo without being noticed by any other than herfelf, and hë perceived that he gained iaft upon her good opinion. Without being confcious of it herfelÇ fhe was lefs eager for large aíľemblies ; and Lorenzo^ charmed with her returning tafte for the country,. left her many hours alone, that fhe might find fome novelty in his prefence. It could not be long before Cornelia dis¬ covered the difguifeofthe artful Don Guz^ itìart, who befought her with the tendered accents, not to expofe him, but permit him to enjoy the only pleafure life had now for him, that of being near, and be¬ holding her. Cornelia coujd not deny this reqüeft, to a man who had ftruck her lively fancy, by the gallantry of his perfon and addrefs ; and who, while he poffefíed all the folidity of Lorenzo, was ¡qualified by all that glitter, and thofe fupcrficial attainments,
195 attainments, which bind in fetters the' hearts of half the fair. The virtue of Cornelia was' fcarce iufiV cient protecìion againfi thè devices of the dangerous Guzman. She was a novice ih life, and he reprefeíítéäto her the maxims which DOn Raphael and' Lorenzo Шй given her, as fuperannuatèd notions aud illiberal opinions. DangeroUs^JÉď' fophlf- tical maxims from a flattering toiigüë, antf ãn agreeable form, few womeiihave power to withftand. Жопе, whòfe Éhtìs are not well inftrueled in the truant öf religion, and on this fubjéél Don Éafinael had very ; flightly touched in his Mttóätion 6f Cof-' riéltá; refefví%*Jfbr"-â^Í!6é· of maturity thofè opinions whicít '"-ought to be in¬ grafted in the youthful mind, at the fame period with every morål and focial dutý', '' Lorenzo had a ót the f hiàlîeft fufpicion óf ibis illicit con hežlioti : hé believed Ihat Dön Guzman was ой a journey to a very diftant province, and how could he fur- mife that one of the moft airy поЫегаед vot. ш, к 0 f
m o| Madrid was, no? ottøer f ihm the hiunble Anthony, who with, ίο much .^eal and attention performed the тедпеД offices of bis %tion? ^ mon^çnt'ş l^jÇpicioft жтЦ ^ye d^fefled Кщ; but tha^t Сцрдшд jçi^ye^ arofe, and he щ ia hiınfelf more, ^ippy tjisn aí any former period, ; as Сод* жеДа feemed to haye feiä afide her talle fot $$щ s|!i4 feldob ехргдвМ a wJilhtQ ¡Í ' îi J f * ť íl " Г b ' tfåftfødriffr t)pn t GmmW> nplwjthftgnding his dex-r t^ri,ty, ran, frequent teard of d^teftip^ wjhe« \®ущ qbUged ^ аДе^4 Lorfen^Cfì to tjb^ howfqş of hjs^ijiitirnaj^,friends; and once, when.. Lorenzo p^id- a ľ viftţ to his ^ţher„ to thanji him forhţis, former, protect tJQn oj ÇprneJ^, he s wa§ ? oţilige^to feign ЦщЩ ill. Tint, щЛ§ çye qí Caw^ 1^Щщ.тя1рхеД tÄ ate h¡§ cp^unte-. 1щсе^ад4!*Я НЯ € РгМ ^ИЩс^едф ^ #8апее whg^ objjge^ţq ,ци$п& Ц, фе prefence qf ï * ι " ТЬе
. m Th^wövMty^öf this* adveiítare began to/ wear out, and Bon Guzma# W tìm в$ & teøéå® >vhkhhad «fò^yel|RéAtìeid ehe tíl^ÄÄ^tó c№ hit ШеШе^- Шш ttM Cötm t, withbut having fønt previous notice ßhig át 1ШеШ>1 hmií^ iíivítéá ЙЙ1 á1í# Cornélia to join them in a íhort excursion 1 «ро#Ш Шег> ^ a ШааШШШШ^Ь. pleafetìt grave at Шт dîïtà'lïe^. U ; f ' :ΐ - ŕ;; "■""= · ■■■' '; : ' - л ■■ -i '■' ý^í^ '■»': -v ,;:. ÄilI ^ivås ali àlrVe- '^Ú№tfápàÍ% hilprf 1ат^Ш^ЕШ% tl^ ^. tìoÉ ©4Ш^ ЬШ air he could, he геаА^<й1фШ" Шт -аШ>г^^ ihti ЙВД É Ш^ШШ artière fe peiformed ш к* variety
196 variety of air» así they* moved along the dimpling waves, u «л ; ¿ , ' Cornelia had no apprehenfion of difco¬ very, and fo entirely v^adî he blinded; her underftanding,, tfeat fhe. would not * ; ha#e> fcrupled to eall him ; by^his паше had he not charged her .on pain of lofing hin^ for eyer, tiOjobferverprofound filence! on the > ι Xhe i; ivarying landfcape appeared n to, move around them a$ th,ey glided, ; along upon the bofom of the tranfparent water» Spring had Scattered ι .oyer, eyeyy ; tree and every .ftrub» the fleecy promife of the opening year,; and foft perfume moved in ţjie wind. They arrived fome v time a%r s noon· at the fecluded fpoţ the Count had felecled for this rural entertainment» and knding,; they entered the groy^ whofe QY^r r hanging branches s affqrde^a, p|eşfant· zfådefmklniihsac.^ : - j^, „■( ν> , ^.,\ :>l |po»j6u%nian,^afţeţ mm to fpread the repafl upon the floping green, retreated; to a little, diflançe ^ehind ; , , abufib
197 a buih, as if from refpecì to the company, but in truth to avoid the Count, who had, more than once regarded him with the look of a man who endeavours to tax his memory with fòme di İlan t recollecìion. The company being feaţed, Lorenzo ex- preíľed his admiration of the place, which fo powerfuly recalled to his mind lm ad¬ ventures in the foreft, that he declared he would frequently vifit it/that he might be reminded of thöfë days of misfortune, when doubt and uncertainty were the brighter of his profpecis. vr ; ¡ ( . / \, ; Cornelia frailirtg reminded him; of thek Äŕft interview, апДЛп her heart thought that; if Bon Gmmm were permitted to join their company they fhould be per- fečily happy. They were agreeably amufed to hear Don Guzman, after toning his guitar, fing the following words; >. ■·. ι .' L. . К 3 Sad
ш Síd was the parting, "When the tear ftarting, Trembled in drops on the cheek of my dctir; When tlie breaft panting» il'plt words ,were wantiiag, Aîuımuring, fighing, a&eu, iii mine ear. Glad was the meeting, Tender the greeting ; Caz ing, delighted, till tears üljed .the eye ; W.hea aí returning, E^ehwit^h lpVe : bMrWi\g, Tajled the rapture that Ijpeaks in a figh» ** Брои -φαψ ^honour/' exclaimed lhe Count, (t your valet has «an excellent »tafte, 4¡>ne would almoft «hink he was in love." ■ ¿ m believe he Is,^* «4ed Cornelia, wi««h wiuch ftmpijicky; ana the Coun^t turning his eyes upon her, her confufion imme- djately roufed ^is fuipicion. ■ . "He has not lived long in your family, I believe/* fdid fhe Con«t, '■* be Æeems fo modeft a youth, that he has nò wifh to be feen." <f He has been with us more than a month," replied Lorenzo, and if all fer¬ vants
1Ô9 vants were as attentive, and obliging as Anthony, mafters would have no reafon to complain.'* "With whom did Ъе live before you engaged him ?" faid the Count,—-" Ï think I bave fomewhere feen him." ^Äis figure, and agreeable addrefs, were the -only recommendations î nad/' faid Lorenzo; "and my fkill in phyfiognomy did not deceive me,—Come hither, An¬ thony/' cried tne Count, aloud, in a tone of voice that Don Guzman did not admire, much léfs the tun» of hie countenance when lie nood befòre ti im. ff You have aţv excellent Unger for tjbe gu kaa% ' ' faid the -Count, ^areleiìly, ŕ "Pretty well, yottr Excelknza," replied Don Guzman, modeftly bowing. " Ï fuppofe," added thø Count, " you have made it a long time your ftudy «·- Would it not turn to better account than your prefent line of life P'* "It would be more fatiguing,"anfwered Don Guzman. . . к 4. « With
200 ŕ ' With what family might you live before you entered your prefent fituation," faid the Count, fixing his eyes upon him with increafmg fufpicion. Don Guzman, in fome perplexity, turned his looks to the ground, replying, that fome tíme fince he lived in the family of the Mendoza's, and had not been in fervice lince. " I believe you indeed, Don Guzman," cried the Count, but immediately recol¬ lecting his rafhnefs, he remained filent. Lorenzo fcarce heard the name of Don Guzman pronounced, than the truth fíufhed upon him with the mofl horrid conviction. He leaped up without fpeaking, and in the firft motion of his fury he drew his fword, and ran hi m through the body. Don Guzman fell upon the ground, and the diftracled Cornelia in a tranfport of de- fpair ftarted up, and threw herfelf upon him, rending ihe air with her cries. tf Abandoned, deceitful, and profligate hypocrite!"cried Lorenzo, "perifli on the . body
201 body of the wretch who has contaminated thy mind." At théfe words he raifed his arm with frenzy, and would certainly have deftroyed his wretched vicìim, if the Count had not caught his arm, and by abfolute force dragged him to a diftance. " Cornelia cannot poffibly be fo crimi¬ nal as appearances make her," cried he. " Liften to reafon, Lorenzo : let not the madnefs of a moment,embitter all your future years." '* Tis well," cried Lorenzo, in an agony of tempeftuous paflion. " You may talk coolly, but I have nothing to do but to die. Could I furvive this difgrace ? Never. If you are indeed my friend, releafe your hold." " Not till you fhall have heard me" cried the Count. "I will pledge myfelf that Cornelia is not half fo guilty as fhe ap¬ pears. This wretch has gained admittance to your houfe, by the only means poffible, к 5 but 9
202 bai wteí proof Ihave yo» that Же ţias been further criminal?" (f Q fbeavtens i M <ried Xovensso^ t( what further|>roof do you require? Js flie not ;at this moment «e^rrbracing han, while flic aocufes f røe as hisaflaftm. Do not taunt me by forming excujfea." Tke-Coun t- incte^á was ilryck dumb ^t the %h|. He ííe^aained bewildered iii a thou- iaudiears v , for he lwd never found li&ifelf $& ejn'barraifed ; and dreading the £oníe- quences that might refult from this outrage, he iabourejd to bring Lorenzo to reafon. iitung to ¿he foul by a difcovery, which in one moment annihilated his repofe, his profpcóìs, and bb love for Cornelia, his brain feemed on fire with keennefs of an- guiih, and throwing himfelf prone upon the ground, be groaned and fighed, as if he was going to Jbueath forth his exiftence. The Countefs had at firft remained mo- tionlefs with horror, at the fudden neu of this tragical f cene, but feeing how much her affiftancc was rcquifite, ihe haftened
203 to Cornelia, and дадруеД ber half dead йода the body-*>r.Çon Çu^nıaiu, >yho^ paje aiKl bleeding fa/fc lay expended «pont tho gr<>und. The íľour>t pence¡ye4, that no iime was to ;b£ îo|t, aud with the affiftance ,of jthje boatţuen, carried the unfortunate gallant to the veflel, giving them inftruciions to toy with all Speed to Madrid, and convey him to the ionie of ibis father. There was $0 hopes tbajt ihis accident could be cwxr çeşded, ani till Ae ey ¿ ent fhould be known, it was ^ejçeflary, ¡that Lorenzo fbou^d re¬ treat. But he could not prevail ori that unhappy ma», ¡to talce the ОпаДеД prqcau- iţions iför Jtujs own ifafe ty, aş afţe^r w^a^ -hgf f İKippeiA<Hl, ie mfhed for nothing fo ддцоЬ as dea;ţbj $ to terminate hismiMprtupes. i'-Ai," laid he,^olefuUy, " now do I ?fc5e.l .wiat Don ijtapţiael ; щий have íyffe$e,d. Now, caii si fuppofe ,the anguifli of his mind ,aodnow ie ¡s aiuply revenged fQrallithat he iuaderweot through my means." Щ. Cornelia
204 Cornelia could not behold Lorenzo ex* tended upon the ground, without : ex'cla-* mations of defpair, and fhe was going to throw herfclf befide him, had not the Count checked her, not a little aflonifhed at her actions, which he imputed to an ef¬ frontery and hypocrify, of which fhe was unconfcious.' > ,'. ì ■ <c Good heavens, Cornelia," cried he, fr what have you done? and what would you do ? To what mifchiefs has your weaknefs expofed us? and what injuries háve yOu done to a man, who loved you fo ardently ?" How was it poffible, thought he, that Lorenzo fhould ever be enamoured of a woman, whofe ignorance approaches to folly. Too little knowledge is undoubtedly as great an introduction to vice as too much; and without religion, there is no founda¬ tion for virtue. He faw the neceffity of Lorenzo^ immediate concealment, but it was too hazardous to carry him to Madrid, and he feemed incapable, as well as indif- ) ferent
205 feront to flight. Cornelia he determined to receive into his own houfe, that he might himfelf watch over her, till he could either place her as boarder in fome con¬ vent, or reftore her to Lorenzo. He now regretted that he had fo haftily difpatched the boat with Don Guzman, and finding that he could not prevail on Lorenzo to rife from the earth ; hè left his own fervant to guard him, while he led his wife and Cornelia to an inn which he remembered upon the Madrid road about halfa league diftant. He returned in hafte, after having feen them lodged in fafety, that he might, if poffible, perfuade Lorenzo to reafon, or force him to fome place of greater fecu¬ rity. On the road his fervant met him, and informed him that fome time after his departure, Lorenzo arofe from the ground, in a füllen difpofition, and gazing round like a man fuddenly roufed from an alarm¬ ing dream, he ran down to the water's edge. Mlea-
«Об "Heavens.!" exclaimed the ^Соид** ^ had you no moiyc prudence. W,her,e did he throw him£clf in ?" " He Jkneiw better/' replied the fervant with a fmile. " I thought that might h&ve been his intention, and haftened after him. He flood fome tirøe looking at the water, and then ait tjhe ,cJauds ; and ţo fay the truth, he looked y¿ery piteous. 4*t Jaft a paffage-boat mwe by ; ţhe mafter ţ%inkr ing, no doubt, he was waiting for him, taokedjup ;to the fíiore. ' Teil your mafier/ faid he tome, ' that I am flying fro4næy.ery thing, and leave to him φ I poflelb, that he ž may make provifipn før the dçJudqd -{Cornelia.' Ие йЬедь your ßxqejilenaa, fprang into the -jboat, and sfittinig down, coveredhisîface twitb hb hands, and Away they rowed/' The Count was di fa μρ о in ted at this accident, and leaving his forvant in charge to wait for the boat, or to follow it in ¿the next that .went paft, he a-eturneditoábe jnn. He there found Cornelia in the deepeil dißrefs.
«07 diftrefs, Lady Agnes had e^po&d to* her jeye^#ie excels of her weaknefs, and the confequences flie ought herieff to have forefeet which fo much affecied her, that ihe was already extremely ill, introeating as a favour that ;fhe might remain at the hm : for fhe found it дтроШЬ1е to meet Lorenzo, who muft tíxifík her unworthy of ia$ry further regard. The Count was fomewhat alarmed at ¿his account, and hoping tfhat this firft error might entirely wean her mind from ¿is natural Jove of vanity, he haitened ,to hor room, but 'h etwas confounded a* iheholdiing lhe «extreme ipaknefs of her features, as 4ke føt in a mohair facing the window, which was open to give her a lktle air. The colour which in the morning had brightejl·- ed her cheeks, was now faded, ¿and iher eyes «wjere become ieavy and Wtekfs. "Heavens ! СощеПа/' eried the Omni, ** you are .estiseinely iiii : ihas до oiflijŕbncfi beten íeatftu\?": ; f* Sit
208 f ^Sit down, if you pleafe," faid fhe, waving her hand, "I fhall not want a phyfieian foon/' * (< I hope," faid he, gazing upon her, " you have not been doubly imprudent ?" ee You may give it any name you pleafe," replied fhe. " 1 know not how you diftinguiih aciions in this world, and I cannot too foon leave a place, where I am conftantly guilty of error. Don Raphael gave me more inftruciions in the nature of drugs than of propriety, cuftom, and de¬ corum, and my knowledge of the one muft make up for my deficiency in the other.". "Then my fears are true>" faid the Count, much agitated. " You have com¬ mitted the rafheft action a chriftian can be guilty of. You have dared to deftroy yourfelf." " And who would live to lead a life of filarne?" anfwered fhe. "Don Raphael always taught me tl^tjitďuch a cafe it was better to die, and 1 "have followed his ad- vice : would to heaven I had never known any
209 any other. Tell Lorenzo I lament the for- rows he has experienced and ftill will feel for my fake ; tell him that I love him with my lateft memory, and though he may not believe it, ' tell him that though Don Guzman gained a fliare of my affections, yet my heart never wavered in its duty, nór my inclinations in their defires. í am fatisfied in:thus quitting the world for which I was not fitted^ and Lorenzo will remember me dead, with more affeftioa than' he could have thought on me living." ^ What fentiments are thefe, and with how much eoolnefs you pronounce them ľ' faid the Count in a mournful tone. ' "And why not?" anfwered Cornelia, fixing her languid eyes upon him. " Don Raphael taught me to defpife life ; it was himfelf who pointed out to me in his cabi¬ net, this invaluable drug, which;is flow, but admits no antidote. I carry it always about me in a fmall cafe of perfumes. I have not ufed the whole, and perhaps you may
210 -may- have occafion for fuch a remedy. There is the reib— i have taken enough." The Cotrøi was more than ever amazed at the character of Cornelia ; ihe feemed to bira to poíľefs the ancient Roman hero- ifai> but that fhe fhould prefenre this in¬ difference for life, when it was momently #ying away, exceeded every itfaing he had ever ¿eafid, and hoping tikat fhe might be «deceived in i he power 4>lthis ppepafation, he ôartód «p and ¡haflened to call for medi¬ cal aid; but before affiftawic« 4>outd ar- nve, she had oea&d to İtv-e— ^ronoancing will» her h& breath the names of b&renzo and Don Guzman. " Was ever fo angular a paflion beard of befo re?* 4 faid uke Count, turning io km kdy. <c How in к роЖЫе tliat a woman fhoukl regard №o f>ertbns at о noe, Witti fo much afôéfton as tli is poor deluded lady certainty did ; a<nd that without being con¬ scious of th<^ impropriety ? How many erroneous opinione dc^es a wrong educa- cation engraft upon the human mind ? and how
Sii how dangerous is it to enter a diftèuent iphßt$ of action to that which has formed our hab^s and engaged our thoughts ? Had this too lovely girl remained at a diftance from ibe vain feenes of feigh life, and never quitted the fhades of the fo$e#, or át moft the boundaries of a village, ber heart would have been iafe from itemp» ration, and ber days would havs paflSe4 m peaoe/' . .ψ JSo, aio," fààâ Lady Agnes, wiping the tears that fell from her eyes, and fuppnef- ting the grief that arofe, for utterance. ** You Teaftm without refleciioö >-^Was not Сопи dia innocent ¿and aiťlefe as a child ? was the not buried in á foreft: end fecu^ed by .the ilrong waïï of a caftle, and the Wronger encompaiffî»enÉs a£ fuperftiti* on ? but «the art Of man tempted her,frcwBaber t%tveat. Was 4s «o€ at the door «of a cot¬ tage, m the bumble guife of a peafant, that Шоп Onsman ûrû beheld åer r Talk not, then, of thefeeurky of íkuation, when men, 'poífeíSng power by nature to charm us, and
212 and riches to give ftrength to their will, defcend into the lowèft fituation to dif¬ cover beauty, innocence, and modèfty^ that they may tranfmnte them into defor* mity, vice, and* uglinefs. Then in the plenipotence of their power, they exult and cry out, behold the glory of my aciions t H-I ; hдf e overcome- volvere; there was nò «seán^ of defenVe«·^*! ¿have. deceived < the vigilance of unfufpeôiing innocence, bjr thè utterance of ás many. oaths,^ vows; and promjfes/as would have caufed me to be hooted from fociety, if thé pérfon to whom I had ufed them had been a man—-and to pleafe myfelf for an; hour, Γ have deftroyed à human being;"· ^ i> / * ^ Moft; truei/' Ifaid the Count, taking her hand. <r l But, toy dear Lady Agnes, I muft obi erve, : that a woman educated in the principles of religion, would nöt be tempt¬ ed, and could not be overcome: becaufe, though me might liften, though her heart might beat, yet fhe would reflecì that no fophiftrý could fet afide the duties which her
213 her heart avowed. But let us now leave this melancholy fubjeóV; -I fear for your health, and Cornelia can receive no further benefit fièom our affiflance. " : г : τ j < - » - The Countefs turned to the corps of this unfortunate lady, and taking, her hand, " Farewell," faid flie, "flower of innocence. It was thy utter ignorance of crime and the vices of men, that brought thee to this. The fáme fentiments which ¡you bore ţo Don Guzman, though mifplaced, were тт fpired by your fifler' Chriftiana in the breafl of Lorenzo, and I fee no difference, but that you were a woman ! " She turned away unable to fay more, and an hired carriage being arrived for them from Madrid, they returned thither with a heav v heart. » " This," faid the Countefs, %щ фе even¬ ing of a day we had dedicated to, pleafure ; On the following morning the Count difpatched proper perfons to convey the body of Cornelia to Madrid, where it was interred
interred with decency anďprivacy. Afean- while he waited with impatience tlie return of the fervant he had fent to flbtíow Lo*· renzo on the track, and gather his raten^ tiens. All* Madrid rang with th* wagical ad- venture, and the Count would h««e fbund the confequences dangerouflV unpleafaot, if Don {Julman, who yet furvived, had nor foiemnlý declared his innocence, and that the whole was owing to« his inexcufable fpirit of intrigue, which he folelnnly vowed to abandon, if he had the good fortune to recover. On the third day the Coimfs fervant lieturned, almoft overcome* with fatigue, and his mafter immediately ordered hŕm into his prefence, imparient to learn tidings of fils friendi '· WW> Pedfo: M fáid he, « whitherhave* youb%íяŕ^ you^vemadean^e^hdlt^tóyiöl 1 it/* *· Ah Holiday; dees 4 yonrExöeh%ïza* calf it?* replied Pedro. *^Mkny fndrhbiidÉysr would
215 would fend meto the grave. I have fpent the wodd and all of money, and it was a lucky thing I had it to fpend, or I might have begged my nay batk, and then I fhould not have got to Madrid this half year/* "Well, Pedro," faid the Count* fmiling» fit down and let me have the fimptc facb, with as tittle of the marvellous at poffible. You know 1 left you waiting for a boat— And fo—** "And fo your Eccellenza, I waited for a long tíme, till at laft a boat come failing away from Madrid, and making f igns to the mailer, and holding up to him a piece of money, he hauled albore, and, took me in. We failed away with a lair wind and a pow¬ erful bench of oars, and I e\peclod every moment to overtake matter Lorenzo ; hut it wasaU in vain, for prefently comes me the boat back again thai had, taken hjku I calls out to the failors, to know* what û*f had done with my mafier, for it ftruck me, and i had rather be Штк* with fuch a thought
f 16 thought than a cudgel» that would be the the beO way to avoid fufpicion ; and thinks 1, they will not then deny Mm even if he fhould pay them to be filent, Yottr mailer* is it, fays the boatman. Well, if that is the cafe, you will find him at the %n of the trumpet, if he is not gone away» but if he is, you will find him at fome other place. Thank you for nothing fays 1, and away we failed," t€ Be a little lefs prolix/* faid the Count. u \ muft be filent, vour Excellenr-a* if 1 тип tell it in fewer words than belong fo it. If a man was to fay no, how can he fhorten the word/* "Proceed/' faid the Count. «Now vou are landed at ~—/· ** No, we did not land there, but a little on this fide, and I had to walk there. I made a good many inquiries before I found him out, and then I might as well have known nothing» for he had taken horfe di* reeìly, and ftruck back again towards Ma· diid.
il? drïd. Ho, Ho, fays I, fécond thoughts are belt Give mea horfe ; a l»il by water» and a ride by land ¡a good for the ltomat h 1 muft have fomething to eat» fo I had fome of the niceli cheefe and onions 1 ever cat in my life, and being rrfrefhed as a man ntav fav, mounted mid firctthed aw£tv at a rare gallop, hardly Haying to bail. When azmini a league, 1 meets me a mule driver» who tel к me he liad feen my maller, mounted on a while mule, in the high road to Segovia. 1 knew htm» fays he» for your mafter, the moment I faw him. How fo, fays I ? Why, fays he, he looked jull ai if he mm going to he hanged« You ľm fun?, will never be drowned» fays 1 : fi you may go your way» aud 1 will go mine, and I'll wager a pifióle, you can't gitcls which will be there ftrft There, where ? fays he. Why, to Ice my mailer kinged, fay« 1, fo 1 flogged away, and the next morning reached Segovia. I might m well have flayed at home for the matter of thnt, for nobody knew Cavalier ILoremo, and 1 vot. m. L made
218 made inquiry all that day, of every body 1 met ami at every inn in the city; fo I mounts me again, and turning my back on the cathedral dial, да Hopped back to Madrid." " Blockhead," cried the Count, "and is this all your information ? you have fpent three davs, and learned nothing." "Pardon me, your Excellenza, I have learned wifdom ; I have learn t that a man is better thanked who does nothing, than he who does every thing without fuccefs." The Count fmiled and difmiflcd him, though he was not very well pleafed with having been folong held in fufpenfe to no purpofe, and he very much doubted whe¬ ther Pedro had not been impofed upon in the firft inilance, it being very improbable, that Lorenzo would return on the road to Madrid, and lefs fo, that he fhould be within that city, and conceal himfelf from his friend. Thus be was obliged to remain in doubt, as the danger of Don Guzman prevented him taking any public meafures, and he hoped
219 hoped that he had only retired for a time, to give full latitude to his grief; and would not fail to fend him notice, when time fliould have foftened the keennefs of his firft defpair.
í n
CHAP,
220
CHAP. VIL
XjORENZO, when he firft left the grove, where he had fo fuddenly difcovered his misfortunes and difhonour, had no other plan than to fly to a diftance, where he might never more behold Cornelia, or hear a name now fo fearful to his ear. But as he fat in the boat, indifferent to all external objecìs, his mind had time to reflecì more coolly on the nature of the retreat he fhould feleci. Öne while he propofed to bury himfelf in the profound and gloomy cloifters of a convent, but he dreaded that prying curiofity which he knew poifefted the breafts of thofe fathers, who have fo little to amufe them beyond the duties of iheir profeffion.
221 Ah, thought he, could I follow the ex¬ ample of Don Raphael, I fhould be con¬ tent in the humbleft fituation, unknowing and unknown. Why may I not feek out fome fequeftered fpot, where I may lament my misfortunes in fecret, and forget if poffible, that I ever knew happier days. I will not indeed a flume the vain name of a hermit, for I make no profeffion of devo¬ tion or penitence; but I will feek for fome filent fhade like the valley of St. Helma, where I will bury myfelf in folitude, and forget that the world contains other beings than the bêafts of the foreft, and the birds of the air. The fanciful project ferved to amufe his mind, and when the boat finiflied its voyage, he haftened on ihore, immediately left the town on foot, that he might fink all traces of his route, not from appre¬ henfion of the confequences of Don Guz¬ man's death, but in the refolution, that not even the Count fliould know where he was, and interrupt his plan. L s The
The feafòh of tne year was fuitable fo his eccentric* wanderings, and he took no regard to his route, taking care only to píď* at a diflancc from large towns, with¬ out inquiring their name, for their air of gaiety filled him with bittemefs, and the finiles of others only reminded him of his own grief. By day he rambled through ihe wildert path», expofed to the burnmg raya of the fon! tite wind, and the duft, fö that his countenance wás fcarceîy to be known. By night be flept beneath fome trees, at ftretched himfelf upon the barren waftev If he discovered a fpot peculiarly romantic/ and decked with all t«e charms of wild and luxuriant nature, he remained witrr intention to ftay. But a few days difguftcď him with the famenefs of obječb ; and the mifery in his breaft^ gave no reft to rns feet. Still be fancied that fome place he had not yet found, was to give him con* ten*, and he flatted forward wifh new hopes, in fearch of this chimera; buf where
223 where fhall the man find eafe from the burden that is bound to his fhouhlers ?—the far¬ ther he proceeds, the lefs able he is to.fup"· port the weight that prcfles him down. The brakes that Lorenzo had paffed, the fteeps that he had clambered, and the rocks that he had leaped, had nearly torn his cloaths to pieces, and he remained but thinly covered with the remnants of finery. His money was not yet expended« for what he purchafed was the fimpleft food, and when he ventured to a cottage, the. genti¬ lity of his manners, and the fadaefs of his countenance, excited at once» refpecì and He ran no hazard of detection from the virtuous inhabitants of the plains and val¬ lies, who each wifli ed to detain him, but it was feldom that he remained two nights in one place, nor would he accept from them the bounty they would freely have given. Upwards of two months he continued to ramble he knew not whither ; no place had power to charm him ; and like thofe h 4 who
f24 who conftantly expeci pleafure to crown their attainments, he ftill expected to find fome fpot that would meet his wifties, yet itili he continued to wander. One evening he arrived at the banks of a brook, which, was enamelled with flow¬ ers, and foftly gurgled over a bed of pebbles, inviting the mind by its foothing found to meditation. The fpot was fe- queftered by furroiinding trees, ftrongly reminding Lorenzo of the foreft of St/ Helma. " Ah î ·" faid hè, fitting down on a little , bank, and leaning his back againft a bäŕch tree. " It was fuch an evening as this when I firft beheld Cornelia in all the fimplicity of youth and innocence. The fun was declining behind mountains like thofe before me; and the fweet and balmy air, admixed wifh the ftillnefs of nature, awakened the tender feelings of the mind to love. Ah me ! what is that paf¬ fion which fteals imperceptibly into our hearts, affumes all the languiihment of fmiles,
225 fmiles, and foftens down the foul: but when oppofed, acis with the tremendous frenzy of madnefs, and drags down mifery on our heads ? What are all the reafonings of philofophers againft that power, which, whether the objeci: be worthy or not, bears down all barriers, and overleaps all bounds ? For fome time he liftened to the mur¬ muring of the brook, or attended to the complaints of the nightingale and dove, till his reverie was interrupted by a flight milling motion near him; and turning his head, he perceived a youth move ilowly to: the brink of the ftream, where he fat down taking his wallet from his fhoulders which he carefully opened, firft taking out a gui¬ tar, and then fome fragments of provifions. Thefe he began to eat with a very good appetite, quenching his thirft in the lim¬ pid ftream. . Lorenzo had no intention to interrupt him, and Was not a little engaged by his agreeable figure, maßte fingular ftyle of L S hİS
226 his drefè, which certainly was without fu- perfluify. Ills features Lorenzo had fome flight recollecìion of having- feen, for though browned by the furt, fhey were wonderfully ftriking and expreffivé. This ftranger, when he had finifhed his refait, carefully replaced the fragments, and taking up his guitar began to play leverai ľňúe àiiís and floitrifhes; then join¬ ing his voice tö the inftrument, he fung thè Mowing popular ballad. AIR. ь Tbe heart 't hit is geh 'rôtis muft ûtfely bfc brave, And the bofom that knows how to conquer ahd faVe> Wants b\it love\s gentle fire to inkindle thfe foul, And exalt to perfection the worth of thfe whole. Love throughout nature unites and combines, Gives union to atoms, and mankind refines» a The АгаЪ who wanders the defaťťs hot fand, Who preys upon man by the force of his hand, Who fnuffs up the gale that's impregnate with fire â At love's gentle zephyr relaxes his iri ; Love throughout nature unites and combines, Gives union to atoms^ and mankind refines. The
227 5. Ţhe favage who treads through CanacHan fnow, When nature is gelid, and cutting winds blow, Wraps his bear-iktn around him, and deep in his coţ Steals a kifs from his miftrefs, and praifes his lot : Love throughout nature unites and combines, Gives union to atoms, and mankind refines. Lorenzo heard a figh at the conclufion of this ballad. How fair, thought he, do we paint this paflion ? with what delufion do we deceive our underftanding and take pains to make ourfelves wretched î Per¬ haps this is föme country fhepherd, come hither to mufe upon his miftrefs. What a pity the charm fhould ever difiblve; for though the fears of a lover are the fharp* eft of torments, yet the pleafures of the paffion are indefinably excellent, fo long as the mind is intoxicated with the fweet delirium. The folitary ftranger having finiflied his fong, was not long before he began ano¬ ther, but he had no fooner pronounced the words ƒ' Blooming virgins eeafe your pining," than
228 than Lorenzo remembered the wandering mufician which had fo charmed him, and the Marquis's family, when they were fly¬ ing from the devaluation of war.—" I muft be better acquainted with this young ad¬ venturer," faid he : " he is like myfelf the child of misfortune." Lorenzo ftarted up, and advanced to¬ wards the youth, who beheld him with a mixture of furprize and fear, taking him for a robber; which the folitude of the place, his tattered, though once elegant, attire, his long rapier and unadorned muf- tachos, not a little confirmed, but having nothing except his guitar to lofe he was not under much apprehenfion, and the words of Loreuzo foon difpelled his fears. " I am charmed," faid he, " with the entertainment I have received from your performance unfeen; I had little expecta¬ tion of fo much harmony in fo defolate a foreft. Do you dwell in thefe woods?" " No, Senor," replied the youth, " I wander about from place to place, and live
229 live by fuch poor efforts as you have heard." ' c It was not," replied Lorenzo, " taking a feat befide him, " the firil time I have liftened to vour fkill. It is now more than two years fince, yet 1 have not forgot the pleafure I took in attending to your fongs at a little village beneath the Pvrenean hills. My curiofity was then awakened in your favour, and I regretted that you departed fo fuddenly." " I do not remember you," replied the youth. i; That is not a wonder," anfwered Lo¬ renzo. " You were ringing juft now about love ; did you ever experience the effecìs of that paffion ?" The youth blufhed deeply, and turning his eyes upon the ground could not fup¬ prefs a figh. " I fcarce dare allow myfelf to believe that it is love which torments me/' an¬ fwered he. " For I never but once faw the princefs, whofe image is ftill in my eyes." " Unfor-
23Õ " Unfortunate that you are," faid Lo¬ renzo, ( ' could nothing lefs than a princefs kindle the flame in your bofom ? What Could infpire you with fuch prefump- tion?" i( Ah ! 1 know not/' replied he ; " it is now about three years fince 1 beheld her, and beheld her but once; yet that was fufficient to caufe me to remember her for ever." " Strange youth that thou art," faid Lorenzo : *' Is this truth or a fičlion ? " Where does thy princefs dwell ? Tell me thy name, and I will be thy ambaflador." " My name is Sayavedra, and the prin* cefs of my afíeőlions lives in this foreft. It was by chance that I paffed through this place when I met this pcerlefs damfel tripping lightly along the path: I flood ftill out of refpecì as flie approached : a fmile played about her lovely mouth, and 1 could have fallen at her feet, and woiv (hipped her, fo divine did fhe appear in my eyes: I had airøpft loft fight of her before
231 before I had courage to purfue her, and when I ran, in hopes of gaining another fight of her ineffable face, and inimitable fliape, I faw her enter a door through the wall of an old caftle that ilands in the cen¬ tre of this wood, and though I waited till all my provifions were fpent Γ never faw her more. So long an abfence has not in the leaft deftroyed her image in my me¬ mory, and you now fee me here in hopes to gain one Angle glance at fo celeftial a maiden. If I can but do that I fliali be happy, for my prefumption dare not af- pire to more." " Ah \ " cried Lorenzo, who had liftened with mingled fenfations of painful and pleafing recollections: f * how much does your little narrative intereft me in your favour, by recalling a too near fimiliarity in our fare. Happy youth, whofe roman¬ tici ty is fatisfied with reflection, and whofe love feeds upon the charms of imagination. The life that you have chofen has much to pleafe, but then it is not always fpring; nor
232 nor do thefe trees always fpread a flielter of impervious foliage." ff In the winter," replied Sayavedra, s( l leave the fields and the villages, and take flielter in fome city. I have been a va¬ grant from infancy, and am now a wanderer from habit. I have viiited many countries. I have traverfed Paleftine, and trodden the fummits of the Alps. From the Archipe¬ lago to the Baltic, from the Elbe to the Tagus I am perfecily acquainted. I am mafter of feveral dialečls, but my guitar fpeaks a general tongue, and never fails to provide me bread." " It is to you then a mine of wealth/* replied Lorenzo. "Princes are at times without fuch a refource, and you ought not to defpair of gaining the lady, fince your revenue is without bounds. Befides, as you are ignorant of your birth you may lay claim to royalty." " I have fufficient knowledge to affurc me I have no fuch claim," anfwered Saya¬ vedra. ' ( I was ftolen in infancy by a va- abond
233 gabond Moor, and I have no other token* of my birth than a picìure which was fuf¬ pended round my neck,and which is fuffi¬ cient to make me believe that I am not fprung from unworthy parents; yet it is to me matter of furprize that I can never difcover the name or the family to whom this might belong, and I ihould be tempted to think it only a fancy ornament, or the portrait of fome perfon long fince dead, did I not imagine there to be a dif¬ tant likenefs to myfelf in the general out¬ line." Sayavedra then unfolded his veft, and prefented the portrait to Lorenzo, but the fhades of night had gathered fo faft that he could not diftinguiih the features. Loren¬ zo inquired of him the name of the caftle, and the foreft, but thefe he did not remem¬ ber, though he perfecily recollecied the way, and was ready to conduci him imme¬ diately to the caftle. Lorenzo found himfelf interefted in this adventure, admiring the fortunes of this new
234 new friend, which reminded him fo ílrong¬ ly of his own, that in many inftances they appeared the fame. Sayavedra fccured his guitar in his wal¬ let, then rifing with alacrity led the way. The evening had clofed at an early hour, for dark and heavy clouds laboured through the atmofphere, and the winds were fuf¬ pended in a dead calm. A fuffocating kind of vapour and heat feemed to foretel an approaching thunder-ftorm, and faint ftaftics of luminous fluid broke the dark fliadings of the clouds. " We fhall dò well to get ffeelter in the caftle," faid Lorenzo, ' f and if it is inha- habited the ftorm vtlÜ be an excellent excufe for the intrufion : Are you certain of your track in this intricate labyrinth ?" " The lightning will guide us," anfwer- ed Sayavedra. " It already flafhes on the tops of the hills. See now how it revels on the dark bofom of the cumbrous clouds."
Lorenzo
ni *■ Lorenzo admired it in filence, and rof¿ lowed Sayavedra, who fuddenly pan fing, took hold of his arm. "Cavalier," faid he, in a whifper, (t ftay, I beg you; do you fee any thing between the trees yon¬ der, to our left? "How fliould I," anfwered Lorenzo, ' ( the foreft is as dark as midnight." "Watch the next flafh/* anfwered the youth; and in a feeond the fubtle light- ning darted, unreftrained through every interftice of the foliage, for a moment, il¬ lumining the deepeft glen of the foreft. " I thought I perceived the grim figures* of two men," faid Lorenzo; the one feemed fitting on the ground, the other j leaning upon a pike." " They are, doubtlefs, robbers," an fwered Sayavedra; "we had better re¬ cede." " You have nothing to lofe," replied .Lorenzo, f( and to me they would do a fa- [vour by taking my life; let us then fol¬ low
236 low our way without either feeking or ih mining them." The lightning now glanced in repeated and fucceffîve dailies, without either rain or thunder, the body of the ftorm being yet at a great diftance, and moving extremely flow. The fhrill found of a bugle horn be¬ hind them, caufed them to flart and look round, but all was impervious obfcurity, and they halted irresolute. (r There are cer- ţainly robters in this %sft," faid Lorenzo, ín a low voice % ^they ífrffl, however, have a very poor booty if they chance to meet us." " ""...'.· '"'■". A fudden cry pCdiftrefs founded from the way they had heard the horn ; and liftening, they could diftinguiih through the filence of the night, the clamorous petition of a female voice for mercy. ''' Now do I wifh that I were armed," faid Sayavedra, i( lend me your fword ; who can tell but this is the very lady I love, in the hands of thefe ruffians ?" tf Take
237 *' Take it," faid Lorenzo, uniheathing it. ff You who love will have more energy to ufe it, than I, who have loved in vain, though your fkill may be lefs then mine ; I have yet a dagger behind in my doublet. Proceed—the lightning will ferve for a torch bearer.'* The cries of diftrefs increafed. The horn again founded, and its doleful notes echoed through the foreft. in a few paces they perceived two ruffians dragging a fe¬ male along, threatening to cut her throat, if fhe did not ceafe her fcreams, but flie had not· fufficient command over her fears to have the power of filence. Sayavedra quickly rufhed upon them, commanding them immediately to relin- quifh the lady, at the fame time he attacked them with generous impetuofity. One of the ruffians flew at him, uttering a volley of oaths, while he defended himfelf brifkly, though without fkill.' Lorenzo advanced to the other, to force the lady from his grafp, but at the fame moment he was feized
238 feized by two men behind, and his arms effectually fecured. Then raifing their pikes to the face of Sayavedra, whom they furrounded ; they compelled him inftantly to furrender, pinioning his arms behind him. To prevent the cries of the lady, they had the barbarity to cover her mouth with part of her drefs, and having thus ef¬ fectually fecured their prey, they proceed¬ ed to fearch for plunder. Their anger was roufed at finding the poor booty the Cavaliers fupplied ; but the lady made them ample amends, and it was a queftion, whether ihe was more dif- treffed at her fituation, or at the lofs of a caiket of eonfiderable value. What grieved Sayavedra, was the lofs of the portrait which they tore from his neck. Having finifhed their plunder, they began to de¬ bate in what manner they would difpofe of the pri forters. " Tajce my counfel," faid one of them, ina hafty rpugh voice, " we want no pri- foi)ers-T-
239 loners—dead people never tell tales.—You underftand me. ------" " What, all three?" cried another, " No, by my faith, I fee no neceffity for it." " What fignifies that ?" replied the firft, <e neceffity or no, there will be fecurity. No half meafures for me." <ς But the Captain has given us pofitive charge/' faid the third, " never to murder, but when we can't avoid it." " Poltroons," cried the firft, t( you have not the fpirit of men, or you would not hefitate about trifles like thefe. There's Filelfo and I; when we are out on the fcout, never iland about niceties. By the Pope's beard I fwear, we bring in double the booty of any of you. We are men of bufinefs-rrblades of right Toledo ftuff." At the name of Filelfo, Lorenzo fhud~ dered ; no barbarity he knew was too in¬ famous for this man, and he trembled to think that this lady and his new friend had fallen within the influence of fuch power. " I pro-
240 " i propofe," faid the fourth, who over¬ looked the lady, " that we take them at once to the calile. We can there deter¬ mine the bufmefs, and if vie there decide to make them dumb, we can put them into the common hole, where I will engage they fhall be fafe enough/' This propofal met their approbation, for it beginning now to rain, they were in hafte to feek Inciter from the ftorm which muttered its vengeance over their heads. They immediately marched forward, and it was not long before the lightning disco¬ vered to the ftckened fight of Lorenzo, the well known walls of the caftle of St. Helma. * f Great God,"cried he, internally, " how have I been unknowingly led to the fatal foreft, whence the evils that have over¬ whelmed me, firft had birth. But what myftery is this ? How has this caftle be¬ come the den of murderers, and what is become of Don Raphael ? Can it be, that he has turned his hand againil all mankind in this outrageous maimer ; or has Count Pandolfo
241 Pandolfo dared to cut the thread of his life, that he might plunder his domains ? Alas why am I compelled to call this man my father, who too probably in this tribunal of mifcreants, will prefide over the fate of his' fon ? О mofl flrange, that it should have been Cornelia, whom Sayavedra beheld, and fo floridly defcribed ! His heart will re¬ ceive a mortal ftab, when he learns thehif* tory of her fate. The gleaming lightning, flafhed upon the fofty and dark turrets of this caftle, elevated in majefty, and canopied with clouds. The rain defcended in a heavy fhower, tinging amongft the trees, while the thunder, in aweful fubiimity, echoed deeply to the foundations of the trembling pile. Sayavedra, though accuftomed to a ram«· bling life, bad never met with an accident of danger equal to the prefent ; and never having been accuftomed to brave the raging pallions of men, his heart died within him as they entered this terrific abode. voi,, nr. м Within
242 Within the court-yard they found a man upon watch, to whom they gave the word of the night, paffing on to a gate, which Lorenzo had never before entered. Here they found a grim and pale looking wretch, watching befide a lamp* He fal u ted them with a fhrill fhaking voice, demanding die fortune of the n igbt " Pretty well, pretty well/* cried they, " Thefe two ftout looking fellows will make a decent figure/* replied he. " The captain is gone very füllen into his own room, fomething has croffed him, but you know he has his whims. By my troth though, thefe are pretty birds, and here is a fparkling dame, her feathers betoken her breed." « Her feathers are pretty well plucked, old father of fin/* replied one of them, " I fancy fhe is a right bit of goods ; but Jago here, who has no more gallantry in him than a Spanifh cow, was juft for gently cut¬ ting her throat. " "· How far did you go to fetch her, com¬ rade of mine/' cried the heavy porter. " Not
«43 ** Not far/' replied he, « thanks to for¬ tune, lhe dropped into our hands, like a bird into a cat's mouth. There was fhe riding along, mounted on a mule, but we foon flopped her curvetting." ** Well, well, it is all very well ; you are come home İn very good time, for we are all going to fit down to be jolly. Such a ratling night without, war*ts a little cheer within—they areali in the old hall/* * f Lead away then/* cried they, " we filali not flay behind." Şo flrange » mctamorpholb of the caftle, filled Lorenzo with confíenla t İ on> but he could not conceive who \ţm the author of fo terrible an arrangement, and he feared that it might be Ftlelfo, who had with this hord of banditti, overcome both the Count and I>on Raphael Thefe robbers, who were dreffed in no uniform, appeared the very dregs of fo~ ciety ; all of them wore long rapiers and piftols, and fome of them had on the tar» nifhed remains of the military habit* The m t gothic
244 gothic hall, where formerly martial knights ufed to fit, and relate their exploits of prowefs, and their «leeds of glory, was now filled with furious wretches, who boaflcd deeds of rapine and pillage. A large brown antique table was co¬ vered with bacon, onions, cheefe, bread, and wine, in promifcuous confufion. Round it, fat near twenty of thefe men, eating with glutonous voracity, and the Herce Fîlelfo fat umpire at one end of the table, carting his regards around him« with the fcowl of a demon. Deeply engaged in eating and drinking, they paid no attention to their prisoners, who were left to fland the fpeeiators of this wild confufion, their keepers being in hafte to join the feafh Lorenzo had now leifure to look around him, yet his eye conftantly fhrunk with horror trom the deep malignity which the features of Filelfo exhibited unrestrained. This ancient hall was lighted with a few low iron lamps, which were placed upon the
945
the table, and gleamed in the faces of the ferocious gang, difpby ing a variety of all that is dark, mean, cunning and deteftable, in the human countenance« Each man ferved himfelf without order, and their fupper had more the air of a fctambfe than a repaft; one fnatchtng from the other, what he ш beginning to eat, and fome wem wrangling» and nearly fight¬ ing bat a portion. Over their heads^ in dark obfcurity, waved the manante of ftandards, which had once wantoned in the field of battle» but were now loft to the eye» except when the lightning fiifhed upon them, through the half broke» window», which rattled with the wind, and trembled at the pealing thunder. Hie fury of the ftorm was loud ; but thefe wretches, in throwing afide the laws of their country» had alfo laid afide the laws of heave» ; making it a fubjeii of ridicule» and a topic of blafphemy. The confufion and uproar, which ñUed the hall» was ex¬ it $ treme,
246 treme, for each man would be heard,, and no man would liften ; and the goblets they f wallowed, rendered them ftill more clamo¬ rous. Filelfo in vain, roared out for order, till he called upon Jago. for a fong, upon which the confufion gradually fubfided into murmurs, and Jago roared out the fol¬ lowing fong, loud enough to be heard above the ftorm, and the frequent inter¬ ruptions it was impoffible to prevent : I Ч > Death or Freedom is our boaft, Unconfined by partial law ; Wc defy the fervile haft, Who would think our wills to awe* War and plunder is our trade* ; ¿* Noblp fouls love danger's air, Seek it in the gloomy fhade, . Or in the (акту furamer's glare· ŕ . ä . ' í Chorus. Then raife the goblet, raife it high, Law and j u ilice we defy ; Raife it high, and let it fhinë, ! 'Tis our God, for 'tis divine. Šunk
247 II Sunk in woods of darkeft hue. Rapine points the gen'rous way $ FearJefs we our deeds purfue, Deeds unheard, that fliun the day. Heat, and cold, and day, and night, - Howling tempefts we defy, Ruthlefs danger's our delight, Thus we live, and thus we'll die. Chorus. Then, &c. This fong was followed by burfts of ap- plaUfe, which ih ook the hall, and all of them rifing together, drank off a large goblet of wine each, holding the cup in their left hand, and flourifhing their fwörds three times in the air ; they appeared with all the frenzy of ancient Bacchants. When they had once more taken their places in fonie kind of order, Filelfo called out to know where were the prifoners, the fcout- ing party had brought in, and where was the plunder. A very pretty picìure this," faid he ; by my troth, I Ihould know the lady ; bring her forward." M 4 ťf It
€< *
248 ff ît was not from the lady we took the picture," faid Jago. (f Her's Were pictures of a better Complexion, or ï have no ţafte." The lady lamenting her misfortunes, and loudly begging for mercy, was conducted towards the table, and the light for the firft time meeting her face, Lorenzo ftarted at beholding the infamous Ippolita. t( Rather worfe for the wëatfi fey Juj»ter/* cried Filelfo, with a look of complacence around him, which only made his features more ftrikingly fhocking. "Still, however* flie may do for .Captain Pandolfo. I fliali furrender my claim very willingly/* /' Captain Pandolfo," cried the, with a» hy fterİcal feream. "Is it Count Pandolfo ? Where is my huiband ?" " Your huiband?" cried Jago, ţf Ho, fio, if that be the cafe, I fwear by the Pope's beard, we are in the wrong-box. I advife: that we fend her ladyihip packing; flie'11 nd her way through the ftorm." " Peace, babbler," vociferated Filelfo, " bring up the ragged Cavalier. Hal What,
What, Lorenzo! Thou here? By thè fhades of hell, thou art moil welcome î " Kindling fury blackened his features as he thus exclaimed, and darting from his feat, he rufhed towards Lorenzo, to immo¬ late him at his feet. €t What is all this/' cried a voice behind, in an imperious tone. " Poltroons. Cow- árds. Do you cut each other's throats ?" " Begone/* cried Filelfo, ,( this bufmefs ismine/' . " \ charge you on difobedience to put up your {word/* cried the fame perfon, rufli· ing . forward with the point of his own fword, interpofed before Lorenzo,-^· " At your peril to'hefitate." " by all that is—/' cried the ferocious Filelfo, flam merin g with paflion. " I will not be reftrained.—dive me reyenge!" " Come on then," cried the Count, for it was he who had thus opportunely entered the hall, and now mifconftrued thefe laft words into a challenge of him« felf. " Come on," cried he, " thy treafon m s ihaU
SSO Ihall be punifhed.—The dénions of hell are fubordinate." ,..·; -.. t *</ . ,¿¿4} Filelfo, blinded by his fury, rufhed upon , the Count, to reach Lorenzo, and immedi¬ ately was ftretched upon the floor, by-the fword of the captain. .,-,.; ,> t b, ?i >4. " So perifh all traitors," cried Pandolfo : and the fertile crew, who had been ihouting death or freedom, filled the hall with clamours of applaufe. - и Pandolfo now had leifure to look round ■ К Л f him. ** Ah í " , cried he, " who have we here? Whofe piflure is that on the table?" . , ν β о ы It belonged to a young Cavalier, as came acrofs our path to night,"« replied Jago, fullenly; " and the tempeft begin¬ ning to fpit we brought Ыщ hejre." « Count pandolfo gazed upon the picìure, and then upon the three prifoners, > with no little emotion. "Peft of my exift- ence," cried he, turning to Ippolita, "am I to believe that there is. an, avcngipg jufr tice which ever brings thy hideous form I before
£51 before me?--¿-Infamous woman! I was black, but you made me ten tim esl black- £%& ** ... ;·.--.. r Ippolita broke out into a taunting laugh. ŕí Was it I/' faid flie, " thatcáufed you· to live : with Lady Almediá ŕ ΐ "Hfcas* it I that caufed you to conceal the real fon ofthat woman y by the Duke of .Aragon ? Was-it I that eaufed you ta abandon him at the age of manhood r and leave him ignorant of hisJbirthr Dó not think, Lorenzo/' continued fhe, turning to bim^ " that I make this difcovery fof your fake ; no> I del'pife you as much as I do this púíllani- motis wretteh before mej ; but it was this fecret which the fond fool, Pandolfo, re- poťedin me that tempted rae to offer you my hand/* - ( During thk (trange feene :the whole troop lat loft in íl u ρ id wonders except thofe who lay ujpon the flooivs or .·. the benches, fo overcome with liquor, that they could only rear their heads, and half open -their fwlmming eyes in drowfy cüríoíity.
Lorenzo, whofe hands had been rèf* leafed ' by one of the men* when they learned that Ippolita was the wife of their; captain« now advanced. " Count Pandol¬ fo/' faid he, in a firm tone of mind; "what í have this moment heard fills me with the greateft doubt and amazement. It is fonte time fince I knew myfelf to be the fon of Lady Almedia, and believed that to you I owed my exiftence. Say then if the words of Ippolita are true, and expeci from mea fecret of, perhaps, equal importance concerning yourfelf/' " What ihe has faid is moft true/' re¬ plied Count Pandolfo. " You are affuredry the fon of Don Raphael, Duke of Aragon, and Lady Almedia. It was that mifcreant Filelfo, who lays dying on the pavementi that murdered your nurfe, wounded you, and threw you both into the Tagus. I happened to be fwimming by moon-light a little way down the ftream, and the waves bore you 'to my arms. I fnatched you from deftručlion, and carried you to the
253 the íhdfe. Your dréfs told me yöu were of no mean birth, arid I conveyed you to the cottage of á peafant, to whom I gave you in truft. Her name was Sylvia. I kept you there as my own fon, confîdër- irŕg you as a treáfure when rny fortune, which was vanifhing, mould be gone : and if at any time I hate treated you with caprice and cruelty, remember that your father, Don Raphael, married my miftrefs in vexation at our family, and I could hardly refrain at times revenging the in¬ fult upon his fon, fo flrangely thrown into my power, and you will fee that I have had great and ample vengeance on this haughty and imperious mortal. You were near three years old when my conneciion with Lady Almedia brought me a fon whom I placed at nurfe, intending when age fhould have deftroyed the vifible dif¬ ference of your years, to produce him in your place, and educate you in a cloifler, Fortune baffled this defign.—My own boy was ftolen by a wandering gang of gypftes, and
$54 and then it was I fliould have produced you to the world as heir to the dukedom 1 * - ' " --. ï, '; ţ - í t of Aragon i but ypur fafber, then in this caftle, was fuppofed by the f world to be dea<I. (f Filelfo .\*ф*Ц*. У W / ecret ^ FOm dame Sylvia, and he has. fince told me that the tokens of your birth remain in an old cheft in a cottage where he dwelt in this; foreft. у His ignorance of your fitu¬ ation in life prevented his applying to the prefent Puke, but I have not left him in ignorance that you are yet alive, and this prefent fituation, which he lias given me in this caftle, was merely to confine me to fecrefy, though he arľečied to dilbelieve the whole of my aifertions. But by what means did you come ať this picìure of your mother ?" " It is not mine," replied Lorenzo, awakening as it were йот a reverie, which this difcovery, and the duplicity of the Duke had produced. " It,belongs to that youth, who I have no doubt is your fon by the Lady Almedia. Come hither. Sayavc- dra (>
255 dra, and take røy place, for I have ; too long been in poffeffiOUiOf your rights:." , Sayavedra timidly advanced, for what he had heard, he could fcarce comprehend, arid had no pleafure ito, find himfelf fon to arcapt dn; of robbers., ; ......ι: '■" It ishimfelC," cried/Pandolfo,. holding out his hand. (< I perceive the little mole above his-left eyê. f Come hither my fon, and ownifyoU can, a wţeţţh like me for yout? father. But you are nobly defcended, and from this day, you Ihall not; have to blufh* ^Lorenzo, í have greatly injured you, but if it be necefiary, I will aţteft ypur rights in any court of Spain. / This, then was the fecret you promifed me, in return for delaring to you the truth/*, " Np," replied Lorenzo, cafting his eyes uppn Ippolita .·; </ jt was a fecret pf a diffe¬ rent nature; it was I, in the difguife of a rnonk, whiçb my fituation compelled me to aflume, who was prefľed iu^ţo, the fervice by,thofe Cavaliers who forced you to take the han4,of. this woman. It was I who performed
256 performed the marriage ceremony, which my firil education qualified nié for, arid í proteft that this Lady Ippolita is.' not your wife. I can defcribe to you thè chamber, and the words that were fpoken during lhe ceremony, and I remember that Ippolita threw her arms round your neck when the fervice was fmiihed/* / "I thank you/' cried Count Pandolfo ; " I was at firft incredulous; I am now fatis- fied. This deceitful harpy may now go and howl to fhe ft orm, or join the hags on the feared heath, who are dancing to the lightning's blaze." '* Wretch Ï- Impoftèr !—Villain V' rer peated Ippolita, in the wildeft fury> to Lorenzo ; "· you have been guilty óf facri- lege, and I will inform the inquifition. Ώο you know that Cornelia is dead ; that Dòn Guzman is dead, and you will be broken alive for a murderer ? I will impeach you for mimieking the rights of the church. You ihalî find that though a woman, I can make a man to tremble. This moment î fet
£57 fet out : I will tumble the caftle about the ears of you all V' " Stop her," cried Count Pandolfo, as fhe was making towards the door. " You are a prifoner here, Madam, and will not fo foon efcape^ Though Д am determined no longer to lead the troop, they fhall not be betray ed.— They fhall have time to feparate." "No flinching; no whining;" cried feveral of them in murmurs. ** You mail not quit us; what fhould we do without you?** " Put yourfelves under my direéìton," cried Ippolita, with daring fiercenefs: " I have a firmer foul and a more, hardy fpirit than that puftlanimous wretch:—-I, woman as } am, will lead you in the lace of danger, and fhew you that fex is the dif* tincìion of fools, when noble aelions call tø exertion." 4( Your words are big," faid Jago, fcowling from beneath his hanging brows, and fpeaking in a deep How tone, " But where
where was your heart of lion this night, when we feized you in the road to the foreft? you were then* mere woman. If our noblë Captain will not ftay with us, wé ihüft^féek for other quarters: this qualm of his'n only wants a little wine to wàfhit doAvn. What fay you, Captain, you won't be ägámft a parting glafs ? Sup- pofe you, and your fon, and your ion that is not, fit ¿down to our table' here : and Madam too will not refufe a bumper, or my guefsíbelies me," * ; ч " Letit be fo," faid the Count. " Còme, iny boynana you; ^Lorenzo* take your places■;'« you may not be-ufed to' inch dif- order as this, but the caftle affords no better*":-^· -, л ··.--· ■^'-'- -■-"=■■ ■ - ι $uch of the company - who had any fobernefè remaining, mixed themfelves round the table prom ifcuoüíly^ with thofe who lay drunk, and the glafs began again to'-circulate., ^ь·- *·;■·.·*·■ ^ Lorenzo ? was filent, mufîng upon the difcovery of the night, which formed fo fingular
âS9 íiWgular a concatenation of evetffö, that any one link-to thè chain having been wanting, w would have deftroyed the whole 1 hut when he looked round him at the banditti that ufurpéd the hall, he feared to inquire of Count Pandolfo, what he had done with Don Raphael, and whether he y et lived. The night^ was bý thm^hxa advanced, but the ftorm continued to howl, and the thun¬ der every now and then muttered over the caftleUymofé darkeft dungeons were ¡not úňféareheíLby .the^fubtle: lightning. : The goblet had gone?'twice round, and noify mirth was ibéginning. tolrife^ when fuddbnJy a bude horn founded in hafte^ and· the report ¿of av pift©! alarmed them; .Every man who had ftrength; or fenfe remaining feized a fwordbr* a d&ğğ&r.; ; ¿ \ :\ r ; ; îr " Béftrm, be cool and:uridifmaye$¡" eried the Count, his ^eje $t$m$ 5 ν?ΐφ newtlnftre. 4\l have, eiigaged to leäye ; you^ but I : wijl not leave you, in^the ţinţe^ oí danger „i Whatever be the caufe /ofuthis alarm, re- main hereân filence and firmnefs, while I
860 go fm gly to inquire the meaning of this. unufual fignal, whkh only the utmoft dan¬ ger can excufe." At thefe words, with a firm ftep, he ad¬ vanced towards the door, but: was not more than half way acrofs the hall, when thé door was buril ©peri *with violence, and feveral foldters* of thé holy brother¬ hood marched m i with pikes at charge. Some of the robbers had ftarted up with bud cries of vengeance, but the fight of this tremendous array, funk them all into fear and filence : even the Count turned pale, ftandirtg on the floor røith bis fword point hanging down. ** Surrender/* cried twenty voices at once ; "уош яте all pri foners. —The Aril who dares ftir or refift, will be run through the body/* So many foldifers Äéd in, that they com¬ pletely lined the hall preïentingf a breaft- wòrk of pikes to the difmay of the robbers, A brilliant flame filone in at the door, and a number of fervants bearing torches en* tered.
261 tered, crying out to the foldiers, a Stand clear, that his Excellenza the Duke of Aragon, and his noble fon, Count Aranda, may enter.*' "Isit fo?" faid Lorenzo, cafting his eyes towards the door, "is my friend then come to witnefs this ftrange difcovery of my birth ? but what to me is now the kindnefs of fortune, fince Cornelia has been falfe and is dead?" The Duke of Aragon and the Marquis by his fide, both with their fwordş drawn, entered the hall ; they turned th)eir eyes round with a look of apprehenfion, and perceiving the Count in his uncouth habit of a robber, the Duke Cried out, " Count Pandolfo, is it thus you execute the truft reppfed in you ? I had a better opinion of your promifes than İ find they merited. You have converted iny caftle into a den for banditti, and your outrages have reached the ears of public juftice. You imagined yourfelf fècure, but you were expofed, and I came myfelf to witnefs what I
2® 1 could not credit. What account do you give of your charge ? How: iş Don .Ra¬ phael?" s . "He is well," cried Count Pandolfo, abafhed. The Duke moved forward to take ¡a feat, and the Count Aranda paffing near -Lo- гепго, the latter feized him; by the $rm. The Count fearing fome danger, turned brifkly round to defend himfelf, nor did the voice of Lorenzo caufe him İefs fur- m "h k poiTible!'* cried he, "Loijenzo in this place ŕ and in this company; and in fuch a garb! Give me leave to fay, I know not, what excufe you can offer for be¬ coming the companion of fuch men aş I fee around me. "? •■••¡и ä - " Sofţlyi" replied Lorenzo, fighing, t( my tattered garments belie me. Know you not the fragments of aiijb'efs, in which I once was,happy it f The thorns qf the wafte, and the boughs of the foreft have torn me thus. It is not fix hours fince I was taken pri-
Ž63 prifoner, as I wandered by chance with this youth through the foreft, which I knew not then was the fatal foreft of St. Helma." " You will excufe my fufpicions/' faid the Count; " I have news to tell you, that will give you pleafure. Don Guzman has recovered, and you may again appear." Lorenzo fighed, " My Lord Duke," faid Count Aranda, (C give me leave to introduce to you, my friends whom I have juft difcovered 3 in a ftiattered plight—Cavalier Lorenzo. '* "Under tliat difguife, 1 * faid Pandolfo, taking courage, " G ive me leave to i n tro- duce to your Excellenza, this your relation, the heir of Aragon, and the fon of his high- - nefs, Don Raphael." : « > The Duke appeared not a little difturbed, looking upon Lorenzo with marks of dif- truft and difpleafure. , 7 How," cried he, "dare you abufe дпу, credulity by fuch a tale? I r know well ihat my nephew was drowned." f We
Wë have proof more than fufficient/' replied the Count, w and you know it. I can bring before you a chain of events from his infancy, and if you would not be publicly expofed, and publicly ftripped of the titles and fit u at i ons you now hold, you will upon this fpot acknowledge your nephew, and the heir of Aragon. In an old cheft, at the cottage of Filelfo, are at this moment, the cloaths in which the little Lorenzo was dreffed, when »thrown into the river ; they were preferved by dame Sylvia, when fhe removed thither. Upon his arm is itili the mark of the wound he re¬ ceived, and in his cloaths, are an anfwer^ ing rent." " Stop," cried the Duke in confufion, and throwing himfelf into the arms of Lo¬ renzo ; " there requires riot fo many par- ticulars to obtain juftice from me, when I am convinced of its due. I did believe that I could trace fome family refem¬ blance ; but how could I fufpeci that my nephew fhould yet live after fo many years lofe ?"
Лбэ * ( My Lord Duke," replied Lorenzo, " it is natural that you fliould regard me with a jealous eye, but it is becaufe you do not know me. On this fpot, and before thefe witnefles, I refign to you the pof- feflion of all honors and titles that belong to me, nor will I publicly claim them, till acknowledged as your heir, which may heaven for a long time avert ! I muft in¬ deed claim from you a competency, the pofteifions I have received from Lady Al¬ media, belonging now to this young man, as fon to Count Pandolfo." At this moment they were thrown into confufion, by the fudden ilinefs of Count Pandolfo, who turning pale and red alteiv nately, funk into the arms of one of the foldiers, on which Ippolita clapped her hands, and broke out into ац hy nericai laugh ; but immediately turned pale, and drooped her head. " What is the meaning of this my fiery ?" eried the Duke. (( Can any man inform vol. т. к , u$
266 us of the truth—fpeak, and he fliali be par¬ doned." " I can," faida pale thin figure of a man, with deep hollow eyes, and ghalily vif'age. 4t I will explain it, if your Exceilenza will pledge vmu*word to pardon me." " Lead him away—rack him, till he dif- covers what he knows;" cried the Duke. " I make no bargains with robbers." " Pardon me," interrupted Count Aranda» "you have already given your word— vou cannot retract. Speak what you know,—I will engage your fafety." "Donna Ippolita," faid he, "has poifoned the Count.—I faw her take from her bofom a phial, which flie emptied into a goblet of wine. She knew not that my eye was upon her. She beckoned me to her: * Carry this/ laid ihe, * to thy Captain, and bring his cip to me, that I may pledge him, for though he hates me, 1 love him ftill.' I had no objection to give the Captain this quieter. I feared he would betray us if he left our gang. But,·thought I, 'tis a- pity fo
2бГ fo loving a couple ihould part. So as this woman defired to pledge the Captain, I dextrouily mixed the liquor—The Count and the lady both had their fliare." Ippolita at thefe words uttered a loud feream that vibrated through the hall, and clofing her eyes, flie funk back upon the pavement; her face, in a few moments, became difcoloured, and her foul left its once too beautiful maníion, with yells of defpair, that ftruck difmay even into tlüe hearts of the moft obdurate. So dread¬ fully ftrong were the effecìs of this poHon which had been fo long before it ope¬ rated, that in lefs than five minutes after Count Pandolfo became fpeechlefs, he breathed his laft with violent convuliions. " Let us away," cried the Duke, filled with horror at feenes to which he had . never been accuftomed. " Take every oa>c of thefe men prisoners to Leon : the moll atrocious fhall be hanged, and the reft fent to the gallies for life. This mifcreant fliali not efcape, becaufe he has betrayed N 2 his
268 his own fecret. My word had no allufion to a crime I did not fufpeci. It was only the puniihment due to him as a robber that I alluded to. It were an aci of injuftice towards all fociety, to turn loofe a wild beaft like this amongft them." Lorenzo fmiled in his own mind at the deep policy oí the Duke, whofe characler he had before remarked, yet he could not in this inftance confider it an ači of injuf¬ tice. " We muft trouble you," faid the Duke to Lorenzo, " to lead us to the moil ha¬ bitable part of the caftle. The night is too late at prefent to vifit Don Raphael" Lorenzo, in filence, led the way, two torch bearers lighting them to that part of the caftle which Don Raphael had ñtted «p : a profound filence every where pre¬ ceding them : they found it difmantled of its ornaments; the books were torn up to kindle fires ; and feveral cheils, and bags of plunder, were heaped in confufion amidi! a promifcuous quantity of arms. " This
269 "This looks like the den of a robber,** obferved the Count. * r It was here, no doubt, Pandolfo brooded over his expedi¬ tions, and iiimulatcd hb avarice by the view of what he had already acquired.** The whole company feated themfelves, the fervants lighted two lamps, and Lo¬ renzo direciing them to look for wine, and other refreflimentSj they foon found abundance, though not in equal quality to the ñores of Don Raphael, which had been quickly exhauiled. The greateft part of the night was fpent in different recitals, and mutual explana¬ tions, to the aftonifliment of Sayavedra» who felt very little fatisfacìion in the change of his fortune when he found that the lady of his fancy no longer lived. «Our fudden appearance this night would furprize," faid Count Aranda. " The whole of the proceedings of Count Pan¬ dolfo, and thefe men, were betrayed to us by Nugnez, the fmugglcr, who had no other means to revenge himfelf on Filelfo. к 3 It
270 İt was under his direction the whole of this enterprize was eonducìed, and he now remains without in the foreft with a party of referve, for the characler of thefe rob¬ bers has in two months filled this part of the country with difmay, and we confider¬ ed it a folly to leave any thing to chance." On the following morning, as foon as it was well day, they haflened to feek the chamber of Don Raphael, which the death of Count Pandolfo rendered uncertain to be found. The light of day partially broke through the folemn obfcurity of the pnftages and chambers, giving fo dreary and defolate an appearance to the whole pile of building, that the Duke, contrafting it with the elegances he was accuftomed to fee round him, would willingly have fhrunk from therefearch, fearing that fome chamber might retain a robber, who had efcaped the captivity of his comrades. As they paffed along, Lorenzo obfervee? a door with a key remaining in the lock, and immediately opened it, flart ing bock with
271 with horror at perceiving a human body upon the floor. The Duke call his eye into the chamber, and was hurrying away in conftematton, when Lorenzo recollect* ing himfelf, begged him to return. ** 1 perceive/* laid he, '* that this is the body of dame Sybia, which has lain, no doubt, on the fpot where fhe died, no one taking the trouble to bury her. She is withered and dry, and this, my friend Aranda, muft have been the corpfe I was led to believe was Cornelia's, on the night when 1 was brought hither a pri foner." The Duke haflened them away. If Good heavens Ï what horrors this place affords ! M faid he; " what a flrange and barbarous tatte mutt my brother have had for all that is terrible ! How could he pafs years in thefe gothic chambers, lit only for owls and bandita V* " liften/* faid Sayavedra ; " I thought that I heard the rattling of a chain. Don Raphael is, doubtlels, within yon door.** к \ The
The Duke turned pale, and remained filent. " It does not feem to me" laid the Count, " that the found proceeds from within that apartment; it rather comes from a diftant part of the caille. " "We are going to alarm ourfelves/* replied Lorenzo, fmiling. " When I firft came to this foreft, I was warned to be¬ ware of a fpirit that wandered about this caftle in chains. Did your Excellenza ever hear of any perfon being confined till extreme old age, and afterwards mur¬ dered?" " Never/* replied the Duke, with evi¬ dent difmay, "is fuch a ftrange report current in this country?" The company were alarmed with appre-> henfions for their own fafety, as the ftrange found they heard evidently advanced. In a few minutes a human form, clad in a garb of coarfe ftlk, which hung down to the ground, entered the farther end of the gallery. His hands were faftened by a chain,
273 chain, and his fteps were meafured and fad: his beard was long, and his eyes bent upon the ground. At every motion he made, the chain emited a rattling noife, but his eyes were never raifed to regard any thing around him. The whole company remained filent, liftening to the words that he uttered to himfelf. " Is it then true," faid he, " that I am nothing but a beaft? Has my immortal fpirit forfaken me, never more to return ? yes; I am become an animal—a mere ma¬ chine—a philofophical man—fit only to herd with the beafts of the field. Yet my teeth are not made to crop the herbage as the fheep; nor to immolate the lamb like the wolf. I have no claws, like a tiger, or wings like the eagle of the mountains.— How then, beaft as I am, am I to provide for my fuftenance? It is true I do not want much. About ten or twelve thou¬ fand acres of fpontaneous produce is about fufficient food, for I cannot cultivate the n S earth,
earth, fince providence has deprived me of a foul. Yes, I know I am a beau\;md only a beaft : were I more I fliould be capable of improving myself. Matter may be irti- proved, beafts may be improved, but it is only intelligence that can improve itfelf; All the wifdom in the im i ver f e cannot now teach me to combine two ideas, and draw an inference. As I was yefterday I am to day, and fhall be fo for ever. I am now like all other beafts, the fame through a thoufand generations. Matter juft above vegetation. Yes, it muft be fo. But where is my fòul ? Ah ! I thank thee, gra¬ cious Creator! that to which thou gaveft being thou wilt not annihilate, though thou may eft change. This fpark of im¬ mortality is free—now will I exult in my freedom.—Now do I wander over the hills —now do I contemplate the wonders of thy creation. —Thou haft parted this my foul from my body, and permitted me to enjoy the boundlefs regions of our hemifphere, while
\
275 while my wretched body lays at this mo¬ ment in the caftle of St. Helma !" " How ftrange a being, and of how com¬ pound a nature is man !" faid Lorenzo ; " behold here, Don Raphael ! Remark the diítinčiions between our exiftence, and re¬ gard man as a link between angels and animals. He poíTeíľes the celeftial and immortal fpirit of the one, with all the qualifications which are beftowed on whole races of animals." Don Raphael had approached fufficiently near to diftinguiih the company, and attend to this difcourfe. " Why," faid he, mildly, " are you come to witnefs my humilia¬ tion ? Lorenzo, though I have loft my foul, and am become a mere animal, I re¬ member, and forgive you. Animals have memory.—Which road did you conte ?" ζί We came from Leon," anfwered the Duke. (t Ah ! then you could not meet my fpi¬ rit, for I was all Iaft night fitting upon the heath, watching .the lightning, that it might do
276 ■t do no mifchief. I expecled that the Caftle of St. Helma would have been blown down, and the mortal part of me cruíhed in the ruins, but I found it fafe this morn¬ ing. See how Count Pandolfo has chained me ünce I became a beaft ; but I was fufli- ciently tame, and had no inclination to expofe my fallen ftate before man/* " My dear brother/' faid the Duke, "you are no longer to remain in this fituation, we are come to free you and pardon you. We have difcovered that your legitimate fon efcaped from the waves, and is nú other than Lorenzo before you/* " And is this pofitively and perempto¬ rily true?" faid Don Raphael, feizing Lo¬ renzo ; " when I firft faw you, I found a ftrong inclination to you, but I trembled for your fidelity to me. You now fee the lion tamed, and if it be true, which my brother aifures me, that I have received a pardon, my foul will then again return to my body, and I will fpend the reft of my days in penitence and prayer, and be unin¬ terrupted
277 temipted in thofe divine contemplations, which fo often delight me on the high mountains." The whole company were grieved and aftonifhed at the words they heard, which difplayed the human underftanding in ruins ; and endeavouring in all their dif¬ courfes to confirm him in the idea, that he was again like other men, they avoided particulars, which might too nearly touch. the fubjeČt of his derangement. They retired together to the library, where they breakfafted ; after which, Lo¬ renzo indulged himfelf in the melancholy pleafure of wandering through the apart¬ ments of the caftle, while his friends ex¬ amined into its wealth. The Duke requefted that his fon^in-Iaw would negotiate between him and Lorenzo, by inquiring his views, and what part of the family e dates he intended to claim. To this intimation, Lorenzo replied, " I want neither power, wealth, nor fame. I have no motive to appear in the world fu¬ perior
27В perior to what I have been, and 1 confefs that I mould like to refide in this caflle, upon an cftabiifhmcnt, fuch as my rank demands. I fhould live here in all the re¬ tirement which my misfortunes render agreeable, and when weary of foli tude, I can fly to the neighbouring city. Habit has in fome meafure familiarized me to thefe woods, where 1 have been engaged in fo many adventures ; that thought is always returning them frcíh upon me. Here will I lament the wretched fate of my Cornelia, for lier innocence I cannot doubt, as her foul was unconfcious of falfe- hood." This was exacìly what the Duke would have wifhed. It would leave him in tran¬ quil'pofleffion'of his prefent honora, and he immediately coincided in the plan, en¬ tering more at large into the economy οΐ fuch an eítabliíhmenť. ' Ие was obliged the fame day to return to Leon, leaving to Lorenzo all thofe re- pairs and improvements, which Kis fancy began already to defign
279 At Leon, a public acknowledgment was made of the rights and claims of Lorenzo, and a number of workmen difpatched to reftore the caftle to its ancient fplendour. Lorenzo appointed Nugnez as his fteward, and attended his friend the Count, to the city, where Don Raphael immedi¬ ately entered the retirement of an auftere order of monks, and the Duke taking Say¬ avedra under his protecìion, haftened to Madrid ; for though policy obliged him to politenefs, he could not look upon Lo¬ renzo with perfect fatisfacìion. The Count remained yet a few days, to enjoy the company of his friend, endea¬ vouring to infpire him with a tafte for fociety. As they paffed by the church of St. Stephen, they were tempted to enter, by feeing many others haftening the fame way. They found the high altar decorated as on a day of feftival, and a very numer¬ ous affembly, who expreffed their impa¬ tience by whifpers, while they waited the commencement of the ceremony. Lorenzo
Lorenzo and his friend contrived to get as near as poffible to the gates which di¬ vided the fancluary, where they inquired of one of the fpeeiators, what was the oc- cafion of this unufual aifembly. " It is," replied the Cavalier whom they had addrefíed, " the admiffion of a nun to her liril noviciate. She is a mofl lovely creature, and one would almoil wifh to go to heaven, ifit were only for the fake of her company." Lorenzo fmiled at this eulogium. My own folly, thought he, deprived me of a lady who might have merited fo much praife ; but is there a fécond in the world of whom this can be faid with truth ? The commencement of the ceremonial awakened all his attention. The holy fifters entered and took their places, their long black veils concealing their features, and he flrained his fancy to recolleci the /hape, the air, and the figure of Chrifliana in the candidate for reception.. He clung to the rails in his earneftnefs to gain a glance
281 glance öf her features, and as the ceremony proceeded, his anxiety became extreme, as he perfuaded himfelf it could be no other than Chriftiana. " Good God ! " cried he, in a low voice ; ' ť fhall I then lofe her without even feeing her face ?" The people around him were attracted by his evident emotion, and the eyes of the fpeeiators, as well as the monks, turned upon him. The Count endeavoured to check his emotions, but his fufpenfe was ίο extrem e, that he paid no attention to his words, de¬ manding of feveral people round him, loud^ enough to be heard, what was the name of the novice ? This indecent behaviour caufed no little confufion, and one of the priefts, who was only a fpeciator, advanced to the grating to command him to reftrain his tranfports or retire. " Tell me, holy father ; I befeech you to tell me," faid Lorenzo, " what is thè name
382 name of the lady who is going to take ирод her the vows : tell me only whether it is my dear ftfter." "Reft content;" replied the monk, <f ftie has no brothers but thofe ofthe king¬ dom of heaven—She never had any;—*■ Her name is Mirandula." * c Chriftiana de Mirandula !" exclaimed Lorenzo, с la fp ing his hands : " О heavens ! I cannot bear it—It is too much." At thefe words his eyes doled, and he would have fallen upon the pavement, had not the Count and one or two others fupported him, conveying him from the church to his lodgings ; nor was it without medical affiliane e that he recovered, but though his fenfes returned, a flow fever feized upon his nerves, and the phyfician apprehended the greateft danger. The Count was extremely interefted in this untoward event. The retreat of Chriftiana was a fecret even to him : for when that forfaken and orphan lady faw that all her hopes of gaining Lorenzo's afîëc-
283 áffeciions were absolutely done away, that her friends were defcended to the filent grave, and fhe alone, left to linger in the world, there appeared to her no choice remaining; and the life of a nun poffeffed all the requintes that could incline her mind to eternity, and preferve her unpo- luted, amidft furrounding evils. Yet did fhe nöt precipitate her reception, till ihe had conceived an efteem for the fifters of the houfe, and in fome meafure taken up a tafte for their forms. The Count recalled to mind that thefe ftrft engagements were more a tie upon honour than abfolutely irrecoverable; though it was not to be expečied that fhe would now recede, when character and pious reiolutions would ftrengthen her perfeverance. He determined, however, as a common friend, between thofe whom he wiftied nearer united, to requeft a Cight of her in the parlour, though he concealed his vifit from Lorenzo, that a difappoint* ment might not fo foon reach him. At
284 At his firft requeft, the porterefs returned him very unfatisfacìory anfwers. pofitively refufing to bear his meíľage, alledging that fhe had ftrici orders that no one fhould be admitted to her. (t A fine piece of work we, had of it yefterday," faid fhe; " there was her pretended brother (for we all know fifter Chriftiana never had a bro¬ ther) fwooning away in the church, and difcomppftng the whole company; and then fifter Chriftiana, to be fure, muft follow his example, and. fo the ceremony muft be poftponed. Brother, indeed; he is no more her brother than he is mine:— Some gallant though, I fuppofe ; and give me leave to fay, it is very unbecoming of a perfon fo much like a gentleman as you, to come and make bad worfe." " You very much miftake me," replied the Count, mildly. "If you knew that you were now fpeaking to a Grandee, and that the brother of Chriftiana is Duke of Aragon, you would be a little more kind." i( Bleu
285 ес Biefs me/* cried the porterefs, crofting herfelC and dropping a very low courtefy. te I hope your highnefs will not think any thing of it, for I was never impolite in my life. But only to think--------," " Well, Well," faid the Count, " yon will not now reject my meíľage ; I will en- truft you with a fecret. It is the brother- in-law of the lady, who is my friend. Tell ber --------" "Yes, Yes," cried the porterefs, tripping away. "I'll tell her-------" " Beg of hér —" cried the Count. " Never fear," returned the porterefs, and was gone without waiting for any further in¬ ftruciions. The Count reflecied that nothing could be a more fortunate omen than this agi¬ tation of Chriftiana which fufpended the ceremony, it being a teftimony ftroriger than words, that Lorenzo had yet more fliare in her áffeciions than perhaps ihe her¬ felf had believed. The
286 The porterefs returned and informed the Count, that Chriftiana thanked him for his kindnefs, but intreatéd him to excufe her appearance, as the was far from weli^ and that fhe had not the pleafure öf know¬ ing the Duke of Aragon, or ever remem¬ bered having feen him. " My good friend," replied the Count, *' if you had waited a moment, you would have been better inftručied. Tell her, if you pleafe, that it is Lorenzo de Ferara who lias recovered his patrimony, and is heir to the title I have mentioned; that her fifter Cornelia is dead; and he has many important things to fay to her. Tell her, that as fhe is my ward, I cannot leave Leon without feeing her." The porterefs again tripped away with the menage, and returned in a few mi¬ nutes. " I know not," faid flie, " what you have done in, fending me with your fpeeches. Sifter Chriftiana is gone crazy, 1 believe. ' Go/ faid fhe to me, ç go down to the Count, tell him î fhall be well to- mor-
morrow, and then I will fee him, but'don't fay a word of the pleafure I have expreffed in this news that you brino: me. Gracious heaven, if—But I will not flatter my folly/ I promifed to keep her fecret, which I am well qualified to do." The Count fmiled, and as a recompence for her trouble, forced her to accept a ring, which he begged her to wear as a token of friendfhip. He haflened thence to Lo¬ renzo, reflecting by the way, whether he fhould mention the fubječr oí his vifit, fince it promifed better than he had dared to expeci. The joy upon his features led Lorenzo immediately to inquire what good news he had heard from Madrid, " None," replied the Count, "but I have learnt that your particular behaviour yef- terday, in the church, created fo much confufion, that the ceremony was poft poned. What think you of this accident ? It is a certainty, that flie ftill retains much affection for you in her heart ; but my dear friend, be careful that von are not deceiv ing yourfelf."
288 * ( No," replied Lorenzo, (( \ was per¬ fecily convinced of her merit, it was paf¬ fion alone, that before blinded me to her excellencies, and rather prevented my ac¬ cepting the invaluable gift of her heart After Cornelia, fhe was always moft· dear to me. Her company always charmed, and her converfation was always pleafing—then the mildnefs of her difpofition ; the hea¬ venly benignity of her countenance ; the f weetnefs of her expreffion, and the piety of her thoughts, feemed to raife her above her fex, and the efteem with which I be¬ held her, was tempered with refpecì." se All this, and more might be faid," re¬ plied the Count. " You know with what ienttments fhe infpired me on my firft in¬ terview, and there was nothing I would not have done to ferve her. But can you think fhe will accept you after the many flights ihe has received ? Has fhe not fuffered more from you, than the pride of moft women would ever forgive, and if fhe can forgive you, you may fafely rely that all Spain will fcarce produce her equal."
269 * My dear friend/* faid Lorenzo, ' f do not overwhelm me with difficulties. I feel them too much, and certainly fhall not lurvi ve her rejection/* On the following day, the Count haflen¬ ed to the convent as early as propriety would permit, and after waiting a few mi¬ nutes, Chrifliana came to the 'gate ; her agitation at firil feeing the Count was great, but flie turned her eyes round, with a look of inquiry, exprefflve of difap- pointment at his being alone. She was extremely pale, though the emotion of her fpirits gave animation to her frame. Count Aranda began with the tenderefl inquiries after her health; and then advert¬ ing to his friend, (< My dear ward/* faid he, " you muil not be furprized that I am alone, Lorenzo is too unwell to leave his room, and has too little hope to-—*' tf Ah ! " cried fhe, with a motion of her hand, " do not let me be once more led into error.—Is my fifler Cornelia dead?" о " She
270 "•She is," replied the Count, tc and Lo¬ renzo is impatient to caft himfelf at your feet, to fulfil thofe engagements he pre¬ tends to have made to you, and which your father witneffed." Chriftiana covered her face with her hand, while a few tears forced themfelves from her eyes. They were thé overflow¬ ings of a joy flie could ill conceal. " Who would have thought," faid ihe, breaking filence, " I fliould ever have feen this day ? Tell him that my fate has been long di¬ rected by him, that 1 will even renounce the engagements I have begun to form in this facred place. Spare me any further confufion, and remember I am your ward." The Count was charmed with fenti- ments to which her manner without affec¬ tation gave a deeper impreffion, and re¬ turning her thanks in the name of his friend; he forbore touching on the un¬ fortunate iflue of her lifter's marriage, any other than w T hat could not be concealed,and Chriftiana
27 ì Chriftiana could not refrain a tear of fin- cere regret. It was neceíľary to give lome colour to this change in Chriftiana's difpofition, which ihould quiet the minds of the riflers; and that they might not think themfelves injured or flighted, the Count propofed 4hat the whole fum which he had deliverd in truft ihould remain to the foundation of the houfe, and that under his authority of guardian he ihould advance his claim to her perfon. After a long ftay he took his leave, re¬ turning to Lorenzo, who was impatient to hear his fuccefs. The Count represented the difficulties he pretended to have had, at length confirming all his hopes, and in- fpiring him with renovated life. It required much delicacy to withdraw Chriftiana from the convent; but the rank of the Count, and the name of the Duke of Aragon overcame many difficulties, and after fome preparation the day was fixed which was to give to Lorenzo the greateft o ä bleffing
ш blefling heaven has beftowed upon man— a faithful friend in a virtuous woman. It was but one flep from the convent to the altar, "where in prefence of the Count, and two or three witneffes, Loren¬ zo and Chrifliana offered up their vows of fidelity b efore the Author of purity. In a few days, the Count received a let- ter from Madrid, informing him of the birth óf a fon, which haflened his return. Lorenzo remained at Leon till the caftle was fufficiently in order to become a per¬ manent abode; and then happy in the company of a woman fo well formed to pleafe, he retired ţo the tranquil fhades of the forett, there to live uninterrupted by ambition, and undifturbed by politics. He enlarged upon the plan of Don Ra¬ phael, and not wrapping himfelf up in the dark clouds of fuperftitious obfcurity; he threw open the gates of the caftle, and invited the traveller to enter. His gardens, the foreft, and the mountains were ever charming under all the variations of fea· fon;
273 fon; and when he chofe not to enjoy the beauties of nature, his library, which contained the choiceft authors in Spanilh and Italian, afforded him amufement ; and the elegant accomplifhments of Chriftiana were an inexhauftible fource of fatisfac¬ ìion and pleafure. % Don Raphael, who never conformed to the common aciions of mankind, and who had been led into enormous crimes by the extravagance of his paffions, not the bad- nefs of his heart, retired to the quiet re- eefs of a ferene monaftic eftabliflıment, that he might repent his various errors. Yet not fatisfied with the aufterity of de¬ votion and frequent pennance, he caufed his coffra to be made, and placed in his «chamber, every night ileeping in this fad memento of diflblution, till the imper¬ ceptible hand of death ftretched over him, and he flumbered to awake in other realms of being. FINIS. Ejtton, Printer, 87, Great Portland-Uree t.
