Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Fitzmaurice: a novel
FITZMAURICE. A Banhupttj* ET us not thus give way to deipair: it is true our fortunes are ruined, but a compctci*ce remains % and when I know that our poverty is a proof of our integ* rity, 1 can look down with contempt oa the fraudulently affluent." Thus ipoke the worthy Mr. Fitzmau- rice to his weeping family. His wife fat in fulleu forrow; her mind vvas of the common call; fhe wept a little for her children, and much for hcrfettl She fdt vot. u m all
all the bitterncfs of when re¬ flected that flic muft forego the luxuries of life, and many of its comforts:—no drefs! no Jplundid fetes ! no equipage ! The thonght was nrifcry. Her daughter-*, Helen and Anaflatia, participated in fome degree in their mother's feelings j yet, when they raifed their eyes to their father, a frefh burft of tears would flow at the idea ofhis diflrcflcd fit nation in tlic decline of life* The fon, Edward, was too young to feel his iituation, but he wept becaufe his fiflers fet the example. Mr. Fitfcmauriec had been an eminent merchant; unforefcen lofles had reduced him to bankruptcy; he gave up his all to thc creditors, and meant to retire on the pittance allowed him, to a cheap part of thc country. Helen Fitzmaurice had reached her eighteenth year. Her temper was mild and benevolent 5 fhe pofleffed a great fhare of fenfibility; and as Mrs. Fitz¬ maurice had taken no pains to watch the unfolding
unfolding character of her daugliter, this fcnfibility often carried her to extremes: to the tale of diflrcfe her eye afforded a tear, and her hand relief; but as her bounty was indiferiminate T fhe had often caufc to figh in feeret at the ingratitude of thc world. Anaflatia Fitzmaurice was the reverfe of her fifier. Her heart was good, but its impuhes were regulated by what ihc dignified by the name of prudence. Her temper was eold and rctcrved : when a child, flic evinced a peculiar diftikc to dolls, ami was never known to be guilty of a game at romps. When fhe reached her fifteenth year, her mother took her from thc boarding-fchool, and permitted her to join the circle of tafhion; but fmall was the pleafure fhe derived from this in* dulgcnre. She was pleated for thc three firft days of her emancipation from back* boards, flocks, and chain-ftitch ; but in a fhort time, the inactivity of her mindcaufed her to figh for the more retired femes of b « a hoard-
a boarding-fchooL Her ibrrow for the loifes of lier father was unmixed with anv feltith idea. She loved him, for fhe liad from her infancy been told flic ought to do fo; but her afteelions were weak, and more dependant on certain rules of action, than the impulte of the heart. The morning arrived wheu thc Fitz- maurices were to quit Portman Square for a fmall village in Devonfhhw A hack¬ ney coach conveyed them to thc inn where the ilage let out. It was thc firft time Mrs. Fitzmaurice had ever made ufe of fuch a conveyance, and her tears flowed anew. Her hufband was calm. Helen cheeked a iigh, and Anaflatia betrayed no emotion whatever. Little Edward was pleafed with the idea of travelling; and his infant prattle tended in fome degree to divert the thoughts of the party from a contemplation of their misfortunes. When arrived at the place of tiieir defti- nation, the fituaiion and appearance of the houfc again called forth thc ready tears
tears of Mrs. Fitzmaurice. She ohfervcd to her hutband, that it was ncariy two hundred yards difhint from the village*; and that there was nothing to be feen from the windows but a hanging wood with a river running at the foot of it, mul winding through a valley of fuch extent as to fatigue the eye. The fight of houfes was obftruded by a clump of fir?. It might be all very fine and romantic, but ihe had a wifli to fee fomething human, and did not like to be bored to death by fheep and cattle at the river fide, thongh they might have as much fenfe as moil of the wefi>country bumpkins. Mr, Fitz¬ maurice endeavoured to remove her oh~ jeflions: he expatiated on the beauty of the country, and the pleafurcs of retire¬ ment ; bat when fhe propofed fome nl- teratious in the houfe, he candidly in* formed her that' his finances were not competent to indulge her* " What, Mr. Fitzmaurice! are we to fit in a roou> like this ? The paper is old, 3 3 and
and thc, carpetting 1 need lay nothing of; tt fpeaks for itfelf;—uhat a hideous glar¬ ing colour ! Surely my brother Rigby might have given us a better houfe than this ? Little did I think that I (hould ever have had to put my foot in fuch a barn. Your clerks would have been afhamed of it." *' Your brother, my dear, is furely not the proper obje& of reproach : he gives ns this houfe, and allows you a hundred a-year. Our prefent fituaiion may be his to-morrow :—a merchant's concerns, I need not fay, are variable." u So much the worfe, Mr. Fitzmau¬ rice ! Why did you not flop when you were well ? You know I always advifed you to give up mercantile concerns; and when we were ruined, why could you not manage as well as other people? Pur- block, the wine-merchant, has failed no lefs than three times, and he is now in a* good circumflances as ever.'* " Yes, my love," faid Mr. Fitzmau¬ rice ;
rice ; u but I believe that would •aladlv change fituation» with mc when- ever he puts on hi* nightcap/' <f And 1 vvith his wife, whenever I put on mine," cried Mrs. Fitzmaurice. ** Oh dear! oh dear 1 how wretchedly we are fituated! We have little more than the common comforts of life, and have been here almofl a ^eek, without any body calling, to whom I may impart my for- rows." Mr. Fitzmaurice left the room, hurt at the behaviour of his wife; her querulous impatience added pangs to thofe he al¬ ready fuffered on the account of his chil* dren. He walked to the river fide, ac- companied by Helen, Anaflatia, and Ed¬ ward : the evening was ferene, and Helen propofed lengthening the walk. They had uot proceeded far before a gate im¬ peded their progrefs; it vvas padlocked, and they were preparing to return, when Anaflatia declared herfelf fatigued, and begged to reft awhile. Mr, Fitzuiaurice's & 4 fpirits
fpirits were revived by a view of nature; he affectionately fmiled on hie children, and begged them to fing his favourite air. SONG. A fafc retreat from care, from pain, Is (till the happy iliepherd^ lot; In vaulted roofs if farmw reign, Oh may I ever prize my cot 1 Amanda (thv.s I fearful fpoke). Bethink thee, when the tempefls blow, They rentl the ftately branching oak, But fpare the violet below. When thc fitters had finifhed, Ana¬ flatia, turning her head, beheld a gentle¬ man leaning over the gate, and liftening with attention. With a half-fhriek fhe apprised her fifier of the circumftance, and the whole party arofe from the ground in fome confufion. " Pray don't let me diflurb you, young ladies,** faid the gentleman; " I beg you would go on : in my opinion there is nothing prettier than a pretty fong. I am verv
very fond of mufic, and play a little on the fiddle mvfclf/' At the fame time nn- locking thc gate, he advanced to Mr, Fitzmaurice, and informed him that his name was Pobjoy, and that he held the fituation of furgcon, apothecary, and man-midwife, at the village : " f n cither of which capacities/* faid he, M I lhat I be moil happy to receive your commands," Mr. Fitzmaurice fmiled at the compli¬ ment, thanked him, and was retiring witli his children; but Mr. Pobjoy earnefl ly rcquefted them to walk in and view his enclofure. " I retire here," faid he, with a confequential air, " from the hurry and buttle of the village. I have endeavoured to render the place as tally as poffiblc: it is my opinion, that a genteel income is nothing without we enjoy it; money is mere bell-metal if not put in circulation. Not that I approve of extravagant pro* fufion; in my opinion, there is a medium in all things; don't you think fo, Mifs V 9 addrefling himfelf to Anaflatia, who im- & 5 mediately
mediately aflented to the truth of the remark. " You have a fwect fituation/' laid Helen; u but why do you allow that little ihabby houfe to obftruft the view over the river ?" u That, that's my root-houfe, Mifs— all built of mud and 11 raw, and old branches of trees : a plea foreground would be nothing without a root-home: I planted it all round with fweet peas and polyanthufcs; but what with the ducks and thc gallinaceous tribe, my j>cas are all^ gone ; and it is ray opinion, that nothing but a hempen neckcloth will prevent the idle boys from clambering over the pales to pick my flowers."—The party now approached this modern root-houfe, which bore a flrong refemblance to an ancient pig-ftye. Pobjoy advanced; " A}e, aye/* cried he, " I faid fo; I am of opinion, that James Dobbins will get a hortewhip** ping for this; and yet I fhould be forry fof
for the too : I hate io hurt any body* except in tlie way of my profefiion.** The root-houfc was fo low, that none of the party could (land upright* Helen archly remarked the inconvenience,fbftcn-* ing her obfervation by expatiating on the views the root-houfe afforded* Mr. Pobjoy confeflcd, lhat he and a labourer were thc only architect ; and as fcaflblding wns cxpenfive, he had built it in its prefent ftate. After having fullered fome time from the inronvcnience of poflurc, the party walked round what the proprietor called the park, whieh was, in feci, no more than three fmall fields thrown info one. Mr. Pobjdy begged them to re¬ mark his fictions village, which con- fifled of a church and two cottages built of wood, and fit for the habitation of the emperor of Lilliput and his whole court Mr. Fitzmaurice, unwilling to praife what his judgment condemned, propofed re+ turning; and Mr, Pobjoy, having invited • himfelf to tea on thc Thurfday followm*, & 6 permitted
j permitted them to depart. j Fitzmaurice walked home, the little apo- \ thecary retired to prepare himfelf for a vifit in the village, where, at a card-party, the character of the new-comers was to be canvafled. The party were already affemblcd at the houfe of Mrs. Pratt, the refpeBahh \ widow of an earlefs attorney at Exeter. [| Prudential reafons caufed her to retire 1 from that city, and her economy enabled lier to fupport a genteel appearance in the 5 village. ■* Mrs. Pratt opened the congrefs, by in¬ quiring if any of the party had {etn thc new-comers. Mifs Dawkins, the daughter of a neigh- ! bouring farmer, faid that fhe had fecn the young ladies at a diftance, and that they looked mighty genteel. Mifs Llewellyn, a maiden lady of fixty- five, who had made a few faitx pas about forty years before, exprefled a wifh to know if they were fuch people as folks \\ might
might vifit who had any regard their character. " I wonder who they are/* faid the ex- cifeman: " I don't approve of fuch a conflux of ftrangers to different parts of the country: perhaps they are emigrant French come to cut our throats; I fay, I doi/t Hke it at ail." " Blefs me, Mr. Simmons, how can you talk fo fhockingly ?" exclaimed Mrs. Pratt: " why now I proteft I am quite ia a tremble; dear me, if they fhould be enemies after all!" " I don't know how far it may be in their power to hurt us themfelws," faid the little fmirking curate ; " but it is pof- fible that they may give intelligence to the French; and I think that the poft- mafler ought to examine all their letters: to^ much care cannot be taken." M No more it can, Mr. Whitmore: yes, yes, as fure as Peter Pomfret, they are fpies. How very lucky that I have not vifited them! you may depend upon it
it that I fhall nev - ,1a foot in the houfe." " Upon my word/ 1 faid thc maiden lady, ** folks mxx^ be very careful whom they vifit; I dare fay thc girls are no bet¬ ter than they fhould be ; one of them had a feather in her hat—how ridiculous ! a feather in the hat is a bad fign ; 1 don't like it; Pll be bound they arc flirts, and will come to no good.' 1 A fmothered groan, and a general fignificant head- Shaking, took place at this fagacious ob¬ fervation. A woimded failor with a little boy ap¬ proached the parlour-window ; after many obfervations on the fad impofture of men¬ dicants, the poor objeel: went unrelieved away. He flowly retired, and leaned againft a tree oppofite the houfe. Mr. Fitzmaurice and his family (who had re¬ covered their fatigue by refling at Mr. Pobjoy*s pleafure-ground) were taking a walk to view the village. The party at Mrs* Pratfs crowded io the windows to vkw
view the objects of thoir converfation, and were maHng fome remarks on their drefe and deportment, when Helen, who walked before the reft, flopped fhort; the wretched figure of thc mendicant ftrurk her eye, and her hand mechanically felt for her purfe. Every word might be heard by Mrs. Pratt's party, who were (wondrous to relate!) huihed in filenrc. ** Poor man!'* cried Helen, " you fecm quite fpent; have you walked far to-day ?" " Yes, blefs you, Mifs; I come from Exeter; I am wounded, and am afraid I fhall never be able to walk to London* I am in hopes to get into Greenwich llo£ pital; but if I fhould die, what will be- come of my poor Jem ?'* * ( Oh F* cried Edward eagerly, M he fhall live along with us; Papa always takes care of poor peopk—don't you* papa ?" Mr. Fitzmaurice mournfully fhook hia head, and defiring the difabled feaman ta follow
follow him, walked homeward with family. ** There's for you!" exclaimed Mrs* Pratt; *' who ever heard the like ? We fhall have the parifh over-run with va¬ grants of one fort or another. But, dear me ! is not that Mr. Pobjoy?—la ! lie is fpeaking to them ! only think 1—I won¬ der how he got acquainted with them! but Mr. Pobjoy is too good-natured, that is the truth of it; he is too good-natured, indeed/' « Too good-natured, indeed/* echoed Mr. Simmons. " Too good-natured by far/* faid Mifs Llewellyn, yawning violently. A filence enfued, as is always the cafe, when, in a fcandalous coterie, an individual, by ac¬ cident, becomes the theme of panegyric. The apothecary foon after entered the room. <« Your fervant, ladies; ha! ha! en¬ caged over your prattle broth^ I find !— ** ** Excufe *
Kxcufe my joke; I hope I am not too late. Did you fee the new-comers? Upon my word, Mifs Anaflatia is a pretty rao- deft youug lady/' *« Mifs what!* exclaimed the anti¬ quated virgin; " the name you mentioned is no Chriftian one, I am certain. I don't believe that there is a Sufan or a Sarah to be found in the parifh regifter for the laft fifteen years: the world is fadly altered iince my time*" " There is a medium in all things/* replied Pobjoy; ** but in my opinion it is immaterial whether the name is Anaftati* or plain Ann. Mift feems to be a very quiet, decent fort of a good young wo¬ man ; I like the family much/* " But who are t&ey $ Mr. Pobjoy ? that is what we want to know, If they are good, quiet, neighbourly people, I am lure I have no objection to cultivate a nearer acquaintance; but I muft firft learn their characters, out of refpeel to my own/* Pobjoy
Pobjoy then informed them of all the circumflances he knew, and adhered pretty elofely to the truth. He, however, mag¬ nified tlie remaining property of Mr. Fit^ maurice, becaufe Anaflatia, who had in¬ nocently informed him of the misfortunes of her father, was Ignorant how far his i&Skm were involved. This account fiimulated the euriofity of the female part of the company, who now refolved to honour the new-comers vvith a irifit'; and in a fhort time Mrs. Fitzmau¬ rice became reconciled to Jier fituation, and fhone forth a leading member of the fcandalous coterie,
CHAP*
CHAP. II. J modem $amt-~a modem Merchant* JT OUR years paffed away with little to diffipate the village monotony. Mr, Fitx- maurice's health declined: his wife, by economy, fupported a genteel appearance: Helen retained her innocent gaiety; but the natural ferioufnefs of Anaflatia dege* nerated into gloom. Mr. Fitzmaurice had received many letters from London, the contents of which he kept feeret. Anxiety feemed to prey upon his mind. At length a letter was delivered to him while the family were affembled at breakfafh Mr. Fits* maurice haftily ncad it, and, Avifh a figh, faid, u Edward, my dear, we muft part/* Edward ftood in filence, Helen, alarmed, inquired his meaning, ** Her muft go/* faid Mr. Fitzmaurice, ** to *hi$ uncle's*
uncle's. Mr. Kigby is willing to receive him as an affiftant in the compiing*houfe* Situated as I &*i% the offer is not to be rejected/' ; ** The moft^ lucky thing in the world V* exctomed Mrs. Fitzmaurice. ■■-.■*« You know I always:advilMyou tofehdhint to London/ Who knows bitt the boy may retrieve oSr rilmed fortunes! Wv may yet ihbw peoj>l& v&o we are. I fhall then tove & friuinph over that old cat Miii LKweMyh^ ivlio holds her Ihrivelled head fo high, and talks of the beauty of her gri^it abnt Alice , and the exploits Of Sir tirwynnethy who was bora before the treatiorit of the world/* "Your hopes are fimguinje, and your triumph perhaps premature/' faid Fitz- «^uA be ^riv#led Mt* before Edw^dmakes a ■^■■Tl»rt;'«lway*af yout way, Mr, Fitz- maurice $ you never let ^ae enjoy a cheer* ^;ic ;: -';;^^.( ; -:* : - ■■;-■ ■-..: : .-;---.iful
ful thought Edward will certainly make a fortune; at lead I may hope fo." « I hope he may/* faid Fitzmaurice; «* but moreearneftly do I hope, that, when he has made it, thc acquifition may be productive of no bitter after-refleclion/' " No indeed, Sir, it fhall not/' ex¬ claimed Edward earneflly: " but you told me, good people profper^d;—how comes it then that you are no longer rich ?" " I have endeavoured to do my duty—• I may hope I have fulfilled it—and I am rich/* " Indeed, Sir!" *' Yes, my boy, rich, in the pofleffion of that on winch the changes of the world have no influence-—the treafure of a con-* feience void of reproach. May fuch be your lot, my Edward I You are about to enter on an arduous tafk. Temptations to fraud arc many in the concerns of a merchant. Your uncle is a worthy man; he bears an unblemifhed character on 'Change; yet—my paternal anxiety h\ r 5 duces
duces me to charge you nevtrrto join in any a& your heart may condemn. Should you find my fufpicions grounded, return to this humble dwelling—return poor and hqneft-^I fhall glory in fuch a fon;—but fhould you fofFer a thirfl: of wealth to damp the feelings of a man of honour, I fhould pity, defpife, and renounce you." Mrs. Fitzmaurice chid her hufband for filling Ihe poor hoy's head with prejudices againft his uncle. She faid that Mr. Rigby*s word was as good as the Bank, and that there was not a pcrfon of quality but vvould be happy to fee him at their tables. She hoped her brother was as honeft as when they left London, " And befides," added fhe, " when you were in bufinefs, you often joined him in fchemes I knew nothing about." " I mean not to impeach his honefty," replied Fitzmaurice; " but tliere are fome concerns in which men, reputed of the firictefl probity, will often engage, from ihe little probability of detection. I with to
to fee my^fon the honour and fupport of his country—an honeft merchant; not a fpeeulator or monopohft/* Mrs. Fitzmaurice muttered fomething about fcrupulous nicety, and what i t brought fome folks to, but dared noi: openly avow her fentiments.—" My fon, get money!" was her favourite maxim; and as ihe only languifhed for a renewal of her fplendid eftablifhment, fhe would not have been a fevere cenfor, had her ion tranfgreflTed the commands of Fitz¬ maurice. In a (cw days Edward fot off for London. He dropt many tears at parting from his parents, and his heart felt more than his tongue exprefled. Mr. Rigby's compting-houfe was in Friday Street; his dwelling was in Picca¬ dilly. The character of this gentleman was well known to Fitzmaurice; and his cautions were not given to Edward with¬ out foundation, Mrs, Rigby had thrice received the nuptial benedi&ion. She had in her 4 y°t*th
youth been beautiful, and this qualifica¬ tion procured her two rich hufbands. Her wealth tempted their fucceffor, and he triumphantly bore off his prize from a captain of dragoons, a dancing-mafler, an Irifh peer, and a tragic performer of fome note, The arms with vvhich Mr. Rigby carried on the fiege were religion and luxury. The object of his paffion had, during the lifetime of her former hufbands, given much jufl: occafion to the exercife of cenforious tongues. At thc age of fifty-three flic refolved to live irre¬ proachably. Indeed, time had cruelly ravaged her charms; and every year brought gray hairs, or carried away a tooth: indolence and good living had converted plumpnefs into rotundity, aud the bloom of health into the flufh of plenitude, Mr. Rigby fparcd no coft i|or afflduity to gain the rich widow, lier table was the theme of his panegyric; and thc unflion with which he faid grace won her heart They were married, and in
In a time entertained a fovereign contempt for each other. Though Mrs. Rigby railed at intern* perancc with the fervency of a reclufe, fhe neglected not to flore her table with every luxury, and to repair the inroads made on her conflitution by the alternato ufe of cordials and quack medicines; but her leading feature was devotion. She believed, or pretended to believe, herfelf one of the ele<Sr. She was continually prophefying misfortune to the country, and recounting and expounding dreams. The houfe fwarmed with teachers and fpiritual advifers, who were attracted by the fplendour and elegance of the table. Mr, Rigby having gained his end by religious grimace, threw off the mafk and longed to enjoy his friend, bottle, and fong. But his pious helpmate counter¬ acted all his endeavours, by rendering the houfe difagreeable to any but her own coterie. She was a complete gofBp, de¬ lighted in cakes and caudle, and was fo vw - u c conftaat
conftant an attendant on baptifms and funerals, that her acquaintance declared fhe was never happy but when bringing any one in, or fending any one out of the world. When Edward arrived at the Bell Sa¬ vage inn, he found a fervant waiting to conduct him to his uncle's. This vvas an attention he owed to his aunt, who to fpiritual added family pride. A fplendid chariot conveyed him to Piccadilly.—It was twelve o'clock. Edward was intro¬ duced into a richly-furnifhed apartment, where he found his uncle and aunt bufily employed in the duties of the breakfaft- tablc. Mr. Rigby fhook his nephew by the hand without riling from his chair, and prefented him to his wife, who affection¬ ately kifled his ruddy cheek, and bufily employed herfelf in making tea for the new-comer. Indeed, his appearance w r as fuch as to excite the livclieft intereft. He was tall, though not full growy ; his hair flowed
flowed in luxuriant ringlets over his fhoulders, and fhaded a face whore every opening virtue bloomed. After fome cold inquiries after his fa* mily, Mr. Rigby broke out into enco¬ miums on hia nephew's perfon.—■" Ah, you young blufhing rogue!" cried he t ** that face of yours will one day make the women's hearts ache. We fhall have all the fex pulling caps for you," " 1 wifh, Mr. Rigby," exclaimed his pious mate, " that you vvould not corrupt the boy. Dont mind him, child; tlie women are aU good-for-nothing huffies : they paint iheir faces, and look out of the window, like Jezebel of old, London is the common fewer of iniquity. Avoid the focicty of thofe who would perfuade you to harm. The inhabitants of this wicked town diets in purple and fine linen, and feed fuinptuoufly t they go to balls, and routs, aud vile mafquerades, where there is nothing but mufic and c z anti-
antichrifliati dancing, and rich wines, whieh are drank even to the dregs; and befides all this, the playhoufcs and—-—" " Why heydey! Mrs. Rigby! who is corrupting the boy now ? A pretty pic* ture you have drawn, and very likely to frighten a youth from evil! Confound me if a libertine could have done it bet¬ ter r «' Dont fwear, Mr. Rigby, don't fwcar/' ** Zounds and the devil, woman, who fwears ? But that is always thc way. You and your pious let make virtue to confift ©f walking over red-hot gridirons, or roafting alive upon fpits; and vice you paint fo fair and enticing, that it is no wonder a youth fhould prefer it. It is by fuch canting that fo many converts are made to the devil." Mrs. Rigby now poured forth a torrent of religious abufe. She did not dare to call her hufband rogue ox villain; but fhe c configned
configned him, without mercy, to flames evcrlafting. He very coolly hore her in¬ vectives; aud when the coach v. as an¬ nounced, took Edward by thc arm, and drove to Friday Street, Seven years were con fumed in the compting-houfe of Mr. Rigby. Edward vvas diligent: his uncle termed hun a fober good youth, and advanced him to the dignity of head clerk. During this time the heart of Edward received two great fhocks, by the death of his father and elder After. Anaflatia was married to Mr. Pobjoy, and vvas yearly adding io her family, Mrs. Fitzmaurice feldom wrote to Edward, except on tlie birth of a grandchild; and her letters were fhort and uninterefting. One morning Mr. Rigby called hk nephew into the drawing-room, and, with a look of great vexation, declared that he was likely to lofe fifteen thoufand pounds. Edward inquired the particulars; and his c 3 uncle
uncle that by the ing failure of a houfc at Leghorn he fhould in all probability be a very confi- dcrablc lofer. Mt\ Rigby added, that a prudent, intelligent man muft he dif- patehcd to thc fpot; and as he had every reliance on his abilities and integrity, he had fixed his choice on him. Every thing being prepared, Edward let off for Italy. Thc urgency of his bufinefs would not permit him to take leave of his family, otherwife than by letter: indeed, long feparation had ob¬ literated, in a great degree, the ftronger affections. Arrived at Leghorn, Edward found his uncle's affairs in a very unprofperous train; yet afte clofe attention for two years, he not only faved the fum in quef- tion, but incrcafed it by three thoufand pounds. Mn Rigby was in raptures: he declared Edward to be the heft of youths, defired him to return to England with all fpeed,
fpccd, and announced of making him his heir. Edward ilofed his concerns at Leghorn, and, after having vifited Rome, arrived vvith health and honour in his native country.
C 4
chai*:
CHAP. Ill, Modern Education^ ami Its Effects. HiDWARD, on his return to England, received the mofl flattering teflimonies of regard from his uncle and aunt, Mr, Rigby was a martyr to the gout. His temper was foured. Not even a luxurious table could compenfate for his peevifh tranfports. His wife, though fiill a de~ cided puritan, had difcarded fome of her fpiritual retinue, as their urgent exhorta¬ tions for the erection of a chapel at her own expenfe began lo alarm her avarice. Her conduct was marked with inconfift- ency. She would one week renounce the vanity of drefs; the next, load herfelf with all the richnefs of an exlenfivc ward¬ robe. It is true, fhe kept up the coflume of her feci, even in her vanities. Her jewels
jewels were fet in an old and laces were put on without elegance. In one point, however, the hufband and wife coincided—in their love to their nephew. The three thoufand pounds Edward had faved were prefented to him for pocket-money by Mr. Rigby, who declared him his heir; and foon after, to the aftonifliment of his acquaintance, quitted all mercantile concerns, and re¬ tired to a private hfe with a fortune of two hundred and fifty thoufand pounds. Edward vvas dazzled by the brilliancy of his fituation. When head clerk to Mr. Rigby, he was admitted to thc circles of private life, and efteemed a good kind of a young man; but when heir of fuch imraenfe wealth, his fociety was coveted, and his opinion afked, on all occaflons. The poor nobility would attend his din* ners, and the fons of dukes lounge with him in Bond Street. Harfh and fevere as Mr. and Mrs. Rig¬ by were to all fhe world befides, they c 5 dared
dared not thwart a with of Edward's, To him they were all mildncfs and ur¬ banity ; they indulged his every wifh, and fludicd at all times how to render his life a fceue of joy. With thefe incentives to folly, will it be believed that Edward never abufed their partiality ? He faw their foibles, but endeavoured not to think of them. It is true, he plunged into fome of the fafhionable follies of the day; but he flopt fhort of vice. He poffefled what his father had moft wifhedhim to poffefs—a feeling heart and virtuous principles. In the compting-houfe of his uncle his generofity had never been developed. The concernsof trade had thrown a veil over his natural character; but novv he gave way to every generous impulfe. By this it is not meant to be inferred, that a man of bufinefs muft neceffarily be incapable of worthy feelings: the contrary is daily evident. But when a youthful mind is tied dovvn to one particular purfuit, important duties i»ay be neglected, not from want of feel¬ ing*
ing, but want of thought. Of the three thoufand pounds given to Edward by Mr. j^igby, two thoufand were immediately fettled upon Mrs. Fitzmaurice, and were to devolve, upon her death, to the chil¬ dren of Anaflatia. Among the numerous acquaintance of this favourite of fortune, was the Honour¬ able and Reverend Aubrey Delvalley, He was the fccond fon of a nobleman, who left him dependant on his elder brother. Tlie intereft of his family procured him a considerable living. His fifter Augufta had, when a child, been taken under the protection of an aunt, who, dying, be¬ queathed to her the bulk of her property, which amounted to fixty thoufand pounds. The noble reprefentative of the houfe of Delvalley had found the air of the con¬ tinent extremely falutary for c< a con- fumption of the purfe." Aubrey Delvalley was an agreeable companion. He had entered the church more by compulfion than choice; nor c 6 could
could eight hundred a year make amends for the livelier fcenes he vvas compelled to abandon. He lived with his lifter in Piccadilly. He bore the character of a finifhed gentleman, mixed with the firft circles, and, by fome popular produ<Slions, had given reafon to fuppofe that he would rife in the church. Augufta Delvalley was a perfect beauly. The moft critical obferver could find no¬ thing to condemn in lier face and perfon. To the lavifh bounties of nature fhe joined a fuperior mind. Humane, fincere, unaffected, fhe gained every heart; but a fpark of impetuofity lay dormant in her breaft. She knew it not; for in the com¬ mon occurrences of fafhionable life ihe had found nothing to excite her intereft. Con¬ genial tempers foon difcover thcmfelves. Edward, from his intimacy with Delvalley, had frequent opportunities of converfing with Augufla, Her ftrong fenfe, tem¬ pered by feminine delicacy, made a forci- We impreffion on his mind. He found a charm
charm in her converfation which wanting in that of moil of his female ac¬ quaintance. Augufta perceived his par* tiality: fhe hoped it was love, or rather fhe would not fuflfer herfelf to doubt it: fhe redoubled her efforts to charm, valued not the remarks of the cenforious. but perfifted in attempting to fecure tht; heart of Edward, The object of her attachment, blind to the confequences, continued to be a daily vifitor at the houfe, No fufpicion of Augufla's partiality in his favour had ever entered his imagination. He had often been rallied on her account, but paid no attention to the miferable jefts palled oa his conduct: he treated her as a fifter, with refpectful attentions; thefe Augufta continued to miftake, and awaited the avowal of his love with anxiety and im¬ patience, Delvalley faw with pleafure the chance of a connexion whieh muft ultimately redound to his advantage. He encou- raged"
raged every opportunity of leaving the parties together. Indeed he, though a man of much penetration, was, in com¬ mon with all the world, deceived. He believed his fifter the obje£t of Edward's affection, and was perplexed how to ac¬ count for his myfterious filence. Such a circumftance as tbe connexion of two per- fons well known in fafhionable life, could not efcape the ears of Mr. Rigby, who, one morning after breakfaft, defired a con- ference with his nephew. After telling him that he fhould never pretend to crofs his inclinations, he blamed him for con¬ cealing his attachment, " I know," faid he, " that you might do better, but really fixty thoufli*^ pounds is pretty well— considering—*—" Edward was amazed; he begged his uncle to explain himfelf; and when Mr Rigby had done fo, he affurcd him that he wa* entirely miflaken. ** That I ad¬ mire Mifs Delvalley/* faid he, " is moft true, but I am convinced there ts no more
more attachment on her to me, than ihe attentions fhe efteems due to her bro¬ ther's friend.*' Mr. Rigby chid him for having fuch an humble opinion of his own merits, and fwore that he might gain the firft dutchcfs in the land. Edward novv perceived that the report was too prevalent; and unwilling to give Augufta any caufe to regret having honoured him with particular attention, he determined to pafs a month with his family in Devonfhire. This he had for¬ merly often propofed doing, but his mo¬ ther was too unwell, or Anaflatia near her time: fome trifling excufe was al* ways made, and Edward at length loft every wifh to undertake the journey;— but fince Mr. Rigby had declared him his heir, repeated letters filled vvith every proteftation of regard, had been fent from iiis mother, fifter, and her hufband. Ed¬ ward at length refolved to vifit the *eenes ofhis childhood, and wrote the much-de- fired
fired news to Anaflatia, who, the re¬ turn of poft, fent him the following let¬ ter : * € Mr dear Brother, " I received your kind letter, and am happy to inform you that we are all in good health. You fay that you mean to be with us on Saturday the aoth:—may I beg you not to come till the £4th, as I have not yet got every thing in order? Your bed, you may depend upon it, fhall be well aired; and I have fent Dickens to Exeter for an additional maltrefe. You muft not expect every thing here fo com¬ fortable and fine as you get it in London j but you are heartily welcome to the belt we can afford. The children are fo very noify* that lam obliged to drop my pen.— The Doctor, who prefents his beft compli¬ ments, is of opinion that it is better to at¬ tend the houfehold duties, than to idle away one's time in fcribbling. You were f^ young when you left us, that you have no
no doubt can affure you that he is a very good, humane man, and you will like him much. u I am, my dear brother, " Your affectionate fifter, Rodfourne, *< Auastatia PoBjOY. ,f Devon. " P.S. Your mother, and my little ones, Edward, Mary, Nathaniel, and Ana¬ flatia, who is a twelvemonth old, come the 14th of March, fend you a kifs apiece." Edward propofed tettlng off for Devon* fhire without taking leave of Delvalley; and unwilling to mortify his family by a dif* playof oftentation, herefufed Mr.Rigby's poft-chaife, and walked one evening into the city to take a place in a fla^c-coaeh* He was palling through the Strand, when his arm was fuddenly feized by a female. She was tall and thin; her drefs was white, and fhe wore a beaver hat with two broken feathers ; a quantity of rouge waa
was fmeared over her hollow cheeks, ant! fhe tottered with weaknefs. She begged Edward, with a faint voice ancl hyfteric laugh, to fee her home. He dtfengaged his arm, and walked quiekh n. " Stop 1" cried flic, as loud as her weaknefs would permit her; « Oh, hear me !» Edward involuntarily turned back. « You muft defpife mc," faid the trem¬ bling creature,** but do not fuflfer me to perifh—I am fiarving—Give me but enough to buy me bread for this night. I covet, yet I fear death—Oh, I have a heavy account to anfwer 1" To a tale of diftrefs Edward knew not how to fhut his ears. He gave his arm to the wretched woman, who conducted him to an apartment near the Strand. Having fatisfied the calls of hunger, fhe thanked Edward for his bounty in a man¬ ner which evinced that fhe had not al¬ ways been thc child of penury and vice, Edward was ftruck with compaflion —*« If/' faid he, « the recital will not too
too mueh wound your feelings, may I afk how your life has become fo unfortunate V* ** You have a right to afk, Sir,'* faid the poor woman; " and 1 fhall feel a melancholy pleafure in informing you of the moft ftriking facts of my life.—My errors I owe to education ; 1 hope no de¬ liberate vice had a root in my heart.—-J am the daughter of a man of large pro¬ perty : my mother was a gay fafhionable woman; who, when I was old enough, fent me, with a younger fifter, to an emi¬ nent boarding-fchool. At firft 1 wept much at quitting my parents, but I foon began lo contract friendfhips, and became reconciled to my lot, becaufe I found much time might be fpent free from the reflraints of our governeffes. Mrs, Lar- kinfon, who had been admitted into the partnerfhip of the fchool, had good na¬ ture as well as good fenfe, but was indo¬ lent, and fonder of reading herfelf than of attending to the leflbns of her pupils, Mrs. Delarive (under whole care I vvas more
more placed) had never hem Carried. She* was fafi advancing in years; &md the virgin elegance of youth had given place to the virgin fharpnefs of age. Her features were large and prominent; and a rednefi, which was not confined to her cheeks, gaV3 a fiercenefs to her eye, toturally keen. She was of a very an* cient family, and preferved with care the tree of het genealogy, which fhe boafted had never been contaminated by any bafe alliance, though the branch of it to which flbe belonged had long been falling to de¬ cay. u With much fanctity and decorum of ananners, fhe poffeflTd the power of pleaf- ing the parents and terrifying the children, «nd had acquired the fame of being one trfthebefi temperedandmoft prudent gover- neffes in or about the metropolis. This fame, and her great family, had procured her the patronage of fome of the nobility, many of whofe children weae committed to iaer cire* « Though
** I appeared to be quick, and the greateft expectations were formed by my father from my refidence at a fe- minary, where every thing was profefied to be taught. Indeed, the fchool was re¬ gularly vifited by mafters of French and Italian, mufic and dancing; nor were the ornamental works of the needle for¬ gotten ; two or three months hard labour would often produce a highly finifhed fruit-piece or landfcape, almofl equal to a good drawing, the work of a few hours. Many young ladies who finifhed thefe ufelefs ornamental pieces could fcareely hem a handkerchief. Nor was the perfon neglected: the feet, ftretched in flocks, were prepared for the operations of the dancing-mafter; and to give a proper motion to the knees, the poor girls were made to eurtfey in a narrow fpace between two planks; the fhoulders and neck were to be forced awry by iron collars and braces by tlie moft celebrated maker; and thofe whofe necks Nature had unwifely formed
foin-^d too fhort, were often fufpended in a poiiiion far from agreeable. In cafes of excefiive health the Doctor was fre¬ quently called in, and full dofes admU niftered, io prevent our becoming grofs and vulgar! I well recollect, that this fon of phyfic once met me, and declaring I was too florid, ordered me a draught of the moft naufeous kind. *' Dancing, though a fchool duty, was a melancholy amufement; and when our leflbns in that art were finifhed, we were taught the mofl: elegant manner of en¬ tering a room, how to eurtfey to a duke, to falute a lady, or addrefs the wife of a baronet; and thefe characters we all perfonated in our turn ! " When a child, I had been indulged by my mother in every whim ; it is there¬ fore not to be wondered at that I fome- times refifled the commands of my teacher. I found no charms in the calculations of arithmetic, or the dry rules of grammar; my mind was not fufficiently expanded to perceive
perceive the utility of laborious exertion, and, like the reft of my fchoolfellows, I found nothing more irkfome than the re¬ petition of pages I did not underftand, or of mufical notes, which affociated with the ideas of force and compulfion. Per¬ haps this has fince tended to lefTen the effc&s of the moft delightful harmony. The dilcipline of Mrs. Delarive, a difci- pline, I believe, common in fchools, was applied to all dilpofitions, however varied. Threats **nd punifhments were the moft powerful engines; fometimes the point vvas to be carried by the expofure of an individual to the eyes of her companions in fome difgraceful and painful fituation; vvhich, while it rendered the fufferer, by repetition, proof to the feelings of fhame, gradually hardened the heart, and removed one of the flrongeft incitements to what is great and good. Sometimes even cor¬ poreal punifhments were inflicted, and thole uot always vvith judgment and mo¬ deration. The effect of thefe meafures was
was to infpire in moft of us a wifli to cir¬ cumvent our rulers, and every artifice cunning could fuggcft was made ufe of for that purpofe ; not indeed without fuc« cefs ; inftru$ion was evaded, and the in- ftructor deceived. Some of thc fcholars, gnd among them I may reckon myfelf, were in open rebellion, and, by an obfli- nate perfeverance, fet all power at de¬ fiance, Having often felt the rigour of in* joftice, we were difpofed to look upon all commands as equally arbitrary, and, mu¬ tually encouraging this fyftem of oppofi- tion, held in the greateft contempt all thofe who, by flattery and acqtiiefcence, were endeavouring to ingratiate themfelves with our inftructors. Frequent complaints were made to my mother of my ill con¬ duct ; but fhe was too much a woman of the ton to care about the education of her children: fhe was glad to place us in a fituation where we might not interfere with her pleafurcs. , « In this feminary I remained fome years,
years, making but a flow proficiency ift the polite accomplilhments, while my mind was ftored with little but what chance threw in my way. To read any but fchool-books we were forbidden by exprefs command, and thc idea of a com* mand was fuffieient to infpire us with a wilh to tranfgrefs it. Looking upon my¬ felf as an object of perfecution, I was ac¬ cuflomed to feck for amufement in the wild wanderings of an irregular mind, ren¬ dered more irregular by thc books I was accuflomed to per ufe. Having money at my command, and confequently thc good will of one of the maids, I daily devoured a portion of the contents of a neighbour¬ ing library; mifcellaneous indeed, but chiefly abounding with modern novels and romances: none were rejected, though fome of them would often raife a blufh. u But 1 beg your pardon, Sir, for dwell¬ ing fo minutely on what mnfk to you be an uninterefting fubject; let me, however, aik any parent, how, with fuch an edu* voi,. i, s cation,
cation, a child's can an education by vvhich all that is frivolous is cultivated, and the more important du* ties neglected. " Among my fchoolfellows was a Mils Robinfon ; ihe vvas an amiable but weak girl, A flrict fricndfhip fubfifted between us; 1 had no fecrets for her: fhe par- " took of roy pleafurcs, and fhared my griefs. I was now fifteen, and faft ap¬ proaching to womanhood. Mrs. Delarive redoubled every care <o render me as at¬ tractive as poflible. When I occafionally vifited my mother, the attentions of ihe men always tat my little lieart in a flutter, and I failed not to communicate my new ideas to Sophia Robinfon. This young lady's parents were Weft Indians, and fhe had no opportunity of mixing with any but the felefl company of Mrs. Delarive; but the attentions of her drawing-maflcr compenfated for the reftraints of a board¬ ing-fchool—the hand which fhould have dirc^led the pencil of Sophia was oftener occupied
occupied in prefhng with ardour her Ren¬ der fingers. I was privy to her attach¬ ment, and fympathized with her feelings, but was ignorant of the defperate refcljm- tion fhe had formed. One morning Sophia was not to be found; Mrs. Larkinfon was almofl frantic — Mrs. Delarive fainted away; nor was it till fhe had fwallovved repeated cordials that fhe vvas enabled to weep, or flagger to her bed. The elopement of Sophia vvas generally ap* proved of by her young companions; her fpirit was extolled, and her fituation en¬ vied ; while a very fe\v y who were conft* dered as predcftined old maids, condemned the imprudence and criminality o{ her proceeding. I vvas known to be the par¬ ticular friend of Sophia; this was ibffi. cient to flamp mc as an accomplice: the fact could not be proved, but I fuffered (he punifhment of guilt; fecers and~neg~ hd proved the anger of my teachers, and from thefe I was delivered by my mother, *> * who
who took me, together wilh tny from the fchool. " I now began my career of life* Little enured to the habits of thinking, 1 pof¬ fefled but a fmall fhare of forefight; and knowing nothing of the world and its treachery, I was without fufpicion and without prudence. In defpite of educa¬ tion I pofleflld a feeling heart, and a fprightHncfs which not even the conven¬ tual gloom of a boarding-fchool vvas able to damp. u I had not been at home two years before my father, who had engaged in large concerns, was declared a bankrupt. Our family were obliged to retire into the country, and I found that the profeffions of my admirers were not to be depended upon. I foon confoled myfelf for their defection. Moft of my fuitors had pleafed my ear, but none had touched my heart. I cheerfully retired, with my family, into the obfeurity of the country; and fome few
i&
few years of perfect content fuccecded. Yet my heart felt a void; 1 could not ana* Ivve mv feelings ; vet I found that fome* thing was efiential to my happinefs. At length thc old rector of tlie parifh died ; his fneceflor came to rcfide in our village, and his pretence taught me that my heart had panted for a lover. This gentleman was near thirty, and gifted vvith a perfon highly prepoffefling. I can fcareely, even now, reflrain a tmv f when I reflect with what purity I loved him: I thought him worthy my regard ; he paid me particular attentions, and I flattered mvfclf that he would make propofals to my father and mother. Repeated oaths and vows of fidelity gave me reafon to fuppofe him fincere, and in a fhort time I found myfelf likely to become an unmarried mother," Edward raifed his eyes to the (pcaker; a fingle candle threw a gleam acrofs her hagard features :. the tones of her voice might have moved compaflion, but no traces of emotion marked her counte- x> 3 nance.
nance. She recounted talc as had been that of a flranger—her feelings feemed torpid* '* Ihis woman," ihought Edward, " was once beautiful, was once innocent—Oh! what has he to anfwer for, who eould caufc this difgufiing change !" " This circumftance," continued th^ woman, " I joyfully mentioned to my lover. J, poor, fimple girl, thought he would receive the tidings with* joy : he appeared thunderftruck, but alfuffling a cheerful air, he propofed that I fhould go on a vfiit to a lady, who lived about forty miles from London, from whence he would take me, as by my father's defire, and make me lawfully his wife. 1 will¬ ingly gave ear to this advice, and waited a month at the lady's without hearing from him. At length my father came himfelf to fetch mc home; I eagerly in¬ quired for Mr. Delvalley, and-—** " Who ?" cried Edward, in amaze¬ ment, <* Pet-
u Perhaps I ought not io have men¬ tioned his name," faid the wretched wo¬ man ; " I ice you know him." 44 How 1 the Honourable Auhrcv Dei- valley !" " Ycsl" exclaimed flic, forgetting in momentary feeling her lale torpiiude; u the Honourable! flrange abufe of the word ! The man who, by repeated perjuries, fe- duced an innocent girl; who contami¬ nated a once pure heart; who plunged a wretched father into the grave, while curfes on his child trembled on his tongue, was the Honourable Aubrey Del¬ valley/* " Villain ! villain ! but his heart fhall be wrung when I inform him of your ftory. Proceed." " I inquired for my feducer; but what wa& my horror when 1 heard ihat, during the month I had been abfent, he had kfi England, and was accompanying his filter on a tour io Italy? where it was fuppofed they vvould flay for fome years, owing to & 4 the
the declining health of the lady. Guilt, fhame, and remorfe, overcame me, and I fell fenfelcfs to the ground, Alas! when I recovered my fenfes, the pains I felt told me that my difgraceful fituation was no longer a feeret. My father flood before me; no more the mild, the indulgent parent: his keen eye darted lightnings through my foul. { Wretched girl V cried he, in a terrific voice, (ohl that it had had the power of annihilation!)* wretched girl 1 take my curfe; never, never will I fee you more: you have brought your mo* ther and myfelf to the grave with disho¬ nour; her curfe and mine purfue you.* My father then turned away, and I never faw him more, The miftrefs of the houfe left the room, and I was conducted to thc bed of a fervant in a poor garret. Here I lay ftruggling between life and death for three weeks: at length, when I was enabled to leave my bed, the lady requefted that I would alfo leave the houfe; and fent me a fifty pound note, the
the gift of my father, with orders never to trouble him more. " I had an aunt in London; I refolved to addrefs myfelf to her: flic vvas reckoned a pious good woman, and I hoped would pity thc errors of inexperience ; at leaft I flattered myfelf, that in the metropolis I might obtain fome employment which, with induflry, might enable me to live without being a burden to any. I took a place in the flage, and towards the dufk of the evening found myfelf in London. Immediately on my arrival I took a hack¬ ney coach, and proceeded to the city, where I hoped to find a fervant of my mother, who had married from our houfe when we refided in London. She had married a tradefman, and as ihe had a great affection for me, I had remembered the place of her refidence. The houfe was at thc bottom of a court; and having paid the coachman, I begged him to bring my little trunk after me, I knocked at the door, which was opened by a female n 5 with
with a very four afpcct, who gave me the unplcafant information, that the perfons I afked for had left the houfe fome months; 'that their trade did not go on well; and that they had emigrated to America.— € There is no danger of our hearing from them again in a hurry,' faid fhe,' for tliere is a quarter's rent due/^She then- fhut the door in my face. When I re¬ turned into the flreet, what was my fur- prife to find the coach gone, and no coachman to be fcen !•*■** You fhould have taken the number/ faid a byfhmder who witnefied my diftrefs. The trunk con¬ tained not only my wearing apparel, but all my fmall flock of money, except a few fhillings whieh I had in my pocket; all chance of regaining it was loft; I burft inio tears; while a fmall pittance remained, I had fiill a flraw to grafp; when that pittance failed, I looked around for fuccour, but found no afliflant hand ftretched out towards me. I felt myfelf z defolate being, whofe exiftence vvas ufe- ful
ful to- none, and abhorrent myfelf. Whither was I to turn? where find a fhcltcr ? " While I was in this agony of mind, a well-dreffcd elderly woman approached me, and inquired why I wept. I in¬ formed her of my wretched fituation; fhe appeared to pily me, and defiring me to go with her, iook me to her houfe. After afVeplefs night, during whieh 1 bedewed in) pillow with repentant tears, I rofe and met my landlady at breakfaft; ihe faid, ihat if I wanted work fhe would employ me at thc needle. I however refolved to vifit my aunt, having a faint hope that her pride would revolt at feeing a niece reduced fo low ; and that, by her means, I might be reftored to the bofom of my family. I proceeded vvith a heavy heart to the houfe of my relation; I gave a fingle tap at the door; after waiting above an hour in the hall, I was admitted to an apartment where my aunt was feated oh a fofa giving cream to a lapdog. She did 2> 6 not
not recollect me, * Pray young woman,* faid fhe, in a peevilh tone, * what is your urgent bufinefs with me ?' ** My knees tottered, and my face glowed with the blulh of fhame. " € Pray what do you want ?' continued fhe; * I fuppofe you are come to offer yourfelf for fervice; but your appearance is no very great recommendation; I don't like tbe blufhing of that pretty face.* " i My name,'Madam,faid I, * is ------: I am your unfortunate niece.' " My aunt flatted from her feat — * How, Mifs 1 Do you dare to appear before me ? I never, Heaven be thanked, had fuch an abominable monfter in my houfe before.' She then gave way to a torrent of vituperative language, ill cal¬ culated to heal the wounds of my heart, which began to bleed afrefh, and, unable to bear up againft the acutenefs of my feelings, 1 funk in a fwoon at the feet of my relation. *< When I recovered^ fhe thus addrefied me:
me: * You are, I am forry from my im¬ mortal foul to fay, my niece; I therefore with to know vvhat courfc you mean to purfue: you cannot expect to be received into any of the virtuous fbcieties I fre¬ quent.* u « It is not fociety/ replied I, «that I feek; I wifh merely to be placed m a fituation where I may live without difho- nouring myfelf.' " * That,* faid fhe, * you have done already/ *' I went on : * I have been robbed on my coming to town of the fmall pittance my father gave me; I am without money and without friends; I thought you, Ma¬ dam, would have procured me a fituation, where, by induflry, I might fupport myfelf —I wifh even to wait on a lady/ " * Well/ cried my aunt, after a paufe, * we will fee vvhat is to be done; I pro- mile nothing, but infill that you never again put your foot within theie doors/ " 1 waited not for more, but gave my addrefs,
addrefs, and took my leave. I was in great hopes that family pride would operate in my favour ; but I was deceived. Two days afterwards I received a note from my aunt, in which fhe, after much violent abufe, told me, that fhe renounced mc for ever, as ladies of my profefiion feldom chofe to follow any other. I could not account for the ambiguity of this expreffion, but I was foon made to comprehend it, for I found, with horror 1 found, that the houfe in which I had taken refuge was thc place I ought moft to have fhunned. I now refolved to give my hoftefs the flip, but found myfelf a prifoner in the houfe; the wretched woman threatened to arreft me for my expenfes of board, lodging, and clothes. One evening, after many fruitlcfs attempts, I made my efcape, and found myfelf once more at liberty. I proceeded to an office where fervants are hired ; my place of abode was afked; but this being known, was a fufficient objection. When, I left the office, I perceived that a fervant. had
had followed me from my lodgings; fhe approached, and with a fueer faid, that if I did not turn my virtuous feet homewards I fhould be immediately arrefled, I was again conducted to my prifon-houfe, and my landlady grew more explicit; fhe ex¬ tolled my beauty, and bade me hope every thing from that; fhe added, that a gen¬ tleman of family and fortune would call upon her that evening, and begged me to do all in my power to engage his atten¬ tion, 1 perceived her meaning—my foul fhrunk from the idea; but I had formed my refolution; I refolved to throw myfelf upon the gentleman's generofity, and en¬ treat him to free me from my thraldom. "Theeveningcame; my hoftefs hadfpared no coft to adorn the victim fhe meant for faerifice. I was elegantly drafted, and with fhuddering anxiety entered the par¬ lour. The gentleman was not yet come. I fat in filence. Never, never fhall I forget my feelings at that moment; the melan¬ choly ticking of a chamber-clock added a gloom
gloom to my ideas. A loud knock at the door made me jump from my chair. Tbe old woman, frowning, bade me not be¬ have like a baby. The door opened. A gentleman entered the room. He flarled as he beheld mc. I timidly lifted up my eyes towards him; but foon clofed them in a fwoon, when I beheld Delvalley, whom I had fancied on the continent. On my recovery, I learned that he had, on my fainting, let the houfe, without giving the flighteft token of compaflion. Heaven forgive him ! Yet perhaps thefe were the exaggerations of my betrayer* I fince learned that Delvalley was on the eve of his journey, and that in a few days he left the kingdom. I lay fome time in a dangerous fever; and when health again bloomed on my cheek, I was per- fecuted by the threats of my hoftefs. Thus driven to deijjeration, I began my career of infamy :~a fhort career! In two years I was no longer the object of attention* In two more I loft all traces of
of beauty, and was difmiffed the houfe. j I was now reduced, as many thoufands | are, to fubfift on precarious bread. To I ihink was a torment; and the noify re- veilings of debauchery were a pleafure, I whilft they hufhed the agonies of reflec- | tion. Thu fair fenfations of modefiy were foon deflroyed, and the wild paflions raged at large, uncontrolled by thofe little decencies which throw a charm even upon criminal love. How have 1 envied thofe females, my affociates, who, by the bitter blaft of winter, were deprived of their exiftence — a miferable exiftence, — and whofe ftiffened corfes no longer felt fhe pangs of want! I fear death, I know not why; for furely, furely, no ftate of tor* ment can exceed the prefent: and I drag on a wretched and loathfome being, as you behold." Edward novv arofe, thanked the poor woman for her narration, and declared that Delvalley fliould do her juftice as far as tay in his power.—« It will, however/* added
added he, " be neccflary to know your name/* " Maria Lawrence/' faid fhe.—" But no;—that is the appellation I affumed.— Thc real name, by wliich Delvalley will know his victim, is Helen Fitzmaurice/* Had a thunderbolt fallen at the feet of Edward, his furpriie had not been greater. '* How 1 what faid you ? Who ? Say it again-—quickly! " My name is Helen Fitzmaurice/' " Have you not a brother V* " lhad;—but he has doubtlefs been taught to execrate me/* " You lived in Devonfhire f" " I did. I fee you know my family. My father formerly dwelt in Portman Square, On his misfortunes he retired to --------» " Helen! My fifler!—Gracious Hea¬ ven ! is it poflible ? You are then alive, and I -------- -" u Ha! let mc look upon you well/" tried fhe, with a frantic icream,— %< Yes,
ye^.
yes, it is indeed.—Oh, Edward! curfe mc not:—pray do not curfe me. If you kuew what I have fuffered, what I do fuffer, you would pity me;—indeed, bro¬ ther, you vvould pity mc!—Do not, do not curfe mc!" Edward raifed the fuppliant from thc ground, on which fhe had thrown herfelf. *« Be comforted, Helen; I cannot curfe you; but for the villain who---------he fhall die/* " Oh, no 1 Spare him, Edvyard, fpare him: let his heart be its own punifher; do not become guilty, becaufe your fifter is fo/* '* When came he to your village?** cried Edward, vvith the wildeft emotion. » Not long after your departure for London/* " He knew that he had fed need my fifler, yet profefied a fricndfhip for mc ! Vile hypocrite ! his life fhaU anfwer it J" Helen franticly implored his forbear-* ance: hut for fome time Edward was deaf to her rcmonfirances. At length he en¬ treated
treated her to procure a lodging, and fup* nifhed her with money for that purpofe. He then haftcned to procure a place in the coach, and returned to Mr, Rigby's. In the greateft agitation, Edward fought his uncle, and begged half an hour's con* ference, Mr. Rigby faid that he had a great affair alfo to fpeak of, and led thc way to the library, a place little frequented by any but his nephew. " I have re|eived a vifit, Edward," faid Mr. Rigby, " from the Honourable and Reverend Mr. Delvalley/* " He is a villain P exclaimed Edward. Mr. Rigby, whofe; temper was not much dulcified by fome gouty fymptoms, reprimanded his favourite with unufual afperity for his irreverent expreffion, and afked the reafon of his anger. " Do you know, Sir, that my fifter Helen is living V* " No, I do not. A wicked girl—t know nothing at all about her-~I dont want to hear of her/* "Tou
*< allowed mc, Sir, to be of her exiftence. I was told by yourfelf that fhe died of a rapid decline/' " I did tell you fo," faid Mr. Rigby coolly; S( fot you was a child, and might have blabbed the difgrace of our family. If fhe is alive, let her continue the life fhe has chofen." " Do you know, Sir, that fhe was fcduced by Mr. Delvalley ?'* " No, I did not know that. That's bad !—But the family is rich.—Don't talk about your fifler, but think of yourfelf: you may marry Mifs Delvalley, with fixty thoufand pounds, to-morrow morning!*' " I would fooner/' exclaimed Edward, u join hands with infamy !" " How, nephew! is not Mifs Del¬ valley an eligible connexion }" " Yes, Sir, fhe is every thing a man could wifh; but, independent of our mutual indifference, never vvould I marry tlie lifter of thc man who fcduced mine," " There
u There is no indifference in thc cafe. You are always at thc houfe, and fhe has eyes to fee. Mr, Delvalley has confeffed his wifhes that the union may take place. What would you have more ?" u That Mr. Delvalley fhould act every way amifs, I am not furprifed/* faid Ed¬ ward; "but that he fhould thus commit his fifler, paffes the bounds of illiberally. The connexion, Sir, I muft pofitivcly decline. But Helen*s fituation now claims my care :—fhe is*—~" " Mr. Fitzmaurice/' faid Rigby, en¬ raged, '* I have but one word to fay :— you many Mifs Delvalley in a month, or I fhall no longer look upon you as my heir. Your fifier was a bafe girl; and if you favour her with your protection, it ihall not be at my expenfe/' " Sir/* replied Edward, " while my fifler lives I feel it my duty fo protect: her. She labours under a father's curfe; yet I hope and believe, from what I re- 5 member
member of my father, that he did not, on the approach of death, confirm it:~a father could not/' u Sir," faid Rigby, u your choice is before you. Mifs Delvalley, fixty thou¬ fand pounds, a feat in Parliament, and my fortune at my death; or poverty and your fine fentiments/* u The choice is foon made/* cried Ed¬ ward, He bowed, and left the houfe. Mr. Rigby, enraged, thundered ana* themas againft his virtuous nephew, and fent his effects to a coffeetioufe, with a letter, in vvhich he upbraided him as rebellious and unnatural, recapitulated all thc favours he had received, and bade him never more to appear before him, Thus was Edward left deftitute. The rapidity of the cireumflances whieh were productive of his fall fcarcc allowed him time for reflection; but certainlv no in* duccment whatever vvould have prevailed on him to abandon his penitent fifter. Of the three thoufand pounds given him by
by Rigby* two thoufand had been fettled on Mrs. Fitzmaurice; and the remainder, with a very fmall referve, had been lent to a young nobleman, who paid a debt of honour, and fhot himfelf through the head the next day. Edward, having feen his fifter properly accommodated, determined to purfue his plan of vrfiting his family; hoping, in the affeaion of his relatives, and the repofe of the country, to calm his ruffled temper, and confider his future plans. He fiill refolved to call Delvalley to a fevere account; and no confideration of propriety could reftrain his impetuofity, when the idea of a feduced filter flruck his inind.
CHAF.
CHAP. IV, A Mother of a Family — A Mifanthrope* Jl-fDWARD had atmoft forgotten the fituation of the village; and a little boy fhowed the houfe of Mr. Pobjoy, whicb was difiinguifhed hy a gold peflle and mortar, and a blue board with gold letters, announcing his occupation, over the door. Edward knocked, and a fervant girl appeared, vvith her arms covered with foap-fuds. He vvas fhown into a fmall parlour; and having given his name, anxioufly waited the approach of Anafla¬ tia. The parlour plainly evinced that children were its ufual inmates. Thc carpet was littered with cards and fhreds of paper; a rocking-horfe flood on one fide; a rod was hung over the chimney; vol, i, e and
and a pap-boat flood on a near thc lire-place. Suddenly the cries of children were heard, and a female flep defcended the flairs. The door flew open, and Ed¬ ward affedtionately embraced Anaflatia. After the firft congratulations were over, Edward had an opportunity of contem¬ plating his fifler. She was dreffed in a white bed-gown and coat, neither very dean; and being without flays, her ap¬ pearance was in the higheft degree flutiifh. Her fine face vvas clouded.by an anxious frown, and her hair vvas only to be per¬ ceived where it peeped through the holes f her night-cap. " Ah, my dear brother/' cried Anafla¬ tia, ** how I have longed to fee yon ! But why did you not come in a poft-chaifo, or your own equipage ? My mother and ihe Doctor have walked out to meet you ;•— but how could they expect to fee you in a flage-coach?*' A maid fervant now entered the room, Snc
She faid that Mafler Neddy was naugh¬ ty there was no bearing him, <« Send the children here/' cried Mrs; Pobjoy: «« I dare fay they will be quie£ enough with me." Three fine children were now brought into the room, and began iheir infantine gambols. One climbed up Edward's knee, and cried to have his watch; the other got upou the rocking-horfe ; while * the third hung upon ihc mother. Ed- - ward, though he loved the fociety of cliildren, could at this time have difpenfed with their pretence. He gently informed Anaflatia, fearing to hurt her feelings, that her fifler yet lived. u Does flie indeed ?" cried Anaflatia, without taking her eyes from a worded flocking flie had begun to mend. ci Dear ! I am very forry for it 1 It would be a blefling for her, poor foul, to die !" " Anaflatia 1 furcly yon did not know that fhe furvived the ditcovery of her fhame!'* e % " Oh
u Oh yes, I did: my aunt wrote all about it from London ; and a pretty fpot of work it was. My lather repented fcdly having driven her from him, and never looked up after. Indeed, my father was fi> weak as to be willing to forgive te; and if it had not been for Mr. Pob¬ joy we might have had her again amongft us. Only think 1 to forgive her after her abominable conduct !•— ----Neddy, don't make fuch a noife, or I'll fend you io Sufan directly*" ** Good heavens!" exclaimed Edward, u can it be you, Anaflatia, that fpeaks f —Had it not teen for your hufband Ihe might have been forgiven!—Is this the good humane mun you told me of?'* u Dont he fevere upon Pobjoy/* cried Anaflatia: " he ta a wry good man; it i$ unknown tiie money he gives away to the poor; he would not commit a vaga¬ bond for ihe world; be never fees a horfe in a pound but he flings him fome hay, or a pig in a gate that he does not flop to 5 extrxate.
extricate. be fure, he vvas obliged to hang Timothy Graves for ftealing a lamb; but the fellow was fuch a rogue, that he muft have been hanged fome time or other, and the Dodor was of opinion that the day was immaterial.------Mary, I'll whip you if you make mouths at your brother. Blefs me, if the clock was to flrike, your face would remain fo, and there would be a pretty fpot of work.~~* My father, I am forry to fay, took the affair too much to heart ? for he died in kfs than three months after/* ** He was not well/* faid Edward, 0 when I left him; but I doubt not the fhock haftcned his death.' 1 " Why, to tell you the truth, Edward/ 9 replied Anaflatia, " I think ii was more the remembrance of having given f felcn his curfe; though I cannot fee what par¬ ticular harm that could do her The fact is, my father's brain was turned; and he was continually talking about Helen's ghofl, and that hi* forgivenefs came too e 3 late.
late. I fhalb uever forget ihc moruing before his death. He came inio tlie par¬ lour where I was working my baby-clothes: —* Anaflatia, child/ faid he, c I have been talking to Helen. She has forgiven mc, poor dear girl! She is iu heaven now, Anaflatia !—Slic has fomi ven me indeed; but mv h^art is broke.—I curfed the poor child; but llie has forgiven me that, Anaflatia/—I declare, Edward, I cried fo that------Mary, keep your fingers out of the butter, do 1 Lord blefs me, children, you are always in mifchief, I think P " And my father died foon after tbis ?* 5 €t Yes, he was found dead in the filh- pond next morning," '* Heavens and earth!" exclaimed Ed¬ ward, " what do you tell me! This is the curfed work of your humane hufband! -—Never let me hear his name mentioned. Helen might have been forgiven, and my father might have lived, had it not been for his curfed counfel/* " Whv,
u Why, could not my fa~ ther's falling into thc pond, could he ?— There was a verdict of Accidental death. But if you are angry with my hufband, Edward, I hope you will not forfakc my children. Here is Neddy, who was named afier you : can you have the heart to for¬ fakc him ?—Come here, Neddy, and let me wipe your nofe, Dont fcratch your head, that's a dear." Edward, unable to converfe longer, turned to the piano-forte, and begged his fifter to favour him by playing a leffon. Anaflatia opened her eyes, as if doubting the requeft to be fertous. At length, with a half laugh, fhe exclaimed, " Blefs you, brother! do you think I have nothing belter to do 4 han that ? Befides, it is all ou* of tunc, and the children h ve quite fpoded \X. I dont believe 1 have played twice ti^e I lay in ot N«-ddy. No, no; thr nufery mu\ the fervanU; find me em¬ ployment enough, I allure )ou. Befides, e 4 vvhat
what h$$ a married *mrmn to do with IWfic V* At tbis moment Mrs, Fitzmaurice and Pobjoy entered the room. After much congratulation, Edward renewed the fob- ject, which their arrival had interrupted. Mrs. Fitzmaurice confented to forgive her penitent daughter; and Anaflatia even pro- mifed to pay her a private vifit Edward, unwilling to expofe Helen to reproaches or ill-timed confolation, did not immediately inform his family where he had placed her. Mrs. Ftematirice inquired after he? brother; and the family fat down to a dinner badly cooked and half cold. The children ^ ere a * table; and their little hand§ quickly found their way into every body's plate but tiieir awn. One cried for t^uder-cruft, and the other becaufe hi$ brother was helped before him, The up* roar became general, till Pobjoy, rifing ftom the t^ble, took down the rod, and very deliberately whipfe o$*e, and pui the other
other in the corner. The girl, fearful that her turn was coming next, in at¬ tempting to avoid dada 9 overturned her plate in Edward's bofom, and climbed upon her mother's knee, who rocked her backwards and forwards, finging ** Hufh- aby, baby, the beggars are coming to town/' Thc fcrcams of the affrighted children, thc rage of Pobjoy, the finging of Anaflatia, the barking of two large fpanicls, and thc pacific attempts of the grandmother (who, to reftore quiet, made more noife ihan all put together), formed fuch a hideous concert, that Edward al¬ mofl fancied himfelf in Bedlam. Order was at length reftored : the chil¬ dren were fent out of the room to play; and Edward, after fome preparatory con¬ verfation, informed them of the eflrange- ment of his uncle's affection. A gloom pervaded the features of all at this unwelcome intelligence. — " Oh dear!" faid Anaflatia (while flie put down a bunch of cueranta fhe vvas carrying to her e 5 mouth),
mouth), " how forry I am! And there was I recommending Neddy to your pro- teflion!" *' Upon my word, lam quite fhoeked!" exclaimed Pobjoy. " This is very fur* prifing! In my opinion, you were mudi to blame—very much to blame indeed 1" —He threw himfelf back in his chair. « Lord blefs me!" cried Mrs, Fitz¬ maurice, " if I did not always fay you would do fome filly thing or other! This is the mofl: unfortunate day of my life 1 My hufband's loffes were nothing, as it were, in comparifon to this !—To be fure it was very good of you, Edward (and I always faid fo), to fettle that money on me; but if you had played your cards well, you might have had all my brother's fortune. I dare fay what I can fpare will not keep your groom for a month;—but Pll do what I can for you, and that is but little, Heaven knows!** 4* I never faid/* obferved Pobjoy, « but that it was very properly done to fettle the money
money in fuch a manner. It was the wifeft act of your life; or it would have been all fooled away, like the reft/' « What do you mean, Sir ?** faid Ed* ward fternly. «* I mean no harm, Mr Fitzmaurice; but I may fpeak my mind. In my opi¬ nion, you had better afk your good uncle's pardon. He acted very properly, as far as I can fee, in blaming you for affording protection to a bad woman. My mother- in-law may do as fhe pleafes 5 but my wife, upon fecond thoughts, fhall not encourage wiekednefs." " Indeed/* faid Mrs. Fitzmaurice, tc indeed, Edward, you are much to blame in this bufinefs. You might have humoured my brother, who is old, and protected, if you pleafed, your lifter in private/* " Ay," faid Anaflatia, " and have fpoken ill of her before my uncle, to put him in a good temper with you. Dear k 6 mc,
im, Edward! you bave not acted with common prudence!" Edward was cut to the foul by the fpeeches of his mother and fifter. Mrs. Fitzmaurice began to weep, and Pobjoy advtfed te to take fom-e bartfhorn drops. She reefed for that purpofe; and the apo- ifeeca$y became fb very provokingly con- fcquaitial, thai Edward, wjiofo mind was ^oo itiW)le %M tha moment to bear con- todictkm, rofe, and in a contemptuous tp&ue feid;, * Mm. Pobjoy,, a tnu.ee with aivice* By yous uepe^e4 invitation I came to this houfe, ai&d is it I experience % reception whkh I f&xdy do not merit. My mother a$d fifter aae- difpofed to <?on- igkr my eond-ia-ll iu a reprehenfible point **£ vi^w. In their prefent ftate of mind I cann-ot be a welcome gueft. 1 will therefore only obferve to you, that could J ftoop to flattery and measmcfs for afflu- 48£e and pirate<aiQO, I fliould fhow myfelf %^afcal mmdefaving oi b^th. Sk, I fhall j|0i longer be an intruder." * ( Oh,
* ( Oh, Sir, your moft obedient humble fervant/ 1 cried Pobjoy, " Fine airs you give yourfelf, Sir!"------But Edward was out of hearing. He left the houfe, and walked to ihe inn. His apparent fercnity arofe from agony of mind. His heart was formed for affection. Where he moft had reafon to expect it, it had eluded his grafp. Hearing that no ftage would fet off till thc next day, he ftrolled to a wood at fome diftance from the vil¬ lage, where he threw himfelf on the ground, and, in the ebullition of his rage, exclaimed aloud, " Damn the world !" w Amen, vvith all my lieart," cried a voke near him. Edward flarled up. An elderly man flood before him: his temples and the upper part of his head were bald, and the few remaining locks werefilver white: his eyes were dark and piercing, and a habit of thinking was exprefled in flic fur¬ rows of has foveas cou&te&ance, He was dreffed
dreffed in a plain brown fuit of clothes, and carried a large oaken flick in his hand. " Who are you ?" cried Edward, " How dare you intrude upon my privacy V* " This wood is free to all/* faid the ftranser. ** I aik no man's leave to fre- quent vvhat is as much mine as his. You execiated thc world :—have not I a right to do the fame ? You are a young cynic, -—I am an old one. Let us be better acquainted/* Edward was ftruck by the blunt manners of the flranger,—** That we may be ac¬ quainted/* faid he, •« I muft know your name." " M> name k Withers.—Do you know me now ?" *< It does not give mc much informa¬ tion/' crikd Edward; " yet 1 think I h^aul the name mentioned once or twice by ihc viJlag' 4 apoth''<\irv/' <* W**-t! by Pobjoy ! that grinning fon of medicine-—the humane man, who (pares
fparcs the flea that bites him, yet bangs the poor wretch wlio, preflrd by want and the cries of aiiarving family, trem¬ blingly dares to do wrong!" " You have defcribed him/' faid Ed* ward, * f Did he not/* continued Withers, iS & iye y ou ^y hirth, parentage, and education, life, character, and behaviour, as hawkers do of wretches condemned to the fcaffold ? He knows me not; but calumny and ill-nature will ahvays find materials for thc biographer, Yet why do I revile him ? He docs no more than what is daily pra-ctifcd in this beft of 11 poflible worlds—a world where ielfiihnt Cs and folly walk hand in hand, and vinue is known but by name." Edward felt himfelf relieved bv thcte invectives againft a world he btpm u> abhor, and accepted ihc blunt invit n of Withers, of palling fome hours s cottage, They firollcd through the .* > I, and the old man knocked at the tk . of a ueat
a neat habitation. An old fervant in livery opened it, and afked if his mafler vvould want his farther fervices that day. " Per¬ haps," was the laconic reply; and the two gentlemen walked into the parlour. A final! bookcafe was the only ornament; and Edward obferved, among others, the writing!** of Voltaire and Voluey. Zimmer¬ man on SoHtude lay open upon the table. u You are foured by difappointments," faid the old man, fixing his penetrating eyes on Edward:—" perhaps are fur- rounded by difficulties. When thefe va- nifti, you will again believe the profef¬ fions of a deceitful world, and be again deceived." H You have gnefled right: I am in¬ volved in difficulties, and the prey of disappointment; but I feci more for ano- ther than myfelf/* "A miftrefs, on my life!" exclaimed Withers. " Feel for others! Have others felt for you ?—No.—Be then a raan, or rather, be more:—creep into a corner, and
and fhut your eyes on a villanous world ! Live for yourfelf, as the toad exifts in fwllen independence, cafed in tbe bofom of the rock." The curiofiiy of Edward was excitec} to know the hiftory of liis entertainer. His language and appearance announced no common chara&er. He gave feveral oblique hints of his wifli to know him better ; and Withers at length pretended no longer to mifunderftand him. ** I am a man," faid the cynic, " who in early life felt the oppreffive hand of power. I was gay and thoughtlefs; my fortune was foon diffipated; my friends fleeced me ■; my miftrefe proved a jilt, I eolle&ed tlie fcattered remains of my once large property, and determined to fix my reft* dence at no particular fpot I am con¬ tinually moving from place to plaee. I love nobody—I am beloved by nobody. I am independent of the world, and I hate it. I hate, though I would not in* jure,
jure, my fellow-creatures. wilh "were better conflituied; but, like moft wifhes I find this chimerical. I laugh «it the modern philofoplier, who forcfecs si leform in the moral world, convinced tliat vice is top deeply rooted m the heart of man ever to be eradicated by argument, From your appearance, I fee you are what is called a gentleman. You have taken a difgnfl to the world. Purfue the bent of your mind. I am poor, yet per* mit me to accompany you wherever you go.—You ftart! Is it my poverty which deters you from accepting my offer ? M Edward now apprehended that the in¬ tellect of Mr. Withets were not a little deranged. He coolly declined the pro- pofal, alluring him, that though his com¬ pany had given him much pleafure, his own cireumflances were in fo precarious a ftate, that it was im poffiblc for hnn to amx with any fociety whatever. " Were my eireumiiaucefc/'' feid Mr, Withers,
Withers, £t fueh as to enable me to live independent of all, would you bear mc an an acquaintance ?** Edward allured him that his acquaint¬ ance would do him honour ancl pleafure, a Vain, abfiird compliment {"exclaimed Withers. '* In the opinion of the mul¬ titude it might: for who but would be honoured by the acquaintance of a man of fcveu*thoufand a year ?** Edward fiarted.—The old man conti¬ nued—" Yes, 1 am rich; but to what purpofe ? You may bid me rear a church, to endow a lacy luxurious prieft; give away my fuperfluous wealth to wretches who would add numbers to th* lift >f the ungrateful; or build a pal-tc-- or ;■> foohfli heir to enjoy .'—But not ? hv> *'" r ' f "lf alone, Yet fometimes 1 lu--e U v ik*- nefles of humanity. — 1 fee yo» r natred of t\\f* world: I will confirm yuu in it I will watch ovor a:,d guard you from any foUv, which mtjjht lend to recall vou to fcenes you have fo juflly execrated. Pals this
this night in my cottages to-morrow we go to London. Having fettled all affairs at that emporium of vice and folly, let us retire to a barren mountain, rail at fociety, and curfe ourfelves as forming a part/* Thefe fentiments would, at any other time, have excited the phy of Edward; but now they fo well accorded with his feelings, that he willingly acceded to the propofal. He retired early to his bed, but not to reft: his perturbed mind would not permit fleep to vifit his eyelids. A fonnet, tranflated by himfelf from the Italian of a friend, was brought to his recollection, and he could not help men-~ tally repeating it. SONNET, The wintry mom cornea oa: its gloom conveys A forrow to th« miud. The future ibrm Howls on thc diftant bill j the wafte difplays Full many a dreary and mifhapen form.
Ai
At noon the inn, out a wat'ry cloud, Shoots a rclu£tenfe my:—ere priz'd *t is flown : And now the tempeftj warring keen and loud, In all the horror of its force js known* Night drops her veil, and drifting far and wide, Thefnow defcends. The traveler ilirinks with fear: No hofpitable dome, no flieiter near. He would, but cannot, fly.—Eugenio figh*d, Compell'd, unhappy moralitl, to fey, Tbe life of man, alas! is but a wintry day.
^jft A jf *
chap. v. Ingratitude, and Love. na-**** «W« *Ng* W HEN Mr. Withers and Edward ar* rived in London, they took a lodging in Park Street. During the journey, the old man had, by his artful quefiions, ga- ih/icd every information of the circum- fiances which had occafioncd thedifiurb- ance of Edward when he firft faw him. The cynic fmiled vvith bittcrnefs at thc idea of the punifhment of Delvalley, yet condemned thc eagernefe of Edward to call him to account; " for/' faid he, « were all fuch villains exterminated, how many noble and honourable per foli¬ ages would fuffer in the profeription !" A challenge was written, and Wither* vainlv rcmonflratcd. Thc morning vvas devoted to converfation, chiefly turning
on the villany of mankind. In the even¬ ing an anfwer was returned from Delval¬ ley, purporting that he would not fail to be at the place appointed. Edward now reflected that the fmall remaining property he pofleffed would de¬ volve to the children of Anaflatia, ihould the duel prove fatal to him. He hafiily wrote a will, bequeathing the whole to his eldefi fifter, provided fhe vvould fix her refidence in Wales, Hi* then went to her lodgings; and his behaviour, though affectionate, was fo perturbed, that Helen perceived that fome particular uicaiinefs agitated his bofom. Her manners did not pleafe her brother: indeed they were fo tainted by the wretched co.npany ihe had afiociated with, that, although fhe firove to reprefs it, a vein of vulgarity would fometimes appear. This Edward could not but perceive, as well as teat her health declined. She had laid afide her trap¬ pings of infamy, and appeared in a plain Cotton gown. Her figure vvas faded; and,
and, though not yet thirty, Ihe appeared Un or twelve years older. Edward gave her his addrefs, and took leave, llie next morning, leaving his uneafy pillow, Edward walked towards Kennington Com¬ mon, a place which, Mr* Withers in¬ formed him, would ever live in the an- isals of modern honour and the Newgate Calendar* In his letter Edward had informed Delvalley that he fhould be unaccom¬ panied, and was not a little furprifed at finding a third perfon at the place of ap¬ pointment Delvalley approached.— tc I have in¬ jured you, Mr. Fitzmaurice/' faid he; ** I am here to acknowledge it, and hum¬ ble myfelf before you* It ill becomes a man of my order to reach out an arm of deftrudiom If, however, you will only Men to your jufl anger, I am willing to gratify it. You told me you fliould be ^accompanied; I have therefore brought Captain Ainflie to ae!t as mediator, or witnefe
wiinefs ihat neither of our actions dif¬ grace tlic man of honour/' " Of honourr* exclaimed Edward; " but I come not to talk:—take vour ground, Sir." Delvalley looked mournfully.—" Be it fo," faid he. The colour faded from his lips, and a cold dew overfpread his fore¬ head. Captain Ainflie meafured the -ground; but before Edward could fire, he obferved that the pifiols had fghts, whicli was an advantage. A change vvas agreed upon, aud Delvalley had no fooner received one of Edward's piftols, than lie fiarted, and begged to fpeak before they proceeded to extremities. « Where/' faid Delvalley, " did you get thefe weapons ?" " Thu, Sir, is trifling/* replied Ed¬ ward ; « to what purpofe do you afk ?" " I do not trifle vvith you;—hut tell me how they came into your poffeffion/* " Not longer to delay/' cried Edward, XQU u / "I will
« I will inform you, that attempted fitvc a gentleman from afiaffination near Home,—I was wounded in the ftruggle, and when at daybreak I came to my¬ felf, I found thefe pifiols in the field." «* They were mine ! they were mine!" exclaimed Delvalley. " Banditti attacked the carriage in which my fifier and my¬ felf were feated—I fprung from it, was wounded by them, and dropt thefe pifiols. Thc darknefs of the night prevented my diftinguifhing friends from foes; but thc villains fled, and I was conveyed to Rome, fainting from lofs of blood, I now find that I owe my life to your generous in¬ terference, and can I confent to lift my hand againft you } No! Take my life, which I willingly faerifice; but fpare me thc horror of beirig worfe than an affaf- fin/* Captain Ainflie now interfered. Del¬ valley begged him to propofe any terms. He declared that his behaviour to Mils Fitzmaurice had preyed upon his mind; and
and if the gift of his fortune could atone for his crime, he vvould immediately offer it: but added, that nothing fhould tempt liim to another mode of reparation. Edward paufed* The repentance of Delvalley feemed fincere. Had Helen's mind been uncorrupted, he* would have infiftcd on their immediate marriage: as affairs novv flood, he vvas in a fiate of un¬ certainty. At length he faid^— '* Mr* Delvalley, I once, it appear?* faved your lifo; 1 will not now become vour executioner* Never let me fee you more* I will retire vvith my filler from a world I abhor, and ia obfeurity will en¬ deavour to forget the flattering profpccT my youthful ideas created/* * c llow !" exclaimed Delvalley; '* is it then as 1 have heard ?—tell me, Mr. Fitz¬ maurice—I conjure you to tell me, have you fallen under ihe difpleafure of your uncle ?** a I am justified/* cried Edward bit¬ terly, a in wounding your feelings, if in- r z deed
deed they yet inhabit your bofom.—Yes, Mr. I)eivalley, my uncle renounced me for efpdufihg the caufo of the woman you ruined abd abandoned! See now, foe and tremble at the mifery you have occa- WneA.y/A deferving girl is reduced to Jnd%ence and infamy ;—a father driven to tft^nefe, defpair/ and foiMeflruaion; and his fon thrown from the bofom of his family !—Thefe, thefe are the confe¬ quences of what is termed juvenile indifcre* tion. This rnifory you [ could create—this ruin you could fpread arouud; and yet, Sir, yoii may have flept while the bitter tear cburfed down the cheek of your vie- tiiis1 Yoii would hot hold out an arm of defiru&ion! Ob fhame! what defiruaion have'you hot heaped on my head!—the Weapon of the aflaiBn were mercy in cofrip^rifori^ delvalley and Edward flood oppofite to each other.; and while the former bent his repentant eyes to the ground, an cma- --;v/:-n?; [i^y'i, ■ ■ • ■' ciated
ciated rufned wildly between them. " Spare him, fpare my brother!'* cried flie vvith a frantic fcreara; "Delvalley, Delvalley, you muft not, you will not, furely, kill him—be fatisfied with the wrongs you have done me; for thofe I forgive you, and may Heaven forgive you: but to the fedu&ion of the fifter, add not the murder of the brother!" If Delvalley was before in a ftate of agitation, what were novv his feelings I He fell upon one knee to the withered form of Helen, and raifed the piftdl he held to his temples. Ainflie forcibly dif- armed him, and Helen fell into her bro¬ ther's arms in a fwoon. " Look at her, Sir/' cried Edward ; " this emaciated countenance onc^ bloomed with health, and was irradiated by the bluih of modeily. She once could weep for the W'oes of others—her own griefs cannot now draw down a tear. Behold this *' 3 wreck
wreck of lovelinefs, and confefs yourfelf a villain/* " Your reprehenfion is jufl," faid Cap¬ tain Ainflie; u but would you urge a penitent to defperation ? Let me, Sir, entreat you to retire. The coach whieh conveyed us hither, wait$ at a fhort dis¬ tance from thc turnpike. Permit me to convey Mifs Fitzmaurirc." " I thank you, Sir/' replied Edward; " I may have been ivrong, but in a mo¬ ment like this, the mind cannot always be guarded. Come, my Helen; the world abandons you, \mt your brother's heart is open to penitence." He bowed to Ainf* lie; and lifting his flill lifekfs fifier in his arms, left the fpot. No fooner were they out of f^ght than Ainflie, hurtling into a loud laugh, ex¬ claimed, %t I think we have queered young Sentiment pretty decently/' " I think fo too/' cried Delvalley, while he wiped his forehead ; " but con¬ found
found it, I almofl began to think myfelf in carneft/' " Thc devil you did ?—We fhall have you fermonizing by and by, I fhould not fufpcct you of much compunction^ Reverend Sir, after all I have fecn." u Yes, Ainflie; but when I found he had faved my life, I could not but feci my confcicuec give me a curfed twinge/* " What! I fuppofe you would per¬ fuade me that you really meant to blow jour fapient brains out—faith, if fuch had been vour intention, I would not have baulked your humour." " Why that," faid Delvalley, " vvould have been carrying the joke a little toa far;—but I'm glad 'tis over, at all events. My clerical character remains unfpotted—I may yet look up to a bi- fhopric* To fecure my hopes, I muft ruin Fitzmaurice: if the world are not perfuaded he is a rafeal, they will, I fear, F 4 affix
affix the name on me.—I with any body elfe had faved my life, though/' u Confound your fcruplcs/' cried Ainf¬ lie ; *' how couid you be To ridiculous as to fay you would not marry thc girl ?—- lie did not hint at fuch a thing, and why did you with to put it in his head ?" <s There is no accounting for any thing a man mav do in a moment of fear* You may fey what you will } Ainflie, but it is very awkward to ftand before a loaded piflol; particularly when you arc con¬ vinced a man is in earneft about blowing vour braius out. If I had not been fure that the old loan-contractor had difinhc- rited Fitzmaurice, I would have married the girl to-morrow/' " Indeed 1" u Yes, indeed I would—I would marry the very efieiice of deformity and vice, if money were not wanting. I am not to be tied to thc -upron-flring of a wife*" « Very true/* faid Ainflie; ** let the French
French fing, c Five le vin, vive Tamour % I fay, * Vive Vargent j which can pro¬ cure us one as well as the other. But how will your fifter take the news of the fellow's poverty ?** " Jufl like the reft of her fex— open her eyes, and find two hundred and fifty thoufand faults, which were veiled by thc lufire of two hundred and fifty thoufand pounds. My fifter is a woman, is fhe not r u Yes/' replied Ainflie, <( and an un¬ common woman* She loves this Fitz¬ maurice, and will have him in fpitc ofhis poverty/' " Not if I can help *.t/* exclaimed Del¬ valley ; " either my character or his muft go to wreek, and I cannot balance in the choice—But vvhat could bring that fooliih diftracted wench here ? I believe Fitzmaurice to be a man of fpirit, and one who would not trifle in an affair of this fort, I thought he would have been fatisfied with ar- apa* f j logy i
logy; but there is no trufiing thefe men of fcnthnent—the gentleman was in ear- nefl/' Ainflie could account for Helen's fud- den appearance no other way than by at¬ tributing it to a preconcerted fcheme be* tween Fitzmaurice and his fifter. " Thc fellow/' faid he, " has the reputation of •courage, but has it ever been tried ? I'll be fworn he had no more idea of fight¬ ing, than, to fay the truth, we had our¬ felves/* Thefe well-matched companions were both deceived. They ralhly judged of Fitzmaurice by their own fiandard. He was a man of cool deliberate courage, tempered with a compaffionate foftnefs* His furprife at the appearance of his fifler was as great as theirs. Delicacy pre* vented him from renewing a fubject fo ungrateful fo her feelings, and tbe idea of which he wifhed to obliterate from his mind; for he was convinced of the turpitude of duelling, and was fhocked to
to think he had been fo great a flave to his paflions. The day on which Edward vifited his fifter, fhe perceived that his agitation was more than common. She fent to his fervant, defiring him to watch her brother, for her penetrating mind had readily gueffed the truth. The man, who had a real affection for his mafler, though he had been but a fhort time in his fer¬ vice, ventured to read a letter which was left in the pocket of one of the coats he was brufhing;. This letter was the dial- lenge. Fearing to incur his mafter's an* ger fliould he apply to the police, the man communicated the affair to Helen, who fortunately arrived time enough to prevent an affray. Delvalley and Ainflie, as they walked homewards* engaged in a ferious conver¬ fation relative to their future plans of operation. The clerical paragon vvas fo influence tlie mind of Augufla in the Cap¬ tain's favour, for which he was to receive f 6 five
five thoufand pounds on the day of mar¬ riage. * While the interefied Delvalley vvas forming fchemes for the advancement of his fortune, Augufla's heart was torn by a thoufand new fenfations :—that Edward fliould quit London without the common attention of taking leave, flung her to the quick. She.novv felt fhe loved him with ardour, His large fortune, flie imagined, had, by flattering his vanity, extinguiflied the foftcr affections of tlie heart. She wifhed him poor, that her difinterefted love might fhine in its full purity; and was only reftrainecl from avowing her af¬ fection by the confideration of his fuperior wealth. Mifs Delvalley was fitting one evening with her friend and companion, Mifs Ormcrode, when her brother entered the room. He had jufl: rifen from dinner, and, though not intoxicated, was in that ftate wherein a man refpe&s neither th« fecrets
fecrets of others nor his own. Del¬ valley feldom allowed himfelf to pafs the bounds of temperance in drinking, not from choice but prudence. " Augufta, my dear/* cried he, " why is that pretty face fo gloomy ? upon my life you looked charmingly to-day, and from a brother a civil thing may liave truth on its fide* If you do not credit me, perhaps you will Captain Ainflie, who hasabfolutely driven me away by his encomiums on your beaut v." " Fray, Aubrey, have you heard any thing of your friend Fitzmaurice ?" faid Augufta; " it is furely very ftrange that he never calls to fee you," li Fitzmaurice 1 Pfhaw ! the fellow is mad, I believe, and on thc point of mar¬ riage with a country Tquire's daughter, not half a degree letter than a milkmaid/' <c On the point of marriage!" faintly repeated Augufla. **. Yes, and it is the beft thing he can 4 do: **
do i has a fnug little fortune, and he is not worth a /hilling/* " Indeed, Aubrey, I fear your wine is rather potent/' faid Augufta, laughing at her ready fears ; "the heir of Mr. Rigby not worth a fhilling !" " No, no ! his bad conduct has cut off all expectations from that quarter. He certainly behaved very ill to his benefac¬ tor: I hate ingratitude, Augufla, and have broken off ail connexion vvith him.'* " But vvhat is his crime, Aubrey ? He is incapable of a bafe action—I am fure he is; I dare vouch for his innocence. His open countenance is the throne of honour: a villain cannot counterfeit the fleady glance of virtue." Delvalley caft his eyes to the ground, raifed them to the ceiling, walked to the window, and at length threw himfelf into a chair, while thc blufh of confeioufnefs overfpread his features, •< He ought to be proud, Augufta, in having
having you for his champion. Bat what wili Ainflie fay to all this ?** " Ainflie!" rqseated Augufta, w Yes; I am much deceived if he is not one of your vvarmeft admirers-*-! am fure he is the moft deferving/* " But what is the crime of Edward ?* " I will not fhock you, my love, by repeating it." " Let me then guefs at vvhat you al¬ lude to/ 5 cried Au: ufta, vvith warmth. u Has he, by perjury, ruined the peace of a family, and feduced fome fond be¬ lieving girl ?** - Augufla> looked fternly at her brother. —Such is the faculty of guilt to feat de- tedlion, that Delvalley fancied himfelf difcovered. " Who told you *is ?" cried he, fat tering. " What do yoii mean, Aubrey ?—Your looks alarm me—I merely gueffed at the crime of Edward/' " True, true, _ Faith, Augufla, tbat claret
claret I ordered laft is abominable fluff; it makes me quite nervous,—Be fatif- fied that Fitzmaurice is a villain ? I will drop his acquaintance* I wonder what keeps Ainflie fo long below, Is he not a fine young fellow, Augufla ?** " Why will you talk ofhim, Aubrey? If you would oblige me, tell mc the crime of Edward/' ** Come, come, fifler, I fee how it is: that fneaking rafeal, Fitzmaurice, has won your heart/' " I thank you for your compliment, Sir; a fneaking rafeal, as you elegantly exprefs yourfelf, is not calculated to en¬ gage the affe£tions of your fifier/' " Pray, my dear, girl, don't be queer; Fitzmaurice is as poor as a Welfh curate; Ainflie is not rich, indeed; but has all the virtues that adorn a man; if Fitzmaurice's perfon is the Apollo Belvidere, Ainflie moves a Hercules/' i€ Aubrey," cried Augufta, rifing, u I will no longer liflcn to you; I am loth to
to a of duplicity, but I fear all is not right. I will myfelf write to Edward. You fay I love iiim—1 own it; i glory in it, and I will let him know my love, lie is innocent of this namclcfs crime on which you feem to lay fuch flrcfs. -1 will not believe that he is on the point of marriage. He loves mc-—or he fhall love me. Yes, I will win the heart which is yet flccled by indifference. Your friend Ainflie has my thanks for his good opinion ; but, fliould he be explicit to you, you are authorized to fay that your fifler has no longer a heart to give; and her hand and heart are inseparable." She then left the room, Mifs Ormcrode following; and Delvalley returned fo the dining-parlour, little fatisfied with the event ofhis fchemes.
chat.
CHAP. vr. A Lady's Miftake* AUGUSTA had no fooner retired to her own apartment, than fhe fat down to write to the man fhe moft loved. She began—tore the unfinifhed fheet—and began again. At length, turning to Mifs Ormcrode, " Tell me, dear girl," cried ihe, u vvhat to fay.—But no.—Your de¬ licacy cannot approve of the flep I am ahout to take. To act as 1 do, you muft love as I do," Selina Ormcrode was thc daughter of a colonel, who, dying with little but ho¬ nour, left a wife and three children with¬ out provifion. Death, however, kindly abridged the fuftbrings of the widow and two eldcft girls, who fell victims to the fmall-
(inall-pox; and Selina, after efoaping with difficulty from thc fame dreadful malady, was taken under the protection of her aunt Mrs. Beddome, who foon after placed her as companion with a Mrs, Prentice, This lady was a woman of fafliion, and, like many olhcr women of fafhion, very partial to crime de vanilk ei noyau. ■ She vvas fubject to hyfteric affec¬ tions ; and though her fervants often de+ clared that Madam had got her dofe, fhe would have been very forry to have heard it thc public talk. But if it had (as a woman of fafhion may do any thing), no perfon with, any pretentions to ton would prefume to cavil at her conduct. Mifs Ormerode, however, was by no mean* tonnifl^ ancl found her fituation very irkfome. Mifs Delvalley having witnefled Sclina's patient fuffcrings, re¬ lieved her from her thraldom, by making her the offer of a refidence*in Sackville Street» Independent of her face, which was not
not a little disfigured by the fraall-pox, the perfon of Mifs Ormcrode was not of the firft order. It was not, however, firikingly. difagreeable, though rather fhort and inelegant. Bnt when fhe fmiled, an air of fweetnefs would pervade her features; and when any man had been half an hour in her company, her perfonal defects vvould be totally loft in the rdmiration of her good fenfe. Augufla, after many attempts, wrote the important letter, and gave it to Selina for perufal, ** It is with grief that I hear re¬ ports to the difadvantage of any : judge then how I am afflicted when perfons I cftccm are the objects of calumny,—I have heard of your eflrangemcnl from your uncle ; I ara forry for it. Yet gifted as you are with every qualification of the heart, tlie fmile of fortune muft be a matter of indifference.—Is it your opinion, Edward, that the lofs of your wealth has changed
changed the fentiments of regard I enter¬ tain in your favour ? Learn to know me better.—My brother leaves London to¬ morrow, for his living. — Perhaps the world may deem my conduct improper, in wifhing to fee you in his abfence; but I defpife the cold maxims of prudence, when they interfere with the dearer in- terefts of the heart, I fhall be at home to none but you ; and prepare to be chid¬ den for your unkind delertion of thofe who eileem you. " Augusta Delvalley/* Sackville Street. Selina, having read the letter, returned it to her friend, and, with a figh, ob¬ ferved, that Mr. Fitzmaurice muft indeed be unfeeling, not to acknowledge the purity of her difinterefted love; but added, that it vvould be difticult to know where to addrefs the letter, as Edward no longer lived at Mr. Rigby's.—This was an obftacle Augufta had not forcfeen. She
She paufed for a moment; and at ringing the bell, ordered a fervant to take the letter to Piccadilly, and make every inquiry. The fervant was, by .Mr. Rigby's porter, directed to the coffee- houfe where the effeas of Edward were fent, after the final rupture between him and his uncle; and when the meffengcr entered the coffee-room, he fortunately beheld Edward at the bar, where he was inquiring if any letters had been left for him. It is not an eafy tafk to depict the aftonifhment which took pofleffion of his mind on perufing the lines traced by the trembling hand, of Augufla.—She, then, loved him 1—He Irad unwittingly encou¬ raged her paflion—a paffion he coukl nol return: for though her many brilliant qualities had conciliated his refpect and admiration, his heart had as yet been. infenfible to the power of love. To a delicate mind, the ch-^rpas of perfon and brilliancy of talent am not fufficient in¬ ducements to form an indiffoluble union. Love
Lore requires more:—it requires thofe fenfations which will exift when time has chafed the loves and graces, and when talent fhrinks from the chilling blafts of neglect. Edward haftily returned to his lodging, where he found Withers employed in reading an anti-minifterial pamphlet; not that he particularly approved of the mat¬ ter, but becaufe its virulent invective accorded with his cynical turn. Without fpeaking, Edward laid the letter he had received before tlie old man, who, when lie had read it, fmiled farcafiically, and again betook himfelf to his pamphlet Edward, half laughing, begged to know his opinion. " Tiiat women are deceitful, and men credulous. What, I fuppofe this Mrs. Delvalley is the wife of one of your friends.—But go on.—Would that my bufinefs were fettled, and I fafe out of this righteous town!— I forefee I ihall have a lonely journey/* 1 «You
« You miftake/' faid Edward. « Do you not remember the name?—This lady is the fifler of the treacherous Delvalley." " How! the rfeh Mifs Delvalley!— She knows your poverty, yet courts your acquaintance ! By heaven, fhe is a noble girl. Her conduct merits ------ Ha, ha, bn, tbat I fliould be a momentary dupe 1" «* Wherefore?" cried Edward. « She is an amiable woman, and merits a heart wholly devoted to her. Does not her prefent conduct prove her difinterefted foul r° " You are a tolerably handfome fel¬ low/' faid Withers, with an arch non¬ chalance. " How can you thus attribute the pureft actions to the bafeft motives ? You fee the world vvith a jaundiced eye, Mr. Withers." " If," faid the cynic fternly, " the bloom of health which novv dyes your chocks, were diffipatcd by difeafc; if the fymmetry of your perfon were to be dif- torted
torted by a hump, or your mourn tlie lofs of its companion, where then would your inamorata's paffion take its flight?—Milton has drawn thc paradife of fools vvith thc pen of a mafler." u You would advife mc, then, not to fee Mifs Delvalley?" " I would advife you to do juft as you think proper—as all men do who afk the advice of others." " Upon my honour, you wrong me. I am at a lofs how to act. Guide, advite me/' " Take, then, no notice of this ro¬ mantic letter, but prepare for your retire¬ ment from mankind," " Good heavens, Mr. Withers! how can you propofe fuch a line of conduct ? I will not fo far forget the dictates of propriety, as to infult by neglect where I cannot heal by acquiefcence/' " I knew you vvould follow your own way," faid Withers drily; " but pray do not interrupt me now ; for I am engaged vol. u o with
with an author who takes a great of pains to prove that vve are a ruined na¬ tion. I love to be told vve arc ruined, I have been told fo every day for half a century. There is certainly a philofophic pleafure in it/' Withers now betook himfelf to his book with the raoft mortifying fang froid. Edward, highly provoked, feized his hat, and walked towards the Park, lie began to diflike thc company of Withers. Iiis manners were fo repulfivc, and his converfation fo bitterly farrafiic, that a man of penetration might conceive his hali>:t of the world to arife more from tlie affectation of iingularity than fixed principle, Thc idea of Augufta, never- tbclefs predominated in Edward's mind ; $m\ he felt quite at a lofs how to act. Ih ftrolled on, without caring whither lie wfi't: and at length flung himfelf on a bench, where he fat muting. H< vps roofed from his reverie hy thc harking of a dog; and looking towards
the little animal, who fawned at f he beheld the favourite lapdog of Mifs Delvalley. He ftartcd up, and at a fmall diftance perceived Mifs Ormerode, at¬ tended by a footman. His eye met hers. He advanced towards her, and flammered an inquiry after het health. Mifs Ormcrode bowed to the compli¬ ment, and both walked on in filence. Edward's brain vvas on thc rack, He clared not afk after Mifs Delvalley:—he knew not what to fay. At length he ventured an unmeaning obfervation on the weather, which was far from relieving hib mind, as he found he had complained of thc heat, while Mifs Ormerode was wrapt in a peliffe, and fecured from the told by a muft*and tippet, Selina pitied his confufion; yet, will¬ ing to oblige her friend and protcctrcls, ventured timidly to inquire why he was no longer a vifitor in Sackville Street. He replied, that important bufinefs had detained him in the country; and that he q % could
could not tell again be obliged to leave London, Selina could now no longer reflrain the impulfe of euriofity. " Thc important bufinefs/' faid fhe, fouling, " is not of fo feeret a nature but it has found its way into the newfpapers." This vvas the device of Delvalley, who had inferted feveral paragraphs in thc daily prints, concerning a marriage of Edward likely to take place. Thcfc, he thought, would cxafperatc Augufla againft him; but fhe had treated them vvith con¬ tempt. She would not credit fueh reports of a man flie thought attached to Jicr. The firft figlit of thefe falfehoods gave her a iranfient pain; but fhe too well knew her own perfections to dread a competitor, Befides, newfpapcr chit-chai vvas what fhe had been accuflomed to fee, as fame iiad often declared that the Honourable Au¬ gufla Delvalley was to be led to thc tem* pie of Hymen by the Duke of A. thc Marquis of B. the Earl of C. Lord D*
&e. &c. when perhaps fhe had fcareely noticed them in a mixed company. Edward was furprifed at thc oblcrvation of Mifs Ormerode. Thc idea of hb/i/ier immediately occurred ; and he begged her to explain her meaning. " It was reported/* faid Selina, blufh- ing, ** that vou left town on ihc account of. lady." ' i( It is true, Madam/* faid Edward: u I did leave town on that account; yet I did not think fcandal had been fo bufy. Thc unfeeling may blame me; but I blufh not to own that I love, and ever fhall love, the lady who canted my de¬ parture. My life would J lay down to ferve her: my expectations I have already forfeited *.,n her account. My u:icle, guided by the prejudices of the world, infiitexl on my abandoning one whom every duty bound mc to protect. I am poor, and muft learn to fafliion my wifhes to my fortunes. I quit thc gay fcenes of life without a figh, and hope in retire- G 3 ment
ment to numb my feelings in finical apa¬ thy/' ir Yon will however fie Mifs Delv;»l- ley?" faid Selina, in a low voice, while ihe endeavouied to hide her tear:*. *•*> 1 wili have that honour before i leave iownS faid Edward, while he handed Mifs Ormerode into the carriage which was waitin** for her. She bowed her head, and the chariot drove away, Edward haftily regained his own apart¬ ment, in whirh lie locked himfelf, to avoid tho farcaftic filters of Withers, Sclina's mind was agitated by a thou¬ fand difierent fenfations. She was con¬ vinced, by Edward's converfation, that he was attached to fome woman of humbk fortunes. She fighed, flie knew not why. She thought it was in pity for her friend; but however flie might wifh to hide her feelings from herfelf, fhe iearcd ihat flic loved Edward Fitzmaurice too much for her peace. His firm attachment to his unknown miftrcts, — an attachment no fe!filli
fclfifn confideration could fented itfelf to her mind In its brivrhteft colours. ««Ah!" thought flic, " would that f were the object of fuch an attachment ! W'ith a partner like Edward, no difficulty would be painful, no toil fcveiv. But i forget my deficiency in perfonal attrac¬ tions. Never till now did I feci their value. Another trial awaited Selina, She Ind to communicate thc cireumflances of her interview vvith Edward io Mifs Delvalley, jShe vainly endeavoured to collect her fcattered thoughts. The chariot ft opt, and fhe afcended to the drawing-room.— It was empty.—Selina took up a book; and in about half an hour, Auguflru beaming vvith beauty, vvhich received every advantage from her elegant court dius. entered the room. "Da you go to St, James's to-day, Mifs Delvalley ? I undcrfiood that it was not your intention/' o 4 *< li
" It was not/' faid Augufta, while fhe arranged her glittering drapery; " but my brother will always drive me thither. He is already gone himfelf. I often beg him not to prefs mc; and tell him, that he may be a bifhop, while 1 can never be one.*—But blefs me, my dear, how unwell you look!" " It is very cold/* replied Sdina, faintly. " No, no, my dear girl, you are really tinwell: you can fcareely fupport your¬ felf. What has happened ?*' « L~4—I have feen Mr. Fitzmaurice,^- and I fear—** " Oh heavens ! what of Edward ? Is he ill? Is lie diftreffed? Tell me quickly/* " I will fell you another time.—The coach is at the door: go to the drawing- room now.'* " I will not go at all.-*—Speak, I entreat you: is my Fitzmaurice ill ?" " He is well/' faid Selina, a Uttle re¬ covered :
covered: i< will fee you before he leaves town." " Before he leaves town !" echoed Au¬ gufla, half fouling, « No, no, he will not leave town alone." " Deareft Mifs Delvalley/* cried Se¬ lina, " prepare for news that will fhock you, I am grieved to be the herald of misfortune, but------" ** Speak, fpeak 1" ** Mr. Fit2maurice*s heart is devoted lo another." u HI not believe it," cried Augufta,. trembling with indignation. " Nor would I believe it/' faid Selina, '* had I not heard the confirmation of what has been the public talk, from his own mouth.** " You muft have been deceived, Mifs Ormerode: it is impoffihle." '• Would it were!" faid Selina, with a deep figh. "iYou are worthy each other. Your fortune vvould repair the injuftice of his uncle, and your virtues make & o 5 worthy
worthy abandoned by his uncle for having fixed his affections on a woman whofe only crime is poverty, He exprefled his lovo in unequivocal terms, and is refolved to retire with her from the hurry of the capital/* Augufla fcareely breathed: a fulien torpor bound up her faculties. At length flie flung herfelf upon thc fofa, and burft into tears. Mifs Ormerode, glad to fee nature thus relieved, attempted not fo check their courfe, but mingled ber forrows vvith thofe of her friend. In a fhort time the foul of Augufta grew in¬ flamed by rage. She franticly rent her drefs, and featteral thc floor with plumes and diamonds, Selina, by her foothing attentions, drew her to her own apart¬ ment ; and the remainder of tlie day was paffed, on the part of Augufta, in floods of tears or ufelefs ilarts of-jaffion.
CHAP.
CH\P. VJI. A Declaration—A tyurrcl—A Reconcilia* fhtu HREE days paffed away without any news from Edward. Augufta had reco¬ vered fomething like tranquillity; at leaft her face wore the appearance of refigna- lion. On thc fourth morning, as fhe fat at her toilet, languid and fpiritlefs, ihc was informed that Mr. Fitzmaurice was in the parlour. At his name joy bright¬ ened her countenance, and her heart beat with unufual quicknefs. She hafiily fi¬ nifhed dreffing, and in a fhort time en¬ tered the room, where ftood the man of her heart, rendered more intcrefting by the dejection vifible oa his manly fea¬ tures, 0 6 Both
i
were evidently emharraflcd. At length Edward made a confufed apology for not having profited before by the pcr- miftion of vifiting her, Augufla novv rallied her finking fpirits, and reproached him for doubting thc continuance of her regard.—■" I fear/* faid fhe, " that there is fome mifunderflanding between } r ou and my brother. If it may be accommo* dated, how r willingly would I mediate between you!" Edward's face glowed at the mention of Delvalley.—" I come, Madam/* faid he, ** to take my leave of you for ever. Highly flattered as I feel myfelf by your fricndfhip, I have been too haidly ufed by fociety to continue to form a part of it. I leave town this evening/' «* You cannot mean it," faid Augufta. ** Are you to deem all men felfifh, be¬ caufe you have fuffered by the folly or wiekednefs of a few ?~Reflect awhile: there are many who would be but too happy could they render you fo/' " Your
u Your opinion does me Ma- dtim; but you over-rate my merits. My exiftence is a matter of indifference to all, —*cven to myfelf/' <* Not fo," exclaimed Augufla, wifh animation: " not fo. Your welfare and happinefs are my earnefl wifhes.—Ed* ward, it is time to throw afide referve. You are not fo mifanthropic but Jove can footh your cares; and the happy woman you have chofen will doubtlefs ------" She hefitated. " That Ihave chofen T cried Edward. ** Pardon me, Mifs Delvalley, if 1 affure you, that I have never yet feen fhe woman who has known how to inlpire me vvith love/* ** No!" faid Augufla, vvith quicknefs* ** Am I then to imagine that all the town are deceived, and that you did not inform Mifs Ormcrode -ihat you were on the point of marriage with a lady, whole only fault was her low cireumflances ?" « Never."
** tlmt your uncle had on thai account difinhcrited**~-~" " Heavens, Mifs Delvalley! can you poflibly be ferious ?" " Is it not fo ?" exclaimed Augufta. " I fliould be forry to think that Mifs Ormerode was the propagator of an un¬ truth. On my honour I am not, I never v\as, on thc point of marriage." Augufta clafped her hands in t ranfport: a flattering tide of joy rufhed to her heart, and her eyes fparklcd with thc ftrcngth of her emotions. *' Oh then, we may yet be happy !•—- Yes, Edward, I fpurn the filly rules which tend to feparate congenial fouls. I blulh not to own my love—my*love for you. Why fhould 1 blufh at what reflects honour on my judgment ? I from this moment rcfign all I poffefs to your difpofal, too happy if you will deign to accept the feeble tcflimony of my affec¬ tion/ 1 Edward
Edward had prepared a fcene of tcndcrnef& ? but of fo dire£l a projiofal he had no idea. " Mifn Delvalley/* faid he, in a folemn tone, i( words are inadequate to exprefs my gratitude for the favourable ideas you entertain of mc. Think, however, that I have never felt any other fentiment for you than cftccm and admiration. You defcrve a heart wholly your own. I will not wrong you by accepting your hand, when love is a fi ranger to my feelings. If I have efcaped the power of your attractions I will venture to aficrt that no woman will have thc power of infpir- ing me with affection. Blefs, then, fome worthier, fome happier man, with that heart where every virtue is throned, and leave me to be forgotten. The gay fcenes of life will foon eralc the tranfient im¬ preffion I, however unworthy, may have made, and Augufla Delvalley be exalted to that rank flie.was born to grace/' Augufta, during this fpecch, fat as petrified*
petrified. Her bofom heaved convut- lively. Edward took her cold hand in his, and proceeded: * ( Your brother has ufed me cruelly: he has cut me to the foul: yet 1 once, on the continent, faved his life from banditti, and I will not take back fhe gift. Tell him, my deareft friend (for fuch muft I call you), that 1 repeat niy forgivenefs for thc ruin he hits heaped upon me ;— and now farewell,—May every good——" ** From banditti!" murmured Augufta, " From banditti! Tell mc all.—Where?" Edward novv execrated his heedlefs conduct. He recoilecled, too late, that Delvalley mentioned his fifier as being in the carriage when he attempted their refcue. Willing to avoid her tranfports, he attempted to leave ihe room, Augufta wildly arofe, She feized him by thc hand, and exclaimed, " You, tlien, were the generous man who came to our aid—who faved the lives of myfelf nnd brother P—It k fo :-—your eyes confefs it. During
CuriruT my long refidence with my nunt nt Italy, m\ bi other frequently made an * vurfion to visit us* We were indeed attacked near Ro.ne. A flranger flew to our af iifiauco. My brotlier was wounded ; ,h ul I foon became infenfible to all that paffed. Wc made many inquiries after the flranger. I have fonnd him.—Oh, my beloved Edward, you once faved my life,—do not, by a cruel flight, deprive me of it 5 do not let me repent that my exiftence is your gift, or force me to fall a felf immolated victim to your unbending fpirit/' " I cannot/ 1 faid he, " offer you the faerifice of an indifferent heart. You urge your obligations to me:—take pi*y, then, on one whofe foal is torn at the light of dilirrfs hv *& incompetent to aiiuagtf; and [vr-mit hiin to lament in folitude the pain he has unwillingly in* tlicled." u Never/* cried Augufla, ** never.-— "What! ihall I fuffer thc man who faved
faved my life—the man I love moxc thatv that life—to wafte his days in a ftate far different from what he vvas taught by thc fycophant world to expect ? Edward, I am rich—1 was rich; for ail that was mine is yours. Oh, that you vvould return the poor faerifice I make, hy a tenderer fentiment than cold eftecm!" H I forbear, Madam/' laid Edward. ivith a difdain-not even his fituation could reprefs, to fay that I think your offer un¬ kind.—Adieu.—I leave this town forever. „I go to------" <tS To your future wife/' raved Augufla, while her varying emotions threw ah air of infanity over her features,—-" It muft not, it fhall not be. I love—but re¬ member, Fitzmaurice, I can hate. It is too plain I am flighted for an unworthy tfljjwCi. You have deceived me, Mifs Ormerode faid truly that your heart was not infenfible. Let not, however, my rival boaft her triumph. She fhall dearly rue.
tuc a competition with Augufta icy i » Madam/* faid Edward, " hear me, ior thc laft time. I once more folcmnly proteft, I never yet had that aftection for anv individual, vvhich I look upon as abfolniely neccflary to form thc bafts of connubial love. What Mifs Ormerode has affcrted 1 know not, but hope and believe that it will be explained to the fati&faction of both; and, grateful for every thought you have deigned to beftovv on me, I for ever take my leave." "Hold!" cried Augufta: i( promife to defer your departure for a month, ot by all that is moft facred, I fwear not to furvive it an hour." Edvvaid, fliockM «t her vehemence, with reluctance gave the demanded piw- mife, and at length was permitted to de* part. Augufta liftened to his retiring fteps, as they echoed through the hall; and when thc ftrect door ftiut after him. felt as if finking into annihilation. Her •z fpirits
her, and fhe leaned on thc ba-k of a chair for fupport At this un* fortunate moment flv* was furprifed hv Selina, who. when the heard that Edward had left "ihe houfe, came to offer all tlio cumulation the cireumflances would per¬ mit " He is then gone ?" cried flie. " Fov* get him tJien, my dear friend, The mau who can neglect a lieart* hke yours is un¬ worthy an attachment fo pure/' In the prefent ftate of Augufla's mind, ihis well-meant addrefs produced the effect of oil on flame. She fixed her ■cxpreifive eye on Selina, and in a broken voice artculated, ** Mils Ormerode, no more duplicity: my Edward is not an unworthy obiect s «»*l )^n abortions, mat he is on the point of marriage, arc 8b fahe u^ their motive i*^ unfathomable/' St bn i now feared that the emotions her friend had experienced were too pow¬ erful to be fupjxjrted, and that her brain had received a rude fhock. She requcfied her
her to calm^ and take fome repofe,—- Augufla ftartcd—" Too long have I fuffered an artful woman to abufe my credulity. Edward has folemnly declared that he has not the flighteft idea of au union with any woman," u He has then probably changed his mind," replied Selina, coolly; fc * and as I never yet have advanced a fy! lable con* trary to the ftrictcft veracity, I muf; be excufed if I aver that he is the deceiver. But, Mifs Delvalley, iincc you have con¬ descended to hurt the feelings of ono whofe dependant fituation claims the moft delicate refpect, I thank you for your kind patronage hitherto, but muft not add to the obligation." She left the room; and rehiring to her own apartment, prepared for a re¬ moval from Sackville Street, Her aunt, Mrs. Beddome, lived in the vicinity of Red Lion Square, To her flie difpatched a note, announcing her intention of taking -Jcfuge in her houfe. All being prepared * for
fora removal, fho maid gufla, begging to fee her for a few mi* nutcs. The girl returned in tears with a meffage purporting that Mifs Delvalley was too much indifpofed to fee any body, and, that flic might not detain her, had ordered the chariot to be at her com¬ mands. Thus freed from dependance on tlie great, which isat beft an irkfome fitu¬ ation, Selina was conveyed to the houie of her aunt, who gave her that welcome which is thc heft foothcr of a wounded fpirit. The more Selina reflected on thc in¬ vectives of Augufta, the more was flie bewildered in conjecture. The words Edward Imd fpoken of his filler flie had innocently conflrued as a declaration of his love fd a miftrefs. That he fhould deny tbe imputation, and affix the fiigma of falfchood upon her, cut her to the foul: fuch behaviour ill accorded with his known .generofity; and fhe was in¬ clined to believe tlmt the rage of Augufta ou
■on refufal of oflered hand had fo far warped her undcrftanding, as to make her imagine that Edward had denied his attachment: at all events flic refolved to clear up this myflery, and wrote an ex- poftulatory letter fo Augufla, cnclofing an open one to Edward. This, however, did not reach the perfon for wliom it was cleftgned : Mifs Delvalley no fooner be¬ hold the hand-writing of Selina, than fhe committed thc letter unopened to the flames. Edward, on his return to Park Street. was accofled by Withers : " I cannot go out of town for more than a month/" faid he, moroicly; "lawyers, with their infernal jargon, will detain me till then, and perhaps longer/' " I am not forry for it/' replied Ed¬ ward ; " for I have given a folemn pro¬ mife to flay in London exactly thc time you mention/* i( To whom have vou given this pro- mifc r" < ( To
" To a woman/' fmiltng at the rebuke he knew he fhould undergo. " To a woman !" exclaimed the cynic, « A womin never values her prpmifes ;— why fhould you value yours ?" « I admire the flrength of your argu¬ ment, but mufl beg leave to decline act¬ ing with impropriety/* « Oh, what a fine young mifanthropc will be fpoiled by a woman's tears!—The fex are always at fome confounded mifchief or other/' They then fcparated: Withers walked out, and Edward took up a volume of Shakefpear; but his mind was too much agitated to attend to the magic of Profpcro, or the fweet fimplicity of Miranda. At length his eye refled on the part where the ferocious Caliban exclaims, « You taught me language, and the profit on't Is, I know how to curfe.'* « How many/' thought he, " only employ the time allotted them for nobler £)urpofts,
purpofcs, railing at their turcs, without fceking to encourage by precept, or amend by example. It fhould fecm that thefe cynical reprovers of human nature, like the monfter drawn by Shake- fpear, only employ their -talents for the bafeft ends. It is true I fuffer by ihe folly and ingratitude of a few; yet did not Augufta fay truly, that I muft not therefore draw conclufions to the condem¬ nation of -all? Withers is a mifanthropc : does his impatient fpirit communicate happinefs to himfelf, or pleafure to oihers ?" In this ftate of mind did Edward fit mufing, till his ideas arranged themfelves in poetical order. BONNET. The ikies may fmile, and Nature deck the ground With all her vernal iiore; her richeft hues O'er hiU and mead their pt&ur'd pride diffufe, And vi'lets waft their grateful incenfe round; vot, I. h Yet
. Yet ftrife deforms the pleafurcs of the grove, (So oft the fage*sand the poet's theme:) The hound the flag, the hawk purfues the dove; The finny tribe pollute with blood the ftream. Thefe uncontroH by Keafon's milder fway, The means of happinefs may never lean; , But, bright illumm'd by her powerful ray, What plea, alas! mall be adduced by Man? That thus his fellow-men become his prey, And hate and rancour fill his fhort protracted fpan! Edward continued mufing, till a letter was delivered to him by the fervant of the houfe: the feal vvas black. lie carelefsly opened it, but his indifference was con¬ verted into aflonifhment, « My pear Nuphew, " Solomon fays, < a rod for the fool's back :* novv, as 1 ^ould not, with¬ out becoming finful, differ from the wifeft of men, I am willing to think that you have afted quite right, and that your conduct towards your poor, dear uncle was not blameable. " It has plcafed Heaven, doubtlefs for t whe
wite purpofcs, and therefore I do not I murmur, to take to itfelf my beloved | third hufband, Nicholas Rigby. He went | off like a fuckling that goes to fleep ; I for having eaten a hearty flipper, he ex- i pired in his arm chair, I have loft ia [ him a faithful helpmate and a tender | guardian. Thc world has loft an honeft: | man, and a merchant of incorruptible in- | tegrity; as the clear man himfelf ufed | often to fay would be thc cafe when he I died. ; " It is fome comfort to mc in this my forrow to reflect that the affairs of thc ; dear departed were all properly fettled; for (worthy creature!) he has left mo every thing he could call his own. He knew (good man !) that he brought no¬ thing into the world, and certainly could cany nothing out. I thought his de#h would have caufed mine: indeed I fhall never recover it. To experience the lofs of a beloved hufband three times, is enough to break the moft obdurate heart; h 2 and
and were I to fuffer thus a fourth time, no mifery would equal mine; but grace is albfufficient, and I hope will, in the end, enable me to bear with fortitude the unavoidable evils of this tranfitory world, " My departed Rigby has left me (as I told you before) all that he could call his own; but I hope, nephew, you know mc too well to imagine that this acceffion of wealth gives me any alleviation from for* row, I fhall never forget tlie giver; who, to my everlafting comfort, is now in Abraham's bofom. Gold is but drofs, and all under the fun is vanity and vexa¬ tion of fpirit. *' 1 fhould be worfe than the beaft with feven heads and ten horns, and the woman who rides upon it, if I rejoiced even for a moment at the poffeffion of worldly mammon. Would that my dear Mr. Rigby had made you his heir ! But as it is, the will of the dead muft; be obeyed: he certainly knew beft how to give away his own-—dear man! *« Tormented
" as I am with this acceftioti of fortune, the only hope of joy 1 have is in the exercife of charity, as well as of every other virtue. I mean fo retire into the country, where I fhall diftribute the widow's mite, and I am only detained in town by the obfiinacy of a woman who ts indebted to me in the fum of two hun¬ dred pounds. She has wiitten me a long letter, in which I am told flie is in diftreffed cireumflances—how that can be I cannot toll; money is ealily made—as my poor dear Mr. Rigby ufed to fay, * Put me in London fireets vvith health and ten fin¬ gers, and I'll make my way to wealth/ Befides, her poverty may be her own fault, and I would not encourage any fpecies of impropriety. You underftand thefe things, nephew: will you fettle this bufinefs for me, and call at my houfe immediately on the receipt of this letter i but dont talk to me of your dear departed uncle, unlefs you have a nfind to break my heart. " I love you, nephew (that is to fay, h 3 in
in an honeft meaning) too much fo hear thc want of your company. Your apartments are preparing, aud after wc have fettled mv affairs, 1 mean to retire lo my native fpot, near Truro in Corn¬ wall, where I fhall bufy myfelf alone in fpiritual concerns, till I die and fleep with my fathers, and leave you to inherit the land. '* I am " Your affectionate aunt in the Spirit* Piccadilly. " Deborah Rigby." Edward's furprife at the receipt of this homily was not to be defcribed ; he rub¬ bed his eyes, doubting if he were awake. At length he refolved to wave the offer, as he had already once fuffered by the caprices of his protectors. With this re¬ folution he repaired to Withers, and in¬ forming him of the circumftance, afked if he did not approve of the determination he had made, not to accept of the propofal of Mrs. Rigby? « No,
" not approve of it/' faid Wi¬ thers, purfing up hi< month, and contract¬ ing his brows; " I am glad to lee that you defpife riches ; but may they not fall, on your refufal, to fome villanous rafeal who would add to the flock of folly and viefc, by every effort of a depraved imagi¬ nation ?** 4< Since/' replied Edward, " your mi- fan th ropy is fuch as to make jou defpife the actions of any, furely the introduction of folly or vice muft be a matter of in¬ difference." " I hate the world, it is true/' cried Withers; " hut I would not injure wliat I cannot amend. Shall Pompey's pillar he overthrown becaufe no longer in a per- feet ftate?—But I am wrong; the weak¬ nefs of humanity fometimes will------ I—I—Follow thc didates of your own henrt/' A tear courfrd down the rugged cheek of Withers; and, alhamed of his better feelings, he left the room. This flrange i* 4 behaviour
behaviour of a man who till novv appeared only guided by the rules of decided mifan* thropy, gave Edward ample room for re¬ flection. Indeed euriofity was not want- ing, but it was*a]ways cheeked by the commanding air of Withers, whofe keen eye fpoke his difapptobation of inquiry, The more Edward reflected on thc conduct of his Mentor, the more he was perplexed. Withers had acknowledged himfelf to be pofleffed of an ample for¬ tune; his appearance was plain; his ex¬ penfes were trivial. He mentioned not from what fources he derived his wealth, and feemed refolved that thcy v fhould re¬ main an impenetrable feeret Edward was preparing to vifit his fif¬ ter, when a folded paper on the floor caught his eye. He opened it: it was poetry, and in Withers's hand-writing.
Written
Written on a Mountain in Devonfhire. Let rne ileal awhile from care, Ahd taite the healthful morning air; From the mountain's ferny brow Let me caft the eye below, Where ocean,- rocks* and woods are feeif, In grand variety combin'd; Where duflcy dells and meadows green Boldly diverfify the fcene, And charm the carerworn mind, if. Crown'd, yon gray mafs of rock Mold, With oaks by autumn ting'd with' gold,* Whofe roots tenacious wind around The hoary ruin. Hark! the found Of rifing winds that fulien blow! v Now diftant waters ftnke the ear; In awful murmurs hoarfe and flow, The fields of ocean heave below,, And mix delight with fear*. nr. In fcenes like thefe the facred choir Of Mona's priefthood ftruck thc lyre With bold entmifiautc glow, . And pluck'd the hallow'd mifbtoe* u 5 Shrouded
Shrouded in woods hke thefe the band Of Freedom*s fons the he wkhflood, While Superftkion's witherM hand Rear'd high the dreaded magic wand, iNor droopM tiU drowned in biood, IV. The ey^ to other &enes k drawn, To the cool vale aud level I&wn; Ta tit' hillock, from whofe mofs-grown &dc Jn clouds of foam defcends the tide ; O'er broken rocks it glides away, Now ripples o*er the fallen tree, In vanous channels now will ilray, In forms fantailic murm'ring play, And feek the wider fea, v. Why at Uie profpett heaves the ugh? What means the tear that dims my eye ? Ah, why do fcenes whkh fliould feeftow Calm thoughts, but prove a fource of woe > In fcenes lefs gmnd-»-«tomemoredear«-^ | n >«*p«-~' s Ml and pleating grove, Amanda's voice has footh*d my ear— (Accept, dear fainted (hade! a tear)-*** Withpure%fondell love*
vi. When I behold rich Devon's plain, A tmn fient pleafure I obtain; The mental banquet foon is croh% When mem'ry paints the fccne thit 's loft— ~ Ah ! k& to me the fpot I kv*tt t But flie—the foul of all—is fied^ (Whofe prefence, deferts had improved, Whofe beauty^ faints to love had mov T d») And numbered with the dead. vir. Ceyfe, ceafe to hope 4 oh child ef woe! That pleafure's cup for thee Hull flow* For thee the ieafons eheerlefs roll, And nature chills, not warms thy ibid* . A retroipecl of pleafurcs gone, Damps ev-ry hope of future joys,—* Ceafe, ceafe thy heart-opprei&ve moan, And reft wkh her, beneath one ione^ Who moil thy thought employs ^ # " ^"" , ""'"" *'" ■■ - ■ "" ■ - "■ -------— ■'■ i 1 1" iniini-nr iiiiii.iiiiii fm 1 i » n im mn . M inn , ,,.......
h6 Could:
Could this paper be written by Wi¬ thers ? No date was affixed to it; the ink was faded, and it appeared as if many years had elapfed fince it had been firft written. A difappointment in early af¬ fection feemed to account for the afperity of the cynic t yet could he who lamented the lofs of a beloved object rail with in* difcriminate rancour againft the fex?— Impoffible, He who has once been in thc habits of liftening to the refined ideas of a pure female mind, will, by catching a portion of its delicacy, learn to appre¬ ciate its value. Wearied with conjecture, Edward left the houfc, with the intention of calling upon his fifter, who had provided, apart¬ ments at Lambeth. He found her em- ployed in reading; her face, divefled of the rouge with* vvhich, in her days of in* hmy i it had been disfigured, was pale and emaciated; her eyes were half clofed, and it appeared as if a tear had lately tfcaped them, After
After affectionately embracing his fifter, Edward inquired the caufe of her de- jedtlon, and afked if the book fhe had been reading had contributed towards it Helen put the book into his hands; it was Dr, Gregory's Legacy to his Daugh¬ ters. " Such," faid fhe, with a figh, £e are the duties of the female world; ah! how have I neglected them P> ** I am happy, my dear Helen," faid Edward, " to find that your repentance is as fincere as your errors and fuffcrings were great; let not, however, repentance degenerate into defpair; I hope yet to fee you reftored to fociety." " I have no wifh," faid Helen, ** again, to mix with the world ; indeed I am un¬ fitted for it; vice has rendered me an ob¬ ject of contempt; and if I defpife nayfclf,. what have I to expect-from others ?" ** You are wrong, Helen; fearch your heart, and you will find a feeret acquit¬ tal/' " No,
** No, Edward, no; fhall I trufi to the voice of that, to whofe weaknefs I owe all my forrows ? My conduct can admit of fittle palliation. Pardon my prefump* tion; but I have a favour to beg: flart not when I requeft you, on my knees, to procure me admiffion into the Magdalen. I will change my name, and no difgrace fttall be reflected on yoiK ,? " Difgrace!" cried Edward, while he raifed her from the ground, and folded her to his bofom; '* difgrace! my dear, my penitent fifter, how fhall I exprefs my fetisfadlion? Purfue your purpofe; lwill bufy myfelf in procuring your admiffion; but do you feel yourfelf capable of fo- dufipn ? Helen, reflect on what you do." u I can bear fectufion; nay, I ardently wifh it; for fhall I tell you ? will you not defpife me if -----" u Proceed, 5 * cried Edward* m I vvas accuftorned," find fhe, burfting into tears, ** when guilty of every irre¬ gularity, to fwallovv large quantifies of fpirituous
long habit renders me incapable of wholly abfiaining from thc practice: befides 3 I vvas brought, hy ex¬ ample, to ufe oaths the moft horrible and blafphemous. I have endeavoured to check thefe fince you fnatched me from dcftruction ; but in defpite of all my pre¬ cautions I fometimes find myfelf faulty. In retirement a fevere guardian will watch over my conduct:, and perhaps I may overcome with difficulty what with diffi¬ culty I acquired," Edward fhuddered as his fifter thus candidly confeffed lier crimes; he foothed her broken fpirit, and, though his pride revolted from the idea, refcbed to pro* cure her the afyt«a& fhe fo sa&ch eovefeA
CHA^
CHAR VIIL The Widow's Tale. DWARD, having left the penitent Helen, repaired to Piccadilly; the foot¬ man immediately recollected him, and with a fmile and low bow teftified his joy at his return. The houfe vvas filent, for Mrs. Rigby kept up the decorum of in* difpofition, though her hufband had been buried four whole days; but Edward was a relation, and his appearance could give no> fhock to the rule& which widows have from time immemorial prcfcribed for themfelves. Mrs. Rigby foon entered the room into which Edward was fhown, leaning upon her maid. After a decent fhovver of tears 3 and.a moderate quantity of deep fighs diily paid to the memory of the dear de¬ parted.
Jul
parted, fhe began to convene in a very compofed and pious ftrain on his cireum¬ flances, " Two hundred and fifty thoufand pounds, my dear Edward," faid fhe, while fhe took a glafs of Daffy's elixir from her attendant, *' is, to be fure, a vaft burden upon a poor lone woman. I think I fhall never marry again; I fhall never forget my poor dear Mr. Rigby* Well! he's in heaven, if ever man went there; fo 1 fubmit to what is ordained* As for marrying again, as I was laying before, it is quite out of the queftion ; I am refolved never to enter info that happy fiate more; I can't bear to think of it. But what can I do ? I cannot manage my affairs alone. You, my dear, who will inherit after me (fince I am to my forrow a widow), are beft qualified to do me right, becaufe you will have an intereft in my affairs; and as my dear Mr. Rigby ufed often to fay, poor man! the horfe you feed will carry* you fafc over the bridge,
bridge, 1 ber, Edward* that you wili g<, to l\\r% Lomcly ; tr) if you raimol get this two hundred pounds by fair means ; but \C flic is obfiinatr, let her take the confequenre: two hundred pounds is an amazing fum, and more than I can afford to lofe : if fhe is in low circumitanccs, it i< doubtlefs her own fault; and Heaven forbid that 1 fhould encourage any fpecic£ of impropriety, Bui you underftand thcfc things, nephew; you are a merchant* and know that money muft be had: charity k a fine thing, a very fine things but let m he juft firft> and charitable after¬ wards/* € * 1 fhall obey yon, Madam, 1 ' faid Ed¬ ward, ft tiling the contempt which fomv part of this ifvo it excited : e€ but I mufi differ <wm you, if 3011 imagine that the love of gain fuj>crfedec every olher feeling in the bread of a merchant. That then are many whofe gcnerouF ideas have been contracted by a too clofe attention to one darling purfuit, is tme; but 1 hope (nay, I know^
1 know) that the majority of our Drifiii, merchants will noi come nnder that de¬ il npt ion," lie then departed, and proceeded t^ IlWi Holborn, in order to examine the validity of the claims of hn anuJ upor, Mr.-*, Lomcl), A girl opened tbe don nnd directed him to a bark mom up two pah* of fiatre. Here lubvani hchcUl n \\$X\\ that charmed hi? feehng heart, Miv, lamely vvas in deep mourning; her facc% which had fuftcred more from grief than time, exhibited traccsof uncommon beauty: ihc vvas workingat her needle, and a beauti¬ ful girl, about fcven years old, wa« reading to her a chanter h\ the Bible, At fom'- diflance irons thcte fM another !^t^ ^mI, who rocked a cradle with Iv r ie*. i v J *il her hands were employed in mnk-niTT^une- of different coloured ribn>Kl-. d ^e 4 wn* boiling, and a final! pierr o*" mcr.i lr:ic by a firing before the fire, Tin^ anr*: mrnt, though thc bed-mom as we! 1 as the! kitchen, was kept perfect!v neat. Vti-
ward recollected the parlour of Anaflatia^ and mentally drew a comparifon between that and the room in which he vvas, Mrs. Lomely arofe ; ihe feemed con¬ fufed at the entrance of a flranger 3 and by (landing before the fire feemed willing to fkreen her culinary articles from ob¬ fervation. Edward apologized for his intrufion, and informed her that he came at the defire of Mrs, Rigby. At this name the check of Mrs. Lomely, naturally pale, faded yet more; but in a fhort time a glowing red flatbed her face, and pointing to her children, with a fig¬ nificant look fhe exclaimed: ** Mrs. Rigby is then refolved on my tmn ! ** By no means, Madam/' cried Ed¬ ward eagerly; * € fhe is incapable of cruelty. Tou are not acquainted with her/* *' I am not, Sir; but I have often fo- licited an interview, and fhe has returned for anfwer, that fhe would put her affairs info
into the hands of one who would fee juf¬ tice done to both parties. Alas! Sir, it is notjujlice I need, but compaffmi" " Mrs. Rigby, Madam, wiil^ I am con* fident, not diftrefs you. Be comforted— I am the perfon who have the manage¬ ment of her concerns, and dare affure you, that no harfh or improper fteps will be taken." " I thank you, Sir—for my dear help- lefs girls do I thank you. 1 can hear mif- fortune—1 have long been a prey to it; but when I refledl on the lot which awaits thefe innocents, my boafted heroifm va~ nifhes, and I feel all the anguifli of whkh a maternal heart is capable," At this inftant die cry of a child ifiucd v from the cradle. Mrs, Lomely approached it, and lifting up the curtain, difelofed the blooming face of a cherub, At the fight of its mother a fmile dimpled its countenance, while the checked tears fiill glittered on its rofy cheek. Edward knelt by
by the cradle, and affectionately kifled the child, who held out its little hands, ancl received the carcffcs with pleafure, Mrs. Lomely took the infant in her arms, and fitting down, requcfied Edward to do the fame. <* You feem, Sir," faid flic, fr * fo poffcf* a feeling foul; your attention to my dear little Sophy tells mc fo; for 1 have found thofe who love the innocent carcfics of a diild to poffefs a general benevolence.— Poor Sophy! bow like her father! May her heart, but not her lot, referable his !'* u I hope, Madam," faid Edward, " that this meeting may prove fortunate for both of us ; your cireumflances may take a fa¬ vourable turn, and I have the fatisfaction of contributing to your happinefs. Permit me to inquire tlic nature of your obliga¬ tions to Mrs, Righy." " It will be neccflary/* faid Mrs.Lomely. with a deep figh, * 4 to recapitulate fome painful cireumflances which gave rife to
my prefent diftrefs *.—I am the daughter of a druggift of Liverpool, who fpared no pains to cultivate my mind ; for 1 was iiis only child. My fattier always fupported a genteel appearance; but he was thought* lefs, and proud of mixing with the befi focicty, to which his good character and cheerful behaviour procured Iiim a willing paffpQrt. Death, however, terminated his career at an early a^e; and on examining his affairs, the fum of four hundred pounds was all that could be faved from the cre¬ ditors. I was at this time feventeen years of age; an uncle, who had a large family, took me under his prote&ion, and I owe him every obligation. At tlie houfe of this kind relation I firil met Mr. Lomely; he was about five years older than mvfclf, ancl was comfortably fettled in a farm: his mind had been cultivated by a better education than generally falls to the lot of the lower claries of life. This advantage ferved
ferved only to give lufire to the feelings of an honeft heart. Mr, Lomely had two fiflers; they were dependant upon him, and while he bufied himfelf in the duties of the field, they fuperintendcd the eco¬ nomy of thc houfe. His affe<tion for thefe fifters was unbounded, and it was often remarked by my uncle, that fo good a brotlier could not fail to make an excel¬ lent hufband, Lomely's vifits at our houfe grew frequent, yet he never neg¬ lected his bufinefs, but of an evening would draw round our fire-fide, ancl cheer our little circle by his gaiety, or improve it by his good fenfe. My uncle loved him more and more, and called him a prudent youth—the higheft title of honour in his eftimation, '* It was obferved by my coufins, who were very good girls, that Lomely paid me particular attentions, 1 pretended to laugh tkt the idea, but in my heart wa* pleafed. At length his behaviour grew fo marked, that it was impoffible to mifun¬ derftand
dcrftand it; and though we talked of fnendfhify wc too well knew it was hve. " At this time an unexpected florm burft upon mc; thc trufiee in whofe hands my little property was veiled ab- feonded, aud I was reduced to be de¬ pendant on my uncle ? who was already burdened with a family of five daughters. I vvas flattered by that worthy relation that I might yet fave a few pounds; but his hopes deceived him; for it was but too certain that the whole of my little pro¬ perty was irretrievably loft. <i No fooner did the news of my mif« fortune fpread about the neighbourhood, than Mr. Lomely openly declared his love* I le, however, candidly informed me* that his income vvas for thc prefent inadequate w> fupport n wife in the way he eould wifh ■^hift fifters muft be provided for; they had the oiler of mi cftabiUhment at tlie houfe of an elderly relation; but a twelve* month would elapfo before he could fettle every thing to his fatUfaction and my voi,. i. ? comfort*
comfort, naming a twelvemonth he affixed the fhorteft period he poflibly could, apprebenfive that I might imagine bis attachment to arife from interefied motives; he feared to hurt my delicacy— -oh that he had confiilted the dictates of prudence !—The year expired, my uncle gave me away, and I pledged my faith to the beft of mankind. Our life, if not fplendid, was happy; my hufband laboured in the field, and in the evening was welcomed home by my fmiles and a comfortable hearth. My eldcft girls, Mary and Jane, were born two years tub- fequent to our marriage, and my little Sophy fix years afterwards." Mrs, Lomely's voice here began to fal¬ ter—fhe rocked her baby on her knee, and proceeded: u My hufband did not fear work; he toiled more than his flrength could bear ; and a few months before my Sophy was born, a lingering illnefs feized him: his Hreetnefi of temper was, however, undi- rainifhed,
minifhed. evening before he died he endeavoured to comfort me, and death feemed to have no terrors for him, but in the apprehcnfion of what I fhould fuffer* Never fhall I forget the next morning; by the affiflance of two neighbours my hufband vvas conveyed from his bed-room to our little parlour. I had placed pil¬ lows about the wicker chair in which he fat; though faint, he fpoke with cheerful- nefs 5 I gave him his bafon of milk, he touched it vvith his lips, but fhook his head, and with a mournful fmile bade me replace it on the tabic. In a few minutes he complained of being drowfy, and leaned his head upon my arm; he re¬ mained in this fituation for about a quar¬ ter of an hour—my eldcft girl ran acrofs the room—1 gave her a fignal to keep filence, and turned my head gently to fee if the reft of the invalid was broken—bis reft vvas eternal—for, oh ! vvhat were my feelings when 1 difcovered that the lifelefs £ & body
of my refled upon my arm! " After fuffering the moft acute forrow I thought could fall to the lot of mor¬ tality, I little thought of experiencing a greater fhare of mifery. Among my huf¬ band's papers I found this letter—-it wa* unfinifhed, and 1 believe written to a bro¬ ther in the Weft Indies.'* Mrs. Lomely took a folded paper from a drawer, and prefented it to Edward, The Letter. u You are wrong, my dear Jame* **Hpru<fence has formed no part of mv character. You affirm in your laft letter, that I fhall be happy, becaufe 1 have acted upon well-judged principles, I am, it i^ tvue, generally cfiecmed a prudent man, but prudence, I repeat it, hah formed n^ part of my character, " I have, I own, always endeavoured to n& right; my paflions arc not violent —woidd
—would could fay fo of my feelings !—■ That equanimity of temper you lay fo much fireffr upon, has, perhap-, been my ruin. Accuflomed, by an early philofo-* phy, to look with indifference on the occurrences of life, i vrilued thc gifts of fortune but little, and fmiled at the avi¬ dity of my fellow-men. " An education fuperior to my rank in life procured mc thc acquaintance of fome agreeable families; and hy this means 1 firft faw the amiable woman who is novv at the fame time ihe torment and folace of my cxiflence. Her fortune was iman, and the villany of her trufiee robbed her even of that. I had addrefied her pre¬ vious to her loffes; ancl though we had entered into no engagement, my affection was known to licr. If even I had not loved her, eould 1, as a man of honour, retract ?—Would t had ! Thc trial might have been fevere, but it would have been tranfient; while the miferies I have en- * 3 tailed
tailed upon her are, I fear, of a perma¬ nent nature, I married—Where was mv tr prudence at that moment ? 1 foon was fur- rounded by a little family; but the ra¬ refies of innocence plunged daggers to my heart. Often when my wife has placed my children on my knee, and a forced fmile has brightened my face, have I curfed the hour which gave birth to thefe pledges of affection. Painful is it to cfothc fou row in the garb of eafe—yet daily was this my tafk. My affairs were deranged ; the expenfes of a family exhauftcd my Yefources, and I felt all the agonies of de¬ fpair when I reflected on the fhock to which I muft expofe my wife. This ex¬ iftence have I dragged on for years : my wife is induflrious and affe<tionatc, my children healthy and beautiful; but their fight is death to me, and their gaiety a fource of bitter reflection. Did I love my family lefs, I would fly to the moft remote part of the world, withheld alone by
by an awful from felf~dcfirui*iion.~ Periiaps, my dear James, this may be the laft time I fhall---------" " This heart-breaking letter, Sir,** con¬ tinued Mrs. Lomely (feeing that Edward had read it), " opened my eyes to the mifery of which I vvas the caufe. I vvas for fome time in a ftate nearly frantic. I found my affairs even worfe than my fears had painted them; but I refolved to imitate my hufband, and make every ef¬ fort to fave my children. The late Mr. Rigby was at Liverpool (whither I had removed, with the intention of opening a fmall fhop), the interefts of Lord Aller- ton having obliged him to take thc jour¬ ney, as a general election was at hand.— An old gentleman of fmall property, but great influence, interefied himfelf in my affairs: he had known and efteemed my hufband; and when Mr. Rigby, of whom he had fome knowledge, called at hi> houfe, I happened to be in thc parlour. 1 4 Not
Not willing to interrupt any buftnel^, f took my '"avc, ancl was much fiirpnfcd at receiving a note n\ thcte wordN: 4< * Mrs, Lomi.ly, u * 1 underfland vou labour under fome little cmbarraflmeuTs-^if two hun¬ dred pounds will be of fervice, you may command them. * £ c I am yours, &•?. c * ( Nicholas Rigby** Mrs. Lomely, u I almofl doubted the evidence of mv fenfes, and was yet in a fiate of uncer¬ tainty, when Mr. Rigby entered my hum¬ ble dwelling. He tendered thc two hun¬ dred pound**-, or more if 1 flood in need of it. I al firll hefitated—-thc offer wa* tempting, but a principle of* jinnee re¬ ft rained ine; and I frank lv aeknowled^rd lhat 1 could only depend upon my in¬ duflry for thc repayment. Mr, Rigbv kiudlv beared me not to he mvaU on lh,U
that head, and taking an acknowledg* ment for tlic money, left me* " 1 flew to thc gentleman zi whofe houfe I had firft feen my benefactor* I told hira all; tears bedewed the cheeks of thc good man, and vowing that he would repay fuch excellence n> far as hiy in his power, he exerted all his influence, de¬ parted with Mr. Rigby for the contefted borough, and Lord Allcrton gained his election, ** I jov fully opened a linen-draper's fhop, and placed tht 4 remainder of my property in a country hank ; but I foon had reafon to repent this flep—the hank failed, and hundreds befides myfelf were fufferers. A long illnefs fuccecded this fatal blow, and my affairs were again deranged—my old friend was dead—I gave up all to my creditors* and, by the advice of my uncle, came to London, Here i am enabled to protract my exiftence by plain work, while my little Mary makes and fells the purfes Ihc is now employed on." i c Ldwand
Edward liftened attentively while Mrs. Lomely told hev fimple tale ? he begged her to cheer her fpirits, for he would fettle every thing to her fatisfaaton; and taking up one of 4he riband purfes, he flipped a ten pound note into it, and took his leave.
CHAP,
CHAP. IX, Love and Hate. On his return to his lodgings, which he,meant todifcharge, Edward vvas met by Withers. *' Heie have been/' faid he, u four letters left for you." " And where are they V* u Gone.—The lady, who, I fuppofe, is your difinterefted inamorata, called in her chariot, with two lazy rafcals behind it, and took them away again," At this moment a chariot drove to the door. " Here fhe is again," cried Withers, u I pity the poor horfes with all my foul.* He then departed. In a few moments the door was thrown open, and Augufta, 16 witb
xvith her fine features diftortcd by rage, entered the room. Edward trembled as he met her hagard eye. Her foftnefs vvas fled ; lier parched lips marked her internal agony. Both were filent for fome time, till Augufta articulated, ** You fecm hurt, Sir, at this Vifit—perhaps I ought to call it intrufion ; but yon ftmft not wonder that t depart from the delicacy of my fex 9 fince you h&vc forfeked the feelings and candour oi yours" " Madam!'' ** Have you not deceived, grofsly de¬ ceived me ? Are you not the moft artful <of mankind ? My love, my ardent love. which I have not fhamecl to acknowledge, is flighted* Has nature formed me a horror to the fight, or has vice blotted my foul J—-^Oh, Edward! I came here to upbraid i but my refolution melts when T behold you." « Edwftrd looked upo& hor with pity, Mt placed her «f<*n r fofa, and walked con-
CK^ifofedly to and '■6o.-~-« I sm fei^ fible, Mifs Del val ley—-I fuy fet I-~4 am fiily fenfible of the honour-^-of my hap* pinefe, and umvorthincfs io hold a place in—in your heart;—but let me**-"—** Edward could fay no moi^; Ifce words died upon his lips, Augufta raifed her fpeaking eyes, and gentlenefs fuperfeded tiie tranfportS'Ofi^ge. Renovated hope fprung ftom the abyfs of defpair, and the heart of Edward feemed yet attainable. Tiiis gleam was momentary. A fudden ideaflafhed acrofs her memory^ and the gay vifion ficd. Again a gloomy frown look poffeffion of her fine features, mnd fhe exclaimed^ « Fitzmaurice, will you, as a man of honam*, deny an engagement with any woman whatfoever?" ■ u I do moft folernnlv dcnv it" " As you hope for peace and repute tmn V* " May i-.ever' forfeit both, if J have yet
yet feen the woman for whom I feel m e&clnfive partiality 1" <* Deceiver! I know you.—May the rewards of perjury be jours!—Read that letter/ 1 Edward, in amazement, took the prof¬ fered letter, and deliberately read it. u Mr bsar Edward, " Since you left me this morning* I feel my heart greatly relieved. Your foothing tendernefs, and ready acquief* cence with my wifhes, have taught me to put a value on life. There is then an objeel: I can love; and one who, in defpite of my failings, can love mcl Oh, how do I regret that I am unworthy the protection I experience from you, my preferver, and my beft friend! To yoo do I owe the happinefs of my life—a happinefs as undeferved as unexpe&cd; and yet to me may you attribute thc eftrimgement of your uncle's affe&ion, Oh?
Oh, my beloved Edward, I was born to be a fource of mifery to others I I wifh much to fee you. Time lingers till I again embrace you. Yet" I would not be importunate. When you can fpare a moment from other avocations, let me be bleft with your prefence, as a Angular circumftance 1 wifh to impart took place foon after you left me this morning.—* What name fhall I fign ?—I am at a lofe; but believe me *< Your affectionate and grateful Lambeth u Hel eh." ** You are confounded, Sir," faid Au¬ gufta, with affected cool nefs. ** Your heart is fufceptible of love, I find. WiH you deny that this letter is* meant for you ?'* €i I do not deny it, Madam. n * € Do you know the writer Y\ *J I do." il An4
* And—" Augufta paufed, « You *-*Iove her?" ** I do;—but hear me, for heaven's fake,** A few wnrds explained thc myflery?; and again the countenance of Augufla proclaimed the reign of hope. ** I have then injured Mifs Ormerode," cried fhe: * ( how fhaH I repair the effects of my impetuofity ? n Edward rejoiced to fee her fo calm, and hoped to lead the converfation to a lefs intereft ing topic; but ihc perceived his intention, and, in an impofmg voice, faid, *' No, Fitzmaurice; no: feek not toctraw me from thc fettled purpofe of rny heart. 1 have gone too far to recede. I *will here learn my fate. You fee before vou a woman whofe alliance has been afpired to by the firft famihes in the king¬ dom, but whofe foul fcorns to gratify intereft at the expenfe of love. I be¬ held you, from the moment I knew you, with affection* Your immenfe wealth prevented
prevented the dec'kration which trembled On mf lips. My love is moft difinterefted: treat it not with contempt; but pity a woman, whofe proud foul never before fiooped to entreaty," Edward's fenfations at this epoch par* took of compaflion and contempt; yet he foothed themgitafed Augufta; and in the courfe of the converfation fhe learned the fact of his re->efiab!ifhed fortunes, A burtning blufh dyed her cheefas at tbe difcovery. She panted for brea&h, and fell almoft fainting on the &f * aia Edward threw himfelf on his, knees before her; and taking her hand, bathed it with Ins tears*-—At length, &fter a flroggle re* Ambling thnt of the In ft p&ngs of nature* Augufla rofe from the conch. *' y Th done^ cried flie, in a voice fenrcely Human; w *rt< done; and 1 am indeed eontemptiNe—funk lower than i could conc<»!v*<( degradation! Bnt never more will 1 infolf, by my prefence, fhe dlgniifed part <>I mv few No: I fly them
them for ever. Fitzmaurice, I am yours —your miflrefs—your flave. You may defpife me,~but ......... ■■ ' ■ ........ - " Here the voice'of Augufla became inarticulate* Hollow, half-fuppreffed fereams, burft at intervals from her bo* fom % and her vacant eye rolled gloomily on each furrounding obje<SL The fituation of Edward was no lefs pitiable. Petrified with amazement, he doubted if he heard aright. That a wo- ma& of high rank, of hitherto unftained lefs ifetion, fhould foltcit his bant with abject fupplication, and on his refufal fhould propofe his acceptance of her on any terms, feemed to be more the wan¬ dering of a perturbed brain, than reality, Augufta ftood with the immobility of a ftatue, Edward again approached her, A$ he took her hand, fenfation feemed to return. She fell into his arms, and burft into tears. Edward now loft all reflec¬ tion. His brain was frenzied. He prefled her s
her to his bofom, and imprinted a burning kifs on her lips. But his wandering reafon was recalled by a heavy groan. He ftartcd, and per¬ ceived the figure of Withers, who, with a look of forrow, was ftanding at the door of the room. Edward fprang from the embrace of Augufta, who fell upon the fofa, covering her glowing face with her hands. « How dare you, Sir—whence came you—and why r" *' I came out of the next room," faid Withers; " and my purpofe is to fave you.** " I at prefent neither want your com¬ pany nor advice," " So 1 apprehend," faid the cynic drily; u and yet I believe they were never more neccflary, Thc pretence of a third perfon h very troublefomc in certain cafes; but now, young man, 1 muft defire that you will yourfelf leave the room, /mean to have the honour of cfeorting this lady to her carriage," The
The commanding air which Withers affumed, inflcad of exciting, cooled the anger of Edward, which was loft in aftonifliment *' 1 entreat you, Sir, to withdraw: 1 muft yet fpeak a word to this lady." " So mufl J," cried Withers. Then turning to Augufta, " You fee before you, Madam, a man who has had feme experience in the world, as my gray hairs fortify. Yet my head was not always gray; and I can remember what it wns to be young. I then loved to follow my own incHnations, and! have frnarted for it, 1 am refolved to guard others from thc fhares into whieh I fell myfelf. Yon are a fine young lady; nnd it would he ten thoufand pities if you were to fnrn out a mere woman of the ton. Yon liave duties to fulfil; and the chief of thefe is ft fubject ion of thofe violent ft arts of paf¬ fion, which will ultimately be productive df mifery and repentance. I fliould be forry, fo help me Heaveu, to fee fo fine a woman
a woman degraded from the rank fhe might adorn. And my young friend here is a noble youth:—long may he continue fo! It would tear my foul if he were to turn out a fcoundrcl.—I overheard your converfation. Not a word efcaped mc. I do not blufh to own my eaves-dropping. I hope it will turn to good account—I pity you, Lady, You liave fixed your affec¬ tions on perhaps thc only man who vvould not return them. Forget him, then. Look around you: honour, riches, titles, and birth courfc your acceptance. Efface, then, a tranfitory impreffion, and believe that your feeret fhall ever remain locked within my bofom." Augufta abruptly arofe; and, addreff- ing herfelf to Edward, " Before I leave you, Sir," faid fhe, in a tone of defpera¬ tion, (i allow mc yet to fpeak a word. I am too degraded to mix with thc vir¬ tuous world, I am funk in my own cftccm* I have made a profter of my hand and fortune—>1 have even de- 4 feended
to propofals to repeat— You have contemptuoufly feorned m) love •— beware, Fitzmaurice, of my hate 1" She flew down flairs, and the chariot immediately drove away. ** Spoken in the fpirit of feminine ineek- nefs!" faid Withers. *« I begin to fear I am treading on barrels of gunpowder* I fhall not be eafy till I have fearched the cellars. I muft cook my own dinner, or I fhall have arfenic in my peafc-foup " « This, Sir, is trifling," faid Edward, gravely. €i Upon my word though," continued Withers, " I do not think it unlikely. The poet was right when he talked of a * woman feorned'." « We are not in Italy," faid Edward, with a mournful fmile. ** No, nor in El Dorado," replied Withers. " Mifs Delvalley has been, however, educated in the Italian fchool. She may bring up a few of the cuf- toms,
ioms, and the aqua toffana. Our nation, which ufed to boaft originality, has now fubmitted to be a cdpyift. Why not adopt Italian tragedies in real life, as we do the German at our theatres ?—I hope foon to leave London. I am fick of this maddening town. You are a rich man: you will not novv be a reclufe. I began to have a fricndfhip for you; and I muft retire alone." Edward carneftly entreated his Mentor to detail his plan. He acknowledged that although in the firft burft of paflion he had acceded to the propofal of feclu- fion from the world, he could not fee how it could wholly be effected; and that the attempt would favour more of infanity than fentiment. A fmile ftole over the furrowed coun- tenance of thc cynic; but Edward could not tell to what clafs it belonged: it nei¬ ther exprefled pleafure nor contempt The fmile was tranfient. Withers fixed his penetratiflg eyes on thole
thofe of his young friend, and " you really think that man ftands in need of the afliftaKce of his fellow-men ? Do you think that yirtce is the inmate of our planet ? As years advance, you will be enabled to judge,— e I could a tale unfold f but—as yet I may not—I muft not bia.^ your judgment. Live in the world, or retire from it, as reafon dictates; aud when your choice is decided, hear from me the hiftory of a fi^ty years pilgrim* age." Edward eagerly requefted Mr. V* ither* not to defer fktisfying his euriofity, whirh he affured him fprung from no bafe mo¬ tive, " I am confident," faid he, " that the hiftory of your life would have an influence on mine." Withers, in filence, took up his hat, and ftrolled iuto the Park; and whei* Edward was preparing to follow him. a fervant ca-me with a meflage from thc cynic, requefling Mr. Fitzmaurice not w leave tlie ho&fe for a day or two. Willing
to oblige the old man, Edward confented, not without a latent hope of prevailing on him to difcover who and what he was.
vot. 1. k f „ CHAf*
chap. x. A Magdalen. After .*** **»««.* He wrote a note to his aunt, that an un^* forefecn accident would prevent his calling on her for a few days. He then dreffed, and haftencd to his fifter. She appeared in good fpirits; and he inquired by what means fhe had conveyed her note of the day before. Helen replied, that flie had left it herfelf at his lodgings. " I feared to enter," faid fhe; " for I have no right to intrude where the virtuous refort" Edward now readily divined the means by which the letter had fallen into the hands of Augufta. Withers had infoimed him that feveral letters had been left, and after-
afterwards taken away; and he concluded that the note of his fifter had been placed by the fervant vvith the others on the table, and given together by miftake to Augufla, whofe fufpicion had prompted her to vio¬ late the fanctity of a feal. Helen then informed her brother of the circumftance to vvhich fhe alluded in her note. Edward had fcareely left her the day before, when a genteel woman entered tlie apartment, and, begging pardon for her intrufion, aiked if her name was Lawrence, Helen blufhed, and replied, that fhe had borne that name for fome years, u Your real name, then, is Helen Fit/.* maurice ?" Helen faintly anfwered that it vvas. " Were you ever married, Madam?" " Never." " Do you know Mr, Emanuel Fitz- maurice P k * * 6 1 have
* f I have heard my father mention a dereafed brother of that name." *' Did he not clie in Portugal ?" >* No: 1 believe he fell a faerifice to a contagious fever in fhe Weft Indies at a very early ago." " >You, then, Madam, arc the perfon I vvas to feek. I have been informed of your hiftory.—Have you any plan in view for your future life ?—Should you deferve, you will meet with encouragement." Helen thanked thc lady, with tears in her eyes, and obferved, that as flic had found a generous protector in her own brother, flie coukl not, without ingrati¬ tude, be a burden to a flranger. The offer, fhe added, claimed her confidence; and fhe would own that it was her inten¬ tion to enter into the focicty of the Mag¬ dalens." Ctf You may depend upon an admiffion," did the woman, " fhould your brother's application fail." oiie
She then warned Helen not to watch thc road fhe fliould take, and left thc houfc* Edward was much furprifed when his fifter related thefe rmftcrtous circum* fiances* His fufpicions foil fell upon Withers;—but what motive coukl he have for myflery ? Edward had trufled him with thc feeret of his filler's wrongs; and it was by his advice that he was con¬ firmed in the plan of permitting her to become a Magdalen. Mifs Delvalley knew not the abode of Helen; yet fome confufed thoughts entered Edward's mind* The idea of Aubrey Delvalley never oc* curred, either to brother or filler* Three weeks paffed away.—Withers, by his entreaties, prevailed on Edward not fo leave him; while Mrs. Rigby murmured at his not rcfidin* altogether at her houfc. She however faw him daily; and her temper became as placid and foft as it was before harfh and re¬ pulfivc. R 3 One
One morning, as Edward paffed through Sackville Street, he caft his eyes on thc houfc of Augufta, and, to his furprife, obferved that the furniture was advertifed for fale. On inquiry, he heard that Mifs Delvalley was gone to Lifbon, and that the premifes and furniture were to be fold by auction. Melancholy took poffeffion of Edward's mindi which was not alleviated by the entrance of his fifter into the Magdalen. Withers, at his requeft, had exerted him¬ felf to procure her the fituation. What a reflection for a man of feeling! A fifter loft to the wwld at an early age, and pining in a fociety where few were willing inmates:^—fhut up with women, whofe coarfe converfation and indelicate manners mufl fhock her repentant fpirit, and hold to her view the defpicable cha¬ racter fhe moft wifhed to forget. Often had Edward determined to attend the fervice; but a fear of betraying his fenfi- bility
bility withheld him. urged him to be a man. *< Your fifter," faid he, " has doubtlefs caft an eye over the church, to difcover her beloved protector. Do you wifh to make her imagine that neglect is the caufe of your non-appearance ?" This reflection conquered the reluc¬ tance of Edward, and he refolved to attend the fervicei—The Sunday arrived: the two friends filently walked towards the chapel. It was uncommonly crowded, and with difficulty they procured a feat Edward, addreffing himfelf to a plain dreft elderly gentleman who fat next him, inquired the caufe of this extraordinary concourfe; and underftood that a very popular preacher was to deliver the dif- courfe. * € If I had known this," added the gentleman, " I would have flayed at home: I hate to liften to afte&ed fenti* ment and real bombaft." Edward fmiled.—" You do not, then," k 4 laid
faid he, H approve of our modern pulpifc eloquence ?" ** Not altogether, Sir. Some clergy*. men, confeious that they can never rife at beft above mediocrity, take no care of any thing but their tithes and furplice fees; and the prayers are run over as a matter of duty, with as little care as a boy repeats his Accidence." " But our popular preachers—" ** Are generally affe&ed coxcombs* who drefs the hair with modifh ftudied negligence, beftowing that time on their brainlefs fkulls vvhich were more ufefully employed in attending to the fouls of their parifhioners. Thefe ephemera difplay a feai ring (the diamond is now obfolcte), with a white cambric handkerchief, which wafts perfume like thc center of a Catholic prieft* They hem in a foft tone, begin the prayer in a voice but half a breath removed from filence, then rife in he* roicSj and, to imprefs Chrifiians vvith for¬ titude*
titude, talk of cleanfing jlaHes, with Hercnlanean perfeverance. Some¬ times they pretend, nay do their befl to weep, in order to affecT: their hearers; liltle imagining (fuch is the force of felf- love) that one half are yawning, and tlie other faft aileep." ■' You arc fevere* Sir/* * e Juflly fo, I affure you. I am an old-fafhioned man, Sir: I Jove to goto church with my family. My father did fo before mc; and I hope my children will continue the good cufiom when 1 am gone. But let us hear good fenfe for our pains, I hate to fee a man of God, whofe words fhould inftruct and example edify, condeieend to tlie acl ions of a fool and coxcomb. Such were not our Til* lotfons, our Souths, and our Houghs, Admirably has our belt of modern poets* eriticifed the effenced race of preachers." a I am forry our clergy fland no higher in your efteem." H Do not mittake me, Sir/' replied
the gentleman gravely ; " I do not mean to throw out exclusive cenfure—*no, Sir; we have among the clergy many brilliant characters, great laid good men, from the bifhop to the curate: we may cenfure a particular limb of a flatue as mutilated, while we admire the exquifite fymmetry of the other parts; and I fcruple not to affirm, that the great body of our clergy iu compofed of men of the higheft talents, honour, ancl exemplary piety*" Edward now looked towards the fcreen * which fhrowds the unfortunate daughters of vice from particular obtervation; through its dufky gloom he perceived tbe figures of women, but their perfons he could not diftinguifh* The fervice began; it was delivered in a manner folemn and im- preffive; Ihe reader was evidently fenfible of the duties ofhis office; his articulation was clear ancl fonorous, yet abounding in
4
melody, ,,^.
melody. Thc Creed and,Pfalms were fung hy thc Magdalens, and their fweet voices, echoing through the chapel, vi^ brated on the heart of Edward. Still he heard not the voice of Helen, and fear took poffeffion of his mind : was flie ill, or had grief and miferv deadened her vocal powers, which he well remem¬ bered to have been of the firft order ? The prayers were now concluded, and an anthem was to be fung previous to the difeourfe. Mute attention reigned in the church, aud fuddenly thc voice of Helen founded in full melody; her power¬ ful notes and exquifite tafle chained every ear, and the congregation fcarce dared to breathe, left it might interrupt the tide of harmony. " O fpare me a little, that I may re¬ cover my flrength before I go hence, and be no more feen 1" Thus fung this real penitent. The words and mufic were in unifon with her feel¬ mgs i and the foft figh with which fhe concluded
concluded a movement feemed prophetic of the happinefs fhe might yet enjoy. Edward's eyes, filled with tears, were fixed upon the gallery, when fuddenly tlie anthem was interrupted—thc voice of thc fongflrefs faltered—the ftrain was, how¬ ever, renewed, but it was faint ancl trem¬ bling. Edward attributed the caufe of this interruption fo fhe keen nefs of her feelings; but he partook of her anguifli when, turning his eyes towards the pulpit, he beheld——-Aubrey Delvalley, In¬ dignation fwelled his heart—he caught his Mentor by the arm, and in a few words informed him of the circtfmfhuice. Wi¬ thers clafped his hands with fervency ;— " The hour of retribution is come," faid he, in a low and eager voice; " out of his own mouth fhall he be judged." Delvalley was the popular preacher de¬ fcribed by thc neighbour of Edward; he pulled out his handkerchief, fprinklcd it with ottar of rofes, laid his difeourfe with a delicate hand on the cufhion, and flung himfcli
himfelf on the feat vvith languid elegance. His perfon was impofing, though his face was rather bloated by luxurious living; he was not yet forty, but thc gout had, from the fame caufe, affected his feet 7 fo that he vvas obliged to receive affiflance. when getting in or out of his chariot. Rifing from his feat when the anthem was concluded, he looked round the church with affected humility: a filence reigned, but a few fhort and loud fobs were heard from the gallery. At length, in a low voice, fo as not to be heard at the diflance of two feats* the preacher began. The preliminary prayer being concluded, he gave as a text the words of the prophet Nathan to David; "And Nathan faid unto David, Thou ART THE MAN !" Having divided his difeourfe, as ufual, into different heads, he expatiated upon the flory of Rahab and the mercies of Heaven to the penitent; his language was eafy and flowing, his humility well put on*
on> and the attentive congregation w&$ inclined to pardon his previous foppery, in confideration of the excellence of his diction. Suddenly the look of humility was fu* $>erfeded by a dictatorial demeanour* ** But," cried he (while his dark eye Jkfhed with energy), " if fuch be the rniferies of the female world, what fhall we fay fo the wretch who ean calmly and deliberately form a plan for the deftru£tion of innocence ? who mn fyftcmalically purfue the dictates of a depraved itna- ginatiou, and banifh virtue from the un* fufpectbg heart ? Will it be believed that fueh monfters exift ? Charity would an¬ fwer, No; but Truth loudly proclaims the fact:: nay, even in this affembly (vvhich God forbid) may poflibly be found a man, who, while he lifts bis hand with hypo¬ critical zeal to his Maker, would not (in his heart) ftartle at feduction." Loud and repeated fobs were heard from the gallery, Edward ftood immoveable;
and fearing to be difcovered, he took hi$ flation behind Withers, who, with the bitter/neer of confeious triumph, directed his undivided attention to the preacher* " Is fuch a man aware," continued Delvalley, '* that not one alone is the fuf¬ ferer—that not only the object of his un¬ hallowed purfuit is for ever configned to mifery, but that a father will curfe his ilMated offspring, that a mother will con¬ quer thc feelings of nature, and abandon het lovely daughter to a world where fho will be rejected of all? 1 * A heavy groan, which feemed to con- vulfe the bofom from whence it iffued, m was heard. Edward too well knew from whom it proceeded-—he felt in agonies, « Think you, O violators of all laws, human and divine," exclaimed Delvalley with fervour, u that if your conduct be unknown or unheeded by others, your own feelings will be dormant ? Perhaps fome of you may be looked up to with reve« rence and efteem; perhaps you mzy pub**
licly declaim againft what you in feeret practife; but are you therefore happier ? I fay ye are not; for confeience, unflum* bering confeience, will loudly cry to each, * THOU A&T THE MAN V " Edward now quitted his ftation behind Withers, in hopes of catching the eye of the preacher, who continued in a loud voice— " Lenity itfelf muft here be filent j compaffion cannot urge a plea; juftice, ftern juftice, muft hold the fcale; ac¬ cording to the meafure he meted fhall it be meted to him again.—And what mufl be the dying horrors of a feducer ? a jufb defpair of-—•—■•** A voice iffued from the gallery-* <f Oh ! condemn not thyfelf—for thou ART THE MAK !" Loud convulfive fhricks were heard; the Magdalens were difcovered through the dufky fcreen to haften round one of their companions who had fallen. They conveyed her away, and her fereams were yet heard faintly from her apartment, _______This.
This confufion had no fooner fubftded, than thc congregation turned again to the preacher: his lips were pale and quiver* ing, and his rubicund face affumed a pur* pie hue. lie had recognifed the voice of Helen, which, in thc anthem, he had not noticed, being more bufily employed in furveying the fairer part of the affembly. " Look at the good man!" exclaimed the gentleman who fat next to Edward ; " how moved he appears to be! The un¬ fortunate woman found his difeourfe too powerful for her feelings—it has diflurbed him—what an excellent heart! I am glad I came here to~day." Delvalley attempted to compofe himfelf t he again addreffed the impatient congre¬ gation ; but at the moment he lifted up his eyes, he met thofe of Edward fixed intently upon him. As if fafcinated by the bafilifk, he gazed in fpeechlefs hor¬ ror ; and, after many attempts to proceed, he abruptly concluded his difeourfe. All thc audience were in tears; fome wept
wept for fafhion, fome for feeling. Del¬ valley flowly defcended from the pulpit; he tottered along the aifle leaning on the reader. He quickly difrobed, and hoping to efcape inquiries, and avoid meeting Edward, as well as his malady would per¬ mit, he hafiened to his chariot, vvhich was at the door of the veftry. He had mounted a flep by the affiflance of his footman, when the man he moft dreaded approached with Withers: who, as he paffed bim, exclaimed with energy, " thou art thb man!" Delvalley heard no more^—hts hands relinquifhed their hold ; he funk groaning into the arms of his fervant, and was car¬ ried, half-fainting, back into the veftry,
MP OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
(tiated by S. Gosneu, Little Uuccn Street, Holbouj.
