Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The haunted palace: or, The horrors of Ventoliene: a romance
???
HAUNTED PALACE, •OR The Horrors of Venlolienr %
"RlSE, Michael, I conjure thee ; re- assume the man, and follow me; for, though worlds were opposed to worlds and yonder fiery gulph were to enwrap mc in its burning folds, I would go on. Conscious of the justness of my cause and the rectitude of my heart* I will pursue the wretch to the confines of Hell itself"
?
4 'Ah'
"Ah ! Sir/' said Michael, " we are arrived there already, I'm sure ; there¬ fore do not, for the holv viran/s sake. attempt to go any further. Oh ! holy saints, and heavenly martyrs, protect and save us ; see how the flames are pouring out ; aye, there they come, thicker and faster ; whv should vour honor wish to go on, when, I am ??? if he took the road your honor says, he must go into Hell itself: for, is not that the mouth of it? Ihave been told so a thousand times." ''Peace, fool!** exclaimed the im¬ patient Edward; "rbe without more delay, and follow me ; I tell thee again, it is nothing more than a weak eruption of Mount Vesuvius. By these cursed groundless fears, I shall lose the only opportunity I may ever have, of avenging the cause of injured inno¬ cence, and saving a suffering sister, and
and her helpless children, from misery, worse than death." So saying, he raised Michael, aud dragged the fainting fellow after him up the mountain. They had scarcely ascended a hundred paces, when tbe object they were in pursuit of repassed them, followed by three others, and tlescended with rapidity towardi the plain. The suddenness of his return, ,md the swiftness of his flight, not only surprised the wondering Ed wan I ;iml his companion, but put it out oí his ?????? to follow them with equrri speeci. "By the holy virgin/* saitl iiich tei. " he is come out of Ikll again, and. ;v I hope tobe saved, there are three imp? of the devil, Dogging him alo:u,\ - Bravo! let us ruu, your honor, und overtake them, that ??? may see Jmw B2 thoe
those black gentlemen exercise his worship. I'm not afraid to go down, though I wits most eon founded! v, to Saying this, Michael, in his turn, pulled his master after him. It was but at intervals thev could distinguish any thing. For some minutes, they would bc involved in total darkiie^ owing to the frequent showers of ashes, thrown out of the mountain ; then, columns of light would appear, and the dismal roar of the vulcano, rc- semhjing nothing but the fa bloc I bowl¬ ings ofthe damned, woultl a.v>ault their ears, and appal even the heart of Ed¬ ward ; but, as revenge urged him, he threw off every enervating thought, antl rushed on with all the speetl he could make. They had descended about twenty minutes,
minutes, in as near a direction as they could suppose the others had taken, when they were alarmed by the sound of several voit es near them, uttering, iu Italian, the mobt horrid ¡mpiccation.«. Edward paused ; Michael, though * brave, clung close ίο his master. "You are but poorly armed, youi honor, as well as me," said he. l.tl- ward regarded not the observation of hisseivant, but exclaimed : ** Curse on this untimely interruption ; the villain will escape mc ; I may traverse the whole continent, from Italy to Cochin- china, and not meet with him again/' Hardly had he pronounced this, wiu η .*eveu men, whose countenances bo .-poke them the perpetrators of every" honkl ileal, -cu/rounded ihem: and what added to their astonishment was, to perceive, among the group, the \ ery man they had pursued. His face, tho* B J hon ibi v
horribly besmeared with blood, and lacerami in se\*eral places, was in an instant recos: ? iscd by Edward, who ad- vaneed toareis him, saying: "Aveng¬ ing heaven luis, at length, begun the work of justice. Gentlemen/' conti - ηικ d bit, addressing* the other six, one of whom held a torch to his face, *'permit me to render you my sincere and ardent thanks, for thus unexpect¬ edly placing in my power a man, who has trampled on all laws, divine and human, and has even bid defiance to heaven itself; and one, whom I have, with the most unremitting diligence, pursued ; but he ever found means to escape from me, and, not till within, these two hours, have I been able to keep him in sight for one moment. "And who are you? and what are you r " said one of the men.
"lam
** I am Edward Fitzallan, of the kingdom of Ireland," replied he, " and that monster is my brother-in-law.— Condemned by the laws of his country to suffer derdh, he fied, and, till this night, has eluded every search. By mere accident, I, this evetring, discover¬ ed a servant of his, and from him ex¬ torted a confession of where his mas¬ ter then was. I followed the direc¬ tion ; it was at a vine dresser's, on tlie mountain ; but, before I reached the spot, I saw the villain pass me; I has¬ tened after him, but he was too rapid in his motions, for I ?? -as obliged to halt, o?ving to my servants terrors at the eruption. "You have a milksop with you, then," said a short fellow; "we will soon teach him otherwise, I warrant you. "
? 4 Saying
Sn}în^ thİN, wtil.oitt n rd. ing" any ie¬ rnai ? on wh .t Li hv.** ¡îl h :d said, they cl*bíil puuni him and lus servant iu a moment, uustfcl tlu pinols from them. and bouiul their liands with thon ars, biihiing them bcstieid, m the least noi^c should be instantly followed by death. Edward was resigned, while Mi¬ chael, in visible trepidation, ventured to beg his master not to go with them. '* Your master," saitl they, " has no choice ; therefbre, come along. " They turned and descended, two of them guarding Edward, while the other four surrounded the bleeding man and Michael. The bellowing ofthe moun¬ tain encreased i showers of ashes fell in all directions ; the air seemed nothing but burning sulphur; respiration be¬ came difficult, and Edward was about to desire them to stop, and indulge him with
with a drop of water, ????? a large company of men, amounting to near forty, hailed them in a language he was unacquainted ???? ; which ???? a ι w»; ered in the same. Their conver¬ sation lasted for about ten minutes, when a more violent eruption than any that had preceded took place, and in a moment, torrents of liquid tire ????? seen to issue from the volcano, and take a course near to the spot where they then stood. By the lights carried in the hands of those ??!? hatl quitted their Iiouse», antl were flying for shelter to Xaples, they discovered, at a small distance from them, a young lady ap¬ parently lifeless. She lay on her face* with one hand clasped to her mouth. Edwartl sprang forward, and earnestly entreated some one ?????! raise her, as she possibly might not be dead : one ofthe men, whose air bespoke him dif¬ ferent from the rest, raised her up, antl ? 5 beckoned
beckoned one of his comrades to assist him. "She is not dead/' said he, in Ita¬ lian, ** let -.» have her **kh us. " She ???? taken up, and all of the m tied a* fast ?? tiiey were able, across the plain, towards the sea ; one stream of the boiling lava was pouring with hor¬ rid violence after them, when a tre¬ mendous storm of thunder and light¬ ning, attended with torrents of water and glutinous mud, mixed with enor¬ mous stones, and træs torn up by the roots, which came rushing trith the most horrible hissing nohe, towards Torre del Greco, appalled even the sa¬ vage ferocity of the group around.— The unhappy Edward kept as close ?? he v/as able to his nearly dying ser¬ vant whom the horrors of the scene had totally unmanned. He begged him
him to keep up his spirits, and wait pa¬ tiently for an explanation, of where they meant to take them, and for what purpose they ????? detained ; but the jïoor fellow was so insensible, that he paid no attention to any thing said to him, but passively suffered himself to bc dragged along, fo* ???!? he could not. They came tt) the shore ; several boats were busy in taking over those that re¬ sided on the mountain. The party hastened with rapid steps silently along, app^ ently ?yi?!l!ng to shun the eyes of every one. They continued thus for some minutes, when one of them, ivho hatl advanced beyond the rest, made a signal, ????? ???? instantly alávered in the same strange language F^ r ard had heard befbre, and a large covered boat, or rather galley, drew close to the shore, into ????? they all entered, the young latly still continuing insen¬ sible. As soon as they were on boartl, ? ? . the
the young man before mentioned caused several frieze wrapper* to be •stretched along on some large boxes» on which they laid the Lady, who ap¬ peared to be about twenty ; they then pushed from shore and stood fbr the bay. Scarce a word was spoken by the whole company; at last, the young man turning to Edward, asked him. Whether he thought the latly was real¬ ly deatl, as the appearance of her coun¬ tenance seemed to indicate. "I would try if there is any pulse,*' saitl Edward ; " if you will permit my bands to be at liberty." The young man immediately untied the thongs, which, by being drawn tight, hatl cut his wrists. "You bleed ! what means this ?" saitl he, looking sternly on the men who had
had bebed Edwaul ; " this İs ??? of your woik, Francesco, I suppose; take some brandy out, and w&>h the wounds* ** The manner in which he s]joke, and the alacrity with which he was oif} ed, convinced Fitzallan that he was the superior. His wrists were immediately chafed ; he then requested the liberation of ¡wor Michael, vvho had sunk to the bottom of the vessel ; it was done, and a glass of brandy given him to think. This roused him and he ventured to look around. Seeing his master safe, he beggetl to assist him in holding up the Lady, whilst Fitzallan endeavoured by chafing her temples, and pouring some liquor into her mouth, to restore her ; but her teeth being clenched, prevented any descending to her sto¬ mach.
"Life
" Life is not wholly Aed,** said he ; * * there ? a puhatioa stdl remains at tbe heart : her insensibility is occasioned by the mofete ; bhe has inhaled the meph ttie vapour, anil, unless somethmg can be done to counteract its effects, she ikill awake no more. Suppose we were to immerge her in the sea ; we can fasten her rø one of the^e wrapping coats, and «çentik lrft her over the side of the vessel ; if any thing will restore her, that will." The young man agreed ; they fasten¬ ed the coat, and, with the assistance of Michael and one of the men, hoisted her over. Four times bad they plunged her, when they perceived a slight con¬ vulsion round the mouth. " It will do, I think," said Edward, "and, had I any instrument to open a vein, she would soon recover. "
"I have
** I have that,** said tht young man, and immediately drew out of hi*> p*»cket a case of instruments. Fitzallan opt Ii¬ tti a vein, but no hlood came ; tlie arm was violently robbed for some time ; at length, the convulsions became strong, and life seemed to return rapidly. In a few seconds, the blood began to drop, and soon after, she opened her eyes, fetched a deep sigh, and endeavoured to speak, but coukl not,—she fell back into the arms of Michael, who sup¬ ported her. During the whole of this transaction, the brother of Fitzallan regarded, with a scowling grin, the different efforts made to restore her, antl when Fitzallan said 'she would recover/ he darted at him a look of fury mingled with contempt. Edward coultl not guess the meaning of this, unless it was, that his savage nature could not bear to see another employed
employed in an act of humanity, lit cast upon him ? look of reproach and triumph, which saitl, soon I hope to see thy malignant spirit humbled in the dust, and the sufferings of my sister be avenged. The boat ???? stood round the bay, fcwards the Gulph of Gaeta: Michael, Edward, and the superior, Λνίί?ι one ofthe men, ????? busied in attend¬ ing on the Lady ; Avhilst the rest were regarding with stoic apathy the dread¬ ful scene behind them ; but, at times, in spite of their assumed indifférence, a peaceful observer might have read in their countenances the sudden sting of a guilty conscience, harrowing their souls. Soon after, they reached the gulph, and landed in a creek of the Island of Ventoliene. The lady had not yet spoken, and death and nature seemed contending for victory. She was borne on shore by four men, stretch¬ ed at length in one of the frieze coats ; the
the captain, for such the young man was, ordered tbem to carry her to his abode ; he then gave some directions respecting the little vessel, and turning tb Edward, batle him follow him, and fear nothing. 1 le obeyed, and Michael, encouraged by his behaviour, assumed more coniidence. Several of the men, whom the lightning made more visible than before, ???? appeared a set of ruth¬ less villains, accustomed to every spec ies of murder, rapine, and plunder. Ed- ^vaτd , s heart, as ???? as Michaels, sunk within him, on taking a nearer ?!??? of his associates ; but he turned with con¬ fidence to the captain, ?????? look and manners, neither spoke him an Italian, nor one familiar in the ways of blood. Four torches were carried before him, aiul they appeared to enter a kind of wood. The path was narrow, and hardly admitted two to go abreast,— so that it ???? with difficulty the lady was
was carried along. They passed near a mile in this manner, when thev ail stoppeti, and, upon the same, signal being given, as was done before, Uvo men appeared, who advanced with great submission to the captain.— They talked together for about a mi¬ nute in the same strange language, and then, lifting up with a lever a part of the stern of an old galley, a door strongly grated ivith iron appeared, but apparently covered with leaves. Edwartl and Alichael involuntarily shrunk back ; the captain observed it, and slapping them on the shoulder, said Thev ????? gone too far to recede now, as they must perforce descend ivith them, for they should ivant his assist¬ ance in restoring the lady. Edward, vvhose faculties had been for a few mo¬ ments dormant, now recollected the unfortunate female, and instantlv de- scended a flight of steps* down which she
she had been carried. Michael seeing there was no alternative, and fancying the scene within eould not exceed the scene ???1??1, followed his master. "You will soon see/' said the cap¬ tain, "thatyou are in the company of a man of honor; and, if you have been injured by that scoundrel/* pointing to Fitzallan's brother, "you shall have ample justice." He hid defiance to the captain with his looks, and growled a horrid curse on Edward—the rest of the men were silent The passage they entered, ????? at the bottom, ???? wide, and lighted up with several torches. As they ad¬ vanced, Edward thought he heard the sound of music, hut it died away and nothing was heard hut their footsteps along
along the vaulted roof. It was near half a mile, as well &* he couhl guess, before they arrived at another flight of steps, similar to those they had de- bcended ; these they now ascended, * and entered a kind of courtyard paved in mosaic. Some broken pieces of marble columns, and parts of mutilated statues, lay scattered in all directions, while before them appeared the remains ofa noble edifice, which seemed to have been destroyed more by the violence of man, or a convulsion of nature, than the hand of time. They turned to the left of this court, and entered what had once been a most magnificent saloon, but ???? was a heap of ruins. Here, on a large slab of beautiful porphyry, they rested tbe Lady, as the men who car¬ ried her were sinking with fatigue.— She ???? uncovered; they found her alive, but quite insensible. The cap¬ tain said, He thought she had better be
be placed on abed ; Edwartl coincided, antl some others of the men were bid to carry her to Novls room. Edward, Alichael, the captain, and two muie, followed ; he having firbt given direc¬ tions to his men respecting Eittal Ian's brother. Tbey passed through the re¬ mains of several elegant apartments. and at lensrth reached the extremity of a gallery, ????? a door opened, and th**y entered a habitable room. In it wa» an old green vetat betl, which had been ornamented with gold, but very little of it remained. The Lady was laid on it—Edward said, He wished some female was there to undress her, as the wet clothes she had on might retard her recovery. "I have ordered one to attend," said the captain.
As be uttered this, a middle aged ? woman, of no prepossessing appearance, entered. "You must undress this Lady, Vash¬ ti/' said he; "????? her in something ?????, and when she is ready to be lifted into bed, let me know." He left the room and paced the gallery. He made no remarks, but seemetl wholly lost in thought, and Ed¬ ward imagined he could at times ob¬ serve him sigh deeply Tiiey conti¬ nued thus for some time, when the woman came out, and said, She was ready, They then entered and lifted the Lady into bvd. The captain asktd Vashti What was most proper to give her, as she hatl been found by his peo¬ ple nearly dead, and, to recover her, they had tlipt her in the sea. Vashti answered She thought rest the most necessary
necessary ; but, if she came to herself, she would call him, antl some cordial should be administered to'her. 'ihis satisfied the captain and he left her.—■ On his quitting the room, he tlid not return by the way he came, but opened a door on one side of the gallery, tle¬ scended about twenty steps, then passed along a dark passage, and crossed a large room, from whence they heard the sound of many voices. " Be not alarmed," said he, " I shall soon restore order when I get among tbem. You appear a gentleman, and ivhatever you may think of me, I will treat you as such ; I have only to ob¬ serve that I expect you to make no re¬ mark on any thing you see; hovv long you will continue here I cannot tell, but that will dep -nd on what you have to relate, about that miscreant, whom you call brother-in-law. He is a vil¬ lain,
Iain, and ¿shall meet his deserts before you leave this place ; for, he has of¬ fended against the laws of this commu¬ nity antl will suffer for his temerity. Nothing will be done this day, or to¬ morrow ; my people stantì in need of rest, and, before the other party re¬ turns, they must obtain it : be silent antl circumspect, and you need not fear any thing. " Edward bowed, antl thanking him, saitl, He shouid venture to make tivo requests, ??? ich were, that his servant might not be taken from him, antl that he might be permitted to attend the Latly, whenever he might in any way be useful to her. These vvere con¬ sented to. They then entered a large lofty room, ivhich was surrounded on all sides with military stores. A com¬ pany of about fifty men were seated at a long table, on which were placed large
large quantities of wines, brandy, ?» ? fruit—each man ???? armt d. V* irai the Captain approached to take his seat, they all rose up, and drank to hnn. Edward was ordereil to sit near him, as ???1! as Michael ; they ????? then de¬ sired to take oif a bumper of brandy, to their better acquaintance, and the Cap¬ tain did the same. Ed?yard looked round, to see ??????? he could percei v«* among the group the man who caused his being brought there, but he wns not present. To describe their diiferent personages, ????? be impossible; they seemed to be composed of all nations* and languages. The Captain appeared about twenty-five, of a sanguine com¬ plexion, florid, open countenance, quick, piercing eye, and the whole con tour of his person at once striking and majestic. Ilis look, though mild, ¿wed the most ferocious into silence. rind the loud clamor which filled the Vol. I. ? room
room, when they entered, at once sub¬ sided. The Captain bade one of them order the victuals to be served; the man left the room, antl soon after re¬ turned, saying They should shortly have it. In about ten minutes, meats of different sorts were set upon the table, to which they all helped them¬ selves as their fancy chose. As soon as the eatables ????? removed, the Cap¬ tain asked Fitzallan, If he ivoukl go to rest, to which he consented, but first wished to know, How the Fatly ???? ; a man was sent, who returned saying, She was still asleep. He then, ivith Michael, left them ; and he ???? ?????? to a room, in ?????, though literally in ruins, he found a bed that would not have disgraced the i epose of royalty itself. Edward and his servant immediately laid themselves down in their clothes, not
4 not being altogether divested of fear; however, they soon fell asleep, and continued so for some time, when Ed¬ ward was waked by Vashti, ??1? de¬ sired him to come to the Lady, as she had waked in violent convulsions. He ran to the chamber, and found her neany exhausted by the struggles she had made. He was at a loss what to do, for she became more and more faint, and he concluded her dying ; he asked for the Captain ; Vashti said, He ???? gone to bed, and they did not dare to disturb him. The Lady sinking again into a kind of stupor, Ed?vard thought it best not to send to him, but stay be¬ side her, ???? Vashti. He sat down ; she spokfe not ; he wished to ask some questions respecting Where they were, and to whom the place belonged ; but, as she was not disposed to talk, he con¬ tented himself with contemplating ia silence the magnificent ruins. Whe- C 2 ther
ther he was above ground or below, he could not guess, as there did not ap¬ pear to be any window, and he was certain in his own mind, though hedid not know exactly how many hours he had been there, that it must be day ; but he forbore to ask. He ran over in his mind a thousand conjectures, of what these people might be. That there was another company of them, the Captain had said ; but, whether equal in number to those he was with, he was likely to remain ignorant ; and how so many men could exist in such a state, was to him incomprehensible : however, he, at last, comforted himself with the hope that the Captain would, when he had obtained some refresh¬ ment, inform him where he was. He ventured to say to Vashti at last, That he should be happy, if some medical aid could be procured for the Lady, as she appeared too ill for him to render her
her that assistance she stood in need of. "As the Captain," said she, "has thought proper to have her brought here, no doubt, but when he gets up, he will procure what is necessary for her; till then, we have nothing to do, but watch her." Fitzallan nodded assent, and, as she ???? disposed to be taciturn, he conti¬ nued so likewise. For near an hour antl half, the Latly remained motionless ; she appeared alive, antl that was all. Edivard had risen from his seat, and approached the bed-side, watching with anxious solicitutle for any change that might take place, when he perceiv¬ ed her lips moving gently. He vvhis- pered Vashti, If she had a cordial of any kind ? Yes, she hatl several. She then put into his hand a glass of what ? 3 she
she said, %vould instantly be of service, if she eould be brought to ????И??? it. ìlc took it, and, gently raising her in his arms, put it to her lips ; she opened her eyes, drank it, antl again fell lifeless on his bosom. Vashti asked, If she had drank or not ; he assured her, She had. "Tis well" said she; **it will immediately have its effect, and, in a few hours, she will be well enough to speak, I dare say. You need not ???? stay any longer; can you find your way to your room ? Take that light, if you think you cannot, " pointing to one on the table. He took it up, and desiring, if she wanted him, that she would instantly awake him, should he be asleep, he returned to his room, which was at a small distance. Michael remained fast asleep. Ed¬ ward surveyed, for some minutes, the ~jaany curious things that lay in wild confusiou
confusion over the room ; they were very beautiful. **Tis pity," said he, * t they are not taken more care of; but I will endeavour to get some more rest." So saying, he laid hirnseifdown again, by the side of his servant ; he courted rest, but found it not. All appeared in dead silence arround him, only at times he thought he could dis¬ cern the dreadful thunder that rent the air, and, at intervals, the horrid howl¬ ing of th aiountain. Again he ima¬ gined he felt the shower of ashes de¬ scending in burning torrents : again he seemed to feel the sulphurous atmos¬ phere, and every breath he di -???, he tlmught he inhaled the mephitic va¬ por. He arose, traversed the room with hasty strides, unwilling to ?????? Alichael, who enjoyed an undisturbed repose. He had continued for a con¬ siderable time in this state of anxiety, when his door opened, and two grim- C 4 looking
lvîoV'ng figures entered, ???? pistols in their belts, and short Mvords. He in¬ voluntarily started, but recovering him¬ self, asked them sternly ????? they wanted. *' //"e' want nothing of yef said one; i( 'tis the Captain says vou must come l «'i/ to him directly, and we are to &1??? you the way." Ethvard immediately roused Michael to go ???1? him. "We had no orders for his attend¬ ance," said the man ; t ''tis only }ou he ?????,5. ,? " You will excuse me/'saidFxhyard, "but I cannot go Avithout him." Michael shuddered, ????? he opened his eyes, an J ???? the ίΛνο men, who, he con-
concluded, were come to dispatch him and his master. He, therefore, crossed himself most devoutly, and began to supplicate them to let him have a few minutes to pray ; but his entreaties ????? disregarded, as they understood him not. Michael, in his confusion, implored them in English, or rather Irish; for, it was ahvays his misfortune, wiuthei ni a fright or pas¬ sion, to jumble the two languages in such a manner, that it ???? absolutely impossible for a stander-by to make out either. The men regarded him Λνίτ?ι contempt, and Edward, finding they did not understand English« beg¬ ged him in it, to he p-»cdied and come along with him, as the í apraiu had sent for him. The men bid Fitzallan make haste ; for, tht ? ????? not used to let the Captain wait.
? 5 "Go
"Go on then," said he, "I will follow you." Michael; with trembling steps, trode after his master; they passed by the door of the Lady, but all ???? silent ; he, therefore, concluded her asleep. They crossed the gallery, and de¬ scended several stairs, which seemed to run round a column ; one ofthe men carried a torch. At the bottom of the stairs, they opened a door, and went across the same court-yard they had entered at. It appeared still dark ; but, whether that arose from night, or tbe eruption, he could not tell. They went ov r er vast heaps of ruins, and en¬ tered another yard, on the opposite side of tyhich they discovered a large lighted room, which they entered. The Captain was seated at the upper end of a long table ; several benches were placed near, and at the bottom, manacled
manacled Λν?ί?ι a very ????? chain, and surrounded by ten of the com¬ pany armed, sat Edwartls brother. The moment Fitzallan perceived him in that situation, in spite of all the in* juries himself and family bad sufferetl through him, he could not help reflect¬ ing that he ivas once dear to him, and that he ivas the father of his sister's children. Edward threw on him a glance of pity and hove a sigh ; Ali¬ chael eyed him with pity likewise, but it ivas pity mingled with a secret satis¬ faction that a wicked man ivas at length secured. The Captain beckoned Edward to approach—he tlid. * * I think, " said he, t 'that you told me, the man you now see our prisoner, was once your brother-in-law, and that you had charges of a criminal nature to adduce against him."
? 6 «I did
"I did, sir," said Edward. "He has likewise/' said the Captain, <t oíiendv.d aganist the laws ofour com¬ munity; and by those laws he is now to he tried ; his acquittal, or condem¬ nation, as to \yhat relates to us, will soon be ?????? ; you shall then be at liberty to make good your charges against him. Here you shall meet with justice, and here the criminal will receive equitable judgment. Thus much I thought necessarv to inform you of; ??? are now going to enter on our charges. Follow vour conductor for some refreshment, and, ????? our trial is over, you shall bc informed. He then bo?ved with great politeness to Edward, and made him a sign to depart. They left the room antl were conducted to one mueh smaller; here they found meat and wine, which they were
were desired to partake of, with th.e man who led them. Edward ventured to ask how the young lady was; he answered, He knew not, but supposed she was well, as Vashti had said, She was going to take her something to eat. This account pleased him, as he felt a strong interest in her fate. Ί hey continued in this room for a consider¬ able time, their companions frequently urging them to drink freely of the wine, but this Edward declined, as his mind was agitated respecting the man whom he was to accuse ; the recollec¬ tion of his crimes filled his lu art with horror, and be involuntarily started up. At that instant, an order was brought for him to attend ; he did, though not without trembling. When he entered, the countenance of the prisoner under¬ went a considerable change ; he turned from red to pale, and from pale to red, alternately. "Come
"Come hither," said the Captain ; "it is now your turn to prefer your charge agamst the criminal ; our trial is over ; but, whether he is condemned or acquitted, is not for you to know, as yet. You must pledge yourself by every tie that is sacred to you, and by your God, if you worship any, that you will not say any thing against this man, but wbat is strictly true: you will find that each party shall have am¬ ple justice. Fitzallan bowed assent ; the oath ???? then administered in their form. "I fear," «aid Fitzallan, "I must be rather prolix in my account of our fa¬ mily connexion, in order to explain some particulars, which it will perhaps be necessary for you to know." "Be it so ? " said the Captain. "lam,"
"I am/ said Fitzallan, "tbe last surviving branch of the house of Fitz¬ allan, of the kingdom of Ireland. Aiy father married young an English latly of considerable distinction, and, soon after my birth, Λν^ιί to reside in Eng¬ land. I had an only sister, whoae birth occasioned the death of my mother— and my father survived but a short time. Previous to his marriage, he had been introduced to a Air, Owen, a near relation of the Lady : this gentleman married, soon after my father, a Welsh lady, of an ancient family, by whom he had one son and two daughters, the eldest of ???^?? children is ???? before you. His father, Mr. Owen, ???? thought to be a man of strict honor and unblemished character ; my father thinking him so, appointed him one of our guardians, which trust I believe he performed with honor; and, as our for¬ tunes ????? nearly equal, a match was projected
projected between my sister and bis son. Aly sister gave her hand to the gentleman present, with a satisfaction, tii it plainly showed the preference she had for him : the establishment made for them \vas such, as spoke the opu- leuce of both families. My sister's fortune was considerably augmented, soon after her marriage, by the bequest of an aunt, ???? left the whole of her fortune to her, independent ofher hus¬ band, antl, in case of her death, it ???? to «lest end to her daughters, if she had any; ifnot, to her husband during his life, and then to revert to a tl istant re¬ lation, at that time residing on the Continent. "Air. Owen behaved towards my sister with great propriety for some time, and she appeared to enjoy a great share of happiness. She was brought to bed, the first year of her marriage, of a daughter, and the second year was blessed
tìessed with another. A short time previous to her confinement, Mr. ????? informed her lie meant to spend a couple of months at his father's, as one of his sisters ???? to be united to an English gentleman, a colonel in the army ; and that he should expect her to join them in Wales, as soon as her recovery would admit. This being ar¬ ranged, he set out, and wrote several affectionate letters to her, for a month after his departure. 'His eldest sister/ he said in one of them, 'was not then at home, but ???? daily expectetl—she had been in France for education. This girl had never been a favourite of my sister's ; she was pronti, vindictive, and a consummate hypocrite ; she possessetl a pleasing person, which she studied to display to the greatest advantage, and every one who possessed charms su¬ perior to her ????, she ????? endeavour to defame. Her mother saw and tried to
to correct her unhappy temper, but in vain. She returned from France, and brought over with her a young lady, whom she introduced as her very par¬ ticular friend, and to whom, she said, she ivas untler great obligations. "Soon after my sister's recovery, she prepared to leave town for Wales, though, for some weeks, her husband had forborne to press her on the sub¬ ject, his letters being cold, short, and formal ; however, thinking she shoultl please and surprise him by her sudden appearance, she set out for her father- in-law's, and took her children and the nurses with her. They arrived in safety ; but, instead of being received with pleasure by her husband, he was scarcely civil to her : said, 'He thought she had done wrong to venture out so soon ; more especially as sbe ???? so recently recovered ; and, as the house was
???? so full of company, the children s being there would be altogether very disagreeable. ' His manner, the tone of his voice, his air, all seemed to have undergone a total revolution. His unkindness hurt her, and she offered to return immetliately, if it was agreeable to him, ' Yes, ' he said, ' he thought that best/ Surprised, but not at all guessing the reason of this determina* tion of her husband, she only desired to stay two days, as she thought she was incapable of going back so soon. Her father and mother-in -1??? ????? the only ones Λν?ιο seemed happy to see her ; and, when she mentioned that her stay would not exceed frvo days, tbey were amazed, and asked Whether it was ???- ing to any of the company bemg disa¬ greeable to her. t By no means, ' she said ; ' it ???? the ????? of her husband, and she had made it a rule, in all things, to obey ??/ t If that ????? the
the only reason,' her mother saitl, *she should not return, and she woultl see herself that the children should be ac¬ commodated in a iving of the house, de¬ tached from the visitors/ antl undertook to reconcile her son to this arrangement. Her husband reluctantly consented to her stay. From that hour, he behaved to her ivith the most mortifying cold¬ ness ; he paid not the least regard to his children, nor ever expressed a wdsh to see them ; the whole of his time was taken up in attending Aliss ????? and her French companion. About a fortnight before my sister went into Wales, a French gentleman, had arrived, called the Count St. Prie, ivho passed for the brother of the Lady. This ??? was one of the most depraved characters in France. Nearly allied by marriage to a noble family, he had run into every excess incident to such a con-
connexion, though his fortune was in¬ adequate to it; and he ???? on the brink of ruin ?\??? he became ac¬ quainted Λνη?ι an English gentleman, and, through him, with Aliss ?????. — - An intimacy commenced, antl he ingra¬ tiated himself so far as to be permitted to pay his addresses. When he had, as he thought, secured her affections, he persuaded her to admit him to every familiarity. That being accomplished, he advised her to return to England, antl take with her the Lady in question, ???? was ? ?????? he had long kept, and who had been the principal means of ruining his fortune. He ????? that he could not long continue at Paris, and therefore, solemnly assured Miss Owen, That, as soon as he heard of her safe arrival at her father's, he ????И prepare to follow. This being all done agreeable to his wishes, he had arrived, as
as I said before, about a fortnight be¬ fore my sister. ( 'Mr. Owen, the elder, had ever en* tertained a contemptible opinion of the French ; this. Miss Owen concluded, would 1 be an effectual bar to her union with the Count, and she found it would be necessary to have a friend, to sup¬ port her. She well knew that her brother's disposition was similar to her own, and that his attention to my sister had ever been directed by sinister de¬ signs. He had kept a mistress in the environs of London, and all the regard he had shown was with no other view but to draw from my sister the income left her by my aunt. When he went down to Wales, he did not mean any other, than to have his wife with him, for the above purposes ; bnt, when he beheld Mademoiselle St. Prie, he saw, or imagined he saw, soniething superior to
to either his wife or his mistress. Miss Owen soon read his thoughts, and ral¬ lied him upon it. He had been privy to some intrigues of her's, when quite a girl, that would have prevented her being honorably united ; and her jour* ney to France, though ostensibly for education, was in realitv for a more secret reason, of which circumstance, through the management of her bro* ther, her rather was kept in absolute ignorance. Her mother's heart felt many pangs upon the occasion, but she was obliged to be silent. Thus the brother and sister continued to assist each other reciprocally in vice, and my poor sister became the victim. Miss Owen soon came to an explanation with her brother ; she saw he was taken with the fascinating charms of Miss St. Prie, and was determined to profit by it ; she, therefore, took an oppor¬ tunity of praising, in the warmest man* ner,
ncr, the accomplishments of her friend; and hiMiiuarcd, how much happier he Avould have been Λν??ι such a woman, than with my sister. He owned his predi¬ lection, and said, He should never be happy, unless he possessed her ; but, to accomplish that, was more than he could devise. She undertook to do it for him, if he ?????! bring about her marriage with the Count. This he. promised to do, and every thing vvas in train for that purpose, when my sister arrivetl. Aliss Owen hated her—the rectitude of Airs. Owen's conduct ap¬ peared every moment to condemn her own ; she, therefore, was a check upon all her actions, and it was for this rea¬ son she hatl persuaded her brother to senti back his wife, immediately on her arrival; but, for once, he* was obliged to agree to his father's commands, who saw that he neglected his wife, and romon-
remonstrated ivith him on the subject; but he paid no attention to his advice, " I bad tben been gone about six months on my travels ; my brother ???? at college, and, ????? from there, was r-it my other guardian's. Aly si.,ter had been there a month, ????? ????? came in one morning, in a violent hurry, and bid her prepare to go to London, as ho meant to set off for that place in the evening. She was much suprised at it, but saitl She ????? obey him. As soou as it was k n ???? in the family, they entlcavouied to dissuade him fiom it ; but he said, He had letteis that obliged him to go on the most pressing business. The letter he recehed, was fiom his mistress, intimating that, un¬ less he directly sent her a certain sum, she would immediately come down and disclose the whole ofthe connexion to h is wife antl father. The sum she wrote Vor. í J) for
for was much too large for him to «lisivcr, as the Count had made free to ?????? from him to a considciablc amount ; and the brother of Aliss St. Prie, ???? not to be denied. He ???? afraid ???????? that a discovery of such a nature ?vouíd entirely preclude him from pursuing his addresses; for, though Miss St. Prie was the counterpart of her pretended brother, yet, before those, whom it ???? their interest to deceive, they appeared models of perfection. The Count strove, by every means in his power to render himself agreeable to the elder Mr. Owen and his wife, and Miss to the son ; it was agreed by Miss Owen and him, previous to their depart ure* that if her father could not he brought to consent to her marriage with the Count, she ? -vould privately ■quit the house, accompanied by her friends, and come to one he would pro¬ vide for them in London ; and then som q
???? method should be devised for Air. Owen's living with Miss St. Prie. At that period, she said, She could not bring her friend to think of any thing short of marriage ; but, as that could not be, something else must, sbe said, be thought of, and nothing appeared so feasible, as to affix some crime to Mrs. Owen, on wbich they might ground a divorce ; but, in that case, ¿supposing they succeeded, she would enjoy her fortune, and that was of more consequence than any thing ; as he should not bc able to support Miss Öt. Prie in any degree of splendor with¬ out it; but they parted wdth a full determination to accomplish both, no matter how. " They had been about tliree weeks m town, when my sister was one morn¬ iiig alarmed by a servant's entering and saying, He wished she would step ?? to
to his master's library ; for, there ???? a lady there, that seemetl to threaten his life : She had come, he said, while his master was out, antl İnsistetl on waiting for him. She staid to hear no more, but ran to the room, ????? she found locked ; she requested to be admitted; he batle her begone, and mind her children-—she had no busi¬ ness therr. t She fias business here, antl 1 vyill let her in/ said a female voice, almost choaked ??И? passion, and saying this, .she tried to open the door. A scufilc ensued, u hen lus foot slipt, and he fell. The door was in¬ stantly opened, and ? ?\ oman vt ry ???? drosed, advanced towards her. * I ron come, said she, ' mattam, to de¬ mand of this villain, your husband, my half year's annuity, ?\1??? he knows was due three ?????? befoie he left Wales, lie Λ\αιη?3 to shuffle mc off, as he has done before, but he sha n't think to
to bamboozle me- I ? ???? him ????, and "tis pity but you ????? him too/ " My sister thougiit she ???? sonic poor maniac, ???? had broke from her confinement, and mistook her husband for some other oentleman. Under this impression, she turned to lea\ e the room, to get assistance, and have her taken ????? ; when the ?????? darted between her and the door, and ex¬ claimed ; t You shall hear me ; per¬ haps I can tell you more than you are ?????? of, about that French ?????? and her pretended brother, Mounseer Prie —but it shall out now.' t At vour peril, advance one ????! more/ said he. ί I don't mind your threats a rush/ said she, t I ???1 tell all I ?????, and that's not a little, and so you and ----------------/ ]j t . a(hanced towards her, pale, and trembling \vith passion, holding in his hand a small pistol ; he Π 3 pointed
pointed it at her head, and fired ; the ball missed her, and passed through the neck of my sister. ' 'Tis ?\??/ said the ??????, * there, you villain, you have killed your wife instead of me; iind I shall have the satisfaction of seeing thee hanged ; my evidence ΛνίΠ do that' ί Take the other then,' said lie, and fired a second. This likewise missed, 'but slightly ?????^ the servant, who had run to the assist ance of my skter. They carried her into the next room ; the servants, thinking their mistress killed, sur¬ rounded their master, and prevented him from doing any more mischief. 'fhe woman ran instantly out of the house, and in a short time returned with some officers of justice; he ???? instantly secured, and surgeons were sent for. * 'Though the ball had passed through the
the neck of my sister, and shattered the collar-bone, yet it was not deemed mortal. She hatl fainted, and con¬ tinuetl so, till the torture she was put to in setting the bone, brought her to recollection. She ???? desired to be calm, and, upon wishing that her hus¬ band might escape, she was informed, That she was not wounded mortally, and, if she would but keep herself quiet, he ????? have no occasion to leave her; this she promised. The gentleman who first came, was a man of great humanity, antl thought it was best, for many reasons, to keep the affair as private as possible, the officers ?????, therefore, desired to stay in the house vvith their prisoner, the servants were bribed to silence, and the woman was detained in the house, ???? a pro¬ mise of having her annuity, whatever it might be, punctually paid ; thus every thing was kept secret, and my sister D 4 rapidly
rcpidîy recovered; but lier peace of mind was -\vrccki*d fort ver. liis father had han .4 r»r for; the accounts» he received induced him to have recourse to the woman foran explanation of what she wanted to tell Mrs. Owen. The information she gave shocked the fa¬ ther so much, that it threw him on a bed of sickness, chicli liad nearly proved fatal ; but he recovered, to feel still greater sorrows, niy sister became well, her husband was released, the woman was satisfied, and discharged, and the contrition which his son mani¬ fested for his past conduct, induced the old gentleman to think, that happiness would again be restored to the family ; and he ventured to quit them, "Three months had elapsed under this delusion, as his attentions to my sister and her children seemed hourly to increase. She had been for some clays
days ill, as were the children, when they received a letter from his father, saying, That the family had been tlumvn into the greatest disorder, by the elopement uf Aliss Owen, Λν??ι the Count and his sister. She had taken Avith her every thing of value she coultl pack up; leaving a short note on the toilette, in¬ timating, That, as her father had thought proper to refuse the Count for a son-in-law, she had pursued her own inclinations, and that it was not her intention ever to sec any ofthe family moie, till they chose to receive the Count as her husband. On receiving this letter, Air. Owen lamented the misfortune of his father, and reprobated in the strongest terms the conduct of his sister ; he seemed to redouble his attentions to his wife, ?????? illness, and that of the girls, encreased ; it was supposed they were drooping for the small-pox, as the complaint vyas D 5 at tendt d
attended with slight sickness and fre¬ quent reaching. This the faculty gave as their opinion, but one of them being iu the room, tluring a reaching fit, more violent than any she had befbre experi¬ enced, alarmed hini, and from some cir¬ cumstances, he ivas led to think that their illness arose from some other cause than he at first imagined : the symptoms were alike in all, and as the tirne was elapsed for the small pox to make its appearance, he enquired How long they hatl been indisposed before he ???? called in? Mr. ?????, to whom this question was addressed, appeared much confused, hesitated, and stammered an answer; this behavior alarmed the gentleman, and he plied his questions more closely; his con¬ fusion encreased, and on his asking the gentleman Why he put such sfcrange questions? he answered, 'To be plain with you, sir, I think Mrs, Owen
Owen and the children have been poisoned ; and if my conjecture is right, I can tell by ?????.' ?? started, ííi\d turning, 'Good God, sir/ said he, ' what do you mean?' 'My meaning is obvious, and you are not ignorant of it,' said tbe doctor. Remorse for a moment glided across his countenance, and, in a feigned accent of despair, asked, Whether there was any thing- could be given to counteract its elfeers ?' í None, sir, 1 fear/ said he; * it has been administered too long. Poor unhappy victims !—'But, ????^?? it is, or it is not, too late, it shall be my business, if I cannot save their lives, to have this horrid transaction brought to light, and the perpetrator to that death he ???И deserves ;* and he fixed his eyes directly on Owen. * You seem as though you suspected me to be guilty of so black a deed. * * Time, ' said the doctor, t Λνί?? discover that ; at D ? present
present it will bc my care to defeat the design/ So saying, he (putted the room, and ordered the servants not to leave their mistress or thechildrcu, fora moment, till his return. "Though the doctor had tmly pre¬ sili 1 --otive evidence to go on, }et he vyas satisfied, iu his ???? mind, they weie poisoned, antl that by the hauti of Owen. Ile vyas leti to think, that it hatl been given in small quantities, in order to elude suspicion, and, therefore, hoped he might be able to preserve their lh'es, though, at times, he almost ties- paired. He look and administered the necessary medicines, when his suspicions were fully verifictl, as the vomited matter spoke at once. lie immediately wrote into Wales, desiring the father's attendance, as Airs. Owen and the children ????? in the most alarming danger. The poor old man came ex¬ press,
press, aml found the lives of all thf e seemed to hang upon a thread. 'Ihe physician, though he kept his know¬ ledge of the real source of tlieir ii!nes-> to himself, caused a strict watch to he kept ??'(? the actions of Owen ; the persons he employed for that puipo^e, ????? such as could be depended on. Near ten days elapsed, before the least favourable symptoms appeared; but, from that time, he g -?? e hopes of tlicir recovery. "As soon as they ????? out of dan¬ ger, he thought it best to inform ihe elder Mr. Owen of his opinion respecting tlie illness of his daughter-in-law and 'grand-children, and proved, past a doubt, that Avhite arsenic had been vgiven them by his son. He pointed out the danger they ????? in, if they continued under the same roof Λν Uh a man possessing such diabolical prin¬ ciples,
ciple*, and said he ivould advise him to have them, under pretence of change of air, con veyetl to a place of safety, aiul till that was done, to keep the oceasion of their removal a secret from Airs. Owen, lest the knowledge of her husband's wickedness should be the means of accelerating that death he so much wished to obtain. Shocked as the father was at this account, he yet had reason enough left to see the ne¬ cessity ofthe doctor's advice being di¬ rectly put into practice. He therefore, without betraying the least suspicion of what had been imparted to him, sent for his son, and told him That he had been advised by his physician to remove Airs. Owen and the children into the country, for the change of air, and asked him where he thought the most agreeable place to take them to. He answered, It ivas immaterial to him ; wherever Mr. Owen chose to go, would meet
meet ?\ ith his approbation. He seemed happy at the idea ofher going, saying He hoped that the country air ?????! soon restore tbem to perfect health. Their depaiture was fixed for the Thursday tbllowing, and a place a short distance from ίοΛνη for their residence. "Owen appeared the whole of the day absorbed in thought, and ????? any rap came to the door, started as if alarmed ; this behavior dkl not pass unobserved by his father, who watehed his every motion. About nine at uight, a violent scuffie was heard İn the hall, and a woman's voice exclaiming ' ? Λν?Ι go up—unhand me/ antl a car¬ riage v/as bearti to draw up close to the door. Äírs. ?????, ????? as she ????, rose to go to the stair bead ; her father did the same, when a woman rushed past them and entered the room ?????? Owen was. My sister had just time to say»
say, 'Oh God ! that is she ???? came to kill my husband/ lier exclamation was not attended to by the father; but «ue of the servants that followed her, said, 'It is the same woman that vyas here w ht n my master shot mistress antl me/ lie bade the servants take care of his tlaughter, and followed the wo¬ man. She was in the room alone, and the first wort Is she could distinctly utter, were: 'Oh, sir, he has- robbed me of my jewels, and given them to that French drab, to w'hom he was yesterday married by a special licence/ 'You mistake the person, madam/ said Ids Father. 'No/ saitl she, crying bit¬ terly, ' I tlo not mistake ; it is Andrew Owen, the owner of this house, that í want, aud he has, not only taken my jewels, but my annuity bond also, and 1 will not stir from this plaee till I have them restored.
* As
"As it ???? impossible for tlie father to understand all this, he opened the door of the library and desired his son, to come out. t I will not,' said he sternly. i If you can listen to the fabri¬ cated tale of a mad ??????, I cannot, nor v'ill not* So saying, he pushed his father aside and attempted to make his escape ; but the old man, w\Û\ un¬ usual strength, caught old of him, whilst the ?????? held him by the col¬ lar. 'Unhand me this instant,'said he to his father. t I will not, ' answered the poor old man ; * You shall explain the meaning of this person's accusation. 'That I never will,' said Owen, and, ???? a violent spring, broke from their grasp and attempted to leap tlown the stairs. One of the men-servants en¬ deavouring to preA*ent him, h; drew a pistol from his pocket and thai it. The ball missed the sen-ant, but en¬ tered the heart of his father, who f-prung
THE HAUNTED PALACE, OR sprung up, as it entered his breast, then fell instantly antl expired without a groan. The confusion this occasionetl he took advantage of, and ivhilst all ran eagerly to assist his dying parent, the abandoned parricide n*atle his escape. "The dreadful scenes my sister wit¬ nessed brought on an abortion, and, for several months, deprived her of rea¬ son. Her children hatl been taken by her mother-in-law into Wales ; she still supported herself under these accumu¬ lated miseries, and, with tentler con¬ cern, watched over my sister, and, through heris and the physician's care, ïvho was the same that saved her life befbre, she began to recover antl show signs of returning reason. She was perfectly calm antl resigned, but never, without shuddering, heard her fatber- ?~1??? mentioned.
When
" When she recovered, it was her con¬ stant custom to ride out in the coach, accompanied by her children. One day, they were stopt by three men, who bade the coachman stay, and let them deliver a letter to his Lady. The ser¬ vant complied, they put the letter into her hand, and, as she was going to opeu it, another carriage came up, into Λνη? c h tbey immediately forced her, and the children, whom they dragged from the nurse, and drove off full gallop. One of the scoundrels fired a pistol at the coachman, but happily did him no harm. "I ???? at that time hourly expected in England, illness, through the mis¬ fortunes of my family, having retarded my return before ??'??? search ?\'?? made after my sister and the children, but all in vain ; not the least tidings could be gained of them for seven months. One evening
evening, as I was ivalking a short dis¬ tance from the house, a letter was put into my hantU by a stranger, who dis- appcaietl directly. The contents in¬ formed me, That my sister and her chil¬ dren ????? alive, but in confinement at a miserable village in Normandy, and, if I would go to a certain place, I should hear more and be informed where to find them. They ????? detained there by order of my brother-in-law, ivho ivas then at Versailles. I lost not a moment in going to the place appointed, but, when I came, I found the person mentioned in the letter had that day been killed by a fail from his horse. Torn by a thousand afflicting passions, 1 hastened to Versailles, in hopes of meeting with the scoundrel. I had applied to Paris for a lettre de cachet and obtainetl it, but he ???? gone from thence, before I reached it. From a •»ervan t ????? he had discharged the day
day beibre I arrived, I learnt that be had taken the name of Volpone, and, that he had, previous to his leaving Eng¬ land, been married to Miss St. Prie. He had contrived to got from Mrs, Maynard, which was the name of the ?????? he had kept for several years, all the jewels that he had given her, and those Avhich she bad received as presents from others ; likewise, all her papers, and every thing of value he couhl put up in a small compass. This was done, ?\<?1? she ???? engaged on a party to Richmond, ? -vherc she was to ???^? staid three days ; but one of the company, being taken suddenly ill, and obliged to be brought to town, broke up the rest. She became frantic on discovering her loss, and that had occasioned the fatal affair at my sis¬ ter's. He said, Miss Owen ???? the mistress of Count St. Prie, and they were hated and despised by every one. lie
He could not tell any thing about Airs. Owen and the children ; but he be¬ lieved she was some where in Nor¬ mandy, antl nearly starving, as he ???? certain there was but a very trifle al¬ lowed for their support ; for, Airs. Owen's confidential servant had tolti him that slie hatl refused to sign some¬ thing, which her husband wanted her to do, antl that ???? the reason she hatl been confined ever since, but he never could get out of him whereabouts it was ; and that Mr. Owen, otherwise Volpone, never staid long any where, as they gambled much, antl ????? ahvays afraid ofa lettre de cachet. "This was all the intelligence I could receive, and with this, I was de¬ termined to continue on the Continent, I caused advertisements to be published, describing my sister, and the children ; and offered a considerable reward to any
any person that could give me infor¬ mation respecting them, but I received none. I went to Paris ; I had him minutely described theie, likewise of¬ fering a still greater reward ; but the information I received was ahvays ^uch as served rather to mislead than direct me right. However, 1, at last, obtain¬ ed certain intelligence that be was in Italy. I pursued him from place to place, but he always had the start of mc. I followed his steps to Naples, where I was positively assured I should hnd him. Under this impression, í arrived there, but my search was vain, till the night your company met me, and you, sir, know the rest." " This, then, is the whole of your evidence against the prisoner ?" said the Captain. * t It is, sir, " said Fitzallan. ' « I have, in
in the relation, strictly abided by the truth you enjoined me, and I trust you Λν?Ι find, upon examination, the whole to be just." " I need not remind you," said the Captain, turning to Owen, "of the oaths you took, ????? you entered our society, and the laws by ????? we arc bound. I therefore call upon you to say, Whether the ????? of ????! has been adduced against you be true or false ? : ' "True/'said he, "In every parti¬ cular, antl, as I must die, I demand ytuir immediate sentence/' "????? then/' said tîie Captain, " that, hy the laws and establishments of this community, ?\'1?1? and undi¬ vided, you, Andrew Owen, subject of the King of Great Britain, have been ' fou η
found guilty of various crimes, which militate against the good order and well-being of the said community, and are likewise further charged with sundry crimes of the blackest dye, committed by you previous to your becoming a member here, of tlu^diole of which charges you have acknow¬ ledged yourself guilty. You are, therefore, condemned to forfeit that life you knew not how to keep Avith honor. Twenty-four hours is the extent of the time you ???-? to live; make the most of it, apply to youi God for mercy ; for, here, there is no reprieve,'' So saying, he arose and left the room, bidding Fitzallan and his ser* vant 1?1??? him. Fitzallan and Mi¬ chael cast a look of pity on the crimi¬ nal, and couhl not help feeling for the fate of a man, ?????? vices had plunged Vol, Ι. E him
him into his then miserable situation. They ???!??? silently to the room, where the refreshments ????? placetl. A thousand distressing thoughts cnrwded on the brain of Fitzallan. "Ah! my sister," said he, ".what art thou ???? suffering, and ??1? mayest thou not be doomed to suffer more, if still alive ? " "That sister's fate you shall soon know, "answered the Captain : t t though silent to Owen on tlie subject, I had not forgot tbat your present grand object was to have her's and the chil¬ dren's situation ?????? to you. It shall be so, and I shall deem myself happy in being the means of restoring an innocent suffering woman to her family. I have known, sir, the bless¬ ing of innocence and the happiness of living among those, ?????? actions ?????!
would ever meet the face of day, and ???? lived the blessed ornaments of society, from the pleasing scenes of which I am ???? for ever, I fear, shut out. One false step led imperceptibly on to more, and, before my soul ???? ??????1^1 to a sense of guilt, I became Λν?^ί you ???? see me. But a truce to those reflections—you shall ????? my ????!? history before you leave this place ; but rest assured, ??????-?? ap¬ pearances may make against us, you Λν?Ι find us all, Λνιίηοιιί distinction, men of the strictest principles. " He heaved a deep sigh, as he spoke this, and Ethvard thought he saw him dash the startling tear indignantly from his eye. u You have promised me," said Ed- ?????!, "the restoration of my sister and her children ; that thought cheers E ? me
me and induces me to conclude you are acquainted with their fate." « < I am so, '* replied he ; f ' and if you will sit down, I will inform you in what manner I became known to Owen, whose death you must not regret, as it will be much better, for your own sake and that of your sister, that he died by our law T s, than by those of yours, as, in that case, it would be public, and, of course, your family would be involved in his disgrace, as you must inevitably have given him up to justice. Yet, before I relate these particulars, it ΛνίΠ ?? necessary for us to enquire after the lady, whose illness alarms me. Besides, I wish to know by what means she came to be alone.'* Edward followed him to her apart¬ ment ; still every where was dark ; a light wits placed in the rooms they pass* ed
etl through ; which ????? very different from any they had seen before ; and, though they did not go through either of the courts tbey had crossed to the great room, yet they found themselves in five minutes at tbe door of that which contained the lady. The Cap¬ tain entered. "???? is she ? " said he to Vashti. " She is much better," she ansivered, * r and will be able to speak to you in a few minutes" "Tell her We are here," said he. She ivent to the bed, and told her, The gentlemen ????? come. She ???? incapable of sitting up, but desired them to come near—they did. "If, " said she, "you are the gentlemen that so humanely saved my life, I should be happy to know of you, Where E 3 I am
I am, and ?? hci her vou can add ano- thcr blessing, hy restoring mc to my frieads, if they arc stiil alive, that they may make you those ???????^1§- menrs vour «»enerous conduct merits. 5 ' 4 : Wheie you are ???\," answered the Captain, 4 ' is of no consequence for you to know—That you are safe from every danger I can assure you of, and who ??? are, further than we are men of honor, belongs not to me to inform you ; and, to convince you of it, I shall observe, That, if you ?\?11 say, W T ho you are, and to whom ??? shall restore you, it shall be done, as soon as you are able to be moved." "I thank you, sir," said she; "I will obey you. •'T am from Scotland, and came with my mother to Maples, tojóin my brother
brother, vvho hatl been making the C¿ rand Tour. Wc had been about a month there, ????? my brother, one evening, introduced an English gen¬ tleman, and his tvvo friends, vvith whom he had formed an intimacy. I knew not what vyas the reason, but 1 could not regard either of the party with any degree of complacency. My brother was offended ; but my mother being of the same opinion as myself, he seb dom brought them, after the first month. Aiy mother had expressed a wish to reside at, or near, Torre del Greco, in preference to Naples ; vve, therefore, quitted that city, and went thither ; our villa was situated about a mile east of the ίοΛνη ; and we had been resident there about a fortnight, when my mother ordered a barge for an ex¬ cursion on the water, and desired my brother to make one of the party. He excused himself, by saying, He ???? E 4 ander
under prior engagements vvith some English friends at Naples ; but, if he could quit them at an early hour, he would join us. He left us; and we, soon after, sailed. "We hatl been out several hours, and my brother came not ! my mother was uneasy. She spoke of it to a gen¬ tleman in our paity ; he asked, With whom Mr. Aiacdonaltl ???? engagetl at Naples ? She said, She ????? not : * If it is the party that I saw him vvith at the opera/ said he, ' he is not in very good hands ; they are reported to be professed gamblers, antl the ladies of their acquaintance, such as are shut out from all societies but their own/ While my mother ???? requesting the gentleman to make it a point of seeing him, and talk to him about it, a boat vyas seen rovving hastily towards the barge. Thinking it was my brother, ???
we lay too, to receive him ; but vve ????? surprised to see his man only, besides the ivatermen. His face expressed the greatest terror. Aîy mother, alarmed, asked Where his master was? £ At home,' answered he, 'just brought in.' She heard no more, but fainted away. The company instantly interrogated him, as to what he meant. I was too much affected at the illness of my mo¬ ther, to attend to what the man said ; but I found we stood İn towards the shore, which we soon reached. Aly mother recovered on landing. "When ive came home, the servants seemed in the greatest confusion—at length, I learnt, That, not long after we had left the house, two gentlemen had come, and enquired for my brother, and on being infbrmed he was gone to Naples, they had set out after him. In about four hours, they ????? astonished E 5 to
to see my brother brought home in a litter, >rounded in several places, and to all appearance dead. Those ???? brought him, informed them, That he had quarrelled ???? some Frenchmen about a debt of honor, or dice, they diti not ????? ?????, and that a fight had ensued, in ????? two of the party hatl been killed, and several ??????^; that the officers of justice had recognised my brother, and, thinking him mortally wounded, had ordered him to be sent home ; that several of the party had made their escape, by leaping from the window, but ίΛνο were taken ; and in the room were found two women, one dead, antl the other dangerously ivounded. Every assistance that could bc procured for him, was got ; for some days, his life was despaired of, and when a gleam of reason appeared, he begged to know, By what means he had been brought home, and whether any of the party,
party he was with, had been takem The doctors desired him to make him¬ self easy on that head, and to ask no questions, as he ivas not well enough to talk. ' Take care of my sister then, ' said he, 'and let her not be out of the sight of my mother. ' They promised, antl he became quiet. "He had been a week upon the re¬ covery, when an order came to give an account of my brother's health ; it was sent. Wc had caused every enquiry to be made respecting the quarrel, and vve gathered, from the evidence of the woman in custotly, That my brother antl seven others had met to decitle a wager, made between him and one of the French gentlemen, and that it had been given against him by a Alonsieur Volpone, who was arbitrator. Aly brother, not being satisfied with it, had expostulated; a scuffie ensued,, in E 6 whicii
which my brother ???? knocked down» when ίΛνο of the company took his part, and they instantly d^v. The con¬ sequence ????, frvo ????? killed, besides the ??????, and the whole of the party, more or less ?vounded, aí it ???? a very small room they ????? in. ???? were taken, the rest made their escape. We learnt since, That one of tbe French¬ men, whom my mother and myself had objected to see, ???? among them, and the very person ???? gave it against my brother; the woman who ???? killed, and the other that was wounded, were, one his Λν?ίε, and the other his sister." Edward started.— u Gracious God!" exclaimed he; *·' pray, madam, what is become ofthe ?????? that survived?" > u I do not know," said the lady; she
lt she vyas confined in a prison at Naples, but, ΛνΙιείΙια' tried, or not, I cannot tell. "Aiy brother, seemet!, at times, very uneasy about me, but for Λνίκιί reason, ??? could never learn. It ???? near tliree months before he could leave his room, and that but for a very short time. Tbe day after he hail first walked out a short ????, we were alarmed by the appearance of an eruption from the mountain. This greatly terrified my mother, and her first care was for my brother, Λν?ιοηι she ordered to be carried to Naples; but he refused to go, saying He saw no danger, and chose to stay where he ????; antl not all her remonstrances could persuade him to be removed ; in conse¬ quence of which we continued at the villa, till that dreadful night, when the eruption became so A r iolcnt. My bro¬ ther
ther was removed by force, and ??? ????? about to follow; my mother, in the greatest consternation, ???$ giving some order respecting me, ?\??? a large party of men entered the portico, threatening destruction on all around, if they met ??? h the least opposition. nie house ???? instantly ransacked of every portable of value; my mother, in wild distraction, knew not Avhat to do ; the domestics struck with horror, ran diiferent ways, leaving us at the mercy of the banditti, or to be buried under the showers of burning ashes, ????? descended in torrents from the mountain. Every one seemed eager for his ???? preservation, and totally regardless of that of others. The thunder burst over us in violent peals, while the lightning gleamed around with ten-fold horrors. I screamed aloud and earnestly implored the pity of those,* who ????? busy in plundering us
us of every thing they coultl cany away, absolutely deatl to the dangers that opened around them, and wholly unappalled by the terrific horrors that reigned on every side: they regarded me not ; at last, a storm of thunder, more violent than any of the former, seemed to awaken them to some sense of their danger; they ran with precipi¬ tation out of the bouse ; I endeavoured to support my poor mother down the steps of the portico, when three men seized us ; two of them bore my mother from me; while a third drag¬ ged me, with velocity, down the slope of the vineyard. We reached the plain, and, as I was supplicating him to take me to my mother, a Hash of lightning darted across us, antl I discovered him to be the Frenchman, called Volpone. At that instant, I heard a violent cry of Here he is, and vve were instantly surrounded. He broke from them, and
and ran precipitately up the side ofthe mountain, and I ???? left alone. I shrieked with terror, and raved, with frantic wildness, the name of my mo¬ ther; butthe tumult of the different elements was too great for me to dis¬ tinguish whether I was answered or not; agony overcame me, I fell senseless to the ground, and to your goodness I have been led to understand I ???? the preservation of my life, as my senses cjuite forsook me when I dropped." Here the lady stopped ; the Captain politely thanked her for the relation she had given, and said ; " You must make yourself easy, ma¬ dam, where you are at present; and, as it will contribute to your recovery to hear that your mother is safe, be as¬ sured that she is so, and Λνιί?ι your brother, and it shall be my business to inform
inform her that you are safe also, antl in the hands of those that Λν?Ι protect you from every danger, till you can be restored to her. You must, therefore, endeavour to ????? ? ???? lines, to assure her of your safety, and I will under¬ take to have them delivered to her in a tdiort time. She is ???? at Naples, as the whole of the ίΟΛνη of Torre del Greco is destroyed, and the adjacent country round, and it may, in one sense, be ?/??? fortunate that you fell into the hands of those men, as, in ail probability, you ????? have perished, Iiad you taken any other ????/' The pleasure that was diffused over the face of the latly, on hearing this ac¬ count, seemed to have the same effect on that of the Captain, and he cheer¬ fully requested her to get the letter ready, the apparatus for ????? should be immetliately brought her. He said Circum-
Circumstances of a singular nature would prevent him from having her conveyed home as soon as he could wish, but that every attention should be paid her that their situation would admit, and Vashti should continue with her. He lamented thev had not a proper change of clothes to offer her, but her ???? should be got ready for her to put on, as soon as she ivas able to sit up. She thanked him in an af¬ fectionate manner for his care and po¬ liteness; he then bowed and left her, having first ordered Vashti to, get the writing-desk. " As soon as they got to a room at the end of the gallery, the Captain said : " Here is another instance of your brother-in-law's depravity, vvhich con¬ firms the information we had received, and
and for which, by our 1????, he is con¬ demned. You must ???? come with me ; I think it necessary to inform you of some particulars respecting my¬ self, and the society you are ???? in." They passed on through another short gallery, and entered a large room, where a brisk fire was burning, and candles in two large silver candlesticks placed upon the table. " Sit ?1????, *' said he, turning to Fitz¬ allan and Michael; " I know the English ahvays love to he near the lire, ???????? in ???^?? or summer, and, as chance as brought us together, we Λν?Ι be as merry as ??? can under our troubles." Thus saying, he placed a large flask of Muscadine ???? upon the table, poured out a goblet to each, and they drank
drank to "Friendship -without deceit" That tlone, the Captain began : " Iiowever painful it may be to a mind of any feeling to relate the errors of apast life, yet an ingenuous confession of them to a generous heart will always meet Λν??ι more or less degree of pity, and, where they cannot approve, they ΛνίΙΙ not too harshly condemn. Such a man I think I have found in you ; I'shall, therefore, ????^ any disguise, inform you of ivhat you may perhaps deem better concealed than avowed. 'T am the second son of a noble¬ man of very high rank, but of what kingdom you must excuse me naming at present. I was brought up under the immediate care of my father, and a divine 4 of great abilities, and greater virtues, ???? the preceptor his diligent care procured for us. Aly brother and myself
myself were the only children my parents ????? blessed with, as they often emphatically termed it ; and, as our fortunes ivere large, ??? received a suitable education. At the age of seventeen, the different masters that hatl attended us were discharged, and, as there ???? but one year difference i u the ages of my brother and myself, ??? ????? to make the Tour together. Our heavenly preceptor, for by that appel¬ lation he deserves to be distinguished, attended υ s on our travels. We ????? to be absent four years ; a suitable establishment ???? provided for us, and ??? set out. ' ' Aiy brother, though a young man of sound sense and quick perception, had at times given our tutor some pains, to inculcate into his breast the necessity of complying with the moral duties of his character ; but, proud of that con¬ sequence
sequence to which he was born, and naturally attached to the freedom of the world, he entered into the pleasures of it, ivith more avidity than prudence, and, in a short time after our arrival at Paris, became involved in several very disagreeable situations. There are never wanting in every city, ?????? ever ready to take advantage of any- young man, who is known to possess a liberal income antl large expectations. It was not long before he was engaged in an amour vvith a married woman, whose husband winked at the crimes of his wife, and never appeared' so happy, as when she was surrounded by a train of unexperienced youths, whose passions she excited, and whose credulity she played on. The young, the gay, the ¿manning, were all forsaken for this insidious woman. It had been the rage in England, some time, to adore none but those already joined in the bands
bands of ??^???. Various ????? the stratagems made use of to entangle me in a similar passion. t No one,'they said, t could possibly be thought a young man of fashion without entering a l an glaise, into the mode.' Our pre¬ ceptor ???? with pain the encourage* ment given to such pursuits by ail anks and conditions. lie endeavoured to detach my brother from the parties he had formed, by requesting him to join in those composed of young people of ages similar to his ????, but no '~ht availed. He would, in compliance with his Avishes, stay a short time among them ; then, under one pretext or another, contrive to quit them, and hasten to the assemblies of this ??????. In a short time, it was evident he ???? firmly attached to her, as she had art enough to make him believe, that she breathed for him alone. She was above double his age } and the mother of se¬ veral
veral children ; two of them as old as my brother. All this was represented to him in the mildest terms, by Doctor L'Antoine, and all the folly attending such a connexion ; but he ivas deaf to all that could be said. TbeDoctor, find¬ ing all remonstrance vain, forbore to urge him further, leaving it to time, and his own good sense, to see Ins error. "One day, I went with the Doctor, on a visit to a fel^v-students of his, whom the good old man represented as one of the most amiable and deserv¬ ing characters in existence; but, at the same time, the most unhappy. He had married, early in life, an amia¬ ble woman, some years older than him* self. By her he had three children, one son, antl two daughters; the young* est had beed married several years to un officer of marines, antl lived, though poor,
poor, tolerably content ; the eldest, then about thirty 'ûix, one of the most ac¬ complished and deserving ?????? of the age, ???? married to a gentleman, ??? en she ???? about twenty; and, as she had but little fortune, it ivas thought that marrying her from liking only, they would be completely happy. He was some ???? years older than her¬ self. At first, he took great pains to introduce his ??1?? ?????-??????, and boasted of her charms and accomplish¬ ments ; but, as soon as the novelty eeasetl, he unmasked, and shewed him¬ self the tyrant. For some years she bore his cruelty without a murmur, and endeavoured to hide her sufferings ? in her own bosom; but her health bemg injured by them, she was obligetl to be removed to her father's ; where, in the -delirium attending the fever she had, she told what she had under¬ gone for twelve or fourteen years. This Vol. I. F induced
induced her father to make tliose en- quii ies that before he had no idea of doing; and,from all the circumstances, he was convinced, that if his daughter returned to the brute, her husband, htr life ?????! mo.st certainly become the sacrifice. He therefore objected to her return, and insisted upon her re¬ siding with him ; when her husband found this resolution about to be adopted by his wife, he made use of coercive measures to enforce her re¬ turn to his house, though, at the same time, he had a mistress in it, ???? reigned with the same despotic sway over him, as he did ?? ? ?? his helpless wife. " Mr. Brisac, for that was tbe name of this tyrant, ???? one day in company with any brother and a large party of young noblemen, being what is called a man of the world, and his fortune enabling
enabling him to mix with the first families. The insinuating manners he could put on, ????????? he had any prospect in view, rendered him an accep¬ table companion ; he ???? ever ready to forward any scheme, so others paid for İt ; and having a ready invention and a consummate kiwvlcdge of the worid, lie never failed to ???-? his company courted. The manner in Avhich he treated his wife, was not ???????? ; but, as she ? -ras never seen in public, she ???? not thought of, antl her suf¬ ferings passed on unregarded. Though all affected to blame is conduct, yet none was so much the friend of injured innocence, as to point out to him the wickedness of his behaviour to an amiable and lovely woman, for such all allowed her to be. From the time my brother became acquainted, an intimacy commenced, and, in ? £??? •days, he was invited to a large dinner F â paity
party at his house. I was included i n the number, and, as my curiosity had been excited by ??1^ 1 had heard from the doctor, I resolved to go ; we ????^ but, instead offinding, aslexpccted, Mrs. Bri¬ sac at the head of the table, I found a coarse vulgar female, dressed in themost extravagant manner, and totally devoid of eveiy accomplishment, either mental or personal. I felt an ??^^???! embar¬ rassment, and ventured to ask the doctor, ???? ???? of thè party, Whether that ???& Mrs. Brisac ? "No," said he; "tbat is the ?????? ???? has so long usurped her place. Mrs. Brisac never appears ; she eats her solitary dinner in her ???? apart¬ ment, sent up from the table of her husband ; you will see it presently : I consented to dine here, for the purpose of being convinced.''
Some
Some time after the company ?\ ? ??? seated at table, I observed a small cover sent ????? by a servant—the doctor sa?v it likewise. Dinner passed, but my mind ???? so much occupied by the thoughts of Mrs. B's sufferings, that I could not eat. Toasts ????? round—it came to the doctor's turn ; * he gave, with an air that spoke to the heart, "Mrs. Brisac." The ?????? darted a look of fury at the doctor, and a threatening one to B. This did not pass unobserved by the company ; they rose ???? pleasure, and gave in bumpers, "Mrs. Brisac. " The woman got up, and left the table. " Come with me, this instant,"' said sbe, turning to Brisac. " Not till the glass is drunk/' said they.
F3
"Let
" Let him do it at his peril," said she, and quitted the room. They in¬ sisted on his drinking; hedid, tliough with visible trepidation. A servant came in, Λν?ιο desired Brisac's company in the breakfast-parlour ; he got up, made a slight apology, and left us. We looked at each other in silence, for some time, vvhen we unanimously agreed to 1??? ? ? the house ; the carriages and servants were ordered, and, in a few minutes, we departed. " This circumstance ???? the talk for several days ; antl, though all pi¬ tied the ??1??, yet there ???? not one but laughed at the husband, as a weak, pusillanimous wretch ; his company was shunned by every body, and, soon after, it vvas reported that he ???? gone to a distant province, and hatl taken his wife and mistress with him.
" About
" About this time, a young man from England became tbe topic of every conversation. He ???? the Adonis of that nation, and every lady, whether married or single, set her cap at him— among the rest, the mistress of my brother, ???? succeeded in chiving him into her snares. She had, for some time, shewn a coldness tovards my brother, which he had mentioned to me several times ; within the last fort¬ night, he had taken up large sums to gratify her avarice ; but, as they fell short of her expectations, and he had drained every resource for that purpose, she thought it high time to look out for another lover—in this young man she fbund one. " My brother had been sincerely attached to this infamous ??????, and, therefore, now felt her treachery in a most poignant maimer. In the height F 4 of
of his resentment, he swore to he re¬ venged, not only apon the lady, hut also npon the young man that had supplanted him. Alarmedat his threats, í hastened to the doctor, and earnestly entreated him to devise some means to take my brother from Paris, telling him the reason of my fears. The poor old man, in a moment, saw the neces¬ sity of it, and ??? set about ruminating upon wha^vas best to be done. " Put hirn," said I, " upon rescuing Mrs. Brisac ; pretend that you have heard where she is immured, and that you want some assistance in restoring her to her father : this Λν?Ι divert his mind from its present pursuits, and, as I know Mrs. Brisac is hated by this friend of my brother's, he ΛνίΠ look upon this as a step towards his revenge on the i&dy, by openly espousing the cause of ? ?????? of virtue. "He
" He agreed, and I hastened to my brother—he ???? just returned from the hotel of Madame, ?????? he had been denied admittance. Frantic with rage and disappointed ???, he ????? sally forth and meet his rival, determined to sacrifice him to his vengeance. I en¬ deavoured to reason with him, but all reasoning ???? vain ; fortunately, the doctor entered. He pretended igno¬ rance of his pupils attachment, ap¬ peared absolutely regardless of his agi¬ tation, and seemed in a violent hurry. i£ I am come," said he, "to request you to tlo for me what my old arm is incapable of performing. " *'What is that?" said I. * c To rescue a beautiful and unhappy young ?????? from the hands of a brutal husband. I am too old to turn F 5 knight-
errant myself, and, therefore, I entreat vou to tlo it for me. " "What say you, Charles," saitl I, " to this adventure ? I must own it appears a singular one, and what I think ΛνίΙΙ just do for you to begin your plan of revenge." " How !—revenge !—what ? " said he, vvith impatience. i i Why, revenge yourself on Aladamc, W T ho, you know, hates Airs. Brisac. ïhat lady has been carried away by her husband, Λνίιο is, at the instigation of the woman he keeps, about to immure her in a convent in Italy. Novv, if ??? could overtake them, antl by some stratagem, get her out of his hands, it would be a glorious exploit, antl some¬ thing for the world to talk about, as it would be quite a novel thing for a young man
man to espouse the cause ofa virtuous ??????, in defiance to the frowns of an impure, ???? 1??? ? ?? every man she is connected ???? for the next ???????? offer. Rouse your spirit, Charles, and, if wc atchieve this adventure, it will sting her more than all you can do . against either/' "But you must set out directly," said the doctor, " if you mean to serve her, as they are alreatly a day in advance, and ??? shall not be long before we return again to Paris, if we hasten after them immediately/' " Afy brother paused for a moment, "I will go/'said he; "it ??? bc the means of slaving her that I value her as little as she does me. But as to that puppy, I am determined to chastise him as soon as I return, I do this to F G s cry ?
serve you, sir/' continued he, turning to the doctor; "and, if ??? succeed, tbe merit of the enterprize must be yours, fbr I shouid never have thought of such a tiling." "The carriage was ordered to be ready in ίΛνο hours, and the doctor gave directions that no one shoultl be acquainted Λνύ?ι our departuie, nor the Toute ??? meant to take ; for even he himself ???? undetermined on that head ; but, as wehad mentioned Italy, thought it best to go thither, especially as that was the place of our next destination, as soon as my brother could be pre¬ vailed on to leave Paris ; but, as ??? did not expect to stay long, it was thought advisable to order our luggage to re¬ main there, antl likewise ίΛνο of the sentants, till they heard from the doctor. This being settled, we set out
We
We travelled at a great rate, under pretence of overtaking the fugitives, and enquired at every post for those wc ????? sure we should not hear of. We had reached Moulins, before ?\? appeared to have the least glimpse of them, when the doctor entered ???? seeming pleasure, and said, He had, at last, discovered their route. They were gone to Lyons, and from thence meant to go down the Rhone, and stop at Aix, where, in all probability, we might come up with them. My brother reluctantly went on, after asking the doctor, Whether hewas certain of meet¬ ing with them there ? " I am led to hope so/' said he; " you will, Charles, gain more honor by such a humane action as this, than by being possessed of all the courtezans hi Paris. "
tí I ????
" I ?? ? ?? continually reminding him ofthe moi tification Madame ????? ex¬ perience when she found he solittle va¬ lued her good opinion ofhim, as to dare to become the champion of a virtuous ?????? —one ????? she hated. This idea seemed to dwell upon his minti, and he pursued the journey Avith appa¬ rent pleasure : ??? reached Avignon, and meant immediately to set off for Aix. I had given orders for the eai- riage to be ready, antl we ????? cross¬ ing a passage for the purpose of reach¬ ing it, when ??? met a gentleman, who ???? one of the party at Brisac's. After the first salutations, he informed us, he ???? on his return to Paris, Avhich place he would have reached before, hatl not an accident retarded him. This ???? no other than having encountered the Brisac family, on their route to Barjols, where they meant to make a stay. lie himself hatl
had been there a fortnight, but ivas now on his return. I ventured to enquire after Airs. Brisac, antl whether he hatl seen her or not? He said, lie hatl not, but had been informetl she was iu a convent, at her ???? request; but ??????, he coultl not tell. ' t This intelligence not only confirmed what the doctor had said, but made him really earnest in restoring her to her father, who was in continual fear of hearing the death of his favorite chihl. Aly brother, rejoiced at the rencontre, ???? about to inform the young man of our ostensible reason for being there; when, fortunately, I checked him, antl turned the dis¬ course, by saying, It was our inten¬ tion to visit Italy, ???? we ????? so near the Alps. The young man soon left us, and we set out for Barjols, in hopes to gain some intelligence as to
λυ hat place Mrs. Brisac had been taken; ??? thought it be^t not to be seen, but to get our news from the people of the house ??? should stop at. "We arrived in the e\ T ening, and, untler pretence of enquiring after a servant that lived ???? Mr. Brisac at Paris, ??? gained the information ??? wanted, but it was totally different from that we had received before ; we were now told, that Mrs. Brisac ???? still in the house, though confined ; that she had attempted the life of her husband, and was in every respect, a very bad ??????; for, though Mr. Brisac had married her ??! thout a fortune, yet she had never loved him. This was the purport of vyhat ??? heard from the hostess : we asked, What part of the house she ???? confined in, antl whe¬ ther the 4 servant ??? wanted was still with her, as we wished to get him. The
The ?????? could not tell, hut she believed, in a room at the top of the house, as thev had often heard music come from there, Avhen they went to a convent of the order of Mercy, not far distant, and she ????? endeavour to learn something about the servant; as to the lady, we told her, We did not ???? to ????? any thing about her. " After the ?????? had left the room, we began to cast about in our minds ???? we could ????-?? intelli¬ gence to Mrs. B. of our intentions to serve her. Our preceptor thought it ?????1 be the most advisable method to go to the convent, and, under a pretence of seeing it, get one of the sisters to be our friend : in this ??? had the gootl fortune to succeed, and α good nun, ???? had six patients to attend daily, undertook to deliver a letter
letter frem the doctor. It contained an account of our accidentally becom¬ ing acquainted with her situation, and our desire to restore her to her fatlier, if it was her wish to be liberated. " Three days passed before any answer came, and it was hastily writ¬ ten with a pin upon á laurel leaf, merely to say, She had received the letter, and that she was totally without the means of answering it; but, in a few days, she hoped she should. The strange idea of writing on a leaf, evinced at once the situation she was in, and we determined not to quit the place, till we had effected her escape. The doctor ancl myself were happy, in one sense, that it could not immediately be put into execution, as he hoped to inform her fatlier of the particulars, and devise some means or
of getting my brother on to Italy, ????'? this unexpected meeting Λνίί?ι the lady prevented. "Wc spent near ? ?????, before the good nun again made her appearance at our little hotel. She brought the doctor a long letter from IMrs. Brisac, ? -rhîch stated such particulars of her situation, as made us determine, at all events, not to quit the place with¬ out her; but, she said in her letter, That she would not have him run any risk on her account, but begged him to send to her father, and request him to apply for the necessary war¬ rants to have her delivered to him ; this ΛνυιιΜ prevent her husband from lia\ ing any real plea for confining her; for, if our attempt should fail, he ????1(1 then be able to substantiate his charges against her, ????? the woman \v ho w us 'in the house, and her creatures,
creatures, ?????! not fail to confirm; as they had already given out that she ivanted to elope with a young gentleman at Partí, wifh ?????, they said, she had an intrigue, and that ???? the reason they deprived her of liberty, to pre\ T cnt her from bringing disgrace upon her family. Those cruel calum¬ nies, she said, would be con mined, if she went from thence with any other person than her father, and that in a legal ????, as, otherwise, she shouid be ever liable to be brought back to Mr. Brisac again. She, therefore, earnestly entreated him to take no further steps till her father's arrival, ????? she should be happy if, by their joint endeavours, she could <ret liberated and be once more re- storctl to peace, to which she had for so manv years been a stranger. "We all agreed to the justness of her reasoning,
reasoning, and resolved to ???? the arrival of ber fai lier. My brother seemed to enter into the spirit of the enterpri/e, and only at intervals thought of Madame. This gave us hopes that he ?????1 relinquish Paris altoge¬ ther, and think no more of ret urn hu? thither. "We had been at Barjols near three ??????, when the father of Mrs. Brisac arrived. He informed us, That, when the doctor's letter came, it found him confined to his bed, through i lint ss occasioned by grief fo. the uncertain fate of his daughter, as the slanderous report had reached him, That she had attempted to elope -with a young man of fashion, but had been detected by her husband, and he had confuied her in consequence of it, in some place known only to himself; and, as all en¬ quiries which he had made tended only
only to confirm tbis report, it hatl been more than his strengtii could support, and he had sunk under it; though he could never bring himself to believe she had ever meant to go off with any gentleman, whatever attempts she might otherwise have made to escape from her husband. But it was impos¬ sible to describe the joy he felt on re¬ ceiving the doctor's ietter ; he got up immediately, regardless of his illness, antl hastenetl to get the proper warrant for her release, which he obtained on producing the letter, and, his own character being so ???! I known, it was erran ted him without hesitation. He hatl travelled night and day ever since, and hoped he should bc at peace, nov/ that he had his dear chihl once more under his protection. Ile took some slight refreshment, antl lest, by any unforseen accident, he shoultl be dis¬ covered to be at Barjols, it was thought most
most proper to send for the necessary officer, and go immediately to the house and demand Mrs. Brisac. " Accordinglv tliey set out, and it ???? thought best i'or my brother and myself, together v.ith ouv servants, to Λ -yait at a small distance from the house, with two carriages, in one ???????? Airs. Brisac, htr tather, and the doctor, ????? to travel, and, in the otlier, our¬ selves ; for we meant to leave Bar jols and go on to Frej us or Nice, Mr. Dan¬ ville, Mrs. Brisac's father, having a sister in Piedmont, γ» ith whom he hoped to place liis daughter, as he should not think her eafe if .she went back to Paris with him. " Every thing being ready, and having been previously assured that Brisac was at home, they proceeded to the house, and ??? took our station as agreed,
agreed. They entered, and it ???? near an hour befbre any person ap¬ peareth To describe my anxiety would he impossible, though I knew not ???? I dreaded every thing. Mv brother began also to be interested; but, to our great joy, ??? at last saw the tloe¬ tor and Mr. Danville supporting a lady, ?\ ho appeared to be so extremei} 7 ?????, that she was incapable of ???1??^ M'ithout assistance ; the carriage (1???? up, and she vvas placetl in it ; ours immediately followed, and ??? drove off full speed towards Frejus. We ?\??? anxious to see a lady, of ?\1?? ??? had heard so much, and ????? ??? had, though undesignedly, i u the first part of our journey, been the means of libera¬ ting. We equally partook in the satis¬ faction of the parent ; our carriage kept close to that of Airs. Brisac, and entered the hotel together. We hastened to pay our respects to the lady,
lady, but were greatly shocked, when we came to the door of the carriage, to perceive her in the arms of her father, to all appearance dead. We lifted her out, and had her immediately conveyed to bed. The father hung over her in speechless agony; medical assistance was sent for ; the doctors came, and pronounced the lady in a high fever ; but, if proper tare was taken of her, and she could be composed, they did not doubt but she would do well. They begged Air. Dainville to be com¬ forted, and to take that repose which he stood so much in need of; he ivith difficulty acquiesced, and Mrs. Brisac ivas consigned to the care of a nurse, with strict orders to watch her in the most attentive manner, and, if she ivished to see any one, to immediately send for the doctor.
Vol. L
G
We
We retired with him, and were soli¬ citous to know in what manner tbey had been received by Brisac. He in¬ formed us, that, On tlieir enquiring at the house for him, they were shewn into the library, and the servant went to inform him that some gentlemen wanted to see him. In a short time, he entered, but appeared greatly con¬ fused, on seeing who they were. The officer directly made known his busi¬ ness, and produced his warrant. Brisac hesitated, stammered, and made as though he did not understand them, saying, that He must certainly be mis¬ taken in their application, as Mrs. Brisac could not possibly have any thing to complain of, and he was sure no wife could be so happy as under the protection of her husband. 'True/ said her father, 'if the husband dis¬ charges the duties of one ; but, when he
he tramples on every solemn \?λα γ made at the altar, it is time for the Λν -ife to seek another protector.' Mr. Brisac was going to reply, when the offi¬ cer stopped him, by observing, That he was not come there to ask ???????? right, or who was ?vrong ; his orders ?????, to demand the body of Ella Brisac, and to have her delivered into the hands of her father, John Francis Dainville, and in case of resistance to those orders, to arrest Henry Brisac, or any of his aidors and abettors. Brisac demanded a sight ofthe ???????^ i^vas shewn him, and, looking out at the window, he per¬ ceived the attendant of the officer in waiting, and instantly concluded it would be more for his advantage to yield her quietly, than to refuse ; he then, ???? a great deal of feigned con¬ cern, said, that Whatever pain it might be to him to give up a wife he had ever fondly loved, yet he could not resist G 2 the
the orders of his Majesty ; he should, therefore, give the proper directions for Airs. Brisac to be delivered up ; but she was so much indisposed, that he feared, she could not travel. He then went to the door, to leave the room, but the officer prevented him by say¬ ing, t You are not, Sir, to leave this room, till Mrs. Brisac is delivered/ He then ordered a servant to go to Mrs. Brisac's room, and inform her, that her father was arrived, and ivished to see her directly. They ivaited near half an hour, before she came ; and, ????? she did, she was supported into the room hy two servants. On seeing her father, she fainted away, and remained a con¬ siderable time ivithout sense or motion ; hut, at length, she revived, and found herself upon the bosom of her parent. He briefly informed her of his intentions to take» her from thence, and wished to know if it met with her approbation. She
She assured him, it did ; he ???? ordered the carriage to d^v up ; she ???? placed in it, and they drove off. It was some time before they coukl speak ; surprise and joy had so far overcome her, that she fainted several times; but, at last, recovered so much as to tell him that She had been very ill, for above ? ????? before he came, much worse than she had been for some time, though she had not been ???? since they left Paris. The letter she received from the doctor had raisetl her spirits, antl she began to hope she should be at last restored to her parent. She had suffered every indignity that a weak and malicious mind could inflict, and it had been his intention to con¬ fine her in a convent ; but, fearing that intelligence might be conveyed to her father of ?????? she ????, he had altered liis resolution, and confined her in a G 3 room
room at the top of the house. What they chose to send for her support, was brought by the ?????? that he kept, and another, her relation. No conver¬ sation Avhatever passed between them ; they placed ????1 she ?????? in her room, and left her for the day, and she saw not any person till the next. In this man¬ ner she continued, till they came to demand her. We began to congratulate him on the happy termination of this adven¬ ture; when he stopped us, by saying, He owed the fortunate result of it to the sensible advice of Mrs. Brisac. t We shail see her soon, I hope, able to dis¬ play those talents, that so liberally adorn her, antl you Λν?Ι feel yourselves happy in her friendship/ We soon after retired to rest, and, the next day, had the happiness of hearing Mrs. Brisac ???? much better. In about a fort¬ night,
night, she was able to leave her room, and, for the first time, I had a distinct view of her face. It ???? that kind, ?????, though not regularly handsome, had something so ????^???? in it, thatyou . could not behold it without admiration antl respect. Time, illness, and grief, had made ravages on her complexion, and thnnvn over it a sickly hue, but that she appeared to lose daily. She ???? about the middle size; her person exquisitely formed, and, when she spoke, your attention was instantly fixed. I ????? not ?vhat possessed me, but from the first moment I beheld her, young as I ????, I became her slave, ???????? to myself. Before I had been with her ? ?????, I ????? have freely parted svitli life, to have made her happy ; and ????1 astonished me more was the visible alteration in my brother. We heard no more of his return to Paris ; Madame was no longer thought G 4 of
of, or mentioned, unless to draw a con¬ trast bei ween her and Mrs. Brisac. 4 Had I loved such an amiable woman as*Mrs. Brisac,' said he to me one day, 4 1 shouhl not have to regret my folly ; she would have loved me, for myself, not for my fortune;—oh! ?vhat a damned infatuated fool I have been ! how just are the doctor's observations ! Should she be made acquainted with my amours, and my headstrong folly in pursuing them, what idea will she form of my morals ? certainly she ΛνίΠ regard me as another Brisac. Ah! Frederic, I conjure thee, keep my folly a secret from her ; and entreat the doc¬ tor to do so likewise; for, I declare solemnly, I would rather possess the esteem of such a woman as this, than all the fulsome love of those, ?????? blandishments deluded my better rea¬ son, and bulled my senses in delirium. 1 fly those wretches for ever, and Λν?Ι endeavour
endeavour to find in the company of good ivómén, that pleasure I sought for, but sought in vain. How vicious and depraved must that man be, who could slight such virtues, much moredefème them í for, I am certain that she de¬ serves not the smallest censure to be thrown upon her actions ; her soul ap¬ pears the seat of purity itself. Ah ! ???? did Omnipotence permit an union, vvith souls so opposite—with one con¬ genial to her ovvn, the bliss of angels would hrve been their lot.' In this manner he would talk, not only to me, but to the doctor, who often smiled at his sallies, and seemed hafipy, that the pursuits of his pupil had taken so laudable a turn, as he was certain there was nothing to fear from Mrs. Brisac; he knew her principles, and did not doubt but, ívhen the grand aim was ansivered, of weaning G 5 him
him from the destructive company he had kept, and the vices he had been plunged in through them, he would imperceptibly become attached to virtue, and return to my father every thing his fond heart could wish* We continued at Frejus a month, after Mrs. Brisac's ?????^??? ; and then proceeded to Nice, her father having taken the proper measures against his son-in-law. He ???? informed by his notary, that his complaint against Brisac had been exhibited in due form, and every thing should be done, that was necessary to forward the divorce. With this assurance we reached Nice, Mr. Dainville meaning to stay there with his daughter, till their presence should be necessary at Paris. The doctor then proposed we should take our leave, and continue our route through v Italy, The thoughts of part¬ ing
ing with Airs. Brisac wrung me to the heart; but I was obligetl to comply, antl hide my uneasiness within my own breast, as I did not dare to make a confident of my brother, antl to the doctor I could not communicate my sorrows. I loved my brother ivith the most tentler friendship; yet, I could not, at times, help regretting that he ivas older than myself: for, if Airs. Biisac should obtain a divorce, she ????? then be at liberty to marry again ; and, as he had the advantage over me both in age antl fortune, I had not the least doubt but he would make an offer of his hand to her, which would most assuredly be accepted. I tried all I could to conquer my unhappy pas¬ sion ; but, the more I struggled, the more entangled I became, and my brother, ivho made no secret of his attachment, appeared equally uneasy as myself; but the doctor, who saw G 6 the
the necessity of separating us, insisted on our compliance. I became per¬ fectly passive, and determined to ???^ my fate with patience. We left Nice, and our folly, I had reason to believe, had not in the • slightest degree been suspected by Mrs. Brisac. Our intentions respecting her, on our arrival at Barjols, ????? grate¬ fully remembered by her, and she assured us, at our departure, that she should never lose sight of tbe obliga¬ tions she held herself under to us. We reluctantly left the place, ????11 contained the only object, I was cer¬ tain, I should ever ??1?? to live for. My brother became shortly the most eccentric character perhaps in exist¬ ence ; in the different assemblies which we resorted to, the ladies named him the Proud Insensible; and the same epithet was bestotved on me. In vain
vain were all their charms displayed ; and ??? would often return to the doctor, Λνηο seldom accompanied us, disgusted and fatigued ; tired Λνίί?ι the impertinences of those whom ??? des¬ pised, and mutually contrasting the affected airs, and superficial acquire¬ ments ofthe ladies ??? had been among, with those of Mrs. Brisac. We had been about a year and half in Italy, visiting the ? ? ???? s places, and the doctor had regularly corresponded svitli Mr. Dainville, ????? he was in¬ formed, that the long expected divorce ????, at length, compleated, and that Inmself and daughter ????? ???? happy, in being totally free from her infamous partner; he had 11????1?? received a letter from his son, stating he was about to return from the East Indies, ?????? he had been for many years, and had acquired a fortune far above his expec¬ tations
tations. We "sincerely rejoiced at the happiness of those worthy people, but my brothers joy knew no bounds; he told the doctor, that, as Mrs. Brisac was now at liberty to make another choice, he should not hesitate a moment, when he came of age, which would bc in about three months, to make her an offer of his hand, and earn est ly entreated the doctor to apprise her or his intentions, and to make use of his interest, both with the father and daughter, to insure his hap¬ piness. The good old man was amazed ; at length he asked my brother, Whether he knew what he had been saying? ί Certainly,' said he, * and I hope you will indulge me iu complying with İt.' —The doctor was now more confounded than before. He pointed out to him tbe absurdity of his request, and the utter impossibility of its bekig complied V'. * Why sir r'
birr' said my brother, t ???^ is there to object to in this latly ? she is not like that I was engaged ???? at Paris ; have vou not allowed her, yourself, to possess every shining virtue r' * True/ saitl he, T have; but that docs not argue I shoultl in any shape contribute to your attachment to Airs. Brisac ; besides, her good sense and rectitude of heart Λν?Ι ever ????? her the impossibility of such an union. In the first place, she is many years older than yourself; antl in the second, the difference of rank and fortune : therefore lay aside, I beseech you, every idea of the kind, and let me have the satisfaction of returning you to your father, the same amiable and deserving young men you both ????? ????? you left him. ' "Aly brother sullenly assented to Λν?^ί our preceptor said, though I evi¬ dently sawt by his looks, that he was determined
determined that Mrs. Brisac should not remain in ignorance of his love for her ; and, though he gave his consent to the proposed return to my father, in about a fortnight, yet I was convinced that he either meditated a visit to Mrs. Brisac, or else would devise some means to prolong our stay in Italy. What he said to the doctor alarmed him; and, as he knew my father's intentions respecting the establishment of his sons, he wrote home, to request him to appoint a time for our return, as he only waited his commands for that purpose. The letter was immediately sent ; but, before it had been gone three days, he received one from my father, ordering our return, as my mother lay dangerously ill. This circumstance the doctor thought lucky, and he has¬ tened to communicate it to us. " I loved my parents tenderly, and attached
attached as I ???? to Mrs. Brisac, antl unwilling to leave a spot near which she resided, yet the idea ofmy mother's danger struck me fbrcibly, and I deter¬ mined to let my secret remain Λνίί?ιίη my own bosom, and to return, without the least reluctance, to my parents; tliough I made a secret vow never to marry any other woman ; and, although many reasons concurretl to convince me that I never should ???^? that hap¬ piness, yet I was resolved to remain single, let my father's intentions be ?vliat they ?????!. I ????? my brother's inflexible disposition, and trembled at the idea of his, probably by that means, becoming the husband of Mrs. Brisac. The bare idea drove me to madness; I had no one to whom I could impart my folly ; for, if known to my brother, it might lead him on to some act of violence, and I loved him too well to give him any uneasiness. " When
" Wlien he ???? informed of the contents of my father's letter, he ap¬ peared much hurt at the intelligence ; but, ??'??^??? it arose from the danger of my mother, or the suddenness Λν?ί?ι ????? he ???? summoned, I coultl not find out, as he had been for some days much on the reserve ??11? me. How¬ ever, he agreed to ????1 the doctor said respecting our immediate return, and gave orders accordingly. He saitl, He should hasten to pay a few visits in the neighbourhood, before his depar¬ ture, and be ready* in ? ???? hours. " The doctor, as soon as he ???? gone, said, He ???? happy to think ??? were summoned, as it would make it appear that no constraint ???? put upon my brothers inclinations, and be the means of detaining him from a lady, vrhom he never coultl possess, and whose character ???? too sacred to be
be trifled vvith. She ???? the daughter of his most early friend ; a ??????, whose past sufferings entitled her to respect antl veneration, antl one whose good sense should preclude every hope that his addresses would be acceptable to her, much more meet ivith the con¬ currence of her father. I heard all, and sighed involuntarily. If there is no chance for my brother, thought I, Λνη^ί can there possibly be for me? Yet, still, I hugged the fond delusion. " lie returned in about three hours, and, soon after, we set out for home ; but, before we arrived, my poor mother liad breathed her last, and my father's life was thought in danger, from the anxiety he hatl suffered respecting her. He received us with ?? ? ??? mark of pleasure antl satisfaction, antl ?\? had the happiness of seeing him recover his health antl serenitv. He shortlv after proposed
proposed a journey to one of his seats, which lay at a small distance from that at ??1??? ??? then were. My brother came of age; but, on account of our recent loss, it was not kept. He ???? attentive to my father, but appeared to be under considerable restraint, and studiously avoided the company of every one. My father, who had at first noticed his reserve, thought it arose from the loss we had sustained ; but, ????? he observed it daily increase, he sent for the doctor, who had left us about a month, on a visit to his rela¬ tions. Wlien be arrived, my father related the melancholy of his son, antl asked his opinion of the cause of it. Though tbe doctor guessed the reason, yet he did not choose to ????? it, but said, It ????? be most atlvisable for my father to ??? 7 ? some conversation, himself, with my brother on the sub¬ ject, and to propose his uniting himself with
with a lady, ivliom my father had often said, he shoultl like to see his daughter-in-law. " Agreeably to this advice, my bro¬ ther was sent for to my father, wlio asked him a vast number of questions, to all of which he gave sullen antl eva¬ sive answers ; and, when the lady was proposed to him, he rose up, and, in an agitated manner, told my father, that, As to his marrying, it was a subject very foreign to his present intentions; but, if he ever did unite himself to any lady, it would not be any one that could be proposed to him, as his heart was already pre-engaged. My father's pride was alarmed, and he sternly de¬ manded To whom? Aiy brother, with¬ out the least hesitation, related every particular of his intimacy with the latly, and concluded by observing, that, ifnot united to Mrs. Brisac, other¬ wise
wise Miss Dainville, he was resolutely determined never to marry at all. My father and the doctor both admired his candor, but condemned him, for in¬ dulging such a preposterous attach¬ ment; but all arguments ????? vain, and he continued in bis resolution. " I have often thought since, that, had I been interrogated, at the same time, on the same subject, what ????И have been my father's surprise, to have heard his other son make a similar declaration, that, if not united to Mrs. Brisac, be ????? never marry any other, and that the very lady, for ????? we were making those resolutions, ???? totally ignorant of our affections for her ; at least, I ???? certain, she was unacquainted with mine. " My father ordered him from his presence, \yith a strict injunction to think
think no more of Miss Dainville. The doctor and he had a long conversation about my brother. What they resolved on I ????? not. My brother did not appear at dinner, but ordered some¬ thing to be served up in his ???? apart¬ ment, where no one ???? permitted to see him, but his confidential servant, ???? said his master ???? indisposed. " Three days passed thus, Λνι&ο^ my seeing him, even at breakfast. On the fourth, my father sent his man to enquire after him. He returned in a few minutes, with astouishment on his countenance, saying, that, neither my brother, nor his servant, ????? there, and all his travelling equipage ???? gone. Instant search was made, and we found it true. A note lay on the table, in his dressing room, which said, that. Unwilling to give pain, by an ob¬ stinate resistance, to a father whom he revered,
revered, being of age, and of course at liberty to make a choice for himself^ he tiiought it most prudent to withdraw from a place, ????? the frowns of a parent could not fail to make too dis¬ agreeable for him. The amiable woman ??1?? he loved had taught him the value of money, and the fortune he already possessed ???? sufficient to enable him to support the dignity of his character, if he avoided those quick¬ sands which bad nearly proved fatal to him at Paris. He should ahvays, he said, pray for the happiness of his parent, and hoped, that, in time, he ????? forgive him for the step he had taken. " My father stood for some mo¬ ments lost in thought; at last, turning to the doctor, he said :-—' I will pursue this head-strong boy, and you, my friend, must be my guide. Frederic shall
sb'dl go λπΙ?ι us, lest, during our ab* ?????, he shouhl do the same.' Td describe >rhat I suffered would be im¬ possible; my heart felt an agony I cannot express. I ???\ Airs. Brisac lost to me for ever, as I had not the least doubt but he was gone to Piedmont, ??????, I un¬ derstood by the doctor's discourse, she still was. By some further conver¬ sation beUvecn him and my father, I waa certain my brother had made known liis pretentions to Mrs. Brisac** father, as the last letter the doctor had received h?d intimated as much ; but Λ?Ίκιί Air. Dainvilles opinion was I couhl not kani. However, I could not help rejoicing in the thought, that my inclination ???? unknown, a\. by tluit means, I -sliould, Λν???ι my father, have the happiness of again visiting a spot, the most dear to me on earth, though I ????? to find, on my arrival there, the Vol. Ι. Η objects
ohjeet of my aÜcctioib, thev\ifc ofmy brother. * £ Orders were ari vcn ?>???*? everv thin ?- got ready directly for our departure. The confusion occasioned by them kept ?? mind in π state, that admitted not of retleetion, and I found in) self in an hotel at Paris, before I recollected clearly the nature of our journey. Afy brother hatl been traced to that place ; he staid but one night there, and then set off; but what route he had taken, ivas not known. Aly father antl the doctor concluded he vyas gone to Piedmont, and ??? imi ediately fol¬ lowed. Xo intelligence could vve get ofhim, till our arrival'at Aix, ?\ here he had been about a week previous to our coming ; but ivhether he was gone to Nice, or Turin, they could not tell. Wc proceeded on to Nice. There we learnt,
HORRORS OF VEN ?? LI ???. learnt, that Mr. Dainville and family had kfr that place for Turin ; my brother hatl not been heard of; ??? therefore concluded he tvas gone thither also. We coultl not learn in vvhat part of Turin they bad taken up their resi¬ dence ; but my father ???? determined to follow. " We had been there above a fort¬ night, without obtaining the least in¬ formation. My brain, through anxiety, dread, and 1 know not Λν?^ί, became like one in delirium. I talked incohe- lently, and formed a thousand projects, λ\1ι?ο1ι vani-shed as soon as made. One moment I wouhl fly to the window, and ?? Jxh vrirb earnestness every pas¬ sing female, in hopes to discover Mrs. L ri sac. tt I was one morning amusing my¬ self in this manner, when I thought I H S heai d
heard a voice I knew. I leaned over the balcony ; it rained. I saw two ladies and a gentleman who were wait¬ ing for a carriage. The same voice spoke again to the servant, and bid him draw up there. What was my surprise and joy, when I recognized Mr. Dainville ! I was before him in a moment. The astonishment of Mr. Dainville was equal to my own ; but I felt a severe disappointment, in not finding in either of the ladies the object of my heart. I enquired after Miss Dain ville, lie said She was well, but at present some distance from Turin. The ladies had got into the coach ; Mr. Dainville desired me to step in also, and if it was agreeable to accompany him home—he had much to say to me. " Overjoyed that I had made a dis¬ covery, v and couhl now be certain where they resided, I stepped in with alacrity.
alacrity. When we ????? seated, Mr. Dainville introduced me to the ladies. One, I found, was his son's wife; the other his youngest daughter, married to an officer. They ????? both amiable lovely women ; but their charms, I thought, fell short of those of Mrs. Brisac. I ???? anxious to learn the cause of her absence from the capi¬ tal, especially as she had so many inducements to be in it. He said, he could not suppose me ignorant of the reason. I told him indeed I was, as we did not come to Turin with my brother, but to seek him. * Is my old friend with you?' said he. I answered in the affirmative. 'Then he has not receiv¬ ed my letter,' returned Mr. Dainville, ' appi ising him of this circumstance. ' I saicl I AvoLild convince him, iflKMvould give us leave, that not onty the doctor and myself^ but also my fathe**, would be happy lo see him. 'Then, till I have II 3 that
that pleasure,' said he, ' I will be silent; you shall see that none of my familv can be ungrateful for the ser- vices yourself antl your brother lurve rendered it.' " As he said this, the coach stopped at an elegant house, near the grand square. As ??? ascended the steps, a young man advanced to tbe ladies, Mr. Dainville introduced him as his son, antl me to them as the gentleman Airs. Brisac had so often mentioned. He accosted me with heartfelt grati¬ tude, and said, He longetl to pay his respects to the doctor, to whom he owed many obligations, and that re¬ specting his sister not the least. " After some general conversation, 1 requested them to accompany ?? to our hotel. Apologizing to the ladies, thev drove vyith me thither. I fountl in ?
my father uneasy at my absence; but m hen I toid them ????? I had brought, tliey ????? satisfied. After the hrst compliments, my father made some enquiries respecting my brother, not in the least doubting but they knew where he was. Mr. Dainville briefly related, That my brother had made overtures to him antl his daughter ; but, though they ????? greatly honored by those offers, yet tbey could not think of accepting them for several reasons. The first ????, the disparity of their ages; the next, Mrs. Brisac's ???^ of fortune, and her inferior birth : That my brother had received their ???????, had endeavoured by argu¬ ments to set aside every objection, and seemed determined, at all events, to persevere in his intentions; in conse¬ quence of ?????, Mrs. Brisac had left Turin, and gone to spend some time at 11 4} a friends,
a friend's, till she should hear of his departure from thence. " With this account all my hopes fled, and I instantly became dejected. 'I must see this daughter of yours/ said my father ; 4 when will you permit me to pay my respects to her?'—' To¬ morrow, sir,' if agreeable/ ζ Is my son at present in Turin?' said he. Air. Dainville could not tell—he had not seen him lately. Was it known vvhere he resided? Air. D. gave his directions ; a servant was immetliately sent. Afy father thanketl him for the just and honorable manner in which he had acted, antl begged to have the honor of seeing his daughter, to thank her also. They then departed witli the doctor. • " Aly father spoke but little on the subject to me, and, in about an hour, the
the servant returned, saying, The gentleman had left the hotel three ivecks ; but they fancied he meant to return, as his luggage ???? still there, and the apartments kept. Aly father sent a letter, informing him of our arrival, and requesting to see him, as soon as be returned. This ???? ordered to be delivered to him the moment he came back. This done, my father left me to my ???? reflec¬ tions. " I ???????! seven months of being of age. I was led to hope that my father would stay in Piedmont till that periotl, ????? 1???? determined, if Airs. Brisac ???? still unengaged, to make her an offer of my hand ; and, if she refused it, I ivas resohed to quit my native country tor ever. With these thoughts I passed the hours that intervened, be¬ fore ??? were to go to Air. Dainvil le's. At H 5 length,
length, the time came; my heart beat high, and as I approached the room, I almost wished I might not see her. J low ?? er, I entered : she arose with her sisters to receive us. Aiy father, vvitli a politeness natuial to him, paid his compliments to all ; but his attention seemed riveted to Airs. Brisac; she took my hauti in the tnost friendly mamici, -and turning to my father, said, 'To this gentleman, my loid, and your other amiable son, antl the gootl tloetor, I owe the happiness I at present enjo}, and shall regartl myself bound to ihcm hy the strictest tics of gratitude.' She looketl more lovely thau ever, and I could not help thinking, she regarded mc Λν??ι peculiar tenderness. " The ? isit passed, my father re¬ turned, and, in observation onthevisit, said, that he did not wonder at 3ns son'-- ptrtiality; for ? if he had not been informed
informed of her age, he shoultl not have supposed her more than twenty. lie thougiit that she received his thanks, in a manner that made him half in love ???? her hismelf. The tloetor smiled, antl remarked, she ???? a woman of real good sense, ' and those ??????/ said he, t never get old ; their mental charms make them appear ever blooming, as affectation of every kind is banished from their bosoms; but they are very rare s I must confess I am an admirer of them myself, ????? ihey fall in my way, old as ? am.' This bally made us laugh, and 1 spent the evening in hetter spirits than I had known ibr some time past. (i Wehad beeu iivc weeks at Turin, after I first saw Mr, liaiuville, and no news had been received of my brother —his luggage ???? still there. ?1? father had made several ? isits to Mr. 11 6 Dain vill e's ;
Dainville's; but, being in mourning, did not appear in public. He seemetl to bc as anxious to pay his respects there as myself. Every day increasetl my passion, antl I began to think the lady Λν -as not indifferent to him. This idea no sooner entereti my head, than I found various reasons to confirm it. This ???? more than I coultl support, and I concluded, that, if my father made her an offer, she certainly wouhl not reject him, as he ivas more suitable to her in point of age, and as his person was remarkably fine. " I visited as usual, and every day served more to confirm my conjectures; though I frequently thought that her looks to me expressed the most be¬ witching kindness, but tempered with a reserve, that seemed at times to check every aspiring hope. Aiy father made no mention of leaving Turin, but seemed
seemed as if he meant to take up his residence there altogether. At length, my suspicions were realized. I was sitting in deep thought reflecting on what my brother would sny, were he to form the same conjectures, ?\ hen the doctor entered the room, and with, as I thought, a more than usually grave countenance. i I am come,' saicl he, t my dear pupil, to inform you of the intentions of your father.' ' Good God,' said I, 'he does not mean to go from here, does he r' u Whether the doctor suspected my attachment or not, I cannot tell ; but the eager manner in which I spoke alarmed him, and, after a short pause, he said : t No, it is not his intention to leave this place, but.....' and he stopped. ' But what?' cried I, 'for God's sake, relieve my mind fromthis suspense.'—-'You must promise me not to be affected at what
Λν -îiat I shall say then.' ' ί Λν?Ι/ said I, t let it be ?\ hatever it may, so Tis not to say that any accident has hap¬ pened to those that are dear to me. Are my father, brother, and Afrs. Brisac ?????' 'They are all so, 1 hope/ said he : t your brother, you know, we have not heard of, and ???? father and Airs. Brisac I left very ???? just novy.' 'What* are ihey together?' said I. ' Your father is at my friemls now/ said he, 'and I believe meanyto make an offer of his hand to.../ lie stopped. 'To Airs. Brisac, is il not?' said 1. ' It is/ said he. t Tis enough/ crietl I ; 'and now, fareweH to every hope...' t< I was about to say more, but my senses forsook me. The good man recovered me, but it was ouly to feel my wretchedness, without the power of alleviation. I rose up and traversed ihe room in a phrenzy. I cursetl my existence,
existence, and the moment I íii>,tdrew breath ; the next, ????? pray for hies > - ings on my father. Oh ! how I pitied my brother! At length, overcome Λν?ί?ι detracting passions, 1 dropped into a kind of stupor. The good man took advantage of my passiveness, and had me con veyetl to betl, Beibre morning, I ???? in a raging fever. I raved in¬ cessantly on Airs. Brisac, then on my father, and begged earnestly to ??? my brother. Irom those ravin os mv fa- ther was made acquainted ???? the state of my heart; that state 1 had so anxiously kept from every one. Oh ! mv God! what were mv sufferings ! "At length, ni}* reason returned ; but I had lain above three vweks insen¬ sible to every thing. Then a gleam of recollection darted across my mind, and the thought of seeing Airs. Erisac the wife of mv father, rushed like a torrent to
to my remembrance. Convinced that I was Liuable to bear this, I determined, as soon as an opportunity presented itself, and I had strength to accomplish it, to leave the residence of my father for-ever; and, like my brother, keep the place of my abode a secret from every one. This resolution formed, in order to accelerate my recovery, I took every thing they offered mc, and, at last, found I had strengtii to sit up, and, in a few days, to pass from room to room. I had not ventured to ask a single question ; and, when my good preceptor came, whicii he did daily, I remained obstinately silent. He saw my distress, and pitied it. He waa convinced I dreaded to hear a confir¬ mation of my fears ; those fears, he seemed, by his looks, to dissipate; my mind could admit but of one idea, and every other >vas absorbed in that. I waited a favorable moment, and r with about
about a hundred pounds sterling in my pocket, quitted Tutin. " í woukl not venture near the house of Mr. Dain ville, but went out at an op¬ posite gate. It was the great post road to Genoa. I reached it, and, after a few hours stay, proceeded to Florence. I was now near the states of the church, A thought struck me ; ' I will embrace the religion of my ancestors,' said I, ' and become a recluse. Wbat have I further to do with the world ?' "At that instant, a mendicant priest approached, ancl earnestly intreated my charitv. He was tall, and rather stout- ly made, with mild pleasing features, that bore themarks of recen t sorrow. 'I wili give thee,' said I, ' the whole of what little I possess, if thou canst procure, for a wretch like me, a place of rest. ' íle started, bowed, crossed himself,
hunscllj advanced a few steps, then drew back, looking earnestly in my face. *Be not. alarmed, father, 1 said I, t I mean what lsay; find me a place of rest; and, as far as my means will go, I will reward you í i Come with me,' said he, ' thou, son of sor¬ row ; I will take thee where those clouds that overhang thy brow shall be chased away.' " He walked s^vly on ; I fol^ved, my weakness not permitting me to go fast. We left the city, entered the fields, and tvalked through three of them. He then struck to the left, and began to ascend a hill. íle assisted me to walk, ' Vou are very ?????,' said he; *you shall stop here," pointing to a little cot in the middle of an olive gnn ? ; 'ihave a frieml here, from whom you can recch'e assistance ; 'tis not the place I meant to take you to, hut
but I sec you cannot go farther.' Thus saying, ??? entered the house. ? ???¬ ???· and a child were employed in reelin«· silk, She arose at our entrance : ' you must get something ihr tlm young man, Zepbirine/ said he, 'for, he stands in need of rest and refresh" ????/ ( Ah ! father,' said the woman, 'mine is but a poor bed ; but, if lie can make shift to lay down on it, he is very welcome/ 'Any where will tlo, ' said L u She led me to a room, in which was a small bed, and a few other neces¬ sary artides, all poor, but very clean. On tbis bed I laid myself down, and, in a few minutes, she returned \s ith some wine, a bunch of gra per, and soiræ biscuit ; ? took some, ami felt revived. Totally regardless of w here I was, I endeavoured to compose myst If to sleep, and soon obtiined it. I lay some
sonic hours ina profound repose, and, when I awoke, 1 found mrself much refreshed. I went into the outer room* 'Aly mother will come again present¬ ly/ said the little girl I saw at my en¬ trance ; ( she is geme to get something for you/ " Whilst I stood admiring some work the little one ???? employed in, the mother entered. She seemed glad to see me look better, and hastenetl to set before mc several articles which she thought would he of use to me. I asked for the father, and was informed he vvould be there in about an hour. It ???? then near dark ; I took some wine, ?????? she urged me to drink, saying, It ?????! rouse my spirits. The honest simplicity that appeared in her countenance charmed mc. I asketi several questions respecting her situa¬ tion lii life. She said, Her husband was
was a domestic of the Cardinal Gerini ; that a nephew of the Cardinal resided at a palace, a short distance from thence, to which place father Theo¬ dore waa gone. "Near two hours passed before he came. When he saw me up, and so much better, he appeared pleased. < ????'?? able,' said he, ?? proceed about a league further? if you can, I ??И1 take you, and I think thercyou will find accommodations that you cannot have here.' I thanked him, and saiil, I was certain I could ?\'?1? it. 1 satisfi¬ ed my kind hostess, and wc set forward. " As we ???!???1, he informed mc, that he was going to take me to the Bononi Palace, ?????? resided a young nobleman, nephew to Cardinal Gering whose only fault ???? that of beiug too gay. He loved pleasure, let it come arrayed
arraved in what írarb it miçbt. His graiul wish was to make others as gay and volatile as himself. The domestic chaplain of this young nobleman was the particular friend of father Theo¬ dore ; aiul, as I seemed to bc oppressed by sorrow, a thought struck him, that he could not do me a greater service, than by dcsiringthe chaplain to permit me to bc with him for a few days, till the nature of my griefs could be known. I did not appear to be altogether un- worthy of his notice ; my appearance, Jie had told him, bespoke me the gentleman. "However benevolent your inten¬ tions might be, father, towards mc,* said I, 'by tlms procuring mean hos¬ pitable roof, yet I must beg leave to decline going thither. I am whoilv in- capable of making a proper return for so much goodness, and absolutely averse
averse to all kind of company. I ??'?! only to hide me from the ?????!, and, in niy own breast, to repose my sorrows.' e You arc >vrong, young man,' said he, ' your unhappiness, lee it arise from ΛνΙκιί cause it ???* ought to be dissipated, not indulged. It ?\ ill bc time enough, ttvcnty years hence, to seek retirement, ????? you can no longer find solace in societv, or honesty among mankind. When you have read the great volume of nature, ????. more precision than you luwe already done, and ?\??? time has taught you not to draw too hasty conclusions from any one circumstance, then will be the time to quit the ?????!, and then the hour to reconcile you to your fate. You have now a just and good heart ; be careful to keep it so, and you will, atlast, enjoy that happiness, Avhich you think you have lost. Suffer not your¬ self to be contaminated by vice, by wilfully
wilfully running into errors, which your better judgment will condemn ; but keep iu the medium way: and, when temptations too rudely assail you, think of father Theodore, antl avoid them.' —I hatl not time to reply; for, as he concluded the last words, the stately porticos of Bononi Palace appeared in view, λ Ve entereti ; my conductor led me to the apartments of father Peter ; he received us with great politeness. * This is the youth,' said father Theo¬ dore, 'whom I met to day in the city, antl for wdiose griefs I leel respect.' * You are welcome, sir,' saitl father Peter, ( to the house of my lortl ; and, vyhat little services I can rentier you, command them. You are at present unhappy, antl the nature of your unea¬ siness I am not acquainted with. This evening you must spend vvith nie. and to-morrow, I will introduce you to my lord ; he is now from home. * "I
i! I bowed my thanks, for I was» unable to speak. I regarded both the fathers with wonder and amazement. The nature of your uneasiness is not unknown to me ! 'My God l said I, t father,' what can tbis mean ? surely I have not been deranged again, while I was at the cot ; I thought I was tbere but a few hours.' e You were not/ said he, 'above six hours there.' 'Then, how could you be acquainted with my story?' t Of that, ' said the father, 'you must remain ignorant ; you have nothing to do, but to make yourself easy where you now are, and endeavour to be happy.' I thought it best to say no more, but sat down, and partook of what was set before me. t£ Elegance and splendor shone conspicuous in every thing around us. Father Peter bade me be cheerful, atui in the morning he would amuse me by Vol. I» I viewhiíç
viewing the sculpture and paintings, so famous in this palace. My gloom began to wear off; and, after a refresh¬ ing sleep, I found myself much better. The prince did not return as was ex¬ pected, and I found ample pleasure in seeing every thing in this terrestrial paradise. " lhad been there a week, and had not seen father Theodore. I began to reflect what place I should direct my steps to next, when father Peter in¬ formed me it was his Avish I should continue ???? him for some time. ' I am certain, ' said he, ' that all places are alike to you ; your time for happiness is not yet come ; you must again see your brother; neither your father nor he are happier than yourself; stay here, and, at a proper time, you shall know more. I consented, though I knew not why. " The
ÍÉ The next morning, before I had left my apartment, the prince was announced. Father Peter came to in¬ form me of it, and desired me to follow him. I did, and was introduced. The prince received me with all the warmth of youthful friendship, and bade me re¬ gard his house as my home, as long as I chose to stay. * I know your story/ said he, t and must confess love is a sad malady.' The manner in ivhich he spoke brought the blood into my face, and, for the first time, I condemned my own folly ; but the prince allowed me no time for reflection ; ' Come with me/ saitl he, £ I must introduce you to my friends. * " So saying, he walked on to a suite of rooms on the left—father Peter and myself followed. The folding doors were, thrown open, and he entered amidst a large company of gentlemen 12 of
of different ages, to all of whom he presented me, as a young man, who would shortly, he hoped, become a member of their society. They received me with great apparent pleasure, and the day flew swiftly on ; but I will not tire you by repeating the diiferent scenes we were engaged in. You that know Italy, can guess what they were. I felt a repugnance to many of them, but had not resolution to withstand their different temptations. " Three months passed ; I never saw father Theodore, and the conti¬ nued round of dissipation I was in¬ volved in, gave me no time to think. One evening, the prince said, he should expect me to accompany him that night, to the inauguration of a new member of their select society. I was become now so familiar with vice and folly, that I could enter with spirit into any
any scheme whatever. I regarded Mrs. Brisac as the property of my father, and forgot, in the vortex of pleasure, tbat she ???? in existence. Even father Theodore ???? thought of no more ; if by chance his words recur¬ red to my remembrance, * Think of father Theodore, antl avoid them/ my heart ????И shudder at vice for a moment, and the next, all would be forgot. " The night came; the prince and sixteen others, including myself, left tbe palace for the place of jneeting. It was about four leagues from thence, and ??? did not reach it till midnight. We stopped at a large and elegant edi¬ fice. A number of servants were in ?????^", Wc entered; an air of solem¬ nity ií ignctl on all around ; horror per¬ vaded mc ; I would have retreated, but dared not, my heart sunk within I 3 me.
me. Mrs. Brisac, and father Theodore, rushed like lightning on my memory. * What can all this mean l I said to myself; * surely something that ought not to be ;' and I made a resolution to think of the words ofthe father, ancl abide by them. li We were conducted into a very large room, which was completely iiung with black, but lighted with a profusion of wax candles. The whole of the company arranged themselves round a kind of altar, rahed seven steps from the floor. As they took their stations, the prince, who had watched my looks, approached. c You have gone too far to recede/ said he, 6 you must now show yourself a man, and shrink not from any thing that you may see ; you will only be a spec¬ tator, rmt you must prepare yourself i ? take the oaths enjoined by this society. * 'I
* I will/ said I, 'if they are not repug¬ nant to honor/ 'Oftbat be assured/ said he. We then th^v nearer to the altar; a signal ???? made; several men entered, bearing candles ; next came one, in the habit of a priest ; then hvo more dressed similar, each bearing a large book; then came six mere, car¬ rying instruments like those used by surgeons for dissecting*; then three more dressed in long bose robes, like those of the druids, one bearing a cat, another a dog, and the third a Ae/?, each in a silver dish, decorated with ribbons and fevers. Then followed three more, with silver ????^; three ivith large ???? tapers, and the ????? procession closed witli twenty-one cho¬ risters. They passed three times round the altar; the first priest then advanced in front, the otti ίΛνο on each side. A fire ???? lighted on the altar, and in¬ cense was burnt, while the priest knelt 14 down
tlown and prayed. At the end of the prayer all rose, and the choristers sung a kind of hymn, but in a language I was totally unacquainted with, "Thatdone, they passed again three times round the altar, antl advanced to¬ wards one of the company, that was placetl near it, and threiv over him a long black robe. They then conducted liim to the priest, before whom he knelt; another prayer followed, and was finished by a response in full chorus. The dog ???? then laid upon the altar ; the priest ascended ; and, vvith some formal incantations, cut its throat. The blood was caught in one ofthe bowls. I felt a cold shivering seize mc, but I rallied my courage, and stood, while the cat and hen vvere sacri¬ ficed in the same manner. The blood was caught in different bowls, and the remains were burnt. The man who had.
had knelt before the altar, ???? ???? presented by the priest with one of the ?????. He drank of them in succes¬ sion ; then several ceremonies took place, after ????? the company formed a larger circle. The tliree priests then began to administer the oaths. The purport of them was at once terrific and sublime ; one particular passage stated, That, ????????? dead or living, every member then present, should, ou that day twelve-month, appear between the hours of twelve and tliree in the morning, before the then officiating priest, and the ????? of the commu¬ nity, to render up an' account of all Tie services he had done, and to bring Avith him such as he shoultl think worthy to be made a member ; and to the strict fulfilment of those condi¬ tions, pledge himself by every tie divine and human.
I ó " .My
" My heart sunk within me, as I took the oath ; and, when the bowl of blood ???? placed to my lips, I nearly fainted; ??????'??, I took it. Wlien the prince, myself, and bvo others, were ??????, the priests knelt again, and each offered up a prayer. Tbe names of the community ????? then called over, when each presented him¬ self, holding in his hard a scried paper, which he iaid witb seeming ιΙβΛ?ί?οη on the altar. A book ???? then pre¬ sented to each c l the novices, ???????, with some of the blood, they wrote their names. Another paper was then deh vei ed to them, with a strict Injunc¬ tion to remember their oatb This done, a blessing ???? pronounced by the priests, and the ??1?1? procession departed as they entered, taking with thera the inaugurated member. " As soon as the train closed, the persons.
persons present congratulated each other, on not losing one member tbat year. Soon after, they all departed, and I returned Λνίί?ι the prince to the palace, and prepared to go to rest. Not a word ???? spoke of any thing that had passed, and I ???? more disposed to be silent, than I had been for some time. I was anxious to see Λν?^ί the sealed paper contained. When I re¬ tired to my apartment, I looked at it, and was about to break the seal, when I sa\v, written on the outside, t A T ol to be opened till it had been three days in my possession.' I laid it down, and went to rest. My sleep was broken and disturbed. I began, when î awoke, to reflect pn my present viciou 3 pursuits. W T hat would Mrs. Brisac think of me, was she acquainted with my follies ? Oh ! how would she pity, and despise me. I had taken oaths, that night, ????? I must keep, or for- 1 6 feit
feit everlasting happiness. And for Λν?^? Why, to be thought a man of spirit. Would to God, that I had em¬ braced a life of seclusion ; I hatl not then errred, as I have done, antl sinned, perhaps, past redemption. * t Itried to compose myself, but sleep I sought in vain, and I got up, with a determined resolution to ??^?^?!^ every temptation. This set my mind a little at ease, and I met the prince antl liis companions as usual. He then asked me what I thought of our last night's adventure ? I said, I knew not what to think of it. I had enteied in¬ to an engagement, the consequences of which I ???? not aware of; but I trusted, that he would not have taken me to any place, that would, in any shape, militate against honor or religi¬ on. He smiled at my observation, and bade me *read my credentials, as soon as
as the allotted time ???? expired ; this ? -vas anxiously expectetl by me, and as soon as that time arrived, I broke the seal. To enter into a detail of what was enjoined me, I dare not do. I can only say, that I had become a member of a society, that could, by their incanta¬ tions and spells, discover the most hidden secrets of the heart. I ???? beíran seriously to think of Icaviiic: Bononi. The prince read my thoughts, but ?????! not admit of my -o*oin<r. The jubilee approached, antl he insisted on my accompanying him to Rome, as the whole ofthe company then at Bo¬ noni meant to be there, I reluctantly consented. " A few days before we departed, I was surprised by the appearance of fa¬ ther T heodore. He addressed me Avith the kindness of a parent. * You are now going/ said he, t to leave Bononi; remem-
remember the instructions you have received from me, antl never lose sight of the engagements you have entered into ' ' Are you acquainted with them?* I asked. ' AI ost certainly, ' returned he ; ' myself and father Peter were tvro of the officiating priests. ' 'Then I am con¬ tent to abide by it/ said I, ' as I think you are both of you good men/ ' You must ????, ' said he, ' make it your ¡study to become familiar vyith the rules laid down in the instructions you have re¬ ceived; and, when the hour of inaugu¬ ration comes, I shall inform you; therefore, prepare yourself for that time; the sooner you are ready the better; antl I flatter myself, if you persist in your present good intentions, that you will not only be restored to your family, but be happier than you can possibly form an idea of; but a single deviation from honor, Λν?Ι mar all youf future prospects, and in all probability
probability, destroy for ever every opening scene of felicity. I shall not fail to offer up my prayers, with those of my brethren, that you may be ivor- thy of being a partaker in all our undertakings, for the good of mankind. It was the spirit led me to observe you first, and your answer to my request confirmed my suspicions. Had I not fortunately met you at that moment, vou would have been a ivanderer antl an outcast from society. You ?????! have embraced vice with avidity, and been plunged into crimes that would have damned your peace fbr ever. The follies you have run into here have been such, as, three months ago, you would have thought yourself incapable of committing. You are ???? con¬ vinced, how destructive example is to those ivho have not resolution to ivith- stand temptation. Persevere in your present laudable intentions, antl you will
Λν?Ι be happy. You ΛνίΙΙ have need of very great fortitude in the place to ????? you are going ; and you will ?????1?? stand in need of good council; ????? you receive it, be sure you abide by it. The frolics of youth are fre¬ quently attended with disastrous con¬ sequences; but, ?? hate ver scenes you may be precipitated into, through the folly of others, in all things remember to decide with the strictest justice, and never forget your engagements.' This said, he blessed, and left me. " His discourse sunk deep into my heart ; I could not form the most dis¬ tant idea ??1^ he alluded to. I fully resolved to atlhere to my intentions of leaving the prince, as soon as I got to Rome. I revolved the ????1? of it in my mind a thousand times ; I ???? con¬ scious of my inability to resist any allurement, that tended to draw me from
from myself. Mrs. Brisac, my brother, and my father, ???? passed in array against me» Alas I said I, they are happy, I am forgotten by them, and it is necessary that I shoultl forget tbem too ; but, 1 surely can do tliat, tyith- öut running into vice. A very short time now, oniy a few weeks, and I shall be able to command a sufficiency for my wants. I >vill retire to some re¬ mote corner ofthe earth, where I can no longer hear any thing that relates to my family, and live in peaceful ob¬ scurity. But my brother, where is he ? perhaps as unhappy as myself. I ??? folkrw his example, and let na one know where I take up my abode. "At the time appointed, ??? set off for Rome. When ??? arrived there, it wanted some days to the commence¬ ment of the jubilee. The city ???? al¬ ready thronged ???? strange.s ; and the
the day after our arrival, the prince's palace was full of visitors of all de¬ scriptions, tvhom his munificence had drawn thither, in order to partake of the solemnity. Grand preparations were made to do honor to the ap¬ proaching festival. The Romans are temperate, and I ???? happy to see far less inclination for wine shown there than at Bononi. Numbers of the noble Romans joined the guests ; and, ???? reason bore the sway, I was content. "This continued for some time; but, one day, the prince was informed, that a large party of English antl Ger¬ man nobility ????? anxious to pay their respects. The name ofa certain noble¬ man was mentioned, as the principal of the former nation. Orders were im¬ mediately given for their admission, antl the*party entered. They were re¬ ceived vvith that hospitality, which marks
marks the character of a Roman, and they appeared highly pleasetl vvith their reception. Before they departed, va¬ rious parties were formed, among the whole of which, I ???? included. " In one of them, ata masquerade, I thought I discovered the form of my brother, in a black domino. I ivanted to accost him, but he studiously avoid¬ ed me. I enquired of every one, who I thought coultl inform me, but none kneiv him. I sought ev f ery where, but he was not to be found. I was anxious antl uneasy ; the prince saw it, and endeavouretl to divert it. I told him of the person I had seen, and that I was sure it was my brother. The prince ordered diligent search to be made, but no such person coultl be met with ; but my dormant feelings bad been roused. The scenes, the pageantry of liome, all began to tire, and I wished to
to leave it. I told the prince so, 'Not yet,* said he ;' * we are going with onr English friends to-morrow on a frohc, and you must join us/ I tried to ex¬ cuse myself, but he would not admit of it. »Six of the party had been pil¬ laged at ? gaming-table, a few evenings before, by a set of sharpers, and they resolved to have revenge. They had found out where the party resorted to, to divide the spoil, * ' Full of this exploit, they set out for the place appointed; but, when arrived, they found, to their disappoint¬ ment, that the whole of the gang were fled, and gone for Naples. An idea was started by one of the company for pursuing them; itwas no sooner sug¬ gested than adopted, and we all set out for Naples. This wild-goose chase, as it appeared to me, I followed with the rest. Nothing occurred worthy ofour notice,
notice, till ??? had been there three days ; those we sought had el utled our search ; but the prince, and ?λ\? others, ???? ????? members of the society at Bononi, were determined to pursue them. Every public place had been ransacked by us, but without effect ; when the prince proposed to us to watch the motions of some men, who had constantly kept us in sight, when¬ ever we appeared in the street; but it was evident they ????? not the men ??? sought. They had followed us, as before, and we ???? them take then- stations, in such a manner, that nei¬ ther of us could go out without being observed. They ????? three, and it u T as agreed that three of our party should go out in the same cloaths they entered in, and the others disguised, were to follow in a short time, to a place appointed. The prince, myself, and
and a young Italian, ????? first to <>"0 " We had not gone far before ?\ ? ? perceived them close behind us ; and at a small distance, the remainder of our company. The prince took towards the beach, and, under the walls of a garden, we stopped. The moon shone bright ; a kind of seat made of stones was at a short distance; to that ?\ ? ? went, and sat down. The men passed us several times ; at length, they ????? joined by five others ; our company appeared not, though I thought they were so situated, they could see all that passed. Aj* soon as those men came up, they stood opposite to us. The piince started up, and ??? foUowed. He advanced towards them, and asked By Arhat authority they dared to watch his motions? They made no ??????, but instantly surrounded us, and one of
of the foremost advanced, and, ???? a sudden spring, threw me down, and two others immediately began to tie my hands and legs. The prince antl his campanions drew their swords. I struggled to obtain my liberty, and had nearly effected it, ????? one of the vil¬ lains struck me a violent ???? on my head, whicii stunned me. I ???? no more, and Λν?ιεη I came to myself, found me stretched on a bed, sur¬ rounded by at least fifty men. They were deliberating about tbe disposal of something, which one of them claimed as his exclusive property. They seemed not to regard me, and I had leisure to remark their several faces, and ? -vas sur¬ prised to see among them several who had been of the prince's parties at Rome ; but the language they made use of, and the place I vvas in, soon convinced me I ???? among a gang of oharpers, or free-bocters. In a few minutes
minutes I was assured of it, as I heard the prince's name made use o£ in terms that proved them to be the very party we had come to Naples in pursuit of; but lunv I could get among them, J was at a loss to guess. Several of the men insisted that they had a right to some particular jewel, as they only were present at the time it ???? taken. At last, it was decided to draw lots for it, and this restored peace. They then turner! tome; I ventured to ask where I was ; they answered, Among gentle¬ men ; and, if I ?? -as disposed to bc pleased with my situation, I should he treated ????. I asked about the prince, and my companions—' They are all safe enoiiifb,' baid thev. " But, not to tire you, let it be suffici¬ ent to say, that I found myself in the society* of tliose very people ???? brought you here. Among them I found
found your brother-in-law. He ???? one of the sharpers, who had stript the prince's party of ??? ? ???1 thousands. They consist of men of desperate for¬ tunes, who having spent the ??!?1? of their patrimony, fly to the gaming table as a resource; and, if they are detected, join a set of desperadoes, who have for several years, subsisted in this island, and bid defiance to the civil power. When any great festival is at hand, the most genteel of tbem are equipped like gentlemen, and frequent all places of resort, whose large com¬ panies are assembled, and, by making use of one particular gentleman's name, are admitted without scruple. That gentleman receives from the society, a uvular income. Another division, moie d ? -.ρ 'rate, have recourse, ??1 ien eve l ìlici ? ? an eruption, to stripping the houses of euiy thing valuable ; sorry 1 am this number far exceeds the ocher, and Vol. 1. Κ ι hey
they never go out upon an expedition, but tbey return laden with plunder. ct There can no calamity happen in Naples or its vicinity, but they imme¬ diately profit by it. Their laws arc many, and punish hy death every one Λνίιο is discovered embezzling any of the general property, or vvho attempts to leave the society, without the srenc- ral consent. For these Owen is con¬ demned ; he was first charged with having secreted several jewels, and pieces of plate, antl a large quantity of bills on the Bank of Venice, which were taken out of a house at Naples, during a late commotion. This pro¬ perty he had hid in the hollow of a rock, and meant to go oif with ; antl Jiad sent an offer to government to dis¬ cover the retreat of the community. He hâd brought over a young man to he of his party, and the night wc fountl you
you, his design was to have been put in execution. He meant to convey away ??1 th him the young lady ????? ??? found on the beach, ?????? mother's Iiouse he had assisted to plunder, as he ???? second in command, and always went on those expeditions. t{ The captain ???? killed by accident that day, and I ???? fetched to supply his place, as they had appointed me to the command, soon after I came -among them, if any accident shouid happen to their commander. I went, tis I observed, for that purpose, when the young num ????? Owen had se¬ duced, made a confession, ? hastened to the spot he pointed out, and found every tiling, as reported ; likewise some letters, as hich confirmed his intentions of delivering up the society. This was a piece ofwliainy I thought not lit to he pardoned, as any member who cho · j ? 2 * l
to 1???? them, had only to make kue, m his intentions, and say in what manner he meant to dispose of himself; and, if money wan wanted, an equal division was made of whatever property they possessed, and his part delivered to him. Tlie oaths that enjoined secrecy ????? administered, and he was per¬ mitted to leave the place, ???? the good wishes of all : And so religiouslv has this been kept, that among a vast number who have left us, not one has been found to betray it. " I hastened to Ihe other side of the bay, to give tbe necessary orders, respecting Owen. You saw in what manner I was obliged to act ; and you, I think, see the justice of the 1??? that condemns him. This day is allowed him for repentance; I hope he will be a pcnitcnt, who has many lives to an¬ swer for. The women that were found at
at the house which the young latly mentioned, ?????, the one Aliss St. Prie, and the otlier Aliss Owen. The former ???? Killed, the latter wounded. Owen was one of them that escaped ; St. Prie himself was taken. lie had been a member of this society about six months previous to this adventure. St. Prie will die by the hands of jus¬ tice, and Owen by ours. i( I have continuetl here, with a hope that I might be able to gain over several of them, to become again good members of society. Six of them are to go out, as soon as a proper division can be made of the plunder they have taken. This dreadful calamity that has befallen Torre del Greco, will be the means of furnishing them out hand¬ somely. The part belonging to Owen will, I think, be sent to Naples for charitable uses. This is one means by ? 3 whicii
?\ hieh thev purchase the inattention of the police. The prince, I found, ???? the cause of mv being sent here. He liad conceived a jealousy against me, respecting a young lady at Rome, whom he fancied ; but thought that her eye oftener reverted towards me, than towards him; and, ashe was acquainted ????, and a member, of this society, he thought it the most advantageous way of disposing of me. " I had been put on board the boat belonging to the party, while I lay insensible from the blow, and did not recover, till I had been at this place near halfan hour. I was then informed ofmy situation,'and the perfidy ofthe prince. As all places were alike to me, I made no scruple of remaining with them, ibr the purpose I mentioned. I have often thought of father Theo¬ dore, and never lose sight of his pre¬ cepts,
cc]>ts, vvhich I hope Λν?Ι, one day or other, turn to my advantage. Were I sure that Airs. Brisac was happy with my father, I think I could be content; but, as I must remain in ignorance of tbat, I will try to make myseif as use¬ ful as I can, where í novv am, till the time comes, when I shall be callctl upon to make my appearance at Bononi; then I shail again see the prince, antl the tvvo fathers. " As soon as the execution of Owen is over, I shall have the latly sent to lier friends ; you, I fear, will'not be permitted to leave this place for some days ; there are forms, that you will be obligetl to comply vvith, antl I much doubt but you will be compelled to become a member, not only of this community, but that of Bononi. 1 ' Alichael, who hatl listened with pro- K ì fountl
found attention to tbe whole of the captain's story, now exclaimed :— t{ Holy St. Patrick î and must my mas¬ ter and myself stay here? Ohi blessed Virgin, then who will find out Mrs. Owen, and the dear little honies of children r'' " Well remembered," said Fitzallan; "you said, I think, sir, that you could inform me where my poor unhappy sister and her chiidreu are confined. I shall thank you to send some person to liberate them antl have them conveyed to England. Let no expence be spared for those dear unhappy sufferers, if I am not permit¬ ted to go myself" " Every thing tbat can be done," said the captain, "be assured shall be ; and, wlien the young lady goes from hence, an express will be sent to Normandy." Fitzallan thanked him, and said, he should repose a confidence in hitn to
to ???-? it completed. He thanked him likcwbe for the relation he had given him, antl requested him to re¬ gard himself through life, as his bro- ther; they pledged reciprocal friend¬ ship. Michael had risen up, and was tra¬ versing the room with hasty strides, every now antl then crossing himself devoutly, (for hewas a gootl catholic,) th». n turning to the captain, he saitl: " Aught I presume to ask your honor one favor?" "Certainly," said he. " Why then, please you, as this mister Owen must be hanged, antl your honor says he has got some property, for the love ofthe Holy Alary antl St. Patrick, let it be seut to some good priests, to sing masses for the repose of his soul; aiH ifit is not enough, I am sure my master will give something, and I ??? give all I have ; and if it pleases his ? 5 honor,.
honor, Ι Λν?Ι add ???^ remains of my year's ?\^??." "Thou art a good fellow, "said the captain, "anddeservest to have more than a year s wages given thee for thy generous offe". But, if mo¬ ney will purchase tbe repose ofthe un¬ happy man's soul, his lot is sufficient to redeem it, antl I will see it sent to a gootl fatlier, ??1? w'ûï have it properly applied." Thib pleased Alichael. The captain then asked Fitzallan Whether he wished to see ????? before he suffered?' He saitl, Yes, he did. " And, pray, let me go too," said Ahchael ; "for, I Avould fain tell him, that I forgive him all the wrong he has done every body, and I hope the Holy Father in God ιν'Ί forgive him." The captain snidi " The priest that attends our society is with him ???? : I was to have notice given me wben he left him : he λ\'ΊΠ be h hot
shot at the head ofthe ??!?1? commu¬ nity." " Then he is not to be hanged?" said Michael: "that is a. good thing; for, I should not like any person to say to our young ladies, when they gi -??? up, that their father was hanged ; though for matter of that, he may desen'e it. All, that have once lived like gentlemen, should die as such." Some other discourse passel, when a man came and t aid, father Gregory had left his penitent. " Ι Λν?Ι now go to Owen," said the captain, "amiteli him, you wish to see and grant hini your forgi ??????." " Do, sir," said Edward; " for, I ?????! not have him die without it. I feel for him much ;" " And so do I too,"said Michael. " I don't Avant any body to die, especially when tbey ben't over good. Oh! ifl ? ? was
was a good priest, how I would pray for him !" The Captain left them ; Michael beat a tattoo on the table. " I wish our good father ???? here, that christened my little brother Joey ; I warrant he ?voiiìd pray for his poor soul, that it might not go into purgatory." Fitzallan remained lost in thought, antl heeded not ????1 the poor fellow hatl said. The Captain entered. tí Come Λνιί?ι nie/ said he; " Owen sullenly consents to see you. However, I ????? have you ????? that you hold no resentment against him." " No y ¡indeed,'" said Michael, "and so ??? do not." They ????? conducted to that sitie of the building, ?????? the trial had been, antl found the unhappy man in a room adjoining, Fitzallan ad¬ vanced 4 towards him. (i I am come, Mr.
Air. Owen," said he, "to assure you of my sincere forgiveness, for all the injuries you have tlone my family ; antl do most earnestly pray, that the Goti of Mercy Λν?Ι pardon you with the same readiness that I do ; and I am certain Airs. Owen Λν?Ι likewise/' "And so do I too," said Alichael, " forgive your honor, antl pray most earnestly that we may sit down in Paradise together for all this, and so the blessed saints take vou to their bosom/' This honest effusion of poor Michaels ■seemed to touch the heart of ????? ; he looked eagerly towards him. " I thank thee, thou good fellow," said he, k ' and I hope thy prayer Λν?Ι be hearth I thank you, Air. Fitzallan, also, for vour good Λνίβ?ιεβ ; for, I tliink, vou do not come here to insult a wretch like me. Your looks bespeak the feel¬ ings
in<> v s of a christian. I dare not ask foigiveness of my wife, but tell he-, when you see her, that I ???? ??1?? I had been a better husband. As to my motlier, I dare not cast a thought that ???? :—ah! you infernal vipers, that leti me on to do those cursed deeds, Λν?ί?τε are you now ? ????? part of Hell is ? our portion ? antl is it among those λί retches that I am to howl out an eternity?—oh! ???? ?, ?????? shall I turn ?"' He looked w ild ly round the room ; his eyes glared, and his ???? le person appeared convulsed. lie lifted his hands in agony to Heaven. "And canst thou, just God, forgive ? ????^? like mc? Ah ! no, it is impossible; I am lost, and doomed to everlasting tortures, ??11? the fiends that have de¬ ceived me. Oh î horrid, horrid thought í -—but Godis just.' J At
At that moment, he darted a look of terrific madness round ; and, fixing his eyes on the sirord of Et)ward, vvho had advanced to endeavour to 'calm his mind, " This will tlo,"saitl he, and, in an instant, he snatched it from the sheath, and plunged it into his heart ! The thought, the action antl the catastrophe were so rapiti, that, before £??????1 coultl well discover that his ?????1 M'as gone, the miserable man fell lifeless at his feet, lie fixetl his eye on him, faintly utteretl the ?????! " Pardon," and, as the Captain drew the svyord from his breast, his soul took his flight for ever. This sight was too much for Alichael ; he sunk at the feet of his master. The Captain and Edward were transfixetl to the spot. An exclamation from Ali¬ chael, as he fell, ?\?? heard by father Gregory,
Gregory, antl one of the people, who were passing the door. They entered ; but, to describe theiv astonishment WOiiltl be impossible ;—two, to all ap¬ pearance, dead on the floor, and the other tvvo standing speechless, vvith countenances that bespoke death, as palpably as those of the others ! The whole community was instantly alarmed, and they thronged to the spot, all enquiring what it meant; but none could tell. The blood that had flowed from the breast of Owen hatl run in streams antl nearly dyed the face and cloaths of Alichael, who had fallen near him. They raised up both ; life, they found, was fled for ever from one; but the other, by proper applications, was soon restored. The recollection of the scene overcame him, and he fainted v again. Every thing appeared mystery; the men could hardly sup¬ pose,
pose that the Captain would take the enemy of the condemned man into the room where he ????, on purpose to stab him ; and yet, what could they tbink, when FitzaHan's sword was found drenched in blood ? At last, the Cap¬ tain spoke, and, in a few words, told them Λν?^ί had happened ; but Edward, whom they had placed in a chair, was so much overpowered by the dreadful catastrophe, that he remained in astate of stupefaction, regardless of every one. Michael ???? at length restored to life, but not to reason ; the poor fel ??? had been ill of a nervous fever, for some time previous to his master's coming to Italy. The events he had iceently witnessed served only to ag¬ gravate his complaints : as soon, there¬ fore, as he came to himself', every symptom of derangement appeareth He
Ile laughed, sang, and cried, in suc¬ cession ; then prayed most earnestly for the repose of poor Owen's soui, whom he ?????1, one minute, fancy he saw going into purgatory—the next, he would imagine close by him, and again about to plunge the ????^ into his breast—when he would start and catch at something as if to hold it. The men ???? ????? present, believing him mad, past recovery, proposed con¬ fining him ; but his master, who had been roused from his lethargy by some¬ thing Alichael said, now recollected himself, and intreated that the poor fellow might be left to him ; and if they would indulge him with a bed, he shoultl be thankful. The Caotain ordered them to bc conducted back to tbeir apartment, and he woidd follow in a few minutes. They were shewn there, where, as soon as
as they were alone, in spite of manly fortitude, tbe tears flowed from Ed¬ ward's eyes in torrents. The horrid exit of Owen sunk deep into his heart ; and, tbe more he reflected on his end, the more he dreaded his everlasting damnation. Michaels dread of pur¬ gatory for the miserable sinner exceed¬ ed every thought. At length, his master reasoned him into a little com¬ posure. It was some time before the Captain came ; he had staid, be said, to give some orders for the interment of Owen, which would take place on the next day early; and, as he was a catholic, he had given orders to father Gregory to get eveiy thing that was necessary. That done, thev shouid think about- removing the lady, and sending aa express to Nonnandy; and, when tlie lady was seut to Naples, ernmincí» bhould
should be made after St. Prie and Aliss Owen. " For the Holy Mary's ?ake 1" said Alichael, " let the good father pray for the redemption of his poor soul ; 'tis pity, though he was a bad man, that it should remain in purga¬ tory/* The Captain strongly assured hini that every thing should be done : this quieted him, and the Captain de¬ sired Edward to take some wine antl try to go to rest, antl, in the morning, he would order him to be called, if he had ? ????? to see the body interred— " But I think," said he, Ct that you had better not. Aiake yourself as com¬ fortable as you can, and try to com¬ pose this honest felloiv, who shall not want for any thing that I can do for him. Fitzallan with thanks acceded to his proposal, persuadetl Alichael to go to hed x and preparetl to follow. The captain
captain then left him. Sleep, at length, closed their eyes, and they dkl not ?????? till the remains ofthe unhappy man hatl been laid in the dust for some boms. The captain had been twice to Edward's room, but finding hhn at rest, forbore to disturb him. lie came iii a third time, soon after Fitzallan awoke—Ali¬ chael ???? still asleep. tí If you are well enough," said the captain, " I ?????! ??1?? you to give the necessary directions, in what manner the messen¬ ger is to proceed, if, on his arrival at your sister's present place of resilience, he should find her incapable to direct herself ; as it is impossible to say in what state she may be. The lady is much better, and will be ready to go rhis evening. I am anxious to have her restored to her mother, who, I find, is distracted for her loss. The father is in the East Indies, but shortly ex¬ pected home ; I therefore beg of you to
to ??? te Λν?ηιί you would ???*? done, as* fast as possible ; then I will have you to see her before she goes." Fitzallan dressed himself immediate¬ ly, and hastened to give every instruc¬ tion for the messenger. That done, the captain took him to the chamber of the lady. She was up ; and now, that sleep hatl restored her, she appear¬ ed an interesting and lovelv ??????. She thanked them in an affectionate manner, for the kind treatment she had received, and earnestly intreated that they ?????! permit her to inform her brother and mother where they might wait upon them, to return, iu some measure, the many obligations she was under. At present, the captain said, circumstances, of which he ?\*?? not at liberty to inforni her, would prevent their having the honor of be¬ ing known to her family; but, at some fut UIO
future period, he hoped they shoultl be able to profit by her polite offers. He was very sorry to add, that his people would be untler the necessity of taking her, ?\?????(1 in a thick veil, f.iom the place she was then at ; hut that every respect she coultl ????? for shoultl be paid, until she ???? received by her mother. He saitl he sliould make one request before she tvent, which ????, That they might have from her some small token, ???????? himself and frientl (meaning Ethvard) might be recognized by her, at some future time, ????? the cloud, that at present enveloped them, was cleared ?????. She looketl at each arm ; she had no bracelets or ring to give them; but, recollecting a pocket-book of curious ?????, she had then ahout her, but which hatl been injured by the sea- water, she took it out, and, from the pocket
pocket of it, ίΙ?€Λν a minature of her brother, ivhich she gave to Fitzallan, and the pocket-book to the captain. tt Those two trifles," saitl she, tt I will beg you to keep, till I can make you a present more worthy of your accept¬ ance, and I sincerely lament that I have it not in my power to offer better. " They both received it with pleasure, antl, in return, Fitzallan dcsiretl her acceptance of his ring, and the captain presented her with a very valuable gem, from the antiquities of Pompeii. He then informed her, That the man who hatl made the attempt to convey her away, had died by his own hand, and she vvould have nothing iu future to fear from that quarter. She hove a heartfelt sigh at the thoughts' of his being his own murderer, and earnestly prayetl that Heaven might forgive him. She gave to \ r ashti what she had of value,
value, beside, in her pockets, and said, That her kindness she never should for¬ get. Soon after, the men came and said they were ready. The packet was de¬ livered to one of them, antl the lady, attended by the captain and Fitzallan, left the house : but, before she quitted the room, a long veil of thick black cloth was thrown over her, and, be¬ tween the two gentlemen, she was led down stairs, and along the dark pas¬ sages by vvhich they entered, then through the wood, at the end of which, on the beach, they found a large boat vvith ten men in it. The lady was lift¬ ed in by the two gentlemen, who then took leave of her, and the boat hove off from shore. When it was out of sight, they turn¬ ed back. The captain, taking the arm Vol. I. L of
of Fif'/aíían, said, "í have reposed ? confidence in your honor, that I think you will not abuse, by making ??? ac¬ quainted with the approach to our abode. I have pledged my faith to the community for you, and I must now inform you, That no person can leave our society, until he has been Avith us ihiee months. However anxious you ??? be to icturn to England, it is not in my power to perní it your going, till that time is expired. To-morrow, ??? λ\ΊΙΙ see the ??!?1? of the community, ¿inti vou niufet then submit to be sworn in a member, as must your servant. In the morning, I ??? shew you the exieni of this dwelling, and, as faras lam informed myself, Λν?Ι give you the his¬ tory of it. Some particulars I tlo not cleaily ?????, hut Vashti can explain them. She has lived here ever since -&he v wa& born ; her father and mother took
look refuge from some calamity, I don't know vyhat, and here died." " The avenues," said Ethvard, * ? ???1 tÏK 1 ruins that lay arotind, besjjeak it* to have bet n a mansion of tlie first consequence. *' " It was/' saitl the captain, "one ofthe grandest palaccs in tîie environs of Naples. As th'-y ad?anced, the man ???? lighted them said, that father Gregory, he did believe, kne w Vashti's father, and he was acquainted vuth the "Neapolitan nobleman ???? owned the domain. " Then wc will refer to liim," said the captain. " to-morrow."' Thev then descended the steps fiom the v ood, under tlie gal!en r , and vialkedaloncr the parage that ??1 to the other stairs. Vs they eame to one particular .«pot, ï «2 ?'< "í* m
Fitzallan remarketl the same sountl of soft musie, as he hatl heart! the first night of his entering it. " There is music," said he, and stopped to listen. " That L frequently heard," said the captain, " and our people think no¬ thing about it ; for, ??? ????? not where it comes from." " Good God !" said Fitzallan, " that is very strange : there is a female voice accompanying it." " Yes/' saitl he, * f I have stood here for an hour toge¬ ther, listening to it in hopes that the sound ?????1 direct me to the musi¬ cian ; but I have been foiled in all my attempts, and I cannot form the most distant idea of vidiere it can proceed from. I have at times imagined my¬ self in fairy land. 'Tis not at any par¬ ticular hour of the night, or any stated period, but comes at all hours and sea- tìons ; but 'tis not thought any thing of
<»'í by the community, as few of them have souls attuned to harmony, and those that have, as they cannot disert- ver the invisible musician, think no more about it, than just to listen for a few minutes, and then pass on. I have myself searched every place I could get at, and cannot conjecture what it can be. However, before we go, I ??? try once more. " As lie said this, the strains ceased and they 4vent on. " The instrument, whatever it be," said Fitzallan," does not resemble any thing I have ever heard, and with you I am inclined to think it something supernatural." As they entered the great court, several ofthe company met them, say¬ ing supper M'as ready, and desired them to hasten to it. Michael was fetched ; he ivas composed, and sat down with L 3 hi*
h-a master, but vyas unable to caf. Iiowever, before tbey went to bed, whieh was not till towards morning, bc became better reconciled to bis situa¬ tion, he having been assured that tho ->quI of the unhappy Owen was at rest. " Tlie next day, it was late before the captain came to Fitzallan, antl the intricacies of the place prevented him from leaving his apartment ; liesides, the doors, he hatl observed, were locked after them, whenever they vvere on that side of the house. lie and Michael descended with the captain, and were conducted, as he thought, to the room they vvere in, the night ofthe trial, but novv, for the first time, lie saw daylight. The captain presented him and Alichael to each one severally ; thev then ranged themselves in, a line, and all*S*t£mained standing, but the captain, who then addressed them in the
the language he had heard on the beach, near Vesuvius, and was an¬ swered in the same. The company present consisted of seventy-three persons, including Fitz¬ allan and Alichael. They ????? all unarmed, antl appeared very genteel· men, the greater part of >vhom were Italians, some French, antl three Eng¬ lish. When this ceremony wns over, the captain communicated to Fitz-' allan the nature of the oath he was to take, and desired him to explain it to Alichael, the principal trait of which ? -vas, That no temptation whatever should induce them to discover the residence of the society; and, if after three months, he should chuse to be¬ come an active member, he should then declare it ; if not, he should leave it by the consent of all; but, previous to their departure, tbey were to become L 4 members
members of tbe society at Bononi, to which place they ?????! be conducted by a select number pointed out by the Qpptain. There they would ?????? the oat lis then taken, and bind themselves by that institution to become the faithful friends of the community at large, and strictly adhere to every law enjoined 4 hem« , There were many other particulars, all of ????? Fitzallan and Michael bound themselves to perform, though Ed wa#d trembled at the idea of becom¬ ing a member at Bononi ; but, as they could not recede from their engage¬ ments, he thought it best to make no comments. As soon as the oaths were taken, a large goblet of wine ???? handed round to each. The company then divided into two parties, and Fitzallan was given
gi\ r en to understand that those on the left were to go to Naples that day, then to Rome, and ????? not to return for a month or fiVe ?????? ; the otheis remained there, to take advantage of any circumstance that might occur for the good ofthe whole. The first men¬ tioned party took leave and departed. The captain and the remainder then sat óown to breakfast, and father Gre¬ gory joined them. The discourse turned on Owen. A thousand instan¬ ces of his depravity of heart ????? related hv several of them, and his death did not seem to be regretted by any one ; they said, that when their companions returned wbo had taken home the lady, they shouki know how St. Prie and Miss Owen were disposed of, as they were to be tried that ?????. "Ah !" said father Gregorv, " wc must leave them to their fate : sooner L 5 or
or later, every one that is unjust meets his full reward." This is strange rea¬ soning, thought Alichael, for a priest who lives among thieves ; but, no matter for that. After somé farther discourse, the captain asked father Gregory, Whether he had not been acquainted vvith Vash¬ ti's father. "Yes," saitl he, "and a worthy good man he was, and deserved a better fate than he met with. lie was an officer of distinguished rank iu tho service of his Sardinian Majesty ; his birth ivas noble, but his fortune mean ; and, at an early periotl of life, he married a young Neapolitan, íyhose birth antl circumstances ????? similar to his own. She ivas gay, volatile, and fond of intrigue, and, within a twelve¬ month after tlieir marriage, the world talketl loudly of her amours ; but he was for a considerable time blind to her
her follies. She brought him one daughter, and, after the birth of that, became totally regardless of her hus¬ band, though "they still continued together. " He ???? soon ordered to join lri» regiment, as ???? was on the eve of breaking out. He left Cagliari, ?????? he then was, and repaired to Piedmont, where be was ordered to Avait the com¬ mands of his soA^ereign. To this place his wife refused to accompany him. She had contracted an intimacy Avith a young nobleman, nearly allied to the King of Naples. This young man A\ T as, ??????! exception, one of the weakest and most dissolute voung men of the age. Ilis luxurious way of life exceed¬ ed all belief, and, as soon as the dif¬ ferent mistresses he kept ceased to please, they were dismissed and heard of no more. Vashti's mother became L G the
the avowed mistress of this ????? prince. Iicr intrigues surpassed his ovvn, and she was one of those vvho were accusetl of drawing together the young nobility, who had plannetl a regular system of popular commotion, iu order to place her keeper on the throne of Naples. * 'They principally resided aí this man¬ sion, which, at that period, ???? one of themost magnificent palaces in Europe; but, before the schemes of these misled unhappy young men could be put in practice, the whole was discovered to the court ; proper measures were taken, to secure the different parties, and amongst them Vashti's mother. On her examination, she produced some¬ thing to implicate herbusbantl, but of what nature was never knoivn ; though it was generally thought, that she to planned to get him criminated, previous herself and the others being discovered. Some
Some have asserted, that the prince had assured her, If her husband ???? dead, and he placetl upon the throne, if he coultl not raise her to it Avith him, that she should be the first ?????? at his court.-—However futile these pro¬ mises ?????, yet she ???? ????? enough to believe them, and entered into the design with all the presumption of success, which ????? minds arc ever prone to indulge. " Tlie plot ???5 no sooner discovered, than proper measures ????? taken tõ secure thern all. Thty ????? seized at this palace, and the whole was given up to be pillaged by the soldiers. It was left in ruins, and Vashti's mother was heard of no more. I never could learn the particulars of what her father was accused of; but, be it ????1 it may, it ?? -as sufhcient to get him dismissed from the king of Sardinia s service, and declared
declared incapable of ever holding any commission untler his sovereign again. Iiis iamily disowned him; his friends deserted him : yet, ivi eked as his wife hatl heen, he could not help lamenting that he had been denied the satisfaction of again seeing her. Loaded vv î t li dis¬ grace, bereft of friends antl fortune, he gathered together what he could from the wreck of all, and, vvith his child antl her nur*c. eame here to close his ?? e*.. Ile ass n mcd the di ess of a pea¬ sant ; the nurse passed for his wife, antl Vashti was reared as a peasant's chihl. He made a friend of the man who had been placed by government to take chaige of the land around the palace, and. amidst those ruins, he lived five years, when Heaven, in mercy, took him to itself The little he had he left to the nurse for his cbild, and here she remained, till deaUi closed her life aho. - Vagiti
" Vashti ???? then sixteen: a «m of the man who resided on the domain married her, and in this plaee they have continued ever since. He is one of this society, and, I think, ? ? ery good man. These lands have been given by the crown of Naples to car¬ dinal Gerini, aiul he has passet I them to his nephew, tîie Prince of Bononi. You all know his character ; there- lore, I need not say any thing respect¬ ing it. " There are many stories reported, of .strange things being seen on that part of the building vvliich leath to the wootl. Alany of our company liave asserted that they have frequently seen a lady pass through the wall; but of this I am not certain myself. AU I know of a report (which was much talked of when I first came hei e ), was, that Vashti's mother, when she first came
came to this place, caused a lovely young tornan to be made away ???? in some manner or otlier, as she ???? jealous of her influence over the prince. In ?\ -hatever manner she was disposed of* this much is certain, that she was never lieard of after Vashti's mother came here. Scveial times I hav» thought of writing to father Theodore about it ; once in particular, ????? a gentleman came and made several en¬ quiries of Joseph, Vashti's husband, Whether he ever heard of any young lady being there, some years back, ???? was like a picture he shewed him : but Joseph told him, That his father ???? dead, who ???? there at the same time as the prince, and that, since he grew up, he had not heard any thing at all about any one, ???? formerly lived in the palace. I was from home when this gentleman called, and 1 cannot say but 1 ivas sorry I did not see him, as
as that might have given me some dye to discover what became of her, How¬ ever, sir, said he, turning to Edward, V Suppose you, the captain, antl my¬ self, when we hear the musie again, endeavour to find out where the sounds proceed from, and try whether we can see the lady the men have so often talked about." " I should be happy indeed/' said the captain, *' to be assured of what I have so often wanted to ?????. Go," said he, " Antonio, and hear whether the music is playing ???? or not." " Antonio went, but soon returned, saying all was silent. They then, after some more trifling conversation, agreed to take litzallan round to thatsideof the dwelling, by which father Gregory and Vashti s husband usually entered The company ail rose, and the father, the' captain,
captain, Fitzallan, and Michael left them, and ascended a flight of marble stairs, that opened into a long antl splendid room, the ornaments of wh ich ????? falling in all directions, so that it was dangerous to stay for any time ia it, lest the motion of the feet should occasion the loosened friezes, or the tottering pilasters to fall and crush them. They, therefore, hastened from. it antl entered a court yard ; this they crossed, and Avent' into another of greater extent, round the whole of which ran a colonnade of corinthian pi liars. The floor ???? of white marble, in tersti ced with porphyry ; the archi¬ trave curiously decorated ???* vine twigs and myrtle entwined. In the middle of the court stood part of a pedestal, which, upon examination, proved to have been a fountain, round the base of which ????? the remains of a large marble bason. From this ????. they
they entereti a magnificent portico, ????? reached the whole length of the south front ofthe palace. The arches ????? richly ornamented in basso relievo, the flooring similar to that of the colonnade. A flight of marble steps descended from the center of the por¬ tico to a park, that spoke at once the grandeur and the boldness of the de¬ sign. In its primeval beauty, it must have surpassed even many of the fa»- famed villas of ancient Rome. They traversed the grand surround¬ ing scene, ??-?? and anon casting back a look towards the pompous ruins. In one spot they viewed a large lake choaked with weeds ; here, mutilateti statues, there, fountains that had long since forhorn to play ; and then again, the ruins of the costly fabric ????? strike the eye. From this Fitzallan would turn and heave a sigh to the m ut abi lity
mutability of human greatness, " I cannot bear to see this ruin," said he, turning to the captain ; "it appals the senses and gives too strikinga memen¬ to of the frailty of human nature. Surely, rather," said he, "the man who can boast of a conscience void of remorse, must be much happier in a cottage, than a prince in tbe pos¬ session of such an edifice as this ivas, when in all its splendor, ivho could not boast of being good as well as great ; but this plainly proves that the wishes of man are never gratified, or his de¬ sires ever satiated." "True, son," said father Gregory; "and let the scene before thee teach thee how little dependance is to be put on the goods of this world, and completely prove to thee wbat our blessed preceptor said :—" That riches make themselves wings and flyaway." 1
As
As the father said this, they ????? ascending a slope that led to the ruins of a small banqueting room. They bad paused to admire the elegance and simplicity of the design, contrasted Avith the bold irrandeur ofthe totteriiur palace, when the soft music that had awakened their curiosity in the gallery, now seemed to float in air before them, and presently, a voice of more than mortal 5?????1?88 5 chaunted the ??????^ ing lines : Wbat is beauty but ? flower, Fading at the evening hour, Blooming gny in morning prhle, CloKcd in death ere even tide ? ■What is riches but a toy, Many Imve, but none enjoy ? ?\??1 is glory, what is fame ? Nothing but an empty name. Rank and power, tan they save The dying noble from the grave ? Health and comfort, can they give ; Or bid tlie titled sinner live ì ------- Ah!
.3$ Mi! w rek hed man! confessili) ütate I-. not moie happv foi bemg great, 'lhe *h\c, who hab a consciciuT fice l'ioni ??И, is fur ??? blest than tino, Tlio' pooi hb iot — b v \ihue led, ?? 1?? e's not where he k}s his head ; The mosvy cout h, or bed of itone, Alike to hnn aie ------ Ileic the music ceased abruptly but the melting strains seemed still to vibrate upon the ear, and hohl the senses wrapt in heavenly extacy. They appeared to ascend above their heads, until the dying melody was lost in gentle whispers. They all stood lost in wonder and amazement, eagerly looking upwards, as if to discovei the angelic harmonist, but nought was ? isible. " These are no liuman sounds,'' cxHaiirted Fitzallan; " would to Hea¬ ven the divine moralist had continued
R RO its seraphic strains a little longer '. Tlic music far surpassed the touch of mor¬ tals, and the moral that the voice con¬ veyed spoke more real truths than the most elaborate productions of our learned divines. Woultl to God it had continued ! I wished to hear more. Ah! when, celestial visitant, wilt thou return, antl charm us with thy song r" While Fitzallan was uttering this. the captain was still watchiiig' Λν?Ιι eager eye the u itle expanse of Heaven- Father Gregory was praying most de- voutly. Alichael hatl dropped upon - liis knees, ami, vvith all the fervency of a saint, was ejaculating his pater- nostcr. At last, turning to his master, he exclaimed, while his face flowed vvith transport:— ' t Novv, by the Holy Saint Patrick, aud all the blessed saints, we have been brought here to go to
Heaven, and Paradise, and all that*. Ah ! little did I think that the Holy fleaven and the blessed sai uts were so near to Hell, or that, when we Mì among a den of thieves, we were at the gates of glory. Oh ! I hope we shall not be long in passing through. Oh ! that tlie dear lady, Mrs. Owen, and the sweet honies, were here with us r and then we should all go together. Ah ! Holy Saint Patrick ! how happy we should be! 1 ' ( - We should, indeed, Michael," said Fitzallan, " could thv wishes be re*- alized ; but that bope, at present, is, I fear, too far distant. But, come with me; we'are going," said he, observing the captain and father Gregory-moving towards the banqueting room. With reluctance he quitted bis posture, and followed his master. They entered a. «saloon ; the paintings that still deco¬ rated
rated the ceiling struck the eye ivith amazement. In the center, was pour¬ trayed, in the most exquisite stile, the decision of Paris—-in the compartments* round, the travels of Ulysses. Thfe music gallery was destroyed, and but little remained of the grand banquet¬ ing room. " I have been thinking," said the captain, who had not as yet spoke, " wdiat would have been the effect ot* the music we just now heard, on a voluptuous and profligate company, such as tliose who last assembled in thie room, ia all the pride of greatness." t T havehad thesamethought '"answer- ed father Gregory ; t t but I fear the con¬ clusion I have drawn would not much redound to their credit ; as the mind sunk in luxury and dissipation is ever tlead to the finer feelings ofthe heart, Vol* L M sõ
so the sound of such strains as those we have heard, instead of affecting them with an idea of a superior order of beings, the ministering angels of a God, superior in wisdom and great - ness, would only be execrated for da¬ ring to disturb their boisterous revels. Such are men, when sin atul folly get the dominion, and women are still more vicious. " I have heard, that Gandiría, which was the name of Vashti's mother, confined a lovely and charmmg girl somewhere in this place, or near it. She had been procured for the pleasure of the prince ; but Claudina, dreading the effect of her charms, had her pri¬ vately secreted before he saw her, and many people have asserted that she was poisoned ; but, as there were various reports 4 circulated of those she had de¬ stroyed, and others she had confined, I paid
I paid but very little attention to it, till about six months since, when I ???? returning ???? Joseph, one even¬ ing, about sun-set, from visiting a poor ?????? ???? ???? dying. I thought, as we crossed the park, I saw the figure of ? ?????? just before mc. I looked earnestly at it, and ???? it enter a short walk that led to the great lake, and, about the middle of it, stop, take a handkerchief out of her bosom, and bind it ???? her ?? ? ??. I beckoned l' Joseph to look that way, at the same time aski n ?; him Whether he knew who it ????? ' Indeed, I do not/ said he, t but probably it is some foreigner come to view the rums ; for, you see. her dress is not like the Italian/ ' True/said I; 'but how could she get here, without some guide or at¬ tendants? Her dress is not mean ; she is of no common rank/ *Ah, mv God !' said he, looking earnestly at her M ? again,
again, ' that is the ?-??? lady I ???'? seen twice before, and she always goes into the lake/ ' Info the lake l said I ; f ???^ dost thou mean, Joseph ?' 1 You Λν?Ι see presently/ said he, ' and hear too / and he kept his eye full upon the lady, Λν?ιοιη I also gazed at atten¬ tively. We advanced towards her. 'I must go up to her/ said I, c and I will ask her Avhat occasions her standing in that strange posture / for, she appeared to be pausing on the brink of the ?vater, with her hands clasped in each other, and the bandage over her eyes. ' It certainly/ said I, ' is some poor being, disordered in her braiu ; she will plunge in, before I can come up with her, I fear/ ' Aye, that she will/ said Jo¬ seph, r ?И be bound for it ; for, I went to catch her, and she flounced straight into the Aväter ; so, don't go any nearer to her; for, ???? she got out, I can't think; I'm sure ??? searched long enough
enough for her, and could not find her, and she screeched dreadfully, as she jumped in ; and I am sure she did not rise again ; for, Leon and myself both plunged after her, in hopes to pull her np—but ??? could not find her ; and ??? watched her rising tbe ninth day ; but her body never floated, antl so ??? told of it ; but ??? got laughed at by our companions, and ??? said no more, especially as it hurted poor Vashti. But though I said nothing about it, I saw her do the same thing again since. И???????, I thought it best to be silent, and, from that time, I have avoided this part of the park.' " All this did not hinder me from advancing towards the spot, and I ???? got ????? twenty feet of her, ????? a violent shriek assailed my ears, and I ???? her plunge. I ran instantly to the »pot, as near as my eye could guess ; M İ but
hut not the least ruffle appeared on the water ; it was as smooth as glass, and the weeds were in the same erect pos¬ ture as those that grew every vvhere around. ' Now/said Joseph, * did I not tell you that she vvould throw her¬ self in, as soon as she hatl done pray¬ ing ? Lord have mercy upon us ! this surely is the ghost of one of those fine lathes, that used to be up at the palace with the prince ; but, why she should drown herself, God only knows.' t< I turned from the spot, but had not gone far before I heard music something similar to that vve heard just now ; but it lasted not above two mi¬ nutes. My mind has frequently dwelt upon the circumstance, but I have never had an opportunity to satisfy my doitbts. I have frequently wandered tlown that walk, İn hopes of again seeing it, but never have." »Aye/»
tt Aye," said Joseph, who had joined them in the park, but had not as yet spoke, " but you may stand a chance of seeing her, now the music is come again ; for, she never appears without it ; antl, ????? Leon and I heard it first, we thought it ???? that in the palace, Tin d so did not mind it, for ??? don't trouble ourselves about that." u That is the music," said the cap¬ tain, turning to Fitzallan, " which you heard last evening, and whicii I have so anxiously sought to find out. How¬ ever, we ΛνίΙΙ try again ; for, there is certainly something more than ordi¬ nary meant by its coming so frequent. Did the latly always appear at the same hour?" said he, turning to Joseph/' rí Yes," he answered, i£ each time I have seen it was at sunset, the same time as the father saw it, and I really think, if y ou would come tlown here AI 4 to-
to-morrow evening, or any evening before the vintage is gathered in, you will see it ; for, I have heard our friends say, they don't hear the sounds ? «ive so often sometimes, as they doat olhers; though it has been heard all thr.es of th* year for the matter of that jLtit,"' continued Joseph, " whatever (lircoveries ypu may make, don't let \ iLshti be informed of it, as it makes her uneasy, and she, poor thing, canT help the fruits ofher mother/' " You say true," replied father Gregory;*' — a good heart will ever reason so/' "We vviil most certainlv/' said the captain, "keep the secret, but we must have your attendance in our .search, as you know the different ave¬ nues fo the palace, and can better guide us than any otlier person/* 4i Oh my God'! your honor/* said Michael, who had not spoke one word since
sìlice he rose from his knees, Ci where «lo ??? mean to go to ? Ah ! do not, I beseech you, seek after dead folks. ?? sure the live ones here have fright¬ ened me enough ; and, tliough I take tiiem all to be very gootl sort of people, vet I think vou hatl better let these happy gentle-folks live as they do ; for, ?? sure they must be happy, or tliey Avould not play antl úiv¿ so, like t.r.gcls." ¿í We shall disturb no one/' said Fitzallan ;" make thyvjlt'ea-y, Aitclru ; ; whatever wc mav do, it ?\?1 most ceituiiììy he productive of ignori." Michael crowed hiimelf and bowed, sa\inur: " The holv Marv ???.>??\'-? vour h.onob !" t: '?\?\' ihew titrer./ J, and r . tveried toward.·» the nvmsion. A¿ - ?? -ìsed on, they agi\ ed tu wate' r - M J
next evening, and in the mean time, if the captain ???? not called another way by any unforeseen event, they agreed to traverse the whole of that side of the building that lay contigu¬ ous to the the long passage ; but it was thought too late to do any thing that day, as they hatl the gardens tô view after they had dined. This settled, they returned by the same grand en¬ trance to the portico, as they had de¬ scended from. As soon as they ivere in the room they usetl to eat in, they ????? informed that the men ivho took the îady to Naples were returned. They ????? pleased to find that she had been deli¬ vered in safety to her friends, by Uvo of the members ???? ????? at Naples to receive her ; that her mother and bro¬ ther were so happy at again seeing her, antl to* fmd she had met with such humane
humane treatment, that they made a very valuable present to the Uvo gen¬ tlemen, who delivered her to them, which they insisted upon their receiv¬ ing, and earnestly intreated they might be permitted to rank them in the num¬ ber of their friends. They brought an account likewise of the trial of St. Prie and Miss ????? ; the former had been condemned to die upon the ?????1, the, latter to be placed in the Order of Pe¬ nitents, there to spend the remai nder of a life, ??1??? had been a continual curse to all she bad be$u in the least conuected with. The order she was consigned ί0Λν33 ofthe severest kind, and punished svitli the greatest rigor those unhappy wretches, whose criinct had occasioned them lo be i m m ? ed by the State within its walk The rest of the day v»as spent in viewing the gaiduis, which, tliough M 6 the
tbe ravages time had made had nearly .obliterated tì^ivhole^f.fheìrrforaiet ??$? 9 stiffîRt&ined enough "????? its joçginal $ gmndeur. Tlie evening was passeti by Fitzallan, in company ivith the captain, father Gregory, Joseph, and six others. The rest were out, in separate parties, and would not come home till the latter part of the next day» or probably the day after. When tbey retired to their rooms, t Ih 1 captain accompanied Fitzallan,. ¿.Aİng, " It was his turn to sleep on that side of tlie house. They went to* tether to Edwards apartment, when the captain said :— Ci I ?\??^ wish you io it mind Mit hael ofthe nature of his cadi, as sonu' liítLch cumstances might î * taken potice ( f by the community, vltUi wouhl induce them to detain frim ufter jou nrj gone, as many of tlxai an? tenacious of tîiç kast sen¬ tence
tence, that might lead in ??^???? to ?" trineiblt would ???^??? an tsereet vvord, ι ou mnst^ßferefore, Aj "%|fc explains very tiring to hiinv*m*a more explicit manner than I have already done*'^ Fitzallan promised, ma the captain bidding him good nights sa * c * <i{ He should be vv ith hhn mtl^ f that they might begki their seard^tomedi« ately after breakfast. " As soon as he was gone, Edward cx^ plained to Michael the nature of the oath he had taken, the sort of people he v.vn among, and the danger he ran of being tki /died there after him, if he ν 't- not in evtvv word he said, ex- t.'wHivdy ch cum spect; he, therefore, «I ."icd, an Ί commanded him, that wh/.i-vcr he might see/or hear, when v Hii Lhyj, not to take the least ^notice, 1 »f í!iey hVúki insist on Iris remaining Cin;*» JMchr.U proinised-the most implicit
implicit observance, and they went to rest. Tlie next morning, as soon as break¬ fast was over, they began their search over that side of the ruins which led immediately to the vaulted passage. The whole \)f the upper part of the building was in ruins, the roof having been demolished at the time of its being destroyed by the soldiers. Find¬ ing it impossible to gather, from these dismembered apartments, what they had consisted of, they thought it best to descend to the passage underneath, which was the only subterranean one they had discovered ; but, in spite of all their researches, they found it im¬ possible to get at tbe entrance to some rooms, that still existed directly over where they stood. They went back to the ruins; various were the means they tried to v remove the remains of some marble
marble columns, that seemetl to have been huddled together in one great mass, to make room for other mate¬ rials. " I think/* said Joseph, " I have heard my father say, This ivas the side of the palace, vvhere the prince usetl to keep his ladies, and there was a music room, and a great number of bed rooms, but only one state apartment. Novv, if vve could remove some of these pil¬ lars, 'tis ten to one but we might be able to see the lower rooms, antl there it is, I'm sure, the music comes from; suppose ive all try with a handspike or tvvo. *' « That's well thought of," said the captain; prithee, go and get some: I must own my curiosity is excited, antl whatever labour it may cost, I don't mind, so I have it gratified." Father Gregory was of the same opinion ;
opinion ; Joseph antl Alichael went and returned presently, vvith a lever antl two handspikes. They set to work immediately, but had toiled near half an hour, without benefiting in the least ; for, as fast as tbey raised one end, the other would fall down, when the music began its heavenly strains* but no voire accompanied it, " It comes from this part ofthe room," said Fitzallan; "the sounds· are more dis¬ tinct here, than where you novv stand. There certainly must be a room under¬ neath, but, being blocked up in such a manner with this rubbish, vve cannot sec where the door was." They then placed the lever under a block of mar¬ ble that had fallen from the sitie, and lifted it with ease. They then put it between two columns, and, raising the whole by a sudden jerk of the haad- .s^ike, it fell with violence, antl preci¬ pitated
pitated thetn, ruins antl all, into a room ??1???1 . The violence of tha crash, and the dread of asking who was hurt, kept all silent. At last, Michael, who had in his fall got astride a marble sphinx, began to roar most horribly for his master, whom he did not see, as the dust that arose from the fall of tlie rubbish, hid him from his sight " Thank God l* said FiUallan, " thou art not killed, nor yet much hurt, I hope." Oh Lord! no, your honor; only my heatl is broke a bit, by that cursed great bunch of flowers falling so devilish near." This exclamation of Michaels set them all in a roar, and convinced each ¿hat neither was harmed. " Well ! God be praised !" said father Gregory, "that ??? are not hurt, at least not materially."
They V
They all ???????? they were safe, but poor Michael ; clasping both hands round the neck ofthe sphinx, he cried: " For the Holy Mary's sake! take me ????? from this dead horse ; Fm sure some evil spirit that has a spite against me, put me upon it. Oh ! and by Holy St. Patrick ! 'tis a woman too, as weli as a horse. Oh Lord ! oh Lord ! ??? are got into bell again' !" As soon as they could stop laughing, they tried to get the poor fellow, whom they found it difficult to disengage from his situation, as he ???? literally enveloped in great bunches of sculp¬ tured flowers. However, they at length succeeded in getting him from his awkward situation. They examined his head, and fortunately found it not much hurt. When they began to look about tltem, they endeavoured to find out what place they were in ; and, from Avhat
what they could judge from appear¬ ances, they concluded it must have been the music room spoke of by Joseph's father. They then searched for the other rooms he mentioned; and, after a deal of labour, discovered a door, ????? they opened, and found it led to the bed chambers. They en¬ tered several rooms; some of them had furniture, others not. They had been examining these fbr near an hour, and ????? about to return, when they heard the footsteps of a woman. "There ????," said Joseph, " as I am alive, if here isn't Vashti coming. She has heard the fine rouse ??? made, and is come to see what is the matter. But ???? she could get down, or how ??? are to get up to go back again, God only ??????; for, the whole ofthe ceiling fell in with us."
As
' As he said this, the door opened, ancl a young hdy f about twenty year» of age, entered. She appeared in a night dress, tied loosely round the waist with a blue sash. Her face \ya$ beautiful, though strongly impressed with sorrow. She made to the other side of the rcom, opened a door, and passed into the next. They fol^ved— Sbe paused about the middle of it— turned round, and fixed her eye sted¬ fastly upon Joseph, with a look of mingled anguish and despair—then waved her hand—pointed towards a particular part of the wall—antl va¬ nished in an instant! "What can this mean ?"' said Fitzallan. " Is there any lady, Joseph, you know of, tliat is like this ??? have seen? 'Tis- evident she addressed herself to you." Joseph said, Si No, I ????? no one that bears the least resemblance toher; though Vashti has got a picture like her, and 1 have
I ??? ? ? heard her say it was her mo¬ ther's : surely this can't be her appa¬ rition ? If so, there is more apparitions than one ; for, that is not the latly ?\1? a-oes into the lake; it is not a bit like her." "No," saitl father Gregory, "this is much taller, and, ifl recollect right, it is, as you say, like Vashti's mother. What can bring the wretched woman upon this earth again r" Whilst they ????? talking, they heard the soft music again. It drew nearer and nearer, till, at last, it seemed to he in the room with them. They listened with the most profound silence. It ceased. Again they bearti some ono approaching. They turned, and saw a lady, whom father Gregory instantly recognized as the vision he ???? in the park. She seemed to swim round the room, rather than walk, and, when she came opposite the wall, she pointed to the
the same part as the former had done, ■and then glided swiftly to the outer room again. Her dress was very dif¬ ferent from that worn by the first, and her face far surpassed the others in beauty, though they seemed near of an age. The music again sounded, but not long. " This is accounted for now," saitl fatlier Gregory; "'theie is certainly some mystery couched under these ap¬ pearances, and it must be our business to find it out. If it is agreeable, we will come here again to -???????, at this time, and their determine to speak to them both ; but ??? must try to find out what that part of the wall means, which, you may be certain, contains something necessary for usto be made acquainted with, or they v\ould not both point to it."
Thev
They then searched the wall, to see if it was hollow, but they found it was not, as far as they coukl sound. They examined the floor ; nothing was there. They looked over every part of the room, but notbing could be found. They then concluded that it was beat to depart, and watch the next day for t hei r c o m i n g. They the refore ρ repa re d to leave it ; bût, when they came back to the music room, they were surprised to find that it. was impossible to get out, without some kind of ladder, as the whole of the ceiling had fallen i u together, and left the walls perfectly bare on all sides. IIow to ascend they knew not, and to get assistance was impossible, as all that were in the secret of visiting that part of the palace were there together, and to make any one hear was impracticable. " Oh Lord ? said Michael, "what will
will your honors do ????? ??? must, sure enough, stay here, and see them ladies again. Oh ! that I was in dear Deny again ! I would never be after a seeking for dead folks. Holy Alary ! what strange things have I not seen, since I set my foots in this here coun¬ try í Ah î the cursed great flower pot ! and that abominable great woman horse ! Ah ! by my soul,· and St. Pa¬ trick, there is not such kickshaws in my dear country, to frighten people out of their wits. I am sure I will never be after coming here again, to get hold of such hubbery bubberies. Why, it is enough to frighten all the blessetl saints in the calendar, much more such a poor honey as me." Whilst Michael was making this oration, Joseph and Fitzallan were busy in trying to find the handspikes, or the lever ; but they laboured in vain, it.
? being too deeply buried in the ruins. They next tried to get some of the pieces of marble together, and pile them one upon the other, in order to make a kind of steps ; but they were so un¬ skilful in this sortoftvork, that, before they could put up a third stone, that which ???? placed as the base gave ???? , and down came their masonry. "What, in the name of God í shall ?\ e do?" said Fitzallan ; "the wall L> so cursedly high, and those confound¬ ed pieces so devilishly big, that it İs impossible to lift them ; and that poor simple fellow will be mad if he sta\5 here." " Aye, marry, your honor. and so I should for the matter of that, and so, please you, vre must try to get out: not but that I like the music, and all that; but I don't much like kitties that don't speak, and pretty ones too, such as those seem to bc that ???
.saw anon. Now, if that devilish queer horse eould bc made to come over here, I think we could get something upon bis back, that would stand firm/' " Vfhat! you want to get astride it again, do your" said Joseph; "vou were so well pleasetl with your other journey, that you woultl willingly mount again." "Ah ! the Dev il mount it,"' saitl Michael; " I'm ??? I will never get on his back agaiu : but you know we must tlo something to get out from hue. Oh ! I vvibh all the spirits had been in Lough Neagh, be¬ fore his honor had thought of running after music of this sort, when vve might have heard it outside that wall, as well as knocking down the house to get at it." Whilst Joseph and Alichael were talking, father Gregory, the captain, and
and Fit/allan, had fortunately raided a part of the column that layover the handspikes, and got one out. They theu cndeavouied to find, vvitli this, the way into the passage below, but in vain. They then agreed to tum back to the bed-rooms, and try to get a pas¬ sage that way into the otlier wing of the house, naturally concluding there must have been some kind of commu¬ nication vvith the other wing of the building. They turned back, though much against Alichaels will, and en¬ tered again the deserted chambers, not one of which coultl they discover ever to have had the least opening ou that side. They therefore concluded, that the entrance must have been on that bide they come in at. They were of course constrained to go back again, and once more attempt to leave it hy the way they came, to adopt Mi¬ chaels scheme of placing something N 9 . upon
upon the sphinx's backj and, by thai ^mcans/ciimb up. Thîstfhey immedi¬ ately set about doing, ¿ud, iu aboul half an hour, had so far accomplished their design, as to bring the sphinx elose to the wall. After a good deal of deliberation, ît was agreed, that one of them shouki get upon the sphinx, and then another get upon his shoulders, and endeavour to jump from thence to the floor above. Michael said, If Joseph would jump, he would stand upon the horse, as he called it, and support him ; but Fitz¬ allan said He thought, as he %vas the lightest, he had best jump. Michael did not much relish that, for fear his master shouki miss the leap, and fall back again, and he thought it much better for Joseph to get a fall than his master. Fitzallan, however, persisted in
in it; up he mounted, andin an in¬ stant, his feet touched the floor above. rí ΓΗ soon get you all out,** said he, rí İf I can limi the way to fhe paik, to get a ladder." tt That you Λν?Ι fímh' 7 said Joseph, " in the first court you entered, close to the one ??? passed» Keep to the right ofthe ruiná." Awav ran Fit/alian to get it; but, İii his huny to ieruni, mbleari of turn- imr to the hft, be tinned to the ric>ht, ¿h^ V_T* ' and diti n nt d Ivo vu iris mistake, till he found himself ??????? tu the por¬ tico. Ile h'btcned ????, ami, ???? gaining* the upper put (4 the toth ι mg fabritİM let / *\i η the ladder, and e;ot them all ep in v*/ y lJiee^d νιο^.Ί İlimdir; fatin i í re?, -?? И??: ??/ * ? «-L and the ust hch/> l ', te thir.k vu:, a queer hobble th. \ .\.\0 ???·»; in ... ? what a pretty pe.ee ef \vo*ã it '„oi.id ^J b\e
have been, if they could not have got out. As soon as they had collected their thoughts sufficiently to look about tbem, tbey were assured that the room they had been in ivas the music room, and, going round to examine that part which joined the bed rooms, they thought they saw two walls, which ran parallel with them. What two walls coultl tlo there, they couhl not imagine, but were determined to find out. The captain, by the help of the ladder, gained the top, antl, looking down, fountl it to be walls about three feet asunder, closed in on every side, ap¬ parently about fifteen feet long, but no visible entrance to it. They were lost in conjecturing what it coultl be built for, when Joseph said — Ci Perhaps that is the yery wall the latly
huly pointed to, and 1 am determined to go there and make a hole in it, ex¬ actly ?????? she pointed, antl that Λν?Ι, in all probability, enable us to ί1?3^Λ^?' what she meant. But the others thought it best not to stay any longer then, lest \ r ashti should be alarmed at.their ab¬ sence. They therefore returned, and. as soon as she saw them, she said, She v\ T as very glad they wore come, as there. had been a gentleman there, to enquire M'hcther any person ???? hurt at the falling of the rooms on the south side of the palace. She said She had heard a gr^at noise, as she ????? round to seek a 4 stray fowl, that had gone that ????, and thought she bearti several ? -oiccs, but did not know ?????? it came. from, antl the gentleman being a stranger, she did not ask him to see any part of the house, as she expected them to return every minute. "But Of he
he has been gone now," said she, " these two bout C' They concluded he nlust have passed when the lloor fell in. The captain ???! lit hatl not seen any one—but there was nobody hurt Who this gentleman could be thev could not imagine, or how he got into 'the park, Jo*eph bung vvitli them. Thevthouiriit ? best í ? seed romiti the diflerent walks, to see if he was still there; bul the man returned in about an hour. sav ing, Tiiere ivas no sign of a person any where. They therefore concluded he had seen as much as lie chose, ami was gone. Dinner vvas immediatery got for ihem, and, as soon as it was over, they seemed all inclined to go to the lake ao-ain ; but a violent storm of thunder O' and lightning coming on, they were pre-
prevented. The lightning ???? ex¬ tremely viv iti, and the thunder seemed to shake the remains ofthe building to its foundation. They were afraid to continue in it, and one and all got up to go into the park. They reached the saloon and crossed it; hut had not passed the whole of the colonnade, be¬ fore one wing of the palace appeared in a blaze. The lightning, as they thought, had struck it, and it burnt with vio¬ lence ; but a most violent storm of rain coming on, deadened the flames, and, in a short time, it appeared extin¬ guished. Yet the storm abated not ; it returned after the rain, Avith ten-fold violence ; peal succeeded peal, and lightning glared around them in all directions. Even the heart of Fitzallan sunk Avithin him. u Almighty being l' said father Gre¬ gory, lifting np his hands to Heaven, (i slay
" slay us not in th\ wralh, but ir, thy punishments remelubtr ìuirey.'* Tbe wlh »le gToup, eonfti-ting'of seven¬ teen persons, as they had been collected through fear from all parts ofthe build¬ ing, surrounded the father, and ear¬ nestly intreated him to pray for them, that they might not perish in their crimes. "'I know not ? -that," said he, " to do for you, mv friends; I am a sinner as well as vou, but ?*?? must, all of you, join me in prayer. Suppose ??? venture to the pavilion on the left, there Λν?? not be so much danger there, as the building being small, ??? rdiall not be so liable to be buried in its mins, should it be 'struck by light¬ ning." They ?? hastened towards it, but had not entered it above a minute, before they perceived the palace again blaz¬ in °\ ?'
:??\ antì wiih such fury, as seemed to t !u eaten its ι otal dissolution ; and yet, they thouglil that the flames came oj!!\ iv-nn the wing m hith they had beta t lut day cs.pl·>] ing. ίζ Xow/' •></d tbc fai J-cr, "ail hopes are lied ; we can du neither thi dead, nor living, ???' service by uar i encarriles ; it will Ο ι' all be buried in one genual ruin/ 4 This observation ?\?? uudcritood hut by pai t ofthe campan \, ?\??? the father forgetting hiubclf, resumed : Ah ! what a j)io\idential escape v,e iiave had ! If \. ? had not Tift those juiiLs when we did, we shouki all ha\e perished toge- thu. It ? evident that is the very pa; t uow burning—iSlill it seems as if ii did no', pioeeed altogether from that vhieh has been so long unrooted, but to the south-wcrtt of ir, ?. hich, though j^iiud io it, yet the ihimc* did not actually blaze from it. u Cod of mer¬ cies, what can it mean ?" "Aii
" Another clap of thunder burat over tliem ; the lightning rolled in ten thouvind fantastic shapes, along the enamelled green, and appeared burning up the verdure, antl transfixing every living animal that came within the reach of its malevolence. The lake appeared one sheet of rolling fire, and, as they viewed it from the pavilion, thev thought it emiltetl from amidst the sulphureous llames several hideous phantoms, whose dread iul bowlings sounded on the car, and struck each trembling hearer vvith more than mor¬ tal horror. The frightful fiends quit¬ ted the lake, and approached towartls the pavilion, when, overcome by their fears, the u hole assembly sunk upon their knees, earnestly imploring the protection of Heaven/' END* OF THE FIRST VOLl'MK. ?. siuwír, Printer, ) K/í)g'SUcct,CoFCUt-G<udcü. 5
