Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The romance of Smyrna: or, The prediction fulfilled!!!
THE ROMANCE OF SMYRNA; 8Ct\ «с.
CHAP. I. Let no man seek
Henceforth to be foretold what shall befal Hím or his children : evil, he may be sure, Which neither his fore-knowledge can prevent, And he the future evil shall no less tn apprehension than in substance feel ; Grievous to bear. Mlí.TON. Ö1X hours passed in refreshing sleep, and Alphonsus awoke much com¬ posed. He instantly enquired after the Duke. Berry, who was beside the bed, said Father James was with him, and he Vol. IV. В had
6 had taken something which Muley had prepared, and which had done him great service. This gave Alphonsus the most pleasing satisfaction, and he was anxious to pay his respects. He hastily arose, and, bidding Berry follow him, entered his father's apartment. He was in a slum¬ ber, and Muley, who had not left him for a moment, said He was, from the sleep he had had, much better than could have been expected. Father James was gone to rest. The Bey, he said, had sent twice to make enquiries after the Duke^ and informed them he would call and see him the next day, when he hoped to bring his discharge. He had ordered his own physician to attend, and had sent several articles, which he thought might do him good. This account gave Alphonsus the most heartfelt pleasure, and he waited with composure the waking of his father. He earnestly requested that Muley would go to bed, as himself and Berry would con¬ tinue
7 tinue in the room : but he could not pre¬ vail upon him to do it 5 he would go as soon as his patient waked. Seeing him determined, Alphonsus no longer urged it. The Duke slept near three hours, and, when he awoke, he thanked Muley for the draught he had given him, and said He found himself apparently much better than he had been for manv months.— *' How is my son ?" said he, <c Have you seen him ?" u I am here," said Alphonsus, u and extremely happy to find what this good man has given you has been of such service." " It has, indeed," said the Duke ; " and I am, thank Heaven, more composed." Alphonsus gazed upon him with the truest pleasure ; he saw that his eyes were, in some measure, divested of that glare, which generally precedes the stroke of death ; he was cheered at the sight, and silently returned thanks to the God of Mercies. В 2 Soon
t* Soon after, the Jew physician entered : he was pleased to see his patient so much bţetter, and entreated he would improve those favorable symptoms, and not to omit taking the drugs he should send. * f Of that," said Alphonsus, " you may be assured ; I shall, with my friend, see them administered." For some days, the Duke appeared to mend, and, on the morning of the fourth, he desired Alphonsus to be with him alone, as he thought he was well enough to converse with him, on the subject that lay nearest his heart, being fearful he should not live to relate t it ; for, he felt that his time in this world was but short. But his son, who was anxious for his recovery, would not per¬ mit the least probability of such an event, and hastily strove to make him entertain more flattering hopes; but, though he listened to him with pleasure, yet he was fully persuaded that his death was near. He, therefore, waved the subject, by ask¬ ing
9 ing In what manner he had been made acquainted with his perilous situation. Alphonsus related to him every parti¬ cular that had passed, from the day of the earthquake, down to the hour when they saw him in the presence of the Bey. When he ceased speaking, his father re¬ mained for some minutes in silent prayer. At last, he said ; " Then to the Eternal God, and that good man, I owe my pre¬ servation, and the happiness I now enjoy, to see a son, whom I deserted nearly as soon as he saw the light ; one destined to close my eyes, and see my wretched re¬ mains laid in that grave î marked out for them twelve years ago.—-But it is late— now, my son, when you have dined, come to me again. I will endeavour to recollect events that are long since past, and which 1 must ever deplore. Alphon¬ sus begged him not to fatigue himself, by relating circumstances that would only awaken distressing images ; for, he had long since considered,«that he must have В 3 had
10 had very pressing reasons for leaving his wife and family, in the manner he did. " True, my son," said the Duke, " and I was led to hope that you would not have heard what had been my crimes, or what my motives, till these gray hairs were laid in the silent grave, and I was gone to render up a just account to that Judge, who never will be deceived. For that purpose, I lost no time, aiter quitting you at Melasso, ¡n writing a particular ac¬ count of all that had befallen me, from the hour 1 left the Palace of De Aranjuez, to that when I so abruptly quitted you.— Those papers, when finished, I constant¬ ly carried about with me; but, the day I was put into prison, they v\ ere, and some others which contained my will, taken from me, and, I suppose, have been sent to Constantinople, or to the Pacha, who resides a considerable distance from hence. " Whatever were their reasons for ac¬ cusing me of such a crime, I know not; un¬ less it was my being seen in the company of the two Arabs, who were apprehended with
11 with me, and whom I met at Grand Cairo. They were recommended to me, as men suffering under accumulated dis¬ tresses, which to me appeared so palpa¬ ble, that 1 believed and relieved them. I took them under my protection, and as¬ sisted them to reach Gaza, where I had not arrived above two hours, and was at the time extremely ill, having suffered much from a fever for several days, when I was apprehended, and immediately taken before the Bey -, but, for some reason I know not w T hat, I was sent, on, with the two Arabs, to this town. I was interro¬ gated at Gaza ; but, being unable to understand to what their questions alluded, and being careless of life, I did not answer them. The Arabs, I was told, were impaled, the day after we reached here ; but my sentence, what¬ ever it was, was not put into execution. " I lay suffering the most dreadful tor- tures^ being heavily chained, and the place I was put in was so # damp, and, at the same time, so intolerably hot, that В 4 I was
12 I was nearly suffocated. Add to this, the drought I experienced from the fever, and the want of water to allay my thirst. I could not speak for many hours before you arrived to my relief, and, when they came to bear me out, as I thought, to exe¬ cution, I felt a glow of pleasure spread over my face, being assured that my tor¬ ments would soon cease, and that it was better to fall by the hands of the execu¬ tioner, than continue İn such lingering torments. I offered, as well as my scorch¬ ing lips would pronounce it, a short prayer for my soul, and closed my eyes, as I thought, for ever.------When, oh ! blessed Saviour ! what were my feelings, when I heard you, my son, and found your ten¬ der hands had raised my wretched head from the marble, and thaï it rested on your bosom ? " 1 opened my eyes, to be convinced of its reality : I saw you, my son, and those worthy men you had brought with you ; but, still, I could not believe it any¬ thing but a dream—my brain beat hard against
ıs against the scull—I felt every artery throb¬ bing with tenfold violence, and I was on the brink of starting from the friendly arms that held me, when I heard your affectionate voice, imploring to have me freed from the cumbrous irons, I was sensible of your kindness ; but, it was so much like enchantment, that I still believed I was in a dream, from which I dreaded to awake. Your image, my dear son, had never left my sight for one mo¬ ment, and the prayer I heard you offer up at Melasso was for ever sounding in my ears—whether sleeping or w r aking, I thought you were always near me. Is it then to be wondered at, that I concluded it to be a vision, which the torments of the executioner would soon wake me from г and even, when I was taken up, and carried along the street, I could not be persuaded but that I was carrying to execution. Nor was it until I no longer saw nor heard the Janizaries, but beheld the physician, and observed the com¬ miserating looks of all around me, that I В 5 began
14 began to think it a reality. Blessed and praised be the merciful God S I found it so, and that the sorrows of age were not sported with .... But I am faint, my son .... give me that drug." Alphonsus hastily arose, and gave it him j he then earnestly intreated him to rest ; he hoped he w r ould be better the next day, and able to give him the re¬ lation he so much wished for. The Duke complied with his request; but, during the whole of that day, and the next, he was too weak to hold discourse with any one but Father James, who had been in¬ formed by the physician that it was im¬ possible for his patient to recover. He had been attacked, he said, with a fever incident to the country, at that time of the year, which never failed to end in death, though its duration was rendered longer or shorter, according to the habit of body of the person afflicted. Thus apprized, he seized every opportunity to be with the Duke, whom he prayed by, exhorted, and comforted, and his prayers
15 prayers seemed to give him the greatest relief. He was sensible himself of the nature of the fever, and, as he knew its fatal tendency, having frequently watched its progress among patients whom he had attended in their dying moments, he pre¬ pared himself for that change which he saw rapidly approaching. All the anxiety he the» had, was for Alphonsus, whom he would have flattered, but he thought it wrong, and desired the Father to w T arn him of it, but not till he had been a few hours with him alone. " í have something," said he, " to im¬ part to him, and, if í exhaust myself by doing it, 'tis only hastening that mes¬ senger, who, I know, must come, and whom I ardently desire to meet." He then requested Father James to send Al¬ phonsus to him, and to go to the ßey, and make some enquiries for his papers. The Father gave him a cordial, to raise his Β ΰ spirits,
16 spirits, and then went, and fetched his son. " I am now better, my Alphonsus," said the Duke; " and shall, I hope, if you will sit down by me, be able to re¬ late what I promised, and which I am anxious you should know, lest my papers should never be restored ! and, as I shall not attempt to palliate any of my crimes» 1 am led to think, when you have heard them, you will be the more readily recon¬ ciled to my loss; but do not, my son, when you know my guilt, condemn too severely the errors of a man, who owed them more to the example of those it was his misfortune to associate with, than to any absolute inclination of his own. I was loth to be outdone in any thing, which I saw my companions capable of executing, and, by that emulation, I fell .... " You have, my son, no doubt, heard from our domestic Chaplain, in "what manner I spent the first sixteen years of my life. That only was the period of hap-
J7 happiness. When I had attained that age, I was, by the will of my father, sent to France and Italy, where I was destined to stay four years. My rank, and the strong recommendations I had, intro¬ duced me to the highest circles, and it was not long, before I formed a con¬ nection with a set of young noblemen, among whom were ranked two princes of the blood ; they distinguished them¬ selves by the appellation of Free-thinkers. That was a name given to those who embraced the doctrines of the English Bolİngbroke and others, who were deno¬ minated philosophers, and formed a sys¬ tem of their own, founded on principles that set Heaven and Hell at defiance. " They held, That all religion was a farce, and that the doctrines of Chris¬ tianity were only such as fools or mad¬ men would believe—That the lessons which priests held out were the canting fables of hypocrisy, to cheat children w ithali, and to obtain money from the igno-
Il ignorant, whose simplicity they preyed on ; and, therefore, it was unworthy of the character of a gentleman to give him¬ self any trouble about a hereafter, as it was a matter of no concern what became of them, after they had enjoyed their days here—That the present was the only thing to be considered ; to revel in those delights the moment afforded, was all that a wise man ought to' mind, and to leave the rest to Chance, which, they affirmed, formed and governed all things ; for, who had ever seen the God the priests talked about—it was evident, from their lives, that they did not believe a syllable of what they preached ; and, as pardons could be bought by the score, and indulgences by the thousand, it was a very strong proof that those who held forth such doctrines regarded the whole as mummery—That, to enjoy every plea¬ sure the world afforded, without the dread of futurity, was what could alone mark the character of a wise man ; since, if
19 if our inclinations had not been meant to have been gratified, we should not have come into the world with such various propensities, and have had the means of enjoying them placed within our pow r er. " On this doctrine, was the system built ; but I only give you the outlines of those infernal precepts, that brought, not only myself, to be capable of committing acts that damned my peace for ever, but that of all those who believed like me. I was led to think that there was no hereafter; therefore, did not hesitate to adopt sentiments so consonant to the warm and vivid imagination of youth. I was delighted with the pleasing vision, and with fervor embraced those delusive tenets. I was unwilling to be out-done by any one in vice; for, 1 found, the greater crimes I committed, the more I was caressed by those disciples of the devil. My every action was applauded, and, when I triumphantly informed them I had
20 I had seduced a young lady, and left her in a brothel, the room where we kept our nightly revels rang with a thunder of applause. I gloried in being the fore¬ most to detach a wife from her husband, and girls from their parents, and, before I had attained my twentieth year, I was a complete adept in every kind of vice. The parents, whose daughters I had seduced, and left to want and infamy, were, if they complained, secured in the Bastille. Their sufferings I laughed at, and the more I was heard of, the more acceptable I became to our society.— They prided themselves more, in having made a convert of me, than of any other person, as it would serve to spread their glorious system, as they called it, over a nation famed as mine was for bigotry and superstition, when I should return to Portugal, and become the companion of the Prince, who was known to be an easy and credulous man, and a fit instru¬ ment for broaching my new philosophy. Thus,
21 Thus, the days passed on, in planning schemes of vice, and the nights in the execution of them. " i had a servant, who was an Italian. This man was my companion in all my excesses, and the pander to my pleasures. He came to me, one day, and said, He had seen a beautiful girl return from Court, who had been to be introduced to Madame de Maintenon, He said, She was the daughter of an old French officer, who had but little, besides his nobility and the Order of St t Louis, to boast of; but that he augured much from the charms of his daughter. She had a bro¬ ther, an officer in the Swiss Guards, a man much talked of for his bravery and personal accomplishments. The account my servant gave of this young lady, raised in me a wish to see her, which he undertook to gratify, and which he ac¬ complished. 1 no sooner saw her, than I became determined to possess her; but she was so well guarded by her father* that
22 that we found it difficult to compass our design. Yet, notwithstanding all ob¬ stacles, I was re? о » -v d to have her. I, therefore, gave him unlimited power to draw on me for what sums he nii^ht want, for that purpose ; and, while this was in agitation, all other pursuits were suspended, and I joined in the revels of my companions. " One evening, a party of them pro¬ posed our visiting an old man, reputed a conjuror; he lived near the woods of Boub^ne. This idea was no sooner suggested than n do^*ed, and the next day fixed upon to set out. We did, and saw the old man ; w r e surrounded him, and ordered him to give us a proof of his skill. He desired to know Whether one, or all, wished to be told their fate. He was answered, All. He then craved a few hours to prepare himself: it was granted ; but, lest he should give us the slip, we surrounded his habitation, and ordered the servants to spread the re¬ freshments
53 fresh men ts on the ground. It was done« and we revelled away the time, in all the licentious levity that marked the age ; though, at the same time, the Court was remarkable for outward appearance of sanctity and devotion, " When he was ready, he gave us no¬ tice, and one at a time was closeted with him. 1 was the fourth ; he held a glass in his left hand, over which he breathed ; then bade me cross it, and say after him, what I then thought unintelligible jargon » ui I uucycu nun. w nen ше prayer was ended, he bade me glance my eye over the glass : I did, and saw my father stabbing a gentleman, with one hand, while, with the other, he held a lady, apparently dead. " * Do you know that figure?' said he. * I do/ answered I ; 6 it is my fa¬ ther.' ť You say right/ returned he; * and you observe the crime he is com¬ mitting. That gentleman was the lady's first husband, and she was your mother— but
24 but that crime will be vHted upon—' , and he paused. < Upon whom ? v said L * Upon the innocent,' returned he. * Your father was guilty of murder, but of that murder never was Mbpected, and a guiltless person suffered for it. Learn to shun his vices, and you may, in some measure, avert the evils that hang over your family/ " I said í did not believe a word of the matter, and, as I came not there to know what my father did, or to hear himself preach, I insisted he would inform me what was to be my fate, and not that of my family. He then breathed on the glass again, and again repeated the prayer. I followed, and, when finished, he bade me fix my eye upon the glass.— I obeyed, when every incident that bad before, and has since, happened me, I saw in quick succession, till my fortieth year------a cloud then appeared to over¬ spread it..
« < What
25 , * ζ ζ What is the meaningof this?* said I; * am I not to live beyond forty ?' * Yes/ said he ; ť you will live many years past that period, but to say what will happen after, I would rather be excused/ c I will excuse you nothing/ said I ; < I came hither to be fully informed, and, at your peril, deny me/ ' Unthinking young man !' said he, ť take then thy wish/— He muttered another prayer, and then bade me look again, when I saw the ghastly figure of a man, holding a scroll in his hand, on which was written : " The house of Aranjuez shall become extinct, when a maiden, fair as the fairest morning in the spring, and chaste as the new-fallen snow, shall be mur¬ dered by the hand of a mother that adores her. " r And what is such an improbable event to me ?' said I, * since such a cir¬ cumstance as this can never happen r'— * That is best known to God/ returned he;
26 he ; * but when you see this man again, remember me, and fly the habitation of your ancestors, or you will die by the hands of the common executioner, since blood will have blood, and the life of a guilty wretch, whom you will send before his God, with all his crimes upon him, will be required of you------but, till you again see him, whose image is before you, follow securely your inclinations ; you need not fear detection.' ' Then you can tell me no more,' said I. ' No more,' rejoined he ; * but mark the features of the person you see, and when you find a scroll on your table, corresponding to that in his hand, fly; for, the vengeance of Heaven hangs over you and yours. I have no more to say; but take this/ giv¬ ing me a small leather bag, covered with odd characters, i and that paper will ex¬ plain what you are to do with it.' A veil again covered the glass, and I quitted the room.
" My
27 " My companions went in, in succes¬ sion ■> some were pleased, others not ; but, however, we concluded the old man was no tool. Nevertheless, we soon for¬ got in dissipation the whole of what had been told us. u Two days after our return to Paris, I was informed by Salla, my Italian servant, that he had succeeded in his project of getting the young lady into my power.— He had procured a iettre-de-cachet for the father and mother, and got the young of¬ ficer accused of a crime, for which he was then under arrest; and, if I would be at the end of the Boulevards at six that evening, he would bring the lady to me. With pleasure inexpressible, 1 heard his tidings and at the hour appointed, went to the spot in disguise. " 1 had not waited long, before I saw a carriage drive up, and, when it came op¬ posite to where I stood, the postilion stop¬ ped ; one of the two servants that attend¬ ed, opened the door, and Salia stepping out,
ss out, said to the lady : c Here is the Mar- quis, we need not fear any thing now/— He came up to me and said ; * Monsieur le Marquis, must I accompany you to this lady's parents, or will you dispense with my attendance ?' I took the hint, and said : * I cannot possibly part with you/ We then got in, and the carriage drove off. <r I had not been seated above a mi¬ nute, before the lovely victim was loading me with thanks, for kindly interesting myself to gain her parents' release ; ' But why/ said she, ť were they carried so far from Paris/ I looked at Salla. ť I am better acquainted with that particular than the Marquis/ said he ; * but it is in his power to serve them, as they are in confinement in a fortress on his domain ; and, if he cannot absolutely liberate, yet he will be able to permit you to be with them/ ** She again thanked me in the most af¬ fecting terms, and, had I not been lost to
to every sense of guilt, my heart would have smote me for tbe diabolical act I was about to commit ; but, as I consider¬ ed every additional crime as an additional honor, I felt no compunction, but pro¬ ceeded on, amusing myself with the ac¬ count I should have to give to my compa¬ nions. " I did not know to what place w« were going, having left it to the direction of my infamous agent. We travelled ra¬ pid!}' for three hours, when we stopped at a small genteel house, near a village. The carriage was discharged immediately, and another, he informed me, was ready at thib place. We took some refresh- ments, and, by a hint he gave me, í was upon my guard, so as not to alarm the lady, either by words or actions. <c Soon after, we entered another vehi¬ cle, and pursued our journey, but not onward ; wc were only, by a bye-road, returning to Paris, which place we reached very late at night; but the lady Vol. IV. C wa'
30 was given to understand, she was in a town near the fortress, in which her pa¬ rents w r ere confined. She was anxious, late as it was, to go to them immediately ; but Salla informed her it was impossible, and, therefore, desired she would repose herself, and depend upon my good offices to serve her. Every thing had been pre¬ pared, I saw, for her reception, and, when we had supped, I took leave of her, with a promise of going with her early in the morning. As soon as the infamous Salía and my¬ self were left alone, he briefly informed me, That he had caused it to be given out, I had been, that evening, wounded in a duel ; and, having killed m) anta¬ gonist, would be obliged to be concealed for a few days. He baid, That, as he had succeeded in getting the lady into my power, it would be necessary to complete my designs as quick as possible, lest any unforeseen event should liberate her bro¬ ther, whose vengeance and vigilance I should
3i should have reason to dread. He would, therefore, advise me to accomplish my views upon the lady the next day. He used a number of arguments to convince me of its necessity ; but my heart, in this instance, recoiled from violence. Whether 1 was awed by her virtue, which shone con¬ spicuously in every feature, or the grate¬ ful manner in which she thanked me for my pretended kindness to her parents, 1 know not ; but, at any rate, 1 was deter¬ mined to let her know, the next day, her real situation, and to hold out to her the most flattering prospects, if she would consent to become my mistress, or, if she refused, to dread the consequence. * ť I put this design into execution ; but, to describe her distress and amazement, when she understood in what hands she was, would be impossible. She had re¬ course to tears, piayers, and entreaties; but, by means of that infamous Salla, 1 was deaf to all. I gave her four hours to С 2 consider
consider of it, and, at the expiration ot that time, I went to her again. u She appeared perfectly composed., and said, She had deliberately consider¬ ed my proposals, and, if i would allow her pen and ink, to write to her parents, to satisfy them of her safety, she would con¬ sent to become my mistress, on condition that she should remain where she then was, and no one be made acquainted with her place of residence. 1 consented to t his, and some other particulars. She then desired I would leave her for a few hours, ns the letter she had to write would take up some time; she wished to justify herself to her parents, and reconcile them to her loss. I agreed to this, and she gave me leave to come to her apartment in the evening, " The room she was in was on the first floor, and the windows were well secur¬ ed; so that they could not be opened. Pens, ink, and paper, were immediately bent to her, and 1 hugged myself in the security
S3 security of possessing, in a few hours, one of the most charming girls in Paris. I made my vile companion a valuable pre¬ sent, and sent him to make some pur¬ chases for the lovely Estelle. She had been alone, till within half an hour of the lime appointed for my going to her, when a servant, who was in a room under¬ neath, ran across the gallery to that I was in, and said, She was sure .something was amias in Ma'amselle's apartment *, for, she had heard something fall on the floor, and likewise an unusual noise, for a long time before ; but she did not like to say any¬ thing. ťí Fhurried directly to the room. Salla was out, but I had the key. I opened the door, when, to my distracted eyes, there appeared the lovely victim, stretched in death, and weltering in her blood. One square of glass had been cut out of the window, and on the table lay a small pair of scissars, such as the ladies use for cutting devices in paper. They were С % literally
literally drenched in blood. I caught her up, and laid her on the sopha, when, taking her hand to feel the pulse, to my utter amazement, I saw the artery cut through, and, on examining the other, I found that cut likewise, and ano¬ ther small incision on the side of her neck. " I was like one frantic. I cursed my¬ self, and Salla, and imprecated vengeance on all. In the midst of my exclamations, Salla entered, and, for the first time 'm my life, I saw something like remorse on his countenance. He tried, by every means in his power» to stop the blood, which he thought still flowed, though faintly, I knew nothing of surgery, nor did my com¬ panions. " When he found that we could not render her any assistance, he advised me to go to another room, while he procured a surgeon ; but he was at a loss what ac¬ count to give him, when, looking round, in the greatest distress, he perceived the squ are
35
Square of the window gone, and a piece of ribbon depending from it. He instantly ran to it, and pulled it in. At the end, it was evident a paper liad been fastened, which was gone ; a small bit of it still remained, and, in order to facilitate its descent, an etwee had been suspended a little above it. e We are betrayed,' said Salla ¿ ( see what paper is gone.'—· The servant obeyed, and found two sheets less than she left. * You have no time to lose/ said he > * the letter, by this time, has reached the destined per¬ son. We shall be apprehended for the murder.' " There %vas no leisure for consulta¬ tion ; flight was our only resource, which the disguise we wore would, we thought, facilitate, and, under pretence of getting some assistance, we precipitately quitted the house. We hastened to the banks of the Seine, took boat, and ordered the watermen to row with all speed to Meu- lan ÍLrc wc stopped, and paid them С I well
3« well to wait for us, having, as we said, business of the greatest moment to trans¬ act, and should return in about three hours. When we had quitted them, we 'hastened on to the other hide of the vil¬ lage, and, at the house of a peasant, for six louis d'or, wc changed our dress. We procured a carriage, in which we reached the first post town, on the route for Italy, which we gained by a cir¬ cuitous road. ** At that place, we changed our dresses again ; previous to which, we or¬ ii«, red the carriage to wait, that we might rciĽYVi in it ; biifj instead ofthat, we pio- cecdedj and did not rest cither night or dj:y, ΐ'ΊΙ v\ с had p;<v*,eci the Л!ръ. Wc ihon thought ounclvcb secure, and re ted at Turin. íLre i had time to reilect upon tie enormity of my crimes ; but, by the assistance of my companion, I ьбпп lost all traces of remorse, and, in the gay scenes in which I engaged, forgot the fair
57 fair flower 1 had precipitated to an un¬ timely grave. " Salla procured an account from Paris, of the manner in which the news of my disappearing was received by my compa¬ nions, and learned that my absence was imputed to the affair of honor, in which, by the contrivance of Salla, they had been given to under>tand, 1 had been engaged. Not the least Item of the real cause was mentioned ; but í was, notwithstanding this, unwilling to return to Paris; and,as Italy was tiie place destined for me to \ isit, before my return to Portugal, I thought it best to continue there. iv After a shor: time, I became as fa¬ miliar with vice, as I had been in France, and gave a loose to every dissolute plea¬ sure ; but î was not long permitted to remain there. I received an order from his Majesty, commanding my immediate return to Lisbon. 1 obeyed, though with extreme reluctance ; and, when I arrived in that city, endeavoured, by assuming С Ь an
38
an exterior, the direct reverse to what I had been in France and Italy, to give the lie to those slanders, which had been, with no sparing hand, bestowed upon my character. So complete an adept was I in dissimulation, that I found the means of imposing on every one ; and, so far from being regarded as an abandoned person, I was looked upon as a pattern for all the young grandees. The Prince of Brazil became so much attached to me, that my advice was considered as an oracle, and nothing was done by him, without first consulting me. His mild and candid temper laid him open to every designing man, and I am certain, had he come to the throne, I should, in every thing but the name, have reigned over Portugal. But the Almighty merci¬ fully decreed it otherwise. " I come now, my son, to that part of my life the most eventful. The Prince had a daughter, the most lovely and ac¬ complished of her sex. Though very young,
39 young, she had in understanding the ma¬ turity of age. This lady I aspired to, though I knew she loved, and was be¬ loved by, Don Joseph De Parvero. This nobleman I saw and envied ; and, fear¬ ing he would possess a treasure I panted to obtain, I lost no time in making known my pretensions to the Prince. He in¬ stantly consented, and ordered his daugh¬ ter to receive me as her destined hus¬ band. But I was not approved of by either the Princess or her mother ; they both opposed the commands of the Prince. iC I envied my rival, and, from tbe prin¬ ciples which had guided my actions, when abroad, made no scruple to plan his death. The two Princesses had gained their Majesties to Don John's interest, and their son was sent for and ordered by them to give his immediate consent to the marriage of Don John with Donna Louisa. Their commands w r ere couched in such terms, that he was compelled to С ő obey,
obey, and, when he informed me of it, î made a virtue of necessity, and patiently submitted to my loss. " But I was determined, in secret, to destroy my rival ; for which purpose, I consulted Salla, whom I had continued in my service. He immediately came into my scheme ; but Heaven defeated it, and I, fearing my designs might be dis¬ covered, through Salla's means, gave him that poison I had designed for the Prince. He died by my hand. " After the death of this wretch, i made several attempts on the life of Don John ; but, by the protection of the Saints, he was preserved. Disappointed in all my schemes, I sought refuge from my own thoughts in all circles where mixed the young and the gay, and, at an assembly, I saw your mother, the amiable and lovely Alary of Coimbra. I immediately made proposals i they were accepted, and she became my wife ; but, in spite of her many virtues, the immense fortune I pos¬ sessed,
4 t sessed, and the сЬ^-п! \g children sh л brought me, 1 w a« , ine rol· L·, lì ,«.. 0 h i knew not why, ;< ^ir т.-.« her was all that could be desired in wom«n.
CHAP.
4'2
CHAP. П. Whence, and what art thou, execrable shape ? That durst, though grim and terrible, advance Thy miscreated front athwart my way ž Milton. " I HAD been married about six years, when you, my son, came into the world. You were our third child, and, in less than two years after, your mother lay in again of your youngest sister. She was recovering, when, as I was, one day, sitting in my closet, I heard the door open. Surprised at any one's entering, without leave, I turned hastily, to demand Who it was? when, to my utter amazement, I beheld advance towards me the same ghastly figure í had seen in the glass, in the woods of Boulogne.
"He
43 ({ He drew near, holding in his hand the scroll. *' Struck with terror, I precipitately left the room, and ran to that in v\ hich my wife was. í fastened the door after me, and approached her ; but, before I could explain any thing, he entered.— Your mother shrieked, and threw her head on my bosom. The figure advanced close to us, and held up the scroll. Our eyes were involuntarily fixed on it. He held it some time—I had no power to stir. Three times he waved it over our heads, and vanished ! ! ! My wife fell senseless on my breast. " I summoned her attendants, and hastened to my chamber. As I entered, I again beheld upon the table the dread¬ ful scroll ; and, though there were two of your mother's women in the room, yet they saw it not. I then no longer doubted the prophecy of the old man, and ran over, in my mind, every occurrence that had happened since, and found that every thing
14 thing had turned out as he lï.ri fui c told. Hit i** Isi L; of my rear, ■ \\ . and the enormity ot m\ crinte^, ruslied, like a torrent, on mv brain. The stinffs of a guilty сопг -cience assailed me on all sides. I cursed mvelf and all mankind, hut none so earnestly as those who were the authors of doctrines, that had, under the impious veil of philosophy, damned both my soul and body tor ever. The conflict in my breast became so strong, that í was, more than once, going to rid myself of an existence which now became in¬ tolerable ; but the good Father, who was afterwards vour preceptor, my son, and whose pious lite 1 had, in my heart, despised, saved me from the commission of an act, which would have plunged my soul into endless flames. u I spent some hours in considering how to dispose of myself. To continue with a virtuous wife, and innocent chil¬ dren, whose virtues would incessantly rise up in judgment against me, I could not
45 not think of. I, therefore, determined to leave them for ever ; and, for this purpose, thought it best to quit my house, without the knowledge of any one; go to Father Jerome, at the Monastery of St. John's, and to him lay open every secret of my heart. I had, in many instances, proved the sincerity of his attachment to myself and family. " I had no sooner planned this scheme, than I began to execute it. I desired to be left alone, and, as soon as 1 was so, sat down to arrange my papers, and select whatever I thought might be necessary. When this was done, I hastened from, the house. " There was a communication between the Palace of Aranjuez and the Monaste¬ ry, by means of a subterraneous passage, the door to which opened from the baths, near the house, and was supposed to be made to descend, at any time, to examine the pipes which conveyed the water.— This passage was known only to the Father
Father and myself—he had one key, and I anothci. Through this Τ went, at a time, when I thought my innocent family would be wrapt in sleep, and I, at the Monastery, find some of the Fathers at their midnight prayers. 1 fondly ima¬ gined, that, by becoming a voluntary sacrifice, I might avert, in some measure, the evils that hung over my family, while 1 continued in it. I did not then reflect on the threatenings of the Most High, and that what he promises lie never fails to fulfil, when he says : * The sins of the fathers shall be visited upon the children, unto the third and fourth ge¬ neration.' " You, my son, are a living witness of this great truth, and I must acknowledge, even in this, that the great Creator is just. Forgive me, my son ; I see it hurts you. Why, oh ! why did I live, to cause you to suffer thus !" Alphonsus begged him to be com¬ posed, and to rest assured, That he con¬ sidered
47 hidereel every affliction as coming from above, for some wise and good purpose, and, for that reason, should never con¬ demn his father. The Duke blessed him, while the tears streamed down his cheeks. " i am," said he, " unworthy of su good a son. Pity me, oh ! my God ! pity a penitent dying sinner." After a pause, he proceeded. " I reached the chapel of the Monas¬ tery, before the service was ended. All were surprised at seeing me at so unusual an hour. I forbore to assign any reason for my visit, any more than that the want of rest had induced me to wander there. I desired Father Jerome to let me speak with him alone. I then briefly related all that had occurred, and implored his advice and assistance. I could only give bim a slight sketch of my crimes. He condemned me, in the severest terms ; yet, his reproofs were tempered with mercy. He was of opinion, That I should, by
48 by no means, agnin see my family. He thought it most advisable., for my own sake, not to continue in Lisbon, but to go among some brethren in f - Levant, there prepare myself lor a pilgrimage to the Holv Citv, aud endeavour, bv r.cb of charity and devotion, to make myseh' u fit member for ¡some holy society, where I might spend the remainder of my wretched life; but, till I could gain a passage for any place 1 should fix on, he would advise me to remain with them ; and, as money would be necessary for me to perform my charities, it would, he said, be proper to direct, in what man¬ ner this was to be procured and sent. " At length, he suggested a scheme, which was, That I should make a grant of certain lands to the Monastery, the produce of which, added to what I had brought with me, would supply me with every thing I might want. This was all done to my wish. The Father -ъ were to be silent, as to my having been among them.
4* them. A vessel was sought for, and, in three weeks, one was found, bound to Smyrna, from whence they thought it would be easy for me to go to any of the islands in the Archipelago, where there was a society, of which I might like to become a member. I took a sum suffi¬ cient for my wants, and left, with a heart overwhelmed with .the keenest anguish and remorse, the home of my ancestors, a virtuous and beloved wife, and four in¬ nocent and lovely children, whose infant years called upon mc for a father's care. I wa*> sentenced, by the servants of my God, to quit for ever those clear, those tender ties, formed by Heaven to bless the state of man ; but my crimes were crreat, v*nd thev demanded an atonement equal to them. The holy men saw my anguish ; they pitied me ; they would have' spoken comfort, but dared not: their pious souls shrunk from a remem¬ brance of the polluted wretch before them. Thev enjoined me a most severe penance
ÒG penance, and 1 was fully determined to observe it. I took the name of Father Peter, and, amid the prayers of the com¬ munity, I sailed. " I reached Smyrna, but found not an Order there rigid enough for me. I visited several islands adjacent, and, at length, fixed on Sevra. Among the Capuchins, I found the asylum I sought. I did not become a member, but was permitted to reside with them. To their Bishop 1 made a full confession. He gave me comfort, but ordered me strictly to adhere to the penance enjoined me. '* I continued there three years, before I thought myself fit, in any shape, to visit the Holy City. I had corresponded regu¬ larly with Father Jerome; from him I heard every thing relative to my dear fa¬ mily, and blessed my God that their mo¬ ther lived, to supply the place of an un¬ worthy father.
« I left
51 " í left Scyra, and repaired, with many more pilgrims, to the Holy Land, being resolved to spend my Lent at Jerusalem. That sacred place 1 reached ; my trem¬ bling soul sunk with dread, as I ap¬ proached the spot on which the Saviour of the world died for such sinners as mv- self. 1 spent the weeks appropriated for repentance and humiliation, as it became a wretch like me ; but, when the hour came for the pilgrims to go to the Tem¬ ple, I felt my sins rise in quick array against me ; I wo uld have receded, but could not .... iS I have not strength, my son, to de¬ scribe what I suffered, during the most part of three days and nights I re¬ mained, with the other pilgrims, in the Holy Temple, while the priests performed the different masses. But, humbled as I was, I yet felt a gleam of comfort dart upon my benighted soul,and, from that mo¬ ment.
52
ment, ventured to hope, that, by strictly- observing the penance, I might obtain forgiveness, if my life was prolonged for a few years. '* On Easter-Monday, I joined the other pilgrims, and went with them to Jordan. Having performed the customary ceremo¬ nies, such as bathing, and bearing from thence some boughs of the trees that grow on the margin, we went on to the plains of Jericho, in the middle of which the Governor of Jerusalem had his tent pitched, before which every pilgrim passed, one by one, that he might as¬ certain whether the whole of the caphor had been paid. This ceremony being over, I left my companions, and returned to Jerusalem, being determined that the solitarv life enjoined me should commence immediately, and, from that time,for-se\en vears, I never tasted any thing but bread, nor drank any thing but water. The bare earth
53 earth was my bed, and the coarsest cloth my covering. 1 contended with all the elements, for I was constantly exposed to them. My hair soon became grey, and, from giving up my thoughts to the study of nature, 1 was soon capable of render¬ ing assistance, in the hours of sickness, to the Arabs, among whom I was often com¬ pelled to be, in my various journies through Palestine and Egypt. My ap¬ pearance they reverenced, and the cures I was happy enough to perform, induced them to give me the name of the Doctor Pilgrim. " Various were my trials, for more than nine years; but my constitution bore up against every thing. After that time, I made it a regular rule to go every year to Smyrna, and from thence, to several of the adjacent places. It was on one of those visits, that the circumstance hap¬ pened relative to the Murrays, which I related to you and your friend, at Smyrna, Vol. IV. D and
54 and which I consider as one of the hap¬ piest events of my life. At Melasso, I met with the Frenchman, at whose house I left you, and, finding him an intelligent and humane man, I fixed upon him as my agent, to purchase Christian slaves, and send them home. To this man's house I regularly went every year, and it was there I first heard of the dreadful earth¬ quake« I hastened on to Smyrna, in hopes to hear more particulars than I couid obtain at Melasso ; but no letters had arrived, and this went still further to aggravate my distress. " I had borne the account of your bro¬ ther and sister's deaths, and likewise your good pastor's, with firmness, though the latter hung about my heart like a bur¬ then I could not throw off. I always condemned myself as accessary to it. J had, several times after my banishment, determined to transmit to him a full ac¬ count
55
count of my crimes, but was always, by some means or other, prevented. " I had been absent from Lisbon about thirteen years, when I received a letter from Father Jerome, in which he inform¬ ed me, That the good man began to sink under the weight of years, and had often bewailed the uncertainty he was in respecting my fate. On hearing this, I resolved to lay open my whole heart to him, as I thought it might give him some satisfaction. I hastened, therefore, to write a long and faithful account, and, as soon as I had completed it, seized the oppor¬ tunity of a vessel going to Lisbon, to send it by the master, with orders for him to leave it at the post-office, and send word to the Father of its being there, desiring him to fetch it ; but, it" he found the Fa¬ ther was dead, or that he did not come himself, (for he was expressly to order it not to be delivered into any hands but his own,) the master was to take it away D 2 again,
56 #gain, and lodge it with Father Jerome, to whom i likewise wrote ; but, not be¬ ing certain of his always being at Lisbon, I did not think it advisable to send the packet to him. " The next letter I received informed me of the fate of that venerable and good man, your preceptor, whose death was minutely related. This account tore open again my wounds -, I could not help accusing myself as the cause, and have never ceased to lament it since. ζί My Lents, I had always made it a constant practice to spend at Jerusalem, and, though it was near the time when vessels were expected from Europe, when >I was first informed of the earthquake, yet I left Smyrna unsatisfied ; for, no let¬ ters had come from Father Jerome, and, as I never conversed with any person in Smyrna, unless I had letters, I could not o-ain the information 1 wanted, and I left it
57 it for the Holy Land, oppressed with the deepest grief. " The week before Easter, I was seized with à violent illness, such as I had ne¬ ver experienced before, and í remained incapable of returning to Smyrna, at my usual time. At length, however, I gained strength, and set off for that place, where, w r hen I an Íved, I was informed by the Superior of the Franciscans, who is at the bend of the Latin church, and to whom my letters were directed, That, being' alarmed at my not coming back, for so many months after my usual time, he had sent a person to Joppa with them, a fort¬ night before, with orders to return them, if I could not be found. This was a se¬ vere stroke to me, and, being anxious to hear what were the accounts respecting Lisbon, I learnt from the Superior, That the whole of the city had been destroyed. " Two days after this, as I was at my devotions, in the church of the Latins,' D 3 you
58 yon entered, I was struck forcibly with the resemblance you bore to my wife. I took out her picture, and looked at both. The more I saw of you, the more I was convinced of the likeness ; and, as you rose up to leave the church, I could not restrain my inclination to speak» I trem¬ bled in such a manner, when you answer¬ ed, that I could scarcely stand, and, wben your friend gave me your address, an agi¬ tation seized me, and my whole frame ap¬ peared convulsed. ** I followed you with my eyes as long as I couid see you, and then re¬ turned home, under a thousand distracting thoughts. " I was certain of your being a Portu¬ guese, and, from the likeness you bore to my wife, and the trouble visible in your countenance, I was almost convinced you were one of my family, though I could not imagine which. There was such an air of mystery hung over you, that I found it impossible to ascertain any
$9 any thing. Add to this, when my letters came back, I learned from them the fate of my family. You were represented iti them as dead ; still, I could not detach my¬ self from you, Your resemblance to my dear Mary was so strong, that 1 found my¬ self unhappy when I was absent from you. " When my time came to go to Joppa, I was led to hope that, in the journey you consented tQ take with me to Me¬ lasso, I might be able to gather from your discourse what I so much wished to know j but that hope was not gratified, and, at the time I heard you at prayer, I had given up every idea of being satisfied. But that prayer, that ardent prayer, struck like lightning on my distracted brain: I heard the whole, and, contrary to my de¬ termination, found i was wholly incapable to make myself known. I felt the full force of my guilt, and trembled to ac¬ knowledge I was the sinful father of so good a son. I heard your complaint* your name, and likewise my own. The D 4 conflict
60 coriflict was too great, and I dropped in- sentible on the floor/ " When ¿came to myself, when I saw you busied iu restoring me, and observed the concern on your countenance» it was more than my wretched frame could sup¬ port, and, for the first time, for several years, I prayed for immediate dissolution. Unable to bear your presence, from the idea of my unworthiness, I determined to leave you, and, therefore, feigned to be better than I really was. As soon as I was alone, Τ sat down to write a few lines to you, v which done, I watched an opportunity, while the slave slept, to quit the house. " I intended to write to you, as^ soon ás I was a little composed, from Jop- pa, and to lay open my whole heart to you, as I had done to your preceptor. I reached, with the greatest difficulty, Hali* carnassus, and, being informed that a^ vessel had sailed for loppa, a short time- before,
... .. -61 .,. before, I begged thet® ίο take me out to se% and endstfOUr to cw^ft^ke^er. For a proper gmtvàity!, theyi consented ; but> having stood out to sear for several hour% and not discovering her, jthe men puţ about, with a$ intjent ip land rnş at Rhodesí; but yvß baå jnpţ şaî|p^ <φον£ half an hour, when a spm$ >щ ş&el ^>v^ in sight, belonging to that¡ islan4^ They were bound for Joppa, with pilgrims· I was receivbd on r^ard without heşitatbn, and landed with them in safety^ : : j ľ ;? " Assoonajs ^arrived, I became?sensi¬ ble of returning^ iUnesş, and was confine^ for several w r eeks ; b^P í recovçr^d time enough to reach Jerqşalerri the week ? be¬ fore the Passion, In ascending the^mşjun- taitís near the oit^lf^lť a very great weaferies^, and a pre«şqntimeiît that I should never ag^in see tí^at jr^ply place. Heft it at the u^aithne, with^a ¡he^rţ oppr^sişe^^itl^gr^fţndsadne as I ha<| fp^fujjy pr^inised, tojrêdeem spmf T^^/r-rbVi it's /r.ü'I¿:!i; ' I -^Chmitpt
62 Christian slaves at Gráad Cairo, I set off with the caravan for that place. During my stay there, I finished my account, whieh I meant for you ; and, while tears' of contrition and remorse dropped on my 4 pen, I earnestly implored my blessed Sa¬ viour, tbtt he would permit you to receive it, «rød that ytm * might pity, though you could not but condemn, your guilty pa¬ tent. When I had finished it, I deter¬ mined to send it to you, as soon as I should reach Gasea. ** Two days before I left Cairo, the two Arabs whom I mentioned were pre* sented to me. They were in distress ; that distress I softened, and permitted them to accompany me on my journey. The effects of ihat journey, you, my dear son, know, and I can never be sufficiently thankful to tìie Almighty, who has, by blessing me with a sight of yon, given tne an assurance of hi* merey and forgive¬ ness, and planted in шу breast a firm hope, ibat I shall meet ш Heaven your blessed
63 blessed mother and those dear children I so cruelly deserted. Forgive me, my dear son ; forgive thy penitent dying fa¬ ther ; he implores it of thee." At saying this, the tears streamed down his furrowed cheeks. Alphonsus dropped on his knees, and, clasping the hand of his father, exclaimed : " Oh í my father, do not distress me, by asking pardon of me, who feel so ac- cutely all your sufferings^ Oh, God í what is it that I should pardon? Have not your prayers, penitence, and sufferings, obtained your forgiveness from the Most High ? Then, what, my father, can your son have to forgive ? Oh ! dry those tears ; in pity dry them, and fet me see your face once more ir* smiles." The poor old man« looked at him with the greatest tenderness, and offered up a prayer of gratitude to Heaven, for blessing him with the opportunity of lay¬ ing open his heart to his son. Seeing D б Alphonsus
64 Alphonsus greatly distressed, he tried to assume composure, and said, He was better than he ţ could have expected.— He then asked for some of Muley's me¬ dicine. He took it, and soon seemed to have renewed spirits. He then desired * Alphonsus to make the remainder of that poor man's life easy, by immediately fix¬ ing him about his person, and to take him with him to Europe, after he had discharged the last duties to himself,— Alphonsus, who could not bear the idea of losing his father, appeared, at) this re¬ quest, much agitated. The Duke per¬ ceived it, and, to divert his thoughts, desired he would send in Muley----- -his desire w r as instantly obeyed. When Alphonsus carne out, Berry hast¬ ened tö him, and, taking his hand, said : " Oh ! my dear patron, why are you so much distressed ? Why did you stay so' long in the chamber ? I came to the door several times, and, could I have pre¬ sumed
65 sumed, I would have entered with some- fruit." Alphonsus was so much lost in thought, that he did not observe, at first, the coun¬ tenance of the poor boy, who had been weeping ; but, when he did, he checked his own uneasiness, and, assuming an air of cheerfulness, asked for Father James. " He is gone to the Bey," said Berry ; " he has been sent for. v Alphonsus took some wine and fruit, and, when a littie recovered, returned to his father, who, he found, had fainted ; but, Muley say¬ ing he would soon be better, Alphonsus's fears abated. He was now convinced of the great power of nature over the human tjgart; though he had never seen his father, to know him, in his infant years, and, when he grew up, had been rather led to forget than to regret him, yet now, when he saw and heard him, and, in some measure, witnessed his sufferings, he was brought most earnestly to wish that he migrât recover,
в$
recover, and, notwithstanding his sor¬ rows, they might still be happy toge¬ ther. All his errors were forgot, and he saw nothing but the bright side of the picture. One thing which made him hope that it would be so, was, the prospect that appeared of his brother's happiness, and that such an event might induce his fa¬ ther to return with him to Europe, if he could but recover strength to go back to Smyrna. He saw him a sincere penitent for every crime, and was fully persuaded that he merited all his duty and obe¬ dience, as much as if he Had never erred. He called to remembrance that divitte saying of our blessed Saviour : ** That there is more joy in Heaven over one ¿inner that repentethi than over ninety and nine just persons, that need no repentance," He firmly believed, that his father was one of those for- given and received by the Almighty, and thought him \ more valued parent then,
67
then, than if he had never been guilt}. Fulü of these reflections, he stepped to the bed-side of the Duke ; saw him «asleep*, and most fervently prayed it might help* to restore him-
CHAP.
68
chap. ra. How cracks a noble heart ..... good night And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest !— Hamlet. SOON after, Father James came back, and desired to see Alphonsus alone. He went to him* The Father held in his hand a large packet. ì" I am," said he, <e just returned from the Bey, who gave me those papers, and desired they might be delivered to you,— He entreats your pardon for having sent them to the Pacha of Grand Cairo ; but said, The nature of his office obliged him to do it. He has likewise sent a full re¬ lease før the Duke, as the guilty wretch, for whom he was taken, has been appre¬ hended at Grand Cairo, and has made a free confession of his crime. The two Arabs,
69 Arabs that accompanied the Duke, had been his accomplices, and, he having re¬ ceived information of his designs being discovered, had secreted himself, but pre¬ vailed upon the Arabs to practise the de¬ ception they did. By that means, he es¬ caped detection, as the Pacha was in- 1 formed he left the city with them, and that occasioned the Duke to be mistaken for him. The rebel, he said,, was known to be a Mahometan, though born a Chris¬ tian ; and, when the Duke's upper gar¬ ments were taken off, the day he was to have died, they were surprised to see upon his arm the rrark of a Christian pilgrim who had been at Jerusalem. It was made known to the Bey, who caused the execution to be suspended, and sent the account, with the papers, to the Pacha." This gave Alphonsus the greatest pleasure, and he flattered himself that the relation would go a great way towards the restoration of the 'Duke- He
70 He asked Father James, What his opinion was, and whether he did not think he would recover? To this question the good man gave an evasive answer. He knew not how to damp the rising hopes which Alphonsus seemed to entertain, and encourage them he could not. As soon as Alphonsus was informed that his father was awake, he hastened to him, to impart the good news brought from the Bey. The Duke was rejoiced at again having the papers· " There is," said he, " among them some letters,. which I shall beg my dear son to see· safely delivered, as they are directed."— « Ahl Sir," said Alphonsus, " let me hope that you will recover, and that, instead of letters, those for whom they are intended may have the happiness of seeing you in person-" The Duke sighed deeply. " Do not, my son>" said he, *' entertain any such flattering hopes. I have now done with the world» and all its concerns ¿ I shall only
71 only go a short time before you. Weigh¬ ed down as I am, by sorrows and in¬ firmities, I could not enjoy life, were my days prolonged. No, my dear son, there is « that within, which passeth show/— Regard, I beseech you, the hour as near at hand, when we must part. I have the satisfaction of knowing, that, after all my troubles, a beloved son will close my eyes." Alphonsus cast a look of despair at the Father, and then at Muley, but spoke not. His father turned to him again, and said : " Let me, my son, beg of you to consider those two worthy men in the light of parents. They are deserving of your affection, and will live, I hope, many years, to prove they can act as fathers by you. Observe what I have said respecting the letters, and now, let me see the youth you have adopted. Berry was fetched in. " This child/* said the Duke, " will live to be an ornament to his country, and a blessing ta
to you. 4 Rear him as your own, and provide for him accordingly." Berry,, who had watched, the coun¬ tenance of Alphonsus, saw the keenest anguish imprinted on h\ .He clasped his hands in an agony, and, turning to the Duke, cried, " Oh ! Sir, do not speak so mournfully to my dear patron \ it will break his heart. , Jf ypu will but recover,, and go to Smyrna with us, we shall all be happy. Oh 1 if I could but make you well 1 Can't you, my dear Muley, get the fever from the Duke, and iet^ me have it г " * e No, my goo$ boy/1 said Muley ;. * I cannot. I wish I could, remove it j but that rests with God alone." " Oh ! then, what shall we do ?" said Berry ; u my dear patron will die, and I shall: then have nothing but sorrow and poor. Muley.'*, Each individual was so much affected at the poor boy's unfeigned grief, that they forgot their own concern to soften his. Alphonsus succeeded in com- posing ;Шт* by appearing cheerful. The
73 The Duke "being again seized with a fainting fit, Berry left the room.' It was near two hours,' before he was ágéin sen¬ sible, and, when he recovered, Alphonsus was convinced he could not survive.— He suffered himself ťo be reconciled to the approaching hour, and returned thanks to the Almighty, who had blessed him with a sight of his parent, and that, at the moment when he stood most in need of comfort. The next day, Father James informed him, That it was the physician's opinion, that the Duke could not possibly live above" a couple of days : he, therefore, prayed him to be reconciled to an event, that could not be opposed. Alphonsus saw the truth of the observation, and 'submitted to it with calmness, though his heart, at the instant, felt a pang of sorrow equal to any he had #ver known ; but he checked it, and addressed himself to his God. In
74 In the morning of the following day, the ТЭике appeared much better, and again desired to see Alphonsus. Wben his son kneeled to him, he bade him rise, and sit down beside the bed. " I have, my son," said he, u a desire,That you will not take my remains from hence. Let the money that would be expended on my funeral, if buried with my ancestors, be spent in the redemption of Christian slaves. You will always find many, in the different places belonging to the Porte, and the Barbary States. M f agent, at Melasso, is an honest man ; let him, and those worthy men you have with you, direct you in the choice of proper objects, and let the sum I have agreed to pay annually for that purpose be aug¬ mented, as much, as your generous and feeling heart shall see fit, 4t l hav«* likewise a wish, That no pomp, or ceremony whatever, be ob¬ served ; but let me be buried in as plain a manner as possible· Give something to
гь to thé Janizary, who came forward to prove he knew me, to keep in remem¬ brance, and, likewise, a handsome present to the worthy people, in whose house I now am. " I would fain say something relative to your dear mother, who, I hope, yet lives; but I cannot say what I could wish. Let her, my dear son, have the letter I have addressed to her, and your brother his. Send, likewise, that to Father Jerome. Write to him yourself; you will learn from the Superior of the Franciscans, at Smyrna, in what manner to direct to him, if that direction which is now on the letter should have occasion to be altered. " I have settled every thing of my earthly concerns in Lisbon, for five years past ; therefore, have nothing to trouble you with, in that particulari and, I trust, when I am laid in the silent grave, though I have been guilty of so many and vari¬ ous crimes, yet, by my sincere and ardent repentance,
76 fepentance, I shall not be thought un¬ worthy of your remembrance ý and, if my blessing will contribute in any shape to your happiness, my dear son, may a dou¬ ble portion of it rest upon you. ** Your brother, I trust, will yet be a comfort to his mother, and I will still hope that the completion of the prophecy is yet at a remote distance. * , « In Father Jerome's hands, are some particulars relative to your grand-father. He received them from the last Superior of Stf John's. If you have a wish to see them, in all probability, he will let you ; though I think, as they will not give you &ny pleasure, it would be as well if you did not. ** Now, my son, may tbe eternal and everlasting God bless you 1 and may your days be such as tbe virtuous only can «njoy ! 'Vice,"you4 are * now convinced, brings with it the severest punishments ; and, though years may roll on, in the un¬ interrupted commission of sin, yet the „ hoar
n hour of retribution must come. I can never sufficiently thank my God, for hav¬ ing prolonged my existence to a period like this, and for having been permitted to atone for my enormities, while several of my companions have been taken off in the full career of their vices." He again blessed his son with fer¬ vency, and then desired to see the Father, who administered the Host. He lay for some hours composed ; after that time, he began visibly to grow worse, and, at the dawn of day, as he ţaised himself in his bed, tojóin in a prayer with his son, and the priest pronounced the words : ci Come, ye blessed of my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you," he fell back, and expired without a single strug¬ gle ! For some moments, Alphonsus held the lifeless body in his arms, and gave a loose to his sorrows ; but he was, at last, per¬ suaded to leave it, and, with Berry, retir¬ ed to his chamber. Vol. IV. E When
78 When the anguish of his heart was a little abated, he was surprised at the ap¬ pearance of his young charge ; for, though he had taken him ţo his room, yet he was unconscious of his presence ; but, when he saw him looking up in his face, in the most supplicating manner, and observed the change which grief had made in the dear lad's countenance, he began to be alarmed, lest the effect it might have on ¡such д susceptible heart, should be the means of bringing on an illness, that might also deprive him cf that blessing. He checked his grief, and consoles poor Berry, whose heart, like a tender flower, expanded by the cheering rays of tbe sun, felt immediately tbe change in his patron's countenance, and, looking up, like a lily overcharged with rain, said : " If I could, Sir, but see you again as happy as I once did at Smyrna, I would wish for nothing more. Oh ! how glad I shall be when we leave this place !" IC That/' said Alphonsus, " we shall soon do.
79 do. I have but the last duties to pay my departed parent, and we shall then go." " I shall be glad of that indeed," said Berry; " for this has been the most dis¬ mal scene I ever saw in my life." They continued talking for some time; the dis¬ course of Berry softened his cares, and he was more himself than his friends could have expected. Alphonsus complied in every thing with the commands of his father; the most minute article was punctually at¬ tended to, and, as soon as every thing was completed, he quitted Joppa, having, be¬ fore he left it, obtained permission to have his own remains laid beside his father's, if he should die in any of the provinces belonging to the Porte. They reached Smyrna, after a very short voyage : no letters had arrived, nor was Captain Brindley returned, though expected every day. Father James thought it most advisable for Alphonsus not to send off the letters, till he had him- E 2 self
80 self received an account of his friends at Lisbon ; but he was anxious to fulfil the desire of his father; therefore, waited upon the Superior of the Franciscans, with the letter directed to him. He received Alphonsus with a great deal of hospita¬ lity, and expressed his surprise that he had not had the letters before. Alphonsus then related the death of lhe Duke, and the mannerjn which they had been detained, The Superior said, He was inclined to think, when he last saw him, that he should never have that hap¬ piness again, as he appeared to alter great¬ ly, immediately after the dreadful cala¬ mity at Lisbon. He advised Alphonsus to wait a few days, before he sent the letters, as he was in expectation of hear¬ ing from Father Jerome ; but, if he did not in the course of the next week, and he would call upon him again, he would give him a proper direction, as he thought the letter, as then addressed, would not reach Father Jerome, he having been obliged lately
8i lately to go to Rome, and he was not cer¬ tain whether he was returned to Lisbon or not. This satisfied Alphonsus, and he was further gratified, by hearing the Su¬ perior speak in the highest terms of his father, whom, he said, he should ever re¬ gard as a Saint, and more deserving canon¬ ization, ' than hundreds who had ob¬ tained it. His piety, charity, and private virtues were such, as would ever stand on record, as long as the Forte had a slave to dispose of, as what he had left for the purpose of befriending the w r retched, would, he was certain, alone insure him a seat in Heaven. The pleasure this gave Alphonsus was a balm to his wounded heart, greater than he ever hoped to find, and he left the Superior, exulting in the thought, That, though his father had suffered, his sufferings had been the means of happi¬ ness to many. The Greek merchant, whose name was Artemias, as soon as he was informed E 3 of
82 of Alphonsus's arrival, hastened to pay his respects to him, and to assure him, that he would soon have the pleasure of seeing Captain Brindley, as he had been spoke with at sea. This intelligence gave him great satisfaction, and Artemias was equally as much pleased, to see his coun¬ tenance relax from that air of deep me¬ lancholy which hung over it. He chatted on various subjects, in his usual style, and, among the rest, said, That John Morland was gone to England, and had quitted Smyrna so privately, that even Yessam had not been apprised of it, till he had been gone two days. He said, He supposed the reports re¬ specting his brother had driven him away ; for, he had pretended illness, and never came among the Franks, after his going to Sedequi. ** For, Lord bless me !" said he, w who could know what he had done, and come again into the street, without expecting a mob at his heels, with his poor brother at the head of them ? And so,
83 so, no doubt, John Morland thought; and, on that account, imagined it best to go home, where he thinks he can't reach him. Lord help the poor silly noddy, he little knows what is sent home before him. Good Lord ! I shall never forget our ad¬ ventures in that business. 'Tis well 'tis over ; but I am sure I coudn't run out in the streets again, at midnight, for all the world ; I should think that he was after me, or that I should see him strait before me, or in every corner j but, thank God, that affair's over, and I have not seen him since. I often think, if it had happened in the morning, what a pretty show I should have made of myself. Well, it was a strange maggot, to be sure, for him to come to me, when there were so many others that could have set¬ tled such business better than myself— but there's no accounting for what spirits doJ' Alphonsus smiled at this rhapsody, and coincided in the opinion of Artemias, E 4 That
liiat it was the dread of what reception he should meet with in the streets, had caused Morland to leave Smyrna.— " Ay," said he, " I thought you would say so, and a pretty story we shall have to tell Captain Brindley, when he comes ; for, he never liked Morland^—nor did any * good man." Berry was highly pleased with the mer¬ chant, and, when he rose up to quit them, said : ** I wish, Sir, }ou would permit me to ask Artemias to come often ; he makes you smile.'* st I shall always/' said Alphonsus, " be particu¬ larly happy to see my friend ; therefore, if you can persuade him to visit us often, pray do ; it will give me pleasure at all times." ßt.*y then earnestly entreated Artemias to repeat his visit as often as possible, and he promised to be with them again soon. Alphonsus sent for the French mer¬ chant, at Melasso, to come to hira, at Smyrna ; but, before he arrived, he had the
85 the happiness of again embracing his friend Brindley, who arrived three days after the messenger had been sent to Me¬ lasso. The appearance of Alphonsus shocked the Captain exceedingly; the vast alteration he perceived was such, as convinced him he had suffered much. Alphonsus was not conscious of the great change himself; but his friend ob¬ served it with deep regret, and the more he looked at him, the more reluctant he was to answer the many enquiries he made.—-He fvh the sincerest sorrow that he could not give him any satisfactory in¬ telligence; he evaded it for sometime, but, at length, confessed he had brought letters. At the mention of letters, Berry's countenance chr.n^cd from smiles to gloom. He trembled at their contents*, lest they should be such as Ehe last ; but, when he heard the Captain say, that he could not possibly iet him have them till the next tlay, he thought he would get an К 5 opportu-
opportunity to request him not to deliver them at all. Berry and Muley were in¬ troduced by Alphonsus to him, and he briefly related in what manner he had the happiness of meeting both, and the im¬ portant service the latter had rendered his father. Tnis account amazed the Cap¬ tain, as he little thought, when he last saw his friend, that in the aged man he would find a father. The various circum¬ stances were related that had occurred since his departure, nor was that of Mor¬ land forgotten. Thus passed away the first day ;but, the next, he knew he could not avoid pro¬ ducing the letters. He brought them on shore; but, when he came to Frank- street, to deliver them, he found Alphon¬ sus had been sent for by the Superior of the Franciscans. Berry seized the oppor¬ tunity, and earnestly entreated Mr, Brind¬ ley not to let Alphonsus have the letters, and then related what had happened when the last packet came. This ac¬ count
S7 count was no more than what the Cap* tain expected, and he was sensible, that those he now brought were such, as could not do away his uneasiness. Yet, he knew there was a necessity for his see¬ ing them, as one came from his mother's confessor, and related an account of her death. While he was talking with Berry, Al¬ phonsus returned. His countenance was serene, but it was evident he had been in¬ formed of some new calamity, though he endeavoured to hide his concern. " Have you, my friend," said he, " brought my letters r" " I have," answered the Cap¬ tain ; " but I think the. news they con¬ tain you already know." " I believe I do," said Alphonsus ; cc my mother, I find, is no more ; but she is happy ; therefore, whatever your's convey, they cannot now affect me. The Superior briefly said, That the good man be¬ longing to the Monastery of St. John's, who was my father's friend, had in- E 6 formed
88 formed him of her death, and he has given me instructions where to write to him. Captain Brindley then delivered the packet. When Alphonsus opened it, he found one letter from his friend Gonsalvo, and another from his mother's confessor. He opened Gonsalvo's first ; it contained nothing particular, more than the kind enquiries and sincere wishes of a valued friend. He then took the Father's, which began :
CHAP;
89
CHAP. IV. Then infant reason grows apace, and call* For the kind hand of an assiduous care. Delightful task ! to rear the tender thought, To teach the young idea how to shoo« ! Thomson. fC ONCE more, my dear son, is it allowed me to address thee ; and, though on a subject painful to nature, yet I hope it will find thee that patient Christian which thy virtues promised.— My last was afflicting indeed, and this is not much less so ; but call to thy remem¬ brance the admonitions ΐ have so often given to thee, and then I am sure thou wilt not too harshly accuse Heaven. " You may recollect I told you in my last, That your mother, from her recent griefs, was too ill to write to you. She survived,
90 survived, my son, but two days after, and died as she had lived, the best of women, and the sincerest Christian. ** Your brother, whose love for her equalled your own, bore his loss with firmness; but he felt for you, and^was unwilling to have you informed of it.— He was ill for some weeks after your mo¬ ther's death ; but, at length, happily re¬ covered. He is not yet united to the ob¬ ject of his choice ; the delay remains with the lady ; she is averse from the marriage, and solicits her parents to permit her to take the holy habit ; but this they will not hear of. Your brother is very un¬ happy ; and, gs this lady, he declares, is the only object he can ever hope for feli¬ city with, I dread the effects of her per¬ sisting in her desire to quit the world, which every one is surprised at, your bro¬ ther being considered as one of the hand¬ somest men in Portugal, and of a cha¬ racter the most exalted. It is, however, surmised. That the lady has fornfed an attach-
91 attachment for a young man, whom she saw with your brother, a short time pre¬ vious to his return to Europe : but this is only surmise. " In this state it remains at present ; the young gentleman was, a short time since, sent off, with some troops, to Goa, from whence, in all probability, he will never return. Don Xavier, though ap¬ prised by a friend of his, that the young man was his rival, opposed his being sent away. He solicited his Majesty to permit an old veteran officer, who had a desire to go to Goa, to be sent out in his stead ; but the influence of the lady's parents prevailed, and Don Xavier is so much hurt at it, that he has declined appearing at Court since. This young gentleman, I think, you have heard your mother speak of, as the grand-son of Donna Maria, the wife of your grand¬ father, by a daughter she had by a former husband. Your brother has always re¬ garded him with the highest esteem, he having
having lost his parents at an early åge, and so great is Don Xavier's regard for him, and the young lady, that he would not scruple to give up his pretensions in his favor, if, by that means, he could procure them happiness—such is the nobleness of his character. tC I thought, my son, to have sat down, and written to thee a long account of ail that has happened, relative to thy wife, since I wrote' last; but, hearing that Father Jerome is under the necessity of writing to thee, I leave it to him, who can explain eveTy thing better than my¬ self, who am grown feeble, and my sight nearly gone. ** * Farewell, my son ! may the blessing of the Moot High, and the comforts of the righteous, be thine, prays with fervency thy preceptor in God. « Austin." This letter Alphonsus perused, without that emotion which had shaken his frame,
on
on reading the Father's former one. He was not surprised at his mother's death, as it was what he had expected ; but it gave him the greatest concern to think, he had not been fortunate enough to have remitted to her his father's letter, as he thought it might have conveyed to her a satisfaction, that would have softened her other calamities ; to hear that a husband, whom she had many reasons to think un¬ worthy of her regard, had become the best and most exemplary of men. He took the letter out, and looked at it with the keenest sorrow. " The hand/' said he, * £ that penned this, and that for whom it was designed, are now no more. Widely distant are your earthly remains from each other; yet, I will hope that your souls now enjoy an un¬ interrupted union, in the realms of bliss, where I trust I shall shortly, join you and my dear lost Alzira. Ah, my God! of her the Father said he had much to tell me. Ah ! why, thou reverend man, didst
didst thou put it off to another hand? Why must the full knowledge of my sorrows be delayed ? Why not let me be acquainted with them at once ? Then I should have no more to do with this world, or its concerns, but hasten to that region, where we shali be for ever blest. Yes, Alzira, with thee I know I shall be happy.» He pressed the letter of his father to his lips several times. He was tempted to break the seal. u Oh, my mother ľ* said he, ** couldst thou have lived to hold this, as I now do, wiih what pleasure would thy righteous soul have winged its flight !" He paced the room, forgetful of every thing but the objects that never quitted his thoughts, his parents, his Alzira. Berry- who had waited in the anti-room, under the greatest apprehension, hearing the footsteps of Alphonsus, ventured to the door, tapped at it, and begged to know Whether he might come in. His voice turned
95 turned the current of Alphonsus's thoughts; they reverted to his father's charge, That he would look upon that youth as his own, and he bade him come in. The dear boy cast a trembling glance at Alphonsus. " Have you finished, Sir/ T said he, " your letters, or shall I again go to Muley ?" " You may stay with me, Berry," said his patron : 4S I have perused my letters, and shall want you to read to me. But you see I am not distressed ; therefore, do not, my good boy, be uneasy. I shall be cheerful, jnow I have heard from my friends." Berry was disposed to,believe what Alphonsus said, and jumped about with such glee, that it gave bis patron a mo¬ mentary pleasure to observe him. He took a book, and read the lessons Father James had set him, and, likewise, one that Muley had given him to learn, of Turkish, which pleased him highly, as he said it sounded so pretty ; " And we shall
shall now," said be, " go to our lessons again, and I hope I shall soon be able to erect a sphere, and, between Muley and me, we shall make calculations as exact as Sir Isaac Newton's. I have some bits of poetry, too, to show you ; 1 thought to have finished one to-day, but the letters------" €t Well, but, my dear boy," said Al¬ phonsus, ** think no more, I beg of you, about the letters. I shall not, I promise you, now be unhappy ; therefore, pursue your studies, and, believe me, I shall find a pleasure in joining in them."— " Then, indeed," said Berry, " I shall be happy ; for, I'm sure I am never so comfortable as when you are with us ; because then I am certain you are not reading any of those papers." t( Then, as m) presence," said Alphonsus, " makes you more easy, I think we will be to¬ gether în all your studies, jd I will turn school-boy, unless 'tis Wiien I am giving you instructions in my own language, and then
97 then I must be master : we will begin next week ; so, give Muley and the Father notice." A slave entering, said Captain Brind¬ ley and Artemias were waiting, to see him. Alphonsus desired them to come to him, and they spent the remainder of the day together. The next morning, when Alphonsus níet the Captain, they entered on the subject of all that had happened since they parted. Mr,. Brindley's affairs began to wear a much brighter prospect, though war had been declared. Alphonsus re¬ counted to him all that had occurred to himself, and mentioned his having sent for the merchant, from Melasso, whom he hourly expected, being, he said, determin¬ ed to double the sum his father had left, for the purpose of redeeming slaves, or being in any shape useful to the distress¬ ed. He pointed out the great services Muley had rendered him, and said, If any thing could be done, to serve the Malt¬ ese
as ese, for his sake, he should most gladly do it. In the course of the week, the merchant came, and the grief he expressed, when he heard of the Duke's death, convinced Alphonsus how highly his father was es¬ teemed in the Levant. He gave the merchant to understand It, was his inten¬ tion to double the sum his father had al¬ lowed, and thought it most advisable to send a proper agent to the Barbary States, to take an account of those slaves that might be disposed of there. He found, upon examining the merchant's accounts, the sums had been so well applied, that he was happy to constitute him principal agent, and made a considerable addition to the sum his father had generally paid him for his trouble. Every thing was soon settled, and he left Alphonsus, with a heart overflowing with gratitude. He was charged with a message from him, to his brother-in-law, the Turk, to whom he sent a very hand¬ some
99 some present, for the trouble he had given him when at Melasso, and for the letter he had furnished him with, when he went to search for his father at Rhodes —nor were the ladies forgotten. It gave Captain Brindley great con¬ cern, to observe the exactness with which Alphonsus settled every thing re¬ lative to his affairs, as it appeared that he considered himself as a person that would not long be an inhabitant of this world,— Pressed with that idea, he ventured to ask him some questions about his con¬ cerns in Portugal, and whether he did not mean to return thither, when be heard from Father Jerome, as he had been as¬ sured by Gonsalvo, that the accusation against him by the Church had been done away. But Alphonsus said, As Father Austin had not mentioned any thing of that in his letter, be did not think it safe to return. " Another rea¬ son," added he, " is, That, if I were to go back, the distressing images that Lis¬ bon
100 bon would recai, would only revive my griefs. I feel, I still love my Alzira, and she is gone—murdered------ fled for ever. ------ Never, never shall I again behold her, and, deprived of her, what have I to live for ? I cannot, a second time, feel that tender attachment. I cannot, in the smiles of another, ever hope to find that bliss I had fondly promised myseif with her. All is fled, my friend ; buried with her for ever ! <( You, my friend, are a living instance of this truth : That a tender heart feels but once the violence of a sincere and ardent passion. However it may fancy that it does, vet time zoili prove the fal- sky of such reasoning ; and I am well· con¬ vinced that every one, who thinks and feels like me, will assent to my assertion. I am certain you do yourself at this mo¬ ment; for, though you make ah excel¬ lent husband to an amiable and deserving woman, yet you must own that the lost Susan
101 Susan stili holds the first place in your heart." " True/' said the Captain ; " but, though I allow all you have said to be just, yet I think that you might, like me, enjoy some share of felicity—passive, at least. If I am not so happy as I might have been with my Susan, had Heaven spared her, yet, I feel a pleasure, at my return from a voyage, to be embraced by a woman, who, I am well assured, cen¬ ters all her happiness in me, which I should not, in the single state, or in the caresses of a wanton. Therefore, if I might venture to advise, I would have you, as soon as your grief is a little abated, seek some worthy object, who, if she cannot entirely chase away your sorrow. 0 , may, in some measure, soften them." * f Ah ! my friend," said Alphonsus, " you do not know my heart ; 'tis evi¬ dent you do not ; or you would not hold out such advice. No, my good friend, Al- zira's image^er innocence,and hcrsuffer- V0L.-IV. F inffs»
102 ings, are too deeply engraven on my heart, ever to be erased. 'Tis there she ever has remained, since the first moment 1 beheld lier, and ever will remain, till death shall again unite us. Had she fallen a victim to her own licentious pas¬ sions, then might you blame me for my attachment; but she did not ; she was the victim of unbridled lust, and inhuman brutality.—*--^-But he is gone, í hope, to that tribunal, where her wrongs will be avenged—and mine, too. Oh, God ! how dreadful is the thought! but'tis over; I will endeavour to forget the inhuman villain, and may his name be cursed by every rising generation î ------Pity me, my friend; I forget myseif ; 'tis not my place to curse any one ; a much higher Power has denounced its vengeance on him, and he already feels it." Mr. Brindley was much hurt at the agitation which appeared on the features of his friend л he was sorry he had called up images, which, he plainjp saw, served but
Ш5 but to aggravate his affliction. He soothed him, by all the persuasive lan¬ guage ho was master of, and partly suc¬ ceeded. He called in Berry, wdio seemed to have a greater influence over his feel¬ ings than any one else. The moment he entered, the countenance of Alphonsus assumed a more composed aspect, as he appeared loath to distress the poor boy, w T ho, it was evident, felt an equal share of all his patron's sorrows. ^Alphonsus looked at him with carnestn^ss, and, with a mildnets peculiar to himself, turned to Berry, who, l\e observed, had been weeping. *' What is the matter, my dear boy ?" said he ; " can't you get your lesson P' a Yes, Sir; I can," said Berry; " but not so well as when you are near, and with this problem I have been so mqeh perplexed, that Muley said 1 had better wait, and finish it when you are with us. But I have got a few lines, which I must beg you will please to coucet. Muley F 2 laughs
104 * laughs at me, and says English poetry is not half so musical as the Arabic, and this Vexes me ; for, I have told him again and again he is not to form a judgment of tbe English poetry from my scraps ; but at this he nods bis head, shrugs significantly,^ and directly says : * Ay, 'tis all very pretty, till you know better ; but leave that trifling, and come with me to take an altitude; for, I am sure, if you busy yourself about such fooleries as verse-making, you will never make a philosopher, or astronomer either.' So my father used to say, when he wanted to teach me the use of the quadrant, and I must certainly think they are both right ; only, sometimes, I cannot help writing, or thinking, on what I have so often been beat for: though I much wish to be ranked as a follower of Sir Isaac Newton, as Muley says It 'is a far more noble pursuit, than tagging English rhymes ; but I am sure he would not dislike them so much, could he read any other than mine.
105 mine. And do you know, Sir, that, just now, when I went back to him, he had got my last sonnet, and drawn on it the different houses of the planets, at the time the Moon was in conjunction with Mars ; and he did this, because it hap¬ pened to be nearest to him, and to show in how little estimation he holds my pro¬ ductions." These observations of Berry's made Alphonsus laugh,« as well as the Captain ; and, to console him, they said It would be better to write his poetry, when Muley was at his devotions, and then leave it on the table, in Don Alphonsus's dress¬ ing-room, where Muley would not see it., *· But is that in your hand," said Mr. Brindley, " the unfortunate bit of poetry which Muley despises so ?" * c It is part of it, Sir," said Berry; " but this is only an air, that I wrote for the English Consul's lady, and nothing near so good as the one he drew the figure on." " Oh t F 3 pray,
ш ^prày, let me see it," said the Captant. Йену presented it : AIR. Softfy let the zephyrs breathe, While my Suvia walks beneath Yon róscate bowers» May no reptile títere invade* But, in safety, may she tre.id Oa blooming ñowcrs í While the lark and the thrtičh, ln «weet notes, froro^a^h bud}, Proclaim the approach of my joy. I'll fly to her arms, to revel in charms, That nev&r, ah ! never can cloy. « Why, bless me, Berry," said Al¬ phonsus, " you are quite an enraptured lover. Pray, is the Consul's lady your lovely Silvia?*' " Yes, Sir," answered Beiry, with the greatest innocence ima¬ ginable ; " when I was last there, she wished, she said, to have a little air, that would suit some music, the words of which she had lost ; so,'I thought ï could write something that would do, and this is
ют is one of the little pieces ; but that which Muley had was the best, i am very gbd he did not see this ; if he had, he would have laughed at it indeed ; for, he was never, I believe, very fond of the ladies*. He says They are all so very ignorant, that they are fit only for the seraglio, as they cao talk of nothing but what relates to their own trifles ; and none but silly fellow s, who have no capacities for any thing else, will trouble their heads about them. But that, you know, Sir, is not the fashion in England, where the ladies are held in such estimation; and so I have often told him ; but he says The English are all fools in love, and know nothing but how to fight their enemies, establish good laws, and preserve treaties, or make, sometimes, pretty good mer¬ chants ; and, put love out of the question, they are the most ingenious people under the sun. But, of all the four nations, of which Great Britain is composed, hè says The Irish please him the most ; for, they F 4 love
105 loye like men, and not like asses, besides being the best fighters in the whole world} aiid he will persist in it, that Ireland is the brightest jewel in the British Crown, and säys he loves the whole race of Hibernians next to the Arabs/' This last observation made them both laugh aloud. ** Upon my honor, Berry," said Mr. Brindley, " you seem to have had very warm contests with Muley about our nation." " Yes, indeed, we have," said Berry ; " forche will not allow there was ever more than one great man in it, and that was Sir Isaac Newton ; and such is his veneration for thst philosopher, that, if he was near him, I think he would pay the same adoration to him as he would to the blessed Virgin. But, though he regards my country and my verses as he does, I do noi love him a bit the less for it, because 1 think he is a veiy wise man, and will, one time or other, he says, make me as great as Sir Isaac, if I will but mind what he says, and
1Q9 and leave off verse-writing ; and, if he does, I'm sure I shall be great in¬ deed." ec And that I sincerely hope you will," said Alphonsus, smiling at the energy with which this excellent youth spoke.
F s CHAP.
НО
CHAP. V. Pursue these sun» of darkness ; Drive them out, from all Heaven*s bounds, Into the utter deep. Milton. SOON after, they were sum¬ moned to dinner, when Muley joined them, and a Ion * conversation took place, respecting the different pursuits they were engaged in. Muley displayed a wonderful scientific knowledge, and the more Capt. Brindley conversed with him, the more he was led to hope, that such a sensible and worthy man, together with Berry, might be the means of chasing away the sorrow of Arphonsus, and enable him to regain a love for society, in which he now never mixed ; but Berry accompanied Father James to several places, and, whereever he went,
ш went, was sure to gain the admiration of all. For three months after the arrival of Captain Brindley, Alphonsus spent his time wholly in the company of his family. Muley, the Father, Berry, and Mr. Brind¬ ley, formed the whole of their parties. Sometimes», the Greek merchant made one in the group, in whose conversation they found an agreeable relaxation from their studies. Alphonsus had employed Father James to send an account to the Capuchins, at Scyra, of the Duke's death, and to inform them That, as soon as letters arrived from the Superior of St. John's, at Lisborj, he should transmit to them an account of his father's will, a circumstance that Alphonsus much wished over. He tried to divert his mind ; the letters he received from Melasso gave him great satisfaction ; but he still felt himself miserable. He longed to hear that his brother was united to the object of his choice, though he F o s knew
П2 knew not why he was anxious for that event ; but, though three months had elapsed, since he wrote to bis friends at Lisbon, no answers had arrived ; neither had tbe Superior of the Franciscans re¬ ceived the smallest intelligence. He began to be very unhappy, though he disguised it from his friends ; but Berry, who was ever watchful of his coun¬ tenance, saw the trouble which he wished to hide, and was never easy a moment from him. The Captain observed the deep and rooted melancholy that preyed upon his constitution ; he with pain beheld the hectic flush upon bis cheek, and sighed to think it was not in the power of friend¬ ship to ward off that stroke, which he saw inevitably approaching. All that he could devise he did, but in vain; and even, when a smile would appear, that smile was like a small bright ray, bursting amid the gloom that oversha¬ dows the earth, when the clouds are pres¬ sing to dissolve themselves in rain. One
из One morning, when Captain Brindley was at the Custom-Hcuse, he had the pleasure to hear announced a ship from Lisbon, and, soon after, some letters were delivered to him for Alphonsus. He took them, and hastened home. He found him busy with his young charge and Muley, and, at first, was debating with himself whether it would be best to deli¬ ver them or not ; but, as Alphonsus rose, and went to the window, he said : " I wonder, my friend, if there are any letters for me. I wish Father James would go to the Franciscans,, and enquire." " I can save*him that trouble," said the Cap¬ tain; " I have the letters, and, whatever may be their contents, I trust you will remember the duty you owe yourself and your God." " I shall not," said Alphon¬ sus, " be unmindful of either. These, I hope, will be the last I shall ever have occasion to expect from Lisbon." A smile passed across his face, as he took the packet from his friend, and he added ;
IH added í * c i shall now, I hope, be able to fofil, in every respect, the last commands of my father. 1 * ** And then," said the Captain, " I trust I shall have the hap· piness cr carrying yom in comfort ťo your native country/' Alphonsus shook his head, but said no¬ thing. He retired to his closet, to read the packet ; on opening it, he found it the long*expected letter from Father Jerome, and the Duke's will He read tbe former. ** You have, no doubt* my son, long before tbis, concluded that I was dead, or wholly regardless of the request made in your letter to me, which I re¬ ceived in safety ; but I must now ac¬ count to you for my delay, which has been to you, I believe, extremely tedious. I was, when it arrived, attending a con* vocation at Home, whither I had been summoned by his Holiness, to give in my
115 my evidence respecting Dm Joseph Ό& Sal. * c You have received, I find, from my brother Austin, the confession of your in¬ jured wife, down to the time when she was on the bed of death. I shall there¬ fore conclude that dismal event. ** Soon after our brother had left her;, she expired ; but not till she had been in¬ formed by me, that the crimes of Do® Joseph had been, that morning, clearly proved, and he would suffer, as soon as- the express which had been sent to hi* Holiness should return. She died, as she pronounced : * Then, my poor de¬ ceived Alphonsus will be revenged.' She had likewise the happiness of knowing that her child was dead - t it had expired m convulsions, the second day after Don Joseph was brought to Lisbon. " I was happy to administer the smallest gleam of comfort to her* and had the satisfaction of saying to her parting spirit: * Depart in peace, my daughter»
116 daughter, thy sins are forgiven thee : they were not voluntary ; therefore, thy merciful God will surely pardon thy of¬ fences/ She had suffered much, but died pfeaceably, and resigned her soul in confidence to her Creator. " It was but three days after this event, before I was ordered to proceed on to Rome, after the messenger. The friends of the Cardinal, Don Joseph's brother, were determined to save him, if possible, and the great wealth he posses¬ sed was thought, by the friends of the house of Aranjuez, would be the means of procuring a remission of his sentence, notwithstanding the many crimes adduc¬ ed against him. I was, therefore, as one ©f his judges, fixed upon to go to Rome. 1 immediately obeyed, and reached there time enough to prevent an appeal, when I had the satisfaction of having the sen¬ tence confirmed by his Holiness. I was not long in my return, and the whole was conducted with such secrecy and celerity, that
117 that I had executed my commission be¬ fore the others had presented their ap¬ peal, and I reached Lisbon in safety, where, the next day, I had the sentence executed. " But, a few hours before his death, he had nearly deceived the executioners, by attempting to strangle himself with a pocket handkerchief; but he was dis¬ covered before his design was completed, and not left a moment, till justice was ex¬ ecuted on him. He refused, to the last, to join in any prayers,but died,execrating your wife, and all that had had any con·* cern in his death. " I shali now account to you for the voice you heard in the Church of St. Roch. You had, till your entering that edifice, been regarded by every one as dead. Various reports had been circulated respecting you, some alledging that you were dead, and others, that you were liv¬ ing ; but what, in my opinion, confirmed the latter, was, That two of your friends had
118 had been taken up and examined respect¬ ing you. This had "been done by Цоп Joseph and his cabal, to force them, if you were Kving, to give up the place of your abode. But they were truly de¬ serving of the name of friends, and the wretch, who caused thetn to suffer, would» I arri certain, have had the life of all, had not Providence ordained that I should^. on the.* dny previous to that appointed for their execution, sit in judgment on a prisoner, in the room of one of my bro¬ thers who hâd been taken İU. A cir* etimstance occurred in the proceedings, which occasioned the mention of the pri¬ soners, who suffered the second question respecting you. Your name surprised me ; I made enquiry about what had passed» and, though I knew not what the Cardi- naľs motives were, for proceeding with stich rigor towards two innocent men, yet I was determined to exercise that authority my situation in the society en- abled me to do, and I had the satisfaction of
219 of releasing two worthy and deserving persons. ** I was, as well as my brothers, sur¬ prised that Don Joseph should not rejoice* when he heard his niece's husband had escaped in the general horror, and was still living, and was perplexed to hear he should be the first to discredit the report, and even attempt to take the lives of two innocent men, who had been the means of saving him. These circum* stances put me upon enquiring more minutely after the manner in which Don Joseph lived > and, by means of a brother, skice dead, I was informed of his scanda¬ lous connexion ; but could not, from the promise of secrecy I had made, make public what I knew. Another reason was, the fear I had of endangering the life of him who had imparted the secret k> me, as from the great power of Don Joseph, I did not doubt but that would be the case, especially as I knew not but your wife consented to the crime, and I had no
120 no voucher but this one brother to sup· port my asseition. For you, my son, I felt, and was persuaded that you must be somewhere near Lisbon, or lie concealed in the ruins. I, therefore, caused diligent search to be made for you, but couid not succeed, *' A few days before that on which you entered the Church,! had learned from the brother, that he was certain you were living ; but, if you were discovered to be so by Don Joseph, your life would not be safe one moment. It happened, the even¬ ing of your entering St. Roch's, that it was this good man's turn to be one of those that were to perform the vesper ser¬ vice. He was struck with your appear¬ ance, as you walked up the great aisle ; be followed you with his eye, and saw you approach the altar. He pretended a giddiness, left his seat, and went into the cloister unattended. He hastened to a small door, that opened at the back of the stall, сю§е by the statue of St. Roch.— ■ Ht
í 21 He there listened, heard the latter part of your prayer, and gave you the timely warning, to leave the Church, lest any of Don Joseph's emissaries should see you. He then, in the greatest haste, came to me. " We instantly sent a lay brother to watch your motions, and then consulted what was to be done. He called to my recollection a bag, that had been put into my hands by rhe Duke, your father, when he left the palace of Aranjuez, for, as all the predictions of an astrologer he had consulted, when in France, from whom he received it, had proved true, he had not the least doubt but the sequel would likewise. The purport of the injunction delivered to him with it was : * That when a son of his should become an out¬ cast from his family, and his life should be sought by the nearest relative of his wife, then should that bag be given him, and he be charged to fly his country ; fur, death awaited him in every step. — But,
im Bub mhm» in a foreign land, he should succour-a dying penitenti then mould ihc crisis øf his fate be near % and, in a dis¬ tant spot, the characters would be ex¬ plained* 1 u I was no sooner reminded of this, than I thought the moment wa*> most as¬ suredly come, and you were the person alluded to. This good brother, whose name was Father Thomas, and myself, had often commented on the strangeness of the injunction, but could never ima¬ gine what it теш!, as we thought such an event next to impossible. But now, we no longer doubted the truth of the oracle, and, judging we had aot a minute to lose, I took what money 1 had, and, while Father Thomas wrote the letter which accompanied it, I got ready the bag. The moment it was done, we sent a lay brother with it, md ordered him to attend your mottens ; but so as not to be observed by you, and I can аьшге you, my søn, no parent ever rejoiced more over
12$ over the escape of a beloved chikl, out of the bands of an executioner, than we did when informed that you had left the Tagus, as we bad not the least doubt but an overruling Providence would protect you. I still hoped you would be happy, and fetidly imagined that, as soon as you should find every obstacle done away, as it now is, you would return, and we should again be blessed with your so¬ ciety. " As soon as we found you were beyond Don Joseph's reach, we kept a strict watch upon him, to see whether be had received any intelligence of your having been in Lisbon, and we soon found he had ; for, he came there, and stayed near a fortnight. During the whole of that time, his emissaries were out in all directions, so that we more than once congratulated ourselves in your escape ; for, had you remained, you would most certainly have fallen a victim to his diabolical machinations. " A few
124 ** A few months after this, I had the misfortune to lose my much-valued bro¬ ther Thomas. He had been ill, ever since our dreadful calamity : he lost the dearest friend he had, in that hour of misery, when death rode triumphant over so many thousands. - Previous to his death, he informed me of his having pre¬ served you once before, by sending the ointment and the letter, which occasioned your being taken from Gonsalvo's, by Montcaraz. He likewise requested me to send the blank letter to your wife, and then was the moment come that dissolved the promise I had made him. He had been the confessor of Faccela, and from her he learned the crimes of Don Joseph. " Struck with tbe enormities of the abandoned wretch, he revealed it to me, under the promise of secrecy, and I advised him to act as he did, when the papers were delivered to Alzira ; and, as his time in this w r orld, he thought, was but
125 but of short duration, he enjoined her that silence which she observed. But, when he was beyond the vindictive reach of the miscreant, I sent her the letter sealed with black, which was the means of dis¬ covering her uncle's and her own guilt. I was the Father she confessed to, and,. as I knew she was comparatively inno* cent, I pronounced over her that pardon, which some of my more rigid brethren denied. * c During my stay at Rome, this last time, I made enquiries after the valet, who was the first infamous agent in poor Alzira's misery, and had the satisfaction to learn, that he had been accused, some months before, of a crime against the Church, and had suffered in the Inqui¬ sition, but not without suspicion of Don Joseph's being the occasion of his death. This last visit of mine was caused by the friends of De Sal having entered a pro¬ test against the whole of the proceedings, Vol, IV, G which
126 which had been exhibited, to prove his guilt ; but in this they were baffled, as the Confessor to his niece, who died at Roses, came forward to support the truth of those crimes alledged against him.— Tbe Fathers, on hearing this, chose to close the whole, lest some more should start up as yet not heard of, and add to the list of enormities, which were already but too numerous. I then obtained an order to reverse the imputations against you, and for ,уои to be allowed the son of the houses of Aranjuez and Coimbra, which decree I now send, and hope it will give you the same pleasure it does me. " Your father's death, my son, was no more than might have been expected. He was not young, and, as the Almighty had, in mercy, prolonged his life, to a period far beyond that of any of his gay companions, we ought to be thankful that ¡t was so, and by no means to grieve at
127 · at his loss, since he is happy. The all- searching eye of Heaven is particularly to be noticed, in the assistance you «so timely gave him, and shows, at once, the great mercy of our heavenly Saviour, who would not permit his penitent and suffer¬ ing servant to die in a foreign land, under the hand of the public executioner, but, in the midst of his chastisements, remembered mercy. He had sinned ; he had repented ; he was regarded with pity by his' God, and, in the awful mo¬ ment when he most stood in need of comfort and consolation, he had the in¬ expressible happiness of beholding a beloved child, and to have that child near, to perform the last kind offices. " Such were the advantages, my son, which your father possessed over the criminal and abandoned Don Joseph,— His fall was rejoiced in ; his death none pitied, and none now pronounces his name, but with execrations, while that of }our father will ever be mentioned G 2 with
12$ with blessings, and those that are yet un¬ born* will speak the name of Aranjuez with reverence, and say, f That good man redeemed my father from slavery,* The fond mother is, perhaps, at this moment, exulting in his name, and say¬ ing ; r Ah ! blessed saint ! he restored to my widow r ed arms my long-lost son/— The wife may say : c He has returned to my bosom my captive husband, and, by that good man's means, my babes again behold their parent/ < ( Does not this, my son, ascend more grateful to thy ear, than the most fragrant incense of the East is to the smelí of mortals ? Rejoice, then, with me, that your blessed father is at rest, and learn, by his example, to shun the fallacious doctrines that lead to vice, and tempt but to destroy. His will, of which I send you a copy, is correspondent to his life. Those lands which were supposed to be in the hands of the Church, you will see, will not be theirs, unless your¬ self
129 self an'> brother die without heirs, which I sincerely hope.will not be the case, but that you will, and Don Xavier also, leave many yet behind you.
GS
CHAP.
130
CHAP. Vi. [The Letter continued,] --------------- .— Whence deeply-rankling grows" The partial thought, the listless unconcern, Cold and averting from our neighbour's good. Then dark disgust, and hatred-winding wiles, Coward deceit % At last, extinct each social feeling fell, And joyless inhumanity pervades And petrinçs the heart. Thomson. «* IT is out of my power to describe the surprise and consternation of your brother, when I imparted to him all that related to your father. I found it difficult to make him believe it, but was at last convinced, especially when I delivered to him your letter. I am very sorry he is not so happy as he deserves to be. The lady of his choice is still averse
İ31 averse from the marriage, and persists in a desire to quit the world for holy retire¬ ment ; but, in this, she is highly to be blamed. It is not the outward show of devotion that marks the righteous per¬ son ; but they, and they only, whose life is distinguished by acts of unfeigned charity and benevolence, who feel for others' woes, and not too harshly condemn a fallen brother, whose repentance is sincere. <c She is misguided, and thinks that, among the holy sisterhood, she shall meet with none, but those whose souls are as pure as her own. She knows not, that, under the sacred veil, lurk selfish passions, and that, though abstinence and external show marks the devotee, yet, there are not in the world so many vices destructive to society as in the bosom of a cloister. But youth are ge* nerally guided by appearances. Could they pluck off the disguise, and see things as they really are, then might many avoid the G 4 rocks
132 yocks they split on, and on which num¬ bers have been fatally wrecked. '* I ventured to talk to her upon the subject, and pointed out the many evils she would have to contend with. She heard me, and appeared surprised that one of rriy holy profession should speak iu direct opposition to doctrines I had engaged to inculcate. But I fear my reasoning had but little effect : she re¬ garded my arguments as not coming from my heart ; but, could she have known the real motives by which I was actuated, •I think she would have listened to my persuasions. It is her çarthly, as well aş eternal, happiness, that I had at heart the felicity of your brother, and that of her own family. A good woman can always, in my opinion, discharge.the du¬ ties to her God, as well, in the world and society, as she can secluded from it, and much more is that female to be valued, who .passes, uncontammated, amidst: tempta-
133 temptations, than she who shuts herself up in a cloister to avoid them. " Thousands are compelled, by avarici¬ ous or unthinking parents, to sacrifice their lives to religious pursuits, that nei¬ ther their habit nor inclinations suit them for. They know they are obliged to stay there ; they regret the pleasures of that world they are for ever secluded from. Hence, jealousy and envy take possession of their breasts, and, * though they smo¬ ther them under the veil of imagi¬ nary devotion, they are still hankering af¬ ter those enjoyments, which, by being de¬ barred of, they fancy greater than they really are ; and, as they cannot bear to know that another enjoys what they are precluded from, they lose no opportunities of persuading those who are guided only by exteriors, to embrace that life, which seems, to alî appearance, to be the only road that leads to bliss. But, no sooner is the veil taken, and Éhe irrevocable vow passed, than the delusion vanishes, and, G 5 instead
134 instead qf unanimity, they find discord and discontent, though the outward show still kept up. But it is then too late ; their doom is fixed, and they find they have nothing else to do but to adopt the same mode of reasoning and acting as the sis¬ terhood. ** I will allow that there are instances similar to this, where they are led to em¬ brace a religious life from motives of piety only* One in particular I remember, eighteen years ago, in the daughter of Don Manuel Sa vero. ' c The day on which her father was ex¬ pected to return from a successful cam¬ paign, a grand entertainment was to be given, and her mother had made very great preparations to receive him, when a messenger arrived, with an account of his having been killed by accidentas he was taking leave of the troops. Ibis melan¬ choly event had such an effect upon her spirits, that she, from that hour, determin¬ ed to devote the remainder of her life to God
135 God. She was but sixteen. I saw her several times after she had taken the veil, and never could perceive the least discon¬ tent on her countenance, or any symp¬ toms of regret for the world she had quit- ed. On the contrary, the most unfeigned and cheerful piety animated her whole frame, such as I could only hope to see in the form of the sincerest christian. " But those examples, my dear son, are very rare, and, therefore, I am inclined to think that some other motive, than the one your brother's choice alledges, in¬ duces her to solicit leave to become a nun. From Father Austin 1 learned, that it is an attachment to a young nobleman, who has been sent to Goa. If so, she is greatly to be pitied ; for, your brother, í am certain, possesses such a nobleness of soul, that he would sooner sacrifice his own peace, than destroy that of another. ** There are circumstances, my son, relative to that young man, that you are G б unac-
13& unacquainted witb, but which it is ne¬ cessary you should know. Your grand¬ father was, by marriage, his grand-father also. I will just give you a slight sketch of sorne particulars, as they were deliver¬ ed to me by the last Superior. " Your grand-father was the only son of the illustrious house you spring from, and was, at the age of nineteen, reckon¬ ed one of the handsomest young men in Portugal. He saw, and loved, a lady of great personal beauty. She was also ad¬ mired by «another young nobleman, of nearly bis own age, to whom the prefer¬ ence was given by the lady and her friends 5 and, during the absence of your grand-father, with the regiment he com¬ manded, she was united to his rival. On his return to Lisbon, love, jealousy, and revenge, all actuated him by turns. He found it impossible to conquer his un¬ happy passion, «and, to live without the lady* was equally so· * She
ni (ζ She had been married, at the time of his return, near a year, and had lain in of a daughter. Disappointed love urged him on to a -crime, wnich, in any other case, his nature would have revolted at. He planned a scheme to destroy his rival, which but too well succeeded. He re¬ turned to his regiment, and, soon after¬ wards, under a pretence of illness, left it for the benefit of consulting a physician, in another province, which place he left alone, put on the dress of a Venetian* and repaired to Lisbon. " Thus disguised, he found out where the lady and her husband were. He watched a favorable opportunity, afid, one day, when he discovered them without attendants, he rushed suddenly from his hiding-place, and, with one hand, held the lady, while, with the other, he plunged his poniard into the breast of her husband, whom he saw fall lifeless at his feet. He instantly fled, leaving her stretched insensible ой the body. He had
138 had laid his plans ir> such a secure man¬ ner, that he had niaae his езсаре in safety, and with şadı expedition, that his ab¬ sence was not noticed, any other way than for the cause he had assigned, Ci He continued near three months at the town he had gone from, during which time he heard various reports concerning the murder, and was, at last, told, That a man had been apprehended for it, and suffered for the supposed crime, which he resolutely denied to the last ; but strong presumptive evidence condemned him.«— Thus then your grand-father deemed him¬ self secure, and, as soon as he heard that the lady was recovering from her grief, he returned to Lisbon, and, two years after, »she became his wife—by her he had your father. " But the marriage was neither long nor happy ; for, in three years, he died, after experiencing the deepest remorse, and the lady did not long survive him. It is supposed that he confessed to her, on his
139 his death-bed, the crime he had commit¬ ted ; for, she was known frequently to call upon her murdered husband,, and be¬ wail hej; unhappy lot, in having been united to his murderer. " The daughter she had by her first husband had been, on her second mar¬ riage, taken by her parents, educated by them, and married, at a very early age, to a young nobleman, by whom she had a son, the young man in question ; but his father died near a month before his birth, and his mother took the veil. He ís an amiable and accomplished youth, and your brother is so partial to him, that it is supposed, if he could bring their parents to consent, he would give up his preten** sion s to the lady in his favor. He is so much offended at his being sent to Goa,, that he refuses to go to court. " I have related those circumstances to you, that you might not conclude, be¬ cause you have been heavily afflicted, that God is unjust. No, my son, he is not ; we
140 we are taught that the innocent are, by the just decrees of Heaven, to suffer for the guilty, and we must allow it to be right. " I have seen your friends, Gonsalvo and Montcaraz, aud made them happy, by assuring them that you are at liberty to return to your home, which 1 much wish, as your brother seems to want such a friend as yourself. You will, I make no doubt, immediately do what is neces¬ sary in your father's affairs, where you now are ; and that I may have the happi¬ ness of seeing you soon, is the sincere prayer of your friend m God, "Jerome.** " P. S. Your brother has desired me to commend him to you, and earnestly hopes you will immediately comply with the wishes of your friends, who devoutly pray for your health, and most speedy return."
Alphonsus*
141 Alphonsus sighed deeply, as he finished this last sentence. u Could I," said he, " my friend, and my valued brother, com¬ ply with your request, I should be hap¬ py; but my soul is wedded to grief, and I shall but add to the sorrows of a brother, whom I too dearly love, to give one pang of affliction more. He has enough to contend with ;-·—a hopeless pas¬ sion! a love, which, lam certain,will never meet return. Unfortunate young mant thou too, as well as myself, art included in the dreadful curse entailed upon our family. But I must not—no, 1 will not, call in question the decrees of the Most High. oes not this good Father allow them to be just ? and my own feelings admit the truth. Had not my grand-father been a murderer, his grandchildren would not have been the devoted victims they are. Now, my poor Alzira, I shall, I flatter myseif, shortly be witb thee. All my earthly concerns will soon be settled, and I shall have nothing left to do, but die
142 die ..... Thy suffering spirit is avenged; all thy murderers are consigned to the just punishment their crimes deserve, and I have lived to know it. Blessed be the Holy Saints ! I shali now resign my soul in peaces" For some moments, he sat wrapped in profound thought; then recollected his fatheťs will. He read it ; it was a just one. He had bequeathed liberal sums to the Capuchins, at Scyra, the same to the Franciscans, at Smyrna ; a sum equal to five hundred a year, English, he had left to be appropriated, for ever, for the re¬ demption of slaves ; a large sum he had also left for the accommodation of poor pilgrims, going to Jerusalem, to discharge for them the caphor, previous to their en¬ tering tbe city ; and also a very handsome sum to the Fathers of the Latin Convent, л at that place, where the Frank pilgrims are received, previous to their ascent to the Temple, and during their abode in the City. The remainder he ordered to have equally
143 equally divided between his surviving children, after the death of his wife. When Alphonsus had read it, he desir¬ ed the Captain to come to him, to whom he communicated the contents, and re¬ quested his assistance in executing all that was necessary, which he undertook immediately to perform, in conjunction with Father James. While his friends were engaged in completing the will of the Duke, Al¬ phonsus amused himself in attending to his young charge, whom he was more anxious than ever to see accomplished* Frequently would Berry entertain him with various little anecdotes of his coun· trymen, and the many lickings he had received, for not attending properly to the lessons of navigation his father wanted him to learn. At other times, he would converse with Muley, to whom he was become so much attached, that he found in his conversation great relief to his mind, and he saw, with unspeakable plea- sure,
144 $tire, the amazing progress Berry made m in the science of astronomy and astro¬ logy. Befeides this, he found him becom¬ ing a proficient in Turkish and Arabic, and Father James, before he left Al¬ phonsus, to execute his commission in the Holy Land, was not a little proud of his acquirements in Greek and Latin. One day, Alphonsus found Műley ex¬ plaining to Berry the strange characters on the bag. This was what he had often intended to ask ; but, many things inter¬ vening, be had been prevented. He sat down, and listened attentively 5 but the discourse they were then on was not what related to the effects of the figures* but the meaning of them, when the like should appear on the Herørens. When feat was finished, Alphonsus requested Moley to explain by what means he be¬ came acquainted with the situation tff his fether.
" For
145 " For you, Sir," said Muley, <r to com¬ prehend ita scientific meaning, would be impossible, unless, like me, you had de¬ voted some years to the study of astrology % but I will tell you, That, by the know¬ ledge I have, í never saw signs like these in the possession of any one, but I was immediatelv certain the head of that fa- «# mily was in the most imminent danger.— What you see on this side, plainly points out the place, and the exact time, when he would suffer. This gives a description of your person and that you were de¬ signed by fate t »ve a father. The time was nearly < ed, and, if Heaven had not mor ч mediately interposed, he would have ied. I was sensible there was not a moment to lose, and the event convinced you that my fears were just. u I am now endeavouring to make Berry comprehend this part of the science, a« it may be of great service to him here¬ after,
146 «after, when I am in thè dust, as I am sure I shall be, long before my pupil at¬ raias the age of twenty. I love him as my child, and, when he can no longer look up to me for instruction, he will bless my memory, and say he is thankful that I kept him so close to his studies, as the knowledge which I shall impart to him will be of far more utility than mak¬ ing English verses." Berry looked at Alphonsus with an air that said : u You see, Sir, with what con¬ tempt he treats my productions, and how incorrigible he remains." Alphonsus smííed, and said, He hoped Berry would not let his attachment to verse-making in¬ trude upon the Lours set apart for more abstruse studies. " I hope he will not," said Muley ; '* if he knew what a treasure he loses by abusing time, he would not trifle away a single moment." " True/* said Alphonsus ; " and do you, Berry, profit, I beg of you, by what your friend savs."
147 says." " I will, indeed, Sir," said the youth. Here they were interrupted by a slave, who brought a letter just arrived, from Berry's father, giving an account of his having been captured by a French priva¬ teer, and carried to Marseilles, from whence he had been sent to Havre, and there exchanged ; but the whole of the crew, together with his brother, had been detained. He related, That he found all his family well, and his wife w r as much pleased at his having left him in such good hands at Smyrna. He gave an account of the death of his wife's cousin, a charming young woman, who had been struck by lightning, on the gra^e of a young gentleman, to whom she had been but a few days married, when he was killed in a fight with a French frigate close in shore, and in sight of many hundreds, who had crowd¬ ed to the rocks, to witness the engage¬ ment. They succeeded in taking the French-
148 Frenchman, but her husband fell.—He was brought on shore, and expired a few moments after he was landed on the beach. The sight had such an effect upon the lady, that she lost her senses, and, whenever she could elude the vigilance of those who attended her, she would hasten •to his grave, from which she was always obliged to be taken by violence. During a tremendous storm of thunder and light¬ ning, in the dead of night, she had found means to quit the house, and was not miss¬ ed till the dawn, when the tempest had a little subsided. They immediately con¬ cluded to what place she was gone, and went after her, when, to their inexpress¬ ible grief» they found her dead, stretched on the grave of her husband, but not in the least changed in her features 5 only a small black mark on her breast. Some part of her clothes were rent, it was sup¬ posed by the wind, and her fine long hair Ъао been singed by the lightning. He said, The dismal catastrophe had been very
149 very much talked of, and so great a num¬ ber of people attended her funeral, as had never been heard of in that part of the country. Berry heard the letter read with the greatest concern ; he wept bitterly.— u Ah, my dear cousin Ella!" said he, " and are you then never to see me more ? Ah ! Sir, I loved her next to my mother. She was the most sweet-tempered and in¬ dulgent to me of any of my relations.— She has often heard me read, and her hus¬ band taught me to write. Oh ! that they had but lived to see me once again í But now, it cannot be, and I care not if I never go back to England more. Oh ! Ella, my dear, dear Ella !" Alphonsus was much affected at the con¬ cern this affectionate boy felt for the loss of his cousin. He consoled him in the most tender manner, and, when he had a little soothed him, said He should go with him and Muley, to visit Artemias, whom they had not seen for several days. Vol. IV, H fhe
Ζ 50 The mention of Alphonsus going out, a circumstance which had not occurred since their return to Smyrna, gave a *urn to the thoughts of Berry, and, hastily wiping away his tears, he prepared togo. They found their Greek friend at home, but indisposed. He had, he said, been unwell, or he should have waited on them. He was much pleased at seeing them, saying, He was very low spirited, now Father James was absent, because he had wanted him to take them the new» he had received from England, respecting Mor¬ land, who, his correspondent informed him, had arrived there. When he came, he was. surprised to find Mr. Merchon's door shut against him, and his daughter going to be married, the next week, to a neighbour of his, a very worthy young man. They had, he said, received the packet Father James had sent, and the contents had shocked them exceedingly ; but they were
İDİ were not long in deciding what to do.— All correspondence with Morland was in stantly stopped, and, when he came to their house, he was denied admittance, and, the next day, he was given to un¬ derstand for what reason. As soon as he found his crimes were known in England, as well as at Smyrna, he made haste to quit London, but where he was gone re¬ mained a secret, though it was conjec¬ tured to France, as a person answer¬ ing bib description had been seen at Boulogne. ι " Now, Sir/* said Artemias, " you see what good all his wickedness has done him. He will live, with all his ill-got wealth, like a vagabond, and die like a beast. Poor wicked wretch that he is ! Why, 1 should think the very dogs would bark at me, as I passed along the streets, andscent the crime of murder. Well! 'tis one good thing that young Morland did frighten me ьо ; else, this abomina¬ ble man would have gone to England, H 2 and
152 .and married the lady, and then, Lord help her, what a pretty bargain she would have had ! I never go past St. Polycarp's tomb, but I think of Father James, and the coffin. Ohi Lord bless us, what a precious affair that was! Fm sure, I should never have been able to get open the grave, unless young Morland had stood by me all the time : I might, through fear, have done it then ; but, to be sure, we don't know what we can do till we are tried." " We do not, indeed," said Alphon¬ sus ; " but the great service you and the good Father rendered the lady, I think herself and family cannot be too grateful for." " Ay, very true," said Artemias ; " but there is very little gratitude in the world, and I think, in this instance, it is verified ; for, neither the lady nor her father has written to cither of us." Berr> r listened with great attention to the discourse. He had heard several detached
153 detached conversations upon the subject, but never the whole, and the talk of the merchant had awakened his curiosity, as well as that of Mulev. As soon as they had finished their visit, and return¬ ed to Frank-street, they desired Alphon¬ se to explain, which he did, giving them an account of all that had passed relative to the affair. Muley crossed himself devoutly, and prayed the Holy Virgin to protect him from the sight of the murderer. Berry found a cold shiver overspread him, when Alphonsus came to that part, where one brother plunged the other to a watery grave. " Ah, my God !" said he, " I would have saved my brother a thousand times ; no wicked man should have persuaded me to do such a thing." " My good boy," said Muley, " I hope you will ever be secured from such temp¬ tations. Guard, my child, thy heart be-, times against love and jealousy; 'tis the bait which the Infernal one holds out as H 3 the
154 the most alluring, to attract his victims. Love is the occasion of more crimes being committed by man, than all the other evils that curse his lot." ** Then, I am sure," cried Berry, " I will take care never to be in love with any lady." iC I hope,'' said Mulev, smiling, " you never will ; but 1 thought so, too, once ; and yet, I was forced, though a slave, to feel that pation." — " What !" cried Berry, tť have you, Mu¬ ley, been in love in your lite-time, f thought you had been too mut h <Л a phi¬ losopher." "Ah! my dear bo}," said Muley, fi£ philosophy, and the most pro¬ found learning, will not ward off the en¬ croachments of that 'sly enemy to our peace. I buffet ted and contended with him for a long time, but was, at last, obliged to surrender the fortress to my successful blockader, and I was never so happy, as during the time of my double captivity.' W
« Oh Ì
155 ťí Oh! pray, telime all about it," said Bern ; ** if Don Alphonsus will permit." (i That 1 will," said his patron, " if Mu¬ ley will oblige us with the recital." My love story," said Muley, u will afford you but little entertainment." " Oh ! but, pray," said Berry, " let me hear it."— Muley smiled at his eagerness, and began;
H 4 CFIAP.
156
CHAP. VII. Neither her outside, form'd so fair, Nor aught— So much delight me as those graceful acts, Those thousand decencies, that daily flow From all her words aad actions, mild with юте ■ ....... which declare unfeign'd Union of mind, or in us both one soul. " I HAD been, my dear boy, about six years in slavery, when, as I was, one day, attending my young masters to the door of the mosque, I was surprised with the sudden appearance of two Greek females, who did not, from their dress, appear to be slaves. They passed me twice, as I waited the return of my masters. I knew not what it was, but I felt an uncommon desire to know who they
157 they were, The eldest, by what I could judge, appeared to be about thirty. Her countenance was captivating, without be¬ inor handsome ; an air of sorrow was strongly impressed upon her features. As she passed me, she started, cast down her eyes аь they met mine, and, with a mo. desty that instantly took my heart pri¬ soner, turned from me. The other lady was much younger, and more beautiful ; vet, í felt no emotion when I looked on her. My hour for captivity was come, and never, till that moment, did i think my- selt a hlave. ť * Scon after they had passed mc, the .second time, my masters came out ; but, so much was 1 taken up in reflecting on what 1 had seen, that 1 did not perceive their approach, and they had put on their slipper», and stood with amazement, re¬ garding me, before I recollected for what purpose 1 waited there. They laughed at me, and concluded, from the deep v stady I appeared to be in, that I was considci- П 5 ing
I5ñ ing some knotty point in astronomy. One of the young folks tapped me on the shoulder, bidding me follow them. Roused from my reverie, I obeyed ; but, from that hour, I could think of nothing but the fair Greek. I thought, if I could but get another sight of her, I should be happy, and earnestly longed for Friday again. " Friday, at length, came, and no poor creature released from confinement, ever hailed the day with more transport than f did. I placed myself, as before, and counted every moment with the utmost anxiety, and the time was nearly elapsed, when to my longing eyes appeared the two ladies. They passed me as before, 1 thought the eye of the eldest was turn¬ ed on mc ; but, the instant she observed the earnestness with which 1 looked at her, she timidly withdrew it. They walk¬ ed on; I followed with my eyes, till 1 lost sight ot them.
- ť From
159 <ť From the manner in which her look had been directed to me, I thought 1 was not disregarded by her ; and, from that day, I determined to find out the place of her residence. When Friday came again, I desired my master to let me go, while he was in the mosque, to get some in¬ strument I wanted for him, to which he consented. I had resolved to follow her, at a distance, and, by that means, learn the house she lived at, and who she WttS. tr The Fridav came, but I saw her not. f had forgot the instrument, and returned dejected. Another Friday arrived, and I was equally unfortunate : ht ill I hoped the next would not be so. That day, my 'heart bent high with expectation, and, at Ubt, 1 had the happiness of seeing them approach. As soon as they had passed me, í followed, wiih a beating heart, and oLbcrved them go into a house belonging to a Greek merchant* í hastened to a person, at a small distance, and asked Π β Whe-
IGO Whether he could inform me Who the ladres were. He said They were the merchant's sister and her daughter. She was, he said, but lately come. With this information, I returned to the mosque; my masters were not out. I rejoiced at it, and, when they came, they were sur¬ prised to see me look cheerful, as I had been very melancholy for many days, owing to my disappointments. They noticed the alteration, and were pleased at my appearance. " I ran over in my mind a thousand expedients how to gain more intelligence; but, as often, asked myself What good that knowledge would do me, as it was impossible I could profit by it, being a slave, and, in all probability, the lady was married. The more I thought of it, the more I saw the necessity there was for ray conquering my foolish passion. I, therefore, desired my master to permit me to stay at home, under a pretence of getting something ready against his re¬ turn
161 turn to his lessons. I vainly hoped, by this, that I should forget the cause ôf my uneasiness; and, if 1 did not see her again, I should think no more about her. " With this belief, I struggled for some weeks, at the end of which, I found I was as bad off as ever, and I could no longer invent excuses for staying at home. To tîıe mosque then I went, as before ; but, the first time, I did not see the lady, and I returned restless and unhappy, but with afirm resolution to get the better of my folly ; and, by the time Friday came again, I thought myself cured. But I was doomed not to be so. I saw her, and she put to flight all my philosophy. " I came back, miserable. I had no one to whom I chose to make known the secret of my heart, lest my presump¬ tion should be punished ; but, now, an opportunity offered for me, I thought, to come off conqueror. My master was go¬ ing, for a few weeks, to a country-house, whither
162 whither I accompanied him, not doubting but I should most assuredly get rid of my passion í but there, alas î I got worse and worse. We staid seven weeks, and, not¬ withstanding alî I had done, I was more in love than ever. I could neither eat, drink, nor sleep, without thinking of the lady', and, at last, the conflict ín my mind brought-on a fever, in which I languish¬ ed for mar:y weeks ; and, though I ear¬ nestly prayed for death, that salutary agent came not. " During my illness, the studies of my young master had been suspended ; he was, therefore, particularly anxious to see mc recovered, that he might resume them, as all his happiness centered in the pur¬ suit. 1 exerted myself to attend him, and, though reduced to a skeleton, í would be in the study. « My young master was greatly at¬ tached to me, and had every advice for me that could be procured. All the physi¬ cians declared my complaint was more in the
163 the mind than body. This good young man, thinking that ï repined at being a biave, generously oilered to obtain from his father my liberty, if 1 would but pro¬ mise to continue with him, tül he was perfect in ihg science he was studying. But this, I positively assured him, was not tbe case. He then conjured me, in the mo>t friendly manner, to tell him the came of my uneasiness, and, at length, succeeded in getting the secret from me ; and no noble and generous was the good young man, that he not only promised to keep it from his father, but undertook to serve me with the lady. iC And this he performed ; for, in a f:\v day.*, after, he entered the room we usually satin, in the garden, and said He had some good news to tell me, which was, That he had found out who the lady was, and he could with certainty assure me, that, though a slave, I was not indifferent to her; for, she had seen and fancied me, even before I had noticed her,
164 her, and had been as much distressed with her attachment, as I had been with mine. She was, he said, perfectly ac¬ quainted with all the incidents of my life, previous to my seeing her" first, and had purposely passed that way, in order to see what effect her presence would have on me. She had been happy in observing the concern I manifested, when she ap¬ peared ; but, though she was led to flat¬ ter herself that I felt the same, yet she was withheld from making known her partiality, lest she should be thought wanting in that delicacy, which is the greatest ornament of her sex. Her for¬ tune was large, and wholly independent. She had one daughter, who was provided for, and was soon to be married to a French gentleman, with whom she was to go to France ; but, as there was a great disparity in our years, she had been inclined to think I might reject her on that account, supposing she made me an offer; and the idea of a refusal, added to her
165 her other fears, had determined her, as soon as her daughter was married, to enter a convent. f Now,' said my dear master, c you must be a fool, indeed, if you suffer such a charming woman to be lost to the world on your account.' " 'Tis impossible to say what joy this news afforded me. I blessed my dear young friend a thousand times, and im¬ plored him to advise me how I should act. * I will procure for you,' said he, * a dispensation and your release, and then marry the lady. In the mean time, I will contrive that you shali, at times, converse with her.' And he was as good as his word ; for, in about a fortnight, I had the happiness of being in her com¬ pany. My good young master was so anxious to see us both happy, that he, in reality, procured a dispensation for me, from the Superior of the Carthusians, and I was, by his contrivance, united to this excellent woman. Every thing was con* ducted with the greatest privacy* as the priest
166 priest that married us thought it most ad¬ visable not to make it known, till the young lady was gone to France. " Thus I passed several months in the greatest felicity. Our marriage had not been suspected by any one ; the young lady was married, and, soon after, was to sail, with her husband, when my old master was taken ill, and died. This en¬ tirely changed our plan : my young mas¬ ter was obliged to go to Aleppo, and it was ordained that I should accompany him, and my wife was to follow, as soon as her daughter had sailed. I was to have my liberty, and reside with my mas¬ ter as a friend. But, alas ! I was too happy, and it was decreed I should not Ions remain so. " My dear wife followed me, under pretence of business, to Aleppo, where, for some months, we enjoyed the most perfect felicity ; but, in the midst of my blessings, this dear and amiable woman was torn from me by the small-pox, and, with
167 with her, died all my hopes of happiness. As our marriage had not been made pub¬ lic, I benefited nothing by her death t the whole of her fortune reverted, by just right, to her daughter. ťŕ Soon after this dismal event, my dear master, who shared in all my joys and all my sorrows, proposed our jour¬ ney to Samosath, and, from thence, we went into Persia, and the other events followed which 1 related, when I had first the pleasure of seeing you. (t And now, my dear buy, you see that neither age nor philosophy are proof against love. My short-lived felicity was such, as I think even angels might have envied, and convinces me That love is either the source of the greatest happi¬ ness, or the most poignant misery : there is no medium. The only thing you have to do is, to guard against jealousy, which ís the curse and bane to all domestic peace. The noble and generoin soul will not suffer such a vice, for a moment, to get footing
lés footing İn his'breast. He spurns with indignation the insidious invader of his bliss,and will not listen to hb insinuations. Remember my advice, my dear child, and be happy/' Alphonsus and Berry, both warmly thanked Muley for the recital he had given. Alphonsus mused on it long, and remarked that every one he had con¬ versed with, of his acquaintance, had confirmed what Muley said - That love was the offspring of every calamity, and, on the contrary, of every good, proving, what the poet says, The only good Heav'n ín our cup has thrown To make the tedious draught of life go down. * s AMs !" said Alphonsus, «« had I been blessed in marriage, what bliss had then been mine! but fate did not ordain it, and I must patiently submit to its all- wise decrees/* Berry, by Muley's rela¬ tion, had been diverted from reflecting on
169 on his father's letter; but, when he again recollected it, he wept afresh for hib cousin's death, and, as often as he could, unperceived, would go to it, and read it over and over again. Alphonsus suspected him, by the manner in which his countenance appeared, and, there¬ fore, kept him almost constantly with him. One morning, he waked, seemingly much pleased with something, and told his patron He had made some verses on the death of his cousin, which he would write off, if he would promise not to let Muley know it. Alphonsus promised, and bade him get dre^ed, and write them. Berry was overjoyed at the consent ţ he went to writing, and, at breakfast, when Muley was gone to get ready the ex¬ ercises, he showed the lines to Alphon¬ sus, who assured him that no one should see them, besides himself, till Father James returned, when he should read them. " That, Sir," said Berry, " I don't mind j
170 mind ι for he will not laugh at them, as Muley does." This point being settled, he went to his studies, while Alphonsus read the stanzas. 3uOii4 huffling winds and scmïuiog clouds Athwart the wel km fly j The frowniog wave, the sullen swell, Proclaim the tempest nigh. Each fallen leaf and scattcťd straw Id eddies dance around, With wild fantastic measures bum The u idüîated ground. Black mâ more black the clouds appear, Large drops of rain descend ; The lowly shrubs, oppress*d with weight, Their tender brauche* bend. The howling winds, amid the rocks, And hollow caverns, tell The threat'ning storm approaches fast, That tolls the dismal knell. Of many a hapless seaman's fate, Who ne'er again shall view The happy cot where dwells his love, His dear, hk constant Sue. . " AU
171
ťf AH hands aloft,'* the boatswain cries ; " To sea this instant hie ; Strike the fore-top, each sheet belay* And let the cable fly.'* Now rain Ín torrents swift descends ; The voice of Jove is heard j Bright sheets of lightning chaae the gloom ; Each eye to Heav'n is rear J d. Amid the desolating scene, And thunder's awful roar, The wretched Ella wander'd forth, And sought the craggy bhore. The forked lightnings, wing'd with death, Around her footsteps play ; She heeded nought, but wandei'd on, To seek the breathes clay. Of him she lov'd, for whom her heart liad never сеачЧ to mourn, Since on the shore hi? bleeding corse \Va> by his messmates borne. Пгг tender limbs, bereft of strength By griePs disarming sway, Contend, but feebly, with die winds, By which she's borne away
172
Oer the rough shore, where billows rol And foaming lash the beach, Still she contends and straggles on, Her Edward's grave to reach. At length, she reach'dthe sileot spot, That mark'd her Edward's tomb ; Where oft she hâd tn anguish knelt, And moorn'd his hapless doom ; Where oft, in accents passing sad, Her loss she had depior'd, And oft the briny tear had dropped On her departed lord. Low on the sod i>he trembling ftH ; ** I come, my love, * she cried, ci Amid the thunder's aw&l roar, To prove myself thy bride. ** 1 come to seek my Edward lost i I come his sod to share. Oh î may our God in pity strike His íàtal lightnings here—" She bar*d her breast to meet the stroke, Her prayV to Heav'n ascends ; Soft pity, hors'd on cherub's wings, The lightning's point attends.
173
She galas her wish ; transfixed, behold The wretched Ella Hes; On that cold grave, where Edward sleeps, This faithful partner dies.
Vol. IV. I CHAP.
174
CHAP. VIII. Know of your youth, examine well your biood, Whether, if you yield not to your father's choice, You can endure the livery of a mm ; For aye to be in shady cloister mew'd, To live a barren sister all your life, Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon. Midsummer Night's Dream. WHEN Alphonsu» Lad read the verses, his heart bore testimony to the grief poor Berry felt, and had so feelingly expressed in the lines before him, aud he was not ashamed to add a tear to those which his young charge bad bhed for the loss of the gentle Ella. When he came to him, he highly commended his per¬ formance, and encouraged him to indulge his inclination, when it did not interfere with those hours set apart for his other , exer-
175 exercises. At this Berry felt the sincerest pleasure; and, though he hove a deep sigh for the fate of his cousin, yet his grier 1 was lessened by the generous commenda¬ tions of Alphonsus. It was above a month beyond the time appointed for the return of Father James from Palestine, whither he had gone to fulfil the will of the Duke, before he came back. On his arrival, he felt great con¬ cern at the alteration visible in Alphon¬ sus, who seemed to waste imperceptibly, though he had no actual complaint. For a few davs after the Father's return, he was cheerful, and appeared as if he had forgot his sorrows. Berry's improvements gave the Father great satisfaction, and he was not a little pleased with his verses. Soon after, Captain Brindley gave AK phonsus an account of all having been settled at Scyra. Now it was, that he seemed in reality to have clone with the world ; and, as he was 1 strongly petsuaded 12 he
176 he should not long be in it, he wrote a long and faithful account of all that had been done, to Father Jerome, whom he earnestly requested to be mindful of his brother, whose happiness he was parti¬ cularly anxious to hear. He thanked him for the kind and generous services he had so repeatedly rendered him and his rather. He requested he would still cor¬ respond with him, and not withhold his fatherly advice, though he could not bring himself to comply with his wishes, in re¬ gard to his return home. He wrote likewise to Father Austin, Gonsalvo, and Montcaraz ; nor was his old friend Benedicta forgotten. When this was done, he settled all his earthly con¬ cerns, as nothing could divert his mind from the supposttion that he shottld not long survive his father. But, the more his bodily strength declined, the more his spirits appeared to return. He was fre¬ quently seen to smile, and was alwi cheerful and easy. This appearance с ceíve.
177 ceived all his friends, except Muley, whom nothing could dissuade from the belief, that he should, before many months were passed, lose for ever this truly great and deserving friend. In this pleasing delusion near four months elapsed. Captain Brindley was preparing to return again to England, as he had stayed a much longer time than usual, owing to the business he had been employed on by Alphonsus. The day was fixed for his sailing, and several times had he been led to hope, that he should prevail upon his friend to accompany him, thinking that the change of place and different objects, would »go a great way towards effecting a cure, and would in¬ duce him to return to society. But all hopes were fled, when letters arrived from Lisbon, directed to Captain Brindley, if there; if not, to Father James. Mr. Brindley opened the first, and found it came from Gonsalvo~he read :
IS "I address
па " ï AfcnjEtiss you, my dear Sir, with a -Jiape* that you will not have left Smyrna, bejore tbis letter reaches that place. In- p\öseá is one ftonâ Father Jerome to you, and another from Don Xavier. I have heen informed by them of their contents ·> &д4> as they are such, as, I am certain, must give our valued and afflicted friend «the; jkeenjşst sorrow, I thought it best to }тче the packet directed to you» as I have aAtJately Мед informe.4 of the real state qf Λοη Aiphxrøus's health«; hut, ¡£ ïfjiiglit, conjecture froniithp bst account, I şhpı44 suppose it to he шсЬ, as casuot %tU bear an additional shock of grief.-rr? However, I leave it to your superior }$dgpEuent, either to make known to him the ¿contents, or reserve them unril he may be enabled to read them widrøut dan¬ ger. It gives me the deepest concern to reflect, that a family so noble, good, and great, should b,e aítogetíier m unfortunate* I think, I neyer lemy life» hea«d of such various calamities befalling one house, in so
179 so^hort a time. Surely, all possible evils have awaited it of late years, as it seems but as >esterüay, that the house of Aran¬ juez was tbe most flourishing io all Por¬ tugal------and now, ah ! now, what is become of it ? I tremble to hear, that it is extinct, and that you cannot say Don Al¬ phonsus lives, and will be restored to the world ! " Father Austin is very ill, but has re¬ quested me to assure Don Alphonsus, That, though he is incapable of writing to him, he is not unmindfulof him in his prayers, which he never offers up, with¬ out supplicating the God of Mercies to comfort and support him. " Father Jerome, whom I saw this morning, bids me add the same. He is also ill. He gave me both letters un¬ sealed, and desired me to use my own discretion, in forwarding them to Smyrna. Believe me, when I assure you, that, though I have heard and read of many families being unfortunate, yet none so I 4 truly
180 truly so» as that of our friend. Surely the ways of Heaven are inscrutable and just, and 'tis not for us to pry into them. Often have I been tempted to ask, Why such a catastrophe is permitted to hap¬ pen ? when I call to mind the words of Homer : ■ ' - ------seek not thou to find, The sacred councils of the Almighty mind. Invoïv'd in darkness lies the great decree ; Nor can the depths of fate be pierc 'd by thee. " This reflection has checked my pre¬ sumption, and I have instantly said, It is not for man to ask : € Why dost thou thus afflict thy creatures r'— Montçaraz is not now at Lisbon. " I need not, I think, say any thing to you of the events that have happened, since the letters will explain, and I must beg of you to read them, before you venture to give them to Don Alphonsus. But I would advise you not to let him
see
181 see them at all, unless he be better than I have reason to expect. Father Jerome is of the same opinion ; for that reason, he has thought proper to address you, if still at Smyrna, and, if not, Father James, whom I much value, though I have not the happiness of knowing him. " Poor old Benedicta is overwhelmed with sorrow, to think she is not likely ever again to seç Don Alphonsus. She is frequently at my house, and mourns this last sad stroke of fate to the house of Aranjuez, (related in Father Jerome's letter) as the occurrence is now publicly talked of. It has been the general con¬ versation ever since, though every means were used to suppress it. " The repairing of the churches and the building of others, seem to be more attended to than private accommoda¬ tion. A new palace, for the king, is I 5 now
m now erçcting-^-the rums of the former remain., ;.. « '* Don Xavier is now in the monastery of St. John's. I have seen him twice, rød hjs situation may be better felt than describe· * e I must beg of you to write to me as soon as possible, being very anxious ţo know tbe state of Don Alphonsus's health, and you 'will greatly oblige your sincere friend* « D. Gonsalvo." The letter of Father Jerome. "Sir, ** The bearer of ill news is ever unwelcome, and much more so to those that share in the afflictions of their friends ; but, as I am, from the nature of my situation, and many other circum¬ stances, obliged to address you, I trust vou
185 vou will not think it troublesome in me to communicate to you events, which it may be necessary, however afflicting for Don Alphonsus, to be made acquainted with. c ' My last letter to him contained some occurrences relative to his family, and mentioned the expectation of his brother's being soon united to a young lady whom he had long loved. Her history is short, but í will give İt. —She is the third daugh¬ ter of a branch of the house of Aregos : her father went out, some years back, as governor of Brazil, and took his family with him. He had children born there, but how \o^q he continued in that situa¬ tion is not certain. This young lady was with him at the time Don Xavier arrived in Brazil. He went out, it was generally supposed, to supersede the Governor, though it was given out his own private affairs drew him to that colony. Be that as it may, lu never took upon him the I b command
184 command, but continued there in a pri¬ vate capacity, till the Governor returned to Lisbon, to which place he accompanied him, and, soon after, it was publickly known, that he wished to espouse the lovely Theresia. " She was thought the most beautiful female that had been seen in Lisbon for many years, and no tess accomplished than handsome. All our young grandees became her captives, but all overtures were rejected by her parents, except Don Xavier's. Him they were extremely so¬ licitous to see their son-in-law : his great and illustrious descent, his personal at¬ tractions and mental acquirements, all conduce to regard him as one of the most desirable men in the kingdom. It was no wonder that the parents selected him, in preference to every other, as a hus¬ band for their favorite daughter. She was the idol of them both, but of the mother in particular, whose partiality was carried
185 carried to such an excess, as wholly to disregard her other children, though they could all boast no small share of beauty. This daughter the mother was ever anxi¬ ous to see united to Don Xavier, more on account of his affinity to the blood-royal, than any other consideration, and nothing was talked of by her, but the pleasure she should enjoy, when she saw her Theresia Dutchess of Aranjucz, the King having permitted Don Xavier to take the title, notwithstanding the uncertainty of his father's death. But Heaven smiled not on the wishes of this parent. " Don Xavier had, when he went to Brazil, taken with him a young nobleman, to whom he was by marriage related, and to whom he was sincerely attached.— This youth was, in every one's opinion, but the parents of Theresia, an amiable and truly deserving young man. Theresia saw him, and a mutual love took place, but it was kept a secret· The fear she enter-
186 entertained of her parents, knowing their intentions respecting Don Xavier, urged them to conceal their attachment, and it was not till some time after their return to Lisbon, that it was suspected. While she remained in Brazil, her marriage with Don Xavier was not designed to take place, but, as soou as circumstances would permit, after their arrival in Por¬ tugal. " But, when she came to Lisbon, the noise her charms made, and the dread her parents had, lest any accident should hap¬ pen to prevent the union, which they had for a long time set their hearts upon, caused them to inform her, That she must soon become Dutchess De Aranjuez.— This information, it was noticed, gave her great concern. She entreated her pa¬ rents not to urge her to a step she couid not willingly consent to, as she had an in¬ superable objection to marriage, and an ardent desire to take the veil. But this was
187 was only said to prevent her mother from suspecting her inclination to Don Xavier's friend. But, afterwards, I am persuaded she had a real wish to become a nun, though not till her attachment had been discovered, when the young gentleman was sent to Goa. From that time, she became more desirous than ever of quit^ ting the world. t£ I was requested by her parents to talk to her. I did, and used all the argu¬ ments I was master of, and, by virtue of my hols office, laid an injunction on her, to think no more of retirement, but ac¬ cord with the wishes of her parents.-— She heard me with the greatest meekness, and attended to all I »aid ; but I plainly saw that neither my arguments nor threats had that weight with her, which her pa¬ rents were induced to hope. However, I did not despair of convincing her, and, on that account, persuaded her father not to
188 to urge the marriage for the present, and I would see her again. ** In this train- matters were, when I wrote to Don Alphonsus last. Soon after that, I was desired again to see Theresia. I did, and again enforced my arguments ; and, as I had been informed of her at¬ tachment to the young nobleman, I pointed out the enormity she would be guilty of, in pretending to sacrifice herself to God, when her heart was dedicated to an earthly object. She burst into tears, confessed her error, and entreated my forgiveness, for hav¬ ing alledged a reason for wishing to quit 'he world, different from the real cause. " < Pity my youth, Father/ said she, * and forgive me. I see the impossibility there is for me ever to be the wife of him, with whom only I can be happy, and is it not less criminal to embrace a life, where I can uninterruptedly confess my sins,
189 sins, than to become the wife of a man I cannot love. My heart, you know, Father, is in the possession of another ; then, should I not be guilty of as great a sin, were í to become the wife of Don Xavier, as I should to take the veil ? In the first, I should comply with the wishes of my earthly parents j but, 'at the same time, I should offend my God· He re¬ quires at the altar, that I should give my heart, whole and undivided, to my hus¬ band. How can I become a wife, con¬ scious that I cannot fulfil the vows I should be required to make· *· * If I take the veil, I shall learn, among the holy sisterhood, to conquer my unhappy love, and soon become a virtuous votary of my God ; but, if I am Don Xavier's wife, I shall ever be repin¬ ing at my lot, and regretting that it is not in my power to love him, as his merit de¬ serves. The seeing me restlsss and un¬ happy, would embitter the peace of my hus-
190 husband, and the whole of our life would be üäthing but continual discontent and uneasiness, if not jealousy ; and that once routed, in a breast like Don Xavier's, -Would perhaps occasion the death of more than one. Young as I am, I have weighed*all those different argumentein my mind, and I never reasoned with my- •se-îf,but 14oirhd it turn to a final determi¬ nation, never to become the wife of any man, if I could not prefer him to every other-mortal. My parents have other -еЬШтеп besides me; who have none of those nice scruples ; therefore, they will not rail to make them happy, by comply¬ ing with their wishes in every thing. I pray you, holy Father, to entreat them to indulge me in my request. I care not in what holy society I am placed, nor to what part of the world í am sent ; all I have to beg, is, that fhey will con¬ sent to my desire, and I will ask no more/
«· I felt
291 " I felt convinced, by what she said, that she was really desirous of quitting the world, from ideas of conscience only, and not tbe motives I at first v attributed к to. I pitied this truly good and amiable supplicant, and was resolved to use every argument in my power, to persuade her father to grant her petition. I bade her depend upon my intentions to serve her, and, it possible, I would bring her pa¬ rents to consent. She appeared happy at the assurances I gave her, and we parted. " I did not see either of them for some days. When I did, I fulfilled my pro¬ mise, but had the mortification to ob¬ serve, İn both father and mother, a de¬ termined resolution that she should not quit them. My persuasions were use¬ less ; and, though they professed to pay great deference to my opinion, yet I saw they did not mean to attend to it, but were more than ever resolved to make her obedient to their com¬ mands—
192 mands— particularly her mother. When I had discharged my duty, as it be¬ came my office, I left them, but could not help being uneasy at what I now thought obstinacy in them.
CHAP.
193
CHAP. IX. [The Letter continued.*] Is there no pity sitting in the clouds, That sees into the bottom of my grief? Oh ï sweet my mother, cast me not away ; Delay this marriage, for a month, a week ; Or, if you do not, nuke the bridal bed In that dim monument, where Tibak lies. Romeo and Juum " I SAW Don Xavier that day, and had a long conversation with him.— He was so far from wishing to possess the lady, that he assured me it would give him the greatest pleasure, if he could contribute, in any shape, to her happi¬ ness with the object of her choice. He desired me to see Don Emanuel, her fa¬ ther, again, and tell him, That, if he would give his consent to Theresia's mar¬ riage
riage with the young man, he would, from the regard he had for him, make his fortune equal to his own, and procure for him the place of aid-de-camp to the Prince of Brazil, which would occasion his im¬ mediate recai. " This generosity amazed me, and I thought I never in my life beheld so great, so good a man. lie entreated me to go immediately, as he said he much wished to have his mind at rest, being determin¬ ed to quit the world, as soon as the event should be known, and embrace that ii«e his lovely Theresia ьо ardently wished for. iť I tvent to her parents, and imparted to them my commission troni Don Xa\ia ; but, instead of receiving the intelligence as I expected, and gratefully accepting the offer, they spurned it, and said, Though Don Xavier was blinded bv his passion for their daughter, so as to give up his own happiness to insure another**, yet they were not to the future interest ah d
195 and welfare of their child. They should, therefore, insist on her becoming his wife, or they would renounce her for ever. They desired Don Xavier and myself to be with them early the next morning, when her final answer should be given. I said, I was certain, that whatever hap¬ piness Don Xavier might expe.t, in be¬ ing united to their daughter, he would never be induced to owe that union to force. I asked permission to see Theresia; they consented, though, I thought, re¬ luctantly. iC I found her in tears. Her father, she said, had been with her that morning,and she had ventured to beg of him to inter¬ cede with her mother, but he had denied her. 1 told her the nature of my visit. She appeared overcome with gratitude to Don Xavier, for his exalted conduct, and more than once exclaimed: *Oh/ my God! Why cannot 1 love this ex¬ cellent man ? What can my stubborn heart mean ? Tell him, holy Father, how much
196 rauch I value the noble and generous offer he has made, and that I would not hesi¬ tate a moment to become his wife, were I not too conscious I do not, cannot, de¬ serve him. *Tis I, and I only, ought to be the sacrifice, for being blind to virtues such as his ; and, since I cannot make him happy, I never will any one else/ " This, I told her, I thought too great an act of heroism, and what Don Xavier would never consent to. The first wish of his heart was, to see her easy, and free from apprehensions on his account, and nothing could hurt him more than her persisting in her design. I, therefore, entreated her to think no more of it, but leave it to us to accomplish what we had begun. I told her she might expect us at an earîy hour the next day, when I had not the least doubt but all would be settled to her wishes. « I left her, and returned to Don Xavier, to whom I related all that had passed, i Ie admired her more than ever, and
197 and I plainly saw it would be a grand struggle between them, Which should show the greatest heroism. He resolved, as soon as he should return the next day, as he did not doubt of succeeding with her parents, to go to the King, .make known the situation of this lovely pair, and re¬ quest the recai of his relation. Having settled this in his mind, he seemed much pleased with the arrangement he had made, and told me He thought İt would be the happiest moment of his life, if he could accomplish his design. " The next morning came, and never in my life did I see him more happy. As soon as he saw me, he said : * You see, Father, I am not changed in my deter¬ mination. I am resolved to force those unfeeling parents to let their deserving child be happy her own way. I will see his Majesty, as soon as I have settled the other business, and will not leave him till I have obtained my request. I would not forego the felicity 1 shall enjoy in Vol. IV. K. unit·
IOS uniting them, for any earthly considera¬ tion. In seeing them blest, perhaps I may be induced to continue in the world, to witness the happiness I have procured them/ " Thus pleased with the prospect of doing á noble act, he went with me to Don Emanueľs, little thinking that the lovely object he came to serve, would, in a few short hours, be beyond the reach of every earthly good. He entered in high spirits ; her father received us; and, after politely thanking him for his noble offers, said, He was inclined to think his daughter would now be brought to re¬ gard the honor he did her, in wishing to espouse her, with the gratitude his vir¬ tues merited, and immediately consent to be his wife. * That/ said Don Xavier, * îs not " now the question. You know the purport of my visit ; I own I should have thought myself the happiest man on earth, to have received Donna Theresia as my wife ; but, as circumstances now are,
m *re, I am inclined to think her peace ought to be considered in preference to my own, and, for that purpose, í come to repeat the offers which I desired my good friend here to make yesterday, and I hope you will not oppose the sincere wish I have to make two young people happy/ ** Don Emanuel said, He was surprised that Don Xavier should wish to relinquish his daughter, after having, for so long a time, professed the most ardent attach¬ ment, and had obtained the assent of their Majesties to the union. Don Xavier explained his motives, and that in л uch a manner, as could not fail to convince him of the noble part he himself was act¬ ing, and the necessity there was for him to give his consent to his child's hap¬ piness. I aided the arguments of Don Xavier, and the old gentleman rose up, saying, He would fetch Theresa, who was then wiih her mother, who had gone to her for the express purpose of obliging К 2 her
200 her to fix the dav for her marriage with Don Xavier. . ' fe The room we were in was on the ground floor ; the door opened into a sa¬ loon, frfcm which a flight of marble stairs ascended to a suit of rooms above» Don Emanuel had opened the door to fetch his daughter, when a violent shriek was heard. We ran immediately to the stairs, and, as Don Xavier reached the first step, the body of the lovely Theresia fell lifeless into his arms j her angelic bosom streamed with blood, and her snowy neck was dislocated I ** I cannot paint the scene that follow¬ ed, nor do justice to the horror that ap¬ peared on the countenances of all. She had, I perceived, precipitated herself from the top of the stairs ; for, as we ran to them, her head pitched on the rail, and Don Xavier caught her in his arms : but hfe was fled for ever ! The father was in- capable of either motion or speech. He TcgmC.å the bleeding body with stupid horror.
horror, while we heard the most violent shrieks above. Don Xavier' held her to his bosom ; ипаЬю to speak, he turned his eyes in agony to Heaven, as if imploring pity. I was nearly deprived of reason, when I saw, by tfee manner 'm which the head hung, trmt hfe was irrecover¬ ably gone. Some oP the domestics ran for assistance, but it came*too late. Don Xavier, when they returned, had sunk on the Soor, with the bleeding victim clasp¬ ed to his breast. The surgeons examined the body, and instantly pronounced her dead, not so much« from the wound she had received, but from the neck being dislocated, which had occasioned instant death. " While they probed the wound, no painter could do justice to the * anguish that was expressed on the countenance of Don Xavier. He shrunk at every, turn of the instrument, and looked with an ejiger eye upon the face of ti»s mur¬ dered beauty, as if to see whether К 3 they
Я02 they gave her paiqu He couľd not be persuMied but that the wound only had occasioned her death. Щ entreated them to use every endeavour! that art, or na¬ ture could invent, to save her. He held herin his arms; clashed her again to his bosom, till his brain whirled to madness, and it was with, the greatest diificulty they could get him to leave the body for a moment, while it was laid on the bed. Don Emanuel remained «as one inani¬ mate, except when a deep groan passed his lips. " 1 feared every thing for Don Xavier. The surgeons did likewise, and advised * he might be bled· It was dope, and he soon became a little composed ; though, in a moment, he would start up, run to the saloon, and look with the bitterest anguish cm the blood that had streamed on the floor. The doctors thought, if hfe could be removed, in all probability, he would be better, as they wer£ .afraid his reason, from the suddenness of the shock, would
2QS would be affected, if he continued there; b^t I found it impossible to do it, with¬ out using violence, and that I did not like to have recourse to. 1 was, therefore, for seven hours, obliged to continue in the house, surrounded by doctors and various people, whom the confusion and igno¬ rance of the domestics had at first let 'm. í could not bear to see his distress; my heart felt griefs unutterable, without hav¬ ing power to allay them, and the confu- sioa was so great, that í could not decide on what I had beat to do. Overcome by the scenes I had witnessed, and what t saw my friend buffer, I fainted, a circum¬ stance that never happened to me but once before in my whole life. " When I recovered, I found Don Xavier had hold of my hand, and the tears were streaming down his face. * I have killed him, doctor, I am sure,' said he ! c Oh î in pity, save this holy man/ 1 was much affected at this fresh proof of the goodness of this excellent mar^s heart. К 4 I soon
204 f soort made him sensible I was-bet ter; but, if he meant that I should recover, h* must consent to go with me. * I will go any where,' said he, * to serve you; but, pray, do not let those gentlemen any more interest themselves for me ; I am robbed, by cruel fate, of ail that was lovely and virtuous, and can I now have a wish to live ? Oh, God I pity thy servant, who must not dare to complain. I will go home, but I beg of you to let me see once more that beautiful lilly, cropped in its bloom, and levelled in the dust by a rude and unexpected blast. Oh, my Saviour ! this is too much ; 'tis more than I can bear ; but let me see her once more, I beg, I implore you.' " They were all .sensible how much tbis w r ould affect him, yet they feared to deny it. I, therefore, said, His wish should be complied with, if he w r ould promise %> go with me, as soon as I thought pro¬ per to desire it. This he faithfully pro¬ mised, and I went with him to the cham¬ ber
ms ber of death, where lay the murdered rose· He took her clay-cold hand, ana pressed it to his lips. He spoke not, but his looks plainly indicated what he felt at that moment. I saw the vbtent struggles of his grief-wTung heart. I bade him remember his engagement ; and, as I was too old to bear additional distress, beg¬ ged he would leave the chamber, and go with me, as I felt myself getting faint. <c This was really the case ; for, before I could finish what I was going to say, I grew sick, and fainted again, and was much longer than before in recovering. The medical men were much alarmed, but i,at length, got better, and desired to be taken home. I felt very ill, but was more concerned for Don Xavier than my¬ self. He seemed equally as anxious for mc, and this, I believe, was the means pf inducing him to quit Don Emanueľs. He went with me to the Monasterv, from which three of my brothers had come, on benring of the dreadful catastrophe.**-* К ·> The
ιΊ>£ news had I spread .with rapidity through the city, and various Were the reports upon the occasion; but, though I was in tbe house at the moment, I was ignorant of what had caused the dismal »cene, as I had been too much concerned at the distress of Don Xavier, to make any enquiries about it. *' Don Xavier and myself remained for many eføys in such a state, that it was hard to say whether we were or were not in ou* senses. I was the first to show that I was perfectly sensible, and desired to see my brother Austin ; from him I learned all the particulars that couid be obtained. ·* He said, That, as soon as the bro¬ thers were informed of what had hap¬ pened, three of them immediately went to Don Emanuel's, where they found all in the greatest confusion» They attended us to tbe Monastery, and then returned to karn what had caused the lady's death ; but it was a considerable time before they could
207 could gain the slightest information*—· Donna Antonia, Theresia's mother, was the only one, it was supposed, whocould throw any light upon it ¿ but she appear¬ ed wholly deprived of reason; so much so, that it required five or six people to confine her. However, when they went again, the next day, they were informed by Ines, Donna Antonia's maid, That her lady had gone to Theresia*» room, with a determination to oblige her to say when she would become the wife of Don Xavier. " Her mistress, she said, had not been there long, before she heard her voice raised in anger, declaring, that, if her daughter continued obstinate, she would sooner see her dead at her feet, than she should have her desire of going intoa cloister. They continued disputing, for sume time, when she heard Theresia say : * Then, indeed, Madam, I will be that beggar ; 'for, I never will be Don Xavier's К 6 wife.'
208 wŕfe/ At thifv Donna Antonia exclaim¬ ed : *Theni take that, thou stubborn dis¬ obedient wretch/ At that moment, the door opened, and she saw her mistress follow Theresia out; she shrieked vio- lenriy,, and, as she reached the top of the stairs, observed her strike at the breast of the young lady, who was precipitated over them ; and as she fell, her mistress gave a spring back into the room, scream¬ ed out * Oh, God 1 my child' ------ and fell against the. side of a dressing stool, by which she was stunned, and remained so, she did believe, forsorne time, as she didnot attend to her, but ran with the other domestics to the saloon. Who found her mistress, or how she recovered, she did not know, as she was not near her for many hours, but she believed it was the doctors. But, when they had got her to bed, they were surprised at her rising and breaking from those who attempted to hold her, and she had done 4 nothing since but rave, and try to get at some¬ thing
2Θ9 thing to put an end to her life, saying She had killed her daughter, and would not live herself. Don Emanuel, she said, would not go near her lady, and did nothing but weep and lament. The lady was to be buried that day; every body, she said, mourned the death of Theresia, and condemned Donna An¬ tonia, but none more than she herself did. fi This account of Ines surprised us all; we could hardly suppose that a mother would let passion so far get thç better of her reason, as to take the life of a child she was so extremely fond of. Yet, how could we account for it in any other way ì and tbe subsequent conduct of Antonia seemed to confirm it, as she is still deranged, and continually calling on her murdered child, and praying forgive¬ ness. Add to this, a small knife was found in the room, bloody to tbe hilt, and its size exactly corresponded with the wound in Theresias breast We have been
это Ъе&п fed to conclude,, that, overcome by rage, when she heard her daughter persist m refusing Don Xavier, she was urged to strike at her with the knife, but the young lady being so near the stairs, to avoid the blow, had turned her face to her mother, which gave Donna Antonia an opportunity of striking where she did, and Theresia being frightened, and not regarding the stairs, had fallen to the bottom.. " Nothing was talked of for some days, hut the death of this lovely young crea¬ ture. Her parents were condemned se¬ verely by all ranks of people. I was much hurt at hearing it, but it is impos¬ sible to stop the tongue of public report. " Don Xavier remained at the Monas¬ tery, and contmued very ill for near a month, when he began to grow better, and conversed with me. He much la¬ mented the death of Theresia ; but it was with manly sorrow. He said, He was now convinced, that no earthly power could
í
ni could counteract the decrees of fat#,,and 8 he was certain that tbe prophecy which bung over his house would be fulfilled in the strictest sense of the word ; and that persuasion should decide him to enter upon a religious life, lest, if he continued in the world, he might, by some means or other, be the occasion of more fatal events ; being sure that a curse, such as that by which they had suffered, would not be satisfied until the whole race of Aranjuez was extinct. " I tried to reason with him on the wrong he would do himself and the state* by adhering to such a resolution ; but he was fixed, and nothing that Father Aus¬ tin or myself said, could alter his design. He never once .glanced at the crimes of his father, or grand-father, though I knew he felt a conviction that he suffered for them. He acknowledged the justice of Heaven, without complaining, and gave, with the greatest composure, orders to his domestics to arrange every thing for his
212 bis quitting for ever Ae domains of hi* -ancestors. Every one dependent on him has been amply provided for, antl the rich domains of Aranjuez and Coimbra now revert to Don Alphonsus, who, I tremble to hear, is not in a situation to profit by it, as his last letter seemed to convince me that his mind and body were not in a better situation than Don Xavier's is at present ; and, from that, 1 can de¬ rive but little hope—nay, none at all, since the death of this lovely innocent by her mother, an event so extraor¬ dinary, as I think not to be paralleled, certainly indicates the completion of the- prophecy. "How unsearchable are the ways of Heaven ! and, though slow in avenging murder, how sure antl certain in its exe¬ cution ! No crimes of such a dye as those we know of, ever escaped the avenging hand of God. What a lesson would this aflford to every young man, setting out in the career of føshionabk follies, were he to
213 to attend to it ! but that, I believe, will never be the case. Youth are too fond of their own opinions, and will believe nothing that militates against their plea¬ sures. " Don Xavier entered, three days ago, on his noviciate. AH his wordly affairs have been settled some weeks past. The day previous to his finally quitting all concern with the worlds he wrote the let¬ ter I send with this to his brother; and, as the penning of even that short epistle gave him pain, he requested I would transmit the particulars of all that has happened to his brother. I promised, and have performed it as faras I am able; but, with this différence, that I thought it best to address you, instead of Don Alphonsus. I must, therefore, again re¬ quest you will use your own discretion, in giving him the information I send, if still living. Poor unhappy young man ! my heart feels a father's pangs for him,—' If, Sir, you should have the smallest pros¬ pect
214 pect of his recovery, I earnestly entreat you will not let any thing pass untried to preserve his life. He is now the last and only branch of that noble family ; and, could he live to restore its honors, it would give happiness to hundreds.— Probably, if he could be prevailed upon to return to Lisbon, he might recover.— I would wish you to try what the voice of friendship can effect ; it raay do a great deal, and none would you in ake more happy, by such an event, than your friend in God, " Jerome."
CHAP.
215
CHAP. Χ. Mute, mute the eong, extinguish *d in the ky, The promised glory fades with dawning day. Oh I kind obKvion, with thy friendly veil, Spare the sweet not«?«, but hide the ctosing talev Anonymous. WHEN Captain Brindley had finished the letter, he remained for some time absorbed in thought. He was wholly at a loss in what manner to act.—* He was too sensible that Alphonsus ought not to be made acquainted with its con¬ tents, as it would most certainly accele¬ rate his death. He thought it best to consult Father James, and, jointly with him, endeavour to persuade Alphonsus to go with him to England. The letter of .Don Xavier he read, as follows :
"To
mê " To you, Alphonsus, my only brother, and dearest friend, do I sit down to write the last letter I shall ever address to any earthly being. Tbe Monastery, from which this is dated, is now m ν home. I have quitted for ever the domains of our ancestors, and resign all that was called mine to you, rny best belpved friend and brother, whose sorrows I vainly fancied I should chase away as the dews of the.morning------But, now, that cheering hope is vanished, and I am become a mourner like yourself. ** Yes, my Alphonsus, your brother, whom you, perhaps, at this moment, conclude to be one of the happiest of men, ís now, by the sad reverse of stern and cruel fate, doomed, like you, to- mourn an object lost, an angel mur¬ dered !——Alphonsus, she's gone for ever, gone, like your Alzira. She has, by a mother's hand, joined her kindred saints, ere the bloom of beauty full blossomed* on her cheek. "Oh'
217 " Oh ! the sight, the dreadful sight, was too much. Lifeless—inanimates- bleeding in my arms, she fell------Yes, that afflicting scene I was condemned to witness—-and to suffer.—Where is rea¬ son now ? Methinks it flies, when I reflect on the murdered Theresia the sweetest—loveliest—flower that ever bloomed.——· Oh î cruel, unrelenting fate ! " But I must remember I am a man, and, as such, must learn to suffer. Om¬ nipotence is just. Remember the in¬ nocent and lovely Estelle. Think on Paris—and be dumb. " All, now, Alphonsus, is hushed again. Return, my brother, my friend; we will compare our sorrows, and go, hand-in-hand, to the silent tomb. There we shall rest------the shade of Estelle will be satisfied—her parents will be avenged ! " All is still around me ; not even the fleeting owl, or ominous bat, is heard.— Nought
im Nought wakes but myself—all is quiet; and yet, Alphonsus, I cannot sleep— *-Nó, sleep flies the wretched, and visits none but those who know notares, who fee} no sorrows, such as those that wring your heart and mine. <« 1Щ ğ 0 and pray, my brother, arid then return to you again------But, no ; the holy Fathers are at rest ; they know no griefs like ours. Oh ! that í could rest like them, and sleep away my cares ! ** Come to me, my brother. I pr'y- thee do not refuse me, I will pray with you; I will weep with you ; and, while you invoke the name of Alzira, I will call upon my Theresia. ** We are not, my Alphonsus, destined to have our name descend to posterity— the voice of God forbids it. Then, come to me ; we shall soften each other's cares, and bid, in calm retirement, defiance to our fate. ** I cannot tell you what has occasioned my removal here ; I am not capable.— Father
Ъ\9 Father Jerome, that righteous and good man, will. *' I have been very ill, but am now better, and should be well again, I think, if you would come and share this solitude with me ; you shall then decide which has got the deepest sorrows to contend with. " To-morrow, I enter on my noviciate, and soon I shall be enrolled among the holy brethren, where, in pious medita¬ tion, I hope to wear out the remainder of my life. I will hope; I will wait for your return ; then, do not disappoint me. " I can write no more, Alphonsus ; I am faint—very faint ------. * f Farewell, my brother; be not ab¬ sent from me long ; nor deny the re¬ quest of him, who will ever be your affectionate, though deeply afflicted, bro¬ ther, ** Xavier." The Monastery of St. John's, 17-*«^. This
â£0 Thk letter Mr. Brindley thought less proper to be communicated to Alphonsus than the other. He hastened with them to Father James; they consulted fox «onie tíme what was best to be done, and, at bength, agreed to withhold the know- fledge of them from Alphonsus, till they saw whether he might get better or not» They determined to exert all the influence they had over him, to persuade him to go to England. As he was so much attached to Berry, they thought it would not be amiss to tell him, that the youth's .education would require masters, such as could not be procured in Asia ; and, as he could not part from him, it would be far better for Alphonsus to go to England, and place himself under the care of those properly qualified for that office. This, they thought most advis¬ able ; for, if he returned to Lisbon, they were certain, the full knowledge of his family's afflictions would inevitably put an end to his existence. Having
221 Having settled this in their ,røiacU, $?çy determined not to lose any time, a# they plainly saw his health was hourly decl}n> ing, They returned, therefore* to him, and, without taking any notice qf tbe let¬ ters, led the discourse very artfully ta ţ}>e subject of Berry's learning. They «φ- served, That, as Muley was so good an astronomer, it was a pity he was not in London, the center of arts and science*, where every thing coul4|feprocured to beip science and accelerate knowledge. They .-.aid, They were surprised be had nqta desire to see the bittlwpkce of the great¬ est astronomer that ever lived. " í have always," said Muley, u had that desire, even before I became a slave ¿ but fate denied me that happiness, and I was obliged to be content. Yet, I canr not say but I should, even now« had 1 Jonger to live» be happy íq \Uk that Wand. Th«ey have macj-e more improve¬ ments in astronomy and navigation, than any other people in the world ; and, ex* Vol. IV. L cept
222 ceja! the Dutch, have extended commerce bèjbtA any other power/' " Then, sup- posé, é said the Father, ** you were to ask Don Alphonsus to permit you to attend Berry г to England, and stay there a few months: ï am certain you would, by what Ihive heard at the English Consul's, obtain more knowledge cf the sciences there, in one month, than you can here in twdve. Tbe practice, as well as the theory, you will meet with there ; and, in in the company of the professors, you will find new fields of speculation open to ybur view, that here you can have no con- ception oĺ The discovery of foreign countries, tbe knowledge of other na¬ tions, the customs and manners of various people, aH serve to expand the mind of man, and put him upon researches. He compares causes with effects, and soon throws light upon what before was hid In darkness* Hence the many discoveries the English have made in arts and sci¬ ences* « Tlie
223
" The French possess the merit of in¬ vention, but the English of bringing every thing to perfection. It is astonishing with what perseverance they will pursue any object, that tends either to raise their fame, or serve their interests and, by what I have seen of them here, I am led to think they will soon rival their haughty neigh¬ bours, in every pursuit of art or science. Observe what vast naval power they have, and what excellent seamen. St*c with what courage and magnanimity they will face dangers, brave storms, and suffer dis¬ tress. Every nun among them appears a philosopher and a hero, in all situations except domestic ones, and in that he sometimes fails. " I have heard much of the brave stand they made, under the great William, who forced the haughty Louis to acknow! dge the superiority of the British arms, when raised against tyranny. 1 have often re¬ flected on the fallacious grandeur of that aspiring Monarch, who thought tiie whole L 2 world
22i world was made to bow to him, and own him universal sovereign, when William, the Krøg of what Louis, in his imaginary greatness, deemed a petty state, arose, like David, to destroy him, and level his vaunted powers in the dust. The ¿reat defeat of his fleet, and, soon after, that of his hopes at Kamur, which was retaken by a few thousands of the English, in sight of a hundred thousand of Louis's bravest troops, all veterans, is a circum¬ stance that will ever reflect the highest honor on the English, and eternal dis¬ grace on the boasting and aspiring Louis. " I should always take the English for a model, whenever I am in distress. They do not, like the French, fiddle and sing it away ι сиг drown it* like the Ger¬ mans, in drinking ; or smoke it away like tbe Dutch ; but allow a decent time to sorrow, bow obedient to the decrees of Heaven, and, with a proper philosophy, reassume their usuai pursuits. I sincerely regret that I cannot be among them ι but I think,
225 î think, were 1 Don Alphonsus, I should not be long in determining to visit that Island, were it for no other reason than to see how far the genius of Berry would expand, am! what it is possible for the human mind to acquire, when aided by such instructions as could be procured there." Alphonsus had listened with the most profound attention to all the Father had said ; then, turning to Captain Brindley, said : ** I wish my health had been bet¬ ter; I should have, from what Father James has said, be tempted*to see England, as I think, with him, that it is the seat of science." " It is indeed/* said the Captain, " and I really believe, if you would but exert yourself a little, a voyage with me would be of the greatest service to your health, and you would have the felicity of seeing the improvements Berry might daily make. -L* S Al
22§ li you do not chuse it, you will have no Obcaeton to see the least company. Berry, Маку, and the masters, would afford amusement sufficient to pass away the time ; and, when I could visit you, which should be often, I would let you know what they were dwng in the world, of war and politics, which forms a great scope for conversation in England. For, every man there knows he is at liberty to descant on the state, and give his opinion, either for, or against, the King's ministers, whose conduct he never scruples to cen¬ sure, if it does not meet his own ideas of right. " Liberty is the grand charter of the "English, and is what will ever give them a decided superiority over every other nation in the world. If a man there tills the ground, he reaps it unmolested. No man can be deprived of his possessions, but by the laws of his country. The so¬ vereign
2Ž7 vereign cannot say, I wijl build a wall there, or erect a house here, if the Дап -fí is not bis ownj therefore, every t npnjs secure in whatever he enjoys, It is amusing to those who have resided in the East, for any length of time, to observe the customs and manners of our country. They surprise him * f he looks with amaze¬ ment to see a nobleman and a beggar pace the streets, with an equal degree of pride > the artificer, proud of his trade, thinks himself as great as a lord : his ideas always center in the advantage he possesses of knowing something, by which he can obtain a subsistence in any of the provinces ·, whereas, a nobleman, if reduced to distress, can do nothing to soften his wants. Hence, you will ob¬ serve no more respect paid to the one than the other, unless he is a great political character, and then, he becomes the idol of the people - 9 and İt is not unfrequent to L i find
f28 find more deference pardeo him, than to Ше ¿ovireiğn. If, ott àny public occasion, hb appears in his carriage, the horses are deefned unworthy to draw him ; they are dismissed from their office, the populace take the place they occupied, and he is conducted in triumph to the destined spot. Hľís the same with their great admirals and generals/ 1 a Then, it seems," said Muley, " that politicians, sailors, and soldiers, are the oitìy men to whom honors are paid in England/* " By no means/* answered the Captain ; * e men, in all sciences, are regarded with the highest respect and ve- nbiratfon— *those in the arts, likewise ; none passes unnoticed in the world of let¬ ters. The only obstacle to genius, in our country, is the difficulty which attends the rìrst introduction of it to the world.— Could that be done away, there would not be à greater, nor a wiser people, on the face
2UŰ hee of the earth. I have often wished fe a fortune, to enable me to âeek out ob¬ scure merit. A trifling encouragement would save htmdreds fmm destruction; but I am not blessed with the means ; therefore, I must net think «of it I dwell with ple-asure on the thought of what a genius, in this dear boy, is rescued from oblivion, that would have been doomed, perhaps, all his life, to follow a profes*- sion he had neither abilities nor inclination for/* " Indeed, Sir," said Berry, " I could not bear the sea ; and yet, my father would make me go with him ι but Don Alphon¬ sus came, and saved me from boxing the compass; and, Fm sure, I shall never be able to return his goodness to me· Oh ί I wish Don Alphonsus, Muley, and Fa¬ ther James, would go to England. I would show them where I have been beat many times, for not attending to some- L 5 thing
230 thing or other about the ship, and the verses l med to make when I was at home. I left them with my cousin -, but she, poor de$r Ella ! she is dead, and so is Captain Edward, her husband.— Ah! they were kind to me, and, Fm sure, I never shall forget what I owe them." Saying this, he turned to hide a tear.«— ** Have you a wish, Berry," said Alphon¬ sus, " to go to England ?" fC If you were to go, Sir," answered he ; " but not else ; for, I could not now be happy any where without you. For this re-ason, I never think of England : you have been moré a father to me than my own ; be¬ cause you have had me taught what I was ignorant of before, and have instructed me yourself; and, if I was not to be grateful for all such blessings, I should not be deserving the kindness you show me. If you» Sir, would go to England, I should
231 I should forget all my sorrows for my poor cousin Ella» and be merry and joyous all the day* for, we could get such a multitude of books «and in¬ struments, such as Muley wanted, when we were searching for Aldeba- ran, to see in what part of the Hea¬ vens he was posited, we could not com* plete our purpose ; but, if we had been in England, we should soon have done it." " Then you shall go there," said Al¬ phonsus ; "and, as it is the wish of those, my friends, that I should go myself, what¬ ever disinclination I might have, I will try to conquer it 3 and comply with your desire ; not that I have the least hope of its benefiting my health, yet i will try the experiment, for the sake of you, my dear boy." This was beyond all their hopes, and the Father expressed the highest satis¬ faction, as did they all ; but none more L 6 than
ш ihm Vàpíéà Ъ*Шку> Berry could HåWly beßeve It poisibéev that Ws patrom woufd really go^ nut be as^uted him he wìàs determined, if the Czpîmn would ШЫ Щт in uuiämg his toføtfdly concerns. Tliís #as readily consented to, and Mu¬ ley was desired to prepare for their de¬ parture. In the evening, Father James and Mu¬ ley were together, when the former ob¬ served, that Muley was not so cheerful as might be expected, front the thoughts of his going to a country, where, according to his estimation, the only wise man, since * the days of Solomon, was born. <c I will telí you,* said he, *' my reasons. I see the error you ran into, in supposing that Don Alphonsus will recover, tìe never can, and I am certain he is sensible of it himself. No* Father, he will soon join the spirits of his parents, in the re¬ gions beyond the sun. ît is but a short fime, and he will be no more ; but he will
will reach Engbrtd, and I shall mi be long after hint. I am certain Лете к some great misfortune has lately befallen one of his family, I could have warned him of it, but it is of во use for mortals to know what ought to be reserved for God alone. I feel that all the knowledge I have acquired has only served to con¬ vince me of my ignorance ; and the more I know of myself, the more contemptible I appear in my own eyes, when compared with the Deity. It is this makes me un¬ happy; but I shall be better, when I get on board." Father James was much concerned at what Muley said ; and, from the opinion he entertained of his knowledge, was induced to believe that what he said would most assuredly come to pass. In a few days, all was ready for their departure. Alphonsus had but few to take leave of, besides the Greek mer¬ chant, whose friendship he highly esteem* ed,
264 ed, as he regarded him in the light of a sincere honest man. He desired Alphon¬ sus, when be got to England, to make enquiries after Morland, who, he dared say, was wandering about like an Eng- lish dog, hooted and scouted at by every one ; and begged him not to forget St. Polycarp's tomb, Alphonsus smiled, and said He might depend upon his re- membrance. When the hour for their departure came, Father James was so much affect¬ ed» that he could not say he blessed them ; but his looks plainly indicated the most fervent wishes for their safety» Al¬ phonsus assured him, That he would ever remain near his heart, as his best and dearest friend. To him he consigned the care of all the sums he had requested him to dispose of in charity; and, if ne¬ cessary, to assist his agent at Melasso, till he should return, as Alphonsus as¬ sured him it was his intention to come back
2S5 back to Smyrna, and there take up his final residence, as he left it more out of regard to the wishes of his friends* than his own inclinations.
CHAP.
$$&
CHAP. XI. ι At that black hour, whieh general horror shtds, On the low level of th* inglorious throng,. Sweet peace, and heavenly hope, and humble joy 7 Divinely beam on his exalted sou!. Destruction gild, and crown him for the skies, With incommunicable lustre bright« Young, THEY sailed, snd, for some days, Alphonsus seemed much better. Captain Brindley did not design to touch at any place, in his voyage back,- håvinga futt loading for London. He continued fluctuating for several days ; but Muley said, He would soon mend, which indeed was the case ; after the first three weeks, he seemed to recover fast, and, by the time they arrived in England, he was, the Captain thought, nearly well. He began to
237 to think so himself ; but it was like art expiring flame, that fans and blazes, then wavers, sinks, and expires. He entered London in tolerable spirits, though the bustle and confusion that every where presented itself, in that grand mart, rather discomposed him ; but, when he came to the Captain's house, and observ¬ ed the neatness, order, and regularity» which every where appeared conspicu¬ ous, added to the hospitality and cheer¬ fulness with which the whole family re¬ ceived him, he seemed much pleased. Mr. Brindley hastened to inform Fa¬ ther Jerome of wmcre Alphonsus was, and the reason fór his persuading him to take the voyage ; and, with a pleasing hope, assured him he had every reason to sup¬ pose he would recover------assigned the cause of his not communicating the con¬ tents of his letter to Alphonsus ; but said He should not delay it any longer, than till it could be done with safety. He requested the Father to write to him about
2$S about Don Xavier's health, being ex¬ tremely anxious to hear he was recover¬ ed from the shock he had received, as his mind, he thought, by the contents of the letter to his brother, appeared to be much deranged.. When this was sent off, the Cap¬ tain, was easy, and entered with plea¬ sure into the idea that his friend would soon be welL In a few days, Ber¬ ry, with Alphonsus, Muley, and the Cap¬ tain, went to pay his respects to his pa¬ rents, but he found his father was not in England—he wa* gone out commander of, a West Indiaman. His mother was overcome with joy to see him, and Berry no less so at meeting her* He rejoiced to find hi& brothers and sisters well s and to them he made several presents. Mrs. Berry was in raptures, when she looked upon her dear boy> and could not enough express her gratitude to Alphonsus, for his kindness to her child. He told her That her son should come often to visit ber„
239 her, and said He regarded himself as much obliged to herself and her husband,'for parting with Berry to him, as he was his chief comfort. When the youth had visited with his brothers the former spots where he used to play, and some of his old school-mates, he returned with his patron· In their way back, Mr. Brindley asked Alphonsus Whether he did not think he should feel himself more comfortable in England than in Asia ? He answered, but with a deep sigh, €t Had Heaven, my friend, blessed me in the manner yourself and Ber¬ ry's father have been, with smiling com¬ forts, I might indeed have thought Eng¬ land a paradise ; but, as it is, robbed of every domestic happiness, in the loss of my Alzira, no spot, however blessed by nature, can tear the canker from my wounded heart* I have but one hope now left, and that is, to hear my brother en^ joys that felicity I am for ever deprived of." The
2Í0 The Captain felt disturbed at this ob¬ servation : he shifted his seat in the coach, turned to the window/and said : ** There, Muley, down that street you can procure some of the feestmathematical instruments in the worlds and to-morrow," said he, turn¬ ing to Alphomus, ** if it is agreeable, we will go with Muley to see iDem.*' " Sup¬ pose we go now, 7, said Alphonsus, ·' I should be happy to do that," returned Muley ţ " 1 am anxious, to see what I have heard so much of." The coachman was bade to drive to the repository, when, as soon as they entered, the astonishment of Muley was extreme, especially when shown an orrery, a beau¬ tiful machinery of Graham's. An artist that attended worked it, to show them the revolutions of the planets in their differ¬ ent spheres. Berry was so much delight¬ ed, that he jumped and capered about, as if he was out of his wits for joy. Muley 's was silent amazement, and, when shown some large telescopes, said, in his grave way,
way, That it was well worth tbe voyage he had come, to be convinced of the power of those wonderful instruments ; and, though he thought there had been but one great man in England, he must now add Graham to that one. They continued for some considerable time at the mathematician's. Alphonsuü made very large purchases for Berry and Muley, and, could his thoughts have been detached from the objects which cop tinual¬ ly engrossed them, he might have been as much amused as either of them ; but that could not be—his sorrows were too deeply rooted ever to be eradicated. He entered the coach, smiling on Berry, who, delighted with a case of instruments that had been purchased, whispered to Alphonsus : " I shaVt write verses, now that I have got so much to learn with these.; Æd I shall at last please Muley." Muley sat wrapped in profound con¬ templation ; but, when they reached Mr. Brindley's, and the different purchases
were
242 were laid on the table, he viewed them with a kind of enthusiastic rapture, and exclaimed : ** Now, if I was but as young as you, my dear Berry, what discoveries would I not make in the world of sci¬ ence ! But I am old ; my days are num¬ bered ; but if you do but attend to what I say, you may attain what I would."— ** Vii do every thing," said Berry, € * that you deske, and I assure you I will not write any more verses, till you give me leave." ** Then you will please me at Jast," said Muley ; " the air of England, I see, has some effect towards making you sensible 5 and,> when your other fool¬ eries are thrown aside, there will be some hopes of your becoming a wise man," These reflections of Muley never failed to excite a smile on the faces of Alphon¬ sus and the Captain. For some days, they did n# pursue their exercises, as, Alphonsus was en¬ gaged . with them and his friend in viewing every thing worthy of the atten-
1243 -attention of strangers. He then de¬ sired Mr. Brindley to procure proper masters to attend Berry ; this was soon -done ; and, as he thought the cares of servants might be what Alphonsus could not aftend to, he made him an offer for him to continue in his house, till his health should be established. Alphonsus was pleased with this proposal, and accepted of it. But he did not get better, and he had not been in England above two months, before he was observed to get ill again. A heavy langor overspread his whole frame, and he was continually wishing to hear from Lisbon, to which place he had written at the same time Captain Brindley did. He had, at the desire of his friends, called in the aid of physicians, but none of them gave the least hopes of his reco¬ very. This account shocked tbe Captain, who had entertained very nattering ideas to the contrary. But, in a few days, all hope was fled. Alphonsus was sensible of
ги т øf his »pp«?aching end, and desired his friend to break it to Berry, who had for some time neglected his studies, and was continually in tears. The poor boy had -watched the altered countenance of his patron, and had unfortunately overheard one ef the maids telling another, That the gentleman would soon die, for the doc¬ tors told her master so. From that mo- meat* Berry became miserablej not all that Muley said cpuld induce him to mind his lessons ; all was neglected -, and no¬ thing could prevail upon him to leave bis patron's room. His concern was perceived by Alphon¬ sus, who felt for him all the tender affec¬ tion of the best of parents» He could not bear to see İlim grieve* and had fre¬ quently a wish to live, that he might give peace to the child of his adoption. Mr. Brindley dkl all in his power to compose him, but in vàin. JBeriy could not bear the thought of losing his dearest friend. Muley was the only one who appeared calm j
245 calm ; he was sensible, from the time they left Smyrna, that Alphonsus would not recover. The event justified what he said to Father James ; for, this excellent and good man lived but five days after the physicians had been consulted. A few hours before his death, he de- bired to speak with the Captain alone. This was a circumstance Mr. Brindley had wished for, he having been for some days distressed in his mind, respecting the let¬ ters from Father Jerome and Don Xavier. While there remained the least hope of his recovery, he could not bring himself to communicate their contents ; but now that all hope was fled, and fearing the un<\ easiness which Alphonsus expressed con¬ cerning news from Lisbon, might affect him, he thought it best to consult Muley, whether it would not be right to inform him of them. Muley was of opinion they ought not to be withheld. " It cannot now," said he, «* affect the serenity of his soul ; but it may give him a degree of Vol. IV. M . satis-
246 satisfaction, which he should not be de¬ prived of." The Captain then determin¬ ed to deliver them, and to state his rea¬ sons for acting as he had done. When they were alone, Alphonsus said ñe had desired to see him, to put into his hands lìis will, which he would request him to see faithfully executed, and that he would cause his remains Xo be taken to Lisbon, which was, he said, contrary to his intentions some time before. Another request was, that he would consent to the union of Berry, with one of his daugh¬ ters, if mutual inclination should be per¬ ceived between them 3 and permit them to reside altogether at Lisbon, if they had no particular objection to it. Muley, he should expressly desire might never quit Berry, till his death ; and upon the open¬ ing of his will, he hoped they would mid he had not been unmindful of them. He was sorry he had not heard from Lisbon, as he had particularly requested his bro¬ ther, and Father Jerome, to take Berry under
2*7 under their protection, till he came of age ; but to permit him, till that period, to reside in England, under Mr. Brindley and Muley's care ; as, by that time, his inclinations would be known, in respect to the attachments he might form ; how¬ ever, he earnestly desired that no com¬ pulsion should be used to oblige cither of tbe young people to make choice of the other. Mr. Brindley faithfully promised to fulfil every wish of his heart ; and then, in as gentle a manner as possible, inform¬ ed Alphonsus that he had had letters, and assigned his reasons for withholding them. Alphonsus was pleased at this fresh proof of his friendship, and desired the letters might be read to him. The Cap¬ tain obeyed. During the whole of tbe reading, the greatest calmness appeared on the countenance of Alphonsus. НЬ> soul was collected, and he seemed far above the reach of earthly sorrows. One part of his brother's letter alone seemed M 2 tO
24$ to affect him, but he soon recovered him¬ self, and said : ** I thank you, my dear friend, sincere¬ ly thank you; now, at last, I am convinc¬ ed I have nothing more to do with life. I shall die content ; but my poor brother! he is, indeed, a far greater sufferer than myself*. Oh ! that I could speak com- - fort to him ! but that cannot be. I shall meet him in the regions of everlasting felicity. I am sorry I am unable to write to him ; but do you, my friend, tell him I pity him. I feel for him, and pray to tbe God of Mercies to soften his af- - fiictions. Would to the Eternal I could do more, but I cannot.... we are parted here ; but, in Heaven, we shall meet again ..... Tell him I desire to have my remains laid in that grave where he will rest, that my dust may be united to his. -------------Almighty Being! thy decrees are just ·. ,. I bow, with my poor bro¬ ther, submissive to the rod.------------- Be careful, my kind friend, of that dear boy. Let
249 Let him and Muley accompany ray re¬ mains, and, with you, see them laid in that spot, where our sorrows will cease for ever. Then, oh ! then, shall I joia my dear Alzira, in the beatitude of Hea¬ ven ------We shall meet again, and never, never, to be disunited more.------ Oh İ my blessed Saviour, take thy suffering servant to thy mercy, and let his parting spirit be at peace !" The tears streamed down the cheeks of the Captain. " Let me, my friend," continued Alphonsus, " see that dear boy and Muley." They were 4 ca!led in.; he blessed them both; and taking the hands of Berry, placed one in Muley*s, the other in Captain Brindley's. * ť To those valued friends, do I now, my dear boy, resign thee ; and, never but in death, quit their fatherly protec¬ tion.—My dear friends, I charge you, be fathers to him. Make him a good man ; teach him the fear of God, and warn him against thè commission of those cffmes> M 3 which
25Ö which have levelled my miserable and unfortunate family in the dust, even in the bloom of youth, and rising greatness. Bless him, oh í my God ! with the choicest of thy blessings! let no evil come near to hurt- him, and extend thy hea¬ venly benediction ίο those his friends, who now promise to watch over, and never to forsake him ! * .. Be composed, my much-loved boy ; do not weep thus ; you distress me much. í am going to be at rest ; therefore, you should rather rejoice." Berry could bear no more ; he sunk upon the bed and exclaimed : ** I cannot live» if my dear and blessed friend dies. Let me, too, die .... Oh, God !" Alphonsus begged them to raise, and endeavour to comfort him, and take him to another room, as he feared his distra would injure bim m such a manner as to affect his reason. But all that they ma could not prevail upon him to quit the apartment, and it was not till they told him
251 him he would kill his patron, that he con¬ sented to leave the side of the bed. His anguish had hurt Alphonsus much, and, from that hour, he got worse, though he was collected to the last. A few minutes before he expired, he begged once more to see Berr. Mukv was- likewise asked for. They came to him, when he pressed his dying lips on the hand of Berry, blessed шш, αν.ά ->ύά : lf Farew f ell, my dear, dear boy. I am go¬ ing to eternal rest ; but I shall, at a distant period, agam see you-—clasp you to my bosom—never to be parted more .... Do not grieve ; I shall soon be free from every earthly pain ; only remember to act conformably to the advice I have given you .... (iod bless you alî, my de;ir t dear friends ...... I come Alzira— I come to join thee. — . .—«,,...... ■ /' Those were the last words* he distinctly pronounced, and bis righteous soul took its flight for ever 111 M 4 Poor
Poor Berry ! No pen can do justice to the sorrow which this dear youth experienced. For several days, he re¬ fused all comfort, and even Muley be¬ gan to fear for his life, His mother was fetched, and she, at last, succeed¬ ed in composing him ; but it was several weeks, before he was well enough to attend the remains of his lamented patron to Lisbon. On opening the will, which they found wholly in his own hand-writing, they were surprised to find That he had left to the Captain ten thousand pounds; to Muley two thousand a year for his life ; twenty thousand pounds to either of Mr, Brindley's daughters Berry might make choice of; one thousand a year to each of his friends at Lisbon, Gonsalvo and Montcara2 ; two hundred a year to Be¬ nedicta and her son; a thousand pounds to Father James, at Smyrna, and a rich diamond ring to Artemias, to wear in re¬ membrance
253 membrance of him. The rest of his for* tune, which was very considerable, he left to Berry, constituting him his sole heir. The whole of what he designed for the church, he had settled on Fathers Jerome and Austin, previous to his leaving Smyr¬ na, when he had requested to have an elegant tomb erected to the memory of his Akira. I le had likewise settled every thing with the Father, respecting Berry^ whom he had a desire to have naturalized in Portugal, and begged his assistance for that purpose, whenever he should be brought to Lisbon, and presented to him. The same request he had also made to his brother. The Captain and Muley had not per¬ formed the last solemn duties that could be paid their Friend in England, above ten day*», before letters arrived from Fa¬ ther Jerome, which gave the finishing stroke to the decrees of Heaven.-— The letter was very short» but gave an ac· count
254 count ot the death of Don Xavier, severi weeks after he wrote the last letter to his brother. He died of a fever, with which 'he was seized a.few days after writing, and was supposed to have been brought on by the extreme agitation of his mind, which had hourly encreased. But, though, for the most part, he was de¬ prived of reason^ yet, the last two days previous to his death, he luid Ьлеп per¬ fectly sensible ; he had submitted to his fate with the greatest calmness, and la¬ mented nothing but being denied the happiness of seeing Alphonsus. Father Austin, he said, was given over ; he had been ill some time. He thanked Mr. Brindley, in the most affectionate man¬ ner, for the care they had taken of Don Alphonsus, and perfectly coincided with them in opinion, that they had taken the best step possible to restore his health, and strongly advised the Cap¬ tain to keep him ignorant of all that had
2Э5 had happened, till they could do it with safety. When Berry was sufficiently recovered, they prepared to leave England, with the last remains of their ever lamented friend. They reached Lisbon, and im¬ mediately sent notice of their arrival to the Monastery of St. -John's ; likewise to Gonsalvo and Montcaraz, who came to drop the tear of sorrow over the bier of him, who would never cease to live in their remembrance. Father Jerome and some other Fathers attended, when every honor was paid to his remains, that his high birth and sufferings demanded.— Hk wish, in every respect, was com¬ plied with, and in nothing more readily than ín procuring the naturalisation of Berry. Thus, in the prime of youth, and full manhood, fell victims to a father's crimes, two of the most exalted characters that ever drew the breath of life------the last noble
í
£56 noble branches of a long and illustrious race, that the saying of the Most High might be fulfilled r—»" I will visit the sins oi the fathers upon the children, unto tbe third and fourth generation/* The child of Alphonsus's adoption was received by the holy brethren with the highest respect. Father Austin was no more; but Father Jerome presented him to their Majesties, who were pleased to approve of the heir he had chosen, and ccmfirmed Berry in the right of what had been bequeathed him. He was ac¬ knowledged a subject of Portugal, and received as such ; and, as Alphonsus had ordered, he was permitted to go back to England, till his education was complete, when he was to return to Lisbon. He saw the aged Benedicta and her son, to whom he begged permission to make a very handsome present, and assured her, that, when he came back to Portugal, she should come and live with him the remain-
2$? remainder of her life. The poor old woman mourned deeply the loss of her generous friend, as did all who knew him, and were acquainted with his fate, which every one deplored* Berry returned to England, and, at the age of nineteen, made choice of Captain Brindley 's second daughter, to whom he had been attached from the first moment he beheld her. Muley lived but a few months after Berry returned to England 5 and, on his death-bed, confirmed what he had pre¬ dicted, when they first met him at Haii- carnassus, That three years would be the extent of his life, he dying within that period. He was buried agreeably to his desire, near the spot where the remains of Mr. Graham, the mathema* tician, were deposited. He died, pro¬ mising that Berry, with his posterity, would reach the highest honors, and his name would become as illustrious
in '
258 in Portugal^ as that of his excellent be¬ nefactor had been before him, whom he never ceased to regret, to honor, and revere.
FINIS.
Knight and Coropton, Printers, Middle Støet, С loath Fair.
