Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The sisters of St. Gothard: a tale
IHE
Sisters of St. Got hard.
CHAPTER I. İN Switzerland, surrounded by lofty mountains, near the source of the Rhine, and in the bosom of obscurity, lived Blanchard — aman esteemed by his hum¬ ble neighbours for his simplicity, virtue, and benevolence. To the wretched, the hungry, and the wayworn traveller, hi.s cot was an asylum. Peace, with little more than poverty, was his lot ; but the little he possessed was cheerfully shared with those who craved his aid. He had two daughters, blooming, in- voL, i. в nocent.
nocen t, and pure as the air of their na¬ tive mountains. They had lost their mother at the earliest dawn of their ex¬ istence, and the duties of that parent had therefore devolved upon him. His daughters formed all his cares, all his joys, and all his treasure. He poured instruction into their minds ; he convinced them that virtue was the sub¬ stance of that happiness wbich all pur¬ sued under so many modes and forms— tliat neither pomp, power, nor riches, could still the horrors of the guilty breast, nor could poverty, with all the traili of evils which are the lot of man, rob the virtuous bosom of that internal peace which the world can neither give nor take away. " My children," he would say, " you are strangers to this world; you have been born and bred in the vale of obscu¬ rity and peace ; but should it be your destiny to mix in it when the hand of death shall have removed me from you, you
you will require all the resolution and fortitude which I have instilled into you to withstand the temptations which an intercourse with it will inevitably ex¬ pose you to. Vice will assume the fal¬ lacious appearance of felicity—pleasure and joy seem to be her attendants ; but beware, my children, of her fatal allure¬ ments—they conceal the designs of the wicked to draw the unwary to destruc¬ tion." Thus, in the language of wisdom and virtue, he inculcated those moral princi¬ ples which regulate the conduct, fix the character, and open a vista of future and eternal happiness. Adelaide, his eldest daughter, had at¬ tained the age of seventeen. Her golden ringlets, in beautiful profusion, waved over her shoulders ; the lily lent its pureness, and the rose blushed upon her cheek ; the ethereal blue of heaven co¬ loured her eyes, and beamed with soft radiance. Her person, though under в 2 the
the middle &îze. might have served as a model * f symmetry and exquisite beau¬ ty : gentleness and a native grace ac¬ companied all her movements. To the charms of her exterior were added the more lasting ones of the mind ; she was virtuous, benevolent, modest, and mil of sensibility. Every hour that en- croached not upon the discharge of her active duties was dedicated to reading— not light works of fancy; her books were few, but they were calculated to rix her principles, cultivate her under¬ standing, and refine her mind. Rosette was one year younger than her sister. She was a brunette, but the pen¬ cil of the painter and the imagination of the poet could not exceed the charms i4* this lovely maid. Her black eyes ¿parkled with fire and joy ; the damask rose dveel her cheek ; her dark ehesnut hair, half tied up, fell carelessly, in rich clusters, upon her neck. She was tall, and elegantly formed, and a dazzding beauty
kmity struck the ewe oí the beholder upon first seeing her. Her disposition was amiable, and her manners sweet and engaging—but she was giddy and thoughtless ; the sound of the pipe and tabor would draw Reiette from her du¬ ty, and she would mix in the sports, for¬ getful of her rlock, and her favourite lamb, which she lefi straying in the val¬ ley. Blanchard had early impressed upon his daughters the necessity of industry and activity—" Tbe former will save you from vice, and the latter preserve health. The children of labour are seldom vi¬ cious; they are removed from the scenes of the voluptuous, the dissipated, and the profligate. Their habits of industry keep their minds pure and untainted. and temperance and exercise preveni the diseases which visit the indolent and the great." Adelaide and Rosette shared in the labours of the day; they alternately и 3 ten deti
tended their flocks on the mountains, and assisted their father in cultivating their garden, and turning to the best ac¬ count the treasures of the orchard. Their household concerns were conducted with that regularity, simplicity, and decorum, which are inseparable from domestic comfort After the toils of the day, the wise Blanchard would sit at the door of his cottage, reading to his daughters les¬ sons of virtue and instruction. When the sun was sinking in the horizon, and its departing rays gilded the mountains, he would lay down his book, and call their attention to the beauties of the scenery around them. .** That glorious luminary of light and life—those lofty hills, covered with ver¬ dure—those grand rivers, which take their source here, meander through, and serve as the boundary to other countries— the interspersed villages, exhibiting cul¬ tivation and plenty—the bleating pf the flocks, and the contentment of the sim* pie
pie shepherd—the music of the pipe, and the sprightly mirth of the village maids, proclaim aloud the power, the wisdom, the benevolence, and harmony, which pervade the works of God. Virtue is the best image of our Creator ; she is и solace in the hour of trial anel disap¬ pointment ; she sooths us in sickness and sorrow, and points the way to everlasting happiness. Ah, my children !" he would add, " how infatuated are those wdio forsake her paths î Reason tells us that every deviation from rectitude under¬ mines our peace, plants a thorn in the bo¬ som, and destroys that inward tranquillity arising from a self-approving conscience." This fond father watched with unre¬ mitting attention the opening characters of his daughters. In Adelaide he per¬ ceived a solidity of mind, a fixed principle of right, a firmness and strength of reso¬ lution not likely to be shaken by the insinuations of the immoral, or the de¬ signs of the libertine. With inward sa- B 4 tisfaction
tisfaction he looked forward to this un¬ folding blossom of future comfort. In the pious fervour of paternal affection, he would say to himself— u My Adelaide, thou hast chosen Virtue for thy guide ; she will lead thee through the stormy seasons of life, she will support thee in the hour of temptation and danger, she will solace thee when every thing else hath ceased to please, she will smooth thy pillow in the prospect of death, and conduct thee to unfading glory and im¬ mortality/ In Rosette, the equal sharer of his anxious affection, he marked with pain a pliability and easiness of temper, which he dreaded would lay her open to the machinations of the artful and designing. In her general conduct her motives were amiable, and her intentions strictly cor¬ rect and virtuous ; a fascinating sweet¬ ness influenced her manners, and she was warm and generous in her affections. If her father, in the anxiety of pa¬ ternal
ternai regard, pointed out an error she had committed, she instantly determined to avoid the like, and atone for what she had done; but her resolutions were hast¬ ily formed, and as suddenly broken.— " To-day,'* she would say, " I have been deficient in the discharge of my duties, but to-morrow's sun shall witness with what diligence and assiduity I shall en¬ deavour to make up for that deficiency, which causes me now such painful but unavailing regret." But, alas! frail and readily forgotten vyere the resolutions of the lovely shep¬ herdess. Novelty, mirth, and music, ever had charms for Rosette. The feasts of the vintage, the simple gallantry of the mountain swain, the vivacity of her youthful companions, the charms of the dance, and the magic of the pipe, would instantly put to flight her best inten- tions«
в 5 CHAP-
CHAPTER II.
One beautiful afternoon, when the west¬ ern sun threw its golden glory over the mountains, Rosette, who had been wan¬ dering with her fleecy care, and was somewhat overcome with the heat of the day, reclined upon a bank, and fell asleep. Her favourite lamb stood by her, and licked the lovely hand that administered to its wants. She had brought it up; it ate from her cup, and was cherished in her bosom ; it followed her, and in soft bleatings bespoke its attachment to its kind mistress. The caresses of this emblem of inno¬ cence roused Rosette from her slumbers. The
The sound of music struck upon her ear; she started up, and from an eminence beheld a military train, whose martial strains were calculated to stimulate the* soldier to glory, and excite sentiments of novelty and delight in the simple inha¬ bitants of sequestered regions. It was a German regiment, on its way through the cantons of Switzerland.— The temptation was irresistible ; she in¬ stantly descended into the valley, and was met by a party of the village youth, eager in following a sight so rare and at¬ tractive. " Come, Rosette/ said one of her com¬ panions, " come along with us—the mu¬ sic is bewitching/ " It is so, but I cannot leave the flock and my little lamb." " The flock and your little lamb will graze on, though you are absent. 1 ' " But my father—will he not upbraid me with negligence and want of duty ?" " No/ said a youth of winning sort- в 6 ness ;
ness ; " if Blanchard loves his daughter, he will not grudge her any of the little enjoyments that fall in her way." He seized her hand. Rosette hesitat¬ ed—" If I go, I swerve from my duty." " If you stay, you will lose the sight." The regiment paused. " Ah ! can I enjoy at the expence of mv conscience?" said Rosette. " Reason, principle, and religion, enforce this sa¬ cred injunction, that our first duty is adoration to the Almighty Creator of the universe ; our second that of gratitude and obedience to those who are the au¬ thors of our being. Ought I to forget what 1 owe to my father ? has he not cherished me, protected me, instructed me, and formed my mind to virtue ?" " Beautiful Rosette,** said the artful youth, * it is a false principle that teaches you to reject the innocent pleasures which court you in the morning of life.'* " It is fallacious reasoning that tells ше any thing can amuse or afford ddight when
when the conscience is goaded with a sense of error. I cannot leave the flock; I must not—will not go." '* But you will soon return/ said her companions. The regiment proceeded ; the band struck up, and played an air peculiarly pleasing to her feelings ; her resolution fled, and she was led off by the sprightly group. АЪ, Rosette! where was thy firmness ? Dear-bought, too often, are those fleet¬ ing pleasures, and frequently purchased with years of painful but unavailing con¬ viction. Too easily was she induced to relinquish a strict observance of duty, and too little aware how progressive is error, and how fatal in its ultimate con¬ sequences is the first deviation from rec¬ titude. Step by step we are led on, till the mind, by imperceptible degrees, loses that acute sense of honour, virtue, and religion· Vice seizes the unguarded mo¬ ment; she assumes a gay and flattering appearance.
appearance, and the deluded victim ea¬ gerly snatches at the allurements which she holds out. Rosette was inherently amiable, and blessed with a tender father, who bad early cultivated every promising virtue, and had corrected with unremitting care every propensity likely to destroy or un¬ dermine them. She was keenly alive to every .sense of duty, but she was unsteady —-the deceitful arguments of her giddy party prevailed; she abandoned her fa¬ ther's interest, and the solid gratification of having resisted her inclination to err. Charmed with the military parade, the music, the bustle and wonder it excited, and led on by the irresistible persuasions of her lively associates, she soon lost all thoughts of her fleecy charge ; desert¬ ed, it grazed on from place to place, separated, straggled, and disappeared among tbe crags. Tbe pet lamb bleated in vain for her who had so kindi) cherished it ; l· wandered on till it came-
came to the brow of the hill, and fell among the rocks that overhung a tre¬ mendous precipice. Lacerated, and un¬ able to extricate itself, it bleated forth its sufferings unheard. Adelaide, who had come to relieve her sister, was alarmed at finding her absent, and the flock dispersed. She returned to her father, agitated, and ex¬ pressed her fears for her sister's safety. The first emotions excited in the good man were paternal solicitude ; but these painful sensations soon gave place to others no less distressing to his feelings. Hearing that a regiment had passed through the village, and reflecting with deep regret upon the instability and gid¬ diness which marked the character of Rosette, he concluded she bad been per¬ suaded by her companions to follow it, and leave her charge. He left bis gar¬ den, in which be had been employing himself, and, with Adelaide, went in search of his flock. After
After some hours of fatigue he partly collected them. Some were lost, and <tliers so much torn and wounded, that the humane heart of Blanchard shorten¬ ed their sufferings. In vain he looked for the little lamb : he had given up the search as fruitless, when chance led him to the eminence from whence the inno¬ cent had fallen. He looked down, and with pity beheld its perilous situation. " Poor animal ' thou hast been cruelly forsaken by her who tenderly cherished thee : yet her heart would bleed to see thee thus. I will attempt thy rescue." With this benevolent intention he e-autiously descended the steep, and, ex¬ tending his arm, eagerly caught hold of the sufferer; but his foot slipped, and he fell with violence upon a projecting cliff, and losing hold of the lamb, it was pre¬ cipitated elown the precipice, and dashed í о pieces. What must have been the feelings of the aflectionate Adelaide, who beheld the
tlie dangerous situation of her beloved father, without being able torender him assistance ' Agonized with terror at the impending fate, which a moment might decide for ever, she screamed violently, when some of their good neighbours luckily passing through the valley, flew to her, and eagerly inquired the cause of her distress. They learned what was the subject of her alarm, and with the utmost promptitude they ran every risk to save their worthy friend. Two of them descended the rock, and by their joint efforts effected their humane pur¬ pose. They raised the good man, who, stunned by*the fall, and much bruised, was for some time unable to speak ; but the prompt assistance afforded him by his kind neighbours, and the tender as¬ siduities of Adelaide*, brought him to a sense of the dangerous situation from which he had been snatched. Observing his daughter in tears, he en¬ treated her to be comforted, assured her he
he was better, and should soon be well. He thanked his friends for their kind services.—" You have saved me from a cruel death : may that life, which your benevolent exertions have prolonged, be spent in acts of piety fo God, and frater¬ nal charity to my fellow-man !" They conveyed bini home, and it be¬ ing considered necessary, he was bled, and put to bed. We shall now return to Rosette, vvho, in the gaiety of her heart, had not been disturbed by an obtruding thought of her deserted flock. The regiment march¬ ed on, and drew for some miles a con¬ course of people after it. The beauty and fascinating appearance of its com¬ manders, the nodding plumes and splen¬ did trappings, the martial strains, and the false notion of glory and greatness attached to the sanguinary profession, dazzled and enchanted the youth of both ^exes : but the pageantry of all such лсепез soon passes away, and, like the vi¬ sions
sions of slumber, scarcely leaves a more indelible impression. Tbe regiment halted, the music ceased, the charm was broken, and the youthful party were roused from their enchanted felicity ; and now conscience, that faith¬ ful monitor, whispered Rosette how frail and faulty she had been.—" Ah/ she exclaimed, " my father ! how little have í profited from your lessons of virtue and wisdom ! í have neglected that sa¬ cred duty I owed to thee. Weak, gid¬ dy, and unthinking, for a few hours of irrational and fleeting enjoyment, I have offended God, whose all-seeing eye per¬ ceives not only our most trivial move¬ ments, but every motive which stimu¬ lates, urges, and induces to action." The vivacity of the juvenile party was unrestrained; they laughed, sung, chat¬ ted, and expressed the pleasure they had received from this unexpected occur¬ rence. Every heart was light and joy¬ ful but Rosette's. They endeavoured to
to rouse her from dejection.—" Your fa¬ ther will forgive you," they said. '* Yes," she replied ; " but can I for¬ give myself?" They arrived, md Bosette, anxious for the fate of her forsaken charge, was going towards the valley, when she was stopped by one of the kind friends who liad assisted in snatching her father from death. He communicated to her what had happened, and reluctantly disclosed the evils which had arisen from her mis¬ conduct. Sorrow, repentance, and affectioni\ al¬ ternately agitated her bosom, and she trot home in a state of distraction. She new to her father's apartment ; but what were her feelings when siie got there ! Λ strong sense of her ingratitude, and the sight of an affectionate parent laid upon a bed of pain, from which he might never more arise, overcame her : she struggled for utterance, but the conflict of
of reflections was too much, and she sunk upon his couch without sense or motion.
CH APTER Ui.
Pkedeess of his own situation, the good Blanchard thought only of restor¬ ing his daughter to peace and reason. The gentle Adelaide exerted her tender¬ ness to recover and calm her.— ťí Al) dear Rosette, be comforted! all will again be well. Let us unite in prayers to Heaven for the preservation of our be 1 - loved father. While blessed with bini, with health and peace, we want no more; we shall again be happy." Soft balmy kindness ! never-failing specific to the wounded mind ! bow gra teiid
grateful is thy language in the hour of sorrow ! Like the voice of the adminis¬ tering angel, the mild accents of the beauteous Adelaide sunk to the heart, and diffused a tranquillizing charm. The warm affections of Rosette were soothed by her sister's tenderness ; but, turning her eyes towards her father, and observing his pale countenance, remorse again seized her, and she threw berseli upon bis bosom in an agony of tears. " Aly child," he said, "it is no part of a parenťs duty, nor is it a benevolent spirit that would take advantage of a heart depressed with a consciousness of error, and with remorse for having erred. Tt is not in the language of reproach, nor in unavailing reflections upon the past, that i mean to wring your feelings, and torture your sensibility. No, my Rosette, it is my duty to snoth and at¬ tune your mind to peace, and to warn you, in tbe voice of instruction, against the indulgence of propensities likely to destroy
destroy or cast a ¿doom over vour future happiness. I have, from your earliest infancy, enforced into vou the necessity of being virtuous, to be happy. Α ν tuous life is the result of principles ac¬ quired for the regulation of our conduct, and the subjection of passion. Every propensity in our natures which leads to error ought to be vigilantly checked and overcome. This requires the exertion of reason, and firmness of character. With unceasing attention I have ob¬ served the unfolding dispositions of my children. As my object has been, in the cultivation of their minds, their ul¬ timate happiness, I have carefully re¬ strained every tendency which threaten¬ ed to affect it. Though you possess many amiable qualities, yet, my Rosette, with pain 1 mark, you betray a levity and inclination for novelty and amuse¬ ment, which, if improperly indulged, would tei minate in ruin. Pleasure is not the business of life: we are sent into the
the world tor nobler purposes than the gratification of selfish and immoderate passions. Amusement is not to be pur¬ chased at the expence of duties and those moral obligations which ought to bind us all in one chain of universal be¬ nevolence and active virtue. Let me then exhort you to attain a command over yourself, and to reflect upon the fa¬ tal effects of yielding to the impulse of inclination, when it militates against prudence and principle. When the sun in orient splendour called you from peaceful repose to the duties of the day, you had no intention to neglect any of them. But, my child, it is negative vir¬ tue which merely abstains from vice— tbe test of merit is resisting temptation. You may plead that you was persuaded by others : but where was your firmness —a firmness í have so often taught you w r as indispensable, to enable you to gain a victory over yourself—a victory more glorious and pleasing to God than all
all the vain conquests which have de luged the world in blood, and misled mankind by their false splendour? " You entered my chamber this morn¬ ing, and, with the tender affection of a daughter, expressed your pleasure at rinding me in health. We parted. How little were you aware, that before the dav was done, I should suffer by your imprudence ! But, my darling Rosette, I advert to this accident only to serve as a lesson, which, I hope, will be deeplv impressed upon you. The hour of temp¬ tation may arrive, and, if not resisted, may destroy your peace, and blast the prospects of your youth for ever. At that fated moment, may the guardian of virtue hover over my child, and protect and inspire her with unconquerable firm¬ ness !" As he uttered these words, the good man threw himself back in an agony oí' mind, as if a prophetic spirit foreboded some future evil to his daughter. vol. i. c Rosette,
Rosette, sunk in sorrow, was roused by this sudden emotion of her father; and falling on her knees before him, and clasping his hands, exclaimed—" Oh, my father! my beloved father! pity, pardon your Rosette ! From this mo¬ ment I will devote myself to thee : re¬ store me to favour—recover, and I shall again be happy !" The fervent and affectionate manner which accompanied this ejaculation con¬ veyed joy to the breast of this worthy parent. He clasped her to his heart, kissed her tenderly, and assured her of his pardon and affection. The amiable Adelaide with tears beheld this affect¬ ing scene, and w r as alternately pressed in the arms of her father. The good man was exhausted ; his daughters adminis¬ tered a composing draught, and left him to repose. In a few days he was able to leave ids apartment, and in a short time recovered his usual health and spirits. Happiness once more visited this vir« tuous
tuous family. The good-humour and benevolence of the worthy Blanchard, the bewitching softness of Adelaide. and the fascinating sprightliness of Ro¬ sette, drew around them their humble friends, and the cottage of the good man was the scene of mirth, hospitality, and virtuous enjoyment. The western sun, in chastened splen¬ dour, cheered the face of nature—the lofty tops of the mountains and the waving pines were gilded with its pur¬ ple and declining glories; the dulcet pipe of the rural swain floated on the gale ; the bleating of the flocks, and the dis¬ tant sound of the waterfall, struck upon the ear, and raised the contemplative soul to heaven. In this soft hour of cairn felicity, in an arbour with encircling fragrance, and shaded with a spreading ehesnut, the pious Blanchard, blessed with inter nal peace and domestic comfort, enjoy¬ ed the beauties of creation. His bloom- с 2 ing
mg daughters sat beside him. He play¬ ed upon bis pipe some little airs, expres- >ive of the simplicity and independence of those pure regions. Adelaide, in a soft and melodious voice, sung tbe sorrows of a love-lorn maid. The tale breathed w ? oc; Blan- ehard ¡sighed, and a tear of warm feeling graced the damask cheek of Rosette. "Give us your song/ said Blanchard. 44 I will, my father," she replied ; and with the fascinating powers of native grace and beauty, began her song. It was the " Rural Wedding." She sung of the virtues, the loves, the joys of the happy pair. The air was lively, and Ro¬ sette exerted herself to please her father. " Aly children," said Blanchard, throw¬ ing his arms round them, " these are happv moments, which the virtuous and unambitious can only know. What are the reflections arising from the guilty pleasures of the licentious ?—Where is the safety of tbe tyrant, whose throne totters
totters under him, and whose head wears the diadem of usurpation and cruelty ? —What constitutes tbe happiness of the cold-hearted and selfish, whose harul is never stretched out to succour the un¬ fortunate ? With such there is no feli¬ city, and splendid misery is the worst lot of man. In this humble vale, my child¬ ren, you experience a content which the grandeur of a palace can never bestow." " Ah, my father !" said Adelaide. who had listened with delight to his mild and affectionate instruction, " I sigh not for wealth and splendour: in your cottage, blessed with you, may Adelaide live and die !" He kissed off a tear that had stolen over the rose of her cheek. Rosette looked sorrowful, and ex¬ claimed, with a deep sigh—" Never but in thy cottage, my rather, shall thy Ro¬ sette know happiness." Tears filled her lovely eyes, and she wept upon her father's breast. с 3 ■· My
44 Aly children," he said, " if I have a wish for protracted existence, it is for vour sakes. I have watched over your early years—-I have leei you into the path of virtue—1 have cherished you with tender aflection ; hitherto you have lived m innocence and peace ; but that fated moment must arrive, wdiich will separate us forever, λ Veep not, my children ; I shall leave you to the protection of a merciful Being, wdio will be your cer¬ tain guide." He paused ; a sigh escaped him. He observed bis daughters pen¬ sive and affected—" Aly children, this is the hour of sensibility—benevolent spi¬ rits alone know it: it is a luxury to feel it, but it betrays a weakness to let it overcome us. It unfits us for the du¬ ties we owe to others, and w e ought not to anticipate sorrows that are unavoid¬ able; it destroys our present enjoyment, and implies a mistrust of the goodness eif Providence. Mortality is the lot of шап, and we ought to be armed with re- signation
signation to meet it. Divine religion will support us in tbe conflict of death, and remove all its gloomy terrors." He pressed his daughters to his breast blessed them, and took υρ his pipe. He played an air so lively and sweet, that all around them seemed reanimated : Echo reverberated the notes, sweet Phi¬ lomela attempted to imitate bis lays, the tender lambkin bleated in unison to the enchanting sounds, and the distant pipe 1 of a rustic swain was responsive to his strains. The mild countenance of Ade¬ laide was lighted up, and Rosette resu¬ med her usual gaiety.
r 4 KÌÌAV-
CHAPTER IV.
Ат this happy moment, their friend Glandolph approached them. Blan¬ chard loved him as a brother ; they were bred together from infancy, and their friendship grew, and strengthened with their years. Their characters for wis¬ dom and virtue were similar ; they were inseparable in youth, and in manhood reposed in each other unbounded confi¬ dence. Glandolph had a son and daughter, the joy and ргорг: of his declining years. He had married lis son to the beautiful Anatte. She wan amiable and modest, and loved Rodolphus with exemplary affection,
affection, wdiile all his joys were centered in Anatte, His only wish was to see his daugh¬ ter Agnes, who possessed all the mild anel endearing virtues of her sex, united to a man who deserved her; and now lie was likely to have it realized. The handsome Rosmond, brave, generous, and virtuous, had long loved her, and at last ventured to solicit the hand that could only form bis happiness. Glan¬ dolph consented ; he knew his worth, and wit!· joy anticipated an event which was likely to secure the future felicity of Agnes. " Friend of my heart and early youth Г' said he, " I am come to solicit your pre¬ sence at my daughter's wedding. Had Providence removed me, you would have been the father of my Agnes; anel 1 need hardly say, that on this occasion the company of yourself and lovely daughters is indispensable." The heart of Blanchard was ever alive to с 5 tiie
the pleasures of friendship and social in¬ tercourse, and pressed the band of Glan- dolpli as lie led him to a seat.—" Friend of my life! often have you gladdened mv heart in the heyday of youth, and softened its anguish in the hour of sor¬ row. Tbe welfare of your children is dear to me as my own—your joys arc* my joys, and our destinies are blended inseparably ; 1 will participate in the happy event, and rejoice with all,—Come. my llosette, tap a cask of our best wine. and let us drink to the prosperity of the youthful pair." llosette instantly obeyed, and returned with a mug of the finest produce of the vintage ; she filled a glass, and with the grace and blooming beauty of a Hebe. presented it to the worthy Glandolph. ť * Fair daughter of Virtue' I appoint thee my cupbearer-—henceforth ï will nave no other but thee," llosette laughed, and dropped upon tier knee—*' I will be thy cupbearer, oh Jupiter '
Jupiter ! but swear by the Styx thou wilt not dismiss me, though unluckily I should happen to fall." The jest and sprightly humour of Ro¬ sette delighted the good man : from in¬ fancy she had been his particular fa¬ vourite ; he caught her in his arms, ami affectionately kissed her rosy cheek. They drank to the happiness of Agi u к and her future spouse. The two old friends recalled in memory the ga> sal¬ lies of frolicsome youth ; thev toid a tale of other times, and amused their youth¬ ful auditors by their good-humour and sage reflections. The sun's last rays left a faint tinge of its unparalleled splendour on the towering mountains of St. Gotbard ; night was preparing her sable mantie to envelop the northern hemisphere in dark¬ ness, when Glandolph rose to depart. He kissed the lovely sisters, and pressed the hand of Blanchard. —" My friend, I meet you with joy, but part with reit к - c Q tance ;
tance ; our hearts are united by a friend¬ ship sacred and indissoluble : but myAg- nes will be anxious to meet me again in health and safety. Please the Almighty Disposer of human events ! we shall as¬ semble soon upon an occasion of rejoi¬ cing and happiness." The marriage of Agne? was to take place in eight days. Adelaide, by this event, anticipated the pleasure of seeing her youthful friend united to the object of her affection, wdiile Rosette was more engaged in laying out her dress, and pleasing herself with tbe gratification it was likely to afford her. At length the happy morn arrived; and as Adelaide and Rosette were chosen as bridemaids, they were dressed soon for the occasion. The diamonds of Gol- eonda blazed not upon them, nor did the silkworm lend its aid ; finery and fashion were unknown to them — they were dressed with simplicity and taste. Adelaide wore a white muslin jacket, trimmed
trimmed with fringe of her own making, and fitted nicely to hei delicate shape ; a white sash encircled her waist, anei her locks of gold richly fell over her shoul¬ ders, while her fair temples were bound with a wreath of white roses; but the rose of beauty blushed upon her cheek. Rosette's robe was white muslin, loosely made, and a broad white sash, tied care¬ lessly across her lovely shoulders, partly confined it ; a wreath of white rosebuds adorned her dark hair, and a rich bou¬ quet breathed its sweetness upon her more fragrant bosom. Blush, ye daughters of pomp and fashion ! after the labours of your toilet, the finery of the east, and the aid of art, to be eclipsed by the simple and un¬ adorned children of nature ! Thus radiant in youthful beauty, the artless daughters of Blanchard entered his apartment.—" Aly dear father," said Adelaide, ** we are ready." " But
tť But does our appearance please you?" said Rosette, turning gracefully round. ·* He whom thy exterior does not please ought never to be blessed with the sight of woman. But remember, my Rosette, that beauty only, like the rival rose, blooms to captivate, and ex¬ cite sentiments of regret upon its rapid decay. A wise man may admire a wo¬ man's beauty, but he can only esteem her for those charms of the mind which will ensure him a rational companion in the hours of reflection and domestic en¬ joyment/' A prayer in silence was breathed tor their happiness ; and taking an arm of each, he set out for the scene of friend¬ ship and festivity. The cottage of Glandolph was filled with his old friends, and a sprightly party of the young of both sexes. Agnes entered the room, blushing, and breath¬ ing sweetness and beauty ; she was at¬ tended
tended by Adelaide and Rosette: all eyes were upon them, and nature seem¬ ed to have lavished her choicest gifts up¬ on these lo veiy maids. Shortly after Rosmond arrived, and his manly countenance, animated with joy and rich in youthful beauty, excited the admiration of all, and a strong in¬ terest in bis happiness. The sacred ce¬ remony te>ok place, and their destinies were united. They returned from church to a plen¬ tiful entertainment; the best wines of the vintage inspired them, and friend¬ ship and hospitality diffused happiness. The jokes of the old, the hilarity of the young, and the charms of tbe unaffected nymphs of the valley, passed the time in social enjoyment till the hour of dan¬ cing. They assembled upon the green ; the old took their seats to look on, and every youth seized the hand of her he loved best. The pipe and tabor struck up; tlie dance
dance was formed, and led off by the bride 3 ; all was activity, mirth, and plea¬ sure. The swains by their gallantry testified their joy and admiration, and their blooming partners were no less de¬ lighted. An amiable youth, with a handsome form and gentle manners, had obtained the band of Rosette for the dance. Cap¬ tivated with her beauty, her vivacity, and manners, he anxiously hoped to re¬ tain her for the others. They had got to the bottom of the dance, when he left her, to procure her refreshment : during this interval, overcome with the heat and the exertion of dancing, she leaned carelessly against a fir-tree. A stranger passing through the valley was arrested by the sound of music, and the rural appearance of the dancers ; but turning his eyes towards Rosette, he was instantly rivetted to the spot. The roses of her cheeks were flushed with a deeper dye—her ruby lips breathed sweet¬ ness,
ness, and her full black eyes sparkled with fire and animation. He sprang from his horse, gave it to his attendant, and advanced towards her.—'* Lovely maid/ he said, " 1 am enchanted with this rural scene : will you permit a stran¬ ger to join you in the dance—a stranger not altogether unworthy of this fair hand ?" He seized it with avidity. Rosette blushed. " Will you dance with me ?" he ea¬ gerly inquired. " AJyşsîster is engaged, sir/ said Ade¬ laide. Ai ' " But my partner is absent/ observed Rosette. " Will you condescend to favour me with your hand for the next dance ?" Evidently pleased, she consented. Adelaide, with the mild countenance of a guardian angel, cast a look of dis¬ approbation ; but it was disregarded by Rosette. The noble mien and graceful appearance of the stranger bespoke him of
of rank and fashion. The easy dignity of his manners, the charm of his language, the elegance of his person, and the beau¬ ty of his countenance, dazzled and cap¬ tivated the volatile Rosette. At that moment her father's lessons on firmness and self-command were forgotten. * The music began for a new dance, the part¬ ners took their places, and this gay son of fashion led off the giddy but yet mo¬ dest Rosette. All eyes were fixed with admiration. Nature proudly might have exulted in her work, for she certainly never exhibit¬ ed a lovelier pair. Adelaide with uneasiness beheld his attentions to her sister. Looking at her as she moved gracefully through the dance, she sighed to herself—" Thy beau¬ ty might grace a diadem—but what will $uch a man think of an obscure cottager's daughter ?" She was roused from these reflections by the presence of Glandolph. The dews
dews of e\ ening were gathering,, and anxious for the health of the youthful party, the good man requested them to leave off dancing. He had been ap¬ prized that «ι gc ntleman had solicited ad¬ mission amongst them, and as he was looking for him, he perceived he was ad¬ vancing towards him. He thanked Glandolph in polite terms for the pleasure which the indulgence of his friends had afforded him.—** 1 am an intruder, sir, I feel ; but the beauty of the rural scencrv, to which 1 am a stran- ger, and the condescension of these love¬ ly females, must plead for me, if I have broken those rules wdiich decorum pre¬ scribes." " Sir," <"ч1 Glandolph, *' your appear¬ ance ani ices your rank in the higher order of the community. My humble cottage is not accustomed to such a guest —but the rich and the poor, the wretch¬ ed and the traveller, are ever welcome there», wh< n they stand in need of the little
little it can bestow. You require re¬ freshment—if you will condescend to ac¬ cept of such as my cot affords, let me in¬ duce you by the assurance of a hearty welcome." The stranger was thoughtful.—" Par¬ don me, sir, if I appear deficient in grate- iul acknowledgment ; but a short reflec¬ tion seems to convince me that virtue, benevolence, and all social and moral good, have fled the higher orders of so¬ ciety, and taken refuge in these happy mountains.'* Glandolph smiled, bowed, and con¬ ducted him to the cottage. An ample board, covered with game, fruits, cream, and wines, bespoke the kind landlord. The unknown guest had contrived to place himself by Rosette, and was paying her delicate but pointed attention. Blamlju .d with the keen eye of an anxious parent, observed his assiduities, and with pain perceived they were too favourably received. He withdrew, as soon
soon as respect fór his valued friend would permit him, and summoned his daughters to attend him.
CHAPTER V.
The next morning Blanchard called Rosette into his apartment. She enter¬ ed depressed : and as she approached him, the consciousness of having acted wrong, and regret at having occasioned him uneasiness, agitated her, and she hurst into tears. He took her kindly by the hand, and seated her by him.—" Aly dear child, 1 did not send for you to reproach you in virulent and painful language, but to re¬ monstrate, with a father's love, upon the impropriety
impropriety of your conduct at our wor¬ thy friend's. You broke through the rules of good-breeding and decorum, in relinquishing the hand of an amiable young man, to whom you was engaged in the dance, to bestow yours upon a stranger, whose character and conduct are unknown here. His personal attractions, his air of rank and fashion, and his in¬ sinuating manners, seemed to captivate your whole attention. But, my llosette, what is title, wealth, and beauty, if the soul is destitute of virtue, and tlie mind isaprey to sensual influence? I am never predisposed to think uncharitably ; but thismanisunrevealed—we must be cau¬ tious. The schemes and deep-laid plans of the designing are not seen through by the unsuspicious, and even those endow¬ ed with superior powers cf judgment and penetration have been the dupes of tlieir deception. How necessary then is it to caution you, young, warm, gene¬ rous, and inexperienced, against the in¬ sinuations
sinuations of a man seemingly so much elevated above you ! Grant to this stranger all the virtues wiiich my fond wishes combine in the man destined to be the tender protector of my child, yet the disparity of birth precludes the pro¬ bability of his having any serious or ho¬ nourable intention. Aware of this, be guarded and firm ; and should he again be seen here, fly his presence, as you would the hungry lion, ready to make that lovely form his prey. You have been born and nurtured in these peace¬ ful mountains; confine your views with¬ in their limits, and virtue and happiness will be your portion. Let no unhappy prepossession for this casual visitor find a place in your breast—tliat breast hither¬ to the mansion of joyous innocence. Do not think I aim at chilling the warm and generous impulse of youth by the frigid lessons of age and experience : on the contrary, I have ever promoted the enjoyment
enjoyment of your juvenile parties, and that virtuous intercourse with our sex, so pleasing, and what creates our mutual good and domestic felicity. Virtue has been my guide through life—I placed all my confidence in her never-failing suc¬ cour ; she smoothed the blasts that en¬ countered me on my way, she cheered my soul when oppressed with sorrow, and has brought me to a haven of rest." ** Ah, my father/ said Rosette, in a voice of sorrow, " why did I not inherit thy virtues ! Alas ! I feel how unwor¬ thy I am of thee. Thy lessons of wis¬ dom and piety, thy acts of charity, and thy life of friendship and benevolence, ought to have strengthened my frail na¬ ture by precept and example, bucklered me against evil, and formed my soul to reasonable purposes and steady resolves." Overcome with a sense of her weak¬ ness, conscious of having erred, and dis¬ tressed that she had pained the bosom of so
so tender and worthy a father, she threw herself into his arms, and shed tears of affection and repentance. He soothed and exhorted her to de¬ spise those little gratifications of a mo¬ ment, incompatible with real happiness, and so sure of bringing with them dis¬ appointment and regret. Encouraged by his mild tone of affec¬ tion, strengthened by the wisdom and solidity of his admonitions, her bosom calmed; she implored him to continue to warn her of her errors, and to direct and restrain the propensities of her nature. A tear of parental tenderness stole down bis cheek, and Rosette affection¬ ately kissed it off. Harmony was re¬ stored, and peace (oh, Virtue! ever thine) reigned in the cottage : Blanchard was happy, Adelaide was undeviating, and Rosette determined to be so. F very wish seemed to be to please her rather. Anxious to fulfil her duties, the rising vol. i. d sun
sun, scarcely above the horizon, roused her from slumber. " Alas !" she said to herself, " I have erred—I have distressed, by my conduct, the best of fathers, and an amiable and affectionate sister. Henceforth I will be correct, steady, and resolute : this win¬ ning stranger, brilliant in beauty and graces, shall not steal the heart of Ro¬ sette, nor estrange it from duty." As the care of the flock alternately devolved upon the sisters, it happened that Adelaide was the shepherdess of the day, and Rosette was busy in domestic arrangements. Her father's bed-room had undergone some little repair, and she was exerting her taste in disposing the simple ornaments. She was stand¬ ing at tbe w indow, watering some plants, and was bestowing particular care upon h< r father's favourite im rtle; the tramp¬ ling of horses induced her to look up, and she instantly caught the eyes of the "ti anger. Flushed—
Flushed—agitated, she abruptly shut the casement.—" Ah !" she sighed, " why does he come here with that graceful form and lovely countenance? It haunts me. Can art and crime wear the spe¬ cious semblance of honour and sweet¬ ness? Ah no! But what is it to me? He retains no thought of her whom he solicited to mingle in the dance. He shall not break my repose." The fascinations of this beautiful youth, and his flattering attentions, had made a serious impression upon the heart of Rosette; but ever influenced by pure principles, and the warning voice of her beloved father, she had ba¬ nished him from her recollection. Alas! this inauspicious incident convinced her he was too near her affections, and too easily recalled. To her fervid imagina¬ tion he now appeared with a thousand additional graces. Occupied vvitb these reflections, she was sunk in thought when her sistei d 2 entered
entered the room. Observing her pen¬ sive air, she tendei ly inquired into the nature of her meditations? Ever accustomed to the confidence of one another, Rosette gladly laid open her heart, and implored her to strengthen her by her example and counsel. ·* Ah, my dear Rosette ! does not rea¬ son tell you to banish from your mind tina enemy to your peace and our do¬ mestic felicity? Reason is our surest guide: the disposition to give way to ill-placed attachment ought to be super¬ seded by it ; else why did the gracious Author of our beings endow us with powers of mind next to himself, but to enable us to restrain propensity, and re¬ gulate the passions ^ Love is the im¬ pulse of nature, and tbe ordinance of Heaven, whereby its immutable decrees are cai ri cd into effect. Reciprocal and virtuous iittciehments form the basis of moral good and rational pleasure. Ob- save the e ally and pure affections of Agnes
Agnes and Anatte; they have termi¬ nated in happy unions, likely to ensure domestic jo) % and to close the evening of life in tlu bosom of friendship. The retrospect of a well-spent life causes no painful reflections, A self-approving conscience carries a charm with it, that will bear us up against every evil—lead us through the intricate mazes of life—- inspire ns with hope when the shades of death gather around us, and extend our views to a blessed futurity. This life of peace and hereafter happiness cannot be purchased by tbe gratification of selfish and thoughtless passions. Deviations from rectitude lead to habits; habits in time become confirmed, and the virtuous tenor of the soul is lost. Rouse, my Rosette^ to exertion of mind ! be deter¬ mined to discourage tbe image of this intruder, whom chance may have brought here again, or, if he looks to meet with you, seeks to destroy the quiet of that gentle bosom." d 3 Rosette's
Rosette's attention was fixed upon her sister; she thought she appeared some¬ thing more than human. Нет cheek glowed with the energy of virtue, and her mild eyes were lighted up with a pure and benevolent spirit. The inte¬ rest she felt in a sister whom she ten¬ derly loved threw a lustre over her fea¬ tures, and seemed to inspire her with wisdom above her years. Thus, oh, Virtue ! is the charm of thy divine influence: thou conferrest a dig¬ nity upon the most humble of thy vo¬ taries, whieh the wealth of princes and the splendour of a crown cannot bestow. Rosette tenderly loved her sister, and venerated her virtues. She threw her¬ self into her arms, warmly expressed her affection, and ardently wished she might be enabled to copy her excellence. Adelaide, with a tender regard for her father's peace, kept from his knowledge the cireumstance of the stranger passing the house, and prudently provided a- gainst
gainst the chance of her sister meeting with him, by entirely superintending the flock herself, while Rosette was busy in domestic employments.
CHAPTER VI.
A week passed, and nothing occurred to excite the alarm of Adelaide. She began to think her sister's health might suffer, from not having her usual exer¬ cise: she advised her to resume her wonted duties, to regain her cheerful¬ ness, and cease to cherish the idea of a man so fatal to her repose. Dear to her soul, the influence of her beloved Adelaide never ceased to ope¬ rate. She studied her counsel, and pro- D 4 fited
fited by it. Tranquillity returned to her bosom—health bloomed on her cheek—and conscious rectitude irradia¬ ted her beauty. She led her fleecy care to the richest pasture. Under the shade of the darksome pine, or umbrageous oak of brighter verdure, she reclined with a book, or sung the wild airs of her native mountains. One fine evening, when scarcely a zephyr moved the foliage, the western sky, richly streaked in golden and crim¬ son glories, threw a blush over the face of nature; the tops of the distant Alps, with sublime grandeur, struck the eye with wonder and admiration. The beauty of such striking scenery was not lost upon Rosette ; she had been taught by her father to observe the stupendous works of creation with religious awe.— " To praise the works of the beneficent Being," he would say, " is gratitude, and, as incense, rises to Heaven !" In this hour of still repose, Rosette sat
sat watching her charge. The harmony that reigned stole over her feelings : she sung a plaintive air, and the melody of her voice seemed to charm the feathered race, as they joined in her music. She had finished her song, when a rust¬ ling amongst the leaves made her start ; she hastily turned her head, and beheld the stranger. She instantly got up, and attempted to fly ; but it was in vain—he seized her hand, and detained her, " Beautiful Rosette, why do you fly me?—why fly from the man who loves you, and who has sought to breathe his soul at ye)ur feet—to bestow bis heart, and to transplant you to a more ge¬ nial soil, where so fair a flower may bloom, flourish, and excite the admira¬ tion of all around? These humble val¬ leys are unbefitting so rare a treasure as Rosette; they conceal the charms that, in tlieir proper .γιι ere, would shine She leading star of beauty and fashion. Fly D 5 with
with me, and wealth and splendour shall surround you." " Fly with you, insidious stranger ! What mean your words? Think not, in the polished language of superior birth, to allure me by your professions of love, professions as deceitful and fleeting as the breath which gives them utterance. Talk not uf wealth and splendour : I am equally a stranger to them, as I am to the vices and follies which too often at¬ tend them. I am humble and unknown, but the precepts of a wise and pious pa¬ rent have taught me that virtue is sub¬ stantial happiness. If now, whoever you are, or however exalted your rank, the virtuous and independent soul of Blanchard would spurn your alliance, were you destitute of those virtues which, he considers, elevate one human being above another. I have neither ambition nor vanity enough to believe your protestations: if honourable, you would
would not shim the presence of my fa¬ ther." In finishing these words, she disen¬ gaged herself from his hold, and hastily turned from him ; but he again caught her hand, and prevented her going, " Ah, charming Rosette ! condemn me not too hastily. You are not aware of the reasons which compel me to act with a seeming want of candour. I have fled my paternal roof, because the tyranny of an ambitious father w r ould force me to give my hand where my heart was ever averse. No, lovely maid ! it is you alone who fill my soul. From the first mo¬ ment I beheld you, that fair form has haunted me incessantly. I fly to silence and solitude ; but, alas ! there you pur¬ sue me, and, by one glance of those bright eyes, rivet my chains for ever. Speak to me, Rosette ! Ah ! let me dare to hope you return my passion ! Aly destiny is in your hands—it is you only can heal the wounds you have D 6 made—
made —you alone can restore me to joy and unutterable felicity. Leave these gloomy mountains: let me snatch you from the fate which awaits you if you remain here — obscurity and oblivion. Leave your father, and I will place you beyond the reach of misfortune: tbe chilling blasts of penury shall never blight that beauteous form, and plea¬ sure and affluence shall attend vou.". The ardent manner which accom¬ panied his words, his tall and elegant figure, the fascination of his language, and the sparkling beauties of his counte¬ nance, heightened by a deep suffusion occasioned by the agitation of his feel¬ ings, too powerfully conspired to fix his image in the bosom of Rosette : but the words " leave your father" liad struck upon her ear, and, like the talisman of virtue, instantly roused her to firmness and dignity. " Leave my father! Ah, treacherous шап ! is it thus you seek to gain my affec¬ tion.
tion, by attempting to undermine every principle of duty and obligation ! In the humble cottage of Blanchard virtue dwells, and that happiness which your proffered wealth can never bestow." Thus saying, she suddenly freed her hand, and with incredible swiftness was out of sight. She sought her father, and related to him the sudden appearance of the stran¬ ger, and the language he addressed to her. With the vigilant eye of a parent he penetrated the motive which led this artful and dangerous man to seek his daughter.— w Let me again caution you to fly his presence. Beware of fostering any idea of his intentions being honour¬ able. Judge not of him by the integri¬ ty of your own heart. He would blush as much at making you his wife, as I would at seeing you the victim of his licentiousness. The vices of men of ex¬ alted rank particularly undermine the cause
cause of virtue and morality» They are too often enabled by their wealth and power to screen themselves from the punish¬ ment due to their crimes ; the meridian sun of fortune casts a splendour about them, and their deeds of sin are lost in its blaze. Be firm and resolute in the hour of temptation. Remember, my Rosette, that by one unguarded act you may darken the pleasing prospects of your youth for ever." The injunctions of her father were ever sacred to her, and she determined strictly to observe them : but when alone, the image of this bewitching man pre¬ sented itself to her fervid fancy, array¬ ed in all its assemblage of charms and graces. " Ah !" she said to herself, " can false¬ hood and treachery be the inmates of so fair a temple ?—has Nature lavished her choicest gifts upon this stranger, only to render him irresistible, and to ensure his success in the career of vice ? Ah
* Ah no ! it cannot be !— Alay my father not bej mistaken ? Hope whispers, he may love with lionour and truth the humble Rosette. No! false and fatal idea, where would you lead me?—into a labyrinth of despair, from which rea¬ son alone can extricate me." Thus her peace was affected, and her sprightliness fled ; but, resolved to smo¬ ther so hapless an attachment, she avoid¬ ed every chance of meeting with its ob¬ ject, and trusted to time for the re-es¬ tablishment of that content which had hitherto been her lot.
CH/ P-
CHAPTER VII
The worthy Blanchard, anxiously alive to the safety and happiness of his daugh¬ ters, had been distressed by the intru¬ sion of the unknown gentleman at the wedding of Agnes. The rank which his appearance indicated rendered him, he considered, the more formidable : but as he was not aware that he had been seen near his cottage, he had lulled his fears, in the hope that he would not appear again, and that tbe charms of Rosette would soon be forgotten. His suspicions were again excited. His surprising her alone, his professions of love, his allurements of Λν ealth and independence,
independence, and his base entreaty to " leave her father/ convinced him that his views were profligate, and his plans concerted. He resolved his daughter should not be exposed to the hazard of meeting him again. He enjoined her not to leave home but under his pro¬ tection, or accompanied by her friends. This prudent measure being adopted by this virtuous parent, it will soon appear how necessary it was and the power and influence he had to guard against in this enemy to his domestic joys. He was the son of the baron Montalvo, the high magistrate of Bern, and chief governor of the aristocratic cantons. His influence in the confede¬ rated republic, his splendid fortune and illustrious family, rendered him one of the most conspicuous and powerful cha¬ racters in the government This son, the heir to his rank and fortunes, was the pride of a weak and indulgent mo¬ ther. In infancy he had been the spoil¬ ed
ed darling of her selfish affection : every whim had been gratified, every error overlooked, and passion, pride, and pro¬ pensity, had been allowed their full sway. Nature, as it has been observed, had selected her favours to adorn his person ; in face and figure he was completely beautiful. He had a good understand- ing, and was not destitute of the quali¬ ties of the heart, had they been culti¬ vated ; but his mother's unjustifiable in¬ dulgence perverted the advantages which he possessed. His personal attractions she studied to improve by every embellishment that fortune furnished her with, and her pride was hourly gratified by the commenda¬ tions parsed upon the beauty and accom¬ plishments of the youthful Alphonso. The most able masters bad been ap¬ pointed to teach him every branch of elegant and fashionable acquirement, wdiile the culture of his heart, and fixing principles of virtue and honour, had been totally
totally neglected by her who ought to have been most assiduous in cultivating them. His captivating figure, his graces, and fascinating powers of pleasing, had gained him the admiration of the high circles be moved in. The most accom¬ plished females were anxious to attract him, and the first families in Bern would have been proud to have formed an alli¬ ance with the house of Alontalvo. But a virtuous and honourable con¬ nexion was remote from tbe intentions of the gay Alphonso : he was engaged İn an endless round of dissipated plea¬ sures, and as his father allowed him a splendid income, he was too amply sup¬ plied with the means of gratifying every guilty propensity. He was practised in every art of seduction, and many an in¬ nocent female had fallen a victim to his treacherous plans. It was in vain for a father, husband, or brother, to look for redress. If a tale of domestic injury was disclosed to his mother, it was either dis¬ regarded,
regarded, or considered juvenile indis¬ cretion, which his fortune and fashion sanctioned. His father, wholly occu¬ pied by the political affairs of the state, had little time, or indeed inclination, to look into the moral conduct of his son : he was satisfied to see him received every¬ where with the most fiattering applause, and acknowledged as highly qualified to support the hereditary honours of his house. Such was the finished character whom chance threw in the way of the simple Rosette. From the moment he beheld her on the green, her beauty caught, fired, and fixed him. The beautiful Adelaide struck him with admiration; but her reserve repelled the slightest ad¬ vances towards her, while the natural vivacity of her sister rendered her more accessible. He was astonished to find a cultiva¬ tion of mind and superiority of manners which he conceived entirely above the humble
humble sphere of their destiny. Blan¬ chard attracted his investigation ; but he shrunk from the task: his still hand¬ some countenance was illumined with cultivated reason and conscious virtue; his intelligent eye had marked the stran¬ ger, and seemed to penetrate his soul's dark thoughts. Alontalvo, in his company, had sat uneasy ; he felt birth and fortune w r ere not sufficient, and was compelled to feel that a humble cottager had inspired him with awe: he determined to elude his observation, and seek every means to encounter Bosette. A fortnight had elapsed since tbe wedding, and from that time he had formed bis views. He bad taken up his abode in a private manner at the village, which was a quarter of a mile from the valley where Blanchard's cottage stood. He was enabled to take bis measures from the - 4-lligenee of bis servant, a worth¬ ies, creature, who was the minister of his
his excesses, and who had attained such influence over him, that the faint calls of conscience were soon silenced by his iniquitous reasoning. By his means he had been led to Ro¬ sette when alone, and he acted as a vigi¬ lant spy upon the movements of this in¬ nocent family. Though watchful as an Argus, he had not been able to learn any thing of her, whom it will be recol¬ lected her father's prudence had kept out of tbe way. The dazzling beauty, innocence, and lively manners of Rosette, had filled anel fired the mind of Alontal- vo, and he determined to relinquish no scheme, however difficult, or likely to prove abortive, in the hope he would succeed in alluring her into his power. His intimating to her his father's inten¬ tion to compel him to marry was a fa¬ brication, artfully contrived to support his plan : he suspected Blanchard 's vigi¬ lance was roused, and his chief point vvas to lull it. Despairing
Despairing ofall opportunity to prac¬ tise bis arts upon the youthful heart of Rosette, he boldly determined to go to ihe cottage, varnish the tale that villany suggested, and, if possible, ingratiate himself into the opinion of Blanchard. Towards tbe close of the day, after its labours had been industriously pursued, Blanchard dedicated the evenings to the improvement of his daughters : he read to them, played upon his pipe, and mixed in the sports of their juvenile parties. His conversation was a source of pleasure: they listened with delight, and were charmed by his wisdom. He portrayed, in bright colours, the ami¬ able mother who had given them birth, and expired in the flower of youth and beauty ; he strengthened their minds by useful knowledge, and enlarged them by general principles. In one of those rational hours, his daughters sat beside him employed in needlework. Blending amusement with instruction,
instruction, he was reading to them the history of William Tell, the brave de¬ fender and avenger of Helvetic liberty. With the soul and inborn independence of a Swiss, he had entered into the spirit of tbe hero : be was expatiating with feel¬ ing and energy on his valour and virtues, when he heard some one inquire of his ¡servant if bis master was at home ? The voice struck him ; he hastily laid down his book, and he assumed a firm and dignified aspect. The stranger en¬ tered—the only man who had ever ex¬ cited terror in his fearless breast. Blan¬ chard rose, bowed, and requested him to be seated, Alontalvo, with all tbe sang froid of fashionable manners and dauntless feel¬ ings, pcllteiy inquired after his health; anel fixing his eyes upon tbe blushing Rosette and her sister, he passed the louai compii merits. " 1 hank God ! my family are well. And now, ur, Τ must request you to in¬ form
form me to what motive I am indebted for the honour you do me in this visit Τ The grave manner of Blanchard, and his direct question, disconcerted him, but he was soon himself. " Sir, from the casual moment which introduced me to your family, I have felt a particular interest. The superior minds and the graces of your charming daughters have gained my warmest ad¬ miration, and I hesitate not to confess that your youngest has inspired me with a passion as ardent as it is sincere. I shall willingly renounce the splendid ad¬ vantages of birth and fortune, to bestow my hand upon your amiable daughter, My father is a man of rank and power in the republic : í am bis only son, and succeed to bis hereditary fortune 1 . He is proud and ambitious, and proposes a marriage for me with one of tbe first fa¬ milies in Switzerland : hb object in ìbis alliance is to gratify his pride—4o bring me wealth, and destroy my happiness, vol. i. к by
by compelling me to give my hand where my heart rejects. You will then per¬ ceive, sir, that disappointed in the ob¬ ject of his policy, there is no hope at present of my obtaining his consent toa marriage that militates against his views but must ensure my happiness. If you will agree to it, 1 shall privately espouse ) our daughter, and that happy day which you think proper to appoint shall unite our destinies. A short time will con¬ vince my father of the tyranny of his measures, and resentment will give way to parental affection. Your daughter will then be received with the cordiality and respect which will be due to her .situation, and which her virtues and beauty are so eminently calculated to adorn " Montalvo ceased, and Blanchard, who ñda fixed his penetrating eye upon him, and had listened with steady attention, calmly replied—" Far be it from me, sir, \UiO am a parent myself, to encourage any
any act that sets at defiance parental au¬ thority. A parent has no right to sacri¬ fice tbe happiness of a child to gratify a ruling passion, nor would a just one require the sacrifice ; he is bound by ties, human and divine, to contribute all in his power to his temporal and eternal happiness. On the other hand, it is the duty of a son to conciliate a father's con¬ sent to bis wishes, by patiently pointing out that he had mistaken the object of his happiness by the interest he felt in his welfare, and not by an act, direct or indirect, shake off that authority which cherished and protected his youth. The advantages of birth and fortune, which you are willing to relinquish for my daughter, are unquestionably great sacrifices on your part, but they have no weight with me. I esteem no man but for his virtues—that is the lustre that will gild the humblest name. The deference considered clue to rank I com¬ ply with, from a sense ofthat moral and E 2 civil
civil concord which is necessary for the good of the state, and the keeping the subordinate classes of tbe community in order and peace. " I am well convinced, from the hum¬ ble birth, the artless manners, and simple education of my daughters, they are bet¬ ter calculated to conduct a cottage than preside in a palace. But whatever sta¬ tions they are doomed to fill, whether in the higher or lowest orders of the statt, my ambition is to see them virtuous, happy, and support an honest name. If, therefore, sir, you find, in maturely weighing this important subject, that my daughter is the decided object of your affection—that you can procure your father's sanction to the match, and my Bosette is disposed to accept you, I shall then think 1 have no right to prevent a union. In the mean time, sir, I forbid any communication with my daughter, as I am determined never to give my consent to a secret marriage. Every
Every clandestine act, wdiere there is no absolute necessity for its being so, I cr i- sider a deviation of honour ; and no child of mine shall languish under the con¬ tempt of a disappointed and haughty father-in-law." So saying he arose, reminded his daughters they supped from home, and bowed to Montalvo, who took his leave, disconcerted but not discouraged.
e3
CHAP-
CHAPTER VIII
Af οντλιλό, in the course of his propo¬ sal to Blanchard, had been careful to conceal his name—to give a specious gloss to his intentions—to allure the good man into confidence, and gain access to Rosette. Blanchard was not to be deceived. Endowed with uncommon sagacity, he was fully persuaded he sought the ruin of his paternal peace ; and the following morning, as he sat at breakfast, he ad¬ dressed his daughters.—" Aly children, I am ffoiiiíí to call vour attention to a subject upon which our future happiness may rest. You were present when this dangerous
dangerous stranger introduced himself, and you heard what was his motive and proposal. As it particularly concerns you, my Rosette, I entreat you to be impressed with the cautions of a father, whose chief object has been the prospe¬ rity of his children. This man professes to love, and proposes to marry you : be¬ lieve it not—it is the tale of treachery, to get admittance to you, and deceive me, by a specious appearance of honour and truth. To ask you if you are disposed to love him, would be to mock your feelings—I am aware he has made too much impression upon your heart. Youth is the season for warm and generous at¬ tachments—nature is not to be extin¬ guished, but restrained by virtue, and regulated by prudence. No marriage can be felicitous that is not founded on affection, and no affection can be per¬ manent that is not generated by esteem. Short-lived is the influence which beauty gives, and transitory is the passion it j: 4 creates.
creates. This young man has had nei¬ ther time nor opportunity to esteem you for the qualities of your mind, and he is taken with those only that, like the beautiful i ose, blooms for a day, ex- panels its sweets, fades, withers, and dies. If he loves you with tbe sincerity he professes, he will seek no clandestine me j ans te) prove it, but pursue those that will testify his honourable intentions : in the mean time, whatever they are, it is my pe>sitive desire that he has no ad¬ mittance to you. I have every confi¬ dence in your virtue and tender affec¬ tion ; but, my dear child, there is a want of firmness in your character, that if you do not strive to attain, may lead you into irretrievable ruin. 1 have guarded my children with unremitting care, but the tirne approaches when they must act for themselves ; course of years will de¬ prive you of my protection: your con¬ duct, if correct, will be your safeguard, and the arm of a guardian God will ex¬ tend
tend over you, and strengthen your best resolves." He finished his early meal, tenderly embraced his daughters, and went to pursue the duties of the day. Montalvo, upon quitting Blanchard, perceived there was no hope of lulling his suspicions, or imposing upon bis wis¬ dom and discernment. Eagle-eyed, he felt he penetrated his soul, and was in¬ accessible to his art. Three weeks had passed since his vi¬ sit, and he had not been seen. Blan¬ chard was relieved ; he cherished the hope that he had left the place, and that his enjoyment with his family would no more be disturbed. From tbe bene¬ volence of his nature he was ever averse to assume authority. His moral lessons were inculcated with mildness and rea- son; his daughters listened to him with pleasure, and obeyed him from aflection. He had restricted Rosette in her usual habits of exercise, but conceiving tbe E 5 necessity
necessity had ceased, he gladly removed the restraint. He was pleased to ob¬ serve her disposition to subdue the im¬ pressions she bad received: his increas¬ ing kindness awakened her tenderest feelings, and, happy in bis company, she forgot the sorrow of her heart. The amiable Anatte had cemented her happy union with Rodolphus by bring¬ ing him a fine boy. The child w T as go¬ ing to be christened, and all their friends were invited upon the joyful occasion. Blanchard and Glandolph formed but etne family; their connexions, their in¬ terests, and tlieir enjoyments, like their friendship, were inseparable. Glandolph knew that his friend's quiet and domes¬ tic joys had been lately affected. He bad succeeded in removing his appre¬ hensions, and he hoped their social party would restore bis spirits to their usual tone. Tbe day arrived, and the friends as- feir-bled to witness the holy ceremony. The
The lovely babe received the prayers of the church, the benediction of the priest, and the blessings of the company. The youthful mother breathed a prayer for it, as she pressed it to her breast, and the grateful father prayed it might inherit the virtues of its grandfather. They sat down to a plentiful board, where virtue, harmony, and friendship presided. Strangers to wealth and folly, all slavish ceremony was banished there: no cold-hearted unmeaning con: plaisance —no trifling manners, current from the stamp of fashion, but good-breeding, the result of a benevolent heart, reason, and social intercourse. The young people had entered into the games and pastime usual amongst them. Every cheek was rosy witli health, every eye sparkled with joy, and every heart dilated with good-humour. Blanchard had committed a present for the little Glandolph to the care of Ro¬ sette. This little memorial of friend- K 6 ship
ship had, on coming away, been forgot¬ ten. She recollected it when they got to Anattďs, but afraid her father might think her careless of the charge, she had not mentioned it to him, and watched an opportunity to go home for it. During an interval between the games,, Rosette stole from the party, and whis¬ pered to Adelaide her intention, and bid her take no notice of her absence to her father, for she should soon return— ^ " Keep my place for me, mv Adelaide ; I decide upon those who forfeit in the next game." She stole a kiss from her sister, and, unperceived, left the room. Ingoing home, she liad to pass through a meadow where cattle were grazing. xV large bull was among them ; it was fhe terror of many, but not of Rosette 1 , as she was well acquainted with its pa¬ cific nature, if buffeied to remain quiet. At this moment it was attacked by a fe¬ rocious dog, set en by the wanton cruelty of
of some idle and brutal by-standers. The patient animal bore for some time tbe unprovoked assault of its antagonists, but by repeated attacks, torn, bleeding, and assaileel from all quarters with dirt, sticks, and stones, it had become furious, and was ready to gore and tear to pieces every thing that e>pposed it, or came in its way. At this unlucky moment, the defence¬ less Rosette entered the meadow from a narrow path, which prevented her seeing it, till it was too late to retreat. Tbe tortured and enraged beast was directly in her way, and threatened immediate destruction. A shriek of terror from the sudden danger before her arrested the animal, when a man darted through an opening of the hedge, seized it by one of its horns, and with incredible dexterity turned it about. It immedi¬ ately took an opposite direction, and quitted the meadow. The terrified and sinking Rosette en¬ deavoured to collect strength to thank her
her deliverer. She turned her averted eyes towards him ; but what were her emotions, when she beheld that fascinat¬ ing being, so fatal ^o her repose ! Trem¬ bling from the danger she had escaped, and still more agitated at the presence of him who had rescued her, she attempted to express her thanks, but her faltering accents died upon her lips, lie supported her in his arms, and blessed tbe propitious star that led him to snatch her from the fury of the for¬ midable animal.—" Ah, charming Ro¬ sette! what hazard would I not run, and what danger would I not brave, to pro¬ tect that lovely person ! and what sacri¬ fice would I not make, to convince you of my ardent passion, which neither time nor reason can subdue !" Roused to exertion by his protesta¬ tions, and the danger she felt in listening to bim, all-armed as he was with fatal powers to conquer, she hastily replied— ** You made your proposals to my father, and
and you are acquainted with his reasons for rejecting them. I shall gratefully re¬ member your generous conduct in ex¬ posing yourself to preserve me ; but my father has forbidden all intercourse, and duty and inclination enjoin me to abide by his orders." She quickened her pace to get to the house, but tbe persecuted bull wa« in the path that led from the meadow ; there was no alternative but to leave it, and take a circuit of two fields, which unavoidably extended Rosette's walk, and gave Montalvo, what he too eagerly desired, a longer opportunity of exer¬ cising his persuasive talents on hv art¬ less heart He told her he had written to his mo¬ ther, and had informed her of his un¬ changeable attachment—that his happi¬ ness depended upon a union with the amiable object of it, and begged her to use her influence with his father to ob¬ tain his consent—" I have this day re¬ ceived
ceivcd an answer from my mother. She assures me of the interest she takes in my happiness, and that my attachment has the sanction of her approbation. She has convinced me that an application to my father at present, irritated with disappointment in his ambitious views in forming an alliance with one of the richest families in Bern, would only pre¬ clude the hope of future reconciliation, and deprive me of the fortune that rest¬ ed with his will. But, charming Ro¬ sette ! my mother bids me assure you how much she wishes to promote our happiness, and that if you will accom¬ pany me to Bern, she will be ready to receive you, and by a private marriage ensure our felicity. My father, she adds, will in time relent, and feel the injustice be does me in cherishing resentment for declining splendid misery, to possess my¬ self of the only female my heart ap¬ proves." ť ' Хо," said llosette, firmly, '* I de¬ cline
cline your proposal ; if you esteemed me as much as you profess to love, you would never have made it. The bait you hold out cannot allure me. You profess a passion that cannot be honourable, else you would not seek to draw me from duty, and an affectionate parent. Aly father is no tyrant, but the friend of his children : in their good he has been ac¬ tuated by no vain schemes of fleeting for¬ tune; their peace and ultimate happi¬ ness have been his aim. Elevated as you are by rank, possessed of the advantages ©f fortune, ende>wed with tlie exterior graces of youth and beauty—brilliant as are these gifts, I would not unite my humble destiny to yours, nor share a throne with hi in who would seek to se¬ parate me from my father." "Ah, Rosette!" cried Montalvo, "mis¬ take me not. I have no wish to allure. you from your father, but to separate you for a short time, to secure our hap¬ piness by a private marriage, which your father
father has resolutely declared against, and mine, by all the powers of reason¬ ing, could not be induced at present to sa. ì etion. Are we then to be the sacri¬ fices of a haughty ambition on one side, and the scrupulous exactness of a roman¬ tic sense of honour on the other ? I have already mentioned, I shall enjoy my fa¬ ther's hereditary fortune at his death—he cannot disinherit me; but his private property, which is immense, is at his own disposal, and, if inclmed, he can cut me off from all advantage. You will perceive how impolitic it would be, either to urge his consent, or act contrary to his wishes by a public marriage. I enjoy a liberal income from my father, augment¬ ed by my mother's allowance, and a handsome provision left me by an uncle. I bave a beautiful villa, situated on the banks of the Aar, adorned by nature and art with all that can render it delightful for study, recreation, and enjoyment. Thither, after the auspicious hour which makes
makes you mine, would I transplant my Rosette, to be its dearest ornament, and to bloom the fairest and sweetest flower in the garden of creation. " In this elegant retreat, fitted for love and friendship, tbe worthy Blanchard and lovely Adelaide should find a permanent asylum. There your father would rest from the cares of the flock, and the la¬ bours of the field ; no longer would his paternal bosom he agitated with the anx¬ iety of making a provision for his child¬ ren, nor throb with anguish at the painful reflection of leaving them unpro¬ tected to a treacherous world. There his benevolent spirit would continue to watch over, instruct, and delight them, by his lesboos of wisdom and virtue. When time will have softened the aspe¬ rity of disappointment, my father shall be made acquainted with our happy union. Then my adored Rosette shall grace the brightest circles in Bern, and be the envy, the admiration, and the pole-star
pole-star of rank and fashion ; while her lovely satellite, the interesting Adelaide, will no less attract all eyes, and be soli¬ cited to accept tbe hand that holds out wealth and honours." As he finished these words, they en¬ tered the enclosure that led up to Blan¬ chard's house. The designing Montalvo perceived the critical moment was ar¬ rived, and he determined to profit by it He had observed that Rosette had list¬ ened to the latter part of his discourse with more composure and a slower step. Accustomed in his criminal pursuits to watch and mark all the inlets to passion, to trace tbe wanderings, the waverings, and weaknesses of the female heart, he perceived that already the firmness of Rosette was shaken; and he was too deeply skilled in the art of ruin to over¬ look the slightest symptom which in¬ dicated the progress he had made. Fatal perception í He had hit upon the chord which vibrated to her feelings : pomp
pomp and splendour, wealth and title, danced in gay visions before her, intoxi¬ cated her youthful fancy, and blended with the amiable and benevolent quali¬ ties of her heart—weaknesses too apt to predominate, but when under the in¬ fluence of her father's virtuous and reli¬ gious precepts. Keenly sighted to the varied expres¬ sion of her artless countenance, with fa¬ cility he translated every turn, and was too well convinced his dangerous image usurped her bosom, and revelled in all the fullness of imagery. Too ingeni¬ ously had be contrived to remove tbe obstacle of separation from her father— an obstacle that in her gayest moment would have arrested her, and brought her back to duty. Specious in all his ar¬ guments, he had infused into her mind the anticipated pleasure of rendering her beloved father and sister independent, happy, and the sharers of all tbe splendid advantages which his o'fers enabled her to
to bestow. With an enraptured air he seized her band—" Ah, lovely, dearest Rosette! let me hope you love me—that I nave found a place in that gentle bo¬ som, and that you will accompany me to Bern, where felicity awaits us !" Rosette was silent—a moment's reflec¬ tion, and her father flashed upon her mind ; his sacred injunction, " be firm and resolute in the hour of temptation !" struck upon her recollection ; she in¬ stantly felt her frailty, her danger in list¬ ening to his proposals.—"Ah ! let me go ! Heaven frowns upon us. Are we not acting contrary to every principle of du¬ ty ?—Shall we forget what is due to the authors of our beings, who strewed our infantile paths with roses, and carefully extracted every thorn ?—shall we repay them with ingratitude, destroy the hope of their bosoms, and frustrate the end of their paternal labours? No! we must part!" disengaging her band. " Then it will be for ever. I expect every
every moment my servant with the car¬ riage that is to convey me from you. Can you so easily deliver me to all the horrors of despai r, and blast the joys of my youth and fortunes ? Ah, my ado¬ red Rosette ! reflect before it is too late. You hold my destiny in your hands— you only can bestow happiness, or fix distraction. I had given orders for my departure to-day. Aly soul fondly cling- big to the spot which contained my trea¬ sure, I had wandered out, sunk in me¬ lancholy reflections, to view, for the last time, the scene where first I saw, in daz¬ zling beauty, her whose image fills my devoted heart. Chance, on my part, led me near you ; but the vigilance of a pro¬ tecting Providence sent me to save from injury that lovely form." As he was speaking, a carriage appeared at some distance, and was coming slowly along the road.—" Ah ! there," he exclaimed, with agitation, *■ there is the vehicle that
that is to drag me from you : a few hours, and I shall be far distant from her I love—no ray of hope to cheer me on iny way ; dead to every sense of joy— lost to society, and all the advantages of birth and fortune, the wretched Al¬ phonso will become a wanderer on the face of the earth—a victim to a violent and unrequited love ; while she who in¬ spired it, and abandons him to his fate, will banish him from her remembrance." A crimson blush suffused the downy cheek of Rosette, and told him too elo¬ quently that was impossible. The car¬ riage was within a few yards of them. " Will you go, Rosette ?" he passion· ately said. *« Go? ------Ah, my father ! can I leave my beloved father ?" " Ah, dear mistrustful Eosette! have I not convinced you that it will be for a short time? It will soon be in your power to render his decline of lite tran¬ quil,
quìi, affluent, and happy—to see him blest, and spend his remaining years in the arms of his children." Rosette was agitated and irresolute. He led her insensibly towards the car¬ riage, when his servant, who had been waiting at some distance, approached, k t down the steps, and retired. The moment was now at -hand that was to ňx the future fate of Rosette. Alontalvo led her up to the steps of the chariot. Her foot rested upon the first ; slie started back, trembling and agonized. He held her in his arms, pressed her to his breast, and kissed the lovely cheek, deserted by the rose from the conflict of contending feelings,—" Ah, dearest Ro¬ sette!" he said, in a plam ti ve tone, "why do you hesitate ? Aly destiny rests with you, and must be decided : I have sa¬ crificed birth, beauty, fortune, and a fa¬ ther's views, and will you not make one small sacrifice on your part—that of leav¬ ing your father for a short time?" Again vol, i. f Alontalvo
Alontalvo helped her to ascend, and again she fell back, and sunk into his arms.— *' Then we must part. Ah ! cruel, dear, adored Rosette! why do you sport with the feelings of my wounded heart ? I can support the conflict no longer. Con¬ sent to go ! let me conduct you to* felb city—the enchanting path is straiglit before you—Fortune courts you, and extends her gifts ; reject them not. Love, my devoted love, will encompass yon, and shield you from every evil,— Say, will you be mine? if not, one fatal jadieu, and we part for ever !" As he concluded, he was agitated with the eager hope that the hour was come which was to crown with success his vigi* knee and perseverance. His tall and graceful form, varied and assumed in all its movements the beauties of the most per¬ fect statuary; his eyes, flashing with euer* gy, or melting with softness, as the va¬ rying conflict of his passions produced —the light brown hair, that fell in rich and
and disordered clusters over his forehead of snow—the beautiful suffusion that glowed upon his cheek, and gave a bril¬ liancy to every feature, too powerfully, alas! too fatally, conspired to rob Ro¬ sette of the little share of resolution left, and to obliterate from her mind her fa¬ ther's pious lessons of virtue and firm¬ ness. She turned her head towards the cottage, with a wild and agitated look—- " Aly father ! oh, my father ! thy pater* nal cot gave me· birth—thy tenderness cherished my infant years, and thy wis- dom taught me virtue is our only good." Alontalvo reminded her the favourable clay approached that would enable her to repay such unremitting attentions—that her father should share her future for¬ tunes, and Jive and die in the bosoms of his children. He attempted again to as¬ sist her to get in; .she trembled, hesi. tated, and was irresolute.—*' The îa.st moment is on the wing which detcr- r 2 mines
mines our fate. Ah, seal it !—say you will be mine for ever !" He pressed his rosy mouth to her fal¬ tering lips ; what she meant to say died there. The poison diffused to her soul ; all was forgotten ; his supporting arm raised her to the carriage. She was ín it —he followed—the postillion received orders, and it instantly drove off*
CHAPTER IX.
On, Virtue ! only source of joy and peace! where were thy bright messen¬ gers—where those guardian spirits, dele¬ gated by thee, to support and strengthen the frail soul in the hour of temptation ? —where
—where were they and their superin¬ tending mission at this fated moment, this crisis, this struggle between duty and inclination ?—Too credulous Ro¬ sette! why did you listen to the so¬ phistry of this dangerous being, caution¬ ed as you were, that he only sought your destruction?—Where was that firmness, inculcated by a wise, virtuous, and pious parent, from your early years ? Did memory treacherously desert you, or did she call back those hapny scenes when, under the fostering care of a ten¬ der father, and hand in hand with the friend and sister of your youth, you gaily trod the enchanted paths of peace and innocence? and though neither wealth nor honours were thine, thy guiltless breast enjoyed an unalloyed felicity, which the slaves of pomp and splendour seldom know. Amiable but infatuated maid! how little were you aware of the character of the man who captivated your youthful f 3 heart
heart, removed your objections, poisoneel the pure source of duty and prudence by lm fallacious reasoning, and filled your ardent mind with scenes of untastcd anticipated enjoyments ! Artfully he gikìed the prospects before you with the sunshine of rank and grandeur. Ho¬ nours courted you ; the voice of admira¬ tion saluted you everywdiere. Every path was strewed with roses, whilst the thorns that lurked beneath were care¬ fully concealed from your view. An evil hour favoured the artful Alont¬ alvo. His tale of falsehood, ever framed and ever ready, easily gained credit with the unsuspicious Rosette. Removed from the haunts of licentious pleasures, he had no resource within himself, and seldom sought for amusement but in the gratification of his unchecked propensi¬ ties. To one of his irrational and dissipated habits, time hung heavy, situated as he then was. Hearing that within some miles
miles of the village was to be seen a her¬ mitage, one of tbe many curiosities vvhich present the traveiler in this pic-r turesque country, he had given orders to have a carriage ready for him at a certain time to carry him thither. His mind invariably be v nt on the оЫ jcct of his pursuit, he had in the interval walked towards the valley, anxiously exploring every path, in the hope of meeting with his devoted victim. The reader is already aware what fortuitous circumstances brought them together, and how fatally every thing conspired to fa¬ vour his most sanguine wishes. His domestic, the faithful »bettor in his vices and snares, finding his master did not come home at the appointed time, ordered the driver to follow with the carriage, while he went to apprize him it would meet him on the road. At some distance he saw him in compa¬ ny with Rosette, and, skilled in strata gem and ready wiles, he perceived the ι 4 moment
moment of success was at hand. He marked every turn and attitude which could enable him to act, and, fiend-like, exulted in the casualty that promised to close the scene. His master advanced with his prize, and the active confident of sin received orders to settle all things, and follow immediately. Rosette is gone : we must drop the curtain, and return to the virtuous and happy scene she had quitted. Adelaide was alarmed at her length of absence, and was under the necessity of acquaint¬ ing her father with it. The fears of this tender parent were instantly renewed. Agitated, he communicated to his friend his apprehensions that his daughter had fallen into the hands of this enemy in ambush. Glandolph, no less alarmed, dispatched their friends everywhere in search of her; but no one returned with the object of their concern ; and all the intelligence gained by their inquiries was, that she had
had been seen in imminent danger from the enraged bull, and that a gentleman timely saved her from its fury. A car¬ riage had been seen some time after, with the same gentleman in it, but whe¬ ther alone, or accompanied, no person could tell. These fatal tidings were too strongly calculated to confirm the terrors of Blan¬ chard. Every means were used to dis¬ cover the treacherous author of his mis¬ fortune, but he had too artfully conceal¬ ed his name, and the high office his fa¬ ther held in the government ; therefore every avenue that led to detection was closed against the unhappy father. In this hour of trial the pious man looked to Heaven—to that gracious Power who had supported him in sick¬ ness and sorrow. He strove to be resign¬ ed, but it was in vain—the lovely image of his daughter was constantly before him ; he saw her the victim of subtle, sanctioned, and inaccessible villany —no F 5 redress
redress for a distracted father—none for his fallen child. Convinced of the amiable qualities of her heart, he beheld her, in the hour of reflection, delivered over to self-torment¬ ing reproach. Gladly would he have snatched her frorn despair, and cherished her on his paternal bosom, conducted Iter back to virtue, and pointed the way to pardon and happiness. Every day reminded him of his lost treasure—her sprightly manners, that beguiled his pensive hours—her tender inquiry after his health and comfort-*- tlie joy and affection she evinced, when, after absence, he again entered his happy cot. Those domestic scenes of past feli¬ city crowded fast upon his recollection, overwhelmed him with despondency, and sapped his ľ ealth. The distressed Adelaide beheld his anguish, without being able to offer con¬ solation ; it admitted of none. In an evil hour he was robbed of that lovely blossom
blossom he had reared with so much ten- dernesss, and cherished with unceasing care, and to whom he looked forward, in the hope of seeing the fondest wishes of a parent realized. This pleasing prospect vanished, and the cloud of sorrow gathered fast—hung dark and gloomy over his setting sun. Agonized with painful reflections, he would exclaim—" Ill-fated maid ! soon will thy visionary scenes of felicity be dispelled, w r hen the voice of conscience awakens thee to a sense of duty and re¬ ligion—when the sober hour of reason comes, and shews, when too late, how fatally thou hast mistaken the road to happiness! Though in the bloom of youth and beauty, thy influence over a depraved heart will be of short dura¬ tion—the charm dies in possession ; se¬ cure of tbe prey, it palls upein the viti¬ ated senses, though so ardently desired before. Soon wilt thou be deserted for a new r victim of bis licentiousness, and cast abandoned upon a world to which i' 6 thou
thou art a stranger, friendless and for¬ lorn—thy fair name s^gmatized, the prospects of thy youth blasted, and thy peace destroyed for ever. Who will then receive my child, mitigate the sufferings of self-reproach, and save her from de¬ spair?·—wdio will hold out the blessed comforts of religion, and the consolation it offers of hope and mercy to the peni¬ tent soul ?"
CHAP-
CHAPTER Χ.
From this picture, darkened with the sorrow of a parent's blighted hopes, the good Glandolph endeavoured to draw his friend. He pointed out the blessings that were still left him — the amiable Adelaide, who promised to be the staff of his declining years, and to requite liis paternal labours ; the friends who were sincerely and inseparably attached to him; and, above all, tbe gratification arising from the conscious discharge of all the duties of his being. Ever alive to tbe soothing voice of friendship, and the consolations of that blessed religion on which he rested all his
his hopes, he listened to the mild com¬ forts wiiich his faithful friend adminis¬ tered. He saw the rose fade on the cheek of Adelaide; his fears were roused, dreading to lose the remaining treasure of his soul. He became resigned, and regained, in some degree, his usual spi¬ rits ; but it was one of those deceitful calms that portend a storm. Concealed sorrow hastened its progress, and preyed upon the vital principle of life. When alone, the image of his Rosele was his inseparable companion ; his nights be¬ came broken, and his dreams filled with the sufferings of bis beloved child. lie rose, as usual, early, met Adelaide, appearingly happy, and pursued the duties of the day: but his altered looks indicated tbe decay of nature; bis strength declined, and he was unable to take bis wonted exercise. His friends were alarmed, doubled their attentions and their efforts to save him—but in vain. Glandolph never left his valued and dearest
dearest friend ; he saw the hour fast ap¬ proaching that must part them, and ln° heart was wrung with inexpressible an¬ guish. Blanchard beheld his grief, and his heart fondly clung to the friend of his life. He had spent a restless night : the sun rose in splendour, and threw a ray on the dying countenance of Blanchard; he hailed its glorious light for the last time. The disconsolate Adelaide per¬ ceived with agony the fatal change that evinced bis speedy dissolution. Her bo- «som was rent with sorrow. Already she had lost the sister of her heart: cheer¬ ful, in the day-spring of life, they tre>d together the flowery scenes of youth, •happy in the sunshine of a father's love ; the hour was at hand that must sepa¬ rate her from her father—that beloved father wdio constituted her happiness and wish to live. Observing her sunk in grief, he took her hand, pressed it to his lips, and at¬ tempted
tempted to sooth her; but the feeble powers of nature denied their office. Glandolph raised him in his arms, and administered a cordial, which seemed to rekindle the expiring spark. He cast a look of affection towards him, took his hand, and pressed it between his own. " Friend of my life," he said, " I must leave you ; tbe hand of death is upon me. Grieve not at this separation ; we shall meet in those blessed regions, where endless beatitude awaits the weary, the afflicted soul. Providence, in its inscrutable wisdom, has visited me with affliction, I strove to bear the blow that fell upon me : but my child gone, lost to virtue, and followed by ?U the evils ever the attendants of error! heart¬ rending reflections! they were too much, and nature, unequal to the conflict, sunk under the pressure. At this awful pe¬ riod, my soul, hovering ready to depart, still clings to the dear children of my anxious cares, and the faithful friends of my
my early years. To you, my beloved Glandolph, I entrust my Adelaide. Be a father to her ; strengthen her mind by your virtuous precepts, and shield her youth and innocence in your protecting arms. Nature, lingering on the brink of dissolution, is nearly exhausted—yet one last request. Never cease to love, and learn the fate of my Rosette; and when a villain's crime falls heavy on her, and the calumny of the uncharitable has marked her for disgrace, take her to your cot, the asylum of virtue, where she has so often heard its purest pre¬ cepts. Sooth her soul upon that bene* volent breast; assure her of my love—of my forgiveness, and that, with the lan¬ guor of death, I implore a blessing from Heaven for her, and leave her mine, And now, my friend, the task is finished —the transient scenes of life are closeel— eternity opens before me." The afflicted Glandolph bedewed with tears the cold hand vvhich still in friend¬ ship's
ship's clasp united his. He assured him in a solemn manner, he would strictly fulfil tbe sacred duties that had devolved upon him, Blanchard sunk upon his pillow, and slumbered for some hours. A faint groan escaped him ; he opened his eyes, and cast them upon his weeping friends. He stretched his hand—attempted to lift his head. Glandolph raised him; he clasped his hand, and sunk upon %Ы bosorø of Adelaide.— " Aly God !—- røy friends !—-my children !—Rosette*—" Life fled with that loved name. Mm distracted daughter pressed feer lips to his, and fell senseless upon his breast. The remains of this exemplary parent were committed to the dust with a re* ligious and unfeigned sorrow. No bla¬ zoned characters, in marble pride, detail¬ ed his humble virtues to posterity ; but bis piety, his charity, bis wisdom, and benevolence, found a monument in every breast, where the records of affee* tion preserved his name. CHAP-
CHAPTER XÏ.
The worthy Glandolph disposed of the little property of his departed ffiend to tfee best advantage, let the cottage and ground attached to it, and carried tbe weeping Adelaide to her future home. Tor some time her grief admitted of no alleviation. Her father was ever be¬ fore her, and filled her dreams : her sis¬ ter's fate presented all the evils she anti¬ cipated would follow it ; her imprudence bad laid a parent in the dust, and re¬ morse, she dreaded, would pursue her. These painful reflections disturbed her bosom, and stole the rose from her youthful cheek. The
The heaving stomach rejects the me¬ dicine unskilfully administered—so does tlie depressed mind all consolation un¬ seasonably offered. Glandolph knew that sorrow, in some degree, must have its course; he watched the moment when reason prevailed, to strengthen her mind, to raise her above the cares of this eva¬ nescent state, and to tranquillize her with the balmy hope of a blessed immortality. The amiable Agnes soothed lier sor¬ rows with the affection of a sister ; she lived close to her father, and had a con¬ stant opportunity of exercising the dic¬ tates of her heart. The kiı d Anatte was no less assiduous in seeking to sof¬ ten her grief, by all the endearing atten¬ tions which never fail to assuage the pangs of a wounded mind. The tender affection of her paternal friend, the ef¬ forts of friendship, and her own exer¬ tions, enabled her to compose her feel¬ ings. As the light of reason illumined, the sombre cloud of sorrow fled; the hope
hope of a future state that would restore her to a beloved father—the anticipated joy of recovering a lost sister, and re¬ moving the evils she had sought, renew¬ ed the energies of her mind. Glandolph supported her.—" Aly Ade¬ laide/ said the pious man, " the first duties of a Christian are resignation to the dispensations of an unerring Ruler— a perfect confidence in his unbounded goodness—a thorough conviction that every act is for general good, whether it deprives us of the objects of our affec¬ tions by a sudden revolution, levels our fortunes in the dust, or visits us with sickness and sorrows." Three months had passed since the death of her father; the violence of Adelaide's grief had subsided into a pen¬ sive calm The birthday of her benevo¬ lent protector had arrived, and his family and friends were assembled at his hos¬ pitable cottage. The affectionate con¬ gratulations
gratulations he received, the attentions he bestowed, the filial love and virtues of his children, and the mirth that flow¬ ed from bosoms unsullied with a vice, rendered this humble mansion а зееве of enviable felicity. In the midst of this domestic enjoy¬ ment, the smile of friendship sat on every brow: the delighted grandfather encir¬ cled in his arms the little Rodolphus, A man with hasty steps approached the gate : he craved, in well-bred terms, as¬ sistance for his lady ; her carriage, he said, had broken down, and she was both hurt and alarmed. He was dressed in rich livery, and appeared to be in the service of a person of distinction. Glandolph instantly dispatched his son to htr assistance, and to offer the accom¬ modation his house afforded. Shortly after the lady arrived, sup¬ ported by Rodolphus and a tall elegant young man. Her commanding and dig¬ nified
nified appearance inspired awe, while her sweet and affable countenance conciliated affection. Glandolph advanced to meet her. In respectful terms he expressed his concern at the accident that had arrested her; he regretted he could offer her no suitable accommodation—" Such as my house affords, madam, let me assure you I am happy to offer, and the ready assistance of my family, to contribute to your ease." Though evidently in pain, she eyed him with attention, bent graciously to his kindness, and with a look of ineffa¬ ble sweetness expressed her thanks. She complained of her arm, and her sleeve was stained with blood. Agnes, Ade¬ laide, and Anatte, gathered round her ; they examined her arm, and were glad to find it was only bruised, and a slight cut had caused some effusion of blood. The young gentleman who accom¬ panied her seemed lost to every thing around him in his fears for the lady ; but finding
finding nothing serious had happened, ho advanced tovyards Glandolph, and with a look of indescribable sensibility said to him—" I have been very deficient in expressing my thanks for your hu¬ mane assistance ; but I trust, sir, your benevolence will plead for me, when I confess my fears, excited for the most amiable of mothers^ bad suspended every other idea." Then turning round, he eyed the fe¬ males with a degree of admiration and pleasure ; but when he perceived Ade¬ laide, he fixed his eye upon her, and seemed to contemplate her as a vision that would quickly glide w4h the eva¬ nescent scenes of creative fancy. Perceiving she w f as the object of his attention, the blush of modesty over¬ spread her countenance, and heightened every beauty : ber fair ringlets, fastened up, fell carelessly back upon her neck, while the traces of sorrow and sensibility visible in her face, gave an angelic ex¬ pression
pression to her appearance, which render¬ ed it scarce earthly. The lady anxiously inquired if her servant was hurt? an elderly female who had been in the carriage with her. She was informed she felt more disordered from the accident than from any mate¬ rial injury. Then, addressing herself to Glandolph, she observed that her son had quitted the carriage while it de¬ scended the valley, and consequently had escaped the chance of suffering by the unpleasant occurrence.— (f Thank God, my Clementine is safe í Provi¬ dence has particularly marked me for iU mercies, in preserving my beloved son, and guiding me to your friendly man¬ sion. But, sir, we are intruders upon your benevolence : I am aware we must put you to great inconvenience in re¬ maining at your house, and I feel too mueh indispe>sed to be able to proceed." " I entreat you, madam," said tbe gexxî man, " to spare yourself all unnecessary voe, ι. α uneasiness ;
uneasiness; my door is open to those whom casual t), ini sfortune, or want, may have led to approach it : I have little to bestow, but that little is freely given. I regret that my humble dwelling is so ill calculated for your reception; but the best it affords is at the service of your¬ self and son, and my daughter, who lives close to me, wLU lodge your ser¬ vants." The lady, in gracious terms, thanked him for his polite humanity, and ex¬ pressed a desire to retire to rest, Ade¬ laide attended her, and after rendering every attention, took leave of her for the night.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XII.
Tms lady, whom accident brought to the cottage of the worthy Glandolph, was the countess Rimini, the widow of the Italian count Rimini. This noble¬ man, with a fine understanding highly cultivated, possessed qualities of tbe heart which had gained him the admira¬ tion and esteem of the good: Rimini had one failing-—it was his ruling passion— pride, lie was noble, generous, bene¬ volent, and sincere; but when this weak¬ ness predominated, the lustre of his cha¬ racter was eclipsed. As he boasted of being a branch ot the illustrious house of Medicis, he conceived that no noble g 2 family
family was worthy of his alliance. In his view to form a matrimonial connex¬ ion, he fixed his eye upon the beautiful signora Constantia. She was his uncle's daughter on the father's side. In es¬ pousing her, he conceived the dignity of his house was not affected, nor its noble blood contaminated by the mixture of unequal alliance. Happy, thrice happy for Rimini, that in his choice of a wife, when pride was the motive that determined his prefer¬ ence, he found a combination of every virtue and quality : she was beautiful in face and figure, her manners captivating, and her disposition angelic. She had acquired every branch of polite and or¬ namental education ; but the cultivation of reason—consequently -all the qualities of the heart, had been the pride and plea¬ sure of a judicious mother. The count soon discovered the inva¬ luable treasure he possessed in his Con¬ stantia : her beauty and accomplishments were
were the admiration of the court of Flo¬ rence; her benevolence and active vir¬ tues gained her universal esteem ; while her exalted mind, her intelligence and taste for solid pursuits, qualified her to be the rational companion, as well as the wife, of Rimini. One son blessed their union : he was the pride of his father and the delight of his mother; but Clementine, though an only child, was not a spoiled one. His mother, with a penetrating eye, watched his opening disposition : she checked the sallies of temper, and cor¬ rected his errors as they appeared ; she infused into his mind the happiness aris¬ ing from the practice of virtue, and set before him in glowing colours the evils ever attending a life of vice. These moral lessons, early impressed, strengthened, cultivated, and brought into action the amiable qualities that blossomed with his years. His father procured for him the first masters in с 3 everv
every branch of learning and science : his natural talents and unwearied applica¬ tion to study had enabled him, at an early period, to arrive at great profi¬ ciency. His father's pride was hourly gratified in seeing his son advance, by rapid pro¬ gress, to eminence, while his mother de¬ lighted in the prospect of his rendering himself conspicuous, by the virtues and amiable qualities of his heart. When the hours of study were over, he flew to his mother's apartment; her tender affec¬ tion and enchanting conversation was the stimulant and reward of all his exertions. The hoars which are too often spent in a circle of frivolous and criminal pur¬ suits by the youth of the higher classes, the youthful Rimini dedicated to his mother; there only he found solid hap¬ piness. The court of Tuscany was brilliant, and exhibited an assemblage of rank, youth, and beauty; yet the heart of Clementine
Clementine was untouched, and indif¬ ferent to the attractions around him. His mother had inspired him with the love of virtue, of cultivated reason, and all the solid and domestic enjoyments arising from it. He cast his eyes over the females of the court: though daz¬ zling in exterior graces, he found them deficient in those qualities that excite exalted affection and create esteem ; his accomplished mother was his criterion, and all other women by comparison sunk în his estimation. Count Rimini had a brother, to whom he was much attached. He had risen to high honours in the ecclesiastical state, and was in great favour at the court of the pope. He had a daughter ; she w r as beautiful, and embellish exî with all the ornaments of an expensive and fashion¬ able education. The count's property was immense, and the cardinal's fortune, with church preferments, splendid, This wealth they Q 4 planned
planned to unite in their families by the union of their children—an alliance par¬ ticularly pleasing to tlie lofty spirit of the count, as it preserved immingled the ancestry of his house. This covenant had taken place in the infancy of Clementine and his cousin, so that there was neither choice nor inclina¬ tion between them. The countess si¬ lently regretted this engagement. Sig¬ nora Valetta was beautiful—she was ele¬ gant—she was the star of the court, and the pride of fashion ; but she possessed none of those essential qualities calculated to win the affections, and answer the exalt¬ ed sentiments of the amiable and ac¬ complished Clementine. From a sense of duty which had ever governed him, he looked forward to the necessity of shortly espousing Valetta: habit bad prepared him for the sacrifice ; she was his father's choice—she was beau¬ tiful—she could be fascinating—but his heart owned no other sentiment. A stranger
A stranger to love, he felt no passion but filial tenderness. His beloved mo* ther filled his soul, influenced his con¬ duct, and exalted his mind : all his lei¬ sure hours were spent with her. In her delightful society he felt a charm no¬ where else to be found; from her pre¬ cepts he imbibed the principles of reli¬ gion and virtue, and her wisdom cau¬ tioned him against the allurements of pleasure and the dangerous influence of tbe passions. At this period a pestilential fever spread its fatal influence through Flo¬ rence, and carried off innumerable vic¬ tims. Among the many who fell a sa¬ crifice to this dreadful malady, count Rimini soon followed. In perfect health he was suddenly attacked with the symp¬ toms, and the third day terminated bis existence. This event plunged the countess in profound sorrow. She had enjoyed, since her marriage, uninterrupted hap- G 5 piness*.
piness : the count adored her—she loved him tenderly, and her study was his peace and felicity. The projected union between her dear Clementine and signora Valetta had caused her sorrowful regret: her maternal bosom was disturbed with apprehensions for his future happiness ; yet no opposing voice was raised by the countess—it was the count's favourite scheme, his ardent wish, and she had too much affection for him to allow her to frustrate it.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XIII.
Shortly after the death of the count, the countess received a pressing invita¬ tion from her sister, who ivas married, and resided at Bern. A tender affection had subsisted between them from early years; but since the marriage of her sister, the countess had few personal op¬ portunities of enjoying her confidence. Madame De ^tallburg lived in splen¬ dour; but bhe was rivetted to home by the infirmities of an affectionate husband, and a young and numerous fami!) rest¬ ing upon bor for the exercise oí maternal virtues. Gladly would she have flown to tbe consolation of the countess, not- ο ϋ withstanding
withstanding the extent of countries be¬ tween them; but tbe imperative duties of a wife and mother could not dispense with her presence. Madame De Stallburg urged her re¬ quest with all the arguments her affec¬ tion furnished her with. She hoped a removal from the scene of sorrow, and change of circumstances, might help to dispel the grief that preyed upon her sister. The young count Rimini, in the death of his father, received the first lesson of affliction: he was inconsolable. His mother entered bis apartment—he was struck with the ravages sorrow had made upon her fine countenance: he suddenly roused from the grief that had seized him, thought only of his mother, and studied to sooth her sufferings, and cheer lier widowed bosom. The countess was anxious to see her sister; but fbe veil ef sorrow wiiich hung over her threw a saturnine shade Dn
on every object, and rendered her unfit for exertion. Her son, alarmed at the melancholy that preyed upon her, implored her to have some regard for her health, or at least for his happiness.—" Alı, my be¬ loved mother!" he exclaimed, " if I lose you, what will become of your unhappy Clementine ? Alas ! you know you are my only source of joy !—with you it flies for ever! Who will counsel me— who will charm me—and who will love me with a love like yours?" This tender appeal to the heart of the most amiable of mothers instantly was felt. She clasped him to her breast, and poured a torrent of tears over his lovely face. She assured him he was the tie that bound her to life, and her chief ob¬ ject was his happiness. The countess prepared for her journey. Having arranged their domestic affairs, they set off for Bern, and arrived in safety. Madame
Madame De Stallburg was overjoyed. She was an exemplary woman ; she felt and practised all the social and moral duties ; she had a strong understanding, and a delicate mind ; her affections were acute, her manners tender, and she pos¬ sessed a persuasive charm of conveying consolation to the afflicted heart. The countess soon feit the benefit arising from her conversations. Every thing that reason, religion, and affection could offer, were held out by madame De Stallburg in tbe most cheering light. The count selelom left his mother. Every enjoyment was sacrificed to be in her company, and ι estore her tranquillity. Such filia! tenderness was amply rewarded; he had the delightful satisfaction of see¬ ing her recover her health and repose. The c<unites,·, was happy in the affec¬ tion of ber sister, and in the bosom of her lovely family. Six months had passed in \ leasing intercourse, when she received intelligence of the death of an old
old and faithful steward, who was at the head of her establishment. She took leave of madame De Stall- burg W'th painful regret; they mingled tears of aflection, and parted with a struggle. But the affairs of her house¬ hold required her presence. She was on her way to Italy when the accident oc¬ curred that introduced her to the cot¬ tage. Such is the history of the noble fa¬ mily who were now the guests of the obscure but virtuous Glandolph. The countess passed a restless night, and was very feverish in the morning. The count was alarmed, and requested to have medical assistance immediately. Glandolph sent for the best tbe nearest village could aflord. This gentleman assured them the lady was in no danger—that the contusion of her arm, and probably the agitation of the accident, had produced îs'ight fever. He recommended she should be kept very
very quiet, and sent medicine to com¬ pose and induce sleep. The count was inexpressibly relieved ; bis fears subsided, and he was enabled to share with Adelaide the attendance on his mother. In a few days the countess was able to leave her bed, and a week after joineel her kind landlord at his family board. She thanked him, in ee>ndescending terms, for the kind attentions she had received. She informed him, with all the complaisance and sweetness that marked her character, the motives wirch led her to Bern, and her necessity for returning home.—** I must pursue my journey in a few days. I must leave you, sir/ she said; " but I know not how I shall be able to ten icyself away ; your lovely daughter has quite engaged my affection; lier amiaole and humane attentions have excited my utmost gra¬ titude; her beauty, her angelic sweet¬ ness, and pleasing manners, have created in
ín me the highest interest and admira¬ tion. I have frequented courts—I was born and bred in tbe circles of rank and f rtune, but I have never met in such society so lovely, so interesting a female. And how have you contrived, sir, to rear so delicate a plant, when tbe rude blasts of bumble destin ν must have blown keen and cold upon its tender growth, and tbe genial sun of fortune could never reach, to bring it to matu¬ rity?" " That is the reason, madam, that it has flourished. No false principle of grandeur and greatness checked the ef¬ forts of nature and the exercise of reason. Born in obscurity, nurtured In virtue, and secluded from intercourse with the gay and tbe dissipated, this fair flower has attained its native perfections, and, once strengthened, it will never perish." " And do you think there is no virtue to be found in the court, *he palace, and the
the gilded mansion of the rich ?" asked the countess. ** Far be it from mc, madam, to pre¬ sume to hold it out as an axiom. Vir- tue is confined to no rank or degree—she has been found conspicuously great in all these situations : but it must be ac¬ knowledged that a court is neither the nursery nor the sanctuary of virtue." The countess sighed. She was asto¬ nished and delighted with the wisdom of this good man,—** I acquiesce, sir, in — the justice of your observations, and I esteem your sentiments. Your daugh¬ ter has attached my heart ; and if you will consent to her accompanying me to Italy, I will engage to fulfil towards her the sacred duties of a mother. She shall live in splendour *rith me, enjoy my confidential affection, and aagment the happiness I possess in my beloved son.'* " Yoi do me the highest honour, ma¬ dam, in considering a daughter of mine qualified
qualified to be, in any degree, the com¬ panion of such intellectual excellence and exalted virtue as yours. Aly Ade¬ laide is ill calculated to enter the lists of fashion with the sons and daughters of wealth and title ; I am afraid it is only the amiable qualities of herj heart, and the principles of virtue and | honour in which she has been educated, that ren¬ der her deserving of your esteem. Your offer, madam, to take her under your protection, is generous and condescend¬ ing. In gratitude to you, should í com¬ ply with your request, surmount my own feelings, and tear her from my arms, I am not satisfied I should act conform¬ able to the «acred duty I undertook ; the spirit of her sainted father, could it look down, might frown upon me for relinquishing my charge." " You astonish me !" said the coun¬ tess ; " are you not her father ?" " In every thing but in being the au¬ thor of her existence. I love her as ten« dcrly
derly as my own children; from the day of her birth she has been equally the object of my solicitude. She is the daughter of the earliest, best, and dear» est friend of my life. As the strongest test of the inviolable friendship that from infancy subsisted between vis, he left me his child, to cherish and protect her youth and innocence." *· Jt is a sacred charge, sir, and at¬ taches to it sacred duties; to qualify to discharge them, requires virtue and principle, and I am persuaded you pos¬ sess them. When I entered your house, I was struck with your kindness, and the gracious manner you offered me ac¬ commodation. I have drawn my con¬ clusion of your character, and believe me, sir, it excites my veneration and esteem," Tbe good man expressed his sense of the honour she did him ; and the coun¬ tess renewed her request, that he would commit Adelaide to her protection. He
He assured her of the exalted opinion he formed of her character, and that he was sensible her offer opened a prospect of fortune for his Adelaide.—" But hap¬ piness, madam/ he added, " consists not in title, wealth, or power; virtue is the essence of our joys—the foundation of rational felicity. Hitherto she has passed a life of imiGcence and reason : no mistaken principle of refinement has cramped her intellect, checked the ge¬ nerous impulse of youth, or rendered the native graces of the human charac¬ ter contemptible by affectation, artificial maimers, and weak-minded conceptions of taste and elegance. Bred within tbe confines of these mountains, unaspiring, and happy in tbe aflection of a tender father, the placid soul of Adelaide never rose above the horizon of her destiny, nor bad a wish that bounded beyond it. Excuse, then, the reluctance 1 feci to part vvitli her. Ignorant of the modes ¿aid habits of the great—suddenly re¬ moved
moved to a sphere of life to which she is a stranger, and unqualified to move in it, wdiat must be my apprehensions for the future happiness of this daughter of my tenderest affection !" The countess, more and more pleased with the wisdom and virtues of this good man, assured him she admired his prin¬ ciples, the strength of his observations, his tender solicitude for his lovely or¬ phan, and the pious light in which he regarded the obligation he had taken upon him.-«-" If you will resign her to my care," she added, " I will engage to discharge with tenderness the duties I take upon me. I am on my way to Florence, where family affairs require my presence. I have a favourite villa on the lake of Geneva, where I spend some months every year: the romantic beauty of its situation—.the calm retreat it affords me from the tyranny of fashion and the fatigues of a court, render it a delightful repose. There the happiest hotirs
houľs of my life glided softly by, blest in the arms of an affectionate husband, and delighted with the unfolding dispo¬ sition of my darling boy. I shall visit this retirement in ? few mouths; and should the gay scenes of high life not affoid that happiness which is congenial to the feelings of youi amiable daughter, I will then place her again under your fostering care." Glandolph renewed his thanks, and begged to assure her he founded unli¬ mited reliance upon her noble character ; and if Adelaide was inclined to accept of her favour, whatever struggle it should cost him to part with her, be should con¬ sider it a duty not to oppose her wishes.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XIV.
The pensive sorrow that had fastened upon the mind of Adelaide was diverted by the presence of the countess. Her affability, sweetness, and the fascinating powers of mind and manners, had cre¬ ated in her bosom a congenial sympathy towards this charming woman. Glandolph disclosed to.her the pro¬ posal the countess had made.—" It is a .splendid prospect for one of your hum¬ ble views ; it may raise your fortune. But remember, my Adelaide, virtue alone is the foundation upon which hap¬ piness cannot be shaken. I have a per¬ fect confidence in vour principles, and that
that firmness which marks your charac¬ ter. If this offer accords with vour in- clination, I will commit you to the care of this excellent and angelic woman, and to the protection ofthat Providence who guards alike the palace and the cottage." Adelaide expressed her thanks for the generous interest the countess took in her.—" She is a charming woman," she observed ; " she seems to he possessed of all the amiable qualities of the heart, and the rational powers of the human mind. I ride, that ludicrous passion, en¬ gendered from false notions, weak intel¬ lect, and deficiency of goodness, seems to have no share in her benevolent and truly noble character. If my heart were not a prey to sorrow, I could accom¬ pany her over the world. I feel dis¬ posed to love her tenderly ; but tbe image of my belovcel father is always before me. The mysterious fate of my dear Rosette, pregnant with all the con¬ comitant evils of misconduct, haunts me vol. I. Jf incessantly ;
incessantly ; and the idea of leaving you» my dearest and best friend, creates a^ poignancy of feeling which no future, advantage can obliterate." In finishing these words, her eyes fill¬ ed ; slie threw her arms round the neck of the worthy man, and shed a torrent of tears. He pressed her to his heart, and kiss¬ ed the soft dieek that was moisten¬ ed with sensibility and aflection. He assured her that nothing but her future advantage could induce him to part with her, and tliat he was pressed by the soli¬ citations of the countess.—" It rests with yourself, my Adelaide, to decide: but wherever you go, my humble cottage ia your home; you will ever find it the asylum of your innocence, a peaceful retreat from the tumultuous scenes of pomp and grandeur, and the roof under which a father's arms will always be open to receive you." As he concluded, the countess enter¬ ed
ed the room. Glandolph informed her her proposal was the subject of their conversation. She advanced towards Adelaide» took her hand, and in the kindest tone as¬ sured her of the interest and affeetion she had conceived for her, her disposition to receive her as a daughter* and to fulfil towards her all the duties which so ten¬ der a tie involved—" But, amiable Ade¬ laide," added the countess, " it is not my wish to impose any restraint upon your feelings. If you can be induced to ac¬ company rae to Italy, I shall exert every means in my power to make you happy ; and when I go to Geneva, should it be your wish to leave me, I will conduct you myself to the protection of yeiir worthy friend." The generous öfter, and the affection¬ ate manner which rendered it irresist¬ ible, overcame the feelings of Adelaide, and she expressed her gratitude and in¬ clination to accept it. ll 25 A week
A week was fixed upon for the count¬ ess's departure. Adelaide prepared for her journey. A short time was neces¬ sary to arrange and collect her simple wardrobe : it was chiefly spent in con¬ vincing the friends of her youth of the sincerity of her affections, and that nei¬ ther time nor place, nor elevation nor depression of circumstances, should ren¬ der them less dear to her heart. The day arrived : all things were in readiness, and the carriage and servants at tlie door. The moment of parting was at hand. The countess, with grace¬ ful step and pensive air, walked up to Glandolph : she took his hand and press¬ ed it within her own, and with a look of ineffable sweetness, thanked him for the benefits she had enjoyed under his roof.—" I have received a lesson, sir, that will be indelibly impressed upon me : í have been taught, from observation, tiiat intrinsic worth, genuine benevo¬ lence, cultivated intellect, moral virtue, and
mid true good-breeding, are to be femnd united in a cottage in Switzerland." The flush of modest unconscious worth overspread the still - blooming cheek of Glandolph. The count with warmth expressed bis gratitude for the attentions they had received. The agitated Adeline was pressed al¬ ternately in tbe arms of her young friends; but when she approached her kind protector to bid him adieu, her feelings quite overcame her; she fell into his arms in atı agony of tears. He folded her to his breast, and as¬ sured her of his equally divided affec¬ tion ; that he had committed her to the most exalted protection, and that tlie time would arrive when he shoulu clasp her to his heart again. He tenderly kissed and blessed her. A tear stole down his cheek. Adelaide saw it, and clung to his bosom. The count gently disengaged her from H 3 the
the affected Glandolph, and Supporting her in his arms, he led hei* out of the cottage, and placed her in the carnage. The countess followed ; and the count, after taking a ki leave of the amiable relatives of their worthy landlord, ascend¬ ed tbe coach, and it drove immediately off amidst tlie tears and blessings of this virtuous family.
CHAPTER XV.
Adelaide's grief ren cieved herfor some time insensible to every thing ; but the amiable soothings of the countess, ami the gentle attentions of the connt, calmed her emotions. She recollected what she owed to such fiiends, and 'en¬ deavoured
deavoured to banish from their observa¬ tion her private sorrows. They were travelling through one of the most picturesque countries in Europe. Tbe sublime grandeur of the lofty Alps, whose aspiring summits seem¬ ed to invade the regions of ether—the luxuriant scenery which everywhere courted the eye of tbe traveller—the ro¬ mantic situation and rural beauty of tbe scattered cottages, interspersed with the towering palaces of the rich—the rosy cheeks, the lowly courtesy of these sim¬ ple children of nature, as they drove along, struck forcibly upon tbe contem¬ plative mind of Adelaide, opened an ex¬ tended scene for the admiration of the grand and striking beauties of creation, and filled her soul with sentiments of devotion to the beneficent Author of unlimited systems. The countess was pleased to see with what feeling and energy her fair corn¬ il 4 paniori
panion viewed the enchanting prospects that opened before them. The count was assiduous in beguil¬ ing her melancholy, lie pointed out the beauties that particularly caught his attention, and with the ardour of youth, and in the delicate language of taste and sentiment, expressed bis alternate sensa¬ tions of wonder and admiration. The converse of such beings formed a source of intellectual and reciprocal de¬ iight. New beauties of the mind were disclobed in the interchange of thought and sentiment. Congeniality of ideas, acute perception of indescribable feel¬ ings, and equality of reason, ever form the principle of attraction and the bond of union between elevated and rational souls. The countess was charmed with her young friend, and rejoiced at the acquisi¬ tion she had made to her domestic hap¬ piness. . The count contemplated her as a being
being of celestial order ; and the grate¬ ful Adelaide every hour had new in¬ ducements to love and admire the an¬ gelic disposition of her noble benefac¬ tress. The weather proved fine ; no accident occurred to alarm or detain them on the road ; they had a delightful journey, and arrived in health at the noble family castle on the borders of the Arno, near Florence, There the countess was visited by all the people of rank and fashion ; and Adelaide, for the first time, had an op¬ portunity of observing the manners of the great. The melancholy events that had taken place in her own family par¬ ticularly disposed her mind to pensive reflection, and the sudden transition from a cottage to a palace had furnished her %iith an abundant source of serious meditation. The ladies vvho came to congratulate the countess upon her arrival were, as H 5 they
they seemed to style themselves, friends. Inquiries were made after her health, the state of her spirits, ťhe circumstan¬ ces of her journey, the effect it had pro¬ duced, in the kindest language and soft¬ est tones ; but the heart had no share in the concern. No wonder—they were too busy, they were otherwise excited ; the countess was addressed, but poor Adelaide was "the object of inquiry. All eyes were wandering over her lovely person with a bold and undaunted stare, or investigating her with an envious and malicious curiosity. The count observed them; he was tmeasy, and endeavoured to divert Ade¬ laide's embarrassment. First impressions upon solid minds are seldom eradicated. Ás Adelaide could not view the company «he was now introduced to through the medium of fashion, she beheld them with the clear and sober eye of reason, stripped of the gilding of title, the trappings of finery,
finery, tbe anogant air of modish man¬ ners, and the imaginary superiority above the rest of their species ; she saw only the dignity of the human character de¬ graded by folly, and a deficiency of mo¬ ral virtue. Every day afforded fresh instances to admire and venerate the countess. She attended court ; she was its brightest ornament. She entered into the amuse¬ ments, and conformed to the modes of the viobility ; yet tbe mind of the countess Rimini was uncorruptcd, was unsullied. Every day brought its duties, and every evening was enjoyed, from tbe reflection. that those duties had been discharged. Amidst the gay scenes of dissipation and splendemr, she led a life of piety and rea¬ son. Literary characters, eminent for their talents and sound principles, at¬ tended her assemblies, and enjoyed tbe charms of her conversation. Her mas¬ querades and gaming parties were fre 1 - quentcd by the nobility in general ; but л 6 none
none were admitted to her friendship and esteem but those wliei bad distin¬ guished themselves for moral rectitude and the exercise of the Christian virtues. Her study was to search out merit, pin¬ ing under all the disadvantages of ob¬ scurity—to draw forth the latent sparks of genius, chilled by poverty, and too often annihilated from despair—to pro¬ tect the friendless widow, and provide for tbe orphan, and to cheer and ease the infirmities of age by tbe pious hand of charity. Such were the avocations which con¬ stantly engaged a certain portion of her time. Surrounded by pomp and cere¬ mony, the fatigues of the court, and the dignity e)f her rank to sustain, yet the countess never alleged any of those se¬ condary duťes as an apology for the neglect of the primary obligations of a Christian. This illustrious woman, whose pene¬ tration and restless philanthropy had en¬ abled
abled her to discover the intrinsic merit and modest virtues of Adelaide, was every day more charmed and attached to her. She endeavoured, by the irresistible influence she possessed, to soften the loss of departed friends, and supply the place of those whom she had left. She sought amusement for her in the novelties that surrounded her, and took her to see every thing that was wonderful and cu¬ rious in nature and art. The beautiful city of Florence, envi¬ roned by mountains, whose fertile sides exhibited a luxuriant display of olive trees, rich fruits, vineyards, and delight¬ ful villas, gratified the ravished senses, and conveyed to the enthusiastic mind the creation of exuberant fancy. She carried her to view the grand duke's palace, ornamented and enriched vvitli the unrivalled works of those im¬ mortal men celebrated for architecture 1 , sculpture, and painting. These productions of genius and sub¬ lime
lime grandeur opened a new source of admiration to the astonished Adelaide— represented to her imagination Athens in the zenith of its glory, when the fine arts had reached the highest degree of perfection, where the genius of painting and sculpture first discovered their strik¬ ing and magic powers, and where ele¬ gant literature, profound philosophy, pu- Tity of morals, and splendid virtues, were cultivated with astonishing success, and served as the prototype for admiring Ïn viewing the rare and Valuable col¬ lections of art everywhere to be found in this noble city, the countess was gra¬ tified with the observations and judi¬ cious remarks they drew from the ad¬ miring \deV«de ; and she was amazed n*- the historical knowledge, general in¬ formation, cultivation of mind, and deli¬ cacy of taste and sentiment, that gra¬ dually unfolded to the discriminating powers of her noble friend. CHAP-
CHAPTER XVI.
After going through the ceremonial of receiving and returning the compliments of her visitors, the countess retired to the relieving and true source of pleasure, do¬ mestic enjoyment. With her son, Ade¬ laide, and the chosen friends of her heart, she had a plan of rational felicity, that neither the attractions of the court nor the influence of fashion were alknved to break tlirough. At the ancient castle possessed by the Riminis from generation to generation, she fixed her abode. It was situated on the rich and flowery margin of the Arno, commanding a view of Florence, and sur¬ rounded from the south by the Apen¬ nines,
nines, whe)se majestic and solemn gran¬ deur formed a striking contrast with the buz and activity of that opulent city— banks enamelled with nature's vivid and inimitable coburs, fruit-trees bending under their delicious burthens, corn-fields waving in yellow beauty, and diversified with the vegetable productions of this abundant and fertile country, justly styled the garden of Europe. Here, on her extended domains, hap¬ py in the society of an affectionate son, her amiable Adelaide, and in the exer¬ cise of benevolence, the countess had in¬ exhaustible sources of happiness. Belles- lettres were her delight. She was well acquainted with the German and French languages, and could hold easy converse with foreigners. She found Adelaide had an imperfect knowdedge of the Ger¬ man, but Italian, though not in its purity, was her native tongue. Tbe countess expressed her intention of having her improved in the Italian language,
language, and the count solicited to be¬ come her preceptor. Under the instruc¬ tions of so accomplished a master, a pu* pil endowed with all the powers of un¬ derstanding and perception—what les¬ sons could fail in promoting the progress of study ? The count surprised her one day in taking a sketch of the beautiful scenery that rivetted her attention. He looked at it with pleasure, and asked who had been her master in that art? She blushed ; she declared herself to* tally ignorant of the sublime art—that she had been accustomed to take rough sketches from nature, for amusement, and guided only by her father, vvho pos¬ sessed a native but uncultivated taste. The count admired the piece, and en¬ treated he might have the pleasure of giving her a few instructions. Adelaide thanked him, and expressed in delicate terms her sense of his conde¬ scending attentions. The
The perusal of works of genius and science—the study of the languages— painting, in which the count excelled, and had produced the most exquisitely fi¬ nished pieces—and music, whose heaven¬ ly powers the countess had attained to the highest perfection, constituted their mental pursuits. The count was astonished with what facility Adelaide arrived at improve¬ ment, and the genius she discovered ha drawing. While he was engaged in guiding the pencil of his lovely pupil, his mother frequently charmed them with her performance on the piano-forte, and the magic of her voice. Her melo¬ dious strains, when heard from an ad¬ joining apartment, struck upon the en¬ raptured ear, disengaged the mind from the clog of earthly conceptions, elevated the soul, and opened an Elysium upon the delighted senses. Tlie countess formed frequent parties for recreation, and to explore tlie beau¬ ties
ties of the country; and those only were selected vrhose virtues, talents, and agree¬ able manners, rendered them acquisi¬ tions. Riding, sailing, and accompany¬ ing the count to fish, in beautiful plea¬ sure-boats, with rich awnings, rendered cool and fragrant by the introduction of the finest plants and flowers, and attend¬ ed by a concert of wind-instruments, al¬ ternately succeeded to study. Walking was the countess's favourite exercise. She considered it the most conducive to health, and calculated to give elasticity to the body, and energy to the powers of the mind. When vvan- deiiig over the velvet banks of the Ar¬ no, or seeking the sequestered paths of ťhe umbrageous forest, what language can express her feelings, entwined w ith the arm of her lovely companion, and leaning on her beloved son ! Iïis fascinating conversation, emiehed with learning and science, communicated a charm to the heart öf his delighted mo¬ ther.
ther. Past sorrows, the embryo thoughtr of future woes, fled her bosom—she saw, bhe heard only her Clementine. Some time after her arrival in Italy, Adelaide had written to her fiiends. She received letters in return, breathing af¬ fection, and assuring her they were all well. Thus happy in the intelligence of their health and welfare, blessed with the friendship of her patroness, engaged in elegant pursuits, in the midst of re¬ fined and delightful pleasures, her days glided like a felicitous dream ; and but for the remembrance of her beloved fa¬ ther, and the loved image °»f her lost sister, nothing interrupted its repose. The countess loved her with the affec¬ tion ejf a mother ; her society seemed as necessary to her happiness as her dear Clementine's. The count's chief time was spent with his mother, anel Adelaide had constant opportunities of discovering the amiable qualities of his heart. IIjs filial conduct wa&
was exemplary, and the health and en¬ joyment of his beloved parent rose para mount in bis breast. His brilliant acquirements were sources of intellectual delight, in the serious hours of conversation ; and his lively fancy, insinuating manners, and un¬ changeable sweetness of temper, stole the affections of those intimately ac¬ quainted with him, and gained him uni¬ versal admiration.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XVII.
Signora Valetta, the destined bride of the count, v/as absent from Florence when the countess arrived, and she was now coining to spend some days with her. Her presence was announced. She walked boldly up to the countess, and with an air of consummate indifference saluted her, inquired after her health as if she had only seen her the day before, thoimh it was seven months since that о had been the case. Before her aunt had ceased speaking, she turned abruptly round, threw a rose she had in her hand at her cousin, and asked if he was asleep ? " No,
*' No, that is impossible in your сонь pany/ he replied. With a modish laugh she exclaimed— " Well, for once your mighty lordship has condescended to say a gallant thing ; but if you öfter your compliments with such a gloomy air, I am afraid they will not take." " Gloomy indeed ; signora Valetta was certainly right." A profound sigh escaped with his ambiguous words. The countess seized the opportunity of introducing Adelaide.— " Signora Blanchard/ she added, " possesses my tenderest affection and esteem." She bent slightly to the graceful incli¬ nation of Adelaide, and fixed her eyes upon her with a broad stare, that ex¬ pressed astonishment and invidious cu¬ riosity. She attacked the count in a strain of raillery. She observed to him he was become quite rusiicated .since his journey to Switzerland, and, had he re¬ mained a httie long among the moun¬ tains,
tains, wdiat with bis innate taste for ru¬ ral beauties, and bis facility in acquiring them, be would soon have made an excellent goatherd.—.** Really, Clemen¬ tine 3 ," she added, (i if you absent your¬ self from court, and all fashionable and polite resorts, you will become total¬ ly unfit for the company of women of fashion/' " You are quite in the right, fair cou¬ sin/ he coolly replied : " if my best af¬ fections tho instructive converse of my accomplir Le d motber, the amiable friends whom she has selected about her, and reason and principle, are to be sacrificed, I с π fess I am unqualified, and indeed disclaim all pretensions for such dear- bought society." Befor,* be had finished this retort, ex¬ tra ted fremi him by the levity of bis cou- ми, ber eye again fixed upon Adelaide. Not accustomed to the effrontery of people of ht r stamp, her sensibility was pained. A blush rendered her beauty radiant,
radiant, and her cast-down eyes sought refuge from the invading scrutiny of sig¬ nora Valetta. Aíodest, affectionate, en¬ lightened, possessing all the graces of the mind, and the finest feelings of the heart, the delicíate Adelaide shrunk from ad¬ miration and inquiry. Signora Valetta was beautiful ; but the charms of her person, the qualities of her heart, and the powers of her mind, were sullied, corrupted, and perverted, by the false system of modish education and manners. A large brilliant black eye flashed boldly upon the beholder— a ^transparent skin— a vermi Ilion cheek, never heightened by the bkish of mo¬ desty—beau tiful lips, that never charmed with the language of feeling—and the f ^est teeth were constantly displayed, with an unmeaning or sarcastic grin. Vanity and pride were the leading features of her character. Conscious of her personal attractions, she considerivi admiration her due, and received the vol. ι. ι most
most unqualified flattery by exaction. Ever engaged in a series of frivolous and dissipated pursuits, her mind was a va¬ cuum that afforded neither mental nor moral reflection. Pleasure and self-gratification she con¬ sidered the sole aim of a woman of fa¬ shion ; and the kindly sympathies of our nature, the culture of the heart, and the tender and social affections arising from it, were to her unintelligible jargon, un¬ derstood only by those doomed to drudge in the lower walks of ufe. Her marriage with her cousin had been early instilled into her, and she neither opposed nor anticipated the event with pain or pleasure, and only when she saw him remembered her engagement. Weak, inconsistent, in a constant flutter of multiplying follies, this volatile being was disclaimed by nature, and rendered contemptible by art. Thus the gay, haughty» and unfeeling Valetta, was shortly to become the wife of the count! The
The late count Rimini was so bent upon this union, that her defects of cha¬ racter, and deficiency of the virtues of the heart, were overlooked by him, or considered errors that would give place to time and reflection. The ancestry of his house, the name of Rimini, was his pride—his failing. Governed by this arbitrary passion, lie was blind to the future happiness of his son, and hesitated not to sacrifice it ; and, the more to se¬ cure the accomplishment of the match, he settled that the bulk of his fortune should become the property of his niece in the event of his son failing to abide by the contract. Adelaide had been informed by the countess that this union had been pro¬ jected from childhood, and in a short time would be .solemnized.—** Alas!" she said to herself, "is this the destined wife of the amiable, the accomplished Rimini! this insensible—this fantastic being!" This reflection w r as accompanied with 1 2 regret.
leg ret. Every hour disclosed the latent virtues of bis mind, the benevolence of his character, and the ardour of his affec¬ tions. Love insensibly stole to the bo 4>m of Adelaide. Alas! she thought she cherished only sentiments of grati¬ tude and esteem ; but the arrival of Va¬ letta, and the approaching union, first told her heart it was too deeply inte¬ rested.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XVIII.
Signora Valetta was now tired of the castle. Four days had rendered its exqui¬ site scenery vapid. Insensible to the charms of her aunt's company, and in¬ different to the personal and mental at¬ tractions of the count, she sought grati¬ fication in every change, and pursued it with avidity, A party was formed among her friends to visit the court of Naples : she was so¬ licited to accompany them, and, having obtained her father's consent, she was eager to prepare for her departure. She was to be absent for some months, and it was ñxea by the cardinal that the τ 3 marriage
marriage should be consummated upon her return. She took leave of the coun¬ tess with all tbe nonchalance of a cold heart, and parted from the count, with whom she was to spend her future life, without the smallest emotion. During her visit the countess lament¬ ed more than ever the destiny that al¬ lotted her for her son, whose sentiments, pursuits, and moral habits, fitted him for the solid joys and happy participa¬ tions of domestic life. The virtues and mental charms of the angelic Adelaide, like the rising beams of an eastern sim, gradualiy unfolded, and stole upon her delighted affections. How often did she regret the fate that rose between, and for¬ bade the union of two beings whose con¬ geniality of soul and sentiment formed them alike for reciprocal felicity f The future happiness of her son was her chief oljijeet, and to see that established was the wish of her heart. Alas ! what pro¬ spect for her maternal hopes was there in his
his marriage with Valetta ? None. All nature, upheld and supported by oppo- sites, in the variety of its mode and mat¬ ter could not produce two beings more discordant than the exalted Rimini and the unamiable Valetta. In her last visit, the count expressed a more than usual dislike to her habits and manners, and lamented in a sor¬ rowful tone the fate that bound him to a woman he could not love.—.'* Ah, my beloved mother!" he exclaimed, while he flung himself on her bosom, ** I shall never find, among wealth and title, ex¬ cellence like yours. I have seen one whose fair form bears the semblance of all your virtues ; but, like those bright bodies that compose our planetary sys¬ tem, they are lost in the blaze of that sublime luminary, the primary source of their magnificence. So the mild radi¬ ance emitted from the virtues of Ade¬ laide is obscured in the splendour of your acquirements." 14 The
The countess sighed, and dropped a silent tear. She reminded him of the necessity of extricating himself from predilections that militated against ho¬ nour.—** There is no slavery so abject, my dear Clementine, as the subjection of reason to the dominion of passion; and the poor negro, chained to his task, may enjoy a freedom of mind which the tyrant who sports with his destiny can neither fetter nor possess like him. You have been accustomed to consider your cousin your destined wife : this contract was ľormed by your father, sanctioned by hers, and you cannot recede. Though Valetta is not the object of your selec¬ tion, nor calculated to share with you the solid joys which ever spring from reason and regulated pursuits, yet sa¬ crifices of private feelings must be made if justice requires them towards others. In the variety of modified existence, un¬ der the most painful and trying circum¬ stances, and pressed by calamities on all sides,
sides, no one can be unhappy whose sou! is unstained with guilt—crime alone in¬ volves despair : true happiness presents itself to every sound and cultivated mind. Learn then my beloved Cle¬ mentine, to trace it to its source, the re¬ cesses of your own heart. Rise superior to selfish affections, and recollect we are formed aá links in the chain of universal good, and not created for partial distri¬ butions and self-indulgences.' The countess's private sentiments co¬ incided with her son's. She looked for¬ ward to the day that was to seal his fu¬ ture fate with anguish and apprehension; but she considered it a duty to discou¬ rage impressions that could only prove fatal to his repose, and probably involve the peace of the amiable Adelaide. Alas ! that was already affected. Hi¬ therto a stranger to love, her beloved fa¬ ther, her sister, the friends of her early years, possessed her affections. Those ties were dissolved—removed. The heart
ι 5
of Adelaide was formed for refined and ardent attachments; she loved the coun¬ tess tenderly, studied her wishes, and was only happy with her. The amiable qualities the count pos¬ sessed were exhibited in the fairest point of view, in his unceasing assiduities to his mother. Filial love may be consi¬ dered the foundation of the kindred vir¬ tues. Conspicuous in that character, was it possible for Adelaide not to ad¬ mire—to esteem him? And well for the tranquillity of her breast had no other sentiment been excited ; but his kind and delicate attentions, accompanied with the charm of manner, the sweetest tones, imperceptibly encroached upon her softest affections. Reason and vir¬ tue, the faithful monitors of Adelaide, who had led her through the safe paths of obscurity, now whispered the evils she prepared for herself, by in¬ dulging a passion so hopeless and de¬ structive to her peace and the freedom of
of her mind. She struggled to subdue it, but nature still rebelled. Every day renewed the count's instructions, and brought a return of his attentions— attentions too delicate for superficial ob¬ servation, but to the eye of love, whose microscopic powers quickly discern the minute action, develop the motive, trans¬ late the look, and penetrate the inmost recesses of the heart. The conflict of love in a virtuous bo¬ som creates no wild emotions nor guilty terrors, yet the sensibility of Adelaide shrunk from the count's penetrating eye, as if she dreaded one fatal glance would reach her heart, and betray sentiments that she wished to conceal and bury in her breast for ever. Prudence and prin¬ ciple, the safeguards of virtue and the indispensable auxiliaries in the warfare of the passions, supported her ih her ef¬ forts to suppress an attachment as exalt¬ ed as dangerous to her repose. Though frequently and unavoidably alone with I 6 the
the count, the dignity of virtue, like her unconquerable ægis, carried a chann that precluded discovery. In ЪУ presence she strove to disguise her feelings, and assume the appearance of a peace and liberty that were no lon¬ ger hers. The high sense she enter¬ tained of female rectitude, the fatal eon- sequences she attached to the slightest dereliction from it, and the dignity of virtue, that imperiously restricts and for¬ bids the confession of a passion that ought to be solicited by him who in¬ spired it, armed her with firmness.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XIX.
What human foresight as sufficient to guard us against the cross incidents that spring up to defeat our most prudent measures and best resolves ! The castle was full of company ; it was the count's birthday—he had attained his twenty. second year. The ladies were assembled in the saloon. The countess wore upon her bosom a miniature of her son ; she highly prized it, as it was considered a striking likeness. A young lady sat next her, and if it might be presumed upon from the glances that stole under the silken fringe of a beautiful black eye, the count was the object of her attraction. She
She had rivetted her attention to the lovely features that, in imitative art, seemed to smile with filial bve upon the maternal breast. She raised her hand, and took hold of it ; but the countess turning her head hastily round, the chain that suspended it snapped, and it drop¬ ped into the possession of the young la¬ dy. A fler feasting her eyes upon it, she returned it to the countess, who, advan¬ cing to where she sat, said, in a low r voice —" Here, my Adelaide—to you only I entrust this." She took it from the countess, and shortly after locked it up in her work- table. Some days after, she was sitting- alone in й small study that opened into a spacious library. It was the countess's retreat rrom interruption, as none were admitted there but those inseparable from herself—the count and Adelaide, She opened her cabinet, and took out the count's picture, to repair the trivial damage it had sustained. As
As she raised it to her eyes she sighed deeply; a profound melancholy seized her for some time.—" Ah ! cruel test of my dear countess's confidence and affec¬ tion ! Ah ! why," she exclaimed, " has she afforded me the fatal pleasure of feasting my eyes upon that sweet and lovely countenance? Alas! every line¬ ament is too lastingly portrayed upon my heart. Just copy of a perfect ori¬ ginal ! you convey the benevolent smile that marks his features; and while I gaze, you seem to pity the unhappy Adelaide. Ill-fated prepossession ! what remains for me but hidden sorrows and broken peace? Oh, Love! delusive and dangerous passion ! without reason, our only 'mide, where wouldst thou lead the un wary mortals who give themselves up to thee? Divine Virtue, in hallowed precept, points out my guilt, in allowing its influence to abstract my soul from the importance of the sacred and relative duties of my being; and fair Reason, with
with unerring counsel, shews me my presumption in loving the most amiable and exalted of men. Alas ! were the count at liberty to choose, he would never think of the humble Adelaide. Vain thought! he does net, he ought not to love me — b<¿ is irrevocably destined for another !" " Destined for another!—Ah, fatal truth !" exchimed a voice, İn a low and plaintive tone. instantaneous terror roused her from the reverie that led her to express her feelings. She turned hastily round, and beheld the count. Thé pure blood for¬ sook her beautiful cheek, and was suc¬ ceeded by a deadly white; the miniature dropped from her hand, and she would have sunk upon the floor, but he saved her in his arms. " Ah, dear and amiable Adelaide!" he kindly said, " do not think I intruded or stole upon your private hours : I was reading in the library, unconscious of any
any one being near me ; the door of the study was open—I heard your angelic voice. Ah, extatic words! can I believe that Adelaide loves me?" " Love you !—unguarded truth !" her agitated frame and feeble voice gather¬ ing strength, from the necessity of exert¬ ing fortitude and firmness : w yes, the fa¬ tal secret has escaped me, and cannot be recalled ! But you are too generous to take advantage of this unfortunate dis¬ covery. I will be candid with you ; the soul of Adelaide is unaccustomed to dis¬ simulation, and it is now too late to dis¬ semble. Aly imprudence has enabled you to discover sentiments that I wished to bury for ever, and, alas ! vainly strove to conceal even from myself. Your many virtues, the charm of intellectual excel- lence, your generous and respectful at¬ tentions, and my gratitude and esteem, have united to inspire me with a tender¬ ness that can emiy end with my exist¬ ence." " Ah!
" Ah ! what do T hear?" said the count, transported with joy at this declaration, and pressing her with tender fondness to his breast : " you know it not, sweet Adelaide, but the soul of Rimini dearly loves you ------" She stopped him short.—" Ah ! be¬ ware, my brd, of cherishing such dan¬ gerous sentiments ! Cease to hope I will listen to them from this hour : the pain¬ ful confession necessity extorted from me—it was unavoidable ; but, from this ill-fated accident, the heart of Adelaide is sealed up for ever !" " Then hear me for once, before your resolution is finally fixed," said the count; " let me justify the favourable opinion you have of my heart and intellect, by assuring you that it is only the virtues and mental refinements of Adelaide that can excite the esteem, the admiration, and the love of Rimini. Yes, virtuous and charming Adelaide ! in your hospi¬ table dwelling, when my eye first caught the
the modest beauties ofthat lovely figure, I discovered a mind superior to the fas¬ cination of external charms. I thought nature had robbed the sex, and lavished all her gifts upon my angelic mother; but you have convinced me that she re¬ served for you those perfections which bear the semblance of her excellence. You taught me the first lesson of love ; alas! I have been too prompt and pro¬ gressive a pupil. From that fated mo¬ ment I have loved you with increasing affection. Our studies, our amusements, our conversations, every day, every hour, have disclosed to me the treasures you possess, in all the endearing qualities of the heart, and the resources of a delicate and cultivated mind. I thought I was secure ; my mother occupied my heart, and nothing could attract it that fell short of her. Ah ! why do you resem¬ ble her? why do you wear her soft graces and her virtues, to steal the affection of her son ? Yes, it is too sure you have surprised
surprised it, and human effort is unable to defend me against your influence." " Count," said Adelaide, abruptly, " I am too sensible of tbe bonoi r you con¬ fer upon me not to feel grateful for the preference. But you must rouse from the infatuation of such sentiments. Reason and virtue may slumber, but in the vir¬ tuous bosom they can never cease to operate. Let ns weigh the consequences of fostering a passion that involves so many sacrifices, and ask what those sa¬ crifices are ? The peace of an exem p) ary mother, the honour of her son, and the gratitude ï owe to my generous and be¬ loved benefactress-—the honour of her son, dearer to her than life, and hitherto spotless *md unsullied as the maternal mind that first implanted the sacred principle. Even now I feci myself guil¬ ty in holding this interview, which my fatal imprudence has involved me in. Ah, my lord ! let us exert to fulfil those imperious duties that moral obligation enjoins
enjoins us ; we shall be refunded in the end with peace and satisfaction, when the selfish passions pass away like the vi¬ sions of sleep, and leave only pain and regret to perpetuate their ι icmory/ In closing her sentence, she disengaged herself from the count's arm, that still supported her, and advanced towards the door, to leave the гост. " Ah," he softly said, with a pensive ah% " this is the last conference you are determined to hold wjth the unfortunate Rimini—and will you not allow liim at least the satisfaction of assuring you how much, how delicately he loves you ?" " Ah, my lord!" she hastily said, " cease, oh, cease this forbidden subject ! Destiny places insuperable barriers be¬ tween us ! remember your engagement ! remember the claims of signora Valetta!" She again attempted to leave the room ; he seized her hand, and kneeling at her feet, entreated she would hear him,
him, with all the eloquence of exalted passion. The bosom of Adelaide was agonized— the struggle of feelings, and the dictates of reason, the powerful pleadings of an ardent attachment, opposed to principles engrafted in her mind from early years. Let it be conceived the attractions of him who, at her feet, in the language of delicacy and virtue, pleaded the influence of his honourable affection. The roses and the lilies blended not their beauties to adorn him, yet he was beautiful be¬ yond description. His complexion was a clear olive, but when his feelings were excited, a crim¬ son shade suffused his cheek, and gave an inexpressible richness to his features. His eyes were black and penetrating, but accompanied with a melting softness that stole to the heart. His nose was inclin¬ ing to aquiline, and gave an exquisite and delicate turn to his profile. His month
mouth was beautiful; an irresistible smile played about it, and it was adorned by the finest set of teeth that can be ima¬ gined. Let there be superadded to this combination of beauty a sweetness of countenance that no description can con¬ vey, that no emotion of his feelings could deprive it of, and which even in sleep dwelt upon his features. In his person he was tall, graceful, and elegantly form¬ ed. Such were the endowments of thus fascinating being, who breathed the pure sentiments of liis heart before the loved object who had inspired them. " Ah !" he said, wdtb emotion, " you bid me remember my engagement, and the claims of Yaletta. Yes, she has claims ; my father's will entitles her to the bulk of iny fortune, in the event of my declining to marry her. But she has no claims upon my heart—that never was hers, never can be, and is yours de¬ cidedly for ever ! I owe her nothing. She bas no affection-—her heart is per¬ verted,
verted, cold, and incapable of love. 1 made her no vows—*I entered into no engagement—my heart, my inclinations were never consulted, and, alas ! I have been the victim of my father's pride and misused authority. Yet what chains can reach the mind ?—what despotism can fetter the heart—bind down, destroy, or repel the affections of our nature ? Hi¬ therto I was free—no female excited a serious thought : my mother engrossed шу soul ; to her I flew for instruction, amusement, and happiness—-on her ma¬ ternal bosom I breathed every wish*— every sentiment of my heart was laid open Wore her. My father and uncle, from tlie infancy of their children, entered iur to the covenant that was to seal their f'ut¬ ture happiness or misery. As I advan* ced to the years of reflection, my heart rebelled ; but my duty submitted. All women were on a level with me but my angelic mother, who rose upon the hori¬ zon of my affections the pole-star of vir¬ tue
tue and beauty, to illumine my soul, to guide me on my way, to influence me by her bright example, to lead me to true felicity on earth and eternal hap¬ piness hereafter ! Think not, my loved Adelaide, 1 harbour a thought unworthy of thee. My soul respects your л irtues, and those virtues will bloom anew when the charms of that lovely and delicate form will perish with a few revoh ing years. You possess my heart, and 1 of¬ fer ymi my band. Though I lose con¬ siderable property by declining a union repugnant to my feelings, what are the glittering gifts of fortune, when put in the balance with those solid and rational advantages that compose real happiness? Titles, pomp, parade, and fashion, have ever dazzled the unthinking of mankind. For a few years, while in the vigour of health and youth, pleasure, Шее the ig- nis fatum, enchants and fastens upon the deluded senses, continues to allure, deerv, and too often leads to ultimate VOL. L K i uin :
ruin : no longer able to pursue the fleet¬ ing meteor, the votaries of folly are a- wakened by reason to a conviction of the deceptie »11 they had inchiged—reason, that divine emanation of the Godhead, whose voice, never silent, but often neg¬ lected, discloses the fatal truth, wdien too late, that different and distant is the hap¬ piness that sensual gratification gives, to that calm, satisfactory, and never-failing enjoyment which virtue bestows." *' Aly lord/ said Adelaide, " need I repeat how much I admire your senti- тегЧ, and esteem your illustrious vir¬ tues? The sacrifice of fortune—your generous offer to one so much beneath л ou, demand my warm and lasting gra¬ titude. But poor, bumble, and unde¬ serving as I am of the rank you would confer upon me, 1 reject the noble hand that honour claims for another. Your conflict with signora Valetta has been, by parental authority, imposed upon her as well as you. ín tbe eyes of the world siie
she is considered your future bride, and the publicity of that circumstance has deterred and precluded all other offers. Would it be just or honourable to with¬ draw? No, mylord —the die is cast, you cannot recede ! Exert the eminent qua» iities that compose your character : re¬ member the peace of the countess—ful¬ fil your engagement, and forget the liumble Adelaide*. The conscious dis¬ charge of duties, however painful, will compensate for disappointments in the objects of our pursuit, and ensure 4 a last¬ ing peace and happiness." She paused. Tbe count, who was «unk in despair, pressed her hand, and attempted to speak. " My lord, it is in vain r This con¬ ference has lasted too lono- but it will be o' the last: from this hour my resolution is fixed, and the subject dropped for ever. There is but one thing can raise yoa higher in my estimation, and tranquillize к % my
my mind—grant my reejuest, and I have done" " Ah !" he sorrowfully replied, " ami¬ able Adelaide, what would I not grant, sacrifice, and relinquish, to convince you of the sincerity, the delicacy, tbe ardour of my affection, and to restore that peace to you, that, alas ! is denied to me for ever." ** Ah, then, as you value my repose, engage, from this interview, never to re¬ new wdiat has passed between us. Con¬ ceal from my beloved countess what would affect her peace, and disturb the tranquillity of lier mind, and bury my imprudence in your generous breast." H I will promise faithfully/ he said, with a deep sigh, " to comply with what you exact from me, though it cost me life ! Adieu, charming and lovely maid ! may peace again possess that gentle bo¬ som, though happiness from this moment deserts the soul of Clementine!" Then
Then disengaging her hand from the count, who was overwhelmed with sor¬ row, she left the study, and retired to her own apartment.
CHAPTER XX.
When Adelaide was alone, she reflect¬ ed with pain upon the imprudence that had betrayed the secret of her heart to him from whom she wished most to con¬ ceal it. To the delicate and chaste mind, even the shadow of indecorum is a spec¬ tre from which it flies with dread. Ale- lancholy, and dissatisfied with herself, no¬ thing offered to console her but the he)~ nour and delicacy of tbe count, which &he knew were inviolable. К 3 Supported
Supported by the confidence she re¬ posed m hini, and her own virtuous and determined firmness, she calmed her emotions, and was enabled to appear be¬ fore tlie countess cheerful, anel to ľontrí- bute towards her happiness, of which she formed so chief a pari The ardent afice* ion tlie count had conceived for her lastencd upon his heart. He revered her virtues and prin¬ ciples; but her final resolution was ini¬ mical to his hopes, and annihilated every prospect of happiness. She had rejected his hand, and nothing he perceived wovild induce her to accept it, while chained down with his unfortunate engagement: hope left his breast, and melancholy seized his mind. But the presence of his loved mother ever dispelled the gloom ; and he exerted his natural liveliness to hide tbe sorrows that even her maternal tenderness could not remove. The heart of man is naturally prone to feed upon the vision of its wishes. The
The count ì ¿fleeted, with pleasure that he was loved by Adelaide, and in her» society be felt a charm that lulled the distracting idea he must soon relinquish it, to unite himself to one so opposite to her who held his affections. The countess, with the watchful eye of maternal solicitude, perceived the de¬ pression her son could not conceal, and his love for Adelaide. This amiable and beautiful creature had engaged her tender affection, and she was well aware it was impossible for a young man of fervid and sentimental feelings to see, to know, and not to love her. Her heart approved of his choice, but she consider¬ ed honour demanded his hand for Va¬ letta. She soothed and strengthened his mind; she reminded him of the neces¬ sity of checking an attaching nt that could never be realized, and that the time was fast approaching when his plighted faith at the altar would bind him to another. She endeavoured to amuse and divert к é his
his mind by every means that her wis¬ dom and tenderness suggested; and every day Adelaide felt her increasing affection and attentions. Their studies, amusements, and diver¬ sions, went on as usual. The countess was aware that solitude and reflection fed the maladies of the mind, and she drew her son into company, without appearing to design it. Ah I it required no sacrifice on his part to attend her any¬ where : her influence threw a cheering ray over the gloom that pervaded his soul, and her presence was the centre of attraction, around wdiich virtue, talent, and genius, ever congregated. She had frequent and select parties, and the hos¬ pitable and noble Castle of Rimini re¬ sounded with rational mirth and elegant enjoyment. Dehibive sunshine! fleeting joys! ever evanescent amidst the changing scenes of oar fluctuating being ! How soon must that splendid mansion, where virtue*,
virtue, grace, and beauty presided, be¬ come a theatre of unfeigned sorrow, si¬ lence, and woe ! Amidst the storms of fate, let not the sufferer repine. Arraign not an all-just and unerring Providence, whose gifts, could we perceive it, are dis¬ tributed alike. He wdio reclines upon a couch of down feels not the roses with¬ out their thorns; sleep often flies the restless pillow of luxury, while the son of hardship enjoys refreshing slumbers upon his hard and sorry mattress. The palace and the cot have their joys and sor¬ rows, and all are visited in their turn with the afflictions of an inevitable destiny. The countess was informed that a fa¬ vourite brother was attacked with a dan¬ gerous fever, and that fatal consequences were apprehended. She instantly set off to Florence, and found him totally insensible to all about him. His lady, who was constantly engaged in a circle of fashionable gaieties, was not aware of the symptoms of the disorder ; and when к 5 she
she was apprised of their alarming ten¬ dency, she fled bis bedroom as tbe cham¬ ber of death, and only consulted her own safety. Far otherwise were the feelings of his amiable sister ; night and day, with un¬ remitting assiduity, she attended Ыш, and administered his medicines. Hea¬ ven heard her prayers for his recovery, and restored him to health ; but, alas ! her tender attentions cost him an affec¬ tionate sister and faithful friend. * This excellent and exemplary wo№№ no sooner saw ber brother recover the blessing of invalescence, than she was seized with the dreadful malady. It ra¬ pidly assumed that formidable ascendan¬ cy which decidedly baffled all human skill. Infection bad taken place from her first attendance upon her brother; the seedh of death were sown,, and slow¬ ly, but f'diaily, spread their baneful in¬ fluence through her system. The count was distracted at beholding his
feis mother's alarming state, He sent for all the medical me« most eminent in their profession ; but (dreadful intel¬ ligence !) they told him the powers of medicine were inefficacious—every effort was fruitless^—the disease prevailed, and death must ultimately ensue. Despair seized him. He flew to his mother's apartment, and throwing himself on the bed, clasped her in his arms, as if to snatch her from the grasp of death. The attendants attempted to remon¬ strate—to remove him ; it was in vain. He pressed her vvitb frenzied fondness to bis breast— e * Afy God !" he exclaim¬ ed, in a frantic voice, '* spare my be¬ loved mother! Ah! would you leave me, my mother, to all the horrors of my fate? Stay! ah, stay to cheer and sooth my troubled soul, or take your Clenievrine with you!—Life or death shall newer tear me from you !" This affecting appeal to the affeetion К 6 of
of bis insensible mother pierced the heart of Adelaide and all present with an¬ guish. The countess opened her eyes, and fixed them upon the countenance of her son, and with a dying, yet anxious look of tenderness, convinced him how much she was alive to his sufferings. She looked at Adelaide, who was drowned in tears ; she kissed the beautiful cheek, now faded with the blast of death, and tenderly requested her to take a support¬ ing cordial. She swallowed it, and the exhilarating draught seemed to revive her, and shortly after she spoke audibly. She desired her attendants might leave the room. Adelaide supported her on one side, and the count wept upon her bosom.—" My beloved Clementine," she said, ** my time is short ; death hovers over me. Listen to tbe last words of a mother who dearly к ved you, and whose happiness you constituted. You have
have been an exemplary son ; my last breath shall waft to heaven to crave a blessing for you." The count, convulsed with sorrow*, was unable to hear her. "Ah, my Clementine ! be composed. Hear me—this is the last effort of na¬ ture. Fulfil your engagement; it was your father's wish—honour demands it. You can never be miserable : virtue car¬ ries a talisman, that will impart a secret felicity in the midst of every privation." Then taking the hand of Adelaide, and putting it within her son's—" Ah Î' 1 she said, " could I have united you by a sacred bond, I should have been satis¬ fied—but fate has ordered it otherwise. With you, my Adelaide, amiable and deserving child of my ten derest affec¬ tion ! I leave my blessing. Cherish luy memory : be happy. I have left \ou a fortune that will render you easy and independent; but, alas! that is a trifling proof of my regard—my heart could best
best attest it I entreat you to remain with my Clementine till time shall have softened the pungency of sorrow. Ah ! it is unavailing—but nature must have its course : you will sooth hirm and sup¬ ply the place of a mother, whose fondest hopes a inel joys were centered in him." Adelaide, overwhelmed with grief, was unable to reply ; but throwing her ann over the bosom of the countess, in broken accents expressed tlie agonies of her heart. * ť Ah, in y son !" she said, seeing him sunk in sorrow, *' the separation from those we love is a painful struggle. Phi¬ losophy isas foiled ; religion alone will bear us tlirough the conflict. The long¬ est life is a fleeting term, estimated by our views of eternity. Young as you arc, and .-.be u id you be fated evento pro¬ tracted ex i si enee 1 , short is the span; we shall soon meet, and on the bosom of a Mother, from which you are now sever¬ ed, you u ill rest for ever. To you í re* siim
sign my Adelaide. The time is fast ap¬ proaching when she must leave you. Had I lived, she only could have sup¬ plied your place to me. Venerate ber ν ir- tues; protect her youth and innocence; conduct her yourself to Switzerland, and place her again under that virtuous roof from whence I took her. Ah ! now my loved Clementine, faint, weary, and lin¬ gering between the disunion of soul and body, slight as are tbe bonds wiiich hold them together, I could say much, hut feeble nature is almost extinct. Still, still to tlie emy heart fondly clings, and thy dear image glides between me and au awful though merciful Deity. Cherish the principles it has been my btudy to inculcate; let them guide and fortify you in the temptations of passion. Danger¬ ous are the mazy windings you bav ν yet to tread. Ί rust not the gay illusions of youth ful fancy ; the paths of pleasure are strewed with roses, but certain and fatal are the thorns that lurk beneath. Rugged
Hugged and cheerless often is the road to virtue—rigid her precepts, and painful the duties she enjoins ; but she is the faithful and only guide to happiness ; follow her, and she will gradually dispel the gloom, cheer you on your way, and open a vista of immortal glory. Ah ! now the languor of death seizes me— I can no more. Aly God ! to thee I commit my children !·—Protect—bless them—my beloved Clementine—my Adelaide—adieu for ever !" The last words faintly died upon her lips. She fell into the slumber of death, and for some hours remained in that state. The count, delirious with sorrow, lay upon her pillow, pressed her cold cheek, and still fondly clung to her maternal breast. The grief of tbe distressed Adelaide was no less acute. She kissed tbe insen¬ sible face of her loved benefactress, and bede weel it with the warm tears that gushed in anguish fiom her eyes. The
The moment arrived, pregnant with fate; a long and last sigh escaped the countess. She opened her eyes, and with the smile of beatitude looked upon her son and Adelaide, The breath fled the beautiful mansion for ever, and with it the pure spirit tojóin its kindred angels. The count was roused to distraction. The attendants in vain attempted to re¬ move him from the bed, though the me¬ dical gentlemen assured him tbe coun¬ tess was no more,—*' What ! my mo¬ ther dead ! Impossible ! she smiles upon me !" then clasping her lifeless form in his arms with frantic affection, he ex¬ claimed— "Aly angel mother! they would tear me from you : but they shall not prevail ; I will journey w4h you through the shades of death—I will sup¬ port you on the way—I will enter hea¬ ven with you—life, death, eternity, sball not step between us !" Naturally ardent in bis affections, the convulsion of his feelings suspended tho operation s
operations of reason. Adelaide was roused from her own sufferings to calm his. She soothed him, and entreated him to meet with resignation the unerring decrees of a just and merciful Providence -—"Ah, my lord! think of the unhappy Adelaide." At that loved name he started from the bed, and seeing her disconsolate ap¬ pearance, he; became calm and collected. -—" Ah ! pity this excess ! I am left to myself: who will guide, vvho will sup¬ port me ? Oh, my mother í" " Heaven will support you, my lord, and tbe friendship of Adelaide shall be exerted to assuage your sufferings." Then throwing her arms round him, and pressing him with tenderness to her heart, she entreated him to leave tbe room. He got up at her solicitation; hut casting bis eye towards the bed, and see¬ ing the countenance of his mother se* rene and beautiful in death, a paroxysm of
of despair seized him.>—" And must we part, my adored mother ?—A last and cruel embrace then. Farew ell for ever !" Then clasping his hands in agony, he fell over tbe body of the countess; a cold dew moistened his forehead, and he fainted awav. During suspended animation, the me- dical attendants removed him from the room, and prudently gave orders that he should be prevented from cateringit.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XXL
Foe some time the violence of tbe count's feelings affected liis health, and threatened to disorder his mind. At lengtli a calm succeeded, or rather a stu¬ por, frorn which no one could rouse him, even to take nourishment, but Adelaide : her appearance, her voice, would instant¬ ly produce a change, and act upon liis spirits. If he perceived her depressed, he would forget his own sorrows to mi¬ tigate hers. In her presence a faint sunshine of returning happiness would brighten bis countenance; but the in¬ stant she left tlie room, tbe gloom of despair settled upon him. Adelaide
Adelaide was unwearied in her atten¬ tions to him. She calmed him by well- timed consolation ; she cheered him with the assurance that time and absence shoukl never diminish the friendship she cherished for him ; she infused into bis soul the blessed solace of religion ; she strengthened bis mind by her own ex¬ ample*, and reason imperceptibly resum¬ ed its empire. Her own feelings were concealed from the count ; but when alone, they burst from her troubled bosom. Tlie image of her beloved countess was ever with her, and the time fast approaching when she must quit tbe amiable and exalted object who possessed her heart. The idea of leaving him unhappy, and to the horrors of a union that blasted his hopes of future happiness, occasioned her sor¬ rowful reflections, ami mingled with her past and present sufferings. She had written to her worthy friend Glandolph, and had given him tbe in¬ telligence
telligence of the death of her bene&o tress, and that she should return to hi» protection whenever the count was suf¬ ficiently recovered to conduct her to Switzerland. It was now six weeks since the death of the countess. 'The count's health was re-established, and his grief had subsided into calm and pensive reflection. Distracting was the idea of tearing herself from Rimini Castle: but that day must arrive — and prudence and principle were ever paramount in the mind of Adelaide. Bhe had watched a ñt time to remind the count of this pain¬ ful separation ; but the slightest allusion to tbe subject would instantly throw bim into despair, from which it required the full exertion of lier influence to draw him. One dav, after tbe exercise of a lon^ walk, in which the count seemed to re¬ gain his usual strength and energy, they returned to dinner. lie ate with appe¬ tite,
tite, and talked with spirits. They re¬ tired afterwards to the library ; there, to such qualified beings, the feast of intel¬ lect was fully enjoyed. They had been looking into a work written hy an Italian of celebrity, ex¬ hibiting the miseries of life as solely arising from the irregularities and influ¬ ence of the passions. Adelaide had supported his hypo¬ thesis. " What then/ said the count, " is hap¬ piness in the grasp e>f every one ?" " The substance is," she replied— u the shadow only is pursued by passion." * f Can the passions be subdued and destroyed at will ?" " They may be subdued, if not de¬ stroyed ; and, at least, we may prevent them from subduing us." " Are you a stoic then, Ixiautiful Ade¬ laide ?" he said, with a pensive .smile. The blush of inherent delicacy height- enee!
ened the roses on her cheeks. She knew he was too well aware of the suscepti¬ bility of her heart to all the tender sym¬ pathies of our nature.—" No, my lord," she said, with mila dignity, ** I blush not to own it, I am no stoic; nor do I believe Heaven's purposes could be ef¬ fected by such unnatural productions. Passions are given us as the incen¬ tives to action, and reason is bestowed to guide and restrain their impulse. The gratification of onr propensities, the attainment of the objects of our pursuit and reciprocal attachments, form the en¬ joyments of early life : but how often are they succeeded by an old age of re¬ gret and dissatisfaction !" " Enchanting Adelaide !" exclaimed the count, with a vehement and sorrow¬ ful air, " every word you utter is a truth tlut carries conviction to my reason, but daggers to my heart, Youth is the sea¬ son to enjoy the blessings that fall in our
our way; and must we callously pass by them, to ensure that satisfaction so desirable in the evening of Hfe ?" " No, my lord ; to use the language of a celebrated poet, * To enjoy is to obey ;' but when our enjoyments are inimical to duty, what then remains ?—the al¬ ternative of fluctuating passion, or the solid and permanent felicity which the discharge of duties ever brings ?" After a pause, and with a deep sigh, he exclaimed—" Yes, most amiable and perfect of your sex, you are right ; vir¬ tue and happiness are as inseparable as the shadow from the substance·—but there is no enjoyment where the incli¬ nations have no interest^ " True, my lord ; but when our en¬ joyments are to be purchased at the ex- pence of principle, they will cease to be enjoyments. Short is the season of youth, and often spent in the pursuit of frivo¬ lous and fancied joys ; but when the so¬ ber age of reflection arrives, they perish, vol. I. L and
and like the autumnal leaves, when scattered around, excite only painful re¬ collections and unavailing regret. Aly lord, allov me to ask you, ifit was given you to choose, whether you would fore¬ ge* the temporary objects of present de¬ sire, or possess them at the fatal expence of 'd goaded conscience, linked to ail the infirmities of age—how would you de¬ cide?" *' Father of mercies f " he exclaimed, with energy, u though disappointment and sorrow be my portion, let conscious rectitude be mine !" " Ah, my lord !" said Adelaide, ten¬ derly, " 1 am too well aware of the ex¬ alted qualities you possess, to have doubt¬ ed your decision." Perceiving his mind filled with a train of reflections favourable to her wishes, she informed him that her friends anxi¬ ously awaited her return to them, and expressed her intention to set off for Switzerland. He
He started with a look of sudden des¬ pair at her proposal, and entreated her not to think of leaving Mm so soon, or at least to allow him a little longer time to prepare his feelings for the painful separation. His agitation distressed her, and she agreed to remain a fortnight longer at the castle. A transient gleam of joy shot асгоьь his features, but was soon superseded by the gloom of reflection. He abrupt¬ ly left the room, and when he appeared at supper, his mind had evidently suffer¬ ed a conflict. The fortnight passed ; and during the time he had sunk again into despon¬ dency. He bad taken no notice of Ade¬ laide's intended departure. Unhappy to see him a prey to the ardency of his affection, and the misfor¬ tune of an imposed engagement, she was reluctant to torture bis feelings by renewing the subject. L 2 Proeras-
Procrastination may remove the evil, but can never lessen it. She was well aware she could not remain long""· at the castle with propriety, since she had lost the protection of the countess. Seizing the opportunity, as they sat at an open balcony, enjoying the lofty and sublime beauties the Apennines exhi¬ bited in prospect.—" How often," she said, " have I risen with the sun scarce¬ ly above the horizon, to mark his open¬ ing glories from behind yon summits, and in his genial progress embrace the extended chain, till evening saw him sink below the western hills, and in ma- jectic splendour leave his glowing man¬ tle upon their tops ! For the last time I contemplate the grandeur of your scenery, ye stupendous works of a won¬ derful and inscrutable Deity !" " For the last time ?" echoed the count, in a tone of despair, " Yes, my lord, 1 must set off for Uri this week ; and if you find yourself un¬ able
able to undertake the journey, you will, I am certain, find me a proper guide to conduct me thither." " A proper guide !—chilling expres¬ sion ! To whom would Rimini entrust her who is dearer to him than life? No, it is impossible. I have reasoned with myself; I have attempted to sub¬ due this turbulent passion ; I have sum¬ moned duty—confided in religion—im¬ plored God ; but, fatal truth ! I must confess it, all human effort is vain : it haunts me—governs me, and fills my' soul with hope, despair, joy, and unut¬ terable pain." " Aly lord, this is the language of a prohibited passion, not of reason. We must part." " No !" he exclaimed, in a wild tone, " I cannot part with you ; death is pre¬ ferable to that." " And what do you require of me in this painful conflict ?" " To accept of my hand. If 1 pos- L 3 sessed
sessed the riches of Croesus, the extend¬ ed empire of Alexander, and the united influence of the Roman world, you, and vou only, should share them with mc." " And Ì, my lord, won ki reject them all, and the hand th^t proffers them, while honour claims it for another. Poor, humble, and unknown, your noble and generous mother found me; but the breath of calumny never dimmed my spoless name. Her benevolence, hei¬ tender affection, drew me from obscuri¬ ty ; her liberality has pldced me beyond want and dependence, and in death she left me her blessing. Precious bequest ' it will console me in the pensive hour of sorrow—it will serve me as an antidote against the dangerous supremacy of the passions, and the study of my life shall be to deserve it. Ah, my lord ! do you re¬ member her last request ^-— 4 Fulfil your engagement—-honour demands it—it was your father's wish. Honour, that sacred law in the hinnan breast, which unites man
man to man—the security, the bond ol society, and wdiich hitherto has influenced every action of your life, and irradiated your illustrious name 4 : would you tram¬ ple upon its rights? would you sacrifice it for an attachment that reflects upon you .so little credit ? No, my lord, I esteem you too much to take advantage oi' the preference which, unfortunately, you ho¬ nour me with. You know my princi¬ ples ; you know the extent of my af¬ fection—it will terminate only with my being. I have had my struggles; the conflict has been great, but the satis¬ faction arising from it is more than equivalent for all the happiness which gratified inclination can bring." " Have you then/ he exclaimed, in a teme of sorrow, " determined not tc» many me ?" ** I have 1 , my lord,'' she replied, with firmness. " Then my doom is fixed !" he vehe¬ mently said, and sunk upon the soia m ι. 4 an
an agony of despair. " Yes, my sainted mother ! your request shall be fulfilled : I will unite myself to the destiny that blasts m> hopes— Valetta shall have my hand ; but thou, cruel, adored Adelaide ! irresistible magnet of my affections that impels me to a secret fate! thou only hast my heart," Adelaide, affected by his agitation, was going to leave the room ; but sud¬ denly rising, he clasped her in his arms in a transport of passion, and exclaimed — rt Yes, you fill my soul: fate shall not separate us—love has united us for ever. I have a beautiful villa, situated in the hollow of a rich and fertile valley, surrounded by the Apennines, exhibit¬ ing on tlieir luxuriant and fragrant sides the glowing and vivid scenery of the celebrated Tempe. In this paradise, whose unaspiring beauties are concealed from the eye of the traveller, and shel¬ tered from the eastern blasts of the Adri¬ atic by protecting mountains, 1 will place my
my Adelaide. It will be the asylum of love, the Elysium of all my joys, the centre of my hopes, and the boundary of my wishes. Ah, my Adelaide ! what are those unnatural institutes that bind the victims of compulsion ?—what are they to those whose hearts, souls, and minds are cemented by principles so pure, so elevated, that human ties cannot reach them? In this charming retreat, my wounded breast will find solace fiom the trials, disappointments, and sorrows of a forced union. My adored Adelaide shall preside there the idol of my con¬ centered affections. I will guard her from intrusion ; I will shelter her from the changes and chances of this chequer¬ ed state. On her bosom I shall taste that felicity which Rimini can only find there, and I will protect her against the combined calumny of a world." " And I, my lord," said the shocked and agitated Adelaide, " will save you from the crime—I will protect myself from
from the necessity of your shielding me from deserved reproach. Ah! what shocking proposal have I heard !<—what perversion of reason—desertion of prin¬ ciple—dereliction of virtue and religion —and from him whose exalted virtues were first the foundation of my esteem ! Think not, my lord, ungenerously to take advantage of the prepossession vvhich unguardedly I betrayed for you. My affections have ever been sincere, ar¬ dent, and unchangeable; but they are controlled by reason: my principles govern me, and my resolution is equal to the most painful trials. 1 have dis¬ charged the duties towards you that my gratitude and my heart dictated, and 1 have fulfilled the dying request of mv beloved benefactress. The language oí reproach is repugnant to my feelings—1 am unwilling to add to the disorder and disquietude which the tyranny of unre¬ strained passion subjects you to; but have you, my içırd, acquitted yourself towards
towards me as your sainted mother en¬ joined you ? Do you recollect her words —' Venerate her virtues—protect her youth and innocence—and conduct her yourself to Switzerland?' Yes, you have offered me protection : upon what prin¬ ciple? Iniquitous perversion of tlie term! Do you suppose that she vvho declined your hand, with all the flatter¬ ing distinctions attached to it, from a sense of honour, can ever be induced te) relinquish virtue, when shame and mi¬ sery are sure to follow such dereliction ? Aly lord, I entreat you, rouse from the infatuation that infects the amiable qualities of your mind, and obstructs and poisons the pure channels through which your many virtues found their way to admiration and esteem." While she had been speaking, he had thrown himself on tbe couch, deeply agitated by a conflict of hostile feeiings ; but observing her about to leave the room,
room, he started up, and attempted to detain her. " I am already too much shocked, my lord/ she said, with dignity ; ťí I can¬ not remain with you, to prolong a sub¬ ject that militates so much against those pure principles in which I have been educated, and is so fatal to your repose." Then disengaging herself from his hold, she lefl the room.
END OF VOL. I.
Punted by J- Darling, LeBd«nhall-strect, London.
