THE UNIVERSITY 
OF ILLINOIS 
LIBRARY 

%^^ 

1629 c 

N. i 



SALATHIEL. 



A STORY OF 



THE PAST, THE PRESENT, AND 



THE FUTURE. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 



VOL. III. 



NEW EDITION. 



LONDON : 

HENRY COLBURN, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 

1829. 



PRIKTED by a. J. VALpy, RED LION COURT, FLEET STREET. 






SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER I. 



The seventeenth day of the month Tamuz, ever 
memorable in the sufferings of Israel, was the last 
of the Daily Sacrifice. Sorrow and fear were on 
the city ; and the silence of the night was broken 
by lamentation from the multitude. I retired to 
my chamber of affliction, and busied myself in 
preparing for the guard of the temple, to withdraw 
my mind from the gloom that was beginning to 
master me. Yet when I looked round the room, 
and thought of what I had been, of the opulent 
enjoyments of my palace, and of the i)eloved faces 
VOL. III. A 



^"*63»^ 






2 SALATHIEL. 

that surrounded me there, I felt the sickness of 
the heart. 

The chilling air that blew through the dilapi- 
dated walls, the cruse of water, the scanty bread, 
the glimmering lamp, the comfortless and squalid 
bed, on which lay, in the last stage of weakness, a 
patriot and a hero, —being full of fine affections and 
abilities, reduced to the helplessness of an infant, 
and whom, in leaving for the night, I might be 
leaving to perish by the poniard of the robber, — 
unmanned me. I cast the scymitar from my hand, 
and sat down with a sullen determination there to 
linger until death, or that darker vengeance which 
haunted me, should do its will. 

The night was stormy ; and the wind rolled in 
long and bitter gusts through the deserted cham- 
bers of the huge mansion. But the mind is the 
true place of suffering ; and I felt the season's 
visitation in my locks drenched about my face, 
and my tattered robes swept by the freezing blasts, 
as only the natural course of things. 

I was sitting by the bed-side, moistening the 
fevered lips of Constantius with water, and press- 
ing on him the last fragment of bread which I 
might ever have to give, when I, with sudden 
delight, heard him utter for the first time articulate 
sounds. I stooped my ear to catch accents so dear 



SALATHIEL. S 

and full of hope. But the words were a suppli- 
cation. He prayed to the Christian's God ! 

I turned away from this resistless conviction 
of his belief. But this was no time for debate ; 
and I was won to listen again. His voice was 
scarcely above a whisper, but his language was 
the aspiration of a glowing heart. His eyes were 
closed ; and evidently unconscious of my presence, 
in his high communion with Heaven, he talked of 
things of which I had but imperfect knowledge, 
or none ; of blood shed for the sins of man ; of a 
descended Spirit to guard the path of the servants 
of Heaven ; of the unspeakable love that gave the 
Son of God to torture and mortal death for the 
atonement of that human iniquity which nothing 
but such a sacrifice could atone. He named the 
names dear to us both; and praying '-'for their 
safety, if they still were in life, or for their meet- 
ing beyond the grave, resigned himself to the will 
of his Lord." 

I waited in sacred awe till I saw, by the sub- 
siding motion of the lips, that the inward prayer 
which followed, was done ; and then, anxious to 
gain information of my family, questioned him. 
But, with the prayer, the interval of mental power 
passed away. The veil was drawn over his senses 
once more ; and his answers were unintelligible. 



4 SALATHIEL. 

Yet even the hope of his restoration lightened 
my gloom ; my spirits, naturally elastic, shook off 
their leaden weight : I took up the scymitar, and 
pressing the cold hand of my noble fellow- victim, 
prepared to issue forth to the Temple. 

The storm was partially gone ; and the moon, 
approaching to the full, was high in heaven, fight- 
ing her way through masses of rapid cloud. The 
wind still roared in long blasts, as the tempest 
retired, like an army repulsed, and indignant at 
being driven from the spoil. But the ground was 
deluged, and a bitter sleet shot on our half-naked 
bodies. I had far to pass through the streets of 
the upper city ; and their aspect was deeply suited 
to the melancholy of the hour. 

Vast walls and buttresses of the burned and 
overthrown mansions remained, that, in the spec- 
tral light, looked like gigantic spectres. Ranges 
of inferior ruins stretched to the utmost glance ; 
some yet sending up the smoke of recent confla- 
gration, and others beaten down by the storms, or 
left to decay. TJie immense buildings of the 
chieftains, once the scenes of all but kingly mag- 
nificence, stood roofless and windowless, with the 
light sadly gleaming through their fissures, and 
the wind singing a dirge of ruin through their life- 
less halls. I scarcely met a human being ; for the 



SALATHIEL. 5 

sword and famine had fearfully reduced the once 
countless population. 

But I sometimes startled a flight of vultures 
from their meal ; or, in the sinking of the light, 
stumbled upon a heap that uttered a cry, and 
showed that life was there ; or, from his horrid 
morsel, a wretch glared upon me, as one wolf 
might glare upon another that came to rob him of 
his prey ; or the twinkling of a miserable lamp, in 
the corner of a ruin, glimmered over a knot of 
felony and murder, reckoning their hideous gains, 
and carousing and quarrelling with the dagger 
drawn. Heaps of bones, whitening in the air, 
were the monuments of the wasted valour of my 
countrymen ; and the oppressive atmosphere gave 
the sensation of walking in a sepulchre. 

I dragged on my limbs, with increased diffi- 
culty, through those long avenues of misery and 
death, that, black, silent, and split into a thou- 
sand shapes of ruin, looked less like the streets of 
a city, than the rocky defiles of a mountain shat- 
tered by lightnings and earthquakes. But we 
were strong in that dreary strength which man 
derives from excess of calamity. Mental and 
bodily suffering seemed to have done their worst. 
Within the city there was not sustenance for the 
tenth part of even its reduced population for a week 



4 



SALATHIEL. 



to come. Our armouries were exhausted — our 
bodies naked — our limbs withered by perpetual 
wounds and watching". I should have welcomed 
the assault which closed this lamentable struggle 
against impossibilities. 

On the summit of the hill I found a crowd of 
unhappy beings, who came, like myself, actuated 
by zeal to defend the Temple from the insults to 
which its sanctity was now nightly exposed. Fac- 
tion had long extinguished the native homage of 
the people. Battles had been fought within its 
walls ; and many a corpse loaded the sacred floors, 
that once would have required solemn ceremonies 
to free them from the pollution of an unlicensed 
step. 

And what a band were assembled there! Wretches 
mutilated by wounds, worn with sleeplessness, 
haggard with want of food ; shivering together on 
the declivity, whose naked elevation exposed them 
to the whole inclemency of the night ; flung, like 
the dead, on the ground, or gathered in little knots 
among the ruined porticoes, with death in every 
frame, and despair in every heart. 

I was sheltering myself behind the broken co- 
lumns of the Grand gate, from the bitter wind 
which searched every fibre, and was sinking into 
that chilling torpor which benumbs body and mind 



SALATHIEL. 7 

alike ; when a clash of military music, and the 
tramp of a multitude, assailed my ear. I started 
up, and found my miserable companions mustering 
from the various hollows of the hill to our post on 
the central ground of Mount Moriah, where the 
view was boundless on every side. A growing 
blaze rose up from the valley, and flashed upon 
the wall of circumvallation. The sounds of cym- 
bal and trumpet swelled : the blaze advanced 
rapidly ; and going the circuit of the wall, the 
helmets and lances of cavalry were seen glittering 
through the gloom ; a crowd of archers preceded 
a dense body of the legionary horse, at whose 
head rode the Roman general and his chief 
officers. On this night the fatal wall had been 
completed, and Titus was going its round in tri- 
umph. Every horseman carried a torch ; and 
strong divisions of infantry followed, bearing 
lamps and vessels of combustible matter on the 
points of their spears. As the whole moved, roll- 
ing and bending with the inequalities of the ground, 
I thought that I saw a mighty serpent coiling his 
burning spires round the prey that was never to 
be rescued by the power of man. 

But the pomp of war belc'W, and the wretched- 
ness around, raised reflections of such bitterness, 
that, when Titus and his splendid troop reached 



8 SALATHIEL. 

the foot of the Temple-hill, one outcry of sorrow 
and anticipated ruin burst from us all. The con- 
queror heard it, and, from the instant manoeuvring 
of his troops, was evidently alarmed : he had known 
the courage of the Jews too long, not to dread the 
effects of their despair. 

And despair it was, fierce and untameable ! I 
started forward, exclaiming, " If there is a man 
among you ready to stake his life for his country, 
let him follow me." 

To the last hour the Jew was a warrior. The 
crowd grasped their spears, and we sprang down 
the cliffs. As we reached the outer wall of the 
city, I restrained their exhaustless spirit, until I 
had singly ascertained the state of the enemy. 
Titus was passing the well-known ravine near the 
Fountain-gate, where the ground was difficult 
for cavalry, from its being chiefly divided into gar- 
dens. I threw open the gate, and led the way to 
the circumvallation. The centinels, occupied with 
looking on the pomp, suffered us to approach un- 
perceived ; we mounted the wall, overthrew every 
thing before us, and plunged down upon the caval- 
ry entangled in the ravine. 

The bravery of the'iegions was not proof against 
the fury of our attack. Even our wild faces and 
naked forms, seen by the uncertain glare of the 



SALATHIEL. d 

torches, looked scarcely human. Horse and man 
were rolled down the declivity. The arrival of 
fresh troops only increased the confusion ; their 
torches made them a mark for our pikes and ar- 
rows ; every point told ; and every Roman that 
fell, armed a Jew. The conflict became murder- 
ous ; and we stabbed at our ease the troopers of 
the Emperor's guard, through their mail, while 
their long lances were useless. 

The defile gave us incalculable advantages ; for 
the garden-walls were impassable by the cavalry, 
while we bounded over them like deer. All was 
uproar, terror, and rage. We actually waded 
through blood. At every step I trod on horse or 
man ; helmets and bucklers, lances and armour, 
lay in heaps : the stream of the ravine soon ran 
purple with the proudest gore of the proud le- 
gions. 

At length, while we were absolutely oppressed 
with the multitude of dead, a sudden blast of 
trumpets, and the loud shouts of the enemy, led 
me to prepare for a still fiercer effort. A tide 
of cavalry poured over the ground ; a gallant 
figure, cheering them on, with his helmet in his 
hand, galloped in their front ; I withdrew my 
wearied followers from the exposed situation into 
which their success had led them, and, posting 



10 SALATHiEL. 

tbem behind a rampart of Roman dead, awaited 
the charge. ^ 

It came with the force of thunder ; the powerful 
horses of the imperial escort broke over our ram- 
part at the first shock, and bore us down like stub- 
ble. Every man of us was under their feet in 
a moment ; yet the very number of our assailants 
saved us. The narrowness of the place gave no 
room for the management of the horse ; the dark- 
ness assisted both our escape and assault ; and, 
even lying on the ground, we plunged our knives 
in horse and rider with terrible retaliation. 

The cavalry at length gave way ; but the Roman 
general, a man of the heroic spirit that is only in- 
flamed by repulse, rushed forward among the dis- 
heartened troops, and roused them, by his cries 
and gestures, to retrieve their honour. After 
a few bold words, he charged at their head. I 
singled him out, as I saw his golden eagle gleam 
in the torch-light. To capture the son of Vespa- 
sian would have been a triumph worth a hundred 
lives. Titus was celebrated for personal dexterity 
in the management of the horse and lance ; and I 
could not restrain my admiration of the skill with 
which he penetrated the difficulties of the field, and 
the mastery with which he repelled or overthrew 
all that opposed him. 



SALATHIEL. 11 

Our motley ranks were already scatterings ; when 
I called out my name, and defied him to the com- 
bat. He stooped over his charger's neck to dis- 
cover his adversary ; and, seeing before him a 
being as blackened and beggared as the most dis- 
mantled figure of the crowd, gave a laugh of fierce 
derision, and was turning away, when our roar of 
scorn recalled him. He struck in the spur, and, 
couching his lance, he bounded towards me. To 
have waited his attack must have been destruc- 
tion ; I sprang aside, and with my full vigour flung 
the javelin : it went through his buckler. He 
reeled ; and a groan rose from the legionaries, who 
were rushing forwards to his support. He stopped 
them with a fierce gesture, and, casting off the 
entangled buckler, charged again. But the hope of 
the imperial diadem was not to be thus cheaply 
hazarded. The whole circle of cavalry rolled in 
upon us ; I was dragged down by a hundred 
hands ; and Titus was forced away, indignant at 
the zeal which thwarted his fiery valour. 

In the confusion I was forgotten, slipped through 
the concourse, and rejoined my countrymen, who 
had given me over for lost, and now received 
me with shouts of victory. The universal cry was 
to advance; but I felt that the limit of triumph for 
that night was come: the engagement had become 



12 SALATHIEL. 

known to the whole range of the enemy's camps, 
and troops without number were already pouring 
down. I ordered a retreat ; but there was one re- 
maining exploit to make the night*s service memo- 
rable. 

Leaving a few hundred pikemen outside the cir- 
cumvallatioti to keep off any sudden attempt, I set 
every hand at work to gather the dry weeds, 
rushes, and fragments of trees, from the low 
grounds into a pile. It was laid against the ram- 
part. I flung the first torch, and pile and rampart 
were soon alike in a blaze. Volumes of flame, car- 
ried by the wind, rolled round its entire circuit. 

The Romans rushed down in multitudes to ex- 
tinguish the fire. But this became continually 
more difiicult. Jerusalem had been roused from 
its sleep ; and the extravagant rumours that a 
great victory was obtained, Titus slain, and the 
enemy's camp taken by storm, stimulated the 
natural spirit of the people to the most boundless 
confidence. Every Jew who could find a lance, an 
arrow, or a knife, hurried to the gates ; and the 
space between the walls and the circumvallatiori 
was crowded with an army, which, in that crisis 
of superhuman exultation, perhaps no disciplined 
force on earth could have outfought. 

Nothing could now save the rampart. Torches 



SALATHIEL. 13 

innumerable, piles of fagots, arms, even the dead, 
all things that could burn, were flung upon it. 
Thousands who, at other times, might have shrunk, 
forgot the name of fear, leaped into the very midst 
of the flames, and, tearing up the blazing timbers, 
dug to the heart of the rampart, and filled the 
hollows with sulphur and bitumen ; or struggled 
their way across the tumbling ruins, to throw 
themselves among the Roman spearsmen, and see 
the blood of an enemy before they died. 

War never had a bolder moment. Human na- 
ture, roused to the wildest height of enthusiasm, 
was lavishing life like dust. The rampart spread 
a horrid light upon the havoc : every spot of the 
battle, every group of the furious living and the 
trampled and deformed dead,. was keenly visible. 
The ear was deafened by the incessant roar of 
flame, the falling of the huge heaps of the ram- 
part, and the agonies and exultations of men re- 
velling in mutual slaughter. 

In that hour came one of those solemn signs 
that marked the downfal of Jerusalem. 

The tempest, that had blown at intervals with 
tremendous violence, died away at once ; and a 
surge of light ascended from the horizon, and 
rolled up rapidly to the zenith. The phenomenon 
instantly fixed every eye. There was an indefin- 



14 SALATHIEL. 

able sense in the general mind tbat a sign of power 
and Providence was about to be given. The 
battle ceased ; the outcries were followed by utter 
silence ; the armed ranks stood still, in the very 
act of rushing on each other : all faces were turned 
on the heavens. 

The light rose pale and quivering, like the me- 
teors of a summer evening. But in the zenith it 
spread and swelled into a splendour that distin- 
guished it irresistibly from the wonders of earth 
or air. It swiftly eclipsed every star. The moon 
vanished before it ; the canopy of the sky seemed 
to be dissolved, for a view into a bright and in- 
finite region beyond, fit for the career of those 
mighty beings to whom man is but a feather on 
the gale. 

As we gazed, this boundless field was trans- 
formed into a field of battle ; multitudes poured 
across it in the fiercest convulsions of combat ; 
horsemen charged, and died under their horses' 
feet ; armour and standards were trampled in 
blood ; column and line burst through each other. 
At length the battle stooped towards the earth ; 
and, with hearts beating with indescribable feel- 
ings, we recognised in the fight the banners of the 
tribes. It was Jew and Roman struggling for 
life ; the very countenances of the combatants be- 



SALATHIEL. 15 

came visible, and each man below saw a represen- 
tative of himself and his fortunes above. The fate 
of Jewish war was there written by the hand of 
Heaven ; the fate of the individual was there 
predicted in the individual triumph or fall. What 
tongue of man can tell the intense interest with 
which we watched every blow, every movement, 
every wound of those images of ourselves ? 

The light illumined the whole horizon below. 
The legions were seen drawn out in front of the 
camps ready for action ; every helmet and spear- 
point glittering in the radiance ; every face turned' 
up, gazing in awe and terror on the sky. The 
tents spreading over the hills ; the thousands and 
tens of thousands of auxiliaries and captives ; the 
little groups of the peasantry roused from sleep by 
the uproar of the night, and gathered upon the 
knolls and eminences of their fields ; ail were 
bathed in a flood of preternatural lustre. 

But the wondrous battle approached its close. 
The visionary Romans shook ; column and cohort 
gave way ; and the banners of the tribes waved in 
victory over the field. Then first, human voices 
dared to be heard. From the city and the plain 
burst forth one mighty shout of triumph. 

But our presumption was soon to be checked. 
A peal of thunder that made the very ground 



16 SALATHIEL. 

tremble under our feet, rolled from the four 
quarters of the heaven. The conquering host 
shook, broke, and fled in utter confusion over the 
sapphire field. It was pursued ; but by no sem- 
blance of the Roman. 

An awful enemy was on its steps. Flashes of 
forked fire, like myriads of lances, darted after it ; 
cloud on cloud deepened down, as the smoke of a 
mighty furnace ; globes of light shot blasting and 
burning along its track. Then, amid the doubled 
roar of thunder, rushed forth the chivalry of Hea- 
ven ; shapes of transcendent beauty, yet with 
looks of wrath that withered the human eye ; 
armed sons of immortality descending on the wing 
by millions ; mingled with shapes and instruments 
of ruin, for which the mind has no conception. 
The circle of the heaven was filled with the 
chariots and horses of fire. Flight was in vain : 
the weapons were seen to drop from the Jewish 
host : their warriors sank upon the splendid field. 
Still the immortal armies poured on, trampling 
and blasting, until the last of the routed was con- 
sumed. 

The angry pomp then paused. Countless wings 
were spread, and the angelic multitudes, having 
done the work of vengeance, rushed upward with 
the sound of ocean in the storm. The roar of 



SALATHIEL. 17 

trumpets and thunders was heard, until the splen- 
dour was lost in the heights of the empyrean. 

We felt the terrible warning. Our strength 
was dried up at the sight ; despair seized upon our 
souls. We had seen the fate of Jerusalem. No 
victory over man could now save us from the 
coming of final ruin. 

Thousands never left the ground on which they 
stood ; they perished by their own hands, or lay 
down and died of broken hearts. The rest fled 
through the night, that again wrapped them in 
tenfold darkness. The whole multitude scattered 
away, with soundless steps and in silence, like an 
army of spectres. 



18 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER II. 

In the deepest dejection that could overwhelm 
the human mind, 1 returned to the city, where one 
melancholy care still bound me to existence. I 
hastened to my comfortless home ; but the battle 
had fluctuated so far round the walls, that I found 
myself perplexed among the ruins of a portion of 
the lower city, a crowd of obscure streets which 
belonged almost wholly to strangers and the 
poorer population. 

The faction of John of Giscala, composed chiefly 
of the more profligate and beggared class, had 
made the lower city their stronghold, before they 
became masters of Mount Moriah ; and some des- 
perate skirmishes, of which conflagrations were the 
perpetual consequence, laid waste the principal 



SALATHIEL. 19 

part of a district built and kept up with the haste 
and carelessness of poverty. To find a guide 
through this scene of dilapidation was hopeless, for 
every living creature, terrified by the awful por- 
tents of the sky, had now fled from the streets. 
The night was solid darkness. No expiring gleam 
from the burnt rampart, no fires of the Roman 
camps, no lamp on the Jewish battlements, broke 
the pitchy blackness. Life and light seemed to 
have perished together. 

To proceed soon became impossible ; and 1 had 
no other resource than to wait the coming of day. 
But to one accustomed as I was to hardships, this 
inconvenience was trivial. I felt my way along 
the walls to the entrance of a house that promised 
some protection from the night, and flinging my- 
self into a corner, vainly tried to slumber. But 
the rising of the storm, and the rain pouring upon 
my lair, drove me to seek a more sheltered spot 
within the ruin. The destruction was so effectual, 
that this was difficult to discover ; and I was hope- 
lessly returning to take my chance in the open air, 
when I observed the glimmer of a lamp through 
a crevice in the upper part of the building. My 
first impulse was to approach and obtain assist- 
ance. But the abruptness of the ascent gave me 
time to consider the hazard of breaking in upon 



20 SALATHIEL. 

such groups as might be gathered at that hour, 
in a period when every atrocity under Heaven 
reigned in Jerusalem. 

My patience was put to but brief trial ; for, in 
a few minutes, I heard a low hymn. It paused, 
as if followed by prayer. The hymn began again, 
in accents so faint, as evidently to express the fear 
of the worshippers. But the sounds thrilled through 
my soul. I listened in a struggle of doubt and 
hope. Could I be deceived ? and, if I were, how 
bitter must be the discovery ! I sat down on the 
foot of the rude stair, to feed myself with the 
fancied delight, before it should be snatched from 
me for ever. 

But my perturbation would have risen to mad- 
ness, had I stopped longer. I climbed up the 
tottering steps ; half-way I found myself obstructed 
by a door; I struck upon it, and called aloud. 
After an interval of miserable delay, a still higher 
door was opened, and a figure, disguised in a 
mantle, tremblingly looked out, and demanded my 
purpose. I saw glancing over her two faces, that 
I would have given the world to see. I called 
out "Miriam!" Overpowered with emotion, my 
speech failed me. I lived only in my eyes. I saw 
Miriam fling off the mantle with a scream of joy, 
and rush down the steps. I saw my two daughters 



. SALATHI^. 21 

follow her with the speed of love ; the door was 
thrown back, and I fell fainting- into their arms. 

Tears, exclamations, and gazings, were long our 
only language. My wife flung her arms round 
me, and hung over my wasted frame with endless 
embraces and sobs of joy. My daughters fell at 
my feet, bathed my cold hands with their tears, 
smiled on me in speechless delight, and then wept 
again. They had thought me lost to them for 
ever. I had thought them dead, or driven to some 
solitude which forbade us to meet again on this 
side of the grave. For two years, two dreadful 
years, a lonely man on earth, a wifeless husband, 
a childless father, tried by every misery of mind 
and body ; here, here I found my treasure once 
more. On this spot, wretched and destitute as it 
was, in the midst of public misery and personal 
woe, I had found those whose loss would have 
made the riches of mankind beggary to me. My 
soul overflowed. Words were not to tell the 
feverish fondness, the strong delight that quivered 
through me. I wept with woman's weakness ; I 
held my wife and children at arm's length, that I 
might enjoy the full happiness of gazing on them ; 
then my eyes would grow dim ; and I caught them 
to my heart, and in silence, the silence of un- 



22 SALATHIEL. 

speakable emotion, tried to collect my thoughts, 
and convince myself that my joy was no dream. 

The night passed in mutual inquiries. The 
career of my family had been deeply diversified. 
On my capture in the great battle with Cestius, 
in which it was conceived that I had fallen, they 
were on the point of coming to Jerusalem to ascer- 
tain their misfortune. The advance of the Romans 
to Masada precluded this. They sailed for Alex- 
andria, and were overtaken by a storm. 

'* In that storm," said Miriam, with terror 
painted on her countenance, " we saw a sight that 
appalled the firmest heart among us, and to this 
hour recalls horrid images. The night had fallen 
intensely dark. Our vessel, labouring through the 
tempest during the day, and greatly shattered, 
was expected to go down before morn, and I had 
come upon the deck prepared to submit to the 
general fate ; when I saw a flame upon the horizon. 
I pointed it out to the mariners ; but they were 
paralyzed by weariness and fear ; and instead of 
approaching what I conceived to be a beacon, they 
let the vessel drive before the wind. I watched 
the light ; to my astonishment I saw it advancing 
over the waves. It was a large ship on fire, and 
rushing down upon us. Then indeed there was 
no insensibility in our mariners ; they were like 



SALATHIEL. 23 

madmen through excess of fear ; they did every- 
thing but make a resolute effort to escape the 
danger. 

" The blazing ship came towards us with terrific 
rapidity. As it approached, the figure of a man 
was seen on the deck, standing unhurt in the 
midst of the burning. The Syrian pilot, hitherto 
the boldest of our crew, at this sight, cast the 
helm from his hands in despair, and tore his beard, 
exclaiming that we were undone. To our ques- 
tions he would give no other answer than pointing 
to the solitary being who stood calmly in the centre 
of conflagration, more like a demon than a man. 

*' I proposed that we should make some effort 
to rescue this unfortunate man. But the pilot was 
horror-struck at the thought, and then gave up 
the tale, that it cost him agonies even to utter. 
He told us that the being whom our frantic com- 
passion would attempt to save, was an accursed 
thing ; that for some crime too inexpiable to 
allow of his remaining among creatures capable of 
hope, he was cast out from men, stricken into the 
nature of the condemned spirits, and sentenced 
to rove the ocean in fire, ever burning, and never 
consumed !" 

I felt every word, as if that fire were devouring 
my flesh. The sense of what I was, and what I 



24 SALATHIEL. 

must be, was poison. My head swam ; mortal 
pain overwhelmed me. And this abhorred thing 
I was ; this sentenced and fearful wretch I was, 
covered with wrath and shame, the exile from 
human nature ; and I heard my sentence pro- 
nounced, and my existence declared hideous, by 
the lips on which I hung for confidence and con- 
solation against the world. 

Flinging my mantle over my face to hide its 
writhings, I seemed to listen; but my ears refused 
to hear. In my perturbation, I once thought of 
boldly avowing the truth, and thus freeing myself 
from the pang of perpetual concealment. But the 
offence and the retribution were too real and too 
deadly to be disclosed, without destroying the last 
chance of happiness to those innocent sufferers. 
I mastered the convulsion, and again bent my ear. 
"Our story exhausts you," said Miriam; "but 
it is done. After a long pursuit, in which the 
burning ship followed us, as if with the express 
purpose of our ruin, we were snatched from a 
death by fire, only to undergo the chance of one 
by the waves ; for we struck upon a rock. Yet it 
may have been owing even to that chase that we 
were saved. The ship had driven us towards land. 
At sea we must have perished ; but the shore was 
found to be so near, that the country people, guided 



SALATHIEL. 25 

by the flame, saved us without the loss of a life. 
Once on shore, we met with some of the fugitives 
from Masada, who brought us to Jerusalem, the 
only remaining refuge for our unhappy nation." 

To prevent a recurrence of this torturing sub- 
ject, I mastered my emotion so far as to ask some 
question of their means of support during the 
siege. But Miriam's thoughts were still busy with 
the sea. After some hesitation, and as if she 
dreaded the answer, she said; "One extraordinary 
circumstance made me take a strong interest in 
the fate of that solitary being on board the burn- 
ing vessel. It once seemed to have the most 
striking likeness to you. I even cried out to it 
under that impression ; but fortunate it was for us 
all that my heedless cry was not answered ; for, 
when it approached us, I could see its countenance 
change: it threw a sheet of flame across our vessel 
that almost scorched us to death ; and then, per- 
haps thinking that our destruction was complete, 
the human fiend ascended from the waters in a 
pillar of intense fire." 

I felt deep pain in this romantic narrative. My 
mysterious sentence was the common talk of man- 
kind ! My frightful secret, that I had thought 
locked up in my own heart, was loose as the air ! 
This was enough to make life bitter. But, to be 
VOL. III. B 



2G SALATHIEL. 

identified in the minds of my family with the ob•^ 
ject of universal horror, was a chance which I 
determined not to contemplate. My secret there 
was still safe ; and my resolution became fixed, 
never to destroy that safety by any frantic con- 
fidence of my own. 



SALATHIEL. 27 



CHAPTER III. 



While, with ray head bent on my knees, I 
hung in the misery of self-abhorrence, I heard the 
name of Constantius sorrowfully pronounced be- 
side me. The state in which he must be left by 
my long absence flashed upon my mind ; I threw 
back the mantle, and saw Salome. It was her voice 
that wept ; and I then first observed the work of 
woe in her form and features. She was almost 
a shadow ; her eye was lustreless, and the hands 
that she clasped in silent prayer were reduced to 
the bone. But before I could speak, Miriam made 
a sign of silence to me, and led the mourner away ; 
then returning, said, ** I dreaded lest you might 
make any inquiries before Salome for her husband. 
Religion alone has kept her from the grave. On 



28 SALATHIEL. 

our arrival here we found our noble Constantius 
worn out by the fatigue of the time ; but he was 
our guardian spirit in the dreadful tumults of the 
city. When we were burned out of one asylum, he 
led us to another. It is but a week since he placed 
us in this melancholy spot, but yet the more secure 
and unknown. He himself brought us provisions, 
supplied us with every comfort that could be ob- 
tained by his impoverished means, and saved us 
from want. But now," — the tears gushed from 
her eyes, and she could not proceed. 

*' Yes — now," said I, *'he is a sight that would 
shock the eye : we must keep Salome in ignorance 
as long as we can." 

'*The unhappy girl knows his fate but too v/ell. 
He left us a few days since, to obtain some intelli- 
gence of the siege. AYe sat, during the night, 
listening to, the frightful sounds of battle. At 
day-break, unable any longer to bear the suspense, 
or sit looking at Salome's wretchedness, I ventured 
to the Fountain-gate, and there heard what I so 
bitterly anticipated — our brave Constantius was 
slain !" 

She wept aloud ; and sobs and cries of irrepres- 
sible anguish answered her from the chamber of 
my unhappy child. 

The danger of a too sudden discovery prevented 



SALATHIEL. 29 

me from drying those tears ; and I could proceed 
only by offering conjectures on the various chances 
of battle, the possibility of his being made prisoner, 
and the general difficulty of ascertaining the fates 
of men in the irregular combats of a populace. But 
Salome sat fixed in cold incredulity. Esther sor- 
rowfully kissed my hand for the disposition to give 
them a ray of comfort ; Miriam gazed on me with 
a sad and searching look, as if she felt that I would 
not tamper with their distresses, yet was deeply 
perplexed for the issue. 

At last the delay grew painful to myself; and 
taking Salome to my arms, and pressing a kiss of 
parental love on her pale cheek, I whispered, ** he 
lives." 

I was overwhelmed with transports and thanks- 
givings. Precaution was at an end. If battle 
were raging in the streets, I could not now have 
restrained the generous impatience of friendship 
and love. We left the tower. There was not 
much to leave, besides the walls ; but such as it 
was, the first fugitive was welcome to the posses- 
sion. Night was still within the building, which 
had belonged to some of the Roman officers of 
state, and was massive and of great extent. But 
at the threshold, the grey dawn came quivering 
over the Mount of Olives. 



BO SALATHIEL. 

We struggled through the long and winding 
streets, which even in the fight were nearly im- 
passable. From the inhabitants we met with no 
impediment ; a few haggard and fierce-looking 
men stared at us from the ruins ; but we, wrapt 
up in rude mantles, and hurrying along, wore too 
much the livery of despair, to be disturbed by our 
fellows ia wretchedness. 

With a trembling heart I led the way to the 
chamber, where lay one, in whose life our general 
happiness was centred. Fearful of the shock 
which our sudden appearance might give his en- 
feebled frame, and not less of the misery with 
which he must be seen, I advanced alone to the 
bed-side. He gave no sign of recognition, though 
he was evidently awake ; and I was about to close 
the curtains, and keep at least Salome from the 
hazardous sight of this living ruin, when I found 
her beside me. She took his hand, and sat down on 
the bed with her eyes fixed on his hollow features. 
She spoke not a word, but sat cherishing the 
wasted hand in her own, and kissing it with sad 
fondness. Her grief was too sacred for our in- 
terference; and in sorrow scarcely less poignant 
than her own, I led apart Miriam and Esther, 
who, like me, believed that the parting day was 
come. 



SALATHIEL. 31 

Such rude help as could be found in medicine, 
— at a time when our men of science had fled the 
city, and a few herbs were the only resource, — 
had not been neglected even in my distraction. 
But life seemed retiring hour by hour ; and if I 
dared to contemplate the death of this heroic and 
beloved being, it was almost with a wish that it 
had happened before the arrival of those to whom 
it must be a renewal of agony. 

But the minor cares, which make so humble, 
yet so necessary a page in the history of life, were 
now to occupy me. Food must be provided for 
the increased number of my inmates ; and where 
was that to be found in the circle of a beleaguered 
city 1 Money was useless, even if I possessed it : 
the friends who would once have shared their last 
meal with me were exiled or slain ; and it was in 
the midst of a fierce populace, themselves dying 
of hunger, that I was to glean the daily sub- 
sistence of my wife and children. The natural 
pride of the chieftain revolted at the idea of sup- 
plicating for food ; but this was one of the ques- 
tions that show the absurdity of pride; and I 
must beg, if I would not see them die. The 
dwelling had belonged to one of the noble families 
extinguished or driven out in the first commotions 
of the war. The factions which perpetually tore 



32 SALATHIEL. 

each other, and fought from house to house, had 
stripped its lofty halls of every thing that could 
be plundered in the hurry of civil feud ; and when 
I took refuge under its roof, it looked the very 
palace of desolation. But it was a shelter; un- 
disturbed by the riots of the crowd, too bare to in- 
vite the robber; and even its vast and naked 
chambers, its gloomy passages, and frowning case- 
ments, were congenial to the mood of my mind. 
With Constantius insensible and dying before me, 
and with my own spirit darkened by an eternal 
cloud, I loved the loneliness and darkness. When 
the echo of the winds came round me, as I sat 
during my miserable midnights watching the coun- 
tenance of my son, and moistening his feverish lip 
with the water, that even then was becoming a 
commodity of rare price in Jerusalem ; I com- 
muned with memories that I would not have ex- 
changed for the brightest enjoyments of life. I 
welcomed the sad music, in which the beloved 
voices revisited my soul ; what was earth now to 
me, but a tomb ? pomp, nay comfort, would have 
been a mockery. I clung to the solitude and ob- 
scurity that gave me the picture of the grave. 

But the presence of my family made me feel 
the wretchedness of my abode. And when I cast 
my eyes round the squalid and chilling halls, and 



SALATHIEL. 33 

saw wandering through them those gentle and de- 
licate forms, and saw them trying to disguise by 
smiles and cheering words the depression that the 
whole scene must inspire, I felt a pang that might 
defy a firmer philosophy than mine. 

*' Here," said I to Miriam, as I hastened to the 
door, " I leave you mistress of a palace. The 
Asmonean blood once flourished within these walls ; 
and why dot we ? I have seen the nobles of the 
land crowded into these chambers ; and every spot 
of them echoing with festivity. They are not so 
full now ; but we must make the most of what we 
have. Those hangings, that I remember the pride 
of the Sidonian who sold them, and the wonder of 
Jerusalem, are left to us still ; if they are in frag- 
ments, they will but show our handy-work the 
more. We must make our own music ; and, in 
default of menials, serve with our own hands. The 
pile in that corner was once a throne sent by a 
Persian king to the descendant of the Maccabees ; 
it will serve us at least for firing. The walls are 
thick ; the roof may hold out a few storms more ; 
the casements, if they keep out nothing else, keep 
out the day-light, an unwelcome guest, which 
would do any thing but reconcile us to the state of 
the mansion : and now, farewell for a few hours." 

Miriam caught my arm, and said in that sweet 



34 SALATHIEL. 

tone which always sank into my heart, *' Sala- 
thiel, you must not leave us in this temper. I 
would rather hear your open complaints of fortune 
than this affectation of scorn for our calamities. 
They are many and painful, I allow; though I 
will not — dare not repine. They may even be 
such as are beyond human cure. But who shall 
say, that he has deserved better ; or if he has, that 
suffering may not be the determined means of pu- 
rifying and exalting his nature 1 Is gold the only 
thing that is to be tried in the fire ?" 

She waited my answer with a look of dejected 
love. 

" Miriam, I need not say that I respect and 
honour your feelings ; but no resignation can 
combat the substantial evils of life. Will the finest 
sentiments that ever came from human lips make 
this darkness light, turn this bitter wind into 
warmth, or make these hideous chambers but the 
dungeon V 

" Salathiel, I dread this language," was the an- 
swer, with more than usual solemnity ; ** it is, 
must I say it, even ungrateful and unwise. Shall 
the creatures of the Power by whom we are placed 
in life, either defy his wrath, or disregard his 
mercy? Might we not be more severely tasked 
than we are 1 Are there not thousands at this hour 



SALATHIEL. ^ 

in the world, who, with at least equal claims to the 
divine benevolence, (I tremble when I use the pre- 
sumptuous phrase,) are undergoing calamities to 
which ours are happiness ? Look from this very 
threshold : are there not thousands within the walls 
of Jerusalem groaning in the pangs of unhealed 
wounds, mad, starving, stripped of every succour 
of man, dying in hovels, the last survivors of their 
wretched race? and yet we, still enjoying health, 
with a roof over our heads, with our children round 
us safe, when the plague of the first-born has fallen 
upon almost every house in Judea, can complain ! 
Be comforted, my love ; I see but one actual cala- 
mity among us ; and, if Constantius should sur- 
vive, even that one would be at an end." 

I tried to escape under cover of ridicule. 

**So, let fancy have its way; and never had it 
a more boundless field. Let us dream this ruin 
into our palace, fill its walls with imaginary opu- 
lence, and be happy in spite of chance or change. 
Here will I sit," said I, throwing myself on the 
remnant of an embroidered couch; ''enjoy the 
delights of society in solitude, and feel every com- 
fort of life in cold, squalidness, and privation." 
Miriam turned away with a vexed look ; but soon 
recovering her composure, came back to conquer 
with her irresistible smile. 

" I can forgive your unhappiness. The spirit of 



36 SALATHIEL. 

man is not made to endure with the patience of 
woman. But, thoughts like yours are nurtured 
into sadness by inactivity : you must leave us for a 
while, and see how far our skill may not improve 
even this dwelling. Go into the streets, and bring 
us intelligence of what the Romans are doing. 
Try the effect of sun-shine and air; and then 
return, and allow the wonders that can be done 
even by helpless woman." 

I obeyed the orders of my gentle despot, and 
hurried through the echoing walls of this palace 
of the winds. As I approached the great avenues 
leading from the gates to the Temple, unusual 
sounds struck my ears. Hitherto, nothing in the 
sadness of the besieged city was sadder than its 
silence. Death was lord of Jerusalem ; and the 
numberless ways in which life was extinguished, 
had left but the remnant of its once proud and 
flourishing population. y 

But now, shouts, and, still more, the deep and 
perpetual murmur that bespeaks the movements 
and gatherings of a crowded city, astonished me. 
My first conception was, that the enemy had 
advanced in force ; and I was turning towards the 
battlements to witness or repel the general fate, 
when I was involved in the multitude whose 
voices had perplexed me. 

It was the season of the passover. The Roman 



SALATHIEL. 37 

barrier bad bitberto kept back tbe tribes ; but tbe 
victory that left it in embers, opened the gates ; 
and we once more saw tbe sons of Judea filling 
the courts of tbe city of cities. 



38 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER IV. 



Nothing could be more unrestrained than the 
public rejoicing. The bold myriads that poured 
in hour by hour, many of them long acquainted 
with Roman battle, and distinguished for the suc- 
cessful defence of their strongholds ; many of 
them even bearing arms taken from the enemy, or 
displaying honourable scars, seemed to have come, 
sent by Heaven. The enemy, evidently dis- 
heartened by their late losses, and the destruction 
of the rampart which had cost them so much 
labour, were collected in their camps ; and access 
was free from every quarter. The rumours of 
our triumph had spread with singular rapidity 
through the land; and even the fearful pheno- 
menon that wrote our undoing in the skies, stimu- 



SALATHIEL. 39 

Jated the national hope. No son of Abraham 
could believe, without the strongest repugnance, 
that Heaven had interposed, and yet, interposed 
against the chosen people. 

A living torrent came swelling into the gates ; 
and the great avenues and public places were 
quickly impassable with the multitude. Jerusalem 
never before contained such a mass of population. 
Wherever the eye turned were tents, fires, and 
feasting ; still, the multitude wore an aspect not 
such as in former days. The war had made its 
impression on the inmost spirit of our country. 
The shepherds and tillers of the ground had been 
forced into the habits of soldiership; and I saw 
before me, for the gentle and joyous inhabitants of 
the field and garden, bands of warriors, made 
fierce by the sullen necessities of the time. 

The ruin in which they found Jerusalem, in- 
creased their gloom. Groups were seen every 
where climbing among the fallen buildings to find 
out the dwelling of some chief of their tribe, and 
venting furious indignation on the hands that had 
overthrown it. The work of war upon the famous 
defences of the city was a profanation in their 
eyes. Crowds rushed through the plain to trace 
the spot where their kindred fell, and gather their 
bones to the tardy sepulchre. Others were ex- 



40 SALATHIEL. 

ulting over the wrecks of the Roman, and burning 
them in heaps, that they might not mix with the 
honoured dead. But it was the dilapidation of 
the Temple that struck them with the deepest 
wrath. The whole nervous sensibility and native 
reverence of the Jew were awakened by the sight 
of the humiliated sanctuary. They knelt and 
kissed the pavements stained with the marks of 
civil feud. They sent forth deep lamentations for 
the dismantled beauty of gate and altar. They 
wrapped their mantles round their heads, and, 
covering themselves with dust and ashes, chanted 
hymns of funereal sorrow over the ruins. Hun- 
dreds lay embracing pillar and threshold, as they 
would the corpse of a parent or a child ; or, start- 
ing from the ground, gathered on the heights 
nearest to the enemy, and poured out curses upon 
the abomination of desolation — the idolatrous ban- 
ner that flaunted over the Roman camps, and by 
its mere presence insulted and polluted the Temple 
of their fathers. 

In the midst of this sorrow, and never was there 
more real sorrow, was the strange contrast of a 
violent spirit of festivity. The passover, the grand 
celebration of our law, was till now marked by a 
grave homage. Even its recollections of trium- 
phant deliverance and illustrious promise were but 



SALATHIEL. 41 

slightly suffered to mitigate the general awe. But 
the character of the Jew had undergone a signal 
change. Desperate valour and haughty contempt 
of all power but that of arms, were the impulse of 
the time. The habits of the camp were transferred 
through every part of life ; and the reckless joy 
of the soldier when the battle is done, the eager- 
ness for immediate indulgence, and the rude and 
unhallowed resources to while away the heavy 
hour of idleness, were powerfully and repul- 
sively prominent in the final coming-up of the 
nation. 

As I struggled through the avenues in search 
of the remnant of my tribe, my ears were per- 
petually startled by sounds of riot ; I saw, beside 
the spot where relations were weeping over their 
dead, crowds drinking, dancing, and clamouring. 
Songs of wild exultation over the enemy were 
mingled with laments for their country ; wine 
flowed ; and the board, loaded with careless pro- 
fusion, was surrounded by revellers, with whom 
the carouse was often succeeded by the quarrel. 

The pharisee and scribe, the pests of society, 
were as busy as ever, bustling through the con- 
course with supercilious dignity, canvassing for 
hearers in the market-places as of old, offering 
their wordy devotions where they might best be 



42 SALATHIEL. 

seen, and quarrelling, with the native bitterness 
of religious faction. Blind guides of the blind ; 
vipers and hypocrites ; I think that I see them 
still with their turbans pulled down upon their 
scowling brows ; their mantles gathered round 
them, that they might not be degraded by a pro- 
fane touch ; and every feature of their acrid and 
worldly physiognomies wrinkled with pride put to 
the torture by the assumption of humility. 

Minstrels, far unlike those who once led the 
way with sacred song to the gates of the holy city, 
flocked round the tents ; and companies of Greek 
and Syrian mimes, dancers, and flute-players, the 
natural and fatal growth of a period of military 
relaxation, were erecting their pavilions, as in the 
festivals of their own profligate cities. 

Deepening the shadows of this fearful profana- 
tion, stood forth the progeny of terror ; the ex- 
orcist, the soothsayer, the magician girdled with 
live serpents, the pretended prophet naked and 
pouring out furious rhapsodies ; impostors of every 
colour and trade ; yet, some of those abhorred and 
frightful beings the dupes of their own imposture ; 
some utterly frenzied ; and some declaring and 
doing wonders, that showed a power of evil never 
learned from man. 

In depression of heart I gave up the effort to 



SALATHIEL. 43 

urge my way through scenes that, firm as I was, 
terrified me; and turned towards my home, 
through the steep path that passed along the outer 
Court of the Temple. There all was the mournful 
silence suited to the sanctuary that was to see 
its altars kindled no more. But the ruins were 
crowded with kneeling and woe-begone worshippers, 
that, from morning till night, clung to the sacred 
soil, and wept for the departing majesty of Judah. 
I knelt with them, and mingled my tears with 
theirs. 

Prayer calmed my spirit ; and before I left the 
height, I stopped to look again upon the wondrous 
expanse below. The clear atmosphere of the East 
singularly diminishes distance, and I seemed to 
stand close to the Roman camps. The valley at 
my feet was living with the new population of 
Jerusalem clustering thick as bees, and sending up 
the perpetual hum of their mighty hive. The sight 
was superb ; and I involuntarily exulted in the 
strength that my country was still able to display 
in the face of her enemies. 

'* Here were the elements of mutual havoc ; 
but might they not be the elements of preserva- 
tion?" — The thought occurred, that now was thje 
time to make an effort for peace. '* We had, by 
the repulse of the legionaries, shown the price 



44 SALATHIEL. 

which they must pay for conquest. Even since that 
repulse, a new force had started forward, armed 
with an enthusiasm that would perish only with 
the last man, and tenfold increasing the difficul- 
ties of the conquest." 

I turned again to the ruins, where I joined 
myself to some venerable and influential men, 
who alike shuddered at the excesses of the crowd 
below, and the catastrophe that prolonged war 
must bring. My advice produced an impression. 
The remnant of the Sanhedrim were speedily col- 
lected ; and my proposal was adopted, that a de- 
putation should immediately be sent to Titus, to 
ascertain how far he was disposed to an armistice. 
The regular pacification might then follow with a 
more solemn ceremonial. 

From the top of Mount Moriah we anxiously 
watched the passage of our envoys through the 
multitude that wandered over the space from Je- 
rusalem to the foot of the enemy's position. We 
saw them pass unmolested, and enter the Roman 
lines ; and from the group of officers of rank who 
came forward to meet them, we gladly conjectured 
that their reception was favourable. Within an 
hour we saw them moving down the side of the 
hill on their return ; and, at some distance behind, 
a cluster of horsemen slowly advancing. 



SALATHIEL. 45 

The deputation had executed its task with suc- 
cess. It was received by Titus with Italian urba- 
nity. To its representations of the power subsist- 
ing in Judea to sustain the war, he fully assented ; 
and, giving high praise to the fortitude of the 
people, only lamented the necessary havoc of 
war. To give the stronger proof of his wish for 
peace, his answer was to be conveyed formally by 
a mission of his chief councillors and officers to 
the Sanhedrim. 

The tidings were soon propagated among the 
people ; and proud of their strength, and irritated 
against the invader as they were, the prospect of 
relief from their innumerable privations was wel- 
comed with undisguised joy. The hope was as 
cheering to the two prominent leaders of the fac- 
tions, as to any man among us. John of Giscala 
had been stimulated into daring by circumstances 
alone ; nature never intended him for a warrior. 
Wily, grasping, and selfish, cruel without bold- 
ness, and keen without intellectual vigour; his 
only purpose was to accumulate money, and to en- 
joy power. The loftier objects of public life were 
beyond his narrow capacity. He had been rapidly 
losing even his own meaner objects ; his followers 
were deserting him ; and a continuance of the war 



46 SALATHIEL. 

involved equally the personal peril which he feared, 
and the fall of that tottering authority, whose loss 
would leave him to insulted justice. 

Simon, the son of Gioras, was altogether of a 
higher class of mankind. He was by nature a 
soldier ; and might have, in other times, risen to a 
place among the celebrated names of war. But 
the fierceness of the period inflamed his bold spirit 
into savage atrocity. In the tumults of the city 
he had distinguished himself by that unhesitating 
hardihood, which values neither its own life nor 
that of others ; and his boldness threw the hollow 
and artificial character of his rival deeply into th6 
shade. But he found a different adversary in the 
Romans. His brute bravery was met by intelli- 
gent valour; his rashness was punished by the 
discipline of the legions ; and, weary of conflicts 
in which he was sure to be defeated, he had long 
left the field to the irregular sallies of the tribes, 
and contented himself with prowess in city feud, 
and the preservation of his authority against the 
dagger. 

Peace with Rome would have relieved both 
John and Simon from the danger which threat- 
ened to overwhelm them alike : to the citizens it 
would have given an instant change from the ter- 



SALATHIEL. 4% 

rors of assault to tranquillity : to the nation, the 
hope of an existence made splendidly secure and 
honourable, by its having been won from the sove- 
reign of the world. 



48 Sx\LATHIEL. 



CHAPTER V. 

The movement of the Roman mission through 
the plain was marked by loud shouts. As it ap- 
proached the gates, our little Council descended 
from the Temple-porch to meet it, where one of the 
open places in the centre of the city was appointed 
for the conference. The applauding roar of the 
people followed the troop through the streets ; and 
when the tribunes and senators entered the square, 
and gave us the right hand of amity, the universal 
acclamation shook the air. A gleam of joy revi- 
sited my heart ; and I was on the point of ascend- 
ing an elevation in the centre, to announce the 
terms of this fortunate armistice ; — to my astonish- 
ment I saw the spot pre-occupied. 

Whence came the intruder, no one could tell ; 



SALATHIEL. 49* 

but there he stood, a figure that fixed the universal 
eye. He was of lofty stature, brown as an Indian, 
and thin as one worn to the last extremity by 
sorrow or famine. Conjecture was busy. He 
seemed, alternately, — the fugitive from a dungeon, 
— one of the half-savage recluses that sometimes 
come from their dens in the wilderness, to exhibit 
among us the last humiliation of mind and body, — 
a dealer in forbidden arts, attempting to impose on 
the rude credulity of the populace, — and a prophet, 
armed with the fearful knowledge of our approach- 
ing fall. But to me there was an expression in 
his countenance that partook of all : yet I gazed 
with an indefinable feeling, that there was a some- 
thing different from all in the glaring eye, the 
fixed and livid scorn of the lip, and the stern and 
grand outline of features, that appeared alike 
overflowing with malignity and majesty. 

No man thought of interrupting him. A power- 
ful interest hushed every voice of the multitude ; 
and the only impulse was eagerness to hear the 
lofty wisdom, or the fatal tidings, that must be 
deposited with such a being. He himself seemed 
to be overwhelmed with the magnitude of the 
thoughts that he was commissioned to disclose. 
He stood for a while with the look of one op- 
pressed by a fearful dream ; his bosom heaving, 

VOL. III. c 



50 SALATHIEL. 

his teeth gnashing, every muscle of his meagre 
frame swelling and quivering. He strongly clasped 
his bony arms across his breast, as if to repress the 
agitation that impeded his words ; then, stamping 
on the ground, in wrath at the faculties which thus 
sank under him at the important moment, the 
tempest of his soul broke forth. 

** Judah! thou wert as a lion — thou wert as the 
king of the forest when he went up to the moun- 
tains to slay, and from the mountains came down 
to devour. Thou wert as the garden of Eden, — 
every precious stone was thy covering ; the sar- 
dine, the topaz, and the beryl were thy pavements ; 
thy fountains were of silver, and thy daughters 
that walked in thy groves were as the cherubim 
and the seraphim. 

*' Judah ! thy temple was glorious as the sun- 
rising, and thy priests were the wise of the earth. 
Kings came against thee, and their bones were an 
offering ; the fowls of the air devoured them ; the 
foxes brought their young, and feasted them upon 
the mighty. 

" Judah ! thou wert as a fire in the midst of the 
nations — a fire upon an altar ; who shall quench 
thee? — A sword over the neck of the heathen; 
who shall say unto thee. Smite no more ! Thou 
wert as the thunder and the lightning : thou 



SALATHIEL. Si 

earnest from thy place, and the earth was dark ; 
the heaven was thine, the earth was at thy feet. 
Thou didst thunder, and the nations shook ; and 
the fire of thy indignation consumed them." 

The voice in which this extraordinary being 
uttered those words was like the thunder. The 
multitude listened with breathless awe. The ap- 
peal in the language of their own prophets, was 
to them a renewal of the times of inspiration ; and 
they awaited with outstretched and quivering 
countenances the sentence that their passions in- 
terpreted into the will of Heaven. 

The figure lifted up his glance, that had hitherto 
been fixed on the ground ; and, whether it was the 
work of fancy, or reality, I thought that the 
glance threw an actual beam of fire across the up- 
turned visages of the myriads that filled every spot 
on which a foot could rest; roof, wall, and ground. 
Bowing his head, and raising his hands in the 
most solemn adoration towards the Temple, he 
pursued, in a voice scarcely above a whisper, yet 
indescribably impressive — 

" Sons of the faithful Abraham, of Isaac, and 
of Jacob ! people chosen of God, elect and holy ! 
will you suff'er that house of holiness to be the 
scoff" of the idolater? Will you see the polluted 
sacrifice laid upon its altars? Will you be slaves 



52 SALATHIEL. 

and victims in the presence of the house of 
David r 

A rising outcry of the multitude showed how 
deeply they felt his words. A fierce smile light' 
ened across his features at the sound. He erected 
his colossal form ; and cried out, like the roar of 
a whirlwind, ** Then, men of Judah, be strong, 
and follow the hand that led you through the sea 
and through the desert. Is that hand shortened, 
that it cannot save 1 Break off this accursed 
league with the sons of Belial. Fly every man 
to arms, for the glory of the mighty people. Will 
the Most High desert his people ? Go ; and let 
the sword that smote the Canaanite, smite the 
Roman." 

He was answered with furious exultation. 
Swords and poniards were brandished in the air. 
The safety of the Roman officers became endan- 
gered ; and I, with some of the elders, dread- 
ing a result which must throw fatal obstacles in 
the way of pacification, attempted to control the 
popular violence by reason and entreaty. But 
the spirit of the Romans, haughty with conquest, 
and long contempt of rabble prowess, disdained 
to take precautions with a mob ; and they awaited 
with palpable contempt in their faces the subsiding 
of this city effervescence. But this silent scorn, 



SALATHIEL. 53 

which probably stung the deeper for its silence, 
was retorted by clamours of unequivocal rage ; 
the mysterious disturber saw the storm coming ; 
and flinging a furious gesture towards the Roman 
camps, -u hich lay glittering in the sun-shine along 
the hills, he rushed into the loftiest language of 
malediction. 

"Take up a lament for the Roman," he shouted. 
" He comes like a leviathan ; he troubleth the 
waters with his presence ; and the rivers behold 
him, an 1 are afraid. 

" Thus saith the king, he who holdeth Israel in 
the hollow of his hand : I will spread my net over 
thee, and my people shall drag thee upon the 
shore ; I will leave thee to rot upon the land ; I will 
fill the beasts of the earth with thee, until they shall 
come and find thee dry bones and dust, even thy 
glory turned into a taint and a scorn. 

" Lift up a cry over Rome, and say ; Thou art 
the leopard ; thy jaws are red with blood, and thy 
claws are heavy because of the multitude of the 
slain ; thy spots are glorious, and thy feet are like 
wings for swiftness. But thy time is at hand. 
My arrow shall smite through thee ; my steel shall 
go through thee : I will lay thy flesh upon the 
hills ; thy blood shall be red in the rivers ; the pits 
shall be full of thee. 



54 SALATHIEL. 

" For thus saith the king, I have not forsaken 
my children. For my pleasure, I have given them 
over for a little while to the hands of the oppressor ; 
but they have loved me — they have come before 
me, and offered up sacrifices ; and shall I desert 
the land of the chosen, the sons of the glorious, 
my people Israel T A universal outcry of sorrow, 
wrath, and triumph, followed this allusion to the 
national sufferings. 

" Ho !" exclaimed the figure. *' Men of Israel, 
hear the words of wisdom. The burden of Rome. 
By the swords of the mighty will I cause her 
multitude to fall ; the terrible and the strong shall 
be on thee, city of the idolater ; they shall hew oif 
thy cuirasses, as the hewer of wood ; and of thy 
shields they shall make vessels of water. There 
shall be fire in thy palaces, and the sword. Thy 
sons and thy daughters shall they consume ; and 
thy precious things shall be a spoil, when the king 
shall give the sign from the sanctuary." He 
paused, and lifting up his fleshless arm, stood like 
a giant bronze pointing to the Temple. 

To the utter astonishment of all, a vapour was 
seen to ascend from the summit of Mount Moriah, 
wreathing and white like the smoke that used to 
mark the Daily Sacrifice. Our first conception 
was, that this great interrupted rite was resumed ; 



SALATHIEL. 55 

and the shout of joy was on our lips. But the 
vapour had scarcely parted from the crown of the 
hill, when it blackened, and began to whirl with 
extraordinary rapidity ; it thenceforth less ascended 
than shot up, perpetually darkening and distending. 
The horizon grew dim ; the cloudy canopy above 
continued to spread and revolve ; lightning began 
to quiver through ; and we heard, at intervals, 
long low peals of thunder. But no rain fell, and 
the wind was lifeless. Nothing could be more 
complete than the calm ; not a hair of our heads 
was moved ; yet the heart of the countless multi- 
tude was penetrated with the dread of some im- 
pending catastrophe, that restrained every voice ; 
and the silence itself was awful. 

In the climate of Judea we had been accustomed 
to the rapid rise and violent devastations of tem- 
pests. But the rising of this storm, so closely 
connected with the appearance of the strange 
summoner, that it almost followed his command, 
invested a phenomenon, at all times fearful, with a 
character that might have struck firmer minds than 
those of the enthusiasts round him. To heighten 
the wonder, the progress of the storm was still 
faithful to the command. Wherever this man of 
mystery waved his arm, there rushed a sheet of 
cloud. The bluest tract of heaven was black as 



56 SALATHIEL. 

night the moment he turned his ominous presence 
towards it, until there was no more sky to be ob- 
literated, and, but for the fiery streaks that tore 
through, we should have stood under a canopy of 
solid gloom. 

At length the whirlwind that we had seen 
driving and rolling the clouds like billows, burst 
upon us ; roaring as it came ; scattering fragments 
of the buildings far and wide, and cutting a broad 
way through the overthrown multitude. Then 
superstition and terror were loud-mouthed. The 
populace, crushed and dashed down, exclaimed 
that a volcano was throwing up flame from the 
mount of the Temple ; that sulphurous smokes 
were rising through the crevices of the ground ; 
that the rocking of an earthquake was felt ; and, 
still more terrible, that beings not to be looked on, 
nor even to be named, were hovering round them 
in the storm. 

The general rush of the multitude, in which 
hundreds were trampled down, and in which 
nothing but the most violent efforts could keep 
any on their feet, bore me away for a while. The 
struggle was sufficient to absorb all my senses, for 
nothing could be more perilous. The darkness 
was intense. The peals of the storm were deafen- 
ing; and the bowlings and fury of the crowd. 



SALATHIEL. 57 

trampling and being trampled on, and fighting for 
life in blindness and despair, with hand, foot, and 
dagger, made an uproar louder than that of the 
storm. In this conflict rather of demons than of 
men, I was whirled away in eddy after eddy, until 
chance brought me again to the foot of the ele- 
vation. 

There I beheld a new wonder. A column of 
livid fire stood upon it, reaching to the clouds. I 
could discern the outline of a human form within. 
But while I expected to see it drop dead, or 
blasted to a cinder, the flame spread over the 
ground, and J saw its strange inhabitant making 
signs like those of incantation. He drew a circle 
upon the burning soil, poured out some unguent, 
which diff'used a powerful and rich odour, razed 
the skin of his arm with a dagger, and let fall some 
drops of blood into the blaze. 

I shuddered at the sight of those palpable ap- 
peals to the power of evil ; but I was pressed upon 
by thousands, and retreat was impossible. The 
magician then, with a ghastly smile of triumph, 
waved the weapon towards the Roman camps. 
"Behold," he cried, ''the beginnings of ven- 
geance !" A thunder-roll, that almost split the ear, 
echoed round the hills. The darkness passed 
away with it. Above Jerusalem the sky cleared. 



58 SALATHIEL. 

and cleared into a translucence and blue splendour 
unrivalled by the brightest sun-shine. The people, 
"wrought up to the highest expectancy, shouted at 
this promise of a prouder deliverance, and exclaim- 
ing, ''Goshen! Goshen!" looked breathlessly for 
the completion of the plague upon the more than 
Egyptian oppressor. They were not held long in 
suspense. 

The storm had cleared away from above our 
heads only to gather in deeper terrors round the 
circle of the hills, on which we could see the enemy 
in the most overwhelming state of uncertainty and 
alarm. The clouds rushed on, ridge over ridge, 
till the whole horizon seemed shut in by a wall of 
night towering to the skies. I heard the deep 
voice of the magician ; at the utterance of some 
wild words, a gleam played round the dagger's 
point, and the wall of darkness was instantly a wall 
of fire. The storm was let loose in its rage. 
While we stood in day-light and in perfect calm, 
the lightning poured like sheets of rain, or gushes 
of burning metal from a furnace, upon the enemy. 
The vast circuit of the camps was one blaze. The 
wind tore every thing before it with irresistible 
violence. We saw the tents swept off the ground, 
and driven far over the hills in flames, like meteors ; 
the piles of arras and banners blown away ; the 



SALATHIEL. 59 

soldiery clinging to the rocks, or flying together in 
helpless crowds, or scattering, like maniacs, with 
hair and garments on fire ; the baggage and mili- 
tary machines, the turrets and ramparts sinking in 
flames ; the beasts of burthen plunging and rushing 
through the lines, or lying in smouldering heaps 
where the lightning first smote them. 



60 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER VI. 

The Roman troop had hitherto remained in 
stern composure. The visitations of nature they 
were accustomed to sustain ; the perturbations of 
a Jewish mob were beneath the notice of the uni- 
versal conquerors. But the sight of the havoc 
among their countrymen shook their stoicism ; and 
the cavalry that formed the escort burst into indig- 
nant murmurs at the loud exultation of the mul- 
titude ; until the commander of the troop, a young 
officer, whose arms and bearing showed him to be 
of the highest rank, unable to restrain his feelings, 
spurred to the front of the embarrassed mission. 

" How long," exclaimed he, " senators, shall we 
stand here to be scoffed at by these wretches? 
The imperial guard feels itself disgraced by such 



SALATHIEL. 61 

a service. Will you have the troop openly muti- 
ny ? If they should ride away, and leave us to our- 
selves, who could blame them ? Decide what is to 
be done. What will the noble Titus say, when 
we return to tell him that we stood by and listened 
to the taunts of those cooped-up slaves on him, 
the army, and Rome ? But how long shall we be 
suffered even to listen ? Linger here, and before 
the day is out, before the hour is out, your lives 
will be at the mercy of those assassins. And, by 
the immortal gods, richly shall we all deserve our 
fate, for having come into this den but as masters, 
riding over the necks of those last and lowest of 
mankind." 

It was fortunate for the speaker that he spoke in 
a language but little known to our bold peasantry. 
The senators held their peace, and waited for the 
subsiding of the popular effervescence. 

" Noble Sempronius," exclaimed the fiery youth, 
to a grave and lofty-countenanced m.an, at the head 
of the mission, ** to remain here is only to risk your 
safety, and the honour of the emperor. Treaty 
with this people is out of the question. Give me 
the order to move now, and I will be responsible 
for your security. Or rather, give me the order 
to disperse this rabble, and a single charge will de- 
cide the affair." 



63 SALATHIEL. 

He threw himself forward on his horse's neck, 
and fixed his look eagerly on the senator's counte- 
nance. But the old Roman was immoveable. The 
magician, who had stood with his robe wrapped 
round his arms, in an attitude of contemptuous 
ease, awaiting the result of the demand, burst into 
loud laughter. The young soldier's indignation 
was roused by this new object. He turned to the 
scorner, and crying out, "Ha! is it you, mis- 
creant ? you at least shall not escape me," flung 
his lance full against his bosom. I saw the weapon 
strike with prodigious force ; but it might as well 
have struck a rock. It flew into splinters. 

The Roman rushed at him with his drawn fal- 
chion. His strange antagonist stood without 
moving a limb, and only raised his cold, large eye. 
The charger, in his fiercest bound, instantly swerved, 
and had nearly unseated his rider. Nothing could 
bring him forward again. Spur and voice were 
useless. The animal, a magnificent jet-black, of 
the largest Turcoman breed, strong as a bull and 
bold as a lion, could not abide that stern eye. He 
galloped madly round and round, but the attempt 
to urge him against the stranger stopped him, as 
if he were stabbed. Then, with every muscle 
in his frame palpitating, his broad chest heaving, 
his nostrils breathing out thick vapour, and the 



SALATHIEL. 68 

foam flying over his front like snow, he would 
plunge and roar, till, mastering his powerful rider, 
he wheeled round, and darted away. 

The shouts of scorn that rose from the populace 
at every fresh failure doubly enraged the young 
Roman. He made a final effort, and grasping the 
bridle in both hands, and dashing in the spur, at 
length succeeded in forcing on the wearied charger. 
The noble creature at one immense leap reached 
the fated spot. But there he was fixed, as if some 
power had transformed him into stone. He no 
longer staggered nor swerved, but crouching down, 
with his feet thrust forward, his crest stooped, his 
nostrils on the ground, and his brilliant eye strained 
and filmy, as if he were growing blind, stood 
gazing with a look of almost human horror. The 
furious rider struck him on the head with the flat 
of his falchion. The charger gathered up his 
limbs at a blow, reared straight as a column, and 
bellowing, plunged upon his forehead. There was 
a general cry of terror even among the multitude, 
and they rushed forward to help him to rise. But 
he rose no more. He rolled over and over his 
rider, and stretching out his limbs with a convul- 
sion, died. 

The tumult was on the point of being renewed ; 



64 SALATHIEL. 

for the soldiery pushed forward to bear away their 
officer, who lay like a corpse ; but the crowd had 
already covered the ground ; and blows were given 
on both sides. Indignant at the interruption of 
the armistice, and the injury that threatened the 
sacred person of ambassadors, I forced my way 
through the crowd, and by exerting a strength 
with which few could cope, rescued the body of 
the young Roman, and delivering it to the mis- 
sion, protested against thei-r construing the casual 
violence of rioters into the determination of the 
people. 

I had partially succeeded in calming their re- 
sentment, and in restraining the blood-thirsty 
weapons that were already glittering in numberless 
hands ; when a sound like that of a trumpet, 
distant, but blown with tremendous force, struck 
every ear at once. 

The magician pointed to the heavens directly 
above his head. A small fragment of cloud, that 
seemed to have escaped from the mass of the 
tempest only to contrast with the brightness, was 
floating along the zenith. He took up his parable: 
** Have I not covered the heavens with a cloud i 
saith the Mighty One. Have I not said to the 
sun, Be dark; and to the moon and stars, Be 



SALATHIEL. 05 

ashamed ? Have I not hidden mine enemies in the 
shroud, and said to the whirlwind, Go forth and 
slay ?" 

His gesture turned all eyes to the wrecks of the 
Roman camp, where the whirlwind continued to 
ravage, and the thunders still roared. Then throw- 
ing himself forward, with a look full of wild gran- 
deur, and in a voice hollow and appalling as the 
storm, he exclaimed : — 

"Behold! this day shall a wonder be wrought 
among you : — this day shall a mighty thing be 
brought to pass. Kings shall see it, and tremble ; 
yea, the heathen shall melt before thee. Their 
strength shall be as water, and their hearts as the 
burning flax. Sorrow shall be on them, as the 
locust on the green field ; and they shall flee as 
from a lion. Behold ! in the cloud shall a sword 
be brandished before thee ; in smoke and in fire 
shalt thou conquer. For his angel shall come ; 
and the sword and the flame shall at this hour be 
a sign unto Israel !" 

Whether by the proverbial sagacity of the wan- 
derers of the desert, by knowledge from some 
darker source, or simply by one of those coinci- 
dences which so curiously come to sustain the cre- 
dit of daring conjecture, the little orbed vapour 



06 SALATHIEL. 

began to lengthen, and rapidly assumed the shape 
of a sword ! 

Dreading the popular power of imposture, and 
the uses to which it would inevitably be applied, 
I was glad that this extraordinary being had thus 
put himself upon his trial ; and I stood gazing in 
eager expectation that some passing gust would 
dissipate at once the cloud, and the reputation of 
the prophet. Yet, utterly scorning the common 
pretensions of the rambling practisers of forbidden 
arts, I knew that awful things had been done ; 
that, most of all, in these latter days of our coun- 
try, strange influences were let loose, perhaps to 
plunge into deeper ruin a people guiltily prone to 
take refuge in delusions. I had heard prophecies, 
hideous and unholy, yet which were never taught 
by man ; I had seen a command of the elements 
that utterly defied philosophy to account for them. 
If, in the last vengeance of Heaven, evil spirits 
were ever suffered to go forth and give their 
power to evil men, for the purpose of binding in 
the faster chains of falsehood a race who loved a 
lie, it was in those hours of signs and wonders, 
that might, if possible, deceive the very elect. 

To my astonishment, the cloud suddenly changed 
its colour : from white it became intensely red ; 



SALATHIEL. 67 

and, in a few moments more, it burst into a flame, 
that threw a broad reflection upon the whole atmos- 
phere. It was, palbably, a vast falchion of fire — 
the centre of a fiery halo. And from that hour to 
the last of the glorious and unhappy city of David, 
that flaming" sword, the sign of wrath predicted 
a thousand years before, blazed day and night over 
Jerusalem ! 

But its instant effect was terrible. The mul- 
titude, already indignant against the Romans, and 
restrained only by my desperate efforts, were now 
roused to the highest pitch of presumption. To 
doubt of the help of Heaven was impiety, after 
this open wonder ; to spare an hour between this 
divine command and the extermination of the ido- 
laters, was sacrilege. They poured round the un- 
fortunate troop, and instantly overwhelmed them, 
as an earthquake would have overwhelmed them. 
A mass of human life, dense as the ground it trod 
upon, broke over them. The Romans struggled 
heroically : I saw their charges often make fear- 
ful way; and their swords and lances dripping 
with blood every time that they were whirled 
round their heads. But the conflict was too un- 
equal : one by one those brave men were torn 
down; I saw them swept along by the torrent, 
fewer and fewer still above the living wave ; gra- 



68 SALATHIEL. 

dually separated more widely from each other, 
each man faintly struggling for himself, flinging 
his feeble arms to the right and left, till, dizzy 
with fatigue and despair, at last down he went, 
and the roaring tide closed over him. 

All perished ; and a day of hope was closed in 
superstition, treachery, and inexpiable murder. 



SALATHIEL. 69 



CHAPTER Vir. 

It was night before I could extricate myself 
from the tumult. The attempt to save the unfor- 
tunate men who so fatally trusted to our good 
faith, had led me gradually down to the gates ; 
and the greater portion of the city lay between me 
and home. To traverse it was still a matter of 
danger. Furious festivity had succeeded to con- 
flict : the roving mountaineers made little differ- 
ence between a stranger and an enemy ; and 
whether inflamed with wine, triumph, or the love 
of violence, the carousers, on that night, were 
masters of Jerusalem. 

I kept my course through the less frequented 
ways ; and leaving on either side the great ave- 
nues, crowded with tents, and glittering with illu- 



70 SALATHIEL. 

mination, committed mj/self to the quiet light of 
the moon, now touching the eastern verge. 

But in choosing the more solitary streets, I was, 
without recollecting it, led into the open place 
where the late disturbance had begun ; and I felt 
some vague dread of passing a spot on which had 
appeared a being so singular as the leader of the 
day. 

By a compromise with my prudence, I kept as 
far from the hillock as possible ; and was moving 
rapidly along beside the wall of one of the huge 
buildings of Herod, when I felt my robe grasped. 
In the nervousness of the time, and doubtful from 
what region of earth or air my antagonist in that 
place of spells might come, I drew my dagger 
with a sensation that I had never felt in the field, 
and setting my back against the wall, stood on my 
defence. But a groan and a fall at my feet made 
me sheathe the weapon, and ascertain how far I 
could relieve the sufferer. I raised him from the 
ground, and by the moon-light recognised the com- 
mander of the escort. The dying struggles of his 
charger had crushed him ; and the multitude, too 
busy to try whether life was or was not totally 
extinguished, abandoned him to his fate. 

To leave him where he was, was to leave him 
to perish. I owed something to the survivor of 



SALATHIEL. 71 

the unfortunate mission ; and my short consulta- 
tion closed, by carrying him on my shoulders to 
the door of my comfortless dwelling. 

The Roman had formidably learned to distrust 
Jewish fidelity. The gloom inside the entrance 
looked the very colour of secret murder ; and du- 
ring the time of his transit from the market-place, 
he had found leisure to conclude that he was the 
victim of but a more dexterous assassin, who 
wished to join the profit of plunder to the national 
pleasure of revenge. Even the dismantled ap- 
pearance of the exterior was enough for suspicion ; 
and he firmly ordered that I should terminate my 
good offices at the threshold. Irritated and in- 
sulted by his obvious meaning, I left him to his 
wish ; and placing him in the fullest enjoyment of 
such security as the open street and the moon- 
light could give, took my farewell, bidding him in 
future have a better opinion of mankind. 

Yet I was to be startled in my turn. As I 
rather climbed than ascended the broken stair- 
cases, I saw an unusual light from the chambers 
above, and heard the sound of voices, and the 
movement of rapid feet. Accustomed as I was 
to reverses, I felt tenfold alarm from the precious- 
ness of my stake. The ferocious bands that 
crowded the streets, inflamed with wine and blood, 



72 SALATHIEL. 

could have no scruples where plunder tempted 
them; and, in the strong persuasion that some 
misfortune had happened in my long absence, I 
lingered, in doubt whether I should not return to 
the streets, collect what assistance I could among 
the passers-by, and crush the robbers by main 
force. But sudden exclamations, and hurried feet 
above, left me no time ; I darted up the shattered 
steps, and breathlessly threw open the door. 

Well might I wonder. I saw a superb room 
hung with tapestry ; a table in the centre covered 
with plate and viands ; a rich lamp illuminating 
the chamber ; stately furniture ; a fire blazing on 
a tripod, and throwing a cheering warmth and 
delicious odour round ; and to enjoy all this, not a 
living creature. 

But whatever my anxieties might be, they were 
delightfully scattered by the voice of Esther, who 
came flying towards me with outstretched arms, 
and a face bright with joy. From the inner 
chamber followed more messengers of good tidings, 
Miriam and Salome leading Constantius. They 
had watched over him from the time of my depar- 
ture, with a sickly alternation of hope and fear ; as 
the evening approached, he seemed dying. Salome, 
with the jealousy of deep sorrow, desired to be left 
alone with him ; and the two sad listeners at the 



SALATHIEL. 73 

door expected every moment the burst of agony 
announcing his irreparable loss. They heard a cry 
of joy : the torpor was gone ; and Constantius was 
sitting up, raised to new life, wondering at all 
round him, and uttering the raptures of gratitude 
and love. 

The rush of feet that had impelled me to my 
abrupt entrance, was the haste of my family to 
bring the recovered patient in triumph from his 
weary bed into the view of the comforts provided 
for him and me. The change wrought in the 
chamber itself, was explained by the presence of 
two old domestics, who, after the flight of the for- 
mer possessors, had been overlooked, and suffered 
to hide rather than live in a corner of the ruin. 
They had contrived, in the general spoliation, to 
secrete some of the precious things which the haste 
of plunder had not time to seize. The presence of 
a noble family under the honoured roof once more, 
brought out their feelings and treasures together ; 
and by the graceful dexterity of Miriam and 
Esther, were those sad and naked walls converted 
into an apartment not unworthy to be inhabited by 
themselves. 

While I was indulging in the luxury which 
those gentle ministers provided, the thought of the 

VOL. III. B 



74 SALATHIEL. 

unfortunate Roman occurred to me. I slightly 
mentioned him, and every voice was raised to have 
him brought in from the hazards of the night. 
Constantius, feeble as he was, rose from his couch 
to assist in this work of hospitality ; but he was 
under a fond tyrant, who would not suffer her com- 
mands to be questioned. Salome's orders were 
obeyed ; and to the old domestic and me was des- 
tined the undivided honour. 

I found the wounded officer lying on the spot 
where I had parted with him, gazing on the moon, 
and humming a gay popular air in a most melan- 
choly tone. He had palpably made up his reckon- 
ing with this world ; and calmly waiting until some 
Jewish knife should put an end to his song, he de- 
termined to save himself from the trouble of think- 
ing, and die like a man who had nothing better to 
do. But the struggle was against nature ; and as 
I slowly felt my way along the obscure passages, I 
had time^ to hear the song flutter, and now and then 
a groan supersede it altogether. My step caught 
his quick ear, and I heard in return the ringing of 
a sword plucked sharply from the scabbard. 

The bold Roman, reckless as he was of life, was 
evidently resolved not to let it go without a price ; 
and it was probably fortunate for me, or my old and 
tottering fellow-philanthropist, that the ruinous 



saLathiel. 75 

state of the passages compelled us to take time in 
our advance. 

*' Two of them," I heard him mutter, as we 
gradually worked our way towards the light, " two 
of them, and perhaps twenty at their backs." He 
tried to raise himself up against the door-post, 
leaning on one hand, and with the other feebly 
pointing the falchion to keep us off. ** Thieves," 
said he, ** let us understand each other. If you 
must cut my throat, you must fight for it ; and 
after all, I have nothing to make it worth your 
trouble. By Jove and Venus," and he laughed 
with the strange jocularity that sometimes besets 
the bold in the last peril, ** the cleverest robber in 
Jerusalem could make nothing of me." I stood in 
the shadow, listening till he had disburdened his 
soul. '* My clothes would not sell for the smallest 
coin in your sashes ; I could not furnish out 
a scarecrow : — yet, Jewish patriots, or thieves, or 
saints, or all together, I will tell you how you can 
make money of me. Take me to the Roman camp, 
and I answer for your fortune on the spot." I 
laughed in my turn. " By all that's honest, I 
never was more serious in my life," said he. " Far 
be it from me to trifle with heroes of your profes- 
sion. You shall have this helmet-full of gold 
Vespasians." 



76 SALATHIEL. 

*' Well then, you shall live at least for to-night. 
However, there is one condition which I cannot 
give up — " 

*' Of course, that I give you two helmets-full 
instead of one. Agreed." 

. ** The condition from which nothing can make 
me recede is — " 

" Three times the money ; or ten times the 
money ?" I pondered. The old domestic stared 
at us both. 

"Why ; you extravagant Jew, have you no 
conscience 1 Recollect how little the lives of half 
the generals in the service are worth half the 
sum. But, say any thing, short of the military 
chest — out with the condition at once." 

" That you come instantly with me to supper." 

The formidable stipulation was gaily acceded 
to. The old domestic and I supported him up the 
stairs, whose condition, as he afterwards allowed, 
led him still to nurture shrewd doubts of Jewish 
hospitality. But, when I opened the door of the 
chamber, and he saw the striking preparations 
within, he uttered a cry of surprise ; and turning, 
bowed with Italian grace, in tacit acknowledgment 
of the wrong that he had done me. 

As I led him forward, and the light fell on his 
features, I saw Esther's countenance glow with 



SALATHIEL. ^^ 

crimson. The Roman pronounced her name, and 
flew over to her. Miriam — we all, in the same 
moment, recognised the stranger, and every lip at 
once uttered ** Septimius !" 

A few campaigns in the imperial guard had 
changed the handsome Italian boy, the friend and 
favourite of Constantius, into the showy officer, 
the friend and favourite of every body ; with the 
elegance of the court, and the freedom of the 
camp, he had inherited from nature the easy light- 
ness and animation of temper that neither can 
give. Nothing could be more amusing than the 
restless round of anecdote that he kept up through 
the night. The circle in which he found himself, 
contrasted with the wretchedness of the few hours 
before, let his recollections flow with wild vivacity. 
His stories, however exhausted in the society of 
the imperial tent, were new to us, and he told 
them with the taste of a man of high breeding, 
and the sarcastic finish of a keen observer of the 
absurdities that will creep in among the mighty 
and the wise of the world. 

In our several ways he delighted us all. Con- 
stantius seemed to gain years of health, laughing 
at the ludicrous histories of his military friends. 
Salome's face glistened with the vividness so long 
chased away by sorrow, as the manners of Rome 



78 SALATHIEL. 

passed before her in the liveliest colours of plea- 
santry. Esther treasured every word, with an 
emotion that fluctuated across her beauty, like the 
opening and shutting of a rose under the evening 
breeze. I was interested by the pungent sketches 
of public character, that started up in the midst of 
sportive description. Miriam alone was reluctant, 
and her glance frequently rested with pain on 
Esther's hectic cheek. But even Miriam some- 
times gave way to the voice of the charmer ; her 
fears were forgotten, and she joined in the general 
smile. 

When the females retired, we held a short con- 
sultation on the means of restoring our guest to 
his friends. In the immediate disturbance of the 
city, to be seen was to encounter certain death ; 
and no pacific intercourse with the besiegers could ' 
be expected after our enormous infraction of 
treaty. Constantius urged the despatch of a pri- 
vate messenger to the camp, with some proposal 
of a plan for his escape. To my suprise, and cer- 
tainly to my gratification, Septimius himself flatly 
negatived the measure. 

" It has too much hazard for my taste," said 
he, sportively. "Your messenger will probably 
be caught by the people, and as probably hanged ; 
or, if he reach the camp, he will be hanged there 



SALATHIEL. 79 

inevitably. Jewish credit in general does not 
stand high within these twelve hours with my 
countrymen. If the fellow die here like a woman, 
— with a story in his mouth, you will be brought 
under the justice of your sovereign lord the mob, 
and there will be an end of every human being 
belonging to you. If my countrymen inflict the 
axe, you are not the safer ; for every peasant 
about the camp is a spy, and the news will travel 
here in the next half hour; and, after all, your 
trouble will be thrown away. Titus has good- 
nature enough, and probably would not wish to see 
me hoisted on the top of a pike on your gates ; 
but he is a furious disciplinarian, swears by the 
law of honour and arms, and is, I well know, 
chafing, like a roused lion, against every one who 
has had a share in this day's business. I myself 
should have a chance of hanging for an example, 
if I returned before his sovereign displeasure had 
time to cool. My relationship to him would be 
only a feather in the cap of his military stoicism ; 
and minor personages would be warned against ill 
luck by the sight of the pendent blood imperial. 
So, I must trespass on your hospitality for a day 
or two." 

" But what is to be finally done ?" said I. "The 
armistice can never be tried again." 



80 SALATHIEL. 

** Why not ? Do you think that the loss of a 
few troopers can make any difference? Out of 
twenty thousand cavalry we can easily spare a 
hundred. Those things have happened once a 
week since the beginning of the campaign. They 
agree with our notions admirably. The survivors 
get promotion; and whatever libation they may 
offer for their good luck, it is certainly not tears. 
A stupid officer, and on this occasion I fairly 
reckon myself among the number, is taken off the 
roll before he might have the opportunity of doing 
mischie.f by some blunder on a larger scale. Ex- 
perience is gained ; dinners are given by the suc- 
cessors ; we are entrapped no more, at least in the 
same way ; and a parcel of unfortunates, who have 
spent half their lives in railing at the world, and 
being browbeat by their superiors, suddenly start 
into rank, become superiors themselves, learn to 
browbeat in their turn, and bless the day when 
the wheel of fortune, if it rolled down for others, 
rolled up for them. You will have the armistice 
again in a week." 

The ease of this confession of soldiership re- 
pelled me a little ; but its air of frankness and 
disregard of chance and care, carried it off showily. 
I too was but a peasant-soldier, with my heart in 
every thing. The man before me was a son of the 



SALATHIEL. 81 

camp, the professional warrior, whose business it 
was to stifle all feelings but those of the camp. 
Yet, heroism and hardheartedness ! — I could not 
join them. I had still something to learn ; and 
the gay philosopher of the sword lost ground with 
me. 

I was retiring for the night, when I felt the 
soft hand of Miriam on my shoulder, " I have 
been anxious," she said, **to ask your opinion 
about this Roman." Her fine countenance, that 
reflected every motion of her spirit like a mirror, 
showed that the subject was one of deep interest. 
" Is misfortune always to pursue us, Salathiel ?" 
'* In what possible shape at present?" said I. "We 
have spent some hours as amusing as I ever re- 
member. What can have occurred since this 
morning, when your philosophy made so light of 
our actual evils ?" " For external evils I have but 
little feeling," was her answer; " but I see in the 
chance that brought Septimius here to-night, some- 
thing of the fate which you have so often said 
follows your house. I tremble for Esther's peace 
of mind. What if she should be attracted by this 
Roman ?" 

" Esther ! my darling Esther ! love an alien ? a 
Roman idolater ? What an abyss you open before 
me!" 



82 SALATHIEL. 

** While Septimius remained among us in the 
mountains, I saw with terror that Esther's beauty 
attracted him. His Italian elegance was even 
then a dangerous charm for a mind so inexperi- 
enced and sensitive as hers. I knew the impossi- 
bility of their union, and rejoiced when his recovery 
allowed of his leaving the palace. But, for a long 
period after, Esther was evidently unhappy ; her 
spirits gave way : she became fonder of solitude ; 
and I believe that nothing but extreme care, and 
the change of scene which followed, preserved her 
from the grave." 

" Miriam ! I have no comfort to offer. I am a 
stricken man ; misfortune must be ray portion. 
But, if any thing were to bereave me of that girl, 
I feel that my heart would break. We must delay 
no longer. By the first light the Roman shall 
quit this house, — this city. He shall not stay 
another hour to poison the peace of my family; 
the only peace that I now can consider or enjoy in 
the world." 

*' Yet, rashness must not disgrace what is true 
wisdom, my Salathiel. The Roman is here 
protected by the laws of courtesy. You cannot 
send him forth, without giving him over to the 
horrid temper of the populace. A few days may 
make that escape easy, which would now be im- 



SALATHIEL. 83 

possible. Besides, I may have done him injustice, 
and mistaken the common pleasure of seeing un- 
expected friends, for the attempt to mislead the 
affections of our innocent and ardent child." 

** No ! By the first light he leaves this roof. 
The truth glares on me. I might have seen it in 
his looks. His language, however general, was 
perpetually directed to Esther by some personal 
allusion. His voice lost its ease when he answered 
a remark of hers. After she spoke, he affected 
abstraction — an old artifice. His manner is too well 
calculated to disturb the mind of woman — and most 
of all, of woman cursed with feeling and genius. 
Esther has already imagined this brilliant profligate 
into a wonder ! I must break the spell, or she must 
perish. What is to become of her I of me ? man 
of misery ! — By the first dawn the Roman takes 
his departure." 

In bitterness of soul I turned from the chamber, 
where the lamps still burning, and the glittering 
table, looked too bright for the gloomy spirit 
of the hour. The cool air that breathed through 
a casement led me towards it ; and, disinclined to 
speak, and holding Miriam's hand, I listened to 
the confused and sleepy murmurs of the city be- 
low. 

I felt the hand in mine tremble convulsively. 



84 SALATHIEL. 

Miriam's face was pale with fear ; she stood with 
lips apart and breathless, brows knitted, eyes 
straining upwards. In utter alarm, I asked the 
cause. She lifted the hand, which had fallen by 
her side, and slowly, like the staff of the sooth- 
sayer, pointed to the heavens. The cause was 
there. The ominous sword had, for the tirst 
time, met her eye. The blaze, which even in 
noon-day was fearfully visible, in midnight was 
tremendous. A blade, of the deepest hue of gore, 
stretched over the vast horizon, pouring from its 
edge perpetual streams and showers of crimson 
flame, that looked like showers of fresh blood. 
Boundless slaughter was in the emblem. Beyond 
the circle of the sky was wan ; the stars sickened ; 
and the moon, though at the full, hung like an 
orb of lead. The mighty falchion, the pledge of a 
terrible and inevitable judgment, extinguished all 
the beneficent splendours of heaven. 

'•There, there is the Sign that I have seen for 
months in my dreams," said Miriam, in an awed 
voice ; ** that has haunted me whenever I laid my 
head upon my pillow; that has been before me in 
the day, wherever I moved ; that I have seen 
colouring every object, every moment of my life, 
since I entered these fated walls. I have strug- 
gled to drive away the horrid image ; I have wept 



SALATHIEL. 85 

and prayed. But it was where nothing could un- 
fix it. It was pictured on my mind ; and with it 
came other images, fearful, though they brought 
me no terrors ; — melancholy sights to those that 
have no hope but here, yet glorious to the ser- 
vants of the truth, Salathiel. I have had warn- 
ings. I must never leave the city of David." She 
knelt, in the deep prayer of the soul. 

Her words came on me with the power of pro- 
phecy. '* King and protector of Israel !" I ex- 
claimed, "is this to be the suffering of thy holy 
ones ? On me let thy will be done ; but spare 
her who now kneels before thee. Are the pure 
to be given into the hands of the merciless, and 
thy children to be trampled as the ashes of the 
pile?" 

My impatient voice caught Miriam's ear, and 
she rose, with a countenance beaming wisdom and 
love. 

** Salathiel, we must not murmur. Even that 
sight of awe, that terrible emblem, has taught me 
the selfishness of my anxieties. What are our 
petty personal sorrows to the weight of affliction 
figured in that instrument of supreme wrath ? The 
woe of millions, the blood of a nation, the ruin of 
the glorious fabric built by the hands of the Eternal 
for bis glory and the good of mankind, the fall of 



^ SALATHIEL. 

Israel, is written in letters of flame before our eyes ; 
and can I complain of the chances and hazards 
which may fall to my share ? Henceforth, my hus- 
band and my love," and she threw herself into my 
willing arms, ''you shall never be disturbed with 
my griefs ; exercise your own powerful under- 
standing, guard against evil by your talents and 
knowledge of life, as far as it can be guarded 
against by man ; and beyond that, disdain to repine 
or fear. In my supplication I have committed our 
child into the hands of Him who sitteth on the 
circle of eternity !" 

Quivering with every finer feeling of the heart, 
maternal love, matron faith, and grateful adora- 
tion, she hung upon my neck, until, as if a portion 
of her noble spirit had passed into mine, I felt a 
confidence and consolation like her own. 



SALATHIEL. 87 



CHAPTER VIII. 



I WAS spared the ungraciousness of urging the 
young soldier's departure ; for when I met him 
next morning, his first topic was the means of 
escape. He had heen since day-break examining 
from my turrets the accessible passages of the for- 
tifications, and had even, by the help of a peasant, 
despatched a letter to his friends, requesting either 
a formal demand of his person from the Jews, or 
some private effort to extricate him. 

But, with the night the glow of soldiership was 
gone. In the fall of his charger he had been vio- 
lently bruised. He complained of inward suffer- 
ing, and his pallid face and feeble words gave 
painful proof that he had much still to undergo. 
Though, even if he were perfectly recovered, the 



88 SALATHIEL. 

crowded battlements, and the popular rage, showed 
the impossibility of immediate return. 

Three days passed thus drearily. At home I 
was surrounded by sickness, or vexed by suspicion, 
the worse sickness of the mind. Septimius lay in 
his chamber, struggling to laugh, talk, and read 
away the heavy hours ; and finally, like all such 
strugglers, giving up the task in despair ; his ideas 
were in the Roman camp. He professed gratitude 
of the deepest nature for the service that I had 
done him now for the second time; **if saving so 
unimportant a life was a service either to him or 
any one else. Yet, he almost wished that he had 
been left where he was found. A man could not 
finish his course better than among his gallant com- 
rades ; and with all his anxiety to return, he felt 
no trivial concern as to the view which Titus might 
take of the whole unfortunate aff*air. Of justice 
he was secure ; but, to be questioned for his mili- 
tary conduct, was in itself a degradation. The loss 
of Sempronius too, a most confidential friend and 
councillor of the Emperor, would weigh heavily ; — 
while there was nothing but his own testimony to 
sustain his honour against the crowd of secret ene- 
mies, .which every man of military rank was certain 
to have. In short," said he, "on my sleepless 
couch I have turned true penitent for the foolish 



SALATHIEL. 89 

cilriosity, or boyish desire, of mixing myself with 
public matters, or extravagant illusion, which 
prompted me to volunteer, nay, solicit the command 
of an escort which would have been by right put 
under the care of some mere tribune." 

I tried to cheer him, by saying that his had been 
only the natural desire of an active mind to see so 
singular a scene as our city offered ; or the ho- 
nourable wish of a soldier to be foremost wherever 
there was any thing to be done. 

" It was more than either," said he ; " there was 
actual illusion in the case. I now feel that I was 
practised upon. You know the strange concourse 
of all kinds of people that follow a camp for all 
kinds of purposes ; — plunderers, traders, and jug- 
glers, crowding on our movements, as regularly as 
the crows, and with nearly the same objects. For a 
week past, I had found myself beset by an old, gib- 
bering slave of this class. Wherever I rede, the 
fellow was before my eyes ; he contrived to mingle 
with my servants, and became a sort of favourite, 
by selling them counterfeit rings and gems at ten 
times their value. The wretch was clever too ; 
and as my tent hours began to be disturbed by the 
unusual gaiety of the listeners to his lies, I ordered 
him to be flogged out of the lines. But twelve 
hours had not passed, before I found him gambol- 



90 SALATHIEL. 

ing again ; and was about to order the instant in- 
fliction of the discipline, when he threw himself on 
the ground, and implored * a moment of my secret 
ear.' Conceive who the fellow was ?" 

*' The impostor that harangued in the square !" 
" The very man. He told me that there were 
certain contrivances on foot, to bring me into dis- 
favour with the general ; which I knew to be the 
fact. He gave me the names of the parties, which 
I felt to be sufficiently probable ; and finished by 
saying, that having so long eaten of my bread, (a 
week,) and enjoyed my liberality, (the promise of 
the whip,) he longed to show his gratitude by 
giving me an opportunity of putting my enemies to 
silence on the spot. This opportunity was, to so- 
licit the command of the escort required for the 
mission. How he gained his wisdom, I know not ; 
but I took the advice, went instantly to Titus, 
found that an armistice was being debated in coun- 
cil, that there was some difficulty in the choice of 
an officer for a service by no means likely to be a 
sinecure in point of either judgment or hazard ; 
stepped forward, and, to the surprise of every body, 
disclaimed the privileges of my rank, and insisted 
on marching at the head of this handful, this cen- 
turion's guard, into the formidable city of Jeru- 
salem," 



SALATHIEL. Ip. 

" His object of course was your destruction. I 
now see the cause of the harangue that roused the 
people; he was in the pay of the conspirators 
against you. Yet, his appearance was striking : 
there was a vigour about his look and language, a 
fierce consciousness of power somewhere, that dis- 
tinguished him from his race. He came too, and 
disappeared, without my being able to discover 
whence or whither." 

" Oh, the commonest contrivance of his trade. 
Those fellows always come and go in a cloud, if 
they can. He was probably beside you half the 
day, before and after. You saw how little he 
thought of the lance that I sent to bring out his 
secrets. He doubtless wore a corslet ; otherwise 
there would have been one juggler the less in the 
world. The truth is, I have been duped, but I 
have made up my mind to think nothing about the 
dupery. The slave is certainly clever, perhaps to 
an extraordinary degree — a knave undoubtedly, 
and of the first magnitude. But he has the secret 
of the cabal against me; and that secret makes 
him at once fit to be employed, and dangerous to 
be provoked. The blow of the lance yesterday 
showed him that I am not always to be trifled 
with. In fact, prince, you might find it advan- 
tageous to employ him occasionally yourself. It 



92 SALATHIEL. 

was he who conveyed my letter to the camp this 
morning ! " 

My look probably expressed my alarm at this 
species of envoy. 

" You may rely on my honour," said the Roman, 
"not to involve you in any of the fellow's inven- 
tions. Slippery as he is, I have a hold on him 
too, that he will not venture to shake off. And 
now, to let you into full confidence, I expect him 
back this very night, when he will relieve your 
city of an inhabitant unworthy of remaining among 
so polished a people, and your house, my prince, 
of an inmate, than whom none on earth can be 
more grateful for your hospitality." 

He concluded this mixture of levity, address, 
and frankness, with a smile, and in a tone of 
elegance, that compelled me to take it all on the 
more favourable side. But against suffering the 
step of his strange emissary to pollute the thresh- 
old in which I lived, I expressed my plain deter- 
mination. 

*' For that too I have provided," said he. '* My 
intercourse with the reprobate is to take place 
at another quarter of the city, as far as possible," 
and he laughed, " for reasons equally of mine and 
yours, from this dwelling. I have managed mat- 
ters so as not to compromise any of my friends ; 



SALATHIEL. 



^ 



and, to make my arrangements on that point still 
more secure, may I express a wish that neither 
Conslantius nor any other person of your house 
may be acquainted with my intention of leaving 
them, and, I may sincerely say, leaving every thing 
that could gratify my best feelings, — this very 
evening." 

This was an easy and graceful avoidance of the 
difficulties which his longer residence threatened. 
I gave him the promise of secrecy, cautioning him 
against reposing any dangerous confidence in his 
emissary, of whom I had an irrepressible abhor- 
rence ; and was about to leave the chamber, when 
he caught my hand, and said in unusual emotion — 

•' Prince of Naphtali, I have but one word more 
to say. You are a man of the world, and can 
make allowance for the giddiness of human pas- 
sions. Some of them are uncontrollable, or at 
least, which I have never learned to control, and 
in me perhaps belong to inferiority of mind. But 
if, on my departure, you should hear calumnies 
against me — " 

" Impossible, my young friend ; or if I should, 
you may rely on my giving the calumniators a very 
brief answer." 

" Or, if even yourself should be disposed to 
think severely of me ; — you know the circumstan- 



94 SALATHIEL. 

ces under which a man of birth and fortune must 
be placed, in our profession." 

** I do ; and am much more disposed to regret, 
than to wonder at the consequences." 

"If you should hear that I had been assailed, 
in an evil hour, by an unexpected temptation, 
which I had long laboured to resist ; assailed by 
it under the most powerful circumstances that 
ever yet tasked the human mind ; circumstances 
to which, from the beginning of the world, wisdom 
has been proverbially folly, and resolution weak- 
ness ; if it should have mastered my whole being 
— spirit, soul, and body ; if I were willing to give 
up the brightest prospects for its possession — to 
hazard life, hope, honours — " 

The thought of Esther smote me. I started 
from him, where he stood, with his fine head droop- 
ing like the Antinous, and his figure the very 
emblem of passionate dejection. " Roman, you 
are here as my guest ; and as such I have listened 
to you with patience until now. But, if any mem- 
ber of my family is concerned in what you say, I 
desire, in the most distinct terms, that the subject 
shall be mentioned no more. The daughters of 
Israel are sacred. Never shall a child of mine 
wed with those who now lord it over my unhappy 
country." 



SALATHIEL. 95 

He spread his hands and eyes in the broadest 
astonishment. " Prince, can it be possible that 
you have so totally mistaken me ? My perplexities 
are of an entirely different nature. Do me jus- 
tice ; I laugh at the triflings of human passion, as 
unworthy of men of common sense ; and allowing, 
as every man of taste must allow, the beauty of 
the females of your distinguished house, believe 
me that I have been too busy with matters of 
painful interest, to have given more than a glance 
to their unquestionable attractions. Now, let us 
understand each other, as soldiers and men of hO' 
Mour. — The chain with which I am bound is not of 
roses, but of iron ; a chain of invisible, yet stern 
influences, that haunt my night, and even my day. 
Right glad should I be, to find myself free enough 
from that hideous bond, to be capable of admiring 
the beauty of woman." His voice faltered, and he 
turned away with a shudder, as from a visionary 
tormentor. 

" What ! has that accursed dealer in spells, that 
man of desperate arts, if he be man, involved you 
too in his net ? I know the superstitions of your 
country, and how deeply they darken the under- 
standing. But dares the impostor soar so high ! " 
He shook from head to foot ; and clasped his 
hands with the violence of despair. *' You saw 



96 SALATHIEL. 

how he defied, how he mocked at me, how he 
spurned me when my abhorrence rose to the mad- 
ness of attempting to strike him. I might as well 
have flung the weapon at the clouds. You saw 
the instinctive terror of my charger. That animal 
was celebrated in our whole cavalry for its bold, 
nay, furious spirit. Yet, before the eye of that 
man of power and evil, it cowered like a hare, and 
died of his glance. By him the temptation has 
been offered ; of its nature 1 dare not speak ; but 
it is dazzling, fearful, and must, I feel it, — must 
finally be fatal." 

*' Then cast it from you at once. Be a man 
— a hero," 

''It is hopeless — I must be the victim ; I am 
bound irretrievably. — Farewell, prince ; we shall 
see each other no more." 

He flung himself upon the couch. I offered 
him assistance, advice, consolation, in vain. The 
spirit of the soldier was extinguished. The victim 
of fantastic illusion lay before me. I left him to 
the care of the old domestic; and when I closed 
the door, thought I had closed the door of the 
grave. 



SALATHIEL. 97 



CHAPTER IX. 



During this period the city presented the tur- 
balent aspect that must result from the concourse 
of vast and warlike multitudes, nearly strangers to 
each other, or known only by hereditary bicker- 
ings. The pride of the clansman of Judah looked 
down upon every human being, and his country- 
men among the rest. The Benjamite retorted it, 
boasted of the inheritance of Jerusalem, and 
looked down upon the men of the Galilees as riot- 
ers and plunderers. These too had their objects of 
scorn ; and the remnants of the tribes of Dan and 
Ephraim were held in merciless disdain, as the 
descendants of rebels and idolaters. To deepen 
those ancient feuds, were thrown in the mutual 
injuries of the factions of John and Simon. Their 
VOL. Ill, E 



yb SALATHIEL. 

leaders were now but the shadow of what they had 
been ; yet the memory of their mischiefs survived 
with a keenness aggravated by the public discovery 
of the miserable insignificance of the instruments. 

Power and genius in the tyrant offer the con- 
solation, that if the chain have galled us, it has 
been bound by a hand made for supremacy. But 
the last misery of the slave is, to have been bound 
by a creature even more contemptible than him- 
self; to have given to folly the homage due to 
talent; to have stooped before meanness, and 
trembled under the frown of the feeble. 

The obvious losses and alarm of the enemy, who 
had now totally withdrawn from the plain, and 
were occupied with raising rampart on rampart 
round their several camps ; the triumph over the 
unfortunate troop ; and the excitement of a crowd 
of diviners, pretended prophets, and frantic vi- 
sionaries, filled the populace with every vanity of 
conquest. The constant exclamation in the streets 
was — " Let us march to storm the camps, and 
drive the idolater into the sea !" But the new 
luxuries of the city were too congenial, not to act 
ss formidable rivals to the popular ambition. No 
leader appeared ; the boastings passed away ; and 
the boiling temperament of the warrior had time 
to run into the safer channel of words and wine. 



SALATHIEL. 99 

Yet, one melancholy remembrancer was there. 
Through the midst of the wildest festivity, through 
the groups of drinking, dancing, bravadoing, and 
quarrelling, Sabat the Ishmaelite moved, day by 
day, from dawn till evening, pouring out his sen- 
tences of condemnation. Nothing could be more 
singular nor more awful than his figure, as the 
denouncer of ruin hurried along, like a being de- 
nuded of all objects in life but the one. The 
multitude, in their most extravagant excess, felt 
undissembled fear before him. I have seen the 
most ferocious tumult stilled by the distant sound 
of his portentous voice. The dagger was instantly 
sheathed ; the head buried in the garment ; the 
form often prostrate until he passed by. Where 
he went, the song of licence was dumb ; the dance 
ceased ; the cup fell from the hand ; and many a 
lip of violence and blasphemy quivered with long- 
forgotten prayer. 

How he sustained life, none could tell. He 
was reduced to the thinnest anatomy ; his eye had 
the yellow glare of blindness ; his once raven hair 
was of the whiteness of flax. He was an animated 
corpse. But he still had the stride of a giant ; he 
drove onward with a force which, if few attempted 
to resist, none seemed able to withstand ; his ges- 
tures were rapid and nervous in an extraordinary 



100 SALATHIEL. 

degree, and his voice was overwhelming. It had 
the rush and volume of a powerful gust of wind. 
Even in the hubbub of the day, through the innu- 
merable noises of the streets, it was audible from 
the remotest quarters of the city. I have heard it 
through the tread and shouts of fifty thousand 
marching men. But, in twilight and silence, the 
eternal *' Woe ! — woe ! — woe !" howled along the 
air with a sound that told of nothing human. 

His unfortunate bride still followed him ; never 
uttering a word, never looking but on him. She 
glided along with him in his swiftest course, as 
bound by a spell to wander where he wandered, 
an unconscious slave ; her form almost a shadow ; 
without a sound, a gesture, or a glance : her feet 
alone moved. 

I often attempted to render this undone pair 
some assistance. Sabat recognised me, and re- 
turned brief thanks ; and perhaps I was the only 
man in Jerusalem to whom he vouchsafed either 
thanks or memory. But he uniformly refused aid 
of every kind, and reproaching himself for the 
moment given to human recollections, burst away, 
and began his denunciation of "Woe! — woe! — 
woe !" 

The hope of treaty with the besiegers was now 
nearly desperate ; yet I felt so deeply the ruin that 



SALATHIEL. 101 

must follow protracted war, that I had laboured 
with incessant anxiety to bring the people to a 
sense of their situation. My name was high ; my 
decided refusal of all command or public rank gave 
me an influence which threw more grasping am- 
bition into the shade ; and the leading men of 
Jerusalem were glad to delegate their power to 
me, with the double object of relieving themselves 
from an effort to which they were unequal, and 
from a responsibility under which even their co- 
vetousness and pride had begun to tremble. 

But Jerusalem was not to be saved ; there was 
an opposing fatality — an irresistible, intangible 
power, arrayed against my efforts. I felt it at my 
first step. If I had been treading on the vault of 
a volcano, and heard it roar under me, I could 
not have been made more sensible of the hollow- 
ness and hopelessness of every effort to save the 
nation. In the midst of our most according coun- 
cil, some luckless impediment was sure to start up. 
While we seemed on the verge of conciliating and 
securing the most important interests, to that 
verge we were forbidden to approach. Communi- 
cations actually commenced with the Roman ge- 
neral, and which promised the most certain results, 
were broken off, none could tell how. There was 
an antagonist somewhere, but beyond our grasp ; 



102 SALATHIEL. 

a hostility as powerful, as constant, and as little 
capable of being counteracted as the hostility of 
the plague. 

After my final conversation with Septimius, I 
had spent the day in one of those perplexing deli- 
berations, and was returning with a weary heart ; 
when, in an obscure street leading to the Upper 
City, I was roused from my reverie by the sound 
of one of our mountain songs. Music has been 
among ray chief solaces through existence, and 
the song of Naphtali at that moment of depression 
keenly moved me. I stopped to listen, in front 
of the minstrel's tent, in which a circle of soldiers 
and shepherds from the Galilees were sitting over 
their cups. His skill deserved a higher audience. 
He touched his little harp with elegance, to a 
voice that reminded me of the sportiveness and 
wild melody of a bird in spring. The moon-light 
shone through the tent ; and, as the boy sat under 
the large white folds in the fantastic dress of his 
art, a loose vermilion robe, belted with sparkling 
stones, and turban of yellow silk, that drooped 
upon his shoulder like a golden pinion, he resem- 
bled the Persian pictures of the Peri embosomed 
in the bell of the lily. The rude and dark-featured 
listeners round him might well have sat for the 
swart demons submissive to his will. 



SALATHIEL. 103 

But thoughts soon returned that were not to be 
soothed by music ; and throwing some pieces of 
money to the boy, I hastened on. The departure 
of the young Roman, and the influence that it 
might have on my family, and peculiarly on the 
mind of a creature doubly endeared to me by a 
strange and melancholy similitude to the temper 
of my own excitable mind, deeply occupied me ; 
and it was even with some presentiment of evil 
that I reached home. 

The first sound that I beard was the lamentation 
of the old domestics. But I could not wait to 
solve their unintelligible attempts to explain the 
disaster. I Hew to my family. ^Miriam was ab- 
sorbed in profound sorrow ; Salome was in loud 
affliction. Dreading every thing that could be 
told me, yet with that sullen hardihood which long 
misfortune gives, I took my wife's hands, and, in 
a voice struggling for composure, desired her to 
tell me the worst at once. 

** Esther is gone !" was her answer. She could 
articulate no more ; the effort to speak this shook 
her whole frame. But Salome broke out into loud 
reprobation of the baseness of the wretch who had 
turned our hospitality into a snare ; and whose life, 
twice saved, was employed only to bring misery 
on his preserver. 



104 SALATHIEL. 

The blow fell upon me with the keenness of a 
sword. *' Was Esther, was my daughter, my in- 
nocent, darling Esther, consenting to this flight ?" 
*' I know not," said Miriam. " I dare not ask 
myself the question. If she can have forgotten 
her duty, to follow the stranger ; if she can have 
left her parents !— no ; it must have been through 
some horrid artifice. But the thought is too bitter. 
Raise no more such thoughts in my mind." 

She sank in silence. But Salome was not to 
be restrained. She asserted the total impossibility 
of Esther's having thrown off her allegiance to 
religion and filial duty. *'She must have been 
either," said this generous and enthusiastic being, 
" subjected to those dreadful arts in which the 
idolaters deal, and deluded by visions and evil 
powers; or carried away by actual force. Con- 
stantius has gone already in search of her ; feeble 
as he is, he determined to discover the robbers ; 
and though his steps were tottering, and the eflbrt 
may hazard his life, he would not be restrained, 
nor would I restrain him, where I should have so 
much rejoiced to hazard my own." 

I rose to depart. Miriam clung to me. ** Must 
I lose all, Salathiel ?" 

*' I am the guilty one, wife ! I should have 
guarded against this. I alone am to blame. — 



SALATHIEL. 105 

Those tears reproach me more deeply than all the 
words in the world. — I will recover Esther. With- 
out her we all should be miserable. The Roman 
general is just. I will demand her of Septimius 
in his presence. Miriam! you shall see your child. 
Salome ! you shall see your sister. And now, 
come to my heart come both ; my last hope of 
happiness, the remnant of all that once promised 
to fill my declining days with peace and prospe- 
rity. — Weep no more, Miriam ! Salome ! I must 
not be unmanned at this time of trial. Go to your 
chambers, and pray for me. — Farewell !" 

It was nearly midnight, and the city sounds 
where hushed, except where the crowds, wliicli still 
poured in, struggled for their quarters. The very 
fear of being thus disturbed kept up the disturb- 
ance of the population ; and in the leading avenues 
the tents showed fierce watchers against this vio- 
lence, sitting round their tables, until wine either 
sent them to sleep, or roused them into daggers- 
drawing. Subordination was at an end ; plunder 
and blood were to be dreaded by every man who 
ventured among those champions of freedom and 
property ; and more than once this night I was 
compelled to show that I wore a weapon. 

But the disorder which left the city a seat of 
dissolute riot, was not suffered to interfere with 



106 SALATHIEL. 

the actual defence. That singular mixture of 
rabble giddiness and sacred care, which distin- 
guished my countrymen above all nations, was 
fully displayed in those final hours ; and the walls 
that enclosed a million of rioters and robbers, were 
guarded with the solemn vigilance of a sanctuary. 

No argument could prevail with the peasantry 
at the gate to let me pass. My rank, and even 
my public name, went for little in the scale, against 
the possibility of my renewing the treaty with an 
enemy whom they now scorned ; and I was doubt- 
ing whether I must not lose the night by the reluct- 
ance of those rough but honest sentinels, when I 
was cheered by seeing one of the head-men of 
their tribe arrive. He had been a furious politician ; 
honour and honesty were his declared worship ; &nd 
his horror of humbler motives was fierceness itself. 
This was enough for me. I knew what public 
vehemence means. I took him aside; without 
ceremony put gold into his grasp ; and saw the 
gate thrown open before me by the immaculate 
hand of the patriotic Jonathan. 

But while I had scarcely congratulated myself 
on having passed this formidable barrier, and was 
still within the defences, the trampling of horse 
echoed on the road. The night was clear, and 
there was no hope of avoiding them, enclosed as I 



SALATHIEL. 107 

was with walls. A large body of Idumean horse- 
men came on, escorting waggons of provision. The 
foremost riders were half asleep, and I was in 
strong hope of eluding them all ; when one of the 
drivers, in the wantonness of authority, laid his 
whip on me. I rashly returned the blow, and the 
man fell off his horse insensible. I was surrounded, 
charged with murder ; was brought before their 
chieftain, and found that chieftain, Onias ! 

My old enemy recognised me instantly ; and, 
with undying revenge firing every feature, de- 
manded whither I was going. 

"To the Roman camp," was the direct answer. 

"The purpose ?" 

" To have an interview with the Roman gene- 
ral." 

" You come deputed by the authorities?" 

" By not one of them." 

" I long ago knew you to be a bold fellow, but 
you exceed my opinion. We cannot spare heroes 
from Jerusalem at this time ; so, you must turn 
back with us." 

"By what right?" 

" By the right of the stronger." 

" With what object ?" 

" That you may be hanged as a deserter. It 



108 SALATHIEL. 

will save you the trouble of going to Titus to be 
hauged as a spy." 

I disdained reply ; and in the midst of a circle 
of barbarians exulting over their capture, as if 
they had taken the chief enemy of the state, was 
marched back to the walls. 

There I was not the only person disturbed by 
the adventure. The first glimpse of me, caught 
by the captain of the night, exhibited every thing 
that could be ludicrous in the shape of consterna- 
tion. To the inquiries, how I was suffered to 
pass, he answered, by an appeal to his " honour ;" 
which he again valued, in my presence too, '*^as 
the most invaluable possession of the citizen sol- 
dier." He said the words without a blush, and 
I even listened to them without a smile. He 
probably trembled a little for his bribe ; but he 
soon discovered by my look, that I considered the 
money as too far gone to be worth pursuing. 

Yet Onias, who seemed to know him as well as 
I, fixed on him a scrutinizing aspect, of all others 
the most hateful to a delicate conscience ; and his 
only resource was to heap opprobrium upon me. 
How had I contrived to escape the guard, said Jo- 
nathan, " was totally inconceivable, unless it was 
by — " I gave him an assuring glance — '' by im- 
posing on the credulity of some of the ignorant 



SALATHIEL. 109 

peasants ; possibly even by direct corruption. But 
to put the matter out of future possibility, he 
would proceed to examine the prisoner's person." 

He proceeded accordingly, and from my sash 
took my purse, as a public precaution. He was a 
vigilant guardian of the state ; for the purse was 
never restored. 

Onias looked at him, during his harangue, with 
a countenance between contempt and ridicule. 

i' I must go forward now," said he ; ** but, cap- 
tain, see to your prisoner. He must answer be- 
fore the council to-morrow; and as you have so 
worthily disabled him from operations with the 
guard, your own head is answerable for his safe 
keeping." My enemy, to make all sure, himself 
saw me marched within the tower over the gate; 
comforted his soul by a parting promise that my 
time was come, and rode off with his Idumeans — 
to the boundless satisfaction of the scrupulous and 
much alarmed Jonathan. 

The tower was massive ; and there was no pro- 
bability that any thing less than a Roman batter- 
ing-ram would ever lay open its solid sides. The 
captain had recovered his virtue at the instant of 
my losing my purse ; and I now could no more 
dream of sapping his integrity, than of sapping the 
huge blocks of the tower. Whether I was to be 



110 SALATHIEL. 

prisoner for the night or for the siege, or to glut 
the axe by morning, were questions which lay in 
the bosom of as implacable a villain, as long-de- 
layed revenge ever made malignant ; but what 
was to become of my child, of my family, of my 
share in the great cause, for which alone life was 
of value ! 

The chamber to which I was consigned was at 
the top of the tower, and overlooked a vast extent 
of country. Before me were the Roman camps seen 
clearly in the moon- light, and wrapt in silence, ex- 
cept when the solitary trumpet sounded the watch, 
or the heavy tread of a troop going its rounds was 
heard. The city sounds were but the murmurs of 
the sinking tide of the multitude. The Spring was 
in her glory. The air came fresh and sweet from 
the fields. All was tranquillity ; yet what a mass 
of destructive power was lying motionless under 
that tranquillity! Fire, sword, and man, were 
before me ; elements of evil that a touch could 
rouse into tempest, not to be allayed but by torrents 
of blood, and the ruin of empires. 



SALATHIEL. HI 



CHAPTER X. 



While my mind was wandering away in 
thoughts of the madness of ambition in so brief 
a being as man, I heard a loud clamour of voices 
in the chambers below. The rustic guard had 
been enjoying themselves ; but their wine was 
already out, and they set their faces boldly against 
the discipline which pretended to limit the wine of 
patriots so true and thirsty. The clamour arose 
from the discovery that the cellars of the tower 
had been examined by a previous guard, who pro- 
vided for the temperance of their successors, by 
taking the whole temptation to themselves. High 
words followed between the abettors of discipline 
and the partisans of the bottle ; and if my door 
were but unbarred, I might have expeditiously 



112 SALATHIEL. 

relieved the captain of his charge. But its bolts 
were enormous ; and I tried lock and panel in 
vain. 

As I was giving up the effort, a light footstep 
ascended the stairs ; a key turned in the ponderous 
walls ; and the minstrel of the tent stood before 
me. 

" If you wish to escape from certain death," he 
whispered, " do as I bid you." He looked from 
the casement; sang a few notes; and, on being 
answered from without, pulled up a rope, which we 
hauled in together. The task was of some diffi- 
culty ; but at length a weighty hamper appeared, 
loaded with wine. He took a portion of the con- 
traband freight in his arms, and without a word 
disappeared. I heard his v/elcome proclaimed 
below with loud applause. Half the guard were 
instantly on the stairs to assist him down with the 
remainder, but against this he firmly protested ; 
and threatened, in case of a single attempt to in- 
terfere with his operations, that he would awake 
the captain, and publicly give back the keys of 
this incomparable private cellar to the legitimate 
hand. The threat was effective; the unlading of 
the hamper was left to his own dexterity ; and at 
length but one solitary flask lay before us. 

** You deserve some payment for your trouble," 



SALATHIEL. 113 

said he, with the careless and jovial air of his 
brethren. " Here's to your night's enterprise, 
whatever it be," pouring out a few drops and 
tasting them, while he forced a large draught 
upon me. " And now good night, my prince, 
unless you love the tower too much to take leave 
of this gallant guard by a window." 

•* But, boy, if you are detected in assisting my 
escape !" 

*' Oh ! I have been detected in all sorts of 
frolics in my time, and yet here I am. The 
truth is, prince, I have travelled in your country, 
and have an old honour for your name. No later 
than to-day you gave me the handsomest present 
I have got since I came within the walls. I know 
the noble captain below stairs to be a thorough 
rogue ; and the mighty Onias to want nothing for 
wickedness but the opportunity : in short, the 
thought occurred to me on seeing you, to ramble 
into the guard-house, help the honest revellers 
below to a little more wine than is good for their 
understandings ; this contraband affair being a 
commodity in which, between ourselves, I deal ; 
and further, break the laws by assisting you to 
leave captain, sentinels, persecutors, and all, behind. 
— Now, if you value your life, be the substitute 
for the empty flasks ; get into this hamper, and 



114 SALATHIEL. 

make your way through the air like a bird. In 
two minutes I shall be safe enough. You need 
have no fears for me." 

I coiled the rope round a beam, that my weight 
might not bring it down too suddenly ; forced my- 
self through the narrow window, and launched out 
into air, at a height of a hundred feet. But if I 
felt any distrust, it was brief. I was rapidly 
lowered down, passing the successive casements, 
in which I saw the successive watches of the 
guard drinking, sleeping, singing, and discussing 
public affairs with village rationality. Luckily no 
eye turned upon the fugitive ; and the ground 
was touched at last. 

In another moment the minstrel came, rather 
flying than sliding, down the rope. I said some- 
thing in acknowledgment of this service. But he 
laid his finger on his lip, and pointing to the ram- 
part, where a moving lamp showed that we were 
still within observation, led me through paths be- 
set with thickets that no eye could penetrate, but, 
as he said, " that of a supplier of garrisons with 
contraband." But their intricacy offered no ob- 
struction to this stripling ; and after amusing him- 
self with my perplexities, he led me to the verge 
of the plain. 

*' I have detained you," said he, " in these bram- 



SALATHIEL. 115 

bles, for the double purpose of avoiding the look- 
out from the battlements, and of giving the moon 
time to hide her blushing beauties." She lay red- 
dening with the mists on the horizon. " She has 
been often called our mother ; and, as children of 
the moon, the minstrels are allowed the privilege 
of keeping later hours, and being madder than the 
mob of mankind. But, like other children, we 
are sometimes engaged in matters which would 
dispense with the maternal eye ; and to-night, be- 
tween assisting the Galileans to their wine, and 
cheating them of their prisoner, I wished that she 
was many a fathom below the ocean. ** Mother," 
said he, throwing himself into an attitude, and 
pouring a gush of harmony from his little hnrp, 
*' take a child's blessing, and begone." The words 
were spoken to a kind of tune, rambling, but sin- 
gularly sweet. '* Do you know," said he, with a 
sigh, as he turned and saw me gazing in admira- 
tion of his skill, " I am weary to death of my pro- 
fession ." 

•* Then, why not leave it? you are fit for better 
things ; your accomplishments are of the very na- 
ture that make their way in society." 

**Why not leave it? Oh, for a hundred rea- 
sons. In the first place, I should be more wearied 
of every other. I should be the bird in the cage, 



116 SALATHIEL. 

fed, sheltered, and possibly a favourite. — But 
what bird would not rather take the chance of the 
open air, even to be beat by the storms of sum- 
mer, and frozen by the winter's chill? No; let 
me clap my pinions, and sing my song under the 
free canopy of the skies ; or be voiceless, and 
wingless, and— dead." 

*'Boy, this is the natural language of your 
years. But the time must come when the spirit 
sinks, and man requires other charms in life than 
the power of roaming. The common change of 
nature which compels us in the days of sun-shine 
to provide for winter, is only a forewarning of the 
time when life shall require rest, an assured 
shelter, and the presence of human beings who 
feel an interest in us. The wanderer comes at 
last, a broken-hearted dependant, to solicit the 
alms of men who, without a spark of his genius, 
had the common sense to follow the track beaten 
for them by mankind." 

He made no answer, but hung his head over the 
harp, and let his fingers stray among the strings. 
The moon's edge was now touching the moun- 
tains. 

" We must be gone," said I ; '* but, as I insist 
on your not exposing yourself to further hazard, 
remember to look for me within a few days in Je- 



SALATHIEL. 117 

rusalem. I owe you something for your night's 
service; which, if you are willing, shall be repaid 
by taking you into my household, should the siege 
be raised ; if not, you are but as you were." 

He was all nervous perturbation at the offer ; 
wept, laughed, danced, rang a prelude upon the 
strings, kissed my hand, and finally bounded away 
before me. I called to him, repeating my wish 
that he should go no further. 

** Impossible," said he ; " you would be lost in a 
moment. If I had not crossed the ground huu' 
dreds of times, I should never be able to find my 
road. Half a mile forward, it is all rampart, 
trench, and ravine. You would be stopped by a 
myriad of sentinels. Why, nothing on earth could 
get to the foot of yonder hills, near as they seem, 
but an army, — or a minstrel." 

Remonstrance was hopeless, for he ran on be- 
fore me, and ran with a rapidity that tasked even 
my foot to follow. We soon came into the forti- 
fied ground, and I then felt his value. He led 
me over fosse and rampart, up the scarp and 
through the palisade, with the sagacity of instinct. 
But this was not all. I repeatedly saw the senti- 
nels within a few feet of us, and expected to be 
challenged every moment ; but not a syllable was 
heard. I passed, with patrols of the legionary horse 



118 SALATHIEL. 

on either side of me ; still, not a word. I walked 
through the rows of tents, in which the troops were 
up, and preparing for the duties of the morning. 
Not an eye fell upon me; and I almost began to be- 
lieve myself, like a hero of the old fables, covered 
with a cloud. 

The boy still continued racing along ; until, on 
reaching the summit of a mound at some distance 
in front of me, he uttered a cry, and fell. I had 
heard no challenge ; and conceiving that his fall 
was accidental, hurried towards him. 

A flight of arrows whizzed over my head ; and 
the black visages of a mob of Ethiopian riders 
came bouncing up a hollow between us. It was 
not my purpose to fight, even if I had any hope of 
success against marksmen who could hit an ele- 
phant's eye. I called out for quarter in every lan- 
guage of which I was capable. But the Ethio- 
pians only shook their woolly heads, laid hands on 
me, and began an investigation of my riches, cre- 
ditable to polished society. Barbarians, with a 
tongue and physiognomy worthy only of their kin- 
dred baboons, probed every plait of my garments 
with an accuracy that could have been surpassed only 
in the most civilised custom-houses of the empire. 
A succession of shrieks, which I mistook for rage, 
but which were the mirth of those sons of dark- 



SALATHIEL. 119 

ness, were the prelude to measures which augured 
more formidable consequences than the rifling of a 
man who had already undergone rifling by a pro- 
fessor. A rope was thrown over my arms, and I was 
led towards the outposts. Yet even the neigh- 
bourhood of their Roman friends did not seem the 
most congenial to my captors. More than one 
consultation was held, in which their white teeth 
were bared to the jaw with rage, and their scymi- 
tars were whirled like so many flashes of light- 
ning about each other's turbans, before they 
could decide, whether my throat was to be cut on 
the spot to get rid of an encumbrance, or they 
were to try how far the emptiness of my purse 
might not be made up to them by the reward for 
the capture of a spy in the trappings of a chief- 
tain. 

I gave up remonstrance, where, if I had all the 
tongues of Babel, none of them seemed likely to 
answer my purpose; and reserving the nice dis- 
tinction between an ambassador and a spy for 
more cultivated ears, quietly walked onward in 
the midst of this ragged troop of thieves ; the 
more insensible to honesty or argument, as they 
were thieves privileged according to law. 

But our approach to the camp bred another 
difficulty. The troop felt an obvious disinclination 



120 SALATHIEL. 

to come too close to the legionaries. Whatever 
was the produce of their rovings might be inquired 
into, and retained for the honour of justice, and 
the benefit of its servants. Untutored as the 
negroes were, they had acquired a knowledge of 
the latitude of the official conscience ; and bowed 
to the mastery of the white in plunder, as in the 
other accomplishments of an advanced age. 

All could not venture to the camp ; yet who 
was to be intrusted with the general interest, so far 
as receiving the reward ? The discussion was car- 
ried on chiefly by gesture, which sometimes pro- 
ceeded to blows ; and at last was wound up to 
such vigour, that a brawny ruffian, to preserve 
the peace, seized the rope, and dragging me out 
of the circle, began sharpening his scyraitar on his 
knife, to cut my throat with the more certainty, 
and at once extinguish the controversy. 

But, at the instant, a horrid outcry arose ; and 
a figure, hideous beyond conception, not a foot 
high, blacker than the blackest, and darting flames 
from its mouth, bounded in among us, mounted 
upon a wild beast of a horse, that kicked and tore 
at every thing. The Ethiopians shrieked with 
terror, and were scattered on all sides at the first 
shock ; the ground was so cut up by the military 
operations, that they stumbled at every step ; 



SALATHIEL. 121 

some were unhorsed ; some lay desperately kicked 
and bitten ; some probably had their necks broken ; 
and others carried home the tale to spread it 
through the land of lions. I heard it long after, 
exciting the utmost amaze in a venerable circle 
sitting round one of the fountains of the Nile. 

I was saved from being thus summarily made 
the victim of peace ; but was as far as ever from 
freedom. While I was endeavouring to loose the 
rope, a patrol of the legionary horse came gallop- 
ing from the camp ; and I was taken, with this 
badge of a bad character upon me. But the flying 
negroes were the more amusing object. There 
was just light enough to see them running and rol- 
ling about the plain ; turbans flying off in the air ; 
and the few riders who could boast of keeping 
their seats, whirled away over i)rake and brier, at 
the mercy of their maddened horses. This display, 
which had been, at first, taken for the prelude to 
an assault on the lines, was now a source of plea- 
santry ; and the horsemanship of the savages was 
honoured with many a roar. 

My case came next under consideration. '' I 
was found at the edge of the Roman intrenchments, 
where to be found was to die; I was besides taken 
with the mark of reprobation upon me," But I 

VOL. III. F 



122 SA LATHI EL. 

pleaded my own merits loudly, and appealed to the 
rope as evidence that I was not there by my own 
will. The legionaries were better soldiers than 
logicians, and my defence perplexed them : until 
some profounder one thought of inquiring what 
brought me there at all. The troop flocked round 
to hear how I should rebut this overwhelming 
question. I mentioned my purpose in a few 
words. 

The scale again turned in my favour, and I be- 
gan to think victory secure ; when a young stand- 
ard-bearer, who was probably destined to rise in 
the state, declared, with a splenetic tongue and 
brow of office, that " in this day of cheating, too 
much precaution could not be adopted against 
cheats of all colours ; that the more plausible my 
story was, the more likely it was to be a fabrica- 
tion ; that I might have volunteered my captivity 
only to give weight to my fabrication ; and that, 
finally, as my escape might do some kind of mis- 
chief, while my hanging could do none whatever, 
it was advisable — to hang me without delay." 

The orator spoke the words of popularity ; and 
my fate was sealed. But a new difficulty arose. 
By whom was the sentence to be put in execution ; 
for the duty would have sullied the legionary ho- 



SALATHIEL. 123 

nour for life. The demur was perplexing ; but 
the dignity of the cavalry must at all events be 
preserved. 

A trampled African, who lay groaning in a ditch 
beside me, caught the sound of the debate, dragged 
himself out, and offered, mangled as he was, to 
perform the office for any sum that their genero- 
sity might think proper. Never was man nearer 
paying the grand debt, than I was at that moment. 
The African recovered his vigour as by magic ; and 
the young statesman took upon himself the super- 
intendance of this service to his country. I was 
not idle, and raised my voice against this violence 
to a ** negociator ;" but the troopers of the Impe- 
rial horse had been roused from their sleep on my 
account, and they were not to return, liable to the 
ridicule of having been roused by a false alarm. 
While I still endeavoured to put off the evil hour, 
the trampling of a large body of cavalry was heard. 
** The General!" exclaimed the young oflficer, who 
evidently had an instinctive sensibility to the ap- 
proach of rank. 

** Let Titus come," said I, "or any man of ho- 
nour, and he will understand me." I tore the 
badge of disgrace from my arms, and stepped for- 
ward to meet the great son of Vespasian. My look 
of confidence alarmed the troop, and the standard- 



1^ SALATHIEL. 

bearer made way for a man who dared to speak to 
the heir of the throne. But the general was not 
Titus : a broad, brutal countenance, red with ex- 
cess, glared haughtily round. I caught his eye, 
and he suddenly turned pale : a whisper from one 
of the officers put him in possession of the circum- 
stances, and he rode up to me. " So, rebel ! you 
are come to this at last. You have been taken in 
the fact, and must undergo your natural fate." 

" I demand to be led to your general. I scorn 
to defend myself before inferiors." 

'* Inferiors !" he bit his livid lip. ** Traitor, you 
are not now on the hill of Scopas, at the head of an 
army." 

I recognised Cestius. ** Nor you," said I, *' on 
the plain, at the head of an army ; and so much 
the more fortunate for both you and them. — But, 
I scorn to talk to men whose backs I have seen. 
Lead me to your master, fugitive !" 

The troops, unaccustomed to this plain speak- 
ing in presence of the tyrant of the legions, looked 
on with wonder. Cestius himself' was staggered ; 
but the nature of the man soon returned ; and in 
a voice of fury, he ordered a body of Arab archers, 
who were seen moving at a distance, to be brought 
up for the extinction of a ** traitor unworthy of a 
Roman sword." 



SALATHIEL. 125 

The Arabs, exhilarated at the prospect of 
reward, came up shouting, tossing their lances, 
and shooting their arrows. As a last resource, I 
solemnly protested against this murder, which 1 
pronounced to be the work of a revenge disgrace- 
ful to the name of soldier; and, taunting Cestius 
with his defeat, demanded that, if he doubted my 
honour, he should try, on the spot, which of our 
swords was the better. 

He answered my taunt only by a glare of rage, 
and a gesture to the archers ; who instantly threw 
themselves into a half circle round me, with the 
expertness of proficients in the trade of justice, 
and bended their bows. I was determined to 
resist to the last, and flung out upbraidings and 
scorn upon the murderer, which drove him to hide 
his head behind the troops ; when another dis- 
turbance arose. Scymitars waved, turbans shook, 
horses plunged ; the deep order was broken ; and 
at length a horseman, magnificently apparelled 
and mounted, burst into the ring, and rushed 
fiercely round. 

** What, you miscreants," he shouted, " what in 
the name of Beelzebub is all this for? who dares 
to take the command out of my hands ? down 
with your bows. — Commit murder, and I not 
present ! The first man that pulls a string shall 



126 SALATHIEL. 

leave an empty saddle. Draw off, cut-throats; 
or, if you want to do the world a service, shoot 
one another. " 

I gazed in vain on this figure of cloth of gold 
and purple. The turban, that blazing with gems 
hung down on his forehead, and the beard, that 
black as the raven's wing curled full round his lip, 
completely bafiled me. He looked at me in turn, 
thrust out a sinewy hand, and, clasping mine, 
exclaimed with a loud laugh — 

*' What, prince, does the plumage make you 
forget the bird ? What can have brought you 
into the hands of my culprits? I thought that 
you were drowned, burned, or a candidate for the 
imperial diadem, by this time." 

The voice and manner recurred to me. '* My 
friend of the free trade !" said I. 

"By no means. I have reformed — am a 
changed man — captain of pirates no more; but 
a loyal plunderer — in the service of Vespasian, 
and in command of a thousand Arab cavalry, that 
will ride, run away, and rob, with any corps in 
the service ; and the word is a bold one." 

Our brief conference was broken up by the 
return of Cestius, who, outrageous at the delay, 
and coming to inquire the cause, found fresh fuel 
for his wrath in the sight of the Arab captain 



SALATHIEL. 127 

turned into my protector. With an execration he 
demanded why his orders had been disobeyed. 
The captain answered with the most provoking- 
coolness, that " no Roman officer, let his rank be 
what it might, was entitled to degrade the allies 
into executioners." The Roman grew furious with 
the slight in the face of the troops ; who highly 
enjoyed it. The Arab grew more sarcastic ; till 
Cestius was rash enough to lift his hand, and the 
Arab anticipated the blow by dashing his charger 
at him, and leaving the haughty general and his 
horse struggling together on the ground. 

An insult of this kind to the second in command 
was, of course, not to be forgiven. The Arabs 
bent their bows to make battle for their captain, 
but he forbade resistance ; and when the legionary 
tribune demanded his sword, he surrendered it 
with a smile, saying, that " he had done service 
enough for one day, in saving an honest man, and 
punishing a ruffian," and that he should justify 
himself to Titus alone. 

My fate was still undetermined. But the 
legionaries soon had more pressing matters to 
think of. The clangour of horns and loud shouts 
came in the direction of the city. The plain still 
lay in shade ; but I could see through the dusk 
immense crowds moving forward like an inunda- 



128 SALATHIEL. 

tion. The legions were instantly under arms, 
and T stood a chance of being walked over by two 
armies. 

But I was not to encounter so distinguished a 
catastrophe. Some symptoms of my inclination 
to escape attracted the eye of the guard, and I was 
marched to the common repository of malefactors 
in the rear of the lines. 



SALATHIEL. 129 



CHAPTER XI. 



My new quarters were within the walls of one 
of those huge country mansions, which the pride 
of our ancestors had built to be the plague of their 
posterity ; for those the enemy chiefly employed 
for our prisons. Their prodigious strength defied 
desultory attack ; time made little other impres- 
sion on them than to picture their walls with in- 
numerable stains ; and the man must be a practised 
prison-breaker who could force his way out of 
their depths of marble. 

But if my eyes were useless, my ears had their 
full indulgence. Every sound of the conflict was 
heard. The attack was frequently furious, and 
must have been close to the walls of my dungeon. 
The various rallying cries of the tribes rang through 



130 SALATHIEL. 

its cells; then a Roman shout and the heavy 
charge of the cavalry would roll along, till, after 
an encountering roar and a long clashing of wea- 
pons, the tumult passed wild away, to be rapidly 
renewed by the obstinate bravery of my unfortu- 
nate countrymen. 

I felt, as a man and a leader must feel, during 
scenes in which he ought to take a part, yet to 
which he was virtually as much dead as the sleeper 
in the tomb. My life had been activity; my heart 
was in the cause ; I had knowledge, zeal, and 
strength, that might in the chances of battle turn 
defeat into triumph. My name was known ; I 
beard it often among the charging cries of the day. 
But here I lay within impassable barriers. A 
thousand times during those miserable hours I 
measured their height with my eye, and longed for 
the hopeless vigour that could scale them; then 
threw myself on the ground, and, closing my ears 
with my hands, laboured to exclude thought from 
my soul. 

But my fellow-prisoners were practical philo- 
sophers to a man ; untaught in the schools, 'tis 
true, yet fully trained in that great academe, worth 
all that Plato ever dreamed in — experience. 

In my wanderings through mankind, I never 
before had such an opportunity of studying variety 



SALATHIEL. 131 

of character. War is the hot-bed that urges all 
our qualities, good and evil, into their broadest 
luxuriance. The generous become munificent ; the 
mean turn into the villanous ; and the rude harden 
into brutality. The camp is the great inn, at 
which all the dubious qualities set up their rest ; 
and a single campaign perfects the culprit to the 
height of his profession. There were round me in 
these immense halls about five hundred profligates, 
any one of whose histories would have been inva- 
luable to a scorner of human nature. 

Among the loose armies of the East those fel- 
lows exercised their vocation as regular appen- 
dages ; often lived in luxury, and sometimes shot 
up into leaders themselves. But the approach to 
the Roman armies required a master-hand. The 
temptation was strong, for the legionary was the 
grand ravager: war was always busy where he 
trod ; and, like the lion, he left the larger share of 
the prey to the jackall. But justice, inexorable 
and rapid, was his rule, in all cases but his own ; 
and the jackall, suspected of trespassing beyond the 
legitimate distance from the superior savage, ran 
the most imminent hazard of being disqualified for 
all encroachments to come. Three-fourths of my 
associates had played this perilous game, and its 



132 SALATHIEL. 

penalties were now awaiting only the first leisure 
of the troops. Peace, at all times vexatious to 
their trade, had thus a double disgust for them ; 
and the most patriotic son of Israel could not have 
taken a more zealous interest in the defeat of the 
legions. But philosophy still predominated, and 
when the retiring sounds showed the repulse of 
the tribes, not a countenance was the darker ; if 
hope was at an end, hilarity took its place, and the 
prison rang with the most reckless exhibitions of 
practical glee, riotous songs, and fierce mockeries 
at the power of rods and axes. The professional 
talents of those sons of chance were remorselessly 
displayed. The mimic collected his audience, bur- 
lesqued the pompous tribunes and officials of the 
army, and gathered his pence and plaudits, as if 
he was under the open sky, and could call his head 
his own . The nostrum-vender had his secrets for the 
cure of every ill, and harangued on the impotence of 
brand, scourge, and blade; where the patient had 
but the wisdom to employ his irresistible unguent. 
The soothsayer sold fate at the lowest price, and 
fixed the casualties of the next four-and-twenty 
hours ; an easy task with the principal part of his 
audience. The minstrel chanted the honour and 
glory of a life unencumbered by care or conscience; 



SALATHIEL. 133 

and the pilferer, with but an hour to live, exer- 
cised his trade with an industry proportioned to the 
shortness of his time. 

In the whole gang I met with but one man 
thoroughly out of spirits. He had obviously been 
no favourite of fortune, for the human form could 
scarcely be less indebted to clothing. His swarthy 
visage was doubly blackened by hunger and ex- 
haustion, and even his voice had a prison sound. 
Driven away from the joyous groups by the na- 
tural repulsion which the careless feel for visages 
that remind them of the world's troubles, he took 
refuge in the corner where I lay, tormented by 
every echo of the battle. 

His groans attracted my notice, and, not unwil- 
ling to forget the melancholy and agitating scenes 
in which every moment was draining the last hope 
of my country, I turned to the wretch beside me, 
and asked the cause of his sorrows. 

" Ingratitude," was the reply. " This is a vil- 
lauous world ; a man may spend his life in serving 
others ; and what will he gain in the end ? Nothing. 
There is, for instance, the prince of Damascus 
wallowing in wealth ; yet the greatest rogue under 
this roof has not a more pitiful stock of honour ; 
witness his conduct to me. He was out of favour 
with his uncle, the late prince ; was not worth more 



134 SALATHIEL. 

than the raiment on his limbs ; and as likely to 
finish his days on the gibbet as any of the knot of 
robbers that helped him to scour the roads about 
Sidon. In his distress he applied to me. I had 
driven a handsome smuggling trade between Egypt 
and the north, and now and then gave him a hand- 
some price for his booty. The idea of bringing his 
uncle to a compromise was out of the question. The 
attempt would have probably first brought ourselves 
to the axe. I gave in my proposal, and named my 
price ; it was allowed to be fair. I made my way 
into the palace, became a favourite by giving up 
some of my old friends of the troop ; was exalted 
to the honours of cup-bearer ; and, on my first 
night of office, gave the old man a cup which cured 
him of drunkenness for ever. And what, do you 
think, was my reward?" 

** I think I could name what it ought to have 
been." 

" You conclude, half his heir's jewels and trea- 
sure, at the least. No ; not a stone, not a shekel. 
I was thrown into chains, and finally kicked out of 
the city, with a promise, the only one that he will 
ever keep, that if I venture into his sacred pre- 
sence again, I shall leave it without my head. 
There's a villain for you ! There's gratitude ! He 
will never do good as long as he lives !" 



SALATHIEL. 135 

" That may still depend upon your assistance. 
Return to him, and give him the opportunity." 

*' My next example was among the Romans. 
It must be owned that they pay well for secret 
services. But then, ingratitude infects them from 
top to toe. I had been three years in their em- 
ployment ; and, if I made free with a few of their 
secrets in favour of others, it was only on the 
commercial principle of having as many customers 
as one can supply ; still I helped them to the 
knowledge of all that was going on. 

*' At last a showy adventurer changed the scene 
of my labours. Some insult from the prefect 
stirred up his blood, and in revenge he sailed 
away with his galley, and set up on his own ac- 
count. The prefect had reason to regret the 
quarrel ; for not a sail, from a shallop to a trireme, 
could touch the water from the Cyclades to Cyprus, 
without being overhauled by the captain. I was 
set upon his track, and got into his good graces by 
lending him a little of my information ; of which 
he made such desperate use, that the prefect swore 
my destruction as a traitor. To make up the 
quarrel, I tried a wider game, and was bringing 
the Roman fleet upon the pirates in their very nest, 
when a whole course of ill luck came across me. 
A pair whom, to the last hour of my life, nothing 



136 SALATHIEL. 

will persuade me to think any thing but demons 
sent expressly to do me mischief, broke up one of 
the finest inventions that ever came into the head 
of man. 

** The consequence was, that the pirates, instead 
of being attacked, burned the prefect's bed under 
him, and would have burned himself, if he had not 
thought a watery end better than a fiery one, 
leaped overboard, and gone straight to the bottom. 
The whole blame fell upon me ; and my only pay- 
ment from the Romans was the cropping of my 
ears, and a declaration, sworn to in the names of 
Romulus and Remus, that if lever ventured again 
within a Roman camp or city, I should not get off 
so well. There's ingratitude for you ; never was 
man so unfortunate." 

" Quite the contrary ; it appears to me that 
seldom was man so lucky. If not one in a hundred 
would have your tale to tell, not one in a thousand 
would have lived to tell it." I had already recog- 
nised the Egyptian of the cavern. 

'* But gratitude, humanity, justice." 

" Say no more about them. Or, if any libeller 
of your masters start up, tell your story, and con- 
fute him. Whatever the Romans may be in the 
matter of justice, your case is an answer to all 
charges on their mercy." 



SALATHIEL. 137 

He looked at rae with a ghastly grimace, and, 
as he threw back the long and squalid locks that 
covered his countenance, showed what beggary had 
done to the sleek features of the once superbly 
clothed and jewelled sea-rover. ** But what," 
said I, " threw a man of your virtue among such 
a gang of caitiffs as are here V 

" Another instance of ingratitude. I had been 
for twenty years connected with one of the leading 
men of Jerusalem, and I will say, that in my ex- 
perience of mankind, I have known no individual 
less perplexed with any weakness of conscience. 
He had a diflicult game to play ; between the 
Romans, whom he served privately, the Jews, 
whom he served publicly, and himself, whom be 
served with at least as much zeal as either of his 
employers. The times were made for the success 
of a man who has his eyes open, and suffers neither 
the fear of anything on earth, nor the hope of 
any thing after it, to shut them. He succeeded 
accordingly ; got rid of some rivals by the dagger ; 
sent some to harangue in the dungeon; bribed, 
where money would answer his purpose ; menaced, 
where threats would be current coin ; and, by the 
practice of those natural means of rising in public 
affairs, became the hope of a faction. But on 



1B8 SALATHIEL. 

his glory there was one cloud — the prince of 
Naphtali !" 

I listened, all ear. I had deeply known the 
early hostility of Onias ; but his devices were too 
tortuous for me to trace, and, till the past night, 
I had lost sight of him for years. I asked what 
cause of bitterness existed between those per- 
sonages. 

**A multitude; as generally happens, where 
the imagination becomes a party, and the accuser 
is allowed to be the judge. The prince, in youth, 
and before he attained his rank, had the insolence 
to fall in love with the woman marked by Onias 
for his own. He had the additional insolence to 
attract her, and the completion of his crimes was 
marriage. Onias swore his ruin thenceforth. 
Public convulsions put off the promise ; and while 
he was driven to his last struggle to keep himself 
among the living, he had the indulgence of seeing 
the young husband shoot up without any trouble 
into rank, wealth, and renown." 

" But has not time blunted his hostility ?" 

*' Time, as the proverb goes, blunts nothing but 
a man's wit, his teeth, and his good intentions," 
said the knave, with a sneer on his grim visage. 
*' The next half is, that it sharpens wine, women, 



SALATHIEL, 139 

and wickedness. What Onias may have been 
doing of late, I can only guess ; but, unless he is 
changed by miracle, he has been dealing in every 
villanous contrivance from subornation to sorcery. 
I had my own affairs to mind. But, unless Satan 
owes him a grudge, he is now not far from his 
revenge." 

I thought of our meeting at the city gates ; and, 
alarmed at the chance of his discovering my family, 
asked, whether Onias had obtained any late know- 
ledge of his rival. 

*' Of that I know but little," said he ; " yet, 
quick as his revenge may be, unless my honest 
employer manages with more temper than usual, 
he will rue the hour when he set foot on the track 
of the prince of Naphtali. If ever man possessed 
the mastery of the spirits that our wizards pretend 
to raise, the prince is that man. I myself have 
hunted him for years ; yet he always baffled me. 
I have laid traps for him that nothing in human 
cunning could have escaped ; yet he broke through 
them, as if they were spiders' webs. I lured him 
by his domestics into the hands of the Romans ; 
and saw him sent to the thirstiest lover of blood 
that ever sat on a throne. Yet he came back ; 
aye, came from the very clutch of Nero. I mad- 
dened his friends against him ; and he contrived 



140 SALATHIEL. 

to escape even from the malice and madness of his 
friends: a matter which, you will own, is among 
the most memorable. I had him plunged into a 
dungeon; where I kept him alive, for certain 
reasons, while Onias was to be kept to his bargain 
by the prisoner's re-appearance. Yet he escaped; 
and my last intelligence of him is, that this master 
of fate and fortune is at this moment living in 
pomp at Jerusalem, the spot where I have been 
for the last month in close pursuit of him. Time, 
or some marvellous power, must have disguised 
him. And yet, if I were to meet the man this 
night—" 

" Look on me, slave !" I rose, and, grasping 
him by the throat, unsheathed my dagger. ''You 
have found him, and to your cost. Atrocious 
villain ! it is to you then that I owe so much 
misery. Make your peace with Heaven, if you 
can ; for it would be a crime to suffer you to leave 
this spot alive." 

He was dumb with terror. I held him with an 
iron grasp. The thought that if he escaped me, 
it must be only to let loose a murderer against 
my house, made me feel his death an act of jus- 
tice. 

"Let me go," he at last muttered; ** let me 
live ; I am not fit to die. In the name of that 



SALATHIEL. 141 

Lord whom you worship, spare me !" He fell at 
my feet, in desperate and howling supplication. — 
" You have not heard all ; I have abjured your 
enemy. Spare me, and I will swear to pass my 
days in the desert, a wanderer ; never to come 
again before the face of man ; to lie upon the rock 
— to live upon the weed — to drink of the pool — to 
macerate this miserable body, until I sink into the 
grave !" 

I paused, struck by the abject eagerness for life 
in a wretch self-condemned, and whose life was 
ready to be thus vowed to misery. While I held 
the dagger glittering before him, his senses con- 
tinued bound up by fear. He gazed on it with 
an eye that quivered with every quivering of the 
steel. With one hand he grasped my uplifted arm 
as he knelt, and with the other gathered his rags 
round his throat to cover it from the blow. His 
voice was lost in horrid gaspings ; his mouth was 
wide open and livid ; the hair of his head started 
up, and writhed with the deadly writhing of 
bis features. I sheathed the weapon, and his 
countenance instantly returned into its old hollow 
grimace. A ghastly smile grew upon it, as he 
drew from his bosom a small packet. 

** If you had put me to death," said the wretch, 
"you would have lost your best friend. This 



142 SALATHIEL. 

packet contains a correspondence for which Onias 
would give all that he is worth in the world ; and 
well he might ; for the man who has it in his hands, 
has his life. The world is made up of ingratitude. 
After all my services, slandering here, plundering 
there, hunting down his opponents in every di- 
rection, till they either put themselves out of the 
world, or he saved them the trouble ; he had the 
baseness to throw me off. At the head of his 
troops, when he felt himself secure, he flung me 
into scorn ; he kicked me from his horse's side ; 
nay, ordered me to be turned loose, as he said, 
'to carry my treachery to the Romans, if they 
should be fools enough to think me worth the hire.' 
I was watching my opportunity to enter Jerusalem, 
and stab him to the heart, when I was taken by 
some of the plunderers that hover round the camp ; 
was recognised as having done some things in my 
time too ingenious for vulgar conceptions ; and am 
probably to suffer, for the benefit of Roman mo- 
rality, as a robber and assassin, as soon as the 
legions shall have murdered every man, and robbed 
every house in Jerusalem." 

The packet contained a close correspondence of 
Onias with the Roman authorities. A sensation 
of triumph glowed through me, — I held the fate of 
my implacable enemy in my hand. I could now 



SALATHIEL. 143 

with a word strike to the earth the being whose 
artifices and cruelties had waylaid me through 
life ; the traitor to my country would perish by the 
same blow that avenged my own wrongs. '* The 
last hours of his culprit existence should be hours 
of that solemn and self-acknowledged retribution, 
which seals the triumph of justice !" 

My nature was made for violent passions. In 
love and hatred, in ambition, in scorn, in revenge, 
my original spirit knew no bounds. Time, sorrow, 
and the conviction of my own outcast state, soft- 
ened those powerful and hazardous impulses, and 
I found the value of adversity. Misfortune comes 
with healing on its wings to the burning temper of 
the heart, as the tempest comes to the arid soiL 
It tears up the surface, but softens it for the seeds 
of the nobler virtues ; in even its feeblest work, it 
cools the withering and devouring heat for a time. 
I had yet to find with what fatal rapidity the heart 
resumes its old, overwhelming passions. 

*' I spare your life," said T, " but on one con- 
dition — that you henceforth make Onias the 
perpetual object of your vigilance ; that you keep 
him from injury to me and mine ; and that, when 
I shall seize him at last, you shall be forthcoming 
to give public proof of his treachery." 



144 SALATHIEL. 

" This sounds well," said the Egyptian, as he 
cast his eyes round the lofty hall. *' But it would 
sound better, if we were not on this side of the 
gate. All the talking in the world will not lower 
those walls an inch, nor make that gate turn on its 
hinges ; though for that, and for every other too, 
there is one master-key. Happy was the time," and 
the fellow's sullen eye lighted up with the joy of 
knavery, '* when I could walk through every cabinet, 
closet, and cell, from the emperor's palace in Rome 
down to the emperor's dungeon in Cesarea." 

I produced a few coins, which I had contrived 
to conceal, and flung them into his clutch. The 
sum rekindled life in him ; avarice has its enthu- 
siasts, as well as superstition. He forgot danger, 
prison, and even my dagger, in the sight of his 
idol. He turned the coins to the light in all 
possible ways ; he tried them with his teeth ; he 
tasted, he kissed, he pressed them to his bosom. 
Never was lover at the feet of his mistress more 
rapturous, than this last of human beings, at the 
touch of money in the midst of wretchedness and 
ruin, with the chance of immediate death, and the 
certainty of desperate and solitary hazard, even if 
he should escape. His transports taught me a 
lesson ; and in that prison and from that slave of 



SALATHIEL. 145 

vice, I learned long to tremble at the power of 
gold over the human mind. 

It was past midnight, and the noise of the cri- 
minals round me had already sunk away. The floor 
was strewed with sleepers, and the only waking 
figure was the sentinel as he trod wearily along 
the passages ; when the Egyptian, desiring me to 
feign sleep, that his further operations might not 
be embarrassed, drew himself along the ground 
towards him. The soldier, a huge German, covered 
with beard and iron, and going his rounds with 
the insensibility of a machine, all but trod upon 
the Egyptian, who lay crouching and writhing be- 
fore him. I saw the spear lifted up, and heard a 
growl that made me think my envoy's career com- 
pletely at an end in this world. He still lay on 
the ground, writhing under the German's foot, as 
a serpent might under the paw of a lion. 

I was about to spring up, and interpose ; but his 
time was not yet come. The spear hung in air, 
gradually turned its point upwards, and finally re- 
sumed its seat of peace on the German's shoulder. 
That art of persuasion which speaks to the palm, 
and whose language is of all nations, had touched 
the son of Woden ; I heard the sound of the coin 
on the marble ; a few words arranged the details. 
The sentinel discovered that his vigilance was re- 

VOL. III. G 



146 SALATHIEL. 

quired in another direction ; broke off his cus- 
tomary round, and walked away. The Egyptian 
turned to me with a triumphant smile on his vil- 
lanous visage ; the gate rolled on its hinge ; and 
he slipped through like a shadow. 

On the instant, my mind misgave me. I had 
put the fate of my family into the hands of a slave, 
destitute of even the pretence of principle. In my 
eagerness to save, might I not have been delivering 
them up to their enemy ? He had sold Onias to 
me ; might he not make his peace by selling me 
to Onias? The gate was still open. The sentinel 
was gone to a distant part of the building. A few 
steps would put me beyond bondage. 

Yet, I had come to recover Esther. If I left 
the camp, what hope was there of my ever seeing 
this child of my heart again ? How could I enjoy 
liberty, while I thought that she was in Roman 
hands? would not every hour of my life be embit- 
tered by the chance that she might be suffering 
the miseries of a dungeon, or be borne away from 
every being that she loved into a strange land, 
or dying, and calling on me for help in vain ? 

Those contending impulses passed through my 
mind with the speed, and almost with the agony, 
of an arrow. But the more I thought of the 
Egyptian, the more I took his treachery for cer- 



SALATHIEL. 147 

tain. The present ruin of all predominated over 
the possible sufferings of one ; and with a heart 
throbbing almost to suffocation, and a step scarcely 
able to move, I dragged myself towards the portal. 



148 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER XII. 

But I was not to escape, and anticipate the 
traitor. As I touched the threshold, a loud sound 
of trampling feet and many voices drove me back. 
By that curious texture of the feelings which pre- 
fers suffering to suspense, I was almost glad to 
have the question decided for me by fortune, and 
flung myself on the ground among a heap of the 
undone, who lay enjoying a slumber that might be 
envied by princes. 

The gate was thrown open, and in burst a living 
mass of horror, — a multitude of beings in whom 
the human face and form were almost obliterated ; 
shapes gaunt with famine, black with dust, with- 
ered with deadly fatigue, and covered with gashes 
and gore. 
The war had gone on from cruelty to cruelty. To 



SALATHIEL. 149 

the Roman tbe Jew was a rebel, and he received 
a rebel's treatment ; to the Jew the Roman was 
a tyrant, and dearly was the price of his tyranny 
exacted. Quarter was seldom given on either 
side. The natural generosity of the son of Ves- 
pasian attempted for a while to soften the rigours 
of this furious system. But the slaughter of the 
mission exasperated him ; he declared the Jews a 
people incapable of faith, and proclaimed a war of 
extermination. 

The battle of the day had furnished the first 
opportunity of formal vengeance. The people, 
stimulated by the arrival and ambition of Onias, 
had made a desperate effort to force the Roman 
Knes. The attacks were reiterated with more than 
valour, with rage and madness ; the Jews fought 
with a disregard of life that appalled and had nearly 
overwhelmed even the Roman steadiness. The 
loss of the legions was formidable ; all their chief 
officers were wounded, many were killed. Titus 
himself, leading a column from the Decuman gate, 
was wounded by a blow from a sling; and the 
state of the ramparts, as I saw them at day-break, 
torn down in immense breaches, and filling up the 
ditch with their ruins, showed the imminent hazard 
of the whole army. Another hour of light would 
probably have been its ruin. But Judea would 



150 SALATHIEL. 

not have been the more secure ; for the factions, 
relieved from the presence of an enemy, would 
have torn each other to pieces. 

The loss of the Jews was so prodigious, as to be 
accounted for only by their eagerness to throw 
away life. Not less than a hundred thousand 
corpses lay between the camp and Jerusalem. No 
prisoners were taken ; and the crowd that now 
approached were the wounded, gathered off the 
field, to be crucified in atonement to the memory 
of the mission. 

The coming of those victims put an end to the 
possibility or the desire of sleep. The immense 
and gloomy hall, one of those in use for the stately 
banquets customary among the leaders of Jeru- 
salem, was suddenly a blaze of torches. The 
malefactors and captives were thrown together in 
heaps, guarded by a strong detachment of spear- 
men, that lined the sides, like ranges of iron 
statues overlooking the mixed and moving con- 
fusion of wretched life between. Guilt, sorrow, 
and shame, were there in their dreadful undis- 
guise. The roof rang to oaths and screams of pain, 
as the wounded tossed and rolled upon each other ; 
to bitter lamentation, and, more bitter still, to 
those self-accusing outcries that the near ap- 
proach of violent death sometimes furiously a- 



SALATHIEL. 151 

wakens in the most daring criminals. For, stern 
as the justice was, it still was justice; the Jewish 
character had fearfully changed. Rapine and 
bloodshed had become the habits of the populace ; 
and among the panting and quivering wretches 
before me, begging a moment of life, I recog- 
nised many a face, that seen in Jerusalem was the 
sign of plunder and massacre. 

Repulsive as my recollections were, I spent the 
greater part of the night in bandaging their wounds, 
and relieving the thirst which, scarcely less than 
their wounds, wrung them. There were women 
too among those wrecks of the sword ; and now 
that the frenzy of the day was passed, they exhi- 
bited a picture of the most heart-breaking dejection. 
Lying on the ground, with mutilated limbs, and 
every lineament of their former selves disfigured, 
they cried from that living grave alternately for 
vengeance and for mercy. Then, tearing their 
hair, and flinging it as their last mark of hatred 
and scorn at the legionaries, they devoted them to 
ruin in the name of the God of Israel. Then pas- 
sion would give way to pain or a sense of ruin, 
and in floods of tears they called on the names of 
parent, husband, and child, whom they were to 
see no more. 



1^ SALATHIEL. 

It was known that, at day-break, the prisoners 
were to die ; and the din of hammers, and the 
creaking of waggons bearing the crosses, broke 
the night with horrid intimation. At length, 
the stillness terribly told that all was prepared. 
The night, measured by moments, seemed endless, 
and many a longing was uttered for the dawn that 
was to put them out of their misery. Yet, when 
the first gray light fell through the casements, and 
the trumpet sounded for the escort to get under 
arms, nothing could exceed the fury and despair 
of the crowd. Some rushed upon the spears of 
the reluctant soldiery ; some bounded in mad 
antics through the hall ; others fell on their knees, 
and offered up horrid and shuddering prayers; 
many flung themselves upon the floor, and, in the 
paroxysm of wrath and fear, perished. 

Shocked and sickened by this misery, I withdrew 
from the gate, where the tumult was thickest, as 
the soldiery were already driving them out ; and 
returned to my old lair to await the stroke that 
was to fall upon myself. But I found it occupied. 
A circle were standing round a speaker, to whom 
they listened with singular attention. The voice 
caught my ear ; from the crowd round him I was 
unable to observe his features ; but, once drawn 



SALATHIEL, 153 

within the sound of his words, I shared the general 
interest in their extraordinary power. He was a 
preacher of the new religion. 

In my wanderings through Judea, it must be sup- 
posed that I had often met with those Nazarenes. 
Their doctrines had a vivid simplicity that might 
have attracted my attention as a philosopher ; but 
the delight of philosophy was cold to their power. 
The splendour and strength of their preaching 
realised the boldest traditions of oratory. Yet 
their triumph was not that of oratory. They dis- 
claimed all pretension to eloquence or literature ; 
declaring that, even if they possessed them, they 
dared not sully by human instruments of success 
the glory due to Heaven. They carried this self- 
denial to the singular extent of divulging every 
circumstance calculated to deprive themselves and 
their doctrines of human distinction. They openly 
acknowledged that they were of humble birth and 
occupation, unlearned, sinners like the rest of man- 
kind, and, in some instances, guilty of former ex- 
cesses of blind zeal, bigots, and persecutors of the 
new religion even to blood. 

Of their Master they spoke with the same open- 
ness. They told of his humble origin, his career 
of unpopularity and rejection, and his death by the 
punishment of a slave. To the scoffer at their 



154 SALATHIEL. 

hopes of a kingdom to be given by the sufferer of 
that ignominious death, they unhesitatingly an- 
swered, that their hope was founded expressly 
upon his death ; and that they lived and rejoiced 
in the expectation that they were to seal their 
faith with their blood. 

I had often seen enthusiasm among my country- 
men ; but this was a spirit of a distinct and loftier 
birth. It had the vigour of enthusiasm without 
its rashness ; the innocence of infancy with the 
wisdom of years ; the solemn reverence of the Jew 
for the divine will, free from his jealous and ex- 
clusive claim to the possession of the truth. The 
law and the prophets were perpetually in their 
hands ; and they perpetually embarrassed our in- 
dolent doctors and acrid pharisees with questions 
and interpretations, to which no reply could be 
returned but a sneer or an anathema. 

But, in the power of conviction, in the master 
art of striking through heart and understanding 
with sudden light, like the bolt from Heaven, I 
never heard, I never shall hear, their equals. To 
call it eloquence, were to humiliate this stupen- 
dous gift; the most practised skill of the rhetori- 
cian gave way before it like gossamer, like chaff 
before the whirlwind. It broke its way through 
sophistry by the mere weight of thought. It had 



SALATHIEL. 155 

a rapid abundance and reality that swept the 
hearer along. In its disdain of the mere decora- 
tions of speech, in the bold and naked nerve of its 
language, which the sickly sophist called uncouth- 
ness, there was an irresistible energy — the energy 
of the tempest giving proof, in its untameable and 
irregular rushings, of its descent from a region be- 
yond the reach of man. I never listened to one 
of these preachers but with the consciousness that 
he was the depository of mighty knowledge. He 
had the whole mystery of the human affections 
bare to his eye. Among a thousand hearts, one 
word sent conviction at the same instant. All their 
diversities of feeling, sorrow, and error, were sha- 
ken at once by that universal language. — It talked 
to the soul ! 

Of those overwhelming appeals, which often 
lasted for hours together, and to which I listened 
overwhelmed ; nothing is left to posterity but a 
few fragments, and those letters which the Chris- 
tians still preserve among their sacred writings, — 
great productions, and giving all the impression 
that it is possible to transmit to the future. But, 
the living voice, the illumined countenance, the 
frame glowing and instinct with inspiration! — 
what can transmit them ? 

*' Here," said I, as I often stood and heard their 



156 SALATH2EL. 

voices thundering over the multitude, ** here is the 
true power that is to shake the temples of heathen- 
ism. Here is a new element, come to overthrow, 
or renovate the world." I saw our holy law 
struggling" to keep itself in existence, compressed 
on every side by idolatry ; a little fountain feebly 
urging its way through its native rocks, but ex- 
hausted and dried up the moment it reached the 
plain. But here was an ocean, an inexhaustible 
depth and breadth of power, made to roll round 
the world, and be, at the will of Providence, the 
illimitable instrument of its bounty. I saw our holy 
law feebly sheltering under its despoiled and in- 
sulted ordinances the truth of Heaven. But here 
was a religion scorning a narrower temple than the 
earth and the heaven ! 

Yet I turned away from those convictions. A 
thousand times I was on the point of throwing 
myself at the feet of the men who bore this tran- 
scendent gift, and asking, "What shall I do to be 
saved 1" A thousand times I could have cried out, 
*' Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian." 
But my doubting heart ! I make no attempt to 
account for myself, or my career ; — I have felt as 
strongly drawn back, as if there were an actual 
hand forcing me away. — The illusion was a willing 
one, and it was suffered, like all such, to hold me 



SALATHIEL. 157 

in its captivity. — But, even when I walked away, 
I have said, " Whence had those men this knov\r- 
ledge I If angels from God were to come down 
to reclaim the world, could they tell us things dif- 
ferent, or tell us more!" 

I looked round upon the labours of ancient wis- 
dom ; and I saw how trivial a space its utmost 
vigour had cleared, and how soon even that space 
was overrun by the rankness of the world ; and I 
said, " Here is the central fire, the mighty reser- 
voir of light, awaiting but the divine command, to 
burst up in splendour, consume the impurities of 
the world at once, and regenerate mankind." 

But the veil was upon my face. I laboured 
against conviction ; and, shutting out the subject 
from my thoughts, sternly determined to live and 
die in the faith of my fathers. 

I heard but the few and simple closing words of 
the speaker in this group of the devoted. He was 
sorrowful that the gospel had been so long com- 
mitted to his hands in vain. He had, through fear 
of his own inadequacy to the task of converting his 
brethren, and in remaining deference to their pre- 
judices, suffered the truth to decay; and seen the 
illustrious labours of the apostles without follow- 
ing their example. " But," said he, " I was re- 
buked ; the opportunity once neglected, was re- 



158 SALATHIEL. ^ 

fused even to my prayers. I was thenceforth ill 
perils, in civil war, in domestic sedition. I am but 
now come from a dungeon. But, in my bonds, it 
pleased Him in whose hand are the corners of the 
heavens, to visit me. I knelt and prayed, acknow- 
ledging my sin, and beseeching him by the mercies 
of the Lord, that, before I died, I might proclaim 
his holy truth before Israel. In that hour came 
a voice bidding me go forth ; and, lo ! my chains 
fell from my hands, and I went forth. And when 
I came to the gates of the dungeon, I willed to go 
forward to the city of David. But I was for- 
bidden ; and my steps were turned here to awake 
my brethren to knowledge before they perish." 

The trumpets rang again, as a new crowd were 
drained off to execution. My heart sank at the 
melancholy sound ; but among the converts there 
was not a murmur. ** Kneel," said the preacher ; 
" the hour is come. Let us give thanks unto the 
Lord." They knelt, and he poured out his spirit 
aloud in prayer. 

"Now go forth," he said, rising alone; "go 
forth, redeemed of the Lord. This night have ye 
known that he is gracious. Those things that 
God before hath showed by the mouth of all his 
prophets that Christ should suffer, he hath ful- 
filled. But ye have heard, but ye have been con- 



SALATHIEL. 159 

verted, that your sins may be blotted out when 
the times of refreshing shall come from the pre- 
sence of the Lord. But ye have been called — but 
ye have been justified — but ye shall be glorified. 
Our hope of you is steadfast ; knowing that, as 
you have been partakers of his cross, so shall ye 
be of his kingdom. Now be grace unto you, and 
peace from the Lord !" 

He laid his hands upon the kneeling martyrs, 
and went slowly round, blessing them. His face 
had been hitherto turned from me ; and I was too 
much impressed by his words, and the awful cir- 
cumstances in which he stood, to even conjecture 
who he w^as. But in moving round, he came 
before me. To my inexpressible surprise and 
alarm, tlie teacher was Eleazar. I had lost every 
trace of him since we parted in the fortress, and, 
with sorrow of heart, had concluded him a sacri- 
fice to the common atrocities practised in our fero- 
cious war. 

His long absence was now^ explained. But no 
explanation could account for the extraordinary 
change that had been wrought upon his counte- 
nance and mind. Always generous and manly, 
the softness of a nature made for domestic life had 
concealed the vigour of his understanding. He 
was the general reconciler in the disputes of the 



160 SALATHIEL. 

neighbouring districts — the impartial judge— the 
unwearied friend; and his features wore the stamp 
of this quiet career. But the man before me bore 
uncontrollable energy in every tone and feature. 
The failing flame of the torch that burned over 
his head, was enough to show the transformation 
of his countenance into force and grandeur ; his 
glance was a living fire : the hair that floated over 
it, changed by captivity to the whiteness of snow, 
shaded a forehead that seemed to have suddenly 
expanded into majesty. If I had met with such 
a man in a desert, I should have augured in him 
the founder or the subverter of a throne. 

While I stood absolutely awed by his presence, 
the gates were thrown open, and a strong detach- 
ment of spearmen poured in to gather up the 
gleanings of the hall. Then was renewed the 
scene of misery. The prisoners struggled furiously 
against the horrid death that was now certain. 
Their rage and imprecations were answered by 
the blows and curses of the soldiery. Wretches, 
that I had thought dead, started from the ground, 
and flung themselves at their feet ; or rushed 
against the armed ranks, tore the weapons out of 
their hands, and broke them in mad triumph 
through the hall ; or turned them against the 
shields and cuirasses with the force of frenzy. 



SALATHIEL. 161 

Others dashed their foreheads against the walls 
and floor, and died upon the spot. Others sprang 
up the projections of the sculpture, and climbed 
with the agility of leopards to the roof to force 
the casements. But additional troops poured in ; 
and the crowd were overwhelmed, and driven out 
to undergo their destiny. 

During this long tumult the Christian converts 
continued kneeling, and evidently absorbed by 
thoughts that extinguished fear. Even the sounds 
from without, that terribly told what was going 
on, and every tone of which pierced me to the 
marrow, produced only a deeper supplication that 
light would be given to the souls of the suflferers. 
This patience probably induced the soldiery to 
leave them to the last, while they drove out the 
more untractable at the point of the spear, like 
cattle to the slaughter. I still stood aloof. The 
sacredness of the moments that came before death 
were not to be interrupted. The transformed 
Eleazar had already passed away from the things 
of this world. I would not force them on him 
again, nor vainly and cruelly disturb the holy 
serenity of one at peace alike with man and 
Heaven. At length the order came. " Now, my 
beloved brothers, beloved in the Lord, go forth," 
said Eleazar, with a noble exultation glowing in 



162 SALATHIEL. 

his countenance. " Quit ye like men; be strong ; 
fear not them who can kill only the body. Even 
this night saw you still in your sins — the wisdom 
that was before all worlds, hidden from you — 
without a Saviour. But he that calleth light out 
of darkness, hath wrought in you. The ear of the 
Lord has not been heavy, that he should not hear ; 
his hand has not been straitened. He has poured 
upon you that Spirit which is an earnest of your 
inheritance, holy, incorruptible, eternal in the 
heavens. Now, sons of Abraham, redeemed of 
Christ, kings and priests of God for ever ; go, 
where he is gone to prepare a place for you. Go, 
to the house of many mansions. Go, to the king- 
dom of glory ! " 

With tears and blessings, Eleazar took water, 
and baptized the converts. They sang a hymn, 
and then rising, moved towards the gate ; the 
soldiers standing at a distance, and looking on at 
this more than heroic resignation with eyes of 
respect and wonder. 

But I could restrain myself no longer. I 
stopped Eleazar : he instantly recognised me ; and 
the colour that shot through his cheek showed 
that with me came a tide of memory. I was 
speechless ; I embraced him : tears of old friend- 
ship dimmed my eyes. He was overpowered like 



SALATHIEL* 163 

myself j and could only exclaim — ** Salathiel ! my 
brother, — what misfortune has brought you here I 
— But you are not to die I — "Where is Miriam, — 
where are your children ? — You cannot be a pri- 
soner ? — Fly from this dreadful place." 

*' Never, my brother; unless I can save you. — 
The tyrants shall have the blood of both upon 
their heads." 

" This is madness, Salathiel — impiety ! Oh that 
you were this moment even as I am ! — in all but 
death. — It is your duty to live; you have many 
ties to the world. What have I ? or what service 
can I do to the world, equal to that of showing in 
what peace a follower of my Lord and Master can 
die ? Again, I say, oh that you were at this mo- 
ment awake to the truths, the holy and imperish- 
able consolations, that make the cross to me more 
triumphant than a throne ! " 

The theme was a painful one. He instantly 
saw my perturbation, and forbore to urge me. But 
fixing his humid eyes on heaven, and with uplifted 
hands, he gave me his parting benediction. *' May 
the time come," said he, '* when the veil shall be 
taken away from the face of my unhappy kindred, 
and of my undone country ! When the days of the 
desolation of Israel come to be accomplished, let 
her kneel before the altar ! — let her weep in sack- 



164 SALATHIEL. 

doth, and repent of her iniquities ; so shall the sun 
of glory arise upon her once more." Then, as if a 
flash of knowledge had darted into his soul, he 
fixed his solemn gaze on me. " Salathiel, you are 
not fit to die ; pray that you may not now sink 
into the grave. You have fierce impulses, untamed 
passions, of whose power you have yet no concep- 
tion. Supplicate for length of years ; rather en- 
dure all the miseries of exile ; be alone upon the 
earth — weary, wild, and desolate : but pray that 
you may not die, until you know the truths that 
Israel yet shall know. Let it be for me to die, 
and seal my faith by my blood. Let it be for you 
to live, and seal it by your penitence. But live 
in hope. Even on earth, a day bright beyond 
earthly splendour ; lovely beyond all the visions 
of beauty ; magnificent and powerful beyond the 
loftiest thought of human nature, shall come ; and 
we, even we, my Ibrother, shall on earth meet 
again." 



SALATHIEL. 165 



CHAPTER XIII. 

There was a thrilling influence in the words 
of Eleazar, that left me without reply ; and for a 
while I stood absorbed. When I raised my eyes 
again, I saw him following the melancholy train 
down the valley of slaughter. I rushed after him. 
He would not listen to my entreaties ; he would 
suffer no ransom to be offered for his life. I sup- 
plicated the tribune of the escort for a moment's 
delay, until I could solicit mercy from Titus. The 
officer, himself deeply pained by the service on 
which he was ordered, had no authority, but sent 
a centurion with me to the general commanding. 

I hurried my guide through the immense force 
drawn out to witness the offering to the shades of 
the Roman senators and soldiers. The morning 



166 SALATHIEL. 

was stormy ; and driving clouds covering the 
ridges of the hills, darkened the feeble dawn so 
much, that torches were necessary to direct the 
movement of the troops. The wind came howling 
through the spears and standards ; but with it 
came the fiercer sounds of human agony. As we 
reached the entrance of the valley, the centurion 
pointed to the height where the general stood, in 
the midst of a group of mounted officers wrapped 
in their cloaks, against the sleet that came furi- 
ously whirling from the hills. 

I darted up the steep with a rapidity that left 
my companion far below ; and implored the Roman 
humanity for my countrymen, and for my noble 
and innocent brother. On my knee, on the knee 
that I had never before bowed to man, I besought 
the illustrious son of Vespasian to spare men 
'* whose only crime was that of having defended 
their country." I adjured the heir of the empire 
" to rescue from an ignominious fate, subjects 
driven into revolt only by violences, which he 
would be the first to disown." *' If," said I, "you 
demand money for the lives of my countrymen, it 
shall be given even to our last ounce of silver : if 
you would have territory, we will give up our 
lands, and go forth exiles. If you must have life 
for life, take mine, and let my brother go free ! " 



SALATHIEL. 167 

The general slowly removed the cloak which 
covered him to the eyes ; and Cestius was before 
me. *' So," said he, with a malignant smile, " you 
can kneel, Jew, and play the rhetorician : however, 
as you are here, your having escaped me once is 
no reason why you should laugh at justice a second 
time. Here, Torquatus," he beckoned to an 
officer, "take this rebel to the crosses; and bring 
me an account of the way in which he behaves. 
You see, Jew, that I have some care of your re- 
putation. A fellow, careless as you are, would 
probably have died in some paltry skirmish ; but 
you shall now figure before your countrymen as a 
patriot should, and die with the honours of a native 
hero." 

I disdained to answer. The officer came up, at- 
tended by some spearmen ^ and I was led to the 
valley. A snow-storm of extraordinary violence, 
long gathering on the sky, broke forth as I de- 
scended, and it was only by grasping the rocks and 
shrubs on the side of the declivity that we could 
avoid being blown away. We staggered along, 
blinded and half- frozen. The storm fell heavily 
upon the legions, and the heights were quickly 
abandoned for the shelter of the valley. The valley 
itself was a sheet of snow, torn up by fierce blasts 



168 SALATHIEL. 

that drifted it hazardously upon the troops, and 
threw every thing into confusion. 

But the sight that opened on me as I passed the 
first gorge, effaced storm and soldiery, and might 
have effaced the world, from my mind. Through 
the whole extent of the huge, naked and rocky 
hollow, were planted crosses. The ravine, dark 
even in sun-shine, was now black as midnight; 
and its only light was from the scattered torches, 
and the fires into which the bodies of the victims 
were flung as they died, to make room for others. 
On those crosses hung hundreds, writhing in mi- 
series, made only to show the hideous capability of 
suffering that exists in our frame. I was instantly 
recognised, and many a hand was stretched out to 
me, imploring that I should mercifully hasten 
death. I heard my name called on, as their prince, 
their leader, their countryman, to remember and 
revenge. Incensed and horror-struck, I raved at 
the legionaries and their tyrant master ; until I 
sank upon the ground in exhaustion, covering my 
head with my mantle, that I might exclude alike 
sight and sound. 

A voice at my side aroused me; a cross had just 
been fixed on the spot, and at its foot stood, prepar- 
ing for death, the man who had spoken. I looked 



SALATHIEL. 169 

upon his face, and gave an involuntary crj^ For 
seven-and-thirty years I had not seen that face ; 
but I had seen it on a night never to be erased 
from my remembrance, or my soul. I knew every 
feature of it through all the changes of years. 

IManhood had passed into age ; the bold and san- 
guine countenance was furrowed with cares and 
crimes. But I knew at once the man who had on 
that night been foremost at my call ; the daring 
rabble leader, who had first shouted at my fatal 
summons ; and maddened the multitude, as 1 had 
maddened myself and him. He turned his glance 
upon me at the cry. His pale visage grew black 
as death. The past flashed upon his soul. He 
shook from head to foot with keen convulsion. 
He gasped, and tried to speak ; but no words 
came. He beat his breast wildly, and pointed to 
the cross with dreadful meaning. The executioner, 
a brutal slave, scoffed at him as a dastard. He 
heard nothing ; but with his pallid eyes staring on 
me, and his hand pointed upwards, stood stiffen- 
ing. Life departed as he stood ! The executioner, 
impatient, laid his grasp upon him ; but he was 
beyond the power of man. He fell backward like 
a pillar of stone. 

I started from the corpse, and, utterly unnerved, 
VOL. III. H 



170 SALATHIEL. 

looked wildly round for some way of escape from 
this scene of despair. As I tried to penetrate the 
dusk towards the bottom of the valley, Eleazar 
was seen at the head of his little band, standing 
at the foot of a cross, surrounded by soldiers. I 
thought no more of safety; and, plunging into the 
valley, forced my way through the rocks and 
snow-drifts, till I reached the foot of the declivity 
on which this true hero was about to die. But 
there an impenetrable fence of spears stopped me. 
I implored, execrated, struggled; Eleazar's eye 
fell on me ; and the smile on his uplifted counte- 
nance showed at once how much he thanked me, 
and how calmly he was prepared to bid the world 
farewell. My struggles were useless, and 1 had 
but one resource more. 

I flew, with a swiftness that baffled pursuit^ to 
the camp; passed the intrenchments by the 
breaches left since the battle ; and before I could 
be stopped or questioned, entered the tent of 
Titus. 

The supper lamps were burning, and three 
stately-looking men still lingered over the table, 
one of the few unpopular luxuries of the general. 
A large packet of letters were being distributed 
by a page ; and, while I stood in the shade of the 



S A LATHI EL. 171 

tent-curtain a moment until I should ascertain 
whether Titus was among the three, I was made 
the unwilling sharer of the secrets of Rome. 

'* All is going on well," said one of the readers. 
** Here, that truest of courtiers, my showy friend 
Statilius, sends, compiled by his own hand, an 
endless list of the pomps and processions, games 
and congratulations, in the Emperor's progress 
through Italy. The intelligence is not the newest 
in the world. But it would break my courtly 
friend's heart to think that he had not the happi- 
ness of giving it first. So let him think, and so 
let him worship the rising sun, until another 
dynasty comes, and he discovers that if this sun 
have risen in the east, a much finer one may rise in 
the west. Thus runs the world." 

''War with the Britons," read anether. •'* They 
have marched a hundred of their naked clans from 
the hills. The remnant of the Druids are busy 
again with their incantations ; and it is more than 
suspected that the whole is stirred up by our in- 
comparable governor of western Gaul, who affects 
the diadem, like all the ridiculous governors of the 
age." 

"Well, then, he shall have his wish," said a 
third. ** The Emperor will give him, of course, 
a court fit for a rebel : his council, lictors ; and 



172 SALATHIEL. 

his palace, a dungeon in the Mamertine. But, as 
to the Britons, I doubt their caring one of their 
own leather pence whether he wears the diadem 
or the halter. The savages have probably been 
vexed by some new attempt to squeeze money 
from them — the quickest way to try the national 
sensibilities. They have the spirit of trade in 
them already, and are as keen in the barter of 
their wolf-skins and bulls-hides, as if they sup- 
plied the world with Tyrian canopies and Indian 
pearls." 

"A letter from Sempronius ! — By Venus, its 
exquisite intaglio and elaborate perfumes would 
betray it all the world over ; full of scandals, as 
usual, and full of discontent. He seems quite 
dismantled ; and complains that — the sex are 
growing ugly, the seasons comfortless, and man- 
kind dull ; a certain sign that my emptiest of 
friends, and the best dresser in Italy, is growing 
old." 

*' So much the better for his circle. As for 
himself, while he can flourish in curls and calumny, 
he will be happy, the true man of high life, a prey 
to tailors, a figure for actors to burlesque, and an 
inveterate weariness to the world." 

** But here is a despatch from the Emperor, 
and, unfortunately for human eyes, written in his 



SALATHIEL. 173 

own most unreadable hand." The speaker stood 
up to the lamp, and gave me an opportunity of ob- 
serving him. His countenance and figure struck 
me, as what no other word could express than — 
princely. The features were handsome, and strongly 
marked Italian ; and the form, though tending to 
breadth, and rather under the usual stature, was 
eminently dignified. His voice too was remark- 
able. I never heard one that more completely 
united softness and majesty. 

Here I could have but the shadow of a doubt 
that I had found Titus ; yet I had that shadow. 
Our meeting in the field, where we had fought 
hand to hand, gave me no recollection of the man 
before me. Titus might not even be among the 
three ; and nothing but seizure and ruin could be 
the consequence of discovering myself to subordi- 
nates. 

" Good news, it is to be hoped," said both the 
listeners together, as they deferentially watched 
his perusal. 

** None whatever ; a mere private chronicle, in 
the Emperor's usual style ; all kinds of oddities 
together. He laughs at me for complaining of 
want of intelligence from Rome, and says that, 
unless we send him some, the politicians of the 
city will die of emptiness, or raise a rebellion; 



174 SALATHIEL. 

and that he is the most ill-used personage in the 
empire, in being" obliged to supply brains for so 
many blockheads, and keep up the reputation of 
an honest man, in the midst of so many knaves. 
But he mentions, and for that I am deeply grateful, 
that he has just erected the golden statue, which 
I vowed so long ago to the memory of my unfor- 
tuniate friend Britannicus ; and is about to dedicate 
an ivory equestrian one to him, to be placed in the 
Circus. He concludes the epistle with saying that, 
unless the British insurrection speedily blows over, 
he shall be a beggar, and must turn tribune for a 
livelihood ; defends his impracticable manuscript, 
which, he says, I am imitating as fast as I can ; and 
repeats his old jest, that — if I were not born to be 
a prince and an idler, I might have made my bread 
by my talents for forgery." His hearers repaid 
the imperial merriment by its full tribute of loyal 
laughter. 

Doubt was now at an end, and I advanced. 
My step roused the party, and they started up, 
drawing their swords. But the quick eye of Titus 
recognised me ; and satisfying his companions by 
a gesture, I heard him pronounce to them; *'My 
antagonist, the Prince of Naphtali." There was 
no time for ceremony ; and I addressed him at 
once. 



SALATHIEL. 175 

" Son of Vespasian, you are a soldier, and know 
what is due to the brave. I come to solicit your 
mercy ; it is the first time that I ever stooped to 
solicit man. My brother, a chieftain of Israel, is 
in your hands, condemned to the horrid death of 
the cross ; he is virtuous, brave, and noble ; save him, 
and you will do an act of justice more honourable 
to your name than the bloodiest victory." 

Titus looked at me in silence, and evidently 
perplexed ; then returned to his chair, and having 
consulted with his companions, hesitatingly pro- 
nounced : " Prince, you know not what you have 
asked. I am bound, like others, by the Emperor's 
commands ; and they strictly are, that none of 
your countrymen, taken after the offer of peace, 
must live." 

'' Hear this, God of Israel !" I cried. " King 
of vengeance, hear and remember !" 

" You are rash, prince," said Titus, gravely ; 
" yet I can forgive your national temper. With 
others, even your venturing here might bring you 
into hazard. But the perfidy of your people 
makes truce and treaty impossible. They leave 
me no alternative. I lament the necessity. It is 
the desire of the illustrious Vespasian to reign in 
peace. But this is now at an end." 

He paused, and, advancing towards me, offered 



176 SALATHIEL. 

his haod, with the words, " I know that there are 
brave and high-minded men among your nation. 
I have been astonished at the valour, nay, I will 
call it, the daring and heroic contempt of suffering 
and death, that this siege has already shown. I 
have been witness too," and he smiled, ** of the 
prince of Naphtali's prowess in the field, and I 
would most willingly have such among my 
friends." — I waited for the conclusion. ** Why 
not come among us," said he; *' give up a resist- 
ance that must end in ruin ; abandon a cause that 
all the world sees to be desperate ; save yourself 
from popular caprice, the violence of your ran- 
corous factions, and the final fall of your city? — 
Be Caesar's friend ; and name what life, posses- 
sion, or employ, you will." 

The thought of deserting the cause of Jerusalem 
was profanation. I drew back, and looked at the 
majestic Roman, as if T saw the original tempter 
at my side. 

** Son of Vespasian, I am at this hour a poor 
man ; as I may in the next be an exile or a slave. 
I have ties to life as strong as ever were bound 
round the heart of man ; I stand here a suppliant 
for the life of one whose loss would embitter mine ! 
Yet, not for wealth unlimited, for the safety of my 
family, for the life of the noble victim that is now 



SALATHIEL. 177 

standing at the place of torture, dare I abandon, 
dare I think the impious thought of abandoning, 
the cause of the City of Holiness." 

The picture of her ruin rose before my eyes, 
and tears forced their way ; my strength was dis- 
solved ; my voice was choked. The Romans fixed 
their looks on the ground, affected by the sin- 
cerity of a soldier's sorrow. I took the hand, that 
was again offered. 

" Titus ! in the name of that Being to whom 
the wisdom of the earth is folly, I adjure you to 
beware. Jerusalem is sacred. Her crimes have 
often wrought her misery — often has she been 
trampled by the armies of the stranger. But she 
is still the City of the Omnipotent ; and never was 
blow inflicted on her by man, that was not terribly 
repaid. 

" The Assyrian came, the mightiest power of 
the world ; he plundered her temple, and led 
her people into captivity. How long was it before 
his empire was a dream, his dynasty extinguished 
in blood, and an enemy on his throne ? — The Per- 
sian came ; from her protector, he turned into her 
oppressor; and his empire was swept away like 
the dust of the desert! — The Syrian smote her: 
the smiter died in agonies of remorse ; and where 
is his kingdom now ?— The Egyptian smote her 5 



178 SALATHIEL. 

and who now sits on the throne of the Ptolemies ? 
— Pompey came ; the invincible, the conqueror of 
a thousand cities ; the light of Rome ; the lord of 
Asia, riding on the very wings of victory. But 
he profaned her Temple ; and from that hour he 
w^ent down — down, like a mill-stone plunged into 
the ocean ! Blind counsel, rash ambition, womanish 
fears, were upon the great statesman and warrior 
of Rome. Where does he sleep ? What sands 
were coloured with his blood? The universal 
conqueror died a slave, by the hands of a slave ! — 
Crassus came at the head of the legions ; he plun- 
dered the sacred vessels of the sanctuary. Ven- 
geance followed him, and he was cursed by the 
curse of God. Where are the bones of the robber 
and his host? Go, tear them from the jaws of the 
lion and the wolf of Partbia, — their fitting tomb ! 

" You, too, son of Vespasian, may be commis- 
sioned for the punishment of a stiff-necked and 
rebellious people. You may scourge our naked 
vice by the force of arms ; and then you may re- 
turn to your own land exulting in the conquest 
of the fiercest enemy of Rome. But shall you 
escape the common fate of the instrument of evil ? 
— shall you see a peaceful old age ? — shall a son 
of yours ever sit upon the throne? — shall not 
rather some monster of your blood efface the me- 



SALATHIEL. 179 

mory of your virtues, and make Rome, in bit- 
terness of soul, curse the Flavian name ?" 

Titus grew pale ; and shuddering", covered his 
eyes with his mantle, as he sat. His companions 
stood gazing on me with the awed aspect of men 
gazing on the messenger of fate. ** Spare Elea- 
zar," was all that I could utter. Titus made a 
sign to the page ; who flew to bear, if not too late, 
the orders of mercy. 

While we continued in a silence that none of us 
felt inclined to break, a door opened behind me, 
and an officer entered. It was Septimius. I seized 
him by the throat : " Villain ! give me back my 
child ; base hypocrite ! give up my innocent daugh- 
ter. Where have you taken her ? lead me to her, 
or die." 

Titus rose in evident surprise and indignation. 
" What do I hear, Septimius? have you been 
guilty of this offence ? Prince, let him loose ; until 
his general shall hear what he has to say for him- 
self." 

Septimius affected the most extreme and easy 
ignorance. *' Most noble Titus, I have to thank 
you for having saved my neck from the grasp of 
this hasty personage ; but, beyond that, I have 
nothing to say for myself, or any one else. — I never 
saw this man before.— I know no more of his 



180 SALATHIEL. 

daughter than of the queen of Abyssmia, or the 
three-formed Diana ; and, by the goddess I swear 
that I believe him to be perfectly under her influ- 
ence ; and either a lunatic, or a most excellent ac- 
tor. Be honest, Jew, if you can ; and acknow- 
ledge that you never saw me before in your life." 

I stood in astonishment ; his effrontery struck 
me dumb. " You perceive, most noble Titus," 
he went on, '' how a plain question puts an end to 
this public accuser's charges. But, in his present 
state, whether affected or real, he should not be 
suffered to go at large : suffer me to send him to 
my quarters, where he shall be taken sufficient 
care of, until we at least find out what brought 
him here." 

*' Ingrate," I exclaimed, *' you make me hate 
human nature ; is this my return I Better that I 
had left you to be trampled like the viper that you 
are." 

The dark eye of the general fixed on Septimius, 
seemed to require a graver explanation. 

" Ingrate," retorted he. " By Jupiter, the fel- 
low's insolence is superb. For what should I be 
grateful? but for my escape from his detestable 
hands ; or, perhaps, he means those of his country- 
men. Very probably he figured among the rabble 
that would have murdered me, as they did the rest 



SALATHIEL. 181 

of US : — grateful, yes, I ought to be, for an exhibi- 
tion of human villanv, that I misfht search the 
world through without seeing again ; or, for the 
lesson, never to venture within his walls on the 
faith of the traitors that hold them. — But, let me 
be allowed to say, most noble Titus, that you con- 
descend too much in listening to any of this rabble ; 
nay, that you hazard the safety of the state in 
hazarding your person within the reach of one of 
a race of assassins." 

Titus smiled ; and waved back his companions, 
who, on the surmise, were approaching him. 

** Let me be honoured with your commands," 
urged Septimius, " to take this person in charge; 
felon or insane, I shall speedily put him in the 
way of cure." 

A tribune, breathless with haste, came in at the 
moment with a letter, which he gave to Titus ; and 
retired to a distant part of the tent to await the 
answer. The colour rose into the Roman's cheek, 
as he looked over the paper ; he showed it to his 
companions, and then put it into my hand. I read 
the words — 

" An assassin, hired by the chiefs of Jerusalem, 
yesterday passed the gates. His object is the life 
of the Roman general. He goes under pretence 
of recovering one of his family supposed to be car- 



182 SALATHIEL. 

ried off from the city, but who has never left his 
house. He has communications with the camp, 
by which he can enter at pleasure ; and the noble 
Titus cannot be too much on his guard." 

The note was in an enclosure from Cestius, 
stating that it had been just transmitted to him 
from a high authority in Jerusalem. 

I flung it on the ground, with the scorn due to 
such an accusation, declaring, that it was unne- 
cessary for ** my enemy Cestius to have put his 
name to a document which so easily revealed its 
writer." 

" You, of course, Septimius," said the general, 
settling his penetrating gaze on him, *' could know 
nothing of this letter V 

Septimius entered on his defence with serious- 
ness ; and showed that, from the time and circum- 
stances, no share in it could be attached to him. 
Titus retired a few steps, and having consulted 
with the officers, who I perceived were unanimous 
for my being instantly put to death, addressed me 
in that grave and silver-toned voice, which charac- 
terized the singular composure of his nature. 

" We have exchanged blows, and pledges of 
honour, prince ; and I will not suffer myself to 
believe that a man of your rank and soldiership 
could stoop to the crime charged here. In truth, 



SALATHIEL. 183 

were none but personal considerations to be in 
question, I should instantly set you free. But 
there are weighty interests connected with my life, 
which make it seem fitting to my friends and ad- 
visers, that, in all cases, precautions should be 
taken, which otherwise I should disdain. To 
satisfy their minds, and the spirit of the Emperor's 
orders, I must detain you for a few days. Your 
treatment shall be honourable." 

Septimius advanced to again demand my cus- 
tody ; but a look repelled the remiest, and I 
was directed to follow one of the secretaries of 
Titus. 



184 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER XIV. 



A TROOP of cavalry were at the tent door. We 
set off through the storm ; and, a few miles from 
the camp, reached a large building, peopled with 
a host of high functionaries, attached to Titus, as 
governor of Judea. 

" You are a prodigious favourite with the ge- 
neral," said my companion, as we passed through 
a range of magnificent rooms furnished with Ita- 
lian luxury; '* or he would never have sent you 
here. He had these chambers furnished for his 
own residence, but your countrymen have kept 
him too busy ; and for the last month he is in- 
debted to you for sleeping under canvas." 

I observed, that " peace was the first wish of 



SALATHIEL. 185 

my heart; but that no people could be reproached 
with contending' too boldly for freedom." 

" The sentiment is Roman," was the reply. 
*' But let us come to the fact. Titus, once fixed 
in the government, would be worth all the fantasies 
that ever fed the declaimers on independence. 
His character is peace ; and if he ever comes to 
the empire, he will make the first of monarchs. 
You should try him, and reap the first fruits of his 
talent for making people happy. There ; look 
round this room : you see every panel hung with 
a picture, a lyre, or a volume ; what does that 
tell?" 

" Certainly not the habits of a soldier ; yet he 
is distinguished in the field." 

" No man more. There is not a rider in the 
legions that can sit a horse, or manage a lance 
better. He has the talents of a general besides ; 
and more than all, he has the most iron perse- 
verance that ever dwelt in the bosom of man. If 
the two armies were to slaughter each other until 
there was but half a dozen spearmen left between 
them, Titus would head his remnant, and battle 
it out till he died. But whether it is nature, or 
the poison that he drank with Britannicus, he 
wants the eternal vividness of his father. Aye, 
there was the soldier for the legions. Look, prince. 



186 SALATHIEL. 

at this picture, and tell me what you think of the 
countenance." 

He drew aside a curtain that covered a superb 
equestrian portrait of the Emperor. 

I saw a countenance of incomparable shrewd- 
ness, eccentricity, and self-enjoyment. Every 
feature told the same tale ; from the rounded and 
dimpled chin to the broad and deeply veined fore- 
head, overhung with its rough mat of hair. The 
hooked nose, the deep wrinkles about the lips, the 
thick dark eyebrow, obliquely raised, as if some 
new jest was gathering, showed the perpetual 
humourist. But the eye beneath that brow, — 
an orb black as charcoal, with a spot of intense 
brightness in the centre, as if a breath could turn 
that coal into flame,— belonged to the supreme 
sagacity and determination that had raised Vespa- 
sian from a cottage to the throne. 

The secretary, whose jovial character strongly 
resembled that of the object of his panegyric, 
could not restrain his admiration. " There," said 
he, " is the man who has fought more battles, said 
more good things, and taken less physic, than any 
emperor that ever wore the diadem. I served 
with him from decurion up to tribune; and he 
was always the same, active, brave, and laughing 
from morn till night. Old as he is, day-light 



SALATHIEL. 187 

never finds him in his bed. He rides, swims, runs, 
outjests every body ; and frowns at nothing on 
earth, but an old woman and a physician. He 
loves money, 'tis true ; but what he squeezes from 
the overgrown, he scatters like a prince. But his 
mirth is inexhaustible ; a little rough, so much for 
his camp education ; but the most curious mixture 
of justice, spleen, and pleasantry in the world." 
My companion's memory teemed with examples. 

— ** An Alexandrian governor was ordered to 
Rome to account for a long course of extortion : 
immediately on his arrival he pretended to be taken 
violently ill ; which of course put off the inquiry. 
The Emperor heard of this ; expressed the greatest 
interest in so meritorious a public servant ; paid 
him a visit the next day as a physician ; ordered 
him a variety of medicines, which the unfortunate 
governor was compelled to take ; renewed his visit 
regularly every day, and every day charged him an 
enormous fee. Beggary stared the governor in 
the face ; and never was a complication of disorders 
so rapidly cured. 

— " I was riding out with him one day, a few 
miles from Rome, when we saw a fellow beating 
his mule cruelly ; and, on being called to, insisting 
on his right to * do what he would with his own.' 
I was indignant, and would have fought the mule's 



188 SALATHIEL. 

quarrel. But the Emperor laughed at my zeal ; 
and after some jesting with the brutal owner, 
bought the mule, only annexing the condition, that 
the fellow should lead it to the stable : — he actu- 
ally sent him with the mule two hundred and fifty 
miles, on foot, to one of his palaces in Gaul, with 
a lictor after him, to see that the contract was 
fairly performed. 

— '' One of his chamberlains had been soliciting 
a place about court for, as he said, his brother. 
The Emperor found out the fact, that it was for a 
stranger, who was to lay down a large sum. He 
sent for the stranger, ratified the bargain, gave 
the place, and put the money in his own pocket. 
The chamberlain was in great alarm on meeting 
the Emperor some days after. ** Your dejection 
is natural enough," said Vespasian, " as you have 
so lately lost your brother ; but then, you should 
wish me joy, for he has become mine. 

** By the altar of Momus, and the brass beard of 
the god Ridiculus, I could tell you a hundred 
things of the same kind," said the jovial and in- 
exhaustible secretary. " Take but one more. 

— " One of our great patricians, an ^milian,and 
as vain and insolent a beast as lives, had ordered 
a quantity of a particularly striped cloth, which it 
cost the merchant infinite pains to procure. But 



SALATHIEL. 189 

the great man's taste had altered in the mean time, 
and he returned the cloth without ceremony, 
threatening besides, that, if the merchant made 
any clamours on the subject, his payment should be 
six month's work in the slave-mill. 

" The man, on the verge of ruin, came, tearing 
his hair and bursting with rage, to lay his com- 
plaint before the Emperor ; who, however, plainly 
told him that there was no remedy, but desired 
him to send a dress of the cloth to the palace. 
Within the week, the patrician was honoured with 
a message, that the Emperor would dine with him, 
and the message was accompanied with the dress, 
and an intimation that Vespasian wished to make it 
popular. Rome was instantly ransacked for the 
cloth ; but not a yard of it was to be found but in 
the single merchant's hands. The patrician's 
household must be equipped in it, cost what it 
would. The dealer, in pleasant revenge, charged 
ten times the value, and his fortune was made in a 
day. 

" Now Titus, with many a noble quality, is 
altogether another man. He abhors the Emperor's 
rough-hewn jocularity ; he speaks Greek better 
than the Emperor does his own tongue, is a poet, 
and a clever one besides, in both languages ; 
extemporises verse with elegance; is no mean 



190 SALATHIEL. 

performer on the lyre ; sings ; is a picture-lover, 
and so forth. I believe from my soul that, with 
all his talents for war and government, he would 
rather spend his day over books, and his evenings 
among poets and philosophers, or telling Italian 
tales to the ears of some of your brilliant orientals, 
than ride over the world at the head of the legions. 
And now," said my open-hearted guide, " having 
betrayed court secrets enough for one day, I must 
leave you, and return to the camp. Here you 
will spend your time as you please; until some 
decision is come to. The household is at your 
service, and the officer in command will attend 
your orders ; — farewell !" 

Captivity is wretchedness, even if the captive 
trod on cloth of gold. My treatment was imperial ; 
a banquet, that might have feasted a Roman epi- 
cure, was laid before me ; a crowd of attendants, 
sumptuously habited, waited round the table ; 
music played, perfumes burned ; the whole cere- 
monial of princely luxury was gone through, as if 
Titus were present, instead of his heart-broken 
prisoner. But to that prisoner, bread and water 
with freedom would have been the truer luxury. 

I wandered through the spacious apartments, 
dazzled by their splendour, and often ready to ask, 
"Can man be unhappy in the midst of these 



SALATHIEL. 191 

things ?" yet, answering the question in the 
pang of heart which they were so powerless to 
soothe. 

I took down the richly-blazoned \olumes of the 
Western poets, and while, at every line that I un- 
rolled, I felt how much richer were their contents 
than the gold and gems that incased them. I yet 
felt the inadequacy of even their beauty and vi- 
gour to console the spirit stricken by real cala- 
mity. 

I threw aside the volumes, and strayed to the 
casements, through which the sun-set began to 
pour in a tide of glory. The landscape beneath 
was beautiful ;— a peaceful valley shut in with lofty 
eminences, on whose marble foreheads the sun- 
beams wrought coronets, as coloured and glittering 
as ever were set with chrysolite and ruby. The 
snow was gone as rapidly as it had come ; and the 
green earth in the freshness of the bright hour 
might almost be said " to laugh and sing." The 
air came fanning and warm from the reviving 
flowers. There was a light and joyous beauty in 
even the waving of the shrubs, as they shook off 
the moisture in sparkles at every wave ; birds in- 
numerable broke out into song, and fluttered their 
little wet wings with delight in the sunshine ; and 
the rivulet, still swelled with the shower, ran 



192 SA LATHI EL. 

dimpling and gurgling along, with a music of its 
own. 

But the true sadness of the soul is not to be 
scattered by the life and loveliness of external 
things. I turned from the sun and nature to fling 
myself on my couch, and feel that, where a man's 
treasure is, there his heart is also. 

''What might not be doing in Jerusalem? 
what fanatic violence, personal revenge, or public 
license might not be let loose, while I was linger- 
ing among the costly vanities of the Pagan ? My 
enemy, at least, was there, in the possession of 
unbridled authority ;" and the thought was in itself 
a history of evil. 

" And where was Esther, my beloved, the child 
of my soul, the glowing and magnificent-minded 
being, whose beauty and whose thoughts were 
scarcely mortal? Might she not be in the last 
extremity of suffering, helplessly calling on her 
wretched father to save her ; in the dungeon, 
withering with cold and famine, and upbraiding me 
for having forgotten my child ; or in the hands of 
the robbers of the desert, and dragging her deli- 
cate and sinking form through rocks and sands at 
the mercy of savages ; or dead, and have died 
without a hand to succour, or a voice to cheer her 
in her hour of agony ?'' 



SALATHIEL. 193 

Thought annihilates time, and I lay thus sinking 
from depth to depth, I know not how long; till I 
was roused by the entrance of the usual endless 
train of attendants with lights ; and the chief 
steward, a venerable man of my country, whom 
Titus had generously continued in the office where 
he found him, came to acquaint me that a new 
banquet awaited my pleasure. The old man wept 
at the sight of a chieftain of Israel in captivity ; 
his heart was full, and when I had dismissed the 
attendants with their untasted banquet, he gave 
way to his recollections. 

The palace was once the dwelling of Ananus, 
the high-priest, whose death under the crudest 
circumstances was the leading cause of the triumph 
of the factions, and the ruin of Jerusalem. In the 
very chamber where I sat he had spent the last 
day of his life ; and left it only to take charge of 
the Temple on the fatal night of the assault by the 
Idumaeans. He was wise and vigorous ; but, what 
is the wisdom of man ? 

A storm, memorable in the annals of devasta- 
tion, raged during the night. Ananus, convinced 
that all was safe from human hostility in this ra- 
vage of the elements, suffered the wearied citizens 
to retire from their posts. The gates were opened 
by traitors ; the Idumaeans, furious for blood and 
VOL. III. I 



194 SALATHIEL. 

spoil, rushed in ; the guard, surprised in their 
sleep or dispersed, were massacred ; and by day- 
light eight thousand corpses lay on the sacred 
pavements of the Temple; and among them the 
noblest and wisest man of Judea, Ananus. 

*' I found," said the old man, " the body of my 
great and good lord under a heap of dead, but was 
not suffered to convey it to the tomb of his fathers 
in the valley of Jehoshaphat. I brought his sword 
and his phylactery here, and they are now the only 
memorials of the noblest line that perished since 
the Maccabees. In these chambers I have re- 
mained since, and in them it is my hope to die. 
The palace is large ; the Roman senators and offi- 
cers reside in another wing, which I have not en- 
tered for years, and shall never enter ; mild mas- 
ters as the Romans have been to me, I cannot bear 
to see them masters within the walls of a chief of 
my country." 

The story of Naomi occurred to me ; but she 
was so much beyond my hope of discovery, that I 
forebore to renew the old man's griefs by her 
name. A sound of trumpets and the trampling of 
cavalry was heard from the portal. 

" It is but the nightly changing of the troops," 
said the steward, " or perhaps the arrival of some 
officers from the camp : they often ride here after 



SALATHIEL. 



195 



night-fall to supper, spend a few hours, and by 
day- break are gone. But of them and their pro- 
ceedings I know nothing. No Jew enters, nor 
desires to enter, the banquet-hall of the enemies 
of his country." 

A knocking at the door interrupted him, and an 
officer appeared, with an order for the prisoners in 
the palace to be removed into strict confinement. 
The venerable steward gave way to tears at the 
new offence to a leader of his people. I felt some 
surprise ; but merely asked what new alarm had 
demanded this harsh measure. 

" I know no more," replied the officer, " than 
that the general has arrived here a few minutes 
since ; and that, as some attempts have been lately 
made on his life, the council have thought proper 
to put the Jewish poniards as much out of his way 
as they can. The order is universal ; and I am 
directed to lead you to your apartment." 

" Then, let them look to my escape," said I. *' I 
thank the council for this service. While I con- 
tinued above suspicion, they might have thrown 
open every door in their dungeons. But since they 
thus degrade me, you may tell them that their 
walls should be high, and their bolts strong, to 
keep me their prisoner. Lead on, sir." 

The council seemed to have been aware of my 



196 SALATHIEL. 

opinions, for my new chamber was in one of the 
turrets ; the customary place of detention for pri- 
soners supposed to be peculiarly difficult to keep 
within bounds. The lower floor being generally 
occupied by the guard, there could be no under- 
mining : the smallness of the building laid all the 
operations of the fugitive open to the centinel's 
eye ; and the height was of itself an obstacle that, 
even if the bars were forced, might daunt the ad- 
venturer. 

The steward followed me to my den, wringing 
his hands. Yet the little apartment was not in- 
commodious ; there were some obvious attempts at 
rendering it a fitter place of habitation than usual ; 
and a more delicate frame than mine might have 
found indulgence in its carpets and cushions. Even 
my solitary hours were not forgotten, and some 
handsome volumes from the governor's library oc- 
cupied a corner. 

There was a lyre too, if I chose to sing my sor- 
rows ; and a gilded chest of wine, if I chose to 
drink them away. The height was an inconve- 
nience only to my escape: but a lover of land- 
scape and fresh air would have envied me ; for I 
had the range of the horizon, and the benefit of 
every breeze from its four quarters. A Chaldee 
would have chosen it for his commerce with the 



SALATHIEL. 197 

lights of heaven ; for every star, from the gorgeous 
front of Aldebaran to the minutest diamond spark 
of the sky, shone there in its brightness. And 
a philosopher would have rejoiced in the secluded 
comfort of a spot, which, in the officer's parting 
pleasantry, was in every sense " so much above the 
world." 



198 SA LATHI EL, 



CHAPTER XV. 



To me the prison and the palace were the same. 
No believer in fate, and a strong believer in the 
doctrine that, in the infinite majority of cases, the 
unlucky have to thank only themselves ; feeling, 
too, that the manly and the wise disdain to act by 
borrowed will or wisdom; I was yet irresistibly 
conscious of my own ste^-n exception. That there 
was an influence hanging over me, I deeply knew ; 
that I might as well strive with the winds, was 
the fruit of my whole experience ; and, with as 
much self-resolve in me as I ever knew in man, 
and as lofty a calculation of the wonders that 
human energy may work, I abandoned myself on 
principle to the chances of the hour. — I was the 
weed upon the wave ; and, whether above or below 



SALATHIEL. 199 

the surface, I knew that the wave would roll on, 
and that I must roll on along wdth it. — I was the 
atom in the air; and, whether I should float 
unseen for ever, or be brought into sight by the 
gilding of some chance sun-beam across me, my 
destiny was to float and quiver up and down. — 
I was the vapour ; and whether, like the evening 
cloud, my after years were to evolve into glorious 
shapes and colours, or I should creep along the 
pools and valleys of fortune till the end of time, — 
yet, there I was, still in existence, and that exis- 
tence bound by laws incapable of the choices or 
caprices of man. 

I had yet to learn the true burden of my 
great malediction ; for the circumstances of my 
life were yet adverse to its fated solitude of 
soul ; its bitter conviction that there was not a 
being under the canopy of heaven whose heart 
was towards me ; its dull and melancholy exile, in 
the midst of a world full of activity, hope, and 
passion. I was still in the very eddy of life, and 
battling it with the boldest. My family survived: 
public cares, personal interests, glowing attach- 
ments, the whole vigorous activity of the citizen 
and the soldier, were mine. I was still husband, 
father, friend, champion of a great people; my 
task was difficult and grave, but it was ardent. 



200 SALATHIEL. 

proud, and animating. I was made for this acti- 
vity of the whole man ; master of a powerful 
frame that defied fatigue, and was proof against 
the sharpest visitations of nature ; and of an in- 
tellect, which, whatever might be its rank, re- 
joiced in tasking itself with labours that appalled 
and perplexed the multitude — in feeding and 
stimulating a perpetual passion for the grand and 
the imaginative — in giving itself up to an ambi- 
tion, a devouring and inappeasable desire of doing 
something by which I should be rescued from the 
common obscurity ; of planting in the waste the 
seed of a name which should spring up and flourish, 
and go on distending in vigour and majesty, when 
the more precocious fosterings of the day were 
withered and dust. 

Idle as I knew the praise of man, and sovereign 
as was my scorn for the meanness which stoops to 
the vulgar purchase of popularity, I felt and ho- 
noured the true fame — that renown whose statue 
is devoted, not by the suspicious and clamorous 
flattery of the time, but by the solemn and volun- 
tary homage of the future ; whose splendour, like 
that of a new-born star, if it take ages to reach 
mankind, is sure to reach them at last, and shines 
for ages after its fount is extinguished ; whose 
essential power, if it be coerced and obscured, like 



SALATHTEL. 201 

that of man while his earthly tenement still shuts 
him in, is thenceforth to develop itself from 
strength to strength — the mortal putting on im- 
mortality. 

In the whirl of such thoughts I was often 
carried away, to the utter oblivion of my peculiar 
fate ; for man and his associations were strong 
within me, in defiance of the command. The 
gloom often passed away from my soul, as the 
darkness does from the midnight ocean in the dash 
and foam of its own waters. Nature is perpetual ; 
and drives the affections, sleeping or waking, as 
it drives the blood through the old channels, it 
was only at periods, produced by strong circum- 
stance, that I felt the fetter ; but then, the iron 
entered into my soul ! 

To this partial pressure belongs the singular 
combination of such a fate as mine with an interest 
in the world, with my loves and hates, my thirst 
of human fame, my reluctance at the prospect of 
the common ills and injuries of life. I was a man ; 
and this is the whole solution of the problem. 
For one remote evidence that I was distinct from 
mankind, I had ten thousand direct and constant, 
that I was the same. But, for the partiality of 
the pressure, there was a lofty reason. 

The man who feels himself above the common 



202 SALATHIEL; 

fate, is instantly placed above the common de- 
fences of mankind. He may calumniate and 
ruin ; he may burn and plunder ; he may be the 
rebel and the murderer. Fear is, after all, the 
great security. But what earthly power could 
intimidate him ! What were chains, or the scaf- 
fold, to him, who felt instinctively that time was 
not made for his being ; that the scaffold was im- 
potent ; that he should yet trample on the grave 
of his judge; on the mouldered throne of his 
king; on the dead sovereignty of his nation? 
With his impassiveness, his experience, his know- 
ledge, and his passions, concocted and blackened 
by ages, what breast could be safe against the 
dagger of this tremendous exile ? what power be 
secure against the rebel machination, or the open 
hostility of a being invested with the strength of 
immortal evil ? What was to hinder a man made 
familiar with every mode of influencing human 
passions — the sage, the sorcerer, the fount of tra- 
dition, the friend of their worshipped ancestors — 
from maddening the multitude at whose head he 
willed to march, clothed in the attributes of almost 
a divinity ? 

But I was precluded, or saved, from this fearful 
career by the providential feeling of the common 
repugnances, hopes, and fears of human nature. 



SALATHIEL. 203 

Pain and disease were instinctively as much shun- 
ned by me as if I held my life on the frailest 
tenure ; death was as formidable as my natural 
soldiership would suffer it to be ; and, even when 
the thought occurred that I might defy extinction, 
it threw but a darker shade over the common ter- 
rors, to conceive that I must undergo the suffering 
of death without the peace of the grave. Mau 
bears his agony for once, and is done. Mine 
might be borne to the bitterest extremity, but 
must be borne with the keener bitterness of the 
knowledge that it was in vain. 

I was recalled from those reveries to the world, 
by a paper dropped through a crevice in the 
rafters above my head. On seeing its signature, 
" Septimius," my first impulse was to tear it in 
pieces ; but Esther's name struck me, and I read 
through the letter. 

''You must not think me a villain, though, 1 
confess, appearances are much in favour of the 
supposition. But, this morning, I had no choice 
between denying that I knew you, and being 
utterly ruined. This comes of discipline. Titus 
is a disciplinarian of the first order ; and the con- 
sequence is, that no man dares acknowledge any 
little irregularity before him : so far, his morality 
propagates knaves. But I must clear myself of 



204 SALATHIEL. 

the charge of having acted disingenuously hy your 
admirable daughter. I take every power that 
binds the soul to witness, that I know not what is 
become of her ; nay, I am in the deepest anxiety 
to know the fate of one so lovely, so innocent, and 
so high-minded. 

" And now, prince, that I am oat of the reach 
of your frown, let me have courage to disburden 
my heart. I have long known Esther, and as long 
loved her. From the time when I was first re- 
ceived within your palace in Naphtali ; and I have 
not forgotten that to your hospitality I then owed 
my life ; I was struck with her talents and her 
beauty. When the war separated us, r.nd 1 re- 
turned to Rome, neither in Kome, nor in the 
empire, could I see her equal. To solicit our 
union, I gave up the honours and pleasures of the 
court, for the campaign in your hazardous country. 
I searched Judea in vain ; and it was chiefly in 
the vague hope of obtaining some intelligence of 
Esther, that I solicited the command of our un- 
fortunate mission. There I felt all hazard more 
than repaid by her sight, to me lovelier than 
ever. 

'' I will acknowledge that I prolonged my con- 
finement, to have the opportunity of obtaining her 
hand. But her religious scruples were unconquer- 



SALATHIEL. 205 

able. I implored her leave to explain myself to 
you. Even this, too, she refused, ' from her know- 
ledge of your decision.' What then was I to do I 
Loving to excess, bewildered by passion, oppressed 
with disappointment, and seeing but one object 
on earth, my evil genius prompted me to act the 
dissembler. 

" Under pretext of disclosing some secrets con- 
nected with your safety, I induced her to meet me, 
for the first and last time, on the battlements. 
There, I besought her to fly with me— to be my 
bride — to enjoy the illustrious rank and life that 
belonged to the Imperial blood ; and when we were 
once wedded, to solicit the approval of her family. 
I was sincere ; T take the gods to witness, I was 
sincere. But my entreaty was in vain ; she re- 
pelled me with resolute scorn ; she charged me 
with treachery to you, to her, to faith, and sacred 
hospitality. I knelt to her— she spurned me. In 
distraction, and knowing only that to live without 
her was wretchedness, I was bearing her away to 
the gate, when we were surrounded by armed men. 
My single attendant fled : I was overpowered, and 
forced to the gate ; and I saw Esther, my lovely 
and beloved Esther, no more." 

There was an honesty in this full confession that 
did more for the writer's cause than subtler Ian- 



206 SALATHIEL. 

guag-e. The young Roman had been severely 
tried ; and who could expect from a soldier the 
self-denial,' that it might have been hard to find 
under the grave brow of philosophy ? Stern as time 
and trial had made me, I was not petrified into a 
contempt of the generous weaknesses of earlier 
years ; yet, to love a being like Esther — what was 
it, but to be just ? and, while I honoured the high 
sense of duty which repelled a lover so dangerous 
to a woman's heart, I pitied and forgave the vio- 
lence of a passion, lighted by unrivalled loveliness 
of form and mind. 

It was growing late ; and the steward, who 
made a virtue of showing me the more respect the 
more I was treated with severity, came in to ar- 
range my couch for the night ; " he would suffer 
no inferior hands to approach the person of one 
of the leaders of his fallen country. In truth," 
added he, *' if I were not permitted to be your at- 
tendant to night, my prince might have been for- 
gotten ; for every human being but myself is busy 
in the grand banquet-gallery." 

Sound of instruments and voices arose. '* There, 
you may hear the music. Titus gives a supper in 
honour of the Emperor's birth-day, and the palace 
will be kept awake until day-light ; for the Ro- 
mans, with all their philosophy, are great lovers of 



SALATHIEL. 207 

the table ; and Titus is renowned for late sittings. 
—Or would you wish to see them at their ban- 
quet ?" So saying, he unbarred the shutters of a 
casement, commanding a view along the gallery ; 
of which every door and window was thrown open 
for the breeze. 

If an ancient Roman could start from his slum- 
ber into the midst of European life, he must look 
with scorn on its absence of grace, elegance, and 
fancy. But it is in its festivities, and, most of all, 
in its banquets, that he would feel the incurable 
barbarism of the Gothic blood. Contrasted with 
the fine displays that made the table of the Roman 
noble a picture, and threw over the indulgence of 
appetite the colours of the imagination ; with what 
eyes must he contemplate the tasteless and com- 
mon-place dress, the coarse attendants, the meagre 
ornament, the want of mirth, music, and intellec- 
tual interest — the whole heavy machinery that 
converts the feast into the mere drudgery of de- 
vouring ! 

The guests before me were fifty or sixty splen- 
didly-dressed men, attended by a crowd of domes- 
tics attired with scarcely less splendour; for no 
man thought of coming to the banquet in the robes 
of ordinary life. The embroidered couch, itself a 
striking object, allowed the ease of position, at 



208 SALATHIEL. 

once delightful in the relaxing climates of the south, 
and capable of combining with every grace of the 
human figure. At a slight distance, the table, 
loaded with plate glittering under the blaze of 
a profusion of lamps, and surrounded by couches 
thus covered with rich draperies, was like a cen- 
tral source of light radiating in broad shafts of 
every brilliant hue. All that belonged to the or- 
nament of the board was superb. The wealth of 
the patricians, and their perpetual intercourse 
with Greece, made them masters of the finest per- 
formances of the arts. The sums expended on 
plate were enormous ; but its taste and beauty 
were essential to the refined enjoyment of the 
banquet. Copies of the most famous statues and 
groups of sculpture in the precious metals ; tro- 
phies of the victories of Greek and Roman ; models 
of the celebrated temples ; were mingled with the 
vases of flowers and lighted perfumes ; and, cover- 
ing and colouring all, was a vast scarlet canopy 
which combined the groups beneath the eye, and 
threw the whole into the form that a painter would 
love. 

But the true skill was shown in the constant 
prevention of that want of topic, which turns con- 
versation into weariness. There was a perpetual 
succession of new objects and excitements. Even 



SALATHIEL. 209 

the common changes of the table were made to 
assist this purpose. The coming in of each course 
was announced by music, and the attendants were 
preceded by a procession of minstrels dancing, 
chaplet-crowned, and playing popular melodies. 
Between the courses, a higher entertainment was 
offered in the recitations, pleasantries read or 
acted by a class of professional satirists of the ab- 
surdities of the day. 

It is easy to imagine how ferlile a source of inte- 
rest this must have been made by the subtle and 
splenetic Italian, moving through Roman life, the 
most various, animating, and fantastic scene, in which 
society ever shone. The recitations were always 
looked to as the charm of the feast. They were 
often severe ; but their severity was reserved for 
public men and matters. The court supplied the 
most tempting and popular ridicule ; but the re- 
citer was a privileged person, and all the better 
humoured Caesars bore the castigation without a 
murmur. No man in the empire was more laughed 
at than Vespasian, and no man oftener joined in 
the laugh. One of his morning's sports was to 
collect the burlesques of the night before, give 
them new pungency by a touch of the imperial 
pen, and then despatch them to make their way 



210 SALATHIEL. 

through the world. The strong- headed sovereign 
knew the value of an organ of public opinion, and 
used to call their perusal, " sitting for his pic- 
ture." The picture was sometimes so strong, 
that the courtiers trembled. But the veteran who 
had borne thirty years of battle, laid it up among 
** his portraits," laughed the insult away, and re- 
peated his popular saying, ** that when he was 
old enough to come to years of discretion, and 
give up the emperor, he should become reciter 
himself, and have his turn with the world." 

The recitations again were varied, by a sportive 
lottery, in which the guests drew prizes ; some- 
times of value, gems and plate ; sometimes merely 
an epigram, or a caricature. The banquet gene- 
rally closed with a theatric dance by the chief 
public performers of the day ; and the finest forms 
and most delicate art of Greece and Iberia dis- 
played — the story of Theseus and Ariadne ; the 
flight of Jason ; the fate of Semele, or some other 
of the brilliant fictions of their poetry. In the 
presence of this vivid scene, sat, tempering its 
wildness by the majesty of religion, the three great 
tutelar idols of Rome, Jove, Juno, and Minerva, 
of colossal height, throned at the head of the hall ; 
completing, false as they were, the most singular 



SALATHIEL. 211 

and dazzling combination that man ever saw, of 
the delight of the senses with the delight of the 
mind. 

To me human joy was always a source of enjoy- 
ment ; and in the sweet sounds of the harps and 
flutes, and the pleasant murmur of cheerful voices, 
I was not unwilling to forget the spot from which 
I listened. But the prisoner cannot long forget 
his cell ; and closing the casement I walked away. 

" Little I ever thought," sighed the old steward, 
" of seeing that sight. But all nations have fallen 
in their time, and perhaps the only wonder is, that 
Israel should have stood so long. But it is still 
stranger to my eyes to see that gallery as it is to- 
night : many a long year it has been shunned by 
Jew and Roman alike ; for the enemy give way to 
dreams and the fear of apparitions beyond any 
other people ; and the mighty things done in the 
times of our fathers, and which, though disho- 
noured in the mouths of the heathen, made their 
report known through the earth, have made Judea 
a land of awe to its evil conquerors. It is fifteen 
years this very day, since I saw the light of lamp, 
or the foot of man, within those casements." 

" Yet," said I, " the great Ananus lived as 
became his rank ; and there were then no dangers 
to disturb him in the midst of his people." 



212 SALATHIEL. 

'* But there was one terrible event which made 
those walls unhallowed; nay, even in this spot 
where we stand, I would not remain alone through 
the night, to have the palace for my own." 

A rich and solemn strain of music that ushered 
in some change in the displays of the banquet, in- 
terrupted my question ; while the old man's coun- 
tenance assumed something of the alarm which he 
described. 

*' That sound," said he, shuddering, '* goes to 
my heart. It is the same that I heard on the 
night of death. On that night Matthan, the only 
son of my great master, was to be wedded to the 
daughter of the prince of Hebron; and that gal- 
lery was laid out for the wedding feast. All the 
leaders of Jerusalem were there, all the noble wo- 
men, all the chief priesthood ; all the grandeur, 
wealth, and beauty of our tribe. But Matthan 
was*iiot the son of his father's mind. He was 
haughty, and the slave of passion ; he had fled 
from his father's roof years before, and taken re- 
fuge among the mountains. The caravan passing 
through Galilee dreaded the name of Matthan, for 
he was bold ; the chief of the hills saw his fol- 
lowers flying from his side, for deadly was the 
spear of Matthan ; but he was generous, and often 
the slave rejoiced in the breaking of his chains, 



SALATHIEL. 213 

and the peasant saw his flocks cover the valley 
again, by the arm and the bounty of Matthan. 

" When he returned, danger or sorrow had 
wrought a change in him like the passing from 
youth to age. His strength was withered, and 
his voice was broken down, like the voice of him 
that treads on the brink of the timely grave. 

" His nobler father wept over him, and gave him 
welcome; and the palace was filled with rejoicing 
for the coming back of the first-born. But he 
took no delight in the feast, neither in the praises 
of men, nor in the voice of the singer. He wan- 
dered through his father's halls, even as the 
leopard, chained, and longing to escape to the 
desert and the prey again. 

" Disturbances were beginning to be heard of 
in Jerusalem ; and he fell into the hands of the 
evil. Onias, the man of blood, betrayed hin» into 
the secret ways of conspiracy against our con- 
querors. His heart was bold, and his temper high; 
and he was easily drawn into the desperate game, 
by a villain, who stirred up the generous spirit of 
our nobles, only to sell their blood to Rome. 

** He grew more lonely and violent day by day ; 
he withdrew from the amusements of his rank, and 
shut himself up in the wing of the palace ending 
in this tower. In this room, where we are sitting, 



214 SALATHIEL. 

I have seen his lamp burning through the livelong 
winter nights ; and grieved over the sleeplessness 
that showed he was among the unhappy. Into 
his chamber none were suffered to enter but the 
mountaineers alone, who had followed him in his 
wandering life, and whose speech none else could 
understand. 

** I little dreamed what inhabitant was then in 
this cell. At last, a change was wrought upon 
him. He went forth ; he took delight in the horse 
and the chariot, in the chase, and the feast, and 
the die. He plunged into public life with the 
eagerness of one thirsting and hungering for the 
applause of men. He harangued, he gave magni- 
ficent gifts, he filled up every hour with the labour 
of mind or body, like one to whom an hour of rest 
would be a blot in his existence. His illustrious 
father, that he might bless his posterity before he 
died, counselled him to take to wife Thamar, the 
fairest and noblest of the daughters of Hebron. 
The offer of the alliance of Matthan was heard 
with joy ; and the day of the marriage was ap- 
pointed. 

*' On that day I saw him come from the coun- 
cil-hall, after receiving the congratulations of his 
friends. 1 saw him passing along to his chamber ; 
but I dared not cross him on his way ; I fled and 



SALATHIEL. 215 

hid myself behind the portal, even from the wrath 
of his countenance. He thought that he was 
alone ; and then he gave way to his agony. Never 
did I behold such a countenance of wrath and woe. 
It was bloated with prodigal living, and it was 
now flushed with wine, swallowed to drown 
thought ; but misery was branded there. 

** He raved, he rent his bridal raiment, and cast 
it from him. He wept ; he knelt and cursed the hour 
that he was born ; he flung himself upon the ground, 
and rolled in a convulsion of rage and woe. At the 
least sound he would spring up, and, drawing his 
scymitar, swear to put the intruder to death. I 
remained in my refuge ; yet more in fear of his 
countenance than of his sword. He took letters 
from his bosom, read them, and then scattering 
their fragments in the air, devoted himself to ruin, 
devoted his line, Judea, the world. 

*' He tottered towards me, and I dreaded his 
rage at the discovery ; but T saw, at a glance, that 
his mind was gone. He was talking to the air; he 
clasped his hands wildly ; his face was covered with 
tears ; he implored for mercy, and fell. I has- 
tened to bear him to a couch ; he saw me not ; but 
cried out against himself, as a betrayer and a mur- 
derer, the feeble slave of others' will, the guilty 



216 SALATHIEL. 

fugitive from honour, the criminal marked by the 
hand of Heaven. 

" I called for help. His mountaineers rushed 
in ; they repulsed me ; and, chiding him in their 
barbarian tongue, and seeming accustomed to those 
fits of sorrow, carried away in their arms the noble 
Matthan, complaining and crying like a child. 

" The evening fell, and I saw him ride forth at 
the head of his kindred to bring home the bride. 
The wretchedness of the day was past ; and those 
who looked only on the lofty bearing, and heard 
the joyous language of the leader of that train, 
would have thought that sorrow had never touched 
his heart. I watched for his return with fear and 
anxiety ; for I deemed his joy unhallowed and 
fearful. 

" But all was well ; the bridal procession re- 
turned. Matthan, glittering in jewels, came proud- 
ly reining his steed white as the snow. The sounds 
of harp and trumpet — the chorus of the singers — 
the gay light of the torches — and the beauty of the 
youths and maidens who danced, and threw their 
crowns of flowers before the bride, made me forget 
every thing but the delight of seeing peace and 
prosperity come among us once more. 

** When the bride and her female companions 



SALATHIEL. 217 

entered the hall reserved for them to prepare for 
the nuptial banquet, I followed my great master 
into the gallery. The bridegroom and a multitude 
of his friends were there already ; and never was 
crowd more joyous. But the wonder and the life 
of all was the bridegroom himself. Loud as they 
were, his voice was the loudest ; he laughed at 
every thing, as if he had never known a care in 
the world, or was never to know one again. The 
jest was never out of his lips ; and when he pledged 
the cup to the health of the company or the fair 
bride, and often he pledged it that evening, he al- 
ways said something that raised shouts of applause. 
I once or twice passed near him, but he had wiped 
every sign of grief from his features ; and if he 
seemed to be mad with any thing, it was with joy. 
The gallery rang with admiration, and not less with 
surprise ; for he had shut himself up so long from 
the people, that he was almost unknown ; and the 
world is generally good-natured enough to invent 
a character for those who will take no trouble to 
make one for themselves. Some had set him down 
for intolerable haughtiness ; others for fear of 
mixing in the growing tumults ; others for a dealer 
in the black art; and others, for a mere fool. But 
now opinions were altered at once, and every voice 
of his tribe was loud in wonder at the talents that 
VOL. III. K 



218 SALATHIEL. 

he had so long hid in retirement. The old rejoiced 
to see the vigour and ability of Ananus renewed ; 
the warriors and nobles still active in the public 
affairs, foreseeing the struggles that were to come, 
looked proudly to this newly discovered champion of 
their country ; and the young, struck by his bold 
sentiments, were ready to fall down in homage to 
their future prince and leader. 

*' I was standing in the train of the high-priest, 
near the central casement, through which you may 
now see the throne of Titus. My eyes, I know 
not why, strayed to this tower ; I marked a lamp 
quivering, and a form rushing backwards and for- 
wards in gestures of violent sorrow. A foot beside 
me made me turn. There stood Matthan with his 
eyes fixed upon the tower. But his gaiety was 
gone. His countenance was vvild and yet cold. 
He looked like a man stricken to stone in the 
midst of some fierce burst of passion. He saw me 
not ; he saw not the guests ; he saw nothing but 
the dying lamp, and the hurrying form. 

'* The chorus of the singing women announced 
that the bride was about to enter. 

** I looked up at the tower ; the lamp was 
twinkling its last ; and the form was still seen 
wringing its hands. The bridal preparations went 
on, and the hymn was heard that denotes the veil- 



SALATHIEL. 219 

ing of the bride. But my eyes were fixed on tlie 
dying light, and the form, that now held a cup in 
its hand. A shriek was heard, so wild, that the 
guests sprang from their seats in alarm and asto- 
nishment. My eye turned upon Matthan, but he 
had summoned up his strength, and, though I saw 
him shake in every limb, his proud lip wore a 
smile. 

•* Yet even that was gone, as, with a start, and 
clasping his hand upon his brow, he abruptly 
turned from the window, and in a loud and angry 
tone demanded, why the bridal attendants delayed 
the coming of the princess of Hebron. The lamp 
had disappeared, and the tower was in darkness 
again. The attendants hastened — the portals were 
thrown open ; and the bride, in grace and majesty 
that drew all eyes, was led up to the canopy be- 
neath which the bridegroom stood. He raised 
the veil. His countenance was instantly trans- 
formed into blank horror. He uttered no voice ; 
but stood gazing. The bride let fall the veil 
again, and taking his hand, led him slowly, and 
without a word, down the hall. 

** None checked this strange ceremony ; none 
dared to check it. We were deprived of all 
power by astonishment. The high-priest himself 
stood with his venerable hands lifted up to Hea- 



220 SALATHIEL. 

ven, as if he felt that evil was come upon his 
house. The wedded pair walked in silence through 
the long range of chambers to the tower ; and 
as they passed, the numberless attendants felt 
themselves bound by the same mysterious awe. 
But our senses at length returned, and Ananus, 
in the full dread of his misfortune, yet bold to 
his dying hour, suffered none to go before 
him. We found the door of the tower barred, 
and long summoned Matthan to come forth, 
and relieve our fears lest some desperate in- 
vention of sorcery or conspiracy had been played 
upon him. No answer was returned, and we 
forced the door. 

** What a sight was there ! Two corpses lay, 
side by side. The blood still trickled from the 
bosom of the unfortunate Matthan. I raised the 
veil ; the hue of poison was upon the lips ; but 
they were not the lips of the princess of Hebron. 
The countenance was Arabian, and of exceeding 
beauty, but wan and wasted by sorrow. 

** A new confusion arose. The mountaineers, 
on bearing of the death of their lord, and still 
more of that noble creature in whom they 
honoured the race of their chieftains, demanded 
vengeance : they were too fierce to listen to 
reason, and our attempts to explain the unhappy 



SA LATHI EL. 221 

truth only kindled their rage. Scymitars were 
drawn, blood was shed ; and though the barbarians 
were repelled, yet they plundered the w ing of the 
palace, and bore off the infant offspring of their 
dead mistress ; the last scion of an illustrious tree, 
that was itself so soon to feel the axe. 

" The princess of Hebron was found alone, 
swooning at the tumult of the palace. I saw the 
unfortunate and guilty Matthan laid in the sepul- 
chre of his fathers— the last that ever slept there; 
for his great sire, w orthy of being laid in the mo- 
nument of kings, was denied the honours of the 
grave by his murderers. Yet he sleeps in the 
noblest of all graves ; his memory is treasured in 
the love and sorrows of his country. 

'* It was discovered that Matthan, during his 
wanderings in the desert, had wedded the daughter 
of a sheik ; a generous and high-minded creature, 
who more than once saved him from being undone 
by his own recklessness. He loved her with the 
violence of his nature ; but the prospects which his 
rank and talents opened to him on his return to 
his country, made him shrink from the acknow- 
ledgment of the alliance of his wilder days. Yet 
to live without her he found impossible ; and he 
brought her to the tower. Surrounded by his 
mountaineers, this portion of the palace was inac- 



222 SA LATHI EL. 

cessible ; and his solitude, and the lights seen 
through the casements, were often thought to 
imply studies of the strange philosophy, or evil 
superstitions, that had begun to infect the noble 
youth of Palestine. 

** But the necessity of sustaining his ambition 
by an illustrious marriage drove his fickle heart at 
last to treachery. The Arabian knew it, and 
disdaining to reproach the traitor, pined away 
before his eyes. Remorse and ambition alter- 
nately distracted him ; he loved, and yet was 
forced along by the necessity that vice makes for 
itself. The bridal procession was seen by the un- 
happy prisoner, and she swallowed poison. The 
rest is beyond my power to account for. But it 
is rumoured among the attendants, that strange 
sights have been seen, and sounds of a bridal 
throng heard in the chambers through which their 
last melancholy march was made ; though, whether 
it be truth, or the common fear of the vulgar, I 
know not, nor indeed wish too curiously to 
inquire." 



SALATHIEL. 223 



CHAPTER XVI. 



As the old man spoke, sounds arose not un- 
suited to his tale. But my faith in the legend did 
not amount to so sudden a realisation, and I looked 
towards the gallery. There, from whatever mo- 
tive, every thing was in disturbance. The guests 
were hurrying from the tables. Many had thrown 
the military cloak over their festal robes ; some 
were in the adjoining apartments equipping them- 
selves with arms and armour. A group were 
standing round Titus, evidently in anxious con- 
sultation. In the spacious grounds below, horse- 
men were mounting, and attendants hurrying in 
all directions. The calls of the clarion and trum- 
pet echoed through the courts : shortly after, a 
large body of cavalry came wheeling round to the 



224 SALATHIEL. 

portal of the gardens; and Titus went forth, con- 
spicuous among the bustling crowd for his manly 
composure. He gave some orders, which were 
despatched by tribunes galloping as for their lives ; 
then, mounting his charger, rode slowly through 
the gates at the head of his stately company, him- 
self the most stately of them all . 

The woods surrounding the palace soon inter- 
cepted the view of the imperial troop ; and after 
straining my eyes as long as I could see the glitter 
of a helmet by the feeble moon, and exhausting 
my old companion's understanding in conjectures 
of the cause of this rapid change, I turned to my 
casement to make that prayer for the peace of 
Jerusalem, which bad been nightly on my lips 
from the hour when they first could pray ; and 
which no danger, nor sorrow, nor disgust at man- 
kind, nor the bitterest despair, has ever silenced 
during ages. From the dungeon has that supplica- 
tion risen ; from the mine ; from the arid sands of 
the wilderness ; from the savage shores of the 
farthest ocean; from the bosom of the rolling 
waters ; from the fires of the persecutor ; from the 
field before the battle ; from the field covered with 
its dead ; from the living grave of the monk ; from 
the cavern of the robber ; from the palace ; from 
the scaffold ! 



SALATHIEL. 225 

While I continued in this outpouring of the 
soul, with my eyes fixed on the cloudy throne of 
Him, whom no man hath seen nor can see ! the 
morn seemed to be advancing on the sky; a pale 
reflection spread over the masses of rolling vapour ; 
it lingered, faded, grew richer, again sank, and 
night covered the earth ; again swelled, and a 
fierce lustre turned the low and heavy clouds to 
the colour of conflagration. 

" There is an attack on either the enemy's camp 
or the city," I exclaimed to my companion, who 
was already dropping into slumber on his cushion. 
** Day-break it cannot be, for the middle watch 
has not been half an houT sounded. Help me to 
escape ; be but my guide through the chambers, 
and name your recompense." 

The steward wrung his helpless hands, and 
offered his life to my service ; but described the 
precautions of my jailers so fully, that I gave up 
the idea of immediate escape ; and, after gazing 
at the sky until it became a sheet of darkness once 
more, bade him good night, and flung myself down 
to seek such rest as I could find upon my pillow. 

But I was tossed by anxious thoughts, and 
sleep was a tardy visitant. I heard the tread- 
ing of the guard, till its recurrence irritated me. 
The meanings of the wind through the trees told 



226 SALATHIEL. 

me that a storm was rising ; and to get rid of the 
uneasy conflict between the desire of sleep and the 
difficulty of shutting out thought, I rose, and 
watched the progress of the tempest. 

The lightnings flashed in broad beams through 
the clouds, and the rain fell with the violence of 
the southern storm. But, through the flash, 
pov/erful and deepening again shone the red illu- 
mination above the city ; and neither the roar of 
the wind, nor the dash of the descending deluge, 
could extinguish the shouts that, remote as they 
were, 1 knew to be shouts of battle. 

I measured the tower with my eye ; I tried the 
strength of the bars ; but the attempt only served 
to disturb my companion, who had survived his 
sorrows long enough to sleep as soundly as if there 
were not a woe on earth. When I used some of 
the common-places of regret for the disturbance, 
*' I am glad," said he, *' that you awoke me ; for 
I was dreaming the story of my unfortunate lord 
and his son over again." 

*•' The natural result of your having so lately 
renewed its recollection, and of this having been 
the time of the catastrophe." 

" Aye, the time is much, for every soul in the 
palace has had the story told to him to-day : the 
old retainers, who remember and weep over the 



SALATHIEL. 227 

days of their great master, are full of it. There 
is perhaps scarcely a room under this roof where 
some heart is not trembling to-night with ghostly 
fear ; nor a peasant's thatch, where the death of 
Matthan and the Arabian has not made pale faces; 
nor a sentinel for miles round, who does not shiver 
at every falling leaf, and think of the shriek, the 
avenging spirit, and the bridegroom stricken in his 
hour of pride. But, — Powers of Heaven preserve 
us! look there!" 

I looked ; but it was to the old man, whose 
countenance alarmed me with the idea that he had 
wrought his imagination to a hazardous extreme. 
I took his cold hand ; and telling him that I felt 
myself unable to sleep, and should have the less 
merit in watching till morn, gently laid his stiffened 
limbs on the couch, and bade him try to rest. He 
lay as unresisting, yet fixed, as if he had been 
turned to ice. But the eye stared through the 
casement, till I followed its direction, yet with 
only the added belief that he was overcome by the 
common terrors of the household ; for to me ten- 
fold darkness lay upon every object from the ground 
to the battlements. 

The departing officers and attendants kept the 
palace in tumult ; but more than common urgency 
quickened them ; and the last group, and the last 



228 SALATHIEL. 

sound of voices soon passed sway, leaving the si- 
lence, like the darkness, deeper than ever. 

I accidentally turned to the casement, and there 
— I saw a figure slight and shadowy, passing back- 
ward and forward in front of a quivering lamp ! 
My surprise was more startling than I would ven- 
ture to communicate to my companion, already 
almost paralysed with fear. But if I had conjured 
up a phantom to give force to the tale, none could 
have been more closely similar. 

The figure was enveloped in robes whose richness 
1 could perceive even across the court ; the ges- 
tures, the wild hurry of the pacings through the 
chamber, the general air of woe and distraction, 
were not to be mistaken. In the midst of the 
silence I heard the creaking of bolts, and the fall 
of chains, that seemed to be at my side. A single 
word followed ; but that word terribly comprehen- 
sive: — "Death!" The sound was uttered in a 
hollow and sepulchral tone, that left the imagina- 
tion free to shape the picture with what suUenness 
it willed. But the sound was scarcely uttered, 
when I heard a shriek, wild as ever told of woe ; 
saw the figure sink down, and the lamp quiver, 
and expire ! 

The old man had seen what I had seen ; but the 
natural feebleness of age left him a more helpless 



SALATHIEL. 2^ 

prey to superstitious fear; and no attempt to ex- 
plain these singular coincidences could calm him. 
He was convinced that the vengeance which had 
stricken his master's house was still abroad ; and 
that he had beheld its minister. Remonstrance 
was in vain ; and he sank alternately into the 
reveries and the stupefaction of spiritual terror. 

I tended him with the more interest, from ray 
being not altogether unimpressed with the possi- 
bility that his alarms were just. I was no believer 
in the vulgar narratives of superstition. But 
nature has its mysteries : truth or judgment might 
be commissioned from sources strange to human 
perceptions. To give way to the workings of a 
sickly imagination, may characterise the vulgar, 
the idle, and the weak; but to admit the power of 
Heaven to suspend its own laws for its own pur- 
poses, is among the soundest conclusions of the 
pious and the wise. 

While I sat beside the couch, and watched the 
ebbs and flows of life, in a frame that I sometimes 
expected to see give way utterly, a jarring of 
bolts again struck my ear. I listened with a 
strange emotion. But the sound soon ceased, and 
I was firm again. The old man had heard it, and 
iu a new convulsion, grasped both my hands, and 



230 SALATHIEL. 

held me close. The sound returned ; it increased ; 
I saw the wall of the tower open, and the figure 
stand before me. " It is she, it is she," shudder- 
ingly murmured my companion, fixing his eyes on 
it, and holding me with the clasp of agony. The 
heart beat thick within me. But I interposed 
myself between the corpse-like being whom I held 
in my arms, and the unearthly visitant ; and de- 
manded " for what purpose it had come." The 
figure started as I spoke ; then, gazing intently on 
me as I turned to the light, threw up its veil, and 
fell at my feet. The lovely Naomi was the 
spectre! But perfectly guiltless was the gentle 
girl of the ghostly potency of her presence, and 
the unfilial alarm into which she had thrown her 
adopted father ; whom she was delighted to find, 
but whom she candidly acknowledged, " she never 
dreamed of finding there." 

*' The tower contains a prisoner," said she trem- 
blingly, *' who must be saved this night ; for to- 
morrow at day-break is his dreadful hour. I knew 
that he would be condemned ; and we agreed on 
a signal by which I was to learn when the time 
was fixed. I have watched all night for it, and 
almost betrayed myself by a cry of horror that I 
could not suppress at the sight of that signal just; 



SALATHIEL. 231 

now. I had no resource but to bear my own 
message, and assist him myself in escaping from 
this place of tyranny and sorrow." 

"But, my child, who is the prisoner, or where?" 

She blushed, and said, *' One who saved me 
when the world was against me. He rescued me 
from the hands of barbarians ; and could I leave 
him to perish ?" 

** Lead on then, and without delay ; for day- 
break is not far. But how shall we find our way 
to his dungeon?" 

" I paid high," said she, " for my knowledge 
of this tower ; and it has no concealments from 
me. Remove this bar." 

I drew out a slender iron rod ; some of the large 
stones of the wall gave way ; and disclosed a wind- 
ing stair in the depth of the wall, by which we 
descended. We found the prisoner writing, and 
so much occupied, that our light footsteps did not 
interrupt him. 

" There," soliloquized he, as he ran his eye 
down the epistle; ''I think, my masters, if not 
the better, some of you will be the wiser for my 
labours. Home truths are the truths after all. 
Titus will learn what a set of incurable reprobates 
he has about him; and by this time to-morrow, 
when I shall care as little for mankind as mankind 



232 SALATHIEL. 

ever cared for me, I shall do the state service; 
from my gibbet turn reformer, and make the 
scaffold popular. — And now for the farewell to my 
lady and my love." 

He sighed, and threw down the pen. " No, 
my sweet Naomi, I can say nothing half so fond, 
or half so bitter, as my feelings at this moment. 
Would that I had never seen you, if we are to 
part so soon. — Yet, why should I regret to have 
known innocence, beauty, and truth, in their per- 
fection ? No, my love, rosy was the hour when I 
first saw you, and proud is even the parting hour 
that tells me I could have loved so noble a being. 
— But all is better as it is. How could I have 
borne to see you following the fortunes of a wan- 
derer, of a man without a country or a name? — 
Then, farewell, my Naomi; dearest, farewell; 
you were the gleam of sunshine in my cloudy day, 
the star in my dreary night ; and while my heart 
beats, you shall be there. Your name shall be 
the last upon my lips ; and if there be thought 
beyond the grave, you shall be remembered and 
— oh, how deeply — loved !" 

I had been on the point of disturbing his medi- 
tation ; but Naomi, with the fine avarice of pas- 
sion, would not lose a syllable. She held me 
back, and implored me by her countenance to let 



SALATHIEL. 233 

her have the full confession of her lover's faith. 
That beautiful countenance ran through all the 
shades of feeling, and was covered with blushes 
and tears, while the unconscious worshipper poured 
out his devotion. But the time was flying ; I in- 
sisted on interrupting this epicurism of the soul ; 
and when Naomi found that she must hear no more, 
she would allow none but herself the pleasure of 
the surprise. 

A sigh which swelled from the prisoner's heart, 
was echoed. He turned suddenly, and pronounced 
her name with a loudness of delight, that nothing 
but the chance that protects the imprudent could 
have prevented from bringing the guard upon us. 
His quick eye soon caught me, where I stood in 
shadow ; and he sprang forward to extinguish the 
intruder. But the lamp saved us from the en- 
counter ; and lifting his hands and eyes in amaze- 
ment, he laughed as loudly as he had spoken. 

*' In the name of all the wonders of the world," 
exclaimed he, ** are you here too ? Where are 
we to meet next ? We have met already in 
water, fire, and earth ; and nothing is left for 
us now but the clouds. Come, be honest, prince, 
and tell me whether it was not for the sake of 
some such experiment that you ventured here ; 
for between ourselves, if another hour finds us 



234 SALATHIEL. 

within these four walls, we shall know the grand 
secret as assuredly as Titus wears a head, and has 
n. scoundrel at his elbow." 

I was rejoiced to find that in attempting- to save 
the life of Naomi's lover, I was discharging a debt 
to the preserver of my own. To my mention of 
this service, he replied with soldier-like frank- 
ness, that, " I owed him no obligation whatever; 
he had long hated the intolerable insolence and 
cruelty of Cestius, and the debt was on his side, 
as I had favoured him with an opportunity that 
every officer in the service would have been happy 
to possess. His chastisement would do him good, 
as well as the rest of the world ; and thus, in fact, 
I might look upon myself as a benefactor to the 
human race." 

Naomi hung upon me, pale and anxiously listen- 
ing to every sound abroad. " This little trembler," 
said he sportively, as he took her passive hand, 
**I am destined to meet always in alarm. I first 
found her flying from a troop of human brutes, 
who were robbing the baggage of the Roman 
camp; I thought her worth something better than 
to keep goats on the Libanus, and weave turbans 
for some Syrian deserter; she was of the same 
opinion, and fell in love with me on the spot." 
JyTaomi exclaimed against this version of the story. 



SALATHIEL. 235 

'* No matter for the mode," said he, " I give 
the facts. I dazzled her ambition by the promise 
of a palace, — in the air ; bribed her avarice by 
the display of a purse, unconscious of gold ; and 
bewitched her senses by a speech, a smile, and 
a figure, that for the first time in my life I found 
to be irresistible." 

Naomi again protested ; and the dialogue might 
have consumed the night "without their discover- 
ing the lapse of time ; had I not interposed, and 
inquired, what further means of escape were in 
our power. The lovely girl started from her 
waking dream, and pointed to a ring in the wall, 
which was connected with a concealed door. I 
tried it, but it resisted my force. At length we 
all strove at it together. But no door opened. 

Naomi wrung her hands. " The unfortunate 
lord of this tower in former times," said she, and 
the tear stood in her eye, " always predicted that 
it would be fatal to his family. To escape his 
own fate, he pierced its walls with passages 
in every direction; but they did not save my 
noble, my unfortunate father." She sat down 
weeping ; while I tore at the ring, w^hich finally 
broke off in my hands. The lover stood with 
folded arms, gazing in sad delight on the beautiful 
being, from whom he was so soon to part for ever ; 



236 SALATHIEL. 

and whose face and form wore almost the shadowy 
loveliness of a vision. 

The chance of their escape devolved on me 
solely ; for neither would have desired to disturb 
that strange and melancholy luxury of contempla- 
tion. But, as the concealed door must be given 
up, the only resource was to return to my cell, 
and thence make our way through the passage by 
which Naomi had arrived. A glance from the 
casement showed me the court filled with soldiery, 
and lights moving through her chamber. This 
hope was gone. 

In the deepest doubt and fear, I ventured up 
through the tower to discover whether my cell 
was not already in possession of the guard. I 
pushed back the door noiselessly ; the cell was 
empty ; even the old steward was gone. Imagina- 
tion is a dangerous auxiliary in such a crisis ; and 
it created out of this trivial change a host of 
alarms. — He must have fled to give notice of my 
retreat ; or to rouse the vigilance of the soldiery 
by the story of the wonders that he had seen. 
Escape was hopeless. [ even heard a confused 
whispering, which '* proved that we had fallen 
into the snare." 

There was now no alternative but to be seized 
and die ; or to make a bold rush for life, and take 



SALATHIEL. 237 

our chance. I returned, carried the fainting 
Naomi up the stairs ; and suppressing the infinite 
risk of the attempt to penetrate through a building 
in which nearly the entire of its inmates were still 
awake and busy, and which was guarded by the 
vigilance of Roman patrols, I advised that we 
should do any thing rather than remain where we 
were. She was timid and submissive ; but to my 
surprise, her lover, whom I had known the very 
soul of daring, and who met danger with a jovial 
scorn — the bold seaman, the haughty leader of 
men harder to be ruled than the elements, the 
gallant despiser of death but a day past, in the 
cause of a mere stranger— was now totally un- 
nerved. The novelty of passion absorbed the 
heroic spirit of the youth ; he lingered near his 
mistress, and gazed on her with an intenseness 
that told, his world was there. To my questions 
he gave no answer ; but obeyed, without a word 
or a glance turned from the exquisite countenance 
that sank and blushed under his gaze. If the 
actual power of enchantment had been wrought 
upon him, he could not have been more fixed, 
helpless, and charmed. 

I heard the noise of pain, and thought of the 
ancient follower of the house of Ananus. My 
cooler judgment had acquitted him of betraying 



238 SALATHIEL. 

me into the enemy's liands. A part of the cell 
was filled up with the remnants of a canopy re- 
moved from the statelier apaigfenents. The groan 
came from behind them. I drew them away, and 
saw a door open by which he must have left the 
tower. I went forward a few steps ; hope throb- 
bed in me. I returned, desired the captain and 
Naomi to follow, wrapped myself in a cloak, and 
sword in hand led the way through the darkness. 
I had not gone far, when I found myself treading 
on a human body. I sprang back ; but the figure, 
more startled than I, rolled down a succession of 
steps before me, and falling against a door burst it 
open. A strong light from within flashed up the 
stairs; and taking Naomi's hand, 1 led her down 
this steep and narrow outlet of the grand gallery. 
As she came towards the light, a wild cry was 
given ; the man, whom I now perceived to be the 
steward, rose on his feet, and exclaiming, "It is 
she, risen from the grave, the Arabian !" rushed 
through the vast hall, in which were still a number 
of domestics setting it in order after the banquet. 
Every eye was turned to the spot from which we 
emerged. Naomi's white-robed form, followed by 
her lover's and mine wrapped to the brow in our 
dark mantles, formidably verified the superstition. 
The crowd were already prepared to witness a 



SA LATHI EL. 239 

wonder on this night of woe. They fled, or fell on 
their faces ; the steward still rushing on, propa- 
gated terror before im; and through the long vista 
of lighted chambers, where to be seen might have 
been ruin, we moved unquestioned, until we saw 
the portal. It, too, had been thrown open by 
some of the fugitives : the gardens were deserted ; 
the troops had been drawn by the search in 
Naomi's chamber to another quarter of the palace. 
Before us was welcome solitude ; and we were 
soon traversing the wood-paths by the light of the 
stars. 



240 SALATHIELr. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

While we traversed the grounds, the heaving- 
of the branches under the wind, which rose in 
strong gusts from time to time, and the rush of 
the rivulets from the hill-sides, which retained the 
swell of the melting snows, prevented our hearing 
other sounds. But when we emerged from this 
little forest of every plant that yields fruit or fra- 
grance, and began to climb the surrounding ridge, 
the sights and sounds to which I had been so long 
accustomed broke upon us. To the south a long 
line of light showed where Jerusalem was strug- 
gling against a midnight assault; and the uproar 
of battle came melancholy upon the wind. The 
Roman camp-fires blazed round the promontory 
Scopas, like the innumerable crevices of some huge 
volcanic hill breathing flame from root to summit. 



SALATHIEL. 241 

But a more immediate peril lay in the route 
behind us. The first height from which we could 
see the palace, showed us the well-known fire- 
signals of the enemy flaming on its battlements. 
Our escape had, of course, been discovered. The 
signals were answered from every point of the 
horizon. Where was a signal, there was an ene- 
my's post : we could not advance a step without 
the most imminent chance of seizure ; and, in those 
times, death by the shaft or the sword was the 
instant consequence. 

The signals were followed by the trumpet ; and 
every blast from the palace-roof was answered for 
miles round. The whole horizon was alive with 
enemies ; and yet, if in every call, captivity and 
death had not been the language, this circling echo 
of the noblest of all instruments of sound, coming 
in a thousand various tones from the varied 
distances, softened by the dewy softness of the 
night, and breathing from sources invisible, as if 
they were inspired only by the winds, or poured 
from the clouds, might have seemed lovely and 
sublime. 

But a new alarm rose in the direction of the 

forest, which now hiy beneath us, like a sea slightly 

silvered on its thousand billows by the sinking 

moon. The trampling of cavalry was distinctly 

VOL. III. L 



242 SALATHIEL. 

heard in pursuit, and torches were seen wandering 
through the trees. The pursuit had turned into 
the very path by which we came ; and the baying 
of a bloodhound up the ridge was guiding the 
cavalry to our inevitable capture, if we remained. 
I was resolved not to be taken, while T could fight 
or fly; and pointing out to my fellow-fugitives the 
detachment of horse as they glittered from the 
grove, and scoured the foot of the hills, I plunged 
down into a ravine, where I could expect to find 
only some torrent too deep for us to pass, and 
which might be our grave. But it was at least 
protracted fate : we should not fall alive into the 
hands of men exasperated to the last degree of 
animosity, and sure to sacrifice us after the 
mockery of a prejudiced trial, and the misery of 
a dungeon. If we died, we should not leave our 
bodies to be insulted by the caprice of the brutal 
soldier; and no stain of weakness or submission 
should degrade the last hour of the sons of Jeru- 
salem. 

I had given Naomi into the hands of her lover ; 
and, while they slowly descended the precipice, 
returned to its edge to ascertain whether the 
enemy were still upon our steps. The rock, 
towards the summit, was splintered into a number 
of little pinnacles ; grasping one of which, I clung, 



SALATHIEL. 243 

listening and gazing" with indescribable nervous- 
ness. The sounds of pursuit had perished, or were 
so mingled with the common sounds of nature as 
to be unheard ; and I was congratulating myself 
upon our total safety, and about to return to the 
spot where I had left my companions, when the 
torch-light shot up from the dell immediately be- 
low me. It passed rapidly round, and, to my 
surprise and alarm, began to spread between me 
and the path which I had marked for our escape. 

I gave a hurried glance along the ravine ; but 
Naomi was not there. A detachment of archers 
were climbing over the huge rocks that filled up 
its depth, and flashing their torches through every 
hollow where a human being could lie. Conceal- 
ment was impossible, if they continued their search ; 
but after a short period, the torches appeared to 
pass down an angle of the glen where some thickets 
allowed shelter. 

To rescue my unfortunate charge, was my first 
resolve ; and I began to let myself down the ab- 
rupt side of the hollow, before the torches disap- 
peared. They at last seemed to be completely 
gone ; but, as I hung within a few feet of the path, 
a growl and a dash at my throat nearly overthrew 
my steadiness. I knew that a precipice of im- 
mense depth lay underneath ; and, in the utter 



244 SALATHIEL. 

darkness, I could have no certainty that my next 
step might not carry me over it. My sole expe- 
dient was to grasp the rock with one hand, and 
defend myself to the last with the other. The 
bloodhound had tracked me ; and he flew again at 
my throat, but I was now prepared ; I caught him 
in the bound, and whirled him down the ravine. 
His howl, as he fell from crag to crag, detected me 
at once. A hundred torches rushed upwards. I 
climbed the pinnacle, sprang from its top into a 
pine thicket, and, winding over a long extent of 
broken ground, gradually lost torches and outcries 
together. 

After a pause, to consider in what quarter final 
escape was most probable, a glimmering light 
through the thicket at a considerable distance 
towards the city determined me. My pursuers 
must be far behind : the loss of the bloodhound 
diminished still more their chance of reaching my 
track through a remarkably wild and broken dis- 
trict; and come what would, whether that light 
was kindled by friends or enemies, I should see 
them before they could discover me. 

I struggled on, until I reached the base of a 
ridge, on whose further side the light gleamed. 
To ascend it, was beyond my powers ; but, b}^ 
gliding along the base, I found a crevice, which, 



SALATHIEL. 245 

enlarged, whether by nature or the human hand, 
led through the hill. My way in darkness was 
brief; I had not gone a third of the distance, 
when the light shone strongly through the cavern. 
At its mouth, I stood overwhelmed. I had strayed 
into the memorable valley of the Crosses ! 

Thousands of men besmeared with blood, dust, 
and clay, half-naked, brandishing weapons still 
dripping with gore; whirling torches; shouting 
out roars of triumph ; howling in desperate la- 
mentation ; trampling and tossing dead bodies 
with furious insult ; kneeling and weeping over 
the dead with the most violent affliction ; wrapping 
themselves in robes and armour ; tearing away 
their raiment, and flinging sword and spear into 
the flames ; throwing hundreds of corpses into one 
promiscuous burning, round which they danced 
with furious exultation ; carrying away on litters 
of lances and branches corpses that they seemed to 
hallow as more than mortal ; every strange variety 
of human passion wound up to its wildest height 
was pictured before me. And all was thrown into 
the most living distinctness by the blaze of an im- 
mense central heap of timber. 

The horrid cruelties of the morning had been 
heard of in Jerusalem ; and the spirit of the peo- 
ple was roused to vengeance. With that impe- 



246 SALATHIEL. 

rishable courage which distinguished them above 
all cations, a defiance and scorn of hazard that in 
those unhappy days only urged them to their ruin, 
they determined to make the enemy pay in slaugh- 
ter for the memory of their warriors. A multi- 
tude, without a leader, but among whom served 
with the simple spear many a leader, poured out 
from the gates to attack an enemy flushed with 
victory, and secured in intrenchments impregnable 
to the naked strength of my unfortunate country- 
men. 

They divided into two armies; one of which 
assaulted the lines, while the other marched to the 
valley of the Crosses. The assault on the lines 
was repelled, after long and desperate displays of 
intrepidity. It was the intelligence of this attack 
that had broken up the banquet. The Romans 
sustained heavy losses in the early part of the 
night ; their outposts in the plain were sacrificed, 
and the chief part of their cantonments burned. 

But the '* army of vengeance," a name given to 
it alike by Jew and Roman, accomplished its 
purpose with dreadful retribution. The legion- 
aries posted to defend the valley, were trampled 
down and destroyed at the first charge. Detach- 
ment on detachment sent to extricate them, met 
with the same fate. One of the few prisoners 



SALATHIEL. 247 

described the valley, when his detachment reached 
its verge, as having the look of a living whirlpool, 
a vast and tempestuous rolling and heaving of in- 
furiate life, into which the attempt to descend was 
instant destruction. " Every cohort that entered 
it," said the centurion, ** was instantly ingulphed, 
and seen no more. Last night our legion, the 
fifteenth, lay down in their tents five thousand 
strong; to-night there are not ten of us on the 
face of the earth." 

The conflict was long ; and the last of the enemy 
were under the Jewish sword, when I reached the 
mouth of the cavern. But in the first intervals of 
the struggle, the remains of our tortured people 
had been taken down from the accursed tree, 
tended with solemn sorrow, and given up to their 
relatives and friends to be borne back to Jeru- 
salem. The crosses were thrown into a heap, and 
set on fire : the fallen legionaries underwent the 
last indignities that could be inflicted by scorn and 
rage ; and when even those grew weary, were 
flung into the blazing pile. 

The fate of the noble Eleazar was still unknown ; 
and, to obtain the certainty of his preservation, or 
to render the last honour to his remains, I forced 
my way towards the spot on which I had seen him, 
awaiting death. But my researches were in vain ; 



248 SALATHIEL. 

the witnesses on both sides were now where there 
is no utterance. Guard, executioner, and victim, 
were clay : the battle had raged chiefly round that 
spot ; and the ground, trampled, and stained deep, 
gave melancholy evidence of the havoc. There 
were painful and peculiar signs of the sacrifice that 
had extinguished the little group of the converts; 
and I poured oil and wine upon their hallowed 
ashes. A large fragment of a cross still stood 
erect in the midst of them. " Was it upon thee, 
accursed thing," I exclaimed, '* that the life-blood 
of my brother was poured ? Was it upon thee, 
that the last breath was breathed in torture from 
the lips of virtue, heroism, and purity ? Never 
shalt thou minister again to the cruelty of the 
monsters that raised thee there." 

Indignantly I tore up the beam ; and dragging 
it to the pile by my single strength — to the won- 
der of the crowd, who eagerly offered their help, 
but whom I would not suffer to share in this ima- 
ginary, yet consoling retribution — I rolled it into 
the flames, amid shouts and rejoicings. 

Day-break was now at hand, and the sounds of 
the enemy's movements made our return necessary. 
We heaped the last Roman corpse on the pile ; 
covered it with the broken spears, helmets, and 
cuirasses of the dead, and then left the care of the 



SALATHIEL. 249 

conflagration to the wind. From the valley to Je- 
rusalem, our way was crowded with the enemy's 
posts ; but the keen eye and agile vigour of the 
Jew eluded or anticipated the heavy-armed legion- 
aries, by long experience taught to dread the 
night in Judea ; and we reached the Grand Gate 
of Sion, as the sun was shooting his first rays on 
the pinnacles of the Temple. 

In those strange and agitated days, when every 
hour produced some extraordinary scene, I remem- 
ber few more extraordinary than that morning s 
march into the city. It was a triumph, but how 
unlike all that bore the name ! It was no idle, 
popular pageant ; no fantastic and studied exhibi- 
tion of trophies and treasures ; no gaudy homage 
to personal ambition ; no holiday show to amuse 
the idleness, or feed the vanity of a capital secure 
in peace, and pampered with the habits of opulence 
and national supremacy. But it was at once a 
rejoicing, a funeral, a great act of atonement, a 
popular preservation, whose results none could 
limit, and a proud revenge on the proudest of ene- 
mies. 

That night not an eye had closed in Jerusalem. 
The Romans, quick to turn every change to advan- 
tage, had suftered the advance of our irregular 
combatants only until they could throw a force 



250 SALATHIEL. 

between them and the gates. The assault was 
made, and with partial success ; but the popula- 
tion once roused, was terrible to an enemy fighting 
against walls and ramparts, and the assailants were, 
after long slaughter on both sides, drawn off at the 
sight of our columns moving from the hills. We 
marched in, upwards of fifty thousand men, as wild 
and strange-looking a host as ever trod, to accla- 
mations from voices unnumbered. Every case- 
ment, roof, battlement, and wall, in the long range 
of magnificent streets leading round by the foot of 
Sion to Mount Moriah, was covered with specta- 
tors. Man, woman, and child, of every rank, 
were there, straining their eyes and voices, and 
waving hands, weapons, and banners for their de- 
liverers from the terror of instant massacre. Our 
motley ranks had equipped themselves with the 
Roman spoils, where they could ; and, among the 
ragged vestures, discoloured turbans, and rude 
pikes, moved masses of glittering mail, helmets, 
and gilded lances. Beside the torn flags of the 
tribes were tossing embroidered standards with the 
initials of the Caesars, or the golden image of some 
deity, mutilated by our scorn for the idolater. The 
Jewish trumpets had scarcely sent up their chorus, 
when it was followed by the clanging of the Roman 
cymbal, the long and brilliant tone of the clarion, 



SALATHIEL. S5l 

or the deep roar of the brass conch and serpent* 
Close upon ranks exulting and shouting victory, 
came ranks bearing the honoured dead on litters, 
and bursting into bitter sorrow ; then rolled on- 
ward thousands, bounding and showing the wea- 
pons and relics that they had torn from the enemy ; 
then passed groups of the priesthood, — for they 
too had long taken the common share in the de- 
fence, — singing one of the glorious hymns of the 
Temple: then again followed litters surrounded 
by the wives and children of the dead, wrapt in 
inconsolable grief. Bands of warriors, who had 
none to care for, the habitual sons of the field ; 
armed women ; chained captives ; beggars ; men 
covered with the stately dresses of our higher 
ranks ; biers heaped with corpses ; waggons piled 
with armour, tents, provisions, the wounded, the 
dead ; every diversity of human circumstance, 
person and equipment that belong to a state in 
which the elements of society are let loose, in that 
march successively moved before the eye. With 
the men were mingled the captured horses of the 
legionaries ; the camels and dromedaries of the 
allies ; herds of the bull and buffalo, droves of 
goats and sheep ; the whole one mighty mass of 
misery, rejoicing, nakedness, splendour, pride, hu- 
miliation, furious and savage life, and honoured 



252 SALATHIEL. 

and lamented death ; the noblest patriotism, and 
the most hideous abandonment to the excesses of 
our nature. 

As soon as I could extricate myself from the 
concourse, I hastened to appease the anxieties of 
my family ; who had suffered the general terrors of 
the night, with the addition of their own stake in 
my peril, and that of Constantius. Esther had 
returned, and was still in nervous alarm. On the 
night of her being led, through filial zeal, to meet 
Septimius, she was seized by a party of armed 
men, and by them conveyed to a dungeon, where 
questions had been put to her tending to charge 
me at once with magic, and correspondence with 
the enemy. But no threatenings could influence 
her, and she found herself as unexpectedly set at 
liberty as she had been seized. At the gate of her 
prison the minstrel had met her, and through the 
midst of the city, then in its fiercest agitation, had 
with singular dexterity conducted her safely home. 

A service of this kind was not to go unrewarded, 
and he was suffered to remain under our roof until 
my return. But by that time he had made his 
ground secure by such zealous service, and so 
many graceful and valuable qualities, that even 
Miriam, sensitive and sagacious as she was, de- 
sired that he should be retained. From his know- 



SALATHIEL. 253 

ledge of the various dialects of Asia, and his means 
of unsuspected intercourse, but few events could 
occur of which he had not obtained some previous 
knowledge. His adroitness in availing himself of 
his knowledge I had already experienced in my 
escape from the gates, and it was to him that was 
due the flight of the negroes. A stray charger, a 
mask, and the common juggler's contrivance of the 
breathing flames, made up the demon that de- 
frauded the Ethiopian exchequer. But his dexte- 
rity in the arts of elegance and taste was singular : 
his pencil was dipt in nature ; and the sketches 
that he was perpetually making of the wild and 
picturesque population that now filled our streets 
were incomparable. He sculptured ; he modelled ; 
he wove; he wrought the gold filigree and chain- 
work for which our artists were famous, with a 
skill that the most famous might have envied. His 
knowledge of languages was the natural result of 
his wanderings, but it was extraordinarily various 
and pure. The dance and song were part of his 
profession ; but from the little imperfect harp in 
use among the minstrels, he drew tones that none 
other had ever delighted me with ; — sounds of 
such alternate spirit and sweetness, such heart- 
reaching power, that they were like an immediate 
communication of mind with mind. 



254 SALATHIEL. 

And the charm of those acquirements was en- 
hanced by the graceful carelessness with which he 
made his estimate of their value. To my ques- 
tions, how he could, at his age, have mastered so 
many attainments, his reply was, that, with his 
three teachers, ** every thing might be learned, 
common sense alone excepted, the peculiar and 
rarest gift of providence. Those three teachers 
were, Necessity, Habit, and Time. At his starting 
in life, Necessity had told him that, if he hoped to 
live, he must labour ; Habit turned the labour into 
an indulgence ; and Time gave every man an hour 
for every thing, unless he chose to yawn it away." 

But he had higher topics ; and the sagacity of 
his views, in a crisis that was made to shake the 
wisdom of the wise, often held me in astonishment. 
The fate of Constantius deeply perplexed me. He 
had now been absent three days ; and no tidings of 
him could be heard among the returning warriors, 
further than that he had joined them in the march 
to the valley of the Crosses, had distinguished 
himself by the intrepidity of his attack on the le- 
gionary guard at the entrance, and was seen for a 
short time with a captured standard in his hand 
leading on the people. 

Unable to endure the silent anguish of those 
round me, silent only through fear of giving pain, 



SALATHIEL. 255 

I had determined on passing the walls again, to 
seek my brave and unfortunate son among the 
fallen. But Miriam's quick affection detected me, 
and with weeping prayers she implored that " I 
should not risk a life on which hung her own and 
those of her children." 

The sound of the lyre came soothingly upon the 
air, and to dissipate the cloud that was gathering 
on my mind, I wandered to a balcony, where, in 
the light of the evening sun, and the pleasant 
breathing of the breeze, the minstrel was touching 
the strings to the song that had first attracted me. 
I flung my wearied frame on a couch, and lis- 
tened ; till memory became too keen, and I waved 
my hand to him to change the strain. He obeyed ; 
but his heart was in the harp no more ; his touch 
faltered, the song died away, and he approached 
me with a soothingness of voice and manner that 
none would have desired to resist. ** My prince, 
you are unhappy ; and if your sorrows can be 
lightened by any service of mine, why not com- 
mand me ?" He waited ; but I was too much ab- 
sorbed in gloomy speculation. " I can pass the 
gates," he timidly continued, *' if such be my lord's 
will." I made a sign of dissent ; for the enemy, 
since their late surprise, had begun to urge the 
siege with increased vigilance. Yet my anxiety 



256 SALATHIEL. 

for the fate of Constantius, and scarcely less for 
that of Naomi and her lover, must have been 
visible. 

He still lingered nigh, watching the indications 
that inward struggle so forcibly paints upon the 
external man. '* Prince of Naphtali," said he, in 
a steadier tone, " among my teachers, I forgot to 
mention one, and that one the most effective of all 
— Self-determination ! not the mere disregard of 
personal risk, but the intrepidity of the mind. I 
loved knowledge, and I pursued it without fear. 
Nature is boundless, wise, and wonderful. But 
prejudice bars up the gate of knowledge. The 
man who would learn, must despise the timidity 
that shrinks from wisdom ; he must hate the 
tyranny of opinion that condemns its pursuit. Wis- 
dom is, like beauty, to be won only by the bold." 

I looked up at the young pronouncer of the 
oracle. His countenance, animated by the" topic, 
wore an expression of brilliancy and power, in 
which I should never have recognised the delicate 
and dejected being that he always appeared, ex- 
cept in some moment of sportiveness, come and 
gone with the quickness of lightning. 

** Minstrel, apply this to our people, or their bigot- 
ed and ignorant leaders. I have no prejudices." 

*' All men have them, my prince ; and the 



SALATHIEL. 257 

only distinction is, that in some they are mean, 
dark, and malignant ; in others they are lofty, ge- 
nerous, and feeling ; yet they are but the stronger 
for their nobleness. The mind itself struggles to 
throw off the vile and naked fetter. But how 
many forget the incumbrance of the chain of gold 
in its preciousness !" — He hesitated, and then, 
with a still more elevated air, again began : ** You 
despise, for instance, the little ingenuities of our 
profession, and I own that in general they deserve 
nothing else. But if there were to come before 
you some true lover of nature, a disciple of that 
sublimer philosophy which holds the secrets of her 
operations ; a master of those superb influences 
which rule the frame of things, and yet more, 
guide the fates of men and nations; would not 
your prejudices, and noble ones they are, lead you 
to repel the ofl'er of his knowledge ?" 

Thoughts tending to those mysteries had so often 
occurred to me, and my mind was by its original 
constitution so fond of the abstruse and the wild, 
that I listened with the interest of habitual plea- 
sure to the romance of philosophy. The figure 
before me was not unsuited to the illusion ; slight, 
habited in the fanciful dress of his art, a tunic of 
purple cloth, bound round the waist with a girdle ; 
the turban, a mere band of scarlet silk, lightly laid 



258 SALATHIEL. 

upon his curls. There was in this nothing- that 
was not to be seen at every hour in the streets ; but, 
round his waist, instead of the usual girdle of the 
minstrels, he wore to-night a large golden serpent, 
embossed and coloured with a startling resemblance 
to life, and a broad golden circlet wrought with 
devices of serpents clasped his brow. But the 
countenance was vividness itself; not without that 
occasional wandering and touch of melancholy that 
showed where early care has been ; yet redeeming 
the gloom by a smile that had the sweetness and 
suddenness of the sun-beam across an April shower. 

The evening music of the Roman camps roused 
me, as their ranks were drawn out for the custo- 
mary exercise. I turned from them to glance 
upon the battlements, that were now crowded with 
stragglers of the tribes inhaling the air of the 
fields, and like myself gazing on the movements of 
the enemy. The thought pressed on me, how 
soon and how terribly all this must end ; what 
were the multitudes to be, that now lived and 
breathed beneath my glance ? I turned from earth 
to look upon the west, where the evening star was 
lying on a rosy cloud, like a spirit sent to bring 
back tidings from this troubled world. 

" There, boy," said I, •* will your wisdom tell 
me the story of that star ? Are its people as mad 



SALATHIEL. 259 

as we i Is there ambition on one side, and folly on 
the other I are their great men the prey of a po- 
pulace, and their populace the tools and the fools of 
their great men ? Have they orators, to inflame their 
passions ; lawyers, to beggar them in pursuit of 
justice ; traders, to cheat them ; heroes, to give 
them laurels and vanity at the price of blood, hun- 
ger, and misery ; and philosophers, to be the worst 
plagues among them— in the midst of perpetual 
wonders, and baffled by every pebble under their 
feet, insensible to their own ignorance ; and with 
every attribute and voice of nature full of worship, 
wrapping themselves in the robe of the scorner, 
and refusing their homage to a God?" 

*' Even that knowledge," said the minstrel, 
'* may not be beyond the flight of the human in- 
tellect; but prejudices must be first overcome: we 
must learn to scorn names, defy idle fears, and 
use the powers of nature to give us the mastery 
of nature. There are virtues in plants, in metals, 
even in words, that to seek alarms the feeble, but 
to possess constitutes the mighty. There are in- 
fluences of the air, of the stars, of even the most 
neglected and despised things, that may be gifted 
to confer the sovereignty of mankind." 

I listened with the passive indulgence of one 
listening under a spell : his voice had the sweet 



260 SALATHIEL. 

ness and flow of song, and his language was made 
impressive by gestures of striking intelligence and 
beauty. He pointed to the skies, to the flowers, 
to the horizon, that glowed like an ocean of amber ; 
and his fine countenance assumed a new character 
of loftiness, loveliness, or repose, as he gazed on 
the sublime or the serene. 

" Boy," said I, faintly, '* are not those the stu- 
dies by which the pagan world is made evil ?" 

He smiled. " No ! Light is not further from 
darkness than wisdom from the superstition of the 
pagan. Rome is filled with the madness that falls 
upon idolatry for its curse — that has fallen since 
the beginning of the world — that shall fall until 
its end. She is the slave of spiritual fear. This 
hour, among the proudest, boldest, wisest, within 
the borders of paganism, there lives not a man un- 
enslaved by the lowest delusion. The soothsayer, 
the interpreter of dreams, the sacrificer, the seller 
of the remnants and dust of the dead, the misera- 
ble pretender to magic ; those are the true rulers 
of the haughty empire — those are the sceptre- 
bearers, to whom the emperor is a menial ; who 
laugh at authority, set counsel at nought, and are 
sapping the foundations of the state, were they 
deep as the centre, by sapping the vigour and 
virtue of the national mind." 



SALATHIEL. 261 

While he spoke, he was, with apparent uncon- 
sciousness, sketching some outlines on one of the 
large marble-slabs of the wall. My eyes had fol- 
lowed the sun, until the balcony, darkened by an 
old vine, was in the depth of twilight. To my 
surprise, the marble began to be covered with fire ; 
but fire of the softest and most silvery hue. The 
surprise was increased, by seeing this glow-worm 
lustre kindle into form. I saw Constantius ; and 
by his side Naomi and her lover. As the lines 
grew clearer still, I saw them in chains, and in a 
dungeon ! 

The extraordinary information which the min- 
strel had the means of obtaining, made me demand, 
in real alarm, whether the picture were true ; and 
that, if it were, I should be instantly acquainted 
with whatever might enable me to save them. 

** And trifles like those fires can excite your as- 
tonishment?" he replied. — '* What if I were to 
tell you of wonders, such as it has not entered into 
the mind of the world to conceive ; yet, which are 
before us every hour of our lives, are mingled with 
everything, are grasped in our insensate hands, are 
trodden by our careless feet ? See these crys- 
tals — " he scraped a portion of the nitre exuding 
from the wall;—" in these is hidden a power to 
which the strength of man is but air — to which 



262 SALATHIEL. 

the mighty bulwarks round us are but as the leaf 
on the breeze — at whose command armies shall 
vanish, mountains shake, empires perish — the 
whole face of society shall change ; — yet, by a 
sublime contradiction, combining the greatest evil 
with the greatest good — the most lavish waste of 
life and happiness, with the most signal provision 
for human security and civilization ! 

" Look on this metal," said he, pointing to some 
of the leaden ornaments of the balcony ; " and 
think what is the worth of human judgment. Who 
would give the pearl or the diamond, the silver or 
the gold, for this discoloured dross? Yet here is 
the king of metals — the king of earth ; for it can 
create, subdue, and rule all that earth produces of 
nobleness and power. Within this dross are trea- 
sures hidden, more than earth could buy — truth, 
knowledge, and freedom. — It can give the dead a 
new life, and give the living a new immortality. — 
It can stoop the haughtiest usurper that ever 
sinned against man into the lowest scorn. — It can 
raise the humblest son of obscurity into pre-emi- 
nence ; and, even without breaking in upon the 
seclusion that he loves, make him the benefactor 
of the human race, and set him forth crowned to 
every future age with involuntary glory. — It can 
flash light upon the darkest corners of the earth ; 



SALATHIRL. 263 

light never to be extinguished. It can civilize the 
barbarian : it can pour perpetual increase of hap- 
piness, strength, and liberty, round the civilized. — 
It can make feet to itself that walk through the 
dungeon-walls ; wings that the uttermost limits of 
the world cannot weary ; eyes to which the darkest 
concealments of evil are naked as the day ; intellect 
that darts through the universe, and grasps the 
mightiest mysteries of nature and of mind ! But in 
it too is a fearful power of ruin. Holding the keys 
of opulence and empire, it can raise men and 
nations to the most dazzling height. But it can 
stain, delude, and madden them, until they become 
a worse than pestilence to human nature." 

While he spoke, his form assumed a grandeur 
commensurate to his lofty topics; the power of his 
voice awoke with the awaking power of his mind. 
My faculties succumbed under his presence, and 
I could only exclaim : '* More of those wonders ; 
give me more of those noble evidences of the su- 
premacy of man ! " 

*' Man!" said my strange enlightener ; "look 
upon him as he is ; and what more helpless thing 
moves under the canopy of heaven ? The prey of 
folly, the creature of accident, the sport of nature ; 
the surge whirls him where it will ; the wind 
scorns his bidding ; the storm crushes him ; the 



264 SALATHIEL. 

lightning smites him. But, look upon man, when 
Knowledge has touched him with her sceptre." — 
He fixed upon me eyes, from which I thought that 
the very lightnings gleamed. The circlet round 
his brow seemed to quiver and sparkle with inward 
lustre ; the golden serpent that clasped his robe 
seemed to writhe and revolve. I felt like one 
under its fascination. A sense of danger thrilled 
through me, yet mixed with a dreamy and luxu- 
rious sense of enjoyment. The air was heavy 
with fragrance ; and I sat listening in powerless 
homage to a lip moulded by beauty and disdain. 

** Man, the sport of nature !" said he, pointing 
to a bead of dew that hung glittering on a leaf of 
the vine. *'Say, man the sovereign of nature! 
With but so feeble an instrument as this dew-drop, 
he might control and scorn the wind and the wave ! 
— Or would you defy the storm in darkness ; with- 
out sun or star speed through the unknown ocean ; 
and add a new world to the old ? Within this 
fragment lies the secret." He struck off a brown 
splinter from the stone of the balcony. — " Or 
would you behold regions, to which the stars that 
now blaze above our heads are but the portal ; 
kingdoms of light never penetrated by mortal 
vision ; generations of worlds ? By what splendid 
influence think you that the miracle is to be 



SALATHIEL. 265 

wrought ? Even by this dust !" He took up a 
few grains of the sand at his feet, and poured them 
into my robe. He saw his time. *' Would you," 
exclaimed he, " be master of those magnificent 
secrets? — But bind this girdle round you, and 
invoke the name that I shall name." 

I shuddered ; the arts of the diviner flashed 
upon me. But I had listened too long not to be 
enfeebled by the temptation. I felt the passion 
which lost us paradise — the thirst of forbidden 
knowledge. 

Still I resisted. The young deceiver urged me 
with more distinct promises. " In your fate," 
said he, " the fate of your nation is bound up. 
Has it not been declared that a great deliverer is 
to come, by whom the face of the enemies of 
Judah is to be withered, and the kingdom and the 
sceptre of the earth given back to the hand of 
Israel ? Pledge yourself to me, and be that deli- 
verer ! — You shrink ! Know then, that while I 
speak, every creature of your blood is in chains ; 
your house is desolate ; your fortunes are over- 
thrown ; you are cut off, root and branch ; you are 
exiled— desperate — undone !" 

I felt a dreadful certainty that his words were 
true. My heart bled at the picture of ruin. I 
wavered. The temptation tingled through my 

VOL. III. M 



266 SA LATH I EL. 

veins. " What was the sacrifice of myself," 
thought I, " wretched and sentenced as I was, to 
the preservation of beings made for happiness ? 
Or, was I to hesitate, let the risk be what it might, 
when virtue, patriotism, and boundless knowledge, 
were added to that preservation ? For the trivial 
honours that man could give to man, the highest 
intellects of the earth had been influenced ; but 
the honours of the restorer of Judah were an im- 
mortal theme, — the old splendours of triumph were 
pronounced vain and dim, the old supremacy of 
thrones weakness to the domination and grandeur 
of the sovereign that should sway the returning 
tribes of Sion." 

The figure approached me ; and in a voice that 
sank with subtle force through every nerve, pro- 
nounced the vow that I was to utter. I was ter- 
ror-struck ; a cloud came over my sight; strange 
light moved and glittered before me. I felt the 
unspeakable dread that my faculties should betray 
me, and that I should unconsciously yield to a 
temptation which yet I had no strength to with- 
stand. 

While I sat helpless, and almost blind, I was 
aroused by a majestic voice. I looked up. Elea- 
zar was at my side. I would have flung myself 
into his arms ; I would have cast myself at his 



SALATHIEL. 267 

feet ; but there was an indescribable sensation 
that told me my noble brother was to be so ap- 
proached no more. " Well and wisely hast thou 
resisted," were his solemn words; " for in thee 
are the last fortunes of thy people. Judea must 
fall ; but fallen with her as thou shalt be, and 
desolate, despairing, and wild, as shall be thy 
sojourn, the last blow of ruin to both would be 
given, hadst thou yielded to the adversary." I 
glanced at the minstrel. His visage was horror : 
he stood deformed, like one dead in the moment 
of torture. I closed my eyes against the hideous 
spectacle. — A sound of hurrying steps made me 
open them the next instant. — I was alone ! 



268 SALATHIEL. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 



The sounds of the footsteps thickened. Ex- 
hausted and overwhelmed as I was by the trial 
that my mind had just undergone, I sat nearly 
unconscious of external things, till I was roused by 
a strong grasp from behind, and saw myself sur- 
rounded by armed men. I was passively bound ; 
and, indifferent to fortune, was flung into a litter, 
and conveyed to the dungeons of the Tower of 
Antonia. In this vast circle of fortifications, the 
citadel of the former Roman garrison, the Jewish 
government was now held, or rather Onias lorded 
it over the population. He had discovered my 
dwelling ; and the first fruit of his knowledge was 
my seizure and that of my family. He was now 
playing the last throw of that desperate game to 



SALATHIEL. 269 

which his life had been given. Power was within 
his reach, yet there I stood to thwart him once 
more; and he was resolved to extinguish the first 
source of his danger. Yet I was popular, and, 
with all his daring, he desired to cast the odium 
of my death on the Sanhedrim. I was to be tried 
on the ground of treating with the enemy ; my 
family were seized, to shake my courage by their 
peril ; and I was to be forced to an ignominious 
confession, as the price of saving their lives. 

At the mouth of the dungeon, a torch was put 
into my hands. I was left to make my way ; and 
the iron door was closed, that had shut out many 
a wretch from light and life. At the bottom of 
the steps I found a man sleeping tranquilly on 
the bare stone. The glare of the torch disturbed 
him ; he started up, and looking in my face, ex- 
claimed in the buoyant and cheerful tone by 
which I should have recognised him under any 
disguise, ** By Jupiter, I knew that we were to 
meet ! If I had to sleep to-night at the bottom of 
the sea, I should wager my scymitar to a straw 
that our bodies would be found lying side by side. 
I presume we mount the scaffold together to-mor- 
row, for the benefit of Jewish morality. Well 
then, since our fates are to be joined, let us begin 
by — supping together." 



270 SALATHIEL. 

He laid his store on the ground ; but I was 
heart-sick, and could only question him of Naomi 
and the misfortune which had betrayed him into 
the hands of the tyrant. " Our history is the 
briefest in the world," was the answer, " We 
found ourselves pursued, and we fled. The pur- 
suers followed faster than my fair mistress could 
run, or I could carry her. So, we were over- 
taken before we could clear the rocks ; and our 
captors were forthwith carrying us to the Roman 
camp in great joy at their prize. But it was in- 
tended to be an unlucky day for the legions. We 
came across a Jewish troop headed by a fine bold 
fellow, who dashed upon the captors, and fluttered 
them like a flight of pigeons. Nothing could pro- 
mise better than the affair ; for my new captor 
turned out to be an old friend, and one of the 
most gallant that ever commanded a trireme. 
Many a day the Cypr lot and I chased (Nemesis 
forgive us for it !) the pirates through the Cycla- 
des : I, however, did not know then what pleasant 
personages the brothers of the free-trade might 
be." He smiled ; and the sigh that followed the 
smile, told how little he had since found to com- 
pensate for his old adventures. 

" Your captor was my son, my heroic Constan- 
tius?" I exclaimed. 



SALATHIEL. 271 

** The very man. When he had found me out 
under my Arab trappings, he was all hospitality, 
and invited me to share the honours of his princely 
father's house. His troop soon scattered, every 
man to his home ; and I was gazing at the head 
of an incomparable knave and early acquaintance, 
Jonathan, nailed up over the gate for some villauy 
which he had not been as adroit as usual in turn- 
ing to profit ; when Constantius, myself, and that 
lovel}^ and innocent girl, whom I shall never see 
more," — he stooped his brow at the recollection — 
''were seized by the guard, separated, and sent, I 
suppose, alike to the dungeon." 

Shortly after midnight I was brought before 
the tribunal. Onias was my accuser, and I was 
astonished at the dexterity, number, and plausi- 
bility of his charges — magic, treachery, denial of 
my services to the country, the betrayal of my 
army, the refusal to push the defeated enemy to a 
surrender, lest by the cessation of the war my am- 
bition should be deprived of its object ; and last, 
and most astonishing, the assassination of my kins- 
man Jubal, through fear of his testimony. 

I made my defence with the fearlessness of one 
weary of life, and with the force of truth. Some 
of the charges I explained ; others I promptly 
and effectually repelled. To the imputation of 



272 SALATHIEL. 

treachery I answered in a single sentence — 
" Read that correspondence with the enemy, and 
judge, which is the traitor." I took the Egyp- 
tian's papers from my sash, and flung them on the 
table. 

The aspect of my accuser at the words Was one 
that might have made his sternest hater pity him. 
He gasped — he trembled — he gnashed his teeth in 
rage and terror ; and, finally, took refuge in the 
ranks of his followers. But the judges themselves 
were in visible perplexity : they looked over the 
papers, held them to the lamps, and examined 
them in all imaginable ways ; until the chief of 
the Sanhedrim rising, with a frown that fixed all 
eyes on me, flung the papers at my feet. The 
deepest silence was round me as I took up the re- 
jected proofs. To my astonishment, they were 
utterly blank ! 

I now recollected that, on my entrance, I had 
been pressed upon by the crowd. In that moment 
the false papers must have been substituted. T 
saw the Egyptian gliding away from the side of 
Onias, and saw by the countenance of my accuser 
that the tidings of the robbery had just reached 
him. He rose, and declaimed against me with 
renewed energy. He was eloquent by nature : 
the habit of public aff'airs had given even the form 



SALATHIEL. 273 

of his speaking that character of practical vigour 
and reality which is essential to great public im- 
pression. His passions were inflamed ; his fortunes 
hung in the scale — perhaps his life ; and he poured 
out the whole collected impulse in a torrent of the 
boldest and most nervous declamation upon my 
head. But my name was high ; my rank was not 
to be lightly assailed ; my national services were 
felt; and even the corrupt judicature summoned 
for my ruin, were not so insensible to popular feel- 
ing as to violate the forms of law to crush me. 
The trial lasted during the night. I had the mi- 
sery to see my wife, my children, Constantius, 
Naomi, my domestics, my-fellow-warriors, every 
human being whom there was a chance of perplex- 
ing or terrifying into testimony, brought forward 
against me. As a last resource, on the secret 
suggestion of the Egyptian, who had his own re- 
venge to satisfy, the adventures of the pirates' 
cavern were declaimed upon ; and the captain was 
summoned from his cell. His figure and noble 
physiognomy made him conspicuous, and a general 
murmur of admiration arose on his advance to the 
tribunal. Miriam was at my side. I felt her 
tremble ; her colour went and came ; and she 
drank in every tone of his voice with an intense 
anxiety. But when, in answer to the questions of 



274 SALATHIEL. 

Onias, he detailed his story, and in answer to the 
charge of his being an enemy, denied that he was 
either Roman or Greek, Miriam's spirit hung upon 
every word. 

" A soldier's best pedigree," said he, conclu- 
ding, *' is his sword. I know no more than that I 
was reared in the house of a Cypriot noble, to 
whom I had been brought by a trader of Alexan- 
dria. My protector made me a sailor, and would 
have made me his heir ; but Roman insolence dis- 
gusted me, and I left my command, bearing with 
me no other inheritance than a heart too proud for 
slavery, my scymitar, and this signet, which I 
have worn from my infancy." He took from his 
bosom a large sculptured gem, fastened to a chain 
of pearls. Miriam put forth her trembling hand 
for it, read, with a starting eye, her own name 
and mine, and exclaiming " My son ! my son !" 
tottered forward, arid fell fainting into his arms. 

I flew to them both, and never did my woe- worn 
heart beat with keener joy than when I too clasped 
my son, my long-lost, my first-born. Yet clouds 
gathered instantly. — Was he not come to take the 
earliest embrace of his parents, in the crisis of 
their fate, — the promise of an unbroken lineage, 
given in the days when my country was in the jaws 
of destruction ; — the son, the brother, the husband. 



SALATHIEL. 275 

awaking to those loveliest and happiest ties of our 
nature, only when the axe of the traitor, or the 
sword of the enemy, was uplifted to cut them 
asunder for ever; — the prince, the patriot, the 
warrior, summoned to the first exercise of his no- 
ble rights and duties, when in the next hour a heap 
of dust might be all that was left of himself, his 
family, and his people ! 

I clung to him with a fondness thirsting to repay 
its long arrear. His desertion in the hands of 
strangers ; the early hardships ; the loss of a mo- 
ther's love and a father's protection ; the insults 
and privations that the struggler through the 
world must bear ; the desperate hazards of his 
life ; even the errors into which necessity and cir- 
cumstance had driven him, rose up in judgment 
against me ; and I reproached myself for the acci- 
dent, perhaps the irresistible accident, that gave 
my infant to the roaring waters. 

But the tears and exclamations of the people 
round us recalled us. I might then have walked 
from the hall without any man's daring to lay a 
hand upon me ; for the public feeling, touched by 
the discovery of my son, was loud for my instant li- 
beration. But I was not to be satisfied with this 
imperfect justice, and demanded that the tribunal 
should proceed. 



276 SALATHIEL. 

The presence of my family was felt to be too 
strong for the fears of my accuser ; and, demand- 
ing no defence but truth, I implored of them to 
retire. An impression, like that of the warning 
of a superior spirit, struck on my mind as I pro- 
nounced the word. It told me that I had spoken 
the sentence of utter separation. They came hand 
in hand to bid me farewell. Constantius and Sa- 
lome knelt before me for final forgiveness. My 
son and his betrothed bowed their heads to ask my 
blessing. Miriam and Esther came last, and si- 
lently hung upon my neck, dissolved in tears of 
matchless anguish and love. I lifted my eyes and 
heart to Heaven, and, though oppressed with the 
terrible convictions of my own fate, prayed for 
them, and put forth my hands, and blessed them 
in the name of the God of Israel. I saw them pass 
away. My firmness could bear no more. I wept 
aloud. But with my sorrow there was given a 
hope — a light across the gloom of my soul. When 
I saw their stately forms solemnly move along 
through the fierce and guilty multitude, and the 
distant portal shut upon them ; I thought of the 
sons and daughters of the great patriarch, passing 
within the door of the ark from the midst of a 
condemned world. 

The night was worn out ; the people, exhausted 



SALATHIEL. 277 

by the length of a trial protracted for the purpose, 
had left the hall nearly empty; and Onias, now 
secure of a tribunal that dreaded nothing but the 
public eye, urged the decision. The judges were 
his creatures, through corruption or fear ; his fol- 
lowers alone remained. Sure to be crushed, the 
fluctuations of hope were gone ; and I listened to 
the powerful and high-wrought harangue of my 
enemy without a movement but of admiration for 
his extraordinary powers, or of pity for their per- 
verter. While he stood drinking in with ears and 
eyes the wonder and homage of the audience, I 
myself called for sentence. " Scorning," said I, 
" to reason with understandings that will not com- 
prehend, and consciences that cannot feel, I ap- 
peal from the man of blood to the God of mercies ; 
from the worse than man of blood, from the cor- 
rupter of justice, to Him who shall judge the 
judge; to the Mighty and the Holy One, who 
shall yet pass sentence in the sight of earth and 
heaven." 

The chief assessor rose ; my condemnation was 
upon a lip quivering and pale : he had already in 
his hands the border of the robe which he was to 
rend, in sign that the accused was rent from Israel. 
A confusion at the portal checked him ; and the 
words resounded, " Beware ! shed not the inno- 



278 SALATHIEL. 

cent blood." The voice was as a voice from the 
sepulchre ; deep, melancholy, but searching to the 
very heart. The guard gave way, and a man co- 
vered from head to foot with a sepulchral garment 
rushed up the immense hall. At the foot of the 
tribunal he flung off the garment, and disclosed a 
face and form that well might have ranked him 
among the dwellers of the grave. 

'* 1 have come from the tombs," exclaimed he: 
*' I had laid down to die in the resting-place of 
my fathers, in the valley of Jehoshaphat. A man 
in white raiment stood beside me, and commanded 
me to come, and bear witness of the truth. The 
Romans were round me, he led me through them ; 
— the battlements were before me, he led me 
through them ; — riot, fury, and frenzy stood in 
my path through your city, he led me through 
them ;— and lo ! here I come, and proclaim by 
his command, ' Beware ! shed not the innocent 
blood.' " Onias stood paralysed. No memory of 
mine could recall the haggard features of the 
stranger. The chief of the tribunal, in manifest 
confusion, required his name. *' My name," he an- 
swered, with a wild wave of his hand, '* is no- 
thing — air— is gone. What I was, is past ; what 
I shall be, the tomb alone must tell : but what I 
am, is the witness commissioned to proclaim Onias 



SALATHIEL. 279 

the betrayer of the blood of your nobles— the slave 
of Rome — the traitor to his country and his reli- 
gion." All hands were lifted up in astonishment. 
Onias, sick at heart, made a feeble gesture of de- 
nial. ** Dares the traitor deny his own hand- 
writing ?" was the indignant reply. *' Let him 
read his treason, committed within these twelve 
hours." He stalked over to the guilty Onias, and 
held his letters to the Roman general before his 
shrinking eye. 

But what was his truth or falsehood to me ? I 
was marked for vengeance. While my eyes were 
fixed on the portal through which had vanished 
my last hope of happiness, I was startled by an 
outcry ; and I saw the gleam of steel at my throats 
Onias, in despair of smiting me by the arm of the 
law, had made a frenzied effort to destroy me by 
his own. Quick as lightning the stranger threw 
himself between us, and grasped the assassin ; 
they struggled — they were involved in the large 
and loose robe, and fell together. I dashed for- 
ward to separate them. But the deed was done. 
Onias lay rolling upon the ground ; the dagger 
was in the stranger's grasp, and it was crimson to 
the hilt. I could feel no vindictiveness against 
the dying, and I offered him my hand. He threw 
a violent expression of scorn into his stiffening fea- 



280 SALATHIEL. 

tures, and cried at convulsive intervals — " No 
compassion — no hypocrisy for me — I die as I lived. 
I hated you, for you thwarted me. — You have the 
best of the game now ; but if I had lived till to- 
morrow, I should have been lord of Jerusalem. — 
The Romans will settle all.— You and yours would 
have been in my power. — You shall perish.— That 
boy is your son ; he was brought to me in his 
infancy ; I hated you as my rival ; and I swore 
that you should never see your first-born again. — 
I sold him to the Alexandrian. —You shall not 
live to triumph over me ; your dungeon shall be 
your tomb ; another night, and you sleep no more, 
or sleep for ever." He gathered his mantle over 
his face, and died. 

His followers, after the first consternation, de- 
manded vengeance on the stranger. But it was 
now my time to protect him, and I insisted on his 
right of self-defence, and declared that no man 
should strike him but through me. '* This is noble 
and generous," interrupted he, '' but useless. I 
too am dying; but I rejoice that I am dying by 
the wound meant for you. Have I at last atoned ? 
Have you forgotten ? Can you forgive ? Then, 
prince of Naphtali, Ir.y your hand upon this heart, 
and, while it beats, believe that there you are 
honoured. Time has changed me ; misery has ex- 



SALATHIEL. 281 

tinguished the last trace of what I was. —Farewell, 
my kinsmaD, friend, chieftain ; and remember — 
Jubal." I caught him in my arms ; my heart 
melted at his sufferings — his generous attachment 
— his heroic devotion — his deep repentance. " You 
have more than atoned," I exclaimed; ** you are 
more than forgiven. Live, my manly, kind, high- 
hearted Jubal ; live for the honour of your race — 
of your country — of human nature." He looked 
up with a smile of gratitude, and faintly uttering, 
" I die happy," breathed in my arms the last 
breath of one of the most gallant spirits that ever 
left the world. 

Loud shouts abroad, and blazes that coloured 
the roof with long columns of lurid light, put an 
end to the deliberation of the tribunal. The enemy 
were assaulting the citadel ; and the mockery of 
justice was summarily closed by returning me to 
my dungeon, to await times fitter for the calmness 
of judicial murder. 

The assault continued for some hours ; but to 
my cavern, sunk in the very foundations of the 
fortress, day never came ; and I lay, still buried 
in darkness, when I heard sounds like the blows 
of pickaxes; and from time to time the fall of 
heavy bodies, followed by a roar. The air grew 
close ; and, chill as the dungeon had been, I ex- 



282 SALATHIEL. 

perienced a sensation of heat still more painful. 
The heat increased rapidly. I tried to avoid it 
by shifting my place in the large vault, which had 
been originally a granary. But the evil was not 
to be baffled ; the air grew hotter and hotter. T 
flung myself on the pavement to draw a cool breath 
from the stones: they began to glow under me. 
I ran to the door of the dungeon : it was iron, and 
the touch scorched me. In alarm at the most 
hideous of all deaths, I shouted, I tore at the 
walls, at the massive rings in the floor, less per- 
haps from the hope of thus escaping, than from 
the vague eagerness to deaden present pain by 
violent effort. But I tore up the pavement, and 
shook down the fragments of the walls, in vain. 
The walls themselves began to split with the heat; 
smoke eddied through the crevices of the immense 
stones; and the dungeon was filled with fiery 
vapour. My raiment encumbered me; I tore it 
away, and, on the floor, saw it fall in ashes. I 
felt the agonies of suff'ocation ; and at last, help- 
less and hopeless, threw myself down, like my 
raiment, to be consumed. 

I had scarcely touched the stone, when I felt it 
shake and vibrate from side to side. A hollow 
noise like distant thunder echoed through the 
vault : the walls shook, collapsed, opened, and I 



SALATHIEL. 283 

was plunged down a chasm, and continued rolling 
for some moments in a whirl of stones, dust, earth, 
and smoke. When it subsided, I found myself 
lying on the green sward, in noon-day, at the bot- 
tom of a valley, with the tower of Antonia covered 
with the legionaries, five hundred feet above me. 

The remnants of huge fires round pillars of tim- 
ber explained the mystery. The enemy had under- 
mined the wall ; and, by burning the props, had 
brought it down at the time of their assault. 
Onias, the planner of the attack, for which he was 
to be repaid with the procuratorship of Judea, 
had placed me in the spot where ruin was to begin, 
and cheered his dying moments with the certainty 
that, acquitted or not, there I must be undone. 

I long lay contused and powerless among the 
ruins. But the twilight air revived me ; and I 
crept through the deserted intrenchments of the 
enemy, until I reached one of the gates ; where I 
announced my name, and was received with re- 
joicings. 

The heart of my countrymen was heroic to the 
last, and deeply was its heroism now demanded ; 
for the whole force of the enemy had been 
brought up for final assault ; and when I entered, 
every portion of the walls was the scene of un- 
exampled battle. Where the ground suffered 



284 SALATHIEL. 

the approach of troops, the enemy's columnsj 
headed by archers and slingers innumerable, 
rushed to the rampart, climbing up the breaches 
with their shields over their heads. Against the 
towers were wheeled towers filled with troops, 
who descended on the wall, and fought us hand to 
hand. We felt the perpetual blows of the batter- 
ing-rams shaking the battlements under our feet. 
Where the ground repelled direct assault, there 
the military machines poured havoc, and those 
were the most dreaded of all. 

The skill of man, exerted for ages on the arts 
of compendious slaughter, has scarcely produced 
the equals of those horrible engines. They threw 
masses of unextinguishable fire, of boiling water, 
of burning oil, of red-hot flints, of molten metal, 
from distances that precluded defence, and with a 
force that nothing could resist. The catapult shot 
stones of a hundred weight from the distance of 
furlongs, with the straightness of an arrow, and 
with an impulse that ground every thing in their 
way to powder. The fortitude that scorned the 
Roman spear, and exulted in the sight of the co- 
lumns mounting the scaling-ladders, as mounting 
to sure destruction, quailed before the tremendous 
power of the catapult. The singular and omi- 
nous cry of the watcher that gave notice of its 



SALATHIEL. 285 

discharge, " The son cometh," was a sound that 
prostrated every man upon his face, until the crash 
of the walls told that the blow was given. 

Every thought that I had now for earth was in 
the tower of Antonia. But there the legions ren- 
dered approach impossible ; and I could only gaze 
from a distance, and see, in the bitterness of my 
soul, the enemy gradually forcing their way from 
rampart to rampart. It was in vain that I strove 
to collect a few who would join me in a desperate 
attempt to succour its defenders. I was left alone ; 
and sadly sitting on the battlements, I took the 
chance of some friendly spear or stone. Through 
all the roar I heard the voice of Sabat the Ish- 
maelite ; the eternal " Woe ! — woe ! — woe !" loud 
as ever, and in appalling unison with the hour. 
He came rushing along the wall with the same 
rapid and vigorous stride as of old ; but his be- 
trothed no longer followed him. She was borne 
in his arms ! The stones from the engines thun- 
dered against the wall ; they tore up the strong 
buttresses like weeds ; they struck away whole 
ranks of men, and whirled their remnants through 
the air. They levelled towers, and swept battle- 
ments away with their defenders at a blow. But 
Sabat moved unshrinking on his wild mission. 
His cry was terrible prophecy. " A voice from 



286 SALATHIEL. 

the east, a voice from the west, a voice from 
the four winds, a voice against Jerusalem and the 
holy house, a voice against the bridegrooms and 
the brides, a voice against this whole people." 

He stopped before me ; and pointing to the 
face of his bride, said with sudden faltering and 
tears, *' She is gone, she is dead. — She died last 
twilight. — I promised to die too. — She follows me 
no more ; it is I that must follow her." Death 
was in his face ; and my only wonder was, that a 
form so utterly reduced could live and move. I 
offered him some provision from the basket of a 
dead soldier at my feet. For the first time, he 
took it, thanked me, and ate. Not less to my sur- 
prise, he continued gazing round him on the move- 
ments of the enemy, on the temple, the tower of 
Antonia, and the hills. But his station was emi- 
nently perilous, and I pointed out one of the 
largest of the military engines taking its position 
to play upon the spot where we were. He refused 
to stir. " The look may be long," said he, " when 
a man looks his last." I heard the roar of the 
engine, and leaped from the rampart, to escape 
the discharge. Sabat stood, and again began his 
cry : ** Woe to the city, and to the holy house, 
and to the people !" The discharge tore up a 
large portion of the battlement. Sabat never 



SALATHIEL. 287 

moved limb nor feature. The wall was cut away 
on his right and left, as if it had been cut with an 
axe. He stood calmly on the projecting fragment, 
with his lips to the lips of his bride. I saw the 
engine levelled again, and again called to him to 
escape. He gave me no answer but a melancholy 
smile ; and crying out with a voice that filled the 
air, " Woe, to myself !" stood. I heard the rush of 
the stone. It smote Sabat and his bride into atoms ! 
The fall of our illustrious and unhappy city was 
supernatural. The destruction of the conquered 
was against the first principles of Roman polity ; 
and, to the last hour of our national existence, 
Rome held out ofiers of peace, and lamented our 
frantic determination to be undone. But the de- 
cree was gone forth from a mightier throne. 
During the latter days of the siege, a hostility, to 
which that of man was as the grain of sand to the 
tempest that drives it on, overpowered our strength 
and senses. Fearful shapes and voices in the air; 
visions startling us from our short and troubled 
sleep ; lunacy in its most hideous forms ; sudden 
death in the midst of vigour; the fury of the 
elements let loose upon our unsheltered heads ; we 
had every terror and evil that could beset human 
nature, but pestilence ; the most probable of all in 



288 SALATHIET.. 

a city crowded with the famishing, the diseased, 
the wounded, and the dead. Yet, though the 
streets were covered with the unburied ; though 
every wall and trench was teeming; though six 
hundred thousand corpses lay flung over the ram- 
part, and naked to the sun — pestilence came not ; 
for if it had come, the enemy would have been 
scared away. But the *' abomination of desola- 
tion," the pagan standard, was fixed ; where it 
was to remain until the plough passed over the 
ruins of Jerusalem ! 

On this night, this fatal night, no man laid his 
head upon his pillow. Heaven and earth were in 
conflict. Meteors burned above us ; the ground 
shook under our feet; the volcano blazed ; the 
wind burst forth in irresistible blasts, and swept 
the living and the dead in whirlwinds far into the 
desert. We heard the bellowing of the distant 
Mediterranean, as if its waters were at our side, 
swelled by a new deluge. The lakes and rivers 
roared, and inundated the land. The fiery sword 
shot out tenfold fire. Showers of blood fell. Thun- 
der pealed from every quarter of the heaven. 
Lightning in immense sheets, of an intensity and 
duration that turned the darkness into more than 
day, withering eye and soul, burned from the 



SALATHIEL. 289 

zenith to the ground, and marked its track by 
forests on flame, and the shattered summits of the 
hills. 

Defence was un thought of ; for the mortal ene- 
my had past from the mind. Our hearts quaked 
for fear ; but it was, to see the powers of heaven 
shaken. All cast away the shield and the spear, 
and crouched before the descending judgment. We 
were conscience-smitten. Our cries of remorse, 
anguish, and horror, were heard through the up- 
roar of the storm. We howled to the caverns to 
hide us ; we plunged into the sepulchres, to escape 
the wrath that consumed the living ; we would 
have buried ourselves under the mountains. 

I knew the cause, the unspeakable cause ; and 
knew that the last hour of crime was at hand. A 
few fugitives, astonished to see one man among 
them not sunk into the lowest feebleness of fear, 
came round me, and besought me to lead them to 
some place of safety, if such were now to be found 
on earth. I told them openly that they were to 
die ; and counselled them to die in the hallowed 
ground of the Temple. They followed ; and I led 
them, through streets encumbered with every shape 
of human suffering, to the foot of Mount Moriah. 
But beyond that, we found advance impossible. 
Piles of cloud, whose darkness was palpable even 
VOL. III. N 



290 SALATHIEL. 

in the midnight in which we stood, covered the 
holy hill. Impatient, and not to be daunted by 
any thing that man could overcome, I cheered my 
disheartened band, and attempted to lead the way 
up the ascent. But I had scarcely entered the 
cloud, when I was swept downward by a gust, 
that tore the rocks in a flinty shower round me. 

Now came the last and most wondrous sign, 
that marked the fate of rejected Israel. 

While I lay helpless, I heard the whirlwind 
roar through the cloudy hill ; and the vapours 
began to revolve. A pale light, like that of the 
rising moon, quivered on their edges ; and the 
clouds rose, and rapidly shaped themselves into 
the forms of battlements and towers. The sound 
of voices was heard within, low and distant, yet 
strangely sweet. Still the lustre brightened, and 
the airy building rose, tower on tower, and battle- 
ment on battlement. In awe that held us mute, 
we knelt and gazed upon this more than mortal 
architecture, that continued rising and spreading, 
and glowing with a serener light, still soft and 
silvery, yet to which the broadest moon-beam was 
dim. At last, it stood forth to earth and heaven 
the colossal image of the first Temple, of the 
building raised by the wisest of men, and conse- 
crated by the visible glory. All Jerusalem saw 



SALATHIEL. 291 

the image; and the shout that in the midst of 
their despair ascended from its thousands and tens 
of thousands, told what proud remembrances were 
there. But a hymn was heard, that might have 
hushed the world beside. Never fell on my ear, 
never on the human sense, a sound so majestic, 
yet so subduing ; so full of melancholy, yet of 
grandeur and command. The vast portal opened, 
and from it marched a host, such as man had 
never seen before, such as man shall never see 
but once again ; the guardian angels of the city of 
David ! — they came forth glorious, but w^ith woe 
in all their steps ; the stars upon their helmets 
dim ; their robes stained ; tears flowing down their 
celestial beauty. ** Let us go hence," was their 
song of sorrow. — ** Let us go hence," was answered 
by the sad echoes of the mountains. — '* Let us go 
hence," swelled upon the night, to the farthest 
limits of the land. The procession lingered long 
on the summit of the hill. The thunder pealed ; 
and they rose at the command, diffusing waves of 
light over the expanse of heaven. Their chorus 
was heard, still magnificent and melancholy, when 
their splendour was diminished to the brightness 
of a star. Then the thunder roared again ; the 
cloudy temple was scattered on the winds ; and 



292 SALATHIEL. 

darkness, the omen of her grave, settled upon 
Jerusalem. 

I was roused from deep reverie by the voice of 
a man. " What !" said he, ** sitting here, when 
all the world is awake ? Poring over the faces of 
dead men, when you should be the foremost among 
the living? All Jerusalem in arms; and yet 
you scorn your time to gain laurels?" The 
haughty and sarcastic tone was familiar to my 
recollection ; but to see, as I did, a Roman soldier 
within a few feet of me, was enough to make me 
spring up, and draw my scymitar, careless of coun- 
tenances. " You ought to know me," said he, 
without moving a muscle ; '* for, though it is some 
years since we met, we have not been often asun- 
der. And so, here you have been sitting these 
twelve hours among corpses, to no better purpose 
than losing your time and your memory to- 
gether !" 

T looked round ; the sun was in his meridian ! 
The little band that I had led to the foot of the 
mountain, were lying dead to a man. 

** Are you not a Roman ?" I exclaimed. 

" No ; but I conclude, that nearly as much ab- 
surdity and mischief may be committed under these 
trappings as under any other ; and therefore I 



SALATHIEL. 293 

wear them. But you may change with me if you 
like. This cuirass and falchion will help you to 
money, riot, violence, and vice ; and what more 
do nine-tenths of mankind ask for in their souls ? 
Take my offer, and you will be on the winning- 
side; another thing that men like. But be ex- 
peditious ; for before this sun dips his forehead in 
the Asphaltites, the bloodshed and robbery will be 
over." His laugh, as he uttered the words, was 
bitterness itself; and I felt my flesh instinctively 
shudder. But a glance towards the Temple told 
me that the words were true. The legions had 
forced their way to the foot of the third and 
weakest rampart, which I saw flying in pieces under 
the blows of the battering-rams. They must have 
marched by the very spot where I sat since mid- 
night; and I probably escaped only by being taken 
for one of the dead. I wrung my hands in agony. 
He burst into a wild roar of derision. '' What 
fools you lords of the creation are ! What is the 
loss of life to the naked wretches that you see run- 
ning about like frightened children on those battle- 
ments? or to the clothed wretches that you see 
ready to massacre them for the honour and glory 
of a better-clothed wretch ? — a dinner too much 
will revenge them on the emperor of the earth. 
The spear or the arrow comes ; and quick as 



294 SALATHIEL. 

thought their troubles are at an end. Man! — the 
true misery is to live, to be constrained to live, to 
feel the wants, wearinesses, and weaknesses of life, 

yet to drag on existence ; to be what I am." 

He tore the helmet from his forehead, and with 
a start of inward pain flung it to a measureless 
distance in the air. In amaze and terror, I beheld 
Epiphanes ! The same Greek countenance, the 
same kingly presence, the same strength and he- 
roic stature, and the same despair, were before me, 
that in the early years of my woe I had seen on 
the shores of the Dead Sea. '* I told you," said he, 
with a sudden return to calmness, " that this 
day would come ; and to tell you so, required no 
spirit of prophecy. There is a time for all things ; 
long-suffering among the rest ; and your country- 
men had long ago come to that time. But, one 
grand hope was still to be given ; they cast it from 
them ! Ages on ages shall pass, before they learn 
the loftiness of that hope, or fulfil the punishment 
of that rejection. Yet, in the fulness of time, 
shall the light break in upon their darkness. They 
shall ask, Why are we the despised, the branded, 
the trampled, the abjured of all nations? Why are 
the barbarian and the civilised alike our op« 
pressors? Why do contending faiths join in 
crushing us alone? Why do realms, distant as 



SALATHIEL. 295 

the ends of the earth, and diverse as day and 
night, — alike those who have heard our history, 
and those who have never heard of us but as the 
sad sojourners of the earth, — unite in one cry of 
scorn ? And what is the universal voice of nature, 
but the voice of the King of nature?" 

I listened in reverence, to language that pierced 
my heart with an intense power of truth, yet with 
a pang thQ^made me writhe. I longed, yet dreaded, 
to hear again the searching and lofty accents of- 
this being- of unwilling wisdom. ** Man of terri- , 
ble knowledge," said I, " canst thou tell for what 
crime this judgment shall come ?" 

His mighty brow was stooped in solemn fear, 
and his features quivered, as he slowly spoke. — 
*' Their crime? There is no name for it. The 
spirits of Heaven weep when they think of it. 
The spirits of the abyss tremble. Man alone, the 
man of Judea alone, could commit that horror of 
horrors." 

He paused, and prostrated himself at the words; 
then rising-, rapidly uttered — " Judge of the 
crime by its punishment. From the beginning 
Israel was stubborn, and his stubbornness brought 
him to sorrow. He rebelled, and he was warned 
by the captivity of a monarch, or the slaughter of 
a tribe. — He sinned more deeply, for he was the 



296 SALATHIEL. 

slave of impurity ; then was his king-dom divided ; 
yet a few years saw him powerful once more. — He 
sinned more deeply still ; for he sought the wor- 
ship of idols. Then came his deeper punishment, 
in the fall of his throne, and the long- captivity of 
his people. But even Babylon sent back the for- 
given to his throne. 

** Happy, I say to you, happy will be the hour 
for Israel — for mankind — for creation, when he 
shall take into his hand the records of his fathers, 
and in tears and prayers ask — What is that greater 
crime than rebellion? than blasphemy? than im- 
purity ? than idolatry ? which not seventy years, 
nor a thousand years of sorrow have seen forgiven ; 
which has prolonged his woe into the old age of 
the world — which threatens him with a chain, not 
to be broken but by the thunder-stroke that 
breaks up the universe !" 

*' And still," said I, trembling, and subdued 
before the living oracle — •* still is there hope?" 

*' Look to that mountain," was the answer, as 
he pointed to Moriah. Its side, covered with the 
legions advancing to the assault, shone and 
wavered in the sun like a tide of burning brass. 
** It is now a sight of splendid evil !" exclaimed 
he. ** But upon that mountain shall yet be en- 
throned a Sovereign, before whom the sun shall 



SALATHIEL. 297 

hide his head, and at the lifting of whose sceptre 
heaven and the heaven of heavens shall bow down ! 
To that mountain shall man, and more than man, 
crowd for wisdom and happiness. From that 
mountain shall light flow to the ends of the uni- 
verse ; and the government shall be to the Ever- 
lasting !" 

The roar of the assault began, and my awful 
companion was recalled to the world. *' I must 
see the end of this battle," said he, in his old mix- 
ture of sarcasm and melancholy. " Man's natural 
talent for making himself miserable may go far, 
but he is still the better for a teacher. On the 
top of that hill there are twenty thousand men 
panting for each other's blood, like tigers ; and 
yet without me, they would leave the grand busi- 
ness undone after all." 

" But one word more," I cried, giving my last 
look to the tower of Antonia, on which the eagle 
now glittered. 

He anticipated me. *' They are all safe — they are 
in the hands of Septimius, who will deal with them 
as become love and honour. He solicited the com- 
mand, that he might provide for their security. 
They comfort themselves with the hope that you 
will return. But return you will never. They 
will be happy in the hope— until sorrow is too long 



298 SALATHIEL. 

shut out to find room when it comes ; they love 
you, and will love you long" ; but there is an end 
of all things. And now, farewell." 

*' And now, onward," said I. ** But every spot 
is crowded with the Roman columns. How am I 
to pass those spears ?" 

He laughed wildly, flung his arm round me, as 
of old ; and ran, with the speed of a stag, round 
the foot of the hill, to an unobstructed side. The 
ascent was nearly perpendicular ; but he bounded 
up the crags without drawing a breath, placed me 
on a battlement, and was gone. 

Below me war raged in its boundless fury. The 
enemy had forced their way ; and the exasperated 
Jews, contemptuous of life, fought them with the 
rage of wild beasts. When the lance was broke, 
the knife was the weapon ; when the knife failed, 
they tore with their hands and teeth. Masses of 
stone, torches, even dead bodies, every thing that 
could minister to destruction, were hurled from 
the roofs on the assailants, who were often repulsed 
with deadly havoc. But they still made way; 
the courts of the Gentiles, of the Israelites, and of 
the priests, were successively stormed ; and the 
legions at length established themselves in front of 
the inner Temple. A scream of wrath and agony at 
the possible profanation of the Holy of Holies, rose 



SALATHIEL. 299 

from the multitude. I leaped from the battlement, 
and showing myself to the people, demanded, " who 
would follow me?" The crowd exulted at the 
sight of their well-known chieftain ; and in the 
impulse of the moment we rushed on the enemy, 
and drove them from the court of the sanctuary. 
Startled by the sudden reverse, the Roman gene- 
rals renewed their proposal for a surrender, and 
Titus himself, at the most imminent hazard, forced 
his way to the portal, and besought me to surren- 
der, and save the Temple. 

But Jerusalem was marked for ruin. While I 
was in the very act of checking the shower of 
spears, I heard the voice of one of those extraor- 
dinary beings who, by mad predictions of the cer- 
tain succour of Heaven, kept up the resistance 
while there was a man to be slaughtered. He was 
standing on the roof of a vast cloister, surrounded 
with a crowd of unfortunate men, whom his false 
prophecies were infuriating against the offer of 
life. I recognised the impostor, by whom the 
Roman mission had been destroyed. The legion- 
aries pointed in vain to the flames already rising 
round the cloisters. But the predictions grew 
bolder still, and the words of truce were answered 
by showers of missiles. The flames suddenly burst 
out through the roof; and the whole of its defend- 



300 SALATHIEL. 

ers, to the number of thousands, sank into the con- 
flagration. When I looked round after the shock, 
the impostor, without a touch of fire on his rai- 
ment, was haranguing in a distant quarter, and, 
man or fiend, urging the multitude to their fate ! 

This was the day of days, the ninth day of the 
month Ab, the anniversary of the burning of the 
Temple by the king of Babylon. One thousand 
one hundred and thirty years seven months and 
fifteen days were past, from its foundation by our 
great King Solomon ! My attack had repelled the 
legionaries ; and Titus, exhausted and dispirited, 
began to withdraw the routed columns from the 
front of the Temple. It was the fifth hour : the 
sun was scorching up their strength ; and I looked 
proudly forward to victory and the preservation of 
the Temple. 

As I was standing on the portal of the court of 
the sanctuary, and gazing at the march of the de- 
feated troops towards the tower of Antonia, I 
heard the voice of the Demoniac close to my ear. — 
" I told you that this day would end in nothing 
without me." I turned, but he was already far 
away among the crowd; and before I could even 
speak, I saw him, torch in hand, bound into the 
Golden window beside the vail of the Holy place. 
The inner Temple was instantly in a blaze. Our 



SALATHIEL. 301 

cries, and the sight of the flames, brought back 
the enemy at full speed. I saw that the fatal hour 
was come ; and, collecting a few brave men, took 
my post before the vail of the Portico, to guard 
the entrance with my blood. 

But the legions rushed onward, crying out, that 
** they were led by the Fates," and that '* the God 
of the Jews had given his people and city into 
their hands." The torrent was irresistible. Titus 
rushed in at its head, exclaiming, that ** the Divi- 
nity alone could have given the stronghold into 
his power, for it was beyond the hope and strength 
of man." My devoted companions were torn 
down in an instant. I was forced back to the vail 
of the Holy of Holies, fighting at random in the 
midst of the legionaries, who now saw no enemies 
but each other. In the fury of plunder, they de- 
luged the Portico and the Sanctuary with mutual 
blood. 

The golden table of Pompey, the golden vine, 
the trophies of Herod, were instantly torn away. 
Subordination was lost. The troops trampled upon 
their officers. Titus himself was saved only by 
cutting his way through those madmen. But I 
longed to die ; and give my last breath, and the 
last drop of my veins, to the seat of Sanctity and 
Glory. I fought— I taunted—I heaped loud scorn 



302 SALATHIEL. 

and reprobation on the profaners^ — I was covered 
from head to foot with gore ; but it was from the 
hearts of Romans — I toiled for death ; but I re- 
mained without a wound. Yet, woe to the life 
that came within the sweep of ray scymitar. The 
last blow that I struck was at an impious hand, 
put forth to grasp the vail that shut the Holy of 
Holies from the human gaze. The hand flew from 
the body ; and the spoiler fell groaning at my feet. 
He sent up an expiring look, and I knew the coun- 
tenance of my persecutor Cestius. 

But a new enemy was come, conqueror alike of 
the victor and the vanquished^fire. I heard its roar, 
round the sanctuary. The Romans, appalled, fled 
to the portal ; but they were doomed. A wall of fire 
stood before them. They rushed back, tore down 
the vail, and the Holy of Holies stood open. 

The blaze melted the plates of the roof, in a 
golden shower above me. It calcined the marble 
floor ; it dissipated in vapour the inestimable gems 
that studded the walls. All who entered, lay 
turned to ashes. So perish the profaners ! But 
on the sacred Ark the flame had no power. It 
whirled and swept in a red orb round the un- 
touched symbol of the throne of thrones. Still I 
lived ; but I felt my strength giving way : the 
heat withered my sinews — the flame extinguished 



SALATHIEL. 303 

my sight. I sank upon the threshold, rejoicing 
that death was inevitable. Then, once again, 
I heard the words of terror; — " Tarry thou 
TILL I COME."— The world disappeared from 
before me. 



Here I pause. — I had undergone that portion 
of my career which was to be passed among my 
people. My life as father, husband, citizen, was 
at an end. Thenceforth I was to be a solitary 
man. My fate had yet scarcely fallen upon me ; 
but I was now to feel it, in the disruption of every 
gentler tie that held me to life. I was to make 
my couch with the savage, the outcast, and the 
slave. I was to see the ruin of the mighty, and 
the overthrow of empires. Yet, in the tumult 
that changed the face of the world, I was still to 
live, and be unchanged. Every sterner passion 
that disturbs our nature was to reign in successive 
tyranny over my soul. 

Fearfully was the decree fulfilled. 

In revenge for the fall of Jerusalem, I traversed 



304 SALATHIEL. 

the globe to seek out an enemy of Rome. I 
found in the northern snows a man of blood : 
I stirred up the soul of Alaric, and led him to the 
sack of Rome. — In revenge for the insults heaped 
upon the Jew by the dotards and dastards of the 
city of Constantine, I sought out an instrument of 
compendious ruin: I found him in the Arabian 
sands, and poured ambition into the soul of the 
enthusiast of Mecca. — In revenge for the pollu- 
tion of the ruins of the Temple, I roused the iron 
tribes of the west, and at the head of the cru- 
saders expelled the Saracens. I fed full on 
revenge, and I felt the misery of revenge ! 

A passion for the mysteries of nature seized 
me. I toiled with the alchemist; I wore away 
years in the perplexities of the schoolmen ; and I 
felt the guilt and emptiness of unlawful know- 
ledge ! 

A passion for human fame seized me. I drew 
my sword in the Italian wars : triumphed ; was a 
monarch ; and learned to curse the hour when I 
first dreamed of fame ! 

A passion for gold seized me. I felt the gnaw- 
ing of avarice — the last infirmity of the fallen 
mind. Wealth came to my wish, and to my tor- 
ment. In the midst of royal treasures, I was 
poorer than the poorest. Days and nights of mi- 



SALATHIEL. 305 

sery were the gift of avarice. I felt within me 
the undying worm. In my passion, I longed for 
regions where the hand of man had never rifled 
the mine. I found a bold Genoese, and led him 
to the discovery of a new world. With its metals 
I inundated the old ; and to my own misery, added 
the misery of two hemispheres ! 

Yet the circle of the passions, a circle of fire, 
was not to surround my fated steps for ever. 
Calmer and nobler aspirations were to rise in my 
melancholy heart. I had seen the birth of true 
science, true liberty, and true wisdom. I had 
lived with Petrarch, among the glorious relics of 
the genius of Greece and Rome. I had stood 
enraptured beside the easel of Angelo and Ra- 
phael. I had conversed with the merchant-kings 
of the Mediterranean. I had stood at Mentz, 
beside the wonder-working macline that makes 
knowledge imperishable, and sends it with winged 
speed through the earth. At the pulpit of the 
mighty man of Wittenberg, I had knelt; Israelite 
as I was, and am — I did involuntary homage to 
the mind of Luther ! 

At this hour, I see the dawn of thing?, to whose 
glory the glory of the past is but a dream. 

But I must close these thoughts, as wandering 



306 SALATHIEL. 

as the steps of my pilgrimage. I have more to 
tell ; strange, magnificent, and sad. 

But I must await the impulse of my heart. — 
Or, can the happy and the high-born, treading 
upon roses, have an ear for the story of the Exile, 
whose path has for a thousand years been in the 
brier and the thorn ! 



THE END. 



LONDON : 

rnixTF.D BY A. J. vALry, red lion coukt, fleet street. 



