Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Sir Ethelbert: or, The dissolution of monasteries: a romance
SIR ETHELBERT; on, THE DISSOLUTION* OF MONASTERIES.
CHAP. L Tue hour íbr serving up the supper messes at length arrived ; and shortly after, Weewitte cautiously ushered into the chamber of Lortl de Mandeviile, Father Philip, the Æseulapius of whom Lady Mary hatl so highly spoken. " This is not my first repair to the sick-chamber of the Lortl de Mandeville, albeit my noble patient may not wot of the matter," said the skilful monk as he approached the couch ofthe invalid: " it was whilom, when the Lady Mary a * a/ and your lordship were vexed by the small-pox.. \U*1- XX A
α Γη good sooth, the recordation tarries in my mind, of bavin?'· heard how de- spiteouslv I comported my bearings to my skilled leech mi that occasion, 1 ' re¬ plied his lordship, smiling in satisfaction at the arrival of Mary's famed Æseula¬ pius. " Riin<>ur -'has told of, holy sir, how 1, with cruelness, did rovne* vour thumb, when vou in kindliness drenched me with meet beveraey from the drug'- ster's." " We have each, then, some ileal ft) forgive," responded the good-natured e monk : " so let us .diake hands in quiet¬ ism, and promise mutual forbearance from displacencv," * t Aptly I make promise to bite no thumb this time, —not even my own, at you," said De Mandeville, still smiling. il But, holy sire, a bVother of vour lecch¬ erà ftorder has pronounced me marvel¬ lously ill ; and the great marvel to me is, that I feel no pereeiveance of the piteous matter. What wis you ?" tí That doctors difler oftimes, — But I
must ask advisement of your reelings and your pulse ere I can pronounce on the matter," Pulse examined, and queries answered, Father Philip assured his anxious hearers tnat he couhl discover not one alarming symptom about his lordship. The delighted and amazed Mary now imparted to the holy man the dire prog¬ nostics of the court physician, when the surprise of Father Philip could oni\ be surpassed hy his displeasure ; for well was he aware ofthe mischief such alarm¬ ing predictions might have effected upon both these young persons : and he there¬ fore solemnly assured them that there existed no one symptom to awaken ap¬ prehension ; and were it not for ??· tain interdictions to having it known that he had been summoned, he would demand an explanation from Doctor Balmfield, of assertions so totally unfounded. This discordance in the opinions of these skilful physicians sprang not from professional discrepancy ; but through the courtly Balmfield permitting his ? 2
patroness, and not his own judgment, to arrange the opinions which lie uttered. From the moment of Latlv Marv's ay f swoon in the base-court, Rosamond had found her alarms antl perplexities relative to this hated being rapidly augmenting ; since every hour presented some new occurrence to awaken interest, if not admiration, for the alien Mary. And from all the wary Constance had allowed to transpire in their long interview* if the active part taken by the new lortl abbot of St. Stephen's in forwarding the wishes of*Lord St. Oswald respecting the education of Lady Mary, she had been taught to shrink from taking any new step in her path of en nhy, lest it might lead tt) the betrayal of her having per¬ formed the secret counteraction to every anxious effort made for the improvement of her detested stepdaughter : antl more especially wei*e sbe to present her, as the promised pointing-stock to the guests in Aibalanda Castle, in the homely garb which she hatl tlecreetl for her disfiguring attire, it now struck her sensitive feel-
im*s t İt might at once lead .suspicion uf fads to glance at her ; and thus, a% »t ever is with those who permit headlong passion to guide their hark of action, dis¬ placing judgment from the helm, Rosa¬ mond now found herself stianded where she could find no extrication. Fettered from acting with authority in her own castle by the disguise >he had inadvertently assumed, Ladv St. Oswald intimated to her daughter and Lortl Da¬ lincourt her wish fbr all mumming to he discontinueik as Lord de Mantle ville's illness must interdict all joyance ; hut neither would relinquish their regal ho¬ nours;— Lord Dalincourt tor reasons alreatly stateti ; and Latly Warburg, he- cause the moment >he surrendered her sovereign dignitv >he must take a tender part in the sick-chamber, or sink in the scale of universal approbation. The} both, therefore, laughed to scorn the idea of De Mandeville luning any ailment of suf¬ ficient magnitude to demand the discard¬ ing mirth from their train; and both expressed conviction that the morrow ? 3
wouhl find him İn perfect convalescence, and ready for every sport* But the invalescence of De Mamie* ville would noi accord with the present pnipose« of Lady St. Oswald, who re¬ solved to ha\e Anther consultation with tht 4 abbess of St. Mildretls,ere the noxious Mary shoultl he permitted amongst the guests; she therefoie commanded Doc¬ tor Balmfield io cut off all communica¬ tion between those attached to the sick- chamber and all others in the castle, by discovering and proclaiming every symp¬ tom iu her stepson of an alarming in¬ fections malady ; an \ this, she trusted, wouhl not only aiti all her plans relative to lier daughter's abdication of supreme command in that castle, but keep Mary out ofthe wav of furthci interesting Fitz- rivers, vvho.se opinions bore too universal an influence not to be dreaded by her. Father Philip's visit being limited by caution, he had departed ere the return of A'Parry from his supper to his lord's dormitory. Antl no small degree of sur¬ prise did this faithful valet experience,
when he perceiveti a materini improve¬ ment in tbe spirits of those he had kll in the sick chamber, and that his dear Ioni, instead of becoming more indis¬ posed, appeared considerably ? covered; ami .still ???? his wonder augmentai, when Ladv Marv anil her damsel Maud took leave of Lord de Mandeville lor the night, — leaving directions with him (A*Parry) to summon them from a chamber in the next stor\ in tin 4 same tower, should his lord become ill again during the night and require their at¬ tendance Nothing could have induced the at- fectionate Mary to avail herself of ihe seneschal.s kindness in a prompt arrange¬ ment of this contiguous chamber for her use, had not Father Philip pronounced it more efficacious for the tranquillity of her brother's repose to have no attend¬ ant in his tlormitorv for the night hut the one to whom he was accustomed ; nor would her brother so readiiv have permitted his tender nurses to depart, had not Father Philip taken such hold ? 1
of his fancy as to lead to his resting firm reliance upon his opinions; and upon the adamantine basis of whose skill he rested for prompt revenge upon Doctor Balmfield for alarming him and poor Mary so cruelly, by enabling him to keep hall in perfect health ere Doctor Balmfield had done shaking his wise head and prognosticating ; — and even whilst musing upon all possible contriv¬ ances fbr his lovely sister to keep hall with him in the trappings becoming her race, De Mandeville dropped into a pro¬ found repose. Mary and Maud, after returning a dozen times to listen at De Mandeville's door if all were tranquil, at length, as¬ sured the predictions of Father Philip were happily verified, retired to seek their own repose : and Lady Mary, re¬ freshed by an industrious slumber, and encountering no agitation to affect the brilliancy of her complexion or cloud her animation, presented herself to her brother the subsequent morning, with an aspect so much more gratifying to the
pride of hér evidently convalescent bro¬ ther than she had appeared in any part of the preceding day, that he seemed, in addition to having commenced forget- fulness of the slubberdegrulhon object that had scared him on the moment of his entering the castle of tlieir ancestors, to become every moment still more de¬ termined that she should appear by his side in the hall, albeit even decked iu her present degrading traps. The breakfast messes of Lady Mary and her brother had been some time removed, ere Doctor Balmfield made his appearance. The invalid, who had arisen and dressed to receive his sister, upon the doctor being announced, dived down beneath his bed-clothes, and performed a sick part as meetly as even the leech or the countess herself could have wished. The doctor shook his head, looked dis¬ maying, and still peremptorily pronounc¬ ed sequestration from all other inha¬ bitants ofthe castle; and then withdrew into the antechamber, followed hy Mary, who, with solemn looks and voice suited ? 5
to such an awful moment, entreated the kindly doctor would make advisement to her of what dern malady her brother and self w r ere to he whelmed by. " Why, not aught so bream as she seemed to form expectment of, he trusted ; but, in certainty 7 , he sorrowed to say he weened they would soonly be distemper¬ ed hy — " — and he looked as dismaying as if about to announce that the plague or sweating sickness w 7 as the blastment he had foretold ; and with a deep sigh, and audible hem, he faultered —" a malign in¬ fection of the small-pox ; his lordship hav¬ ing befortuned him to enter an hostelry when on progress, which, unkent hy their party, was infected.". The solemn leech, at this moment de¬ tecting something like a smile beaming over the countenance of Lady 7 Mary, be¬ came at once dissatisfied with this malady, resolved to prepare another against his next visit, and took leave, with warning Mary, not only for her brother's sake, but her own, to forefend his lordship's chamber from becoming a folkmöte for
noiaseful copemates, such as Sir Leoline Worhngton, or, indeed, Master Fitzrivers. Mary re-entered her brother's chamber, to prepare him for this unexpected second edition of the small-pox, thus predicted for their having once more together; and they were wandering over the whole land of conjecture for a plausible mo¬ tive to account for this strange and cruel endeavour to alarm them, and were beginning to settle it as a flight of insa¬ nity in the poor leech, when A'Parry announced that Father Ralph was in the antechamber, and craved the honour of parliance with the Lady Mary, Mary found the holy man was bearer of a request to her from Lady Rudd, one of the royal party, for an interview in a particular chamber not far distant, where her ladyship was then anxiously awaiting that gratification. But poor Lady Mary felt no anxiety on her part for an interview with any of the strangers, now lackless of friends as she was to support her in such measures; she therefore reminded the reverend ? ?
Mercury of the interdict pronounced by Doctor Balmfield to holding communi¬ cation with any individual out of a pre¬ scribed district. " The Lady Rudd has been led to vveet * all the learned leech's adread," returned the priest; ' f but she had the small-pox ercwhiles, and fears nothing.*' " So had I ercwhiles, yet I dread everything,** bought Mary: and now requesting Father Ralph to await, whilst she enquired if her brother could spare her, she hastened to inform De Mande¬ ville of the strange request of this Lady Rudd ; when, to her utter dismay, he announced to her that this Lady Rudd was rm other than their lady mother, who, he doubted not, had imagined this interview for some kindly purpose.** And so the credulous youth believed; since, in all transactions with him, this wily manœuvrer had ever contrived to make kindliness appear on the surface. But poor Mary had been taught, by sad experience, that her stepdame could
have other views than kindly ones by her, and her heart quailed and her frame trembled ; but she felt it as her duty to comply: she therefore immediately re¬ turned to Father Ralph, and proceeded with him to this interview, which had been the result of Rosamond's restless night, in which she formed this plan of seeing Mary, that she might form her own judgment of what her long-cherished enmity had to hope or fear. Mary's anticipating terrors had so completely blanched her cheeks and lips, that Rosamond in one glance felt relieved, believing that she could prove no rival to herself or Rhona in personal beauty 7 ;— a belief which Rosamond gave herself no opportunity 7 to waver in ; forMary's man¬ ner of entering the chamber where this implacable foe was awaiting to receive her so reminded Lady 7 St. Oswald of her own ill-requited benefactress, that she turned her ey r es in haste, and never dared to achieve a steady glance at her, whom she seemed to fear as she would a basilisk ; by which means she escaped the anguish
of beholding the variations in Marv's countenance — the illuminations which emanateti from her feelings — those ravs of mental fighi, piav ing with the sv\e?test smiles of youth and innocence, which formeil beauty in Ladv Marv that Rosa- mond and Rhona couhl not rival, Rosamond was seated in a turned chair, then an article iu much esteem; — a veil thrown over head — not to conceal her face, since she fearetl not Marv's recogí u · tion, but to shade the emotions which this anxioie interview might possili!} elicit. The moment Father Ralph led in the trembling Mary, Rosamond announced herself an invalid who feared lo sit near windows, antl requested Latly Mary to seat herself on a cushion which had been placed on the rushes for her. Rosamond then proceeded to state, that she was the intimate friend of Latly St. Oswald, by whose desire she had requested this pri¬ vate interview with Ladv Marv, and was to act in it as her substitute Mary, although scarcely able to stand through agitation, instantly arose, and in
tremulous tono *au! — "Then, madam» as the substitute of Lath St. Oswald, neih^ps it would he meet lor me to Kned before vou in that respect due to my father's wife. Haplessly, I am unweel- imr of the tbrms in usance between parents aml children ; but my wish is to comport my-elf with all the apt re· Nueet which mav* vvdl become mv tlutv.*' 44 Keep tt> your .seal, Lady Mary," replied the wincing Rosamond. íC í thank you, in the name of the lady I am here to represent, for the marvel of such meet intendment; which I confer I had not imagined me to expect» ît was not so, whilom* : vour haviom was not alvvavs so right excellent.** ** I was not ahvavs of an ???, Ladv lludil, to imagine the right haviour from the wrong. When 1 evinced displacence to your friend, she was not my fatln spouse, and duty had then no meet cl n; upon me : eket I was ofthat tender age when I ?? oílended, that I might have
aptly hoped my unmeet portance would not have been registered so durefully." " Mav I wot bv whose behest you have been led from the cherishment of enmity to my friend-—a lady who never injured you?" said Rosamond, afler an uncomfortable pause. " Fathers Hubert, Jonathan, and Adri¬ an, have had successively the care of my r religious principles, madam," responded Mary 7 , prudently repressing a rising com¬ ment upon her stepdanie's last affirm¬ ation. " Llave the other branches of your education been so vantaged ? You must not feel discontentment at this question. It is the interest which pangs Lady 7 St. Oswald in your concernments, which thus leads me to query you upon all that it seemeth me in fitment for her maternal solicitude to have view of and advisement." " As they were for much time con¬ ducted under the rede of the abbess of St. Mildred's," responded Mary, trem¬ bling lest, in th" spirit of ingenuousness,
she should infringe her promise to the hermit of* the valley, " ali, no doubt, madam, were vantaged as aptly as the dullard under pupilage yielded scope," At tins moment Rosamond started in alarm, and extended her eyes as if in expectation of some preternatural appear¬ ance, which she feared anticipated by a dire groan which had grated upon her ear just as Lady Mary had closed her last sentence. — Mary, too, hatl heard the groan ; and not aware of Father Ralph having retired, concluded he was stand¬ ing behind where she was seated, and that he had launched that first-rate groan to evince the torment she hatl proved to him when he had shared with Dame Vintry in her pupilage. The apprehen¬ sions of Latlv St. Oswald not being ?- ? realised, she recovered her composure, antl aSaid, " You must rich me with more positive advisement of the matter. It will be ior little contentation to Lady St. Oswald's anxiety, if more cautlour is not iu fosterage at ween us." CT " Then, madam, I must let vou wot,
íbr my bashment, the abbess of St. Mild¬ red's never fortuned me with her approof; albeit my teachers were vantaged by 7 such meed. And this testimony, at least of ingenuousness, should, I imagine me, spare me from further voicing mv own humiliation." " It sounds not boastful, in sooth," replied Rosamond in a tone of chagrin ; fbr Mary, she feared, was much too wary for her purpose. " It has been avouched, that vour somewhilc tutoress was not fashioned above the herd of clownery. How, then, vantaged you by your accent and your language, Lady Alary?" The dismayed iMary perceived the snare thus laid to catch the capabilities oí her present instructors ; and promptly recollecting a fact that in this instance could secure them from implication, she without hesitation answered—"I imagine me, Lady Rudd, that the cause why Dame Vintry did not engraft her accents upon mine, was through the approach¬ ment all around ofthe olden retainers of my grandsire, who still made tarriance iu
this castle, to die within its walls ; many of whom were gentlemen of high polish- mcnt, and as long as they endured—for I sorrow to say then left me to find accents in aggrief for m ν bereavement OCT » of them, who were ewer kind to me — their diction, I doubt not, was my guid¬ ance." " Did they give you tutorage in other languages?" demanded Rosamond,iu dis¬ may at resources thus having sprung up to enlighten this being she abhorred,— resources she had never calculated upon to counteract. " Thev did all for m ν vantage that * *■ ? kindliness could imagine for me," said Mary, who, deeming herself fortunate in this recollection of these early kind aux¬ iliaries in her education, scrupled not to lav as much to their charge in the mis- demeanour of instructing her as truth and prudence could sanction ; aware she could effect no misclûef by it, since they were alreatly removed from yielding her instruction. " Did they devise for you much meet
accomplishments?" demanded the almost phrensicd Rosamond. " They kindly imagined some for me," responded iMary, " but how meet they were I wot not. One tutored mc in the cunning to draw a hawk upon my fist — another the deft management of a palfrey — another to leap a bar — and one, who whilom hatl been lortl of misrule, skilled me in the art of dancing in some guise after the fashion of his own gone day." Rosamond felt relieved ; and in a tone that told she was so, enquired, what Dame Morton had taught her ; antl to say it without disguise With difficulty poor Mary could now suppress a flood of tears, upon being thus arbitrarily called upon to make state¬ ments which, as she could not directly sacrifice her veracity, she feared must prove the fiat against her dear Mrs. Mor¬ ton's return ; but ere her pause for suf¬ ficient firmness to pronounce this fatal decree could have awakened impatience in her auditress, Rosamond uttered a piercing shriek, and, starting from her
seat in wild dismay, commanded Lady Mary to fly to her own chamber; and then, with the speed of terror, winged her own wav to that door of this spacious apartment which communicated w ith the most populous part ofthe castk Mary, cheered by gratitude for this respite from the menaced banishment of her dear instructress, gladly obeyed the mandate of her stepdame, but not with¬ out wistfully casting her eves around ; when, instead of the dire horror she was in quest of, she beheld Algernon Fitz¬ rivers standing close beside her. " Oh.' Master Algernon ! " she ex¬ claimed, as he took her trembling hand with the tender sympathising interest of a brother; "imagine you as you may, vou can scantly wis how í have been iust wil tiered and agazed." *71 " Oh, I wot all," responded Algernon. " But make repair into yon antechamber; and, while you uprouse your composure under my guardage, I will make shrift of how 1 came to witness what fortuned in these chambers."
" But ere I make tarriance here," said Mary, " wouhl it not be more kindly not for me to obey the behest of Lady Rudd, antl leave her whilst sho î perilled?" " Feel contentation," returned Alger- non, " and do not cumber her with ob¬ servation upon her heing so soonly quailed by some gamef'ul damsel at her play- pleasures ; for such I saw it was, when I rushet! forward to yield my aidance to you : and this sportive damsel, and Father Ralph, I can well imagine me, are both now with her, to service her as well be¬ comes them. But Lady Mary," con¬ tinued Algernon, blushing, antl in evident agitation, " through an embarrassing cir¬ cumstance I was, to my discontentment, compelled to become an infixed auditor of your interview with Lady Rudd. My surprisal on finding you admitted to a conference with her solaced my heart, for it told that no impairment through in¬ fectious malady was in menace to jeopar¬ dise her safety : I therefore now have for my further comfort the intendment of
visiting my dear De Mandeville — and that, in sooth, albeit the royal interdict is still in force ; but that solace cannot be mine, until the matter which placed me in such unmeet ambush has accomplished its intendment, But tell me, Lach 7 Mary, Ín surauce tell me, bave you repaired yourvaliancesufriciently to enterprise} our speeding to your brother's chamber?" Mary answering in the affirmative, Algernon accompanied her to the pas¬ sage leading to the place of her present destination ; ancl then hastened from her with a bounding heart, to seek the fulfil¬ ment of an assignation which had been most unexpectedly interrupted. And this assignation was with no less a person¬ age than the representative of the queen ; who, alarmed at the cautious reserve Fitzrivers was assuming still more and more iu lus conduct towards her, and wish¬ ing to unfetter this caution by that decree of encouragement which she well knew how to infuse fbr feeding a flame which she yet wished not to blaze into public notice, sent him a billet, to summon \??
on the instant of its delivery, to a private conference Ín an apartment which, being the chief of' a suite of chambers not then in use, ashe conceived sectue from all interruption. His heart, bounding with hopes and wishes, vet saddened bv fears and cer- tainties, instantly obeyed this unexpected summons. But this retired range of chambers presenting the same sort of recommendation to the mother which it had clone to the daughter, Rosamond entered the very vainc chamber to re¬ ceive Lady Mary in the moment after Algernon; who had scarcely made his tremulous obeisance to the idol of' his heart's homage ere he was doomed to flight, by a signal from Lady Warburg to escape through a door to which she pointed: and thus Algernon became encaged in a dark closet, whence he could discover no covert retreat ; and from a bold sally forth he was deterred, by Lady Warburg's mandate for his re¬ treat fully evincing that he must not be seen there by her mother.
Scarcely one moment now elapsed ere the agitated Rosamond, who by picking her steps along the faded rushes on the floor had not perceived those she had routed, planteil her chair almost in contact with the clo-et door, which Al¬ gernon, dreading the noise he might un¬ avoidably make in the attempt, now feared to fasten, or even completely to close. In shade thus himself, he possessed a commanding view of all who approached Lady St, Oswald, and couhl distinctly hear all that was utteretl near him. Latly Alary's appearance theie, the graceful¬ ness of her deportment, and the modest diffidence of her replies to what he pro¬ nounced an unfair and unfeeling sort of catechism, infinitely surprised and charmed him, aitluug'i he knew not the perplexities which impeded the ingenu¬ ousness of her responses. Hut this un¬ favourable impression dawning upon his mind, of Lady St. Oswald, was at length put to flight by the alarm which called him from his involuntary ambush ; when, speeding to aid the lady of his lortl as vol. ?. c
duty commanded, he perceived Lady Warburg and her damsel Cinefrede emerging from another closet, and with such mirth upon their countenances and in their maimer, that he doubted not they had imagined the exploit of these horrid groans to terminate that sojourn of the countess which thus imprisoned them ; and, not deeming such an exploit to the credit of Rhona's feeling for her mother, intuitively turned from the pur¬ suit of his lady love, to lull the alarms of the interesting Mary and lead her to protection,
CHAP. II. Algernon* repaired to the assignation chamber under a belief that Rhona would return to it the moment she could relieve herself of the apprehension of anothei interruption from her mother : but sbe came not thither ; and upon seeking her elsewhere, he ascertained that she had repaired to the cirque : and thus assured she hatl no commands fbr him at present, he, after just showing himself in the cirque, antl carefully treasuring within his bounding heart the encouraging smile beamed on him by Rhona as she grace¬ fully ambled round the equestrian area upon her beautiful white palfrey, he re¬ treated to fulfil his voluntary assignation a ~ in the chamber of De Alandeville; where, to his amaze as well as pleasure, he found his young friend perfectly re¬ covered, antl engaged in an amicable disputation with his lovely sister, who ? 2
would not agree to his hoisting a black- flag from his window 7 , which be had em¬ ployed A'Parry to rout out of the stand¬ ard room for the purpose of a signal to remind his gay friends in,the cirque that he was dying í Algernon fbr some mom ents felt as¬ sured Lady Mary would be compelled to yield, since she had adopted a metliod never employed by the females in Ves¬ pasian Tower to subdue the wayward fancies of this spoiled }outh. — She adopted no wily coaxing, but dashed at once into combat with his reason, which she performed so playfully, that Edward could not resist her prowess; nor couid Algernon wonder that he was thus van¬ quished. The black pendant was there¬ fore sent away : but his lordship, not pleased w T ith the little respect evinced by his father's guests for him in the mo¬ ments of that peril pronounced by one so eminent in leeebcraft as Doctor Balm- field, could not restrain his wounded feelings, but spoke in bitterness of many of them.
"And Rhona," he said, "who made her babblement every day of my life, till ï came to tarry in Aibalanda, of how she affectioned me better than all the world beside !— it cannot but marvd me, at the very moment death is in announcement hovering over me, for hei¬ tt) be so devoted to her délices* —so assottetl v 'fb the mummery of playing consort to mv withering earn!—flourish- ing about i .ι play-pleasures untler the very window of mv sick bovver amongst her wooers ; dancing, I wot, her coaxing smiles around, to enfetter all more dure¬ fully !" "Hey, my lord and brother!" ex¬ claimed Mary, smiling sportively ; tf al¬ beit emmewed in this goodly castle all my days, f have bearti of the pains ami penalties of the tender malady. — For¬ sooth, but vour displeasance at Latlv Warburg, fbr advantaging her health this meet morning by a behooveful scamper on her palfrey, makes betrayal ofthe nature of that malady which Dr. Balmfidd so
? ó
marvellously predicted was to whelm you." " Tush î Maiy 7 ," responded Edward pettishly; "I should as soonly wis of you lor my lady love ; and were you to make salliance from me now 7 , and go gleeking in gladsomeness, even albeit you wot I am not ill, I should be pangetl with jealous bitterness." " Well, jealous malcontented," saitl Mary, smiling, whilst a tear of gratified affection glistened in her eyes at thus finding any 7 relative who regarded her sufficiently to experience one pang of jealousy about her, "my belief is, that Lady Warburg wots as well as vve do now you have no illness to discomfort her : as in sooth it imagines me, that it is in sequence of the masked battery" they sallied hitherward to play off for my surprisal, to prison me until the apt time arrives for my summon to appear amid the witvvorms, to be agazed with wonderment ; and that, fearing the kind¬ liness of fraternal feeling might be your leadman into pity ior me, and so dis-
appoint their sportiveness, they deemed it meet that you also should be em- mewed." "Something of similar suspicion ha;· posscassioned mc," said Algernon ; "since no other motive can imagine us for thus prisoning you both, whilst the portance of those who cannot be weetless of Doc¬ tor Bahnfield's advisement proclaims their being in no alarm either for your peril, or, through the predict of conta¬ gion, for themselves." "Say you so?" exclaimed Lord de Mandeville: "then, not fearing hetraval from you, Fitzrivers, I'll hoist retaliation on my crest, and set a work fbr counter surprisals through my witcraft. I owe them at least the pang of disappointment to their project, for the noious panic they imagined them to jeopardise my Alary and myself vvitli ; — ay, and which, for aught they care, might unchild the lord ofthe castle that yields their shelter. I have promised our well-faithed leech, who made our rescue from perilled pangs of apprehension, to abide in restfulness ? 4
until the morrow in my chamber: but on the morrow, albeit with plague, pestilence, and sweating sickness m lijo round me, I'll daiefully perform my course to my station in my father's hal ! and throw down mv gage tt) any who shall tiare to say their nay ward to mv invalcascence. Aud, Algernon, as m v ?- ? ' ·/ heart \earns to take ?? Marv —whom 1 feel .iurance more and more is natured to prove a graceful plume in our honour's helmet'— to perform her part as a St. Os¬ wald besitle me in our ancestral hali to-morrow, imagine for ?? how we can make her trappings fiiul accordance with her birthdom. But, Latly Mary, whom were you so quaintly sehooletl by, to fashion }our hair in such tieft guise?" " Why," said Marv, blushing as she a/ a * ? smiled, <4 1 have hatl view of some casts from Italy ; but ere í encountered this vantages one of our grandsire's ancient retainers, who aggraeed this establishment whilom, kindly fashioned for me his daughter's long hair in the manner of statues which hatl pleased him in Italy :
so thus, from recollection, my tire of this day was formed." "And bv whom, mav I enne to wot, were you taught to trap \our prett} ankles so deftly, Lady Marv Jli demanded Loi d de Mandeville, smiling in his turn : " of course not by your ancient gentle¬ man, fbr that would have lacked deco¬ rum, albeit that even the demure damsel Maud's long shanks had pei formed proxv fbr }ours in the pupilage." Mary placetl the pretty ankles in ques¬ tion very securely out of" view; ami blushed, and looked as embarrassed as she had done when those pretty ankles, and pretty feet appertaining to them, had beeu discovered in their high alti- tude upon the Pvrenean stilt* : and had she not felt it as indecorous to speak of her ankles before Fit/rivers, ??? wonhl have infoi med her brother that she had learned this tieft fashion of swathing them with fine linen, improved by a garnish of purflew at one edge, from her now absent governess, Mrs. Morton ; and that she had therefore long dis. c J
carded, unless to encounter mire in walk¬ ing, the clumsy cloth hose with which the abbess of St. Mildred's supplied llf>l' . · ν · * " There exists some unmeet, marvel which stumbles my comprehension rela¬ tive to Ladv Marv's wardrobe," said Algernon. " I was present when our honoured lortl gave advisement to the abbess of St. Mildred's monastery, that he wished neither to spare for cost nor travail in the appointments of his daugh¬ ter, even child as she then was ; and requested the abbess still further to fore¬ see all things for the garnish ofthe Latly Mary's apparel which might aptly ac¬ cord with her station." " Since this is so, forsooth," said Mary, as tears of grateful sensibility trembled in her eyes — "since your averment is proof) Master Fitzrivers, that my dear kintl father did not issue his behest for my being thus rustically garbed, I will give comfort and contentation to your sorely vexed pride, my brother, by trap¬ ping myself in gaudcry beseeming my
estate. Erewhîlcs the lord abbot of St. Stephen's having, as you wcet, obtained my father's permission to as- sume his kind tutelage as by my grand- sire's will appointed, he presei. ted me with some fair garbs brought from abroad, expressly fashioned fbr me ; but a> the abbess persisted in surauce of my lord and father having ordained this rustic guise fbr me, I prayed the kind lord abbot to let me place his beautiful gifts in restfulness within my revestiary, until my honoured father should think it meet fbr me to undight the homelv habit of his choice." Roth b. other and friend heard this intelligence of Marv's resources with heartfelt pleasure ; and Algernon also felt, with glowing admiration, how ami¬ able had been this sacrifice to duty in so youthful a female. " Dut," continued Mary, after a thoughtful pause, in which her often awakened suspicions of her stepdame being the regulator of this humiliating attire for her once again darted into ? (ì
her remembrance — " perhaps I had better tarry awhile ere I display my bravery, lest there might be any whom it might not content." " Why ! do you wis that you were doomed to sackcloth through pontifical authority, simpleton ?" exclaimed Lord de Mandeville. " You have meekiy r played the obedient child to parental usurpation long enough, Lady of Alba- landa. — Come; the chrysalis shall trans¬ mute into a butterfly on the morrow ; — yes, in sooth, to-morrow you shall cast your slough : wouhl vve could throw it over the head ofthe serpent to whom it pertains í Hatl it not been for the good leech's behest for my tarriance in restfulness until the morrow, I should this veiy day astert the royal party with the portentous blastment of my presence, leading the interdicted Lady Mary into the hall of our ancestors." Rhona had looked so enchantingly 7 beautiful amid her admirers in the cirque, and had smiled so bevvitchingly upon Algernon, that nothing but his promise
to Lady Mary of visiting her brother could have attracted him from the sphere of Lady Warburg; and, in the moment of his reluctant transit, he consoled him¬ self with the determination to make his visit to his young friends as short as he could manage it without unkindness : — yet it happened that the inartificial mode of Lady Mary's innocent vivacity and conversation, so dissimilar to the studied graces of the females with whom he hatl been accustomed to assort, so resistlessly operated, that she wiled on his sojourn in her brother's chamber, until, to his amazement, he found he had scarcely time at his disposal to make his dinner toilet. Lady 7 St. Oswald pleaded indisposition as the cause of her not appearing at the dinner-board : and this was not altogether an excuse without foundation ; since the nature of the alarm which had so sud¬ denly terminated her interview with Lady Mary had almost paralyzed her into serious illness. The chamber in which both Ladies St. Oswald and War-
burg had determined the private inter¬ views they had appointed should take place, was that in which all the histrionic pla} -pleasures of the castle hatl ever been enacted; consequently there was an appropriate range of' small rooms or closets on both sides of it fbr attiring. Into one of those closets Rhona mo¬ tioned Fitzrivers to retreat; whilst, with her damsel Ginefrede, she found con¬ cealment in another, where there was sufficient light admitted for her to ob¬ serve the complete costume of a spectre which had lain undisturbed in this place of her refuge fbr years : antl, in high displeasure at her mother for having in¬ terrupted iier assignation, Rhona couhl not resist the oppoitunity of revenge thus afforded her upon her parent, whom she knew to be superstitious!} sensitive upon such points. She therefore aided Ginefrede in attiring, antl in giv ing ef¬ fect to the dire groan that preceded the appearance of this awful spectre, which, in the imagination of the conscience- stricken Rosamond, wore the aspect of
her predecessor — the Countess Adda: and so completely was she overwhelmed with dismay, that she determined to rout her tlaughter and their party out of Ai¬ balanda Castle without delay. But to devise means for effecting this determi¬ nation without the concurrence of Rho¬ na, which she despaired oi obtaining, as she dared not betray to her the dire ap¬ prehensions she endured, proved an in¬ surmountable puzzle ; antl at length she was led to resolve, even subdued as she was by agitation, to repair to her con¬ federate Constance during the time of dinner in the hall : hut ere she entered her horse-litter, to proceed to -St. Mil¬ dred's monastery, she issued her instruc¬ tions to the satellites she was to leave in the castle relative to those matters she wished f ? have put in train without ap¬ pearing tobe the work other designs. Doctor Balmfield, therefore, by the order other who regulated even his pro¬ fessional opinions, shortly after he was seated at the dinner-board, announced that Lortl de Maiuleville was happily
İn so promising a state of amendment, he trusted to see his lordship, in a very few days, forming one of the party in the baİL " Then we may form the expectment of seeing liis lordship accompanied hither- ward h\ the fair game we have had in promise for our sportiveness withal," said one of the noble guests. CT " And hy the way, Sir Ruperi War¬ burg," exclaimed Mrs. Alice Sneakup, one of Rosamond and Rhona's most devoted satellites, " I was for the dear countess's play-pleasure this morning, casting nativities, and \ours seemed to decree ror vou the honour of becoming a' CT falconer to this said wible\as; so that by whatsoever creance fate decrees vou to hold her by, you can make manage¬ ment to keep her from soaring ere we list." No arrangement could have been more consonant to the wishes of the designing •^ CT Rupert than this kind decree of fate. From the various traits of Lady Mary's character which had come to his know-
letlíre, he conceived her to be foimed bv naf ure for the spouse of a freehooting bai on or knight; he had therefore neai ly rooh ed upon the pioject of making her Ins own : fbr, could he attach her to him, he doubted not her having coinage, euterpii/e, antl affection, to become all that his fortunes might require in a wile, shoultl tho-.e fortunes demantl his improvement of means by rapine; whilst, on the other hand, shoultl the punv ^piingal* De -Man¬ deville demise in his bed or bv some well directed thrust iu the tilt-vaid, could he obtain .Maiy of Aibabntl ι from his sovereign, as the recompence for late important bei vice, he shoultl deem him¬ self superlative!) fortunate; and this implied aidance of her stepdame he hailetl as a propitious omen, Whilst this intelligence of Mrs, Snoak- up's was elevating the designer Rupeit bv all the aspiring views in hope's per¬ spective, it was operating very differently upon others. Lit/m ers absolutely shud¬ dered when this pretended predict »truck
his recoiling ears. Sir Rupert's dissipated courses, even before his dire perjuries affixed their black stamp upon him, rendered him a being so wholly unworthy ofthe guileless, estimable Mary, that, with a bosom throbbing with indignation, he determined to counteract the fell project, from whomsoever it might have emanated, bv intimating to Ladv Marv the testi- a^ ? . ./ mony Sir Rupert had borne against Anne Bolevn ; and thus present an infallible antidote to the dangerous contagion of Rupert's fine exterior and captivating manners. Sir Leoline, too, was filled with indig¬ nation and alarm at the thought of any species of encouragement yielded to such a profligate. He felt the honour of his family sullied by even a suggestion of an alliance with Sir Rupert, and the hap¬ piness in menace of his innocent young kinswoman; who had in her wiltl pranks the preceding morning sported herself into his admiration so completely, that he determined to stand guarii between her and the kintl stars of Rupert, by himself seizing the post predicted for
this profligate. This resolution formed, .Sir Leoline became wild for the reap¬ pearance of Lord de Mandeville amongaSt them, not doubting that Ladv Marv would prove bis accompaniment ; be therefore proceeded to elance the arrows of bis ridicule wdth such merciless force against Doctor Iialmfleld*s recent prognostics of contagion, that the wincing leech found it expedient to make no longer delay in presenting him a billet from Lady St. Oswald, imagined by T her for the purpose of engrossing his attention and his time from annoying observations of any 7 pos¬ sible plan of hers which her visit at St. Mildred's might arrange fbr action. This billet contained a request for Sir Leoline to get up a splendid masque to celebrate the recovery of De Mandeville from dangerous illness ; adding, that the seneschal could furnish him with every requisite to facilitate the measure, while the castle jester woukl prove a useful auxiliary. This request of Rosamond's was so consonant to the fancy of Sir Leoline,
that the moment he caught a glimpse of Weewitte, as in accordance with ancient custom he occasionally strayed from his station at the feet of the pretended sove¬ reign, to rove around the dinner-boards, to enliven the gue·' \ as thev feasted, bv his professional C"'iceits Sir Lcoline demanded if there was a lord of misrule then iu existence iu Aibalanda, €i Odd-sooth ! Sii knight!" exclaimed the now reanimated jester; «* we have had none other in existence here, ^ince our jiai amount lord tli^vantaged us bv having looi ed from the helm, excepting where this our master seneschal is ruler," — bowing with ludicrous ceremony to the grinning Davenant ;—" and then our nth is not a-niis." *' Well, sirrah ! rule or misrule, you are to have a new lord of tho latter inconti¬ nently," said Sir Leoiino ; "and eftsoons you must repair to a consultation with me, both of ye, my masters seneschal and witworm." "Odd's knightiings! that latter is a mlsnom, enranked by your wiseness,"
responded Weewitte " I am not the reptile that aptly feeds on wit, but the plant that yields the food ; therefore, from my advisement, take the appellative fbr your own meet usance." Davenant's conference being ended with Sir Leoline, he hied hi.a to fulfil a not lier with his young lord, who was full of anxiety f n' arranging his appear¬ ance İT the hall of his ancestors, so as to impress his gueMs with conviction of whom he really was that they had treated with so hule ceremoiiy : and the sene¬ schal, who had with displeasure observei the little feeling evinced, even when the leech Daimliehls prognostics weie in full credence, entered into hb lordship's plans mtbt enthusi .stically, and promised ap¬ propriate splendour in every department, — hut not so expeditiously, he fearetl, as bv the monow. " For this cattle," said he, " having ' JS been disgarnished bv the non- residence of my honoured Ioni and lady, vve have but few clinquants, or other ornature, left for our use The country is not, as the
SIR ETHELBERT.
metropolis, stored with aidance in bar tery for gold. In our needmeet of' trappings and nappery, to borrow is avoid I ess ; albeit naught shall ibresiovv the travail of diligent preparation, and to foresee all things to be nobly garnished, wherein I have not lack of'means; but I fear this lack in our liveries, to dight a proper garnish of lacqueys and serving grooms : wherefore, should it not be too much ior your lordship's discontentation to make tarriance in these chambers another day, I could avouch, without a nay ward, to have all things quaintly settled in such fair fashion, by the morrow after next, as shall well become my young lord's birthdom, and shall deserve to be told of in days to come." The ι casons for this delay in the emancipation of De Mandeville appeared so admissible, and the seneschal promised so consonantly to his wishes, that his lordship, without murmuring, acquiesced in this postponement, although twenty- four hours added to his confinement was not a cheering measure j but in accord-
ance with the advice of Father Philip he sought his pillow betimes this night, and slept away many of the tedious hours which were to intervene ere he couhl appear in such guise as to convince the royal party that some respect was due to him as well as to Lady Warburg,
CHAP. IIL -Lf.wiY ALwîy, on rising with the sun the subsequent morning, hastened to put her plan into prompt execution, of restoring the chamber she liad occupied the two preceding nights into its original state, > a.^ a. J O J — that of a sitting chamber, — as being pleasanter for her brother than his dor¬ mitory. This transmutation being accomplished, and the chamber as deftly trapped as circumscribed resources wouhl permit, and as elegant a breakfast served up by the sewer as the substantial usage of the periotl allowed — but with the novel ac¬ companiment of our heroine's own simple repast — Lady Alary sent her request to Lord tie Alandeville to favour her cham¬ ber with his company at breakfast. But not more did the surpri.se which Alary had arranged for Edward opeiate upon him, than his being accompanied
by Sir Leoline Worhngton and Algernon Fitzrivers did upon her ; for, absorbed in her anxious arrangements, they had passed up to her brother's chambers unheard and unobserved. The juvenile raptures of Lord tie Mandeville upon this unexpected change of chambers, could only be surpassed by his ecstasy on beholding his sister metamorphosed into a being with whom he could exultingly proclaim aíHniíy ; for Mary was beautifully though dimply arraved, in one of the elegant and cost!} dresses, which Sir Ethelbert cie Courland hail sent to her from the Con¬ tinent, as pertaining to the new ar¬ rangements made in her tutelage by the lord abbot of St. Stephen's monas¬ tery. " Oh ! for what quaint surprisais ani 1 indebted to Mary of Aibalanda!" be exclaimed; "whom my pride with un¬ speakable solace pants to present to \ou. Sir Thomas Wvatte, as mv own born a/ j/ affectionate sister." " None of your Sir Thomas Wyatte> vol. a. d
for me, an' please you!" exclaimed Su Leoline. " liy my halidom ! I rescind from the triumph of his hays, for the more genial honour of kindred rights, V> thus, as lackbrain verseless Leoline, I claim the cordial salutation of propin¬ quity from the cherry lips of im fair co/ Mary tie Rhone:" and the moment Sii Leoline had taken what he demanded u-i his kindred righi, he added, after an aulmiring gaze at the blushing Mary — " Bv mv halidom ! but I have been a- *· warelessly poaching on nokindied manoi. Tins peerless bird cannot, 1 vis, be the wild eyas whose eyes we seeled w lien we came with our ¡turpi¿sal swoop upon her, Maiy's expected happiness in this ??- pi ise fbr her brot lier wouid have expe- nenced considerable increase, had Al genion only formed the addition to theii part} ; but the accompaniment of the satirical Sir Leoline destroyed all com¬ fort for her, who until this moment hatl never been called upon to perform the honours to any guests : and apprehensiu
oi acquitting herself* awkwardly, even through lier total ignorance ofthe matter ; and although not called upon to carve the capon, the shovellers, or the quails — such being the province of her father's squires and pages present—yet there were many courtesies in her department to demand her attentions. She therefore scarcely ever witluhew her watchful e\cs from their observation of Algernon, to catch the kind signal he ever and anou gave her when he perceived her inex¬ perience at fault : and with such striking naivete she acted, and looked so artlessh grateful fbr every new hint which awaiteil her unwearied observation, that Sir Leo¬ line could not restrain hh· raptures ; ami notwithstanding he was aware his observ¬ ations distressed this novice in societv, he could not resist exclaiming, — ** 1 should Hke to weet wbat vou will at last blowth into, Mary of Aibalanda! Each moment it has fortuned me to en¬ counter you, I lune been gared ama/e by the divers fashions of vour healings. Ü ^
Lrst*, your appearance wore that of the veriest shimbleshamble which the as. t erteti eyes of man ever recoiled from. Anon, 1 deseiied you in the recumbency of un alabaster model of marvellous ?????- fulness. Somewhilc 1 recognised my coz f aheight in elevation's career, ibi the approof of all beholders, as the most featly apt performer upon stilts that ever bounded in meet heydegives. Eft, 1 felt you penetrating the sensitive verse- man, whom it fortuned me to represent, In the shunless shafts of your playful wit and witchcraft, 'then, soonly found I mv transmuting coz in the aspen form of youngling .timiditv, shrinking* from the homage of admiring envoys * from the court of our usurpers. ? mo¬ ment gone, I had the honour of a pre¬ sentment to me of my cousin Mary, as an elegant, mild, noble lady, bearing the most heaven! v visnomv extant; —and a' a/ next, iu the present moment, 1 have fo commend in vou intendment to a lord
of misrule, of the most anxious in pupil¬ age that ever strove for the comportance of graced courtesy. By my halidom I I shall not marvel if I find iu me the im¬ pulsion to turn verseman in good booth, to make dureful celebration of our Ai¬ balanda belliboneV* '* But these divers bearings remimi mc of the reverse," continued Sir Leoline. u Can vou imagine vou, Master 1 'itz- ? a_3 L ' rivers, what gars this tieternuned grasp mv honoured earn and Lady Warburg hav** taken of the crown of England J It might have been passing well as the playpleasure of our mirthful inneità just as an apt surprisal of our fair Pro¬ teus here bv our arrivance as a rovai band; but, when the household stuif with which we came freighted v'hhpered a contradiction to their old chums ot wails and cupboards, and that soonly each rat and mouse upon the premises scented out betrayal by the jit ment in each span of tapestry or arras to tiie
» 3
passes they had aforetime trodden, and that the very spiders themselves indus¬ triously spun out their discoveries to old captive flies they now refettercd, that our enactment was not upon royal authority, the cherishment of this mumming be¬ came bootless ; albeit vve persevere !" Algernon confessed he could form no conjecture upon the stimulus to such perseverance; more especially as it was evidently the wish of Lad}' St. Oswald that such mumming should terminate " By my halitlom ! Master Fitzrivers," said Sir Leoline "but it has been bruit¬ ed in whispers, that this cause, which you ween ought to operait 1 against this dureful graspment of' the crown, is the leadman to Latly Warburg's pertinacity." "Lady Warburg has, through life evinced herself' so aflectioned to hei mother, and withal so meetly durions," exclaimed Algernon, "as to establish a flat contradiction to this disnatural libel." "Albeit apt is vour ingenuitv in aid¬ ance of those you think aspeised," rt - turned Sir Leoline, "you will ne^e.
SIR raise this rumour, as a libel, to the stand¬ ard of belief in some about my goodly aunt and her fair daughter ; fbr the} th tell oflate, the marvel has arisen in Rho¬ na to stumble her in complacence to her lady mother." "Well," said Edward, '«granting Rhona oftimes chafes her lati} mother, it is mere reprisal ; for Rhona has in dirifi to mc confessed her dam en- chafes her to the matter," Alt!tough Algernon believed the affir¬ mations of Sir Leoline the defamation of the envious, and that De Mandeville had been deceived through some spor- tiveness in Rhona ; vet he looked so sor- rovvíul that she should be thus libelled, it escaped not the observation of Mary, who, grievetl to see poor Algernon in such evident distress at Rhona's being accused of acting so uudutifully, strove with all her artless powers of sympatin to ? ieki him consolation, bv saving — " Latly Warburg may, perchance, chad her ladv mother iu such guise as J oftimes tease my Maud, who fbr manv ? 1
a lorn year of my existence has been mv only mother, ancl whom, forsooth, I have teased beyond all durance ; albeit at the self-same moment, I do bethink me, I would have periled life to service Mauíly." As Mary uttered this, she glanced her eyes towards Maud, who for lack of a superior substitute had remained in the chamber, as the gentlewoman of' Lady- Mary ; anil the tears which glistened in Mary's eyes bore attestation to the truth ol her belief; whilst the responsive look and starting tears of Maud betravetl a CT » reciprocity of feeling, affecting to ab around them. " But," continued Mary, iv even pri¬ soned in this white tower, it has been voiced to me, what tells more kindly fbr Ladv Marburg ; as it fashions the continu- ance of royal spousals, to keep somebody — 1 am wcetless whom—from discontent- nig Latly Warburg by his bootless suit." " That must be her niding kinsman, that knightless Sir Rupert; fox he did make gabbiemeut about permissions from
Rome for cousins to intermarry," said Sir Leoline scornfully. " We, Master Algernon, have heard a different July love predicted by his kindly stars for him : but were 1 to unreave bis destiny, he should find it in a noose which should arride all the svbils which occult mv - teries ever maddened, in the efforts of their prowess to undo." Mary turned so pale, in horror upon learning of a knightless niding being ? ¿?? ? ? domesticated beneath the roof of her Iionourable father, that Algernon felt an agonized pang assail his bosom, through apprehension of this transcendentie hand¬ some profligate having made a serious im- pression upon this innocent and amiable young creature; and at once to count.i- act this fatal impression ifit yet were pa¬ sible, said — "Albeit stars and rumour may predict in vantage fbr him, we have that surance for our contentai ion, o! having no heiress amongst us of sufficient wealth to repay this perjured and merce¬ nary witness for his sanguinary tostimom against the late mai tyred queen." D Ù
Mary, now absolutely trembling ín horror, demanded how a being so mar¬ vellously wicked could have been ad¬ mitted at Aibalanda ; and the overjoyed Algernon, now assured that all was safe within her bosom, replied,—" Rropinquit) to Latly Warburg has been Sir Rupert's passport," i( Is this, forsooth, the world's mode," said Mary iu amazement ; (i warelessly to admit high-viced persons into honourable society, to beam blastment upon morals, antl tarnish the lustre of respectability, merelv through the unmeet mischief of' some one in that societv having the mis- chance of a faitour * for kindred ?" " Hev! my fair Portcus!" exclaimed Si* Leoline, " how came it to befortune you, in this your prisonment, to learn the motie of reasoning so deftly? By mv halidom ! ihe divers matters emmewed within mv coz gar my wonderment in ?' ? a/ marvel whence they came." *' Perchance," replied Mary smiling, " instinct may luve performed its won-
derous operations upon you, coz, as well a* on other wild animals 1 have had fin copemates. But why marvel at finding that within a prisoned coz, like stuff piled promiscuously in lumber chamber-, some of good report, some but sorrv ; some useful, some otherwise·—or, as in the spontaneous vegetation of' a wilder¬ ness, where, as semblant to my exclusion from the vantage of society, not air nm sun have penetrated, it is not fashioned for much marvel, that the same soil should }ield for its production, with manyan un¬ meet weed, some few plants of promise." " Na}, by my halidom í to instinct I vield the whole iashion ofthe fascinating performance," responded Sir Leoline ; "and which m its operative influence, I betrust me, has not lacked tt) instil !nc for kind. I therefoie betimes lav n v daun foi a fair pai tage ; and soonlv ,? may become convenience, I'll bring hi¬ therward another candidate for ki.ulred solace —Blanch, my sister; in whom, I assure \ou, is not the fault that her em- braeement of you has tarried thus." n 6
Mary expressed ber happiness at this promise of introduction to ber kins¬ woman with all the animated joy it yielded to her social mind; and now, perceiving tlieir repast was ended, was preparing to withdraw, to escape from Sir Leoline's gallant speeches : and at this opportune moment, De .Mandeville calling Sir Leoline to observe the extensive proaspect which the windows commanded, Marv motioned for Algernon to accom- a.' CT pany her into the antechamber, where she hastened to deliver the confidential message of the hermit of the valley to CT a nim — being the first appropriate moment she had found for doing so ; and also a letter from the lord abbot of St. Stephen's monastery, which had been sent to bei care that morning. Algernon was so amazed by the mes- CT / sftge from his nameless friend, and so anxious to explore a letter which, from its superscription, be knew was from bis beloved and respected tutor Kenrick, that he hastened back to say adieu to Lord de Mandeville, the moment he parted
from Mary ; antl re-entered to do so, as Sir Leoline, impatient at viewing prospects whilst his thoughts were ñxed upon a lovely young female, eagerly exclaimed— " But, De Mandeville, this kinswoman of thine and of mine, of whom such mis¬ weening portraiture went forth in form ef wild geese antl dullards, bids fair to prove as peerless a lady as devotei servant need desire to sigh for. By the daze of her speaking eyes, and by the witchment of her playful smiles, I avouch that by the time she escapes from her greyhound redundancy of arms and legs, by having performed to the pinnacle the portion of growth the airling is enter¬ prising, I shall deem ila peril to endanger me where the fascinations of' this Marv may be found ; awired, that whilst con- sanguiuit} forbids a union, still vanquish¬ ment must be avoulless." " Why, I really do imagine me there may be peril in the onslaught," replied the delighted Edward, "to those gallan:* not provisioned with the shield of Rhona's superior beauty to protect them."
" I vvot not i f Rhona's is superior beauty," replied Sir Leoline; "it may have more to tlazc in it, and may be tolti of with more marvel in a picture: but Lad} Mary's mind vantages her face at every turn by the lumine of expression, that enthralls more than the t /¿///r//ofher wooer, .—■ ay, hy my halidom ! the actual soul of him .she captivates." A trumpet sounding at this moment from the tilt-yard, proved the signal for calling away our knight and squire; the latter postponing the perusal ofthe lord abbot's welcome letter, just vvhiLt he shoultl fake one look af Rhona; and full of'amazement he hastened onward, at the preference thus almost pionouncetl by Sir Leoline of Lady Marv's beautv being a' * t ™ at least more fascinating than Lady Warburg's : and during his short stay now in the i\Ad of action, whilst he beheld the bewitching smile with which the wily Rhona knew full well how to bwoop upon her quarry, still more increased his amazement at the declaration of' Sir Leoline ; yet at length, as those smiles
were levelled expressly at himself; a doubt arose, if' they beamed wdth the seraphic sweetness, or her eyes with the mental intelligence, of his young friend Mary. The introduction to Lady Mary took place this morning, of her cousin Blanch Worhngton—an elegant and interesting girl, about one vear her senior; and who, Ö 7 a/ ' although reared chiefly in the society of Rhona, was artless and ingenuous as bei cousin of Aibalanda: but although interior tt> that cousin iu point of intellect, so much congeniality was in their mutual dispositions, that they met with pleasure, and parted with regret; each individual looking forward with delight at the happ\ prospect of future friendship. Sir Leoline and his sister, in this \isit, informed their secluded cousins of a circumstance which had occurred, through a*S the report having spread of their Majes¬ ties being staying in Aibalanda Castle. Lord Barrowcliff, one of ihe neighbouring nobles, had arrived that morning in mut h distress, to pay his duty and offer apologies
for not having done so earlier, through his total ignorance of the royal presence being so near; and, in the flattering hope that this tardiness in evincing duty might graciously be pardoned, to request the condescension of their Majesties to honour with their presence the festivities wdiich were to take place this day in his castle and upon his domain, in celebration of his only son's coming of age ;—that the notice not being of sufficient length for the respect due to his sovereign, he would postpone the assembling until the morrow or day after, were it not the numbers appointed from afar could not be stoppet! in time ; and, above all, the weather being unusually sultry, the cheer could not with safety be doomed to delay in its consumption, since a sufficiënt or meet supply could not be substituted in such a remote part of the country in apt time for the occasion. This loyal hospitality had of course elicited a candid confession of the indi¬ viduality ofthe party in Aibalanda ; and, in consequence, his lordship poliMy
transferred the invitation intended for their Majesties and court to the substi¬ tutes he found upon the premi.ses. But whether this hospitality was to be ac¬ cepted, the Worlingtons said they knew not yet ; Lady St. Oswald being against the measure, since this baron was one of those who, giving credence to the dis¬ loyalty of the late Lord St. Oswald, had never paid his respects to the present: but Lady Warburg being wild to partake of festivities thus oftered, the matter re¬ mained yet undecided. As Mary fully expected, the moment her cousins took leave, De Mandeville declared his determination to attend the fete at liockcliff Castle ; — " Not," he said, « as heir of Aibalanda but in apt disguisement ; " for he felt the respect due to the memory of his slan¬ dered grandsire presented an interdict to his entering the gates of Lord Barrow- cliff as Lord de Mandeville ; nor other¬ wise 'should he force his company upon the persons going from Aibalanda, as they had seemed to consider his absence
from his own father's hoard as no subject of regret : but that his project was, for himself and sister, with their immediate suite, to proceed in disguise to liockcliff Castle, unknown to the royal mummers, ami to take their station amid the .spec¬ tators. The wild Mary woukl have been charmed with the project, had not alarm for her brother's health subdued every wish fbr its accomplishment: but Dave¬ nant shortly after entering, ίο announce his disappointment in every attenrpt to borrow, — all things tkcc.alive being in requisition throughout the neighbourhood for the fete at RockcliílCastíe, —she soon found there was no alternative for recon¬ ciling her brother to this unforeseen delay in keeping hall, but acquiescence in his project, provided Father Philip said not his navuard fo the measure; fbr whose decree the seneschal undertook to de¬ spatch a trusty messenger, antl, if nt ces¬ sai v, to make everv arrangement for their disguise, and for their conveyance to and from Lortl Barrowcliff's, without the
knowledge of any whom bis young lord wished to remain in ignorance of the matter. Father Philip himself arrived, as sooft as possible, to investigate the safety of the measure; and soon felt conviction, that an interdict to his patient's wishes would teem with more peril to his health, than permission to become a spectator of the revels ; nor did the sapient leech feel much apprehension from the result, a^ the weather was as sultry as might have been expected iu the very height ot ^?????.
CHAI'. IV, In· the course oi' this mornincr, ?'???? brought intelligence to his lord, that Ladv Warburg and all the guests were ? ? ? going to the revels at liockcliff Castle ; and that Lady St. Oswald had departed in tlisconteutation, to pass the while at St. Mildred's monastery. Conventual hospitality was doomed to decrease the dinner-party this dav at 1 a' t Aibalanda, for Algernon dined at St. Stephen's. Communications from his eloved parental friend Father Kenrick had lately reached Algernon from this monastery, but no intimation that the *v * writer was an inhabitant of it — fortius concealment had been thought atlvisable by Sir Ethelbert; but the letter delivereti lo him bv Ladv Marv contained inlelli- * s * gence that, in the lord abbot of this neighbouring community, he would find his earfy guardian and preceptor.
On the wings of the wind, Algernon new to receive the long coveted blessing of his revered, inestimable friend ; whose society he was in no haste to quit, until Father Philip, afler dinner, informed htm he had better hie to his toilet to trap for the liockcliff' Castle festivities, as Lady Warburg and a large party from Aibalanda were going thither, although Lady St. Oswald was too much indisposed to accompany them : and shortly after this intelligence Algernon hastened home, to prepare for attendance upon Lady Warburg, whom he felt he should anticipate more rapture in beholding the worshipped star of homage in the region of'revel, were she not going thither whilst her affectionate mother was ill, and whose indisposition, lie was convinced, had arisen through the alarm which Rhona had so unmeetly occasioned her the pre¬ ce ling day. The difficulty of disguising Lady Mary was infinite: ior having hitherto ap¬ peared only garbed as a rustic, nothing in such form could conceal her from
recognition ; w hilst any attire of superioi life could not be adopted, since the place which circumstances tlecreetl for her to occupy at liockcliff Castle must neces sarily rank her with the common multi¬ tude At length, as time pressed, she was compelled sorely against her wish, although the fashion of the dress was such as to prevent any murmur from feminine propriety; —she was metamor¬ phosed into a sailor boy of the Nether¬ lands ; De Mandeville was trappel as her shipmate; and Davenant as their master ; whilst Maud, Weewitte, antl A'Parry assumed the garb of Dutch pea¬ sants. From the castle wardrobe were all these habits supplied ; — collected there for tbe masks and moralities which in past days had been represented in Aibalanda : and although the rare fruit, the lemon, whidi had appeared at a civic feast in the metropolis more than three years before, was not yet to be found in country parts, our band of mummers feared not to submit to bronz¬ ing their complexions, to aid in their
disguise; assured that, if their own ex¬ ertions could not effectually remove the Miia!! degree of bronzing which the sup¬ posed effects of sun antl winds couhl warrant for natives of Holland, Father Philip, for certainty, hatl .skill and cun¬ ning in his craft for their blanching. As water carriage was the most con¬ sonant to the wish of secresy in this ex- peditioii·—and there being meandering through the Aibalanda domain, ami pass¬ ing close to the castle, a beautiful rivulet, the course of which ran by the very gates of liockcliff Castle — our meny mummers adopted this mode of waftage; and the garb which some of them wore accorded not a little with the aptitude of the measure. Our Lady Mary, envelop ?! in a re¬ dundant dress, her head jammed, even forehead and ears, into a thrum cap, to conceal her beautiful and luxuriant hair, appeared considerably shorter than in hei own attire; and which, with the bronzing other lily complexion, so com¬ pletely metamorphosed her, that none
uninformed of the matter could havt identified her by common observation ; more particularly, as she could imitate the broken accents of the character she had assumed most natural Iv, haying often heard Weewitte's mimicry of foreigners ι/ a~ in their efforts to speak English : antl in a very short periotl she appeared much more at home in her new guise than her brother; who at length proclaimed, that he must content himself with performing a dumb mariner when any person should near him from whom he might appre¬ hend detection through his unruly mem- ber, which could utter no foreign language but in that purity he had acquired from Father Hubert, However, this compul¬ sive taciturnity he soon found would noi prove of any material consequence ; since not only his sister, but Weewitte and Davenant were ready to prompt him with some homely phrase of foreign im¬ portation, when they perceived his refine ment on the verge of* betraying him. When our party was ready for embark¬ ation, they found a gaily-trapped Dutch
boat ready to receive them, containing a crew of smart skippers much more nu¬ merous than Lord de Alandeville could have hoped for upon so short a notice. Wind and a gently rippling tide from the contiguous ocean heing with them, en¬ abled their effecting their waftage by sails ; and at the helm stood a mariner, who, although vested in the gabardine of a common seaman, and with a countenance as deeply bronzed as any present, yet presented such a noble form of majestic grandeur, — betrayed such graceful dig¬ nity 7 in every movement, — whilst such resplendent intellect beamed from his eyes, which were seldom withdrawn from the youthful mummers fbr whose pas¬ time this voyage was enterprised, — that Alary felt alarmed, and the buoyancy V ay a/ of her animation considerably subsided, until some tones in his voice, as he di¬ rected the marineras, betrayed him to hei¬ as one from whom she had only to expect good. Her courage and vivacity conse¬ quently rallied, yet she almost wondered why they should revive ; since she more vol. n, E
than ever felt tempted to believe thai supernatural agency must influence the different appearances in the hermit oí St. Stephen's Valley; for here he was, in absolute certainty, and without any symptoms of that advance in age which had been so visible in her revered in¬ structor the last day she had visited the hermitage. Although the passage of our voy- agers was not devoid of scenic beau¬ ties, Edward and Mary, having all theii thoughts fixed upon anticipated scenes at liockcliff Castle, bestowed no observ¬ ation upon the embarkment, until, from the circumstance of their being late in proceeding to tiie festival, they began to feel alarm on perceiving no throngs, nor even individuals, in view, making towards the point of attraction, which at once led them to anxious scrutiny of every vista they glided by, to lull their apprehensiou of a disappointment await¬ ing them in the postponement ofthe fete; when at length a cordial, in the sound ol music and much shrill shouting, revived
their hopes, by sounding conviction of their being, in good sooth, approaching very near the scene of action. From the oppressive heat of the day, the commencing pastime arranged fbr the occasion (the chase of a hart) had been postponed from noon to eventide, and now 7 all at once struck the eyes of our delighted Dutch freight through one of those communicative scenic open¬ ings our young expectants had looked to so successlessly before ; and now 7 all at once they beheld the grand pageant of a chase, composed of gaily-decked " lords and ladies, and gentlemen and gentlewomen, and pages, mounted on splendidly-trapped wdiite palfreys, and genets, and barbs, kc* ¿cc. attended by bands of huntsmen, and hounds, antl horns, and shawms, and trumpets and parkers, and foresters and franklins, and churls, and varlcts, and villains," quite sufficient to astound as well as deh^ht our Lady Mary, whose gay bark, more unexpected to the eye of each beholdei than the animated scene of pastime was e 2
to her, attracted numbers down to 1 1 it- water's edge, to witness the debarking of these aquatics, to join the multitude now returned from their short chase : íbr, as if in accommodation to the demand fbr time to enact so much in, the poor hart had taken to the soil, and was so hotly pursued she .soon gave in ; and her pursuers were now returned in triumph io the lawn before the castle, to conso¬ lidate with numerous parties that had not arrived iu time to join the chase ; among which late arrivals were Ladv CT ?! Warburg and her party from Aibalanda. Our voyagers landed, and ranged them¬ selves amid the inferior multitude, iu respectful distance from the imposing grandeur which the nobility and gentry of' this numerous assembly presented ; and only a few moments ere the same band of music which had conveyed consolation to our juvenile atlventurers sounded forth an accompaniment to a rustic bridal procession just entering the lawn to dance before a bride-stake which was elevated with the due decorations
bf rosemary and flowers : and after the lively measure had been footed with all the might ancl main of the performers, a game at the quintain was played off* with rapidity by the magic hands of dexterity. The distress of Maiy's agitation, for the first moments in which she had ever heart! a full band of wind instruments sounded together in astounding might, or, as the expression of those thus em¬ phatically pronounced it, a " noyse of music," afforded her brother infinite amuse¬ ment, as did also her satisfaction upou the relief she experienced when, accord¬ ing to the same mode of' expression, " the noyse was appeased :" and poor Latly Mary, unsophisticated indeed, found not only the sound of melody oppressive, but that w hieb was not harmonious, — the jostling and pressure of the multi¬ tude, and also the view of so manv in¬ dividuals at once; and, for the brst time, proved almost too much fbr her com¬ posure; antl she would have implored Weewitte to take her with Manti back to the boat, only the kindness of her E 3
heart revolted from depriving others of enjoyment. But, by degrees, Mary's courage re¬ novated, and her feelings tranquillized by observing, amongst the surrounding throng, many well-known faces of the Aibalanda chatellany, and reflecting that other rustics might be equally in- hostile. But when, at length, her party allowed ambition to encourage their efforts to obtain for her and themselves a near station to the baron and those immediately around him, and that she descried Algernon and her cousin Blanch arrayed in all the bravery the occasion required, her gratification in the scene began to animate ; and shortly her art¬ less observations and lively sallies so delighted her brother, — who had been initiated in such scenes,—that be would have encouraged her exuberance of spi¬ rits beyond the prudence necessary for tlieir disguise, had not Mary felt a little .saddened whenever she beheld Algernon CT attending to every look and movement of Rhona as if his own existence de-
pended upon his unwearied observation of Lady Warburg ; for Mary felt grieved rhat her ever kind friend Fitzrivers should bestow his affections unworthily; and the scene of disrespectful daring which she had beheld this paragon enact upon her mother's sacred tomb, allowed her not to yield the meet! of approbation to Lady Warburg's intrinsic merit. Xor was it in malice to Rhona, or through lack of Christian charity, she cherished the remembrance of this long past scene. Every 7 recollection of her mother was of the balmy sweets of maternal tender¬ ness, beaming the sunshine of all the happiness other life's morning ; and there was a hallowed gratitude, which guarded every circumstance relative to this lament¬ ed parent, within the shrine of memory in Mary's heart, where the lorm of her mother was consecrated and embalmed ; and the being who hatl offered insult to the sacred ashes of her mother, even though with the plea of extreme youtli fbr her vindication, Marv could not be- E 1
lieve the possessor of a sterling disposi¬ tion. Completely as the efforts for disguising Latly Mary fiom detection hatl been effected, and disfiguring as the garb which apparelled her- unquestionably wa.s, there was*still a something in the buoy¬ ant air and manner of this young skip¬ per which attraeteti the observation of the higher ranks; for, to Lady ????'? infinite surprise, antl the alarm of the helmsman, — who seernet! enacting her shadow, —- the heir of liockcliff Castle walked forth from the con ^cuous part of the scene he occupied, to place Mary- and her immediate party in a more com- modious situation: in'doing which, he put many questions to Lady Mary rela¬ tive to her country and sojourn in Eng¬ land ; which, although painfully embar¬ rassed bv the noi'dtv of her situation, and by the natural timidityof her sex and youth, she yet succeeded in answering with propriety. But when others of the baron's party—attracted by the grace and beauty and sportiveness of these Dutch
boys, and by the strikingly dignified de¬ portment ofthe majestic man who it was conjectured was their father—■ occasion¬ ally accosted Mary through the evening, she, as well as her brother, was glad to avail herself of so efficient an auxiliary as Weewitte to aid her in yielding that information which many appeared anxious to obtain. The game at the quintain was suc¬ ceeded by a juggler, whose feats were of the most astonishing kind, antl fully cal¬ culated to impress upon the minds ofthe majority of his amazed spectators an in¬ controvertible conviction of magic beim>' at work : nor was this impression likelv to be impaired when, his 'marvellous ac¬ tivity and slight-of-lund performances ended, he commenced his astrological ; and the absolute velocity yvi t h which it had become necessarv to enact all their intended pastimes — the intense sultri¬ ness óf the noon compelling all that was arranged to occupy the whole tlay to bé compresseti into the evening — now called for brevity even in the awful eon- L 5
sulfation with the stars. The baron and baroness Barrtnvcliff, and their heir, the day-star of pleasure's horoscope, there¬ fore had their conferences with this mys¬ tic propounder oi destinies most lapidly managed, when Lady Waiburg was led forwaid for this poi teutons consultation; and thus was presented to Lad} Mary's near inspection this monopolizer of ge¬ neral admiration : antl Mary had never before beheld, m animated nature, any human being so dazzlingly beautiful. Marv, for manv an hour of her life, a/ ·■ had contemplated the exquisite loveliness of her own mother in portraits painted by Michael Angelo Ruonarotti, and by Raphael, and still holding their station in Aibalanda Castle; but tht se pi educ¬ tions of preeminence in beauty, although objects of almost idolatry to the admira¬ tion of an affectionate chilo, possessed nothing of that dazzling brilliancy which was the character of Rhona's beauty, noi of that imposing air winch seemed to stamp Lady Warburg's right to the degree of superlative in all things de-
mantling praise; and also lacked the imposing splendour of drapery, such as Lady Alary had never before been fated to behold, ancl which, in itself, might have transfixed the delighted gaze, even had the wearer beeu but passing fair. For this fete, being a birthday anniver¬ sary, hatl permitted lihona to indulge in her strong passion for magnificence in dress ; and on this occasion, beside her Venetian robe of Kendal green, pow¬ dered and intertissued with silver, she was garnished with gems of dazzling re¬ splendence. The apparel of Lady Warburg noi only attracted but rivetetl the attention of many individuals present. — Lord tie Mandeville it filled with marvel ; for, not only prior to their progress from Vespasian Tower, but even on theii route into Yorkshire, she had deplored to him the late sudden transition from liberality to the reverse, in Lortl St. Oswald not having permitted her ? procure a Kendal green dress ; and yet» here, without any apparent means of e 6
procuring this long-coveted garment, she appeared in one of infinitely more mag¬ nificence than she had ever before dis¬ played, even in her court splendour. And not more of Lortl de Alandeville's marvel and attention did this Venetian habit awaken and transfix, than it diti those ofthe damsel Aland; for she stood agazed, trembling in heart and frame, with her quivering lips severed in amaze¬ ment, gaping with impatience to ask questions which she dared not to utter. The alarm and conjectures of the agi¬ tated Aland were not without foundation. Our readers may recollect that the para¬ phernalia íbr Lady Adela's spousals with Sir Ethelbert had been executed in the most finished style of taste and cost. 'fhe sad and dire termination to those expected nuptials awakened in the mind of Adela an unconquerable anti¬ pathy to tiie garments prepared for this bitter hour of disappointment; and, con¬ sequently, she never arrayed herself in any of them; they, therefore, lay unmo¬ lested in the trussing-cases in the reves-
tiarv within the suite of Lady Adela's own chambers since that eventful period; Lord St. Oswald never yet having yielded permission to any individual to investi¬ gate the privacies of these chambers, or any of the depositaries belonging to the late countess; antl thus they had remained sacred even from tin» examin¬ ation of her own child. The valuable family jewels of the St. Oswalds had been removed írom Alba- landa ; and Rosamond, as the present lord's spouse, obtained power to use them ; and this permission she extended tt> her daughter ; and, glittering iu the Countess AdeUts family jewels, Rhona hail long been seen, whilst Adela's daughter was uniformly clad in the coarse stuffs antl lock ram of a common rustic. Upon the pretended royal progress, tiie fictitious queen-consort allotted, bv her own sovereign decree, the chambers of the late countess to her own use ; fbr she had heard of the magnificent depo¬ site they contained, and which, she knew, her mother had often vainly endeavoured
to wheedle from her, in this point, in¬ exorable lord. It had been necessary fbr the admira¬ tion traps, laid in train by Rosamond and her daughter to manœuvre a fre¬ quent change of the domestics attendant upon their own persons, lest habit should throw tlmn oft' their guard, and lead these chamber familiars to detect that they were not precisely of the true angelic order. Uhona had just arrived at lier wits' end for the invention of plausible excuses, and such as might reflect lustre upon her own amiability, fbr her frequent changes in this department, when the kindness of her lucky stars ordained that she should detect her bower-woman in the commission of a moral crime ·* and, with Rosamond's aid, lihona so managed her not delivering up the culprit to shame and punishment, as to bind the offender to her by the bonds of sell-defence ; fbr, should the defaulter, Ginifrede, open her mouth when Ladv Warbiinç wished it closed, her ladyship could unclose hers, and tell secrets too j or, should Ginifrede
cease to trumpet forth the praise of her fair lady, that lady could sound the trumpet of alarm iu the ears of Ginifrede, and arouse her to her sense of self-preserv¬ ation. Rhona's passion for admiration and applause was so inveterate, it had gra¬ dually led her into every art and cunning craft to awaken the one and call forth the other. Mauy things cruel and un¬ kind to others, — many tlungs which, if discovered, woukl have degraded her, — she, without scruple, had committed, from time to time, to feed this insatiable appetite of vanity ; but never before had she imagined any thing so disgraceful as that which she had in contemplation, long ere the power had become hers to explore the trussing-cases where the Kendal green dress hatl· for years re¬ posed, and which alluring dress became, at one glance, an impellent to more than the mere gratification of curiosity,—since green, she believ#, shed peculiar lustre over her fascinations, antl its being a favourite colour of the king's perhaps
aided its pre-eminence in her estimation : but although the king was fbr the pre¬ sent mated, yet there was the beir of Rockliff Castle, who was in remainder to a dukedom, and consequently would form inteligible captive. Accomplices had been necessary for the execution of her plan of exploring the trussing-cases, and in fitting the garments she purloined thence to her form ; and in procuring the one, and per¬ forming the other, Mrs. Ginifrede proved a most efficient auxiliary; and, by the counsel of this accomplished shapesmith, an anodyne was provided fbr Lady War- burg's conscience, by placing the same number of garments in the cases as were CT taken thence, but without deeming at- ' CT tention to respondent value a necessary measure ; and this arrangement being completed satisfactorily, Lady Warburg boldly ventured to attire herself' for the fête at liockcliff Castle in a garb she bad not come honourably possessed oí', in full security that none who had ever beheld this Venetian habit before could in possi-
bilit v cross her path, whilst Lortl de Man¬ deville, being snugly in his sick chamber, coukl make no annoying remark upon the occasion. But in this security Lady Warburg was deceived. Lord tie Mandeville, in¬ stead of being confined to his chamber, re¬ covering from the pleasing expectation of plague or sweating sickness, was at Rock- cliff Castle to behold her in this attrac¬ tive bravery; and Maud was there also, to recognise what she had hailetl with admiration, when with her own hands she had unpacked it, on its arrival at Alba- landa, and had bitterly wept over when with those very same hands she repacked it, after the mysterious events which had decreed for it an unheeded deposite for ??? v a vear,
(???. ?. Xiius beautifully attired, and hailetl with the universal admiration she anti¬ cipated, Lady Warburg approached the mystic board, to inquire what fate had decreed fbr her. The pompous astrologer, after gravely consulting the awful page in which her destiny 7 was to be descried, presented her a folded paper, which, upon inspection, she announced, in a voice carefully melo¬ dized to charm all ears, " was a clean blank." The astrologer in affected amaze, requested her to intrust the mystic page to the hand of any one amid the multitude, to huld apart írom him until he should give the word fbr its restoration to her fair hand ; and he pronounced, "she then would find her stars more com¬ municative;" and the choice of Rhona, upon one glance at the multitude, fixed
upon our heroine as the favoured mor¬ tal, to be honoured by this portentous agency. The blushing Mary recoiled and trembled, but her summoncrs (some of the nobles who took pride in thus performing service for Lady Warburg) would not excuse her, and hurried her away to receive that honour thus decreed for her. But soon, to her consolation and encouragement, she fount! lier brother pacing by her side; for Lord tie Man¬ deville, feeling himself the protector of his sister, suffered her not to proceed to the conspicuous part she was now com¬ pelled to take in the scene without him ; and so intrepidly he enacted guardage, that he stood like a very eagle, whose wings were raisetl in readiness to swoop upon those who should molest its young ; and which Sir Leoline perceiving, he remarked it to Algernon, who was stand¬ ing with him near to lihona. " And," he atided, " there is so much for marvel in these airlings, trapped as Dutch, and complexioned as those scat·
teri ing Egyptian Warlocks ! — Beshrew me, but this must be looked to ! " " 'There may be more to look to, sii knights, than the marvel of one brother aiming at the guardance of another in a strange land," exclaimed a monk of' the Cistercian order, who, with many reli¬ gious of the neighbourhood, were to be found amid the guests and multitude at liockcliff this day. " Those fine birds," he continued, " who wear their own plumage, or those who dight in that not their own, had better look to their guardage :" antl thus ? ? saying, he moved away. The startled Rhona trembled in heart; yet, with admirable self-possession, smiled her fascinations antl inquired the holy father's meaning from those who had bearti him. For this query Algernon was deter¬ mined to seek a response. Feeling alarm for the jewels with which Lady Warburg was so profusely decked, and which he knew were the property of the St. Os¬ walds ; and convinced the Cistercian's
caution had not been uttered without cause, he, to the further alarm of the conscious lihona, followed the retreating monk, and courteously requested an ex¬ planation. " Explanation in full is not meet for your ear at present, my son," returned the monk, still passing onward, with his head so bent upon his path as wholly tt) effect the concealment of' his countenance be¬ neath his hood. " Enough for you to wot is the declarement that, if your sal¬ liance from this folkmöte be not apt in guai dance, my retle is, for the surance of safety for the rich property of vour paramount's children, to avise that glitter¬ ing bubble to seek waftage homeward with the Dutch skippers who wend by ihe towers ot' Aibalanda. Xow, Heaven speetl you i and be wary: hut, if future happiness has prisement for you, recoil from your present hopes and wishes, antl vantage your destiny by seeking good fellow ship with the sea-boy who now holds the mystic page ; fbr 1 can make astro¬ logical announcements without aidance
from books, and tell you, " that you ι stars predict future good for you, through means of this unknown stripling." The monk now suddenly turned into a path so dark ami intricate that he at once was lost to the pursuit of Algernon; who returned to the .side of Rhona jusi in the moment when the astrologer issued his marniate to the Dutch boy to present the paper, which he held ín trust for the stars, to their magnificent votary; and the striking elegance of encouraging condescension with wdiich Lady Warburg received the ni}stic deposite would have .secured to her the triumph of undivided admiration, had not the prepossessing diffidence with which it was unaffectedly presented surprised the approbation oi every beholder into bestowing much pleased attention upon the interesting youth. And thus, in the very moment after the monk's prediction, admiration of this boy's deportment taking forcible hold ot Algernon, filled his mind with wonder " For whence this strange predictions
And how could this youthful stranger in¬ fluence his fate?" But thus propelled to bestow his earnest observation upon this airling, Fitzrivers became particularly struck by the prepossessing aspect of ti¬ midity, as the boy reluctantly stood forth to public gaze; and was led to mark Uie contrast in Rhona's assured mode of pre¬ senting herselfi and standing triumphantly the full ñve of observation. Rhona promptly 7 and gracefully ex¬ plored the before blank page ; and al¬ though the mystic ink had not been allowed sufficient, time for complete visibi¬ lity, she yet could decipher high-strained compliments to her beauty 7 , and promises of auspicious fortune quite enough to content her rapacity. Thi.s astrological exhibition thus ended with high gratification to Lady Warburg, Lortl and Lady Banovvcliff and their guests entered the Castle base court, fol¬ lowed by as many of the eager multitude as could buffet the tide ofthe strong cur¬ rent of pressure and struggle ; amongst whom were not our Dutch adventurers,
at which Mary rejoiced; for, although naturally anxious to behold more and more of spectacles she had never before witnessed ; she yet, through the coward apprehension of uninitiation, believed she should be more comfortable at Aibalanda; and the attention she had evidently awak¬ ened, she had no precedent to instruct her into ascribing to admiration ; and she therefore fearetl it arose from suspicion oí her disguise ; and, under this apprehen¬ sion, she entreated her brother to consent to their departure, but in vain ; and, all impatience to witness more ofthe specta¬ cles in expectation, Lord de Mandeville upbraided Weewitte for not having pro¬ cured for them admission into the Castle. " You, master jester, by the cunning of your craft," he added, "ought to have conveyed tb in as coruscations of your wit." " Would that have been witcraft, lortl of mine, emitting coruscations to light the cat out of the Dutch bag that con- tained your jester ? " retorted Weewitte. " Would our kittens then have remained
undetected at their play ? Were it not fortius disguisement, odd's flash! my wit would have sparkled up deftly through the con f agion of foolery, and have made many a marvellous salliance. But, by'r Lady! this concealment of my craft sorrows me so out of consola¬ tion, I would I might speetl me tt) our waftage homeward ; ior here, I have found, fish out of water become flat." But not very long was the anxiety of Lord de Maiuleville to become a spec¬ tator ofthe revels within left ungratified. a—* The courtesy of the young heir tt) the apparent foreigners led him to despatch an officer of the household to conduct them by a private pass into the base- court, antl to accommodate them í hert with places where they might view the spectacle as conveniently as might be accomplished. The pageants here exhibited, by mono. polising the attention of the spectator. allowed of no individual observ ation ■ but at length the ca.se was altered, when the cornettes sounded for the banquet U VOL, H. w
commence in the great hall ofthe castle; when as manv ofthe multitude as could press into that, and the guest chambers w here the feast was spread, were, in com¬ pliance with the custom ofthe age, with¬ out demur admitted ; and amongst which * CT throng, to the terror of Lady Mary and Maud, and the delight of De Man¬ deville, our Dutch atlventurers, through the muscular prowess or' the helmsman, Davenant, and Weewitte, were included, I í re, indeed, a scene of amazement awaited Lady Alary, who hatl never be¬ fo 1 beheld a dainty banquet; — and hov ? as she now admitted to behold one 0 —-amongst the rabble, encountering extreme fatigue, and terror, and pressure, and buffeting she had never been doomed f ? conceive the libe of. But from this unpleasant situation she was shortly ex¬ tricated by some one belonging to the household, who removed her antl her party into the front rank of these motley spectators, and, by desire of the cour¬ teous heir, supplied them with refresh¬ ments. In this front rank Mary's alarm
most rapidly subsided ; when the glitter¬ ing daze of this magnificent scene made all the natural impression upon our youthful novice it was calculatetl to effect. Afler Alary had recovered the first astounding of her amazed faculties, she gradually found power to identity sub¬ jects for distinct admiration ; — the .splendid trappings of the walls, hung round with the richest tapestry—the rich canopies of' estate — the numbers of boards or tables " laid bant]net-wise," affording an imposing view of all their coverings of the most rare and costly nappery, antl bearing on them the most dainty viands in profusion, adorned by comfitures and subtil ties challenging the approof and marvel of all beholders — the cupboards, with appropriate tiers of glittering plate, some of parcel gilt, and some of solid gold — the prodi¬ gality of wax-lights of various colours, some as large as torches, and receiving additional brilliancy of effect from the silver or gilt plates which were stationed F 2
behind them on the walls — antl the fair ladies, md dames, and nobles, and gentle¬ men, all trapped in silver, and gold, and velvet, and silk, and embroidery, and goldsmiths' work, and precious stones — antl the grand noyes of marvellously fine and cheering 1 music. At length the tables were taken up, to make way for dancing, which then im¬ mediately commenced ; and Mary saw, with delight, the dances — bargenettes, panyons, turgyons, and rounds — in high style, all bearing the names of their in¬ ventors or of the measure and number which they contained. And Mary now had opportunity to make her observations upon individuals also ; and soon remark¬ ed that her handsome uncle was attired in more dazzling bravery than any other noble present ; that he seemed the most determined performei in the dance, and was generally leadman * ; and even when not in the dancing measure, the most active mover in the whole assem¬ blage. And why this should be so
awakened her marvel ; for the solution did not appear to her, that all this anima¬ tion was a manoeuvre to shield from detection bis being no longer young; and, most of all, from Lady Warburg. The easy graces of Lady Warburg, whilst they excited universal admiration, also excited the amazement of our young novice Mary ; for the traditional precepts which Maud had carefully handed down to her as having regulated the bearings of her female ancestors bad evidently not been communicated to Rhona, for she obeyed not the precept, " That maid¬ ens should not emulate the crane or tortoise in turning their heads over their shoulders, but should look and bear their countenances straight forward;" and seemed not to deem it in the least un- maidenly to glance her eyes, ami beam her smiles, in every direction fbr the destruction of mankind. And still more to Mary's marvel, she beheld Rhona, and other ladies present, adopt, without appa¬ rent scruple, that cordial salutation to the men of their acquaintance upon their
first meeting fbr the evening, of which she had read with the incredulity of a sceptic, although panegyrized by Eras¬ mus * : and these feelings of amazement were accompanied by those of disappro¬ bation ; and that, not because Mary was a prude, but because she was a child of purity, whose inherent feelings of pro¬ priety were unsophisticated by pernicious fashion and example. The graceful cinque -????, in which Ladv Warburg excited a new enthusiastic hurst of admir *- : on, was promptly suc¬ ceeded by a masque, in which the peerless Uhona was claimed by the heir of the ca-tle as liis partner in the dance to be introduced therein ; when the disap¬ pointed Fitzrivers, who had been pro¬ mised the boon of her hand in a round, feeling some bitter pangs, not only from this bereavement of promised happiness, but through the evident joy with which liis fair enslaver acceded to the alleged
claims of this duke in remainder, re¬ solved to turn his eyes from the gorgeous banquet upon which they but too much delighted to feast, and enter into conver¬ sation with the Dutch youth, whom he hatl just observed amid the spectators, to discover, if possible, if he could in any wise prove likely to lead him to the path in which to discover his parentage ; for, through such a possibility only, could Algernon present himself with any solu¬ tion tt) the mysterious Cistercian's strange prediction of this youth proving his au¬ spicious fate, Algernon, accordingly, accosted Latly Mary, ami, with the pleas¬ ing urbanity for which he was celebrated, inquired if Mynherr could speak French, as he himself could not boast much flu¬ ency in the articulation of Dutch.* Mary, with a brilliant blush, uttered her affirmation in a short sentence, with so pure an accent of refinement, that Al-
?
gernon exclaimed, " You are superior to your present guise, gootl youth." " Possibly," Mary responded; "but my prudence could not rank in the su¬ perlative, were I to make inconvenient shrifts in a confessional such as this." " Rut may I ask," demanded Alger¬ non, " the place of your intended des¬ tination when you depart from this confessional and these shores?" " Tiie castle of my ancestors." " 1 ndeed î — Where situated ? " " At present in the blank leaf of the mysterious sage — caution : but when a/ ~ discretion and time shall make fit its no¬ mination, I may 7 , perchance, there per¬ form the pleasing rites of' hospitality' to some of merry England's bright orna¬ ments ; and to none with more sincerity than to Alonsieur Fitzrivers. " You know me — IIow strange! how passing strange ! " " Fame travels farther than the expanse of water that now divides me from my home; but more illustrious names than
even this of universal estimation reached the shore, from whence I came : vve had tidings that the monarch of your realm, and his fair consort, were staying in these parts. You cannot longer wonder what drew us hither." All this our mirthful Mary uttered in accents so genuinely foreign as to defy detection, and in a voice in which no tone of her own performed ; yet at the same moment her eyes beamed antl smiles dimpled the playful sportiveness that danced within her heart, as merrily as any of the performers in the masque before her. " But when you leave this castle, whither is your destination ?" demanded Algernon anxiously. " 1 must not answer; for, as you con jecture, we are not here in our own estate," saitl Maiv, " I want not to penetrate where cour¬ tesy must withhold curiosity; but I fain would know more of you: one, "ho at least prett ntls to mystic science, has foretold that I am to derive lup- i 5
piness through your aid. To fulfil this prediction, which, as I can augur you are a philanthropist, would yield pleasure to your benevolence, I must improve our acquaintance. Now, under the cir¬ cumstance of this disguise of yours, how am I to manage my intention?" " Xav," said .Mary, "if fate has de- creed that I am to turn fortune's wheel fbr your advantage, fate will speed the matter, and realise this bodement without our toiling for that wdiich is avoid I ess. Rely upon fate for our re-meeting ; and then, when in my own estate, should ' a/ 7 you recognise me, it will yield me plea¬ sure to acknowledge Monsieur Fitzrivers a c - an acquaintance" " lint should any cause exist why I might not recognise you, will you pro¬ mise tt) claim that acquaintance with l! t /λί vers?" "Oh, fear not," responded Alary; "fate will pet form the announcement. Some marvellous whiil of Dame Fortune's wheel will piove the mystic flourish for mv introduction in my own estate"
"Well," said Algernon, charmed with the vivacity which now sparkled in every tone and movement of this young fo¬ reigner, "although you will make no promise for future performance, perhaps you will a present one ; — will }OU grant waftage to myself and a few companions to Aibalanda iu your boat, should we require such an accommodation ?" The surprised Mary turned to the helmsman and Davenant for their ac¬ quiescence ; which obtainetl, she made the requested promise to Algernon, who, after expressing thanks, hastened to in¬ form Lord Dalincourt ofthe alarm which had been conveyed to him fbr the safety of Lady Warburg's decorations, antl the advice given for her route to Aibalanda ; when, to the amaze of Algernon, bis lordship suggested the possibility of the danger resting with the foreigners themselves; one of whose accomplices had probably sounded the trump of alarm into his ears, to obtain for his aquatic associates the chance of such rich booty. r 6
For a moment Algernon was a con¬ vert to this suspicion ; but in the next threw it from him with indignation, in firm conviction that in the Dutch boy lie had conversed with there would be found no guile: and just as he was giving utterance to this conviction, lie espied lhe lord abbot of St. Stephen's in earnest conference with the majestic man belonging to the Dutch adventurers; and who, when questioned, exonerated the ibi eign party from every suspicion ihat had been formed of their integrity; vet Lord Dalincourt, assured no danger awaited R hona on her progress home, ward through the forest, would not ac- nuic^ce iu her returning anv other way; «uuljiet as this negation was decided, one of the Dutch boat's crew made his \va\ into the hall of 1 festivity, to inform Davennnt that the rapidly increasing darkness of the niirht, and otlier alarming appearances, portending a fearful visita¬ tion írom íhe elements, it had become ad\wible to make no longer larrianee ere thty commenced their voyage from llockcüíi;
CHAP. VL The final masque was now commencing, m which Lady Warburg and some other exquisite performers were expected to make the spectators marvel at their wondrous excellence: it became, there¬ fore, a matter of real difficulty to per¬ suade the sell-willed De Mandeville to acquiesce in prompt departuie; and when at length, with much exertion, our party eliceteli their disentanglement from the impeding multitude, and buffeted their pass through the base-court out of the castle gates, the sound of clarions from within proved too mighty fbr the eager curiosity of his lordship to resist, and ere bis companions were avvaie of bis intention he had escaped from his party and re-entered the castle, to the serious alarm of his sister, and the consternation of' those who felt the expediency of reaching a haven in Aibalanda eve the
ignited atmosphere shoultl openly declare that tremendous warfare, which dense darkness, oppressive heat, and some few flashes of vivid lightning, proclaimed in preparation. To depart without Lord tie Mande¬ ville was out of the question ; and to extract him from the throng within they found impracticable : for neither Dave¬ nant nor Weewitte, with all their muscular prowess, could force or penetrate their way to him, whom they ever and anon descried at no great distance ; but, like the bough of Tantalus, he eluded tlieir grasp, and at length disappeared — nor coukl their anxious researches lead them to any tidings of the truant. During this anxious research, the alarmed Mary was left with the equally terrified Maud, under the protection of their helmsman — in whom our readers have no doubt identified Sir Ethelbert — and in a station beneath a spreading tree at the verge of a contiguous forest : iu which station the glaring torch-light, arranged for an effective illumination of
the lawn before the castle, glared with almost appalling influence; since the fierce rays of the torches seemed to in¬ crease the blackness of the back-ground, antl to gleam radiance upon the apertures of the woodland boundaries, as if those beams were shining there to light the gloomy pathways to surrounding gulfs and caverns, if not to Tartarus itself. The spot now occupied by the trem¬ bling Mary and her companions com¬ manded a full view of the castle, and of all who effectcul egress and regress through its gates ; whilst immediately from where ihey stood branched a short pass to the water's edge, where their boat lay iu readiness for their embarcation. The incessant thunder, which had fbr some time rolled its majestic murmurs at a distance, drew gradually nearer. The uow almost incessant lightning quivered or darted its blue javelins in and out of every surrounding inlet of the forest — yielding momentary brightness to every dense mass of foliage within view — and
beamed its fiercest rays across the ground, as if fbr a resplendent carpet. Sir Ethelbert, in alarmed anxiety for Mary, and in terror for her brother, found himself in a perplexing situation ; fbr he could not leave one unguarded, whilst he sought the other—well aware of what the turpitude of villany might imagine : whilst he trembled for possible evils assailing the thoughtless Edward, he still more feared for the child of' his anxious care, now alike threatened by the war of ele¬ ments and the ruffian throng collected around the castle for pastime and fbr plunder. At length Sir Ethelbert's solicitude to make some effort for the discovery of Edward, to enable Mary to reach home, induced his recommending Lady Mary to take refuge in tbe boat, where her safety from mortal an noy a^ *c would be secure ; and, although shuddering at the measure of confiding herself to the care of utter strangers, Mary acquiesced — knowing the motive of the request was a hope to expedite the return of her
truant brother : and they were hastening down the pathway to the boat, when a closely hooded monk hailed the helms¬ man, who in evident joy, whispered to Mary, " The hermit of St. Stephen's val¬ ley will meetly take my place in your guardage, lady." Mary joyfully and gratefully took the monk's offered arm, in that firm con¬ fidence which was never the case when she detected the younger personation of the venerable hermit as the one present ; and yet the younger of these personations was not the man of mystery. This elder individual, who, under the sanction Jl the lord abbot, inhabited the hermitage of the valley, was wholly unknown even to the lortl abbot himself; but he had presented a passport to the good opinion ofthe community of St. Stephen's which could not be disputed. His integrity thus guaranteed, and his capabilities for that refined preceptorship which Sir Ethelbert panted to undertake himself; induced the appointment of the myste *
rious stranger to a post which he filled most sitisfactorily and conscientiously. To Mary's eager demand of how she came to have the happiness of meeting Mm in the regions of festivity, he replied, that to watch over ber safety bad drawn him thither. Marv's grateful acknowledgments were fearfully interrupted by coruscations of fhe incessant lir 1 ning giving to her a. CT '~ a. J view a boy in a sailor's garb, flitting across the path, before them, pursued by ? mau holding in bis hand an unsheathed dagger. The garb of fhe retreating \ictim operated on Mary's heart like steel upon 'die electric flash, for, like that subtile matter, she was instantaneously attracted ; and, as the javelin to its point of em¬ bassy, she darted to the ilägger, and upborne by the strength of her aflection in her sprmg to seize it, the surprise occasioned by the sudden grasp relaxed the assassin's hold ; when she snatched the murderous weapon from his hand, and hurled it into the water. This prompt
SIR ETIILLBERl. and intrcjiid enterjirisc achieved, the agitated Mary sunk into the hermit's c arms, \ et wildly shrieking fbr her brother ; and in a moment Sir Ethelbert appeared, bearing in his arms the rescued youth: fbr the flitting assassin had arrested Sir CT Ethelbert's progress to the castle ; and, like Mary, assured the retreating victim was De Mandeville, he rushed after the menaced youth to shield him from de¬ struction. By the lightning's brilliant aid, they soon perceived- the rescued youth was not De Maude v ??, but a something more juvenile boy, and of a class far beneath him. Mary's agonised affection relieved, she now 7 revived ; and in a tone of pity, forgetting wholly the foreign accent she bad assumed, enquired if the poor youth had escaped all injury. The rescued boy, dropping out of Sir Ethelbert's relaxing aim, sunk upon his knees before Ladv Mary, exclaiming iu the most touching accents —" Oh I kind youth! by all the saints in heaven 1 con. jure you, take me fiom this harmful place anon ! If that boat be yours, take mo
with you to sea. Take me with you to the end of the woiId, and 1 will be your faitht a slave" The impatience of Sir Ethelbert to place the' child of his tender care in a place of comparative security from the too probable vengeance of the foiled as¬ sassin, led him to hurry Mary 7 on board the boat, and to grant the poor suppliant's petition, by affording him shelter in it. Latly Mary antl Maud now embarked under the protection of the hermit of the valley and the boat's crew, who, by order of their helm-man, rowed oif some little way from shoie, under shelter of an overhanging rock, there to await the re¬ turn of their absent passengers; antl Sir Ethelbert once more bent his steps toward the castle, in pursuit of De Mandeville. The rescued youth, although not aware of the active part Latly Mary hatl borne in his rescue, vet attracted by the kind tones in which she had accosted him. and for the permission she had obtained for his embarking with her, drew close to the spot where she was seated, as if she was
the only being he had to look to for con¬ solation ; and .soon she heard hiin sobbing pitcouslv, and his sobs intermingled with soft, yet penetrating moans. Marv's mind was so agitated by varied alarms, that fbr the first moments after her establishment in the boat she seemed ab¬ sorbed in her apprehensions ; but soon her .sensibility to the claims of' humanity was aroused, and led her enquiries to dis¬ cover that the poor boy had received a wound, and which had led to his flight. Upon this information, he was laid by the kind-hearted mariners upon the softest place they could devise; and, with the aid of" Lady Maiy's handkerchiefi they stanched the wound, which, though the strong material of his jacket had prevented from being of a more formidable extent, the} yet found severe, but none on board could pronounce if its aspect was one of menace. Tbe additional interest which this dis¬ covery awakened fbr the patient sufferer elicited many questions relative to this attempted assassination; but the bov's
only reply heing " Spare me ! Oh spare me! " which he uttered with great men¬ tal anguish, Mary entreated that every distressing query might, for the present, be suspended. Her wishes operated as a mandate from fate ; and as a further cor¬ dial for his evident mental sufferings, she assured him he should be taken every tender care of, and that when he should become equal to a distant removal, it should he to a place of security from all his apprehensions. " Amongst honest men ? " exclaimed the boy, in a tone of affecting agitation. "For your meet comfort and conten- tation, amongst honest men," responded Lady r Mary. The youth, with a wild cry of almost maniac joy, uttered his fervent thanks¬ giving to heaven, and then to the kindky being who thus comforted him ; and from this moment his tears and moans lost half their bitterness. Although these occurrences attracted Mary's attention, they did not monopo¬ lise her thoughts. Her anxiety for the
reappearance of her brother became agonising from its protraction ; and had not her mysterious friend of St. Stephen's valley negatived the measure, as one more likely to impede than aid the activity of researchjshe would have implored to be re- landed, that^he too might seek the truant. But much longer Mary was not doomed to this mental torture. Her apprehen¬ sions fbr her brother's safety were at length happily terminated by his arrival, accompanied by Sir Ethelbert and Dave¬ nant, who had found his volatile lordship grouped in with a dense crowd, observing the success of the opponents in the game of mumchance, which many of the noble¬ men and gentlemen were engaged in with the fair ladies and gentlewomen. Lord de Mandeville instanti} flew to his sister, kissed her affectionately, re¬ gretted the alarm and trouble he had occasioned, and hoped she was not much terrified by the storm. " It is fearful," replied Mary " and now you are come, I trust we shall make no longer tarriance from the meet shelter
of our babitance, from whence the claims of humanity are sorrowing us ior each moment of detention." " And not even yet can wc make repair thitherward," said the helmsman, in a tone of chagrin : " some new passengers, to whom w aftage has been promised to Aibalanda Castle, we have now to tarry for." " Let nothing tempt us to bewray to them our identity," said Lord dc Man- deville eagerly. «* Let us debark them at Aibalanda greeze ; and then eftsoons efiect our own landing, when freeiboted from their observance." Tlie helmsman and Davenant agreed to this proposition, The hermit, on learn¬ ing strangers were coming on board, removed from his .station by Mai\, to one of more obscuritv; when Edward, taking the reverend man's vacated place, whis¬ pered to his sifter, that lie bad been an observer of a strange scene, in which Rhona had been the principal performer. " She acted a part as artificially as any of the apt maskers," he continued. " I
saw her make pretension to ignorance of mumchance, albeit she understands it to perfection. Under this guise, her oppo¬ nents being thrown off their enguardment, she won all the marcs they disported with ; and then------" Edward was here interrupted in his de¬ tail, through the commotion occasioned by the boat's nearing the shore, to take on board the expected passengers ; but the sequel was, that the success of Rhona emboldened her to risk her win¬ nings against a cupful of' gold marcs just won of' some unlucky person by a masker. But her sweet and captivating display of' innocent unsuspecting igno¬ rance of what she was gracefully perform¬ ing made no impression upon her wary adversary, Sir Rupert, who, more attentive to his own manoeuvring than to her fasci¬ nations, came off victorious; when Lady Warburg fired into a fury upon this unlooked lor disappointment to her golden expectations of obtaining money fbr va¬ rious pressing occasions, antl, to conceal the real cause of her violent agitation, she vol. u. g
dexterously turned it to apprehension of' the storm, and of returning home through a fearful forest, full of perilous dells and other causes to create affright¬ ment. Algernon, who had not been Rhona's observer through her gambling scene, possessed no clew to peneti ate that rage from disappointed hopes occasioned her apparent agonies; and therefore, believ¬ ing them the genuine, M\d consequently interesting, alarms of female timidity, prevailed upon Lord Dalincourt to accept fbr her the promised passage in the Dutch boat ; and Weewitte hav ing been observ etl by them whilst in quest of his young Ioni, they hailed, and at length obtainetl him for their pilot to the place of em¬ barcation. This opportunity of being consigned to the especial protection of Fitzrivers, m a moment of excited sympathy for her, was, not to be lost by Rhona ; and as no moment of delay was allowed her hy the impatient Weewitte, Latly Warburg pa* theticallv took leave of the members of
the Aibalanda party who were doomed to the perils of a land convex ance home; and, accompanied by a hand of gallant idolaters tk .ermineti upon aUendhu·- their lady love to her embarcation, she sallied forth, and at length, after an alluring display of interesting and well-executed alarm, which circumstances amply fur¬ nished for her benefit, she grateful!} took leave of' this escort, as if the soul of gratitude were seated on her ruby lips, and then entered the boat with graceful dignifw Fit/rivers soon was seated by his beau¬ tiful enslaver, antl the boat moved rapidly on between embankments, meandering through an extensive and gloomy forest, where the huge trunks ami widely spread¬ ing limbs of the lofty trees standing on each margin of the stream, looked in their lurid masses like ranks of giants ciati in black armour arranged in formi¬ dable phalanx for mutual warfare ; or perhaps, more aptly, resembling black demons of enchanted woods, actively working their igniting spells, darting their
wild firebrands far and wide for the de¬ struction of devoted mortals : fbr now tlie almost incessant discharge of flaming arrows from the magazines of electric matter, darting in and out antl along the sable masses of the water's boundaries, ever and anon illuminated the boat itself from stem to stern with instantaneous lights—-sometimes brilliantly beautiful, sometimes luminously terrific ; the rivulet on which they wafted expanding into sheets of liquid fire, as if flowing from a volcanic eruption, or sparkling with a softer light of sapphire hue. Thunder rolling unremittingly its most tremendous cannonade, whilst the intensity of op¬ pressive heat, without one balmy breeze or cooling distillation to breathe a hope that this hostile force of elementary com¬ motion was not charged with a mission for the world's destruction, yielded scope sufficient for the most dismaying fancies, in an age when science had scarcely yet taught conviction that nature's .self, not supernatural agency, was the worker of each storm.
Such sounds and appearances could not but fill the mind of Lady Mary with awful terror; although, through the in¬ fluence of her enlightened instructors, not of superstitious tendency : yet her alarms, agonising to a hitherto secluded being, who hatl never before glided over the bosom of flowing water in tlie gloom of night—who had never before been from beneath the shelter of Albalanda's roof after eventide—Mary confined within her own panting bosom ; only clasping her brother's hand with more tender energy, whilst from her heart ebulated, in silent piety, her fervent invocations for the great Protector's shield. Not thus lihona; — her alarms were no longer counterfeit. Genuine terror, augmented by superstition, had super¬ seded the boiling fury of a disappointed gamester ; and what she now lelt, she determined shoultl operate in its fullest force upon the susceptibilities of the sympathising Algernon, — this incognito Plantagenet. She therefore panted, sob¬ bed, antl shrieked more piteously, but not
so gracefully as she had before managed, because it was no longer acting; and implored Algernon to protect her; and thus painfully increased the distressed sympathy of him she clung to for that succour which he had no power to yield. The title being in full ebb, they glided over this inlet of the sea with rapidity; yet there was time sufficient afforded in a voyage of six miles, for observation to be made, even from under a monk's hood, upon the lures thrown out by the terror- stricken damsel for the entanglement of her tender supporter, and upon the in¬ fluential operation of tins fascinator's power upon Algernon, who seemed al¬ most ready to weep over her because he knew not how to lull her apprehensions or to treat her oppressive display of them; since feminine terrors were little the fashion of this period : for that firmness in danger, that courage in its menace, which the age of chivalry had nui tured in the female minti to ñ\ them for the companion, the comforter, the oftimes
aider of the heroic knight, had not yet become extinct ; and Rhona would not have thought, in the first instance, of act¬ ing 0\ part of timidity she did not feel or of making it manifest when she did experience alarm, had it not been for the effect which Ladv Mary's sensibility, evinced by her swoon, had made upon the admiration even of those w lit) had entered Aibalanda Castle preparei! to laugh at, not sympathise with, its wiltl inhabitant. Mary, too, made observations during this rapid vo} age : and besides those which increased her belief that Latly Warburg did not quite deserve the temler regard of Algernon, she marked, with terror, how Algernon's sword, as it rested between the wearer's person antl the boat, seemed to attract every stream of lightning which emanateti from one point, and that his bending over Lady Warburg to shield her from those incessant visit¬ ations left this apparent attractor unim¬ peded allurements fbr his destruction ; and after some repetitions of this alarm G h
to her eager observation, she, who had nestled closely 7 to her brother and Maud in coward apprehension, suddenly darted, as the accompaniment of a terrific flash of ignited menace, and threw over the Cj ' shoulder of Algernon a silken surcoat, which by the arrangement of Sir Ethel¬ bert had been brought on board for her accommodation, and iu which she had been carefully enveloped by him to shield her from the breath of night. Mary performed all this through the impulsion of alarm awakened by observ¬ ation, yet it was almost intuitively, since her ideas of lightning and attraction could have had no sciential guide ; and her surmise upon the analogy between lightning and electricity had been only vaguely awaken etl by some attempted experiments of the hermit ofthe valley, who hatl laboured frequently to realise suspicions which floated in his compre¬ hensive mind upon these wondrous mat¬ ters ; but possessing no apparatus to aiti his efforts, they were fated to disappoint- ment, leaving it to Kepler, Franklin, and
others in after times, to prove more for¬ tunate. Although the thoughts of Fitzrivers seemed monopolised by anxiety for his beauteous charge, his gratitude was aptly at its post; antl its powerful feelings were forcibly awakened by an action which in the same moment filled him with surprise and admiration, through a youth so juvenile as scarcely to be eman¬ cipated from need of protection for him¬ self possessing courage sufficient thus to obey the inspiration of humanity : and the nature ofthe deed, Algernon in some small degree was competent to appreciate; Father Kenrick having been often en¬ gaged, whilst Algernon had been under his immediate care, in experiments, to which the reverend father had been led by the acuteness of his observation and the philosophic propensities of his power¬ ful intellect; but they too, Uke the her¬ mit's speculations in the .same com se, had found but little advance in success. And not one fleeting moment was Fitzrivers left without proof incontrovert¬ ed &
ible of the extent of his obligation to the intrepid boy ; for although the mis¬ chief from the flash which Lady Mary's impulse led her to dart after must have taken effect ere she could have achieved her purpose, had it been charged with a destructive mission, its successor was not so harmless : it came to proclaim what possible evil she had providentially prevented ; fbr it struck the boat where the sword rested, antl fired a sail which fluttered near this spot of peril, whilst Algernon himself felf a sensible shock, albeit he remained uninjured bv it through the preventive supplied by Lady Mary. The commotion occasioned by extin¬ guishing this alarming iire. which all fearetl was but a prelude to a more ex¬ tensive conflagration, was not a little augmented b ν the almost f ι antic terror of Latly Warburg antl her satellite Mrs. ?/ ? Alice Sneak u j>, who both shrieked dire¬ fully without ceasing, save when her ladyship imploretl e\evy man on boartl to tlesist from their respective employ-
ment, to rally around her, to yield her protection from the demons who were the malign performers of this terrific storm. And in these moments of'awful alarm Marv had thrown her trembling arms „r ? around her brother, as if she hoped to prove once more his shield from fire ; and her tones arose not above her breath, antl only came fraught with the gentle yet energetic invocations which pioty inspired, to every guardian power that hoveed near, to save her brother and her other friends from peril. In these invocations, possibly self'might have been implied ; but in recapitulating the scene with Maud, Lord tie Mandeville affirmed, with tears of fraternal exultation glisten¬ ing in his eyes, that no mention of herself escapetl the trembling lips of Mary, whilst devoutly imploring for the protection of those around her. The terrific firebrand had but just effectetl its alarming mission, when a tor¬ rent of rain commenced; and scarcely had its penetrating power become per- q (i
ceptible, ere a canopy of estate was hoisted over the head of Mary and Ed¬ ward, who promptly invited those wdio were not so accommodated to take shel¬ ter with them. The helmsman, wdth all who hatl employment in the waftage of the boat, declined ; as anxiety to get into harbour led them to set the ele¬ ments at defiance : but lihona instan¬ taneously flew into the offered shelter, to save herself and her splendour from the torrent ; when terror still superseding her usual powers of acting her sweet disinterested fascinations, — the actuat¬ ing spring of all her actions, — self led to her almost rudely displacing Lady Mary, for the establishment of herself in the exact spot which she believetl the most secure from the falling torrent. Shortly the violence of' the rain seemed to extinguish the inflammable matter which had so lately flashed around ; and this perceptible earnest of security no sooner became mani lest to Lady War¬ burg, than she resumed her sweet con¬ ciliating manœuvres, by expressing her
fears that, through the spirit of anti¬ cipating that politesse wou Id have allotted to her the place of estate, she had, İn the wildness of her terrors, intuitively taken possession of it: and then she proceeded to address something kind or flatter¬ ing to all near her ; but contriving, in every sentence she uttered, adroitly to present to view her own pre-eminence in all things. This opportunity for the display of captivations and superior intellect was not now permitted long continuance ; for the boat arrived at Aibalanda whilst she was thus throwing out the lures of her perfections as catch-flies for the gud¬ geons she trusted she should attract. At the Aibalanda place of demarcation from this inlet of the sea, Da\enant had arranged all things ihr the convenience of an unobserwd lar» ding of his >oung lord and ladv, and entrance for them through a subterraneous pass into the castle; and anxiety to expedite the dis¬ embarking of this precious freight in¬ duced their giving to Lady Warburg
and her companions the precedence in this convenience : and therefore they were immediately landed, and given into the care of'the guard who was in waiting for the boat's arrival, under whose escort, and that of a torch-bearer, they were speedily ushered to the castle; Algernon so overpowered by amaze upon suddenly beholding the predicting closely-hooded monk at his elbow in the moment of debarking, that he failed to make his intended earnest request to his young Dutch friend and preserver, to send him information on the morrow of' where even an epistolary communication might reach him. The moment this detachment of voy¬ agers were completely out of' sight, the remainder of the Aibalanda residents effected their disembarcation ; but al¬ though hurried as this landing was com¬ pelled to be, through apprehension of' the renewal ofthe storm, neither Edward nor Mary quitted the boat without their most grateful acknowledgments for the
kindness and care of those whom they were leaving with regret. Mary's first w isn had been for the poor wounded youth's landing at the castle, that she might attend to his care ; but the hermit and the helmsman, point¬ ing out the advantages of another desig¬ nation for him, she, confiding in their wisdom and humanity, consigned her protégé to their charge ; antl accordingly be was conveyed by them to St. Stephen's monastery, and delivered to the especial care of Father Philip.
LH Al * \ li. Algernon's retirement to his couch was not attended with the hoped for be¬ nefit of repose ; for the form and words of the hooded Cistertian still standing before him, and sounding in his ears his warning voice, not only banished slee}), but took precedence even of' Rhona in his agitated thoughts. The first address of this impressive personage hatl taken a firm grasp of bis attention, through the prophetic tout 4 · he had assumed ; but his farewell \uldress iu the moment he unexpected!} pre¬ sented himself to view, when, with Rho¬ na, Algernon was debaikiug, filled his hostím with inquietude which nearly overpowered him. The rebuke which it contained fbr not seeking out his pa¬ rentage, overwhelmed him with .self- upbraiding, whilst its solemn caution to beware how he disposed of his affec-
tions, lest in the form of perfection he might find deceit, and in the wife of his bosom the offspring of those whose hands might have immolated his own parents, filled him with such absolute dismay, that he dcterminetl to lose no moment in confiding to the lord abbot of St. Stephen's all that this mysterious monk had uttered, antl to consult with this competent adviser upon the methods to pursue for obtaining that clew for winch he hatl so long panted for leading him to the coveted embrace of his pa- rents ; and accordingly, the instant the portgrave was at his post to unclose the cattle gates, he set out for this anxious interview. Algernon's communications, and his affecting agitation upon the implied im¬ molation of his parents, operateti with such effect upon the feeling heart of the amiable Kenrick, that he detenhined to exert his influence over the mind of' Sir Ethelbert, to obtain from him more of the history of' Algernon than he had confided to him; and if Sir Ethelbert
had been sincere upon the circumscrip¬ tion of bis knowledge relative to the matter, then to persuade him to dis¬ close to the unfortunate orphan the sad calamity which had led Sir Ethelbert to protect him, and to permit and aid every exertion for making discovery of the survivors of the dire conflagration: and thus determined, the lord abbot promised bis sorely afflicted voung friend that be would endeavour to have some intelligence for him bv eventide. Algernon, thus comforted, took leave; and feeling that, in his present state of uncertainty relative to his future pros¬ pect«, he ought sedulously to shun Lady Warburg — since it bad become evident to him, wdio was as little infected with presumptuous fancies as man could be, that she bad discovered his passion for her, and was bestowing upon him the most manifest encouragement to confess an attachment which he bad so long cherished unproclaimed ■— he therefore turned bis horse's steps from St. Stephen's monastery to liockcliff Castle, there to
perform all necessary courtesies ere the party from Aibalanda should be on the wing thither. And this duty accomplish¬ ed, Algernon went his solitary way along the coast, with an anxious hope of dis¬ covering, from the fishermen whom he might encounter, some clew to the dis¬ covery of his Dutch incognito. Upon mature deliberation, the wary lord abbot deemed it better policy to make no communication to Sir Ethel¬ bert relative to the mysterious monk's */ apparent knowledge of Algernon's pa¬ rentage, until he should himself have conversed with this Cistertian, whom he believed he should find in the person of the hermit of the valley. In his con¬ ference, therefore, with Sir Ethelbert, who was now an inmate of St. Stephen's monastery, the lord abbot represented the petition of Fitzrivers to become acquainted with all that was known rela¬ tive to his family as solely arising from the young unfortunate's own mutual feeling, in his sad and solitary belief that he had no kindred.
" Let him learn to bear this dureful misery with fortitude, from me," replied Sir Ethelbert. " I stand alone—bereav¬ ed of kindred affections in this peopled world—albeit I have a sire! — Oh, had I never known a father, I had been blest I" And, as be spoke, the desola¬ tion of despair which overspread bis ex¬ pressive countenance, and paralysed his frame, shot the Jiangs of genuine sympa¬ thy through the bosom of the feeling Kenrick. Sir Ethelbert had never seen Fitzrivers since he had been sent fixfm the care of Father Kenrick, until he beheld him in liockcliff Castle the preceding evening j when the fine and prepossessing exterior of this orphan, the graceful sweetness of his manners,^ with the intellectual treasures which beamed from his eyes, added so considerably to the interest which he had ever cherished for Alger¬ non, that, with increase of deep regret, he felt the necessity of still concealing wdthin the recesses of his own panged bosom the true name and estate of the
immolated parents of his protege ; and, in addition to this torturing compulsion, Ethelbert keenly felt the disgraceful em¬ barrassments—even the mazes of subter¬ fuge or absolute falsehood — * in which this fatal cause for secrecy entoiled him, to beguile the shrewd Kenrick from shel¬ tering a suspicion of his knowing more of the dire tragedy of Llanellen's Rock, which had bereaved poor Algernon of parents and high estate, than liefhad here¬ tofore acknowledged. Father Kenrick, at the period in which humanity had led him to explore the appalling mysteries of the Witch's Point, was informed by Ethelbert, in hisconfiden- tialcommunications with this unfortunate young man» that, in the moment when the fell blight to his earthly happiness had driven him (Ethelbert) from Alba- landa, he had fled to the lonely castle of Lianei len, there to brood over the dire misery which hatl so unexpectedly assail¬ ed him : that his arrival at Llauellen having beeu wholly unknown to a band of freebooters that had concealed themselves
in and about the castle, which was par¬ ticularly suited tt) such nefarious pur¬ poses, they had, even on the very night of his arrival, and being wholly unconscious of it, entoiled a boatful of fugitives from the enfired carick into the fatal gulf of Llanellen : that, in the moment when he had been attracted from his sleepless couch by the appalling cries of the hap¬ less victims, he was himself surrounded by a sanguinary troop: antl that all which he had been suffered to effect by his ut¬ most exertions to rescue the devoted vic¬ tims, was the preservation of an infant's life ; and for which preservation he should, iu a very few hours after, have paid the ibrfeit of his own existence, had it not been for the providential appear¬ ance ofthe valiant monk. In this new conference upon the sub¬ ject, the agitated Ethelbert again assured his revered friend, that although he had seen some of the victims immolated in this dire tragedy during his endeavours to rescue them, they were strangers to him ; and that nothing then, or since,
had transpired, which could allow fbr him the consolation to lead Algernon to the discovery of his birthdom. And in this recapitulation, as in the first recital, the penetrating Kenrick felt conviction that Ethelbert did know more of the crimes of others than, through some fetter of honour or conscience, or com¬ pulsion, he found himself at liberty to reveal. In addition to this recapitulation of' circumstances long past, Sir Ethelbert added, that he had offered large re¬ wards for the discovery of any who had escaped the conflagration of the carick, in hopes of learning from this survivor the names and estate of those who had so calamitously perished within the Witch's Point ; and although hitherto without eftect, yet hoping, through these still offered rewards, some satis¬ factory intelligence might be obtained, he had forborne to acquaint the unfor¬ tunate Algernon with the dire events which bad bereaved him of his kindred; and had induced his insulated protégé
to believe he still had parents, now in voluntary exile." "This misweening kindness,— for it is somewhilc since I began to wis it was unheedy,"—continued Ethelbert, "has brought its own aggrievance : for I have felt, fbr my discontentation, pangs for my lacerated heart when forced to oppose- ment of the wishes of this aflectioned youth, when in mauy a touching epistle he has prayed for my assentment to his joining his parents in their exile ; where, perchance, he might aid them with his services in needment, or com¬ fort them with his filial love if for grief they wanted consolation ; — nay, even to make tarriance with them fbr a given time, just to hear their voices sound in the apt utterance of a meet blessing upon their own alienated child. Yet even for this apparent cruelness in my denay, I found, fbr many a day, sweet consolation in the hoped fov recompence I had in the intendment of my romantic visions in store fbr his ultimate felicity," i( You have erewhiles, my friend, mar-
vellet! at my placing the child of my adoption under the guardage of the man I hated. When I formed the plan which marvelled you, Adda was the spouse of that man. — Under the auspices of an angel I wist my protege (unless the fault were within himself) must become soonly all that I could wish him. Atlela had presented this man whom I hated a tlaughter : antl in my romantic \ isions I enterprised for my protégé the vanquish¬ ment of that daughter's heart, whilst he surrendered his own to his enslaver, and vantaged him with the consentment of her parents ; and that in this wise a St. Oswahl and a De Courland might be united: for as I shall never enter into wedlock, and at the periotl when I was haplessly summoned from Aibalanda to De Courland Hall, I hatl the pang to discover that the person who hail lived in the affection of my father ere his spousals with my angelic mother, and has borne his name ever since the de¬ cease of my lamented parent, never had any legal right to that distinction, and voe. ?. π
SIR ETHELBERT. therefore that her progeny could not inherit the titles and hereditary estates of the Dc Courlands ; those honours would become extinct with me. — And this led to my intendment in chaffery for the deception I so mis ween ingly practised towards poor Algernon, to adopt him fbr my heir, and, by purchase from our monarch, obtain power to bequeath to him, with the bulk of my riches, not only the barony of De Courland, but the earldom of Fitzrivers, which, through my mother, you wot, I have the power to assume whensoever it is for my content¬ ment; and of which, as if in presenti¬ ment of my after intendment, 1 vested him with the name in the first moments I yielded him protection. " But, as from all my day-dreams, I have been awakened by my despiteous destiny only to find the sorrowed pangs of breme disappointment. — Algernon found no Adela to vantage him by prov¬ ing what a mortal couhl be : a fiend had usurped her place; and, instead of habiting beneath the same roof with the
o-uìleless Mary, the luckless youth has been upbrouglit with the demoniac Ro¬ samond's own counterpart, antl has, 1 fear me, been beshrewed with the cure¬ less poison of a dureful passion fbr the offspring of a female fiend. " For the aggrandisement of the arch¬ fiend Rosamond's offspring, I will not reave my earthly idol Mary, to ennoble Algernon," continued Sir Ethelbert. " I have now no happy prospect tor him of his spousais wdth a seraph ; no com¬ pensation fbr his contentment awaiting to betide him fbr the deception I so warelessly practised relative to the exist¬ ence of his parents : my embarrassment is therefore pangful ; for I wot not what to do. Yield me your advisement. Shall this misweening tleception have conti¬ nuance ? shall the poor youth remain in contentation, in the delusive hope that something yet may occur — albeit it may not be soonly—to remove the interdiction to the knowledge of his parentage?" The amiable lord abbot, full of com¬ miserating regrets that facts hail not been ? l 2
^revealed to Algernon long since, antl at a period when the reflecting powers of ins mind would not have been so matured as to feel the fate of his parents, and his own insulation, with such intensity of anguish as uow must be inflicted ; antl though his sympathising feelings clung, with Sir Ethelbert's, to the continuance ofthe unfortunate deception practised; }et his firmer judgment pronounced the more painful task must be adopted, as perhaps the only means now to be found of unclosing the tettei s in which the wdv daughter oí Rosamond hatl entoiled ? ? him : for her knowledge of'his insulation, and consequent insignificance, would at once lender him to her a captive not woith aiming to retain, while his acquaint¬ ance with the sad ami hopeless truth would awaken him to cei taint ies inimical to Ins passion for Latly Waiburg. At length Algernon, in painini agita¬ tion, appealed at St. Stephen's monas- tei} foi the promised information; \et b> no means anticipating the dire intelli¬ gence that awaited him, antl which the
feeling Kenrick endeavoured as much as possible to meliorate, by forbearing to recount to him the sad catastrophe by which he lost his parents in all its genuine and attendant horrors. Gently as the sympathising Kenrick made this afflicting communication, as the holy man hatl anticipated, it almost annihilated Algernon through filial an- guish anil indiv ¡dual despair ; antl as the wound which thus penetrateti his affec¬ tionate heart became each moment more torturing, it seemetl to senti forth his very life-drops in the tears of agony he .shed for the fate of his parents and for his own desolation ; for thus unexpectedly iinding himself alone in the world, with¬ out a name or place of tlesignation, at once subdued his fortitude. But the first agonising conflict subsiding, Algernon, ashamed of having yielded to such an overflow of sensibility, resolutely com¬ bateti for the resumption of manly firm¬ ness ; and aftei a successful struggle with pangs of' mighty anguish, he batle a hur¬ ried adieu to the sympathising abbot, and ? 3
.sought the solitary refuge oí' his own chamber in Aibalanda. Both Lady Marv and Lord de Man- deville had beeu so much overpowered by fatigue, through all the exertions they had sustained in their excursion to Rock- cliff Castle, that neither of them awoke, the subsequent morning, until an un¬ usually late hour ; when his lordship, aware of having caugb: some degree of cold in his revelling, listened without much impatience to the advice of his anxious sister to keep vevy quiet all that day, to enable him more aptly to sustain the fatigue he had hi meditation, when the arrangements of Davenant should enable him to perform his surprisal upon the guests by keeping hall. But although he submitted to the ad¬ vice of Mary, through some sort of internal evidence that he could not very successfully rebel, yet he bore not the absence of Algernon with such unmur¬ muring submission ; fbr, besides the plea¬ sure of having a companion with him whom he sincerely regarded, he wanted
to hear his account of the pleasures of liockcliff« and to learn if suspicion had crept into his mind ofthe identity of his Dutch fellow-passengers : he therefore commissioned A'Parry to discover how he was engaged ; when, learning that Lady Warburg and all the guests hatl set out immediately after dinner to pay their compliments at liockcliff Castle, he naturally concluded Fitzrivers formed one of'this party, and though he regretted and murmured, he still was obliged to submit to an absence which he feared must deprive him of seeing Algernon until the morrow. The party returned late from perform¬ ing their civilities at Rockcliff, and shortly after, the supper messes were served ; when De Mandeville, overpowered by ennui and fatigue from the preceding night, gladly acquiCaSced in Father Philip's prescription of retiring early to his pillow, — a prescription which the good monk extended to Lady Mary, to whom he con¬ veyed the welcome intelligence that the wounded youth was doing well, although ? 1
he had some secret grief inimical to his speedy recovery which they could not persuade him to reveal : and so pro¬ foundly did sleep perform its operation over the faculties of our young brother and sister, that neither of them knew aught of the mysterious transactions which had taken place beneath the roof of Aibalanda Castle tluring the hours of their repose, until informed by A'Parry and Maud, when performing their re¬ spective attendance at the morning toilets of their lortl and lady. av' The intelligence communicated by Maud and A'Parry to their amazed au¬ ditor, was, that after supper the preceding night, orders were just issued for taking up the table, antl the board end was only removed, when one entered in con¬ sternation, to announce a body of horse¬ men at the gate ; and in a moment after, a party of whom entered the hall, with a pursuivant from the Star-chamber, to arrest the party there assembled, every one by name, fbr treason or misprision of treason : Lord Dalincourt fbr seizing on
the crown of Englanti, antl assuming its privileges, even in the lifetime of his sovereign lortl the king ; and all the other nobles and gentlemen, and ladies and gentlewomen, one and all, for aiding antl abetting in such disloyal act. The war¬ rant being inspected and pronounced genuine by those present who knew the form and .signature of such fearful mat¬ ters, the dismay and consternation be¬ came tremendous, —some ladies fainting — others contenting themselves with hysterics: but after the first hurst of terror, antl as the messengers, proving themselves courteous, allowed all those arrested liberty to retire to make arrange¬ ments for departing, the acuteness of the general alarm subsided, and even the ladies became more composed ; and that especially, when assuretl their destination was not fbr the Tower of London, but merely toappcarbeforethoCouncil; when, if they could prove they had not been engaged in any plot against the state, all might end to their contentation. The given time ior preparation having h 5
expired, the arrested party, comprising all who had formed the pretended court, save Lord de Mandeville and Master Fitzrivers, neither of whom were named in the citation, were all conducted by the troop of horsemen and the messenger down to the sea-shore, where they were embarked in two large vessels, which, the moment the embarcation was accom¬ plished, hove out to sea, and the horse¬ men galloped off westward ; so that by morning's dawn no trace of them ap¬ peared,— leaving in Aibalanda Castle no vestige of that gay throng which bad lately enlivened its sombre chambers, save some of the household stuff and some other matters which there had not been time or convenience to remove.
CHAP. VIII. Tms extraordinary and alarming intel¬ ligence reached the afflicted Algernon about the same moment, and through the medium of a similar channel, in which it Ι?ίΛ-Ι travelled to his young friends ; and his amaze and consternation for the moment superseding his own individual sorrows, he hastened to Lord de Mande- ville's chamber, there to lament with him, and to discuss the possibility of any active measure upon their part proving useful. He found the dismay and commiseration of Lady Mary fbr this individual suffering little inferior to her brother's ; no recol¬ lection beaming through her mind to aciduate the milk of human kindness, by remembrance of the ill nature towards herself which had actuated the adoption of this luckless achievement. Scarcely had our alarmed young friends h 0
met, when they were joined by the lord abbot of St. Stephen's monastery and Father Philip, who came to evince sym¬ pathy and offer services in whatever form they could be beneficial. These reverend visitors afforded much consolation, by as¬ surances that nothing more serious than alarm could in possibility be the result of this citement to any of the arrested individuals, as not one of the lords or gentlemen were suspected of fiction, or of influential exertions relative to religious controversy : yet still they in heart trem¬ bled ; for the blood of Anne Boleyn, Lord Rochford, Bishop Fisher, Sir Tho¬ mas More, &c. whispered in horrid re¬ membrance thai innocence was now no shield. But of short influence was even this ray of consolation ; fbr Mar}-, although by no means prone to industry in seeking unpleasant reflections, suddenly recol¬ lected, and with a visible accompaniment of tremor, that Sir Rupert Warburg was arrested with them, and that there was no answering fbr what fatalities he might
lay to the charge of any ofthe party, to extricate himself from suspicion ; and this recollection, with its concomitant possibilities, could find nothing to coun¬ teract its operations upon the minds of the three alarmed young friends. At length a loud and hurried peal at the portal occasioned another species of alarm, natural in its inspiration and dis¬ maying in its effect ; fbr all believed another party of the king's officers were arrived, for the arrest of those in the castle who had escaped the first visita¬ tion. But nothing more terrific appeared at the portal than a horseman on a foam¬ ing steed, who delivered a ietter* and then set off*in full gallop, as if'fearing to be stopped or questioned. This letter was addressed to Lord de Mandeville, and contained a few lines, desiring his lordship, Latly Mary, and Master Fitz¬ rivers, to feel no alarm for the fate of those persons so recently rem ? vet! /rom Aibalanda ; as their arrest had only been a counterjest devised to please a sovereign who loved mirth as well as
those who, in their muu:ming, had usurp¬ ed the crown of England. "But how should the king, or any of his merry-men, wot aught of this play¬ pleasure in timefulness to form this counterjest ?" exclaimed De Mandeville " Had it fortuned me to recollect this before, it would have spared for us much misweening alarm. The Council, the Star-chamber, could in sooth have had no hand in this scathful plot ; since it was only in one of the last hostelries we reposed at in our progress hitherward, that my 7 lady 7 mother, in the joyance of her spirits, first warelessly proposed our assumption of a royal party, and to wend our way to Aibalanda." " I cry your pardon, my honoured lord ! " said A' Parry 7 , who, being bearer of the letter from the portgrave, had tarried in the chamber, wdth the natural hope of learning if its contents were to increase alarm ; " but it was not unkent by me ere we left Vespasian Tower that such sportful mummery was to wend you hitherward to wilder our honoured Lady
Mary ; Ginefrede made betrayal of the matter, though incontinently she gave it her denay. But in troth, had not the matter been forethought of, as by her dedarement, how could the insignia of royalty displayed have happed to find place so aptly amid tlie household stuff that made travel with us ?" This proof of the project having been premeditated was too conclusive for dis¬ belief; anc! Algernon felt the painful sensation of displeasure against lihona, ior the duplicity she had evinced relative to the premeditation of this unkind scheme : and now, as he feared that every hope of happiness for him in au¬ spicious love was wrested from him by his ruthless tate, he for some moments thought it might be to his benefit to hear such tidings of his fair lihona ; and that, like Sir Leoline, he ought to seek and hail the imperfections of the enslaver of his heart, to effect its emancipation ; but in a moment more, the pangs which shot through that wounded heart at such a suggestion led him to feel conviction
that the discovery of Lady Warburg's having any essential fault would prove more agonizing to his peace than even the torturing nurture of his hopeless passion. Alarm fbr Rhona's safety, and that of other friends, being lulled to rest by the assurances contained in the letter, and which both the lord abbot and Father Philip perceived some private reason to deem authentic, Algernon's own sorrows resumed their full dominion over his mind ; and sending their saddening in¬ fluence to his eloquent countenance and his touching voice, soon became percep¬ tible to his young friends ; and upon being left to themselves by the departure ofthe holy men, whose avocations called them hence, De Mandeville, wdth the solicitude of fraternal attachment, en¬ treated to know what could thus afiect him. The affectionate manner of the usually volatile Edward, and the anxious look of Mary, at once unmanned poor Algernon ; and even in that age, when chivalric
usages were so much in fashion, he at once lost all his heroism, and, bursting into an agony of tears, wept convulsively ; and so did Mary ; whilst De Mandeville looked more than half inclined to do so too, as he stood before them with a hauti of each clasped in his — pressing and kissing each captive hand, and ever and anon commencing sentences of kindly sympathy, yet losing, as he proceeded, all power of voice fbr audible articu¬ lation. At length Algernon, catching a tone of Mary's sobs, startet!, antl paused from his own, to learn what such a touching sound could mean. " She weeps because you do," said Edward, " and because she wots not what to do fbr your comfort and contentation. I prithee tell us, Algernon, what of evil has fortuned you. Oh ! you wis not how my affection clings to you ; and how it sorrows mc, as well as Mary, to see you in this guise. Do make déchirement of what cruelness afflicts you. Whiles I was a helpless youngling, you ever were my
champion, Algernon ; now, in return, allow me to prove that at least your sympathising friend is not ungrateful." Algernon clasped De Mandeville to his palpitating bosom in an agony of emotion, as he almost inarticulately mur¬ mured out, " There is, then, affection for me in a world in wdiich I stand alone," "Alas!" said Mary, in the sweetest tones of melting sympathy ever uttered by sensibility, " affliction has betided you in the bereavement of those whom your heart so fondly had in cherishment. — Alas! alas!" Algernon took Lady Mary's hand, and pressed it in acquiescent silence to his quivering lips; and, so subdued by Mary's melting tones that he could not arti¬ culate or remand his firmness, he rushed from the chamber to his own, where, in solitude, and in the solemn exercise of that assuasive wdiich only couhl tlistil balms for his afflictions, he strove to ac¬ quire a restoration of fortitude, which hatl forsaken him in the moment in which he most required its aid.
At length he rejoined his commise¬ rating friends, and in a few words, —for the subject was too agonising to dwell upon, — he informed them of his hapless, nameless insulation. Lord de Mandeville no longer scrupled to join in the tears of sympathy shed by Mary, until a sudden thought struck him, which came beaming with a bright ray of hope upou the .sanguine expect¬ ations of a youthful projector. " I will incontinently write to my fa¬ ther," he exclaimed, " with entreatancc tor conseuttnent to my setting out with you in quest of that information you pant to weet. Father Hubert shall make salliance with us, and whiles he is my guardance from idleness, will yield you avize and aidance ; and then, should it sorrow us to learn no tidance of that we seek through Wales and Ireland — why then you must find contentation in the name of our own brother ; and Mary's love and mine shall make it genial to you, Algernon." " Oh, Edward ! you unman me by
this affecting kindness!" exclaimed the grateful Algernon, quivering* with the overcharge of sensibility. " And in your brother and sister you will also find genial sympathizers, for vve too are motherless, Algernon," saitl Man 7 , " albeit wc have the blessing of'a father, I for many a dureful year stood lonely in this world, without one smile of kindred affection to cheer me ; and yet I weathered the dern scene of lonely desolation, oftimes with a sorrowing heart, yet oftener with a light one ; for some- thing within me used to beam in promise as it should seem for my solace, that the cheering sun of affection's consolations vvoufil some time shine upon me : antl this hope of my cherishment has not been disappointed, — for here I have two dear brothers. — Remember this, dear Algernon,—-that your day of life is but in its morning, andere its meridian none can wot how bright may shine your orb of happiness. And to realise soonly what for good may he in store for our brother, write, Edward, to our father ; antl, if I may
avize, not fbr his assentiment for your salliance through Wales antl Ireland, for that, you hear, wouhl irtit vantage, since there enquiry has proved bootless,—but tell to our hither all the sad tale : he affections Algernon as a child, and he will not slumber in his aidance. Through alb the ambassadors he weets, antl all the cunning channels of diplomacy, he can bi uit the matter warefully, antl enterprise the speeding of intelligence, with an apt view and advisement that you must lack. Fitzrivers was struck with astonishment at this unexpected sapience of advice from Mary, whilst he felt her affecting kindness with sympathy and gratitude. Lortl tie .Mandeville's epistle to his father being soon compieteti, and de¬ spatched by express to Father Hubert, for him tt) forward by the most secure chan¬ nel, Mary took an opportunity to ob serve to her brother, that now the project of keeping hall in state had been disappointed by the arrest of so many of' his guests, she conceived his dining in
public atall was equally negatived by the sorrows of Algernon ; for that friendship must forbid his making his first appear¬ ance in public hall, at the very moment in which Algernon had learned the sad intelligence of his destiny. " Do you wis, he would better like the solitude of'this tower at present, Mary ? " demanded Edward, without even one pang at giving up his longed for eman¬ cipation from these dull chambers. " And furthermore, ween you we had better put off the lord abbot and Father Philip from dining at Aibalanda ; which you know they promised, when it imagined me I shoultl keep hall ? " " Let them come if they list," re¬ sponded Mary, — " for they may beguile poor Algernon of some moments of his sorrovvance, or, may he, vantage him by their meet avize in this his dire need¬ ment." The two kind churchmen, full of .sym¬ pathy for the hapless Algernon, benevo¬ lently kept their promise of dining at Aibalanda this day, although the scene
they had to encounter there was so widely different from that they had been bid¬ den to. There being now no female but domes¬ tics left in the castle with Lady Mary, the kind and considerate lord abbot invited Algernon to arrange fbr his dor¬ mitory to be at St. Stephen's monastery, which, from proximity to Aibalanda, would enable him still conveniently to pass much of his time each day with his young friends ; and, as propriety urged the matter, Algernon gratefully acqui¬ esced ; and when taking his departure with the holy father, he promised De Mandeville and Mary, that when he joined them on the morrow, they should see him more composed. Algernon was faithful to his word; Mary's affecting reference to lier own insulation had taken such hold upon his mind, as to withdraw him, through sym¬ pathy, from the intensity of his own afflictions, and to beguile him now and then to admit a distant ray of hope to beam upon the drear prospect of his situ-
avion ; but as a brighter beam to cherish, he turned many a w f akhig thought, in his long night of meditation, to those conso¬ lations wdiich never prove delusive : — thus, the" fore, he had become evidently less abstracted ; and though still touch- ingly dejected, he joined in tjie conver¬ sation of Lady Marv and her brother with some apparent interest, and in their perambulations in and about the castle ; and sometimes listened with more than apparent interest to the traditions Mary's memory was stored with, of" events con¬ nected with Aibalanda, and its long line of inhabitants : and so judicious were her selections, and told with such animation and admirable effect, that Algernon, in delight and amazement, woukl have ques tioneil her, hatl his mind been at ease, how her knowledge of these circum- cumstances had been acquired ; and how her judgment, taste, and execution had been so happily formed ? — And she would have told him, that for these com¬ binations she was indebted to the MSS. of lier mother's selection and own pen,
and to her mysterious preceptor of the hermitage of St. Stephen's valley. Nor would Algernon have experienced much surprise at this intelligence ; for Adela's competence he was aware of, and had learned, from the lord abbot, sufficient of the hermit, to believe him a man of uncommon talent and universal information : and although he knew not the message delivered by Lady 7 Mary to him had actually come from this won¬ drous hermit, yet he suspected it, antl panted for an introduction to him, under a cherished hope of its proving so, antl that at least he might learn from him the name he had a righi to bear. And an introduction to a hermit of St. Stephen's valley the kind Kenrick had also much at heart for Algernon ; vT? J since Ethelbert, having refused an intro¬ duction yet in his own character, led the lord abbot to project occasional inter¬ views between-Sir Ethelbert, in his dis¬ guise as the hermit, and the unfortunate orphan; — Kenrick little doubting that if this sort of communication were once vol* ?? χ
effected, Fitzrivers, by making his own sure way to the esteem of his guardian, might eventually overcome his contumacy in those concealments relative to the parents of this young man, which Ken¬ rick fully believed in operation over the mind of Ethelbert. Upon the lord abbot's return from Aibalanda, after dining there, he talked much of the young persons he had been with to Sir Ethelbert; and disclosed hi.- project of introducing Algernon to his guardian : and in this discussion he ventured to advise the absence of Ethel¬ bert from the vicinity of Lady Mary ; for having just passed so many hours in her society, Kenrick pronounced her a dangerous object for his romantic friend to consecrate as an idol, lest such adola- try might not always remain parental: and Sir Ethelbert promised to reply to him on the morrow. To the infinite satisfaction of the lord abbot, Sir Ethelbert on the morrow as¬ sented to this proposed introduction, as the hermit of the valley, to his afflicted
profégé* " But memorize it, my best friend," continued Ethelbert, " that whiles he tarries in the St. Oswald family, he must not wot who is his protector ; for, through the dern severance of the peerless Adda from her .spousals with the hapless Ethelbert, there must be in existence strong prejudice that cannot vantage me in that family ; and that prejudice might make extcndment to a nameless orphan, if known to be the pro¬ tected of'the miswecned Ethelbert. "But, my friend," continued Ethel¬ bert, " to your advisement for me to fly" from Alary 7 I cannot yield. Fear not iu me a second Pygmalion ;—my attach- ment to Adda can only know impairment with the last throb of the life-pulse of my lorn heart ; and the daughter of Adda is shrined as my own child within my parental bosom : and until her un¬ heedy father takes her to his own guard- age, here will I make tarriance as the wakeful dragon to protect the Hesperian fruit. Had Atlela been left in the reck¬ less state of helpless insulation into which ι 2.
poor Alary has warelessly been thrown, í might have been fearless in lea\ing her when occasion aptly called me hence, in full surauce that angelic being would never act u n meetly. — Not so could I betrust ber child ; for albeit the mind of Mary is the translucent stream of purity —her heai t the repository of' e\cry virtue ·—yet Mary is so wild, so wareless, and so sensithe withal in sen¬ sibility 7 , she keeps my alarms for her in constant wakefulness. And now in aid- men t of other motives for my care in fbrefending danger is, that it has been appointed to me, the niding Rupert Warburg having been noting the land¬ marks of the Aibalanda domain, and been enterprising through many chan¬ nels fbr the exact statement of how riched the inheritor was deemed. Such enterprises are not the acts of ruined profligates, without deep meaning in hoped iov vantage : and should his repair be soonly hitherward, as I imagine me he has in his intendment, bis action* must have wareful heed."
The evening of this day, when the dejected Algernon returned from Alba- landa to St. Stephen's monastery, his introduction to Ethelbert, as the hermit of the valley, was accomplished by the kind Kenrick, who announced the her¬ mit as a near relative of the guardian of Fitzrivers. The power thus unexpect¬ edly yielded to him, of holding commu¬ nication with one of the kindred of him whom he now considered not as his guardian, but his benefactor, afforded to Algernon infinite consolation ; and in¬ spired him with courage, after a night passed in serious metlitation, to obtain an early conference with the hermit, of wdiose present sojourn in the convent he .had been informed, — in which con¬ ference he fully opened his swelling heart to the disguised Ethelbert, upon the subject of the pang inflicted by de¬ pendance upon a man who refused him the gratification of knowing even the name of him to whom his gratitude was debtor; and implored the hermit to be¬ friend him, by obtaining permission for I 3
him to take arms, and endeavour to serve his country wheresoever its enemies might call him. " I shall soonly give advisement of your spirited intendment," responded Ethel¬ bert, " to your guardian ; an office he voluntarily took upon himself for your behoof and which, I betrust me, you will not warelessly throw from you. Iu the moment you were left without aiti- ** ance, he took the reins to vantage you ; and, albeit unseen, he guided gently, and ever for your benefit." " Then let him guide them still ; and with grateful submission I will bow to his views and advisement, in firm reliance that he will not, longer than is apt íbr necessity 7 , embitter me in a state of'supine Inactiveness, in which he would not fetter one that he regards," said Algernon with graceful dignity ; betraying, that whilst the influence of gratitude impelled him to submission, the spirit of independence felt it as a sacrifice : and in this moment, so interesting Algernon appeared, the reserve of Ethelbert was vanquished, and s
in defiance of' his long established deter¬ mination, he confessed himself as Alger¬ non's protector—his name, and the mo¬ tives which had hitherto induced con¬ cealment. " And now," he added, İn much emotion, " that you do wot by whom you are protected, I hope, for my contentation, the prejudices you may have imbibed to stumble me iu your esteem may not prove }our leadman iu shrinking from yielding to me the solace of your considering me the fostering parent to whom the care of pitying Pro¬ vidence consigned you. And now you do know me, Algernon, keep in your rccordance, that the first sweet balm which flowed into my cup of bitter sor¬ rows came in the infantine smiles of him who now sits beside me. This memorize, and let not your misconception of' the m is weened Ethelbert lead you in man¬ hood to restore that cup of unalloyed bitterness which sorrowed me aforetime." The kindness expressed in this address, with the impressive melting tones in which Sir Ethelbert gave it utterance, z í
went promptly to the susceptible heart of Algernon ; and as he pressed the trem¬ bling hand which affectionately grasped his, he gratefully accepted the paternal protection thus benignly offered, and promised obedience in all things to the wishes of his benefactor. And without one pause of hesitation he did so : for nothing in the form of suspicion chilled the full current of his confidence, since he was of that happy age of inexperience which judges of' the ore in other hearts by 7 the purity of its own ; and with his bosom throbbing with his own exquisite sensibilities, all power of observation was absorbed, or he might have been taught to doubt and pause, by 7 perceiving that in the moment of these benevolent profes¬ sions there yet was a conflict within the bosom of his guardian,—a warfare between the open sunshine of'ingenuousness, and the dense clouds of dire concealment,— a conflict that leti Ethelbert to groan in spirit, as he thus taught gratitude to glow when conscience whispered it was un¬ merited.
CHAP. IX. Algernon at length separated from Sir Ethelbert for the day; and, initier solemn restrictions not to betray the name of hi- protector, he proceetletl to Aibalanda, and found his young friends in the dog^ kennel, where Lady Mary seemed ac¬ quainted with every hound whose amity was desirable ; and they all whining and fretting, as ifin grief or jealousy, until she had bestowed upon them some mirk of her recognition, when their jov burst ? a' l/ into an ecstatic chorus of barking, that became at length almost deafening. When Lortl tie Mandeville had fully gratified his curiosity in the investigation of this kennel, Algernon accompanied him and his sister to the mew, where the birds seemed to covet the caresses of Lady Alary, ami to manteuvre fbr them with coquettish address; and ? the infi¬ nite delight oi' her brother she knew the ι 5
pedigree and qualities of every goshawk, tassello, lauer, laueret, merlyon, or fawcon, who all seemed to eye her as if aware she talked of them, and to plume when she put on her hawk's-gloves, and pre¬ pared their jcassis and bells, as if they each individually hoped to be the honoured bird ; and Edward, in raptures with the exhibition, declared Mary drew the hawks on her fist so dexterously, and rebated them so gracefully, that when he came of age he must make her his falconer. Lortl de Mandeville, aithoughdelighted with every thing Mary had the power of showing him, as novelty gifted it with charms, at length became weary of the sights within the castle precincts; he therefore proposed to ramble into the chatellany, for then they might oblige Algernon by discovering some clew to the Dutch skipper who had taken such a marvellous holdfast upon his fancy at Rockcliff 1 Castle " Not only on im fancy but on m> *> * *i a' meet gratitude," said Algernon : " and besides, too, the poor wounded youth
al St. Stephen's monastery is panged with anxiety to hear of this gallant youth, to wdiose valiance he is indebted for life, as I may aptly say I am also for mine." " An embryo hero, whose com¬ panionship will championkse us all!" exclaimed Edward, glancing his laugh¬ ing eyes archív at the blushing Marv. ? 4 a.' ^ *■ * " To wing, then, for 'chieving the disco¬ very of this doughty swarth hero — this Black Prince of yours, Algernon ; whon 1 forethink may blowth into an humble servant fbr our Mary here." " We must weet more of his intrinsic value, ere the iriends of our ladv give assentment to that forethought," replied Algernon gravely. During their pedestrian excursion, Lord de Mandeviile and Fitzrivers made frequent observations to each other upon the striking popularity of' Lady Mary. Prom the kennel of the hound, to the stately monastery of the rigid recluse, all evinced unbounded iov at beholding her. In ever} hamlet they approached, they observed the ohi gaffer or his voung I J », a ι 0
son loitering near, in the anxious hope of being of service to her in opening some gate, or removing some obstinately im¬ peding pig, or placing stones in some intervening brook for her to pass over ; the gammers all coming forward to meet her wdth the countenance and warm ex¬ pressions of hearty welcome, mingled with evident expectation that she was come to bestow 7 some benefit upon them ; whilst the untamed children clustered around her, using all their wiles to attract her notice, and all ready primed and loaded with giggling propensities to meet and hail the w r ild pranks they doubted not she would play for their amusement. Algernon observed all this as accu- rately as her brother, but with a different impression : for it went beyond amusing him ; since it awakened the most animated admiration of a disposition so sweet anti benevolent, as thus, without one adventi¬ tious aid — no pomp, no wealth, and none to yield her consequence in her insulation —thus to attract the good will of all around her. And this admiration would have
arisen to the very highest pinnacle in the mind of our young observer ere he left Aibalanda, had not Mary ever and anon cast herself headlong from this eminence she was soaring to, bv some hoyden exploit, which could never have entered into the code of Lady Warburg's refinements even to conceive ; for poor Mary, elevated almost out of her wits by the happiness of having beneath the same roof with her an actual relative, and that her own darling brother ; antl also the preserver of that brother's life, and her own, her eaily friend ; and these two treasures condescending to be not only her companions but like her very pages ; her spirits ebullated beyond all boundary-—with no governess, no hermit of the \alley, near to call them to sub¬ jection : and as Edward laughed with all his might and main at manv of her extraordinary extemporaneous sallies, so she hoped to have had the satisfaction of' beguiling thesadnessof Master Algernon ; therefore many of her sportive achieve¬ ments were dashed into for the benevo-
lent purpose of stealing the thoughts of Fitzrivers from melancholy contempla¬ tions. At length, as the lord abbot gave it as his opinion, that, situated as Algernon so long had been m the family of Lord St. Oswald, it was necessary for him to make some personal enquuy after the rate of those so dear to his lordship, Sir Ethel¬ bert assented to his lepaumg to the metropolis for that pu ι pose; antl arranged with the lord abbot, that one of the steady fathers of St. Stephen's should accompany him, lest, if the îecent arrest had been a serious one from the Star- chamber, the }Oiith might commit him¬ self by unw itting cnquu ies. No sooner did this anangement trans¬ pire in Aibalanda, than the Lord de Mandeville, with all the wilfulness of a spoiled child, detei mined to accompany Algernon, to set lus piojccts in motion for rescuing Mary fiom the doleful castle of Aibalanda. None aiound him hatl power to control him ; and even the aníluishod tears and pathetic entieaties
of his sister could not prevail, when she importuned him not to go until he bad ascertained that the alarming arrest had terminateti amicably. He therefore did depart; beguiling poor Mary's unutter¬ able grief by assurances, that if his lady mother was not returned to Vespa¬ sian Tower, he would come back incon¬ tinently, accompanied by Father Hubert; and tarry at Aibalanda until he should have received communication from his rather, from whom he expected permis¬ sion for her residence in future to be where his was, until he should go to college. The grief of Lady Mary upon the de¬ parture of her brother and Fitzrivers was piteous ; and for many weeks her flown appetite, bloom, anil spirits, proclaimed it to all around : but time imperceptibly stole from her dejection by its magic opiates;—her instructions were indus¬ triously resumed by the hermit of St. Stephen's valley, and by Zarini ; and, to her high gratification, Mrs. Morion re-appeared in Aibalanda Castle shortly
after the departure of the countess had removed the interdict to her return. In due time, Algernon, his voung companion, antl attendants, proceeded to Vespasian Tower ; led thither by in¬ formation they received in the metro¬ polis : antl in Vespasian Tower they found almost every one of those who had been so spontaneously removed from Aibalanda, comfortably enjoying the termination of their voyage and appre¬ hensions; and wdio stated to Lord tie Mandeville and Fitzrivers, that the persons into wdiose custody they had been committed hatl treated them with much respect, and afforded them every comfort and accommodation, but still persevering in silence upon the subject of their arrest: their surprise and joy had therefore been infinite, when, instead of landing them in Loudon to take them before the Council, they had been tie- barked at the most convenient point on the Kentish coast for their repair to Vespasian Tower; and that the moment their- demarcation had been carefully ef-
fected, the ships hove out to sea, taking nothing pertaining to them away, unless they had made free with Sir Rupert, who bad never been seen by any of them since the first movements for their landing liad commenced. It also appeared, that with much fear and trembling, and all the wary circum¬ spection requisite, the most sapient amongst the party had felt their way at court ; w here no frown nor jealousy: appearing, thev bad ventured to ask questions, which led to the discovery that the arrest bad not proceeded from the Council, or any legal authority : and thus the whole matter transpiring, had found its way to the ears of' the sovereign, who was charmed with the joke, and pronounced it the exploit of .some right loyal subjects, whom he would nobly recompense did thev ever betra v them- selves. But the projectors and agents of this apparent royal reprisal had other views and wishes than seeking public recom¬ pence for their performance; since the
projectors,—no other than the wily abbess of St. Mildred's, and her friend Rosamond, — had their object fully answered, by the removal of the latter and her party from a spot replete with perils and vexations to her, and extricating the former from fearful embarrassment individually; and a strong conspiring party of fanatics, with whom bhe affected to coalesce, from the party of the opposite faction which Aibalanda had thus sheltered to the dis¬ quiet of these conspirators. Sir Ethel¬ bert, in cordial compliance with his sis¬ ter's request, became her abettor, by supplying her with a couple of those ships he had always riding in the offing to perform his embassies far and wide, as soon as he learned it was fbr the re¬ moval of Rosamond, and all the alarms her residence at Aibalanda had awakened for the happiness of his itlol Mary ; and thus so easily to rid himself of these alarms, he promised faithfully that lie would not only lend these ships and their crews to Constance, but comply with ììcr fin (her request to preserve the secret
even from his friend, the abbot of St. Stephen's monastery: and although true to this promise, he couhl not allow Mary and the tvvo youths, w horn he had speci¬ fied should not be named in the party for arrest, to be agitated by unnecessary apprehension, antl therefore contrived to have their alarms lulled to rest. And that warrant, in which Sir Ethel¬ bert stipulateti that the name of De Mandeville and Fitzrivers should not he insorteti, and which bore the imposing form of a genuine writ, was one accident¬ ally retained in the possession of one of the monks of St. Mildred's, who hatl once been in the service of Cardinal Wolsey, and had acted as au officer iu the Star- chamber ; and tliis monk, knowing how to fill the blanks, and having by him some old seal impressions which he kept as matters of curiosity, he affixed one ofthe king's, and managed so adroitly that all whom it was pretended to concern were completely deceived. As it had been in the power of Rosa¬ mond to lull the apprehensions of' her
daughter, even ere her embarcation as a pretended prisoner of state, the sea voyage proved so efficacious to the health of Rhona, that her beauty seemed tran¬ scendent even beyond its own former bril¬ liancy by its effect ; and the dejected Algernon keenly felt that he had never before beheld her half so formidable. When he first saw her on his return from Vespasian Tower, he found her at work, surrounded by tastefully grouped females, — some young guests and companions, some attendants, — all engaged in the ele¬ gant employment of stringing pearls, winding gold threads and silks, or bending gracefully over the frames of varied fancy works; but still Rhona looking herself like the queen of tl Tis parterre of beauty's flowers: and all these graces antl elegances of taste and refinement struck forcibly upon the page of' recollection, iu Alger¬ non's mind, the unpolished avocations of Latly Mary, where gold and pearls were to be discovered only in her mind, and the embroidery İn the tissue of her varied actions.
Although years had elapsed since the catastrophe which had bereaved him of his parents, yet Algernon clad himself in appropriate mourning the moment he learned his deprivation. His sable ha¬ biliments, however, awakened no sur¬ prise at Vespasian Tower, as a letter from the abbess of St. Mildred's had pre¬ ceded his arrival ; a letter in which she stated, that she had learned from her emissaries, Master Fitzrivers had just received advisement of the death of his parents; and that his assuming no title in consequence was caused by political cunning : and weeting this antl much more, from meet authority, relative to Master Fitzrivers, her avize tt) her friend Rosamond and her fair daughter was, deftly to affection him bv their disinte- rested courtesies, and by Üúa means ac- cumulate a behooveful store of gratitude for themselves, that might vantage them hereafter. This intimation gifted tlie reception bestowed by mother and daughter upon Algernon with such marked courtesy,
that, startled by it, he at once conceived he had fillen in the estimation of the w 01 Id, and that humanity thus urgetl them to coi diality, which he felt oppies- siv e thiough the humiliation it awakened ; not so—for not one pai tide of mortifica¬ tion was blended with the recollection— he remembered the kindness of Mary and Edwaul in their first knowledge of his bereavement. No : every thing they had said, or looked, or done, had penetrated his heai t as the svmpathy of kindred affection ; and even yet seemed reflected thence, as the sun's gentle beams, to wann and cheer him. "Tell me, I prithee," at length said Rhona, smiling most giacioush upon Algernon, and aware of the stiong mie¬ rest he had ever expressed for Lath Maiy, " how have you left the wild flower oi the desert?" "The ïceed you mean, I wis!" ex¬ claimed Mis. Alice Sneakup, whom Al¬ gernon long had known to be the echo ot Lady Waiburg's sentiments.
tt Lady Warburg's nomination was not unmeet," responded Algernon with im¬ pressive gravity : " Lad} Mary is a flower — ay, in sooth, and a sweet one: — and aptly too Ave may class her with aro¬ matics, fbr she exhales balms fbr all around her." (i I see Sir Rupeit's discovery of the balmy xeealth of this aromatic has made its advisement universally," retorted Mrs. Alice contemptuously. " It may prove behooveful chaffery for disappointed heiis, to speculate upon the golden balm she may exhale." The systematically conciliating Rhona, in alarm for the effect this be tra} al of enmitv from her known friend might have upon this captivating \outh, whom gratitude (for she could ascribe it to no other source) so strangely and strongly attached to the children of" Lord St. Os¬ wald, now looking upon and speaking to him with all the fascinating sweetness she could command, said, " Why see [ not my brother Edward, with my — 1 would aptly say my brother Algernon —
only — only, perchance, you might ween it too presuming?" Fitzrivers made no response to this sweet lure for gratitude, since in his present situation he construed incorrect¬ ly ; and, shocked and grievetl that Rhona could deride a friend in adversity, he sighed so profoundly, that Latly Warburg, mistaking its source, felt the pleasure of elated hope so cheerily that her eyes danced with joy; am! her smiles beamed such captivation, that a fearful augmentation might have been added to the hopeless misery of poor Algernon, had he not gifted this increase of anima¬ tion with the spirit of irrisión. "Can it be," continued Rhona spor¬ tively, "that De Maiuleville makes che¬ rishment of displeasure against me, for not making salliance to his sick-chamber at Aibalanda in despite of ?ν. Bahnfield's dern prognostics ? The prediction was, 'life was not worth bartery after breath¬ ing the air of his infected chamber;' else 1 shoultl have performed his kindly nurse most deftly. — Nay, nay; Edward ought
not to make such recordation of this matter. Come, that's a dear good Al¬ gernon 1 — lead him to affection me, and to the embracemcnt of reconciliation." " Here I am without a leadman," exclaimed Lord dc Mandeville, at this moment approaching the frame over which Rhona was displaying her own graces and beauties — "a voluntary vo¬ tary, come to homage at your shrine, panged by gratitude for your cherish¬ ment of me during my quarantine in Aibalanda; and to deplore, with meet aggrievement, the dern dreariment by which I endamaged your sportiveness tluring that dureful time of wail antl woe" " Ho ! my Lortl Testyman ! if the air you breathed during that quarantine, or the copemates of your infected chamber, have gared you to misween your most affectionate sister, and to become disna- tured, I will make no excusation of my portance at fhat pangful time of dread, but speed me now to the racket-court," vol. ?. ?
exclaimed Lady Warburg, throwing co« quettishly around her the prettily-ma¬ naged affectation of pretended pique, to conceal effectively her real indignation at his daring thus to throw any censures upon her conduct. " Come," continued her lath ship, in- t reasing the silvery beaming of her soft radiance more effectively still, to veil the storm that raged within her temper; " come then, you my friends, who do not misvveen poor Rhona—come with me to the racket-court, and whiles some find phi} pleasure in one ball, some may find it in iíilking of another ; fbr while the game goes on, I will prattle with those who give preferment to my babblement, it there be such, upon the subject of im pi ejected tournament antl ball, which, Mastei Fitzrivers, }ou have }et to wot 1 have in contemplation, to celebrate my vantage in the law joust, and to make lepair for the disappointment in not visit¬ ing m v castle You will of certam tv enterprise the tournay, and pleasure me In winning some of those meet prizes 1
sitali have for the contentation of the doughty victors." The bewitching smiles, the seductive tones and manner in which lihona deli¬ vered her intended encouragement, struck to the inmost recesses ofthe heart of Al¬ gernon ; yet failed in the effect intended : for her lures operated like sun-beams on a blighted flower, increasing the disease, antl conveying no benefit of revival, as his insulation destroyed all hope for him ; and in tones of deep dejection he replied by r excusing himself from the honour of* attending her tournament, through the family calamity which had so lately been revealed to him. C( But this tournament cannot con¬ veniently become our preparations, let us be so apt as ever diligence or man's wit can imagine for it, under a week or two," Rhona replied ; "antl that will be time sufficient for all goodly intendments that duty can appoint for your comport¬ ance of respect to those so long departed, The king antl his beautiful consort, whom, I befear me, 1 misused my hu¬ it 2
milky by so unaptly personifying, have graciously promised to honour wdth their presence rny disports : consequently, all that I can devise or imagine me for their comfort and consolation, I must not lack ; and, therefore, amid my bright¬ est stars of chivalry I summon Fitzrivers. And bear in recordation that I wish you to be clad in green ; for that is, you weet, the colour which the — the king affec¬ tions." Still Algernon endeavoured to excuse his attendance at this tournament, but Rhona would not receive his negative ; and she then hurried off to prepare for the tennis-court with such striking grace, that poor Algernon was almost fascinated into the expunction from his mentái vision of the absolute want of feeling which she had unwittingly evinced for his domestic sorrows, in urging him so gaily to forget his griefs, and despatch bis filial reverence, to increase the splen* dour of her pageant by numbers : but filial recollections, with the never slum¬ bering proprieties of his mind, would
restore this lapse of feeling into view ; and would .dwell upon it, and condemn it, and grieve for it, whenever her capti¬ vations strove to subvert his firmness. And the feelings of poor Algernon were thrown from this periotl into one continued state of warfare, between the seductive encouragement secretly be¬ stowed upon him by Rhona, and some dawning disapprobation of her bearings, with his own firm resolution to vvithstantl encouragement : for the basis of his de¬ termination being conviction, that, from the lapse of years since all clew to his name and connections had been lost, no rational hope could exist for its recovery, therefore honour combateti admiration ; and, to the infinite mortification of Lady Warburg, honour hitherto proved vic¬ torious, and no lure could entoil him into committing himself to the deep tie- signer.
•?? a-i
(HAP. X. Nothing could surpass the magnificence preparing under the directions of Lady St. Oswald for the pageant to celebrate her daughter's establishment in the ho¬ nours of her ancestors : and whilst gold, and goldsmiths' work, and precious pave¬ ments, were accumulating, by her desire and Rhona's, upon the trappings in every department, the treasurer of Lortl St. Os¬ wald groaned in spirit at the perceptible diminution of gold and precious stones under his jurisdiction occasioned by this prodigality. Even spacious and hand¬ some buildings fbr the accommodation of the royal train were erected by that miraculous industry which the power of gold can animate : and in no one direc¬ tion did Rosamond withhold that open hand of potent influence ; as the thou¬ sands she thus dissipated would only,
after all, circumscribe the fortune of the detested Mary, and the niding Sir Ru¬ pert whom she had determined should espouse her ; whilst as to the displeasure of her lord upon such prodigality, she could brave it as nothing very formi¬ dable. Whilst these magnificent arrangements were proceeding, it reached the cars of Algernon, that a foreign prince, whose name Rhona had affected to forget when mentioning that such a one was to grace her tournament, was believed by all to be the favoured mortal upon whom the choice of Lady Warburg had at length determined to fall. "By my hal idom ! " exclaimed Sir Leo- line, whilst pouring his surmises and ex¬ pectations upon fhis subject into the ears of the recoiling Algernon "but Ishall be an uncle out of pocket by this grinning gleekmau prince. The accomplished jilt had, whilst in their playpleasure of enacting consort to each other, chimed in so cheerily with the concord of encou¬ ragement, that she tanned the flames of ? 4
his inveterate chronic disease of love, so incurably, that, beshrew it! I forethink it must end harmfully. You, Algernon, too, look contentless upon the case Sir Thomas Wrexham swears he must fee lawmen, to wot what he may institute for the infraction of promises made by eye and smile compact. Lord Ludgate says nought ; but, by the contortions of his massive beard, is portending gazeful avengement. By my halidom ! but she hatl copious dealings in the chaffery of tacit hope. As to my worship, I stand beholden to my lady mother for her pro¬ hibition to this bartery of looks and smiles; or, I wis, I should have been now as much in the care-crazed plight of love as the most distraught dupe of you all — and that's my earn." " By'r lady!" continued Sir Leoline ; " but gratitude to my dam, for her bode- ments in forefending the shoals of this jilt's allurements, is little to what I owe to my own forethought of the forbidden degrees for wedlock, in delivering me from my half formed passion fbr the wild
bird of Aibalanda; and, by my halidom I it is apt for mypeace, the wound of'this airling's witchery had not plunged deeper, antl that I can ween of her as beseems a kins. man : ? ?? talking of this young fascinator reminds me of a demon—^that Rupert Warburg. By- my halidom! Master Fitz¬ rivers, but I feel much discontentation at the non-appearance of this niding." " You do not mean to say 7 ," exclaimed Algernon, turning pale with alarm, " you imagine you that he has made his salliance back into Yorkshire, to enact mischief against the inestimable Mary ? " " Ay do I. — Perchance y r ou wot not he was on board the vessel in which Latly St. Oswald and his fair kinswoman made waftage for Yorkshire ; which circum¬ stance gars additional force to my larum ; for his conferences were marvellously fre¬ quent and confidential with the stepdame You already wis we missed tins knight¬ less Sir upon our landing ; when Lady St. Oswald accounted plausibly for his ab¬ sence, by her belief of its arising through her omission of inviting him incontinently ? 5
to Vespasian Tower, and the pride of the Warburg's being awork to gar his absence : but my reflections upon this subject give me other views and advise¬ ment ofthe matter; and lead me to believe, that in their hourly amicable conferences there was no lack of cordiality to cause this absence." Whether it was, that the extinction of hopein the bosom of Algernon relative to his own estate had annihilated every ray of it respecting Rhona, or that, having heard so often before ofthe moment of the elec¬ tion of her spouse having arrived, such reports had lost their power oí' alarming ; but so it was, that, even to his own amaze¬ ment, he felt much less mental distress from the information of Lady Warburg's long pending choice having been deter¬ mined, than from the intelligence of menace to the happiness of Mary de Rhone from the profligate Sir Rupert : for this too probable menace seemed at once to recall to his reminiscence, in the most glowing colours of favourable im¬ pression, all that Mary had ever said or
done to please his fancy, and yield evi- denceto J the superexcellence of her dis¬ position, until interest fbr her safety became so painfully anxious, he coniti not rest without taking steps more active than those resolved upon by her cousin of revealing to Lord Dalincourt his ap¬ prehensions ; antl Algernon's determin¬ ation was, to convey prompt intelligence to the lortl abbot of St. Stephen's monas¬ tery, of the suspicious disappearance oí Sir Rupert, and its too possible motive ; for as the lord abbot was a guardian ot' Lady Mary's, antl as Sir Ethelbert had, amongst other confidential communica¬ tions, confessed that his residing so con¬ stantly near Aibalanda was to yield his protection to the insulated child of Adela, he little doubted that, on such intelli¬ gence, every effective measure wouhl be adopted to subvert the machinations of Sir Rupert, Thus determined, a trusty messenger became the object of his prompt pursuit; and, in the intensity of his interest fot- Lady Mary's happiness, he would have ? 6
perforniet! that Mercury himself, had he not that very morning received a private summons from the Duke of Suffolk, fbr attendance on the morrow upon impor¬ tant business ; and believing this busi¬ ness something connected with Lord St. Oswald's emba.ssy, wdiich was continually changing its station and its policy, as the variations in amity with the emperor and Francis dictated, he therefore dared form no excuse for non-attendance upon the Duke : but soon, to his infinite relief, learning from his own valet Norman that Father James, his late companion from St. Stephen's, was not to leave the metropolis for Yorkshire until the mor¬ row 7 , he immediately took horse in quest of him, although he had been expressly invited by Lady Warburg to accompany her in a pedestrian excursion after din¬ ner, upon visits of charity in the neigh¬ bourhood. Nothing disheartened, Algernon set out, although his clew to Father James was most unsatisfactory ; as Norman only knew that the holy man lodged in
a monastery in or near London : and after visiting every monastery he could find in the metropolis, in pursuit of Fa¬ ther James, without success, he proceeded to search for him in the neighbouring villages of St. Giles's and Tyburn ; and even set at defiance, in his anxiety for Mary, although he was alone, the soli¬ tary road from the last-named village to that of Charing, called the Way fiom Reading, albeit he knew from report that many a freebooter loitered behind the hedges in that pass, attired as the starving monks who had been sent adrift upon the recent dissolution of the lesser monasteries to beg their bread. But still without success he made this peril¬ ous circuit ; and at length, whilst his exhausted steed, which had borne him from Vespasian Tower, was taking some necessary food antl rest, Algernon be- thought himself of Paul's Walk, where, as Bishop East describes it as "the Lesser isle of Great Britain, or the World's Map," he thought it not unlikely that he might find him he so anxiously
sought : for, as it was the rendezvous of all idlers, it was probably resorted to by starving friars in quest of alms ; antl Father James, he knew 7 , hatl been the bearer of much dole from his own com¬ munity fbr the purpose of yielding relief to their destitute brethren in the me¬ tropolis. Algernon now made no u n necessary delay in hastening to this famous spot of general attraction ; where — though not very speedily, from the immense throng of gossiping or designing multi¬ tudes there collected — he actually did encounter Father James upon the very mission he anticipated, and who informed him that he was to set out that very night for home ; thai, as he was to accompany a brother of his own, wdio was a king's messenger going express to Lincoln, he should travel so far with unusual speed; and that, for his own deeply felt interest fbr the inestimable Mary of Aibalanda, independent of what he knew was felt ior her by his lortl abbot and all his community, he would
make every exertion to reach St. Ste¬ phen's in time to counteract any villany in the meditation of Sir Rupert Warburg. Algernon's mind was thus set at rest for the safety of the interesting Mary : for he knew, from the point in which the wind had continued for many week\s, that if Sir Rupert had embarked in any vessel for Aibalanda, he could not yet have reached that destination ; antl was therelore not likely to arrive where he could effect mischief, ere the fleet tra¬ veller, Father James, should have anade his communications to the lord abbot. And the moment this anxiety, which, whilst in full alarm, had amounted to agonv, was hushed in the minti of' Fitz- rivers, he began for the first time to consitler himself unpardonably culpable in his failure in courtesy towards Lady Warburg ; and although he was to be in London so early the next morning, he now lost not one moment in setting out fbr Vespasian Tower, resolving to throw himself upon her mercy for his pardon, since the true cause of his tiu-
ancy he dared not acknowledge : but fearing his own wearied Bayard could not, without too much exertion, reach Vespasian Tower in unison with his im¬ patience to make his peace wdth the fair Rhona, he procured post-horses, and arrived just as the supper messes were serving up : and the moment he drew up to alight, he perceived Norman anxi¬ ously awaiting bis return, with a sum¬ mons from the Duke of Suffolk to come to him immediately ; which summons had, about an hour since, arrived express by a messenger, who privately told Al¬ gernon that an insurrection had broken out in Lincolnshire ; that tlie Duke of Suffolk was appointed by his Majesty to command the force to put it down ; and that tlie Duke had selected him for one of bis staff. This intelligence being to remain pri¬ vate, and as Algernon was in requisition to set out, as the command expressed it, incontinently, he hastened to his chamber, there to make some hasty arrangements relative to his baggage : and, this accom-
plishetl, he wrote a few lines to Father Hubert, stating, that a summons from court was calling him instantly from Ves¬ pasian Tower, without allowing him time to say adieu to any one ; and entreated the kind father to make all necessary apologies for him. And this plan for adieus he considered iu all respects the most advisable ; since it might cover his failure iu courtesy of the morning, and spare him the pang of parting with those whom he knew not if he might be fated ever more to behold ; whilst it secured him from questions to which he must not reply. These hasty arrangements made, Al- •/? gernon, anxious that none whom he wished not then to see should know of his being in the house, stole his way cau¬ tiously down from his chamber by aback staircase ; and had nearly accomplished his secret retreat, when, in turning into one of the last passes he had to glide through ere he should arrive at the most unfrequented outlet from the house, where his horses were awaiting him, he,
to his utter amazement and dismay 7 , there beheld Lady Warburg in high conference with a stranger of the most questionable appearance, and attended by her gentle¬ woman Ginefrede holding a wax torch. During a reign, in the seventeenth year of which it had been found necessary to publish a statute fhat none but de¬ cent persons should be admitted into court service, antl that the scullions of the royal kitchen should not be permitted to go without clothing, one may readily imagine the offices belonging even to great houses were not the commodious edifices now to be found in the meanest dwellings ; and that, in premises so slovenly managed as the prodigal house¬ hold of Vespasian Tower, the passes antl dens for the domestics' uses were of tlie most miserable denomination. To finti the elegant ? bona, therefore, attired in all the bravery her passion for expensive dres.s had decked her, in one of the most miserable of these dens, at a moment when her mother's numerous guests were mustering around the supper-boards ; and
with evident intention of profound se¬ crecy in the measure ; couhl not have failed to excite the astonishment of Al¬ gernon, even had the person who caused her being there worn the appearance of any with whom Lady Warburg ought tt) hold conference. But far, far otherwise was this man ; his garb, his aspect, his demeanour — all pronounced him profli¬ gate, if not a ruffian : and ere the pre¬ sence of the astounded Fitzrivers had become manifest to any of the confede¬ racy, he heard a few words of a confer¬ ence not intended for the ear of any intruder. " May the .saints above or below 7 be my blastment!" exclaimed the man, in the tones, and with the manners, more of insolent presuming effrontery than of savage ferocity ; " if you tío not pay me with less scant behoof- antl that eftly— 1 will give public advisement of the mat¬ ter, and expose you, lady!" " Oh ! be pitiful ! — Oh! vantage me by a little meet patience, and I will do all for your contentation," faltered out the
trembling lihona, pale with terror, and in tones so subdued, that Algernon, not en¬ during them, rushed forward, and, with his hand on his sword, demanded how the man dared to speak in tones of such insolent threatening to that lady. The man, evidently disconcerted at this address, drew back a few paces ; and reclaiming his posture to one of more respect, he, in tones lowered from the altitude of insolence, replied—" Let the lady tell, why I am so darefuk" lihona, almost fainting with agitation, from a dire cause that might well subdue her, made every exertion fbr the reco¬ very of that inimitable self-possession which was her apt friend in need ; and faintly she articulated, that the man was not to blame ; that İt was an uuheedv scrape of her inexperience : that a wish to vantage a distressed individual had warelessly led to the matter; and that ho- nour, and consideration for the feelings of others, sorrowed her to silence, and not even to confide in him, her most affec- tioned friend : and that all she made en-
treatance for from the good man was, to allow her time for a favourable opportu¬ nity to make advisement of the unheedy embarrassment to her honoured lady mother, who would then enable her to perform incontinently all things fbr the behoof of those concerned." " And can you be a man, and refuse such a scant proof of your courtesy to a lady?" demanded Algernon indignantly. " Courtesy must eat," returned the stranger, " And I have not a marc at this mo¬ ment to give him," saitl Rhona ;— " my excursion of the morning bereaved me." " Allow me the honour of' being your largesse-bearer," saitl Algernon, " Here, Sir, are ñve marcs to feed your courtesy ; but be wareful how ? ? ? presume upon the kindliness of this lady; lest, if ye act not in concordance with honour and con¬ science, the matter may be given to the view and advisement of legal counsellors, who will aptly manage your demands." The man burst into a laugh of scorn;
but he pocketed the marcs, and replied sarcastically, " I would your spirit and your courtesy, generous youngling, had bartery in a fairer cause. I take leave fbr the present : but let the lady be ware¬ ful !—my demand must, nay, shall be ho- mured —that honour may be in the mat¬ ter í Ay shall it, lady ; if it cost you the chaffery of your wardrobe*, yea, even that most valued portion, fbr which you bar¬ tered every noble you possessed! "—and with an expressive sneer at lihona, an indefinable glance at Ginefrede, and a respectful bow to Fitzrivers, disappeared. " And this is my recompence for bene¬ volence!" said the sobbing lihona, her bitter tears of shame and terror now turning to those of joy at this reprieve from the destruction of disgrace ; and y with her sense of security, came back to each vigilant post all her powers for manoeuvring to exalt herself in the estima¬ tion of others. "Oh! kind Algernon!" she continued, " since thus benevolence finds its guerdon, you must fear to bewray
kindliness for me : but if ere I stumble me in gratitude to y 7 ou ■ " " Lady Warburg, this is no place for your tarriance," said Algernon, eagerly interrupting her animated protestation.— " Fly, I conjure you : peril not one pre¬ cious moment, ere you confide in your lady mother; and let not another sun go down ere you discumber yourself from the insulting menaces of a vengeful rudesby. Antl should a counsellor be¬ come necessary, you will find one, faithed in honour, antl gifted with competence, in Father Hubert. Fly! fly! I make en¬ treatancc. —Farewell." Latly Warburg was too well pleased to escape from a spot .so lately perilous to her fame, to require any further incentive íbr obedience ; and she was on rapid wing, when the alarm arrested her progress of Algernon being determined on a pursuit ofthe dismaying stranger, and that hor¬ rible disclosures might prove the conse¬ quence. Instantaneously she turned this dire apprehension into the most flattering appearance of deeply felt interest for
Fitzrivers himself; expressing her appre¬ hension, in the most bewitching form, that he was going in quest of an un¬ principled man, who might in vcngement pang her by the bereavement of bis life. This unequivocally flattering interest, in a moment when his for her had been excited to a dangerous height, aroused his admiration and hope almost beyond the firmness of Algernon to combat: but he did wrestle with them ; and without seeming to appropriate any thing İn her address beyond common interest, he as¬ sured her he was not going in pursuit of the man in question, albeit be was going from Vespasian Tower that moment upon a summons to court, possibly in con¬ sequence of despatches from Lord St. Oswald. Nothing could have proved more for the comfort of Rhona, than the absence of Fitzrivers at this moment from Ves¬ pasian Tower; since his presence, imme¬ diately after witnessing the scene just terminated, would have proved a source of infinite embarrassment to her. Through
this opportune absence, she should have time afforded to compose her aspect, and give to her inventions upon the fearful subject whatever tone she might think most advantageous to her captivations ; whilst his thus setting out secretly, and under embarrassment, as if from the necessity of concealing his plans, which had ap¬ peared in his ingenuous manner whilst ascribing his prompt departure to de¬ spatches from Lord St. Oswald, nlled lier bosom with new hopes of pleasing im¬ port, through firm conviction that these clandestine calls from Vespasian Tower to court were connected with the aggran- disementwhich the abbess of St. Mihlred's had predicted: and influenced by this conviction she bade him a flattering adieu; desiring him, with a pretty flutter of consciousness, not to yield credence to the déchirement, should he hear it even at court, that she was about to be pre¬ vailed on to affection and espouse a fo¬ reign prince.
VOL* JL,
L
CHAI . XL The unexpected delay occasioned by Lady Warburg's embarrassment, added so considerably to the impatience of the messenger, that, to make amendas, Alger¬ non set out at such full speetl for the metropolis as only 7 to admit of broken retrospections of the singular adventure wdiich had thus impeded him ; and these unconnected retrospections, where no train of solid reflection could be called into meditation, allowed the fair heroine of this strange scene to come off for tht present with flying colours, as a benevo¬ lent, artless young creature, whom inex¬ perience of worldly wiles had exposed to machinations she was unprepared to meet - and this impression he carried with him tt) Lincoln, fbr which place he set off at earl} dawn with the Duke of Suffolk anti a tòrce under the duke's command, ibi the suppression of an insurrection led on
by the prior of Barlings, or, as he desig¬ nated himself Captain Cobler, Through the little disposition amongst the insurgents to proceed to violence, and from the management of the Duke of Suffolk in influencing the king to yield some concession, this rebellion of Octo¬ ber 1,336 was, as our readers are aware, speedily subdued. Yet, notwithstanding little more than sound policy and a show of determined spirit had marked the sub¬ jugation of these twenty thousand insur¬ gents, Algernon contrived, in the little time there was opportunity for its accom¬ plishment, to signalise himself so much for intrepidity, self-possession, jutlgment, aml humanity, that he earned and obtainetl the high commendation of 1 the duke ; antl through this commendation received, by the express command of His Majesty, the honour of knighthood for his recompense; and to his gratification wa.s, upon the dis¬ persion of the Lincoln insurgents, ordered forward to join the Duke of Norfolk, now under arms for the subjugation of the Pilgrims of Grace. L 2
From the moment in which Fitzrivers received the honour of knighthood, he became less wretched relative to his own cheerless insulation : for the king had now affixed the name upon him by which he had been knighted ; and having himself acquired that distinction, he was compa¬ ratively satisfied. Immediately after joiniug the Duke of Norfolk's forces, Sir Algernon was or¬ dered to Scarborough Castle, to afford his services to Sir Ralph Evens, who defended that point against the pilgrims : and being now established at no very great distance from St. Stephen's monastery, he became impatient to visit his friends there ; both through affectionate and grateful remem¬ brance of them, and extreme anxiety to learn if any tidings had been heard of Sir Rupert Warburg, and if all things had been set in train for the protection of Lady Mary against all possible menace from this profligate and the insurgents. At length the wished-for opportunity arrived of calling at St. Stephen's, as he was bearing important communications
to the Earl of Cumberland in Skipton Castle. Time for tarriance at St. Stephen's was limited, but Algernon made the most of it, by seeking and obtaining every inform¬ ation fbr which he panted ; and with joy he learned, that so little apprehension of disaffection to government in the chatel¬ lany of Aibalanda or its vicinity existed, and so assured was Sir Ethelbert of Sii¬ li upert being at the present moment out ofthe way of effecting mischief, that he had ventured to proceed to the Nether¬ lands, to bring over from thence a stronger body of his most tried adherents, to dis- perse around Aibalanda incase of .serious protection from political disturbance be¬ coming necessary for the daughter of his never-forgotten Adela. But that daughter, the lord abbot informed Fitzrivers, seemed like some magic branch of olive, that by its own mystic influence kept warfare away ; for that Lady Mary was the dove of peace, that cooed amity and loyalty into the hearts of all around. That in conse-
» <j
quence ofthe representations of Lord tic Mandeville to his father, relative to his sister, Lord St. Oswald had withdrawn all jurisdiction from the unworthy abbess of St. Mildred's over Lady Mary, antl in¬ vested it in him (the abbot), as being trustee appointed by the late lord for the younger children of Lady Adela: that, in consequence of this change in affairs, the liberal sum which had always been allowed for Lady Mary's use was now appropriated as intended; and that, under colour of this paternal source, Sir Ethel¬ bert found an opportunity to pour in a munificent addition from the channel oí his own exhaustless wealth; thus yielding ' a/ ~ a supply for dole and generosity, suffi¬ cient to purchase for Lady Mary the attachment and gratitude of all around her. And, in addition to all this gratii} ing intelligence relative to Mary, the lortl abbot said that albeit Latly Mary had a/ a. been so sudtlenly vested with unlimitetl power over wealth, her honourable prin¬ ciples would not allow her to act unre-
strainedly; for, feeling the distribution of ¡t as a trust confided to her as her father's almoner, she rarely ever bestowed to any extent without due deliberation : that, with the dole she distributed, she gave sage advice which might accredit tlu head and heart of maturity,·—teaching the unthrifty the economy she observed practised in well regulated homestalls — allaying the spirit of revolutionary discon tentation, by recapitulating the acquies¬ cent meekness manifested in his trouble- by their own late archbishop, Wo hey, whom they all revered as a saint ami martyr—and stilling tbe loud murmurs against Cromwell for his lowly origin, by referring to the bumble estate of nu\n\ of those selected by unerring wisdom to lead the Christian world to find the haven of' everlasting happiness; thus verifying, that from the mouths of babes and suck¬ lings wisdom might be taught: whiNt, relative to dangers to be apprehended fbr her through religious faction, all with scarcely any exception, ofthe Alba landa chatellanv,— although within ila t 1
castle he had not proved so successful,— had been converted by the true hermit of St. Stephen's valley (who was in fact one of the most celebrateti missionaries attached to the Reformation) to the new creed ; and, under his instructions, the naturally 7 unheedy Mary had exer¬ cised her religious principles so discreetly, as to yield no opportunity' for bigotry to vantage Yet still the lord abbot con¬ fessed, that from the malignity evinced upon every occasion to Latly 7 Mary, by the satellites of her stepdame, he should cherish great alarms for Lady Mary's security, were not Sir Ethelbert vested with an infallible shield to guard tins child oí" his idolatry from the machina¬ tions of her enemies. The lord abbot, whilst thus discoursing of Latly Mary, forbore from any lure, through fortune's aHractious, for that attachment, which, a.s well as Ethelbert, he anxiously wished to see spring up between Algernon ami Mary ; antl he contented himself to plant his covert battery against the tender affection of his
beloved pupil, by adding a few impressive anecdotes of Mary, in which the sim¬ plicity of her guileless nature was happilx blended with the volatile spirits ot' the sportive child and the unfaltering votary of benevolence; all which he trusted would lend to the desired impression, — if not exactly at this moment, at 1?;? w í ien more maturity of judgment might gleam detection upon Rhona'sarts,—and by the litri it of reason, like the influence of the microscope, lead him to perceive the defective efforts of art, and the match¬ less perfections of nature's touch. But in all these attractive details of t In¬ for once deeply designing Kenrick, no¬ thing penetrated more profoundly into the mind of the attentive Algernon, than the conscientious performance of alinonei bv Mary, and the care, which the lord abbot effectively described, never to arro¬ gate to herself the merit of those eh; 1 ri- lies hhe unceasingly performed : for Un¬ placed in striking contrast the different beanngs of Lady Warburg in sinulai situations, and towards whom he had not L ,;
unfrequently experienced a secret feeling of disapprobation, for her constant as- sumption of the benevolence as her own, whidi had emanated from the treasury of her stepsire, and occasioned her no sacrifice of individual comfort; which he knew had been far from the case with Lady Mary, even when all her charitable dole had sprung from her own privations: so that, when at length he found it neces¬ sary to say farewell to the unfaltering friend of his life, this striking contrast dwelt in his memory so indeiatigably, as to recur for brooding pastime each mo¬ ment when the interruption of passing events left his thoughts at liberty. Sir Algernon's embassy at Skipton Castle ended, he was entrusted as bearer of some important communications from Lord Cumberland for Sir Ralph Evers, which it was arbitrarily necessary shoultl be tiel i vered before a certain periotl. Cpon minute enquiry, Algernon learned that his nearest route to Scarborough would wend not far distant from Alba- landa Castle ; and, upon calculation of
time and space, finding that by travelling ,1 few hours in the night he might gratify his ardent wioh fbr passing one hour with the inestimable Mary, and fin fing this aident wish utterly unvanquishable,— though the night promised to be one of piercing cold, and be had *vne gloomy forests to skirt or pass through,— he at length presented himself at ílu portal of' Aibalanda for admission. Being envelop« -d in a necessary dis¬ guise, to prevent his being ascertained by aii} r of' the insurgents as one oí tht king's forces, some moments elapsed ere he could convince the sceptic portei that he was a safe object for admission ; ???? rhe oiti anil intelligent portgrav e, shorn \lgernon hatl known there so short a penod since, had but the ?????? d*i\ sustained a serious injuty from the care- •ess bearings of one of his fellow-domes¬ tics, which caused hn pitice at the poital to be occupied by a substitute. But Su Algernon's tiigibilit} being at last esta¬ blished In the testimon} of the grace-, siv smiling Father Ralph, his intiotbictmn L (J
to the presence of the surprised and de¬ lighted Mary, and her accomplished governess, was no longer delayed ; when, to the utter amazement of Algernon, he soon perceived that as visible an alter¬ ation had taken place in the comportance ofthe blooming Mary, in the three months which had elapsed since they had parted, as he might reasonably have expected in as many years. Mary had made accurate observations at liockcliff Castle, and marked that the ladies and gentlewomen of the assembly moved about in one sort of pace,—each peculiarly her own ; and not after the diversified fashion of hop, step, slide, jump, whirl, and croupade, in which she usually accomplished every progress of her movements: and very caiefully she endeavoured to imitate {he bearings of those whom she hatl most admired, always excepting Lady Warburg; modestly be¬ lieving that she never couhl imitate her successfully, and resolved to shun the mortification of proving herself an awk¬ ward copyist of inimitability. But soon,
not quite satisfied with her attempt, and remembering that Weewitte, írom the nature of his profession, had been fami¬ liarly admitted into ihe halls of her grand- sire when thronged with the first person¬ ages ofthe land, she, through the amity which had ever prevailetl between her and this ancient adherent, called him into secret council with Maud, gravely exhibited her imitations to him, and then meekly requested to know from him which he recommended for her adoption,— she not meaning to continue an untamed fiily all her days; when Weewitte, who hatl attentively observed her, and guessing why the exhibition was performed, gravely pronounced, — for nothing which related to the advantage of this child of his affec¬ tion was ever deemetl a jest by him — that he fancied none ol' them as he did her own tieft gait, which, when it perchanced to be in sober measure, was that inherited from her peerless latlv mo¬ ther. " These," continued he, " minc¬ ing show-day movements besort not with the simple bearings of your artless mind.—
Odd's puppetry ! they have my nay word. Feel contentation, lady o' mine, with your own airy gait of portancc, wdiich has ere- whiles called forth the approof of that sage in judgment, Master Fitzrivers, whom I heard say to Sir Leoline, that when¬ e'er that Latly Mary ceased to feel herself a sportive child, she would glide into a sylph of surpassing gracefulness." Mary blushed, until tears of grateful sensibility trembled in her beautiful e\es ; and from that moment made such inces¬ sant and effectual endeavours to cease her hoyden sporti vencss, that Algernon now found his predictions to Sir Leoline strik¬ ingly verified. Time allowed but a short .sojourn to Algernon at Aibalanda, and he gave to it every possible moment his important tlutv elsewhere could spare to his wish of re¬ maining with his dear and fascinating sister Mary; but at length he was com- pellet! to inflict upon himself the Jiang oi separation. At the period of this unexpected visit of Sir Algernon at Aibalanda, Mrs.
Morton, although then able to visit the guest-chamber of Lady Mary, was only ¡ust recovering from an illness which still compelled her taking opium to obtain re¬ pose ; and she retired to her dormitory soon after the departure of our young knight : and Lady Mary to her own, in which chamber there was an invaliti in poor Maud, who was then suffering from a visitation of her rheumatism ; and, as usual, her adored young ladv was all af Jectionate attention to her, It bad been Mary's intention tt) sit an hour by the pillow of' poor Maud, to judgt 1 how this patient sufferer seemed likely to pass the night, ere she should herself seek ι epose. The recent visit of Fitzrivers did not increase Mary's hurry to occupy her pillow ; tbr the night having commenced with impenetrable darkness, u^ if the pre¬ lude to a fall of snow, she felt alarmed upon his account, and frequently stoh gently from the couch of Maud to a win¬ dow, to mark what aspect the night nught be assuming ; w hen at length the influence of a small portion of a waning moon
arose with the cheering rays of its mild light, breaking through and seeming with a rising wind to disperse those dense clouds which had excited her apprehen¬ sions : antl thus tranquillised, she was retiring from fhe window to commence her preparations for repose, when to her surprise she beheld the portal unclose without a summons; and, transfixetl hy the circumstance to her point of observation, she almost immediately saw five horsemen enter the base-court with apparent cau¬ tion, as if apprehensive of making a be¬ tray i n ír clatter with their horses' foot-falls, and instant!} dismount, antl roughly drag off a sixth horse, which had been led in by them, a resistless man, or woman, or up¬ right sack,—-but which, the shade from the castle tower prevented her ascertain¬ ing,—antl bear the burtlen swiftly towards the angle from which a door led to the staircase belonging to the nursery-cham¬ bers ; and iu the mass of overwhelming shadow which here concentrated, she lost the party ere they could reach the door, winch was evidently their designation.
For the first few moments Alan be¬ lievetl these horsemen to be a guaì d sent by the attentive loi d abbot of St. Ste¬ phen's to pi otec t her and tiie castle, in consequence of some aku m awakened bv the insurgents, antl that perhaps the si ah horse bore some useful inattei foi nnhtant pin poses. But stdl her beai t tîuohhcd in alarm; and, with a hope of iliscovenng sonic elucidation of the feu ful meauuu, she continued at the window, ?> much iu shade thiough the deep recess of the massy walls in which it was buued as to tlefv detection: w lien soon, -s hei eves a/ ' v attentively wandelet! ovei eveiy pai tol that poi tion ofthe castle which the ionic of these men had lendei edatti active to hei, die beheld a hunt light emanate fiom the staucasc windows of the nurset} towe»*, as if the beai ei was ascending ; and shoitly aftei a httle pause out of' bei obsenation, she again saw the light, and in ìaptd de¬ scent: and aite t pooi Alai} 's agitated heai t had pei foi meti all its painful luau- teuvics of fluttering, and bounding, and bulking, and almost ceasing its puliation,
the ñve men again became visible to her in the base-court without their burden, and almost instantaneously took horse, and left the castle in the same cautious way by which they had entered. This departure announced to Mary, that there was no guard sent from St, Stephen's to protect her. Was treason then at work in the castle? This ques¬ tion brought a fearful recollection to the reminiscence of Marv, beaming with hor- rid possibilities in a look she had seen glanced by Father Ralph upon Fitzrivers as the former was ceremoniously ushering the latter out of her sifting chamber at the moment of his departure; — a look that had startled her at the time, although she could attach no interpretation to its import, further than that it had not pleased her. Geoffrey, the temporary porter, she knew, was much in favour with Father Ralph, in consequence of his kindness to the begging friars, who had thronged to the gates of Aibalanda in much greater numbers within the last few days than they had even dtme upon
ihe dissolution of their respective mo¬ nasteries. And could it be possible they were in conspiracy with the Pilgrims of Grace, such as to bring the loyalty of her house under suspicion ? or was it possible they could have done aught to impede the progress of Algernon ? or, oh ! could it be at all possible that he were their prisoner?—But no, no; he would not so unresistingly have submitted, even to the prowess of five adversaries : no, no; unless, iiuleetl, he had been dis¬ abled from resistance by tearful wounds. The heart of Mary seemed perforateti to its very core with agonising wountls at this dire suggestion ; tor if this un- resisting burtlen were iiuleetl the wountleti Algernon, he had been inhumanly borne to die without aidance in a remote antl now totali} uninhabited quarter of the castle. Latly Mary, from her own course ot reading, antl through the information nnparted to hev upon the subject by her competent instructors, knew full well what atrocities the enthusiasm of politics and bigotry could lead even good men
to commit. And although Father Ralph had treated Sir Algernon that very even¬ ing with fawning courtesy in her cham¬ ber, and herself for the last few weeks with strong semblance of amity, — ac¬ cepting from her, with every appearance of gratitude, ornaments for his altars, and dole to a great amount for the distressed monks and nuns whom he individually assisted,—yet she knew she must not rest her faith implicitly upon his fidelity : and her suspicions and terrors gathering strength as she reflected, Mary deter¬ mined to lose no moment in flving to the chamber-door of Weewitte, whose dor- mitòrv was arranged for her guardage «/ CT CT ~ at the termination of the staircase which led to the range of her apartments, to impart to him wdiat she had witnessed, and to semi him with the communication to the seneschal. Although firmly believing that Mary of Aibalanda had nothing to apprehend from the insurgents of the county 7 , yet the lord abbot and the hermit of the valley had conversed seriously wdth her upon the possibility of its proving other.
wise; and given her advice for her comportance, should she find her self- possession unexpectedly called into re¬ quisition : and the latter had presented her with an ingeniously contrived lan¬ tern, which would enable her to move securely through the castle in the night without the danger of observation, should any suspicion be awakened to render such an expedient necessary. Antl now hastily substituting a pair of thick cloth hose fbr her shoes, and lighting her lan¬ tern, she with noiseless steps and sha¬ dowed light stole out of her chamber without awakening Maud, and glided by the door of Mrs. Morton without dis¬ turbing her : for as one was unable to move, and the other under the influence of opium, she deemed it cruel as it was useless to terminate their slumbers ; al¬ though, under existing circumstances, the tones of a friendly human voice would have proved balm to her tortured alarms, and renovation to her trembling spirit.
CHAP. XII. In a few anxious moments the quivering Mary arrived at Weewitte's door; and with the very first gentle knock she cau¬ tiously attempted, the door unclosed by her touch. Alary, startled by this un¬ expected admission, restrained her breath whilst she listened fbr respiration wdthin, or for any portentous noise; almost fear¬ ing the efforts of treason had here com¬ menced, and that the fell agents of faction were perpetrating some fearful deed. But all was silent: and after some unanswered cautious calls to Weewitte, Mary took courage, through the neces* sity of the measure, to enter the chamber ; and to her dismay found it was unte¬ nanted ; yet with F''^e articles of' the foppish jester'» upper garments scattered about, as if he had been called thence in the moment he had commenced un vest¬ ing fbr repose.
Perchance he, too, had been alarmed ; and perchance he was gone to impart the matter to Davenant. But these pos¬ sibilities must not suffice : fbr, in com¬ pliance with the advice of her oracles, she must seek fbr certainties with un¬ faltering promptitude ; and even without the decorum of female accompaniment, act as the representative of her house, and, to save the honour of its loyalty, haste to inform the seneschal of her suspicions. But, alas! the seneschal's dimmer the agonised Mary found also untenanted, and with every appearance of a scuffle having taken place there; in¬ dicated by a fallen chair and lamp, antl the scattering of massy keys upon the rushes of the floor, which were con¬ spicuously discomposed as by the tramp¬ ling of' feet in vehement exertion. What could our poor nocturnal wan¬ derer now do but stanti mute with de¬ spair, and shake with terror. The latter Mary accomplished with facility; but the former with difficulty; fbr her im¬ pulse was to shriek antl call for aid. But
discretion prevailed ; yet, whilst in the agonies of indecision upon what might prove the most promising measure for her attempting, she beheld Father Ralph, with a wax torch in his hand, glide across an intersecting passage of the gallery which branched from the sene¬ schal's chamber. Instantly Mary determined, vvitli feel¬ ings half recreant half heroic, to follow this alarming wanderer. Tiie direction he had taken led to the chapel : by another contiguous pass she could, un¬ observed and unheard, obtain entrance into the roodloft*, where, amid the images, she could make observation, whether his visit to the chapel was for a pious purpo.se, or tt) hold council with fellow conspirators. The fleet Mary, who had ofttimes glidet! in antl out antl behind everv cavitv that a- a-' coniti permit her volatile spirit to pene¬ trate within the castle precincts, was promptly established in her place of am-
bush ; and to the convenience of her observation, the holy father, whom she soon beheld, started out of the direction he was pacing in, to meet another person who had just entered the chapel at an¬ other door; and both, as if through the influence of some merciful impellent, seated themselves for conver.se upon the steps of a shrine beneath the roodloft : through which arrangement much that they said, although utteretl in cautious toneis, reached her attentive ears. This second personage Mary perceived to be Bardolph, the sacristan ; a man whom she knew to be under incalculable obligations to her family. "Holy Father! I betrust me you be not enchafed at my seeming thus to fore- slow my salliance hitherward, " said Bardolph. " My own arrivali ce İs but now," returned the priest. " But why, I would kycl*, are you here withouten Geoffery?" "He counselled me to wend hither¬ ward, to give advisement, that fearing the
VOL. II.
M
provv r ess of our prisoners in the keep might shend* our cheviseance by dare- fully bursting from their enfetters and prisonment ; and that therefore he, our vowfellovv, has tarried to place a sentinel as warder before the door." " Beshrew me !" responded Ralph, ít but such was my behest ; and it is well he bore it in rccordance. The senes¬ chal and master jester arc dreadiess men ; and were they left without guardance, none coukl wot what their prowess might dare for chivement. And T, my vow- fellow, have had mv escape anon — ay, of murderment from such a dareful spi¬ rit. Our young Sir knight, whom by our deft arra ugh 1 1 we made pay ample chiminage í for passing through our forest, had, iu the short durance since his deposit in yon tower, contrived by the cunning of his strength to burst tht 4 enfetterment óf his right hand, and to grope out from his bosom, I wis, a
dag ; and I, unwitting of this vantage, proceeded to his chamber ere whiles, in my eagerness to peruse those de¬ spatches which, from what I overheard him vaunt to Latly Mary, he had in guardancc fbr our foemen in Scarborough Castle: and upon my approachment to him as he lay writhing on the rushes, striving with all his craft and might to rend the toil in which was his encage- mcnt, he yarely brandished his aw Imping dag for my surprisal, and vowed my instant vanquishment in death if I touch¬ ed him or his papers. And so, beshrew me í my good yoke-fellow, but, in con- siderance of the prizem ent my life is at present to the cause we have embarked in, I fled from the onslaught. But, for my contentation, I soonly shall retort his threat ful babblement; when, aided by my valiant pilgrims, I plant fiftv wounds in his detestable body, for the five we have sworn to remember with avengement : and by every saint above our heads here! Master Sacristan, 1 swear but it gars me joyance to wot the power m U
is now mine own, to gleek* at him in his death grimaces, who gleeked at me in impious disrespect, through the uprouse- ment of the mime bufibonerv of that child of folly I have now clutched. And not only is his life at my behest, but his honour too; — for the tale shall survive him of his tarriance hei a-, to mine for his betrusting kind Paramount's rich daughter to affection him ; but ere the last pangful blow shall strike through his gleeking heart, he shall have tidance that vve have promised her hand to Sir Rupert Warburg," 14 But J wist, holy vowfellow, that this sacred league, which through your advisement myself and others have been em moved to join, was purely spiritual, and that no private enchafement had aught of considerance with the excite¬ ment to arms,*' said Bardolph rather dryly, as he shuddered. " Ay, ay, surely, surely, you conject aright : such was my declarement ; and 1 avouch our call to arms is all purely spi-
ritual,** replied this sharp religionist, look¬ ing as if he rather wished his conscientious comrade would only remember things in the moment he wished him to recollect them. " But, man, my vowfellovv is a frail fabric ; and Satan will, with his entreat¬ ancc, inspire the cherishment of private wrongs, and chafe him to resentment, albeit his best virtues may be awork for his immortal glory: and beshrew me! vowrdlovv, but this said foe of frail man may work even you up, not only to re¬ cordation of affronts, but not to blench* from feasting a vengeful spirit in private retribution, in the same blessed moment in which you lend aidance for your coun¬ try's good, and bring forth strong prove¬ ment that you bear the true Christian's spiritual zeal within your heart." *' But if so be any thoughts but those of spiritual guise ciui be proved meet and natural," responded Bardolph, "what marvel, then, .should those of gratitude become cjntentless with our plot, and
Μ Ί
say their nayward to the vengeance vve have in purpose.?" " Curb them, curb them, honest vow- fèllow í — let them find no restfulness in your breast ; for they are only the delu¬ sions of that tinsel purfievved morality which makes a marvellous fine trapping for the lurement of worldly praise Tut, tut, vowfellovv! gratitude, and sic baubles of quaint virtues, must be quailed when these uve wounds upon our sleeve clepe with an avenging voice for retribution. Rather think you of those of ambition's guise; — ay, of how, in the stead of tarriance here as the obscure sacristan in a deserted baronial castle, you wifl be uplifted by my exaltance, which I wis will soonly be accomplished, into the goodlie and richetl cimdiarch of my cathedral — peradventure of York itself." A pause now ensued, in which these vowfellovv s deeply pondered upon the delusive incentives which led the one, and the diabolical purposes which hatl lured the other, to enlist untler the standanl of rebellion : and the dismayed and heart-
wrung Mary feared, that, in the deatl silence which now prevailed, the tumult¬ uous throbbing within her agitated bosom must betray her presence, or that horror and despair would at once transmute her into a marble statue amid the graven images around, without her having hail power to make even one effort to save poor Algernon : but at length the pause was terminateti by the appearance of Gcoffery approaching. " I fear me, honest Geoffery, our bro¬ thers of grace will bethink us long in tarriance to liberate them from their colti quarters," exclaimed Father Ralph, shud¬ dering from the chill vvhitdi he himself hail experienced in his own sojourn, where he was bereft of his usual comforts; or, per¬ chance, through the shivering fit which Algernon had alarmed him into not hav¬ ing yet subsided. " An' I had been weetless of what be¬ longs to Christian kindness," replied Geoffery, " had I not left a supply ul faggots with our vovvlellovvs, sufficit, bv my t roth, for an auto da Jé, an'thi.s were the vj f
holy office, and even you its Vicar-Gene ral, reverend vowfellovv. Yea; I have be- sorted their comforts to their content¬ ation I wis, from the vintry to the pantry, as the cellars and lardery can yold vouch- ment ; so naught of displeasance will wimple their brows, I betrust me, whiles they have wassailage for their playplea¬ sure. But not so vauntful am I in record- ance of' the contentment of' those of our own household — blenching fai tours í In sooth they make a coil at the Lady Mary's destination : taking it into their considerance, that the nuns of St. Agnes have not meet comportance: and withal are creatures to the Warburgs, and not in fit¬ ment for her guardage: and well woting that no declarement of mine in their ex¬ cusation wouhl prove apt for credence, where the safety of Latly Alary was perilled I deftly stole from them as they murmured, anil eluseti the door of theii hall; and by bar antl bolt have affixed my nayward to their movement thence, till, with our band of pilgrims, we can eftsoons make terms. By Saint Ralph, our leader î
methought, we should an' like have had a mutiny; and my rising on the headless shoulders of Cromwell, as you have pre¬ dicted, mv holy vow fellow, woukl prove a bootless augury." O av " Well, Sirs ! " exclaimed Bardolph, in rather a jealous tone, at this augury— " methought, an' the discontentation per¬ taining to the governance by the band of Cromwell was percausc he was of unmeet lowborn lineage Are we perchance to wend our way to power through seas of' blood, to bend at length to anothei liase hind? Is this the purely spiritual league?" " Yea, spiritual in sooth ; for the spirit of all things which leads us on is now- astir for influence," replied Gcoffery, with a grin ; "fbr all will take up that flail m the scuffle that we bethink us will thresh out most corn for our vantage: but time is not restful; so onward, good ye vow-fellows, lest those we have encaged might break their prisonment. Here is the master-key ; so naught now, an' 1 think, m form of* devil o«' angel, can play one m 5
barful trick to disappoint us in our forth¬ right path to fet back our Pilgrims of Grace to possess us of'this castle." Mary, upon learning her projected destination, had been prevented from crying aloud for mercy by the timely re¬ collection that, although mercy might be extended to her, none was likely to accrue to Sir Algernon from her suppli¬ cation, nor for Weewitte nor Davenant : she therefore gave no utterance to this in¬ vocation, nor to any ofthe panting agonies within her bosom ; and chilled with de¬ spair into the semblance of the alabaster figures around her, she, on the motion of Geoifery for proceeding, seemed to become a moving statue, only animated by auto¬ matical influence into the power of follow¬ ing, or as if impelled from the roodloft into their path by some resistless attrac¬ tion invested in them ; for not one mental power seemed in this moment left to guide her, save that of discretion to manage the light of her lantern and the flowing veil which hid its light, so as to secure her from detection should they
look behind them : but soon some sort oí wild project seemed floating in her mind, of the possibility of gliding by the con¬ spirators unobserved, through some pass she knew of, out upon the beach, antl then to wing her way to alarm the chaf- tellany and rescue Algernon. Door after door, in the gently delving passages the three insurgents now had entered, were unlocked and opened by Geoifery to admit himself and confede¬ rates, and left unclosed hy him to facili¬ tate their triumphant return with two hundred Pilgrims of Grace who had been admitted by Geoifery since the close of day into the subterraneous chambers of the castle ; he having contrived to purloin the master-key from the seneschal, whom a few 7 days back he had accompanied over these important places, to make strict examination if all the securities were in good condition. At length they passed the terminating door of this long range of delving pas¬ sages, and which led into a small hall, in the centre of which was a trap-door m ?
which opened upon a descent of stairs that led to a suite of chambers, which had been excavated for the security of the family and their treasure in times of warfare, and communicated with the beach, from whence Geoifery had ushered in this formidable host to take possession of this important castle. The three con¬ spirators passed through the trap-door, descended the steps, and disappeared, leaving the trap yawning open after them : yet Mary followed them not ; but with a heart bounding as if it would break from the slender barrier which encom¬ passed it, and with every faculty new strung for action, she hung over the darkening chasm, until every ray of light from the retreating torches had dis¬ appeared, and the distant sound of the unclosing the next trap-door broke upon her listening ear, and all sound then died into the still silence of death ; when Mary, invoking the boon of increased strength from whence only that which wore the appearance of supernatural could have been granted to her supplì-
cations, deposited her precious lantern in a place of security, and with an agonised effort, which too probably must end in failure, grasped the massy door, and felt empowered to raise it : but in the next instant it fell from her trembling inadequate hands — and, to her joy and amazement, without sufficient noise to alarm evtm herself; yet, in the violence of its fall, fastening down its own hasps so completely over their correspondent grooves, .as to allow her, with little exer¬ tion, to complete its fastening so as to defy the prowess of Gcoffery and his band. With more difficulty, yet with equal success, Lady 7 Mary closed the first and most massive door of the range of pas¬ sages, and drew the master-key from the lock, where Geoflery, in apprehension of losing it in the commotion he ex¬ pected below 7 , or mistaking it for any belonging to the subterraneous cham¬ bers, had stationed it to remain until he returned. Mary's steps now assimilated with the
bounding of her heart ; and almost wildly she rushed onward, locking every door she passed through, in a range through which she had often made transit on her way to and from marine excursions, till at length she found herself safely lodged iu the chapel : and perhaps no act of grateful piety, performed in so short a period, was ever more devoutly aspirated from a heart, than that she uttered here, for the achievement she had been through the mercy of heaven permitted to per¬ form. But this solemn act performed, whither now 7 should she wend her way ? became the query of her agitated thoughts. Her grateful wishes were, for her first attempt in the liberation of prisoners to be exerted for Algernon, to permit a prompt flight to Scarborough, to extricate his menaced honour from that fell plot which had been formed to blast it : — the painful recollection, that through her childish exploit, the vindictive enmity whiclr ex¬ cited this direful vengeance had been awakened, led her to brave all possible
danger to her own safety through this long range of the castle. But, when arrived in the nursery tower, should she not find the key in Algernon's prison- door, how then was she, alone as she was, to liberate poor Algernon ? The master-key which she had secured, she knew, had 4 only jurisdiction over the places of strength wdthin the castle, and was much too massive for the chamber- locks. This brief retrospect of keys awakened Marv's recollection of a bunch of master- a/ keys to the sleeping chambers, which Davenant had placetl in a secret deposit in his smithery, at the period when the late visitors were in the castle ;° for, as a statute had passed to certify tt) posterity, the court attendants ol' that period not having been far advanced in civilisation, by their propensity, like savages, to steal iron, he, fearing the same passion iu the valets and gentlewomen of the nobles ι CT and gentry, had seen reti the ma.ster-keys by this deposit from the clutches of these iron-fanciers ; and this arrange-
ment of foresight to prevent the cham¬ bers being left to »the inconvenience oí no security from locks he mentioned to Lady Mary at the time, with an ex¬ pressive smile, as this secret depository had once been visited by her in the days when warfare raged between her lady¬ ship and the seneschal, when she per¬ formed an exploit fbr teasing her then active and inveterate enemy by filling the tubes and wards of all his choice keys with clay. This juvenile performance had im¬ pressed the method of access to this repository so completely upon Alary's memory, that she experienced neither difficulty nor delay in exploring it once more; when, as she anticipated, she round a bunch of keys methodically labelled with the designation " Nursery chambers : " and this anxious search happily rewarded, slie was hastening to those chambers ; and in defiance of some natural sh initier¬ ings of something like superstitious ap¬ prehension, upon the unopportune re¬ collection of the strange interruption
to ber embarrassing interview with her stepdame, she determined, for the ad¬ vantage of expedition, to steer her rapid way through that lonely range of cham¬ bers. " " But all are lonely and terrific this fear¬ ful night," thought Mary, who for some moments had contemplated procuring the accompaniment of one or two ql the female domestics, whom she concluded had been left unmolested in tlieir dor¬ mitory. But a moment's consideration ted her to relinquish the comfort of a companion; and above all, the propriety oi one in her liberation of Algernon : asince she knew not in whom she might iiGw with safety confide; whilst seeking them must occasion delay, and delay must prove fatal to the extrication of Algernon from the toils ofthe vindictive Ralph. Propelled by the urgency ofthe ca.se. Marv rushed onward with fear dud trem¬ bling towards the scene of her formei alarm ; when, upon Midden ly turning an
angle in her route, she heard the sound of heavy footsteps ; and looking onvvartl with the eager gaze of apprehension, she beheld a man, bearing a lamp in his hauti, standing before her.
CHAP. XIII. ΛΙαιιυ, transfixed by terror, seemed at once to lose even the faculty of shriek¬ ing ; buí in a moment she heard the gentle voice of Father Adrian, and her heart hailed ìùm. —And why she luid forborne to seek him was, because she had bearti that it was almost impossible to awake him from slumber ; and that, should she succeed in such a difficult achievement, he was so slow in all his movements, that he couhl not be attired ? time to be of'service,—-but oh, joyful ! here he was, awake and ready vested. Father Adrian, devoted ft) literature, not unfrciiuentlv consumed the midnight oil to illumine the lamp of reason for hours after the other inhabitants of the castle had sought repose. Some interest¬ ing point had detained him from his pillow long this night; antl as he usually
did, ere he disrobed, he looked out of a window, to mark the promise of the weather for the morrow, when he per¬ ceived a light in the nursery tower, as if borne by some one ascending the stair¬ case. For some time this circumstance had made no impression upon Father Adrian, for calmly he retirei! from the window to perform his devotions, which was no rapid measure with him : and this im¬ perative duty ended, he commenced his arrangement of the embers on his hearth for the night ; when, in taking hold ofthe fire-fòrk fbr this purpose, some concate¬ nation in itleas, called the disturbetl state of the country sudtlenly to his recollec¬ tion, and with it a suspicion of some spy or conspirator having found an asylum in Aibalanda Castle, who was then roving for no good intent ; and not very tranquil after this suggestion, he at length tie- scended from his dormitory to inform the seneschal of what he had observed and apprehended. Marv in a few faltering words im-
parted to her amazed auditor the perilous state of the castle, and implored him to accompany her for the rescue of Fitz- rivers. — " For then," continued Mary, anxious not to betray any superior interest for Algernon to what she felt for her old attached adherents, " with Sir Al¬ gernon for an auxiliary, holy sire, we may dare approachment to the keep, albeit it has the guardage of an armed warder." The dismay of Father Adrian could only be equalled by his astonishment at the heroic part which his youthful pupil had been inspired with courage to ac¬ complish in a moment of such peril. And this imminent peril thus counter¬ acted by her sel f possession he would have almost rejoiced in, since it placetl the neglected Mary in a situation to arouse the approbation of her father ; and would have even pardoned the treachery of Ralph, since it had led to Lady Mary's brilliant achievement; could he have forgiven the sovereign contempt with which his years were thus
unquestionably held in, by leaving him unmolested, like the females in the castle, as a being whose resistance must prove too feeble to be dreaded. Maiy's courage having now acquired strength from the consolation of such an unobjectionable auxiliary, her impatience grew with it tt> reach the snot of their anxious destination : and in defiance of every respectful effort she made to as¬ similate her pace with that of her ve¬ nerable companion, she yet reached the nursery tower before him, and hatl as¬ certained that the prison of Algernon was the very chamber where Edward, Algernon, and herself! had passed so many hours in amity together ; for now she heard from within, sounds of sighs and restless movement, which announced the chamber being once more inhabited, and by a sad occupant. The moment Father Adrian drew near, Mary ventured to sound her voice through the keyhole, to prevent a too sudden surprise of succour ; and although paralysed with agitation, she audibly ar-
ticulated, " Algernon ! my own brother Algernon ! feel no alarms ; your grateful sister is here with aidance." " Heavenly tones ! whom do I hear, m sooth ?" exclaimed Algernon, in dire¬ ful panic ior the rash .Mary. "Oh! make retreatment, if' there is any retreat of safety for my sweet sister. Oh ! go, — fly hence from those fell dangers which thus have bereaved me of the power of shielding you ! " " No danger perils you or your sistei uow, poor Algernon," said Mary, as she unclosed the prison of Fitzrivers, whom she and her reverend companion found in total darkness, and in so strange a plight, that had it not been for tlie guaranty his voice presented, they would have fled from him as from some monster there placed in security; so ingenious had beeu the mode by which Father Ralph hatl contrived to have this object of his long cherished enmity entoiled ; and from whom formidable resistance would have been otherwise expected. And this devise had sprung from the ingen u it}
ofthe nuns of St. Mildred's, who had long acquired much profit by nets they had invented and manufactured for the poachers far and near ; who at length, wishing for some similar invention with which to catch those wdio had the te¬ merity to disturb them in their illicit sport, the accommodating nuns devised nets for entoilhig men and their horses, as well as hares and partridges; and with such good effect, that Father Ralph, availing himself of the circumstance, had purchased some of these nets for the purpose of entoilhig the seneschal, Wee¬ witte, and some of the doughty inhab¬ itants of Aibalanda, whose loyalty he could not vanquish: and thus provided, he determined the moment of Algernon's arrival to visit Lady Mary, by the means of a net to entrap the valiant young knight, and glut his long cherished venge¬ ance. But in what manner the net was formed, or how the seizure of captives was accomplished, our legislature might not thank us for describing ; we therefore simply narrate that Algernon's caption
was effected in a convenient path, through which the treacherous Ralph had par¬ ticularly advised the unsuspecting Al¬ gernon to travel as the most direct route to Scarborough. And this cowardly seizure achieved, poor Algernon and his spirited steed, alike entoiled beyond the power of resistance or voluntary motion, were led and escorted by five horsemen of the Pilgrims of Grace to Aibalanda, and Algernon deposited in the lonely chamber arranged by Ralph for his pri¬ son ; but where he had not long been permitted to remain unvisited by his vvily r foe, wdio found him no longer un¬ resisting; for, almost maddened by dis¬ may in apprehension of-his despatches falling into the hands of the insurgents,— and that through his own indiscretion in visiting Aibalanda,—and by the proba¬ bility thus indicated of that castle having been betray T ed, and the lovely inestimable Mary yielded up to meet the appalling fate of a heretic, he, almost with the prowess of an infuriated maniac, wrench¬ ed the meshes of his cage wherever he vol. II. N
could conveniently attack them : but having no light to guide his purpose, he soon found, after securing the powei of his right hand over a dagger he- was armed with, that he was only in¬ creasing the embarrassments of his toil by wild exertions to break from it ; and determined to endure his trammels with¬ out further molestation, until the transit of the waning moon should send her beams through the window oi his prison, and yield him light to battle with more effective skill. He was, therefore, in con¬ sequence of these violent exertions, found in a most pitiable state of embarrassment between ?? meshes of the net, the but¬ tons and aigulets of his vestments, and the point and hilt of his sword. Father Adrian, perceiving the nature of this barrier to freedom,, took out his pocket knife and commenced the task of the poor knight's liberation ; but with not half the rapidity wdth wdiich the impatience of Algernon and Mary believed he might have executed it : but the former soon perceiving that, al though the progress
was slow, it was sure, endeavoured for some degree of patience, until at length, being enabled to use his own dagger, be yielded his more rapid aid with it to his extrication ; yet still imploring, as be worked, Mary not to .stay, if danger in any form could there menade her safety. "MasterÆsop told not of darker await¬ ing the poor mouse, whom gratitude led to attempt the liberation of the entoiled lion," said Mary at length, with a faint effort at a smile, as she aided in disen¬ tangling him from the dissevered meshes; " and we may hope to work 'm security now in Aibalanda, as the trap has been ordained to close upon those who set toils for the poor mouse as dern as for the lion." " In very sooth, I avouch it so," said Father Adrian ; " Providence vanfaged Lady Mary with the valiance to engrasp the failour conspirators in their own breme toils, through her seir-possessiou and ------" " My reverend sire l' exclaimed the blushing Mary, shrinking from praise which her own conviction told her was
not altogether her meed ; " I displayed nothing for approof in what has beeu permitted for my chicvance: I have been simply the machine em moved by the in- fluence of the All-merciful, who granted me meet instinct íbr apt obedience From the moment I enterprised following the conspirators, to that in which they wert encaged, I can scarcely 7 pronounce my¬ self a thinking being. Had it been other- wise, influenced by the craven apprehen¬ sions of my sex, I should, I wot, have made no tarriance, hut have fled to awake alarm through the castle ; which would then eftsoon have been in the hands of the treacherous Balph and his pitiless band." Mary now, in a few words of simple truth, gave to the astonished Algernon the leading facts which had placed his life and fame as a public missionary in jeopardy ; and those also, which had led to his li¬ beration: and the moment she ceased her modestly delivered tale of great ex¬ ploit-, Algernon, being by this time per feet ly emancipated, flung himself upon bis knees before her, and, grasping both
nev trembling hands, pressed them de¬ voutly to his lips; pronouncing her, in the most affecting tone, the preserver of his public fame, as well as of his life. " Algernon, arise, 1 prithee ; and say not more, I make entreatancc, to make me wee])," said Mary, combating with her tears, which in such a moment were readily taught to flow : " we must lay by in restfulness for peaceful times our indi¬ vidual feelings, and now exert our valiance for the further deliverance ofthe preserver of" my sire's helpless babes from those despiteous toils which it was tbe chevi¬ sance of my 7 childish folly to occasion. We must hasten to the keep, and en¬ deavour to liberate the seneschal and Weewitte, by whom your salliance for Scarborough may once more be effected, and under happier auspices, I betrust me; for Davenant wots how by signal fires to alarm the chatellany, antl draw around you incontinently a force to dispel the rebel bands in ambush, and attract hithei- vvard meet succour to rescue my father's loyal honour from the sulliage of bearing N 3
the flag of rebellion upon the towers of his castle/* Algernon arose from his knees in obe¬ dience, but not without pressing with ardent gratitude and admiration the trembling hand he held to his lips — to his heart; and the agitated Mary now took up her lamp, in preparation for this anxious enterprise, saying— " You must permit my preceding you both some paces, whilst you wend after me, prepared for the defensive. None of the domestics or adherents, I have per¬ suasion, however drawn into conspiracy, will peril me, so long as they believe I have not the vantage of protection from a loyalist/' Father Adrian and our young knight, deeming Mary's arrangement judicious, made a prompt division oi' the arms in Algernon's possession, and commenced their march in the order regulated fbr them by their young and trembling gene¬ ral ; the good old priest proud of a moment in which arms once more were confided to his hands, under a belief that
those withered hands had not been too much enfeebled by old age to use them in that militant spirit and dexterity which in early life he had learned, whilst mingling the profession of a priest and a soldier. Sir Algernon moved thought¬ fully after Latly iMary, pondering upon Sir Leoline's wondering what his fair cousin of Aibalanda might yet expand into: his heart full of animated gratitude ; his reason, of doubt upon how the adven¬ tures of this night might terminate; antl his eyes, of admiration ofthe airy elegance of the form which glided gracefully on before him, trembling in woman's fears, yet impelled on with heroic spirit antl conviction of necessity 7 —scarcely allowing time, in the speed of her anxiety, for the difficult breathing of her ancient tutor to assimilate his march with comfort At length the rapiti Mary 7 , about to enter the area before the keep, motioned for her followers to remain in shade, and emitting all the light her lantern afforded, presented herself before the astonishetl sentinel ; who, starting back some paces.
rested his arms to her wdth profound respect, yet looked as if he had much rather have beheld a ponk or nighthag there than Mary of Aibalanda. "Robin Haitiani! !" she exclaimed with real surprise, but assumed daunt- lessness, " do 1 gar you affrightment ? Methought you were placetl here by Master Geoifery, for the valiance ot astcrting mc, whom you were stationed in this castle to protect. Was it thus your father would have betrayed his trust, Robin?" " Oh, lady!" he exclaimed, thrusting his musket behind him to conceal it from her view, and with fhe hand not thus employed spread over his agitated coun¬ tenance " If that be the weapon with which your hnal ancestor Cenulph gave aid¬ ance in the glory which laurelled his prince at Cressy, Robin, 1 marvel not you hide it in the moment of its disgrace- ment ; antl I should wis the medal too, which was the bequeathmeut of your loyal hither to you, as the prized trophy
or' your progenitor's bright glory, should >eck concealment. The honourable badge of tbe Black Prince's approof is not the meet bravery for a traitor's bosom." Robin, with a pang of horror vibrating dirough his agitated frame, dashed his »nusket to the ground, as he exclaimed, with 'agony quivering through his tones— i Oh, lady! none should have belowted me with the name of traitor, had not tlie pious Father Ralph made clear tome the certainty my father's soul could ne\et find restfulncass, whiles those wounds, which are borne in badgement by the ~ a' Pilgrims of Grace, remain withouten the .engcment ior which my aidmeut is re¬ quired." %i And couid Father Ralph guile vou nito the belief that the Mightv One could /cquire the aidance of fallen man for lus u engcment ;—and that, iu degraderne nt io his holy cause, by betrayal of trust, by pitiless murder, and rebellion ?—Apilgrim- ige of grace ! To his face, Robin, I u ould tell the misleading Father Ralph, that the restfulness of your loyal father's x J
soul is much more menaced by the in¬ gratitude of his son to the house of St Oswald." Robin fell at Lady Mary's feet, and in a burst of penitential agitation ex¬ claimed, " Oh, lady ! never more shall you find in me cause for upbraidment. Forgive ! betrust me ! lady, lady ! " " I do forgive you, Robin," responded Mary kindly, yet with impressive dignity. " Resume your hand-gun, and use it as your brave ancestor Cenulph used his glave —in the cause of your prince ; and, should she require it, in defence of the only St* Os\vald left you to enguard." Robin started to his feet, and firmly grasped his musket in his hand ; yet with a heart too full of shame and renewed gratitude to give feeling utterance : when Mary, confiding in the truth of that fide¬ lity, which she believed now restored to the standard of loyalty, stepped up to the wicket of the keep, which she unlocked with one of the keys which she had so providentially obtained ; and with the prompt aid of the penitent Robins the
other barriers to entrance being removed, she summoned her two auxiliaries to Jibe- rate the astonished prisoners from the same sort of trammel which had entoiled Sir Algernon, whilst she remained as a warder at the door to give notice of the possible approach of any person. The prisoners here found w T ere [the se¬ neschal, the jester, Zarini, and two sturdy domestics over whose conscience Father Ralph had long since ceased to hold ju¬ risdiction ; ail of whom had been taken at their bedward hour by surprise in their dormitory, and vanquished by unexpected seizure in the toils of treachery. Whilst the extrication of these pri¬ soners was effecting, from their embarrass¬ ing trammels, they were briefly informed of the state of things ?? the castle ; and where the discoveries of Lady Mary had not penetrated, the penitent Robin filled up with his disclosures : and by his state· ment it appeared, that about half the retainers and domestics had remained undisturbed in their adherence to the king and their "paramount lord, because n 6
Father Ralph, suspecting their apostasy in religion, had feared to tamper with their politica! fidelity ; and that they were all, as far as he knew, safe in their beds, unsuspicious of the mischief abroad, antl locked up in their chambers, and wdth the courts in'which their chambers were situated barred up, to prevent the possi¬ bility of their effecting any r discovery or consequent alarm : whilst those who had been won tojóin the pilgrimage were, in consequence of their discontent at the proposed destination of Lady r Mary 7 , locked into their assembling hall, where.Geof- fery: hoped soon to make them recant their murmurs, when the castle should be de¬ livered up to a formidable host; many individuals of which had been admitted at the portal, as starving friars, to obtain re¬ lief from Lady- Mary's dole, and then concealed hy Father Ralph and * the .sacristan in and about the chapel, which being under their immediate juris¬ diction, this deposit of men and arms escaped the seneschal's detection. That a considerable number more of the insur-
gents had been admitted, since the close of day, through the subterraneous passes from the beach ; and that it w T as further arranged for a numerous body to march boldly into the castle to their confederates on the morrow, and there to form an im¬ portant garrison. Tlie surprise of the liberators ot' the prisoners in the keep was infinite, on per¬ ceiving the comparative fortitude with which these captives had seemed to en¬ dure their bonds. The fact was, they had believed their entoilaient had been a rough jest of Geoffery's, in consequence of their having declared it utterly impossible for the much talked of nets, with which some poachers had recently been entrapping their foes in the neighbourhood, to en¬ snare any but* the powerless or craven ; and that Geoifery had offered to wager with them upon the subject. When, therefore, the genuine cause of their im¬ prisonment became known to them, and by whose means their perilous destiny had been arrested, composure was no longer an inhabitant of their bosoms ; for
in one moment every feeling which such treachery 7 , and such an escape from it, could awaken, became in active motion— amongst which gratitude to heaven and Lady Mary was most conspicuous: and the sympathy and grief these rough men expressed for the dire terrors their fair deliverer had encountered, and the perils she had braved, told at once, and forcibly, how faithfully these veteran adherents were attached ίο the insulated plant which had sprung up and blossomed be¬ fore their eyes.
CHAP. XIV. When these liberated prisoners issued from the keep, the agitated Mary put a periotl to their affecting acknowledg¬ ments, by reminding them that traitors were still in the castle; and imploring them to make speed for the departure ot Sir Algernon, ami for a safe escort to accompany him, that he might have passed their treacherous neighbourhood ere any possible alarm couhl hi* given tt» the surrounding insurgents of the check their progress had received within the castle The conflict within the bosom of Fitz* rivers at this moment was agonising ; ior duty to his country, ami duty to gra- titude, were at pitiable warfare 'L* leave the generous heroic Mary to hei fate, ere he couhl asceitam what that í ilte had in promise, was torture to e\er\ feeling of his heart, and to the chivalric
- influence of gallantry which still pre¬ vailed : and he looked so affectingly the distracting conflict which oppressed him, that Mary, full of sympathy, and in kind anxiety to calm every fear for her, ex¬ claimed, " I require no guardage but these faithful adherents ; fbr the moment we can conceive you have passed the boundary of danger, and that our mak¬ ing alarm visible can cause no vcnge¬ ment upon you, Davenant will illu¬ mine'our crepets, and eftsoons vve shall have effectual aidance from the chatellany for our availment. Therefore, make speed withal for Scarborough. The state's concerns are of importance ; and no individual feeling, —no; not even the protection of a sister, Algernon, — must make its wareless interference with the provement of your fidelity to your coun¬ try's cause. Good my friends Weewitte, Jasper, and James, do my bidding for the departure of Sir Algernon, I prithee, without further tarriance." " Alack ! " said Robin, in tones of deeply felt mortification, " our lady fears
to betrust me as an escort for Sir knight; yet will I make proof of the fidelity of her dishonoured servant, by monishing Sir knight of the way by 7 which he may wend in safety even through the passes of the enemy 7 , antl yold to his view such watchwords as may become his speed and safety." Algernon's steed was found fully capa¬ risoned ; and horses promptly made ready for James and Jasper. Algernon felt that his immediate departure was an imperative duty ; and also felt that the pangs inflicted by this duty r were sev ere. Mary 7 , with kind and cheering words and smiles, bade him adieu, whilst her bosom vibrated with ten thousand apprehensions for his safety 7 : but Algernon could not command one smile whilst he uttered farewell ; nor one word of the feelings which oppressed him could he give ut¬ terance to, ere he took wing for Scar¬ borough. But he bore in his bosom a glow of animated gratitude to, and ad¬ miration of, Latly 7 Mary 7 , never likely to be extinguished ; and as he put the met-
tie of his foaming steed to full proof, his truant thoughts, often straying from ex¬ isting dangers, reverted to the singular coincidence in his ruthless destiny, of having been doomed to quit the two iemales whom, of all the world, he most devoutly regarded, in the moment when they seemed most to require his presence and protection. And in the retrospection of this coin¬ cidence, love became jealous of the superior claims which memory presented fbr the admiration of judgment to bestow upon Lady Mary. Reflection, from the very first moment, had not allowed Al¬ gernon to dwell with much complacency upon his last scene with Lady Warburg : for although she had intimated to him that the benevolence of her nature had placed her in the mortifying situation in which he discovered her, yet no rays of this brilliant virtue could daze his eyes from the discovery that her every look and movement betrayed her own consciousness of degradation'—nay, of merited degradation ; and an internal
SIR ETHELBERT. 283 struggle with something approaching to terror, which no pecuniaryembarrassment could have awakened in her bosom. Now, on tlie other hand, there was no look, no tone, no movement, and, above all, no action of this eventful moment in Mary of Aibalanda, upon which retrospection must not ever dwell with delight and admir¬ ation. C4 We will not increase the number of our pages, by a detail of Sir Algernon's rapid flight from Aibalanda; nor in de¬ scribing the precise mode by wdiich Da- venant's signals drew 7 a sufficient force into and around the castle, both of Sir Ethelbert's adherents and of the loyal inhabitants of the chatellany, to .set the insurgents at defiance, to dislodge the encaged foe from their ambuscade, and to deliver the leaders of this base attempt into the strong guardance of military power. It will suffice to state, that Al¬ gernon arrived at his place of destination in good time, for the efficacy ofthe de¬ spatches he conveyed ; and that, through the information which he communicated
relative to the conspiracy for taking pos¬ session of Aibalanda Castle, Sir Ralph Evers sent thither a strong detachment of experienced soldiers to succour antl defend it : but, to the deep mortification of Algernon, he was not permitted to accompany them ; as he found awaiting him, at Scarborough, an order tojóin the Duke of' Norfolk without delay at Don- caster. Algernon was not, however, deprived by this unwelcome order of a glorious a' ?? opportunity of evincing his knight erran¬ try, or his gratitude to his dear fasci¬ nating sister Mary ; fbr these experienced troops found the Castle of \ihalanda in perfect security, well guarded, antl wholly devoid of apprehension relative to further treachery; although the gratitude ol Lady Mary for that anxiety which so many of the revolters had evinced for bei fate, had induced her to permit their remaining in their former situation, until the pleasure of her father should be known upon the subject : and time was not allowed to put the policy of this
dement measure to the test ; since the providential rain which so supcrstitiously operated upon the insurgents, and led to the dispersion of the formidable rebel host, and to a general amnesty, ter¬ minateti their power of attempting fur¬ ther mischiefs in the wily path of con¬ spiracy : for although, according lo Lortl Herbert % "the clergy ofthe north in general, wholly opposing the king's re¬ formation, kept tbe rebellion still on foot, though outwardly smothered for awhile ; " yet, as the king commanded the Duke of Norfolk to remain there, and, together with the Earl of Shrewsbury, to compose all things, the insurgents around Alba- landa felt too much awed to venture blither mischief A short time prior to the breaking out ot these disturbances, Lortl St. Oswald. harassed almost beyond the further en¬ durance of his patience by the disagree¬ ables attendant upon that species of tht diplomacy which had fallen to his lot, and pining tt> behold his darling bov, < p. LSI.
ventured to address the king his master, praying for permission to return to Eng« land, to regulate his domestic concerns and to benefit his declining health. And perhaps no plea for such per¬ mission was ever impelled by more serious necessity: for his domestic con¬ cerns were rapidly deranging through the extravagance of his spouse and her fair daughter; and his health impairing — if not from the effect of foreign climes, at least through foreign affairs — in the perpetual anxiety his mind endured upon those state matters in which he was concerned, rendered intricate and vex¬ atious through the fluctuating friend¬ ships of the faithless potentates wdth whom England was then fated to con¬ sort ; and to which was added, the alarm and hazard which he individually en- d ured upon the subject of his own adop¬ tion of the reformers' creed. And be¬ side all this, the ingenuousness of his mind felt, if not mortified, at least noi satisfied, with the post in the diplomacy eventually assigned to him — not being
that, as in the commencement of his political career, of a regular ambassador : for the king had arranged for him some¬ times to act as a competent adviser for those who bore the responsibility of those distinguished posts ; and sometimes to perform the part of a secret observer, İn whose honour and upon whose vera¬ city His Majesty could place implicit confidence, to report to him selfi or to his confidential minister, every symptom of inconstancy in the faith of Henry's allies, as they arose to his lordship's wary conviction. Antl from this situation, so ungenial to his noble nature, he had made many unsuccessful efforts to ex¬ tricate himself: fbr where he was un¬ suspected of being this wary observer. he almost feared he must pronounce himself a spy ; and if suspected, he couhl not but apprehend the retaliation of some dangerous observer, however strictly honour and veracity guided his reports of others, or caution, the performance of his religious duties. And from the realising his apprehen-
sion of being thus led to the stake for heresy, he had probably been protected by his perpetual changes of residence, occasioned by the versatility of' measures in those with whom Henryformed leagues, or the diversity of places where treatieaS were held, and where it was his sove¬ reign's pleasure that his lordship should be present. In reply to Lord St. Oswald's request fbr permission to return home, was a gracious promise of compliance, as soon as a new mission should be performed by liis lordship in the Low 7 Countries. At length established in the vicinity of England, and predicting that he should he detained there for some months, his lordship determined to .solace his parental feelings with the presence of" his idol boy, and accordingly summoned Father Hu¬ bert and Lord de Mandeville tojóin him. As novelty possessed all the fascina¬ tions for Lord de Mandeville which youth can find in its varying forms, and as he was delighted at an unexpected summons to a foreign country, his lord-
ship devised no impediments to Father Hubert's rapid route to make the adoring parent happy by the presence of his child, whose improvement in all points he fondly pronounced surpassing his most sanguine expectations; and fbr some weeks after this re-meeting of father and son, the former found no alloy to his parental rapture. In Lord St. Oswald's adoration of his son, he had lost all systematic consistency, and at one moment held the reins of govern¬ ment too tensely, and at another held them not at all ; so that the poor spoiled y r outh became at times altogether unmanage¬ able—when neither father nor preceptor could conquer his contumacy. A letter received by Lord de Mandeville from Lady W r arburg, announcing that her long protracted tournament vyas to take place the moment his lordship and Sir Algernon could come to grace it, led Lord de Mandeville to request his father's assent for his imthediately repairing to Vespasian Tower. To the utter dismay of Lord de Man- vol. ?. ?
deville, his father's reply was a déterminée" negative. The spoiled youth murmured indignantly ; and Lord St. Oswald, pro voked at such discourteous conduct, spok. his determination to be obeyed in term a/ too decisive for the pride and self-will oi his son to brook tamely 7 . The young lord's reply was unbecoming: and hb father, under the irritation ofthe moment, injudiciously ordained fbr him confine- ment to his own chambers, where nom were to approach him, save with food , ani this to find continuance until h< should recover recollection of the dut} which he owed his parent. Two nights elapsed without concessioi. from the contumacious delinquent; and Lord St.Oswald was so miserable througl this disunion with his darling, that lib judgment and his affection were at higl warf lue, arguing upon the point of hov concession to his transgressing chihl could emanate from him without degradatio* to parental dignity, when A'Parry ap peared, with an aspect of consternation to announce that Lord de Mandevİlb
was not in his chambers, nor had evi¬ dently been in his bed during the night; and that the chief of his baggage had also disappeared. The dismay and grief of the idolising parent almost menacj^cljii&existence ; and the sympathising "Father Hubert and A'Parry adopted eveiy possible measure to obtain intelligence of' the rash fugitive, and sent off an express for Vespasian Tower direct, where they doubted not he would be ultimately found. But he had not reached Vespasian Tower, nor could the family there yield any intelligence of him ; and the only effect the express thither accomplished, was to contine Lady St. Oswald to her bed some days, and her daughter some hours, as they stateti, through the agony of their aggrievetl r ee lings. At length, after every effort to trace 'he fugitive proving ineffectual, A'Parry iccidentally learned, that an English trading vessel from the coast oí York had * bangt tl its moorings, without any ap¬ parent cause, from the harbour to an ? 2
obscure spot upon the shore, some dis» tance from the town, the evening prior to the flight of Lord tie Mandeville, and had disappeared altogether in the night of liis lordship's abscondence. This intelligence filled the sanguine enquirers with hope, that Lord de Mandeville had embarked in it for Aibalanda ; antl that thiough the influence his sister had acquired over hie lordship's mind, and from the right bias of her own, she would lead him back into the path of filial duty, But here, too, every expectation proved fallacious ; Lord de Mandeville was not at Aibalanda. No trace of him, nor of the ship in question, could be discovered. Neither search nor research, inimen.se rewards offered, nor alarming threats de¬ nounced, proved of any avail ; no intel¬ ligence could be obtained, and his father w T as overwhelmed in despair. The sad tidings of this alarming disap¬ pearance had been communicated by- Father Hubert to the lord abbot of St. Stephen's, who imparted it to Sir Ethel¬ bert ; who having, as he truly informed
the abbess of St. Mildred's, legions of adherents planted around him, was no unimportant auxiliary : and the missing individual being a child of Adela, and the beloved brother of Mary, rendered him a treasure to be sought for far and wide, with zeal and activity, by all over whom Sir Ethelbert held control. Wbilst this anxious and fruitless re¬ search was going forward along the York¬ shire coast, and the contiguous counties, the attached friends of Mary, who sur¬ rounded her, determined not to wring her affectionate heart unneceSaSarily ; and, therefore, unless the sad conviction came of De Mandeville being lost for ever, not to breathe even a suspicion of the pos¬ sible calamity to the susceptible Latly Mary. Shortly, all enquiry around Aibalanda proving unavailing, Sir Ethelbert, al¬ though it inflicted every torture of' fear and anxiety to leave the idol of his earthly care unprotected by his presence, took wing for the metropolis ; there to seek after Sir Rupert Waiburg, upon
whom his suspicion relative ta the dis¬ appearance of Dc Mandeville' 1 fearfully rested ; and to consult with and obtain aid from Cromwell upon the measures which it might be found expedient to adopt relative to the discovery of the fugitive : but ere he departed from St. Stephen's, he gave the most impressive cautions and solemn injunctions to those whom he could influence, relative to the guardancc of Lady Mary. In a few weeks after the departuie of Sir Ethelbert, and several since the mys¬ terious disappearance of De Mandeville, Lady Mary, who, since the dire alarm which the Pilgrims of Ci race occasioned her, had never been permitted by her anxious friends to venture beyond t he- castle gates, to her extreme surprise, was invited by the seneschal upon an aquatic excursion to take place upon the mor¬ row 7 . Mary responded, that her joya nee af such pleasure would be unbounded, and her acquiescence prompt and grateful, only the apprehensions her kind and
anxious friends had recently entertained for her had made her a very craven. " But the recreant from whom sprang our larum s is, for our contentation, now in fast prisonment for hap of debt; and without hazardry, I ween, lady, we may aventure," said Davenant. " It is meet for you to vvot, Lady Mary, that Vere, our franklin, who, from being somedeal misorderly, has waxed now in ?? port¬ ance steady and sober-minded as may be wished, received intimation whilere, that a family of our cottiers, uproused to >uch a dread by the noyance of fays or goblins forbye their habitance, have over- skipped the chatellany, even without pay¬ ment of ehiefrie.* And this wild tale, if told of, the franklin feareth him, might, in its babblement, uprouse a contagion for the like desertion, to the much hurt of our lord's treasury ; and that there¬ upon it bchooveth him to investigate the marvel of the matter : and as it seemeth Vere that he can in no wise deftly make
? f.
procedure without my aidance, and Τ having solemnly sworn to my—to, to my¬ self; not to lose sight of the Lady Mary during—during these times of larum, the franklin promptly bestirred the project of our repair thitherward by sea for your commodiousncss, should it meet your apt approof. And it .seemeth me it would be gladsome for you, who have had of late naught but dreariment : for whilst Vere and myself make our view of the matter of the goblins, you, lady, Mrs. Morton, and vour damsel Maud, will have fbr gazenicnt much beauties—asGreyClough farm has not a little to boast of nature's ornature; and furthermore, for the avoid¬ ance of observers, if it so pleasures you, lady, we can make our little voyage garbed as pilgrims." None can feel surprise that Lady Mary, to whom such pleasing excursions were indeed rare, should with rapture accede to this project. The party, therefore, set out on the morrow at high water ; Mary out of her wits with joy at this project of délices, in a tlay passed with her go-
verness and her old attendants, exploring nature's beauties. The assumption of a disguise, too, added considerably to the charms of her youthful delight : and she enveloped her slight form in a coarse stuff habit, and placed her finely moulded head in the ambush of a slouched hat, with its ornamental scollop shell, with as much ecstaaSy as Rhona ever adorned herself in costly trappings for universal conquest; but Mary's feelings were those of joyful innocence, which Lady War¬ burg could not always boast. The morn was cloudless; the tranquil ocean expanded his liquid brilliancy as an emerald plane ; and whilst the glorious sun quivered his dazzling resplendence upon the translucent element, the boat's prow, as it flitted through its undulating path of sparkling grandeur, opened a page of moral instruction from nature's vo¬ lumes which seemed to say, Even such attractions can vice beam upon her sur¬ face; aud such may be found tiie un¬ fathomable gulf of tearful perdition that lurks beneath her glittering allurements. ? 5
Our party at length reached and en¬ tered upon the indraught over which Grey Clougli farm hung. The limpid stream over which their majestic boat glided, presented to each downcast glance rocks and woods, as romantically beautiful and diversifiée! in form and co¬ louring as those they beheld ia reverse exalted above thera ; and, their debarking effected, the scenic beauties which awaited their surprised admiration far surpassed all that had been expected by Mary, and those who, like her, had never before visited this enchanting spot; whilst the deserted farm itself they found evincing, neither within nor without, any vestige of those sprites, to whose exploits, the scar¬ ing the late inhabitants from the premise- were attributed. Lad, Marv, who had been taught by her enlightened preceptors to yield no credence to those superstitions which yet found be¬ lief,— and even among those of superioi intellect, since Lord Surrey himself hatl not escaped their influo ice,—wondered how any beings could permit fancy, oi
follv, to chase them from such a haven oí nature's enchantments : and whilst wan¬ dering oyer this beautiful spot in every di¬ rection, a pinnacle of rock, surrounding a copse upon the opposite embankment of the indraught, attracted her attention ; and the franklin's colouring of the landscape which he knew it commanded awakened such a wish in the young enthusiast to explore this imposing elevation, that Da¬ venant, now ever happy to oblige her, agreed to cross the stream for her gratifi¬ cation, although the opposite shore did uot appertain to the St. Oswald domain, but to a convent of Black Canons, who held this part of their lands in vassalage to the barony of Warburg.
? «»
CHAP. XV. İVIary found this pinnacle of attraction almost surpassing the expectations she had formed ; for it boldly curved over the sea, which flowed beneath its eastern boundary, whilst on its western it over¬ hung a fertile valley, embellished by picturesque cliffs and coppices. But that which yielded Mary the most delight w 7 as, the discovery of its containing a beautiful rustic structure, which, upou entering, they perceived to be a banquet¬ ing- hou.se : and to whom belonging they were not long doomed to conjecture ; for their entrance disturbed a noble looking man, who had apparently been enjoying profound repose, seated on a bench with the ie.sthe board fbr his pillow. This man's garb was that of a fisherman, but his air and comportance seemed to identify him as belonging to a superior station.
With infinite courtesy he forgave this disturbance of his slumbers ; and to the queries of Airs. Morton, replied, that the building had been originally a hermitage, but upon being disused as such, the holy canons had kindly converted it into a hall of banquet tooblige their neighbours, who often made repair thitherward in parties for recreation : that he, an humble fisher¬ man ofthe coast, had the guardance ofthe premises, and the household stuff con¬ tained therein ; and that his spouse cooked for, and waited upon, those who came thitherward for pleasance. The evident damp of Grey Clough farm, pointed out hy the franklin, had alarmét! the elders of the party at the hazard of faking their refreshment there; it therefore now struck Vere as an advis¬ able measure, to take their mess iu this hall, where all was in goodly seeming. This project meeting general approba¬ tion, and the portly fisherman courteously offering to catch some delicate fish to aid their banquet, he went his way for this obliging purpose, and to summon his
spouse to commence her services; and in obedience to this summons the ex¬ pected dame soon appeared. This woman, though dressed in the coarse attire becoming her station, wa.s neatness personified ; and notwithstand¬ ing her garb w r as the costume of' a cottier, it sat upon her with an air which might have aptly accorded with superior habili¬ ments. Her manner was not courteous like her husbaud's, antl seemed to say that waiting upon others was not what she was born to. She appeared to b· 1 much younger than her spouse, and had features which proclaimed she hatl once been beautiful ; but now hollow cheeks and bloodless skin, stretched over ν isihie veins aud muscles, no longer allowed hei to class with those upon whom the pleasetl eye couhl delight to gaze Yet Lady Man seemed fascinated, for she could not but look upon this woman whenever sin found opportunity : for Alary, as hei early imitative faculty testified, was b} nature an acute observer ; and this woman who wore on the surface so much of stern
repellen ??, Mary found interesting to her compassion, as Mary read in her wan, countenance despair and misery, and a breaking heart. The repast was arranged for a later hour than was at first intended, in conse¬ quence of time being necessary to bring the provisions from Grey Clough, and to catch and cook the promised fish; antl Lady Mary's compassion having been so powerfully awakened as to chain her within the house, she determined to de¬ mand from the object of it if her sorrows admitted of relief; and her anxietv íbr ?? opportunity led her at length to fol¬ low the woman, unobserved by her party, into the little kitchen of this attractive structure The woman had just com¬ menced some active preparation for the guests, when the voice of the supposed young pilgrim sounded in her ears. The sound was electric: her conspicuous start startled Mary so completely, that die would have flitted back to her piotectors, had not the woman caught her by hev garb, as she softly articulated,
" Fear not I— abide ye till I recover me of this surprisa!, which comes in horror to mc." Mary, now assured the poor creature was a maniac, with difficulty suppressed a shriek, and trembled with dismay. In a moment the woman proceeded in low Iv cautious tones, yet with affecting agita¬ tion,—" This is not your first disguise¬ ment, lady. You have donned that of a sailor-boy ercwhiles. Oh, say you did so at liockcliff! Tell me that my ears do not mock me; for then, í wis, will my true ear forefend i/our earthh, míj eternal misery." tí I wot you not, good dame," said the alarmed Alary ; u audit iearcth me to an¬ swer > ou." " 1 am answered,«— hy )our voice answered," returned the woman, now breathing short through agitation : "that cannot in sooth deceive me ; for its sound was registered in the maternal heart. In that disguisement of a sailoi- bov, you saved the lite of m v only child from the dagger of------." The pooi
woman's voice was now lost in emotion ; but in a moment she proceeded. "I beheld your chevisance, and I heard your voice in bewailment of your own brother, whom it seemeth you was the intended victim. That voice hatl penetrance to the heart of maternal gra¬ titude ; and its tone is there infixed, whilst life is mine. Then can you adread me? No; in surance, no: and if you make prizement of your happiness here and hereafter, be dreadiess in now ibi lowing me to rescue that brother, whose threat of mishap so sorrowed you, from those fell fiends who have now also made their entrapment of you, lady, incon¬ tinently follow me with that valiance which led you to entrap the criinefu! conspirators in the Cattle of your ances¬ tors. Again 1 say my advisement is, if vou make prizement of the life of your only brother, antl of your own happiness here and hereafter, follow me : but it must be alone; as onlv for vou will I act ; — í ? none else will 1 peril the safety of those to whom 1 am, alack ! solemnly
bound. But come, lady, — be quick î —. be calm ! — be silent ! " Mary — the dauntless Mary, — daunt less whenever duty ο ι affection called forth her courage, — though trembling in frame, and in agonised susceptibility, feeling in her heart's coi e the menace announced pending over her brother*- life, followed the pitiably agitated woman, who led her rapidly from the kitchen through secret passes, sliding panels, and dciving paths lighted taintiy by spi racles in the walks, down many fathoms. to a shaft over wdiich was placed an iron grating securely padlocked. " Now faint not, lad}," >aid he: guide, for the first time breaking si lence since the commencement of theb rapid route ; " for we cannot betime u for such natural consequences. Uprou^ your firmness, and quail all feminin. recreance. Look down that den of cruel ness, and there behold your own bon brother, to save whom from despiteu murderment my maternal gratitude In led you hitherward." *l
Mary was transfixed by horror and dismay : and at thb moment the piteous moans and wailing of hor indeed own born hi other reached her panged cars, and struck with anguish to her heart; and distinctly she heard him sob — "Marv! darling Marv! mv own sistei Maty ! Algernon, my brother ! oh, could }0U wis but where to find me, I wot not vou wouhl strive together for my aid¬ ance." ;£ líe cries to you," said the sympa¬ thising woman: "if you »peak to him with firmness, it may vantage him with composure meet for his escape." " Edward, my darling ! Mary is here- and will ¡speed ior }our aidance, if} ou uil her by calm firmness," said Mai y Viul though distincti} and collectively die spoke, it was not because .she did not acutely feel ; — no ; the trembling of het frame—the ghastly green hue that hail superseded the bright tiansparent bloom upon her cheeks·—'the quivering of her uow pallid lips, resembling the leaves ot a white rose agitateti bv the breeze which
blows to blight it, — proclaimed that sen¬ sibility and affection were at their active posts, suffering in .silent anguish within her bosom. Her brother's wild shriek of almost maniac surprise and joy, which thrilled through Mary's ears, almost chased that firmness from her bosom so necessary for their safety : but although her heart pal¬ pitated its response, and her eyes gushed out their tears of .sympathy, she pro¬ nounced, " Hush ! hush ! " vvitli that impressiveness which brought prudence to the aiti of the almost joy-maddened prisoner. The grateful mother now unclosed the barrier, raised the grating, and charging Lady Mary to hold it up with all her might whilst she descended to knock off the impeding fetters, slid down the shaft, leaving Mary to implore strength and firmness from the All-merciful : and although each fleeting second crept like an age to the impatience of affection and alarm, Mary's reason acknowledged that the ascent of her brother couhl have
scarcely been more speedily accomplish¬ ed ; and ere, in the almost impenetrably dark spot in which she stood, Edward could discern his sister to clasp her in his longing arms, his preserver raised herself through the shaft, and implored the agitated relatives as yet to meet like total strangers ; since only by speed, silence, and firmness, could they be res¬ cued from the dire plot now in operation against them. In agitated silence, therefore, Mary and Edward now followed the grateful mother, whom they shortly saw, by the light admitted by a spiracle, take from a recess in the wall the habit of a Black Canon, in which she rapidly enveloped the panting De Mandeville; antl from the same accommodating revestiary anothei a- 1 *■ habit of the same order, in which she instantaneously disguised herself: and then proceeded as pilot wdth all the speetl the lack of sufficient light per¬ mitted, until she reached an iron grating, which, being initiated iu the secret of its opening, she unclosed ; and then draw-
ing «a sliding panel which was concealed from observation in the rocky walls, the} emerged from the dark cave into open day, upon a winding pathway sheltered closely by luxuriant underwood. , " You wot your homeward way?" then guide now cautiously whispered : " fot I must mount you on tvvo of the horses, ready caparisoned, to bear you, lady, fron» your friends." Alas I they neither of them knew one furlong of the road from thence to Al balan tla. For a moment their preserver was in despair, for she had no confidant with whom she couhl entrust them ; and tt approach the sea-shore, or wend round to place them in their own boat, sht dared not to attempt, since aloni that line, she knew, were placet! emis saries of those who had thus entoile' them ; and after a few moments' paus« of thought and indecision, she tin» addressed her agitated companions : -~ " The almost distracted mother's ea> took in the melting supplications of he
rescued child to his deliverer at liockcliff Castle to take him in the awaiting boat, and also heard that gracious deliverer's kintl assentment. Believing you from the Low Countries, I formed conclusion my hapless child had made repair hither¬ ward, and have remained restful in con¬ tentation in not hearing thence, bethink¬ ing there was lack of mode. But that not having been a just view of the mat¬ ter, I ask, where, lady, is my child?" Mary replied, " In the monastery of St. Stephen's—safe, and under the imme¬ diate protection ofthe lortl abbot;" and that his tedious wound being at length cured, he was preparing tt) be sent upon the Continent, to honourable and advan¬ tageous protection. 'fhe woman sunk upon her knees, uttered an affecting thanksgiving to hea¬ ven and Mary, antl ther, with eagerness demanded if she might see her child ; if she might accompany him abroad ; and he assured of being protected from those, whom, if they learned hereafter of her aid¬ ing this escape, would not scruple to take
vengement by reaving her of life. And upon these hurried questions being an¬ swered Ín the affirmative, maternal feel¬ ings conquered connubial, and she an¬ nounced her determination herself to prove their guitle, and fly wdth them ; on condition they would not themselves, nor permit others to question her upou matters that might implicate those whom she was bound by duty not to injure. This compact solemnly acceded to on the faith and honour of those she was rescuing, she leti them now, without further delay, through intricate windings to another cavity in the rocks, where they found in a stable .several horses already saddled, three of which the agi- tated fugitives mounted ; and piously commending themselves to the care of pitying heaven, set out for Aibalanda in full speed, — the flight of two of them for life — the third fbr temporal hap- piness. In such a flight utterance was sus¬ pended, save in aspirations to heaven ibi protection ; nor could thought take that
extensive range to agonise, which varied feelings gave full scope for ; since every thought was now concentred in exertion for their speed. The road they flitted over wound along a range of hills, and a far extent of the path they travelled was percep¬ tible from various points ; and as of this, Margaret the grateful mother was aware, she, upon rising to the summit of every ascent, with fearful eagerness cast her searching glances back, to ascertain — through ocular testimony the absence of pursuit — that their flight remained un¬ discovered : and tor nearly four miles had they galloped without Margaret descrying any thing to augment alarm, when Lortl de Mandeville, hoping that they might consequently relax in their -peed, announced for the first time that die fetters from which he bad been st> providentially released had gaiied his ancles st) grievously, that the gait of such full speed severely panget! him ; aiuti scarcely had the poor sufferer given utterance to this first complaint of the
consequences of those fell cruelties which he had for weeks endured, ere Alargarei with dismay beheld a small troop on horseback rising from a declivity in full gallop, " ι Oie same direction with them¬ selves ; and Margaret entertained not a doubt, that the horses they had taken having been unfortunately missed, had led to this prompt pursuit — since a pur¬ suit her trembling heart at once pro¬ nounced it, as wdth a wild shriek she announced that conviction to her dis¬ mayed companions. Mary felt the lacerated state of hei adored brother now more keenly wound¬ ing her own feeling heart ; and De Mandeville, with the manly spirit oí genuine fortitude, dashed onward with his former speed, and in a few moments after fainted through suffering, and fell back upon his horse. In this moment of accumulating distress, the heroism of Lady Mary seemed about to faint too —'bending beneath the anguish of her sympathy. " We must not pause, even to service
him iu his sore suffering," Margaret ex¬ claimed. " W T e must secure him by our girdle ropes to the saddle, lady. I must have the Jeadment of his horse, and you must bear up hy his side to guard he ialls not; antl so we must speed us in our flight: for there is a pass, which if our pursuers should tiare the hazardry of* wouid make expedition fbr their pur¬ pose ; and if we pass not its outlet in apt precedence to forefend it, if some keep their present road they may engird us. — Come, come, revive lady, or all is lost." Mary did rally her firmness, and aideti in securing her helpless brother to his sail- die ; although her heart sickened, and her streaming eyes shunned the pang of beholding his pale face thus blanched to the semblance of' death ; antl again anil agam consigning themselves to the pro¬ tection of Providence, Mary anil Mar¬ garet once more set forward on theii fearfu' flight, though no longer with that rapidity which could promise them secu¬ rity ; and liad it not been that Lortl tk μ, α
Mandeville sometimes revived a little? although only again to relapse into in¬ sensibility, his agonised sister could never nave retained her faculty to perform all that was now 7 required, — so intensely did ,sbe i'ecl all that was doubtless the suffer¬ ings of her brother : and, wholly imac- ncquainted with the road they were travelling, she could derive no consolation through expectation of their onward movement being actually conveying them to any point of certain succour, whilst the cry of her direful ly agitated com¬ panion was not that of confidence in escape, or incessantly her exclamation was, "May heaven protect us;" And from heaven only Margaret felt was aid likely to rescue them, since that thev were inevitably pursued, she on everv fearful backward glance found more conviction ; whilst from those who bad accompanied Lady Mary to Grey (lough she knew they could not hope for Miecour, as they too were entoiled, and many of thun devoted to destruc¬ tion.
Under the auspices of the vile Con¬ stance of St. Mildred's and the vindictive Rosamond, the franklin Vere had been worked upon by the atheistic Ralph, through promises of pardon and indul¬ gences for all his past and future trans¬ gressions, to become a traitor to the lortl of' Aibalanda, and their agent in one of the most atrocious plots which demoniac suggestion could dev ise, to wreak venge¬ ance upon the children of -Vdela, antl out¬ wit Sir Ethelbert— even for the murder of Lortl tie Maiuleville, and the marriage of Lady 7 Mary with Rupert Warburg. Without much difficulty, the contu¬ macious De Mandeville was trepannetl from the protection of his father ; but to withdraw Latly 7 Mary from the invul¬ nerable protection with which Sir Ethel¬ bert encompassed her, was not so easily accomplished ; yet Constance shrank not from the enterprise — assured that she t ould, by the ingenuity of her devises, shield herself from the glancing eve of suspicion. Vere, therelore, was well in¬ structed in his evil taak, and completely
deceived Davenant, for the disguise he assumed was simplicity 7 with ingenuous¬ ness; and with such touching force of both did he bewail his former wild and idle courses, that no suspicion could arise against the sincerity of his truth and good intentions in the mind of the honest seneschal, and the visit to Grey Clougli farm was planned to extract Lady Mary from protection without the possibility of aid or extrication. Preparatory to this, Sir Rupert snugly lodged himself in prison, and caused intel ligen ce^thereof It to he conveyed to the knowledge of Sir Ethelbert; hut his agents were still at large. Ly the plan of taking Lady Mary from Aibalanda by water, her companions would he powerless of pursuing her when. pursuit bhould become a necessary mea¬ sure ; for whilst their aquatic road lay east, their prize should be borne west; and then, when her alarmed attendants, upon finding they had no other mode for movement, should re-embark in their boat, under a belief that thus they should
SIR" ETHELBERT· get back to Aibalanda to arouse the chatellany into active pursuit ofthe miss¬ ing Lady Mary, they should be doomed to find themselves destined for the Sty¬ gian ferry : since the diabolical arrange¬ ment was, whilst the devoted crew shouhl be engaged on shore, to prepare the boat for foundering; and with this cunning craft effectually to silence in the deep every witness who could prove that from the banquetting hall of the Black Ca¬ nons Lady Mary de Rhone had disap¬ peared. The tools necessary for the cruel pro¬ ject relative to the boat were kept in the stable, where the horses were all prepared for the abduction of Lady Mary. In seeking these tools, the absence of the horses taken by the fugitives was dis¬ covered shortly after tlieir departure, and a prompt pursuit commenced of those who had abscouded — supposed to be some of the Aibalanda party, who, having by some means made discoveries of treachery 7 , and supplied with these steeds, had fled off to procure rescue ρ 4
for their periled compeers : and these pursuers set forward at full speed, led by the track of the horses' hoofs of the fugitives ; and resolved to exterminate at once the daring runagates by a shower of arrows, the moment they should come sufficiently near to them for destructive effect.
CHAP. XVI. tjpoN every new glance the despairing Margaret cast around, her terrors aug¬ mented ; and at length, not above a cou¬ ple of furlongs had they to pass over ere die doubted little they should be sur¬ rounded : for now in her onward gaze she could descry the thicket from which 4ie expected a hotly of their pursuers to emerge ; whilst her retrograde observa¬ tions told her but too truly, each time they were repeated, that their pursuers were gaining fearfully upon them. For- 'unately for Mary, she neither looked behinti to observe pursuers, nor antici¬ pated those which might lie before her; lor hatl she, terror must have despoiled her of all power of supporting her help¬ less brother, whose pitiable situation had become almost too distressing for her .■ffectionate heart to contemplate with my command of firmness. i* 5
At length our fugitives turned one of the few remaining points of the meander¬ ing road, which the fears of Margaret augured intervened between them and fatal seizure ; when, ίο their utter dis¬ may 7 , a ruffian sprang up out of aomc fern in which he had Iain concealed ; and darting at the bridle of Margaret's CT CT horse, instantaneously, with the hand oí arbitrary might, stayed the animal's mo¬ tion into stock-still obedience ; when with his other potent hand he plucked her off'her saddle, upon which he vaulted in her stead, and in full speed darted onwards without the utterance of one word : and ere he was thus commodiously accommodated, another, and another, and another ambushed ruffian started out of their bed of concealment ; and cutting the hands which fastened Lord de Man¬ deville on his salitile, snatched his lord¬ ship ami his trembling supporter off their horses, antl, with the same cool deter¬ mination and taciturnity, mounted the steeds of which they thus possessed
themselves, two upon one horse, and galloped after their leader. The consternation of Margaret now foils description, whilst Mary felt an¬ guished with despair : but only for a few moments did the self-possession of the intrepid Margaret forsake her; fbr promptly she recollected that about this spot there was a holý well situated in a cave, where, by the rules of a neigh¬ bouring monastery, fresh rushes were daily strewn as a pallet fbr the poor in¬ valids who were brought thither to benefit CT by the healing efficacy of the spring. In this hallowed cavern she trusted they might find concealment until their pur¬ suers had passed ; and possible aid from some visitor to the spring, or from the charitable monks themselves : and no sooner did these cheering hopes awaken in her active mind, than Margaret snatched up the still insensible De Man¬ deville in her arms, — his late nutrimental privations and mental miseries hav mg reduced him to a very portable weight, <—and piqusly invoking the guidance of p ii
heaven to the asylum she sought, she turned into that direction where she thought it most likely to find it; and was not deceived. The moment Margaret deposited her helpless burden upon evidently fresh rushes in the holy cave, all her newly awakened hopes seemed at once to for¬ sake her ; for as the rushes had been newly strewn, there was then no prospect of the monk's returning until the morrow, and should none else come, the interval was fearful : and she now was boweil down with despair, and so was Mary; until the latter found that sprinkling her brother's face wdth water restored him to perception ; and Mary felt comforted, and prayed, ancl hoped, and trusted; and, .is her brother now could speak to bei, she felt revived fbr any exertion to pro¬ mote their safety. But Margaret knew of no resource to call forth such exer¬ tion, and would not permit her even to hear her brother's voice ; fbr she deemed total silence essential to their safety, since none could tell how sound might vibrate
through that cavern, and lead to the fatal discovery of its being their spot of refuge. In this state of inaction, ancl when no hope of succour seemed within their reach, every trembling fear of all they had to dread seemed to augment ; and, in de¬ spondence and terror, minute after minute dragged on in torturing infliction : each scund, each movement,—their own pant¬ ing respiration, the bounding of their own palpitating hearts, and themuirmuring of the bubbling water,—awakened alter¬ nately their hope and panic. But at length a sound struck to tlieir sensitive ears, more heavilv laden than any predecessor. It increased into that of distant footfalls, and the hearts of the fugitives bounded, and their spirit almost died within them through craven appre¬ hension ; since tvvo of them knew not if they might not prove the step.* of an assassin hastening to deprive them of life — the other, those of the ruffian missioned to bear her to temporal wretchedness. And now they discerned
the jingling of slight chains; and in a moment more, the light, which had been diffused from the entrance as far as the well, was completely impeded by a sol- dier standing in the immediate pass of entry; and who, the moment he appeared. shouted out, as if to companions, the intel· ligence, electrifying to our fugitives,— " Our search is ended !" In a moment more the jingling of chain armour increasetl. Our fugitives, who hatl stationed themselves in the most remote corner of the cavern, where the rushes had been deposited, were in com¬ plete shatle, and no beam of light even from tlie spiracles rested on them ; yet thev conceived they were not so eon. cealed, and that the worth of fhe soldiet r proclaimed that their retreat was dis- cov ered. Two more t allmen * now appeared, accompanied by an oflicer ; and he who had prect tied his companions in arrival, with d'4> respect was commencing some intelligence, when the officer exclaimed,—
Sl Hist I hist ! Harold, my doughty Argus. It is meet we should have surance there are none to list, ere we proclaim discove¬ ries." At the moment the officer ceased speaking, his hand was grasped by a slim pilgrim, who seemed to have flitted out of air into substance: and though the grasp was gentle and tremulous, it operated like that of supernatural impulsion ; fbr impor¬ tunity and helplessness pleaded resistlessly in the tremulous grasp which led the oflicer in silent conjecturing expectation to the rush pallet, where the pilgrim relinquished his impressive hold, ami then retreated fo the most remote corner of the cave ; where, unperceived, the prayers of pious animated thanksgiving from the throbbing heart of Mary de Rhone were aspirated. The surprised and sympathising war¬ rior bent over the person to whom he was thus sí) n sistlessly and affectingly con¬ ducted ; and the soldiers having removed their impeding forms from the entrance, sufficient light emanated thence effectively
to beam upon the occupant of the pallet, and show to his new observer that the wan antl attenuated person he there be¬ held was his beloved young friend Dc Mandeville. The officer, with a wild cry of joy, clasped the recumbent sufferer to his pant¬ ing bosom ; but De Mandeville utteretl no response ; joy was too mighty for bodily weakness, and his lordship in this moment of rapturous recognition swooned in the arms of Algernon Fitzrivers. The moment the feelings which power¬ fully agitated the sympathising Algernon allowed to him the faculty of articulation, he called for the pilgrim to come and vield him information relative to his be¬ loved friend, that he might act accord¬ ingly for his prompt benefit. But instead of this pilgrim, Margaret approached him, and in cautious tones replied — "Speetl us, gallant soldier, to the monastery of St. Stephen's, where you shall wot all that has fortuned this long-periled sufferer. But perease our guardage thitherward may be hazardry
m you ; fbr we, who have darefully res¬ cued this youth from a pitiful fate, are here caved for securement from vengeful pursuers." " We will speed us incontinently to St. Stephen's monastery, where Father Philip will aptly imagine all things for this dear sufferer's consolation," ex¬ claimed the agitated Algernon. " Antl it fortunes meetly, we have a litter at our command, in which we can safely enterprise his secret repair to St. Ste¬ phen's ; and with him those of his pe¬ riled companions, who it may seem me can be thus journeyed without en¬ damage to the dear sufferer's contenta· lion." Lord de Mandeville was now, without one moment of unnecessary delay, wrap¬ ped İn a soldier's watchcoat, to avoid recognition in the moment of removal, and tenderly conveyed to the litter; into which also Margaret and the trembling Latly Mary were admitted : the latter, without having round power to announce
who, beneath the palmer's habit, Alger¬ non had thus in guardage. The detachment so providentially here under the command of Fitzrivers ranked high in militant renown, but they wert 5 few in number; vet this securitv was compensateti not only by doughty vali¬ ance, but by the imposing appearance of musketeers amid their archers mid hench¬ men; although those in the secrets 01 how litlle couhl be effected at that period by lack of rapidity in the performance of a musket, would have fell more in¬ timidated by menace from the active arrow and the formidable halber!. Buí happily the pursuers of our fugitives were operated upou by ignorance of the want of promptitude* in the use of these new engines of destruction ; and, alarmed by their appearance, kept too far alooi from our martial band, to effect a dis¬ covery of who were thus untler guard- age to St. Stephen's monastery. Margaret also was influenced by the
appearance of these formidable looking muskets, for she believed their vanquish¬ ing power guaranteed perfect security to herself and fellow fugitives ; whilst to Do Mandeville and Mary the presence of Fitzrivers was a shield from danger, upon which, under heaven, they confi¬ dently relied. And thus the courage of all being renovated, they were at length enabled mutually to give and receive intelligence upon the leading circum¬ stances which had brought them into their present situation : and Lady Mary now heard, for the first time, ihat her brother had been missing fbr many weeks; and in horror learned from Mar¬ garet the cruelties he had endured, and the perils hy which he had been encom¬ passed, and likewise the dire fate from which she liei self had been so providen¬ tially rescued. Relative to herself, Margaret briefly dated that she was of gentle blood; had m a first .spousals wedded meetly ; but m a second marriage — allured by exterior 'md deceived by art, — not only beneath
her degree, but bad yoked herself to ,·· freebooter, who still contrived to link Ihm to him by threats of vengement upon hei only child, and others of' her kindred, should she forsake him : that her child, being the offspring of her first marriage, she had sent to her own mother to rear in the path of piety and honour ; but upon the death of that competent guardian, and bis father's family cruelly refusing to take charge of him, her un¬ offending child had been returned to her; when her unprincipled spouse, in despite of her tears and siq plications, endeavoured by every means to corrupt her incorruptible boy : and that, upon the memorable fete at Rockcliff Castle being voiced oi', her hapless child had been so determined in his negatives te all the foul deeds her spouse had arranged lor his performance during the festivii ν . that, uproused by alarm at the vindictive rage she saw boiling in the bosom of het CT CT busband at this resistance, maternal feel¬ ings led her to liockcliff, whither het poor child was compelled by her tyräin
to attend him ; but that, in the moment of her realising apprehensions, another hand, and not the aggressing mother's, u as tlecreetl to rescue her immaculate child from the harmful tl agger of a dis¬ appointed corrupter,—a merciful work of Providence, she now firmly believed, íbr the benign purpose of leading the mother of an incorruptible child from die tletestetl path in which she hatl too long been held by art, threats, antl ter- lors. — Antl this brief sketch Margaret concluded with supplication tt) those whom she iu her turn had rescued from leath and misery, to protect her from die dire compulsion of leading the arm ?1' justice to whelm her culprit spouse: aid to this request the} gratefully and »cadilv acceded. To St. Stephen's, monasteiy our still 'verely agitated fugitives were conveved a*, promptly as possibilit} wouhl admit oi ; and in continuance of the mercies »vinced to them by kind providence this dav, the lord abbot was at home, antl N u Ethelbert just aimed from the ??-
tropolis; and the feelings of Alary, when St. Stephen's gates were closed upon them, and her brother safely arrived where the aid of Father Philip was in readiness for him, defy delineation. Sir Algernon rapidly- sought the lord abbot on tlie moment of arrival, and re¬ lated the little which he knew of this providential rescue ; and not a moment was lost ere Lord de Alandeville was tenderly borne fiom the litter into the guest-chamber, since further his lord- ship would noi suffer himself to be con¬ vey etl, as there only 7 , he knew, couhl he he indulged with the presence of his female rescuers. And in this guest chamber, or abbot's parlour, our young pilgrim, who shrunk she knew not why from the recognition of Fifzrivers, shaded her face with her robe, antl gladly took her station in the darkest comer of tht gloomy apartment, where as it seemed for her accommodation, the couch was stationed upon which her brother had been laid. Margaret, now in the sanctuary which
contained her child, could ill endure her maternal impatience to embrace him ; but she knew there were pressing matters to be looked to first ; and in terror she anticipated the demands from her of all she knew relative to the imprisonment of Lord tie Mandeville, and the intended abduction of his sister : and although those she had rescued promised in their gratitude that those shoultl not be in¬ jured whom she was anxious to protect, she trembled iu fear that, whilst she en¬ deavoured to save the lives of the de¬ voted victims whom they hatl left in the hermitage, she might ultimately lead to the condign punishment of her husband : and panting she now stood, in all the contending agitation of warring excite¬ ment ; the spectres of all tho.se whom, by her silence, she might leave to cruel de¬ struction, haunting her tin the one side ; antl, on the otlier, the still more heart- appalling apparition of her own husband being led forth to execution. But the impatience of Fitzrivers to learn some intelligence of how his he-
loved De Mandeville had been detained from, and by whom now restored to his friends, consigned her not very long to this painful agony 7 of indecision ; íbr the eagei demands wdiich Algernon put to Lortl de Mandeville upon the subject, soon led his lordship to reply — " In Lhe groanful custody of despiteous deathsmen." " And who restored me to Algernon and safety?" continued the agitated youth, endeavouring to call up a playful smile, " Why, thut aiding Mynncer of vour dureful recollection!—-that knight ..' CT errant of liockcliff' prowess ! Yes, in gootl sooth ; for when it fortuned him to rescue that interesting hoy from the assassin's dag, he enkindled the flame oí' gratitude in a maternal heart, which lighted m> own Mary to my dungeon, and led both Mary and myself from the breme toils by which we were engirded, to und the protection of our brother Algernon. I have blanched your cheeks, and made you start, and stare, and tiem¬ ble Now start again, and blush with surprisal. — There sits and quakes the
champion ofthe Netherlands, who braved even angry elements to do you service ! -—Ay, Fitzrivers; in this pilgrimised trem¬ bler, when disguisement is doffed, it may fortune you to meet our Mary of Ai¬ balanda." For one moment the intelligence of whom, Jn the Dutch boy's guise, his lively gratitude was to recognise, trans¬ fixed Algernon with motionless amaze¬ ment ; but in another moment he felt every sensibility, upon which this intel¬ ligence could operate, in the full glow of animation : yet he could not articulate his recognition of' the sensitive Mary; he could only fly to her side—-take her trembling hand in his—antl tremble too. "Antl beneath this Black Canon'scowl," continued De Mandeville, " you will find the grateful mother to whom I owe my rescue from murderment —our Mary, from dern misery : for well we wot that ere this night veils the earth, Mary, by threats and stratagem, was to have been affianced to a freehooting knave. But by whom all this was to have been en¬ voi,, il a
acted, it is bootless, Algernon, to query; for Mary and myself, as our gratitude's fee for rescue, have pledged ourselves that no proceeding shall turn in harm- fulness against those agents of the in¬ visible delinquent from whom we have been rescued. And now let me add, whilst I am able,—for I feel languishment is quailing me, — my ever kind and dear lord abbot, I cannot, cannot tarry here, however it may need me ; for you may not make harbourage for Lady Mary in lodgment, and I will not make partage from her mo." " In good sooth, my ever docile pa¬ tient," said Father Philip, who had just then entered, and was anxiously examin¬ ing his lordship's pulse, " it imagines me partage for a day or tvvo will prove of condign benefit to brother antl sister, and make their remeeting more sure antl dureful. The agitation which it per- ceiveth me flutters thus our fair pilgrim'. robe will require care to subjugate : quiet will be as meet for the Lady Mary as ior her languid brother ; and ior twenty
four hours, I predict me, this apt nurse of yours will in no wise be solaced suf¬ ficiently to enterprise her station by your lordship's couch. Then, wherefore not tarry those twenty-four hours under the vantage of my care?" " But who will guard my sister at Aibalanda?" was a query of Lord de Mandeville's which led to an entreaty from Mary to the lortl abbot, to de¬ spatch an express incontinently to the fearful hermitage of the Black Canons, to lull the apprehensiens of her friends and attendants upon her alarming dis¬ appearance, and to speed them home. " Let this express be sent with an armed band," fiil tered out the pitiably agitated Margaret ; " for approachment to that hermitage may not, I w is, be alto¬ gether dangerless." Upon this intimation, the lord abbot determined to send a band of militant friars to enterprise the escort of Lady Mary's attendants to Aibalanda. But the party had gone upou this expedition hy water; and how, Mary
demanded, could a cavalcade of mili¬ tant men protect their return upon thai element ? " They must not be suffered to repair homeward by water, at least in their own boat," exclaimed the agitated Margaret ; " since it imagines me their own boat may have had impairment to—to vantage long tarriance from all means of pursuit after the lost lady." The shrewd lord abbot, perceiving there was more to alarm than this woman pro¬ claimed, promptly thought of an expe- pedient for the safety of these periled persons. The Black Canons held certain portions of their land in fee from the preceptory of St. Stephen's, through which he had a right to claim at a moment's notice service of so many men and horses ; he therefore now wrote hi- official mandate fbr 'e sufficient guard, and sufficient number of horses, to safely convey certain persons, whom he several!} named, forthwith to St. Stephen's monas- ten, from the banquet-house called the Hermitage ofthe Black Canons : and this
mandate he sent off with a troop of Sir Ethelbert's henchmen, and a band of militant friars who had been permitted to' rearm upon the appearance of re¬ bellion in the county.
CHAP. XVIL İİPON the promise of Father Philip to Lord de Mandeville, that he would make not one moment of unnecessary delay ere he .should be permitted to join his sister, and upon the lord abbot and Fitzrivers assuring them that Mary should not be permitted to return to Aibalanda ere her safety there was perfectly secured, his lordship took an affecting leave oí' his affectionate sister, and retired to that bed, and that competent care, so essen¬ tial fbr his recovery from all the dire cruelties and terrors which he had en¬ countered since his abscondencc fiom the protection of his father; and the moment his lordship was tenderly re¬ move 1, as Lady Mary's only female companion could not be withdrawn, from the propriety of bearing her company, the lord abbot, commiserating those na¬ tural feelings which had been proved so
powerful in the bosom of Margaret, or¬ dered her son to be introduced to receive her embrace and blessing. This meeting was so tender, and so overpowering to the acute feelings of both mother and son, that it sensibly affected all who witnessed it ; and Mary, in the fulness of her sympathy, importuned the good Kenrick for an asylum to be se¬ cured for Margaret in the same part of the world whither her son was going. The kind lord abbot immediately com¬ muned with Sir Ethelbert upon the pos¬ sibility of the measure ; and soon, to the joy of both mother and son, announced that Lady Mary's wish should be gra¬ tified. Mary, through all the trials lor her fortitude during this eventful day, had exerted it to the utmost .stretch of its capability : but the frame which encased that fortitude was uot of such firm tex¬ ture ; and that was shaken so perceptibly, that the alarmed Father Philip felt impa¬ tient fbr the removal of every impediment to her return to Aibalanda, that measures
might be adopted for the composure of her nerves. But promptly the good leech knew this removal could not be accomplished; therefore all that was in his power to effect for her benefit, lie hastened to per¬ form ; whilst his fair patient was as do¬ cile and as calm, as her exertions not to obtrude her feelings, to distress her friends, could make her : but the ob¬ truding thoughts upon all her brother had endured -— of all her parent had mentally 7 suffered — the alarm she ex¬ perienced relative to the companions of her aquatic excursion—the horror of having such dire foes—with appalling apprehension for her brother's antl her own future safety, — forced many an ago¬ nising burst of tears from her eyes, and shook her frame with many a convulsive shudder. Sir Algernon spent his time in wander¬ ing from the couch of De Mandeville to the bench upon which poor Mary trem¬ bled, to yield to each the consolation of * a/ his tender friendship ; yet agonised with
the certainty that he must leave them ere the fidelity of Davenant should be established. For the cause which had brought him so providentially to the aid of his dear imperiled friends, was a suspected conspiracy of some new Cap¬ tain Cobler ; and it was his imperative duty to the state to make no lengthened tarriance, even to yield protection to his individual friends : and in grief unut¬ terable, at being again compelled to tear himself from Mary when she needed protection, he at length revealed to her the compulsion which must operate upon his movements. From the moment in which this com¬ munication was made, the firmness of Mary seemed to rally. She assured him, fear need not be entertained for her safety in Aibalanda; that Davenant's fidelity need not be suspected; and that in St. Stephen's monastery the safety of De Mandeville was secure : and she impor¬ tuned him not one moment to delay departure, lest evil might betide the Q 5
state ; and that evil be ascribed to the brave, the loyal Sir Algernon Fitzrivers. Strange to tell, the more Alary impor¬ tuned Algernon to depart, the more un¬ willing he became to do so. What was the fascination that enchained the long idolater of Rhona, by the side of Mary, thus ? It was not the spell of beauty's tears ; fbr Mary's appearance was not improved by weeping. Her tears did not possess charms like Lady Warburg's ; for she never wept but when her heart was in the business, and then she did so with all her might, to the utter ruin of her eyes and the transparency of her complexion ; whilst lihona never allowed the tears of her heart to appear in com¬ pany : and Rhona therefore could regu« late the flow fbr eftect, antl never per¬ mitted one pearly 7 drop to distil its magic more copiously 7 than to appear gracefully interesting. The tears of anguished sym¬ pathy ami terror which Alary had shed within the last few hours leit their traces behind them, as did all the agitation which had disturbed her serenity, to chase
the brilliancy of beauty *. her lovely- hair, too, was dishevelled ; and the hat and robe of her disguise disfiguring to her. Yet Algernon seemed to cling tt) her, as if parting from her would inflict torture which quailed his fortitude ; for to leave her whilst she required protec¬ tion, presented agony too mighty 7 for endurance : still he thought of Rhona perpetually, whilst he thus lingered by Lady Mary, in retrospection of the fear¬ ful aquatic expedition from the festivities of liockcliff* when lihona shone like the sun of splendour for admiration- antl where Mary, from beneath her cloud of concealment, exhaled fragrance that be¬ trayed her balmy sweetness, — and for some oí' which he had yet to express his gratitude; which though he panted to do, he found no worths at his command in which he could adequately express his feelings; and pei haps he lingered in obedience to his lively gratitude, to finti some genial moment of sufficient power to proclaim it : or was it the witchery of 1 aV the Cistertiau's predictions relative to u 6
the interesting Dutch youth at liockcliff, by which he was now spell-bound? Mary, in her assurances to Algernon that he need not fear for her safety in Ai¬ balanda, glanced at her firm reliance upon protection from a sacred agency : and although she merely glanced at this re¬ liance, the tone in which she did so, true to its source, struck conviction to his ear that it came spontaneously from her heart; and almost in despair for Rhona's pre¬ eminence, he vainly challenged memory for such tones upon any sacred cause ever having escaped the lips of Lady Warburg in his hearing. At length Algernon inflicted upon himself the severe pang of departing, to proceed in the mission upon which he had been despatched from Scarborough ; but not until he had had an interview wdth his guardian, who, not daring to appear be¬ fore the children of Adela in his own character, lest they might recoil from him, had enveloped himself iu the garb of a triar, that he might have access to the apartments now rendered by them attrae-
tive to him : and Sir Ethelbert assured Algernon that he had a formidable band of warriors now hovering round St. Ste¬ phen's, in readiness to escort Lady Mary to Aibalanda ; where, disguised as a mi¬ litant friar, he meant to take his station as an additional warder, although barbed arrows would at every turn penetrate his heart in that sad castle. It was evening ere the cavalcade from the hermitage of villany arrived, —* the rescued victims who had attended Latly Mary to Grey Clough,—under escort, not only ofthe militant friars despatched from St. Stephen's fbr them, but by the knights fee troop of Black Canons demanded by the lord abbot of St. Stephen's. Scarcely had the absence of the three horses led to a pursuit of those who hatl purloined them, ere Latly Mary was missed by her terrified companions, and her alarming disappearance proclaimed to Margaret's reprobate husband, the oblig¬ ing fisherman, whom they sought on the beach, and who courteously invited all these dismayed persons to re-enter and
penetrate further into the hermitage, where they would find her in conference with a youth who had come from the Low Countries some w r eeks since, and taken up his abode as boarder with him and his spouse. This bait succeeded : they re¬ entered the hermitage, which was in¬ stantly closed upon them, there to meet the doom intended ior them, and which was thought inevitable. But to the utter dismay of the Black Canons, the mandate of the lord abbot of St. Stephen's overturned the sanguinary projects of their daring ruler, Rupert Warburg, and his coadjutors. This man¬ date proclaimed unequivocally the lord abbot's knowledge of whom the hermit age contained ; so that po.ssiblv he knew more : they, therefore, as they valued their existence as a community, could not dispute the order it contained, or draw upon themselves the suspicion of being engaged in any malpractices or inten¬ tions, by not performing, and to the very letter, all that was required. The prior, therefore, and some senior monks
ofthe Canons, repaired with the militant friars of St. Stephen's to the hermitage; where, with a well enacted appearance of total ignorance of any evil being going forward, they demanded entrance. The courteous fisherman, whom the Canons r announced as their tenant, ad¬ mitted them without a murmur into the interior of the hermitage, and then disap¬ peared with Vere : the latter never to be heard of more; lest, through bribe or con¬ science, be might be led to implicate those who had lured his fidelity from his pa¬ ramount lord. Without impediment, the prior and his attendant monks proceeded to deliver up every individual named in the lord abbot's mandate, save only Vere; and fur¬ nishing them with horses for conveyance, sent off* our liberated victims under safe guardage too St. Stephen's mnastery ; where Davenant was closely questioned by Sir Ethelbert upon the causes which could have induced him to propose, and Mrs. Morton to permit, the unconscious Lady Mary to enter upon a party of plea-
sure in a moment when the fate of her brother was unknown : and Davenant replied, that Vere had imparted to him having accidentally heard that a youth an¬ swering the description of his young lord had privately landed from the Nether¬ lands, taken up his abode in the Black Canon's hermitage, and evinced anxiety to conceal himself from observation ; that upon this intelligence, conceiving the in¬ dividual might be Lord tie Mandeville, and aware that none could prove more likely to attract him back to the bosom of his family than his beloved sister, he, with the concurrence of Mrs. Morton and Father Adrian, agreed to the party which Vere suggested and arranged. And when thus the integrity of' the seneschal's intentions was made manifest, Mary was permitted to proe/Va! with her rescued attendants to Aibalanda, under a strong militant escort, with Ethelbert himself so effectively disguised that he defied all re¬ cognition in the castle ; where, although it w r as agony to enter and remain, he de-
termined to brave all mental anguish in this guardage of Adela's child. After the establishment oí' the grateful Margaret and her incorruptible boy in a secure and comfortable asylum in another country, the lord abbot of St. Stephen's and Sir Ethelbert, no longer deeming the promises made to Margaret binding, as she was now removed out of the way of being called upon to yield testimony fbr the crimination of her husband, made no further delay in laying before the magis¬ trates of the county every circumstance which had transpired to them of the dire imprisonment of Lord de Mandeville, and the intended villany of the compulsive union of his sister with an unmeet spouse : when suspicion falling upon the Black Canons, they undauntedly came forward to vindicate their fame ; and so well did they manage their defence, that they made it appear, the dungeons and keeps which had been discovered within the precincts of their hermitage had been formed there wholly without their knowledge, by the tenant to whom, upon the hermitage hav-
ing ceased to be used as the habitance of anchorets, they had unadvisedly let the premises. While, to secure themselves from any contradiction of their plausible statement, the pretended tenant, Marga¬ ret's miscreant husband, these sanctified Canons employed a trusty pirate belonging to their firm to seize, convey to Austria, and arrange his deposit for life in the mines of Idria ; and at 4he very same time, in further proof of the innocence they asserted, they offered immense re¬ wards fbr the apprehension of the culprit they thus entombed. The moment Father Philip considered De Mandeville sufficiently convalescent to permit removal from his own imme¬ diate care, his lordship was conveyed to Aibalanda Castle, which had been con¬ verted into a formidable garrison for the protection of Lady Mary, who was now so much recovered from the effect of her eventful excursion as to be able to take her daily station in the chamber of her brother ; and soon her doing so manifested
its efficacy by his improving aspect and reanimating spirits. Lord de Mandeville, upon his ^return to Aibalanda, was as unwilling to detail, as his sister was to hear, a narrative 'of his sufferings : but by degrees Mary learned all ; and the effect called forth further proofs of the skill and kindness of Father Philip. The ingenuous Edward perse¬ vered in no reserves to shield him from the censures of his sister, whose thoughts and actions, he believed, were, as the wings of ascending seraphim, bearing her hea¬ venward : he therefore confessed to Mary his own contumacy, awakened by an unconquerable wish to return to Vespasian Tower, which the letters of Rhona had inspired ; that whilst raging under this dominion of his undutiful malady, A'Parry had come under his displeasure so se¬ riously, for presuming to advise filial obedience, that he unfortunately, but as it seemed in punishment for his unmeet obstinacy 7 , substituted for his personal at¬ tendant a Yorkshire simple youth, who had very recently entered Lord St Oswald's
establishment. By this simple rustic he had been persuaded to follow his wishes, and to^ set out for England, not only without his father's consent but his know¬ ledge ; and also brought him opportune intelligence of a yessel being about to sail for Whitby; and in which he eventually embarked — solacing himself with the thoughts of seeing her on this his>oute to Vespasian Tower. Nothing, his lordship stated, during an auspicious voyage, awakened any suspicion of his new valet, or of those with whom he had so warelessly voyaged ; but, that when they debHved in the dead of night, he found, to his dismay, that he had been trepanned into the dern power of demons, who, with savage de- spiteousness, gagged, bound, and blind¬ folded him, and dragged him to that noxious dungeon from which her che¬ visance at liockcliff had delivered him ; — a dungeon, where the cold earth was his couch, mouldy bread and impure water his food ; his employment, con-
trition and dire apprehension ; and his pastime, cruel treatment from his gaoler. Lord de Mandeville, now acutely feel¬ ing how very reprehensible his conduct towards his affectionate father had been, and which the opinion of his sister upon the sorrowful subject most painfully in¬ creased, felt so much shame and distress in the idea of addressing his parent upon the subject of his transgression, that Mary undertook to do it fbr him, and to act as a mediatrix with her kintl father for her offending brother; and without delay the lord abbot of St. Stephen's despatched her letter to Lord Cromwell, to be forwarded in safety to Lord St. Oswald. The flight of De Mandeville and Lady Mary from the hermitage of the Black Canons proved eventually advantageous to Fitzrivers in his military enterprise, as the ruffians who possessed themselves so unceremoniously of the horses they required fbr flight did to our fugitives ; for these ruffians, in their flight upon the horses they had snatched, led off the
pursuers of our flying trio in belief that these flying horses still carried those whom they had at first followed : and at length surrounding them at the identical point where Margaret nad anticipated the occurrence of this possible event, and perceiving the appearance of the ruffians, they at once conceived their steeds to have been stolen by common thieves, and not by those whom they had imagined ; and having now r no time to spare from the meditated abduction they were engaged to perform, for bring¬ ing horse-stealers to justice, they roughly dragged in their turn these illicit riders from their saddles, and in vengeance for the wild chase they ascribed to them hurled the offenders headlong into an adjacent pit. The enterprise m which Sir Algernon was engaged when he so providentially encountered our helpless fugitives, was that of exploring certain caverns in that neighbourhood for suspected conspira¬ tors; and to cover this secret enterprise the litter had been sent with the party,
to appear as if escorting that were the duty under performance. When Alger¬ non was proceeding in this research, after his reluctant departure from St. Stephen's, he was aroused from painful meditation by the moans of one of those who had unhorsed his young friends, and who still lay in the pit pitiably injured by his barbarous overthrow. The compassionate heart of Algernon led succour instantly to the unfortunate sufferer, who was kindly conveyed in this useful litter to a monastery in the route of our military party, there to be taken care of; and ere the departure of his benevolent rescuer from his fearful situation, the suffering man volunteered a confession to our young hero relative to those political alarms which had agitated the garrison of Scarborough ior some days past, and of another serious conspiracy being in existence : and to this confession he was led through viutlictive irritation against his comrades, who had been so little injured in their rough de¬ posit as shortly after to effect their own
escape out of the pit, leaving him behind them to die of fractured bones and hunger. So judiciously, so effectively, and with such intrepidity of individual valour, did Sir Algernon Fitzrivers perform the im¬ portant service for the state which the rescued sufferer's confession led to, that Sir Ralph Evers, the moment he ex¬ pressed his wish for such indulgence, gave him leave of absence, since all alarm hatl been set to rest by his prowess ; antl Sir Algernon without delay repaired to Η oliami, and was, through the rapidity of his own movements antl the swift sail ing of the vessel which wailed him over, the first to convey the joyful intelligence tt) Lortl St. Oswahl of the safety of his truant son. By a singular concidence, Latly Mary's letter to her father was conveyed to his hand by the same government despatch which brought him an epistle from Lady Warburg. Lortl St. Oswahl had not yet recovered to invalescence from the severe illness which parental agonies had Ίη-
flicted, upon the fearful disappearance of his son, nor from the effect of excess ol joy which the intelligence brought by Algernon had awakened ; so that his lordship, fearing the consequence of the perusal of a packet from Aibalanda upon his now easily agitated nerves, summoned Algernon to remain with him ere his trembling fingers dared to unclose an epiaStie, which the signature informell him was from the wild Mary. With a hounding yet quailing heart, panting for, yet shrinking from the daring of in¬ specting it contents, he eagerly snatched the first pretence he thought of to delay the perusal of" that which was to bring him intelligence of his thirling boy, lest, whilst he hoped for gootl, it might per¬ force have come latlen with misery ; antl turning to Algernon, said, with a faint effort at a smile — " Marvellous mature- ment, I wis Sir knight, at Aibalanda ; — a letter, in sooth, from Lady Mary, with¬ out a blur ; antl each line in apt agree- n. .'lit. This is proof she has not of late misused her tune, as whilom. Now, it V Uli iU
imagines me, her writing is as meetly fair as Lady 7 Warburg's ; and more case withal in the forming of the characters." His lordship now, with a panting heart and breathless expectation, ventured upon the task of exploring this fair perform¬ ance ; and his agitation became more and more visible, until tears began to stream down his quivering cheeks ; and at length, in a state of deeply excited sensibility 7 , he threw himself upon the bosom of the alarmed Algernon, and sohbeti outright. " Be not agazed, my friend," at length exclaimed his lordship; "these are not tears and sobs to sorrow me, but to rap. ture the parental bosom. Aly boy, my darling, is the repentant prodigal. Aly long thought mindless A fary is her mo¬ ther* s counterpart. Beati, read Sir, Al¬ gernon; antl say you, have 1 not cause to affection them—-ay, and to wee}) in pa¬ rental contentation ?" Algernon did read, and every line went promptly to his heart; anil the tear,« of Algernon arose .spon taneously
to glisten in his eyes the tribute of ad¬ miring sensibility. " I shall steer incontinently for Alba- landa," at length said Lord St. Oswald, endeavouring to renovate composure. "Lortl Cromwell, in this day's despatch, has kindly vantaged me by liberation from durance here. At Aibalanda we will kill the fatted calf, Fitzrivers ; and then take my Adela's own daughter with us to Vespasian lower. Mary shall no longer live in partance from her sire." The bustle wdiich attended the rapiti departure of Lord St. Oswald antl suite for England, — as he sailed fbr Whitby in a very few hours afler he received the king's permission to quit the Netherlands, — chased the peerless Rhona's epistle completely from his lordship's recollection until embarked upon his voyage, when he lost no further time iu the anticipated pleasure of its perusal ; and he found it a most elaborate congratulation upon the late escape of Lortl tie Mandeville. With that aspect of philanthropy which she had been early taught to assume,
and by which to allure universal admira¬ tion, she pleaded for the truant to be forgiven : y 7 et, whilst doing thi.s, artfully allowing, unconsciously as it were, her own superlative ideas of duty to appear as if doing violence to their high sense of a child's obedience, whilst kindliness was thus leading her to plead for a de¬ linquent. Lady Warburg conceived this episto¬ lary 7 composition the most perfect she had ever accomplished fbr effect, or that ever y 7 ct was penned by a highly 7 gifted mortal ; yet Lord St. Oswald was not pleasetl with it. After the affecting form in which the artless Mary had af¬ fectionately 7 portrayed the penitence of his darling boy, it grated discordantly upon his parental feelings, to perceive, with sensitive quickness, something very like an invidious mode of treating his juvenile transgression ; which having in his heart long pardoned, he had ceased to consider of magnitude : and since De Maiuleville himself so properly ami pa¬ thetically deplored it, he did not thank
any other person officiously to remember and record it. And completely discon¬ certed upon this point, no other in Rho¬ na's composition couhl prove more for¬ tunate in pleasing his lordship ; who at length handing it to Fitzrivers, who was seated by him on the deck of the Bal in¬ ger, in which they were making rapid way fbr England, said, — " Algernon, the perceivancc marvels me, of how the tables have found turnment, since it afore¬ time fortuned me to receive on the same day an epistle from Rosamond's fair daughter and my own. The difference in composition is full as striking as can be appointed, but the side upon which superiority now preponderates vve did not imagine us to anticipate" Fitzrivers perused Rhona's letter with abounding heart ancl profound attention, and at every hue he reati coloured still more perceptibly, but not with the pleased emotions of tenderly affected sensibility which had accompanied the perusal of Mary's artless composition; and when he came to its close he could not but jllJL
acknowledge himself dissatisfied with it ; for, besides feeling wounded fbr his be¬ loved De Mandeville, who had so cruelly suffered fbr his transgression, there was something in the epistle which he feared must be pronounced self applause, which couid not meet his approbation, and led him audibly to say—" In sooth, my ho¬ noured lord, the tables are turned ; and now, upon our view and advisement of this epistle, we must say in reverse of old decision, ' Ah, how unlike to Lady Mary's i ' "
CHAP. XVIII. Our readers may remember how Ladv Mary de Rhone had, in her first know¬ ledge ofthe fascinating Rhona Warburg, evinced every symptom of perfect amity; and then suddenly, without any apparent reason, commenced the most dcterminetl hostility : but although the cause of this inauspicious change was not apparent, it had been excited by more than mere childish caprice. Maud, at that periotl converted to Lutberism, yet still clinging to many tenets and customs of her former faith, had been in the habit of daily taking her young charge—the little more than infant Mary—to the castle chapel, there to pray upon the tomb of Adela ; under the firm belief that the prayers of such an inno¬ cent for the mitigation of her own mother's possible immortal suffering a 1
could not but prove efficacious. Upon one of these .solemn visits to the chapel they beheld the beautiful lihona, without a companion, stealing softly on before them, unconscious of observers, and creeping noiselessly onward as if to secure herself from any ; and arriving at the monument whither they were speed¬ ing, spring up upon it, and then, assuming the most contemptuous looks and ges¬ tures, stamp and spit upon the beautiful form that was sculptured upon the sarco¬ phagus in représentât on of the ill-fated Adela. From this very moment Mary's adoration of her fond mother led her to war wdth Rhona, though the threats of Rosamond's satellites in Aibalanda Castle silenced the indignant child from pro¬ claiming the cause of her violent but just enmity ; for these threats being the menace of evil to her brother, if she spoke of the giddy prank of lihona in the chapel, effectually silenced the affection¬ ate sister, though still the memory of the adoring child bore unfading record. Early impressions are not readily ef-
faced ; and Mary still, as she grew up, and became as firm a votary of the Pro¬ testant faith as ever sprang from the reformation, yet never omitted an oppor¬ tunity of praying upon her mother's tomb; not for the repose of her soul — for that Mary firmly believed hatl earned its own tranquillity — but, somehow, she thought her prayers aspirated in that sacred spot must prove more efficacious, through the influence that might emanate from her mother's virtues. From the moment, therefore, Mary was sufficiently recovered írom the severe effects the adventures of Grey Clough hatl had upon her nerves to visit the chapel, she had found it an insurmountable achievement to reach that consecrated spot ; since, if for a moment she found herself with¬ out De Mandeville by her side, and endeavoured for a transit to the church, she was sure to find her path crossed by the militant friar of St. Stephen's monas¬ tery, to remind her, that after the late occurrences it was unmeet fbr her to tarry one moment alone, and that therefore he r 5
should prove her engardment to her place of destination ; and so fascinating and instructive she found his conversation during the engardment, that she never could have regretted these encounters, only that they impeded the sacred pur¬ pose she had at heart : and in the very- first of these encounters, it struck her quick perception, that beneath the garb of this militant friar she might recognise their helmsman to RockcîiflÇ and identify one of the personations of the hermit of St. Stephen's valley. Mary was at length permitted to ac¬ complish this anxious project ; and the cause of this anxiety to breathe a thanks¬ giving at the hallowed tomb of her mother just at this particular period, arose from the miraculous escape of the offspring of the being who lay beneath this sacred tomb from the fell plots of villany. The pure effusions of Mary's pious heart had been fervently though lowly articulated, and she was arising from her knees, when a deep groan assailed her ear from the opposite side of the chapel, as if from
the tomb of her grandsire ; and ere the vibration of frame the surprise occasioned had subsided, a deep and hollow voice audibly, yetin cautious tones which were meant only to reach her ears, uttered — " Mary of Aibalanda ! list ! and be¬ ware ! The foeman of your house is your guileful champion. In the militant friar it fortunes you to behold the death¬ man of your race — Ethelbert de Cour¬ land!— The assassin of your kindred wears that guise í — Fear him ! —fly from him!" Mary shuddered and trembled ; and, in defiance of reverence to the dead, com¬ menced a wild flight to obtain sanctuary in Father Adrian's study, where she be¬ lieved the lord abbot of St. Stephen's then was, and in whom she would confide this terrific warning, and learn from that sapient and pious man what she was to credit of it, and what to doubt ; fbr Mary almost believed the possibility oí this alarming visitation being superna¬ tural. Maud, and many inhabitants of Aibalanda, were tinctured more or less u ?
with superstitious fancies; and though Lady Mary, through the companionless lire she had been so often doomed to lead having caused her to roam that desolate castle at all seasons alone, had imbibed a species of courage inimical to su¬ perstitious influence ; yet, that super¬ natural agency might be resorted to by Divine Providence for its wise purposes she dared not disbelieve, and therefore upon Father Kenrick's judgment she determined to rely. This determination of Mary's to speed Iter to the lord abbot was spontaneous, so that in the moment after the utterance ofthe alarming warning she veered about to take wing ; when she beheld advancing towards her the militant friar, who bad been .so solemnly announced to her as the deathman of her race, and instantly poor Mary became transfixed to the spot whence she first perceived him. "Child of the sainted Adela!" this friar now exclaimed, and, as he still ad¬ vanced, raising the visor which had partly concealed his face ; " in very sooth it
fortunes you to behold in me the Ethel¬ bert proclaimed to you so despiteously as the assassin of your race ; yet Mary, my chihl İ my all in this lorn life ! fear me not, nor fly from me." Mary now r ventured to look steadfa.stly at this advancing terror, and first beheld, unimpeded by disguise, the prepossessing countenace of Ethelbert de Courland — the beloved, the betrothed, of her hapless mother; and in this first view beheld all of mental agony which could strike upon the tones of commiseration, with all that proclaimed how, in youth, he hatl been gifted to captivate: when, subdued at once, by this first unimpeded view, to all the sympathy her tenderly cherished re¬ membrance of her lost parent inspired, she burst into an agony of tears, ex¬ claiming, whilst she wrung her hands in anguish—"My mother! oh, my mother !" and, as she did so, sunk into the expand¬ ing arms of the direfully agitated Ethel¬ bert, without one recoiling effort to pre¬ vent it. Mary, who never forgot to pity the sor-
row of others in the indulgence of her ow r n, perceiving the anguish she had awakened in Sir Ethelbert, made prompt exertion to resume her firmness ; and though with sobs, she softly articulated— " You heard the astcrting voice that seemed to issue from my grandsire's tomb : yet it could not imagine me to wis evil of him my peerless mother affect ioned, and I was speeding me to seek advise¬ ment ofthe lord abbot; and if in sooth 1 have no cause to fear or fly Ethelbert de Courland, you will wend with me in questment of our mutual friend." " Oh, my child í my Mary i that heart, long panged by sore affliction, í ech, and thanks you," replied the agitated Ethel¬ bert. " You fear me not, nor fly me, Mary : nor did the angel you mentally semble fear the hapless Ethelbert ; and only fled from him through the advise¬ ment of wailful duty. Yes, Mary ; the traduced Ethelbert will make salliance with you; since in verv sooth lie mav ilare- fully wend by the side of innocence 1 , to seek the presence of the good and just."
At this moment Weewitte came rushing towards them ; and so sudden was his ap¬ pearance, he made them start,— a start which reverberated : for on the instant Weewitte recognised, in the wreck of manly beauty now before him, Sir Ethel¬ bert, whose unimpeded face our jester had never beheld, since dimpled over with ecstasy of promised happiness on the eve of his expected nuptials ; and whilst pained emotion quivered on the lips of Weewitte, and beamed through every line of his in¬ telligent countenance, he struggled with reeling while he energetically pressed the hand of Sir Ethelbert, and said— " By the phantoms of happiness! 1 swear my fealty, which never slumbered its respect for him whom for many a year disguise¬ ment told me it was unmeet for me avowedly to recognise : but to sav I joy once more to see Sir Ethelbert, would not be soothsaying ; for there must be lack of joyance in meeting whilst memory has pangs for torturance. But why 1 bounced so rudely hitherward, one of our tal Imen gave advisement that Lady Mary had
glided toward the chapel without guard¬ ance." Pleased with this auxiliary, Sir Ethel¬ bert briefly but cordially thanked Wee¬ witte for his kind remembrance of him, and attention to Lady Mary's safety ; and then informed him of the alarm she had sustained, and requested him to examine and search the chapel for the ambushed assassin of his fame, whilst he «hould con¬ duct their precious charge to safe protec¬ tion. To Father Adrian's study Mary was now conducted by Ethelbert, who an¬ nounced tò the lord abbot, who was there alone,—Ethelbert having been summoned froni their conference by the same alarm for Lady Mary that had reached Wee¬ witte,—4he accusation which had been pre¬ sented against him, entreated the good Kenrick to impart to Lady Mary all that fate permitted him to disclose of the cruel destiny of him so mysteriously ar- raigned, and then retired to aid research for this agent in some dire plot ; fbr such Ethelbert considered this accusation,
since his conscience was free to proclaim it not supernatural agency. This request overwhelmed the lord abbot with perplexity, in which his capa¬ cious mind seemed insufficient to aid him. Without consultation with Sir Ethelbert, or serious communion with his own thoughts, he was thus called upon, in the excitement of Sir Ethelbert's anxiety for acquittal in the mind of this child of his care, spontaneously to recount matters of such deep importance, as in their fiist communication to have blighted the mortal happiness of two unoffending beings : but a moment's thought deter¬ mined Kenrick to enter into no serious particulars, but merely-to announce Sir Ethelbert what he believed him — a martyr jto imperative duty ; a man of sterling honour; and so devoted to the memory of her mother, that to his watch¬ ful care she was indebted for the change of system in her education and the com¬ forts of her latter years ; whilst he had devoted himself almost exclusively to
guarding her safety with the wakeful anxiety of a tender parent. Mary was deeply affected by this infor¬ mation ; and her gratitude rejoiced to think her heart had Jed her instinctively not to credit evil report of him to whom she was so indebted. Father Adrian, having heard that Latly Alary had sustained some alarm in the chapel, now 7 made his appearance, to learn, from ocular demonstration, that she was safe : and the dial in this cham¬ ber now reminding the lord abbot that it was time to depart to attend some duties at St. Stephen's, he advised Mary to proceetl immediately, under escort of Father Adrian, to her own chambers; ami promising to visit her in the evening, he bade her adieu, and sought out Ethel¬ bert, whose researches for the accusing spirit had hitherto proved unavailing : but mutually convinced it emanated from * the conspirators of Grey Clougli, they resolved to take measures accordingly ; and Kenrick, now pressed fbr time, hur¬ ried homeward.
But scarcely had the lord abbot re¬ turned from the chapel, after performing those duties which had called him from Aibalanda, ere the possibility suddenly struck him, of this alarming warning to Lady Mary having emanated from the senior hermit of St. Stephen's valley, to weaken her dependance upon the .sin¬ cerity of Sir Ethelbert's intentions: since he(Kenrick)had long cherished suspicion, that, whilst the highly gifted and pious hermit had conscientiously 7 performed a joint part with the also disguised Ethel¬ bert, in the instructions of Mary in those branches wherein Father Adrian was incompetent, the holy man was, at heart, in enmity with Ethelbert ; and either knew, or fancied, .some evil of him. But the hermit was no longer in the valley to question ; he being gone to at¬ tend a convocation ofthe Protestants in Germany. This suggestion, however, soon was silenced, by 7 conviction that the bene¬ volent hermit would have taken some method less harrowing to Latly Mary's
feelings, to weaken her faith in the pro¬ tection ofthe militant friar: and scarcely had this suspicion been thus silenced, ere, to his surprise and joy, his beloved pupil, Fitzrivers, stood before him. After a cordial greeting, Algernon in¬ formed the kind protector of his early years, that he had that morn ing landed, with Lord St. Osw r ald, at Whitbv, from the Netherlands ; and, by the advice of Father Hubert, thev hud repaired to St. Stephen's monastery to avail them¬ selves of the lord abbot's hospitality, whilst they should make a necessary sojourn for the agitated Lord St. Oswald to recover his firmness, which was shaken to the quick by his near approach to bis providentially rescued children ; and that, also, during this sojourn, Lady Mary and her brother might be apprised their father was in Yorkshire. With thai hospitality which many a way-worn traveller had found a right to laud, the good Kenrick ha*tcncd to make the^e weary voyager& welcome ; yet, whilst he did so, his feeling heart beat
with commiseration fbr poor Ethelbert, to whom he knew this arrival would not yield contentation : and in this first meet¬ ing between the lord of St. Stephen's abbev and the lord of Aibalanda, the latter evinced that he did assuredly re¬ quire time, or other efficient influence, to restore parental firmness ; for he seemed not to have one particle at command, when he endeavoured to express his gratitude to the lord abbot for all the benefits lie had conferred upon his chil¬ dren. When the voyagers had partaken of the hospitalities ofthe festive board, Lord St. Oswald and Father Hubert were prevailed upon by Father Philip to .seek from a siesta some benefit to their ex¬ hausted strength and spirits; for Father de Bo urge bad suffered much from the hostility of his \oyage ; and his lordship the kind leech bad beguiled into taking au anodyne, which required sleep to yield to it the full composing influence required. The moment these, thus devoted to
the power of Somuus, retired to their respective chambers, the lord abbot, availing himself of this relief to the per¬ formance of home courtesies, mounted his fleetest steed, and galloped off to convey the tidings to Sir Ethelbert of Lord St. Oswald's arrival, and intention of'taking his daughter with him when he departed from Aibalanda ; and, as he (anticipated, Ethelbert evinced the most poignant affliction at the intelligence, although Kenrick had long advised his contemplating such a measure as at some time probable. The conference now of these anxious friends was, through neces¬ sity, compelled to brevity. The lord abbot hatl to return to his guests, and Sir Ethelbert to prepare for a prompt re¬ treat from Aibalanda Castle: since to repose another night within its walls, when they encompassed the husband of Adda, his wincing heart recoiled from ; and, besides, his guardage of Adela's children was no longer meet, when a father's arm would he there for their pro¬ tection.
A speedy interview was obtained with Mary ; and after breaking to her gently that her father was in England, antl that ere many hours intervened she might hope to receive his blessing, they in¬ formed her of the necessary departure of Sir Ethelbert : but that she need not fear he would stray witle from the power of yielding her assistance ; and that, through the hand of Davenant, any com¬ munication from her to him would at all times be expeditiously conveyed. They then informed her that at present she was only to speak of Ethelbert as personally known to her, to the lord abbot, Fitzrivers, Weewitte, and Davenant : and that rela¬ tive to her acquirements the interdict to candour was removed, since she had at¬ tained information antl accomplishments almost to the very climax that thev could wish fbr her; therefore there no longer existed the alarms which in the earlier days of her education had propelled secresy, through fearing the bereavement of' instruction : that it was needless to advise her uot to make display of her ac-
quirements ; but not to shrink from it to her own disadvantage: while, upon the subject of religion, they both most solemnly conjured her to be cautious, and never to permit the ingenuousness of her nature to betray her into confes¬ sion of her religious creed before any but those whom she herself knew to he effectively imbued with the same princi¬ ples. The parting of the heart-wrung Ethel¬ bert with this idol of his romantic pa¬ ternal adoration was indeed afflicting ; antl Mary sensibly increased it by the melting tones of her gratitude, to which memory had been recounting fbr the last few hours all it had to glow for, and led her to unfeigned sorrow for this neces¬ sary parting, and to affecting aspirations of hopes and wishes that they might re- meet. At length Lord St. Oswald reached Aibalanda Castle; when, through tender¬ ness to the feidings of his erring but cruelly punished son, his lordship would not permit any witness to their interview.
Without one word, lest it might be con¬ strued into allusion to his disobedience, the idolising father clasped his boy to his swelling bosom, and blessed him, and as¬ pirated a pious thanksgiving to a bene¬ ficent Providence for his preservation. But Dc Mandeville, still wilful, would sink upon his knees before his father, and would talk of his transgression, and im¬ plore forgiveness as a boon he did not merit; and in the touching tears he mingled with his parent's, were those of the most lively and sincere contrition. But long De Mandeville would not confine to himself this solace of parental and filial affection ; he yet was compara¬ tively unblessed, until Mary shared his happiness; and .soon the agitateti Edward conducted his trembling sister to her father's anus. As De Mandeville had importuned Mary not to misuse her aspect by much weeping, she endeavoured by every exer¬ tion to confine her tears within their boundaries; so thata.s her father embraced and hung over her with paternal tender- VOL. ?. s
ness, he, in amazement as well as exulta¬ tion, beheld in his daughter's aspect not one remaining trace of the portentous Roman dwarf; and at length, when the tender sensibilities of this meeting with his children after their miraculous escape from murder and misery allowed the feelings of Lord St. Oswald to assume an aspect ot composure, De Mandeville, with a face dimpled with a smile, de¬ manded, what visonomy Lady Mary liad at length assumed ? " The visonomy of my darling sister El- mina, who died ere you saw light," replied his father ; " but in form and manner she is in very sooth her angel mother." After a mournful pause, Lord St. Oswald continued:—" Fitzrivers gave me conten¬ tion in apprizement of how meetly time had vantaged Mary's aspect, and made much commendation of the graces of her comportance ; but, Mary, how came this pleasing maturemcnt of manner?—« Has magic been the quaint performer in your pupilage ? " The blush which mantled Mary's
cheeks, upon the intimation of Fitzrivers having pronounced her appearance and manners improved, increased as her father proceeded, but she replico! not ; and Lord de Mandeviile, with a smile of fraternal affection, saitl — " Prav, m ν honoured lord and father, imagine you it has been my companionship, which has yielded apt tutorage for Latly Mary ? Ay, do I wot, for certes, one of my sire's offspring has been vantaged in much measure by the society of the other : and as my sage predict, I foresay you will discover which eftsoons." The delighted lather pressed each of his chiltlreu affectionately to his bosom, and then said— " I betrust me, .Mary, vou have no discontentation to accompany me and Edward to the metropolis ; as I have political business to transact, which calls me thitherward without tarriance. From thence vve shall make progress to Vespasian Tower; for never will I again make voluntary partance from my chil¬ dren." Although Mary trembled in heart at s 2
the terror of proceeding to Vespasian Tower, she yet, in the mild tones of du¬ tiful obedience, pronounced a ready ac¬ quiescence. Lord St. Oswald, pleased with the manner in which Mary announced com¬ pliance, hastened to inform her, that as soon as he had evinced his glowing gra¬ titude to all who had borne a part in the preservation of his children in their late dern peril, they must set off for London: and the anxious Mary found courage to enquire which of those who had been her instructors and adherents were to be permitted to accompany her from Ai¬ balanda ? " All, Mary," his lordship replied : " for right excellently, it seemeth me, have they 7 performed their task ; and it would rear and sorrow me to disjoint the perfect machine— 4İid we leave behind us even one component part." Mary felt most grateful for this pro¬ mised indulgence, which seemed to divest the prospect of visiting Vespasian Tower of half its terrors.
CHAP. XIX. Fitzrivers had not accompanied Lord St. Oswald to the castle, in consequence of a summons to a private conference with Sir Ethelbert; who, alarmed for Mary in her proposed removal from Aibalanda, and confiding in the honour of Algernon, now, without reservation, disclosed to him the part be had so long taken in the care of the neglected Mary ; all the bitter enmity of the abbess of St. Mildred's and Rosamond to the chil¬ dren of the peerless Adela; how Al¬ gernon's own letter to his early protector, Kenrick, had led him (Ethelbert) to pro¬ cure the abbacy of St. Stephen's fbr him — to place that wise and good man where, by the will of her grandsire, he had a right to claim at least a share in the care of Lady Mary : and ended bis interesting detail, by announcing new alarms for the safety and happiness of s 3
Alary and her brother through this re¬ moval to Vespasian Tower, and by so¬ lemn entreaties fbr Algernon to keep a watchful eye over them, and to give him immediate intimation of every symp¬ tom fbr alarm ; which he would be en¬ abled conveniently to do, since he (Ethelbert) purposed to wend his way after the children of his Adela, and to aid in their protection should that un¬ fortunately become necessary. Algernon could scarcely persuade him¬ self to yield any degree of credit to the proofs evinced by Sir Ethelbert of Ro¬ samond's turpitude towards Lady Mary, and none to the suspicions relative to Mandeville ; and fain would have as¬ cribed all to the deceptious construing of prejudice. However, he solemnly promised to do all thus required of him by Sir Ethelbert, who then bade him adieu with much internal upbraiding; since, relative to Algernon, his heart se¬ verely smote him, and his conscience could not rest. And so actively did heart and conscience operate fbr Fitz-
rivers, that ere another clay closed, Sir Ethelbert had made over a valuable estate to Algernon for ever, and insti¬ tuted their mutual friend Kenrick as agent and presenter of this gift from him. Algernon had not been gratified by his interview with his guardian in any of its bearings : for independent of the evils which he apprehended as pending over Lady Mary, and the unfavourable im¬ pression he was expected to imbibe of the fascinating Lady St. Oswahl, he had conviction conveyed to his feeling heart, that the preserver of his life and bene¬ factor of his destitution was the son of cureless sorrow ; *nd above all, thnt there ©Kj'&ted a something within this guardian's bosom which seemed like a bar- rier to the overflow of genial fellowship,— an inexplicable something, which at mo¬ ments Algernon had felt at a loss to determine upon which side it hovered, ungraciously 7 awakening suspicion of the good faith of one to the other. This interview proved so distressing to s h
Algernon, that it required some little time to recover his composure ere he proceeded to Aibalanda Castle ; so that ere his arrival there the susceptibilities which had overpowered the parent and children in their meeting had tranquil- lised, and they were all conversing in affectionate cominglement — each attend¬ ing with delight to every look and ac¬ cent of their loved companions. To all Algernon was a welco e arri- v al ; and all, with that welcome beaming in their eyes and smiles, held out a hand of amity. Mary's hand he pressed in homage to his lip.s, and seemed inclined never more to relinquish it : and, at least, as 1Ί eminently · 15 her father himself turned his wandering eyes upon lx*r form and face — every glance still inspiring an unvanquishable anxiety to obtain an¬ other; and although yet convinced Rhona's beauty was more pre-eminent in its daze, he found some resistless magic emanating from every look and tone and movement of Lady Mary, twining around his admiration and his interest.
On the following morning, Mrs. Morton and Father Adrian were presented to Lord St. Oswald by Lady Mary, with that just eulogium and affecting gratitude their individual merit and attention to her improvement claimed. Her eu¬ logiums were repaid hy both in terms most gratifying to a father's heart ; and his lordship lost not a moment in making his request to each for their accompany¬ ing their attached pupil from Aibalanda. Mrs. Morton gladly acceded ; but Father Adrian, though sorely grieved to separate from his docile charge, was, through his advance in years, compelled to decline ; and heing one of the community of St. Stephen's, to which monastery he was to return when he quitted Aibalanda, Mary's anxiety for his comfort and happiness was lulled to rest. Lord St. Oswald became so parentally proud of Mary, that he waxed impatient to present to Rosamond, Lord Dalin¬ court, and others, " the wild savage," whom they had pronounced " could never be tamed." Aibalanda awakening s 5
many heart-rending recollections, he re¬ solved not to delay their departure ; and, as Mary was to accompany him, Lord de Mandeville became also impatient to commence their progress, that he might solace liis mirth with her unsophisticated amazement upon all the wonders of the world that were to he opened to her view. But Mary was in no haste to depart from Aibalanda ; since terror of Rosa¬ mond, and sorrow at leaving those who had been kind to her, and tho.se wdio had looked to her for aid and comfort, panged her grateful and compassionate bosom at the thought of this unexpected journey : yet respect to her parent, and affection to him and her brother, com¬ pelled her to the concealment of this regret. But no cause for concealment operating upon those from whom she was to be taken, grief came bursting forth like an overwhelming torrent ; and peti¬ tions came hourly pouring in to Lord St. Oswald, praying, in the most moving terms of rustic eloquence, not to be-
reave the poor inhabitants of the castle and chatellany of Aibalanda of their earthly blessing ; and at length, with such good effect, that his lordship pro¬ mised she should spend some part of every year amongt them. Lord St. Oswald lost no time in evinc- ing his gratitude, in every adequate form, to those who had conferred obligations on him through service to his children : and although the abbess of St* Mildred's had sunk completely in his estimation, yet in courtesy to her, as the cherished a» »'' friend of Rosamond, he made an effort to pay her his respects ; but she declinetl seeing his lordship, upon the plea of in¬ disposition. Indisposition to see his lord¬ ship certainly prevailed ; since she was conscious that, in an interview, she should be posed to ffnckglausible excuses tor her mismanagement relative to Lady Mary, of whose improvement under the aus¬ pices of the lord abbot of St. Stephen's, she had heard from the mortifying re¬ ports of Father Ralph. The impatience of Father Hubert to s fi
see Lady Mary, after a separation of so many years, led him with all possible speed to Aibalanda ; where his rapture, on finding all his predictions relative to his fair pupii so happily realised, could only be equalled by his gratification on finding, by the cordial tone of his recep¬ tion, that Mary hat! not forgotten inm. And now the delight of having near her so many persons who evinced affectionate feeling toward- her, led Mary to forget her terrors at Vespasian Tower, and to exhilarate into the bewitching playfulness which had superseded the hoyden sport- iveness of her earlier days ; playfulness which never failed to fascinate whilst it enlivened those around her. And to increase Mary's fascinations, her brother contrived to conceal her father and Fitzrivers where they couid distinctly hear her when Zarini was giving her instruction ; and when at length the mirthful Mandeville drew forth these eavesdroppers from ambush in an un¬ expected explosion upon the dismayed Mary, and she learned they had more
than once, in this ambuscade, heard her vocal and instrumental achievements, her natural timiditv was lulled to less ay alarm, and she was led on to perform upon the virginals, the harp, and lute, sc* exquisitely, nm\ sing her thrilling strains to such perfection, that her auditors felt almost persuaded that magic guided her touch and warbled in her lavs. At ieimth the dav arrived for the de- partu rc from Aibalanda of Lord St. Os¬ wald and his children, Mrs. Morton, Father Hubert, Sir Algernon, &c. àc. — the rear brought up by wains of baggage, and by whirlcotes for the accommodation of the females of the party in case of rain or fatigue ; while, in addition to the usual attendants, Lord St· Oswald deemed it priaient to be accompanied by an armed band ; fbr although the judicious arrange¬ ment of Wolsey had cleared the highways of freebooters, yet the recent villany prac¬ tised towards his children rendered effec¬ tive protection a necessary measure. But this armed accompaniment ap¬ peared contemptible, compared to the
band which attachment to Ladv Marv led forth, the morning of her departure, to attentl her through the domain of Ah balanda, — the lortl abbot of St. Ste¬ phen's, with his magnificent retinue and the chief of his monks, followed hy every man, woman, and child ofthe chatellany who could command a horse, or legs, to bear them even part ofthe lorn wav with the long-cherished idol of their esteem and gratitude; and so esteemed, that now the wailings and lamentations of this farewell escort proved more than poor Mary's for¬ titude could sustain with firmness, antl compelled her to weep her adieus, as fa¬ tigue, by degrees, decreased the number of her followers ; until this sobbing vale¬ diction was at last extended to the lord abbot himself, and the now almost dumb- stricken Father Philip, who could no longer call forth a smile or playful sally to chaffer with Lord de Mandeville, nor a jest for bartery with Master Weewitte. This tedious route from the northern boundary of Yorkshire to the metropolis cannot admit of a diary of its progress.
The palfreys <m which the females jour¬ neyed, with their fair riders themselves, required many more hours of re* t than would have been merman for the more robust members of our cavalcade : and not unfrequentiy. iu the e Um¿ pauses the suppressed monasteries were sorely misset! hy Lord St Oswald; for the recent plot against his chiltlreu taught him to tremble, whenever disfmce from great towns compelled their sojourn in any of the lonely hosteliies on their way. In tins tedious march, as Lon! St. Os¬ walt! almost invariably proved the watch¬ ful guardian of hi.s thoughtless heir, Marv almost js invariably found Sir Algernon her protecting shield; whilst Weewitte rode close behind hen with his keen and searching e>e making excursive glances in every direction in quest of possible evil, that his powerful arm might be in readiness for counteraction. And thus dav after dav accumulating the kind and courteous offices of Algernon for Marv, and, in this long escort, the intellectual stores of Mary being called forth in con-
verse with him, it was no wonder that, when this long travel ended, Algernon stood higher far in Mary's grateful esti¬ mation, and Mary in Algernon's ad¬ miration, than when they commenced their progress : and, indeed, so com¬ pletely had Mary entwined around the interest at least of Fitzrivers, that as he entered the metropolis by her side, and she sustained her first alarm, it shot like a barb d arrow through his heart, that in one .short month he should be doomed to relinquish his guardage of her; for at that periotl his leave of absence from Scarborough would expire. Mary, who had never entered any town but Whitby until the commence¬ ment of this long journey, had proved high amusement to her brother by her amazement and alarms whilst passing through each city ; hut all these faded from remembrance when she made her first entrance into London on the eve of St. John the Baptist. To please Lord de Mandeville, our cavalcade diverged from their direct line to Thames Street ;
for his lordship was anxious to show Smithfield to his .sister ; and that abo, in her wend from thence, she might descry with the most imposing effect,—should it chance to be lighted, — "the lantern on Bow steeple ; placed amiti arches, where¬ by travellers to the city might have a sight thereof antl not miss of their wav." But this important luminary was not long looked for, nor even thought of¡ by Lady Alary ; sights so much more marvellous awaited her admiration. St John's vigil was at this periotl tlevoted to public rejoicing. The citizens at carl ν dawn decorated their doors and windows with green branches, and gar¬ lands of gay flowers ; whilst at eventide they illuminated the exterior of their houses with innumerable lamps suspended upon branches of curiously wrought iron. And, perhaps, no moment could in those days have been more happily chosen for a novice in metropolitan display to make her entrée, both for her own gratification, and that of those of her companions who derived pleasure from the artlessness with
which she expressed the alarms, amaze¬ ment, and delight?, that at every ??? step assailed her ; alarms from the pe¬ rilous state of the pavement in many passes causing her palfrey to stumble; whilst the heavy creaking of the pon¬ derous sign.s, and the incessant rattle of the importunate beggars' clack-dishes, with various other astounding noises, made the poor country animal to start and shy. For amazement and delight, Mary found many and many an object. In¬ dependent of the brilliant illuminations, were bonfires in all directions, with their animated accompaniment of high-flying, feet-working, heart-bounding dancers around them : here and there grand processions from the remaining monas¬ teries in celebration of the vigil : in¬ numerable persons, moving or grouped, all garbed according to their individual rank, from the rustics of the neighbour¬ ing villages, now thronged into town to see the sights, up to the nobles of the realm : exhibiting in corners or meet
points, were to he heard or seen the feats of jugglers, or drolls, or motions: mauy a noise of music—stationary, or posting onward to the taverns in the Vintrv or elsewhere : many a city dame and damsel proceeding homeward, after visiting abroad, guarded by an ap¬ prentice or journeyman with a great club on his shoulder, but without the usual accompaniment of a lantern, — the season and the illumination making such unnecessary : with elbows resting upon many a half shop-door, and amid the green boughs, now were beheld gaping for sights a smirking shopkeeper, with his wife and daughter ; or the longing youth, who, clad in sackcloth, felt on such a night the chain of apprenticeship moist galling : whilst the higher ranks of citizens might be descried ; ^ more elevated regions — even in tl * upper chambers of their houses, which, being the largest and most luminous, were ge¬ nerally esteemed their best; antl as each story jutted forth beyond the one be¬ neath it, the summit chambers in narrow
streets presented the friendly intercourse to vis-d-vis neighbours, of shaking by the hand, gossip whispers, or love's lête- à-têie : and in addition to these neigh¬ bourly conveniences, Mary had the novel prospect of beholding, in an intersecting street from that she paced, a party of minever and net-capped dames stationed at opposite windows, partaking of the same supper-mess extended from one house to the other by a dinner-board. And in addition to all these wonders, our fair novice had ever and anon the recreation to behold numerous cavalcades of lords and ladies, gentlemen and gen¬ tlewomen, with magnificent retinues, pacing from the banquet they had been attending, or their rural excursion, to the handsome dwellings of the nobility and gentry then dispersed about the city : whilst not unfrequently the busy scene was diversified by the brawls of intem¬ perance ; or sullied by the figure of a badged culprit from the Sanctuary of St. Martin's-le-G ranci prowling abroad fbr prey ; or embellished by a band of
splendid maskers sallying forth as eques¬ trians or pedestrians upon some mum¬ ming sport according with the vigil, to be enacted in the fields for midnight marvel. But notwithstanding all the delights Mary thus encountered, so many alarms mingled vvitli them, that she almost be¬ lieved joy preponderated over regret when the entrance of the town mansion of her ancestors was accomplished. But although enclosed within the high walls of Oswald House, Alary was soon led by her restless and initiated brother to dis¬ cover that all the glittering sights per¬ taining to the vigil were not excluded from her observation ; since, from an upper gue«t-ehamber, a picturesque and unimpeded view was presented of the Thames, which now was brilliantly illu¬ minated along its banks and in its stationary barges, whilst numerous lamps glittering in the small craft that were gliding over its surface seemed like the inverted constellations of the firmament. And in beholding all these fascinating
wonders, from London Bndge to West¬ minster, Mary declared she never could weary : yet she grew pale, and her eyes blinked j and poor Mrs. Morton became so worn out with fatigue, that her pupil at length perceived it, and instantly pro¬ posed to retire; which aSO pleased her father, that he promised to take her on the morrow to witness another marvellous spectacle, — no less than the mustering of the city watch. The sleeping chambers even of the nobility in the sixteenth century evinced little of the comforts which now conve¬ nience the dormitories of the wealthy : and Oswald House being, like Aibalanda Castle, despoiled of its best household stuff for the decoration of Vespasian Tower, Lady Mary, Dame Morton, md the damsel Maud occupied the same apartment, where, if they did find some¬ thing more luxurious than a sacke of chafe* to rest their heads upon, or dog- swain or hopharlot for coverlette, they hatl not much comfort to tìoast . and not
until some time dedicated to contrivance had elapsed, did Lady Mary find herself actually deposited in a truckle bed ; where soon, in despite ofthe shouting on the river, the explosion of chambers from the gardens on its embankments, and the merry peals from the neighbouring steeples, she fell into a tranquil slumber, which gave to her aspect health and loveliness when she appeared soon after sunrise at the breakfast-board of her father, who, immediately after that solid meal was ended, repaired to Lord Crom¬ well's country residence at Hound's Ditch, to discuss the points of foreign politics which Lord St. Oswald had been so long engaged in warily observinff. Ο ? ? *f D At length the hour arrived for pro¬ ceeding to Chepe, to behold the mus¬ tering oí* the city watch : antl under a supposition that Mary might be further gratified by a view of her sovereign, whom it was rumoured would attend, as he had usually done, with his consorts, and as the royal party had ever been stationed to witness this spectacle at the King's
Head in Chepe, Lord St. Oswald con¬ ducted his party to a haberdasher's where his family had large dealings, exactly opposite the royal stand. But in this expectation of His Majesty's appearance, Lady Mary was, with the multitude, dis¬ appointed : however, the prime spectacle of attraction was attended with no defeat of expectation. This array of civil guard- ance comprised a numerous host, all garbed in white fustian embroidered with the city arms, and attended by several hundred ereset bearers, followed each by a sort of page to carry oil ; and these, with the accompaniment of' henchmen, morrice-dancers, lord mayor, sheriffs, all the city officers, with every gorgeous pageant usual in processions, formed al¬ together no contemptible spectacle. In this haberdasher's was an immense throng of spectators assembled, and owing to Lord St. Oswald's late appli¬ cation it was with difficulty any accom¬ modation could be obtained ; and only for the attractive appearance of Lady Mary leading some of the assembled
occupants of the window 7 into kindness towards her and her brother, in making room for them, they would have seen but little of a spectacle which had caused Christian king of Denm«. ? to exclaim, " Would I had so many halberdiers, archers, and pikes ! then, I trust, I would punish those who have dispossessed me of my realm." Lord St. Oswald, Father Hubert, and Sir Algernon, had seen this attractive spec¬ tacle before : the two first, therefore, con¬ tented themselves with seats as free from street observation as if in Aibalanda Cas¬ tle : but they had here power to watch over the safety of those they were anxious to protect, and found amusement from the speculating dames and damsels near them, who warily expanded their smiles of courtesy to the stranger who ap¬ proached them, as that stranger's garb directed; since, happily for prudent cau¬ tion, the degree of rank was proclaimcil hy material and embroidery as faithfully as hy a herald; and apparel displayed, vol. ir.
in its formation, marks to testify almost to a marc the possessions of the wearer. Algernon, anxious to be near Marv ^ yield her service, and to listen to her art¬ less and animated observations, contrived to obtain standing room by the window frame where she was exalted on the tern- poraiy scaffold, and where, although he could in no wise obtain a glimpse of the street spectacle, he yet had an oblique view into the windows of the King's Head ; and upon which our readers may sup¬ pose his admiring eyes were riveted, when, amid the wedged in throng assem¬ bled there of gaily trapped and entrap* ping fair ladies, he beheld the peerless Lady Warburg seated between a lady and a gentleman. The one he promply per¬ ceived to be the beautiful Catharine Howard ; but the other, from the abun¬ dant crop of beard which had been ah lowed to fertilise over his mouth, he could not immediately recognise, — a cilicious disguise, which both awakened curiosity and impeded its gratification ; curiosity that considerably augmented by the
earnest converse held between this man and Lady Warburg, which not even the spectacle in the street seemed to possess the power of interrupting : and when their conference was ended, the man, with a shake bv the hand of evident amity, bade Rhona adieu, and disencum¬ bered himself from his seat. In the different light which this change of po· sition occasioned, Algernon recognized in him Sir Rupert Warburg j and when at length the pageant had terminated, and Algernon was attending Lady Mary homeward, he caught another identi¬ fying view of this bearded niding turn¬ ing the corner of a street, but now with his Sanctuary badge unimpededly con¬ spicuous. The appearance of Sir Riipet in¬ creased the anxious alarms of Lord St. Oswald, His lordship was aware that Sir Rupert was in Sanctuary ior debt ; but his alarm arose from fearing that he had heard of Mary's arrival : and if; in¬ deed, he had been the culprit who had planned her abduction, he might be ho-
vering in this part of the metropolis to make a second attempt of daring villany. The alarmed father became all impa¬ tience for another interview with Lord Cromwell, to expedite the adoption of measures for the safety of his children ; whilst, through this portentous appear¬ ance of the alarming Rupert, his lord¬ ship determined not to permit his trea¬ sures to roam through the streets of the metropolis, even to show Lady Mary any of its wonders, and only to permit their taking airings on the Thames ; for as he had an armed boat, made warlike for rejoicing seasons, he felt confident they might venture forth upon this track with little apprehension.
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME..
Lovr>o>* Pniitwl h) ?, ív, R. SpotPswooiit. LVow-Strcet-Stjuatv.
