Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Sir Francis Darrell: or, The vortex: a novel
SIR FRANCIS DARRELL; OR THE VORTEX,
LETTER I. Sir Ftwicis Darrell to the Hon. Lewis Vernon. Bramblebear Hall. So much for your present, pursuits—1 will noAV resume the subject of my last. How 1 Avish you were upon the spot! Vour taste for the ridiculous Avould be fully gratified, and, if you felt inclined for more serious amusement, there is no " lack of argument." Within the last week our guests have been doubled in number. — Some of them VOL. I. B
my, old acquaintance—our host you al¬ ready know — absurd as ever, but rather duller; and I should conceive very trouble¬ some to such of his very good friends as find his house more agreeable than its owner. I confine myself to observation and do not find him at all in the way — Veramore and Rivers are of a different opinion. 'The former in particular im¬ parts to me many pathetic complaints on the want of opportunities (nothing else being AA^anted to the success of the said Veramore) created by the fractious and but ill-concealed jealousyofpoor Bramblebear, whose Penelope seems to have as many suitors as her name-sake, and, for aughf I can see to the contrary, with as much prospect of carrying the point. In the meantime I look on and laugh ; or rather I should laugh were you present to share in it—Sackcloth and sorrow are excellent wear for soliloquy, but for a laugh there should be two, and nor many more — ex¬ cept at the first night of a modern tra¬ gedy. You are very much mistaken in the design you impute to myself. I have
none, here or elsewhere. I agree with you that the world as well as yourself are of a differenf; opinion — I shall never be at the trouble to undeceive it — my fol¬ lies have seldom been ofmy oavu seeking —" Rebellion came in my way and I found it." This may appear as eoxcomi- cal a speech as Verarnore could make — yet you partly know its truth. You talk to me too of " my character," and yet it is one Avhich you and fifty others have been struggling for years to obtain for yourselves. I wish you had it; you would make so much better, that is, xwrse use of it, relieve me, and gratify an ambition Avhich is unworthy of a man of sense. It has always appeared to me extraordi¬ nary that you should value women so high¬ ly, and yet love them so little. The height of your gratification ceases Avith its accom¬ plishment — you boAv, and you sigh, and you worship and abandon. For my part, I regard them as a very beautiful but in¬ ferior animal: I think them as much out of their place at our tables as they would be in our senates. The whole present system with regard to that sex is a rem- b 2
nantofthe chivalrous barbarism of pur ancestors, .1 look upon them as grown¬ up children: but like a foolish mamma I pet some only one. . With a contempt for the ■ race I am ever pleased with the individual in spite of myself. You know that, though not rude, I am inattentive,— any thing but a " beau gareon."— 1 would not hand a woman out of her carriage, but I would leap into a river after her. — However, I grant you that as they must walk oftener out of jchariots than into the Thames, you gentlemen servitors, corte- jos and cicisbei have a better chance of being agreeable and useful. You might probably do both, but as you can't swim and 1 can, I recommend you to invite me to your first water-party, Bramblebear's Lady Penelope puzzles me — she is beautiful, but not one of my beauties. You know I admire a differ¬ ent complexion ; but the figure is per- feet. She is accomplished, if her mother and music-master may be believed ; ami¬ able, if a soft voice and a sweet smile could make her so ; young, even by the register of her baptism ; pious and ebaste
and doating on' her husband, ^according to Bramblebear's observation; equally loving not of her husband though rather less pious and t'other thing, according to Veramore's ; and according to mine she detests the one, despises the other, and loves ------herself. That she dislikes Bramblebear as evident—poor soul! I can't blame her — she has found him out to be mighty weak and little-tem¬ pered. She has also* discovered that she married too early to know what she liked, and that there are many likeable people who would have been less discordant and more creditable partners. Still she con¬ ducts herself well, and in point of good humour, to admiration. A good deal of religion — not enthusiasm, fbr that leads the contrary way, — a prying husband who never leaves her, and, as I think, a very temperate pulse, will keep her out of scrapes. [ am glad of it; first, because though Bramblebear is bad, I don't think Veramore much better; and next, be¬ cause Bramblebear is ridiculous enough already, and it would only be thrown away upon him, to make him more so: b 3
thirdly, it would be a pity, because no¬ body Avould pity him; and fourthly, as Scrub says, he Avould 'then become a melancholy and sentimental harlequin, instead of a merry fretful pantaloon, and I like the pantomime better as it is noAV cast. '*■ More in my next — Your's truly, F. Darrell.
<, <r - ' Xr : ( 4! a*"i luiavr vboo . ' -LETTER II. ^ hn,- 1 t r i< a j i '■n*'*' \'f **' ii 'TiJ'^M' Afri Vernon io Sir Francis,Dwell, jj jn *" DEAR DARRELL, " £ - * v ' I must still think you blind to the real character of the sex, and to the purposes __if not of their creation at least—-of their education. Their inferiority is not so obvious as you take upon you to decide. I do not say that they should be in our senates, but I say woe to that country where they do not grace the tables of its senators! What you deem them has been said of their lords by a great poet: « Men are but children of a larger growth,*' &c. and indeed I think upon as good grounds __I could give you examples enough both from books and from life to sup- port my opinion, but you have only to cast your eye round you in the very mansion where you now are yo acknowledge the justice of it. b 4
SIR FRANCIS DARRELL. You "despise the race but arc captivated by the individual— I am something of a realist here and am disposed to think that we do not contemplate the former without carrying along with ns our ex¬ perience of the latter; what we find in the individuals of our knowledge we at¬ tribute to the race, and judge accordingly. I apprehend,'Darrell, you have some reason for your mode of thinking — say., however, what you will, the sex gene¬ rally possesses, all the qualities that en¬ noble the mind, differing, in a few with which Nature has peculiarly marked the masculine character, and which would not be consistent with that delicacy and softness that so amply compensate the boldness and intrepidity, both in action and in council, necessary to men. Bene¬ volence, fortitude, magnanimity, they have in an equal degree, to say nothing of, piety and f other thing, which entre nous is their r grand charm. Yes, J have said it, and * will explain; but first let me say, add to those qualities personal grace and the radiance of female beauty, and tell me if the faint remnant of chi¬ valry ought to be withdrawn ?
If chivalry sprang from barbarism, it was the electric spark struck from flint, it kindled a flame which re-animated ex¬ piring nobility, and, lowered as it has been, still keeps it alive. See what a knight I prove! I think I hear you first laugh, and then looking for my name at the end of this letter, exclaim, <l Is this Vernon ?" Now then for my explanation to convince you that it is he — he himself! Though I think all this due to the character of the race, and do verily be¬ lieve that, compared with oue sex, the balance of all that is good and amiable is greatly in their favour, I find my¬ self thrown by chance, fate, fortune, call it what you will, into a kind of vortex, among a considerable number of the individuals, hardly numerous enough to be ranged under the head of a distinct species, and particularly as they are frequently distinguishable from the race, only by accidents and conse¬ quences. All that belongs 1 to the race these individuals loudly»claim, but they
.,
tacitly pursue^issimilafc objects,.' and in those,pursuits .are perpetually > endanger¬ ing, mot their, rights^but their, places, which they continue to -fill, right - or not, while-they are considered by the majority of the vortex as preserving a justifiable appearance. To be'completed to the taste of appetence, to sing with the pathos of a Sappho, to dance with the twirls of a Presle, to dress with allur- . ing art, to speak in riddles and to look their solution, is the glory of these gay and lovely creatures, and all that they require of one another is the Spar¬ tan virtue. In such a vortex there is no living without gallantry, and he that has no reputation fbr it, must play the part of a noddy. , , . I think my mystery is sufficiently eluci¬ dated, and that you have no more diffi¬ culty in recognizing the features of your noble fellow-labourer (for I will not let you off with your sly pretence of indif¬ ference) in the acquisition of a character, which I shall frankly allow you to have obtained more rapidly, and — you may add if you like —more deservedly than your humble servant.
.FRANCIS < You nvrite withnthehsecurity of sUc^ cess, -and, lli» )suspeetvthat*-.it»renders your nonchalance somewhat ' necessary —i-you are; at iBramblebear Hall, and 1 the jealous-pated/'annafcter, of^it' ( khew you before he committed .matrimony with 1 the beautifuULady Bsfcty, -or, if you will, Penelope,- who, you know, " is beautiful, but not one of your beauties," whose-««figure is perfect,'' whose " voice is soft," whose i" smile '.is sweet," who, «' according to your observation, detests her husband,* despises her wooer, loves — herselfj' and is consequently ready to speak softly, and smile sweetly on the skilful worshipper of her idol. Now, with Bramblebear's titles andi additions, as they are accurately enumerated by your observant quill, indifference is a master-stroke. Enforce it, and I shall not be surprised to hear of his taking pains to lead you himself to the shrine, by way of impeding the avenue to all others. Enforce it, I say, to him, and whomever else you please—but you have no occasion to shut ray eyes—and your attempt instead of acting as a blind
possesses the property of a microscope in dilating to the sight points obscurely imagined from previous study. Frank Darrell confines himself to ob¬ servation ! By the bye, nothing could be better 1 'imagined altogether in reply to my,''hints respecting your character, than the adopting of "this new ingredient; foiVas L observed to you,' the character of a man' of gallantry should not arise from grounds too defined -and glaring, but should rest i on "an airy something, over¬ shadowed'with-the rainbow mist of ho¬ nour, conscience, self-respect, delicacy, esteem, hospitality and friendship. No man can. discriminate and mingle these colours better than yom I am some¬ thing jealous of your skill, having, as you truly say, for some years emulated, your character, from a. conviction that a man of the world, that is, of my vor¬ tex, ' must be^ a man of" gallantry,- to avoid the damning reputation of a noddy, merely considered.as ^holding out to un¬ married damsels that mortifying charm,' a convenient match —exempli gratia,' the '. host of Bramblebear Hall, .
Accomplished as I,think you, the cha¬ racter youfgive pf* Lady Betty as to religion, persuades me that the openly abjuring of it is an error,in you — Can't you manage to make it an eighth colour in the rainbow? My most formidable rival for the smiles of the lovely crea¬ ture whom I mentioned to you in my last is no other than young Rufus Palmer who has a good deal of evangelical talk, and, what is still more alarming, of evangelical ogling. Unfortunately his family are neighbours of the Godfreys, in Hampshire, where they have a beautiful retreat on a small scale, which Godfrey's father purchased for the conveniency of being near the metropolis, having for the greater part of his life served in Parliament for the County in which his principal estates lie. They generally, however, spend the Autumn and Christ¬ mas at Manor House, their seat in Here¬ fordshire. I was in hopes they would have gone down there on the prorogation of Parliament, for besides the riddance of Evangelical Palmer, Godfrey has in¬ finitely more to, engage his attention, 2
consequently die has less leisure'to think Of me, *or of his Penelope, and she has more"* leisure to weave her web; but the expectation of the return of some rela. tivesof his," from God knows where, has decided their stay <at Woodlee for the present,'-though he talks of a probable short excursion either solus, or tete-a-tete with La Belle. ? Godfrey upon the whole is a good fellow, is sensible, and had a regular education, of which he has undoubted¬ ly made great advantage — he does not take the least pains to show that he is a scholar, but every scholar sees it; in his manners he is at ease himself and sets every body abouthim at ease. Though not prominent as a speaker, his opinion is courted by the most distinguished orators of both Houses, and, being from principle independent of party, he is consulted by those of both sides. But in spite of this, his father having lived till his ale habits were irretrievably confirmed, he entered the vortex of life a* perfect animal-machine, and like a dragoon's charger which, backed by his
^IXi^REItL. rider or lefthtodnmselft} instmcti^ly^gal- lops to his allotted* spot,< he obeys,; the word of command.- given* hyua a certam imaginary officer whom old Godfreyihad taught him the magic- of summoning* up to himself, from himself.-- Consequently he was put down among the ,noddies,, : and certain young damsels were* directed lL by their mammas to set their caps.at him, as he was an excellent match. , But he is a very different kind- of noddy from yours—he is not like Bramblebear, dull, ridiculous, jealous, or prying -—yet he leaves few opportunities for the exer¬ tions of gallantry. His attentions* to his wife are neither nauseous on * the one hand, nor constrained on the other — his affection, as I said of his learning, is rather seen than shown; he avoids a dis¬ play of it, but it is detected in a-thou¬ sand ways. ' v *>" '■ j i *w Your science dans^ Yart .militaire v/ill * immediately make" you perceive ,the differenccbetween the fortifications!that defend the heart ofmy enchantress,* and those i that oppose the progress of Vera- more, Rivers; and a certain baronet
who^shall, be., nameless, notwithstanding the- hornwork advanced by engineer JBramblebear to protect the weaker parts. After this, a .noddy would think it time wasted to prolong the siege, if he could think at all upon such a subject —butyou know,better and that with means and time the reduction of every citadel may be calculated, and unless la Belle's heart be a rock, like Gibraltar, go iUmust at last. And that it is not made of impe¬ netrable stuff" certain diagnostics about her eyes and her lips are calculated to remove despair from the mind of a much less determined warrior than Lewy Ver¬ non. Then, I know it was not a love- match : her actions of course are the re¬ sults of duty, and duty we know is a child of reason, of the head, a rough kind of urchin that has little to do with - the heart — It has au arch half-brother, ycleped Imagination, which like an airy sylph is perpetually leaping or flying from one to the other, and will not leave the heart unoccupied. With all her pro¬ priety of behaviour, I think her's is still her own — She esteems her husband —
that perhaps she cannot help doing — but" she does no more. ~ My uncle brought 1 about the' marriage — he'has long known** the families on both sides, and indeed Ave are all Godfrey's voters; noAV mar-" riages that are brought about are 1 " pre¬ cisely the things for our vortex. Though- I say her heart is her OAvn, I do hot mean to liken 1 it to Lady Betty's, Avho is jn Jove ,with herself. I wish 5 she' Avas — no, I rather suspect that she is not upon good;terms with, herself, and there I see the greatest difficulty I haye to encounter. If self-respect be necessary to her, she is labouring to es¬ tablish it in her heart. Many little in¬ cidents induce me to believe ' this, and if she succeeds at the expence of that vain opinion which leads women to estimate themselves by their powers of captivating, I shall then begin to sus¬ pect that she is the impregnable rock. I shall now bring my letter to a conclusion. I meant to say something more as to race and individual, realists, and nominalists. This however will keep, but I cannot keep back my indignation
at your degradation of my powers for aquatic gallantry. Where did you leara that I could not swim ? The Wye, to be sure, is not quite so wide as the Hel¬ lespont, but -were the reward of my crossing the deepest and broadest part of it to be my Hero I would contend with you, and even with the modern Leander for the prize, the foremost on the bank—nay were it to be from Sestos to Abydos. Good night! Your's truly, L. Vernon.
. ri ■> hi.'*- 2 *' *i e- t* LETTER III. IJ 5/r JR«««a* Z>ffrrrf/ to Mr, Vernon. Yes, if I cast my eye round me here, and here only, I should, not wait the twinkling of it to acknowledge the justice of your opinion. Of the men and women assembled at this time under the roof of Bramblebear Hall, the latter far outstrip the former in manhood ; most of them have understandings more masculine; some, pursuits more manly ; others, hearts more undismayable; and one, muscles more pugilistic— Quae maribus tribuuntur, mascula dicas, tit Anna, Piiilotis, that is, the learned Lady Standish, the hunt¬ ress your Cousin Lady Barbara Lewis, the widow Sabretash who is known to have followed her husband, a Captain of Hussars, into an action in which he died on the field, whence she brought his body, and has never since been afraid of any man; and Miss Belcher who with a
softness of face that might be painted fbr a Hebe possesses dimensions of limb, solidity of bone, muscular energy, and pre-eminence of stature that more be¬ token a Thalestris. When I compare these masculines with Veramore, Lord Standish, Rivers, and my host himself; to be sure there is no doubting where childishness is the more applicable. But this gives your' logic no triumph, for if I were to grant, which I readily do, that all the men of your vortex (I thank you for the idea) were mere babes, that would never prove that all the ladies of the said vortex Were not so too. However, I have not time to discuss the point ■— if ever I see cause to think differently, you shall hear of my conversion, meanwhile I beg leave to retain some Mussulman notions, which I have respecting this " Fairest of creation I last and best Of all God's works! Creature in whom excell'd Whatever can to sight or thought be form'd Holy, divine, good, amiable or sweet I" In which apposite quotation you have the authority of a great poet — but remember that poets love to deal in that
fine figure, hyperbole, and that this very poet tacks four monosyllables to the above lines that pretty well deface his own painting. It is but fair to tell you that our circle is not entirely made up of masculine ladies and feminine gentlemen. There are a couple of fine girls here feminine enough both in person and mind, to remind me that the world is not changed — their name is Craven, they are sisters and at the head of the fashionable belles of Peterborough, having learned of Krutzer to play on the piano, to sing of Naldi, and to dance of'Duport. Nor is Lady Standish of Amazon structure or habits, it was to her learning I alluded, for as to her per¬ son she is sufficiently delicate, and " many a luring glance her large dark eye sends on its idle search for sym¬ pathy"— idle, at least, to a bosom now the abode of apathy, like mine: nor, were it otherwise, am I apt to be taken at first sight; we have not met before, and she and her Lord are only visitors for a day or two en passant. Besides, if, as you persist in thinking, I could
not restrain myself to observation, she would certainly make no impression in the same atmosphere with those " loving eyes of tender blue" which have been so shockingly'mismatched with those round unmeaning orbs that have been fixed for the sole purpose of vision in the head of Bramblebear; ,i Lady'Betty stands unrivalled by-any of her .guests. — Her countenance is full of expression, but of guarded expression, and what beams through the long lashes of her eye in spite of herself is corrected and set to-rights by the demure yet graceful smile of her lip which, with the aid of a frigid sentiment and occasional glances at the nearest mirror, betrays the real object of her tenderness. Notwith¬ standing all this, she is not my beauty, for in spite of your compliment to the race, what you 1 venture to call entre nous their grand charm appears to me, at least in married dames, unfriendly to love, which is the zest of beauty. Beauty, abstract¬ edly,' possesses that universal charm which addresses itself to taste, and I can admire it in women as in other things,
as in the symmetry,of a colonnade, in the grace of a Pas dc Ballet, im the colours of the rainbow : but woman's beauty has more to dOiAvith the heart, and much le.ss than is usually supposed with taste*; so comes it that, Avhile we generally agree in opinion as to other beautiful objects, we differ Avidely respecting particular Avomen; and every favoured Jover thinks his oavii mistress a Helen. This is cer¬ tainly a principle in nature, and a happy one. Absolute ugliness out of the ques¬ tion, and even scarcely that, this prin¬ ciple is the sovereign agent of female beauty, the magic that radiates a homely countenance and moulds a common form to accurate proportions. This counte¬ nance and this form constitute the lover's beauty. — If he obtains the pos¬ session of them he is blessed,' if insur¬ mountable difficulties intervene he is wretched — I can conceive madness to result from his state. I could never con¬ ceive a man to go mad for any woman Avho was regardless of him, at least I am sure I could not. i It is upon this principle that Lady
Betty js not my beauty. Sheds gracious and agreeable,, biit I perceive no pre¬ ference of me. -She coquettes a little Avith Veramore when Bramblebear is out of the-room, evidently to amuse herself at his expense, and as she takes much ~\care to hide her dislike of her husband, each of them conceives himself the object of her affection, the one with the ridicu- .lous impatience of a coxcomb, the other Avith the Jnnate jealousy of conscious de- Jnerit, the most degrading, if not the most tormenting, cause of that absurd, pre¬ posterous passion. Your hint as to a skilful adoration of Lady Betty's idol is perhaps not ill- founded, nor am I groAvn so modest as to decline a competition Avith any rivals, much less such as Veramore and Rivers, with the etcmtera Avho compose her train : but the fact is I 'gin to be a-weary of tbe Sun, And wish the estate of the World were now undone. I am. really what I represent myself to you — "I have supped full with horrors," and now, " I pull in resolution, and be-
gin to doubt the equivocation of the promise in which I have found remorse linked with pleasure. I hate the world, Vernon —You are almost theionly man in it in whom I have continued .to con¬ fide ~ men are treacherous, selfish beings, and women are baubles—most of the former shun me and I shun the latter, that is, in society — and even alone I am tired of them. Whether I am led,to it by this apathy, arising rfrom disappointment on #he one hand and satiety on the other, or by some latent unperceived and unac¬ knowledged seeds of virtue in my mind, I know not; but d have entered into a resolution neither to dupe nor be duped. As to Lady Betty, if she bein- deed innocent in spite of the folly that united her to such a mate, .innocent she shall remain for me. There is no judg- jing in a crowd, and I am not likely to bave an opportunity, any more than Vera- more, to come to a sure judgment during my present visit, which an unexpected circumstance will oblige t me to curtail, and that notwithstanding ihe accom- VOL. I. c
phahmect of, your vaticination, for be. hold: me, as your sagacity predicted, the chosen guard of Bramblebear's treasure -^feijt tim. fulfilment of the prophecy and tbe circumstances leading to it de¬ serve a laugh, and I am not in the mood to raise one. -—You shall have it hereafter, ifm the meantime my character does not class me with Heraclitus; for, to tell you tho trutli, I am.tired even of laughing at Fools, wfam yon are not by to excite me. I ant highly pleased with yonr account of yom Vortex, and do adopt both the word and the idea. In such a state gal¬ lantry may be a predominant recom¬ mendation, and little harm ean arise from it during the rapid transit of existence. I believe your Vortex to be of consider¬ able extent, and I see a large and elegant population in your centrifugal circles, as tbey whirl in spiral systems towards the centre of, attraction, (against which the counteracting force is too feeble to maintam them) towards the absorbing y gnlph of irresistible gyration,—towards a gently-protracted but sure perdition.— ft-may be pleasant enough when you.
till the power pf the current hegittsato be felt, but he must have a bold heart or a brainless he^ad, who after that can pique himself on'female folly* .Yon are yet but at the edgo of the Vortex, and,^ like a playful boy in a rapid rivulet which he knows he can stem when he pleases, yon delight in being carried along without effort or resistance. — Wilt you listen to me, ifT say, play not too long? or will you turn to the end ofmy letter to see if the name of Darrell be there ? Vernon! yonr Vortex k no imaginary thing; it is the actual state of a certain portion of civilized countries; a false education and habitual prejudices are the origin of it—the characters that form it are pre¬ pared for their parts as actors for the personages of a drama. It is a showy exhibition the rest of the world are looking on -— it is a play acted in a play, for the world itself is but a larger stage. The glare and the glitter and the enjou- mettt of the comedy in your Vortex dazzle the weak (don't take this to your¬ self) and tempt them to go and mingle c «
in the'scenes, but the wise go away laughing. t ;What will you say when I assure you that my life has hitherto been passed clear of the Vortex ! Will you betieve, that the character you emulate in me has been acquired without the shadow of right to it in the annals of fashion? I am a novice in gallantry, and, paradoxical as it may seem, my renown has grown oui of my ignor¬ ance of the science. If you had known me earlier, I need not have protested much to obtain credit, though I might not have gained by this. You have yet, I see, to learn much of my history, I have indeed played some striking part on the larger stage, where comedies are seldom performed, * but where alternate tragedy and farce are acted in rapid succession. My heart never led me to seduction, but it has at times led me to love. I have more than once without premeditation acteda part in a tragedy, arid once produced a catastrophe -so ' deep — but 1 will not blot this letter with it — Turn 'ro~my talents in farce.
'**■ " r^ »o.5i v t t f * I was still at Eton, whenthe antiquated mania possessed you ot 1 serving some cam¬ paigns, the } laurels of which' I rem'ember you then thought necessary to complete your character, as you now do the myr¬ tles of a softer warfare, Before I was eighteen, (for I remember not the time when I was not my own master, my schoolmaster excepted,) being allowed by the neglect and indifference of Trustees and Procheins Amis, to take possession of Belmont on my mother's death, and about the time I was entered at the uni¬ versity, I stocked the cellars of the Lodge with the best wines of France, Spain, and Portugal, and I opened house to some youths of choice spirit whom I once ac¬ counted friends. I occasionally tenanted the vacant rooms devoted by my an¬ cestors to their visitors with a set of those light fantastic animals who in out¬ ward form and artificial smiles resemble Milton's "last and best of all God's works," but who are distinguishable irom them by their utter disdain of all preten¬ sion to their grand charm, I had heard of the mockery with which c S
."§'0 scSae tif ^thewlts bf tbelasicentury amused , i;ljemselyes^^ inpersonifying the agentsof re¬ ligious ceremonies: though differing little ^'with them, on that subject, and equally ' armed'with all their \ arguments^ against religion, I saw no amusement in their un¬ meaning masquerade, and no point in its ridicule ; but. in the religion of Jupiter, with yvriich my fondness for the classics had made me perfectly acquainted, I found a source of gratification which I unlocked in my Belmont revels, and I ; established Meonidean . and Ovidian masquerades. 1 In those days I considered the table as affording a repast not only to the palate, but to the taste of our intellectual form¬ ation, and I accordingly looked for discus¬ sion and wit and humour, and in fact thei lads' I usually selected did justice to their■ purveyor — they were young men of the most prominent talents. Had their hearts, possessed but a ty the of the soundness and brilliancy of their under- w "standings/ ijshould^most likely have re¬ fined 'some' respect 1 for^my species — x butWour ihteiiectual tilts 1 arid tbiirna-
ments the heart had as little to,do as in our sensual orgies, and we argued down priestcraft, arid bandied ''about 'conceits, quirks, and jests, while champagne 'and burgundy were agreeable; for we none of us ever found pleasure in the com¬ plete sacrifice of our senses to the rosy God. But the revelry of Belmont: was the wonder of the gay, and the scandal of the serious: Modesty cried, fy upon it, and garrulity made its usual additions! till, delivered, over to calumny, my trage¬ dies and farces were worked up into such combustible and inflammatory tales as obtained me the title of Milton's hero in the country,: and that of a man of gallantry in town, — or rather in your Vortex, Yow now see how little I am entitled to the character young men are too apt to think essential to making a figure in life; that I am but swimming at the edge of the current, into which I believe, as I tell you, that I am not likely to plunge. Now, this is no virtue in.me, nor any pretension to virtue; it is down¬ right apathy, proceeding partly, from
satiety, 1 yet still'more from the disgust 1 feeFwith the world, both men and women. But there is, I will own, something re¬ sembling virtue in an odd kind of a feel¬ ing that I have which impels me to advise you, — not to give over amusing yourself at the extremity of yonr Vortex, though by-the-bye this I do also, but —to take care how you force anyone along with you into it. You will find an amazing differ* ence in the results. Take care, Vernon, take care lest while you think, yourself engaged in a Comedy you stumble upon a melancholy denouement. You do not seem to me to have been struck with the character you have given of Godfrey. If he deserves it you will de¬ serve hanging if you make him unhappy. A more truly noble member of society, or possessing more distinguishing marks of a gentleman and a scholar cannot be. A few such men would redeem my opi¬ nion of our species, and make me curse my stars that I stood not on a better footing with them. You must not at¬ tempt to injure him, my dear Vernon; my heart is grown callous at five and
j } ) twenty, and hardly knows what affection is except from what is left in it for you, and that makes me anxious to divert you from a precipice. I know you will say, when once your surprise at this language is abated, that He will not find the kisses on her lips: He that is robb'd, not wanting what is htolen, L$t him not know it, and he'fa not robb'd at all.— that another will if you don't, and that I am striking at the very root of your ambi¬ tion, — all which I allow to be very pro¬ per answers and indubitable maxims, — within your vortex. My advice is not aimed at them at all — my advice is, to ascertain, before you proceed, the real state of Mrs. Godfrey's mind. Is it in the state you assume? It may he for aught I know, and if it is, all I can say is that she is unworthy of such a hus¬ band. — 'Faith, it's very likely, for a wo¬ man she is, and it is the high idea you have unpremeditatedly given me of Godfrey that has led me into this un¬ usual style, not any imagination that she may be an exception to the general na-
.tur^ of:, her sex, though-that^exceptiousrp a, s^all ; nu*cnber, do exist, I believei; For his ( sake it is then that I say, be certain. The ^diagnostics which you tell me you perceive about her eyes and lips are over¬ balanced by what you say of her anxiety to ensure , her . own respect; as : ■■. is j th e weight you give to brought-about mar¬ riages jby the. esteem she cannot refuse, 2&~ cprapa,nied..by an «^e/io»from him, which while, good sense and good manners pre¬ vent \'a display of.it, is detected in a thou¬ sand'ways. 0She must abe 5 worse than .women in general if you judge rightly in thinking her heart unoccupied. If it was indeed unoccupied when they mar¬ ried, if at that time it had never been touched by another, she must be a mon¬ ster if it is not now his, I own the in¬ terest Godfrey's character inspires me with inclines me to wish his wife may be asyorthy of him, and to ascribe that pro¬ priety .of behaviour through which she is seen by you, and perhaps by the world, as acting from/a sense of duty, to the same delicacy of manners in a* still greater degree' than his which' casts the
» veil of refineiUeiit oVer a pas'siorP heard -of with pleasure but seldom seen without disgust. We are hot admitted to the secrets of the sanctuary : ! l there ' and there only ought it' to be v ^displayed. Real and favoured love, in our days, unlike the Thespian deity, has no " hy- psethric fane." It must beseen but by one, it must be taken for granted by all others. So, unless you have unequivo¬ cal proof tiat Mrs. Godfrey's heart is not her husbar d's, I think you may take it for granted that it is, and be assured, Vernon, that that proof would not be long wanting if it were otherwise. — Indeed, indeed, my dear Vernon, you are over-shooting the mark. — Your prismatic professions (I like the simile) may serve in certain cases to throw an airy brilliant mist before the eyes of a deluded husband, but they will not blind such a man as Godfrey, in whose case the very mention of them becomes sacri¬ legious. The ties of honour, conscience, self-respect, delicacy, esteem, hospitality, and friendship are substantial tributes, really due to hira 5 not the ignes fatui c 6
in the regions of gallantry raised to mis¬ lead the jealousy of fools formed and fated to be laughed at. ' A thought occurs to me that may help you in discriminating the character of the lady —get her real opinion of mine. I am no stranger to her beauty though I have never thought of making her ac¬ quaintance, for two reasons; first, be¬ cause I am too tired with the thing to take the trouble; and secondly, which you will say is enough of itself without the other, because it is not likely that I should obtain the entree at Godfrey's. Take an opportunity of hinting such a wish to her, and you may set down her answer as a criterion of her propensities. But tell me fairly what it is, that I may also forman opinion, and whatever that opinion be, I will give it you most can¬ didly. I beg to decline tlie example of Mr. Rufus Palmer — I hate red-headed preachers — it is a most nauseous incon¬ gruity __ besides, though I find no soul- saving qualities in the Scriptures, I am sure they have a damning quality when 3
used as a^ cloak. > Perhaps you .will, ,$ell me the remark is, ill-timed after such.a. sermon against adultery, but , My hair is blacki my eye's ave blue, Fellow sinner, adieu! adieu! < • t * r Yours, / f . . F. Darrell, P. S. Write soon, as I shall not.be here fang, — On the score of swimming, I confounded you with your namesake who was drowned in the Severn. Ac¬ cept my Palinode in the words r of Naso. — Es Deus aquae: nee majus in sequora Proteus Jus habet, ct Triton, Athamaxtiadesque Patljemon.
LETTER IV. Mr. Vernon to Sir Francis Darrell. A sermon with a vengeance! And from you too! How is this? Why,,Darrell, I thought I knew you thoroughly—I give you full credit, my friend, for all the essentials of honour and morals, but certes you are the last man in the world whom I should expect to find soberly and pathetically advocating conjugal con¬ stancy. I was indeed at first surprised, but I soon saw how it was — there is hypo¬ chondriasis in your temperament which occasionally predominates. You were avowedly hipped when you wrote, and not being able to laugh at your guardian¬ ship of Lady Betty's honour, you natu¬ rally slid into a serious essay preservative of La Belle's. She is very much obliged to you, and you are not less obliged to her. What will you say now, if I take
you at your word, and, according to your own proposed criterion, decide that she is a personage of the showy inner drama, one of the Vortex where a man must tri¬ umph or be despised ? Well then, she has no aversion to you j on the contrary, she is your habitual advocate. When¬ ever in her company you are talked ofj and talked of uo man is more, she has always some observation to check or counteract the readiness with which even they who secretly admire openly attack your character — " one should not be* lieve half one hears" — " tales always gain in repetition" —" left to himself from his childhood it is not to be won¬ dered at if he has erred" — " he is still young"— " I have heard that his purse is always open to distress without ostenta¬ tion" — " he is allowed to have genius, which is seldom long at odds with good¬ ness" — and so forth. What say you ? Is this a true criterion ? Shall I put it to account ? What I think even more extra ■ ordiuary is, that whenever she puts in these saving clauses Godfrey always looks pleased, and gives her a smile of appro-
bation; notwithstanding whkaY I tell you fairly I know his door would not be open to you. I had not waited for vour desire to express what I really wish¬ ed—she only gave the general answer that she could not but be glad to see any friend of mine, adding that I should no doubt previously express the same wish to Godfrey. 1 have no doubt she would have liked it, but he, in spite of those smiles I have just told you of; put a de¬ cided negative at once upon it; and the man, for whose temples you have been pleading with such interest and pathos, has no gratitude for the good opinion you entertain of him. I do not mean to retract the character I have given you of Godfrey. I confess I was not v so struck with it as you seem tobe —I thought it a good every-day character, but I discovered nothing to exempt him from the lot oflnsteuow- creatures. However, since I received vour letter I have been studying both him and her with increased attention. The stress you lay upon her desire of self-respect, and his delicate attentions,
together with your reasoning.on thepror priety of veiling affections the appearance of which good company and good sense are agreed not to tolerate, stagger me a little, and I have no objection to con¬ sider whether le jeu en vaut la chandede ; for I am no expiring swain or German sentimentalist who can look forward five years to the delight of kissing for the first time the little finger of his Charlotta. However I do not at present see any rea* sob to suspect that La Belle is an admirer of your Wielands, and as I think that the little I said about her husband reach¬ ed you at a moment when your imagina¬ tion was in a colouring mood, I shall not be in a hurry to raise the siege. Besides I owe Godfrey a grudge on your account, and what would you and all the world think of me if, after a whole winter's pur¬ suit, I should appear to be beat out of the field by a carroty Nicodemus? The fellow is perpetually at Woodlee, and there is no deterring him with deli¬ cate affronts, and gross ones I must not attempt as he is patronized by Godfrey, though even those I am sure would be
of no avail, for his. temperament is not the least evangelical part of him, not. in the warring of his blood, but in the pla¬ cidity of his submissions, and heavenly endurance of rebuke. Curse the crea¬ ture, it is a slim long reed five feet eleven, has light blue eyes with white lashes, a fair freckled skin and a.mouth full of even pearly teeth. Then he talks with such delight of Joseph and Nathan, the Mary's and Magdalen's, at the same time squeezing out a sort of fervid smile from every pore of his face, and widening his eyes as if to make more . way for this seraphic transfusion of soul. He has more than once attempted with affected simplicity to apply" thou art the man" to me: and I must show him that he is not the man for La Belle. He makes awkward pretensions to taste, and writes insipid verses. Why - the Godfreys like him I have no idea — his personal qualities are far below par, and as to family he is a new man. His father I understand was a prosper¬ ous shopman in London, who from his pro¬ fits and great custom began independence
in purchasing from time to time houses at Alton; where he was only knoAvn as a rich citizen of the Metropolis; then in purchasing estates, which gave him consequence in the county. He conti¬ nued enriching himself and died a wealthy man, leaving a widow, a son and heir (Squire Rufus) and two daugh¬ ters to the enjoyment of his accumula¬ ted gains. The girls are singing and dancing fbr husbands, which they are likely to find, their voices and steps be¬ ing rendered irresistibly sweet and grace¬ ful by consols to the amount of " forty thousand pounds of laAvful money of Great Britain, to be equally divided be- tAveen my said daughters" — and the lad, a half-educated gentleman, is thrusting his nose into all the respectable families of the neighbourhood in quest of smiles and praise — he seems to have no per¬ sonal vanity, but a species of vanity more ludicrous if not so ridiculous, that of being noticed for something, any thing, or nothing. You see Avhat a troublesome animal he must be to me, I must find some Avay of getting rid of him.
.A^fine; f picture, you have m^dcapf you? self truly! -r- Weary ;of pleasure, tired of lifeatfi*ye ? and-twenty 1Tshould he seri¬ ously ^ alarmed j. for.; you, if This, was,; the first y^me I .had;fbundi you giving^way tobluCi deyiis;^, Shake them off, my dear Darrejl, and for ever. ^ Life is full of de 7 lights,: and before^nqmanarer they rnore prof iisely. spread^ so blessed .wi^v the the essence:.and encrease the, inpmber of humMjplea.sures,: f IThe classical stores of your Memory, the Ibrilliant visions of your imagination, the luxurious ^ extent of ypuV: j fortutie, jthe command of beauty and: of loyeX ; /Are, these: good reasons fbr, being weary of : the Sun and wish¬ ing the, world at an end? , .Pray step a little farther into my Vortex, nqt yoitr$> and I'll answer for the recovery of your spirits. i( I say mine, , not yours, for anot beingj.so st-rictly, adherent to the rules of rhetoric as, you are, my Vortex has nothingof your inadequacy of centrifugal force,'absorbinggulfj, and sure perdil^pn, £• wilF allow you that siniiles ought 'to be well adjusted in all their beiarings?
but here, whirling, and : something of the giddiness that attends it; made up the extent of my similitude^-'and I had no idea of plunging this pleasant part of European '*; communities into a fright¬ ful Charybdis. I thought of heads diverg- ing to eccentric zeniths, and- between the revolutions recovering a pr6per up¬ rightness, : like the sloping bodies I of spirited waltzers, who at the conclusion of each waltz r are as strait as ever; or, to ' do due honour to an astronomical simile which presents itself;;;-! would have my system likened to'that of Pto¬ lemy, who -set a brilliant sky of suns and stars to'dance in perpetualvortices ardimd this world of ours. YoU may take either of these similes, or both, by way of illustration, only don't engulph us all I beseech yom Something of your minor frolics at Belmont I had heard of, but not of the Classical turn that you gave to them, Which was worthy of tfte enthusiastic idolatry'bf the Heathen deities you were 'so 1 much remarked for at Eton, T think of relating it ; by ■ way of anecdote to
Rufus Palmer; he is a copyist, and rely¬ ing on the proverb, "show me a saint and I'll show you a sinner," I should not be surprised to hear of his peopling his place with Ruths and'Esthers, Bath- shebas and Lady Potiphars., -I am sorry to hear you talk of trage¬ dies. It is in the larger drama you al¬ lude to, or, as I understand it, the seri¬ ous drama of life, that the character of woman stands high, it is there that it must be held sacred. It is there that I remember to have seen my mother honouring her race,'and a sister emu¬ lating her mother. In itself its scenes are rather sedate than sombre, but a fro- , lie of my Vortex played there is michin mallecho ; it means mischief. One must be serious, and that suits neither you nor me. I am not sorry to contem¬ plate it from our gay little Vaudeville.™- Come, step in my friend; it is useless to think of past horrors, sup of them no more, think of supping with Lady Betty, and take my word for it she will be more eloquent, at least more successful in her eloquence than I, in the invitation.
Where and wherefore are you going, and for how long ? The group at Bram* blebear Hall seemed to promise some en¬ tertainment, and then your new office . Think of that Sir Francis. Adieu! my dear Darrell — do not keep me in suspense about your movements, and above all things eschew melancholy. Ever your's, L. Vernon.
LETTER V. Gilbert Saville to George Godfrey, Mq. r " . Milan, Aug. 7th, 181G. MY DEAR GEORGE, Time has begun to shed its balm over wounds which I once thought would have been mortal, and which can never entirely close while my memory remains unimpaired. Notwithstanding the ardour of your invitation to return to England, I own I feel a repugnance, which you will not find it difficult to account for. It is indeed the region of my nativity, but it is also that of scenes from which the most agonizing reflections present themselves to my mind. What have I to do in England, where I am known as a bankrupt in fortune, and considered as the executioner of a lovely innocent woman? And even you, George, how can you continue to esteem or regard.
with the warmth of affection you express, a man Avho at such an early period of your life robbed you of an aurtt you so dearly, so justly loved, and from Avhose noble and cultivated mind you delighted to imbibe admirable counsels, which you prove to me that you have carried with you into the world? Your dear assur¬ ances of unfading remembrance and love, independent of your noble offers, have had their due weight upon my mind, Yes, Geoige, it delights me to believe that you do remember me. You were fifteen when Ave parted; from a child you had had me in view, and for the last three years of the fifteen youi, education was carried on under my roof; and under the immediate auspices of the angel for Avhom you retain so grateful an affection.' The manner in which your heart harmo¬ nized Avith ours, the pleasure you took in our social occurrences, the joy you felt in taking your little Augusta into your arms, and the eager look with which you entreated to be her god-father are vivid in my recollection, and leave me no doubt of your remembrance and attachment. VOL. I. D
v Moderated, as, * my grief has been by the gradual, growth of your goddaughter into the perfect model of her ^mother, and i by other, soothing circumstances, nothing would give me, .greater pleasure than to. throw myself into your arms,- and pass the rest of my life in. contem¬ plating your happiness, and watching her's: but candour requires that I shouki tellyou that I think the repugnance I have mentioned, uniting with a local attach¬ ment I have formed here, would .prevail, had I not two strong additional motives to, comply with the ,wish you have so, warmly expressed. I will,make you ac¬ quainted with these in a few words: Augusta is, becoming, nay is .already, a Roman Catholic,; and she has aur Italian, suitor —both strong against my remain¬ ing longer abroad, at least in this country, in which religion and love are staple- passions, and where it is dangerous to. trifle with cither. . ,, / I am truly pleased, to be able to assure you, that I am convinced that no,impression of the latter nature has, beencmade upon, the heart of my girl*
This circumstance, pleasing as it is. to me/ rendered my continuance in this country painful, for wooers are not so soon repulsed in Italy as in Englandj and this young man, the Count d'Oli- vastro, persisted in a complete persuasion of obtaining her consent, if allowed op¬ portunities to plead Ins passion. As she was not more inclined than. I to give tliose opportunities, and as I had a deli¬ cate part to play with the Count's family, from whom I have received great civili¬ ties, I resolved to make my affairs, and the renewal of peace with France, the motives that induced me to return to my own country. I think the family were not altogether displeased at my re¬ solution, for, though much at their ease, they are not among those whom the French revolution has enriched, and they were aware that the connection the Count sought would not improve his fortune. Young d'Olivastro has some agreeable qualities, but they are dreadfully counter¬ balanced by a haughty, violent and selfish - spirit, and heaven forbid that my Au* gusta should ever be trusted for life to d 2
jx j**** r* j , u 1, ii i'( , , t any being who knows not how to com¬ mand his' passions. ? He is very young, being only^three-and twenty how, 1 and like all the'ypung men of the countries yvhere, Nappleon ruled, he was obliged to serve early in the iuanv> but partaking his family's prepossessions for legitimate succession to the throne, he served un¬ willingly, was made prisoner by the Aus¬ trian, and was allowed to return home on declaring his real principles. Since the return of the Emperor of Austria to Vienna he was advised to go thither to pay his court to the Grand Duke now with his brother, to stale the pretensions of his family to the favour of the sovereign, and to reap advantages which might be expected forliim in con¬ sequence of the grand issue of the Eu- , ropean struggle.' He was not easily pre¬ vailed upon to quit Florence— he would take no refusal to his suit, and he agit¬ ated his own family and Pisani's in a veiy painful and alarming way. His mother, the Countess d'Olivastro, was atone time ' apprehensive that he would 'put an end to himself. ' He afterwards became less
turbulent for a while, but his appearance at the Austrian court being considered as absolutely necessary, he broke out again, and insisted on his mother's expostulating with me on the occasion. The poor Coun¬ tess was very rational, and did every thing in her power to tranquillize him, and to . persuade him to go without delay into Germany ; both Pisani and I endeavour¬ ing at the same time to reason him out of lii& self-willed passion. We could not make him listen to reason, but convinced at length that his interest and fortune would materially suffer if he did not go, he left Tuscany in the same violent temper of mind, declaring that he would sooner die than relinquish his hope. His absence affording me a good op¬ portunity, I did every thing I could to cast a veil over the real cause of my de¬ parture ; I showed no hurry, and strictly observed all the proprieties of a fare¬ well, on leaving a neighbourhood where I had been well received. Having sent a few chests, containing my books and other things which I value, down to Leghorn to be shipped for England, and d 3
adjusted all my affairs at Florence, I took leave of that beautiful spot last Tuesday, and arrived here yesterday so far on my way to Paris. On the other additional motive which induced me to bend my steps towards England I have not time to enlarge. It will lead me to melancholy retrospection; but as I now feel courage enough to face images which used to stagger my fortitude, and the indulgence of which threatened despair, I will not turn from the suBject—indeed it is your due, and I shall probably find an- hour or two at Geneva ; if not, I Avili make the oppor- portunity when I am at Paris, where I know I shall hear from you as soon as possible after you receive this. Direct 'for me to the house of Penevaux and Co. Say every thing affectionate for us to Caroline;- Your truly affectionate Gilbert Saville.
(FRANCIS
\ %t f *{f}+» ?»fJiU 'at ih i <' 'r^>
LETTER VI. • ' r a ti i ' » ilfr. SWwi/e to Mr. Godfrey. < x t t> Geneva, Aug. 14th, 1S16> We have been here three days, which the inviting serenity of the season has tempted me to devote to viewing some of the celebrated scenes of the pictu¬ resque country on the banks of the lake. Subjects that have employed poets, ora¬ tors, and painters would receive no new charm from my pen, nor could I devote my time to them were I even inclined to indulge the enthusiasm which nature every where excites on these favourite regions. I have promised what I know will be to you a more interesting topic, and I will perform the promise, while Au¬ gusta with an agreeable party is on an excursion up the lake. Young as you were, George, you were* but too well acquainted with the events D 4«
which first drove me from one corner of England to another, and from that coun- try altogether when the treaty \yith France'at Amiens opened the door be¬ tween the two countries, and held out a deceitful hope of peace. My misery and your youth, though they could not eradicate our affection., prevented the sustained communication which but a short time before seemed in an established train for life. Your father's attachment to his sister, was one of an indissoluble nature, one which nothing but the death of both could alter —; nor that I think — for never were there two beings on earth who more merited the perpetuity of an affection built not more on the ties of nature than on those virtues and qualities whicii form the foundation of true friend¬ ship. He scarcely suffered less than myself from'the shocking circumstances which blasted the happiness of the fa¬ mily— 1 believe he endured the blow with even less fortitude and that it was as fatal to his life as to my Augusta's.' When we took our flight, (your little god-daughter was at that time only four
years old,) he accompanied us across the channel, and Avent with us to Paris, and it was with difficulty we prevail¬ ed upon him to leave us and return to England, where not only his public duty, but private business of the most urgent nature, required his presence. Previous to his departure, which he had but too good ground to believe would be a final separation from his sister, but which I little thought at the time would so soon be followed by their union in a better world, he made an arrangement Avith Penevaux's house for the regular payment of the interest of his sister's fortune, of which at our mar¬ riage I had so fortunately made an entire separate settlement on her and our children ; and, knowing how little I had to expect from the representatives of the late Sir Francis Darrell, he Avould have left me besides a carte blanche at the banker's, had I not peremptorily refused it—but though he apparently acquiesced, I afterwards knew that jxe gave .instructions to that effect* Had I wanted it/1 Avould not have scrupled d .5
SIR FilANCnT DARREtL* to make use of the credit—T loved him too well for so weak an estimate'of mo¬ ney—but it was never necessary — Five hundred pounds sterling a year has proved more than sufficient means for all that we have wanted or desired. Had not the mortgage on Grove Park been precipitately foreclosed at the death of your father, I think the debt upon it, would with fair dealing have been reduced to a trifle, if not en¬ tirely liquidated: but it is gone and I will not bewail — I want little in this world and your god-daughter has a mind that can find contentjn a portion much smaller than that which she has in right of her mother. The bonds indeed which I executed to the unfortunate Darrell, and which must now be in possession of the inheiitor of his fortune, have lately forced themselves upon my recollection unpleasantly* particularly since my de¬ termination to return to England, nor do I repel from my thought your affectionate proposals respecting them. This is not the moment however to dwell upon the
subject—I baveanore important matter for this letter. When your father left med felt as if the only prop of my hope had been taken from me. Jn his company your aunt was or seemed, to be buoyed up' with resolution to combat the horrors which inwardly preyed upon her heart — but her efforts at appearance failed when he was gone — she became again assailed in dreams and absorbed in reveries. In the latter she would sit for hours without speaking a word, intent on the gloomy images that took possession of her mind: in the former she spoke sometimes in¬ coherently, at others intelligibly enough to show that she dwelt on the dreadful causes of her melancholy state, espe¬ cially the duel between -your uncle Colonel Godfrey and Sir Francis Darrell — which was so fatal to both ! She fre¬ quently cried out, " oh, save him, save himl" and at times seemed to address me as if I wanted proofs of her fidelity — " You know my heart — indeed it never wronged you." In addition to these violent agitations, her slight frame had d 6
tos contend) withi the. consequences^ of ) a miscarriage brought on by information of the duel>at ?a/time' when.»it» was most dangerous.^ < \ * t> > v ^ ■>• -msMuch as-I .suffered, the last words of yburwfatherytas he pressed my hand, sup- portetb'my resolution not only to take ad¬ vantage of all the means which the. most skilful dn the knowledge of the human frame could prescribe; but, by cherishing hopeahivmy.own' breast and proving it by my manner io her, to prevent the total sacrifice of this dear and innocent victim to the false notions and barbarous habits of civilised society. Thin, feeble, pallid, shewas the ghost of my Augusta; yet was not the beam of her eye quite quenched, and there were times when it sparkled with its former sweetness; this was when the prattle of hei* little name¬ sake^ marked the delightful progress of in¬ tellect im infancy.*- Those • encouraging smiles are among' the treasures of my memoiy ;■ Ioften fancy them, though with¬ out tfiehopothey then raised. The cherub thatmroduced them, unconscious of her powerrapplied'the charm from day to day,
and effected so favourable a change^that what L wished I began to believe, and hope strengthened into expectation. - * - With a view of removing all the causes-of recollection, we hadrefused the company of a young lady whose attachment would have induced her to follow the fortunes of her friend; and, in order to guard against the communication of our story among servants, we brought none across the channel with us, but provided our¬ selves with those of the country we were going to inhabit. Paris was out of the question — every reason was against it —» the gaiety, splendour, bustle, expence — but above all, the influx of Englishmen : yet it was desirable to be near the capital, for the sake of medical advice. I took a small furnished house very agreeably situated close to Montmorenci, which is but a few hours ride from Paris. Seeing company, according to the phrase, was completely excluded from my plan ; but I thought some pleasing social inter¬ course would not be the least effective medicine in the malady I was seeking to conquer. This I sought in the family of i
my landlord, among whom we found good sense and kindness, which I flattered myself had considerable effect on my in-, valid. When .her little girl began to oatch the French, the pleasure her mo¬ ther, testified was great, and it was fol¬ lowed; by a .wish to attend to her im¬ provement in the language. The forming a wish for any earthly enjoyment was no inconsiderable point gained —it evident¬ ly produced a state of passive cheerful¬ ness, if I may so express myself) dor active cheerfulness it could not be called ; she looked rather than spoke her feel¬ ings ; it was a tranquil joy too feeble to attain the height of spirits — still it was a flattering change, and I exerted my- myselfhto< bring her to fix her attention on the education of her daughter. Be¬ fore the end of the twelve months which we<?passed in, the beautiful valley of Montmorenck I had the happiness to find 'heivthoughts-flowing chiefly in that channel, and that the gloom which hung overJier countenance was yielding to maternal tenderness and solicitude. •, Thus\ buoyed by increasing hope, I
Avas' thinking' of renewing- an engage* ment for our little pavillion when, as I proposed * it to her, she shook--her head and at the same time said, "'do; but I would not have you flatter yourself that health can be restored to me here — 'I have been led by the affections which Augusta has raised to take some new interest in life, and I even frankly confess to you that your tender assiduities, the love I have always felt fbr you, and the gratitude'now so much due to you, render me not indifferent to the preservation of it: but —" How did my heart beatAvhen she uttered, but! she perceived it; a tear started to her eye, but it dispersed without falling, and was followed by a smile -—she put out her hand, I pressed it to my lieart. " I will not afflict you," continued she, " with an unnecessary prediction — I will eA'en think that 1 may be mistaken in Avhat I suppose the information of my feelings—try, my dear Saville,'all the resources of knowledge and skill — if it be possible to preserve my life my endea¬ vours shall not be wanting; but before
sir yoh r a)gairi f engage this place let us go 1 to Paris' { and ' consult' 1 our physicians- 1 - Thdugh I' have lately been more re¬ signed, and Wen amused, I have unusual symptoms Avhich I cannot account for; the sinkings at my heart, though less frequent, are more resistless, and I draw my breath with pain; the air oppresses me." It was not my intention, my dear George, to be so circumstantial, but it is not easy for me to recur to that part of my life without falling into detail, and I see I must Avatch the impulse that dictates to my pen, or I shall have to break off my narrative at the beginning. The fa¬ culty advised me to take their patient to a southern climate. To me they can¬ didly pronounced the issue to be uncer¬ tain, but also assured me that I had no cause to despair. I immediately deter¬ mined to proceed to Italy —1 informed your father of my determination and the reason for it, and suspecting that his feelings would impel him to come oyer to us I Purged him; if such were his intern- 1 tioii; ; todrop it, as it might prove a very
dangerous trial; to bis sister,/*jand^qvpg*, turn the.remaining hope which^adqeqn? given me. He 'concurred % in f <th t e opiuiqip declaring that )he ( judged iV qf;dier T /eelings by his own 5 andan a privatp^cornmunir, cation he said he had been ilJ„aiTdavas\ unable to .travel, r It r was, fortUna/fritha^. we undertook the journey t , at t ^\\Q t time we did, for in a few months after* tho Peace was dissolved, and the ,ne^ ; abreach with England? was immediately followed ,by that odious step of the firsj; .Consul's --* the detention of all the English ip f Frauce^ Having fixed on Florence for our fu¬ ture residence, I took a letter of credit from our bankers at Paris to their cor¬ respondents in that town, and,„being advised to avoid the mountains,, 1 tra¬ versed France by easy journeys to Mar¬ seilles where we embarked for,Leghorn* The passage was pleasant^ and^trayelling gently through the delightfuj 0 yale 6i\ Arno we reached Florence without any disaster or embarrassment. Throughout our journey I took the r greatest v care v that your aunt should suffer no fatigue, pr as little as possible, a«o I observed U
visible change'Tor-the better. She talk* edanore^sbe noticed the f countries we passed through^ >and she breathed more freelyi' My hopes were so elevated that Tbegan to d'eek myself a new man. By the-dattention of. our Italian 'banker, Signor Cardello, we were soon settled in a Casino about two leagues from the town, nearf Signa, down the river which washed the banks of our garden. aHere, as in Trance, our object was — not complete solitude but — retirement and tranquillity. Your aunt's personal appearance was little changed; she con¬ tinued pale and thin, but Augusta, now turned five, so constantly claimed an exertion of spirits, that her cheerfulness began to > assume an activity which was highly gratifying to me. We early formed an acquaintance with an ad¬ mirable family of the name, of Pisani, whose Campagna was contiguous to ours — they proved at first a source of great comfort, and our acquaintance ripened sinto^real and lasting friendship. The family consisted of the Marchese andMarchesa'di Pisani, SignoraBentivoli,
mother of the.Marchesa,ttwo,sans, big lads at college,-and >a daughter about a year older than your.god-daughter. » In the early part of our acquaint¬ ance they kept much company ac¬ cording to the custom of the country, but they afterwards had melancholy causes of seclusion. They Avere too rational, and possessed too much feeling to attempt to alter our necessary mode of life; and Ave just partook of their's enough to make some variety without fatigue. As to themselves, they left nothing undone that tended in the least^ to restore health to the dear object of my care. She was grateful for their exertions, and strove to give them effect, but that which seemed to produce the greatest was the delight she took in the natural mutual instruction of the'two little girls Augusta and Angelica Pisani. They caught each other's language; their play, their prattle, their dmprove- mentwas the principal medicine Avhich gave case to her malady and prolonged her'life/ r The political events .which succeeded
had mo' > unpleasant consequences with respect'to-us but as they affected our friends the Pisani; indeed, rather the reverse, Tor it so happened that; among the.emigrants who returned to j France at the peace of Amiens, there was one whom you musl?remember Avell, as he was often in-our family circles and considered as a friend <—I mean the Count de B. • Your father and I saAV him at Paris, and he fre¬ quently came to us at Montmorenci. He kneAv my plans and felt greatly interested in the recovery of your aunt.. ■? In compliance Avith his desire I had Avrit* ten hiiman account of our arrival and esta* blishment nearFlorence. We corresponded for some time— he was soon marked out as a man worthy of esteem, and became connected with the government — he Avas particularly known to the amiable cha¬ racter , who aftenA'ards held the reins of government in that part of the immensely- extended dominions under the rule of Napoleon.- I tell you this to account for niy unmolested residence dn Italy during the extraordinary convulsions of the con¬ tinent for the last fourteen years—iiny
parole was alhthat was- re'quired * of me; and I never met with the slightest? public vexation. * ff * *< t ^ \ a> , . k Different wasthe lotof my friend Pisani. Though of amoble family his*good'sense had enabled him to > pass' with »respect the democratic ordeals of the times 1 ; nor was he a suspected or obnoxious man after the establishment of arbitrary power, but his sons in time attained the age when war claimed their services. To be briefj my dear George—-they no sooner quitted their college than they found themselves under the necessity of taking up the sword — they both fell in the same year though in different battles, These blows were severely felt by Pisani, and still more severely by the Marchesa and her mother. * As the mild enjoyments of our inter¬ course with the family had' aided to protract a life which I would have laid down my own to preserve; and which for the last year'of it had been visibly wear¬ ing away till it hung by a thread — so the gloom-with which the house of our friends was doubly'and deeply overcasfrhastened the snapping of that thread which left
SIR'-FRANdS
me wretched and your god-daughter mo¬ therless. Twill not paint to you the. scenes which preceded, that event. My inclination to cherish those sad recollections' has al¬ ready made me Avander more than I ought from thCi object I had in vieAV Avhen I took up the pen, yet had I been less mi¬ nute I doubt whether you Avould have clearly understood how I came to be so indifferent, for I cannot truly say thought¬ less, in respect to the religious principles ofmy child. All that, I had suffered from the ma¬ licious talk of an unfeeling world — from the- death of your uncle John and the manner of it — from the distress of your father's mind, —from the first dangers of my Augusta, — all seemed light, com¬ pared to "the dreadful agitation of my soul, when the form 'of her whom I had so fondly loved, lay lifeless before me, and the expressive farewell of her closing eye was ended, never more to be repeat¬ ed __ or rather ; they all combined then- force with this last shock to unman my frame and leaA'e me to a nerveless exist¬ ence. Yes, George, I was long a non*
.DARRELL. entity,^ and notonly- my*reasoni <buMhe better feelings of nature ceased to influ¬ ence me. I did not for some .time even feel the embraces of .my child> at my heart; it was completely gone with her mother. — But I am wandering again, and you will almost think me expressing myself on am event of yesterday . rather than after a lapse of fourteen -years.* Not so, my dear George, I' am recovered, I have been so at least four out of the four¬ teen. I am nerved again, again have hope in prospect and joy in possession —I have another Augusta. But I find notwith¬ standing this I cannot recur temperately to those images which were so deeply engraven on my poor brain. I will now endeavour to proceed more calmly, yet I have another string to touch upon by >vhich my heart-, is often made to vibrate — not to its recovered lone but — to its former groans. I must speak of it— I must tell you that as I proceed I feel a chain holding me and drawing me back to Signa. In a retired spot of Pisani's grounds, forming a small grove, rest the remains of Augusta. They were at his request
deposited there in a vault purposely pre¬ pared. A less overwhelming soitoav would probably have led me daily to gaze upon her grave, but mine proved a heedless despondency —heedless of all that could affect the heart of man — She was gone—I was alone on earth — I thought but of the incorruptible part of her nature—it Avas all of her now, and I wished to follow her-—my soul.seemed already departed—the earth and all mortal concerns were indifferent to me. Tlie grief of the Pisani fbr their sons was great, ^but in a degree ra¬ tional; they mourned deeply, but nei¬ ther forgot noi* neglected human affairs. Pisani watched the progress of my disordered mind, and suffered many months to elapse before he attempted to reason with me. One day perceiving an inclination in me to fondle my little Au¬ gusta, he ascribed the emotion to a favour¬ able change, and he soon after began to talk of the soothing feelings produced by memorials of friends. He mentioned the desire of erecting tombs as a dictate of nature. Though I Avas sensible that I Avas beginning to think more of life and
more like a living creature. I did hot agree with him in considering memorials always soothing, and I said that I dreaded to look at a picture, or even at a signature. I added that tombs and their monuments were different — the soothing thought they produced arose from a reflection of honouring the dead, and that they were not calculated to excite that vivid remem¬ brance which rushed upon the mind on the sight of personal relics. We were alone walking through his shrubbery: as I spoke he turned into an avenue which led to the little grove, and as we advanced said, — " If the reflection of honouring the dead soothes the heart* of the living, as I know it does; why should you and I reject the consolation it affords ? Let us partake it together." We entered the grove — the dead had been honoured indeed! A monument of white marble had been erected over the grave of my Augusta. Imagine my sur- - prise,—I believe I may say, mypleasure.— It was simple, light, almost airy, as if constructed to be easily burst open, and it manifested the taste for whicii the ar- VOL. I. e
tists of that country are so generally dis¬ tinguished : there was nothing engraved upon, it but her name and the day of her death : it stood upon an insulated circu¬ lar piece of turf. Beyond this, at a little distance, but on opposite sides of the tomb, there were two urns of the same marble on elegant pedestals bearing the names and ages of his sons, and the dates of the battles in which they fell. ^ It Avould not be easy for me to define the nature of the emotion produced by this unexpected scene. I think the predomi¬ nant feeling at the moment was an affec¬ tionate gratitude to Pisani, Avhich, as I approached the monument, was succeed¬ ed by a more violent one that resulted from strong recollection of the object which lay beneath it. My first impulse expressed itself by the seizure and pres¬ sure of my friend's hand: but when I came up to tbe tomb, I Avas seized Avith an universal trembling. Pisani held me up; I leaned upon the marble, burst into tears and wept long and bitterly — I had not wept before. From that day I date .the commence-
SIR* FRANCIS DA ment of iny recovery ; — it "v^s slo4 atfifs^y arid would never have been so faf effectefd as it is,' but for/' the •' part your ; f gdd- 1 ' daughter soon after took in the advance-* j ment of it. Her claims on my attention' were irresistible as they had before been'*' on her mother's — the charm was re¬ peated on me, and I resolved to devote my time and all niy powers to the im-' provement of her mind. * She lived in the house of Pisani 'with her friend Angelica, — they were feared together,' and their attachment gathered strength with their years. Angelica, now a lovely young woman, Avas then an amiable child — she accompanied us in our frequent visits to the grove, entered into' all our conver¬ sations, talking Italian and English al¬ most equally Aveli, and became another daughter to me, as she was in every thing a sister to my Augusta, Avho oh her part 1 had gained the affections of her friend's parents." ' "'''" Noav comes the point. — The French Revolution had shaken religion to its foundation. Some clever men having openly "professed themselves Atheists E 2
and Infidels, Atheism and Infidelity were assumed as evidences of talent and genius* and it was a much more advantageous thing to be taken for a man of talent than for a Christian. There were however many families whom no advantages could make ashamed of their Saviour, and among those were the Pisani: but in general I saw Httle regard paid to the Church, and I was sorry to see it; for, though differing in opinion on certain points, I thought it better that men should stand on the basis of Christianity any where than be set adrift on ill-constructed rafts of pretended philosophy. What I saw of it therefore in Pisani's family ap¬ peared amiable, and I was never struck with a necessity of guarding against its influence —nor, if that bad been the case, should I, in the unhappy state ofmy mind have been able to do it — I will own myself still more to blame: even when I began to think more coherently and suspected that Augusta was imbib¬ ing religion'and friendship together, I inertly suffered it to proceed, satisfying the indolent portion of reason that re- 2 '
SIR
mained stagnant in my • brain with the principle which I still support—that some hope is better than none — that the Ro¬ man faith is preferable to religious in- difference <■ I shalf perhaps do myself an injury in your opinion, my dear George, when I go still farther, and tell you that even now I do not think that this cause would have driven me from Italy — fiom Signa, — from the grove, had there been no other to impel a removal — had the Conte d'Olivastro's vexatious and violent pretensions not determined me upon it, and had not the receipt of your letters added a new impulse. I have not been strict in the examina¬ tion of Augusta's creed; I have been content with seeing her pious and virtu¬ ous, and I have trusted to her understand¬ ing, which is excellent, to correct the er¬ rors of early impression. In this I may have been wrong, but, however her senti¬ ments may ultimately fix as to disputed articles, I shall not be very unhappy while I know her to be good. And now, my dear George, having e 8
fulfilled the promise in my last, adieu! I shall leave Geneva at the end of this week, and probably bo-{in Paris before the end of the ensuing one. "' Your' ever affectionate
Gilbert Saville.
. vdii'. ,)**).'. ^Aj x aanuoa'tj 'iHl f^HitUtl. '■' ! ' ; r ' v ^ EETTER'-'Vl'L *'^ ,-^ v ,*•}**'*» v aiaH•'*■{•? -' »■ /a* la.s^ -j .; Augusta Saville to Angelica x PisanL ,„ , , , , x ,.5 Geneva, Aug. I81S. Mia oarissima Angelical Sorella ama- bile ed amata! — But why should 1 write in Italian to you, who are as well ac¬ quainted with English as myself?—and now that you will want your usual prac¬ tice I think I shall make a point of writing chiefly in a language which I am anxious that you should not neglect. Then be it so, my dearest Angelica, my amiable and truly beloved sister — let our correspond¬ ence be carried on in my native tongue, but without restricting yourself entirely to it, as it will give me great pleasure to read your sentiments, and the expression of your friendship, in the melodious flow of one hardly less natural to me. — And write to me often, Angelica. —You know what I have suffered for some time at the thought of this dreadful separation ; nor could I have endured it, but for e 4
our mutual,resolution of continuing to open our hearts to each other in letters, and the kind promises and engagements of our dear indulgent fathers to do every thing in their power to shorten the period of absence. You know what a pang our parting- kiss inflicted on my heart by that which was felt at your own — the dear Mar¬ chesa saw and felt it, andTbllowed me to my chamber to console and pour the balm of her love into my heart, and her dear affectionate words did con¬ sole me, and I hope she repeated them to you. " Gusta," said she, " this yield¬ ing to passion, for it is passion, is not surely a proof of the fortitude of the character which you admire, and which you thought you possessed. Be moderate, and I shall approve your tears" — dear Marchesa! her own were running down her cheeks.— "Let not yourfeelings over¬ come your reason," continued she, " and I assure you, that if it appears necessary for you to remain long in England, we will bring or send Angelica for you," I pressed her to my heart, and thanked,
her from it, assuring her that'she had greatly lightened the Aveight with whicii it Avas oppressed — that, depending upon her promise, and reflecting upon the ma¬ ternal counsels she had so affectionately allowed me to share with you, I should endeavour to regulate my conduct and feelings through life by them, convinced, as I now Avas al an age capable of judg¬ ing, that they were indeed the results of Avisdom as well as the dictates of a tender mother. In spite of her oAvn advice she gave Avay to a flood of tears, saying at the same time that she would have felt less pain at the separation had ■ it not' taken place at a time when she had reason to fear that my father had been attempt¬ ing to divert my mind from adhering to a faith so important to the eternal welfare J my soul. I assured her that her appre¬ hensions Avere groundless, and that al¬ though my father had lately spoken more to me on the subject of religion than he . had been accustomed to do, it Avas Avith the greatest tenderness, and that he did not even appear to me inclined to lay a
stress,on the differences in our sentiments. She.wasjpleased, again embraced .me,* and gave me her.blessing. { ,A t No, ( my dear.Angelica, I will be no apostate—awe havedearned together to appreciate the,principles of our belief; and it would be,folly as Aveil as wicked^ ness to require, that the ^knowledge of sacred things should be reduced to the level of every capacity — You may again assure our dear mother that this is the invariable sentiment of your sister Augusta,— of her grateful daughter — Repeat it also to our dear Abatte Cevello, with my affectionate remembrance, and tell him dhat I depend greatly upon his prayers. The longer I live and the more I reflect, the more am I convinced, my dearest Angelica, that hoAvever our emo¬ tions may depend on external causes, om* actions should be, generally speaking, though not always, the result of duty. My feelings on quitting Florence plunged me into a state of depression which continued long—Signa had been my home almost as long as I couldremem- berj I had^Qr other family than that of
Pisani 1 ; I Avas brought up with Angelica; Angelica was my more beloved self. — Yes, these Avere just causes — I was torn av/ay — I ceased indeed to wCep, but I felt my loss the more—those dear ob¬ jects of my affection remained present to my imagination, and so absorbed my thoughts, that I totally neglected the attentions Avhich I had ever taken de¬ light in bestowing on my father. Having the whole day endeavoured in vain to direct my attention to the scenes that presented themselves on our journey, and being uneasy at my unusual silence, he began to reproach himself as the cause of my unhappiness, and appeared so un¬ happy himself at my dejection, that I Avas recalled to a sense of what I owed to him, of that affection and care which his unbounded love and indulgence merited. I became immediately sensible that I was deviating from the principles which our dear mother had so perseveringly instilled into our minds, and I resolved to make my obedience to her precepts the best proof to myself of my love fbr her, for my dear Marchesa, and for you, my be- e 6
loved,, Angelica., ■ I know you will be pleased Avitlnmy>resolution, and to show you that I carried it into execution,, I will devote the'rest of this letter to the observations I made after we left Milan on the country through which we passed, and I hope the change may give you as much pleasure as it did my father. Let me pre-monish you* Angelica, not to expect that any description of mine can do justice to the stupendous, the sublime scenery of the Alps; but 1 cannot have crossed them Avithout an irresistible impulse to express to my dearest sister the mixed feelings of delight, wonder, and admiration which the sight of these grand regions of the globe, so diflerent in their nature from that of our own beautifully-soft and smiling vale of Arno, has produced in her Augusta. How often, how constantly did it give words to the predominating wish ofmy heart, « Oh, that Angelica were with me!" My father, anxious to dispel the gloom which seemed settling on my mind, had resolved to go a little out of the direct roac, with the vieAV, of presenting objects
to amuse and rouse me; ami though he perceived already the change my reflec¬ tion had wrought, he- persisted in his intention. — From Milano we - x went to Como with the ancient celebrityof-which you are well acquainted — there L was delighted with an excursion we*made on the lake. In spite of my moral determin¬ ation, the pleasure I received from the picturesque romantic views*of its banks was damped by the absence of her with whom I have from infancy been accus¬ tomed to share every enjoyment. I be¬ lieve in spite of an effort to the con¬ trary that a tear stole to my eye, while 1 assented to the remarks of my father — he perceived it, and kindly said " I wish Angelica were with us!" I echoed the words, and afterwards made no scruple of expressing the wish before him, as I was sure he approved and participated my feelings.^ At the time we were there, the scenery, of the lake of Como surpassed in beauty. all that I had seen, and I could not'suf¬ ficiently admire the different prospects created by tbe eminences rising abruptly;
from the waterfs edge,beautifully softened by a rich and/luxuriant foliage, enlivened by innumerable villas in our Italian style of magnificence, and receiving' the ad¬ ditional charm of sublimity from the dis¬ tant snow-capped summits of the Alps in the back ground.- My father smiled at my enthusiasm, which he took a plea¬ sure in seeing me indulge, and which his remarks increased. I cannot help telling you, trifling as you will think it, that in the .midst of our enjoyment of this grand treat of nature, my ear, so long accus¬ tomed to the full and melodious sounds of our " divina favella," was sadly an¬ noyed with the intolerable grating of— what shall I call it? —the French u of the boatmen, at the piping wire-drawn tone of which I could not however avoid laughing. *outi when a Milanese who ac¬ companied us, and who acted as our Cicerone, said to my father with a truly comic sigh of sentiment; " Lei vede die la Natora ha fatto twtto per Italia ma l'h-aomo niente affatto." — The speech, to sayi nothing of the pronunciation, richly deserved the laugh.
From Gorao.we travelled by au cross road to ■ Laveno, a small town prettily situated on the Lago Maggiore, where we arrived * the next day and embarked for Baveno near the Isole ■■Borromeo. The passage was delightful < and- I was not long in confessing that the scenery of Como could be rivalled. On the whole, the Lago Maggiore pleased mc more by its noble expanse of waters and the distant views : but in detail; that of Como presented more luxuriant land¬ scapes. iWe visited the Fairy 1 Islands, as they are called, though I * could see no¬ thing fairy-like in the ill-disguised art of man. The palace on Isola Bella is dis¬ graced by a number of miserable hovels close to its walls, whicii almost seem to he placed there as a comment on the ill-judged magnificence, or rather the ostentation and mis-spent wealth of those who laid out so < many millions on this palace and its hanging'gardens,: but it must never be forgotten that the wealth of the same hand was not always thrown away on such pompous and ridiculous gratifications.—San Carlo Borromeo and
SIR
his universal charity, wilkever- be the ad¬ miration* bf all whocan feel the influence of that heavenly virtue. < • ' At Baveno Ave entered oh the Simplon road, which led us along the river Toccia to Domo D'Ossola where we were to pass the night.' We Avere now at the foot of the Alps —I cannot describe to' you what. Ifelt while gazing on them as we" approached them. I reflected that the' evening was to be my last in Italy — that those mountains which seem to form an impenetrable barrier between that dear dear Italy and the" rest of the world' Avould by the next night divide me from my beloved 'Angelica — Again my heart Avas full, again niy kind father sympa¬ thised with me and joined in the " I wish Angelica Avere with us!" Oh! that it had 1 been possible ! But I will not dwell on those feelings lest I should again give Avay to the melancholy that resumed its power "over me the whole of that night, unopposed : by my father, who indeed rather encreased it by his own, and by s some'mournful reflections on the little grove at'Signa:' nor was it removed till
our attention and admiration Avere roused by the wonders which surrounded us in our journey the next day over the Sim¬ plon. _*_' J Upon entering the road at Baveno I thought it fine, but what shah I say to express my opinion of part of it passing over the mountains to Breig? It is a most superb and magnificent mo¬ nument of the Avonderful powers with which our Creator has endowed his fa¬ vourite creature — man. I am vexed that we should owe this road to Napoleon, for I am obliged to alloAv the designer of it to have possessed great genius—But why should I not? My dear Marchesa must forgive the question — My admira- .tion of this proof of it does not make me forget that all the greatness of this child of Fortune was never in alliance with goodness, or that his ambition Avas' the scourge of virtue. From Domo the ascent is immediate, the road, hard and broad, winding on the side of a hill through a valley — if such the Val Diviedro can be called, formed, as it is, by lofty mountains standing so
close as scareetyTo admit the rays, of the sun to the extent of its depth — gene¬ rally so narrow that the road -and the torrent whicii rushes down it occupy the whole breadth, and too narrow for both in some places, where *the ,s road is ! then pierced through the solid rock. We entered the first of these galleries, which is eighty yards in length, by passing a bridge thrown across a fine cascade which sends a thick spray over it, whilst the body of water falls with a tremendous noise into the torrent below. These Alpine scenes are immensely wild in their sublimity; I shall not attempt to give particular descriptions of them — To do justice to these awful combina¬ tions of peaks and precipices, woods and torrents, snows and glacieres, would require the pen of that genius which could make " the live thunder leap from peak to peak among rattling crags," transform " lakes into phosphoric seas," and with the sounds of his lyre set " the big rain dancing to the earth."
( ? 5 t Above me arc the Alps,,- , , ■}<> , Tlie palaces of Nature, whose vast walls Have pinnacled in clouds their snowy scalps!; ' And throned Eternity in icy halls Of cold sublimity, where forjms and falls The avalanche—the thunderbolt of snow! All that expands the spirit, yet appals, Gather around these 'summits, as to show How Earth may pierce to Heaven, yet leave vain man below, I shall only say that' in contemplating I was still more sensible of an " expan¬ sion of spirit" than of terror: my me¬ lancholy wore off, and my soul seemed elevated above itself I bad never be¬ fore experienced a similar emotion; I appeared to breathe purer air, in an at¬ mosphere of liberty and independence. Liberty and Independence! what could bring such words to my pen but the magic contagion of poetry — I wish not to be freed from the chains of affection — to cease to depend upon those so dear to my heart, the sources of my happi¬ ness ; and such alone have been my chains, such alone the dependence I have ever felt. We at length arrived at Simplon, a village near the summit of the road
on, the side, of Italy —The Swiss side, though possessing kindred grandeur in the character of its scenery, is not so awful in its features as the Italian. The road continues the same admirable one. Just after attaining its highest point it passes under the glacier of Keltwasser — what a name for the lovely Tuscan mouth of Angelica!—whose .immense masses of ice seem ready to roll down upon the traveller. below, who to his left looks on a precipice of several thousand feet. The acclivity is so gentle that we descended nearly the whole way at a gallop, my father being anxious to reach the plain before night: but we had so often stopped to indulge admiration in our ascent that it was dark when we arrived at Breig. We were now in the Vallais, a coun¬ try so disagreeable to me that I will not dwell upon the objects of it as we passed. I felt oppressed and impri¬ soned by its two ranges of barren hills between which the rapid Rhone flows to the Lake of Geneva. There are, however, some pretty spots on the
way, particularly the situation of Sion, the capital of the Canton: but I saw nothing to compensate for the filthy and deplorable appearance of the inhabit¬ ants, their goitres and cretins. What a relief was it to leave the Canton! and Avell might it be so, fbr never Avas there a greater contrast — between places so near —than that between the Vallais and the Pays de Vaud, which we entered ny a bridge over the Rhone — proudly attri¬ buted by the people to Julius Caesar. We purposed on leaving Breig to pass the night at Bex, and we arrived at that enchanting spot early in the even¬ ing. It is situated directly under some fine and abrupt peaks of Alps near the entrance of the Rhone into the lake. Tiie valley is itself extremely rich; its surrounding views most romantic and picturesque, particularly the Alps of Savoy towards the south, where a very- high and craggy peak called the Dent de Midi, which has its correspondent tooth in the Pays de Vaud called the Dent de Morcles, is a noble and com¬ manding object.
The day of our arrival was a festival — the scenewas exhilarating—myfatherwas particularly interested in it, as it brought to his mind the' fairs and wakes of Eng¬ land—In nie too, though there was little similarity in 5 the modes of gaiety, it produced a recollection of our pleasant Cassini at Florence; and could I have such a recollection without sighing for my Angelica to share with ihe in tlie pleasure of observing new manners and customs ? Our journey from Bex along the banks of the Lake through Vevay and Lausanne to Geneva > was most agree¬ able— the country fine, and some of the costumes of the peasantry pretty — but I will not lengthen my letter with a detailed account of these, 'as my father says he can spare me no longer.'' We arrived on the evening of the * * * at Secheron, where we are at ah hotel delightfully situated on' the banks' of the Lake about a mile from Geneva, and where the Rhone, which we had left muddy at St. Maurice, issues from the Lake as clear as crystal. I am greatly
pleased with tbe place, andi was yester¬ day delighted with a .view from a spot near the tow,n of the ,Prince of Moun¬ tains — the venerable Mont Blanc. I shall here close this letter — My father wishes to push on to Paris, but is so attracted by the beauties about him that we shall probably remain a week, if not longer, here—if so, you shall hear from me again, and of the new scenes that prompt the so frequently-repeated ejaculation, " Oh that Angelica were with me!" Embrace my dear Marchese and Mar- - chesa and Signora Benvolta for me. Remember me kindly to our worthy friends D'Olivastro—-would to Heaven the Count had not proved himself so weak and so violent a young man — I cannot but believe that he is not- the slightest of the motives of our depart- 1 ure—My father says-he will write * to the Marchese on his arrival, in England. Adieu! I love you — love your. ' * ■ 'Augusta,
LETTER VIII. Sir Francis Da?rell to Mr. Vet non, Dover, Aug. lsic.' ■ MY DEAR VERNON, I have just received your, letter which was sent hither after me — I had ap¬ pointed the day for my departure from Bramblebear-Hall allowing time for an answer from you to my last, but unfor¬ tunately only time, and being prepared at the day, I took my leave. Your letter comes opportunely to give a fillip to my. spirits which have been considerably de¬ pressed since my arrival here, Avhere iny time has been spent in contemplation of events and circumstances long past, but which nevertheless are. the motives that - have brought me .thus far on my way to . Paris. I do not believe that you — though the only man to whom 1 have accustomed my¬ self to open my thoughts with that freedom
and confidence which are a relief to the mind-—for where are men tobe found that awaken that interest which unlocks the heart ? — I do not believe that you are much acquainted with jny family history, or indeed with my own child¬ hood; and separation, after our boyish conection at school till within these three years, diverted our attention from passing incidents, or rather prevented their fall¬ ing under our notice. The events and circumstances I allude to relate not to myself; and took place at a time when neither you nor 1 cared for what was going on in the world; they were, though deeply interesting to the parties, of a nature which only fed temporary curiosity, and supplied a day's talk to beings such as people your Vortex —- they involved the loss of life and the destruc¬ tion of character — they happened and are forgotten, except to cast by reflec¬ tion hereditary stains, Heaven knows not needed, to blacken one sufficiently dyed with his own. They were detailed to me by my mother when I began to discover a disposition not likely to submit to the vol. r. F
commander under whom you tell me in one of your letters that Mr. Godfrey early enlisted—the demi-god of the breast — she suspected as I grew up that there were neither demi-gods nor gods sufficiently powerful to control the passions rapidly strengthening in the heart of her son, and like a righteous mother she set before me a picture which ought to have had more effect upon me than it had — It had none — that she wished at least; on the con¬ trary, I looked upon the horrid parts of it as the common results of chance, and in other incidents I saw hereditary na¬ ture, from which I drew fortifying infer¬ ences in behalf of those passions which already terrified her and surprised all good folks who heard of me. But in truth, my dear Vernon, the story is a melancholy one, and as I am meditating, even at this distance of time from the event, some amendment of the catas¬ trophe; which will probably reach your ear from other quarters, I will prepare you, fo» the reports of the Vortex by a short account of the previous history.
My father is gone to the only state of rest that is unmixed with horror — death puts an end to all that disturbs the petty machine called man — nothing survives him but fame, and that is an immortality which does not fall to the lot of one in millions —• the man who last possessed the name and title transmitted to me is among the millions — the good that might be said of him is long completely forgot¬ ten, as will be the evil, though that remains longest in the mouth of his surviving malignant fellow-creature. I Avould not draw him from his state of oblivion to descant on his deformities — I believe him to have possessed many excellent qualities such as they are in human creatures; and that for which he* is condemned is no treason against Na¬ ture in my eyes, though it is not sur¬ prising that it should have been so iri my mother's — he was a man of plea¬ sure. Some twenty years ago, there existed as noAV a Vortex, into which he in his youth had been Avhirled. I believe he chose his Avife at some distance from the limits of it, but, however that may be, f 2
he thought of it as you explain your ideas respecting it in the letter doav on my table, and he took a delight in draw¬ ing his friends, particularly the female ones, into the influence of it. He meant no more harm than you do at this mo* ment -s- but so it Avas. He had a friend of the name of Saville who had a beautiful wife—tiny mother said she was equally sensible and virtuous, qualities in women little to be calculated upon-r-and so Sir Francis thought.as to the sense and virtue of Mrs. Saville. SaVille himself, whose for¬ tune, though equal to every comfort, Avas very unequal to the support of habits contracted among men of ten times his property, had. some time be¬ fore his marriage dipped his estate pretty deeply. Myfatherwas his chief creditor, and after his marriage became his only one, by taking up all his debts, for which he had a mortgage on Grove Park and bonds. So circumstanced, •Mrs. Saville, whose fortune, a small one, had been secured to herself by settle¬ ment, could not but feel kindly towards ii
Sir Francis, who I believe, on my mou¬ ther's assurance, felt himself in a di¬ lemma between the dishonour of taking advantage of obligation and the passion the lady had inspired. He was so struck with this dilemma that it had an influence upon his opinions — he struggled with his passion, but habits are not subdued all at once. His feelings were clearly seen to be what they were—the lady's were interpreted to be what they were not — whispers and winks and talk settled the matter. Sir Francis half believed it himself, and while he resolved on the side of honour saddled his conscience with this proviso, that if the alternative was the lady's free -choice, then the taking advantage of an obligation was out of the question — There was in his mind a doubt, and this doubt he naturally and honourably de¬ termined to solve. Meanwhile Saville who loved his wife to distraction began to understand the looks of his acquaintances and also those of his friend, who was so completely en¬ amoured as not to be able to conceal his f 3
feelings before him. Most unhappily the means which Sir Francis devised to solve his doubt turned Saville's into cer¬ tainty that all Avas not right on the part of his friend; for he took the first oppor¬ tunity of being alone with her to throw himself at her feet and declare his pas¬ sion with all the A r ehemence of a lover. A lover in such a situation, hoAvever skilled he may be in the science of optics, is not likely to have his imagi¬ nation swayed from his direct purpose by thinking of angles of incidence and angles of reflection—but neither will those angles change their properties to be sub¬ servient to the purpose of the lover. Sir Francis was indeed alone in the room with the lady whose hand he had seized, while in the posture peculiarly expressive of adoration at all shrines: but it hap¬ pened that the rays of light from this posture entered a large mirror precisely in an angle to be conveyed by the reflect¬ ing angle to a sofa in the next room on which Saville himself was reclining. On hearing the sound of a voice he raised his eyes exactly in that angular direction,
Which his wife as well as her lover would have wished changed for any other — not that Mrs. Saville had on that occasion aught to fear fbr herself, but every thing for her husband and the unfortu¬ nate man before her. In her eagerness to prevent mischief, she raised his own band against his lips, and nodded her head towards the open door. At the same moment she gave him a letter, re¬ questing him to withdraw immediately, and read it. Understanding her nod and misunderstanding every other part of her conduct, he hastened in silence to obey her, and had mounted his horse before the bewildered Saville, who was approach¬ ing on tip-toe to listen to confessions he expected to ensue, had reached the apart* ment where the short scene had taken place. Surprised at the vanishing of the ob¬ ject, and seeing no confusion in the face of the lady, he almost doubted it to be a vision of his fancy,' which had lately dwelt on the suspicions raised by appear¬ ances. Without explanation he went for¬ ward in haste to overtake the culprit— r 4
he Avas gone, but there Avas no doubt he had been there as Avas proved by the answer of a servant who had just attended to see him mount his horse. Short as was the time which elapsed be¬ tween the discovery made in the mirror and the ascertaining of Sir Francis's de¬ parture, it had given Saville rime to .re¬ collect that he had no proof, and that the exertion of a little restraint on his feelings would soon enable him to effect also a complete discovery, to the convic¬ tion of Mrs. Saville's brother, Colonel Godfrey, whose affection for his sister was mingled with great esteem ; and be¬ fore whom the talkers and hinters were prudently reserved. Still flying reports had reached his ear, and he had even freely conversed on the subject with Sa¬ ville, Avho had not dissembled his uneasi¬ ness, not at the conduct of his wife, but at the attentions of his friend, which seemed fo warrant at least a suspicion of his designs. Colonel Godfrey happened to come down to Grove Park (then Saville's seat) the day before the mirror scene of this
tragedy was performed. He was spirited and young, and little endowed with the virtue of forbearance. He was riding out when Sir Francis paid that morning visit. On his return Saville in the ful¬ ness of heart confided to him all he had seen and all he feared — a passion and clandestine correspondence were evident. It seems that Colonel Godfrey appeared to hear the story with great coolness, and advised the adoption of deliberate mea¬ sures; but while his countenance was unruffled, a fire was kindled at his heart that he had no.diposition to smother; — parting with his brother-in-law he quietly directed his man to take his horses into the road and wait there for him. Deter¬ mined to force the letter from Sir Francis or act upon his refusal as a certainty of his sister's dishonour he arranged his pis¬ tols and carried them with him. It ap¬ pears that he made the demand in a tone so imperious and fiery as to defeat his purpose of obtaining it, and to rouse a spirit of defiance, which being mutually given with equally unyielding temper, an immediate resort to the ultima ratio was f 5
determined. They hurried, attended only by their servants, to the common adjacent to the park wall of Belmont — they fired together at the dropping of a handkerchief by one of the men. Mrs. Saville's brother was shot dead upon the spot, and my father was mortally wound¬ ed. He lived through the day and a considerable part of the night — long enough to make his confessions to my mother, and to give her more pain than he had ever done before, by wishing at the moment she was about to lose him, that he had never given her any cause of pain. The tragedy ended not here — SaviIIe 3 though not so fiery as the unfortunate soldier, could not in the trials he was now put to keep possession of himself. His wife had retired to her room — he was not sorry for it — he wished for the moment to avoid her. Wishing also to avoid himself, he went in quest of the Colonel, whom he expected to find in his chamber: not succeeding there he sought him in other parts of the house and learned that he and Ins man had been
SIR FRANCIS gone from Grove Park nearly two hours: the motive instantly flashed upon his mind — he hastened again to his friend's chamber to ascertain if he had carried arms Avith him; his pistols Avere not in their place, nor to be found. He could no longer command himself— he rushed into his wife's room, told her what he had seen, Avhat all the world said, and, forgetting himself in his agitation, in¬ formed her of his suspicions respecting her brother's absence. In his first trans¬ ports of agony she made some efforts to appease him, but the information of the . Colonel's danger was a fk-:sh of forked -lightning. She fell deprived of her senses, and was only recalled to them by the appalling sounds echoed from mouth to mouth among the attendants — (i the Colonel is killed — the Colonel is dead — the Colonel is shot." Poor lady! she never recovered this ; nor her reputation among the revellers of the Vortex. She continued to breathe a fe\v years and died abroad. Though calumny never gives up the prey upon Avhich it has once inflicted its p 6
DARRELL. fang, Mrs. Saville's innocence on this occasion was completely proved to the wretched husband and all her friends. The letter, which he had seen her put into the hands of Sir Francis, was, after being shown to my mother, given by the latter to his agent to be carried to the for¬ mer. It was one worthy of the real Pene~ lope ; it regretted that she had so ill dis¬ tinguished between the marks of grati¬ tude and dishonour as to induce the friend of her husband to harbour a thought so unmerited by him and so mor¬ tifying and disgraceful to herself as it was but too apparent he entertained. — She acknowledged the obligations they were under, and she conjured him by the honourable tie of those obligations to desist from a conduct which could not but be injurious to her reputation, and to the peace of his friend. This was a style, and done in a manner to convince any man that the lady had not been long enough married to be tired of her husband — my father was convinced and, but for a hasty temper on the one side and pride on the other, no blood need have been
shed — but the decrees of the Fates are absolute even against Jupiter himself; so came it that the inheritance of consider¬ able estates fell to my lot while I was yet a child, and that poor Saville was completely ousted from a comfortable one in the prime of his life — so comes it that life itself is the hodge-podge that it is, so highly seasoned with those pun¬ gent spices .called the Passions. My mother, one of the best of women, had in her composition a vindictive spice — I learned from herself that she was passionately attached to my father, that she suffered extremely from his gal¬ lantries, but that the loss of him had driven her to distraction. — She .vowed vengeance on Saville, and she kept lier word. — She determined to enforce payment of the heavy bonds against him. It being difficult to discharge them he took the resolution of going abroad, and having an opportunity of passing through France he settled in Italy. Time, that is, the small portion of it she was fated to survive, did not assuage the violence of my mother's distempered passion, —
and previous to her death, which took place about the time I left Eton, she had urged the representatives of Sir Francis to proceed to a foreclosure of the mortgage on Grove Park, which was added, harshly enough, but not unfairly, to the property of a being not half so de¬ serving of it as he from whom it passed: but that is neither here nor there, it is only one of the features of that jumble of existence called society. I do not exactly know how it happen¬ ed that Mrs. Saville's relations, who were wealthy did not interpose to keep that estate in their family — they might per¬ haps have acted from a detestation of the vicinity of Belmont, or, which I think was the fact, the foreclosure might have taken place during your friend Godfrey's minority. Be this as it may, it reduced Saville to a diet of grapes and macaroni, which by the way is after all the wisest mode of feeding, since feed we must, and all that a man,-who prefers his mental fa¬ culties to the grossness of a voracious maw, a clear head to a stuffed skin, would wish for — I detest your human vultures
— But Saville is a refined man ; and of course wants money for other purposes than eating and drinking. I never now go to Grove Park without having my mind harassed with the thought of his being deprived of it, especially in the hurried and revengeful way in which it was done. I look at his bonds too with renewed disgust at my species, to con- , ceive the malice of this little brute, endow¬ ed with a diabolical ingenuity to give to such a flimsy material as paper tlie poAver of iron bars; and, vexed to think that they had kept, and perhaps did still keep, a worthier man than myself out of his coun¬ try, I had nearly, in a fit of self-execra¬ tion, thrown them into the fire last spring, upon an application made by an agent of Mr. Godfrey's respecting a liquidation of them. I know better than you in what light Godfrey holds me. I haughtily refused all communication with his agent. The unexpected stir on the subject naturally led me to imagine that. Saville was coming back to England; I inquired
and found it to be so. It is perfectly clear to me that Mr. Godfrey means to take up these bonds — and now, be it known unto you, I do not mean that he shall. I have ascertained that Saville is on his way to England, and is probably at Paris at this moment. I have a plan, which you will call romantic, but it is no such thing, of re-instating him in Grove Park — You shall hear the parti¬ culars by and by — Should he.arrive in England in the meantime, it is ten to one but the ginger of the manly character would spoil my plan — They would in¬ sist and I should scorn — I feel the great¬ est desire to be beforehand with Godfrey, and I hope to be in Paris sooner than Saville. You have now enough to en¬ lighten your conception of the whole design, and you know me enough to need no request to keep all that I have said upon it to yourself. Aaron, whom I take over with me in preference to my man Morris, because he talks French and is not in other respects deficient in travelling abilities,
i has just informed me that the packet Avill not sail till to-morrow morning, which gives me time to reply to your's. In the first place, after what I have Avritten, you will see that if I had an inclination to cloak my own demerits T might impute some of Godfrey's distaste to me to antiquated domestic grievances — but I have no such inclination. God¬ frey shuts his door against me fbr the same reason that most other regular men do; namely, for my OAvn demerits — yet not exactly that either, but for a cha¬ racter which those have brought upon me, and to which you have much more real pretensions than 1. — Mrs. Godfrey's charitable remarks are not decisive of the criterion I proposed, but her reference to her husband is. Vernon! I seriously think you upon a precipice. I would have you ponder well the tragedy 1 have been relating to you. I am disposed to believe that Godfrey's Avife is as much out of your Vortex now as his aunt was out of that which existed in her day. You know I am not a preacher, but not in¬ heriting the vindictive spirit from my
mother, I excuse you the grudge yoU owe Godfrey on my account. I am not advocating constancy—I am anxious that you should continue a votary of Thalia, and have nothing to do with her sister of the bowl, and tbe ballet; and all I say is, keep within your Vortex. Your character of Rufus made me laugh aloud, though by myself. I think I see him with his white and red, a mould of blanc-mange garnished with orange- peel—with his sanctified leer and se¬ raphic transfusions! He is just the thing to give zest to your humour —keep him up, I beseech you; and let me have him as a provocative, which I feel I stand in need of: but if you turn him into any thing but ridicule, you, more than he, will provoke my laugh. And why not tired of life at five-and- twenty? What is there in it after that which can make a man desire to go on crawling over the surface of this earth ? Where are the delights you talk of fit for any but children? The classical stores of the memory, without which men are clods, afford some transient, gleams
of Avhat mankind might haA'e been made, but double the disgust at what they are. Imagination is a horrid gulf that leads to madness — as for love, that is over Avhen one comes of age: beauty consequently soon becomes insipid, and my fortune is so luxuriantly extensive that I don't know Avhat to do with the tenth part of it. Your Vortex might procrastinate the t&dium a year or two, if imbecility of intellect was not a prominent part of th e character of its females. - Your waltz¬ ing simile is very characteristic of your explained system, for though a very slippery rotatory movement, but fe\v are seen to fall, and an erect posture sets all to rights again. As for your Astronomy, I fear you are out — at least you did not mean the simile to be so complete, for you knoAV Ptolemy's proved to be afals* system. Talking of your Vortex, 1 must before J conclude tell you that in the last week of my stay at Bramblebear Hall / began (only began, mind) to think Lady Betty one of the system — but it is too late to say more at present — I must go to sleep
that I may wake again — * c How happy they who wake no more!" The only just line, if I recollect, in that most ela¬ borate collection of Poetical Sermons, the Night Thoughts, —You shall hear from Paris — I mean to go to the hotel where we lodged last year — direct there* Ever your's,
F, Darrell,
LETTER IX. George Godfrey to Gilbert Saville, Esq* MY DEAR UNCLE, W °° dleC ' Au S' 1816 Your letters from Milan and Geneva have both reached me — that from Ge¬ neva affected us extremely — Caroline cried over it with an emotion which made me feel it doubly. In my letter pressing your return to England I expressed feel¬ ings of a different kind — gratitude and lively affection accompanied my recollec¬ tions, which dwelled on those happy days I had spent in the bosom of my more than mother, whose love had never allowed- me to know the heavy loss of my own — The nature of that loss I felt only when the dreadful circumstances you allude to separated me from my aunt. The vivid colours in which you paint the consummation of your own loss
created feelings nearly as painful, and neither Caroline nor I were able to re¬ cover sufficient ease through the whole of yesterday to enjoy the certainty we now have of embracing you and our dear Augusta in the course of a short time." To-day the thought of this has given us an uncommon degree of spirits, and,, being the foreign post-day, I have resolved not to delay replying at least to some parts of your letter, on points which I wish you to be acquainted vvith as soon as possible. By your not noticing the information I gave you respecting the bonds in the possession of Sir Francis Darrell it is evident that my letter on that occasion has miscarried j I shall therefore briefly repeat it.— -In conjuring you to return to England, I previously determined to re¬ move these — I will not say impediments, b u t__ unpleasant circumstances. This de¬ termination indeed was but a renewal of one formed four years ago at the time of the holder of the bonds coming of age, but he left the country suddenly, and 1 dropped my intention for a time, still
meaning to take the first convenient op¬ portunity of discharging them. Of young Darrell you probably know little or nothing, and it is not to be wish¬ ed that you should know any more: but it will be impossible for you not to hear a great deal of him in this country. He is said to possess great natural endowments, yet to be unsocial in his habits, and from all I have heard of him 1 take hira to be an inconsistent character — That is not the worst—he is generally considered as an abandoned and vicious youth, and there are tales told of him too shocking to relate. I have met with him several times : but we are not on terms even of acquaintance — He is courted by the gay whom he treats with indifference if not with contempt — the thinking part of the world keep him off, and these he treats with pride. I do not believe he deserves all that is said against him, but enough to make me decline an inti¬ macy. Instead of waiting upon him myself on the business of the bonds I sent my agent to him. He asked if I was in town
and being informed that I was, be imme¬ diately said: " Sir, you will find my so¬ licitor the proper person to transact this business with"—and telling his name and the situation of his chambers, he di¬ rected the application to be made to him. On this being"done, my agent.was told that Sir Francis had the bonds in his own possession, and had left- instructions to say that he, was in no haste to have them liquidated. I renewed the appli¬ cation myself and learned that he had left London. • ' - ' There is something extraordinary in this conduct — I believe it is a part of his character to do things in an extra¬ ordinary way — but whatever be his hu¬ mour it is happily of little importance in the present case. At a former period I might have been obliged to propose a gradual liquidation — I am now prepared for a complete settlement with him, and it is therefore out of his power to molest you ; even if he contemplated abiding by the passionate instructions of his mother, who it appears was not satisfied with the wresting of Grove Park out of your
hands, but intended to have put the bonds into suit. But I do not think this temper among the vices of Darrell's heart: he is spoken of for generosity, which he is said to carry so far, that even those who condemn his want of princi« pies are led to feel interested for him, and to wish him altered. When I think of Grove Park I some¬ times wish I had been of age at the time of the foreclosure of the mortgage on it, * that the sale might have been prevented, because I know how attached you were to it; indeed how attached I was to it myself: but, on the other hand, the painful events which had occurred in that neighbourhood had made my father in¬ different as to its fate; and though I wished otherwise, I heard of the disposal of it with the less regret. Wishing now is in vain, or I would again wish it could be still your's and my Augusta's. As it cannot be, Caroline, I hope that you will find Woodlee comfortable, and not unlike Grove Park. In the letter that miscarried I told you of thegreat disappointment it was to Caroline VOL. I. G
and me to be obliged to give up the pleasure of going to Paris to meet you. — Some important arrangements which I am engaged in respecting Manor House, and which I have not time to repeat at present are peremptory causes of my stay in England this autumn, I hoped to have managed to remain at Woodlee till your arrival, but as I see by your letters that there must be an interval of some weeks, that is not in my power. I am going almost immediately into Herefordshire and will be back in time to meet you at Southampton ; but at all events Caroline will wait here for your movements. Caroline's person you will of course not know; I believe she was not nine years old when you saw her last; but you will know her heart the moment you see her, it is on her counte¬ nance; and you will not be the less pleased with it, on finding in her lap a face very like her own on the shoulders of a bouncing girl with the same name. £ have not time to enter upon the ge¬ neral topics of your letters, but we shall
have many opportunities of conversinff' upon them. Adieu! ouv ersmg Your ever affectionate V. , George GodfreV. ' / fear'if wSlltf ^ *? Paris ' ^1 icar it will not arrive in time tn «,*«* you on your arrival there meet :
G 2
XETTER X. Mr. Saville to Mr. Godfrey. Paris MY DEAR GEORGE, » We arrived here yesterday. — I believe I was a little unreasonable, as we ap¬ proached Paris, in fancying that I should find a letter from you, as you can hardly have received mine from Geneva. I have no doubt I shall receive your an¬ swer in a few days, if, what Avould be indeed a delight, Ave are not surprised by yourself and Caroline, Avhom you should bring to see this brilliant capital __not that I would consent to think that allurement even thrown into the scale, should it. prove possible fbr you to accelerate our meeting. But I will not let " the fairy promiser of joy" make me so confident as to neglect writing to you on our arrival here, as I shall not
move till I either see or hear from you ; — yet I am so certain of one or the other in a few days, that 1 will not dispatch this till the beginning of the next week, when 1 may be able to give you precise information of the day of our departure. We spent the time very agreeably at Geneva. The mountain scenery and the diversified sublimity of the objects, Avith the beauties of the shores of the Lake, excited enthusiastic feelings' in Augusta, who would not be dissuaded from accompanying me with a party of gentlemen to visit the valley of Chamou¬ nix. I more than once repented con¬ senting to take her; but, as she got at last well over the fatigue and without accident, I Avas extremely glad I did, as the fatigue was amply repaid by the sight of some of the sublimest scenes in Nature, the admiration of which was increased by adventitious beauties that seemed the effects of fanciful operations in the atmosphere. We were at one time^ when ascending the Montarveet to view the mer de glace, enveloped in g 3
DARRELL. clouds, which the sun dispersed in so singular a manner, that it appeared the work of some fairy hand employed fbr our pleasure in rolling back these vo¬ lumes gradually on each side, to display to our view the richly cultivated plains of the Chamounix below, with the wind¬ ings of the Arve through them; other glaciers extending themselves into the midst of corn-fields, the surrounding mountains covered with forests of pine, and, as the clouds opened horizontally and melted completely away, the snow- ' capped summits, Avith their craggy Aiguilles of granite issuing from them, were seen like transparencies on • the deep-blue sky. These stupendous views mock descrip¬ tion, and I shall only make one observ¬ ation, which is, that Avhen we were on the immense glacier of the mer de glace it gave me the idea of a tre¬ mendous sea suddenly frozen in the height of a storm; an idea Avhich I have since found had before struck one of our most intelligent travellers in this
part of Europe *, with whose Avritings you are no doubt well acquainted; and to which I refer you for an interesting account of these scenes. 1 am so strongly impressed Avith those of Cha¬ mounix that I could not resist mention¬ ing them, especially so heightened by accidental circumstances. At Geneva I fell in with Mr. Falstaff; with Avhom I had made an acquaintance the year before at Florence. I offered to accommodate him with the vacant seat in our carriage, and he has travelled Avith us all the way to Paris, Nothing particular occurred on the road, but I feel inclined to give you an account of a short conversation which passed with a French traveller as Ave were ascending a steep hill on leaving Dijon. It Avas a delightful morning; the sun had just risen and cast a soft radiance oA^er the beautiful landscapes of Burgundy, the Cote d'Or presenting, as Ave travelled, on the one hand, hills luxuriously covered with vines teeming with ripe grapes ready for the vinta^ the other hand, a se.
.„ 4.
Jarge extent of level grounds asluxuriously covered with corn waiting for the sickle. The rapid ascent of the road to which we had come induced us to ease the horses by walking up it. The same motive had made a French gentleman quit his cabriolet at the same spot. He bowed to us; on which I accosted him, and expressed my pleasure at the gene¬ ral appearance of the country* I ob¬ served that where I had travelled in France no land appeared to be left waste, and that there was a visible improvement throughout the kingdom since the Revolution. " Do you ascribe this," said I, " to the spirit of Bonaparte's government ?" He replied —" You are in a highly cultivated part of France : in all the other departments, however, agriculture has made a rapid progress : but I cannot say that it is owing to the spirit of Napoleon's government, which was principally a mili¬ tary one ; and to make husbandmen sol¬ diers is not the way to improve the earth: fields of corn and fields of glory require very different processes."
" Yet," saidT, " it must be owned, that in the midst of unceasing wars, and in spite of the depopulation of the lands, the country is wonderfully im¬ proved." " There appear to me," he replied, " two prominent causes for it: first, the increase of knowledge, which, during the last century, had been gradually spread¬ ing over every part of Europe, and which was among the things that the Revolution could not destroy : secondly, the Revolution itself, among the evils of which some good has sprung, and the independence of the small'farmer is not the least. But this is not owing to Napoleon, whose system was not that of independence of any kind. It originated in the first confusion of the application of the new philosophy, and if any thing could atone for its subsequent horrors, it is this. No, Sir, Bonaparte has no, right to the credit of it; and as little ean it be ascribed to the rash leaders and actors in the scenes of the last eight- and-twenty years: their objects were an overthrow and a scramble.'* g 5
, " It can only be ascribed," said I, " to Him whose grand and peculiar system is to produce good out of evil* and whose power is adequate to his system." — " No, Sir," — cried the patriot, too deeply absorbed in his own view of the subject to be aware of the extent of my remark and his negative, — " no such thing. We must look for the cause in the national elasticity — the French, if not oppressed as they were in the feudal times, are equal to any thing —they make as good farmers as soldiers — they are the best cultivators in the world, not excepting the English themselves." I smiled, but not a smile of deri¬ sion. Monsieur had already made the merit of his countrymen independent of the Deity, and I could not be sur¬ prised at his elevation of them above mankind. Besides his mode of not ex¬ cepting my countrymen implied that he allowed them the second place in the scale; and what greater compliment could I expect? Nor did I think the worse of him for it. I did not even con¬ tend the point of precedence in farming, 4
contenting myself Avith saying, that there were some good judges who thought Norfolk farmers unrivalled. He repeat¬ ed the Avord, " Norfolk!" and consider¬ ed a moment. He Avas one of those reasoners, to be found in all countries as well as France, who scorn to ask fbr information, and whose geography Avould lead them from London to Dublin all the way by land. He had never heard of Noifolk, but he had read of China. " The Chinese," he said, <* I know are great cultivators, but they have a soil and a climate that do all the work for them; they have only to scratch tlie ground and scatter the seed." «' My good Sir," cried I, «the Norfolk farmers have no such aids." — " Ohl quest" replied he, tl the tillage is so very easy that even the emperor amuses himself vvith it." — «' That may be,' J said I — I Avas wicked enough to let him go on in the midst of his demi-recollections — " but you may depend upon it that there is a great deal of poor land in Norfolk, and at times a damp and chilly atmosphere, on account' g 6
of which, the utmost skill and labour are requisite to fertilize the earth*" * " I can take upon me," replied he, " to assure you that you are very much mis¬ taken, that the sky is serene, and that the soil produces almost spontaneously." — I told him I wished he could prove that to tny Norfolk friends. — " Vous avez 4te to¬ las, done ? You have been there then ? In that case you must know better than I; that is, you must know that I am right."— I should not easily convince you that you are wrong, thought I, but I did not say it. He pondered a little on the difference between actual experi¬ ence and second-hand knowledge, but abated not a jot of the point in question, saying as he put his foot on the step of his cabriolet and wished us a good day — " Bon jour, Ion voyage ; but be assured that there is more energy in France than in all the other countries of the world put together." • Having given you this little trait of patriotism, I must add Mr. Falstaff's re¬ marks upon it. He had heard our dia¬ logue without taking a share in it, ex-
cept by the partly arch partly contempt- uous smile at the making Old England second to any country in any point what¬ ever. I must tell you that Falstaff is a clever man, but he has his prejudices, 1 pa¬ triotic and political, as strong as any man on either side the channel. He is greatly addicted to theatricals, and a thorough Shakspearean: violent in the moment of argument; but that over, he is in act the mildest and most yielding creature in the worid. The opinion of a single man, accidentally met on the road, drew forth from him a lash upon general character. " The vivacity of the French intel¬ lect," said he, " frequently gives an im¬ pulse to talk, which bowls it considerably beyond the point of fact. With a great deal of real information the French mix a large quantum of imaginary knowledge, acquired by inspiration or some such way, Avhich they will deal out rather than ap¬ pear ignorant of any thing, and fbr the ' reality of which they will warmly argue rather than receive instruction from an¬ other," .
I observed that this might be ap¬ plied to individuals of other countries as well as of France. Without noticing the interruption, he proceeded : " Andintheir arguments their conclu¬ sions are not rarely unconnected with their premises. The show of reasoning gratifies as much as the deductions that produce demonstration. The fact is, that debate is become un premier besoin since the Revolution: before that, love, sentiment and bagatelle afforded the tongue.its principal springs of motion, and fast enough of all conscience did it ga: but the Revolution diffused generally the pretensions to logical perspicuity for¬ merly confined to the philosophers; every gareon du Cafe', every d4croteur learned to argue from their deputies, and became so many Dracos and Aristotles, legislators and logicians, and every topic became a theme. Even Love, Sentiment, and Bagatelle felt the powerful influence of the . expansion of the reasoning fa¬ culty. Love argued that marriage was unnatural Avhen passion ceased to be mu¬ tual, and logically obtained the law of
divorce: Sentiment was reasoned into the denunciation and sacrifice of all na¬ tural ties — into boasting of base birth : and Bagatelle found logical gaiety in singing at murders, and dancing at balls a la victime," Here I stopped him and said : " Re¬ member that at that time all the channels of order were turned, and confusion let in as a deluge upon the land. No won¬ der, as the revolutionary waters assuage, if we see some antic forms resulting from the concussion < of the waves: but the deluge is abated, and with the return of amiable manners Reason establishes her just empire. Even my China friend has a great deal of good sense and good hu¬ mour, and if a patriotic ardour spurs him into a little bouncing, it is not for Eng¬ lishmen to decry the principle. Pray let the French then be good farmers as well as good soldiers." " But pray," exclaimed Falstaff; " let us laugh at the bounce ; and 'tis no mere revolutionary quality, let me tell you. Do you remember the Dauphin's horse at the battle of Agincourt ?" — Here he
fired offoneof his Shakspearean charges.— — «I will not, cries the Dauphin; change my horse with any that treads on four pasterns: ca ha I He bounds from the earth, as if his entrails were hairs: le cheval volant, the pegasus qui a les narines defeul When I bestride him, I soar, I am a hawk : he trots the air ; the earth sings when he touches it; the basest horn of his hoof is more musical than the pipe of Hermes." I laughed:— he continued — " A beast for Perseus: he is pure air and fire ; and the dull elements of earth and water never appear in him, but only in patient stillness, while his rider mounts him : he is indeed a horse, and all other jades you may call beasts.------What think you of the Dauphin's horse?" 'Taking his cue, I answered, " as of the prince of pal¬ freys," __« This clieval volant" said he " has always been, and still is, the hobby of the French." 1 did not check Falstaff's humour by any serious remarks ; but to you, my dear George, I 'will observe that national vanity is an excusable, perhaps a lauda-
ble passion, and merits nothing of the contempt due to the overweaning estima¬ tion of personal qualities. Individuals of every country shouki judge by their own feelings, and never take offence at it. John Bull is not without his share of it; and I cannot myself help thinking that England is the first country in the world : — I am sure Falstaff does; so we are more than quits with the French traveller on the score of patriotism.
In Continitation, Thursday — Yesterday, my dear George, was spent by my Augusta in rest to recover from her fatigue, and in writing to her friend Angelica Pisani. I followed her example, and my letter, you see, is already a volume. This morning I called on Count de B. but did not find him at home. I am sure he will hasten here as soon as he re-
ceives my card. He is a noble being. During the reign of Napoleon, the can¬ dour' and temperance with which he al¬ ways spoke his v sentiments, and the dis¬ dain and abhorrence which he manifested at every kind of espionage and treachery not only removed all suspicion from his character, but gained him the esteem and favour of the government. He was not the less, attached to the family of his unfortunate sovereign, because, seeing no term to the usurpation that existed, he had preferred passing his life in his own country to remaining an exile; nor was that attachment lessened by his not en¬ tering into secret enterprises against the sovereign de facto* When the series of events dislodged tliat ruler from the throne,DeB.rejoiced in the event, and being known to have shown a sincere affection for the restored monarch, he was received at once into favour. During the cent jours he followed the retiring court to the Netherlands. The motive which had actuated him to return to France in 180 L did not now
exist; the Revolution did not appear to be at an end; the usurpation was no longer admitted as permanent. It was necessary to take a side, and Count de B. hesitated not a moment in taking that which had been always his; he remained with his king without relinquishing the hope of returning to his country. He is a man of talents, and is spoken of for the peerage. So I heard from Penevaux this morning at his comptoir, where I likewise called. He told me also that he was to be at a ball which the House gives next Sunday evening, to which he invited me to bring Augusta, on whom Madame Penevaux will previously call. He in- Jbrmed me at the same time that it was a very general invitation, as a formal at¬ tention to all those with whom their ex¬ tended correspondence brought them ac¬ quainted, and that consequently it would be a very mixed assembly, but that many of his particular friends would be present, in expectation of amusement in an assem¬ blage of persons, from every country, whom connection, curiosity, pleasure or chance
had brought to Paris. — I am interrupted. — It must be the Count de B.------
In Continuation. My head is all confusion, George — I know "not where I am — I cannot col¬ lect my thoughts with sufficient regu¬ larity to express them — I have heard of wonders, I have seen extraordinary things; but the most unaccountable that I have ever met with in life has just taken place — I will endeavour to relate it to you circumstantially. — I laid down my pen and went from this closet into the ad¬ joining room, persuaded that I was going to shake hands with the Count de B. — •On entering I found myself alone with a perfect stranger, and whom I could not but know to be an Englishman. He slightly bowed. I was much struck with his figure — there was something noble in his look — his eye varied as if from emotion — it seemed to beam from under a dark-bent brow as if it would pierce me
through, and then softening, and accom¬ panied with a mild smile, it looked as if preparing to conciliate me to the grant¬ ing of some favour. It prepossessed me extremely. On my asking his business, he betray¬ ed a degree of hesitation, and, before he replied, again assumed his pierc¬ ing look — then said in a voice soft and pleasing, " Mr. Saville, I am come to you on business of such delicate nature that I am at, a loss how to enter upon it, or even to mention the name of the person Avhose commission I have to execute." 1 said it must be a mistake, fbr that I had no extraordinary business to transact with any man, and that there was no name Avhich he might not pronounce without the least hesitation. He put on his mild look and smile, and replied: « I wish with all my heart it may be so !" He said this Avith such warmth, and in so melodious a tone, that I really felt my self affected by hislook and manner. " I detest mystery too much," continued he,"to practise it, and for fear of appearing mysterious to you, I will at once tellyou
that the business I come upon is one-be¬ tween you and my friend Darrell." He looked steadfastly at me — I betrayed no emotion — indeed I felt none, but that of surprise. Fifteen years ago the name of Darrell would have affected me. Time and Augusta have dissipated the pangs of sor¬ row, and reflection has convinced me that if I had had some cause of com¬ plaint against the late Sir Francis for not making an exception in his pursuits in my favour, I had no well grounded cause of endless, or of any, animosity. He had not been able to engage the af¬ fections of her whom I loved, and in the hour of his death he had hastened to wipe away the stain of calumny : — he had indeed caused the loss of a beloved friend, but it had been provoked and it had • cost him his own life. — I might shudder at the recollection of the dread¬ ful events, but the hatred which arose out of them was due to myself, and I have paid it, George. Sir Francis had been materi¬ ally my friend — he was that mistaken, that obnoxious character, a man of plea-
sure, but he had been stopped short in his career. I have thought the subject over and over again, too often to be affected by the name of Darrell, and not to have thrown the blame on the right per¬ son,— myself. Had I spoken to Au¬ gusta herself, and not her brother — there indeed I shudder, and I must avoid the thought, or time and my child will have worked for me in vain. — But to re¬ turn from a digression which but too na¬ turally suggested itself. " The name of Darrell does not startle me," said I, " nor am I altogether unprepared for hearing something of the present Sir Francis Darrell, though I own it is a little sudden at a moment when, after an absence of fifteen years, I have scarcely got out of my carriage on mv arrival at Paris." " I hope', Sir," said he, " that what 1 have to communicate will make some atonement for the abruptness of this visit. The present Sir Francis Darrell, with a thousand faults, and a thousand more im¬ puted to him, has a peculiar mode of thinking in respect to matters of business,
which he hopes you will think not among his faults,—or vices, for that I believe is the termusedamong the virtuous members of society." } « ( I am not,at all acquainted with your friend, or his character: —-1 have lived in exile these sixteen years, and he was a child when I left England; —but I know that he is in possession of an estate that was once mine, and also of bonds of mine to his father to the amount of fifteen thousand pounds." The young stranger's countenance underwent several changes as I spoke. At first his pliant dark eye-brows nearly met in front, but they almost as soon se¬ parated, and settled into calm attention. " As to acquaintance with him, Sir," he said, " you will have no loss on that score if you are never better acquainted with him j but this I can assure you, that it is his desire to give you an opportunity of repairing all such losses as are not yet beyond the influence of worldly cir¬ cumstances. He has thought much and with great pain on the manner of his be¬ coming master of Grove Park, and if
some mode could be adopted, not dero¬ gatory to your feelings, of effecting its return to its proper master, it would be a matter of real satisfaction to him." " Sir," said I, " this conversation does greatly surprise me. I know nothing of Sir Francis Darrell; and, whatever rem¬ nant of attachment may exist in my bosom fbr a place which for some gene¬ rations had belonged to my family, it cannot but be knownto Sir Francis, that I have not the means to accept of the opportunity you tell me he would readily afford me of retrieving my affairs. Is he in Paris ?" " He is." " Then, Sir, do me the favor to tell him with my compliments, that 1 re¬ spect his motives, but that the hope of re¬ possessing Grove Park has not ever moved my heart, nor the thought of it entered my head since the sale of it; — that as to the bonds in his hands I have frequently thought of them, and that he shall hear from me upon that subject." " Those bonds," he replied, " are no longer — but, Mr. Saville, before I prq- VOL. I. H
ceed, I must remind you that 1 stated the business I J came upon as rather delicate, and also that Sir Francis had peculiar modes of thinking on matters of business: — itis not his meaning to confer obli¬ gation by what he has done, as you will find, if you Avill consent to favor him- with a discussion on a proposal he Avishes to make to you — and I may therefore now say that those bonds are no longer in existence." "Not in existence!" " Here are the skeletons of them \Vhich I am to deliver into' your hands." He took the papers out of his pocket and presented them — I was confounded, and hardly knew how to act, " Pray take them," said he, " and commission me to appoint an ihterview of explanation." He again advanced them with a peculiar srhile. — I told him that I could not possibly take the bonds. — "It is of little importance," said he, «* for the seals are torn off" I saAv that it was so, " But this is very extraordinary," cried I, with some degree of agit¬ ation — "I don't understand — I' do
not know what to make of Sir Frands Darrell at all." - tr l " Sir," said the young mani half laugh¬ ing, " few do, and therefore most have agreed to make a devil of him ; but I can assure you that in this instance at least he has nothing of a diabolical nature in view; —I entreat you to-take possession of these papers, and name arday for Sir Francis to Avait upon you." I never in my life was so much taken by surprise — he Avas so earnest, and- his smile so persuasive, that I consented to keep the torn bonds till I saw Sir Francis, and I proposed to call upon him imme¬ diately. «« He is not at his hotel just now," said his friend. " Then to-morrow ?" said I. "To-morrow and Saturday,"he replied, " he is engaged to be at St. Germain and Versailles — Will you allow me to name Monday for him at twelve o'clock ?" I assented, and in my agitation omitted to ask a direction, or the name of Sir Francis's friend, who took his leave with a look of satisfaction that added a new h 2
grace to his manner. There is something extremely elegant and engaging in him. As to his friend, I own my thoughts are quite bewildered: —This unexpected and sudden meeting in Paris, the unac¬ countable cancelling of my bonds, the manner in which this young man talked of him — It is all confusion in my brain — Then the hint of recovering Grove Park — What can it mean? A trick it cannot be, for the seals are torn from the bonds — But Grove Park?—I wish I had heard something of young Darrell, or that you were with me — Can his friend's remark as to the opinion of many concerning him have any allusion to the state of his brain ? Heaven forbid I But whatever it is, or whatever he be, I must have patience fbr the visit on Monday, which will explain and give me more insight into his character. No letter from you yet —I will detain this no longer — It will make you certain that I am here. Ever yours, Gilbert Saville.
SIR* FRANCIS
LETTER XL Mr, Saville to Mr. Godfi r ey, Monday night. I have received yours of the------ : it was delivered about an hour after my inter¬ view with young Darrell this morning. I Avas taking up the pen to Avrite to you, my mind being full of the occurrences which had intervened since I laid it down. My imagination had already coloured the style of my letter, when your's Avas put into my hand, and which, Avhile it de¬ lighted me, gave me a shock that threw all my feelings, and all the ideas that had arranged themselves for my paper, into an unconnected medley which I did not attempt at the moment to reduce into order, and I delayed writing till I retired to my chamber fbr the night. h 3
! I hardly know how to begin now, but, desirous that you should know what I felt as well as what passed, I will endea¬ vour at present to return to the train of thought which I was going to trace when the perusal of your ? s overturned it — I wish L could forget the contents of it for an hour. Soon after tbe conversation which I have detailed to you, the Count de B -----■ came in, and staid with us the greater part of the morning; in the course of which Augusta received a visit from Madame Penevaux, who renewed the in¬ vitation to the ball which tbe Count de B. backed with his hopes that he should meet us there. Madame Penevaux re¬ peated her husband's observation to me respecting tbe mixture of the company. — "Many" said she, "will be there whom I hardly^ know — I hope to see Miss Saville in more select re-unions when I may be able to pay her greater attention, but it will amuse her to see the dresses and manners of different nations." Augusta was delighted at the thought, and we engaged to attend.
A capital like Paris naturally calls forth all our curiosity, and at this time it is peculiarly interesting, but I shall not dwell on these subjects now. In company with De B. we spent Friday and Saturday in devotion to the pub* lie attractions j and in the evening ap¬ pointed we went to Ponevaux's. His rooms are spacious and elegant, and in the course of the night became crowded % I shall not undertake, like a delighted boy, to give you a minute description of this magnificent entertainment j you must have seen, though twenty years younger than myself, enough of the superb, the elegant, and the beautiful of such parties, to imagine the different combinations of art and taste in these displays, and in truth I have only brought you into this assembly for particular purposes, to the chief of which I shall now hurry you. While we were paying our compli¬ ments to the Lady of the Feast, I ob* served Falstaff retiring from the circle conversing with the youth who had been, vvith me on Thursday. He was rather H 4>
plainly dressed for such an occasion, but sufficiently distinguished to bespeak him a man of fashion. Falstaff recog¬ nised me' with a smile and a motion of thehead, but he, though he looked at me, showed no sign of knowing me. The prepossesion I had felt in his favour was not diminished' by his present ap¬ pearance, and I resolved on making Falstaff introduce me to him as soon as I disengaged myself from the ceremony that occupied me. It was some time before I could do this, as the Count de B. took the same opportunity to introduce us to a party of friends with whom he wished to fix Augusta for the evening. — And here, George, I can hardly refrain from breaking forth into a rapturous descrip¬ tion of your god-daughter, whose ex¬ pressive countenance, whose ease and un¬ affected grace of person seemed (nay were to my eyes; " they knew not seems,") to place her in the eyes of all at the very summit of the beauty collected this night. Her dress was of her own arrangement, not new, it was Florentine made, but of no particular costume, 4,:.
it shared the French > and' Italian taste,- which indeed as formed on .the Tormeri Its chief excellence was, that it became the wearer, and produced an admiration whicii I could not mistake, and at which I could not but be delighted — how dilat¬ able is the heart of a father! She looked like an angel, and of the qualities we an¬ nex to those seraphic existences, the most obvious was that of innocence in union with good sense. — But to return — Leaving my girl with Count de B,'s friends, I went in quest of Falstaff' and found him in the next room. He was standing with his companion observing the dancers. On seeing me he quitted him and came forward to me — " Pray," said I, " tell me who that is I saw you with ?" " You know," replied he, " I live but to obey you — his name is Darrell." " Darrell!" exclaimed I — "is he re¬ lated to Sir Francis ?" " It is Sir Francis himself." I started and mechanically cast my eyes towards him — His were upon us, but averting them the moment he caught h 5
mine, he moved from his position as if to avoid ihe. •« This is something extra¬ ordinary," cried I. t In spite ofmy reason, in spite of what I said in a former part of this letter I ex¬ perienced an undefinable feeling at foul- ing myself in the same room and withm a few steps of the son of a man who bad borne so prominent a part in the events of my life, of a son so like Ins father in the act of generosity I had witnessed within a few days, and whom I was en¬ gaged to see the very next pf**£ something on the subject of Gioye PaiK, and of whose resemblance to Ins father in another point, I may now add, I was ignorant. Had I previously received your letter my emotion might have had a different tendency - as it was, it ended in admiration, and a sentiment which was little less than affection. I ascribed his visit in disguise to a sentiment ot delicacy, and I thought I saw another. proof of this in his shunning of me in a ball-room. On recovering myself,. I was sensible that I was far from feeling any repugnance to him, and resolving
to show him that I did not, J requested Falstaff to introduce me to him. "There," cried he "I fear I am born to disobey you. When you recognised me in the other room, he put some ques¬ tions to me about you, and I told him something of our Voyage de Geneve. Observing you enter this room just now, I asked him if I should make you ac¬ quainted, to which he replied, «no, not to-night.* " I felt myself that it was as well, and, without imparting to Falstaff' what was passing in my mind, I acquiesced as a matter of course. You do not expect from me, George, the panorama of a ball, though I must say that this presented eccentricities enough to amuse in the description, but I must hasten to matter more important, and I believe I may add more eccentric a ] so _ At the ball I will keep you but one moment longer—Augusta was the ad¬ miration and delight of the evening. As the hour appointed this morning for the interview with Darrell approach¬ ed, I felt a considerable degree of agita- h 6
tion, but of this there was little OAving to painful recollections, which have been yielding for some years to the more pleas¬ ing associations of the mind. — Before I left Signa, though I felt a gratification at the tomb of my Augusta, I had ceased to weep there, and in sight of it loved to enjoy conversations with my child on the happy youth and amiable character of her mother.' The sad part of her story, though never to be forgotten, gave place to happier thoughts, and 1 talked of the earlier days of our abode at Grove Park, those days which you remember to have flowed so delightfully. ■' The name and almost the thought of Darrell had long been banished from my mind, nor did 1 ever in my regrets to Augusta for the loss of Grove Park, accuse him.as the cause. His vice was a most pernicious one, and led to crimes at which every man of just feelings must shudder, but never could the want of generosity be imputed to him. . Had he lived to see the folly and fruitlessness of his pursuit, which must have been the case, Grove Park would never have changed its mas¬ ter, and by this time even my bonds
might have been discharged by the im¬ provements of that estate. Such was the train of my reflections this morning as I sat waiting for Darrell: perhaps the turn it had taken was, if not given, at least supported by the impres¬ sion he had already made both by his manner and his action ; at all events it had prepared me to receive him not only without repugnance, but with pleasure. He did not make me wait long—He now came in with a countenance completely divested of that cast which implied un« certainty as to the propriety or issue of his visit — he did not alternately contract and dilate his expressive brow — he smiled, and, saying that he was aware that he was known to me, he apologised for the liberty he had taken in conversing vvith me in the character of a third per^ son, and said he hoped that I had as r cribed it to its real cause. I replied that I had, adding that his generous pre¬ caution had been unnecessary, and that I should always be happy to see him. As I spoke I put out my hand —lwas surprised to see an appearance of the contracted
brow _it was however but slight, and would have passed unnoticed but for the evident backwardness with which he took my hand. He made a kind of angular bow with his head, and allowed me to take hold of his fingers in a nght-hned position as if they had no joints, « 1 have very unsocial habits, said he, « but 1 appreciate your compliment, Sir, which you will not probably be ready to renew Avhen you know more of me. 1 came to talk with you on business. My ardour was a little repressed by this extraordinary exordium, but he soon removed the awkward feeling it occasion¬ ed, by resuming his smile, and opening the business. . « Mr. Saville," said he, " I "ave already hinted the nature of the pro- nosal I wish to make to you— I do not affect singularity, but I find ,it some¬ times overtakes me without my thinking of it — I have my reasons for acting as 1 do, and I cannot help it if they are not treasons of the rest of the worid. - What men call society is a sad jumble at best, and one of the most absurd reqm-
sites of its pretended constitution is that men must think alike,' or rather must all act as if they thought alike: go a little out of the beaten track, and the cry of extraordinary, singular, aflectation, like the barking of the shepherd's dog warns you back that you, may not get a. bite from the teeth of the guardians of pro¬ priety and general usage. I know that I am now going out of the beaten track, but I am not to be barked back, and I am grown too tough to be bitten. In requesting you to coincide with my vieAvs it is not with an intention to confer an obligation — Obligations in the present state of society are ungracious benefits — If there shall appear any advantage ac¬ cruing to you, it Avill be fully balanced by the weight on my side, which indeed will consist in removing a weight that has fbr someyears, as I before hinted to you in our first interview, molested my thoughts. I do not like the manner in Avhich your estate became my property. It is mot. because we are made to derive existence from certain persons that we are bound to approve of all their actions. It is not my purpose to be irreverent, Sir; I think
we owe ounparents nothing, on-the score of'birth;' it is a forced if not a malicious gift. Who would,accept that-could re¬ fuse itydf> aware of what it was to prove? But we do owe these involuntary agents' more or less for their subsequent conduct in.attempts to alleviate or enable us to bear the burden." * r was rather astonished at this expres¬ sion of extraordinary, and certainly not amiable, sentiments, but I did not inter¬ rupt him : he continued — " You are surprised, I see—no won-' der, for you are yourself a father, and I have heard a happy one — Far be it from me to cast a reflection on a relation so matured — may it be lasting, but this is not always the case in the world." I began to be a little hurt, and observed. that he could have had no opportunity of judging in his own person, consequently could not speak experimentally. " I hope I am not rude," said he eagerly, " it is the farthest thing from • my intention — 1 am too apt to be led by circumstances into these out-of-the- way reflections. I did not even mean to reproach the memory of my own<
SIR" FRANCIS progenitors, but these thoughts are cer¬ tainly not unassociated with the subject ofmy present visit. . I can'reckon among my ancestors some of a very noble na¬ ture, and whatever may have been said ofmy father, I am indebted to him for the honourable transmission of-their ac¬ cumulated fortunes: I have heard too that if all the virtues of the species could be shaken together and impartially divid¬ ed he Avould have his full share of them." 1 could not help laughing, and he smiled. " Your father, Sir," said I, "was one of the most generous men alive." ' <« I have heard so," replied he, — " and it gives me sincere pleasure to hear that eulogy from the lips of a man, from Avhom the utmost I expected Avas a si¬ lent condemnation. Had he lived, Sir, I feel assured that you Avould never have been out of possession of your estate in Northamptonshire. My mother — but I no more mean to cast a slur upon her memory than upon my father's : Ave are all puppets in the hands of Fate, and the passions are the strings Avith Avhicli Ave are made to dance about upon
the, stage* to run up a mountain or plunge into ,a horse-pond, to rise or to fajl, to laugh , or to cry — we can't • help ourselves; yet, there is an inconsistent propensity attached to us of apprcwing or condemning certain results which Ave call the actions of individual puppets.— Now, my dear Sir, my mother was cer¬ tainly jerked into one of those results when the strings shook,her so violently into Grove Park. Undue advantages were taken of unhappy circumstances, and my string leads me to disapprove and to counteract the consequences of that action, and till I do it the string will continue in perpetual violent motion," I laughed again — he smiled again. " It is even so," he proceeded, " but I beg your pardon, and will resume the language of the world. I anr not so disinterested,. Mr. Saville, I might have said so selfish, as to Avish to fetter you vvith the chains of a pure obligation. I do not come with the proud intention of insulting you with a gift. I wish you to have your estate again, but 1 have no romantic scheme of throwing money in-
to the sea like the ancient fool who was overburdened with it— no individual of the tribe of Judah ever pushed a more interested bargain than I purpose—I will have quid pro quo, but I'will be the gentleman-like and splendidly-disposed Hebrew, and such we have learned by experience there are in our days, who leave your Nazarenes at a distance ;-^ I will be the Shevah of this play, if you will allow me." The smile I had worn became serious, and I said here: " Sir Francis, I confess that this language is unexpected—I make no boast of religion, but I have never been ashamed of the oharaoter of a Christian — besides, is it not something like mockery to talk of reinstatement in a large property on conditions which there are no. means of fulfilling ?" His brows met artd parted —*« Will you pardon me?" said he, with a very engag¬ ing look of contrition — " I have no right to talk thus, I am unfit for the society of men so fortunately 1 tempered — I will endeavour to- explain myself without offending. < T am perfectly > convinced
that Grove Park, is more than, equal to the discharge of every incumbrance upon it, including the .amount, of the bonds. An unfavourable sale in the first instance, then dhe expiration of* low. leases, and the , extraordinary improvements .which have been made at little or no expence, have stamped a value on the estate which I am certain my father would have scorned to take advantage, of; so do I, .and I propose to you to re-enter into the pos¬ session -of.it, giving me a security upon it fbr.the payment of all that was .strictly due from you, to be liquidated by annual payments.; and I.have no,doubt if you comply with this proposal on my earnest request, that you will, as.you ought to be, be master of your estate free from every incumbrance, in the course of six ,or seven years." ., , I was more and more surprised and affected as lie proceeded, and when he stopped I was perfectly unprepared with an answer. The humour of one part of his speech, the profaneness of his allusion in another, and the grandeur of som evinced in the action he contemplated
had a confused charm -upon* my mind. The two former I imputed to the too frequent presumption of youth left early to' itself; the latter could only spring from that godlike attribute which we sometimes see elevating and ennobling human nature. I paused — his eyes we're fixed upon me — he saw the working of my mind, andin the moment of suspense he put out his hand and seizing mine very differently to the manner he had used before, he pressed it, detained it in his, and with a smile which an angel might wear, with a voice of music he said " Do not refuse me, Mr. Saville, I conjure you not to refuse me." I really was overcome by his manner — I returned the pressure of his hand, and replied— " What can 1 say ? This is a most ^unexpected and unheard-of pro¬ posal — I should be deficient in common feeling were I insensible of—" " No praise, I entreat you" — cried he, interrupting me—" I am perhaps the last man in the world you should praise — but do not refuse tny request." "Refuse your request!" said IJ « how is
such a request to be refused y or how grant¬ ed, without reflection ? I do not refuse it," continued I, again pressing his hand- to showT felt what I couldmot speak, " I do not refuse it, but the arrangements must of course take place in England, where I had very different views, and where my determinations must be greatly <mided by the situation in which I shall find myself when I arrive there." I was, however,, compelled to say that I would not oppose his intentions, but I observed at the same time that the cancelling of the bonds was. premature. « As for those," said he, *; the amount will be added to the sum for which Grove Park will be made liable in the new deeds whiqh must, be executed on the occa-
sion "
Lwas just going to express feelings ot gratitude and admiration, though I think they would have annoyed him, when Au¬ gusta opened the door of the room. As she advanced, I said-" Sir Francis Darrell" — on, which he rose contracting his brows, then looked full at her, making a slight? bow and walking away to the
window, where I went to him. He never once afterwards turned his eyes towards Augusta, and staid only a few mihutes longer, > during which he thanked me fbr the great pleasure I had given him* said he was going shortly to England, and hoped soon after to settle the "bu¬ siness completely. I said that if the arrangement he proposed took place we should be neighbours, and I hoped__ He did. not let me finish the sentence __ the vibrating contraction of his brows took place—- " I hate Belmont, "said he, " I think of selling it." Then with/ his smile, he added, " Good morrow!" ~* and left tlie room without further cere> mony; I know not how to tell you the sensa¬ tion I felt on his leaving me, nor was Augusta less undetermined what to think- when I had told her all that had passed. She had been struck with his appearance at the ball last night, though he had not been introduced to her; and we both con¬ curred in thinking him an unaccountable but noble-minded being. — With these impressions I was about to Avrite to you
when, as 1 have said, your letter war brought to me. Your account of him has shocked me, and I have dropped the idea of pressing an intimacy which was my first intention, nor will I seek him farther while in Paris than by leaving my card at his hotel. What I have written will serve as an answer to your's—You find the Bonds are destroyed, and as to the subject of Grove Park, we will converse upon it when we meet — It is late, and I shall conclude, that I may go to bed. In the course of the week I will write to you or to Caroline, and inform you of our day of starting and our route. Adieu! Gilbert Saville.
a < , a, -x I - - ^ - letter xii; th ... Sir Francis Darrell to Mr* Vernon, MY DEAR VERNON, When we have done all that we have to do, a, kind of void follows. This may by some be deemed a tranquil and pleasant intermission of labour: to me.it is an intermission of life, and unless my nerv¬ ous cords are put in motion by something to feed imagination they trouble me with unpleasant * catchings. When the beagle,—and I believe also his compa¬ nion, the huntsman, — has finished his chace, he devours his kit and falls asleep. — Is not this happier than eating half a biscuit, and giving one's self up to the tyranny of a random set of nerves ? Any agitation is better than the horror .of passive recollections.' Havingdorie what 1 had to.do^ and avoiding,'by choice,' the " human face divine" (reqsl malign), I VOL. It i
have all day long been subject to my in¬ voluntary catchings and starts; I shall, therefore, get rid of them by employing these vacant hours for your amusement, having by chance fallen in with some precious subjects of your Vortex, Soon after" my arrival here I met with our old acquaintance, Falstaff, vvho, by- the-bye, travelled from Geneva with Mr. Saville, of whom -more anon. We met accidentally at Penevaux's last Thursday, and were invited at the same time to a ball that was to be given on Sunday evening. Falstaff said he should like to spend the intervening days in visiting St. Germain en Laye and Versailles. —■ He pressed me to accompany him, and we made the excursion together. Both of those places, but particularly the latter, are full of English, and I fear many of them do little credit to tlieir country. - I was making this remark to Falstaff as we were walking up one of the streets of Versailles, when my attention was at¬ tracted by a figure in deep mourning hobbling in cloth shoes a little before us. His person was slender and had an
air of fashion that lost nothing of its quality by the tender stepping on the stones, enforced by the admonitions of the gout. He turned into a shop as I asked Avho he Avas. " Don't you know him?" said Falstaff— " that's Dick Lovelace in handsome sables for a beloved wife who departed this life about a month ago, as I learned at Pene¬ vaux's. He is gone into a mercer's shop, and it Avould not at all surprise me if it wsib to anticipate a Avedding-suit." When we came up to the door of the shop I went in, and Falstaff passed on. Lovelace, seated with his back to me, and lolling on the counter, was actually ex¬ amining some blue and other coloured cloths. I did not disturb him — he took no notice of me, and perhaps had not ob¬ served my entrance. He felt, and priced, and praised, saying : " Oui, Monsieur — they are good, and fine, and handsome, but ought I to be thinking of them yet, eh?" This was said in good English, for English is spoken at the shops Avhich the English frequent, but the succeeding question Avas put in such French as Lovelace aa as i 2
master of: " Combien de tems, Moiv sieur, est ce que un mari porte deuil en ce pays ?" The man smiled and replied —" Mais,* Monsieur, c'est selon. Si on est connu, c'est a dire si on est du pays, on porte le deuil un certain tems; autrement c'est selon." — « e Oui," said the widower, " c'est se¬ lon," not troubling himself to think how selon might be applied, " et je ne suis pas un habitant de France." — «« That makes a great difference," re¬ plied the draper, « how many ells shall I have the honour to cut off." Lovelace cast his eye round before he answered, and seeing me, said, " Pas encore." He appeared to doubt whether he knew me or not, which my reserve made him solve in the negative. He looked at the cloths, then at the man, then at me, as if supposing ideas on the occasion for each of us. A suffusion, which did not amount to a blush, plainly indicated that he valued the opinion of others more than his own; — he said he would call again, and went out.
I was buying a pair of gloves at an opposite counter of a pretty little bour¬ geoise, and I said to her that I per¬ ceived the gentleman who had just gone away was a countryman of mine, and from his deep mourning, I feared he must be suffering excessive grief. "Monsieur a perdu son epouse," said she, with an arch elevation of the upper lip — " mais le terns se coule, et on se console." « It is some time then since his wife died?" — "Mais, oui—" "Long?" — " Pas absolument." — « Six mois, peut-etre ?" She perceived I was laughing at her. — " Perhaps one," said she laughing, « mais Monsieur Lovelace est un brave homme, et on est libre de tenir aux usages de sa nation." To the customs of one's country! Thus it is, Vernon, that countries are painted and nations estimated 1 A brain¬ less, heartless, or ridiculous animal sits fbr the picture, and the malicious painter, i S
overcharging even that, hangs it up in public as the resemblance of an English¬ man. Here are your social attributes for you! The savage eats and drinks and raises his brood like other creatures, and if he attacks his fellow man, it is to make him a useful servant; but your civilized gentry, your educated men, in¬ vent a system of social order, by which all the horrid and disgraceful qualities that lurk in their blood are made to ger¬ minate, put forth, and flourish. Not content with the arts of war for the game of rapine and murder, the arts of peace are cultivated to mutilate and to mangle truth, to attack the heart, to give " ample room and verge enough" for the exercise of tbe malignant passions of which the species is composed. Admirable society! But let that pass, and let us go back to the bourgeoise. " And what is the custom in France ?" said I. " On se console aussi," replied she, treating the matter as a jest. " But a month ?" said I. " Mais, pleurer un mois, c'est beau-
coup partout; surtout quand on est jeune." — , - "Jeune! and where do you limit youth ?" " On me dit," replied she maliciously, " que le pauvre Monsieur Lovelace n'a que cinquante ans." i Here was a ne and a que with a vengeance for a widower who had been pricing gay garments I At the end of the street I found Lovelace with Falstaff, who, mentioning my name — "I thought," cried the gouty youth of fifty, "that I had seen you before. Why did'nt you speak? Every body knows Dick Lovelace, eh!" I said it was some time since we met, and his mourning had changed him. " Changed me! Why Falstaff, do I look ill in black ? They tell me I look better than I did; yet I hate black, it puts one in mind, eh! But we must all go: * Omnes eodem cogimur; omnium Versatururna— . Eh! but Sue was a lovely creature, and i 4<
I loved her for herself only, and for no vulgar delights, as I told her mother eh, Falstaff? Not that J was insensible of her personal charms, Etjnilitaviuonsine gloria— Eh! no matter for that, Fate has snatched her from me, Fate, against which it is vain to struggle. —Those were pleasant times, but let us now think of to-day. — Gentle¬ men, will you dine, with me? I have some excellent Clos Vougeot, and Cha¬ teau Margaux of the first quality." • As we lamented the impossibility of ac¬ cepting his invitation, a coach turned into the square and stopped to let out a smart youth, followed by a dame, perhaps not quite old' enough to be his mother, but whose dress was sufficiently under-aged to be that of his wife, while the arrange¬ ment of it might bespeak her his mistress* « Pro sancte Jupiter!" cried Lovelace, "that is Mrs. Crawford — I must speak with her; she is to be at Penevaux's ball." — " Are you to be there ?" said I, with the most undiscomposed features ima-
ginable. He replied in the negative, • not by uttering the monosyllable, No, but casting a significant look, a kind of mulatto glance, bred between a smile and a tear, on his suit of sables, and, kissing his hand, bowed himself away from us. Behold one of your Vortex, whom the gout and gambling have combined to sink before his time. I knew personally very little of him, but the ruin of his fortune every one has heard of. Gambling is one of the distinguished features of society. Hurra for society! Hunc alea decoquit — I never understood the charm of this grand assembler of the high and the low, the rich and the poor, on any other prin¬ ciple than a system under the joint rule of Momus and Medusa, those real rulers of society. I think the fool that is so made bankrupt merits decoction in its literal sense. The lady he ran to, that is as fast as lie could, Mrs. Crawford, and her gallant, the spruce Capt. Rosette, were also of the Vortex, but here they are going fast down, down, down, unworthy of a single dip of ink, except to tell you that the lady would not go to the ball, I 5
and why? Hear. Returning to our hotel we received an en passant kiss of the hand from Lovelace who imparted the important intelligence and the reason — " Some English tabby has put her in mind that it was the Sabbath-day — ha! ha! You won't dine with me then ?" To have answered him we must have raised our voices, as he did not stop, and was some way past us. Mrs. Crawford and the Sabbathl At this rate you may look forward, Vernon, to a voluntary termina¬ tion in some such retreat of conscience as La Trappe. " We have enough of Dick without his Clos Vougeot," said Falstaff, "but if you fancy him, * you shall nose him,' again to-morrow night at the ball, where in spite of his gesticular negative I have no doubt he will make his second ap¬ pearance." We returned together to the hotel where I lodge in Paris: there we found installed a new personage of the Vortex, one with whom I am hardly acquainted, but whom I will give you as I had him from Falstaff. — Jack Bullanger, a gay
little figure, became master of a consi¬ derable fortune at an early period of his life, which but encreased the lightness of a heart naturally light, and destroyed all the equipoise that a sound heart often gives to a heavy head. Bullanger con¬ ceived that fortune and fashion Avere in¬ separable ; and in his ideas fashion con¬ sisted of a commission in one of the regiments in those days constantly sta¬ tioned near the court, free admission at the opera-house and theatres, blood horses, and a musical Avife ; all of Avhich his fortune enabled him to accomplish. The last article was accounted a fine woman, and what Avas vulgarly called a dasher. She was the daughter of a cler¬ gyman ambitious of connection, who, not having fortune to settle her among the great, bethought him of supplying its place by the allurements of the senses; and, oh happy father! succeeded in get¬ ting her a husband of four thousand pounds a-year. Nor was the husband less happy in possessing a Avife, whose person and superior musical powers were universally admired. i 6
, After adittle while Bullanger began to perceive that admiration was a kind of coin which his wife changed according to the value that her fancy set upon it j that having for some time given small change among her admirers indis¬ criminately, she at last gave the whole to a handsome young officer in the same regiment with her husband, who was somewhat uneasy at first; but the fashion of the thing reconciled him to it, and he never was miserable till she eloped. Even in that he found some consolation as he flattered himself it was far from being unfashionable. His habits however were crossed, and he would have given half his fortune to have had her back in de¬ fiance of the sneers of foolish people. Her retreat which he had long strove to discover, was at length made known to him in a letter from herself; in whicii she assured him of her attachment, 1 and re¬ quested a supply of money. He did not hesitate; he sent her money, wrote her a love letter conjuring her to return to him, and promised never to reproach her. Void of shame, she would gladly have em-
braced this offer, for her gallant had forsaken her;—but there was another barrier, sometimes more difficult -to sur¬ mount even than shame ; — she could not part with her. infant, one too clearly not her husband's. In reply to his letter she unblushingly imparted the dilemma, Avhich was no sooner known than re¬ moved ; he received both the mother and the daughter, and Avas happy. Don't you think he deserved to be so, Vernon ? This was not the case with her father — his ambition had distorted hisimagination; but he had understanding enough to see that he had made a strumpet of his daughter, and he died of a broken heart. After sometime Mrs. Bullanger, trust¬ ing to the silly good nature of her husband left him his adopted daughter to take care of; and set off fbr another campaign Avith Captain O'Toandagen, a young ar¬ tillery-officer going to the Peninsula. Since the peace she has been travelling it seems, and has again had the modesty to write to her husband from Bourdeaux for more money, Avhich he sent, and Avas come so far on his way to meet her.
The foregoing piece of Vortical biogra¬ phy is necessary to the completion of my adventures at the ball," to which we will now proceed. Bullanger, having called at Penevaux's, was invited. • I took up Falstaff in my way. We found a large company already assem¬ bled and the dancing begun. I am no dancer, but I used to like to look at good dancing. As we drove to the house I had said to Falstaff that the main spring of dancing, as it was practised, was vanity, —rather than the innate desire of motion, created by music in a state of nature,—and that I doubted whether that was the only passion which the corrup¬ tions of society mingled with it. Falstaff; though a man much older than myself; and no stickler for our senseless habits and customs, thought otherwise, and praised it for an agreeable and innocent diversion. With these different notions, we agreed to make our observations dur¬ ing the night. As we walked, we exa¬ mined, not particularly the grace or agi¬ lity of the busy pretty feet responding to the sprightly tones of a good band of mu-
sic, but the effects on the countenances of the dancers. There were half-a-dozen sets up at once. " Who is that very beautiful girl," said I, " in the light blue and white dress dancing so exquisitely ?" " That," said he, " is Signora Saville, my Florentine acquaintance." Though I had seen Mr. Saville, and had heard from Falstaff of his travelling with him and his daughter, I was not pre¬ pared to hear the name annexed to such a blaze of beauty as darted from the person of this girl. It is long since I was so dazzled. I had not time to trace her features in detail: — her eye was cast down while her person was in motion; but when she raised the lid, as she resumed her place on finishing her solo part of the dance, it discovered a dark pupil on a perfectly white ground, yet it was more soft and expressive than brilliant; — it indicated soul rather than vivacity. A deep- brown wave of unequal curls seemed to move across her forehead; her cheeks glowed with red, but on a complexion
suited to her eye; it was clear but not fair ; her neck rose from her bust with a distinguishing elegance; her stature, though above the height of her.compa¬ nions in the dance, appeared hardly above the middle*size; her hands and feet small, and her arms formed to complete the grace which attended every movement of her person. — If there remained any pro¬ perty yet unperceived, to give the stamp of perfection to her beauty, it received it from the unconscious, unaffected manner Avith which she removed her eyes when she found me gazing at her. — . , " A delightful girl she is," continued Falstaff; " and unrivalled in dancing. Her countenance is animated, but it is a coun¬ tenance of innocence. From her excel¬ ling in the art, acommpn observer might be led to detect in her eyes some slight degree of vanity, but the propriety and modesty of all her steps evince the con¬ trary. Vanity Avould impel her to over¬ step the bounds of domestic dancing to sIioav that she could rival the movements of a Goselin on the stage. — We see nothing of this ; she dances with spirit,
because she is fond of dancing, and she dances weh\ because itis expected of her by her friends. It is evident, however, that she takes more pleasure than pride in it." I agreed that the love of dancing is, in itself, a passion, especially among the French ; they dance for the sake of danc¬ ing ; the choice of partners being quite secondary., Itis not an uncommon thing at their rUral assemblies, when a want of partners occurs, to see a set made up en¬ tirely of men. I remarked too, as a striking proof of this passion, that the man who was dancing with Miss Saville was infi¬ nitely more engaged in the management of his own feet, than in admiring hers, or any other beauty she possesses: on which I observed to Falstaff that I already began to think that it must be, not only a very innocent amusement, but a special preservative of virtue, " for how else," cried I, " could a man dance with such a girl and not forget himself completely ?" "Your servant;" said he, "I did not re-- commend it as a specific, and I see by your remark that you would not be so innocent a dancer as Miss Saville's partner.— I
adhere to my proposition that it is an innocent amusement. — Even that young lady opposite to ber, who emulates the steps of Psyche can scarcely be said to compromise her modesty, for it is obvi¬ ous that the pleasure of the dance wholly engages her t — but let us on and try." , We passed along from set to set, and noticed a number of fine girls, and good dancers, and I certainly was not success¬ ful in looking for tbe passion of envy, which I had often detected in our Eng¬ lish ball-rooms: — but I sometimes point¬ ed out that of vanity, which Falstaff always declared was absorbed by the dancing principle. At the usual interval of the country dances the by-standers were pressed together into the middle of the room, or kept on their seats near the walls, to form an elliptical alley for the Waltzers. " Attention," — cried I to Falstaff. — The perfection of waltzing, you, Ver¬ non, well know, depends upon the con¬ junction of two persons so nicely inter¬ laced by the arms as to form a spe¬ cies .of planet whirling by means of a
certain step round its own centre, and at the same time gliding about tbe ball¬ room elliptically, typifying at once the diurnal and annual motions. " Plurra for innocence !" cried I, "here are your dancing principles I" — "Call it. any thing but dancing," said he, " do look at that couple : — the feet never spring from the ground as in a dance, it is nothing but an embrace, and a moving poise. In fact it is the circulation of an indecent posture, in which no woman- could consent to stand still for a mo¬ ment, and the indecency of which can¬ not be altered by the addition of motion; yet we see modest ladies with uncovered bosoms and bare shoulders, whirling round a room full of company with a man in a mixture of limbs, for which, if surprised alone, they would inevitably lose their reputation: yet are their fathers and husbands looking on while their daughters and wives are publicly in¬ curring the contempt and suspicion of every man of reflection." — " Then," cried I, laughing, " the day is mine." —
*' There may be balls without walt- zes,'^ replied he; — " this is no danc¬ ing.— I would venture to bet twenty to one we do not see Augusta Saville among these twining circulators." -He would have won, and I was rather pleased not to see such beauty in so degrading a light. > A promenade followed, during which we strolled into the card-room, where JEcarte was the principal attraction, and we were not much surprised to find Lovelace, and Bullanger betting on the cards. - The, two men of fashion had lived on terms of intimacy, and their wives frequented each other's parties, till one of them no longer retained your Spartan virtue, Lovelace was showing him some jewels which had been his wife's. — " Poor Sue!" said, he, " she set a great value upon this ring — look at these * seals —r here's a pin worth a hundred j-guineas —You remember her • pearls, Jack, eh ? I promised her never to part with them, — no more I will, no, not to any other wife I may marry; — and I may marry again, eh ? why not, eh ?
I am a young man yet, not much more than forty, Jack — prime of life, eh! — no objection though to the Avearing of them in that case, eh ! Poor dear Sue is in heaven, and wonld not be the worse for it, eh!" Here Bullanger, Avho had divided his attention between the turn the cards took and LoA r elace's dead Avife's jewels, exclaimed; " Heaven ! Hoav long have you believed there was such a place, Lovelace?" - " Ah 1 Jack!" replied he with a reli¬ gious shake of the head, " I never saw any body die before, and I could not help saying my prayers before Sue's aunt, and I.repeated aloud, to the surprise of the old lady, the Belief, the Lord's Prayer, Ten Commandments, and ihe Grace of our Lord." — { " The deuce i" cried Bullanger, " all by heart? what a memory you must have! But to say the truth, I am myself a good deal reformed lately in those matters, and go to church now and then in conse¬ quence of some of Mrs. B.'s admirable .letters which she wrote some years .ago
(before she left me the second time!)" — A settlement of the bets was now called for, and Lovelace had about fifty Louis to pay. We escaped as the two Solomons were lightening their pockets. It was in the second circulation of rotatory bodies, when we were admiring the improved boldness of posture, that a very striking couple, who had entered the room while we were among the card- players, came swimming along in mystic revolution. The man was a stout Ger¬ man officer, whose bristly whiskers had struck terror in the field of battle, and were now carefully cultivated to charm in a ball-room. The lady was comely, but lost some of the height of her person from her head and shoulders being bent considerably backwards in absolute de¬ pendence on the strength of her partner's hands. As they approached that part of the orbit where we stood, Falstaff, in spite of the buz of, « C'est la Baronne Earbonfalbac," recognized Bullanger's campaigner, in quest of whom he was on his way to Bourdeaux. He immedi¬ ately imparted the recognition. I was
standing by a German, whom I mali¬ ciously asked if he knew her name. " Yes," said he, " C'est Madame la Baronne Barbonfalbac." — " Apparament," said I, (C elle est An- gloise." — " Cela sepeut," replied he coolly, " mais elle n'est pas moins Madame Barbon¬ falbac." " Vous la connoissez, sans doute ?" " Pardi, cela se peut bien aussi, puisquc je suis le Baron Barbonfalbac." I bowed with all due respect asking a thousand pardons. " Pas de quoi," replied he civilly, " 'tis very natural question — she waltzes with my dear friend Knocandoff, She is of your country, ish she not very fine vomans ?" I found mysW involved in a very ticklish conversation, but I could not do less than protest he had proved his taste, which he interpreted in favour of Madaine la Baronne^s beauty, and accordingly acknowledged the com- pliment with a leering stare and a grin. I saw Falstaff struggling to stifle a laugh, nor was I easily restrained from one myself. We were relieved^by the Baron's dear
friend Knocandoff making his way through the crowd to inform him that the Baronne found herself indisposed, and had taken a seat at the other end of the room, whither the friends hastened. " She certainly got a glimpse of me,'? said Falstaff*. " Her indisposition," said I, " will probably encrease when she gets a glimpse of Bullanger." *' I think, replied he, " she would rather see him than me." ** The scene would be curious, and we determined to see it. < As the waltz* ing finished, we observed Bullanger and Lovelace mixing in the general pro¬ menade that followed. We kept them in view, and saw them approach the spot where the lady sat. As soon as he saw her he started and seemed to doubt his eyes. —The Baron was sitting at her side, and Knocandoff was standing before her. '* It must be she," exclaimed he. " I say, Lovelace, is not that Mrs. Bullanger?" "'Tis a long time since I saw her," replied Lovelace, " but I should think it very likely, eh ? — Hah! Monsieur 4
Knocandoff!" continued he, recognizing the German officer whom he had made an acquaintance with at Versailles, "Voici mon ami qui prend dans son tete qu'il sait le dame avec qui vous parle ? voulez- vous le introducer?" " Volontiers!" replied the German, " Ce Monsieur, comment s'appelle-t-il ? " C'est Jack Bullanger: tout le monde sait Jack." " Monsieur Jack," said Knocandoff, « connoissez vous Madame------ ?" " Ah ! Mr. Bullanger," cried the lady, anticipating the introduction, " I am glad to see you — how long since you left England ? Give me leave to present you to Baron Barbonfalbac — Baron, a friend of our poor O'Toanagain." " C'etoit un brave homme, O'Toana¬ gain," said the Baron, " he break de neck in de Pyrennee. — I very sorry, but so much betterfor me — Oh ! you did know O'Toanagain ?" Bullanger confounded, had not a word to say. He turned his eyes piteously on his wife, and uttered, " What am I to think ?" — She stopped him short, and, with a look vol. r. &
h« well understood, bade him be com¬ forted :•»- u Grieving," said she, «* will not recall hira; — remember where we are,— a word to the wise: — to-morrow I will tell you all: — we are at the hotel de —, what hotel, Baron ?" — " Dresde, my loaf, where we will be glad to see Toanagain's friend." Awed by the appearance of the Ger¬ man, and unwilling to produce a scene, Bullanger preferred submitting to his own disgrace; and, still hoping that she would return to him, he wished her and the Baron a good night and left the room. — Lovelace was not so merciful, he showed Madame la Baronne by a smile, that his memory was good, and he took an op¬ portunity, in the course of the night, to tell her history to Knocandoff, in con¬ sequence of which, the indignant Bar¬ bonfalbac relinquished her the next morning to her happy husband, stipu¬ lating only for a discharge of the bill at the hotel de Dresde, and repayment of the expenses of Mrs. Bullanger's jour- nies, which the Baron had laid out most disinterestedly, besides allowing her, for
the sake of ^onveniency in travelling, to take his name, for which he made no demand. So much for these Puppets: — they are performing in the last acts of your Vor- , tical Vaudeville. I was greatly amused with them, and determined to let you have them; — so here I send you a vo¬ lunteer volume, having answered your last while I was at Dover, and you may either laugh with me, or at me for wasting my time. But the fact is, that having accomplished the object of my journey I have little else to do: — Paris, like London, — like ail other overpeopled places, has few charms for me: —• " man delights me not, nor woman either, though by your laughing you seem to think so." You may spare yourself the discovery of indications in my extolling a soft dark eye, a graceful arm, and the rest of it. Beauty may yet dazzle my eye, but never will it reach my heart; — 'tis over. — I saw her again the other day ; — she came into the room at the eonclusion of my business with her father. To convince myself that she x 2
had made no impression on me, I did. not look at her a second time after my bow; though in that glance I was con¬ vinced that her beauty did not depend on candle-light and a showy dress. I am expecting a letter from you, but after you receive this, direct no more here. — I leave Paris shortly for London, and, if you have given up La BeUe, which I seriously hope you have, you may go and lose a few weeks with me at Belmont Lodge. Ever your's,
F. Darrell.
LETTER XHt Jfr. Fernon to Sir Francis Darrell. Mount Veroon, Sept. 3d. I he place and the month in the date of this letter, my dear Darrell, will imme¬ diately fill your imagination with pointers, setters, greyhounds, partridges, hares, and all the train,* equipage, and sylvan accoutrements of Dian and her mountain nymphs; and moreover, powder and shot, of which that lunatic goddess was com¬ pletely ignorant, and had not nous enough to invent. To this glorious show you may add the goddess herself, if you can figure her in the person of your acquaintance, Lady Barbara Lewis, who came here on the eve of the first, by my brother's invi¬ tation, to enjoy the slaughter, and as¬ sist in the division of the spoils. She k 3
is a great favorite with the Baron for her bold riding, and I shall not be sur¬ prised to see her take a gun and bring down the outermost bird of the covey. I wonder my sister is not jealous of her : — she must rely upon her want of beauty, but Tcould tell her that there are other charms, and that " where those are light Eros finds a feere." However it is no • business of mine, and if my Lord will spend all his time with dogs, horses, and a huntress, my lady must look to herself, 'that's all I say, and who would blame her? Not I. Lady Mount Vernon, young and cer¬ tainly handsome, being of too delicate a frame to follow my brother over gates and ploughed fields, appears nevertheless to participate his delights, as it were by . reverberation. I am extremely astonish¬ ed at her, and cannot believe it natural. She is fond of reading, and is at present engaged with the Duke of Marlborough's wars; and she talks of his tactics and . genius, so as to show that she is greatly interested in her book, yet she appears to ' listen with infinitely more delight to the
manoeuvres of General Lord Mount Ver¬ non on this ridge and that lea, the creep¬ ing of 1 Chloe, the pointing of Bob, the flushing of the covey, the whur of their wings, the style of aiming the gun, each man dropping his two picked birds, pop, pop, from her Lord's double barrrel,^, pop, from his friend's.—Then to see with what patience, or rather glee, she listens to Barbara's sporting slang, who, in an¬ ticipation of the approaching hunting sea¬ son, goes over the feats of the last with a tenacity of memory that calendars the re¬ markably fine scenting days, the dura¬ tion of the runs, the gates she leaped, the size of the hare, and the name of the rider who wore the scut. " John," says she to my brother, " do you remember the 11th of Decem¬ ber?" " I shall never forget it, Bab," says he, " we had capital sport, — nothing like it all the season, —the ground just nicely open, —the scent lying deliciously, — the hounds all in fine spirits, all staunch, not a single false tongue that day." " Do you remember," says she, " when k &
they were at fault in the single-oak field? What a dead silence there was, Avhile they spread themselves over the field." "Do you remember," says he, * ; in what a style old Growler gave tongue, and how it Avent to your heart ?" I shall never forget it," says Bab, " and the dash Ave immediately made over the gate and across the fallow to farmer Paine's yard. What a fuss it put mo¬ ther Paine in! Do you remember Tim Dawson's fall that day?" " To be sure I do, and your laugh as you passed him by: —but DaAVSon's no bad rider; he had mounted a jade of farmer Littlejohn's which he knew no¬ thing of; — I swore how it would be, when I saw him join the hounds. Do you remember Will Grove that day ?" " Yes," says Bab, " Will Avas well mounted : he is a fine fellow on horse¬ back." " Devilish fine fellow," quoth my Lord, "buthe is an accomplished man, — he is one of the best shots in the county." " Do you remember ?" says Bab — and so they go on catechizing each other's
memory in detail through the whole sea¬ son past, and anticipating many jovial deaths in that to come. Can you conceive such an avarice of bliss ? Surely they. must be the hap¬ piest people upon earth, Avho can thus enjoy the past, the present, and the future all at once. But what is the oddest thing in the world to me is, that my sister, who has now heard this jargon for upAvards of four years, is not worn out with it, nor has as yet entered the Vor¬ tex. To be sure, Mount Vernon is not deficient in other respects, and, after his dogs and horses, is kind enough" to his wife, so kind indeed, that he never admits a dog into the house beyond the sporting parlour, where he sometimes breakfasts, or receives such of his sporting acquaintance as his own pride will not allow him to bring into the drawing- room. Out of the season he is •rather attentive to her than otherwise, and upon the whole has, -1 believe, a very proper husband-like affection for her. But it is time for me to acknowledge your letter from Dover and to tell you how K 5
it happens that I am here. And first as to the unfortunate history of your father and Godfrey's aunt. —Certes, my dear Darrell, it is a most melancholy one ;— but why was it so? It was not owing to the devotion of a lover, or the smiles of a mistress, which are things perfectly un¬ derstood. — If a woman will not smile, her knight in time understands that she is not of the Vortex, and he feels him¬ self bound in honour to bow and with¬ draw his pretensions. What would the most uxorious man have more? I am sure that Mr. Saville would have been satisfied with it. But here comes a hot¬ headed stripling of a colonel, with a "Dam'meSir, I must have my sister's letter directly." Who the devil would give it hi m ? __I never heard the particulars of the affair; those catastrophes, however deep and commented upon at tbe time, soon lose their interest, and seldom sur¬ vive a generation : — besides I went early abroad. That business was certainly a bad one, but I can find no analogy in it with my devoirs to La Belle. —If she prove a Mrs.
Saville, I promise you, Darrell, that God¬ frey shall have no reason to complain of me. — If she is what that peculiar smile of her's indicates, why should she not advance my reputation ? In the name of wonder, why should you be so solicitous about her? If you were in habits of intimacy, I might account for it one way or the other. Are you really becoming a Chevalier Preux ? Your intentions respecting Saville are generous in the extreme, and, con¬ sidering the fortune you possess, wor¬ thy of you. I long to hear how you are received. Godfrey knows nothing of your design, but he has< been rather more communicative lately respecting his own intentions. Not having the remotest idea, of Grove Park, he me¬ ditates settling Mr. Saville and his daughter at Woodlee. I now find that they are the relations; the expectation of whose arrival has prevented the usual removal to the Manor-house in Here 7 fordshire on the prorogation of parlia¬ ment. I had hardly heard of these good k 6
folks, and lately I hear of nothing else, though a profound silence is preserved on the circumstances that caused Mr. Saville to expatriate himself so many years. Mrs. Godfrey talks most enthu¬ siastically of " my uncle and my cousin Augusta." Then " so long in Italy" is naturally followed by the young lady's being " an accomplished .painter, and an excellent musician," to which I begged leave to add sculpture, architecture, and archaiology — a Greek word for Rufus. La Belle put on one of those wicked smiles which I cannot help interpreting in my favour, and Rufus Palmer who was present transfused. By-the-bye, Rufus is become quite attached to me, and a hard word or two never fail to improve his fondness. He has got the whip-hand of rne just now, as you shall hear, but 1 must first tell you that I have been try¬ ing to make a sinner of him, and find him an apt disciple; — but he is not aitfait yet. ' I have made him ashamed of the stone figures in coats, waistcoats, and breeches, __ g£ays, petticoats, shoes and stockings, in/
the court and gardens of his place, yclept Hants Cottage, which were bequeathed to him by his father as fixtures to the said Hants Cottage. I made him observe that statues belonging to men of classical taste were never clothed. " Truly Sir," said Rufus as if suddenly struck, " no more they are, and I have sometimes blushed when I have been in company with ladies." " Did you ever see them blush at it ?" said L " Truly no, but I have-wondered that so modest a lady as Mrs, Godfrey could overcome such carnal exhibitions." " My worthy friend," said I, "it has nothing to do with her modesty one way or the other — It is entirely a mat¬ ter of custom. —Don't you observe that the persons of men are more covered than the persons of women ?" " Truly so," responded Rufus. "Would not you blush to see our friend Godfrey with his shirt collar un¬ buttoned, and thrusting a naked shoulder out?" v ", Doubtless, Mr. Vernon, doubtless."
" Butyou have no objection, have you, to look at Mrs. Godfrey's arms, and her neck peeping from under a lace band — have you ?" " Truly," quoth Rufus, " I can'tsay." " Not say! That's a copy of your countenance, Rufus." " I vow, Mr. Vernon, you are in a comical humour." " Aha! Mr. Palmer, I see you are a- sly one, I am talking merely of the effect of custom, and away goes your wicked imagination to beauty." " Fie, Mr.-Vernon, I bad no such iniquitous thoughts." <« But to return to our subject," con¬ tinued I, " you allow that there is nothing indecent in the ladies being less covered than men, provided the limits pre¬ scribed by modesty are attended to." " Truly, I must allow that." « W T ell, the same custom, whicii covers a living man all but his face and bands, and a living woman all but her face, hands, neck, and arms, has thought proper to leave marble statues still less covered; — and nothing can be more absurd than to
make marble suits of clothes ; it is set¬ ting our statuaries to copy tailors in¬ stead of nature.—For Heaven's sake down with your breeched Vertumnuses and tuckered Pomonas." " But then," quoth he, " the court and gardens would look so empty." "Not at all; you have plenty of trees, and shrubs, and flowers, which are the natural and proper ornaments of grounds, though, to show something of classical taste, I would have a few good copies of the Grecian statues placed here and there. Your grounds possess great capa¬ bility : — it is a pity such points of beauty should not be drawn forth from the mass. — Now that I can take the liberty of a friend, 1 may tell you 'tis the general Avohder, how a young man of such taste can think of leaving it in its present state." " No ! you don't say so! did Mrs. God¬ frey ever make the remark ?" This fellow is a downright Noddy, in love with La Belle, and does not know it: — but she does, and evidently does not like him the worse for it. I hardly think
she "can return his passion, though the best of the Vortex have fantastic notions : and that she is in the Vortex her treatment of this sanctified booby convinces me, for if she has nothing else in vieAV, she will make him marry some damsel of her choosing Avho may chance to have occa¬ sion for a fortune, perhaps her cousin Au¬ gusta. But to return to Rufus : — " Mrs. Godfrey 1" said I, — " to be sure, and all the world." " The Avorld is large, Mr. Vernon, but I wonder Mrs. Godfrey never hinted her opinion to me." "Why you Avicked rogue," cried I, " Avould you have a married woman — oh for shame!" Rufus blushed like an autumn cyder apple. « Truly I thought no harm." " Nay," said I, " I do not Avish to con¬ fess you, but truly you do now and then betray some sinful thoughts, my friend." He ejaculated, " The Lord forbid !" » That blush, Rufus," said I, « that blush speaks a very intelligent language ; — nay, don't be. ashamed of your taste,"
, " Upon my word, Mr. Vernon, I do think her a very fine lady, but —" " Come, come, none of your buts—if you wish to please her, I'll tell you how." «' Who," exclaimed he, turning up the whites of his eyes, " would not like to please so sweet a lady, but I do de¬ clare —" " 1 see Palmer," cried I, interrupting his declaration of innocence," I see that with a great deal of real taste you bave little knowledge of the world; I'll take you under my tuition. — > What say you ?" " Truly, you are very friendly : —my particular studies, I own, have been poetry and geology, subordinate to the holy writings, nnd I suspect that I do want some improv ement in worldly man¬ ners :— I should truly be glad to make some tasteful alterations at Hants Cot¬ tage, such as would please a lady of Mrs. Godfrey's judgment, because I am sure, and you may take my vord for it, Mr. Vernon, she is as innocent as I am, or as you are yourself." I agreed with him, and not to over-
whelm you with Rufus too much at once, I will drop the remainder of our convers¬ ation, and confine the rest of my letter to a brief narrative. I walked round his place with him, dooming the fall of all the wooden and free-stone habiliments, whether enveloping shepherds or shep* herdesses, haymakers orfluters. I marked out two other sites for creditable statues, and I pointed out where taste required the ground to be levelled,—where raised, — where there should be open space and .display, — and where retirement and pri- vacy: and I talked so convincingly on the subject, that he felt the absolute necessity of employing a landscape-gardener to give his premises the appearance which genius, and only genius, could find under the rough coating of nature,—as the diamond receives its brilliancy from the delicate cuts and angular touches of the lapidary. His fortune is large, and will bear some pulls from the hands of taste. He left the choice of the statues to me, and I ordered from London a Venus Callipyges for a grove, a Faunus for the lawn, and a water-nymph for the rivulet. They were
expected in a few days at Hants Cottage, aud I was enjoying in imagination some new conversations with Rufus, which I thought would be necessary to enforce their establishment in their new domains, when I managed to manoeuvre myself into a journey hither, tete-a-tete with Godfrey, leaving my pupil free to im¬ prove the unaccountable partiality La . Belle has for him, which, if he really does not already see, he must soon discover, unless he be even more stupid than I take him to be. You must know that a few days after I wrote last to you, letters arrived from the Savilles, in consequence of which I heard more of them than I had ever heard before, though not a word of what I afterwards became acquainted with on the receipt of your letter now before me. It appearing that Godfrey had time to go into Herefordshire before their arrival, preparations were madefor the journey.— La Belle was to accompany him. Cer¬ tain of this, I said I had an indispensable engagement with Mount Vernon, and be¬ came of course fixed for the excursion.
I completely over-reached myself, for I am certain neither Godfrey nor his wife Would have planned such a trick for me ; but it turned out that, considering the matter well, it was decided that La Belle should remain at Woodlee. Well, I made the best of it, as I usually do ; being, as you know, the professed enemy of blue devils. — Godfrey is a good fellow and a pleasant companion, and I suspect we talked more on the road than we should have done, had I been bodkin. At Hereford we parted, Manor House and Mount Vernon lying on different sides of the city, so here I am, and you see with what company. Lady Barbara has given me a fine ac¬ count of the group you had at Bram¬ blebear Hall; —nor was she very nice in whispering her suspicions of Lady Betty, and — whom do you think? No other than the gallant swain who began (only began, mind,) to think the Lady one of the Vortex. How could he leave North¬ amptonshire at such a beginning ? True, she is not "one of his beauties," and .though " her figure is perfect," yet he
*' admires a different complexion." I can tell hira what he does not know, that her ladyship with all her demureness could not conceal her pique at his flight. By the way, I take it for granted you go again to Bramblebear Hall, on your re¬ turn to England. If so, I'll go with you, or perhaps you may find me there, — I shall not at present debate your character with you: — this is certain that you are a most unequal being, though I am sorry to see that the sombre part of you pre¬ vails more and more. Pray let your next letter be a gay one, and once more I con¬ jure you to eschexv melancholy. Ever your's, ; L. Vernon. P. S. I have this moment received the enclosed from my fond fiiend, Rufus; —i- a treat, which I cannot withhold from you. He shall not want for my advice gratis.
LETTER XIV. B,>fus Palmer, Esq. to the Hon. Lewis reman. Hants Cottage, Sept.2. DEAU MR. VERNON, Your departure from Hants caused me much pain at the time, the improvement of our friendship having rendered our acquaintance very agreeable: but I more particularly felt the loss of your valued company yesterday, at the opening of the cases containing the statues which arrived the daybefore. Oh friend! friend! I fear that taste and virtue are at war with each other: in spite of my endea¬ vours to reason myself out of those preju- dices which you convinced me were not participated by any of the learned, and but by few of'the pious, — and we must make a distinction, for if all the pious are not learned, truly all the learned are not pious — I did nevertheless feel a certain
shock when, in company with my sisters, whose impatience to judge of your taste there was no overcoming, — Martha our cook, and the other maids standing by,— when I say—my eyes first beheld the beau¬ tiful, I mean the unclothed, person of an indecent goddess, raised out of the case by our footman and a carpenter from Alton. I think the statuary must have mistaken-the order you gave. — You evi¬ dently intended the figure to have some slight covering, but the deficiency of posterior drapery doth truly cause a comi¬ cal feeling to the beholder; and Thomas and the carpenter bit their lips to pre¬ vent their laughing; — the maids did laugh, except Martha, who frowned and went away. v I own I was ashamed, yet Miss Palmer and my sister Kitty did not blush. " Nonsense," cried Kitty, " as if it was any thing but stone." But nevertheless, both my sisters went away, and with them the two maids, — which, you see, was showing by action that they thought it better to talk of taste than to see it;—for they both maintain your opinion, that 6
nature is superior to tailoring in works of art, though in works, of real nature there is great room for display of taste by tailors, robe-makers, and fancy-gar¬ deners. They discourse much in your style, and truly while discoursing, I in¬ cline to admit my feelings to be preju¬ dices ; but there is an obstinacy in my sight that warreth against my better un- derstanding, and maketh me withdraw mine eyes from this statue of Venus Cal¬ lipyges, unless quite alone. —Though I must own it is most beautiful, and Avould be more so, if the drapery had not un¬ fortunately been hitched on the goddess's shoulder, for after all, I must maintam with the poet, that, "want of decency is want of sense." But then, as you said, decency dependeth upon time and place. Now, perhaps when this beautiful statue 4 is fixed in her place in the grove, and one hath seen her time after time, one may only be struck wtih the merit of the artist, and the nice touches of his chisel. . - I have endeavoured to reason the maids out of their mirth, and the cook out of her
frown, saying to the former, there was nothing to laugh at, and to Martha that there was no impropriety or immorality in works of taste. —I had no occasion to reason with my sisters, they had all your reasoning by heart. In spite however of their conviction, and of the strong ar¬ guments you made use of, I did not feel comfortable upon the occasion of this Venus, and I resolved nof to open the other cases till I consulted Mrs. Godfrey, knowing how you esteem her taste: — so I made Thomas and the carpenter transport the goddess into the washhouse, and leaving the others nailed up in the hall, I rode over to Woodlee, but was not lucky enough to see Mrs. G. It is the fourth time I have called since Mr. G. left home, and I have only seen her once. — I think it odd. — I never was re¬ fused admittance before. — 1 will go over again to-morrow, and I will leave thib letter open to tell you what passeth. Sept, 3. — Dear Mr, Vernon, — this Venus causeth me much evil. — Not that I have seen Mrs. Godfrey: — I was again denied admittance, the Lord knows why, vol. I. l
— I do Avish I had seen her : — her opi¬ nions agreeing with your's would have helped to take off the impression made upon me by such an unexpected rebuke as I received from Martha this morning, in a manner that will amaze you. — I somehow got up rather early, I did con¬ ceive before any of the family were stir¬ ring ; descending the back-stairs, I walk¬ ed Ayithout ever once thinking Avhat I was about, straight into the Avash-house — when, lo! Avhat think you I beheld ? Venus you say: — truly so, but it was Venus in a flannel petticoat, — a real flannel petticoat,—one of Martha's petticoats:— I know it is her's. I felt an evil spirit of anger rising within me at the pre¬ sumption of my servant, and, without thinking Avhat I Avas about, I began to take it off, when a voice, as if from the ceiling, called to me aloud, " You had better leave it on, Mr. Rufus." The time of the morning, the quiet of the house, not a mouse stirring, not a breath of Avind moving, the voice struck to my heart, as jf I had been a culprit ^detected in his evil ways. But I soon
SIR FRANCIS DARRELL. recovered myself; the wash-house door was open and I saw Martha go across the kitchen. I cannot teli why I did not speak to her: but, leaving tbe pet¬ ticoat upon the beautiful statue, I hastened back to my chamber, where I staid till I was called to breakfast; —after which I went over to Woodlee as I told you, and came back without my errand. And here I am, not knowing what to do, with my sisters calling for the opening of the other cases, Thomas and the housemaids perpetually grinning at one another, my cook watching the wash-house door, and Venus Callipyges in a flannel petticoat. The Lord have mercy upon me, and keep me in the right way ! Pray give me your advice, dear Mr. Vernon: — I shall let things remain as they are till I hear from you: —• I know that your engagements with your brother the Right Honourable the Lord of Mount-Vernon will not allow you to leave Herefordshire at present, but a few lines from you will lelieve my mind much, and in spite of Kitty's re- ' l 2
monstrances the other cases shall not be opened for the present. I hope you had an agreeable journey, and met with his Lordship and her Ladyship and all your family at Mount- Vernon well. ; Mrs. G. looked sweetly the day I saw her, and had her usual agreeable smile, My sisters both send compliments. —Write soon. .1 am, My dear Sir, Your obliged friend and humble servant, Rufus Palmer,
LETTER XV. Aiigusta to Angelica. Faris. * * ♦ . MY DEAR AN0ELICA, I have drawn my pen through the first four pages ofmy letter, which were writ ten more than a week ago, on the day after our arrival here, as they are but a repetition of what my father has been describing to the Majrchese. He pro¬ posed a day of rest and letter-writing. — On reading his letter I would have torn mine, but he would not allow me: —you will see that it would have been no loss. However, on resuming my pen, I.will not quit the lovely scenes of the country near Geneva without indulging the long contracted habit of opening my mind to my dearest Angelica, and showing her ail that passes there. Yes, my sweet l 3
sister, this friendship, this making over of our thoughts and feelings to each other, is, if not life itself, the great support and sweetener of it. Indeed I am never so conscious of my existence as when I am communicating my sentiments to one, who receives them as you do, and repays my love and confidence with her own. The superiority of a married life must, I think, consist in this mutual com¬ plete unbosoming of the heart which that tie is formed and evidently intend¬ ed to produce : I say this, in spite of the many, many instances, that we ourselves have known and heard of, of marriages where no such friendship existed; —- and to observe to you, that possessed of it, as we are, without marriage, I feel armed against the delusions of hope, and never will admit the thought of becoming a wife without complete conviction that I am wooed on this principle. I am content with my Angelica's heart, and the being, who aspires to share my affec¬ tion with her, must possess a heart like her's. Now, be it known to you that this
leads to my informing you of my having had the misfortune to have a lover since I arrived on this side the Alps. How many would call me absurd for using the word, misfortune; but you under¬ stand me, Angelica, and will not think me so. The man that seriously proffers his heart cannot be an object of-con¬ tempt in that, and it must therefore be painful to be obliged to tell him that the highest gift any one has it in his power, to bestow is not thought worthy of acceptance. It is a pity that men will not discover what the event must be, which I think is so easily to be done, and spare unpleasant feelings on both sides. As for persevering lovers, and many-conquering damsels, they are to me incomprehensible characters. — Love, or if you please, the continuation of it, de¬ pends, in my opinion, so entirely upon a return of affection, that I should as soon expect frost in summer, and warmth from ice, as love in a rejected suitor. But the thing exists, and therefore the defect is in my comprehension, or rather let me say, my dear Angelica, that it is owing to the l 4
manner in which we have been instruct¬ ed, to the sentiments which have been instilled into our minds from infancy. I remember my mother well, her delicate form, her pale countenance, and enchanting smile: I fancy that I see my dear Marchesa, xny second mo¬ ther, in youtb and beauty such as her slim form and intelligent countenance still indicate, sitting by her side and talk¬ ing of us; — I recall, or imagine I recall, the> expression of their principles: — no wonder I should imagine tins as they have been so invariably, so impressively inculcated by the beloved survivor. There may be, and there no doubt are, national distinctions of character arising from national distinctions of education^ but'in this neither the Marchesa nor my own mother could be said to be of any eountry, and principle they knew ought to be the same in all. — If our Marchesa has made me an Italian in some things, she has made my dear Angelica an Eng¬ lishwoman in others; — such at least as the" character has been painted to us. If the passions are more uncontrolled in
one country than another, it is not be¬ cause they are uncontrollable by nature more in the one than in the other, but because the regulation of them is ne¬ glected in early life. In Italyparticularly,butnotonlyin Italy, the romance of a goddess and god of love is by no means antiquated, and it is only to the wild worship of these I can attribute all the modern follies we hear of its effects, and among others that of the persevering votary. People of common sense will never think of uniting themselves with¬ out reciprocal attachment; but, says the lover, permit me to endeavour to gain your love. — That " permit me" is the incon* sistency itself: — the woman who permits the endeavour consents to the proposal :— C'est une affaire finie, as the French say. As for conquering damsels who deem a list of lovers necessary to their re¬ putation, they are nothing more than coquettes, a character- contemptible enough, but something still worse. — Jt the gratification of their vanity were all one might be satisfied with a laugh, , but the injury they do is serious. If the l 5
admirer does not break his heart, he is associated by custom, (an unjust one to be sure,) in the ridicule attached to re¬ jected suitors; and the heart that has been refused by one is rendered of less value to another. I am sure we are not prudes, Angelica, yet I cannot but think the'attempt to gain a man's heart for the gratification of vanity a crime, and that she who wilfully uses her attrac¬ tions, be those Avhat they may, to create love, should be considered as legally engaged to the person, and as dishonour¬ ed, if she practises her power on more than one. The very premeditation of conquest indeed is degrading; We have both had the misfortune (I must repeat the word) to refuse the offers of our acquaintance, but with what pain ! It has never entered my thought to gain from any man more than a pleasant interchange of civility; on the contrary I have been greatly on my guard to pre¬ vent any man from suspecting me of an artifice so mortifying. This mode of thinking I owe originally to the Mar¬ chesa, but is completely made my own
by all the power I possess of reasoning. Why is it that what is so much coveted by the generality of our sex should cre¬ ate in me a painful sensation ? I mean admiration. I know what my Angelica's answer will be; — that it is an ill compli¬ ment to the understanding, and indicates that personal qualities are the chief dis¬ tinction of a woman. There is mascu¬ line beauty as well as feminine ; but is a man ever made to perceive that he is admired for it ? and Avhy not ? Because it is not the chief distinction on which he piques himself. And is it with us ? Oh 1 it is as great a weakness in a female bosom as in a man's. It is because I feel it to be so, that it creates some de¬ gree of shame in me when I perceive that a man's eyes are more than commonly occupied in scrutinizing my person. In reading this sentiment you will readily recollect how little I prize the portion of good looks which nature may have given me, or rather hoAV I have learned to prize it properly; fbr not to value it at all would be nearly as weak as to value it alone or principally. My l 6
Angelica then will not think me in dan¬ ger of being vain when I talk to her of admiration and of a lover. There is a chivalrous, and I think just amhnatural deference shoAvn by men to the female character, with which every woman must be pleased, and which she ought to re¬ pay by showing her sense of it; but this is very different, and it is my opinion that the man who begins to make his passion known by marked personal admiration introduces his suit with an insult. And uoav, my dear Angelica, for love and Geneva, or, for the sake of tlie sound, love and the Lake. It seems that visiting that part of Switzerland has long been a passion of my countrymen. —Indeed it well de-- serves its celebrity, but I found that one of the greatest charms it possessed Avas that it gave birth, not to J. J. Rousseau, but to his ideal.generation. There isatpresenttherea young English¬ man of family and fortune whose name is Dartford, who leads a singular life. — Though of pleasant and apparently of so • cial manners, he passes all his time alone 7
in contemplating the remarkable parts of the country, their histories, and their le¬ gends*; the poor follow him and bless him ; the rich he excludes. He was accidentally introduced to our party one day, when my father staid at home to write letters, by our banker Mr. Pollen, who had pre¬ viously given us some idea of his charac¬ ter. He was walking at some distance from the town on the side of the lake; — he had a small book in his hand, which when Mr. Pollen accosted him he closed, keeping his ringer in it as if intending to continue his reading. —Though he spoke to him he looked at me: — his counte¬ nance is strong and marked, and the head altogether one that a painter would select for a story on canvass. He kept his eyes so long flxt upon nie, that though not unprepared for a scrutiny, Mr. Pollen having warned us of his habit, I felt my face flush.— He must have seen my dis¬ tress, but without removing the cause of it, he put his book into his pocket, and remarking that there was room in our carriage, begged permission to join us. It was of course granted, and he passed
. the day with us in our excursion on the side of the lake, opposite.to that along which we had travelled in our journey to Geneva. He soon discovered himself to be a man of cultivated mind, but roman¬ tically enthusiastic, and viewing things with that fervour of imagination which, magnifying ideal existences, degrades the common and necessary realities of life. The book he had been reading was Rousseau's novel. — The madness with which that unhappy man was afflicted is surely of a contagious nature, and I am certain, with our dear mother, that it is better for healthy minds to avoid the risk of contagion. This young man is evidently infected. He described, he painted with rapture - the places — the scenes which Rousseau had animated with the persons of his book: from his language.one mights imagine them su¬ perior to Paradise itself; and that nothing ever equalled Vevai, Clarens, and the rocks of Meillerie. At Clarens, undying Love, the God —I told you that Cupid and Venus had survived all the other an¬ cient gods and goddesses —had fixed his
immortal throne; there it was that he was married to Psyche, and there it was that all nature paid him homage, from man down to the very trees which " take root in love." There " they who had never loved would learn to love, and they who had loved would love the more." Upon the whole, I think our excursion was rendered more pleasant by the com¬ pany of our accidental companion, and perhaps I appeared to him to think so, but he could not dive into my mind to dis¬ tinguish the nature of the pleasure it felt, — which was of that kind excited by the perusal of some interesting romance, fabulous drama, or epic fiction. — It was a Tancred, an Orestes, or a Rinaldo: — I never once thought of Mr, Dartford. He, it seems, was not of that opinion. He called upon us the next day. — My father was gone to Mr. Pollen's, and I was waiting his return to accompany me to Ferney. My hero of the day before coming in the meantime, asked for me, and did not wait to be announced, so that I suddenly found myself alone with him in our sitting-room.
** Wehad a pleasant day yesterday," said he, as he advanced without the least cere r mony; — heroes never bow; — " but I come to persuade you to a much pleasanter excursion : where is Mr. Saville T* — I told him, — " Is he easily persuaded ?" said he: — "I will stay with you till he comes back. *— He must be persuaded. — How could you think of passing through Clarens and Vevai like common post- towns, and not stop a day or two to pay your devotion at the shrine of JuUel How could you, yesterday, with your horses' heads towards Meillene, not push forward to stand, once at least, in that immortal shelter of pure love? We must visit it together." *' You are very ardent," said I, " in favour of those places, but I do not attach the honour and the interest to them that you do; yet I saw enough of the country you idolize, to think it justly entitled to admiration." " Beautiful! beautiful!" cried he;" but their chief interest arises from their asso¬ ciation with Wolmar*s family: — a noble husband superior to jealousy, pure and
disinterested love, and female friendship devoid of envy; — Julia and Clara, no doubt, were uppermost in your thoughts as you past through their country." " I am very little acquainted," said I, "with the characters of the persons you are so enraptured with; I have merely heard them spoken of, and rather unfavourably 5 but at all events I agree in opinion with one of our most celebrated poets 3 who thinks that if Rousseau had never writ¬ ten, those scenes would have been equally romantic; that he has added to the in¬ terest of his works by their adoption, and that they have done for him what no human being could do for them, 9 * " Is it possible," cried he, " that you have never read Rousseau's work ?** " Very possible," replied I. " What, in the name ofi wonder, are you doing here then ?" " I am on my way with my father to England." " For Heaven's sake be more what your features and person indicate; I have often seen Julie in imagination; I never saw her with my eyes till yesterday, and
they were upon her the whole day. I was struck with the resemblance on the first glance I took, and was impelled by the deling it excited to know more of her. I never thought of the intrusion till I lost sight of her. You surely cannot be an every-day creature." ««I am indeed, and wish to be nothing else." " I don't believe, I won't hear you say so. Why, I never heard any woman talk as you did yesterday of the passage over the Alps." «I talked as I felt; lama lover of nature." « A lover of nature, and not of Jean Jaques!" " From all I have learned respecting Rousseau, he must have been a madman or a villain, and I would rather think the former with the sublime bard, whose sen¬ timents I have already quoted, who says, * But he was phrenzied by disease or woe, To that worst pitch of all, which wears a reasoning show.* « His character," I continued, M seems to have been drawn in the same poem by
SIR FRANCIS DARREIN. a masterly hand;— I advise you to read it. The poet makes him more particularly mad when he wrote a work which I have read, or rather heard read,— hm Social Contract; and I shall never forget the remark that was made at the time by one of my friends present, — that the lunatic, not satisfied with vending poison wholesale to the de¬ struction of nations, had prepared it in sugared pills for private families." " Poor Rousseau! what a violent ene¬ my has he in the only woman that ever gave me an idea of his Julie 1 But I must set you right. Whatever may be your opinion of his political work, it is clear that you are unacquainted with the spirit of his Nouvelle Ehise, as you own that literally it is unknown to you/ J ** Literally I own, for I have not read it, but I believe I am not ignorant of tho spirit of it: I have heard comments upon it by friends of whose judgment I have the highest opinion." " Believe me, he is misunderstood: I know his book has been represented as dangerous to virtue."
" If I am not misinformed," said I, <c he represents it so himself.** " There again;" cried he, —" a weak preface is turned into a weapon against one of the finest efforts of genius by which a single error is atoned for by a long life * cf virtuous love." " It should have been atoned for by a life of rigid penitence." " I must, I shall convince you ; but I am more interested at present to know how long you are likely to be here ?" " I believe a very few days longer: we are travellers, as I told you, on our way to England." " There," said he," no doubt to fulfil a happy engagement and bless your lover?" I was much displeased at this liberty, and looked as I felt. " Nay, do not be angry," said he, " you have no right to be so. If you will but reflect, above form as you are, you will «make some allow¬ ance for a man who wishes to ascertain the freedom of your mind." " I am astonished," replied I, " at this conversation from a perfect stranger,"
He stopped me: — "A stranger I aud can you call me a stranger after such a day as yesterday ? Well! I will be corrected. In urging the shortness of your stay as an apology for this precipitancy, I trust you will permit me in England to lose the distinction of a stranger." I said that I had no right to permit, and begged that so embarrassing a con¬ versation might be dropped. " I will obey you, 1 * said he j a and, conscious that, after the declaration 1 have made, my presence would be an annoyance to you in your enjoyment of this charming country, you shall see me no more here- I leave you; give me but the rose in your hand to console me fbr my loss of your company.*-* To ask the flower which I happened to have taken up when he came in, was but an artful mode of repeating his re¬ quest to be considered as my lover. It was quite in Mis style. (t You cannot but know," said I, *« that insignificant as giying the flower would be in itself, it cannot now be considered so," He bowed, said that even tbb but the more
confirmed his prepossessions of yesterday, and Avishing me a pleasant journey home and happiness through life, he smiled and left me. My father returned soon after, and I told him all that had passed, upon whicii he observed that it was absurdly pre¬ mature, but quite consistent Avith the character he had that morning been hear¬ ing of him, Avhich Avas a very high one: his principles were unexceptionable; he \A'as well informed and accomplished, but governed by a romantic imagination which rendered him singular. This was all my father said : he did not recommend him to my thoughts, but neither did he caution me, Avhich plainly showed that he had no objection to him if I had none. Objection! I have no objection to this young man: in spite of his romance he is sensible and amiable; but is this a reason for marrying? 1 have already told my dear Angelica the only ground on which I will ever think of changing my state. — That ground, Mr. Dartford does not possess, and I am determined not to be dazzled by the brilliant quali-
ties which usually sway the heart. If I have any beauty, I will not barter it for admiration; a correspondent soul, a full and faithful confidence of mind ean alone promise a life of happiness; these pre¬ liminaries including good sense, I should not be very fastidious as to the brilliant endowments and accomplishments so often made the only objects of matri¬ mony. Good sense, good humour, ha¬ bitual cheerfulness, an affectionate heart, a.id unbounded confidence, are the real jewels which a woman should look for in a husband. And now, if you please, my dear Ange¬ lica, we are in Paris. I was greatly pleased in entering France, particularly with the Cote d'Or, but to you, whose eyes are familiar with the most beautiful vineyards and abundant corn-fields, de¬ scription would be a work of supereroga¬ tion. — So come at once with me to the capital. Of Paris I have much to say; who could be a week in it and not have much to say ? But my letter is already long, and there are still more calls on my curiosity than I shall have time to satisfy,
as Ave shall now very soon set out for the country that gave me birth, which, the nearer I approach it, augments in my heart a feeling far, far beyond the passion of curiosity,— a desire to see that land of which 1 have heard so much,—to be in the midst of a nation whose virtues and whose prowess have saved the world, whose laws are an example to enlightened governments, and whose habits in pri¬ vate life are sources of domestic happi¬ ness. To be in the midst of them and feel myself one of them i — My Angelica has ever been among the foremost to .extol Britain, and she will not be jealous of the sentiments which a near approach to it calls forth from her Augusta. Signa and the lovely vale of Arno have ever been dear to me, and ever will: the feeling they produce is tenderness; they raise fond recollections and affections, -- recollec¬ tions and affections not associated with Britain, as I was so young when I left it; but we have followed her history, we bave read her authors, we have delighted in tracing the lives of her distinguished
characters, and we have been grateful to her for the return of peace, —sources of a just pride. — Yes, Angelica, I am proud of my country : —you too are proud of your friend's country, — you are half a Briton,- We will have two countries ; — we will live in both:— my dear Marchesa has promised to come for me: — we will divide our time between England and Italy; — we cannot, we will not be sepa¬ rated long. Tutto con te mi piace, Sia colle, o selva, o prato; Tutto e soggiorno ingrato Lungi, arnica, da te. Leaving then for another opportunity, my remarks on the general objects of curiosity, I will conclude my letter with subjects I know to be more interesting to my dear Angelica, — such as more im¬ mediately concern her friends; and I have to communicate a most unexpected oc¬ currence in the life of my father which has just taken place. You are but too weli acquainted, my love, with my dear mother's melancholy VOL. I. m
story, and my father's loss of the family- estate in Northamptonshire, , in conse¬ quence of the vindictive spirit of the late Lady Darrell. How surprised will you be 1 to hear that, from a spirit of a contrary nature reigning in the heart of her son, it is likely to return into his possession! The young Sir Francis Darrell"is at pre¬ sent in Paris. I have seen him twice, — first at a ball before I knew who he was, and afterwards, — the next day, when he called upon my father; but this was scarcely three minutes, for my entrance seemed to be the signal for his departure. He did not even speak to me, — he hardly looked at me; nor should I be able to remember his face, had I not noticed it particularly the evening before. You know how I am always struck with features that bear'the impression-of cha¬ racter, whetherin high or low-life, m mar. fcie or on canvass. This habit, no doubt, I have acquired from my attachment to the study of heads, in painting: — it is an agreeable acquirement, ;as it often fur¬ nishes subject for thought. I first saw Sir Trancis as he stood speaking to agen-
tlemah at a little distance from a set in which I was one of the daneers. I.had i'-gobd. opportunity of viewing his coun¬ tenance without his observing me. Itis a very striking one, .and I should liave hoticed it had the head been on the shoulders of a piscatore in a boat .at Livorno, instead of an English baronet in a ball-room at Paris. The description of features cannot ; con¬ vey a resemblance j the few terms we have for expressing them cannot adapt them- selves.to that infinite variety which is one of the wonders of nature. They mark not character j —character marks them:—we may see two faces with precisely the same features, and they shall be so distinguish¬ ed by the difference of the; spirits which animate them,,as to have no striking re* semblance. ^ Sir Francis has a high forehead, more exposed on one side than on the other, over which hang curls of dark hair j his eye-brows and eyedashes are of the same colour, yet his eyes are blue, which is extraordinary, and but for the character thrown into them by his M 2.:'.
spirit /would be insipid. Blue eyes are out of place, except in a fair complexion, which his is not. I have no time to describe the nose — it is not Roman, it is not Grecian, but approaching to the latter, distinct and prominent: his lips are well turned, and as pliant as his brows. He rarely smiled; but I once or twice could perceive that he had fine teeth. — His chin is proportioned and terminates an oval contour. If I add small ears, a manly bust, and a slim and elegant figure ; will you not say that this is the language of an enamoured damsel ? No ; Angelica will not say so; she knows it is not, and that Augusta does not fall in loye with every fine face she sees, And how could she fall in love with this, well composed as it is, when its animation bespeaks a soul so equivocal — that of an angel, or of a de¬ mon ? There is an air, an inexpressible property, that betokens greatness of soul and amiable affections; but there are alternate signals of conscious depravity, and of remorse eating up his heart fbr
crimes which he can find no means to expiate. Such was the view I took of Sir Francis Darrell at Madame Penevaux's entertainment; and before I knew his . name. I was dancing when he ad¬ vanced to the set I was in. On return¬ ing to ,my place, I again sought him with my eyes; — he was standing directly opposite to me with his fixed on me, and I of course withdrew mine. I observed that he remained some time; but I too well knew what was due to myself to let him perceive that I was studying his fea- tures. When the country-dances were over and the waltzing began, I joined Madame Penevaux, from whom I learned his name. Imagine, Angelica, how I was struck at it, and how much more, when mentioning him to my father, he told me that he expected to J see him at 4 our hotel the following day. He had not communicated it to me before, as there was a kind of mystery in the ap¬ pointment, which had been made, by himself; assuming at the time the cha¬ racter of another person. This I have m 3
since found to have, proceeded from delicacy, as he justly imagined that an abrupt, introduction of the name would be a shock, Having learned who. he-was, 3 natu¬ rally wished to complete my observ¬ ation : — I saAv him several times du¬ ring the night; but though he must have known who I was, he never made the slightest advance; on the contrary, he seemed to shun me. I resolved to see him next day, and I told my father that I wquld join them before he, went away. I have told you how he. behaved; and were I a young lady who piqued my¬ self upon my beauty, 1 think I have said enough to convince you that X must have been very much mortified,, If he was not absolutely rude, he was what a damsel's selfdove might call so : but *<ie greatness of the act which brought him to our hotel, and which I believe brought him from England, soon, effaced such petty considerations from my mind. He had planned a resignation of Grove Park to my father, in a manner not to hurt his feelings. The noble part which I had.
fancied in his nature predominated, and I told my tather what I thought. lie was of my opinion, and I conceived myself mistaken in the other indications of his physiognomy. We continued talking of him and of Grove Park fbr some time, and were still- blowing up the flame of admiration, when comes a letter from my cousin Godfrey, to cool our enthusiasm — and prove me a Lavater. Yes, Angelica, I am right: — Sir Francis Darrell, with a few brilliant virtues, is all that his bent brow and self-inverted eye proclaim. My cousin says that there are horrid stories told of him, and that he is not received in scrupulous society. This letter has quite disconcerted our feelings respect¬ ing this young man and his intentions in regard to Grove Park. It is very desir- - able to recover a family-estate; but it is a different thing to lie under obligations to one whom we cannot respect. My father means to act on this occasion with caution — and, however provoking the disappointment after sucb unlpoked-for hope, it is perhaps better altogether as M 4
it is:—Grove Park is too near to Belmont Lodge. Whatever way the affair ter¬ minates you shall have an account of it. I shall now bring my letter to a close; but I must first tell you of another extraor¬ dinary rencontre. As I was crossing the garden of the Tuilleries with Count de B., I was accosted by Mariana Gaza. I was really very glad to see her, and told her where we lodged. — She came to see . me the next day and made many kind enquiries* about your family,- and the Olivastros. She has been settled in Paris with her husband about a year, and they carry on a commerce in lace and other articles of dress. I am going this very day f o spend a few louis with her. Adieu, my dearest sister ; kiss my mo¬ ther for me, and also my dear Marchesa, and ever love Your Augusta. P. S. We shall leave Paris very soon : I therefore hope that you have addressed ■ your letters direct for England.
1 ! ' " •'*. LETTER XVI. Jlfr. Saville to Mrs. Godfrey. i With what feelings, my dearest Caro¬ line, do I now anticipate the delight of taking you into my arms, and of en¬ circling my beloved Augusta in yours! > At a distance,—without expectation,— without hope, the mind habituates itself to a pleasing contemplation and calm enjoyment of friendship, and of affections, which resemble the love we continue to feel for those already transferred to a better Avorld, when our vivid emotions have been subdued by time. Limited beings as we are, we think of them as denied to our sight, as removed from our embrace, and we go about oui daily business, seeking the enjoyments within reach. How different when we ap¬ proach the objects of our affection, and united hope and anticipation become certainty. Thought kindles into a kind m 5
of reality, and produces a restlessness till Ave are satisfied. It is what I feel at this moment, and I have taken up the pen to tell you that we shall quit Paris the day after to-morrow, and hardly stop to take rest till we find it at Woodlee. George says right, Caroline; it is not likely that I shall know your features and person; but 1 well remember what they were when I used to take you upon my knee at eight years old and praise vct intelligent countenance; and well do I remember Iioav 1 loved you: ^ your features may be changed, but my heart is not: nor probably is my person so much as to be out of your recollec¬ tion;—your's Avas the age for remem- brL.ice. — You have a little Caroline for me too, in whom, George tells me, Isha.ll easily trace you; and I have an Augusta for you, in whom you will recollect her mother, with whom you were so fond to stay at Grove Park. You give me another child in your's ; I bring you a sister in mine. Oh 1 how you will love her! She is beau¬ tiful, Caroline; she is loveliness itself;
— but beauty is not always amiable, how¬ ever prepossessing:—dt is not for her beauty that I say you will ,love her; •— but for the goodness of her heart,—: fbr the winning softness of her t man¬ ners, — for the affection she will bestOAV upon you. Accomplished as she is beautiful, } r ou will not wonder to hear that she has attracted lovers; but you will pro* bably Avonder wheu I tell you that she has never excited envy or jealousy among her female friends ; —and most of those too are of a country extremely ad¬ dicted to the latter passion. You will find this accounted for by the humility of her pretensions, by her repugnance to all display, by the ^delight she takes in see¬ ing other girls, admired, by the praises she bestoAvs upon them; in short, by that secret and never-failing charm of making' others pleased Avith themselves. Her understanding is strong, but of that too she makes no display; — it is always seen in her conduct, but it is only de¬ tected in her conversation ; for while it gratifies men of sense, none feel it other
than, on a par with their own; — such a sweet unaffected deference does she ap¬ pear to show for the opinion of others. She is very fond of music, and few sing or play better than she does; it may be said to be natural to her, as it is to most of the children in the country where she has lived from her infancy: but she is fond of it, as the Italians are, fbr its own sake, and not as an accomplishment. The same of painting; her portfolios will de¬ light you ; but it will be to please that she will take pleasure in opening them, not for the praise of an artist. A better regulated spirit does not exist • I think I hear you say, this is a picture drawn by a doating father ; —well! you will soon be able to judge for yourself, and in the meantime I know you will like to read these effusions even of such a father; and I shall continue to indulge myself on a theme so sweet to my heart, but which can only be allowed when writing to such near and dear relations. She is gone out with her maid to make some purchases preparatory to our de¬ parture, and I have nothing better to
do; —I can have * nothmg better to -do, my dear Caroline. ' " y Augusta was hardly old enough to>be sensible of the loss of her'mother, yet she has given many proofs of her remem¬ brance of her; ai)d from her infancy she has evinced a gieat faculty of discrimina¬ tion as well as of memory. — She would fain persuade herself that she remembers you and George at Grove Park. "' l You already know how much she is in¬ debted to the Marchesa de Pisani for her education. The Marchesa and her mother were affectionately attached do each other : — mutual esteem was never more justly bestowed; — a sister could not have wept more than did the survivor at the loss of her friend, from whom she received her child as her own. Both- she and her husband are pious, but not bigoted, as the little grove at Signa, mentioned in my letter to George, has shown you; and with a 'sincere attach¬ ment to the general principles of the religion she professes, I am ceitain she considers some of the doctrines ostensi¬ bly retained as antiquated: — she talks,
for instance, of meeting her friend in a happier state. The Marchesa is a most amiable woman, and possesses a delicacy of mind not surpassed by the purest of the British character. — To her virtues, her good sense, and extensive acquire¬ ments do I owe such a daughter as I have described Augusta. She approved and imbibed many of her dying friend's sentiments; she adopted her modes of instruction, and, contrary to the cus¬ toms of her country, — I believe I may say contrary to the customs of all coun¬ tries, — made the brilliant parts of edu¬ cation secondary to that of the heart. She completely succeeded in both with her truly loved charges, Augusta and her own Angelica. These girls, extremely alike in mind and accomplishments, are not unlike in person. They resemble each other in all that habits influence, and something in points independent of those ; the same smile, the same manner, the same disinterested preference of others, the same fond at¬ tention to their parents: their persons
too resemble, and in some degree their complexions; but Angelica's, with the whole turn of her countenance, indicates her country, as I think Augusta's does her's. They love each other, and it is a great pity to separate them. They have both been addressed by loA'ers, but neither seems inclined to marry. I am not surprised at this in Augusta, for though I have a great regard for many of my Italian acquaintances, I think that Avhenever she makes a choice it wilkbe in England. She would not, however, listen to an eLegant young Englishman, named Dartford, whom we met at Geneva, one whom, from the account given me by Pollen, my banker, I should not have thought unAvorthy of considera¬ tion, though he is rather romantic in his disposition, and certainly too hasty in his declaration: but as Ave Avere upon the wing, his haste is perhaps not much to be wondered at. Though pleased with the felloAV for admiring my girl, I said nothing to influence her. I shall always leave her to her own good sense, which I am certain will be the best
SIR FRANCIS DARRELL. guide in her choice, whenever it takes place^ While I am ihus indulging myself in a full introduction of my Augusta to her already loved Caroline, she is rot herself thoughtless of her cousin : — you were the subject of our conversation when she went out, and she is probably at this moment thinking of you, and purchasing some Paris gifts for your little Caroline ; — she said she would: — but I expected her back before this. — She is probably indulging an old Italian acquaintance with a gossip on Florentine subjects, 1 or she may be gone to Penevaux's. — I have not exhausted my topic, and I shall go on till she comes: — she cannot now be long. Such a child is a never-failing theme to a father's thought, — a never-failing source of joy to his heart. Caroline, I cannot tell you how I love her; yet not more, believe me, than she deserves ; — and to her own merits add a fund of happmess which I never expected to enjoy. — And when I think that, in spite of her father's misfortunes, she possesses
means sufficiently adequate to all the de¬ sires of so contented a mind to prevent the necessity of consulting the advan¬ tages of fortune in the disposal of her hand, I cannot be too. grateful to Provi¬ dence, who, if he afflicts in some things, blesses in others. I will not then regret the loss of affluence ; but there is nothing wrong in wishing it for such a daughter; — and I must own to you, Caroline, that I had begun to build a fine castle in the air after my interview Avith young Darrell: — I even talked with- Augusta as if I had already made her the mistress of Grove. Park; — she was pleased to hear me, but without being elated ; and v/hen George's letter so soon shook my castle, she felt it so little, that, seeing how pleased I had been with the pro¬ spect for her, she entreated me to be cautious how I incurred obligations to such a character as Sir Francis Darrell, " We are happy as we are," she said, " Avhy Avish for splendour ? or for any addition that may create the smallest change of our happiness ?" No, my dear Caroline, I would not endanger our hap-
piness for the wealth of princes, nor pur¬ chase Grove Park with a single regret of my Augusta's. —«- Are we not happy ? Are we not going to increase our hap¬ piness at Woodlee ? What would I more ?
It is near six o'clock, our dinner hour, and Augusta is not come in. — I am rather uneasy, — Madelena, her maid, i$ with her..—
The clock has struck r—I am extremely uneasy, — yet what accident could pos¬ sibly have happened without my hearing it immediately, as she has our carriage, and a man to attend, whom she could send home ?
Victore, our valet de place, is returned, and tells me the carriage is waiting for her at Penevaux's. — After leaving the lace-shop, she got out at the gate of tbe
Tuilleries, and Madelena directed them to go and take her up at Penevaux's.------ Here she is. —— 1 hear the car¬ riage. —
#**#«#*«
LETTER XV1L Monsieur Penevaux to Mr. SavilU. DEAR SIR, Observing- your carriage to be wait¬ ing in my court at so late an hour, I asked your coachman why he was there: — he said, for Miss Saville, who had ordered him to take her up at my house. I enquired,* and find that she has not been here to-day, nor does Madame Penevaux expect her. There is evi¬ dently some mistake; — I hope there is no accident. — I will call early upon you to-morrow. I am, Your's faithfully, Penevaux.
Thursday,
LETTER XVIII. Sir Francis Darrell to tlie Hon. Lewis Vernon. A Sleeping beauty in the wood! —■ By Jove ! a sleeping beauty in the wood! — But I must not spoil my story ; — it is positively a romance, and a romance I must make it. So, Sir, " Scarcely had ruddy Phoebus displayed his brilliant golden locks from the chambers of the East, enlightening the vast hemisphere, adorned by the superb capital of France ; the little songsters of the groves, variega¬ ted with a thousand glittering colours, were still preluding their melodious com¬ pliments to the vermilion-glowing Auro¬ ra, when already the noble, the invinci¬ ble, the courteous knight, Sir Francis Darrell of Belmont, liis heart swoln with bis high destinies, disdaining shame¬ ful sloth and unmanly soft repose, had left his vainly-inviting couch to meet the
brilliant god of day, and scour the sur¬ rounding woods and valleys, putting to flight iniquitous marauders, and rescuing beauties in distress." ------ This style I think might do very well; but there is romance enough in the thing itself without the stilts of La Mancha's knight; and I will descend, premising to your honour, that none of that extraor¬ dinary champion's extraordinary adven¬ tures can vie with that of your humble servant, which he is about to detail. You see, my dear Vernon, that I have at least begun my letter gaily, be the con¬ clusion of it what it may. You judge right¬ ly of the progress of my mind ; —gloom predominates, and every day I live brings some fresh proof of the horror of the sys¬ tem under which we exist. What a de¬ testable creature is civilized man! The cannibal eats the body of his fellovwman ; but that only when he looksupon him as an open enemy, or as one of a tribe with whom he has no communion; — but social man gnaws into the very soul of his neighbour, and without compunction condemns his acknowledged friend to a
life of torture fbr his own gratification. — I have begun my letter indeed in a gay strain, but the subject of that gaiety was meant for a tragedy, and is the immedi¬ ate motive of these reflections, We maybe designated laughing monsters, if monster means something hugely incon¬ gruous : —we laugh in the midst of hor¬ rors; we laugh when we should weep ; we laugh atevery thing; welaugh at nothing; — no other brutes laugh ; all others look pleased or displeased at Nature's dictate ; but that huge brute, man, is endowed with a supernumerary faculty to insult the dis¬ tress and mock the failings of his kind. He robs his companion at the gaming¬ table and laughs at him ; — he seduces his wife.and laughs at him ; —he runs away with his daughter and laughs at him. If he fails in his attempts in these parti¬ culars, the tables are turned, and they laugh at him ; — or they shoot one an¬ other. Glorious creature ! So triumph ! Dash away, ye lords of the globe, which nothing stops in her orbit! — Why let any thing stop you in your course ? If a woman denies you, poison her — if a
man says you shall not, murder him.— Can any thing speak plainer the nature of man than criminal codes and officers of police? Well! submit we must to these superior agents ; and so compelled to stay a day or two longer in Paris, you shall have my adventure from the spot. Having completed the object of my journey, — tired of seeing Goselin twirl her airy limbs, and weary of the stale re¬ petitions of social life, I left Paris the day before yesterday, just after receiving your letter, dated at Mount Vernon, which I did not intend to answer before I arrived at Brighton. I wished to loiter the rest of the day at St. Germain, the forest of which had more than once unexpectedly presented associations to my mind that occupied me more congenially and more agreeably,—for "horrors now are not dis¬ pleasing to me," — than all that the gay round of the gayest city in the world could do. I slept at St. Germain, and intending to reach Rouen early the next day, I ordered my carriage at daylight* I took 6'
Aaron in, who, roused eariier than usual, soon re-closed his eyes and his senses upon a world as little worthy his observation as his master's. After a time I shut my own, but not to sleep; — to turn them inwardly upon the objects of memory, some of. which are so-very vi¬ vid at times, that I come to myself with a kind of involuntary admonition that u madness lies that way." I was completely lost in a probing re¬ verie, and had half argued myself into the belief of a devil at least, when I thought I was thrown all at once into his clutches, without ceremony: but feeling Aaron under me, and conceiving that he stood some chance of being in better quarters, I soon perceived that I had not fallen quite so low as Pandemonium, notwith¬ standing the repeated vociferation of Diablel Diablel — ejaculations, however, not unsuitable to the infernal event, which was nothing less then a complete renversement of the chariot. The postil¬ lion, caring as little for tbe world as Aaron, and having been as early roused, had, with equal indifference, but less vol. i. n
innocence, addressed himself to that happy oblivion which composes the to¬ lerable half of life. I had trusted to him ; — he trusted to equally faithful crea¬ tures ; — perhaps they were sleepy too;— I am sure they no'more meant to break my neck than the postillion did; but un¬ taught to distinguish between a level and a mound, % and ignorant of the cha¬ riot's centre of gravity, they lodged it on its side, rolling the master over the man. I scrambled out as well as I could, and would have cursed the fellow, if cursing would have done any good; but the poor creature looked sufficiently con- i founded, and our dilemma rather re¬ quired that I should raiseThan depress his spirits. I made him assist in taking Aaron out, who had received a hurt on the arm, that gave him great pain. This appeared to me at the time to be the worst part of the acccident, for the car¬ riage was so little damaged, that had we been able to raise it, we might have proceeded immediately to Poissy, which was not above two miles off: but the Fates were at work, and had Hercules,
or Big Ben himself been there, we should not have set things to rights, till I had performed their behests: for the diges¬ tion of which I presume you have by this time gained a tolerable appetite, and I will no longer tantalize you. After waiting a little with the hope of assistance from some chance travellers, I began to be impatient, and looking round, I perceived what I supposed a ha¬ bitation, at no great distance, almost hid among trees. Any thing was better than kicking my heels in waiting, and I resolved to go up to it to ask for help. The postillion knew nothing of the place, but said there was a narrow road a little farther on which led into the back coun-. try. 1 went as much for amusement as for assistance, having ordered Aaron to make use of the first advantage he could obtain by passengers, to put the chariot on itswheels, and, after examining if they could be trusted, to bring it to the little road, and wait there for me. 1 suppose I might have walked nearly a quarter of an hour, sometimes losing sight and sometimes catching a short glimpse of n2
the place I had seen, before I came close enough to distinguish that it was nothing but a thick wall, which evidently had oqce made a part of a substantial build¬ ing. Going round it I saw that a poor shed had been built to it: — a door front¬ ed me with a window near it. The key was on the outside, which made me sup¬ pose that somebody was within. I tap¬ ped -— no answer was given. — I looked iri a{; the window — the room was a sort of kitchen, with a fire, close to which was a vessel of some kind. This showed that somebody must be near, if not with¬ in. I went to the other side of the shed, which I found formed a regular poor man's cottage of two rooms : — there was a window pn that side too, but I could not see through it, a piece of cloth being hung acrossit. After a moment'sde- liberation I determined to go in. I raised the la;tch, — the door was not locked — I looked round, and was not a little surprised to see, on a table, an elegant cup and sau¬ cer, a couple of silver spoons, a knife and silver fork, a handsome chrystal goblet, a china bason,, and ewer full of fresh water, with plates and other things far above
a common style, as if prepared for the breakfast of a person of distinction s but I was no less surprised on observing, in the corner of the kitchen, two brace of pistols. My surprise at the latter appara¬ tus was accompained with alarm—I suspected that I could not remain with safety in a place to which this combination of tea and warlike equipage was so unsuit¬ able as to the shed under which I stood. I examined the vessel at the fire, and found it contained coffee. I was at a loss what to do. It was clear by the position of the things that I could not stay long without having company. Being alone, I thought the best part I could take was to secure my retreat. —- .1 turned my back on the coffee and the whole concern. —I made but two steps to the door, which had shut itself with its own weight. I had my hand on the latch, when I Avas startled by the sound of a deep-fetched sigh. I am not a ner¬ vous man, Vernon, and as for my life I care not for it; butl certainly had a most extraordinary sensation at that moment; — Avhat, name. can I giA'e it ? It Avas
not fear — it was horror : — that^ sigh so like — but no matter; — I looked round, I felt assured that it proceeded from a wo¬ man : — I Avas impelled, I knoAV not by Avhat influence, it was no time for curio¬ sity —r no other passion excited — but I was impelled, and I raised the latch of the other chamber-door—that door was locked — no person spoke at the noise I made— I knocked unheeded— 1 asked Who was Avithin — no answer — what could I think ? What was to be done ? I was convinced that some person was in the chamber : it never entered my ima¬ gination that the sigh could have pro¬ ceeded from a man — but if a Avoman, I may be equally wrong —some girl eloped with her lover — Avhy should I interfere ? " FareAvell damsel," cried I, "much good may it do you!" — and I was again at the threshold of the hut, v/hcn a similar sigh nailed ine to the spot. I had opened the door — my eye hap¬ pened to rest upon the key — to the han¬ dle of it hung a second key — a second key ! no doubt that of the inner-room — if so, whoever is Avithin is there by eon-
straint. Sucb, my dear Vernon, were the rapid imaginings of my bewildered brain ; the new sigh and the sight of the keys determined me ; and had Luci¬ fer himself stood before me I would have entered. I know I am .writing with Avarmth — how can I do otherwise ? I feel almost Avhat I felt at the moment, nor Avere my feelings then more serious than they are now. I have done, Vernon, what to you I will «say gives me more pleasure than I ever felt in all my life before : —• I will further say to you, that for a few hours I was on such good terms with myself, that I believe I felt something passing in my mind amounting, if not to a hope, at least to a wish, that this paltry state Avas not all. Why do tears come now to my eyes as I write it? What have I said? Folly! I Avould blot it out, but that I care not if you see me as I ara. Teli not your Godfreys that my brains are governed by my heart, and not my heart by them ; though they would take the phrase in another sense — well, so be it. N 4
I entered the inner room — " May I come in ?" said I. A dead silence pre¬ vailed : sufficient light came through the thin cloth over the window to show me a handsome couch on which lay a female figure in a morning dress, motionless, but that I heard her breathe, and found that she was fast asleep. I was con¬ vinced that<all Avas not right; — it was clear that there was no intended mys¬ tery ; whatever was going fonvard, was boldly done; but to me the*appearances were sufficiently mysterious to justify some unusual interference. I endea¬ voured to wake the person by speaking to ber — I begged her to answer me ; — this not availing me, I made no ceremony of tearing away the curtain from the window. — Conceive my surprise, my dear Vernon, when I beheld the beautiful features of Saville's daughter, and that elegant form I once described to you stretched at full length on thexouch in a state of stupefaction, for it was no na¬ tural sleep! You may, perhaps, imagine my surprise by your own at the moment of reading this, —but not my agitation.-—
I have not to complain in general of the want of, presence of mind, but so great was my astonishment, and so affected were my nerves at the sight of this lovely .creature in the situation she lay, that my senses for a moment were off their poise r-.they were almost lost; for a minute they, served me but" to clasp my hands, and utter a useless ejaculation. ..- Recovering myself) I could not doubt that there was some * villany a-foot: — this was no elopement; constraint was evident, and by the basest means. How shall I save her ?* was my first thought. <There .was,no time to bring assistance, and she had no power to'move; I de¬ termined to. take her in my arms, and hasten with her to my carriage. The preparations in the cottage, however, and , the,key in the door convinced me, that such .an attempt was scarcely practicable before the return of the persons con¬ cerned in the horrid business; the-first thing I did therefore was to examine and secure the arms ; the pistols were loaded and primed: — a dreadful pause ensued. — If .1 stand, though armed, I was likely N 5
to be overpowered by numbers. 1 now tried to rouse the innocent victim of treachery. I did what for my life I would not have done had she been sen¬ sible ; 1 shook her roughly by the arm ; T opened her delicate fingers, and beat the rosy palms of her hands — in vain, in vain. Another deep-fetched sigh was all that my efforts produced. I would have given the Avorld to see her open her eyes. To tell you my feelings, Vernon, I must be inspired Avith some neAv language capable of com*eying intelligence of what was never felt before. To stay was pro¬ bably to die: that were nothing, coukb it save her; it Avould be the same if over¬ taken Avith her in my arms, but there Avas a slight chance that I might be beyond pursuit; I resolved upon it. Putting the- pistols into my pockets in the best manner I could, I returned to the couch. She sighed again as I raised and took her- up. Rendered bold by so lovely a fieight, whom would I not have fought ? whom not conquered ? I had scarcely preceeded ten paces from the door, when a rustling noise on
the other side of the cottage made me turn to look; in a moment a woman came from behind, who peeing me, gave a scream and ran away as fast as she could. What was now to be done ? No¬ thing was more certain than that I should be overtaken. There was but one thing left for me, and that was to give alarm in thr»e if possible, and the only hope I had of deing this was by firing one or two of the pistols, on hearing which, Aaron would undoubtedly come in search of me with my own. I accordingly ma¬ naged to draw out one of them, and, let¬ ting it off, I threw it among the bushes. The report had such an effect on Miss Saville that she opened her eyes, but instantly closed them again. This syrnp* torn of her coming to herself re-animated me, and lightened even tlie little weight " I felt before. I proceeded, but every step upon the alert, and not without cause. Still, whether owing to a dependence on the woman whom I had seen, or on a calculation of the time allowed for the evaporation of the fumes of the stupefying drug which n 6
had been given to their prey, I had ad¬ vanced nearly half of the way before the villains came up with me. The noise they made as they ran, gave me sufficient warning to summon up all the coolness the occasion required. I quickly placed the object of pursuit on the grass at the foot of a tree, and returned to face the pursuers. There were three mon, two of them seemingly without arms, theirs, I imagined, being in my possession. These, as I advanced, skulked behind trees; the third, showing his weapons, came on boldly. When near enough to to take an aim, I called to him in French to stop; his answer was a shot, which I immediately returned, and had the satis¬ faction to see him fall; at the same in¬ stant I heard Aaron's voice halloing; it was also heard by the villains. Of the two who had skulked I saw no more: he that fell must have been but slightly wounded, for he was up in an instant, and proved himself swift of foot. I be¬ gan to pursue in my turn, and fired again at the rascal, but he was out of my reach. Aaron, now in sight, called to me to
stop, for that he saw men among the trees. Having gained so much, though eager to take the rogues, I was unwilling to lose my advantage by falling into.an am¬ buscade j and Aaron had come alone,, on hearing the report of the pistol I first fired when I saw the woman. I there¬ fore hastened to complete the removal of my charge, whose deliverance I now flattered myself was effected. As I ap¬ proached the spot where she lay, my emotion was a,truly delightful one ; — my mind was freed from its attention to the means of safety, and left my heart at liberty to enjoy the reflection of having rescued a fellow-creature, and more par¬ ticularly a being so valued, so loved by a father, and relatives now waiting with impatience to embrace her. She lay pre¬ cisely as I had placed her, and was still so much under the influence of the nar¬ cotic ingredient which she had evidently been made to swallow, that I again took her up in my arms motionless. , I briefly made Aaron acquainted with the circum¬ stances that had taken place, and con-
tinuing both on the alert, we arrived with¬ out further molestation at the entrance of the by-road, where my chariot, put to rights by the assistance of some passen¬ gers, was waiting for me. Disembarrassed of my agitation, and cooling in my enthusiasm, I began to feel myself in an awkard position. — Sa¬ ville's daughter in my arms; Saville's daughter entering a town in my carriage, sleeping upon my bosom, as would pro¬ bably be the case,—it required a more im¬ maculate character than mine to defy the Jialra of the Vortex on the other side of the channel. What could I do? I was never more inclined in all my life to attend to the minutise of delicacy. — Put her into the chariot with Aaron and send her home ? That would be profanation. Well! " Since Chance would have it so, why Chance did crown me Without my stir." I took her into the carriage, and I laid her head upon my bosom. Were there such things as angels, Vernon, they might have probed it, and found it then pure as
their's are said to be. Some pangs it felt, indeed. <— Oh ! not for her — but let that pass. She caused no pang, nor needed she to blush so deep, on finding her cheek on that bosom. Poissy was nearer than St. Germain, but the latter was in the road to Paris, where I presumed Saville still was.- I ordered the postillion to turn and drive to St. Germain. Aaron rode on the box with my pistols loaded. I had the others, of which one remained charged : — but there was no occasion for apprehension:— the day was advanced, and there were more travellers on the road; besides I was sure that the villains would lose no time in providing for their own safety. Knowing the activity of the French po¬ lice, their escape appeared to me impro¬ bable, and I was so much struck with the face and figure of the principal person that I was sure I could identify him. He was a middle-sized man, slim, yet remark¬ ably broad across the shoulders; he had very dark brows, and whiskers bushy and wide; the whole turn of the countenance was ferocious:—. I could not mistake htm,
, and I resolved to give information of him when I arrived at St. Germain. Meanwhile I ordered my postillion to proceed gently. The indication in the wood of my companion's being about to come to herself; was repeated soon after the carriage was in motion ; she sighed and opened her eyes, but did not recognize me; she shut them without being aware A of her situation. 'After a few minutes she said, though without opening her eyes, " I am sick." I felt for her, but I was now afraid to speak lest my voice should shock her —yet 1 thought it necessary, and I begged her to be composed; she took no farther notice of this than to repeat, "I am sick." I again said, .« Pray be composed." She continued „quiet fbr about ten minutes. Her head had dropped a little back upon my arm:— her cheek still rested on my bosom. In this position she again opened her eyes ; they were heavy, but fixed upon my face with such an inquiring look that no bril¬ liancy could have exceeded it in intelli¬ gence ; they spoke what her tongue soon uttered. " Good God! where am I?"
— " Going to Mr. Saville," said I. With that answer I perceived her recollection of me returned ; her face, pale with sick¬ ness, the effect pf the drug she had taken, became at once deeply crimsoned all over, and her very neck received a tinge of her blush. This I could have borne, but it was followed by a flood of tears which distressed me beyond measure. — Now sensible of her position, and yet too weak to disengage herself from it, I easily conceive what she must have suf¬ fered. She continued motionless, her eyes shut, but breathing freely; I now thought her sufficiently revived to under¬ stand me, and I accordingly addressed her, first saying that I believed that, though languid, she was in a state of recollection, which allowed of her atten¬ tion, i then intreated her to be com¬ posed, and to listen to me with in¬ dulgence for a few minutes: a sudden shudder of. her whole frame convinced me that a momentary suspicion of me arose in her mind; I as instantly forgave her— awaking as she did on my breast, it was but too natural a thought—-but I
hastened to remove it,.briefly recounting what had passed ; and I concluded with assuring her that the postillion who had brought me from the inn at St. Germain, where I slept* the night before, was now taking us to the same inn, where she /would be in less than half an hour, with persons about her ready to render her every service, and that in a few hours after she might be in her father's arms. WhenTl stopped speaking, she made an -effort to raise her head, her eyes still shut; she put out her hand as if in search of mine; it did not search long, but I was little aware of the excess of her emotion;—she pressed it, carried it to her lips, and bathed it with a shower of tears. You must imagine, for I cannot express, my feelings ; but if you are silly enough, Vernon, to mix with them any thing of -your ideas of love, I shall hate you, or pity you. She now recovered strength enough to endeavour to take her handkerchief out of her pocket. — Upon her moving I discovered that the part of her dress which had Touched my coat was stained
red: — she too perceived it, and eagerly exclaimed, " I hope you are not hurt; — what is the meaning of this blood?" I i begged her not to be alarmed, for that I could not account for it. I soon found however, that the cloth of my coat on the side next to her was drenched with blood, and some of the cloth torn away: — I clearly saw that it proceeded from a slight wound of which I had not been sensible, and that the dark colour of my coat had .prevented my perceiving it sooner. ■ The knowledge of it seemed to quicken * her recovery : forgetting her own misfortune, she was all anxiety about this wound, and conjured me to hasten the boy that it might be immedi¬ ately examined. I have not often felt the sweetness arising from being the real object of anxiety — yes, sweetness ! and with the concurrent circumstances of that I allude J:o, it was inexpressibly sweet. — At her desire I ordered the boy to drive fast, and we were soon at St. Germain. Before we arrived, Miss Saville was* sufficiently recovered to converse freely,
but she could no way account for the event whicii had taken place, either in respect to the planner of it, or the means by which it had been effected. — She remembered no person resembling the man I described, and she had no recol¬ lection of taking any thing that could produce such a sleep. On entering the town she renewed the, expression of her anxiety that I would immediately consult a surgeon, which I promised to do, on condition that she would permit him to advise her also as to what she ought to do in order to counteract the poison which she must have taken.— On this she thought of her father, declaring that she could not delay a moment relieving him from the state of suffering he must be in. I said that refreshment was absolutely neces¬ sary for her, and suggesting the imme¬ diate dispatching of an express to Mr. Saville with an assurance of following speedily, she agreed to see the doctor. Having put her into the hands of the hostess of a good .inn at St. Germain, I obeyed her repeated injunction of having the wound examined,
The rascal had like to have shot me; an inch or two more to the right Avould have gathered me to my fathers; — half a quarter of an inch more to the left and the bullet would not have hit me at all. The Fates had ordered the matter well for me: — the ball had merely grazed the flesh and broken two or three little blood-vessels on my side, which had given out just blood enough to moisten a small part of my clothes. — It appear¬ ed to have stopped of itselfi and required little more than Avashing. — The doctor was lenient to his other patient: — he told her to expect to be .languid fbr a day or two, and prescribed for her only coffee and exercise. During my short absence she had Avritten a letter to Miv Saville, which was immediately forward¬ ed by an express, and the next thing to be settled Avas her conveyance to Paris:— my carriage and my servant were easily offered, but I did not find it so easy to offer the company of the master; and my conscious unworthiness, or, if you like, my worthy conscience AVas debating with itself delicate points, when this girl,
proving herself superior to all false deli¬ cacy, fixed my wavering sentimentality, by asking me in a direct manner to accompany her. I will give you her words: I can substitute no account to do them justice. After seeing the doc¬ tor, she had retired with the hostess to adjust her dress and take some coffee. — I took that time to lodge an information aL the Bureau de Police, where I saw the Commissaire himself. He was very po¬ lite, and saying that an immediate pur¬ suit should be made, offered to accom¬ pany me himself to examine the spot. — He thought it necessary, and that I should lodge the pistols I had taken, at his office. I could not but acknowledge the propriety of this, but it seemed to interfere with the expedition of Miss Saville's return to Paris. — On reflection, however, I found that what the officer proposed might be done in an hour or little more. Informing her of this un¬ expected, or rather unthought-of delay, I civilly offered her *my chariot, express¬ ing a regret to be obliged to part with her without seeing her safely lodged at
ber hotel in Paris, as her eagerness to be again with her father naturally super¬ seded all other considerations. " Far from it, Sir," said she; " perhaps it would have been so, were my mind not re¬ lieved respecting his feelings, by the ex¬ press which, by this time or nearly, will have reached him, and removed his ap¬ prehensions. There is another consider¬ ation now of the greatest weight with me, and if my request does not too much interfere with any plans you may have, I ask it as an additional favour that you will yourself take me to my father." It would be affectation in me to say that I did not penetrate her mean¬ ing, and it-would be unworthy of the candour with which I speak my mind to you if I pretended to degrade the service I had rendered her and Mr. Saville. I had already perused a good deal of her mind, — enough to know that it could not be easy without expressing its gratitude; the tears that had bathed my hand, the voluntary pressure, and the kiss of it, which no other passion of the breast could have wrung from
her, were incontrovertible proofs. An excuse from me would have sent her to finish her journey painfully. Thanks I wanted not: I bad already determined to fly them. —I did not conceive myself entitled, by what I had done, to force the company of an infected, avoided wretch upon the Savilles; and had I been mean enough to think so, I had no desire to do it; — but neither had I any right to keep this young lacly's mind under a heavy load, to gratify my disdain of acknowledgments; I therefore resolved to have it all over at once, to take Saville his daughter, receive his thanks, shake hands with him, and set off immediately for England. In conformity to this resolution, I assured her that I should have great satisfaction in complying with her request; — I purposely avoided the fashionable jargon of " obeying her com¬ mands;"—I told her the time / 1 had computed as necessary for the business I was going upon, and saying that I would order every "thing to v be ready to start as soon as I returned, I left her, 6
What I have to tell you of my expe¬ dition with the Commissaire de Police will not add much to my letter. Taking a sufficient force with us, we proceeded to the little road, and on to the cottage. We found but the vestiges of it, and those consisted chiefly of ashes: — it was burnt to the ground. We found the pistol which I had discharged at a few paces from the building : — nothing re¬ mained by which the villains could be traced: — the pistols were common old French.made pistols. The Commissaire proposed going on to Poissy, but, agree¬ ing with me that the men were not likely to be found there, and that the appre¬ hending of them would take time, he acknowledged the propriety of my re¬ turning to Miss Saville, took my address, and went on himself. 1 At St. Germain I found the carriage at the door, and, handing Miss Saville in, placed myself by ber. Very different were my sensations during the remainder of my day's journey to those of the former part of it. Roused by circum¬ stances, I had been playing a kind of vol. i. °
preternatural part; I had, in fact, as I told you in the beginning of my letter, been transformed, by the irresistible humour of the Fates, into a hero of Romance, and compelled to fulfil my high destinies: but the Romance Avas over: — I was no longer an Oroondates; —I was myself again, —the sophisticated Darrell, hating and hated by the world; a scorner of the male part of it; a con¬ temner of females; a being slandered unjustly, yet not sufficiently condemned; heedless of calumny, shattered by the lightning of thought; iioav weary of life, now laughing at its tricks; as unfit fbr gallantry as for saying mass; a lauder of the grave, a haunter of theatres; amused with folly, but preferring sleep to thought, and death to sleep. — Such is the man Avho was 4 noAV seated beside the most beautiful Avoman in Europe. As to her beauty, it'Avould not have dis¬ turbed me; but it happened that she magnetized me with 1 a feeling which I hardly remember to have had for any of ber sex before, a feeling of respect. The motive which had swayed her to request
my company, the confidence she evinced in herself, that which she reposed in me, the complete absence of all the little arts which are practised by weak females to allure attention, and in no small de¬ gree the consideration of my having been the instrument of her preservation, all conspired to raise her for the time to the rank of a divinity in my estimation. I could have worshipped her in form, but I did not find it easy to talk fami¬ liarly to her. She spoke of her father with affectionate anxiety, of the pleasure she expected in meeting her relations, of Italy, of Switzerland, and of England, but without the slightest- allusion to Grove' Park. She did all she could to support a conversation; but, owing to the little part I took in it, it was evidently constrained, and, in spite of. all the charms I have celebrated in this epistle, I was more than once sensible that I should have been more at my ease at my hotel. — The fact is,- that my attention was at times broken by reflections upon her and upon myself which would ob¬ trude themselves : — I compared .my
mind to hers, and wondered at the dif¬ ference. — > It once crossed me, but only once, and the thought rested not a minute on my brain, that had I been like her, that had I been worthy— the imagining went no further: — it dropped into a secret silent ejaculation of pity. — Poor Flower! destined to be cropped by the hand of some barbarian, to deck for a while the bosom of some selfish brute, to fade, to die, to------ What kind of a system is this, where virtue is proved by misery, and beauty is the destined food of worms ? Oh ! Vernon! the death of a beautiful woman is, of all horrors the——.But what has this to do with Miss Saville ? — My thoughts run strangely aside at times: — She is not dying, she is not likely to die. — 1 would say she ought to marry, if a man were to be found worthy of her. — 1 wish you were worthy of her, Vernon, but you are not, — don't think of her; X never will consent;«— remember, though I should never see her again, I am now her champion for life — no Vor¬ tex for her! Think you that she.has
enflamed me, and that-1 am preparing springes for her ? Depend upon it, she will never think in that Avay of me,; and, what is* equally true, never will / think in that way of her: —no, Avere there no other objection, I have that Avithin me that can never be overcome; — I can have no resting place; and shall I seek it by contaminating the purest of bo¬ soms ? Never, never. My reflections make me digress — I have little to add to the adventures of the day, yet did the conclusion prove even more alarming than the outset. It,was still broad day-light Avhen we drove into the court of the hotel,-in which the Savilles have apartments. Miss Saville's maid and the other servants were ready to receive her: they expected her, but their countenances presaged woe. As I handed her from the chariot, she said, " you will come up with me." " Sir," said the servant in a whisper, " my master is dangerously ill — he is not expected to live." She had flown up the stairs, or I would have detained her — I endeavour¬ ed to overtake her — I should as soon o 3
have, out-stripped Atalanta.: ; Before I reached,the saloon, I; lost sight of her, nor have I seen her since. - ; After:;remaining alone some time, I went in search of a servant,; and ; found onedn the anti-chamber, ; Learning that a physician was with. Mr. Saville, I re¬ quested to see : him for , a minute. He came out to me, and I heard from him that the disappearance of his daughter had agitated. Mr. Sayille in such a man¬ ner as to produce a fever, attended with delirium, of which the issue was very uncertain. I asked for* Miss Saville: -— he said that she was at her father's bed¬ side ; on her knees, and totally absorbed in her, misfortune. Ihave known what it is ; to feel acutely; — my feeling at that moment was something like the -— yes, like —r—. My part was acted-r J had no more to do -—I was extremely shocked, but I had no more to do, andT drove to my old quarters, where I now am. r I. sent; Aaron three times last night to Mr, Savillefs .hotel, but so late as twelve o'clock his intelligence afforded no hope, and I spent a sleepless night, for what
between the daughter and the father I could not reduce the current of my blood to its periodical torpor. About eight this morning I again dispatched Aaron for intelligence, and he brought word that Mr. Saville was come to himself. At ten I went myself, and, asking for Miss Saville, I was informed that she was just gone to bed, having been up all night. — I then requested to see the phy¬ sician avIio, I was told, had just gone in. From him I had the pleasure of hearing that the disorder had taken a favourable turn, that the delirium had ceased, that he had recognised his daughter, and that from the abatement of the fever there was no doubt of his doing Aveil. It is astonishing Avhat an effect this intelli¬ gence had upon me. My spirits had been extremely depressed by the ter¬ mination of the events of yesterday, and it gave them a fillip, Avhich acted upon me not unlike good Burgundy, when I Avas in the habit of Avine-bibbing. It inspired me Avith a degree of gaiety which I returned with here, and began.
as the first pages of my letter testify, to vent upon you. I have done nothing the whole of this day but write to you, which you may see from the volume I send. It is late, and I feel inclined to go to bed and sleep like Ehdymion; yet I will not close my letter without thanking you fbr yours from Herefordshire. I think I see Lady Bab leaping the five-barred gate, and givingTim Dawson the go-by cheer; then all the dogs among mother Paine's pigs. What a delight is that taken by sports¬ men! But there is no disputing taste, though fbr my part I think I should pre¬ fer felling an ox with a hammer, to running a hare out of its life. Why not? Is not death the system of all na¬ ture? Bravo, Lady Bab! Bravo my Lord! Sport away; sporting is your vo¬ cation— sporting is only butchering.— I am glad your brother has so amiable a wife, but I think she might employ her time better than in reading registers of human butchery, which is infinitely the worst species of it. It was no fault of the Duke of Marlborough's, that so many
throats were cut at Blenheim, and else¬ where : no, I do not say that, but 1 say butchery runs in the blood of our gen¬ tle race in a triplicate ratio: the nrst and most innocent division appropriates the generic term, and is plain butchery for the gratification of the glutton; the second species is denominated game, tlie pleasure of which does not consist in the supply of food, but solely in the dexterity of frightening, killing, or catch¬ ing poor little animals; the third species, tlie most unaccountable of the three, is called glory, and the pleasure of that consists in wading unappalled through , rivers of human blood. I think if her ladyship cannot confine herself to novels «. and plays, as she ought to do, she had better take to sermons to, keep up her fund of patience, a virtue so requisite for one in her situation. I rejoice that your good genius sped you from Hampshire with Mr. Godfreys if he had not, depend upon it your evil genius would have got you into a scrape. I am no Preux; I hardly know Mrs, Godfrey's person, and Godfrey morefrom,
your account than personal knowledge — I own hoAvever that I have a new induce- ment to wish them Avell. The farce at Hants Cottage is exquisite. — I am no conjurer if Squire Rufus is not a sly sin¬ ner Avithout your aid. —Did you ever knOAv a professor of purity thac Avas not a hypocrite ? I should not be surprised to find Mrs. Martha's frown and petti¬ coat-lending more owing to jealousy than to pudency. His epistle is delicious — keep him up I conjure you. But Iioav you can possibly conceive that Mrs. Godfrey casts a thought away upon such ,a cre.dure is to me astonishing.—The repeated refusals of admission in the ab¬ sence of her husband, which you have seen under his OAvn hand, have no doubt brdught conviction of the injustice you did to her. taste, if to nothing else — but depend upon it the case would have been the same Avith you:—you would not have been admitted — and probably not have understood the matter more than he; though your mistake Avould have been different, and would have led
to a different result. Once more let me say, — stop in time, I have no objection to your -going to' Bramblebear-Hall, but I would have you be cautious there too. Lady Bab I find is a blab-—but, though she may be mistaken Avith respect to me, I am less scrupulous myself in thinking a little more freely of the one lady than of the other. I do not think I shall go to Bramblebear's on my return to England; but you shall know what becomes of me Avhen I land at Brighton, which will pro¬ bably be in the course of a week, if the police will take my pledge that I will return to Paris, if necessary for the conviction of the villains whom the of¬ ficers are in pursuit of. Meanwhile you may hint to Lady Barbara that, iff find her meddling with my character, 1 will haA r e a Callipyges statue of her made rid¬ ing on horseback, for Rufus's paddock; and being nothing but stone, as Miss Kitty Palmer says, there will be no Coventry-law'against peeping at her. Adieu! I hope I shall have good ac-
counts in the morning of Mr. Saville, and that I shall get away from Paris e ither to-morrow or next day. Ever truly yours, F. Darrell.
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
Printed by A. and R- Spottiswoode, Printers-Street, London.
