Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
An angel's form and a devil's heart: a novel
AN
Angels Form § a Devils Heart.
CHAPTER L JTiDWAllD was now fully convinced of tvhat he before suspected, namely, the to¬ tal absence of all honourable feelings from the heart of Charles Manningham. Time only strengthened this painfid conviction, and Edward began to entertain the most serious apprehensions for the happiness of Clara Lindsay, until he discovered the pre¬ ference tvhich she so openly avowed for Mv. Vivian. Too honourable himself to suspect deceit in others, Edward only felt surprised that Clara could so easily trans- vol. ïîl ? fer
ier her affections from one object to an¬ other, for he never imagined that any hu¬ man being was base enough to trifle with the peace of a fellow-creature, in order to conceal its ow r n secret inclinations. Edward was now advancing towards an age when the feelings glow wdth romantic ardour, and his were of the tenderest na¬ ture : he was but a bad physiognomist, be¬ cause he imagined that all men were sin¬ es cere in their professions, until he found them otherwise. To tliis generous incre¬ dulity may be ascribed his unwillingness to believe the prophetic words of his grand¬ mother, and his equal reluctance to ascribe to the altered maimers of Charles any other motive than that of boyish levity. But bis heart could no longer find excuses for his conduct, since it had become so de¬ cidedly unprincipled, as the gross insult of¬ fered to the unprotected Patty too plainly manifested, andEdward at moments enter¬ tained a secret fear lest she should even now continue the object of his lawless wishes. > V lien
When Charles first heard of Patty's marriage, he tried to assume a loe^k of in¬ difference, saying, that he was glad the girl was well settled in life, and that he hoped she tvould now become more stea¬ dy in her conduct ; for that she tvas cer¬ tainly too pretty to have been allowed to become so early her otvn mistress. It was not every man that would have chosen to make her his tvife, after she had become the talk of a wdiole village. " Patty has had many enemies," repliée! Edward, glancing a look totvards Charles and Miss Lindsay ; " but they hat e not been able to rob her of one virtue she pos¬ sesses. And there are some tvho might not have acted with the prudence aneî de¬ licacy of Patty, had they been placed in her forlorn and trying Situation. Ashforel was too honourable to take advantage of her unprotected state ; he loved her, and he therefore has maele her his wife, thus placing her above the reach of calumny, and the malice ofher foes." ? 2 Charles
Charles pretended not to hear this speech of .Mackenzie's; but Clara could not so easily pass it over in silence.—" I hope," said she, spitefully, " that her husband tvill also place her out of the tvay of temp¬ tation, by not suffering any improper ac¬ quaintances to enter his house, filling her head with a parcel oí romantic nonsense, tvhich can only make her above the duties of her station." <k fler good sense tvill teach her the im¬ propriety of triiiing away her time," said Mr. Lindsay. "I have always felt a great interest in Patty's fate, and I now flatter mvself that she is happily settled, for I have lieard that her husband is a very in¬ dustrious and deserving young man." " it isto be hoped, Edward," cried Cla¬ ra, turning round quickly towards him, *· that since visits oí condolence nxe no lon¬ ger necessary, you tvill cease to excite the remarks of tlie villagers by your grateful attentions to Patty, ΛνΙιο, as she has no lon¬ ger cause to complain of hcr home, and of her
her father's neglect, can now very well dis¬ pense with your tender consolations." " Patty is not very apt to complain of the ill treatment of any person," replied Edward, gravely ; " much less is she in¬ clined to betray, even to me, wdio, you are pleased to say, am so pointed in my atten¬ tions, the faults of her iather. These she w T as ever desirous of concealing, until con¬ cealment was no longer practicable; and as to the remarks of the villagers, if Patty has been so unfortunate as to become the object of remark, it is not among the hum¬ ble inhabitants of the village that she has found enemies— they all know and esteem her worth ; the aged hold her up as an ex¬ ample for their children to imitate, and the young take every opportunity of testify¬ ing for her the liveliest demonstrations of affection. No, Miss Lindsay, it is not among the poor inhabitants of the village tbat Patty's secret enemies are to be found. She has now, however, secured to herself a legal protector, who w ill not hesitate to ? 3 chastise
chastise even a prince, should he have tiie presumption to treat his wife with unman¬ nerly disrespect." Edward now quitted the room, and re¬ tired to his own, conscious that his feelings were too warm at tbat moment to allow of cool dispassionate reasoning, and not wish¬ ing to become involved with Clara in a contest which would only render her more and more bitter against Mrs. Ashford. "Mackenzie looked offended by your friendly advice," said Charles, artfully en¬ deavouring to fan the flame wdiich he saw was kindling in the bosom of Clara. "It is strange that he can be so blind to his own interest, as to espouse thus boldly the cause of a person whom he knows you dislike." " He was always immovable upon this point," retorted Clara with vexation. " It is the only subject on which we have ever seriously disagreed, and I don't believe that any human being has power to wean him from his partiality for that artful creature." k * í think, however, that he is more dar-
big in his obstinacy," continued Charles, " and less cautious of offending, since he lias become the object of public praise. Perliaps he feels that he is no longer under the necessity of being dependent upon the kindness of his early protectors, and that he is now capable of pro\ iding for himself; yet, for the sake of appear¬ ances, I think that he should act w ith more circumspection." " No, no," exclaimed Mr. Lindsay has¬ tily, " such is not the character of Ed¬ ward : no particle of meanness or ingra¬ titude is to be met with in his composi¬ tion. I think that he is wrong in persisting to keep up the acquaintance of Mrs. Ash¬ ford, but, as he acts from principle, I can¬ not so much condemn him." " Indeed, papa," said Clara, " I begin to be seriously offended myself ivith Ed¬ ward, since I am well convinced that he alluded to me as one of Patty's secret ene¬ mies. However, it is not the first time that 1 have been treated with rudeness on B -h tliat
that saucy creature's acce -mt, though ???> bably it may be the last." Mr. Lindsay, after sayir · , a few words in defence of Edward quittcu the apartment; and Charles, tak ; ' M · adva n i age of the irri¬ tated stateof Clara's mmd, took the oppor¬ tunity to increase her displeasure by the most ungenerous insinuations against Ed¬ ward and poor Patty, who, he scrupled not to affirm, had only bestow r ed her hand on Ashford that she might be the better en¬ abled to carry on her intimacy with Ed¬ ward. The poison of these suggestions sunk at last into the mind of Miss Lindsay, who began to consider herself as slighted by Edward—and for whom ? for one wdiom, above all other*, she disliked ; still the chann which Edward bore about his person and in his voice, continued to keep alive sotne portion of that regard w hich he had so long possessed, and Clara preferrea throwing all the blame on Patty, whose conduct she now determined to watch most
most narrowly. To do this sbe employed her maid Sally to inform Ashford that the family would take bread of him, thus se¬ curing to herself the power of putting him on his guard against permitting the fre¬ quent visits of Edward. Sally was com¬ missioned to see Ashford when he called, and to ingratiate herself into his good opi¬ nion, that she might have an opportunity, should it be requisite, to caution him against that intimacy, which Clara pre¬ tended to believe was no longer innocent, at least on the part of Patty. JVIrs. Ashford did not wish to decline what she hoped proceeded from the consi¬ derate kindness of Mr. Lindsay ; yet she could not check some secret fears lest Clara had proposed it, and in that case she was perfectly aware that some mischief was in agitation. Sally, according to the instruc¬ tion of her young lady, always made a rule of seeing Ashford when he called, inviting him into the housekeepers room, and offer¬ ing him a glass of wine, w hen she paid the ? 5 weekly
weekly bills. Sally was a shewy, pleasant- looking girl ; and Ashford, who thought her the very reverse of ????1 she really was, pressed her repeatedly to call and spendali evening with his wife. To this Sally as¬ sented, and thus was an acquaintance ????? menced, ????? enabled Clara to be in com¬ plete possession of all the movements of Patty, and all the opinions of her husband. Ashford happened one morning to be conversing with Sally in the housekeeper's room, when Edward passed the window, and nodded good-naturedly on seeing them together. " Mr. Mackenzie is an uncommonly une young man," said Ashford, " and as fond of Pattv as if she was his sister." " So I have heard," replied Sally. " I believe our Miss Clara would give her ears to be half as much beloved by somebody I know, as Mrs, Ashford is by Mr. Edward. He was ahvays a handsome, sweet-temper¬ ed youth ; all the girisin the village loved him, but he could never see any merit in any
any one but Patty Smith. I don't think that he ever kissed any other girl but her in all his life." Ashford coloured.—*' Why, you tvould not have him kiss and tell, would you, Sally?" " No, certainly not, Mr. Ashford, but I don't think that he is very cautious, for I have often heard Miss Clara scold him for not being more particular in his conduct towards Patty. This, you know, was when they tvere both children together; but they tvere never happy, except in each other's company ; and though his fondness for Patty gave great offence to Mr. and [Mrs. Lindsay, he could never be prevailed on to see her less frequently; so at last they ΛνβηΙ to Mr. Smith to talk to him about it. How foolish ! wasn't it ? to make such a piece of ??-??? about nothing at all, just as if Mr. Edward had been some lord, and they were afraid of his running away with Patty Smith." 14 I don't see what they hal to make a b 6 piece
piece a work about," replied Ashford) with the look and manner oí a person who Λνιβ?^ to disbelieve his ΟΛνη feelings ; '* it was only natural that they should love each other like brother and sister, wben they were brought up under the same roof If Mr. Mackenzie, indeed* was now to be running after Patty, or to be seen kissing her, it would be another matter." " Why, you would not be jealous, [Mr. Ashford, would you ?" Laid Sally, smiling ; ** you would not deny him a kiss for old acquaintance sake?" " No, I should not be jealous, Sally, be¬ cause I have too high an opinion of my wife to be jealous of her ; but I suffer no liberties to be taken either with my wife's person or name. I shall always be glad to see Mr. Mackenzie, when he comes by our house—but no kissing now, Sally." " Not one ?" exclaimed Sally, archly ; " not one ? Oh, you miser ! not one kiss more ? Why, what tvill poor Mr. Edward do now ?" Ashford,
Ashford, half angry, half jealous, yet afraid to shew it, now abruptly wished Sally good-morning ; and jumping into his cart, drove rapidly home, with the unplea¬ sant apprehension that Edward was per¬ haps at that moment m conversation with his wife. With equal speed he alighted, and burst suddenly into theparlour, where Patty was busy at her needle. The sud¬ denness of his entrance, and the strange manner in tvhich he inquired if Mr. [Mac¬ kenzie had called that morning, alarmed Patty, ΛνΙιο asked, in a trembling voice, if any thing was the matter? Ashford, recollecting himself, dretv her gently towards him ; ana .^ ne kissed her cheek, affectionately tried to calm the ter¬ rors ????? he had so unguardedly excited. —" Nothing is the matter, my dear Patty," said he, " only that I have been drinking some of Mr. Lindsay's ale, and it has got into my head, anel made me half tvild ; I could tiiink of nothing else but------" " But what, my dear ? Villiam ?" inquir¬ ed
ed Patty, anxiously watching her hus¬ band's countenance. " Only my own foolish imaginations," cried Ashford. " I tliought that Mr. Mac¬ kenzie, being too much of a gentleman to find any amusement in my company, might prefer coming wdien I was absent; and you know, Patty, that I should not be best pleased at that : for though I shall always respect Mr. Mackenzie, knowing the great friendship you have for him, yet it would be very imprudent in me, Patty, to surfer the visits of so handsome a young man, especially as all the village knows how fond you are of each otiier." Patty's eyes filled with tears. — " Ah, William í I see how it is," said she ; " you have not been drinking Mr. Lindsay's ale for nothing : some one has been speaking ill of me to you, only you don't like to tell me so." 6i No, Patty, no one has been speaking ill of you, nor of Mr. Mackenzie neither; oniy that 1 should not choose hiin to watch his
his opportunities of coming to see you, when I am out about my business." " Mr. Mackenzie will not do any such a thing," said Patty, sorrowfully ; " he is incapable of acting unlike a gentleman. I well know how much I am envied by my betters, because he has always behaved to me with the kindness of a brother ; and had I been his own sister, he could not have felt more deeply my painful situation, nor have rejoiced more sincerely when he found that I had got a comfortable home of my own, and a gooel husband to protect me." " And you shall always finel me a good husband, Fatty," cried Ashford, warmly, " and I shall always be glad to see Mr. Mackenzie; but you know, Patty, that it is necessary to have a little care of what tbe world thinks, and Mr. Mackenzie is so fine a young man, and so far above us, tbat many illnatured tilings might be said if he was to be often at our house, espe¬ cially if I was out." Patty, though her heart was full, assur- ed
ed her husband that she w r ould always be guided by his wishes, and that if he de¬ sired her not to see Edward, she would obey him, though, next to himself, he v^as the person whom she revered most on earth ; for, as she had known and loved him from a child, she ΛνοηΜ never disown the regard «she had for him. The result of this conversation was but too obvious to Edward the next time that he called, as was generally his custom wdien he passed what had formerly been the peaceful dwelling of his grandmother. Ashford received him with coldness, and Patty it ith an embarrassment tvhich im¬ med kitely betrayed to the penetration of Edward, that some secret enemy had been undermining the happiness of this amiable couple. Edward feared that he knew from whence the malevolence had arisen ; but as the peace of Patty tvas sacredly dear to him, he resolved, cost him what it would, to deny himself the gratification which he always felt in the sight of Patty, and
and only to call on her once more before he left the village, on his return to London fbr the winter. Edward, in this instance, how r ever, was wrong in his conjecture. He attributed tbe altered manners of Ashford to the se¬ cret infiuence of Charles Manningham; but, though the latter most cordially wish¬ ed to sow the seeds of dissension between Patty and her husband, he wanted the boldness to do it openly, as he had not for¬ gotten the courageous firmness of Ashford when he so ably defended Patty at the cottage, on the morning when he made her the insulting proposal of becoming his mistress. Charles, therefore, felt no very great relish to encounter again the menaces of lier protector ; he thought that the affair could not rest in better hands than in those of Miss Lindsay, and he therefore awaited patiently the issue of those hints which he had so liberally thrown out on the day when they w r ere left alone together after the mention of Patty's marriage. CHAP-
CHAPTER 11.
Miss Lindsay tvas duly apprized of the effect tvhich Sally's bantering had produced npon William Ashford; and, like the true spirit of malignity, she rejoiced at the success ofher plans. Her mind, however, tvas now employed sufficiently about her¬ self; she had therefore but little leisure to bestow much thought on Patty, who, dear¬ ly as she loved her husband, nevertheless experienced many a painful moment on Edward's account, as his absence gave her room to believe that he felt offended at his late reception. Poor Patty mourned in secret over this belief, for she had no friend to tvhom she could impart her fears, or seek advice un¬ der her present misfortune. At length she resolved to trust her griefs to honest Oli¬ ver.
ver, who had always befriended her wdth ready kindness ; and when next she satv him alone, she mentioned her suspicions that some person had been endeavouring to poison the mind of her husband against Mr. [Mackenzie, ancl that they had already gained tlieir point, since she was sure that Edward ???? offended at something in her husband's behaviour wdien he last saw him, for that he had not called since. Honest Oliver shook her hand with friendly warmth, promising to do his best to find it out, though he dared say it ???? some of Miss Clara's tricks ; for if she had no feeling for her owrn parents, it w T as not to he supposed that she could ??? ? ? much for other people. He offered to deliver to Mr. Edward any message she wished, as he would stake his existence that there w r as no harm between them. Patty blushed, but, remembering the blunt kindness of Oliver, she could not be angry with him. She hotvever declined sending any message to F. d w aid, tvho, as 1,M
he had intended, called a few days after to take leave of Patty before he left the coun¬ try. As Ashford was at home, his visit was but a short one ; and Edward, who had a hundred things to tell Patty, was obliged to content himself with the cold formalities of a common acquaintance. The winter passed in the usual routine of fashionable dissipation. Clara's extra¬ vagance was as boundless as her vanity and self-love; and tliough her mother's health was rapidly declining, and her fa¬ ther's embarrassments as rapidly increasing, Clara still continued as srav and as unfeel- ing as ever, seldom passing a day at home, unless when company was invited to amuse her. Edward bebeld this cruel inattention to her filial duties, and trembled for the con¬ sequence. Her own altered manners to¬ wards himself he generously forgave, but he could not so readily find excuses for her neglect and want of tenderness to her too- indulgent parents. He wished to leave the
the establishment of Mr. Lindsay, and to provide entirely for himself, but both the parents of Clara besought him not to quit them, since their only hope of happiness rested on his attentive tenderness. EcU ward therefore remained, although con¬ trary to his owrn inclination, for Clara, too conscious of his filial kindness towards her parents, felt that the contrast of her ow r n conduct tvas the more striking when ba¬ lanced against his watchful eagerness to promote their comforts. Instead of passing away his time in those thoughtless amuse¬ ments which were tbe soul of her delights, Edward frequently staid at home with Mrs. Lindsay, and by his affectionate attentions softened down the acuteness of her disor¬ der, and beguiled away the heavy hours of long-protracted suffering. The increasing debility of [Mrs. Lindsay rendered an early removal into the country advisable, and Clara heard of the physi¬ cian's orders with a scowl of gloom and dis¬ content, as it tvould necessarily tvithdratv hcr
lier from the amusements of London some weeks before the accustomed time. Iu vain she looked for an invitation from lady Manningham to remain with her iamily until they returned to the Hall ; her lady¬ ship tvould not have insulted the feelings of a daughter, by supposing that, at a time like the present, she would absent herself from the sick-chamber of a parent. Clara therefore looked in vain—no hint of such a thing ???? fell either from the lips of lady Marmingham or Constantia. The accumulated embarrassments of Charles Manningham almost rendered his union with Miss Fellowes unavoidable; VOt Clara had gained so much admiration this lasf w u iter, had been so publicly sought after, thaf ht. felt reluctant to give up his pretensions to her favour ; Λν?ι?ο, on the other hand, his necessities eternally remind¬ ed him of the folly of thinking seriously of one tvho had no fortune. His sister Con¬ stantia tvas on the point of being united to sir Arthur Vivian, whose brother be¬ came
came importunate to have his marriage with [Miss Lindsay celebrated on the same day. Clara had unthinkingly gone too far with her flirting, and bad already allowed her nuptials to be spoken of in public, for her to recede wdth honour. She had artfully permitted the attentions of Mr. Vivian, the better to conceal from the Manning¬ hams her real sentiments; and it was therefore a preconcerted scheme between her and Charles, that each shouki appear to hat^e fixed their affections on different objects. Clara, however, through the means of Sally, tvas acquainted with the involved state of Mr. Manningham's affairs, and she therefore began to feel some degree of alarm lest he should deceive her, and, by marrying the rich Miss Fellotves, pay all his debts, and secure to himself a hand¬ some independence. The cunning of Sally tvas once more employed to find out, if possible, some of the secret movements of Charles, for which service
service she tvas to receive a handsome re¬ muneration. The ceaseless vigilance of Sally at length discovered that the valet of Mr. Manning¬ ham tvas in possession of much valuable information respecting his master. This man, who was tlie son of a decayed trades¬ man, had long testified an affection for Sally, who, following the example of her mistress, as most ladies' maids have done before her, favoured his addresses, in order to tvorni out of him the intelligence she Wim ted. That de>ne, she hastened to her young lady, expecting the promised re- ward for her cleverness. Mb;s Lindsay w r as that evening engaged to a ball at lady [Manningham's: it was the last that siie should attend that season, as tlie next elay tvas fixed on for the de* parture of her family from town. She thereiore retired to dress, in a frame of mind that would have made Sally trem¬ ble, Itad she not been conscious that she tvas
was the bearer of tidings which would make hcr services acceptable to her mistress. " Well, Miss, I have seen Mr. Craw¬ ford this morning," said Sally, " and have heard such a power of news from him ! Mr. Manningham is sadly in debt to every body ; but he has found out a way to pay his creditors, though I fancy it is not a new one." <t What is that, Sally ?" inquired Clara, eagerly. " Only by marrying tlie rich anei ugly Miss Fellowes," replied Sally, shrugging up her shoulders. " When Mr. Crawford told me so, I did not believe him, but he assureel me that it was true, and that Miss Fellowes is invited down this summer to the Hall, when he means to carry her off immediately to Scotland, without asking the leave of any body." " Impossible!" exclaimed Miss I/md- &ay; " he could never intend so basely to deceive me." Then casting her eyes in vol. m. ? the
the glass, where she beheld reflected the graceful symmetry of her own fine form— 6k Impossible that Mr. Manningham should ever think of uniting his fate to that of the poor deformed Lucinda Fellowes !" " Ah, Miss!" said Sally, " money is every thing now-a-days, and Miss Fel¬ lowes has gold enough to. blind the eyes of Mr. Charles to all her ugliness. But if he has behaved ill to you, Miss Clara, I hope he may suffer for it, though you' need not care, for you can have his equal any day you please. So let him take his golden idol, and worship it all his life long if he chuses." " But he shall not take her," exclaimed Clara, in a voice of passion: " if she has dared to raise her hopes so high, if she presumes to think that such a man as Charles Manningham would ever feel any thing but contempt for such a misshapen ugly animal as herself, I will make her rue it all her life long. But, Sally, I can scarcely give credit to the information : it was
w T as but yesterday that Charles expressed his fears lest I should be drawn into a mar¬ riage wdth Mr. Vivian." " Men are sad deceivers, Miss; and though Mr. Charles may, and I dare say does, love you best, it is very certain that he told Crawford not to worry him any more about his debts, for that he should soon pay them off with the gold of MLss Fellowes. Only you won't mention it, Miss Clara, because Mr. Crawford would k>se his situation." Clara could no longer doubt but that Charles intended to deceive her, yet she dressed her face in smiles, while her heart nourished the most resentful feelings to¬ vvards her lover and his intended bride. She paced the room for a iew moments in deep reflection, then reseating herself at her toilet, she arranged herself with the most studied elegance, in the dress which Charles liad praised as most becoming to her; and never had Clara looked more cap¬ tivating than she did this evening, in spite ? 25 oí
.AN of the baneful feelings which rankled in her bosom. She resolved to repel artifice by art, and to bestow the whole of her atten¬ tions on Mr. Vivian, thus hoping to re¬ kindle the flame which interest and neces¬ sity had damped in the breast of Charles. " This evening will decide my fate, and that of Miss F tilo w es, Sally," said Clara, taking another survey of her beautiful form in the glass. Satisfied with herself she now descended to the drawing-room, where her sick mo¬ ther, supported by pillows, sat expecting a sight of her heart's idol. Though breathing with difficulty, the fond misguided parent exhausted her lit¬ tle remains of strength in exclamations of admiration and pride at the appearance of her graceful child. Clara stopped to kiss her feverish lips : her mother grasped her hand.—■" Bless you, my darling! bless you î I hope I shall live to see you return !'* were the parting words of Mrs. Lindsay. " No fear, mamma," replied the unfeeling Ciara ;
Clara; " I expect to find you better; but I shall not be late. Where is Edward?" " He will follow you, my love," said her father; " but I know^ that he wishes first to read your mother to sleep. She Λν?Ι retire as soon as soon as you are gone, and Edward will not he long before he joins you." Clara bit her lips with vexation, but forcing a smile, she said—" I cannot leave my mother in better hands than in those of Edward. Tell him, however, that his absence on this niglit will have a very sin¬ gular look." Thus saying, she quitted the apartment which contained her indulgent parents, one of tvjaom was in the last stage of a de¬ cline, and so nearly exhausted, that it w r as uncertain whether she would ever live to witness her daughter's return—that daugh¬ ter on whom she doted to such an excess, that she had not only sacrificed her health, but her fortune, to procure her all those ? 3 pleasures
pleasures whieh she so thoughtlessly and so selfishly sighed for. Edward lingered behind Miss Lindsay, from an unaccountable reluctance to quit her suffering mother, until he had per¬ formed hi* aecustomed task of reading to her after she had retired for tbe night. Had he, like Clara, onlv studied his own selfish inclinations, he would have fled from tke sick-chamber of Mrs. Lmdsay to the gay ball-room oi lady Marørøgharø, have flown with all the high-raised hopes of youthful expectation, for it was the first evening of Florae appearing irt public, and Frederic had promised to him her hand after the first dance, which she was to open with the second son of Üie duke «of —*— v Although the thoughts of Edward na¬ turally wandered to the scene of mirthful festivity, yet he refused to join it until he had soothed to rest the fluttering spirits of the invalid, whose mind, full ofher ab¬ sent child, refused thk evening to compose itself
itself as early as usual. A t length the ten¬ der voice of Edward operated like a pleas¬ ing opiate on the tired senses of Mrs. Lind¬ say-—she fell into a gentle slumber, and Edward, softly quitting her bedside, has¬ tened to his chamber, in order to prepare himself for his evening's amusement. Clara, piqued by the attentive goodness of Edward, which only rendered her own conduct more striking, replied to all the inquiries concerning his absence with e% r a- sive caution. She saw, to her mortifica¬ tion, Charles lead out Miss Fellowes to the dance, and checking her resentful feel¬ ings, she smilingly bestowed her hand on Mr. Vivian, who proudly led her to where Charles and his little deformed partner tvere standing. The strikingly beautiful figure of Miss Lindsay only made that of poor Lucinda appear more frightful ; yet, could a casual observer have seen into eaeh separate heart, could he have beheld the one, all meekness, gentleness, and benevo- ienee—the other, selfish, proud, and malig- c 4 nant.
nant, with what disgust would he have turned from the finely-proportioned form of Clara-—with tvhat complacency would he have viewed the distorted person of the sweet-tempered and amiable Lucinda ! Charles could not, however, prevent him¬ self from drawing comparisons between the ttvo ladies, which were highly advan¬ tageous to the Λν?8ίιο5 of Miss Lindsay. His eyes followed tvith delight her grace¬ ful movements, and he envied Vivian the privileges of the dance, as well as the smiles and attentions of the captivating Clara. Miss Lindsay read in his watchful glance the uneasiness he felt, and redoubled her flattering assiduities to the unsuspecting Vivian ; while Charles, half mad with his jealous fears, resolved to seize the first op¬ portunity of engaging hcr for a partner. Clara wisely excused herself from com¬ plying with his request, thus adding to his ill-humour and chagrin. " I must speak to you, Clara," said he, " or
w or I shall commit some folly which will ruin me for ever." Miss Lindsay laughingly replied, tbat she did not think that she should have time to attend to him that evening. " To-morrow you leave town," replied Charles, passionately : " I must speak to you to-night." " Miss Fellowes is looking for you," re¬ torted Clara, with an air of raillery, and turned to speak to Mr. Vivian. Charles at that moment 'ursed Miss Fellowes and all the tvorld, Clara included, for he just caught a glimpse of her coun¬ tenance, and saw her smile encouragingly on his rival. It Λν^ late before Edward made his ap¬ pearance, and when he did, Frederic re¬ proached him bitterly for his tardiness.— " I should have thought, Mackenzie," said he, " that you would have been one ofthe first to greet the introduction of Flora into public, instead of tvhich------" " The loss has been solelv mv own, dear ? 5 Frederic,''
Frederic," replied Edward: rt but where is your lovely sister?" Frederic conducted him to where Flora was sitting, whose cheeks glowed with the blush of pleasure at his approach, yet he thought that her dark eyes seemed to reprove him for his absence. " I know that you will pardon me;' said Edward, tenderly pressing the soft hand of Flora in his own, " for my appa¬ rent dilatoriness on this happy evening; but poor Mrs. Lindsay was so extremely low ? that I almost feared that I should be deprived entirely of the felicity of seeing you." " Pardon you ! oh, Mr. Mackenzie, Lipon such an occasion, to ask it was unneces- »sary. I knew that it was not want of kindness that kept you abænt. Poor Mrs. Lindsay ! I fear that her recovery is doubt¬ ful." " I fear so indeed," replied Edward, with a sigh of sympathy that w r as echoed back again by Flora. At
At that instant Clara came up to them. " Oh, you are come at last, Mr. Gravity," said Clara: " pray did you see mamma before you lefl home ?" ** I staid with lier until she dozeel," re¬ pliée! Edw r ard, vrith a coldness which he could not repress, " and then I left her to the care of her nurse : but you mean to return early to-night, do you not ?" " Yes, certainly; but as my mother is not WOrse than usual, and as this is the lastof my tvinter's amusements, I shall stay supper. Flora, my little love, you look charmingly ; let me congratulate you upon your first conquest: the son of a duke is no mean thing, let me tell you—But Vi¬ vian is waiting for rne." In a moment she disappeared through the crotvd;.but her tvords had made a painful impression on the soul of Edtvard. " Miss Lindsay is all gaiety, as usual," cried Flora: ' e she seems to doubt that her poor mother is in danger ; indeed she ? 6 must,
must, or she would surely not have left her." " Did Miss Lindsay possess but half your gentle tenderness, lovely Flora," ex¬ claimed Edward, " she would be spared many a bitter pang of self-reproach, which I fear is in store for her." The sets were now forming, and Ed¬ ward led his beauteous partner to where the company stood. Flora had bestowed on him one of her enchanting smiles, and his heart felt lighter than it had done. He looked at lord George, and listened atten¬ tively to his discourse. " Surely," thought Edward, " this is not the conquest for Flora jManningham to be proud of! It is not an empty title, a splendid retinue, that will satisfy a mind like hers. But how many hearts will feel this evening the in¬ fluence of her loveliness ! how many bo¬ soms beat with a tenderness unknown be¬ fore !" Edward Mt uncomfortable in resigning the
the hand of Flora to another, especially as this other was lord George, who had again secured it before his arrival. He wonder¬ ed not at the admiration so visible on his lordship's countenance ; for wlio couid be¬ hold so finished a picture of feminine grace and sweetness, and not admire one of Hea- ven's most perfect w^orks ? but he wonder¬ ed Λνί^ all the girls in high life could dis¬ cover in the form and features of his lord¬ ship, to make them so envious of the pre¬ ference of lord George. Edtvard had not intended to dance un¬ til after supper, when he hoped again to be enabled to claim the beloved hand of Flora, as she had promised then to become his partner. He looked for Frederic, and perceived him standing by a couch, on tvhich his mother and another lady were sitting, tvhom Edward instantly recogniz¬ ee! to be ladv James Osborne, from her re- semblance to the picture shewn him by sir Joseph Rennie. Lady
Lady Manningham saw and beckoned to him. He obeyed her Summons with alacrity, when she introduced him to lady James and the tw r o Miss Osbornes, 'both handsome-looking girls, who were placed by her side, and who evidently felt nó re¬ luctance to be introduced to so fine a young man as Edward. " I have requested lady Manningham, Mr. Mackenzie, to introduce me to you," said her ladyship, offering him her hand, " as I shall feel tbe highest gratification to be ranked among the number of your friends—first, on account of your own merits, and secondly, from your resem¬ blance to a favourite brother, whom, until lately, I had not seen for nearly eighteen years. Maria, don't you think that Mr. Mackenzie İs astonishingly like your un¬ cle Richard ?" " As like, mamma," said Miss Osborne, gaily, " as two faces can be ; wdth this dif¬ ference, however, that the one is blooming wdth
w ith health and happiness, and the other bears the sickly tinge of an eastern climate and a broken constitution." '* Ah, my sweet girl !" replied lady James, " and you might have added, of a broken heart,; for I have been too many years the correspondent of your uncle not to know that sorrow concealed has preyed upon his mind, and given to his once-hand¬ some, once-blooming face, the sickly hue you mention." Then turning to Edward, she asked if he was in want of a partner, as in that case her daughter Olivia was at his service. This was an offer of too pleasing a na¬ ture to be declined by Edward, Λν?ιο felt an immediate prepossession for lady James and her two lively daughters, to the young¬ est of whom he now tendered his hand while Frederic followed with her sister Miss Osborne. As these young ladies had not long been introduced, and as they were perfectly handsome and good-tempered, and known to
to be girls of fortune, Edward and his friend quickly became objects of envy among the gentlemen, particularly as the Miss Osbornes declined dancing that even¬ ing with any other partners. * £ I think," said Miss Fellowes, very in¬ nocently, to Flora Manningham, " that Olivia Osborne would be a good match for Mr. Mackenzie; they would be a very handsome couple, and he is really so en¬ gaging in his person, and so sweetly good- natured, that I should rejoice to see him become master of a fortune large enough to make him independent for life. AVould not you, Miss Flora ?" (i Yes, certainly," stammered out Flora, confusedly ; " I could not fail to rejoice at anything that would add to the happiness of Mr. Mackenzie: but the affections of Miss Osborne may be already engaged." " So may those of Mr. Mackenzie." Flora started and turned pale. " I do not say that they are," conti¬ nued [Miss Fellowes, smiling benevolently on
on Flora, whose embarrassment pas but too visible; ** I only say that I hope he will be both fortunate and happy in his choice of a partner for life." In this hope she was most fervently joined by Flora, who, had the happiness of Ed ward been placed in her hands, would certainly only have committed it to the keeping of one person, and that person at present shall be nameless.
CHAPTER III.
Morning was already far advanced, and Edward more than once had reminded Clara of her promise to return early, but she angrily demanded whether he had been sent as a spy over her actions, or as a Mentor to remind her of her duties ? She w r as her own mistress, and would not be controlled by him. " It is as a friend and brother that I ventured
venture«! to advise you, Miss Lindsay," said Edward ; " but 1 will offend no lon¬ ger. I thought that should anything oc¬ cur during your absence, you would not easily make peace wdth your own con- science. ** It will be long before I make peace with you" replied Clara, sharply, " since you have done your best, at least, to spoil all my pleasure to-night. But you wdll ñnd yourself disappointed." Then turning hastily on her heel, she left him to wonder at her total want of filial affection for one of the most tender and indulgent of parents. In spite of the warm gratitude of Edward's nature, in spite of hie partiality for Clara, which sprung solely from that high sense of the kindness she had ever, until lately, mani¬ fested totvards him, he could no longer find excuses for her conduct—no longer vietv her with any other sentiments than those of pity and disgust. At the end oí the first dance after sup¬ per,
per, Edward found himself so suddenly indisposed that he requested, Frederic to lead him into another apartment, where be migbt inhale a purer air, desiring him, however, not to notice to any one his ill¬ ness. Frederic, with brotherly solicitude, conducted him to aprivate chamber, which had been laid out for the refreshment of a few select friends of his mother. After waiting until he saw Edward recovering, he, by his desire, quitted him to join the gay party in the ball-room, his friend pro¬ mising to follow in a iew minutes. The sudden indisposition of Edward proceeded from the lively badinage of the Miss Osbornes, who Were remarking to each other the pointed behaviour of lord George to ????? Manningham,—" What a lovely little creature she is !" exclaimed Maria ; " so sweet tempered, so unassum¬ ing, that she shrinks from the general ad¬ miration which she has so justly excited. If his lordship is not deeply enamoured, I will nevcr again pretend to read the lan¬ guage
guage of the eyes, or to be any judge of what is passing within the mind." ** He is of too much consequence to be rejected," said Olivia, " by lady Manning¬ ham; therefore we may conclude that Flora will in all due time become lady George Edward turned sick ; and feeling that he looked pale, and that his limbs refused to support his body, he thought it most prudent to retire for a short time, lest his change of look and manner should create a suspicion of what he wished to conceal from all the world. When alone, he re¬ proached himself severely for having dared to raise his thoughts to one so much his superior. But that mysterious feeling within his breast, which had so often been ?????????, now revived with fresh energy, and a something seemed to whisper to him, that the blood which flowed within his veins was as noble as that of the Manninghams. The heart of ???\ ? ???1 cherished with fond credulity this singular hope, tvhich his bet¬ ter
ter judgment rejected, as vain and delu¬ sive. Edward was on the point of rising from the couch on which he reclined, when the door of the room was hastily opened, and two persons entered, and placed them¬ selves on a sofa near it. That part of the room where Edward sat was partly thrown into that dim obscurity which renders in¬ distinct whatever objects may be involved within its shade, and Edward was there¬ fore unseen by tbe persons, who now be¬ gan to converse with mutual warmth. Ho¬ nour bade him to rise ; but the voice, the words of Clara Lindsay rivetted him to the seat.—" I may save her from ruin," thought Edward, and that thought forbade his dis¬ covering himself. * r What right have you to reproach me with infidelity," exclaimed Clara, angrily, " when you set me an example of deceit and treachery ? Who was the first to ad¬ vise dissimulation, ahd to counsel me to delude the unsuspecting Vivian by a shew of
of kindness which at the beginning was only meant to be transient ?—who but yourself, Charles? and now you blame me, because the constant affection of this ho¬ nourable young man has called forth a re¬ turn." " Then you actually acknowledge that you love Mr. Vivian," said Charles, fu¬ riously, " and that, forgetful of your oft- repeated protestations of tenderness for me, you are ready to become his wife ?" 4i And why not?" replied Clara, with well-dissembled indifference—." why not, Mr. Manningham, when, eeiually forgetful of your vows to me, you are ready to be¬ stow your plighted hand on the rich and beautiful Lucinda Fellowes ?" " By Heavens, this is too much !" cried Charles. " How came you acquainted with my secret movements?—who told you that I meant to marry Miss Fellowes ? or, if í did, what but urgent necessity- could drag me into so hateful, so galling a yoke?" " In
u In that case, wdiat did your generosity intend to make of me V" said Clara, fixing on him a look of ñrm inquiry. " Did your humanity lead you to engage for me the situation of humble companion to your purse-proud wife? Oh, Charles! Charles! I am no longer the dupe of promises, ????? I see now you never intended to perform." i( By all that is most sacred to my sou], I swear," cried Charles, tí that notwith¬ standing my embarrassments have driven me to distraction-—notwithstanding they have pointed out to me the only means of being saved from destruction, by sacrificing myself to Miss Fellowes, my heart is as madly devoted to my adored Clara as ever! I feel that I cannot exist without you— that I could never live to behold you the wife of another. Will you, therefore, for¬ give me, lovely Clara?—will you forget that I ever, in the remotest way, intended to violate my faith to ??? ?" " I may forgive you, Charles," replied Miss
Miss Lindsay, softening hcr voice and look to their accustomed sweetness, " because ï feel that I cannot nourish long any resent¬ ment towards you. But I tvill not deceive you into a belief that I can place any fu¬ ture confidence in your word. There is only one way notv for you to make me any reparation ■ for the pangs I have endured on yoivr account : if you refuse this, I shall immediately give my hand to Mr. Vivian," Edward writhed again with the agony of suppressed emotiom Was it possible that human nature could be so premedi- tately base?—that the heart tvhich pro¬ fessed attachment for one could coldly tri¬ fle tvith the happiness of another? Ed¬ ward now learncel that such duplicity was possible, and he inwardly groaned at the knowledge which he had thus painfully acquired. ** I understand you," said Charles, "and will immediately give you the strong«. est proof that I am * able to give you of my affection. Crawford shall instantly procure
procure a chaise-and-four, which will con¬ vey us to Scotland ; and should my rather refuse to pay my debts, w r e must console ourselves with a temporary exile from Eng¬ land, until they are liquidated by other means. Say, dearest Clara, are you satis¬ fied?" The reply of Miss Lindsay called forth tiie most passionate exclamations from Charles, v/ho, tenderly embracing her, thanked her for her kind consent to his wishes ; then rising, he proposed togo and dispatch Cnvwford for the conveyance which wa/, to conduct him to the summit ofhis felicity. Edward, astonished, and scarcely believ¬ ing it possible tliat Clara, at a moment like this, should consent to quit her fond, hcr dying mother, gave a groan of horror as Charles left the chamber. The sound reached the ear of Clara ; she started, and looking fearfully round the room, perceiv¬ ed, at the furthest end, the ?? ell-known form of Edward, wdio, rising hastily, ap- vol. ill D proached
proached the couch on which she sat in fear and trembling for the result of their inter¬ view. " Yon have overheard our conversation, Edward," said she—-" by what means I know not. Do you intend to betray me ?" " No," replied Edward, firmly—" it is not in my nature to betray the failings of any one ; but if I still possess any influ¬ ence over you, let me conjure you, by all that is sacred, to consider well before you take so rash, so fatal a step. Think, I be¬ seech you. of what will be tiie hopeless agony of the amiable Mr. Vivian, when he finds that you have abandoned him for an¬ other— think of the exhausted state of your doling mother—think how precari¬ ous her life, how doubtful indeed lier re¬ covery ; and wdien you reflect upon what will be her tortures at learning your ab¬ sence, and upon the effect which such evi¬ dent want of reeling and affection may have upon her in her present condition, let that prevent you from performing so rash a promise*
promise. Wait, I entreat of you, dear Miss Lindsay, wait until your poor mother is out of danger." " I cannot, dare not take your advice, Edward," said Clara, a little moved by his voice and manner. " Delay in this in¬ stance would be fatal to me ; to-morrow even would give Manningham too much time for reflection, and the gold of Lucin¬ da would overbalance my personal attrac¬ tions. I must take him at his word, or I shall never become his wife.*' tt And can you hope for happiness in a union of this hurried nature?" asked Ed¬ ward, mournfully ; * s will your delicacy be satisfied with so variable a heart ? Oh, Clara ! tiiat you would but listen to the advice of him whom you once honoured with your regard, that you would but post¬ pone this ill-judged marriage ! The bless¬ ings of Heaven can never follow the fly¬ ing footsteps of a daughter, who abandons to the care of strangers the couch of her suffering parent." υ 2 "I will
" I will hear ??? no more," exclajmeeì Clara, rising. " My mother will yet live to receive and welcome my return. I can¬ not notv retracW-or, if I could, I would not. Adieu ! to your care and tenderness 1 commit my 'mother. Tell her that my absence Λν?Ι be short ; and say to my fa¬ ther that he shall hear from me the mo¬ ment that I ?? become the bride of Man¬ ningham." Clara had vanished before Edward had power to stay her departure, yet, wdth the hope that he might still prevent the ruin lie foresaw, and save her parents the pang of knotving her unworthiness, he hurried after her, passing rapidly through all the illuminated apartments, with the generous wish of snatching her, ungrateful as she was, from what he felt would bring on inevitable misery : but Clara, in leav¬ ing the room, bad been joined by Charles, who, without allowing her time to speak, had conveyed her down a back staircase to the place where Crawford had stationed a chaise-
chaise-and-four, under the firm belief that ïiis master was going to elope wdth the wealthy Miss Fellowes. Nor was this pleas¬ ing hope abandoned until the travellers halted for some slight refreshment, ?\ ? ??? the beautiful form of Clara too quickly discovered to the astonished Crawford hk sad mistake. He gave a sigh of commi¬ seration at what he knew wrould be the fate ofher wdiom he deemed to be the vic¬ tim ofhis masters misguided fondness—a siah of which Clara was whollv itnworthv. Edward was met in his fruitless search after Miss Lindsay by Flora, who inquired, with smiling sweetness, where he had con¬ trived to hide himself, forthat she had not seen him for some time, and had begun to apprehend that he was unwell. The gen¬ tle and endearing softness of her manners calmed, for a moment, the agitated ieeh ings of Edward, who, after expressing his gratitude for her kind solicitude concern¬ ing him, confessed that he had been ob¬ liged to retire from indisposition. He then D 3 asked
asked if slie had seen Miss Lindsay ; but Flora, who had just left the only room which he had not minutely examined, declared tbat she had missed both her brother Charles and Miss Lindsay ever since the first dance after supper. At that moment Frederic came up, and gave into the hand of Edward a note from Mr. Lindsay, requesting that he and Clara would return immediately, as Mrs. Lind¬ say was considerably worse.—" For Hea¬ ven's sake ! dear Frederic,'* said he, " let her be instantly sought for, or it may be too late for her to receive her mother's blessing." " Fly, dear Air. Mackenzie !" cried Flora, while her eyes filled with tears, " fly and assure her parents that she shall follow you immediately. Perhaps she is with Con¬ stantia and Miss Fellowes." Flora darted into the next apartment; but the blood of Edward chilled to his very heart, for he felt that her search would be as fruitless as his own. In a con¬ flict
flict of feelings, which neatly deprived him of all exertion, he hastened down stairs ; nor had he at all regained his composure wdien he arrived at the house of his friend and protector. ** My God í where is Clara ? wdiat has become of her?" exclaimed Mr. Lindsay, as he met Edward on the landing-place. " Her mother, I fear, is dying." Edward passed him, and advanced softly to the bedside. " My child! my dariing!" murmured the sufferer, extending her parched hand, and languidly opening her eyes— t4 where is my beloved Clara? will she not come to receive my last adieu—my last fond prayer for her happiness?—Where is my child ?" Edward entreated Mrs. Lindsay to com¬ pose herself, assuring her that Clara would follow him as soon as she was informed of her father's note. (i I did not expect, Edward, that you would come without my daughter," said Mr. Lindsay, half reproachfully, " when D 4 you
you knew that her immediate return was wished for by her mother." Edward felt the awkwardness of his si« tuation, yet, wishing that the blame of her absence might fall on him, he replied that he expected her every minute, but tbat he liad been so anxious to hasten home, thai he had not spoken to her himself, but had commissioned Frederic to impart to hei* the requcs't of her father. Mr. Linds: y answered, ivith some aspe¬ rity, that he ought to have sought for her himself, but that he would dispatch an¬ other message to lady Manningham, who* he doubted not, would be more attentive to his wishes. (i Do not leave me, Edward, dear Ed¬ ward," faintly articulated Mrs. Lindsay; " for though my own dearest treasure has unkindly neglected me, you, Edward, have been always a son to me, and have loved me with the tenderness of a son." She pressed bis hand as tears of affection and sorrow dimmed his eyes, The physician entered í
entered; Edward watched hiscountenance y and read tbat no hope remained. Under this painful conviction, he fervently pray¬ ed to Heaven that Mrs. Lindsay might be spared in her last moments tbe agony of learning that her child liad abandoned her. Mr. Lindsay, half distracted, dispatched another messenger after his daughter. Every sound, every movement in the chamber, awakened the attention of his wife, who once more, in a still fainter voice, inquired for her unworthy child. To speak had now become difficult to Mrs. Lindsay, but nature made an effort to ex¬ press the maternal feelings which pressed on her heart. " My strength is going fast," said she, motioning to Edward, who bent over her in silent affliction, as he supported her in his arms ; " 1 feel that I am going to that world where all our actions will be judg¬ ed. Ifi have erred by s my too-partial fondness for my child—if I have fixed my afíections too much upon the darling of D 5 my
my soul, and by this have offended my Creator, may my present sufferings, my present consciousness of misplaced love, expiate my offence! Tell my thought¬ less child, that her dying mother, in her last moments, still called down blessings upon her head—still prayed that Provi¬ dence tvould shiekl her dear bosom from those pangs which now I feek Oh, Clara ! my child ! my child ! why are you not near metto receive my parting kiss, my last fare¬ well ?" Mr. Idnd say begged that she would compose herself, assuring her that Clara woulel be tvith her in a few minutes. The dying mother shook her head— *· We do not mæct again in this world," said she, feebly. Then, smiling tenderly on her busbanel and Edtvard, who each hekl a hand, she, with extreme difficulty of breathing, besought the latter not to de¬ sert her beloved partner in the hour of his distress, but ever to regard him as a father and a friend.«—" I die happy," said she, " assured
i% assured that Edward will always be to you what he has ever been to me—a duti¬ ful and aifectionate son. Bless you, dear Edward !—bless you, beloved Lindsay !— bless you------" Clara she would have said, but exhausted nature had performed her task, and the weary spirit now quitted its frail and earthly tenement, to inhabit a purer and a better world.
CHAPTER IV.
It is more easy to imagine than to de¬ scribe tbe distraction of Mr. Lindsay, on rinding that his daughter had eloped with Mr. Manningham.—" I could have for- , given her," said he, " any act of ingrati¬ tude towards myself; but to abandon her mother—and such a mother, and upon her deathbed!—-Oh ! of what materials can her heart be composed, who could fling her- ? G self
self into the arras of a lover—who could think of happiness, when the tenderest of parents was breathing her last?" " Miss Lindsay did not believe that her mother was in danger," replied Edward, wishing to soften down the poignancy of her fathets feelings, although his own heart did not admit any excuse for her conduct, " and it is but charitable ín us to suppose that the persuasions of Mr. Manniiigham overruled all her filial scruples, and silen¬ ced her objections." Mr. Lindsay shook his head in mournful incredulity.—" Seek not to lighten her crime, my dearest Edward," said he ; *\seek not to palliate a fault of the blackest kind —a fault wdiich you are incapable of com¬ mitting, and at v/hich vour nature must O' v revolt. Her poor mother, as well as my¬ self, sacrificed for lier our own comforts, onr own peaee and tranquillity—to procure her wishes, we launched into pleasures but ill suited to our finances ; yet for her sake we bore om* embarrassments patiently, little
little expecting so cruel a return for all our misplaced, our prodigal affection. Ob, Clara ! if at a future time Heaven ever be¬ stows on 5 r ou the sacred name of mother, then, and not till then, will} r oii know the pang, the deep, the remediless agony caus¬ ed by an ungrateful child " Edw r ard, had it been possible, wotdd fain have attempted to excuse the conduct of Miss Lindsav, but he felt how vain, how «V futile was even the wish to throw a veil over*, ¿ionslikehers. With sorrow, such as might well become the grateful soul of Ed¬ ward, he followed tothe grave the remains of Mrs. Lindsay ; and as the cold earth ob¬ scured her coffin from his sight, ?? he heard the long-drawn sob of anguish wdiich burst from the bosom of her husband—anguish rendered doubly keen by the unnatural de¬ sertion ofhis only child, Edward vowed, in the presence ofhis Creator, never to aban¬ don the afflicted mourner during his severe distress, but to remain with him., whatever might be his fate, and to be to him what his
his ungrateful Clara should have been—the comforter and soother of his declining- years. Mr. Lindsay was almost too deeply ab¬ sorbed in the consciousness of the loss he had sustained, to look into his own de¬ ranged affairs, or even to converse much on a subject wliich forcibly recalled to his memory the conduct of his once-idolized daughter. He felt, however, the strong necessity of making the whole of liis em¬ barrassments known to Edward, who, though only now in his eighteenth year, was *ully capable of being serviceable to him in this painfully important business. Edward, unasked, unsolicited, had promi¬ sed not to leave him, and had volunteered ίο perform all the little delicate and tender offices of ? ??? ; Mr. Lindsay therefore made an effort to rouse himself one even¬ ing after the funeral, and endeavoured to gain sufficient composure to speak on the subject of his own deranged circumstances ; butthe remembrance oí her for whose self¬ ish
ish pleasures hehad thus involved himself, and become reduced to comparative beg¬ gary, overpotvered him, and he tvas e)b- ligeel to stop repeatedly during the neces¬ sary exposure of his affairs. Edward listened with surprise and grief to the avowal of Mr. Lindsay's paternal im¬ prudence. He was astonished at the mag¬ nitude of his elebts, and the number of his creditors ; and when the deserted father tvith tearfu* eyes grasped his hand, wdien he bcsouyht him to think and to act as if he tvere in reality his own son, Edward's heart seemed to fill tvith redoubled ten¬ elerness totvards lum ; and he again assured him that he tvould newer leave hiin nor forsake him, but that he should be to him what he had ever been in the days of Ids prosperity—a father and a friend. A little tranquillized by the tenderness of Edward, tvhich Mr. Lindsay knew tvell he could depend on, he now proceeded to express his wish lhat Edtvard tvould dis¬ charge the servants, and that he would ac¬ company
company him into the country, wdiere he proposed to sell the furniture, and every thing that was valuable, to discharge a part of his debts—" That task performed," said he, " my conscience will be more at rest. I do not wish to keep a guinea to myself. My future w r ants wdll be moderate ; andas î have an annuity of forty pounds a-year, 1 must confine them within that narrow scale, for never again wdiile I live will I involve myself in debt." Edward, wdio wished to continue in London, that he might be near sir Joseph Rennie. proposed to Mr. Lindsay tliat he shouki v* aik wdth him to view the apart¬ ments of [Mrs. Alexander Mackenzie, wdiich were then vacant, and wdiicli, as they could be accommodated with a neat drawing- room and two bed-chambers, he thought would suit them, especially as Edward knew that the terms were moderate, and that every thing would be done that lay in the power of the kind-hearted wddow to make them comfortable. Mr. Lindsay consented,
consented, more from an inclination to oblige Edward than from any interest which he felt to see the rooms, as all places were alike to him, who no longer felt ex¬ igence bearable. The name of Lindsay was a passport to the iavour of Mrs, Alexander Mackenzie. Bhe had heard Edward speak of the family in terms of grateful affection, and she therefore felt an immediate desire to per¬ form every friendly attention towards the widowed friend of her young favourite. She knew also that with Mrs. Lindsay ex¬ pired the fortune which had supported her family in opulence, and she therefore felt doubly inclined to shew every respect to Mr. Lindsay, who was thus suddenly ex¬ posed to so sad a change. It w r as soon set¬ tled that Edward and his once-generous pa¬ tron should become the inmates of her house, which she promised should be ready for their, reception on their return from the country. Edward iound no difficulty in dischar¬ ging
ging the domestics of Mr. Lindsay, who were glad to remove from a master whom adversity had already claimed. Sally, the attendant of Clara, was extremely piqued at being left behind by her mistress, wdio, she imagined, had treated her very ill, in not confiding to her the secret of her in¬ tended elopement. She therefore resolved not to serve her again, but to go down, at the request of Mr. Lindsay, to his country- Iiouse, to prepare the way for his return, and then idle could apply to Ashford and his wife, who, she doubted not. would as¬ sist her in getting another situation. Honest Oliver was not so easily dismiss¬ ed; he was the only one out of several servants whoentreated to remain, and share the fallen fortunes of his master. With tears he earnestly besought Edward not to turn him away, assuring him that he was willing to stay for nothing, if he would but retain him about his person. Edward f who from a boy was uncommonly attach* ed to Oliver, felt most keenly the necessity which
which constrained him to separate from so valuable*, so faithful a creature. " If I could keep you, Oliver," said he, " I would not hesitate a moment to have you with me. You should belong to me, and I wouid joyfully repay your services ; but to deceive you would be cruel, Oliver. You know the state of Mr. Lindsay's cir¬ cumstances ; you know also that I have no resources but what I gain by my otvn ex¬ ertions. Those I must notv redouble for the sake of your master, tvho tvas a kind and generous friend to me tvhen my poor old grandmother died. But for his ten¬ derness, his humanity, I then should have wanted a home ; and now it is, thank Hea¬ ven î in my potver to repay a part of his paternal goodness by contributing to his future support. To add to his limited comforts, I must be economical, Oliver; and though it tvill give me the most seri¬ ous uneasiness to part from you, yet I am compelled to sacrifice inclination to a senso of
of duty. We must part, Oliver, atleast for the present." Oliver could not conceal his tears.— u Well, Bír. Edward, if it must be so, it must; but since I lost my poor father, I have not had so hard a trial as this. Par¬ don me, Mr. Edward, but I loved you from the first day s nay hour of your com¬ ing to live at my master's ; and I do think that I liked Miss Clara better after that, because she was always kind to you when she w r as plaguing other people to death. But if we must part, Mr. Edward, do pray let me stay with you until I get another situation. I won't be any trouble, any hindrance to you at all ; only do pray let me stay with you until I get another place." Edward could not object to this request, which enabled him to retain about his per¬ son, at least for a short time longer, a be¬ ing who so sincerely loved him, and to whom he was equally attached. He ac¬ cordingly paid him wdiat was due of his wages,
wages, saying at the same time, that, until their return from the countiy, 'and until Oliver had obtained for himself a comfort¬ able situation, he sliould consider himself as alone responsible for his wages. " God bless you ! and thank you, dear Mr. Edward!" cried honest Oliver, joy¬ fully. " I wants no wages ; I only ask to see your happy face, to hear your kind and encouraging voice. I never saw but one face, never lieard but one voice except yours, which had the same effect on me." " And wdiose was that, Oliver ?" in¬ quired Edward, scarce knowing that he did do so. " Why, Miss Flora at the Hall," replied Oliver. " I could almost swear that you were cut out for each other, for when either of you smile, you are so like each other ; and Patty Ashford says the same." " Poes she?" hastily exclaimed Edward ; then, checking tlie rapturous feelings of the moment, he said—" It can only be in your imaginations, Oliver, for there exists no
no real resemblance between me and Miss Manningham." Edward felt it necessary to call on lady Manningham the day before he left town, as he had not seen any of the family since the night of the ball. Mr. Lindsay had received a letter from Clara, who, as a mere matter of form, begged pardon for the step she had taken, hoped that her mo¬ ther's accustomed tenderness would find excuses for her flight, anel promised to hasten her return as soon as she became [Mrs. Manningham. Mr, Lindsay, with the just feelings of an insulteel father, de¬ clined answering this last proof of Claras cold-blooded selfishness ; yet he dictated to Edward a few lines, merely to inform his daughter, that the mother on wdiose tenelerness she relied as usual for pardon, was no more—that she had died on the night of her elopement. Mr. Lindsay re¬ quested Edward to be silent on every other subject, as he did not wdsh to intrude his sorrows on the notice of one who had
so
so clearly proved her utter incapability of feeling for any but herself. Edward, for the first time, experienced a reluctance to call at the house of sir Charles Manningham, He had heard twice from Frederic since the death of Mrs, Lindsay, but he was the only one of his family who had taken the slightest notice of him sinee the elopement of Clara ; and from him he learnt that both his parents were extremely incensed at Charles for concealing his at¬ tachment, and for marrying without their consent. Edward, notwithstanding his re¬ luctance, thought that it was a mark of re¬ spect which they deserved from him, and he accordingly bent his steps towards the mansion of sir Charles. Frederic and Flora were alone in the drawdng-room when Edward was announ¬ ced. The former flew to greet him with extended hand, while the changeful coun¬ tenance ofthe latter, although, she was si¬ lent, expressed her ready participation in the sentiments of her brother. " Mackenzie,"
" Mackenzie," said Frederic, lt I rejoice to see you. I hope that you Λν?Ι remain until my father and mother come back— I hope that you will clear yourself from all knotvledge of this unlucky affair. I hare fought boldly for you, my friend, in your absence ; I have ??? ? ?? flinched, ??? ? ?? yielded &n inch oí ground—have 1, Flora ? No, though all seem fliclined to believe that y r ou knetv of the intended elopement, yet I have defended you through thick and thin, declaring my positive assurance that you vrere wholly ignorant of the matter. —Have ? not, Flora?" ·*' Yes, my dear brother," replied Flora, blushing; " and I also tried to convince mamma tliat Edward tvas ignorant oí it, from his manner of beseeching that í would immediately endeavour to find Miss Lind¬ say, and to communicate to her the letter of her fatiier." tí Thank you—thank you, ?? lovely friend!" said Edward, pressing her hand to liis lips—" you only did me justice ; yet, had
liad either your brother or Miss Lindsay thought proper to have made me tlieir confidant, although I would have tried to persuade them to give up so rash, so ill- judged a step, yet I should also have felt myseli in honour bound not to betray them." ^ " Ah, do not tell that to my mother !" cried Flora, tvith a look of beseeching earnestness ; " say any thing rather than that you would not have apprised her of my brother's elopement, had you knotvn it." " Dearly as I value the good opinion oí lady Manningham," replied Edtvard, '* I would not purchase it by the sacrifice of my integrity. Nothing would tempt me to betray any confidence tvhich might be reposed in me." .. " Then she will continue to think you privy to their flight," said Flora, mourn¬ fully, " in spite of all our endeavours* to p .-rsiiade her to the contrary." " How," cried Edward, warmly, at the vol. in. e same
same moment letting fall the hand of Flora, u will her ladyship doubt my word ? will she disbelieve my positive assertion that I had no concern in the elopement of her son ? u No, certainly, I meant not—But you are angry with me, Mr. Mackenzie," said Flora, in a trembling voice. " Oh, not with you, dearest, kindest Florai" exclaimed Edward, retaking her hand ; " to be angry with you would be impossible." " Almost impossible," said Frederic; " and yet both my rather and mother have been a little offended at our defending you so warmly, Mackenzie." A loud knocking at the door called the attention of Frederic to the window.— " It is them," said he; " and with them comes lord George and his sister. Con¬ stantia, I suppose, remains with sir Arthur and his mother." At the mention of brd George's name, Edward became for a moment pale. He cast
cast au inquiring glance towards Flora, who, disconcerted, and evidently uneasy, said—" I wish they had staid away : J was in hopes we should haye been alone to-day." Edward felt revived.— u If sbe loved him," thought he, " she w r ould not wish for his absence." The door now opened, and sir Charles and lady Manningham entered. Not as usual did they greet with friendly smiles the presence of Edward—not as usual did they extend their hands towards him, as h token of kindness and of welcome. Yet they seemed pleased once more to heboid him at thcir house, although thcir notwv of him was slight and distant. Lady Man¬ ningham desired Flora to get ready to ac¬ company lord George and his sister, who had come purposely to give her an airing iy Hyde-Park. Flora evidently obeyed with reluctance ; snd in a few minutes Edward found him- ## ?]??? with her parents and Frederic, E 2 not
not hotvever Λνιι?ιοη?, having first encoun¬ tered the strict investigation of lady Jane's eyes, Λν?ιο gave him to understand that she thought him an object worthy of her attention. " We have not seen you, Mr. Macken¬ zie, since the night ofthe ball," said lady Manningham, coldly. " You have not been accustomed to let so long a period elapse between your visits. 1 ' " Your ladyship tvill hat T e the goodness f ? remember," said Edward, respectfully, " that until notv I have never had so painful an occasion to command my ab¬ sence." " Do you mean the death of Mrs. Lind¬ say, or the shameful elopement of her daughter ?" inquired lady Manningham, looking steadily in his face. " I migbt say both," replied Edward, " since the unfortunate circumstance of [Miss Lindsay's imprudent flight has s*o deeplv affected her iather, that but for our intended
intended jourr ey to-morrow, I should still Iiave been debarred the pleasure of seeing ycur ladyship." * v If I thought that Mr. Lindsay was ignorant of his daughter s attachment to my son," said sir Charles, " or, of what is of most consequence, thcir premeditated elopement, I should feel most sensibly for his situation ; but I can hardly believe it' possible that a young woman, reared with such doting fondness as Miss Lindsay was, should conceal from her parents a· circumstance on v/hich the wiiole happi¬ ness of lier life depended." " I think that I may venture to affirm," replied Edward, " that neither Mr. nor Mrs. Lindsay for amoment suspected vv la. t has happened. Indeed, when } ou reflect, sir Charles, upon Miss Lindsay's supposed enüfaííement to Mr. Vivian, you will bj convinced that her parents wo.dd newer sanction so cruel a breach of Iaith, Kay, I am inclined to believe that neither Mr. Manmngbani nor Clara had determined E o upen
upon their flight an hour before it took place." " Were not you the confidant of their shameless disregard to decency and public opinion ?" inquired lady Manningham, tvith a look of scrutinizing attention. i( Chance informed rhe of their intention to elope," replied Edward, " but I had not the power to prevent its taking place." " And tvhat prevented your informing me of a circumstance of šo much import¬ ance 'Γ said lady Manningham, " I might surely liave expected from you, Mr. Mac¬ kenzie, a far different conduct. You con¬ fess that }ou knew tliat my eklest son, and the proud hope of his family* was on the point of disgracing himself for ever, and yet you suffered him to run blindly to his ruin, without once attempting to save him or his relations from unavoidable ?????." " I have airead' mentioned to your ladyship," replied Edward, " that to chance alone I tvas indebted for my knowledge of Mr.
.Mr. Manningham's new-formeeì plans. In¬ disposition obliged me to retire to a pri¬ vate apartment, to which I v/as conducted by Frederic, who had scarcely left me to repose for a few minutes on a couch, when Mr. Manningham and Miss Lindsay en¬ tered the chamber. They were too much occupied by their own feelings to cast a glance towards that oart of the room where I tvas, and I thus, mosl painfully fbr my¬ self, became unw Hungry acquainted with the cause of their mutual recriminations. They ended in an agreement to clop j im¬ mediately. Mr. Manningham left the apartment to give orders for a chaise to be procured ; and so completely tvas I over¬ come by grief vexation, and horror, at the ielea of what the dying mother of Clara must suffer if the elopement took place; that I could not repress a groan which then escaped me, and tvhich alarmed Miss Lind¬ say. It tvas in vain that I besought her to delay her union—in vain that I conjured her to think before she determined upon L ? an
au act which would bring with it its own severe punishment. All my persuasions were unavailing: she left me iu haste. and though I followed almost instantly. she eluded all my vigilance. The note which ï received shortly after from her father called for my immediate presence athome; but î left a message to be de¬ livered to Mi^s Lindsay, which I hoped would hpston her return, and prevent her ???» and imprudent journey." " That is putting the mildest construc¬ tion on the case/' said sir Charles ; " this List unfeeling act of levity has convinced me of what I before suspected, that Miss Lindsay is selfish, cold-hearted, and un¬ dutiful : siie is therefore the last woman on earth that I should have expected Charles to make choice of for a wife. It however íi fiords me great satisfaction, Ed¬ ward, to learn from yourself that you were not privy to their transgression; for it would have been a sad mortification both to me and lady Manningham, to have found
found that you, whom we so sincerely re¬ gard and esteem, were a party in an affair ivhich so materially affects our peace." " It gives me equal pleasure to bear the same," replied lady Manningham; "yet I cannot help regretting that Edward h.ad neither time nor opportunity to communi¬ cate to us what he had overheard; we might then have taken proper precautions to prevent their elopement " Edward was silent; but sir Charles, rising hastily from his seat, said, in an angry tone—" Cease to regret what is now past cure, my dear Constantia. Charles has made his own election, at the risk of our eternal displeasure ; but as I feel too painfully assured of wdiat will be his fu¬ ture unhappiness, wdien reason and reflec¬ tion regain their influence over his mind, 1 shall not add to his self upbraidings by my reproaches or my resentment'' Sir Charles now quitted the chamber ; and lady Manningham, sighing deeply at the probable misery of a darling son, now E 5 turned
turned towards Edward with all her USuai complacency, and asked him some ques¬ tions relative to his intended journey, and his afflicted companion. Edward, highly as he esteemed her ladyship, chose, from motives of delicacy, to conceal the embarrassed state òf får. Lindsay's affairs, and yet he felt himself m a manner compelled to avow the cause of their sudden departure rrotn London, lest she should be offended at his seeming want of confidence. Lady Manningham iiow for the flrst time expressed some friendly concern for the desolate condition of Mr. Lindsay.— * s ï pity bim sincerely," said she, " for to have only one child, and that child so worthless, so cruel, so unnatural, is indeed to be most sorely afflicted. Never shall I be able to look again on Clara Lindsay without a shudder of horror, as I reflect upon the doting fondness of her poor mother, and the sad, sad return she met with frora her unfeeling daughter. The only
only consolation now left for her deserted parent must flow from your affection and tender attentions. Poor Mr. Lindsay ! tell him, Edward, that I would have called on him to-morrow, but for his intended jour¬ ney." Lady Manningham now proceeded to inform Edward, that she had that morning heard from lady James Osborne, who had «goclosed tickets for a ball, which was fixed for the last day of that month.—" Her la¬ dyship has requested me to forward one to you," said lady Manningham, "and I there¬ fore hope that, if possible, you will endea¬ vour to be iu town time enough to avail yourself of her invitation." Edward replied, that he should be ex¬ tremely happy to accept of her ladyship's kindness ; but as it was particular busi¬ ness that called for his presence at *——, the day of bis return was uncertain ; he would, however, try, if possible, to be in town in time to attend at lady James's, " Her ladyship also communicated to ? ? me
me apiece of intelligence," said lady Man¬ ningham, " which, I fear, will not aflord you equal satisfaction. The marchioness of Anendale has lost her son; we may therefore expeet soon to see her return to England announced in the public papers." Edward, although he anticipated this event, could not help feeling extremely shocked, now that it was mentioned to him as having taken place. Kever had he felt beiore so warm an interest in the fate of so young a child—never had he experienced more pain than that which he now did, on being assured that the interesting form of the young earl would no more gladden bis sight in this world. Perbaps, also, the death of his little friend brought to his remem¬ brance h^ beautiful mother, and the deep affliction which at that moment she must be suffering. "Can she feel a mother's pangs ?" thought Edward — " she who couid so coldly counsel another to abandon her helpless offspring ? Oh ! if at tins hour her heart is bursting at the loss of her dar- linii
ling son—if at this moment it swells with all a mother's tenderest, softest, dearest feel¬ ings—all-righteous Heaven! remind her of the terrible sacrifice which, in the days of her early years, she would have imposed upon the parent who gave me being !" Edward's heart insensibly softened to¬ wards the marchioness, as his mind dwelt with lingering sadness on her supposed grief; and, had he not been ashamed ofhis own weakness, he would fain have endea¬ voured to palliate a crime at which his heart sickened, and his nature revolted. Fortunately for Edward, the situation of Mr. Lindsay, and the embarrassment of his affairs, drew off his attention from the dangerous contemplation of what his ardent fancy had pictured to be the state of lady Anendale. The melancholy despondency of poor Mr. Lindsay soon left Edward no time to brood over fancied sorrows ; even the marchioness, her beauty, her faults, and her maternal agonies, wcre forgotten by Edward, as he found himself called upon to
to make every exertion to rouse the lan¬ guid spirits ofhis early patron, and to call off his thoughts from the ungrateful deser¬ tion of his only child.
CHAPTER V. The return of Edward and Mr. Lindsay, at so dull a season of the year, created no small surprise among the inhabitants of the little village σί ——. Various conjec¬ tures went abroad respecting it, as well as remarks on the hasty and ill-timed mar¬ riage of Miss Lindsay with young squire Manningham ; but ail agreed in censuring Clara for her sad want; of fdial aifection, a. well as common humanity, in abandon¬ ing her tender mother on the eve of her dissolution. Sally, though by no means a faultless character herself, was equally shocked by ihe
ths dreadful levity displayed by her young mistress, as well as piqued at her being kept in ignorance of her intended flight. This last feeling made a convert of Sally, &nd she therefore scrupled not to confess to William Âshford anel his wife all the mean and malignant schemes oí her lady to injure Patty, and to rouse the jealousy of her husband, which she hoped w r ould be the means of breaking off all friendly inti¬ macy between him and Edward Macken¬ zie. The generous soul of Ashford imme¬ diately acknowledged its error, and resolv¬ ed upon a speedy atonement, by avowing, both to Sally and his wife, the secret in¬ fluence which the communications of the former had had upon ms mind, at the same time that he determined to conduct him¬ self in future towards Edward, in a manner which should convince him that he was both ready and willing to acknowledge that he had done him injustice. Edward was therefore most pleasingly surprised, when he called to inquire after the
the health of Pattv, to hear himself ad- dressed by hcr husband in terms the most respect fuk and to find himself actual¬ ly pressed to await her return by Ash¬ ford, who beiore had treated him wdth so repelling a coldness, that Edward had al¬ most resolved never again to enter his house. Aftection for Patty, joined to the persuasions of honest Oliver, had overcome the scruples of Edward, and he therefore took the first opportunity of Mr. Lindsay's being engaged with Mr. Curwen, Edward's kind preceptor, who had come to pass the evening with him, to make a short visit to Mrs. Ashford. If Edward was agreeably disappointed in the reception which he met with from Ashford, how was tbe satisfaction which he felt increased when, at the return of Patty, he solicited, as an honour, that he v/ould stand godfather to their little boy, wdiose name it was already decided should be that cf Patty's first and dearest friend. Edward caught the infant from the fond arms
arms of his mother, and smothering him with kisses, promised not only to become his godfather, but to keep in view his fu¬ ture interests and future happiness as sa¬ credly as if he were his own. it is need¬ less to observe the heartfelt d(bght of Patty upon this occasion, as she knew Ed¬ ward too well not 4> be assured that his promise was not the promise of the mo¬ ment, but one that came from Ins heart, one that would be faithfully and rigidly performed. Edward now found himself called upon to act and to think with a judgment far beyond either his years or experience. Mr. Lindsay's despondency continued to increase to an alarming degree, and to ren¬ der him wholly incapable of assisting in the arrangement of his affairs. In this painful exigency, Edward with gratitude accepted of the kind aid of Mr. Curwen, who aiiorded him the most prompt and friendly support in the complicated busi¬ ness of Mr. Lindsay's concerns, and who, with
with equal kindness, persuaded the afflict¬ ed parent to take up his residence with him, as all the furniture and effects were to be disposed of to defray his debts. Mr. Lindsay yielded to the persuasioni: of Ed¬ ward, and retired to the hospitable abode of Mr. Curwen, while Edward and honest Oliver remained to execute tlie trust re¬ posed in them. At the death of old Margaret Grey, Mr. Lindsay had ordered what little property she died possessed of to be removed to his h ise, where it had remained ever since, and where Edward now discovered it, carefully locked up in a spare room, of wdiich Mr. Lindsay had kept the key. He could not behold, without some degree of emotion, the various articles wdiich had been so familiar to hiin in the days of his happy childhood. They recalled to his memory the kind endearing old woman to whom they had formerly belonged, and wdth hei* remembrance w r as blended that of his young and á«»ocent companion, Patty Smith.
Smith. To him the effects of his vener¬ able grandmother tvere useless, but to her thev mhrhtbe of service; and who so tvell deserved to possess them as the tondel* and gentle nurse of Margaret Grey ? Oliver was therefore commissioned to remove Λν1?3? Edward had long considereel to be his own property to the house of William Ashford, while he hastened before him to apprise Patty of his intended gift. Had Edward presented Mrs. Ashford with the most costly furniture for her abode, it could not have been received with more grateful delight than that which she now expressed on again beholding the well- known articles, which habit and circum¬ stances had rendered dear to her. With pride and exultation she placed the high- backed chair of her revered schoolmistress in its former station, declaring that she would never resign its ease and comfort to any one, except sometimes to her hus¬ band, as a great indulgence, or to Edward, tvheneVer he condescended to honour them by
by his presence; then, and only thefl, would Patty give up the sacred seat of her dear old friend. When the distressing business of the sale was over, poor Mr. Lindsay ibimd himself dispossessed of everv thing which had once constituted his pride and pleasure, From fceiings wliicli did honour to his principles, he gave np to his creditors even tlie jewels of his vvife, remarking that jus¬ tice demanded of him this sacrifice, and that his ungrateful child must resign her claim to those \\ ho couhl assert a stronger,. since the chief of his embarrassments had arisen from her sclhYn extravagance. This pidnful duty performed, he again relapsed into his melancholy state of apparent in¬ sensibility, from which notliing could rouse him but the v.jice Gf Edward, or the ge¬ nuine tc;*rs or pity which Oliver woi..d frequently shed over his unhappy master. Thinking that a change of scene, joined to the tender assiduities of Mrs. Alexander Mackenzie, might alleviale his silent and uncomplaining
uncomplaining grief, Edward prepared to return to London the day after he had stood godfather to Patty's infant son. Mr. Curwen, at tvhose house Edward and Mr. Lindsay still remained, gave fo his senior pupils a dinner, to which all the old schoolfellows of Mackenzie were in¬ vited, that tiiey might again meet toge¬ ther and talk over their boyish exploits. That the young men might not feel either their conversation or their hilarity re¬ strained by the presence of their precep¬ tor, Mr. Curtvenand his melancholy guest retired early from the dinner-table to ii distant apartment, leaving orders wdth the attendant servants to supply all the tvants of his gay and happy pupils. Wit, good- humour, and the pleasing recollection of past events, contributed to circulate the glass with greater freedom than prudence warranted, and Edward, for the first time in his life, felt the dangerous intoxicatioii of the senses, as he rose to accompany Gonae of his companions home, whom he considered
considered in a more helpless state than himself. With a feverish pulse 1 , an aching head, and unsteady feet, Edward found himself alone at the gate of Ashford's house. It was late, and the man was shutting up the shop tvhen Edtvard inquired, in a voice not perfectly audible, if his master tvas at home? " No, sir, master is gone to the club, anel won't be home till late; but mistress is in the parlour, if you 11 please to w r alk in." Edward staggered into the room where Patty tvas sitting, and throwing himself into a chair, leaned his head against the wall, tvhile Patty, alarmed, hastily placed her sleeping infant in the cradle, and then advancing towards him, inquired if he was unwell. His look and manner betrayed the cause of his indisposition; she therefore persuaded him to take possession of the high-hacked chair of his grandmother, while she procured him some strong coffee, which in a great degree restored him to a knowledge
knowledge of what was passing. Ed¬ ward's head became clearer, but the influ¬ ence of the w ine stiil remained, and sad¬ dened his feelings. Patty's spirits tvere that ?? ? ???^ none of the highest ; she had seen her father in the course of the day, and learnt from him that he w r as on the brink of ruin, to tvhich his own follies, and the increasing extravagance of his house¬ keeper, had at last brought him, and he con¬ fessed that he had nothing before him but tbe prospect of a jail, unless he could raise by the next morning the sum of twenty pounds to pay part of a debt of sixty. Ash¬ ford had refused to advance him the mo¬ ney, or even to assist him in any way, un- levss he gave up for ever all future intimacy \vith his profligate companion. This pro¬ posal was rejected by Mr. Smith; and Pat¬ ty was tveeping over the probable fate of her infatuated father, when Edtvard, by liis unexpected presence, called off lier at¬ tention to himself. Patty had, from a littie girl, been in the habit
habit of confiding to Edward all that con¬ cerned herself and her family, as far in the latter case as her delicacy would allow, and now tliat she saw him tolerably composed and rational, she felt her mind relieved in pouring forth to him as usual the present grief which oppressed her. Patty had been sadly neglected by her father, and some¬ times liad been treated harshly by him ; but neither his neglect nor his occasional severity had weakened her sense of filial duty, or lessened her filial tenderness: her father was unhappy—his liberty was en¬ dangered, his property exhausted, and his only prospect a prison ; could, therefore, a daughter's heart feel light, while that of an only parent was bursting wdth the pressure of misfortunes, no matter whether unmerited or deserved? All the money that Edward was at pre¬ sent master of did not amount to more than twelve pounds ; this he instantly ten¬ dered to Mrs. Ashford with an air of joyous satisfaction, congratulating himself that
that he possessed the means to assist her in her present hour of difficulty and dis¬ tress ; yet regretting that the sum was not adequate to the wants of her father. Patty's eyes filled with grateful tears at this proof of generous friendship ; but as she was wholly unable to raise the remain¬ ing eight pounds, and as twenty was the least that her father's creditor would ac¬ cept, sbe declined receiving the assistance of Edward, unwilling to inconvenience him by taking wdiat would not relieve her father. ** I thank you a thousand times over, dear Mr. Edward," said Tatty, i( but I will not take the twelve pounds, sinoe it is wholly out of my power to procure the rest of the money, as I have not a shilling that William does not know of. Thank you all the same for your goodness, but my poor father must go to prison—I know he must." tM He shall not go, Patty," cried Ed¬ ward warmly, " he shall not go to pri- vol. m. r son!
son ! For your sake Ι Λν?Ι endeavour to raise the remaining eight pounds. Mr. Curwen, I dare say, Λν?Ι lend me that sum, if I leave in his hands my watch as a secu¬ rity." ** What, part with your watch !" exclaim¬ ed Patty, in amazement—" the watch which your dear father Mackenzie gave you, and wdiich you value as highly as you do your life ! Oh no, Mr. Edward, no ; I cannot think of your making so great a sacrifice fbr my sake." " That, and a still greater sacrifice, be¬ loved Patty, would I make to purchase your ease and happiness," scud Edward, throwing his arms tenderly round the Λνεορή^ Patty, and pressing his lips to her crimson cheek. " Who in this ?vide tvorld can bring forward a stronger claim upon my affection than yourself?—tvho loves me so firmly, so faithfully, as you do, Pat¬ ty ? Have we not been brought up toge¬ ther under this dear though humble roof? and tvere not the last, almost the last words oí
of our revered preceptress, that w r e should continue to love each other through life ? Jn this at least we have obeyed my grand¬ mother—have we not, Patty ?" " Oh, Mr. Edward," sobbed Patty, "why do you remind me of those innocent and happy day.3, when ignorant of the distinc¬ tions of birth and fortune, my only aim was to please and to fulfil your wishes— my only hope to be rewarded by your praise ? If my heart too faithfully obeyed the exhortations of ray revered friend, and prized too warmly your approbation, in¬ stead of that of my near relations, the fault is not my own. Habit made your opinion dear to me—habit made your pre¬ sence, at one ti?ne 9 almost necessary to my existence. For your sake I braved the malice of Miss Lindsay, the insolence of Mr. Manningham, and I was nearly ready to brave tlie anger of my father, sooner than consent to give up your friendship. My father forbade me to speak to you again ; but though I was loth to disobey him wdio F 2 gave
gave me being, yet, if he had turned me into the streets, without a home or without a friend, my heart told me that it would break before it could ever cease to feel for you the kind sentiments of my childhood." Edward pressed the affectionate Patty to his breast with a warmth and energy of feeling which recalled the tvandcring thoughts of Mrs. Ashford. She gently disengaged herself from his embrace, and looking modestly, yet steadily, in his glow¬ ing face, she said·—" I would not have confessed to any one but yourself, Mr. Edwards the nature and strength of my attachment ; but you will never cause me to repent my unguarded candour. I am no longer at liberty to dwell with delight on the scenes of my early days, no longer mistress of my own actions; gratitude and esteem made me become the wife of Ashford, and affection now binds me to the father of my child : but tvhen you offered to part with so dear a treasure as the parting gift of serjeant Mackenzie, and
and to part with it on my account, I could not keep my feefings wdthin proper bounds.'* Edw 7 ard felt in a moment the impro¬ priety of his conduct, and immediately be¬ came sober. He pressed the hand of Pat¬ ty to his lips with respectful tenderness— " Beloved Patty î beloved sister !" he ex¬ claimed, " it is the first, and it shall be the last time that you will ever have cause to lament my having 3 ielded to intem¬ perance. I am no longer under the dan¬ gerous influence of intoxication—I am myself again, Patty, and the same friend brother, and companion, that you knew in your childhood. It was here, in this w r ell- remembered room, that our first affections burst forth—it was here that they w r ere nurtured and cherished by my sainted grandmother—and it was also here that I saw, for the last time, the best, the dearest, and the noblest of men. From his hands I received this precious gift," continued Edward, drawing forth his watch, " and ? 3 gave
#ave a promise never to part witli it, uu · less to save the life of a fellow-creature, In snatching your father, Patty, from the horrors of a prison, I shall perform an ac¬ tion of equal magnitude—I shall dry your tears, my faithful friend, and perhaps pre* serve the peace of your future years, whicli v/ould be endangered should auy thing unpleasant happen to your father. Trust, therefore, to my endeavours, Patty, to re¬ lieve your father, and do not grieve at the means by which he Λν?Ι be succoured. My watch will remain safe with Mr. Cur- wen, until I can repay the money, and that will be in tbe course of a few weeks/' Patty's feelings were too much awaken¬ ed to be cheeked without extreme diffi¬ culty, and Edward, rising hastily fiom his' chair, would have quitted her that she might give way to them freely ; but Patty, placing her hand on his arm, could not suffer bim to depart without pouring forth a part of hcr gratitude before him. Ed¬ ward promised to send Oliver early the next
next morning to her with the remainder of tlie money, that she might be in time to convey it to her father by tlie hour ap¬ pointed by his remorseless creditor. " I know not when I shall see you, or hear from you again," said Patty, still holding his arm, " but my blessings will follow you ever. I shall think of you, Mr. Edward, I shall pray for you, and trust in the goodness of Heaven to guard and save you from the dangerous intimacy of the marchioness of Anendale." " The recollection ofher heartless coun¬ sel to my mother will shield me from the power of her enchantments," replied Ed¬ ward. " If we should ever meet again, she will have lost her influence over my soul and senses." " I hope so, I hope so, Mr. Edward," exclaimed Patty, fervently ; " for I dread the thought of your getting into her power, as much as if her very look and breath were poisonous. Be sure, dear Mr. Ed- Ward, wdien you see the marchioness, to l 4 think
think of your grandmother's words—* Ao angels form and a devils heart.' Oh, I cant never forget them !" Edward promised to remember them as often as Patty could possibly vvish ; then assuring her that he should expect to hear either from her or her husband, asoften as they had teisure, concerning the health ofr his little godson, he reluctantly left Mrs. Ashford, and hurried back to Mr. Cur- wen's, where, fortunately for his wishes. he found that gentleman waiting supper for him alone, as Mr. Lindsay had retired to hk chamber for the night, Edward, wdth some embarrassment, made his wants known to Mr. Curwen^ requesting him to oblige him with the loan of eight pounds, and offering to deposit his watch in his hands until he should be able to repay the money. Mr. Curwen listened to his young favourite with great attention, as well as considerable surprise. He knew tbat in the course of the day he had seen him with several bank-notes, and he
he therefore wondered the more at his present request, as he thought it impos¬ sible that in the course of a few hours he could be penny less. He resolved, never¬ theless, to grant his wdsh, at the same time that he could not avoid being desirous to learn the cause which had occasioned Ed¬ ward to make it. Mr. Curwen took out his pocket-book, and, counting out the notes, said—" There, Edward, is what you asked me for—but had you not better take ten of them ? You may not receive your money as soon as you expect, and it will be awkward for you to be without a guinea, in case you want one." Edward most gratefully accepted the kind offer of Mr. Curwen, presenting him at the same time his highly-treasured watch, and promising to redeem it as early as possible. u No," said Mr. Curwen, " no, Edward, I will not deprive you of so necessary a companion. I know you too well, my dear f δ boy,
boy, to require any other security than your word—that is sufficiënt; pay me tvhen you can, but do not distress your¬ self. And now, my dear young friend, think not that any idle or impertinent cu¬ riosity prompts me to pry into your af¬ fairs, but tliink that it is ?? fatherly anx¬ iety for your welfare and happiness that Trails me wish to learn by what means it became necessary that you should apply to mc for cigli t pounds, when this morning you were yourself master of neariy twice that sum. I flatter myself, Fid ward, that í have proved myself worthy to be trusted by you ; and if the nature of your demand will permit explanation, confide to me the cause. î pass my word never to let it es¬ cape my lips be it what it may." Edtvard felt that he could make a con¬ fidant of Mr. Curwen, and he therefore scrupled not to acknowledge the occasion for wliich the money was borrowed, add¬ ing, that he hoped Mr. Smith would take warning írom his present misfortunes, anel r< pent
repent of his past conduct before he Λν^ completely ruined. Mr, Curwen shook his head emphati¬ cally—" I am grieved, my dear boy," said he, " to find that your benevolence has been throtvn away upon a worthlesss ob¬ ject, and tbe more so, as twenty pounds is a sum of consequence to so young a man as yourself, as tvell as a sum that might have been so much better elisposed of, haei vou bestotved it otherwi.sc As it is, I con- sider it as lost to you for ever. Smith has no principle, no remains of honesty or of honour; he Λν?Ι receive your money, but he will never think of repaying you." " But if, by saving him from the walls of a prison," replied Edward, " I have also fía ved his amiable daughter from the se¬ verest pang tvhich her filial affection could experience, I have more than repaid my¬ self for the loss of my money, and I oxen rejoice that an opportunity has occurred to enable me to discharge a part of ni} debt of gratitude to Mrs. Ashford, for her F 6 kind
kind and uniform tenderness to my grand¬ mother, during her last severe illness." Mr. Curwen took the hand of Edward, and pressed it within his own—" Blest age of pure and innocent enthusiasm !" said he, i( tvhen the best and noblest affections of our nature are so keenly alive to the call of gratitude or honour ! Oh ! where¬ fore shouki a more intimate connexion with the \vorld repress the generous warmth of youthful feelings, and teach us thè sad lesson that dissimulation and dis¬ guise are necessary ! Such, however,is the case, my dear Edward; therefore, as a friend I w r arn you, as a father I advise you, to check the grateful overflowdngs of your heart, lest you should injure both the character and the peace of hcr whose hap¬ piness yon have thus kindly, thus disin¬ terestedly consulted. You need not blush, my son, for well can I enter into the na¬ ture of your sentiments towards Mrs. Ash¬ ford—tvell can I appreciate the state of your feelings for each other, brought up together
together under the same roof, and tutored for a time by tbe same worthy and excel¬ lent being, whose chief aim perhaps was to increase and strengthen the tenderness of your childhood's friendship. But, my dear Edward, the love wdiich then was guileless might now become otherwise. Patty is no longer the girlish companion of your boyhood—-ahe is no longer free to devote her time and thoughts to any other than her husband. He it is wdio must now con¬ stitute her earthly happiness—he it is wdio ought solely to rill both her heart and her mind, while you must now be content to occupy only a secondary place in e^ch. I regret to say, that such is the stete of things in this world, Edward, that were it to be known from whence Smith r*. ceived his present assistance, the character of Mrs. Ashford might surfer so severe a wound, that her future peace would be consider¬ ably endangered. I mention this, my dear young friend, merely to caution you against too openly giving way to your kindness
kindness for your early companion, not from the remotest suspicion, on my part, that in any other respect such caution is necessary." Edward thanked Mr. Curwen for his paternal counsels, assuring him that he would not fail to remember them, and to regulate his future conduct according to his friendly advice. They then parted for the nyht, Edward feeling but too consci¬ ous of the justness of Mr. Curwen's ideas of propriety, from his own unguarded free¬ dom of behaviour that evening; and Mr. Cunven, though ignorant of that beha¬ viour, was nevertheless sensible of the pro¬ bable ãíivger oía connexion between two young people attached to each other from infancy, and linked together by a recipro¬ city of kind and mutual obligations. He therefore felt some degree of satisfaction in knowing that Edward's speedy removal to London would place him out of the reach of the evil whieh he dreaded, and at the same time preserve the character of Mrs Ashford
Ashford from the poisonous breath of vil¬ lage slander. CHAPTER VI. EDΛΛ ? ARD w r as up by break of day. It had been his first intention to dispatch Oliver with a letter to [Mrs. Ashford, but the re¬ flections of the night suggested that this mode of conveying the money to Patty was both dangerous and imprudent. He therefore dresseel himself wdth quickness, resolving to call auel take leave of her hus¬ band, and trust to chance for an opportu¬ nity to slip into the hands of Mrs. Ash¬ ford the sum which w r as necessary to pro¬ cure the lenity of her fathets creditor. Chance did favour the wishes of Ed¬ tvard, who hastened to the house of Ash¬ ford, just at the moment when he was bu¬ sily engaged in his morning's usual occu¬ pation.
pation. He passed into the parlour, where Fatty received, with some degree of con¬ fusion, the promised relief; but Edward staid not to hear her thanks; pressing her band, he motioned her to be silent, then kissing the cheek of his little name¬ sake, he left the room, and after shaking its honest father most cordially by the hand, and wishing him and his family all imaginable good fortune, Edward as has¬ tily returned to Mr. Cu r wen, to whom he secretly imparted the cause of his morn¬ ing's walk, and then joined Mr. Lindsay, who received him with a melancholy smile, telling him that he was ready to begin his journey immediately after breakfast. " During our absence yesterday from the dining-parlour, my dear Edward," said Mr. Lindsay, " I was occupied in writing to my uncle, who is in Ireland, and wbo holds considerable property in that king¬ dom. This I was induced to by the kind advice of Mr. Curwen, who has indeed in¬ terested himself as warmly in my concerns as
?? ¡İ he were my brother; to have re¬ jected his counsels would have been un¬ grateful : yet tvhy sliould I seek to mix again with a tvorld of which 1 am so sadly weary ?—why wish to prolong an exist¬ ence made wretched to me by the heart¬ less conduct of my only child ?" " While the tvorld contains one heart devotedly attached to you, my dear sir," replied Edward hffeetionately, " your ex¬ istence ought to be deemed valuable; and 1 flatter myself that you have not yet to learn that tliere are more hearts than one, on whose fidelity and kindness you may with safety rely." fct Ah, Edward !" said the afflicted father Of Clara, tí I acknowledge, tvith humble grati tu ele, the mercy of my Creator—I feei his goodness every hour that I hear your voice ; yet, as I bend beneath his will, my paternal feelings rise up against my sub¬ missive inclinations, and as I think of my unfeeling daughter, I wish that I no Ion*. ger lived, that I no longer continued to breathe
breathe the same vital air as that which she inhales. Prodigal in my love, lavish in my tenderness, I weakly trusted to the filial duty of my child, as the staff'of my de¬ clining years ; but she has abandoned me in one of the most painful trials of niy life—she has left me to struggle with my misfortunes, uncheered by her smiles, un¬ assisted bv her attentions; she has for- saken in her last moments the parent who gave her being, and the chain is bro¬ ken for ever that bound her to the fond confiding heart of her father." " Mrs. Manningham will plead her own cause," said Edward, " as soon as she re¬ turns. A repentant daughter cannot sue in vain, if she appeals to the tender feek ings of so kind a parent." ( · No future penitence can expiate her crime in my eyes," replied Mr. Lindsay, sterni v. " She who could forsake the v' deathbed of one of the tenderest, best of mothers, who could think of selfish plea¬ sures wdiile the expiring breath trembled on
on that mother's lip ; she wdio could do this must not dare to insult the sacred¬ ness of a father's griefs by any vain and fruitless shew ofiate repentance. My heart disclaims the worthless idol which it so long has worshipped ; and should she ven¬ ture through your means to intrude her¬ self upon my notice, I demand it as a fa¬ vour, Edward—nay, as the strongest proof of your regard, that you will not suffer her to approach my presence, that you will not receive any letters which her matchless effrontery may induce her to convey to you ; for never again, while I exist, will I hold the slightest communica¬ tion with her who was once my daughter." Edward felt too much respect for the wounded affection of Mr. Lindsay to at¬ tempt at this moment to soften his resent¬ ment towards his child. He assured him that, far from doing any thing which could add to his distress of mind, it would be his study to lighten it as much as possi¬ ble, and that he hoped, that for his sake, he would
would not allow his endeavours to prove fruitless. Mr. Lindsay tenderly embraced his kind young friend, tvho now left him to inquire of Oliver if every thing tvas ready for their departure. Mrs, Alexander Mackenzie had expect¬ ed them ; therefore, tvhen the travellers arrived, they were greeted with the smiles of true benevolence and respectful hospi¬ tality, tvhich were not the less welcome to the afflicted mind of Mr. Lindsay, be¬ cause they came from one tvhom fortune had placed in a sphere of life inferior to his own. Mary Mackenzie heaped fresh faggots on the drawing-room fire, re-swept the hearth, and modestly inquired if she should pour out their coffee, while her mother v/as busily engaged in toasting the muffins ? Mr. Lindsay, to whom every shew of kindness tvas now of double value, readily accepted of the offer, though it was not without a great deal of entreaty and per¬ suasion
suasion that he could prevail upon Mary to sit in his presence. When a little recovered from the fa¬ tigues of his journey, Mr. Lindsay remind¬ ed Edward that this was the evening fixed on by lady James Osborne for her public night, and assured him, that unless he honoured her ticket, he should feel con¬ siderably disappointed.—" To tell you the truth, Edward," said he, '* I recollected your invitation, and it made me .anxious to be in town to-day : but for that, I ^???? not have left my friend Curwen this week ; therefore go you must. I shall do ex- tremely well, as Mrs. Mackenzie and her daughter Mary have promised to be my companions until bed-time." Thus assured that Mr. Lindsay would not be left to his own melancholy reflec¬ tions, Edward consented to quit him, con¬ fident that both Mrs. Alexander Macken¬ zie and Mary would do their utmost to make him comfortable and happy. It may not here be unnecessary to ob¬ serve,
serve, that although the former was com« pelled, at the death of her husband, to open a fruiterer's shop for tbe support of her family, yet it w r as one of the better sort, and celebrated for the finest articles oí the kind. She had notv lived twenty years in the same house, and had brought up her children tvith credit and respecta¬ bility, giving them all good plain educa¬ tions, and placing them in different trades, which enabled tliem to support them¬ selves. Mary, iu ore delicate, and more handsome than tbe other girls, remained at home with her mother, waom she as¬ sisted in her business, filling up her lei¬ sure hours by needlework, tvhich she pro¬ cured from the ladies tvho frequently call¬ ed on her mother to order their own fruit. Mary was engaged to a young man in the employment of a person tvho kept a large bookseller's shop at the court end of the town, and to Λνίιοπι she was to be married in a fetv months. Her person, her manners, and her dis¬ position,
position, tvere highly engaging ; Edtvard therefore felt little doubt but that Mn Lindsay would pass his e? ? ening agreeably, and he prepared to íuiñi his engagement to lady James, not without the pleasing hope that he might be a successful candi¬ date fbr the dear hand of Fle>ra Manning¬ ham. Oliver tvas dispatched for a coatdi ; and Edward, tvhen he had finisheel dressing, returned to tvhere Mr. Lindsay and Mrs. Alexander [Mackenzie were sitting. " God bless you for an ornament to the name of Mackenzie !" said she, warmly. tí Oh that my poor brother-in-law could but see you now ! how his brave heart tvould exult in the child of its adoption í ■—I forgot, Mr. Edward, to tell you that Miss Manningham was married last tveek to sir Arthur Vivian ; I saw it in the Sunday-paper; and I hope I shall live to see the day when your marriage with some great laely wdll be announced in fhe same way.—You tvill pardon me, sir," continued she.
she, turning towards Mr. Lindsay, " for the freedom of my speech, but Mr. Ed¬ ward Mackenzie is almost as dear to me as one of my own sons. He w r as not two months old when I first saw him, and had his mother allowed me, I w r ould have buckled him myself with my own baby. I lost sight of him too soon, but I have never forgotten him, and I said then, and I still say the same, that I am sure that he is born to be a great man." " I will trust to your prophecy, my dear friend," replied Edward, " though I confess that it would puzzle me to tell from wdience my greatness is to come." " Some day or other you will find out who was your father," said Mrs. Alexan¬ der, " as well as for what purpose so strange a mark as that of a coronet was placed on your arm. But here comes the coach. Oh that 1 was able to follow you unseen, to hear all the fine things that will be said of you this evening. Many a great lady will
will cast a look and heave a sigh for Mr. Edward Mackenzie." ** You must not try to make my young favourite vain," said Mr. Lindsay, " or you wdll rob him of one of his best quali¬ ties." Edward affectionately pressed their hands, wdiile the smile of grateful pleasure beamed on each handsome feature of his face. It was the smile that so often en¬ chanted honest Oliver, who now stood wdth the door half open, admiring the appear¬ ance of the being wdiom he loved dearest in the world, and whom to be separated from, he felt would be far worse than pover¬ ty or death. The Miss Osbornes were the first who caught the name of Edward, as the ser¬ vant announced his arrival, and immedi¬ ately came forward to receive him with familiar and undisguised pleasure.—" This is an unexpected happiness, Mr. Macken¬ zie," cried Maria, gaily ; " mamma ??! giv en you up. I would inquire ññer y mv vol. in. g luaiih,
health, but that I sec it is quite unneces¬ sary. When did you come to town ?" 1 Γροη Edward's replying only that even¬ ing—" Well," added she, " then we are the more obliged to you for remembering that this is our public night. But let me lead )ou to mamma; she is actually impa¬ tient to present you to my uncle Richard." The satisfaction which instantly became visible in tbe countenance of ladv James wa*« extremely gratifying to the feelings of Edward. She not only held out her hand, but made room for him between herself and a gentleman, to wdiom she in¬ stantly introduced Edward, with a warmth and eagerness of manner that convinced him that he had been the subject of their private conversation. Lady James, then turning towards Ed¬ ward, inquired in the kindest accents after his welfare, assuring him that she felt her¬ self highly flattered by his readiness to oblige her by his presence, wdien he must necessarily be fatigued by his journey. " Mr.
" Mr. Mackenzie is of an age to think lightly of fatigue, my dear sister," said Mr. Colvill. " Tbe erfects of travelling will soon be forgotten, wdien he has selected from among lhe beauties of the ball-room some favourite fair to be liis partner in the dance. When I was his a^c------" A deep sigh left the sentence unfinished. " Ah, my beloved Richard !" exclaimed lady James, in a voice of tenderness, " well do I remember that at Mr. Mackenzie's age you were the most animated, the most happy, but the most romantic creature in the world. You wcre the life, the joy of your family and friends. You were, in tact, every thing that Mr. Mackenzie now is. I shall not rest till my father has seen you, Mr. Mackenzie—until he tells me that you are the living image of what υ. ? brother was at your age." *' Still the same warm-hearted beintç as when a girl," said Mr. Colvill, forcing a smile, as he pressed the hand of lady James. " Do you know, Mr. Mackenzie, that this G 2 dear
dear sister of mine has actually been so nervously impatient for your return to town, that I seriously became uneasy lest it «hould affect her health. When you learn how firmly we have been attached from our infancy, you will cease to won¬ der at the warmth of her feelings towards yourself, who, as she compliments me by saying, bear a resemblance to wdiat I was when I left England." Edward replied, that from whatever cause the kindness of lady James origi¬ nated, lie should deem himself as singu¬ larly fortunate in bemg its object, and that he hoped her ladyship would not think him too presuming if he said that his heart felt disposed to return that flatter¬ ing kindness by every mark of gratitude and resp ct. The exhilarating sounds of a fine band of m mí n.ade tød ward turn his head me¬ chan ca!h towards the ball-room. Olivia Onbo'-ire stood near him: he in- ouircd if she was disengaged, and upon lier
lier replying in the affirmative, he rose to conduct his fair partner to the next cham¬ ber. " I fear, Mr. Mackenzie," said Olivia, with genuine simplicity, iS that you are not much flattered by mamma's compar¬ ing you to uncle Richard. Yet, I assure you, tbat he must have been extremely handsome when a young man, as I will con¬ vince you some day or other, by «shewing you a mini 'ture which he gave to mamma on his leaving Enoland. I certainlv think that you resemble the picture, which my poor uncle had painted for a lady lo whom he was madly attached, and who abandon¬ ed him for another, although she Jiad pro¬ mised solemnly to be his." " She must have been indeed unwor¬ thy such a love as that of your uncle," re* plied Edward gravely, " since the con¬ stancy of his passion appears still to afreet his peace, and undermine his health. Mr. Colvill, though seen by me only for a few minutes, and evidently labouring under g 3 indisposition.
indisposition, seems to be one of tliose characters w r ho make an indelible im¬ pression on the mind. His form is digm- fied, his countenance, though saddened by the disappointments of his early years, is still calculated to charm ; and his voice and manner have something in them to we peculiarly attractive. I should have thought that the woman who had once listened to the avowal of his tenderness, would never have heard w ith complacency the vows of another." '* I should have thought the same," said the lively Olivia, wdth unusual serious¬ ness ; " but my dear uncle was fated to love to distraction, and to love in vain. I never heard the name of the lady who so basely deceived him, but I believe that she is still living. I once thought that I had discovered it ; but it might only be one of my own fancies." Edward felt that he would give a great deal to be privy to this fancy of Olivia; yet of what moment to him could it pos¬ sibly
sibly be, to be made acquainted with the ???? of the lady who had so cruelly blight¬ ed the happiness of Mr. Colvills life? Olivia now spoke of the Manninghams, and the heart of Edward beat quicker at the dear-loved sound. She had been one of the hridemaids to Constantia, and slie now recapitulated to him, with good-na¬ tured willingness, the whole of the bridal ceremony, in doing this, she necessarily spoke of Flora, and this w T as a theme on which the charmed ear of Edward could have dwelt for ever. The tenderness of his feelings beamed in his glowing face, and his eyes, at once brilliant and languish¬ ing, were intently fixed on tlie counte¬ nance of Olivia, when a passing sigh re¬ moved them to the pale features of Flora, who at that instant moved forward with lord George------. A transient blush tinged the cheek of Flora, as she returned the embarrassed bow of Edward, and the familiar nod of his companion. g 4 " That
u That is a dear sweet girl," exclaimed Olivia, warmly, " and infinitely too good f »rlord George: but I believe that things are now neariy settled, and that my love¬ ly iriend will soon become the daughter *>fa duke." *' Impossible r cried Edward, hastily. ** And wdiy impossible Mr. Macken¬ zie?" inquired Olivia Osborne. ** Ì know not," said Edward, confusedly ; lt and yet I should have supposed that neither sir Charles nor ladv Manningham would bestow their daughter upon one whose only possible recommendation is the greatness ofhis family connexions." ki Bless you !" exclaimed Olivia, laughing¬ ly ; " why, do you not know, Mr. Macken¬ zie, that now-a-days rank and fortune are the two best recommendations that a young man can produce in his favour? What parent, except indeed they possessed such old-fashioned notions as mamma, w r ould decline the proposals of a duke's son ? No, no, Mr. Mackenzie, such an offer is sure of
of being received, though he that made it were little better than a knave or fool. I do not mean to insinuate that this is lord George's case ; considering every thing, he is a decent kind of being, and I believe tolerably good-natured and obliging." The eyes of Edward followed the sweet form of Flora until it was no longer visi¬ ble. The sigh which burst from his bosom w r as heard by Olivia.— " You pity Miss Manningham, Mr. Mackenzie ; so do I : yet wdiy should we consider her as an object of commiseration, tvhen her own heart perhaps beats favourably for his lord¬ ship ?" Edward started ; then recovering him¬ self, lie said, in a faltering voice—" I have too high an opinion of sir Charles and iady Manningham to believe that they ΛνοηΜ force the inclinations of their daugh¬ ter ; if lord George is the received lover of Miss Manningham, it must be with her own consent." G £ They
They were ???? joined by Miss Osborne and her partner ; and as they proceeded to the refreshment-room, Edward for a moment resigned the hand of Olitda, to speak to Frederic, whom he now for the first time perceived standing near his mo¬ ther, who ?? ? ?? seemingly in most earnest conversation tvith lady James Osborne and Mr. Colvill. Coukl any thing at that moment hp diffused the spirit of joyful hope into ν soul of Edward, it would have been the kind and flattering attentions tvhich he now met with from lady Manningham and her companions; but the bare supposition of Flora's being engaged to lord George ------ baci damped the buoyant and happy feelings of Mackenzie, who heard, with the languid smile of a disordered mind, that lady Jane -——» sister to lord George, liad been inquiring after him repeatedly sinee she had met him at the house of sir Charles. " You must dance with her ladyship to-night,
to-night, Edward," said lady Manningham, smilingly, " for I have ventured to pro¬ mise for you. Lady Jane is an only daugh¬ ter, and a spoiled one: she has taken a vast fancy to you ; and therefore, tru sting- to your well-known gallantry, I assured her that you would feel yourself highly honoured by the possession of her fair hand. See, her ladyship advances towards «s : I must spare her blushes.—Lady Jane, Mr. Mackenzie has been soliciting tbat my interest may be exerted to procure him the enviable distinction of becoming your partner for the ensuing dance, if you are not otherwise engaged." The eyes of lady Jane sparkled with delight at this desirable piece of informa¬ tion, and she immediately assured Ed¬ ward tbat she was at liberty to comply with his wishes, giving him at tlie same time a look of tender encouragement, which was perfectiy sufficient to autho¬ rize a less diffident voumr, man than Ed- G 6 ward
ward to make the most of the present op¬ portunity. t ' ì must just say a fetv words to my dear Flora," said lady Jane, " and then, Mr, Mackenzie, I tvill attend to you." ** Youi ladyship does me infinite ho¬ nour," replied Edward ; " but may I be permitted to accompany you ?" " Oh, most willingly," said lady Jane, extending totvards him her hand familiarly. " I think that Edwards fortune is al¬ ready made," exclaimed Jady Manning¬ ham, * r if he does not mar it by his too- scrupulous delicacy. Lady Jane is evi¬ dently charmed by his character and by his appearance; she is perfectly her own mistress, and may bestow her hand upon whom she pleases." α The elmnces are certainlv in Edward's favour," said Frederic, *' but I doubt if he will avail himself of her ladyship's par¬ tiality. He is too disinterested and too generous a fellow to sacrifice his heart at tlic shrine of we alt iL' Lady
Lady James and her brother were now left alone for a few moments.—" I do not entirely approve of the present system of throwing young people in the way of each other," said she, gravely, " although it is acted upon by very worthy characters. For instance—lady Manningham has evi¬ dently introduced Mr. Mackenzie to lady Jane this evening, with the good-natured intention of giving him an opportunity to make the most of her ladyship's sentiments in his favour. I cannot bring myself to believe that a young man of such superior intellectual endowments will be induced to barter his future peace for the sake of rank and fortune." *' You speak, Alaria, as if you had known Mr. Mackenzie for years," replied Mr. Col¬ vill, thoughtfully : " how can you judge oí his inclinations or his wishes upon so short an acquaintance?" " By his appearance, by the fire and brilliancy of his eyes, by tbe soul which beams in hiy countenance, my beloved bro¬ ther.
ther, tvhich is too like your own to en¬ sin ine a sordid or a selfish mind," ** Appearances are too often deceitful, Maria; and this }oung man, all-interest¬ ing, all-candid as he seems, m*y be as prone to evil as the matchless beauty whose t icious inclinations ruined my hopes and bb t «.hted my h ippiness, when I deem¬ ed if most secure 'rom interruption," u Aiu Richard f <*'' harpuig on the past, still anticipating future disappoint¬ ments, ai.d induing of luiman nature by one who was a disgrace to her sex. I thought, nay, indeed I expected, that you would feci as highly interested for Mr. Mack en /?? as myself, and 1 am therefore weak enougl ι to he pained on finding that rny expectations are hkely to prove vain." 44 The interest tvhic h the sight of him has occasioned me to ieei," replied Mr. Coh ill, " I tvould fain have concealed with¬ in my own breast, lest I should a second time hate cause to lament my rashness m trusting to appearances. María, rest sa¬ tisfied
tisfied that I feel for your favourite all the kind sentiments wdth wdiich your own friendly bosom abounds. There is a charm about his person, wdiich cannot ha\ y e in¬ fluenced yonr feelings towards him, but which operated upon mine the moment I beheld him ; a charm------" At that instant Jady James ielt herself called on to rise, in order to receive some fresh visitors, and Mr. Coh ill quitted his seat and passed into the ball-room. The pointed attentions of lady Jane, wdio was w hat might be called afine young woman, joined to the freedom of her dress, which exposed to his eye the beauties of her person, soon had their due effect upon the senses of Edward. His spirits became buoyant, his conversation highly eloquent, and his coimtenance, of course, animated and fascinating. Lady Jane viewed her companion wdth romantic admiration, and as she ¿razed on İiİs handsome features, as she listened to his tuneful voice, she forgot the vast dis¬ parity
parity of their birth, and the probable cen* sure of her relations, and seriously resolv¬ ed to raise hirø to her own rank in life, provided that no prior engagement on his part existed to disappoint her wishes. Flora beheld at a distance the conduct of her brother's friend—beheld it wdth the most saddened emotions of sorrow and re¬ gret. Not long before she had seen him with Olivia Osborne, had seen him be- stow on her those smiles of approving kindness, which now he lavished on his more exalted partner. Was Edward a general lover, or was he attracted by the splendour of lady Jane's family connex¬ ions, the glitter of her numerous jewels, or by her own evident and marked par¬ tiality for himself?—" It must be the lat¬ ter," thought Flora, sighing unconsciously at tbe idea, " for Edward is too noble to be biassed by any other feelings than those of aifection and gratitude." Again that heavenly smile irradiated the glowing countenance of Edward, and Flora,
Flora, trembling and pale, gladly availee! herself of lorel George's proposal to take some refreshment. " upon my word," said his lordship, " J me seems wonderfully pleased with her partner. Mackenzie is a fine young fellow, and " dare say infinitely diverting." " He is very amiable," replied Flora, in a low voice, " and possesses talents whicb cannot fail to render his conversation pleasing." Lady Jane and Edward ηοΛν approached to where they were sifting. The former beckoned to her brother, who rising, po¬ litely offered his seat to Edw r ard, while he attended the summons of his sister. " George," said her ladyship, taking his arm, and leading him into the next apart¬ ment ; " George, you must invite Mac¬ kenzie to call on you." « Very well, Jane, I have no objection : bufc what do you mean to do with him when he comes, for it will not be in my potver to entertain him ? Flora says that he
he is so devilish clever, he will be too much for me." ** You silly fellow !" exclaimed lady Jane, " ivere it not for your good-nature, you would be intolerable. But do you invite Mr. Mackenzie to call on vou as soon as possible, and I'll engage to amuse him." " Silly as you think me, Jane," retorted his lordship, " I am wise enough to per¬ ceive the drift of your meaning. Mac¬ kenzie is a handsome young fellow, and you are your own mistress. You under¬ stand me, Jane?" While bis sensible lordship was talking to her cunning ladyship, Edward, placed by the side of Flora Manningham, was endeavouring to draw her into conversa¬ tion ; but he found her unusually reserved, and, as he imagined, cold and distant. His pride took the alarm, and rising hastily from his seat, as he perceived lady Jane and her brother re-enter the refreshment- room, he joined them with an apparent eagerness,
eagerness, which more than confirmed the suspicions of Flora, that lady Jane had succeeded in attaching him to her list of danglers. Lord George, according to his instruc¬ tions, was so extremely earnest in pressing Edward to call on him the next day, tliat the latter found it impossible to refuse, and thus lady Jane obtained her object, which was to gain a favourable opportuni¬ ty of introducing Edward to her father, the duke of------. Lady Jane was satisfied with her nights amusement, and as the morning w T as now far advanced, she signified her wish to re¬ tire. Edward led her to her carriage, and if he ventured too warmly to press her un¬ reluctant hand in his (let it be remember¬ ed that he was not yet nineteen, and that the attractions of lady Jane were such as might have thawed a colder bosom than that of Mackenzie), the eyes of lady Jane told him that his boldness was forgiven— nay
nay more, that it was not displeasing to her; and Edward's gratitude was thus awakened by the flattering notice which he had received from one so high and noblv born as her ladyship.
CHAPTER VIL
Edward had not left his bedchamber the next day, when Frederic Manningham paid him a visit.—" I am come, my dear Mackenzie," said he, " to have half an hour's conversation with you, upon a sub¬ ject whicli materially aifects my peace. Your opinion may be of use to me ; at all events, as the happiness of Flora is con¬ cerned, it Ís natural that I should impart my uneasiness to you, who feel nearly as much interested as myself in her welfare." " What can have disturbed the repose of Miss Manningham," inquired Edward gravely,
gravely, f * when she can boast the posses¬ sion of such a lover as lord George------ ?" " Such a lover !" exclaimed Frederic scornfully. " I will not, cannot believe that Flora is attached to a butterfly like his lordship. But what makes me uneasy, Mackenzie, is the alteration which has lately taken place in the spirits and man¬ ners of mv sister. You know what a lit- tie lively creature she was before she was introduced, how frequently she smiled, and what delight her smiles imparted to us all. Now she is silent and thoughtful, even to melancholy, and seldom smiles, or if she does, her smiles are evidently forced—they come not as usual from her light and hap¬ py heart ; and my only fear is, that some secret grief preys upon her mind, and un¬ dermines her peace. I know that my fa¬ ther and mother are favourable to the at¬ tentions of lord George ; but I know also, that they would not force the inclinations t>f my sister, wcre she averse to the union. What,
What, therefore, dear Mackenzie, can op¬ press the heart of our beloved Flora ?" tí I know not," r jplied Edward, wdth a sigh, " tvhat hidden sorrow can affect the peace of Miss Manningham, but none can deplore more sincerely than myself, that any cause should exist to occasion her a moment's uneasiness." " I believe you, my friend, and therefore have taken this early opportunity to im¬ part to you my fears on her account. The mind of Flora is of so superiora kind, that it is next to impossible that she should feel any thing like an affection for so weak anel insipid a character as lord George. He is good-natured and friendly in the extreme, but that is all-—his intellects are beiow me¬ diocrity ; and tvhen I see him the constant companion of my sister, I almost feel in¬ clined to quarrel with him for his constan¬ cy, and to reproach Flora for her tacit en¬ couragement ofhis addresses." " And why, my dear Frederic, shouid you
vou do either," said Edward, tí since lorel George cannot be as insignificant in the eyes of your sister as he is in yours ? 1 did not perceive any uneasiness or discon¬ tent in Miss Manningham last night. His lordship, as usual, w r as her de\ T oted admirer, anel she seemed perfectly satisfied and pleased that he tvas so. I rather tliink that your imagination, my friend, has been on this occasion too busy in conjuring up a subject to torment you, and that Miss Man¬ ningham is as cheerful and as contented as formerly." " Oh no, 1 am not apt to imagine sor¬ rows—not apt to conjure up sources of un¬ easiness to myself; as yet the world has too many charms, which sweeten my ex¬ istence; and Iat first refused to admit the idea of Flora's being unhappy, until I had repeatedly founel her in tears, and as re¬ peatedly heard her decline confiding to me the cause. Flora tvould not weep fbr fan¬ cied griefs, nor conceal her secret unhap¬ piness from me, tvithout some serious rea¬ son.
son, Mackenzie, you are more eloquent, more persuasive than I am ; you also pos¬ sess great influence over Flora: if you urge her to confide to you the cause of those tears which she has vainly endea¬ voured to hide from her brother, she may be more communicative to you than she has been to me." " Heavens !" exclaimed Edward, in agi¬ tation, (t what a request have you made I How can I, with any degree of propriety, hint to Miss Manningham my knowledge of so delicate a circumstance as that ofher being unhappy ?-—What right have I to pry into a sorrow wdiich, if real, ought to be sacred from the eye of curiosity. No, Fre¬ deric, I dare not venture to address Miss Manningham upon a subject whicb she seeks to conceal from the tenderest aud best of brothers.*' " I did not expect, Mackenzie, that you would refuse my request," said Frederic, half angry at the disappointment of im wishes ; " but you have ceased to feel that brotherly
brotherly interest in what concerns my sis¬ ter, since you have mingled with the worlo." " You wrong me, Frederic," replied Edward, with some degree of warmth ; " it is not /who have changed, it is your sister. No more, as formerly, does she greet my approach with a friendly smile, or ex¬ tend her hand to welcome my arrival. Miss Manningham both looks and speaks with the chilling tone of indifference ; or if she smiles or extends her hand, it is to meet the tc .der pressure of lord George, whose constant attendance even excludes the usual attentions of her older acquaint¬ ance." " I see that I am not likely to receive any assistance from you, Mackenzie," said Frederic, rising to take leave, " therefore I will not detain you from your breakfast." " Will you stay and partake of it with me ?' asked Edward, in a conciliating tone. " Mr Lindsay will be happy to see you ; vol. m. h or.
or, if you like, I will order Oliver to bring our coffee into my painting-room." " I should be glad to see Mr. Lindsay," replied Frederic, " but I fear the sight of me would give rise to painful reflections, connected with his daughter; therefore I must decline your invitation. Charles has written to his father, beseeching him to for¬ give his conduct, and to attribute it to any thing but a disregard of his anger. My father read us the letter and his own an¬ swer. The last was short and sufficiently cutting. He alluded most strongly to the unfeeling indelicacy of Clara in quitting her dying mother ; * but/ said he, t as I ieei convinced that her fault, like your own, will bring with it its own punish¬ ment, I will not add to the keenness of your feelings by closing my doors against your approach. They shall be open to re¬ ceive you, Charles; but the reception which your wife may experience from my family will entirely depend on her own good con- duet
duct. May the virtues of the wife atone, if possible, for the failings ofthe daughter !' Such were the words of my father ; how they will be relished by my mad-brained brother and his heartless wife, I know not; but of this lam assured, that if she has the impudence to accompany Charles in his visit to our house, she will not wish to en¬ ter it a second time, for my mother is re¬ solved to express in the strongest terms her disapprobation of the past." " If so," said Edward, " it is not very probable that she will attempt a reconci¬ liation a second time, unless her husband may possess more power over her than any other being ever did. Poor Mr. Lindsay continues deeply affected by her cruel de¬ sertion, and, unless some change takes place to remove him to a different scene, I fear that he will not long survive his wife. He remains inexorable, as to seeing or rc ceiving any com munication from his daugh¬ ter, andali the hope I now have is, that his uncle in Ireland may invite him to pass the h 2 summer
summer at his estate, where the convivial disposition and known hospitality of the Irish families may contribute to divert his mind from tbe painful subject of Clara's unnatural elopement. I have wished, for this fortnight past, to take a hasty journey down to Monmouthshire, but my reluct¬ ance to leaving him alone has prevented mc." " And what, Mackenzie, can possibly call you into Monmouthshire?" inquired Frederic. tí I never heard you mention that you had friends in that county." u Have you then forgotten," said Ed¬ ward, " what 1 told you respecting the so¬ lemn request of the young son of the mar¬ chioness of Anendale, which was that I should, in case of his death, convey to his sister, lady Elinor, a lock of his hair, which he gave to me for that purpose? I should have fulfilled my promise before now, but for the reason I have just stated." " Lady Elinor is my second cousin, I believe," said Frederic. " I have heard much
much of the beauty and grace of her mo¬ ther, and I feel some curiosity to learn whe¬ ther her daughter is equally attractive ; but I am not likely to have it gratified, as I find tbat, although she is nearly seven¬ teen, she is not to be introduced until the winter after next. There is a degree of cruelty in thus keeping lady Elinor se¬ cluded in an old Gothic mansion, with no other society tban her governess, which gives me a very unfavourable opinion of the maternal aifection of lady Anendale ; and I should enjoy nothing more, my dear Edward, than accompanying you in your journey, that I might have an opportunity of seeing this poor neglected girl, wdth whom my heart claimed kindred the mo¬ ment you told me of her situation, as it was described to you by her affectionate little brother." Edward was overjoyed at the proposal of Frederic, and promised, if possible, to take the journey in the course of the en¬ suing week, could he but be certain that ? 3 Mr.
Mr. Lindsay would not materially feel the loss of bis society. " If we travel post," said Frederic, " we can be there and back again in iess than three days. I never felt so great an eager¬ ness to behold any human being as I now do to see lady Elinor. Poor girl ! what a shame to immure her within the walls of an old gloomy castle, and at an age when other young women are privileged to <en~ joy all the gaieties of life. It would be capital sport to cheat the vigilance of her mother, and run away with tbe girl whom she is pleased to consider as yet too young to mix with the world. I rather suspect that the marchioness is apprehensive lest the beauty of the daughter should eclipse the fading charms of the mother." u Stay till you have seen the marchio¬ ness of Anendale," said Edward, with a sigh which he could not repras ; *' and then, Frederic, yon will blu$h at having called those beauties ftded which are even now at the height of their attractive love¬ liness.
liness. Lady Ehnor may be handsome, but she can never equal, much less eclipse her mother." Frederic looked intently in the face of Edward, which immediately became of a deeper crimson.—" We shall see, my friend," he exclaimed s H and I trust see shortly, the pretensions of lady Elinor to rival her mother. I must contrive to catch a glimpse of the marchioness when she re¬ turns to England." *' Then you will think as I do," replied Edward. " 1 am not quite sure that I shall think as warmly as you do, Mackenzie," said Frederic, archly ; " but, at all events, hurry your journey as much as possible, for I am dying to assure lady Elinor of my kind wishes for her emancipation from her pri¬ son-house." He now took leave of Edtvard, who de¬ scended to the apartment of Mr. Lindsay. The father of Clara had been up several hours, but he would not surfer Edward to h 4 be
be disturbed, as he concluded it was morn¬ ing before he returned from lady James Osborne's. He therefore breakfasted alone, Mary Mackenzie being engaged with her mother in arranging the different fruits, placing flowers between them, that they might appear to the best advantage. When Edward entered their little draw¬ ing-room, Mr. Lindsay inquired if he had been amused wdth his evening's entertain¬ ment, and listened with much seeming attention to Edward's lively description of what had passed ; yet, at the mention of the name of Manningham, a sigh es¬ caped him, as it brought to his recollec¬ tion the child who had so cruelly deserted him, Λν1?6η he stood most in need of her consolation and support. During this conversation, Edward con¬ trived to introduce the subject of his pro¬ mise to the young earl, and his otvn wish that he might be enabled to perform it be¬ fore the return of the marchioness to Eng¬ land. Mr
Mr. Lindsay, who always considered a promise to be sacred, instantly advised him to take the earliest opportunity of visiting Monmouthshire, lest any unfore¬ seen accident might delay or prevent his seeing lady Elinor. Edward thus advised, agreed to leave town in the course of a week, during which time he should finish a picture which he had nearly executed for a friend of sir Joseph Rennie's, from the profits of which he intended to remit to Mr. Cur¬ wen the ten pounds he had advanced him. Remembering his engagement to call on lord George------, Edward, who knew that the best part of the day would be gone before he could return home, resolved to pay several necessary visits, in order that his hours of study might not be broken into the ensuing week. He therefore proceeded to the mansion oí the duke of ------, in St. James's-square, where he was evidently expected by the porter, who seemed acquainted with his name. Four h 5 servants
servants, in dashing liveries, were standing idle in the hall, one of whom inhered Edward into a magnificent apartment, where lord George and bis sister welcomed his arrival, the former wdth an e&tended hand, and the latter with the sweetest smiles which she could command. Lord George asked a few questions re¬ lative to the weather, and other common¬ place topics of conversation, and then left his sister to entertain his visitor, while he entertained himself with a couple of large spaniel dogs, who lay on each side of him, on a beautiful couch, richjy carved, and supported by gilt figures. Lady Jane, however, seemed not to be in want of ber brother's assistance. She had a tolerable knowledge of sdl tbe new publications,, at least of poetry, plays, and novels, which constitute thç chief of a lady's library. Then she endeavoured to find out the kind of music most liked by Edward, who was a passionate admirer 0 f the harp, upon, which she flayed with superior
superior skill; and upon learning which was his favourite instrument, lady Jane purposely inquired if he had heard a new song, naming one, which Edward request¬ ed her to favour him with. Lady Jane cheerfully complied, and placing herself so as to shew the graceful contour ofher form, she sang, in a fine me¬ lodious voice, the following words, while her eyes betrayed to the attentive Edward, that her heart was no stranger to the pas¬ sion which her tongue described : SONG. " 'Tis hurd, when summer clothes tike year In natuie's gayest dress, The vigorous morn of life to wear í« study's dull recess 'Tis hard, with an indignant breast, Betray'd by secret wiles, To meet the spoiler of its rest, And deck the brow in smiles. But, oh ! 'tis harder to conceal A lovets pregnant sigh ; And what the secret heurt doth feci, To bid the cheek deny."
η 6 Edward
Edward was charmed, and lady Jane was perfectly satisfied with the demonstra¬ tions of his approbation. She invited him to accompany her to the opera, saying, that she w r as engaged to call for the Manninghams that evening, and if he liked, her carriage should stop and take him up. Edward coloured as he remembered thdt his lodgings were not in a part of the town sufficiently fashionable to admit of a duke's carriage stopping at his door ; he there¬ fore declined this last mark of her conde¬ scension, promising tojóin herat the opera- house. They w r ere now interrupted by the en¬ trance of the duke, to whom lady Jane immediately introduced Edward, as a par¬ ticular friend of her brother George. His grace received him with courtly politeness, and upon learning his talent for painting, good-naturedly offered to shew him the few pictures which his town- house contained, an offer highly gratify¬ ing
ing to Edward, who thus obtained a sight of some of the finest productions of foreign art. On taking leave, lady Jane reminded him of his engagement for the evening ; and lord George now thought proper to second the wishes of his sister, by saying that he hoped Edward would not forget to join them, for that he knew that his presence would be a most agreeable sur¬ prise to his very dear friend Frederic Man¬ ningham. " So, if you see Frederic," said ford George, " don't tell him that you are to have a seat in our box, or don't say that you will be there at all. That will be the best, won't it, Jane ?" " If you wish to surprise Mr. Manning¬ ham, it certainly will," replied her ladyship, smiling expressively on Edward, who now took leave, and proceeded to make the different calls which he had intended. Sir Joseph Rennie was not forgotten. He wa?
was at home, and sincerely glad to see that his young friend had returned to town. Almost his first inquiry was, if he had changed his opinion of the marchioness of Anendale ? to which Edward replied, that he feared she was not quite as faultless as he had hoped. Sir Joseph then asked for his address, and upon receiving it, remarked that Ed¬ ward must remove to a more fashionable part of the town, as it was necessary that his residence should be such as would al¬ low of his receiving visitors of rank, who might wish to converse with him upon the subject of any picture they might choose him to execute. Edward saw in an instant the propriety of sir Joseph's observation, and, much as he regretted being obliged to leave the friendly Mrs. Alexander Mackenzie, yet he acknowledged that his future prospects required that in this case he should sacri¬ fice inclination to interest. He therefore promised
promised sir Joseph to remove almost im¬ mediately, while the former appointed him to dine with him the next day, that he might meet a gentleman who had ex¬ pressed a desire to see him, in order that he might explain to him the subject of a picture which he wished to have painted for his own private chapel. The heart of Edward now glowed with the warmest gen sation s of pleasure, at the prospect of a work which would add so considerably to his finances, as well as in¬ crease his growing fame. By this he should be enabled to retain in his service the wor¬ thy Oliver, and to procure additional com- fqrtø for Mr. Lindsay. Smartening the rest of his visits, he hwrriyed back to impart the pleasing intel¬ ligence of his unexpected good fortune, which gave the purest satisfaction to his melancholy friend, and which nearly drove poor Oliver out of his senses. So great was his joy, upon learning that he was not to be dismissed by Edward, that he actually wept
wept like a child, and it was several hours before he could talk rationally to the mas¬ ter whom he so dearly loved, and who could not help being sensibly affected him¬ self at the proofs of an attachment at once disinterested and tender.
CHAPTER IX. Edward was in high spirits, and his ani¬ mated features expressed the delighted state of his feelings when he entered the box of the duke of ——, at the opera- house. The Manninghams, with lord George and his sister, were already there : a glance from the eyes ofthe latter directed Edward to take his station behind the chair of lady Jane, who, nodding to him familiarly, said, in a loud wdiisper, that she was half inclined to quarrel with him for bemg so late. Edward
Edward bent over to make his peace with her ladyship, and a smile quickly proclaimed that her anger was of short duration. Lord George pleased himself with ΛνίΙ- nessing the agreeable surprise of Frederic, on the appearance of his friend.—»** Ah, I knew that you would be glad to see him," said his lordship ; " so I told him not to say a word about his being engaged to meet Jane at the opera to-night." " I am always happy to see Mackenzie in all places, and at ail times," replied Frederic ; " therefore, my lord, I can say with sincerity, that you have obliged me by inviting him to meet us here." " Oh, don't thank me," exclaimed his lordship, loud enough for Flora to hear ; " it was not I, but Jane, tvho invited Mr. Mackenzie—not but that I like him very much, oniy I did not think of telling him, as she did, that he was Λνβίοοιηβ to a seat in our box as often as he pleased. Jane is wonderfully taken with him; and upon my
my soul, I must say that he is a fine fel¬ low, and deserve^ to be made a duke." * 4 He is in a fair way to raise himself," whispered Frederic, leaning over Flora as he spoke. " I think that lady Jane has both sense and discernment to reward the talents of my friend : but what will the duke say to his daughter's choice?" " Jane is her own mistress," replied lord George, " and will not couoult any one upon that subject. My father knows her temper, and never opposes her; and for my part, she is so completely my master, that I never venture to contradict her in any thing." Flora, pale as the first timid flower of spring, scarce breathed during this impor¬ tant dialogue between herbrother and her acknowledged lover. Her heart throbbed with convulsive motion, as she turned her modest eyes towards Edward and his noble enslaver. A smile of seeming happiness played round his mouth, and rendered his features doubly handsome. His graceful body,
body, half bent to catch the flattering praise which lady Jane was repeating to him, word for word as it came from the lips of lady James Osborne, who had call¬ ed that morning soon after his departure, and to whom she was engaged that night to return home to supper. The box of lady James was nearly oppo¬ site to that of the duke. Her ladyship was absent, but her daughters and Mr. Colvill were there ; and Flora had observ¬ ed, with some degree of surprise, that tbe attention of their uncle, instead of being directed to tbe performance, was wholly taken up by watching the movements of Edward and lady Jane. Flora sighed, as she felt convinced that Mr. Colvills ideas were similar to her own.—" He has observed, and therefore knows more of tbe world than I do," thought Flora, " and it is evident that he considers them as attached to each other. Why should I wish to mar the brilliant prospects of my dear brother's friend-—I, whom
whom my parents have destined for an¬ other?" Flora turned her mild eyes towards lord George ; a tear rushed into each—a blush of conscious secret shame, the shame of jarring feelings, oí contending duties, tinged the fair cheek of Flora. A look from her mother heightened the glow.— " 1 yield to my fate," thought Flora, " and if it wdn s me to be miserable, I shall at least have the consolation of knowing that I have obeyed the wishes of those who gave me being—that I have fulfilled their hopes, though I shall annihilate my own." Edward, though the chief of his atten¬ tion was engrossed by lady Jane, found lei¬ sure to impart to Frederic the joyful intel¬ ligence, that he should be at liberty to gra¬ tify his desires early the next week, a piece of news which gave great satisfaction to his impatient friend, who actually felt rest¬ less and uneasy to behold his fair relation. Edward had likewise encountered fre¬ quently the gaze of Mr. Colvill ; and he could
could not avoid feeling some degree of curiosity to learn the reason why he so evidently watched all his movements, when his attention ought naturally to be directed towards the representation, which was one of the most celebrated of the Ita¬ lian operas. In any other person this con¬ duct he would have deemed impertinent, but Edward felt a respect, as well as an earnest desire to gain the esteem of lady Osborne's melancholy brother, which pre¬ vented his being offended by a scrutiny that appeared more singular than offensive. Edward also twice attempted to draw Flora Manningham into conversation, but she seemed s ? painfully reserved, so strange¬ ly shy of replying to his questions, that he gave up all hope of hearing fall from her lips that night any other words than a few monosyllables, uttered in so low and falter¬ ing a tone, that Edward's quick and atten¬ tive ear could scarcely catch the sounds as they murmuring passed.—"Ah," thought Edward, " she no longer feels that tender friendship
friendship which every look and word used formerly to evince. Flora of the Hall, and Flora of London, are two distinct beings. The splendour of a coronet, the prospect of a ducal alliance, has more charms for Flora now than the pleasing recollections of our early years. I am too humbly born, too poorly fortuned, to be an object of consideration in the dazzled eyes of Flora. Yet, humble as are my connexions; poor as are my fortunes, the high-souled daughter of a> duke does not disdain to court my smiles* to seek my friendship, and to honouT me with her good opinion." Edward withdrow 1?> eyes from the bashful blushing, Florai and*turning them. quickly on lady Jane,, tvho at that instant ' touched his arm with her fan* ite felt all the warm gratitude of his nature called into action, as he contrastei the different manners of hi$ noble admirer with,, those of the altered and repulsive Efora- Ed¬ tvard,, with a glowing countenance,, and eyes plainly expressive ofhis feelings, press¬ ed
ed the soft unreluctant hand of lady Jane within* hiS'Owni " You will accompany me and George to lady James's supper-party ?" said she, in a voice of tenderness which soothed the mortified pride of Edward. " I know, Mackenzie, that you will always be a wel¬ come guest at her table." " I can refuse your ladyship nothing," said Edward expressively, w and shall think myself too happy in being allowed to accompany you." At that moment Edward caught the in¬ quiring eye of Mr. Colvill, fixed intently on himself He knew not why, but he felt his colour deepen, and an awkward sensation pervaded his frame. Lady Jane addressed him,,and again he listened, again he smiled; but still the effect remained of Mr. Col- vills inquiring glance. At,the conclusion of the opera, tlie Miss Osbornes and their uncle came round to the duke's box, and endeavoured to per¬ suade ladyjManningham.to return and sup with
with their mother ; but this her ladyship declined, pleading herself already engaged to look in at another fashionable rout in Bruton-street. " And are you also engaged, Mr. Mac¬ kenzie ?" said Miss Osborne. Before Edward could reply, lady Jane said—" I can answer, Maria, for Mr. Mac¬ kenzie, since, relying upon your mother's esteem for him, I have engaged him to accompany me to Osborne House, where I am confident he will be received as a welcome visitor." " Your ladyship seems to have formed a proper estimate of our kind feelings to¬ tvards Mr. Mackenzie," replied Mr. Colvill. Then turning to Edward, and offering him his hand—" I feel," said he, " greatly indebted to lady Jane for the opportunity she has thus given me of seeing you again. Before we part, let me have your address* that I may call on you." The servants now came to announce that the carriages ??^??? waiting. Lord George
George conducted Flora to that of her fa¬ ther, while Frederic, presenting his arm to lady Manningham, whispered to Ed¬ ward that he would see him to-mor¬ row. His friend had only time to reply that he should be at home tbe whole of the day, when lady Jane motioned to leave the box, and Edward felt himself called upon to hand her to her carriage, though Mr. Colvill was evidently on the point of offer¬ ing his assistance. He smiled good-natur¬ edly, though faintly, as her ladyship took the arm of Edward, saying, as she passed — ít I must not complain, lady Jane, at your preferring a younger arm than mine ; Mr. Mackenzie has a prior claim to the honour of your attention." " Another time, Mr. Colvill," replied lady Jane, " and I shall feel myself highly honoured by engrossing yours." They wcre now met on the stairs by lord George, wdth whom they immediate* ly proceeded to the duke's carriage, while vol, πι. ι Mr,
Mr. ColviU led his nieces to that of lady James, In a fewTnimites the party stopped at Os¬ borne House, where the flattering kindness of its amiable owner soon convinced Ed¬ ward that he w r as indeed a welcome visitor. Her ladyship now introduced him for the first time to her husband, who had arrived that morning from Ireland, and who appeared equally disposed as her lady¬ ship to pay the homage which is ever due to exalted merit and superior talent. Edward was charmed with the affabili¬ ty and good-humoured pleasantry of his lordship, who, on his part, had not his duty to his guests prevented him, would have conversed the chief of the evening with our young artist, while the sweetly benevolent countenance of lady James ex¬ pressed her delight at seeing the perfect coincidence which there appeared to be between her lord's feelings and her own. '* How is it, dearest Richard," said her ladyship, " tbat Osborne has entered more warmly
warmly into my sentiments than you? See with wdiat willingness he gives credit to my character of young Mackenzie : it was but this instant that he told me that he thought his resemblance to you became more striking the more he conversed with him, anel that he tvas determined to exert all his interest to bring him forward in his profession. I have not heard half as much from you, my dear brother, and yet it is not your general conduct to act so tamely, when 7" feel so warmly." " I am not what I zvas," said Mr. Col¬ vill, pensively. ít For once, beloved Ma¬ ria, you are deceived in the sentiments which your young friend has excited; they are such as I dare not gh-e way to, lest I jshould be again deceived—again made ????1??^. But tell me tvhat you wish me to do for him, Maria: shall I adopt him as my own ?" ** If your heart can love him as you would do your own son, if you had one, I say yes, my brother. I will be the pledge ι 2 ior
for Mackenzie's being worthy of such an election. He will no more deceive nie than you have done, my Richard.'' Mr. Colvill gave a sudden start; then as suddenly recovering himself, he said— " Generous, noble Maria, thus to plead against the interests of your own children, in favour of one whose chief merit, in your .eyes, is his imaginary resemblance to your brother! Imaginary it must indeed be, my love, for who but yourself or the wor¬ thy Osborne could compare the fire and brilliancy of Mackenzie's ejes wdth the faded melancholy hue of mine? The fine regularity of bis features, but above all, his smile·—his to me magic smile, destroys at once the fancied likeness." " Ah, Richard !" exclaimed lady James, in a voice of tender recollection—" ah, Richard, it is not what you are, Lut what you were at his age, that forms the re¬ semblance between Mackenzie and your¬ self. Affliction may have damped the once· dazzling brilham y of your eyes, but the
the colour and the expression of the hearts tenderest feelings are the same. The tvarm sunny glow of health and joy tinge the features of my favourite, while yours are pale, my brother, not from age, but from sorrotv concealed. Yet the form of Ids face, and tbe general resemblance, has struck more than Osborne and myself. His pliant figure, his easy graceful move¬ ment, liis laugh, his voice-—all, all are like what you, my Richard, were tvhen you left England nineteen years ago." Mr. Colvill mused for a moment, then hastily exclaimed—" And tvherefore this resemblance, Maria? What do you infer from it?"—A smile of bitterness, of sup¬ pressed agony, passed over his features— *· There are enough, my sister, to vouch that Mackenzie is no relation to my fa¬ mily." Edward at that instant came up to them.—- u I fear that I intrude," said he, respectfully bowing to lady James ; " but Miss «Osborne requested me far in form your ι 3 ladyship
ladyship that your presence is wanting in the second card-room." *' Y')U can never be considered in the light of an intruder," replied lady James, rising and offering him her place, which he immediately occupied. tí In this in¬ stance you have the power oí obliging me," continued her ladyship, il by en- deavouring to divert the mind of my dear brother, tvho feels but little amusement in scenes like the present." " I shail indeed feel proudly happy," said Edward, " if through me Mr. Colvill can receive any gratification, hotvever slight it may be." * t You are too good, Mr. Mackenzie," replied the brother of lady James, at the same time pressing his hand, " thus volun¬ tarily to devote to one who is half a mis- suthiope those moments which might be rendered precious if passed in the society of another: but 1 tvill not waste them in giving you cause to regret your good-na¬ ture, by reverti up; to liie subject of my own
*>vvn privale misfortunes. ]My sister, who is ene of the best of human beings, has im¬ parted to me the lively interest tvhich sb.e feels for your welfare, My feelings are in unison with her own. It may be in my power to serve you, Mr, Mackenzie, in yenir professional capacity ; but as this is n "ther a proper time nor place for serious toiiununications, if you wiil allow mc, I will call some morning at your lodgings : ï should like to take a peep into your painting-room ; or, if you prefer it, tvill y Oti inane a day when yon can come ami breakfast with mc ? At present I am with lady James Osborne." Edward presented Mr. Colvill with a tfard ofhis address, saying at the same time, that he shouki remove in the course of a week or ten days to a more convenient t art of the town ; but that he should be happy to see Mr. Colvill any morning v\hcn it was convenient, o* to wait upon him at Osborne Iiouse. " Tlien 1 will call on you to-morrow," ι 4> .said
said Mr. Coivi]], looking at tbe card as he ?????, " for I have not yet been so fortu¬ nate as to gain a sight of any of your pro¬ ductions." He now purposely changed the conversation to another subject, until he led to that which lie conceived to be nearest to the heart of Edward, lie t poke oí" lad} Jane, end the nobleners of Ler con¬ nexions aiid the greatness ofher family's mierest* but the cheek of Edward did not asunut α deeper hue at the mention ofher DiUiic. kir he at that moment had for¬ gotten the inquiring glances ofthe speaker directed to himself at the opera house ; and thus, from the steadiness of his look aud manner, Mr. Colvill was at a Ws to decide iiow far his feelings wcre engaged ui the cause of lady Jane. Tliey were now interrupted, and Mr. Colvill, from necessity, postponed until another opportunity the scrutiny lie meant to make-—a scrutiny wdiich, in any other person, ^ould hive been grossly indelicate, but which ii> him, situated as he ???, and under
under the influence of the most generous and noble sentiments, and guided by the purest motives of regard for Edward, and tenderness for his favourite sister lady James, conld not be called indelicate or prying. It ???? necessary that he should ascertain the fact of Edward's disengaged affections before he could bring about the plan he meditated for his future good. From the first time of Mr. Colvills in¬ troduction to Edward, and his perfect knowledge of the partiality which lady James entertained for him,-this plan had occupied the chief of his leisure reflections. He was in fact more warmly interested in the fate of Edward than he chose to ac¬ knowledge, lest, after the severe disap¬ pointment which he had met wdth at his first entrance into the world, he might be accused of rashness and inexperience, iu t Ims hastily adopting the opinions and sen-* timents oí' a warm-hearted and romantic woman. Mr. Colvill had no sooner beheld the ob- i 5 ject
ject of his sistets eulogiums, than his heart did justice to her pra : se, and, in spite of its early misfortunes, expanded towards Ed¬ ward with a kindness equal ίο her own. With his usual quickness of decision, he instantly formed the plan of seconding the wishes of lady James, by promoting the fortunes of her favourite. He imagined that he perceived in his youngest niece, Olivia, a secret inclination towards Edward, which he v/as confident lady James would not dis¬ approve; and it was therefore his inten¬ tion, in case of a mutual inclination being discovered in Edward, to bestow on the young couple a considerable share of his large fortune, with this proviso, that Ed¬ ward sliould take his name. By this means lie ivould amply provide for the eleve of his sister without injuring her daughters, ai.d perpetuate his name, wdiich might otherwise become extinct, as liis only sur¬ viving brother had no male heir to inherit his property. Mr. Colvill, however, felt that his plan
was uncertain, and that its accomplish¬ ment w r as rendered doubtful by the prefer¬ ence wdiich lady Jane------so evidently betrayed fbr Edward. He had watched, with an anxiety somewhat painful, the con¬ duct of Edward towards her ladyship at the opera house ; yet still he remained uncertain what construction to put upon the looks and manners of our young artist,, as both might be influenced by the pride of grati fied van ity, and by tbe consciousness of knowing that he was an object of im¬ portance in the eyes of a handsome girl, so nobly connected as lady Jane. Before,. therefore, Mr. Colvill imparted his plan to lady James, he was desirous of learning its practicability ; and of gaining the ne¬ cessary information, if possible, from Ed¬ ward's self, whether it was gratitude or love that attached him to lady Jane------. To obtain so delicate a piece of informa¬ tion, was now the chief consideration of Mr. Colvill ; yet his knowdedge of Edward was slight, and the confidence he wished 1 6 was
was only the reward of long-tried friend¬ ship. However, tiie attempt must be made; and with this view he inquired his address, resolving to gain his good opinion and esteem, as the first step towards merit¬ ing his confidence. Accordingly, the next d<*y, Mr. Colvill called at the lodgings of Edward, and found him en raffed in his painting-room, adding the last touches to a picture of considerable merit. Struck with the beauty of the perform¬ ance, Mr. Colvill expressed his admiration in terms highly gratifying to the artist, wdio displayed a modesty so unusual, yet •so pleasing, that it enhanced tlie value of his work, stamping it with double worth in the eyes of Mr. Colvill, who inquired when he should be at leisure to begin a series oí pictures from sketches whicb he had him¬ self taken, and brought over with him, of Indian scenery, u I Intend," said Mr. Colvill, " as soon 4 >s î ??? find a bouse to suit my taste, to ull up one suite of apartments in the In-
dian costume ; you Λν?Ι therefore oblige me by calling when you have time, and then you can examine the drawings, wdiich I am anxious to have copied, if possible, under my own direction, as the hints and descriptions which I shall be enabled to give yon will greatly assist your compre¬ hension of my own views. As I shall, therefore, engross a large proportion of your time, Mr. jMaekenzie, and prevent your undertaking any other work of con¬ sequence, you must allow me to set a value upon both your time and occupation, asin this instance I believe that I am a better judge than yourself," •'I shall be perfectly satisfied, sir," said Edward, " to leave what you mention en¬ tirely to yourself; while on my part I shall be more than repaid, if I am so fortunate asto answer your expectations." He then informed him of his engage¬ ment to dine the next day with sir Joseph Rennie, wdio was at tlie same to introduce iiim to a gentleman, to whom sir Joseph had
had partly promised that he should paint an altar-piece for his private chapel ; "but," said Edward, " I tvill endeavour to de¬ cline the tvork if I can, that I may be wholly at liberty to devote all my atten¬ tion to tbe subject of your sketches/' "I thank you," replied Mr. Colvill, "and shall consider myself as obliged by your undertaking them as soon as possible—not that I mean to fag you to death," added he, smilingly, " only that I shall feel at case respecting them, as soon as I shall know that yon have begun them ; anel as there are eight views, it may not be amiss, Mr. Mackenzie, if I just mention to you, that I have valued the time and trouble of their execution at tw T o thousand guineas, a sum which may fall short of their merits, but which may act as a stimulus to so young a man as yourself, particularly as İt may only be the forerunner of a nobler recompence, should your circumstances al¬ low of the fulfilment of my hopes. Do not pain me, my dear Mr. Mackenzie, by any expression
expression of thanks. I am interested, warmly interested in your concerns. My sister's friendly sentiments you are already acquainted wdth; they alone would in¬ fluence my feelings and actions, but you possess a stronger, a more irresistible claim to my regard than even her tender recom¬ mendation—a claim of which she is whoiiy icmorant. Dear as she is, and ever has been to my soul, yet there are some cir¬ cumstances relative to my early disappoint¬ ments, which I neither could nor wotdd impart to her." Mr. Colvill looked greatly agitated ; he took the hand of Edward, tvho evidently sympathized in his feelings, although igno¬ rant of the cause ???1?? occasioned his emotion.—" [Mackenzie, we must be bet¬ ter acquainted," said Mr. Colvill, trying to recover his self-command. " You have the power—yes, I feel that you alone pos¬ sess the power of sweetening the remain¬ der of my existence, and of rendering life still tvorthy of preserving." " Only
AN ANGELS FORM " Only tell me //ore," exclaimed Ed¬ ward, as he warmly pressed the hmd *hat grasped his own, " only tell me hoa\ and I shall deem myself blest indeed, my dear sir, if through me you can receive one mo¬ ments happiness. Oh, do not doubt my sincerity! I am young—I am inexperi¬ enced, but I am capable of proving to wdiat extent a grateful mind and an affec¬ tionate heart can go." ik I will not doubt von. Mackenzie," said Mr. Colvill, in an agitated voice, although fate should doom me to a second disap¬ pointment, where my heart had placed its fondest hopes. No, Mackenzie, I will not doubt you ; I will believe, that although you are young, perhaps ambitious, perhaps even thoughtless, as youth too frequently is, yet 1 will believe, Mackenzie, that you are sincere in your present ieelings, and that you will bo equally sincere in your affection—I will believe this, because you are not a woman." Mr. Cob ill leaned against the shoulder of
of Edward for support, who was scarcely less agitated than himself. At length he recovered bis composure.—" Forgive me, my dear Mackenzie," said he, tenderly re« garding his expressive countenance; " I have suffered myself to be surprised Into a weakness of which I feci myself ashamed ; but I trust to your honour to hold my sorrows sacred. When shall I sec von ?" Edward replied that he would call at Osborne House after he quitted sir Joseph Hennie, if Mr. Colvill was disengaged. ei Do so, my young friend," said Mr. Colvill, " fori shall be at home, and alone." He then took a hasty leave of Edward, who silently followed him to his carriage, which was waiting at the door oí Mrs, Λ lex ander Mackenzie.
CHAP-
CHAPTER X. ??? \ isit of Mr. Colvill gave rise to a tram of netv ideas i ri the mind of Edward. How could he possibly account for the mysteri¬ ous agitation lie hael betrayed, or for the etjually mysterious confession whieh bad escaped the lips of Mr. Colvill during that agitation ? What claim could the^ son of Alice JMaekenzie have upon the good offices and friendly sentiments of the brother of ladv James Osborne ? Edward recollected that his mother had said that he was hke his father: perhaps that father, tvhose name she so sacredly concealed, was a door-loved friend, or near relation of Mr, Colvill ; perliaps—but hotv fruitless wcre his suppositions, how vain his conjectures, unless indeed that he could obtain the long-tt ished for knowledge of who was his
his real father ! That alone appeared want¬ ing to unravel all the mystery of ids birth, the agitation of Mr. Colvill, and the flat¬ tering kindness of lady James Oobornc, as well as the sudden paleness of the beauti¬ ful marchioness upon his first introduction toher. But what could explain the na¬ ture and the cause of his own feeliim's—■ tender, enthubiabtic, and conquering his better judgment, wdiich vainly combatted against the force and power of lady Anen- dale's influence over his senses? This was a subject on wdiich Edward could form no decided opinion. The more he reflected on it, the more he grew be- wildered, impatient, and unhappy; and, had not his ideas of filial duty and obedi¬ ence been as strong as his filial affection, lie would have accused his mother of in¬ justice, and useless caution in thus long withholding from him the secret of his birth : but the gratelul tenderness of Ed¬ ward's heart, and the pliant yieldingness of his disposition, made him conform to tiie wdbhes
wishes of his mother, and even form ex¬ cuses for a taciturnity which ¿rave him ihe most poignant uneasiness.—" Λ day must eome," thought he, ** when caution and concealment will no longor be necessary. It is the duty of a child lo await with pa¬ tience the tvill and pleasure of a parent/" Sueh tvere the sentiments of our young hero; yet, much as has been said, and 1, much as Iras been tt ritten, concerning temali: curiosity, not one of the most curious of that curious sex ever longed ì Iliire ardently to become master of a se¬ cret, Ihun did Eelward to attain the know¬ ledge of who tvas his father. Dcarlv as ? » heloved c.nd t enera teel the memory ot his adopted parent, the kind, the good, tho ail' etionale Mackenzie, still he had a de¬ cided objoefion to pasbing through hte as 1 is son, not because that tvorthy and in¬ estimable ??? had attainexl no higher rank in the army than that of a lieutenant, but "Dccause lui w ard hatí d evert specie ? of de¬ ception, and felt the most mieoutpierable avei sion
aversion to giving utterance to a wilful falsehood. The more he mixed in society, the more reluctance he felt in appearing under a false name, tvhich frequently gave rise fo un¬ meaning questions concerning his con¬ nexions and relatives, whicli he answereel tvith mingled pain and confusion. Wliat connexions, what relatives had he to boast of? The humbleness of his mothers ori¬ gin, though it could not weaken his filial love, nevertheless brought the blush of wounded pride on Ids cheelv, as experience taught him tiie daily lesson, that appear- nuces are ctery thing in ? -tliat is called the tvoRLD, and that mam of his titleel and tvealthy acquaintances wouid change the smile of admiration to the sneer of contempt, tvere they to learn that the ob¬ ject of their notice was the son of Alice, the humble attendant ofthe marchioness of Alleluiale —nay, the marchioness herself, so .at least he was taught to believe, woukl in úut
that case become his persecutor—his dead¬ ly enemy. Singular as it may appear, yet this strange avotval ofhis mother had no potver to abate the romantic idolatry of the en¬ thusiast Edward. His sudden and mys¬ terious affection for the marchioness was proof against every thing but her own bar¬ barity ; and his heart, tvhich was fearless of personal danger, was still open to the genuine emotions of pity, compassion, and well-grounded, though short-lived resent¬ ment. To him, tvho sacredlv revered all the claims of kindred and friends, the cruel and u ufeminine counsel of lady An¬ endale to his mother appeared so unnatural, so barbarous, that in the first impulse of his horror anel his anger, he believed it im¬ possible that he shouki ever bring himself to look on her again, or listen with com¬ posure to the sound of her name. Eut time convinced him that the emotiems oí anger are transient in some bosoms, and that
that his was among thenumber wdio warm¬ ly icei 9 and wdio as quickly forgive an in¬ jury, when it is a personal one. If the blush of pride too often heighten¬ ed the glow upon the check of Edward at the recollection of his mother's origin, it 4vas not lessened by the remembrance of her daughter. It is true that he had a sister, and that that sister was the child of him who w r as one of the kindest, best of human beings. Yet this sister had never sent to him the slightest token of acknowl¬ edgment, had never written to him, or, as he had heard, ever expressed the remotest Avish to begin a correspondence, or to re¬ ceive from him the assurances of his frater¬ nal regard. This cold and heartless conduct, from one whom Edward felt inclined to love with all the tenderness of brotherly affec¬ tion, pained him deeply. The child of serjeant Mackenzie, independent of any daim of relationship, could not fail of being adored
adon d by the gratefid son of his adoption ; and Edward had often sighed to behold her, had often longed to embrace her, but in this he w r as also doomed to be severelv disappointed. Since his mother's return to Scotland, Edward had more than once urged his wish of being permitted to see Janet Mac¬ kenzie ; but his mother always frnmed some fresh excuse to delay his journey» as well as to account for the silence of Janet, who sbe said was not allowed to answer his let¬ ters, hcr aunt having expressed her dis- like to her corresponding with herbrother, lest her thoughts and affections shouki be too much engrossed, and diverted from the objects ofher aunt's family. Edward could hardly repress his indig¬ nation at this selfish and narrow-minded caution of Mrs. Cameron ; yet, as his sister had been reared under her roof, and edu¬ cated by her at a great expence, he re¬ strained his feelings, lest they should in¬ jure
jure the future prospects of Janet, whom he considered to be domesticated for life in the family of her aunt. Mrs. Mackenzie, who, at the request of Edward, WTote constantly to assure him of her welfare, now appeared to have be¬ come tolerably reconciled to the estrange¬ ment of her daughter's affections. She seemed to have placed her own upon the eldest Miss Cameron, a girl of seventeen, and whose attention and tenderness pro¬ mised to make amends for the want of filial love in lier own child. Her first letter to Edward, after her re¬ turn to the residence of Mrs. Cameron, contained a fear that her daughter was se¬ cretly averse to the proposed union wdth her cousin, Colin Cameron ; but the next letter which Edward received tranquillized his mind on this point, and assured him that his mother had been deceived, and that bis sister had no objection to the match. " From her childhood," said Mrs. Mac- VOL. IIL K kc>i3Ìo #
ken zi e, " she has been considered as one of the Camerons. Her first affections were taught to fix on the objects by whicb she was continually surrounded. It would be therefore a pity to disturb the long- formed plans of her aunt, or to attempt to divide the mind of Janet between the friends of her infancy and the brother whom she has never seen since a baby, and whose name she has never heard men¬ tioned by any of the Cameron family. I must content myself, therefore, dear Ed¬ ward, to relinquish my claim to the heart of m}" daughter, and turn for comfort and consolation to you, and to my eldest niece, Janet Cameron. This warm-hearted girl, who is about the same age as my own Janet, loves me with a degree of tender¬ ness which reminds me of yourself. She is what I think you woukl call handsome, for her features eternally remind me of those of my dear departed husband. Sbe has been well educated, and plays and sings ex tremel v well ; but there is a kindness, a warmth
a warmth of feeling in her quick and sparkling eye, tvhich is a dark blue, like that of her uncle Mackenzie, Λν?ι??η speaks immediately to the soul. Janet Cameron has little or nothing of the Scotch accent : but as I hope that I shall be able to pre¬ vail on her mother to let her accompany me back to England, I will not raise' your expectations, Edward, too high, lest my young favourite should fall short of them ; yet 1 would fain bespeak your regard for one tvho already feels towards yourself the kiudcst sentiments of a relation." Edtvard, thus prepared to find in Miss Cameron the dear resemblance of Ids adopted father, felt an earnest desire to be¬ hold her who, from that circumstance alone, possessed a strong and sacred claim upon his lu j art. Each succeeding letter from his mother increased this desire, till at length he be¬ came as anxious to obtain a sight of Janet Cameron, as Frederic Manningham tvas ? % to
to gain a glimpse of the secluded daughter of the marchioness of Anendale. From Frederic Edward had no conceal¬ ments; a mutual confidence existed be¬ tween them, and young Manningham was therefore perfectly acquainted with the ge¬ neral theme of Mrs. Mackenzie's corre¬ spondence—the name of Janet Cameron was become as familiar to him as that of his own sister, and he felt an interest in ber fate, because he believed that Edward's heart had adopted her for a relation. He was therefore pleased to learn from Ed¬ ward, when he called on him, as he had promised at the opera house, that he had just received a letter from his mother, which gave him hopes that he should see hcr shortly in London, and that IVIiss Cameron would accompany her in her journey. This gratifying intelligence gave fresh animation to the lively spirits of Edward» u hile those of Frederic were equally ex¬ hilarated
hilarated by the promise of his friend to be ready to proceed into [Monmouthshire on the following morning, as his picture tvas now finished, and the money ready to be remitted to Mr. Curwen by that night's post. Frederic had also his piece of intel¬ ligence to communicate, which tvas the ar¬ rival of his brother Charles and his bride. They had taken a house only ttvo streets off from the residence of sir Charles, tvhich had given great offence to lady Manning¬ ham, who was therefore but very ill inclin¬ ed to receive the new married pair, wdien tliey should think fit to pay her a visit. Charles had called on the night of his arri¬ val, but all the family tvere from home, and Frederic tvas consequently in expecta¬ tion of hearing, on his return, that tbe visit had been made during his absence. Edward, though unwilling to touch upon a subject which tvould awaken all the sorrows of Mr. Lindsay, yet felt it bis duty to mention to him the arrival of his ? 3 daughter
daughter in London, lest he should be suddenly surprised by her appearance. It tvas the good fortune of Edtvard to possess that pleasing art of softening the most disagreeable intclligenee, nnd Mr. Lindsav received the unwelcome news with a composure which Edward did not expect that he had acquired. *' My dearest Edward," said the father of Clara, " it tvould not surprise me if Mrs. Manninghan ι was to attempt an interview with me: but I am immoveable in m v determination : never will I consent to hold the slightest intercourse with her, until I feel that I am quitting this worid. On my deathbed I may once more behold her who so cruelly abandoned the best and kindest of mothers—on my deathbed I may bestow on lier my forgiveness, but not till then. Edward, I trust to you, and you alone, to save mc from the heart-rending agony of seeing my unfeel¬ ing child. I shall rely on your precau¬ tions,
tions, and on the zeal and affection of the worthy Oliver, who, during your occasional absence, will guard and preserve me from a trial which I am not equal to sustain." Edward immediately cfflred to give up his intended journey to Monmouthshire, but this Mr. Lindsay would not allow,— " No, my dear boy," said he, embracing him as he spoke, " I cannot permit you to be an unnecessary suiferer by my mis¬ fortunes. I know how much your heart is fixed on delivering into the hands of lady Elinor the packet of her brother, and I will not listen for a moment to the pro¬ posal of your giving up your journey on my account. Besides, I cannot always have you with me, and Oliver will faith¬ fully obey my wishes during your absence." Edward, who was that day engaged to dine wdth sir Joseph Hennie, thought it advisable to speak to Oliver upon tins painful subject. He accordingly took the opportunity ? 4 while
wdiile he was dressing to go out, to inform Oliver of the arrival of Clara, and oí the resolution wdiich her father had formed of not seeing her, should she call and attempt an interview. Oliver, wdio most sincerely respected as well as pitied his old master, and detest¬ ai his daughter for her barbarity, promised faithfully to keep watch, lest even the sound of her voice should reach the ears of Mr. Lindsay in his retirement; and' Eil ward, convinced that he might safely rely on the vigilance and attachment of Oliver, felt no scruples in leaving the house and its melancholy inmale to his care. Sir Joseph Rennie w T as too much the real friend oí Edward, not too feel delight¬ ed at the prospect so newly opened to him? of acquiring both wealth and fame, from the generous anel liberal proposal of Mr. Colvill. He promised to explain this new engagement to the gentleman to whom he was about to introduce him, in such a manner
manneras would prevent his taking offence at Edward's declining, for the present, to paint his altar-piece. Sir Joseph congratulated Edward upon bis acquiring the friendship of the Osborne family, particularly tbat of Mr. Colvill, the brother of lady James, whose charac¬ ter he had heard from a friend well ac¬ quainted with the virtues of both brother and sister.—" But," said sir Joseph, " have you engaged fresh apartments? for those you now occupy, as I have before stated, are not such as you ought to inhabit." Edward replied that he had taken lodg¬ ings in one of the fashionable streets, to wdiich he meant to remove as soon as he returned from a short visit wdiich he was about to make into Monmouthshire. Sir Joseph naturally expressed a desire to learn the object of his young friends journey into that county, and Edward made no scruple of confiding to hiin the truth, as he had been the means of intro¬ ducing him to the marchioness and her ? 5 son,
son, and had since then frequently men¬ tioned the lattjr in terms of regret, that authorized Edward to describe to him the artless tenderness and honourable confi¬ dence ofthe heir of Anendale. " And you really intend to take a jour¬ ney on purpose into Monmouthshire," said sir Joseph, " that you may perform your promise to the deceased earl ? Well, my dear Mackenzie, I honour you for holding yoar word sacred. But hotv do you pro¬ pose to gain admittance to the castle of the mar hioness ? You are not perhaps aware of the extreme vigilance of madame Dubois, who is the governess of lady Eli¬ nor, and who will think it her duty not to suffer her pupil to hoki any communica¬ tion with ? young man of whom she is wholly ignorant, and w r hose romantic errand may authorize her to deem him an impostor." Edward replied that he had never once reflected on the improbability of his being admitted to see lady Elinor; and though his
his friend, Frederic Manningham, Imd agreed to accompany him on his expedi¬ tion, yet it had never struck either of them that their journey tvould prove a useless one, or that they should find any difficulty in gaining the good opinion of madame Dubois, through whose interest alone they expected to see lady Elinor. Sir Joseph smiled at this proof 01 Ed¬ ward's ignorance of the tvorld, as it was not very likely that an artful intriguing French woi -an, such as he hh 1 reason to believe madame Dubois, would suffer her pupil to see and converse tvith two hand¬ some young men like Edward and his friend Manningham ; both of them tvere by far too attractive in their persons to be introduced to a young, inexperienced, and secluded girl, like lady Elinor. " I think," said sir Joseph, " that in this dilemma my advice will be serviceable to you, Mackenzie. Alitile worldly artifice in this case may be resorted to without injury to any one. The marepus of Anen- ? fi dale
dale has added considerably to the picture gallery of lady Fitz-Arthur, as he general¬ ly resides at the Castle a part of the sum¬ mer months, and is not a little proud of his collection of paintings, as well as of being considered as one ofthe most zealous patrons of the fine arts. It is this collec¬ tion, Mackenzie, which must be the means of introducing you to the interior of lady Elinor's prison, as well as a note wiiich I will give you to deliver to her watchful duenna, madame Dubois, who is well ac¬ quainted with my name, as I have- been on a visit more than once to the marquis, when he has resided at the Castle, which con tains several of my pictures. My name will be the passport to the presence of madame; after that you must trust to chance, or to your own talents at inven¬ tion, to procure you the accomplishment of your wishes." Edward warmly testified his acknow¬ ledgments to sir Joseph for thus kindly assisting him in the attainment of his hopes.-—
hopes.—" In any other case than the pre¬ sent," said Edward, " I should feel a re¬ pugnance to adopting a measure which might subject me hereafter to the imputa¬ tion of deception : but the motives of my visit seem tu j ustiiy the means. I promised most solemnly to deliver to lady Elinor the little packet entrusted to mc by her brother, and in performing this promise, I cannot perceive any possible harm that can arise from my using an innocent stratagem to procure me tlie sight of lady Elinor." " In any other case." replied sir Joseph, gravely, *' I should be equally averse ter giving my bitnet ion to \ our wishes; but here 1 feel no compunction to forward your plan of performing the dying bequest of an affectionate brother, and of bestow¬ ing on lady Elinor the melancholy plea¬ sure of receiving the last testimonies of his regard. The marchioness, though dot- ingly fond of her son, endeavoured to re¬ press as much as possible his tenderness for
for his sister, whom she treated with in¬ diflerence, keeping her the chief of the day to her studies, that she might not have the opportunity of associating with her brother. Notwithstanding this cruel attempt to disunite them, nature in their young and innocent bosoms would have its course, and they seemed to love each other in proportion to the pains which was taken to render them careless and neglect¬ ful. The marchioness was proof to all the tender pleadings of her son on Ids last removal from the Castle, and ueeidedly opposed the wishes of the marquis and his heir, which were to have lady Elinor ac¬ company them to town. The poor boy seemed conscious of his approaching disso¬ lution, and asked leave to bestow on his sister a lock of' his hair : but this boon the marci lioness had sufficient firmness to re¬ fuse. Had the life of lady Elinor depend¬ ed on her possessing a ringlet of her brotlier's Lair, her mother would not have allowed one of those precious curls to have
have been dissevered from his head. I can only account for lady Anendale's conduct towards her daughter, by suppos¬ ing that she fears that the novelty of a fresh face, intelligent, innocent, and more youthful than her own, may steal from her a portion of that unbounded admira¬ tion which she stili continues to excite in the breasts of her numerous followers." " How groundless this fear !" exclaimed Edward, with warmth ; s ' how improbable that any man tvho once hael viewed the lovely graces, the matchless beauties ofthe marchioness, should quit her side, or ex¬ change her smiles for those of her daimh- ter !" Sir Joseph frowned for a moment on the young enthusiast, but his face quickly recovered its wonted serenity, as he con¬ sidered that youth and inexperience tvere not proof against tlie dangerous combina¬ tion of female beauty and female artifice. " Mackenzie," said sir Joseph, with his accustomed kindness, as he laid his hand on
on his shoulder, " Mackenzie, I am al¬ most tempted to believe tbat you are in love with the marchioness of Anendale. Of this I am sure, that you are one ofher warmest admirers." " In love wdth the marchioness of An¬ endale!" cried Edward, in atone of sur¬ prise, yet with a look of the deepest con¬ fusion : " no, sir Joseph, I am not in hve with the marchioness, though I am certain that no other woman in the world could ever give birth to the same emotions in my heart as she has done." u I own the magic of her charms," re¬ plied sir Joseph; w ' but my knowledge of her character has shielded me from their siren influence. I have seen lady Elinor, of whose beauty you have formed so slight an opinion. When you return, Macken¬ zie, from Monmouthshire, you will per¬ liaps prefer the daughter's unstudied graces to the tempting allurements of the mo¬ ther's practised graces. Guard well your heart, lest, if still unoccupied, it sliould admit
admit an image, whose modesty and self- taught virtues may eclipse the dazzling lustre of maturer beauties." Edward w r as not sorry to be now inter¬ rupted by the arrival of company, whicb aflbrded a seasonable relief to his feel¬ ings. He quickly recovered his vivacity and self-command — not that he could wholly dismiss from his mind the conver¬ sation of sir Joseph, or the approaching in¬ terview which he hoped to gain with lady Elinor. The day, however, passed most agree¬ ably with our young artist, whose talents were not confined alone to the pencil ; they shone alike in conversation, in which he displayed taste, wit, and judgment, far above his years; and when he rose to take leave, that he might call on Mr. Colvill, the guests of sir Joseph felt a momentary blank at his departure., which tbey endea¬ voured to fill up by sounding the praises of so young a man, whose superior under¬ standing, good-natured wit, and extensive knowledge,.
knowledge, bad afforded to all present the highest satisfaction. It was late before Edward returned home from Osborne Iiouse. He had foulid Mr. Colvill alone and indisposed, and he had therefore staid longer than he had intended, as be had a few arrangements to make preparatory to his leaving town the next morning. As soon as he had entered his own apartments, Oliver presented him with a letter, wliich he said he was sure came from Miss Clara, as he knew hcr hand¬ writing as wedi as he did his otvn. Oliver was right; the letter tvas indeed from the pen of Mrs. Manningham, tvho earnestly besought Eelward to call upon hcr as soon as possible. Ungrateful and unfeeling as she was, Edward immediate¬ ly determined to hasten to her residence, in the generous hope of finding her repent¬ ant of her past conduct, and anxious to make every atonement in her power for the faults which she had committed. How great, therefore, was the dis¬ appointment
í ppointmcnt of Edward tiie moment he beheld Mrs. Manningham ! Instead ofthe penitent daughter w hich he had expecteel to meet, he was received by the gay and litely bride of Charles, tvith as free an air, as careless a manner, as if she had no one sin of which her conscience could accuse her. " This visit is doubly kind of you, Eel- ward," said she, offering hira her cheek, which lie coldly saluted, "as my servant in¬ formed me that you were from home tvhen he left my letter, and I hael therefore given you up for to-night : to-morrow I expect¬ ed to have seen you." " To-morrow I leave town for a few days," replied Edtvard, ** and as I thought that you might have a particular wish to see me as soon as you came to town, I hurried here the instant I received your letter, although the lateness of the hour might have excused my absence." '* I thank you," said Clara, " for this proof
proof of your forgiveness. We parted, Edward, in mutual displeasure ; but let that be forgotten. I almost wish now that I had taken your advice, for Charles lias considerable doubts respecting the li¬ quidation of his debts; and his temper, which was ahvays impetuous, is not mend¬ ed by the prospect of doing penance for what the old people term his imprudent mamage. Marmingham saw them last night, and would fain have persuaded me to accompany him there to-day ; but I do not intend to expose myself to the taunts and reproaches of his lady-mother, or tlie paternal advice of his sermonizing father. Time will convince them tîiat I am neither a child nor a fool, and that 1 shall be able to pass tlirough life very well without their countenance and support" Edward, shocked by this speech, as well as disgusted with the speaker, replied, that he should have supposed, that for her own sake, as well as her husband's, she
she tvould have sought to obtain a recon¬ ciliation tvith his parents. " I shall not stoop to beg for their fa- Tours," said Mrs. Manningham, " as I con¬ sider myself the equal of their son ; and should they refuse to advance him the money to pay his elebts, tvhy, w r e must make up our mineis to go abroad, tvhich will not be at all disagreeable to me, who have no one in England to regret or to care about leaving." Edward fixed his eyes on the unblush¬ ing countenance of Clara. His looks spoke volumes ; and for a moment she felt abash¬ ed.—" Your father, Mrs. Manningham, still lives !" exclaimed Edward, in a tone of bitter reproach. " True; but my father has refused to open my letters ; he has forgotten me — tvhy then should I remember him ?" Edward rose indignantly from bis seat ; he was no longer master of his feelings or of his temper.—" I see," said he, " that my visit tvas unnecessary. You can luwe no ΛνίβΙι
wish to 'hold any further communication wdth one wdio thinks and feels in every respect so opposite to yourself." " Is this a proof of your gratitude?" exclaimed Clara, angrily — " is this the return for all my past kindness towards you ? What inducement could I have to send for you, Mackenzie, but to prove that I was still inclined to consider you as my friend and brother? Have you then quite forgotten all my former aifection, wdien you were an inmate of your grandmo¬ ther's cottage, that thus you defy my resentment and slight my friendship?" " The readiness with whieh I obeyed vour summons proves," replied Edward, '·' that I am not in the habit of forgetting any kindness wliich I have received, either from you or your worthv and affectionate parents. Your mother breathed her last sigh in my arms, as she invoked a blessing upon the bead of that child who had de¬ serted her in her last moments ; and your poor afllicted father, though nearly lost to all
all the enjoyments of life, still finds com¬ fort and support from the testimonies of my gratitude and love. Death deprived tne oí a home and of ? relation who adored me. Your father, Mrs. Manningham, generously did his utmost to make up for the loss wdiich 1 had sustained: he was my friend, my father, my benefactor; and now, when death has deprived him of the only tie, the only solace of his existence, I feel it an imperious duty, as well as a grateful pleasure, that I should devote myself to his service, that I should assuage Ids angui oh, compose his mind, and be to him a son, since he no longer possesses the afiection ofhis daughter." A momentary feeling of remorse enter¬ ed the heart of Clara.—" Stay, Edward," said she, laying her hand on his arm ; *' I cannot resist the force of that power you have ahvays held over me. 1 would fain be restored to the bosom of my father, but 1 cannot bring myself to meet with a re¬ pulse,
pulse, even from him. Will he see me at your request ?" Edward shook his head.—" I will not deceive you," he replied : " your father feels too deeply, too acutely, your conduct to the tenderest of mothers, ever to listen to anything like an interview with you, unless he was on the point of death. At that awful moment his resentment may abate, and he may once more receive you to his arms; but until then, all attempts at a reconciliation will be fruitless. It is a subject which I am commanded to ab¬ stain from, and I feel it my duty not to add to his distress by the mention of your name. If I am thus compelled to speak unwelcome truths, you must blame cir¬ cumstances, not me. It was my wish to serve you, my warmest desire to save you from the bitterness of an accusing consci¬ ence ; but you would not let me exert the privileges of a brother, which you your¬ self had formerly given to me." Mrs,
Airs. Manninghan looked as if she felt for once in her life for some one not her¬ self.—" Will you call on me when you re¬ turn to town, Edward ?" said she ; " I shall always be happy to see you, notwith¬ standing the difference of our thoughts and opinions." Edward gave a reluctant consent, and then hurried back to the temporary abode of her deserted parent, bis heart kindling towards him with redoubled tenderness, as be fell more than ever the sad convic¬ tion tliat no bope remained of Iris receiv¬ ing any consolation in this world from the child ofhis fondest affections, his misplaced idolatry. — " Poor Mr. Lindsay !" sigh¬ ed Edward, " iiow unbounded was thy love !—how base has been its return !" Fortunately for Edward, the appearance of Oliver gave a seasonable turn to his ideas, and his mind gradually became oc¬ cupied by the more pleasing subject of tlie next day's journey to the castle of the marchioness of Anendale. VOL, IIL L ????
CHAPTER X. It had been the first intention of Edward and his iriend Manningham to make as rapid a journey as possible into Monmouth¬ shire, that their stay might not exceed a limited time; but they now altered their plan, allowing themselves a day or two to look round them, and to examine tvhat- ever was worthy of their inspection in the route they meant to take. They were both at that delightful age tvhen the mind catches at every distane ivv of pleasure, and the heart swells tvith rapture at the fairy visions of its own crea¬ tion. Season of bliss, how short is your duration ! liow transient your enjoyments 1 Spring had already put forth her varied charms ; the fields could boastof their un¬ wearying verdure, and the trees and shrubs of
of their changeful foliage; all nature seemed teeming with delight; and the joyous faces of the lively peasantry, as they sung or whistled their favourite provincial airs during the labours of the day, added to the cheerfulness of the cene, and ίο the hilarity of the travellers, i( We are a couple of fine fellows truly, Mackenzie,'* said Frederic, gad}, ?? the) ivere taking thcir dinner at one of the besi inns in Monmouthshire ; " here we are, safe from all the neck-break disasters oí the road, and upwards of a hundred and twenty miles from any human being that we know. If this lady Elinor should prove not worth the trouble we have taken to yet a sight of her, how moitified we shall buth feci at our romantic expedition f " " Not at all, ?? dear friend," replied Edward, smilingly; " my purpose here is merely to perform the promise which I gave to her brother ; that accomplished, 1 shall return satisfied. Should the ardour of your passion abate upon ait interview L £ w UU
with its object, you must fortify your mind tvith the reflection that your journey will not altogether be an unpleasing one, and that many a bright eye in London will sparkle with delight, should your roman¬ tic expedition prove a fruitless one. Come, fill again your glass, friend of my soul ; let us once more drink to the health, hap¬ piness, and speedy emancipation of the tlaughter of lady Anendale." (i And may tve find her just the same lovely, modest, artless, bashful, yet warm¬ hearted girl that my imagination has pic¬ tured her to be! To any other man than vourself, [Mackenzie, I should be almost ashamed to acknowledge tvhat may be a proof of my bad taste ; but there is a cer¬ tain something tvhich I look in vain to find in the manners and persons of our vouniî women of fashion—a something wliich I feel to be indispensable in the tvoman tvhom I may select as the partner of my future life. I see that you do not binile, Mackenzie, at my fastidiousness, and
und that you think and feel as I do, not¬ withstanding," added he, archly, " your recent gallantry to lady Jane------. I can¬ not tell why, but I have taken it into my mad brain, that this neglected daughter of your earthly divinity will exactly suit my taste. But tvhy elo tve waste the precious moments, which might be otherwise em¬ ployed ? Let us hasten to the castle oi her mother— DÎy her duenna with well- timed flattery—gain her confidence, and by that means ensure to ourselves a sight of the most valuable picture in the pos¬ session of the marquis." Frederic now rang to inquire if fiesh horses were put to the carriage, and on being told that they were, the young men proceeded with buoyant spirits to the ve¬ nerable mansion, Λν?ηο?ι Frederic termed the prison-house of lady Elinor. As they approached the castle of Fitz- Arthur, Manningham felt his appellation to be just It was a place which had for¬ merly been of considerable strength ; gloo- L 3 my
my and awfully grand, it seemed to mock the ravages of time, tvhich wcre visible in some parts of the building, that tvere wash¬ ed by the waves of a bold and beautiful river. Tlie "postillion stopped at the massy gate ofthe castle, which was opened (not with the speed of a Mercury), by an old man who appeared to fill the office of por¬ ter, and to whom Edward delivered the letter for madame Dubois, from sir Joseph Rennie. Nearly a quarter of an hour elapsed before the return of the hobbling old porter, and they were then requested to alight, tvhile another domestic, some¬ what voungcr. and a little more agile, coil ■/O' O' ducted them to the presence of madame The eyes of the Frenchwoman examin¬ ed tvith scrutinizing attention the counte¬ nances ofher visitors, as she in broken Eng¬ lish asked them a variety of questions, which she conceived to be of importance, before she conserited to the request oí sir Joseph, and allowed them to view the interior of the principal apartments of the Castle, of which
which she was deputed sole mistress dur¬ ing the absence of its noble owners. The handsome persons of Edtvard and Frédéric, their polite apologies for not making her an earlier visit, lest they had now intruded on her time, and their manly and elegant forms, so won upon the favour of madame, that she invited them to be her guests for the night, saying, thj + b * elay was far spent, they could not p, ^ to form a just opinion of the splendiel col¬ lection of the marquis of Anendale; she had a high respect for sir Joseph Rennie, and would do all in her potver to enter¬ tain his friends. The young men, scarce able to conceal their joy, most tv i 11 ingly gave orders íbr the dismissal of their chaise, returning madame many flattering compliments for lier kind attention to the object of their visit; to tvhich she replied, that she should be extremely happy to afford them cvery possible gratification. a> tlieir appearance and manners justified her in so doing. L l Neiti er
Neither Edward nor Frederic were backward in making the proper acknow¬ ledgments for the condescension and kind¬ ness of madame, who, on her part, seemed highly delighted with her young and hand¬ some guests, quickly giving them to un¬ derstand that she rejoiced at the circum¬ stance wliich had conducted them to the castle, and complaining bitterly of the dull life whicli she led during the absence of its owners. In the hope of being rewarded by a sight of lady Elinor, the friends lavished on the wily Frenchwoman compliments and attentions which would have disgust¬ ed the purity of English education ; hut madame received the grossest flattery with a greediness which proved the corruption of hcr mind, and the impurity of her mo¬ rals. Her guests, though young, instant¬ ly comprehended the character of madame Dubois ; and wbile the sincerity of their nature recoiled from the hase prostitution <»f their praise, they felt convinced that all hope
hope of seeing lady Elinor was vain, unless they could charm and amuse her unprin¬ cipled duenna. Madame, though perfectly enchanted with her youthful visitors, and with Ed¬ ward in particular, was not unmindful of the important charge committed to her care. She laughed and talked with a free¬ dom wdiich gave licence to the boldest thoughts ; yet, if she gave way to the le¬ vity of her disposition, she still remember¬ ed that to her was entrusted the only child of the marquis of Anendale. After in¬ dulging herself in the pleasures of conver¬ sation, she apologized for being obliged to leave them for a few minutes. " And is this the being," exclaimed Fre¬ deric warmly, ** to whom the sacred trust is delegated of forming the mind and mo- rals of an English girl? Can any thing prove more strongly the unpardonable ne¬ gligence of thè marchioness, than this one act of misplaced confidence ? What can L 5 we
w r e expect from the pupil of madame Du¬ bois ?" <( Nay, my dear friend," said Edward, " surfer not the warmth of your present feelings to lead you into error. Lady Eli¬ nor may have escaped from the contagion of precept and example ; the purity of her mind may have shielded her from the knowledge of that profligacy which is so apparent in thatof her governess—atleast, it is but charitable in us to think so, until we know to the contrary." u Alas !" cried Frederic, in a tone of real commiseration, tä it is vain to cheat my¬ self with so delusive a hope. Lady Elinor is the daughter of the marchioness, and the pupil of madame Dubois." " I have never lieard any thing against the moral character of the marchioness," replied Edward hastily ; " and as to the le¬ vity now displayed in the conduct of ma- dame, it does not prove that she is equally unguarded when in the company of lady Elinor.
Elinor. Come, come, my friend, do not let your spirits sink at the semblance of imaginary evils. We shall most likely be honoured by a sight of her ladyship, when you will be able with more justice to form an estimate of her character." Madame now entered, followed by a young lady, whom she introduced to her visitors as the only surviving child of the marquis of Anendale. Nothing could ex¬ ceed the surprise of Edward, or the disap¬ pointment of Frederic, on beholding in lady Elinor the very opposite to what their ima¬ ginations had pictured her to be. Instead of a creature composed of beauty, grace, and elegance, they now gazed with astonish¬ ment on one whose tall, thin, unyielding form set the graces at defiance, and Avhose pale features, as if marked by the hand of adversity, could boast no claim to admira¬ tion, unless their appearance of candour and good-nature made an impression upon the heart. A visible confusion seemed to increase the awkwardness oí lady Elinor ; L 6 she
she curtsied ungracefully to the mortified friends, tben hastily seated herself close by the side of madame, whose watchful glances vainly endeavoured to inspire her pupal with confidence and encouragement. Lady Elinor took no part in the conver¬ sation, which now became too dull for tbe lively thoughts of madame. Shs rallied the young men upon their sudden thought- fulness, imputing it to the recollection of their mistresses, wdiom they had left be¬ hind—" I have a few orders to give to our old housekeeper," said she, iC which will de¬ tain me from you perhaps half-an-hour. In the meanwhile lady Elinor shall conduct you to one of the picture-galleries ; and, by the time that I join you, I shall expect to find you as gay and as animated as you w ere before 1 left you." She then desired her embarrassed pupil to shew the gentlemen to the southern gal¬ lery, wliich contained only a part of the pictures belonging to the collection of lady Fitz-Arthur. Lady Elinor slowly obeyed, and
arid our two friends as slowly followed her footsteps. Edward's mind had not long to dwell upon the disappointment wdiich both himself and Frederic had received. He was now within the w r alls of the castle which had sheltered his mother from child¬ hood unto womanhood—of that castle which had also been the chief residence of the fas¬ cinating marchioness, and in wdiose spaci¬ ous and magnificent apartments her infant family had first seen the light. All that now remained oí her numerous offspring was lady Elinor—a being so entirely un¬ like either father or mother, that Edward could not bring himself to believe that she was the child of the beautiful lady Anen¬ dale. Yet, as he gazed wdth doubtful wonder upon her ladyship, he no longer felt surprised at the mother's reluctance to introduce into the world such a compound of stiffness, awkwardness, and inelegance. Notwithstanding the mortified feelings of Edward, he was neither insensible to tbe valuable paintings wbich adorned the southern
southern gallery, nor careless ofthe present opportunity of delivering to lady Elinor the packet of her deceased brother. With some share of emotion, he explained to her ladyship the manner in which he had be¬ come possessed of the packet, which con¬ tained the hair of the young earl, and his surprise v/as considerably increased by the little ieeling wdiich she displayed upon nn occasion wiien he had expected to see her bathed in tears, and warm in gratitude to hitn who iiad undertaken so long a journey entirely for her sake, that she might re¬ ceive the last testimony of her brother's affectionate remembrance. Lady Elinor x*cceived tbe packet with painful confusion, put it hastily into her pocket, and stam¬ mered out a few inaudible words, which Edward supposed were thanks for his kindness. That she might recover from an embarrassment for which he coulu not account, he now turned his attention to the pictures, in order that she might have time to recover her composure. Wben
Λ Vhcn madame rejoined them, lady Eli¬ nor retired, as Edward conjectured, to ex¬ amine the contents of her packet, but in reality from a far different motive, which at that moment our hero little imagined. The gaiety of madame, her sprightly badi¬ nage > and her flattering compliments, soon recalled the flagging spirits of the two friends, and they each resolved to make the most of Λν?^ amusement lay in their v/ay, and to cast aside, if possible, all re¬ membrance of the severe disappointment which each had received from their inter¬ view with lady Elinor, and to make them¬ selves as agreeable as they could to ma- dame, who, on her part, appeared anxious to afford them every gratification which rested on her own powers oí' pleasing. [Madame Dubois was just turned of nine- and-twenty ; she was handsome, well-shap¬ ed, and abounding with wit and anecdote; she possessed all the levity of her country- w omen-—all tbeir fri\ olity and heartless co¬ quetry, w ithout any of their good qualities. A period
A perfect adept at intrigue, she determin¬ ed to practise all her arts upon her pre¬ sent guests, hoping to ñx the attention of one or the other, no matter which, though slie would have given the preference to Edtvard, and thus, if possible, secure to her¬ self a more pleasing establishment than the dependent one she notv held in the family of the marquis. At tea lady Elinor again appeared for a few minutes. She lookeel as if she tvished for an opportunity to speak to Edward; but none occurred, and she therefore withdrew, by the desire of her governess, tvho felt no inclination to have any one present who could be a spy over her words and actions. Upon learning that the young men ????? fond of music, she entertained them with several ofher ???? national airs ; and as she sung tvell, and played still better, they list¬ ened to her tvith satisfaction, expressing themselves with a degree of warmth which repaid the exertions oi madame. On retiring for the night, madame hoped that
that their slumbers tvould not be disturbed by the dashing of the water against that part of the castle tvhere their chambers lay* S' jC added, that it might be necessary to ¿ell them this, lest they should misconstrue the monotonous sound into the moaning voice of some unquiet spirit, who tvas the neces¬ sary inmate of every old mansion in tive world. Then, reminding them of their pro¬ mise of rising early the next morning, that they might accompany her over the prin¬ cipal rooms of the castle, and from thence into the grounds, she reluctantly took leave of her interesting guests, whom she notv consigned to the eare of a venerable-look- ing old woman, whom they were given to understand was the housekeeper of the castle. This ancient domestic, enfeebled by age, and nearly deprived of sight, ascended slowly, and tvith the help of a crutch, the noble flight of marble stairs which led to the several bedchambers, and best apart¬ ments
ments of the house. Edward, in whom the appearance of age never failed to excite respect, good-naturedly obliged his conduc¬ tress to accept of his support, apologizing for the trouble which his presence occasion¬ ed her. At the sound of his voice the old wo¬ man suddenly stopped, and, as she pressed his arm with additional weight, curiously and anxiously endeavoured to run over the features of Edward's face; but her dim eyes refused to discover to her the sight she wished, and again she tottered forward, until she entered a long gloomy passage, partially enlightened by a lamp, which was suspended from the middle of the ceiling. At the extremity of the gallery were the rooms wdiich had been prepared for the vi¬ sitors, one of wdiich she pointed out to Fre¬ deric as being destined to receive him, and then followx'd Edward into the next. u Sit down and rest yourself," said Ed¬ ward, in a tone of compassionate kindness. tí I hope
u I hope it is not often that your strength is thus exhausted, by ascending so high a fiight of stairs." " Oh, that sweet, sweet voice !" ex¬ claimed the old womati, as she seated her¬ seif in a chair, and still holding by the arm of Edward, who begab to feel a some¬ thing more than casual veneration for his companion. (t What would I now give," she continued, " could I but see if your face is as like as your voice is to that dear kind soul, whom I have so often hugged and kissed when a boy ! Ah, sir, you must pardon the freedom of an old woman like me; but my heart danced again with joy, as it was used to do when tliat person spoke to me, the moment that I heard the sound of your voice. Who knows but you may be a relation of his? and yet your name------" " Is Mackenzie," replied Edward, with some degree of emotion. "Ah, then yon are no relation, and per¬ haps not at all like him, only your voice, AVVÌI,
Well, I am nov/ in rny seventy-fifth year, and when I last saw him I was fifty-five. God knows î little dreamed that it was for the last time.-—* Bridget Carter,' said he, taking me round the neck, and kissing me with the kindness of a son, t Bridget Car- ter, I am compelled to leave Monmouth¬ shire immediately. Keep this box,' and it was a silver snuff-box, ' formy sake—un¬ til I return, keep it, Bridget, as sacredly as you would the good name of your beauti¬ ful mistress.' And Bridget has kept them both as sacred as he, dear soul, could wish ; but Bridget has never set eyes on him from that day to this." ** You have lived many years in this castle, I suppose," said Edward, " and must therefore be tenderly attached to the marchioness and lier children ?" " Only one remains, only one remains,"' cried the old woman hastily, " out of eight as lovely babes as ever saw the light. The righteous Judge of all has thus thought fit to visit upon the marchioness the in- constancy
constancy of her early youth. Yes, I have lived long, very long, in the castle. I was nurse to lady Fitz-Arthur ; ahd when she died, her niece tvished me to remain as hou se- keeper. So, as I had passed so much of my life at the castle, I thought best to smother my feelings, and not seek a fresh home in the days of my old age. Äly lady soon married after the death e>f her aunt, but I said to myself, that no good would come to one who had so cruelly deceived one of the best and kindest men on earth." " The marchioness was then in love with the person to tvhom you allude ?" said Ed¬ ward. " In love ! God keep me from such love !" exclaimed the old woman fervently. ik Why, you must know, sir—Mercy on me ! I coukl almost fancy that I was speak¬ ing to him now; but that I knotv cannot be the case, for I dare say he died bro¬ kenhearted, poor, dear soul! when he lieard of my lady's marriage tvith the mar¬ quis ! And as for me, I almost cried myself blind
blind with pure grief at the thought of what he would sufler; but my lady was as gay and as thoughtless as ever: so she made out the words of our worthy old Margaret Grey— t An Angels form and a Devils heart,' for sure enough she has both." Edward gave an involuntary start at the mention of his grandmothers name ; and Bridget Carter, not noticing his agitation, went on vvith her story. " Well, as I was saying, wdien my lady was quite a young thing in her teens, she took it into her head to be desperately in love witha young gentleman, who used to spend part of his holidays with a rela- tion in Monmouthshire. They saw each other by accident, and though then only boy and girl, took a liking to each other. Well, what was to be done ? Lady Fitz- Arthur and his uncle had quarrelled about a piece of land, and hated each other like poison; so the young folks knew they couid only see each other by stealth. My lad \
lady w T as very infirm for some years before her death, and this gave her niece op¬ portunity to meet her lover as often as she pleased and he had time, in the filbert- walk, on the east side ofthe castle garden. I tvas the first to find them out ; but I no sooner cast my eyes, for I could see then as well as any body, on his fine, open, man¬ ly face, than I thought to myself, 'twas no wonder at Miss Fitz-Arthur falling in love with it; and tvhen he took my hand anel told me tvho he was, and begged me not to betray him, the very sounel of his voice seemed to do my heart good, and 1 promised solemnity never to tell my lady of any of their stolen interviews. Well, year after year tvent by, and still they met as usual, and still my old heart danced with delight al the sound ofhis voice; for next to seeing my young laely, he ahvays contrived to see me ; and many and many a kiss have I had from his sweet lips, anel many a prayer have I called dow r n upon his dear head. Ahí this very f oom was the bed
bed-chamber of Miss Fitz-Arthur when she was a girl; that was her bed, and that her toilet, and that very bookcase, I dare say, has often and often concealed his letters." Edward cast a glance round the apart¬ ment; his heart beat quicker than usual, and every w r ord uttered by Bridget Carter -added to the strangeness of his newly- awakened feelings. He would not have interrupted her for the world. "Between those cabinets," said she, "is a door, wdiich is now fastened up by order ofthe marchioness, but which then was ser¬ viceable to the lovers. It communicates bya long fliglit of steps to the river, wdiich sometimes overflows nearly half of them, and by these her lover used to gain admit¬ tance to her chamber, when he could not see her in any other place. I did not like this way of their meeting; but I was old, they were young, and my lady would have her own w r ay ; but I often told Alice that no good woukl come if they met in that way." -'Alice r
" Alice !" exclaimed Edward, trembling¬ ly, " who was Alice?" " Alice vi/as old Margaret's daughter by her first husband," said Bridget, without noticing the strange inquiry of Edward, or his increasing emotion—" Margaret was housekeeper to lady Fitz-Arthur until she married Grey ; and when she left, Alice remained to attend upon and to amuse my young lady, who was ? ? ??? fond of her, and ΛνΙιο took a great deal of pains to make Alice fit to be her companion. My lady also tvas partial to the girl, so she made no objection, and so Alice by this means got an education above her situation. But she tvas a kind, tvarm-hearted girl, and w r e all loveel her, and all felt sorry when she left the castle, though we often said, among each other, that it was a pity my young lady had got such potver over her." " I suppose slie left the castle because she tvas married?" said Edtvard, trem¬ blingly. " Married ! no, no, Alice was not mar- voL. ni. m rieul
ried when she left the castle," said Bridget. " Poor girl í Heaven only knows what has become of her ; from that day to this we have never heard any tidings of poor Alice, but we suspected------ ** At that instant a sudden movement in the gallery was heard by Bridget, who ris¬ ing with tolerable quickness ? motioned to Edward to be silent, and then left the chamber, with the cautious tread and scru¬ tinizing glance of experienced age.
END OF VOL. ?
Printed by J. Darin*?, Uadenhaii-Street, London.
