Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
An angel's form and a devil's heart: a novel
AM
Angeľs Form § a Deviľs Heart.
CHAPTER L ULD Bridget had scarcely left the room, when Frederic entered.—" What in the name of fate, Mackenzie, could induce you to detain that old gossip so long? I thought every minute an age that she btaid, and wished her safe loelged in one of the dungeons of the eastle, wiiere her loquacity would soon have been silenced, for to me it appeared endless. Plague take the old woman! she has hindered me of an hour's conversation ivhich I vol, iv. в wished
w İNİıed to have with you. Why, Edward, wbat ean tlu 1 old cr<4ie have told you, to ι j iake lou look ¡so paie and woe-begonc ? Some sad story about the spectre of the rasile? .some lamentable history of two faiil .ful hearts crossed in love, anel ending in bli'ud>hed and murder?" Edw ard smiled with all his accustomed kindness on his friend; be ivas about to reply, when the door was suddenly opened, and as suddenly closed by lady j 'linor. Softly she approached to where tbe frienels were standing in mute asto¬ nishment, and thus addressed Edward, in a low voice, and in evident confusion, not daring to raise her eyes IVom the ground. " I hope that you will forgive the bold¬ ness of this intrusion, sir," said she, " as well as the deception wdiich I have un¬ willingly been compelled to practise on \oit by the orders of madame Dubois, who is mistress here during the absence of the marchioness. It was her desire that
that I should pass for lady Elinor, whom she strictly enjoined not to leave her room ivhiie you remained------" " Then you are not the daughter of the marquis?" hastily inquireel Frederic, al¬ most breathless with impatience. " No, sir," she modestly replied, " I am tbe daughter of his steward, who has lived many years in tbe family of the marqui«. My dislike to appear before you and tliis gentleman as ladv Elinor will account for my confusion. To you, sir, in particu¬ lar, I must apologize lor receiving the packet elestineel solely for her ladyship : I have, however, delivered it safe into her bands, and she is, in ce>nscquence\ deeply affected by your kindness, in undertaking so long ajourney on lier account She has tberefore commission eel me to say, that, although her governess has thought fit to deny her the pleasure of thanking you personally for your goodness, you will nevertheless carry with you lier best wishes and most grateful remembrance; and as u 2 íhií
this is the only opportunity she might have of conveying to you her sentiments, I trust that you will not think the ivorse of me, for executing the wishes of one of fhe bt ->t and kindest of human beings.' " Dear, kind girl!" eaxclaimcel Frederic, bastily, " I thank you a thousand times in both our names. But is il not possible to gain a sight of lady Elinor, if only for five minutes? Tell her, I beseech you, that the friend who has accompanied Mr. Mackenzie, for the sole purpose of seeing her, is the son of lady Manningham, the cousin of her father. Tell her that be has long, long sighed for an opportunity of assuring İıer of his kindest friendship ; and that unless she allows him the privilege of a relation, and grants him the happiness of half an hour's conversation, be will consider himself as the most unfortunate of men. Teil her all this, I beseech you, my dear girl, and as mucli more as you please, so that you de but persuade lady Elinor to allow as to .soe her." " Most
" Most ivarmly do I second the wishes of my friend," said Edward, in a persua¬ sive voice. "On your influence I shall rely. Heturn, I entreat of you, and tell lady Elinor tbat the toils of our journey will seem light as air, if blest ivith the sweet reward of beholding ber. Teli her also, that her dear little brother strictly en¬ joined me to see her, that I might assure her of his affection." " I will do ni} r best for you," replied the pretended lady Elinor; "but the bom- is late, the whole household have long retired to rest, anel her ladyship, who í confess wishes to see the confident of Ικτ brother, will naturally feel reluctant to an interview with strangers, who mi«ht at a future time misconstrue hercondesce-nsiem." " Oh, do not harbour for an in-tart a thought so injurious to our honour/* ex¬ elaimed Frederic, ivarmly; " we are well aivare of the secluded situation of ladv Elinor, and bitterly regret that she has been so long withheld from the admira¬ li 3 tuni
tion o^tlie ivorld; but let her not refuse to se*. e)ne whose heart has ever beat to- ivr ds her with the tenderest feelings of a relation." " í will explain to her ladyship уош wishes," said the daughter of the steward, " and in a few minutes will return with her answer." She noiv softly quitted the chamber, leaiing tlie young men in a state of pain¬ ful uncertainty. "I was right," cried Edward; "my heart did not deceive me when it rejected the idea of tbe steward's daughter being the child of tbe marchioness ; anel, though ï had no just grounds of suspicion, yet I could not believe her to be the lady Elinor." " Oh, how I shall glory in being too many for the wary Frenchwoman !" said Frederic. " She was afraid, forsooth, to expose her young charge to the notice of two such dashing fellows as we are; but she was not afraid to give us every en¬ courage- о
couragement on her own part, which the boldest mind conld suggest, ел* the me>st voluptuous heart desire. Well, when¬ ever I many, I will not admit a foreign domestic within my house ; if my child¬ ren are destined to be vicious, I'll take care that their vices .shall be purely Eng¬ lish, unmixed with the disgusting, heart¬ less profligacy of foreign maimers," Edward could not belt) smiling at the warmth ivhich his friend displayed, yet be perfectly coincided with him in his dis¬ like of foreign tuition. Edward was about to reply, when the pretended lady Elinor re-entered, and whispering t olel them that her lad) ship hael at length vielded to her eiilreaticas, and consented to sec ihem for íi few id imites in her presence. "Follow me ţ as silently as yeu can." said .she, " for madame sleeps at iho other end of the caller v : but be not alarmed." she added, smilingly, ''Iur ¿h» m bers are и t iu
in general so sound, that nothing but » great noise will ever disturb her." So light were their footsteps, that not a sound was to be heard along the gallery, га\ e that of the quick breathings of the friends, who paused about the middle of the pfrılîerv. while their conductress, shad- ing with lier robe the lamp wbich she held, listened for an instant, then mo¬ tioned thern to follow/ her into a chamber, í lie door of which she gently closed after ihem. A ^oun<>· female timidly advanced to meet them, and Edward instantly re¬ cognized the daughter ofthe marchioness. He hurried forward—his heart was full of the same sirange and uncontrollable emo¬ tions as when be first saw he»r mother, aiid his countenance glowed with the ten- dei ness of his feelings, lie pressed the delicate hand which was extended to¬ wards him, pressed it to his lips ; and lady Elinor did not frown—neither did she withdrew it írom him, until her eyes fell on tbe form of the admiring Fre¬ deric ;
derie ; a blush suffused her fair skin, and she modestly turned them on the ground. " I hope—I trust—" said sbe, in a low sweet voice of virgin innocence, " that you will not think ill of me for receiving your visit at so unseasonable an hour. Mabel urged me to grant your request; and indeed, Mr. Mackenzie, I« should be tbe most ungrateful creature in the world, if I had not wished to see you, that I might express my ivarmest thanks for your kindness in performing the promise you made to my beloved brother." Her voice faltered, anel sbe became considerably agi¬ tated; but recovering, she adeled—"You have bestowed on me the dearest wish of my soul, Mr. Mackenzie, and my gratitude and my prayers shall follow you through life." " Then I am indeed blest !"* exclaimed Edward, with enthusiasm : " dear lady Elinor ! 1 will treasure in my heart this proof of your considerate condescension. Же shall meet again— i feel that we в 5 sballa
and when such is the case, allow me to cherish the flattering hope that you will remember me as one who is devoted to your service." Then, turning towards Frederic, who had been hitherto silent from the joyous rush of his newly-awaken¬ ed passions, he said*—" This gentleman, whom with pride and delight I call my friend, has a stronger claim than myself to the remembrance of your ladyship. He can boast of being related to you. His feelings are the same as mine, and it was the desire of assuring your ladyship how sincerely he was interested in your wel¬ fare which induced him to accompany me in my journey." Lady Elinor raised her eyes in sweet embarrassment, as she extended her hand towards Frederic, who ^irried it to his lips with a fervour of devotion whicb in¬ creased the colour of her cheeks—" You must think for me, Mr. Manningham," said she, in a trembling accent, "for I am unused to the language of affection, unless w hön
when my dear father is here, and tberefore ill able to express my feelings. But I am grateful, truly grateful for your good wishes; they will cheer tbe solitude of my life—they will siveeten the bitterness of my present situation, and I shall now look forward to my introduction into the ivorld with pleasure and impatience, since I may expect to find in it two hearts free from guile, and ready to become niy friends." This was said in so artless a manner, so innocent, so sweet a tone, that both Eelward and Frederic at that moment could have sworn to sacrifice every thing for her happiness. " Lovelv, and dearest lady Elinor!" ex¬ claimed Manningham, fervently pressing her banei in his, " if you find it diflicult to express your gratitude, how shall ƒ find terms to convey to you a just idea of that love which my beart has cherished towards you, ever since Mackenzie first mentioned to me your name anel melancholy sechi¬ li 6 sion
sion from tbat ivorld of wiiich you will one day bocome the brightest ornament í The desire to behold you—to claim the proud privilege of being \ r our relation, then became the fonel wish of my soul ; and noiv that I have obtained its longing desire, now tbat I behold you all anel every thing which my ardent fancy bad pictured, 1 feel the bitterness of fate in thus placing you so far distant from my home, and írom its affectionate inmates, ivho like myself would study to make you happy." " Thank you, thank you !" said lady Elinor, witb grateful energy; " if I live, ímd ive again meet, I will endeavour to convince botb you and Mr. Mackenzie that I am not unworthy e>f your friend¬ ship, or of tbe trouble you have both taken to assure me of your good opinion." Edward feilenlly imprinted on her band 'a kiss, ivhiie Frederic, more boisterous in his feelings, declared that be should be unable to exist, unless be was permitted to
to see her again before he left the castle, ivhich would not be until the day after tbe morrow. " It ivould be a sad thing to die so voung, and so beloved as you must be by your family," said lady Elinor, smilingly ; " therefore, my dear cousin, if Mabel can contrive it, I consent to have one more interview with you and your friend to¬ morrow night ; but let it be at an earlier hour than tbis." Frederic, in raptures at the prospect of once more beholding her, promised to be ready to attend tbe summons of Mabel as soon as madame was asleep. He now reluctantly took leave of her ladyship, and with Eelward trod softly back to tbe chamber of the latter, where be relieved bimself by giving way to tbe admiration wbicb the beauty of lady Elinor bad ex¬ cited, and by laimciiing out into severe invectives against her mother, ibr with¬ holding from the world so choice a trea¬ sure. " In
" In lady Elinor you behold the mar¬ chioness," saiel Edward, gravely. " Yet stay ; let not my enthusiasm mislead me. Lady Elinor possesses all the symmetry of form, all the enchanting loveliness of fea¬ ture and of grace, which so eminently distinguish her mother; but while she rivals her in tlie expression of her coun¬ tenance, in the purity and innocency of look, of voice, of manner, she excels the marchioness ; sbe is what I conceive her mother to have been at her age—and yet I must be deceived——" " What painful remembrance has cross¬ ed your mind, Mackenzie, and clouded your brow ? Banish it quickly, my dear¬ est friend, nor damp the joyous rapture of my feelings by seeing yours less joyous than nav own." " It was indeed a painful remembrance," replied Edward, " but it was only mo¬ mentary, my Frederic, and my heart is now at liberty to enter into all the ex¬ quisite ernotioiiï of yours. I see, 1 feel tiiat
that you are no longer free—that lady Elinor will be the star which will illumine your future path. And well does she appear to merit even tby beart, my kind, my noble Frederic ! Oh, may Heaven smile upon your love ! may it be returned with equal tenderness, equal constancy by her ladyship ! and may no adverse pow r er interpose its resistless authority to disunite two beings who seem formed for each other !" " Oh, may your last ivords be prophe¬ tic !" exclaimed Frederic, earnestly ; " I already love tbe inflocent Elinor, and if I can but inspire her with a portion of my own ardent passion, no earthly power shall wrest her from me. But the rays of morning break through the shutters, and we must rise early to join that detestable Frenchwoman. Farewell, my friend ! may our slumbers be propitious to tbe wishes of our hearts, and may a second Elinor appear, to bless the love of my chosen friend !"
A sigh broke from the lips of Edward as the door closeel and left him to himself. He felt no inclination to sleep, yet he un¬ consciously flung bimself on the foot of the bed, while bis eyes wandered over every object of the chamber, as if in search of something which was absent. Again he sighed—"A second Elinor!" said he. w Oh, where shall I find a being so pure and innocent, so divinely fair as the first Elinor ? one that ivould love me for my¬ self alone·—one that would return the adori ng tenderness of my trusting heart with equal confidence, equal animation ? Once I foolishly supposed tbat I hael found tbe being in whose hands I might safely place my future peace; but a cold or lukewarm passion cannot satisfy a soul like mine. Oh, Flora! it was tby dear image ivhich I treasured in my heart—it was thy tenderness ivhich my inexpe¬ rienced mind supposed to be the only requisite to my worldly felicity ; but time and circumstances have awakened me from
from this pleasing dream of my childhood, and taught me that my hopes of bliss must rest on another and a warmer heart than thine." Edward now rose, and opening one of the shutters, gazed for a few minutes on the water beneath, as its white foam dashed upon the stairs which led to lus chamber. " How often," thought Edward, "has the devoted lover of the marchioness climbed their steep ascent, his heart throb¬ bing with rapture as he approached nearer and nearer to the loved form of her whom he adored ! What must have been his extacy as he pressed his Hps to those of his beloved ! what his agony on finding her faithless to her first vows of constancy and affection ! Oh, wherefore this strange, this unaccountable emotion which per¬ vades my frame at the mention of lady Anendale's name, or of the slightest thing which concerns her? how can it interest me to learn who was the tender lover whom she abandoned? My pity, my
my heaitfelt commiseration can little avail him now ; years have gone by since last his feet pressed these time-worn steps —yet has absence diminished the ardour of his feelings ? Oh no ! the marchioness is not a woman to be easily foi'gottcn : if once loved, she must be loved for over." Edward behekl the streaks of me*r»dng illumine the eastern sky ; he reclosed tlie shutters, and went tow ards the bed- that bed whicii had so often received the beauteous form of the too-lovely mar¬ chioness. He flung himself on the out¬ side, with no inclination to sleep, his mind being te>o mueh occupied by the conversation of old Bridget Carter, and in forming plans by wdiich he should be en¬ abled to gain another sight of her before be left the castle. Was it not strange that hiu voice should resemble that of the gentleman to wdiom lady Anendaie had fancied herself to be attached? and yet, bow many voices were to be found like each other in the world ? Tht j efore where wus
was the singularity ? It was in his own mind, which had too great an aptitude to appropriate things and circumstances to himself If anything was strange, it was his resemblance to Mr. Colvill, whom he now seriously believed to be еаШкт the relation or friend of his un¬ known fatlier. With his mind thus wandering from ob¬ ject to object, it was no wonder that sleep forsook his pillow, or that when it was time to ri -ье he found himself feverish and unwell. Ashamed to олуп the cause, he determined to conceal it altogether from Frederic, lest he should damp the new-born felicity of his bosom-friend by dropping a hint that his thoughts were more buoyant and happy than his ov, n. W u spirits which then were forced; Ed- wiu-el proceeded to the chamber of young Manningham, and as he 'ibtened to the fairy dreams and fairy hopes of his friend, be by degrees became warmed by the -subject, until he forgot the source of his ow n
own disquietude, and all the train of wild conjectures which had haunted bis mind tbe preceding night.
CHAPTER Ii. Madame Dubois greeted tbe presence of ber guests witb smiles of encouraging ap¬ probation, hoping that their slumbers had been propitious í о tlieir wishes She then invited tbem to partake of an elegant little breakfast, which slie haJ provided expressly for tbem, and at which tbe pretendcel lady Elinor -.-"'s compelled to preside. Л Vhen this was concluded, madame proposed to conduct them over the grounds of the castle, and from thence to tho>e apartments which were worthy of observation. After a walk of nearly two hours, daring ivhich time, for the penance they perform¬ ed in listening to the conversation of one whom
•whom they despised, they were amply re¬ paid by the rich and varied scenery around thcni, the party returned by a diflerent route to the castle, when madame, with undiminished gaiety, and unwearied lo¬ quacity, proce* ded to shew them all that appeared to her to be deserving their notice. The pictures occupied the atten¬ tion of Edward, and in them lie iound an inexhaustible fund of amusement as weil as of admiration. These, however, re¬ quired time tt? exrjiiine their diflerent beauties; and madame, after ordering wine and cake for the' r refreshment, smilingly told them that .she would leave tliem until dinner to their own reflections, when she should hope to hear that they were per¬ fectly satisfied whh their mornings осей- •О pation. She had scarcely quitted them five mi¬ nutes, when Mabel appeared, and informed them that madame had walked out to the parsonagc-h<-use», in consequence of letters which bad that morning arrived írom
from tbe marchioness, and tbat, if tbey were disengaged, lady Elinor ivould be happy to see them then, instead of their preconcerted interview after the family had retired to rest It is need! ss to ob- serve with wliat pleasing alacrity they oung men followed the footsteps of their conduc¬ tress, or with what real delight they once more pressed the hand of laely Elinor within their own. " My kind friends," said her ladyship, " how much do I thank you for your willingness to oblige me ! I am so timid a creature, so fearful of giving offence to madame, and of incurring the terrible dis¬ pleasure of my mother, that I have been unhappy ever since I promised to see you again, and at so improper an hour. But now, in tiie face of day, and safe from the watehful guardianship of madame, 1 think Ì can indulge myself with half an hour's conversation with you, wbich will enable' me once more to assure you, Mr. Mac¬ kenzie, and you, too> my dear cousin, that I am
ï am not insensible, nor I hope ungrate¬ ful, for your good opinion and friendly wishes." " Dearest Elinor," said Frederic, still retaining her band in bis, and gently press¬ ing it, " dearest Eli or, allow me to carry with me tbe soul-reviving hope that at a future time, and that not far distant, the gratitude you mention will give place to a warmer, tenderer feeling. To-mor¬ row I shall be compelleel to leave the castle, but my heart will remain with you. Tell me, beloved cousin, can I not, through the means of Mabel, hear from you?" " I know not—that is, I should be afraid," replied her ladyship, blushing with beau¬ tiful confusion : il unfortunately for me, I am not the object of my mother's ¡ove, and I dread to do any thing which can incur her resentment. We learn by to¬ day's post that tbe marchioness is on her return to England. When my poor bro¬ ther lived, í had a kind, a tender comforter in him, although he was much younger than
than myself. His unceasing perseverance used sometimes to gain me the privilege of joining my family in their social parties ; but now tbat I faave lost him, I have no liope of being admitted to the notice of my mother ; yet, Heaven bear me witness, that my heart is as warm towards her as that of my poor brother, and my submis¬ sion to her will even greater than bis, for he was her idol, and could therefore do as he pleased." " But your father, lady Elinor," ex¬ claimed Edward, in a tone of tender com¬ passion, "your father surely has the poiver, and I hope the will, to make you happy ?" íť Ob no !" said her ladyship, with a deep sigh, and witb moistened eyes ; " rny beloved father never opposes the inclina¬ tions of my mother. Once, ineleed, he ven¬ tured to second tbe entreaties of my bro¬ ther, and urged the marchioness to allow me to accompany tbem to London. But I hope never again to see him as I then saw him. I ivould rather remain a pri¬ soner
soner for life, than be the cause of a second quarrel between my parents." " That vou shall never be, adored Eli- nor!" cried Frederic, warmly. "Aprisoner for life ! Shame on the dastard heart that would «iot risk a thousand dansers before 3^ou should remain another year within these walls ! Oh, if on me depended the power of lightening the hours of solitude, with what extacy, dearest Elinor, would I remain! with what care would I watch over your happiness, and think myself too blest if only allowed to see you once a-da)\ to be assured that 1 sometimes occupied your thoughts! Elinor, dear Eli лог! I woulel not deceive you for tbe world ! You know me not—you cannot trust to my protestations; but hereis one who has known me from a boy—Mackenzie is my friend. The .soul of hou our himself-, he would not countenance deceit iii ano hor. He will be the pledge aad airery of my fidelity." vol. iv. с " If
" If necessary," cried Edward, with en¬ thusiasm, " I will stake my existence on the truth and constancy of my friend. Your ladyship may believe me, for I know full well every secret thought, every se¬ cret wibh of his. It is your happiness that now he seeks to secure—alas! that I am compelled to add, fiom the unjustifiable authority of parental severity." " I do believe you, Mr. Mackenzie," replied lady Elinor, with engaging inno- cency ; " for what interest could either of you feel in deluding me with false hopes, false assurances? Oh, if you could see into my heart, you would pity me—you would not wish to persuade me into error. I have no natural friend or protector—I have no adviser to direct my conduct or to teach me the necessary rules of female reserve. My chilled affections are rekin¬ dled by the kindness which you seem to feel for me ; they would lead me to con¬ sent to continue an intimacy, to encourage a friendship which tp me holds forth the sweetest
sweetest prospect of affectionate confidence -—but I fear—" * " Fear nothing, lovely Elinor!" ex¬ claimed Frederic, with impassioned ten¬ derness. " I call my Creator to witness the purity of my intentions, and the sin- cerity of my affection. Trust, then, to one who never yet has misled a confiding heart, wbo never yet has made a promise to a woman that he has not sacredly kept. Mackenzie, you have seen tbe marchioness; you bid fair to become one of her favour¬ ites—you stand pledged to attend her the moment she arrives ; yet you will not re¬ fuse to me your aid and support in any plan 1 may form to ensure the mutual happmess of lady Elinor and myself?" " Command me to the utmost," replied Edward. " My friend shall never find me shrink from any trial in wbich his peace is concerned." Then turning to lady Elinor, he respectfully kisseel her band. " The singular devotion which my beart feels toward your mother dear lady Eli- c â ног/'
nor/* said be, " will not interfere wìtìi tlie lively interest ivhich I take in your v 1- fare. I shall always rejoice in any oppor- tuniti wbicb may occur of proving to your ladyship hoiv mueh I feel, and bow deeply 1 regret the unfortunate estrangement of a mother's love. xVllow me to add, that, thus situated, thus secluded, thus witb- Ik Vİ from all the enjoyments of domestic i omfort, you cannot incur the sin of dis¬ obedience by listening to the dietates of а -n honourable passion like tbat of Mr. Manmngb.:m: neither sballi hesitate in ь\к'л a case to volunteer my services, and te cicist you to the utmost of my power." Her h:dyship, in a low faltering voice, r\;,rcssed her thanks, and her readiness to confide in the sincerity of botb. Frederic now urged, with anxious im¬ patience, that some plan should be fixeel by which they could write to eaeb other; and Mabel, wlio was much attached to her young lady, with cheerful quickness proposed, that the letters of Mr. Man¬ ningham
ningham should be left at the post-office nnder au assumed name, as she could ea¬ sily procure their safe delivery. It was therefore at last décidée!, that Edward should receive the>se of lady Elinor, who, though painfully embarrassed, nevrrthc less yielded to the suggestions of Mabel. who now quitted them to watch tbe re turn of madame. it ivas now that Frederic, in order to compose tbe agitated spirits of lady Eli¬ nor, turned the conversation to the subject of his oivn fami./. He described its do¬ mestic comforts, its affectionate inmates, dwelling with fraternal pride anel love upon the character of Flora, until her laely ship, charmed by tbe description, for¬ got her reserve, and in expressing the de¬ light she should feel on being introduced to such dear relations, betrayed to tbe ad¬ miring friends a ivarmth of feeling, an impassioned tenderness of soul, wbich sa¬ tisfied their sanguine wishes, and cou vinced them that, though the warm current of с В natural
natural affection may for awhile be di¬ verted from its proper channel, yet it will aiways return, when the heart is permitted to give way to its unrestrained feelings. The quick approach of Mabel warned tbem to retire. Reluctantly they took leave of lady Elinor, wbo cut off one of tbe long glossv ringlets of her hair for Fre- derie to deliver to his youngest sister. The lover pressed the dear treasure to bis lips: be ivould not have exchanged it, eould each separate bair have been turned into threads of gold.—" I must share with Flora tbis precious gift, my fair cousin," said he; " and ivhen next we meet, which I hope will not be at any far distant pe¬ riod, I shall expect to receive for myself'a. still dearer present than this silken curl." Mabel now hastily entered, and inform¬ ed them tbat madame was returned. The friends bad only time to kiss the hand of her amiable young pupil, and to hurry back to thek former station, ivhen tbe go¬ verness appeared. AVith truth tbey could botb
both affirm that they hael received the highest gratification from their morning's amusement ; nor did the artful French¬ woman suspect their meaning, as sbe had left Mabel to guard lady Elinor, and lrad also enjoined her ladyship not to leave her chamber until her return. Of Mabel's fidelity, madame had the best opinion, as it was through hermeans that the girl was placed about the person e>f lady Elinor : but Mabel wanted neither sense nor feel¬ ing. She loved lady Elinor, and despised her duenna; and no human being ever rejoiced more sincerely than did Mabel at the prospect of her young lady having se¬ cured to berseli* the affections of such a desirable loveras Frederic Manningham. Instead, tlierefore, of Mabel becoming tbe spy over the actions of lady Elinor, she resolved to use her utmost endea¬ vours to favour the wishes of Frederic, and to assist ber ladyship in claiming, if ne¬ cessary, the protection of bis family. Ma¬ bel bad herself a lover, a youth who lived с 4 not
not far distant from tbe verge of the castle- grounds, and was tbe son of a farmer wbo was a tenant of the marchioness. This young man, and Mabel had often con¬ versed together about the secluded life ivhich lady Elinor seemed destined to lead, and in commiserating her flite, felt most forcibly ihc goodness of Providence, wbich had placed them in a sphere of life so different, anel so happy. It ivas through thè help of her lover that Mabel proposed to carry on tbe cor¬ respondence betiveen her ladyship and Mr. Manningham. She knew that she could trust to his prudence and caution, and she therefore intended to confide to him a piece of intelligence whicii she was assured would give him the sincerest pleasure, and to request that he would always call at the post-office for the letters of Frederic, wliich sbe could easily convey ţo her hand the same evening, as she was in the habit of seeing him generally every day r . This arrangement ivas quickly made known to lady
lady Elinor, who could not deny to Ma¬ bel the interest she felt in the success of her friendly plans; neither did she attempt to conceal from her the favourable im¬ pression which Frederic had made on her mind. : " I shall be too happy, dear Mabel," said her ladyship, " if I am permitted to receive the testimonies of Mr. Manning- ham's kindness without; our correspond¬ ence being discovered by madame; and • should F ever, be so blest as to be domes¬ ticated int his charming.family, I shall think light of all the vexations^md dis¬ appointments ivhich X eternally meet with at home." " Trust tó · my respectful affection," re> plied Mabel, - " for every assistance ivhich either*myself or. Thomas can afford you;- and as to madame Dubois, it shall be hard indeed if. L arrt-not a^matcbfor her. To* deceive a Frenchwoman wilL be no easy matter, but I think.in this case that I shalLbe too many for her. If your lady- c. 5 - ship-
ship 'dbes not betray yourself, I'll engage that you shall be happily settled in the family of lady Manningham before this day month; and your ladyship knows that w f hen once you are the wife of Mr. Fre¬ deric, madame will lose all power over you." ' " Siy kind-hearted Mabel," said lady Elinor, affectionately, " your good wishes and your love for me lead your judg¬ ment astray. How* readily dò yòu ar¬ range every thing according to your own * warm feelings, without ever remembering that I have parents whose consent it will •be necessary to obtain !" " Oh, if your ladyship waits until you obtain their consent," cried Mabel, " you may bid adieu to all hope of ever be¬ coming a bride; and it would be an eternal shame if you ^vere sufïèred much longer to pass the sweetest'hours of your life in this dreary old building, ^where yòu' are treated like a child, and kept 'under as much as if you had not arri ved- to years of
of discretion. Mercy on me! who in their senses ever thought of adling а young- lady of seventeen ' a baby fit only for the nursery.' When the marchioness said this, she must have known herself that she was uttering a falsehoood. No, no, my lady, you must not wait for that which you never will obtain. Heaven has in¬ troduced to you a relation and a friend, both of whom seem ready to die, if necessary, to serve you ; and I declare, upon my w r ord, if I was a lady like you, that I should be extremely puzzled to know to which of them I should give the preference." Lady Elinor smiled upon the lively Mabel, as she said—" If beauty were to decide my choice, I might, like you, be puzzled, my dear Mabel, toascertain whicb face or form was most perfect I should, however, select Mr. Mackenzie for à friend, for I feel that I could already love him as a brother, and that I could rely upon his word with fearless confidence. But, Ma¬ bel, I know not why, yet my heart feels c G differently
differently towards my cousin ; perhaps it is because he is related. ,to me ; yet if 1 was asked which I should prefer as a part¬ ner for life, I should say Mr. Manning¬ ham." " I knew that, my lady, an hour ago," cried Mabel, archly. " I no sooner be¬ held you and Mr. Manningham take leave of each other, than I said to myself, it is Mr. Frederic that lady Elinor has made choice of—it is Mr. Frederic that will be¬ come her deliverer from this melancholy prison. But, my lady, you will not for¬ get, when you are lady Elinor Manning¬ ham, the promise which you made your faithful Mabel ?" *·' No, Mabel," replied her ladyship, em¬ bracing her, " whatever good awaits me, you, and .Thomas shall share it with me. No, Mabel, I can never forget you. To your steady affection, and lively converse, I am indebted fora^few cheerful moments, and wherever I am, Mabel, there shall you be also." Mabel
Mabel kisseel the band of lady Elinor with respectful devotion, then left her to execute some orders, preparatory to her making another shexv at the din ner- table of madame and her guests. Conscious that the latter were now fully convinced of her reluctance to forward any plans of madame, and of her good wishes to¬ wards themselves, Mabel felt less embar¬ rassment at obtruding herself upon tbeir notice, especially as it gave Frederic an opportunity to whisper every now and then some fond message to her lady, while Edward was compelled to entertain a less pleasing object than the goodnattired Ma¬ bel. Next morning, by break of day, the chaise was ordered to be at the castle, that the travellers might begin theirjourney to London. Frederic most earnestly be¬ sought Mabel to persuade lady Elinor to give him one more interview before he set off; and Edward felt even more soli¬ citude than his friend to gain another sight of
tİıe ole! bouseket-per, sínre ît might jbe ín Iar ¡}>n\tr to inform him of something whieh be iiad still to iearii concernitig bis parente Y< t how to obtain a glimpse of 1ь r lit '. v a not, unk^s thr-ıuh the in- ÍLi^tni un ofthe irieiìe'di . ľab-al. Bvdint oťa little artífice, he contrived to mention to her the kindness iihk-h Bridget had shewn him tbe preceding evenmg, and his wibh to huie an opportunity of speaking to her again bafore be left the cattle. Nei er did a luxer long more ardently for the appointed hour which would bless bim with the sight of a favourite mistress, than did Edward for the moment of his retiring fov tbe night At length, to the grief of madame, and the joy of the young men, the old clock-gave notice that the family should separate. Madame affirmée! . tliat the clock was too fast ; but Mabel reminded her that it was scarcely ever known to vary in its time. Madame, how¬ ever, persisted, and another half hour passed in restless impatience on the part of Ed¬ ward
ward and Frederic, while the enamoured duenna seemed loth to give up their so¬ ciety. She promised to be up by their hour of rising, tbat she migbt see that they partook of the breakfast whieh she had given orders to be got reaeli\ anu then, wilh evident reluctance, suffered tbem to depart for their respective chambers. Edward hurried to his room, in the se¬ cret hope of finding the communicative Bridget. He no sooner entered than her voice saluted him with—" Here I am, dear. I have been waiting tbis half hour, because Mabel told me that you wished to see me once again before you went ; but I should have -come here if sbe hael not, for I longed to hear you speak again." Edward thanked her in the gentlest ac¬ cents, and entreated that she would accept of a trifle, as a remembrance as well as reward for the trouble he had given, her. " Money is of no use to me, love, now," said old Bridget. ". My wants are few, and they are provided for in the family." " But
" But tiiere are others who are less for¬ tunate," replied Edward, " mid to whom tbis trifle might bestow comfort and hap¬ piness. For instance, should you hear from the poor Aliee\ whom you spoke of so kindly last night, and hear that she is distressed, would you not rejoice to be able to afford her relief?" " Ah, tliat I would!" exclaimed Bridget, earnestly, " tbat I ivould î for she wis as kind a hearted girl as overlived. Rivtl never ei'ipect to hear from her again. It is now near nineteen years ago since she left the eastle, all of a hurry ; nobody knew ivhen, or how, or w here she went. My old lady bad only been dead a fortnight, and the present marchioness took to her bed the dav before, and never left her room for three weeks after. Well, I can't say but I was glad to hear of this sIkíw of feeling in* к-л·, because we all know that she had at times behaved very bad and ungrate¬ fully to her aunt, and we thought that she now repented, and was sorry for her conduct,
conduct, for she took on sadly, and would let no one come near her but Alk íť \ and an okl lady w T ho had lived many years as companion to her aunt and who died herself soon after sbe lost her mistres. Poor Mrs. Latimer! sbe was a dear good ■-oui, but sbe helped to spoil the mar¬ chioness as much as lady Fitz- Ari hur. 4 ' " Had tbe marchioness no medical ad¬ vice 1 ,"' inquired Edivarel, " during her ill¬ ness ?" " None tbat ever I heard of," said Bridget. " I believe it ivas only her conscience that was affected. Well, never shall I forget the night before my old lady died. I was talking about her to Mrs. Latimer, very melancholy, anel looking every now and then to see if sbe still slept, when Alice eame suddenly into the chamber, lookmg, as I thought, flurried* and begged Mrs. Latimer to go to Miss Fitz-Arthur, who wanted her. The old lady desired me and Alice to remain with my mistress, telling the latter to call her, if she awoke. I longed
to see my young lady, hut ϊ dared not to ditto-bey her orders, which were, that no person but Alice or Mrs. Latimer should approach her. I asked Alice how she wa-s, and sbe said that she fretted sadly, * Ah, Alice,' mid I, * an evil conscience needs no accuser.' Welk ive sat und watched by the bedside of my lady, thinking all the while that Mrs. Latimer staid a lono: while, and wondering what couid possess Miss Fitz-Arthur to sleep in this cham¬ ber, and in the dead of the winter, when not a soul was near her ; for at that time not a room in the gallery was occupied but fhis, Mrs. Intimer came to us at last, as pale as her w r hite apron, and all of a tremble. So I got up, and gave her some wine, and asked how was my young lady? * Mrs. Latimer motioned to Alice to go to her mistress, and the poor girl did not want bidding a second time. The old lady then told me that Miss Fitz-Arthur was now better, but that she had been violently attacked with spasms in her sto¬ mach.
mach. My poor dear mistress now gave a heavy sigh. Alas! it was the last effort of nature ; she w^asgone before we couki raise her from her pillow. Sbe was a good mistress to me, and I honour her me¬ mory," " How did the marchioness bear the news of her aunt's death ?" said Edward, anxious to learn more respecting his mo¬ ther. " Mrs. Latimer would not tell her tbat night," said Bridget, " but sbe left me to ivatch by the side of the corpse, while she attended upon Miss Fitz-Arthur. The next day she told me that it would be well if my young lady got over her grief and despair, as she accused herself for not bemg with her aunt when she died. ' I want her to let me send for a physician,' said Mrs. Latimer, 6 but she won't hear of it, anel indeed I know that I can pre¬ scribe for her disorder as well as a doctor. 1 Well, my old lady was buried, and her niece declared heiress to every thing which belonged
belonged to her. We thought she would have come down at the opening of tlie will, but she did not, and soon after Alice disappeared, to the grief and surprise of ns í Ί1. I asked Mr». Latimer what had become of her but she could only say that m\ h»dy and she had quarrelled, and that ¿h'* had left the castle in the dead of tlie night" " That had a str-ange look, I confess," said Edward, with emotion. ** But could you never learn the true cause of her re- moval ?" *' Never: we only suspected it. You must know that ibe gentleman who was in love with my lady used always to be¬ have very kindly to Alice, who was a sharp, sensible, handsome girl, and very serviceable· to the lovers,, for Alice carried all their letters, and watched' when they were together; lest Mrs. Latimer should surprise them. Ail of a sudden, about five months before my old lady died, Alice told, me that her mistress had fallen out with
my favourite, and had determined never to have him. The», said I» it is because she means to marry the marquis of An¬ endale. Alice feared so tc-o. Well, the ■>ame day I mw my young darling. He kissed my old cheeks as kindly as if I Iiad been his mother^—* Bridget,' said he, * I must set off for London this even in«?. о My father is there, and rcq ures my im¬ mediate presence, but I hope Ishall see you soon again, Bridget, rbr I leave all tliat I value mosi on earth behind ma'—* Ah,' >ays f, ' full well do I know tiiat, dar¬ ling ; but 1 hope you and my young lady have not quarrelled ?'—He sighed deeply. Heaven bless hnn! I think I hear him now.—* Bridget* said he, in a trembling voice, * Bridget, 1 fear that Älise Fitz- Arthur does not love me as dearly as once she did ; yet -she ought to love me more; she knows that I would sacrifice every thing for'her sake. I have begged on my knees that she would become my Wife, but she h*s refused my petition. Ah,
Ah, Bridget! if you knew how I idolize her, you would pity me.'—Well, to make short of my story, he and I talked a good deal together about my young lady, and I tried to console him all in my power, for little did I think how true his words w r ould come to pass, and that I should never see him more. So we parted for the last time, He went to London, and his father bad him sent abroad imme¬ diately. I expected that Miss Fitz-Ar¬ thur would have been broken-hearted; but, instead of that, she never shed a tear, but looked as gay and as happy as ever—nay, she grew quite fat, as I used to say, upon her lover's misery, and no¬ thing ever ailed her, until about a week before my lady died. Then she seemed to fret, and kept much in her chamber ; yet Alice told me that she never read any of her lover's letters, nor ever sent him any answers. Oh, what a world of sin she has to answer for on his account ! So, as I had told Alice, it came to pass ; for
for in a months time after iıer aunt was buried, she set off for London, anei six months afterwards sbe came back agaiu the bride ofthe marquis of Anendaie." " But Alice had left the elisile long before that period?" said Edward. *' Ah, poor girl ! so she had," replied Bridget Carter. '* Poor girl ! I dare say they wrongfully accused İıer." *" Of what?" inquired Edward, with emotion. " Why, it was said," continued Bridget, " that Alice and tlie discarded lover of Miss Filz- Arthur were too fonel of each other, anei that it ivas found out by her laely, who rejected the offer of bis hand on that account ; but sbe soon forgave Alice, anel meant to keep her as if nothing hael happened : however, Alice went off all of a sudden оле night, or early in tbe morning, before auy of us ivere stirring, and one of the housemaids did say, but 1 don't believe it, that she heard a child cry
cry the day before Alice quitted the castle."' Edward started convulsively ; he turned pale and faint—his breathing became diffi¬ cult, but the voice of tlie old housekeeper again called for his attention. " Such is the report among the ser¬ vants/ 5 said Bridget, " some of whom knew of Mi.ss Fitz-Arthur having a se¬ cret lover, but they knew not who he was, and they feared her anger too much to tell of their stolen meetings. True or false, Alice had more friends than enemies at the castle, and some even ventured to whisper that -she had come to an untimely end, for we knew that the marchioness was terribly resentful." Bridget might have gone on for an hour longer, without meeting with any interruption from Edward ; he was too deeply affected by what he had just heard, too sorely grieved and heart-struck at the hints thrown out by Bridget against the purity
purity of his mother's character, to articu¬ late a word in reply. " Well, Heaven preserve you, love !" cried she, rising slowly from her chair; and tben, leaning on her stick, she added —" You will carry with you the prayers and blessings of a weak old woman, who may never live to hear your sweet voice again ; but she will remember you night and morning when she addresses her Creator ; and when you see the marchio¬ ness, you will not let her worm out of you anything tbat I have told you con¬ cerning poor Alice." Edward, at the mention of his mother's name, started wildly from his seat, and grasping the withered hand of Bridget, said, in a hurried voice—" Do you believe the rumour raised against tbe chastity of Alice?" Bridget, although her eyes were too dim to discover the workings of Edivard's features, or the internal agony which he endured, nevertheless felt that his hand vol. iv. i> trembled
trembled in her oivn—"Do I believe it?" said she, wondering at the earnestness of h's inquiry. " Why, darling, if I did believe it, I should not think the worse of poor Alice for having listened te> such a \oiee as yours, and for having placed eoníieíeiK-e in a man who looked too much a woman's friend to ruin and leave her. But looks are false, and so are honied tongues; and if poor Alice was indeed be¬ guiled of her innocence, I say, be the fault on tbe bead of him ivho robbed her of her virtue, not on the poor girl ivho was led astray. Cod bless you, darling ! take care that your cem science keeps clear of so fôul a crime as that of injuring a young and tender maiden, whose sole treasure is her gooel name, wiiose sole portion her innocence." So saying, Bridget Carter hobbled out of the chamber, without noticing the at¬ titude or countenance of Edward, who had sunk back in bis chair, in a state of mental agitation bordering on phrenzy. CHAP-
CHAPTER Ш.
Edward no sooner felt sensible tbat he was alone, than he rose and paced the room with the hurried step of deep-pier¬ cing anguish ; his brain seemed on fire, yet bis heart was cold as ice; at times it neariy ceased to beat—then again the rapid circulation of tbe vital fluid brought on so terrible a palpitation, that he was obliged to pause, and lean against the nearest object for support. At length, striking his forehead wdth violence, he ex¬ claimed, in a voice broken by tears—"Ah, mother ! dear' mother ! too well do I now comprehend the meaning of your mys¬ terious silence respecting the author of my being—your reluctance, shame, con¬ fusion—all, all is now explained, and I— wdiat am I ?—a thing without a name— d 2 without
without a claim to any but that of my deluded mother; the.only birthright I possess is obloquy and shame-—the only portion, a mother's tears. Stay, is tbat all ?—Does not tbe curse ofthe ill-treated marchioness follow my steps?—would she not hate and despise me, if she knew that I was ihe son of her faithless lover—tbe son of that Alice whom her liberal mind had raised to be the friend and confident of herself? Oh, if she so far forgot the humanity of her sex, anel counselled my weak erring parent to abandon me for life, some excuse can now be formed for one ivho had cause to hate me from my birth, and wbose continued patronage to my mother proves that sbe has not a " deviľs heart" My soul absolves her from her imputed crime, and re-admits her dear-loved image—again she is my idol, and the mistress of my destiny. If I am condemned to fe j el her hate, her scorn, lier contempt, it shall not be ac¬ companied with tlie accusation of having deceived
deceived her. I will acknowledge mv- self as the son of Alice, and, if necessary-, expiate with my life tbe injury she sus¬ tained by tbe mutual fault committed by my parents." * Edward cast a shuddering glance round the dimly-illuminated chamber. *—" Per¬ haps," said he, " in this very room my father first breathed tbe language of flat¬ tery to my young, and, until tben, inno¬ cent mother. What foe to constancy and truth at that moment ruled his destiny ? Oh, how could he leave perfection like the marchioness—how breathe the vow of love on any lip but her's, whose touch must then have been enchantment ? Oh, father ! if at this instant thy spirit can look doivn from its blest abode, infuse into the soul of thy unhappy son the balm of comfort and consolation !" Edward now flung himself on the bed and burst into tears ; he felt that he had been abandoned by that father whose spi¬ rit he had thus adjured—that he had been d 3 flung
flung solely upon the care and affection of a young and inexperienced mother, who, if her heart had not been true to maternal feelings, would have abandoned liim also. " Had such been tbe case," exclaimed Edward, " iiow different would now have been my prospects ! Brought up on cha¬ rity, educated hy presuming ignorance, apprenticed to some hateful trade, how ivould my days have passed ! how bitter ivould liave been my existence ! But Heaven did net abandon me, though my father did; Heaven nerved the heart of ray mother to withstand tbe advice of her injured benefactress ; Heaven raised me up a father in the kind, the noble Mackenzie ; and Heaven has abundantly blessed my endeavours to support myself, and be¬ stowed on me friends wiiose kindness ought to make amends for the pangs I now feel." Exhausted by his emotions, he at length sunk into a state of forgetfulness ; and
and thougii his dreams were wild and confused, yet his slumbers remained un¬ broken until the servant rouseel him by tbe desire of madame Dubois, who was already up and waiting for him in the breakfast-parlour. Edivarel was not long in joining her and his friend, who rallied him good-natureeily upon his tardiness to quit the castle ; but bis raillery ceased the instant that he became informed of his in¬ disposition, which was too visible, as soon as the flush had left his cheek, ivhich then became deathy pale. The young men left the castle of the marchioness with feelings far different from those on their arrival. Frederic, by dint of persuasion and harel begging, had gained another interview with lady Eli¬ nor, in which he had renew r ed his vows of fidelity and attachment, and had gained her consent to return in a short time», should anything occur to render her situation more irksome than it noiv was. With the light buoyancy of ardent hope, d 4 of
of happmess already anticipated with the sanguine feelings of youth as yet unchill- eel by disappointment, Frederic imparted to his friend the result of his last inter¬ view with the daughter of the marchio¬ ness. He expatiated on her beauty, her innocence of manners, and lastly, upon the cruelty of lier mother in biding her from the world, at an age when she was capable of enjoying all its pleasurable amusements. 14 I mean," said Frederic, " to get my dear mother into one of her best tem¬ pers, and then I shall confide to her the object of my journey, and its ultimate success. She dislikes the marchioness for her want of maternal affection, and there¬ fore cannot fail to feel interested in the iiite of her neglected daughter. I expect that my mother, who, if she pleases, can act as nobly as any one, will agree to my request of receiving tbis sweet girl under her protection—and tbat she will not hesitate to give her consent to our union. In
In that case, who will be happier than myself, Mackenzie ?" Edward smiled languidly on his ena¬ moured friend.—" Could my prayers pre¬ vail, you w r ould be the happiest of the happy," said he ; " for never did man possess a kinder, truer, nobler heart than thine, my Frederic.'^ Edward at that moment felt as if his own would burst. He had never until now concealed any of his vexations from Manningham ; but his present sorrow was sacred—it was such as he dareel not even breathe to the ear of his bosom friend ; for how coidd he whisper forth a sound that would reflect on the chastity of his mo¬ ther ? His own errors were laid open to the eye of friendship, but those of an¬ other, and that other a parent» were of too sacred a nature even W meet the ear of Frederic. Uiiivble to give vent as usual to his fbelings in the presence of his dear-loved friend,. Edward strove to repress them a& much as possible, and for the first time in Ώ S his
bis life be felt relieved when the chaise set down young Manningham at the door of his father's bouse. Edward excused him¬ self from alighting, and proceeded to the dwelling of Mrs, Alexander Mackenzie, The warm affection with which every individual welcomed his return cb eerend for awhile his agitated mind ; for w T here is the heart incapable of feeling the delightful influence of affection, although it emanates from a being inferior to it¬ self? And Edward was not above shewing that the respectful tenderness of honest Oliver gave bim as pure a gratification as if Oliver had been his^ equal instead of İıis domestic, Mr. Lindsay tenderly embraced the comforter and consoler of his adverse for¬ tunes, and after listening attentively to the description of his journey, and the reception ivhich he hael met witb at tbe castle, he put into bis bands a letter from bis mother, which had arrived that morn¬ ing, telling him at the same time, that be
be had received one from bis uncle, s't James Lindsay, and witb it a pressing in¬ vitation to come immediately to Ireland, wbich invitation he intended to accept, but had delayed writing until Edward's return ; he should now answer it by that night's post : and Edward, wiio firmly believed tbat change of scene and company were essential to bis recovering his accustomed cheerfulness, made no objection to his accepting tbe invitation of his uncle, though under any other cir¬ cumstances he would have lamented the deprivation of his society, as it robbed bim of the exquisite gratification of con¬ tributing to his comforts, and softening the poignancy of his distress. Edward opened witb additional eager¬ ness tbe letter of bis mother—of that mo¬ ther whom he now believed to have been despoiled of her innocence, and then abandoned, by the lover of Miss Fitz- Arthur. His eyes dimmed with tears as he traced tbe well-known characters, n 6 and
and his cheek crimsoned with the warm blush of shame, as be remembered who and wbat be was ; yet bis heart throbbed with delight ivhen be came to that part of her epistle wbich informed him of her intention to begin immediately her jour¬ ney to London, as her young companion ivas too terrified at the idea of the water, for her to hazard her health and tran¬ quillity by a voyage against her inclina¬ tion. Mrs. Mackenzie expressed a hope that her sister-in-law would be able to accommodate her in her house, and Ed¬ ward instantly proposed to leave the apart¬ ments, that the wish of his mother might be gratified ; and as his new lodgings were in readiness to receive him, this would not be attended with any inconvenience to himself. As for Mr. Lindsay, he meant to avail himself of his uncle's in¬ vitation wit].out loss of time; therefore, the removal of his dear young friend woulel not disturb any of his intended arrange¬ ments. The
The day before Mr. Lindsay set off for Ireland, he employed himself in destroying a quantity of papers, which he only con¬ sidered as useless lumber. Among a bun¬ dle of letters, one attracted his attention, and this he now recollected was of too much importance to share the same fate as its companions : it was the letter ivhich had been found by Margaret Grey among the clothes of her grandson, and which she had consigned to the care of Mr. Lindsay a short time previous to her decease. Mr. Lindsay once more perused the letter, and then, calling to Edward, who ivas assisting bim in the disposal of his papers, he presented him with the letter of the dean of H ------, telling him at the same time, by what means it came into his pos» session, and his own promise of concealing it from his knowledge until circumstar-^s authorized his divulging the seer io was his godfather. " I now consider myself at liberty to confide to your prudence," said Mr. Lind¬ say,
say, " this document, which perhaps may lead to the discovery of who ivas your fatlier. At least, my beloved Edward, it will inform you of one thing, of ivhich you have often wished to be acquainted, namely, the rank and station of the per¬ son wdio was your unknown godfather. I leave it entirely to yourself to decide upon the propriety of concealing or be¬ traying tbis circumstance to your mother, who has evidently taken great pains to prevent your receiving the promised fa¬ vour and affection of the benevolent dean of И ------ Г It may easily be conceived that Ed-- ward's surprise was not trifling upon his discovering that his godfather was the honourable Maurice Colvill, tbe father of lady James Osborne and of Mr. Colvill, both of whom had manifested towards himself the kindest feelings. Again his е и riosity was excited to a painful degree, to learn the cause of his mother's shunning a connexion which w r oujid have been so highly
highly advantageous to her son. His internal monitor once more suggested that her mysterious secrecy could alone pro¬ ceed from his being connected with the family of the Colvills. Yet how, in wiiat manner, and by what means, shoukl he dare to assert his right to their notice and friendship? and if such were really the case—if indeed he could claim kindred with them, how strange, how singular it appeared, that Providence should so or¬ dain it tbat his godfather should be the dean of H ------! Edivard felt in a manner bewildered by the variety of his conjectures. The more İıis mind dwelt on the last conversation ivhich he had with his mother, and tbe discourse of olel Bridget Carter, the more perplexed and elisordered were his ideas. Yet, amidst the confusion of bis brain, be felt tbat, ivbatever migbt be bis future destiny, he bad hitherto been the peculiar care of Heaven. Friends he possessed, and faithful friends, on wbose attachment be
he could rely. His prospects also were bright, and bis circumstances easy ; he had only one alloy to his happiness—bis ignorance respecting his birth, and his fears lest bis mother had been the means of withdrawing from the marchioness the lover of her early years, wlio was most probably the possessor of her first affec¬ tions. Edward, however, had but little time to give way to melancholy ideas. His approaching separation from Mr.. Lindsay gave bim some uneasiness, but ivhen he considered that his eariy friend and bene¬ factor ivould derive considerable advan¬ tages from his removal, he ceaseel to- re¬ gret it, especially as Mr. Lindsay promised to keep up with him a regular correspon¬ dence, ivhich would contain a faithful account of ûl that passed during his absence. Edward weuM have pleaded for the undutiful Clara, had he not been deterred by a fear of wounding the feelings of her father,
father, who appeared firm as ever in his resolution of not seeing her. He took the most affectionate leave of Edward, who accompanied him part of tbe way ; but the name of his daughter never once escaped his lips, and Edward felt a very natural reluctance to start a subject which would increase the pain of parting. His own removal from tbe house of Mrs. Alexander Mackenzie followed that of Mr. Lindsay; anel Edward, with his trusty servant, honest Oliver, soon took possession of their new abode, ivhich was not far distant from the town house of sir Joseph Reniñe. This gentleman's kind¬ ness knew of no abatement ; he loved and esteemed Edward, and had his future welfare strongly at heart; and now tbat he was left to himself, with no other guardian than bis oivn honour to shield him against the temptations of the worid, sir Joseph seemed to feel a warmer interest in his concerns, kindly resolving to watch over bim as much as lay in his power. Sir
Sir Joseph knew from experience the many dangers whicii crowd within the circle of fashionable amusements, and he therefore trembled lest his young friend might relax in those studies which were to establish his name in the list of British artists. Edward, however, continued firm in his favourite pursuit, notwithstanding the allurements of pleasure, and the blandish¬ ments of beauty. He was now settled in his new lodgings, and his first hour of leisure was given to Mr. Colvill and lady James Osborne, who received him with every demonstration of regard, and ac¬ tually compelled him to remain and pass the day with them, telling him, that in the evening he would meet a small party of friends, to whom his presence would be an agreeable surprise. Edward was indeed most agreeably sur¬ prised, when he discovered that the friends mentioned by lady James were the Man- ninghams, who were accompanied by lady
indy anel sir Arthur Vivian, and bis bro¬ ther, who by tbis time hael forgotten the disappointment which he had met with in his first choice, and who in the course of the evening gave many strong indica¬ tions of having formed another attachment, which, as Edward then considereel to be hopeless, occasioned him real uneasiness. Mr. Vivian was a young man of pleasing address, superior understanding, handsome person, and amiable disposition ; he was in possession of a large estate, bequeathed to him by a relation, independent of other family expectations—and in fact was es¬ teemed by all prudent parents as an eligi¬ ble match for their daughters. Edward had always regarded Mr. Vivian as a most desirable acquaintance, and none more sincerely lamented his unfortunate attach¬ ment to Clara Lindsay than did Edward Mackenzie. With these friendly sentiments towards him, it was natural that Edward should feel pained for the moment, on witnessing his
his marked attentions to Flora Manning- f* ham, whom he considered as the affianced bride of lord George; but Frederic was not long in imparting to his friend the pleasing intelligence of his lordship's dis¬ missal. It was the first time that he had seen Edward since their return from the Castle, as he had accompanied his mother the same day to the seat of sir Arthur Vivian, and had only been in London a few hours before their visit to lady James, " When í came home," said Frederic, " the first new s which I heard was, that my father had declined the proposals of lord George, as he had discovered some improprieties in his lordship's mode of life, which made him unwilling to commit the happiness of my sister to his care. You know what has ever been my opinion, Mackenzie,, of his lordship ; therefore may judge that this intelligence afforded me infinite satisfaction* especially as I never believed tliat Flora had any regard for him, I hastened to my sister, and quickly dis¬ covered
covered that I was right in my conjectures, and, as she afterwards told me, had only permitted the attentions of this booby lord, that she might be freed from others of a less objectionable nature. ' In fact, my dear brother,' said Flora, * I thought that no one who really knew me would ever suppose me either such a fool or a knave as to be in love with lord George; for this reason I made use of him as a shield to guard me from the attacks of wit and manly eloquence, wliich I had not spirits to encounter, and I did so with little reluctance, because I was convinced that lord George had no real affection for me, and that he was even incapable of feel¬ ing any resentment for my supposed incon¬ stancy, should the real state of my heart ever be maele known to him.'—After Flora liad acknowledged thus much, I taxed her with concealing from me the motives which had first led her to allow of his lordship's adelresses ; and, after the usual shyness of ber sex, accompanied by s'.ghs, blushes, and
and so forth, Flora confessed that her af¬ fection had long been bestowed upon an object who was unconscious of her tender¬ ness, and who was in fact attached to an¬ other." Edward felt an uneasy sensation at his heart at these last words of Frederic ; he cast a glance towards the lovely Flora, which did not diminish his embarrassment; but again the low whisper of his friend met his ear. " With much persuasion I gained from my sister the name of him who had so lonff occupied her thoughts, My own wishes liad for years been placed on an object whom I tliought worthy of her heart, and whom my owm friendship had selected as the husband of my Flora. I expected to hear her name this chosen friend, this favourite of my own, and I verily believe tbat I turned pale with vexation at the mentiem of another. I need not tell you, Edward, that it ivas Vivian, " The same day I accompanied my mother and
and Flora to the seat of sir Arthur, His brother was there, and returned with us to town. Constantia, who is extremely par¬ tial to him, has so blazoned forth his good qualities to my mother, and has repeated so many instances of bis amiableness of disposition, and his warm regard for our family, tbat I think there is little fear of his being a second time disappointed in bis choice. Con stantia was tbe confidant of his secret attachment to Flora, which, I understand, was formed soon after the shameful elopement of Clara, whose con¬ duct quickly erased from his mind every tender idea connected with so worthless an object. I am disappointed, Mackenzie, but I must bear with my vexation, since Flora has bestowed her love on a man whom we all esteem and respect." Edward, though considerably agitated, nevertheless did ample and willing justice to the merits of Mr. Vivian; yet itwas some time before he eould regain his com¬ posure, before he could acquire sufficient self-
self-command to address either Flora or her lover. Nor was Edward the only em¬ barrassed person of the party. Lady Vi¬ vian had not seen him since her marriage, and, though firmly attached to her hus¬ band, yet the recollection of her former sentiments in favour of Edward rnade her for a few moments feel confused in his presence. This, however, soon wore off, and she was then enabled to converse w r ith him on the subject of past scenes and fu¬ ture expectations, wdth ease and vivacity. The party were on the point of breaking «ip, when lady Jane ------was announced. " My dear friends," said her ladyship, not observing Edward, who was conversing with Frederic at the further end of the room, " I am just come from the opera, and could not pass your door without stepping in to inquire how you all arc. My dear Flora, have you got rid of your distressing headache ? Oh, I see that you liave—Vivian's eloquence is a sovereign charm against all bodily pain." "Her
" Her ladyship does not appear to be offended at the dismissal of her brother," said Edward to his companion. " Not in the least," replied Frederic, 4< She is conscious of his weakness of in- tellect, and was only surprised that Flora could tolerate his society as slie did. Lady Jane is neither deficient in good-sense nor good-nature : but see, sbe turns her eyes tbis way." Edward bowed as be met tbe glance of lady Jane, and instinctively moved for¬ ward, as be felt it necessary to apologize for not having called on her laelyship. Lady Jane endeavoured to look and to speak to bim with an air of indifference, but Edivard had placeel himself by ber side, and, someahow or other, had, either intentionally or inadvertently, taken her hand : liis touch dispelled the momentary anger of lady Jane—her eyes betrayed tbe power be bad over her ; and as she suf fered him to conduct her to her carriage, her condescension returned, and she iu- vol. xv. ι; vited
vited him to attend her the next even¬ ing to the theatre, an invitation whieh it ivas not to be supposed a young man of nineteen could very well decline. The hand of lady Jane felt the pressure of Ed¬ ward's lips as he assisted her to ascend the •steps.—*' Stay, Mr. Mackenzie," baid lady Jane, as he had retreated a few paces ; " I think you have dropped your glove." Edward, supposing that such might be the case, received the glove from lady Jane, and once more bade her good-night ; he tben re-entered the house of lady James Osborne, and, after a few minutes conver¬ sation with Frederic, he took leave, and returned to his lodgings. Edward had placed the glove given to him by lady Jane in his pocket, and he took it out with some papers on his re¬ turn home. Instead of his own glove, he perceived the white one worn by her lady¬ ship, and, on feeling something hard within it, he discovered, to his great amazement, a valuable jewel, which he had often seen on
on the fair hand of lady Jane. Edward would that instant have gone to the house of the duke, and returned the ring, but that he knew it was late, and his visit at so unseasonable an hour might give of¬ fence to his grace; he therefore deter¬ mined to call the next morning upon her ladyship, and inform her of her mistake. Lady Jane was aware of his visit, and received him in the drawing-room alone. Edward explained the cause of his in¬ truding on her time, and, as he presented to her the ring, gallantly excused himself for retaining the glove. Her ladyship took the ring, and, gazing on it for a moment, said—" It is to this bauble alone that I am indebted for the pleasure of your pre¬ sent visit, Mr. Mackenzie. What will you think of me, when I tell you that I gave it to you with the hope that it would bring you this morning to my father's house, from which you have unkindly ab¬ sented yourself too long ?" '* What should I think," replied Ed- ii £ ward
ward warmly, " but that your ladyship has over-rated my deserts, and set a value upon tbe devotion of one ivho feels too keenly hk oivn inferiority." " I cannot admit that to be true," said lady Jane. " Merit such as yours will always find its level in the highest ranks of society. The advantages which I pos¬ sess are merely those of rank and fortune, neither -of wliich, in a mental point of view, can place me above my waiting- maid ; but the advantages of which you can boast, Mr. Mackenzie, are tliose of genius, talents, and of mind ; they raise you above tbe paltry considerations of for¬ tune, and eyen reflect a lustre upon those whom you honour by your friendship. If tho glove which your gallantry has led you to retain possesses any value in your sight, let me entreat yonr accept¬ ance of what it contained. Keep tbis trille as a memento of my esteem—accept i í for my sake; and, that your delicacy may not be hurt by any supposed obliga- fori,
don, 1 will exchange it for that ivhich you now wear, unless it is rendered valuable? by being the gift of a dearer friend than myself." Edward drew from bis finger the ring wbich had caught her attention, and, placing it on her hand, whieh sparkled with jewels, said that be should feei him¬ self highly, honoured by tbe exchange,, were the ring of her ladyship of less va¬ lue, but that he could not think of re¬ ceiving in its steael a jewel of so mucit worth. Lady Jane gently forced the ring upon the finger of Edwards saying, with a smile, " Time will convince me of the real value wbich you place upon my gift. We view it with different optics. In my eyes, this plain gold ring, wbich once was yours, is far more valuable than that wbicb I re- ejuest you to preserve as long as you shall feel inclined to number me among the list of your sincere friends." e S " Ancl
" And that will be as long as I exist," exclaimed Eelward, with energy. " Take care, Mr. Mackenzie," said lady Jane, " and do not promise morethan you can perform. If once you admit me as your friend, I may expect more than you are willing to bestow T ; and then—" They ivere now interrupted by the en¬ trance of some company, and Edw T ard in a few minutes took leave, not, however, before lady Jane had reminded him of his engagement for the evenmg.
CHAPTER IV. 4t News ! good news ! delightful news, dear master !" cried Oliver, as he opened the door for Edivard; "Mrs. Macken¬ zie is arrived, and has just sent for you. ï told the man that you were from home, but
but that you would soon be back, anel that you would be with her in the twinkling of an eye." Edward's impatience to behold his mo¬ tber woulel not permit liim to make a moment's stay. He flew rather than walked to his former abode, and in a few minutes felt himself once more pressed to the bosom of his parent, who seemed to view hi in with additional kindness, while on his part he could wdth safety affirm that she was dearer to him than ever, because he believed that sbe had been unfortunate.—" But wdiere, dear mo¬ ther," said he, " is 'ss Cameron ?" " She is with me," replied Airs. Mac¬ kenzie, " and only in the next chamber, I will tell her you are here, and that you have inquired for her," In a few minutes she returned, and with her a young lady, whom sîıe introduced to Edward as Janet Cameron. Edward was already prepared to love her, but as lie recognized the fine blue eye of his fa- E 4 ther
ther Mackenzie, whose melting softness was partly concealed by the long dark eye- bshes which rested on the blooming cheek of Janet, his heart seemed to sv/ell with warmer feelings than he had ever known before. It was not beauty which thus captivated hissenses— it was not symmetry of form, nor any particular grace which lurked around the person of Miss Cameron, ulthough she was handsome, well made, and perfectly the gentlewoman—but she had the tender eyes of serjeant Mackenzie, his benevolent look, and his affectionate voice, which stole into the heart of Ed¬ ward, and fixed for ever its best and dear¬ est affections. His lips touched the glow¬ ing cheek of Janet Cameron, and he still held her soft hand within his own. " My children," said Mrs. Mackenzie, " I have prepared you to meet as fiiends, not as strangers, and it gladdens my soul to feel assured that my wishes will not be fruitless. Edward, you have already discovered the resemblance which I men¬ tioned :
tioned: Janet is considered to be very like her uncle Mackenzie." " So like, my dear mother," exclaimed Edward, " that, if you had not told me to the contrary, I should have supposed her to be my sister." Both Mrs. Mackenzie and Miss Ca¬ meron, looked for a. moment confused.— " She is the daughter* of my fondest af¬ fection,? said Mrs. Mackenzie,, " and no child of mine can^ ever be dearer to me than Janet Cameron. She is all and every thing that I. could wish my own Janet to heľ " Dear, aunt," said Janet, in a low voice tbat penetrated into the heart of Edward like the well-remembered tones of his adopted father's, " dear aunt, do not let your kii d· ness for me lead you to overrate my me¬ rits. Time wiil convince my cousin Fid- ward that I am less perfect than you think me ; but,. whatever may· be my failings, want of gratitude and affection will not be among them," e 5L " I will
" I will pledge myself for the truth of your assertion," said Edward, warmly. " The countenance which resembles tbat of my beloved father, can never be a mask for treachery and deceit—the voice wbose softened tones remind me of his can never give utterance to a falsehood. I will be surety, dear cousin, that you prove to be all that my mother has described you." " Do not bind yourself too hastily, cou¬ sin Edward," replied Janet, blushing con¬ fusedly, as his piercing eye met the timid glance of her own : " I am a w r oman, therefore liable to error, even when I seek most to do good. But such a heart as yours will find excuses for my faults, if they do not originate from vicious incli¬ nations ; and the likeness which I bear to my dear, dear uncle, and the love wbich still I cherish for his memory, as well as my earnest wish to be found worthy of tbe regard of bis adopted son, must plead for me, my dear cousin Edward, should you ever be deceived in tbe opinion which you
you have formed of me and my good qua¬ lities." " Oh, look but like my father Macken¬ zie—-speak but like him, and my soul will cling to you, lovely Janet, even were you otherwise than my mother has repre¬ sented. So dearly, so sacredly do I che¬ rish the memory of my adopted father, that, next to himself, you, Janet, will be adored." " A pretty confession !" cried Mrs. Mac¬ kenzie, while her dark eyes sparkled with a portion of their youthful fire ; " a pretty confession! and before your mo¬ ther, Edward ! Weil, my dear boy, you have my consent to love Janet as ten¬ derly as you please ; she has a heart that is capable of beating as fondly, as faith¬ fully as your own ; and if my beloved husband could look down from bis blest abode, and witness the present scene,, his spirit would rejoice in the bond of kind¬ ness and affection which is thus cementedé e 6 I trust
I trust for ever, between you and that Ja¬ net whom, next to you, he loved dearly " Edward embraced his mother; tears filled his eyes, while those of Mrs. Mac¬ kenzie and Janet were equally humid. He turned toivards Miss Cameron, and joining her hand with that of his parent, said—" Dearest cousin, the heart of ray ividowed mother has aelopted you for her child. Be unto ber a daughter such as you have hitherto been, anel you will then possess a double claim to my affec¬ tion.—Oh wherefore, dear mother, have you so long denied me the privilege of seeing my sister ? Do you not remember the last words of her father—-how ten¬ derly he conjured me to love her for bis sake, and to remember as long as I existed that Janet Mackenzie was his child ? Well do I remember it—most ardently do I long to behold her who has so strong a claim upon my love ! Why have you re¬ fused me, mother, the sight of my sister? why
why have you in preference introduced me to my cousin, wbo will more than. divide that tenderness which I wished solely to belong to Janet Mackenzie ?" " Another time we will talk upon tbat subject," said Mrs. Mackenzie gaily, " but let us now enjoy the pleasures of the present moment. You will not injure Janet Mackenzie by loving Janet Came¬ ron." She now questioned him concerning bis own prospects, and Edward replied with bis habitual candour, ¿md his natural dislike of concealment His mother looked grave and thoughtful, as- he repeated to her the fulfilment of his promise to the young son of the marchioness. She de- sireel her niece to withdraw, while she asked, in a tremulous voice, whom he had seen and what he had heard at the Castle ? It was now Edward's turn to look anel to feel both agitated and embarrassed. He hated falsehood, yet how could he now keep to truth—how even hint to his mother
mother the conversation whieh had passed between himself and old Bridget Carter? Mrs. Mackenzie inquired if Edward had seen the old liousekeeper, and he felt bound to reply in the affirmative. " Poor old Bridget!" said Mrs. Mac¬ kenzie, " I thought she had been dead long ago. She was a kind-hearted affec¬ tionate creature, and when I lived at the Castle, î used to take a pleasure in obliging her. Is she as talkative as ever ?" " She 1ms not lost the privilege of her sex, my dear mother," said Edward, try¬ ing to force a smile. " Something in the tones of my voke struck Bridget as re¬ sembling those of the early lover of Miss Fitz-Arthur, and upon that account she honoured me with lier particular atten¬ tion, and, with all the garrulity of age, made me acquainted with her strong re¬ gard for this gentleman, who she said was the secret lover of her young lady." " Did she mention his name?" said Mrs. Mackenzie, in haste, " ЛЧ
" No, mother, it was reserved for you to gratify my curiosity on tbat point. But she mentioned you in terms of kindness and regret, little imagining tbat I w r as your son, or that I had any cause to take a lively interest in all that she said con¬ cerning you." " And what did Bridget say concerning me?" inquireel bis mother with an un¬ steady voice. " That she loved you," replied Edward, with a sigh of painful recollection. " Your unexpected departure from the castle gave her great uneasiness; all the domestics lamented your absence, and feared they knew not wbat. Some attributed it to the vindictive spirit of Miss Fitz-Arthur, others to------" " To what ?" said Mrs. Mackenzie fear fully. " Ah, mother! what, noiv, if I have forgotten the surmises of the servants, or if the perversity of human nature should lead me to keep alive your curiosity, you could
could not be offended, mother, since riie peace of your future life does not depend' upon your being acquainted with the idle reports of the inmates ofthe Castle." " I feel the justice of your reproof, my son," said Mrs. Mackenzie, enelcavourinö: to check her emotion* " The time v/ill eome, nay it seems to be fast approaching, when you will think differently of my silence. Whatever were the rumours to which my sudden departure gave rise, I feel a consolation in knowing that the real motive of my absence remains^ unknownv. and that no imprudence or want of fore*- thought· on my part betrayed tbe secret which at that moment I would.have died to preserve.'' " And yet, mother, chance will some¬ times discover what prudence and fore¬ thought have strove to conceal." " True, dear Edward ; but, in this in¬ stance, chance has not revealed what it has been the chief study of my life to con- iieaL You look incredulous, but your own coolness
coolness upon the subject is the most striking proof of the truth of my asser¬ tion ; and as to the rumours of the Castle, they can never affect my repose. ï may lament for a moment that I have drawn upon myself the censure of those who once regarded me with esteem and affection, nay I may add respect; but if I were even now placed in the same situation, and under the same circumstances, I should not hesitate to devote myself to the same cause." " Mother!" exclaimed Edward, in a tone of astonishment. Mrs. Mackenzie smiled on him tenderly. " I know not why," said she, embracing him, " but I feel at this instant more light and happy than I have done for years. Perhaps it arises from the conviction that I have performed my duty faithfully to all whom I was bound to love and to obey. Perhaps it is from the hope that Janet Cameron, who to me is so deservedly dear, will one day or other become equally so to
to my son. No matter from ivhat source 1 derive my present pleasing emotions, so that you, ray dear Eelward, partake of tliem ivith me." Edward conld not repress a sigh, yet hæ returned the»embrace of his mother, who next inquireel wbat sort of a being lie had found the daughter of the mar¬ chioness ? This was a subject calculated to rouse the languid spirits of our young art¬ ist, and as he described with warmth the beauties of lady Elinor, his countenance glowed witb a deeper colour, anel his fine eyes shone again with all their wonted brilliancy. " You describe with a lover's energy, my dear Edward," gravely remarked his mother. " Heaven forbid, my son, that you should liave placed your affections upon a daughter of the marchioness of Anendale !" " No, mother," replied Edivard, deeply sighing as he spoke—" the power which rules my destiny has preserved me from a fate
a fate like that which you have taught ine to believe would follow a disclosure of vvho I am. Some guardian-angel shielded my heart from the attractive loveliness of lady Elinor. I felt and owned that she was beautiful, for she is the chastened image of Jier mother, but I viewed her with a brother's eyes, and, what is still more singular, she confessed at parting a reciprocity of the same kind aiid friendly sentiments. I have pledged myself to serve her at the hazard of my life, and strictly will I observe my promise." " Beware of the marchioness, my dear son," cried Mrs. Mackenzie : " I see by the papers that she is daily expected in England. Beware, I conjure you, of her resentment, and keep in mind the warning which I gave you before I returned to Scotland." Edward promised to be on his guard» because his promise seemed necessary to the tranquillity of his mother. He longed to acquaint her of his having discovered who
who ivas bis godfather ; and, as the pre¬ sent opportunity appeared favourable to his wish, he mentioned the departure of Mr Lindsay, as the preparatory introduction to his naming the letter of the dean of JlL ■' " " Chance, in this instance, has been more favourable to me than iny mother," said Edward, smilingly, " I know not, nor can I even guess at the importance which you have attached to my remaining ignorant of my godfather's name ; but you* see, mother, that, notwithstanding all your. prudence and forethought, the secret is- made known to me at last." " It must be Providence, not chance s my dear Edward, that has governed all the circumstances of your short life. Pro¬ vidence will still do more for you, my son, and the chief wish of your heart may be gratified wben you least expect it. Providence has already thought fit to in¬ troduce you to those very beings from whom it has been my principal study to seclude
•seelade you, from the bestand purest mo¬ tives, from an over-attention to wbat I considered to be my duty on tbe one hand, and from my anxiety to secure your happiness on the other. Heaven has willed it otherwise than I expected, and Heaven will not desert you, my dearest Edward, at tbe moment when you will most re¬ quire its aid. Should the same mysterious agency which has guided the past continue to direct the future, and conduct you once again to tbe presence of the worthy, the benevolent dean of H ■ , conceal from him and all his family my residence in London ; not that any intimacy can pos¬ sibly exist between them and the mar¬ chioness—my going abroad will account in a great .degree for my dropping our cor¬ respondence with the dean. " Am I then still to remain ignorant of who w r as my father ?" inquired Edward, with great earnestness. *' May I not even hear the name of him who was tbe lover of Miss Fitz-Arthur, and wdiose affection she relin qui she el.
relinquished, that sbe migbt become the marchioness of Anendale ?" " My vow prevents my disclosing either," said Mrs. Mackenzie, Eelward rose hastily from his chair ; a feeling of momentary anger pervaded his mind, and he walked towards the window. His mother knew bis thoughts, and, un¬ observed by bim, stole softly from tbe apaitment, and returned as silently with Miss Cameron. " Plead for me, Janet," said she, as they approached the window—" plead for me with Edward, for he is angry with bis mother." Edward turned quickly round ; be met tbe glance of Janets dark-blue eye—he remembered the solemn adjurations of his adopted father, and, as he pressed the hand of Janet Cameron in bis oivn, he kissed the cheek of his widowed parent with all bis former kindness. Then, turn¬ ing to the blushing Janet, he said—" My mother has already found the vulnerable part
part of my nature, which, ifit combats for a moment against the pruelence of ma¬ ternal wisdom, yields in an instant to the resistless force of my fair cousin's all-power¬ ful glance. Oh, Janet, beware bow you exert the charm from wiiich I cannot fly. Too well did my mother prophesy the in¬ fluence which you ivould possess over my beart, from your likeness to my sainted father." " Never shall that influence be exerted except to secure your happiness," cried Janet, with an energy of expression, and animation of countenance, whicb thrilled through the frame of Ed ward, and gave birth to a new feeling, a new passion, such as he had imagined, but bad never felt before. " Will you go with us to the theatre tbis evening, Edward?" said Mrs. Mac¬ kenzie. " How delighted should I feel ivere I at liberty to escort you and my sweet cou¬ sin tbere to-night!" replied Edward; " but I am unfortunately engaged to attend lady Jane
Jane ------to Drury-lane. To-morrow I shall be most happy to devote myself to your service," " We must relinquish our claims upon your time, my dear Edward," said Janet gaily, " in favour of those of your more noble acquaintance ; but we shall see you sometimes, shall sometimes enjoy theluxury of your society, shall feel ourselves beloved, and shall know that you would give us more of your time if you had but the power?" Edward flung one arm round the neck of Janet, and the other round that of his mother.^—" Beloved beings!" he exclaimed, with a tenderness of look that rendered every fine feature doubly attractive, " were I to study my inclinations, I should devote to you every hour of my life; but the warmth of my feelings, the new-bom lm}>- piness of my soul 5 must not lead me to forget the claims of my generous and steady friends, whose liberality and friendship have placed me in the situation in which I now am,
am, and whose kindness has afforded me the pleasing prospect of independence, at an age wiien most young men are vainly seeking for patronage and assistance. All the leisure moments that I can, without ingratitude, call my oivn, shall be spent witb you and my dear cousin, and those moments of domestic felicity will reward me for many others wbicb 1 must devote to tbe labours of my profession." Mrs. Mackenzie and Janet both as¬ sured him tbat tbey ivere perfectly satis¬ fied with this promise, and tbat they ivould cheerfully wait until he bad time to ac¬ company them to those places of amuse¬ ment ivhich tbey were desirous of seeing, " To prevent any unnecessary or trouble¬ some inquiries," saiel his mother, " I have determined to pass by the name of Came¬ ron among your acquaintance, in саке tbat we should be seen together ; Janet, of course, is my daughter." Edward smiled affectionately on his mother, and, as this arrangement appeared vol. iv. f to
to him of little consequence, he complied with what he thought the whim ofthe moment, anel reluctantly took leave of her anel Miss Cameron, promising to break¬ fast with tliem the next morning, as his ( r-^agonicnts for the day compelled him to rise car]}". Edward was hurrvins homeward, wben bis progress was stoppée! by Frederic Man- ningham, who rallied him upon his speed, and, taking bis arm, proceeded to inform him that he had heard from lady Elinor, who was in hourly expectation of being informed ofthe arrival of her parents, but that sbe <lid not imagine that they would visit the Castle until they had passed some time in the metropolis. Frederic talked with all the rapidity of a lover, and Edward felt more than ever inclined to listen to him with patience. He bad arranged their correspondence differently from his first proposition, and the katers of lady Elinor came direct to lus father's house, under cover to his trusty servant,
servant, so that Frederic lost not an in¬ stant in receiving them, the impatience of his nature being such as not to allow him to wait until they could reach bis hands by those of Edward. Frederic, although bis whole heart and mind were full of lady Elinor, nevertheless entered ivarmly into the feelings of his friend, wbo, in bis turn, attempted to de¬ scribe the impression wiiich Miss Cameron had made upon his senses.—" I thought how it w r ould be," cried Frederic, " as soon as this northern beauty met your gaze. No more chance for lady Jane; she, as well as Olivia Osborne, and fifty more, may all bind their silken locks with wil- iow. Alas, poor girls ! how I pity tbem ! lad/ Jane in particular. Upon my soul, Mackenzie, it is too bad of you, thus to reject the proffered tenderness of such a woman as lady Jane—and for whom? a little nortiiern gipsey, ivith no other reccnv mendation than a fine dark-blue eye, which your romantic imagination has conceived f S to
to resemble that of your adopted father. Oh, Edward ! Edward ! here is your old enemy come to light again, in the shape of your gratiiude. What would my pre¬ cious sister-in-law say now, if she were told that gratitude had made you fall in love ivith the blue-eyed Janet Cameron, when you might have run off to Scotland with therich daugh ter of the dukeof------ T " Who told you, my friend, that I was in love with Janet Cameron ?" " Yourself, Mackenzie," " You are greatly mistaken, my dear Frederic ; I could never assert that I ivas in love with Miss Cameron, whom I have only seen once, and that for so short a time." " I elo not want you to assert with your tongue what } f our eyes and manner in¬ stantly betrayeel to me. A much shorter time than that ivhich you passed with Miss Cameron was sufficient to rob me of my heart: I no sooner beheld lady Elinor than I felt that I hael hitherto only dreamed of
t)f love, but that it was Elinor alone who eoukl realize the passion. Mackenzie, your beart is not less susceptible than mine. But when shall I see Miss Ca¬ meron ?" Edward invited him to accompany him the next morning to breakfast with hi.s mother and Janet, to which Freeleric will¬ ingly assented. The friends now se¬ parated, and Edward snatched a moment from the half hour he had to dress, that he migbt inform Mrs. Mackenzie of her additional visitor. Of his merits, and his tried affection for her son, she w r as already acquainted; therefore Edward felt per¬ fectly satisfied that his presence would be welcome to his ividowed parent and her loveiy companion.
f 3
CHAP-
CHAPTER V, The result of Frederic's interview with Miss Cameron was such as Edward had expecteel. Divested of every ornament which could add to beauty's charms, Ja- n^t appeared the next morning before her cousin and his friend ; slie was scarcely what might be called a brunette, so clear and pure was the texture of her skin; her c} es were of so dark a sapphire, that in some lights tbey were mistaken for black, and tbe natural colour of her cheek was ilio brightest carmine. Her hair, im- rcstraincel by the fashion of the times, curled in wild luxuriance round her face, falling in many a nut-brown ringlet over lier neck and bosom, which last was form¬ ed by the hand of symmetry. Educat iem had not taught her the artifices of her sex, and,
and, though well skilled in various accom¬ plishments, Janet possessed the irresisti¬ ble charm of native innocence of mind and manners, and a feeling" heart. " It is well, Mackenzie," said Frederic, as soon as they were alone, " that I had seen lady Elinor before Janet Cameron — tc have been the rival of my friend would have been worse than death ; yet 1 am certain that had my affections been disen¬ gaged, they woulel have involuntarily fixed on Miss Cameron." " You then think her handsome ?" in¬ quired Edward, trying to repress his secret satisfaction. " Certainly I do," replied Frederic. "But you know that I am singular in mý opinions with respect to women ; it is something more than mere personal beauty that I look for, and next to Elinor, Miss Cameron appears formed to answer my expectations. I congratulate y em, my friend, upon having so sweet a relation. Once, indeed, I should have viewed her F 4 with
with a jealous eye, fe>r then I looked iota ward to your being something more to me th?n even a friend—" Edward chan¬ ged colour. " But tbe name of brother wouki scarcely have increased my regard for you, Mackenzie, and I must now con¬ sole myself for tbe disappointment of my eariy he>pes, by believing that Miss Came¬ ron is better calculated to make you hap¬ py than my own sister Flora." " There ivas also a time," said Edward, colouring deeply, " when I had dared to aspire to the enviable distinction of being beloved by your sister—But Heaven wills every thing for the best. No being can be more sacred to me than Flora, but I own that tbere is a warmth of feeling and innocent vivacity about Janet Cameron, which better suits my nature than tbe milder tenderness of Miss Manningham." " 1 think as yen do, Mackenzie. Flora's dove-like temperament will bc more con¬ genial to that of Vivian. The glowing ardour of your romantic spirit, my friend, calls
calls for a heart as animated, as enthusias¬ tic as your oivn. I marked the bright blue eyes of Janet Cameron, sweetly mild, chastely tender—tbis, thought I, L· tbe destined mate of my gallant friend." Whatever ivere tbe intentions of Ed¬ ward ivith respect to Miss Cameron, it is certain that he felt unusual pleasure in the opinions of Frederic respecting her, and that, notwithstanding bis numerous engagements, which took up neaiiy r the whole of each day, he contrived to call regularly on bis mother, and to escort her and Janet to tbe theatres* He rose by break of day and w r ent late to bed, yet he enjoyed tbe finest health, for be was hap¬ py, strictly happy, m the performance of all his duties. The principal of his morn¬ ings were devoted to the paintings de¬ signed for Mr. Colvill, who in general called on him in the course of the day, and whose remarks greatly aæisted the labours of Eelward. He sometimes break- fasted with his motber, and frequently f 5 called
cr^cd a second time at her lodgings be¬ forr- ho fulfilled his engagements for the evening. Thus be was enabled to rnin- gk as usual in the parties of the great, and yet to enjoy the society of Janet. vhich he would not have resigned for all the allurements of wealth and splendour. But, while the rose of health bloomed v/ith unabated vigour on the manly cheek of Edward, that of Janet Cameron became paler and paler; even the brilliancy of ber e) r es seemed to decrease, and tears and sighs assumed the place of smiles and the joyful laugh of playful huppiness. Ed¬ ward was alarmed, and besought bis mo¬ ther to remove a short distance from town, lest the air of London was the cause of Janet's indisposition. One morning, in particular, Edward was more urgent than usual; but Janet objected to their removal, and Mrs. Mac¬ kenzie even affected to treat with care¬ lessness what Edward deemed to be of the highest importance. He even fancied that
that he perceived a difference in the be- Jifiviour of Miss Cameron towards him¬ self, and that, when he pressed her hand, she looked confused, trembled, and sud¬ denly withdrew it. Mrs. Mackenzie quit¬ ted the roonv and Edward immediately inquired in what he had offended? ** In nothing," replied Janet, trying to disengage herself from his hold. " How can you have offended me,, cousin Ed¬ ward, when your eosduet has always been that of the kindest brother ?" " Ah, beloved Janet !" cried Edward, " my actions have belied my heart, if they have not betrayed a warmer interest even than brotherly affection."" Janet turned pale, and Edward, agi¬ tated and terrified by her look and man¬ ner, supported her trembling frame within his arms, as he entreated, in the tenderest voice, to be made acquainted with tlie cause of her agitation. At this moment Lis mother returned; Janet broke from f 6 him*
him, and bursting into an agony of tears, left the room, Edward, surprised and grieved by her strange behaviour, applied to his mother for an explanation. " Janet is nervous and low-spirited," said Mrs. Mackenzie; " she will be better soon ; if not, I will take your advice and remove her into the country." *' Perhaps, mother, Miss Cameron has ieft a friend behind, whose loss may make her lament her absence from Scotland." " Janet has many friends in Scotland," said Mrs. Mackenzie, " but I suppose, my dear son, that for friend, I may sub¬ stitute the word lover. What if I should say that Janet's heart is already bestowed upon some Scottish youth ?" " Then, mother, I am wretched !" ex¬ claimed Edward, in ri tone of deep afflic¬ tion, at the same time rising and taking his hat, " Stay, my dear Edward," said his mo¬ ther,
ther, gently detaining him ; " stay and compose yourself ; Janet has left no one behind whose liappiness is so dear to her as yours.—Are you satisfied ?" Edward hugged his mother in an ex¬ tacy of joy, yet he entreated her to lose no time in removing his beloved Janet from London. The distance, however, must not be great, as he could not exist if he did not see her daily. " About ten miles ?" answered Mrs. Mackenzie, looking archly at her son; then adding—" There will be no occasion for our removal, my son : if I but speak five ivords to Janet, her indisposition will vanish, her colour and her spirits will re¬ turn, and those five words will do more for her than change of air, or all the doc¬ tors in the ivorld." " Heavens ! my mother, and do you possess the power of removing the secret uneasiness of Janet, and yet hesitite to do it? What can be those five words on which the peace of my dear cousin de¬ pends ?
pends ? and what can Ъе your motive, dear mother, in delaying to give them utter¬ ance, since they will restore the health and happiness of your niece ?" " Edward," said Airs. Mackenzie, grave¬ ly, " I am not to be hurried into the per¬ formance of anything rashly, merely to gratify the wayward humours of your cousin. The happiness of Janet is far dearer to me than my own—of this she ought to be convinced; but she doubts what I wish her to believe. Ώο not, however, be alarmed, my dear Edivarel; both you and Janet must have patience ; you must teach her the necessity of for¬ bearance and self-denial, and assure her tbat if I seem to trifle with her happiness*-, it is only to render it more secure." Edward could not comprehend his mo¬ ther's meaning. He feb inclined, never¬ theless, to rely upon the gejodness of her intentions both towards himself and iiis cousin, although the manner in which she displaj eel tbat gooemess was as mysterious as
as most of her conduct. Again lie besought her not to neglect the indisposition of Miss Cameron, and again she replied tbat Janet had no cause for uneasinesss, if she placeel a proper confidence in her. Edward, wdio bad outstaid his usual time, was now compelled to hurry back to bis lodgings, where, as he expected, he found Mr. Colvill. He apologized for his absence as well as the confusion of his ideas ivould permit. Mr. Colvill looked at him, and languidly smiled, as he stretched out bis hand towards him. The countenance and manner of JMr. Colvill soon banished from the mind of Edward his own personal vexations; and, as he raised the hand of Mr. Colvill to his lips with respectful affection, he inquired if he had been long indisposed ? " Not long, my dear boy," and his eyes glanced across the table, on wdiich lay a newspaper—" not long : I am subject to these nervous attacks ; my constitution is so
so completely shattered, that any suelelen surprise, either of pleasure or pain, reduces me to the comparative weakness of a child." " May I hope that the present is at least one of pleasure, my dear sir ?" said Edw r ard warmly. Mr. Colvill shook his head,, and deeply sighed—" My hours of pleasure have been few indeed—so few, that I can easily number them, wiiile those wbich I have passed in pain and sickness are as innu¬ merable as the stars in the firmament. And yet, Edward, I ivas once like you— buoyant of spirits, light of heart, and dis¬ posed to view every thing around me with the glance of blissful, self-satisfied happi¬ ness. Oh, how joyous were my days, how peaceful were my nights, until love dis¬ turbed their tranquillity ! Edward, if you value the repose of your soul, trust not to ivoman's smiles—place not your happiness in woman's keeping·—shun the lip of beauty
beauty as the touch of infection—fly the magic circle of a ivoman's arms, for within tbem lie ruin, distraction, and r'cmorse." He sunk upon tbe bosom of Edward, who involuntarily pressed him to his heart. Mr. Colvill started back, and, gazing intently on the countenance of Edivard, saiel—" What means tbis strange, this undefinable aflection, wbich fills my soul, and which, in spite of myself, in spite of memory, that would warn me not to trust an eye like yours, still binds me closer and closer to your interest ? Young man, if you - should deceive me, if you should be tbe second instance that the fairest face of nature can conceal a devil's heart, how great will be the sin for which you will one day have to answer ! But no—-I will not doubt you, dearest Mac¬ kenzie—I will confide in these tears of genuine sympathy—I will once more trust in a beautiful exterior, nor fear lest treachery and dissimulation should be my reward." " The
" The weakness of human nature may lead me into error, sir," said Edward, mo* destly, " but I know tliat I can never he treacherous or hypocritical í love and re¬ verer you, sir, with filial affection ; but gratitude alone would make me study to be worthy of your kindness and li¬ berality." " As yet you know tliem only by name," replied Mr. Colvill, recovering himself, but still leaning on Edward for support. " Though destined by fate, never to know the rapture of a father's name, yet I have the power of adopting, as well as of bestowing my fortune upon whom I please. In the bitterness of recollected anguish, 1 counselled you, my dear boy, to shun the seductions of a Avoman's siren smile ; yet how could my heart, which at. this moment throbs with quicker motion at the remembrance of an angeľs form, ííi ve sanction to so cold a caution ! ·*· Who that wouid ask a heart tò dulness wed, * 'ihe wa** eless culm, llie -»lumber ofthe dead ? - 1 No,
* No, îhe wild bliss of nature i-teds allov, 4 And fe:irnnd sorrow fan the fue of Jay ! ' т -inci síiy, without our hope 1 ?, without our fc j ar? y "Without the home that plighted kue eiult-uis, * Without the smile fiuin partial heauty vum, ' Oh ! what were man f —A world uilhout а ьии.' "Edward," continued Mr. Colvill, "are your affections already engaged ? Think that it is a friend, a father that aoks tbe question, and deal sincerely with me." Tbe sudden glow which flushed the cheek of Edward was noticed by the pe¬ netrating eye of Mr. Colvill.—" My dear boy," said he, pressing his hand affection¬ ately, " the blushes of ingenuous youth betray tbe secret of your beart. One question more—am I acquainted with the object of your passion ?" Edward, in great confusion, replied in the negative, " My hopes tben are vain," said Mr. Colvill, " but my intentions remain the same. You have disappointed me,. Ed¬ ward, but the fault is not yours." Mr.
Mr. Colvill now rose, saying that lie ivould no longer intrude upon his time. His eye again rosted on the paper wbicb remained on tbe table—"My life has been a series of disappointments," said Mr. Col¬ vill, " and yet, ivould you believe it, I am weak enough to be overcome, as you have witnessed this morning, by the mere sigbt of a name among tbe arrivals in London, a name whicb ought to excite in my bo¬ som only one sentiment, and that is indig¬ nation. When shall I see you, Edward- can you call on me this evening?" Edward, recollecting that he had & leisure hour, promised to pass it with Mr. Colvill, wbo now took leave, and Edward, with an eagerness bordering on weakness, caught up tbe paper, while his eye glan¬ ced over the list of fashionable arrivals. Among them was tbat of the marquis and marchioness of Anendale. Edward read no further, but ringing hastily for Oliver, he ordered him to execute some trifling commissions, мпа tben proceeded to
to the bouse of the marquis, that be might be one of the first to welcome their return to England. The same tremors as before now agi¬ tated the frame e>f Edward, as he behekl tbe form and beard tbe voice ofthe beautiful marchioness. He sprang forward to press her extended hand : his look^ his manner •struck tbe marchioness, but recollect ng herself, she with inimitable grace and sweetness expressed the satisfaction wiiich «he felt at the compliment thus paid to her by tbe eariy visit of Edward. She made room for him on the couch on which she reclined, inquired with seeming in¬ terest into all tbat had passed during ber absence from England ; then, suddenly reverting to the loss she had sustained by tbe death of her darling son, she exclaim¬ ed, with an accent and a look tbat pierced the soul of Edward—"None but a mother, Mr. Mackenzie, can judge of a mother's agonies ivhen deprived of such a promis¬ ing child as mine ; be ivas all tbe ivorld to
to me—be was the idol of my existence, the joy of my life. Where, oh where shall I find another object on whom I could lavish all the hoarded tenderness of my bursting heart ? Where shall î meet with one capable of loving me with the doting fondness of my poor boy ?" Tears filled the eyes of the marchioness, and she leaned gently against the trem¬ bling form of Edward, wbose countenance but too weil betrayed to the lovely adept in dissimulation the workings of his mind. " My boy loved you, Mr. Mackenzie," continued the marchioness, " and in his last moments you were remembered witli a kindness which made an indelible im¬ pression on my heart. You are young ; perhaps you have no mother, no father, to claim your filial duties, to divide your affection—perhaps you have both time and inclination to fulfil the wishes of my child, and to supply to me the place of my lost, my idolized son." This
This was a request which totally un¬ nerved tbe pliant soul of Edward, al¬ ready melted to a woman's iveakness. He flung himself on one knee before the mar¬ chioness—be presseel her fair hands to his lips with passionate energy, as he ex¬ claimed, in a tremulous voice, tbat be was at perfect liberty to devote bis life to her service. The marchioness gazed on him for a moment with scrutinizing attention.— " Rise, Mackenzie," said she, in alow voice, " rise, and be assured that I accept ivith gratitude the offer of your filial tender¬ ness. I shall expect to see you, unless you are particukirly engaged, at all my public parties, and to attend me as often as you can in my different engagements. Can you promise, Mackenzie, to give up to me so much of your time as what I have now required ?" " Command every hour of my exist¬ ence," cried Edward, with all the ardour of his romantic character, " and I shall think
think life too short if passed in your pre¬ sence, and if permitted to contribute to your felicity." " Hold, Mackenzie," exclaimed iier ladyship, with sudden gravity ; " 1 enlist you under my banners, and accept of your services, not as a lover, but as a friend, a companion, a confidant—in fact, as a son." " Pardon me, I beseech you," said Ed¬ ivard, in painful confusion, " if in the ivarmth of my feelings î have given ut¬ terance to any expression wiiich could give your ladyship offence, or admit of so pre¬ sumptuous, so bold a construction. The love ivhich filled my bosom from the first hour in whieh I beheld your ladyship—" " Hush !" replied í he marchioness, placing her lianei on bis lips—" No explanations, Mackenzie, they are dangerous things. Love me as: much and as tenderly as you please, but let discretion guide your ac¬ tions. To-morrow week I begin my pub¬ lic n igl its by a masked ball ; let me see you early—but Ishall have an opportunity before
before then to learn from you the charac¬ ter you will assume. You must dine with me to-morrow, and in the evening accom¬ pany me to the theatre; and if your friend, sir Joseph Rennie, is disengaged, bring bim with you, as he is one of those beings of whom I entertain a high opinion." The entrance of some female visitors put an end to the discourse of the mar¬ chioness; and Edward soon after took leave, that he might call on sir Joseph, and make him acquainted with the invitation of her ladyship. Sir Joseph was luckily at home, and free from any particular engagement ; he therefore promised to stop at Edward's lodgings tbe next day, and to convey him in his chariot to the hoţise of the mar¬ chioness. The mind of Edward was not sufficiently collected to admit of his returning to the study of his art ; he therefore resolved to devote the remainder of the day to bis mother and Janet, and he accordingly pro¬ ceeded on his way to their abode. Mrs. vol. iv. g Mackenzie
Mackenzie seemed pleased by his unex¬ pected presence, but Janet coloured con¬ fusedly, and soon made an excuse to leave the room. Edward repeated to his mo¬ ther how he had passed his time since hè had quitted her in the morning, as well às his engagement for the next day. Mrs. Mackenzie inquired at which house the marchioness had a box.—" I have just consented," said she, " to go with Mary and her intended husband to the play to¬ morrow evening, and, as they have left the choice of tbe house to me, I should Hke above all things to take advantage of the present opportunity of seeing once again the lady whom I loved, and whom I have so faithfully served." Edward saw no impropriety in this in¬ nocent w T ish of bis mother being gratified. It was extremely natural that she should long to behold the liberal and affectionate patroness of her youth ; and in so crowded a place as the theatre, it wbs not likely that she should be observed by the marchioness. He
He therefore acquainted her with the exact situation of lady Anendale's box, as it had been pointed out to him by sir Joseph Hennie. Edward once more remarked to his mother the paleness of Janet's cheek, and the languor of her appearance. " Fear not," said Mrs. Mackenzie; " I have spoken to her, and she has promised to be all that I could wish. It is to amuse her mind that I consented to go to the play. Can you sup witb us, my dear Ed¬ ward ?" Edward thought that he should not be able to quit the marchioness in time to join his mother ; " but," said he, " you shall see me as usual at the breakfast hour." " Be on your guard, I conjure you," ex¬ claimed Mrs. Mackenzie, with earnest¬ ness, " and do not suffer yourself to be surprised into a disclosure of any thing which concerns yourself or me. Remem¬ ber that I am a Mrs. Cameron, and that, if pressed on the subject, you must say that your mother lives in Scotland." о % « Trust
44 Trust me, M replied Edward, " that I shall most cautiously avoid the mention of every thing that concerns myself or my family. I have an utter aversion to all kinds of deception, and hate falsehoods too much to resort to them willingly." " I have an equal aversion to them as yourself," said Mrs. Mackenzie ; " but it has been my singular fate, ever since I left the castle of lady Fitz-Arthur, to have my words and actions governed by the vow I then made." Miss Cameron now entered, and Ed¬ ward forgot the question which hovered on his lips, although it was of the utmost importance to his peace. Janet was, he thought, less shy than usual, and the heart of Edward expanded with love and hope ; yet, amidst his own joyous feelings, he forgot not his appointment with Mr. Col¬ vill; taking, therefore, an affectionate leave of his mother and Janet, he hastened to the house of lady James Osborne.
CHAP-
CHAPTER VI.
Edward found Mr. Colvill alone, and so deeply engaged in gazing on something which he held in his hand, and which Ed¬ ward perceived to be a lock of hair, that he noticed not his entrance until he was close by his side. " Ah, my dear boy!" exclaimed Mr. Colvill, with a melancholy smile, " is it you ? Welcome ! welcome ! You find me employed in looking over papers which I have never yet had courage to destroy, though they contain the promises of a broken faitii. Look, Mackenzie, on this soft glossy ringlet—it was the first pledge of a faithless passion. Its beauty is undi¬ minished by time—so is my affection, Thesepapers, which I have weakly retained in my possession, and which I this even- G S ing
ing took out of my cabinet with the in¬ tention of consigning them to the flames, have so completely unnerved me, that I feel incapable of fixing my attention to any other subject. If, therefore, you will listen to the origin of my secret uneasiness, I will confide to you, Mackenzie, the story of my fatal attachment ; it may prove a salutary warning to you, my dear boy, net to allow the exuberance of your feel¬ ings to overcome your reason, prudence, and discretion. If, in the candid exposure of my early frailties, you should feel in¬ clined to condemn my rashness, remember, my dear Mackenzie, that I loved with a passion whicb has withstood the attacks of infidelity, barbarity, and wanton ingra¬ titude." Edward raised the hand of Mr. Colvill to his lips, with an expression of tender¬ ness that seemed to console the heart of the former, who, after carefully returning the silken lock to its place of concealment, thus began :·— " When
" When I was a very young man, younger even than yourself, I became ac¬ quainted, in rather a singular way, with one of the loveliest creatures in the world. Being on a visit to a relation, during one of my college-vacations, and having natu¬ rally a talent for drawing, I was busily engaged one morning in sketching some beautiful scenery, belonging to a fine old seat in the neighbourhood of my uncle. While thus employed, I was suddenly surprised by the appearance of a young lady, whose perfect symmetry of form, and perfect beauty of countenance, ex¬ ceeded even my sanguine imagination. She approached towards me; and, in a voice of musical sweetness, begged per¬ mission to overloe)k the drawing, which I had nearly finished. The request, coming from one so young, and so dazzlingly beau¬ tiful, was instantly complied with. She praised my performance, and would have directed my attention to another view still more picturesque, could I have seen any g 4 thing
thing but herself. We laughed and chatted with the ease of long acquaintance. I told her who I was, and she also commu¬ nicated to me her name and family. It gave a momentary chill to my happiness, but another glance from her dark brilliant eye made me forget every obstacle which my sober judgment told me would be raised to prevent our intimacy. We parted only to renew our interview the following morning. Reason and duty urged me to shun a connexion, clandes¬ tine, imprudent, and without the sanction of our mutual friends ; but love and Ger¬ trude's eyes overcame my scruples. I pledged to her my first vows of fidelity and truth, and received in return a lock of her hair, and a kiss which would have fixed for ever a less constant heart than mine. " The heaviest misfortune which I then knew was our necessary separation. I was compelled to return to college ; but, through the means of a faithful domestic, we
we contrived to carry on a regular corre¬ spondence with each other. Again I was permitted to spend my vacation at my uncle's, and again our delicious interviews commenced. Circumstances now enabled us to meet with less fear of a discovery, and I frequently enjoyed the luxury of her society in the privacy of her own apartments. At that time I was not nineteen, and Gertrude was barely sixteen. The freedom of her manners, which I then attributed to the artless inexperience of her mind, gave me but too many oppor¬ tunities to plead with ardour my passion, and to hear from lips like hers the dan¬ gerous confession of a mutual tenderness. At sounds like these I would catch her passionately to my breast, and clasp her unreluctant, yielding, graceful form within my arms. The voluptuous tenderness of her exquisite eye betrayed the melting softness of her soul, and the warm crimson of her cheek heightened the irresistible allurements of her appearance. G 5 " Honour,
tť Honour, however, guided my actions, notwithstandingthedangerous temptations by which I was surrounded, until one fa¬ tal evening, when halfán hour of bliss, the most perfect that ever fell to a mortal's lot, was tbe forerunner of years of misery, regret, and despondency. " It was our general practice to meet regularly, at a stated hour ; but this I was prevented from doing one evening by some company having arrived at my uncle's, which made my presence indispensable until near midnight. The moment I was at liberty I flew to the residence of my beloved Gertrude. The lateness of the hour prevented my gaining admittance as usual; I therefore recollected that, by means of a boat, I could row myself close under the window of her chamber, which I instantly performed. My beautiful Ger¬ trude had not retired torest, and the dash¬ ing of the oars called her to notice what was passing. She saw me, and, by a move¬ ment of her hand, encouraged me to at¬ tempt
tempt a new ascent to her apartments. A long flight of stone steps conducted me to her arms, and the melting kiss which 1 received as my reward seemed the sweetest I had ever tasted. We were alone, for her attendants had long retired to their chambers-—we were alone, and Gertrude was more beautiful and more tender than usual. We talked of our approaching nuptials ; w r e repeated the oft-repeated plan of her elopement, and sealed our bond of faith and love upon each others' lips. Un» heeded flew the hours, for who in my si¬ tuation, elevated by wine, and intoxicated by love, ever counted the passing moments when in the presence of an adored being ? The silence of the night, the solitude of the place, the exquisite loveliness of Ger¬ trude, but, more than all, the dangerous softness of her manners, made me forget the self-command which I had hitherto kept over myself, and Gertrude became mine, as I then fondly hoped, for ever. My reflections of the morning were by g 6 no
no means enviable. I accused myself of having abused the confidence ofthe woman I adored, and I hastened to make the only r eparation in my power, by marrying h?r immediately. I felt surprised, though not displeased, to find that the confidence of Gertrude was not diminished by my rashness. It was of consequence to my future establishment that our nuptials should be concealed from tbe knowledge of my uncle, who had declared his inten¬ tion of providing for me in a manner as bountiful as was his affection, and I felt convinced that the choice which I had thus clandestinely made would never meet with his sanction ; yet I felt myself bound by an imperious sense of duty, after what had passed between us, to urge the solem¬ nization of our marriage, which I expected ivould meet with the immediate consent of Gertrude. She listened to me with mute attention, until I had finished my entreaties, and then, with a look and ges¬ ture which thrilled through my frame, she
she replied, that she considered herself as strictly mine as if we had been legally married, and that, for the sake of our fu¬ ture comforts, she deemed it advisable to delay for a time the union which I so warmly urged. " This fresh proof, as I then considered it, of Gertrude's confidence in my love, only endeared her the more to my too cre¬ dulous heart. Our dangerous, but deli¬ cious interviews were continued: and if ever man idolized a woman beyond all earthly love, that man was myself, that woman was Gertrude. " The fervour of my affection knew of no abatement, my happiness of no alloy, until I imagined that I perceived a change in the conduct of Gertrude. She began to express her fears lest some one should discover our stolen meetings, and betray them to the friend under whose care she was placed, and to whom she looked up for a noble independence. This fear only made me the more anxious to hasten our union.
union, and I again entreated her to become legally mine ; again she resisted my per¬ suasion, but in a manner that awakened in my mind the distracting conviction that Gertrude was indifferent upon a subject on which all my hopes of earthly happi¬ ness depended. " At this critical juncture, my uncle, who, unknown to me, had been informed of my attachment to Gertrude, desired me to attend him to London, where I was to meet my father and family, preparatory to my receiving an appointment as secretary to a nobleman of high rank who was going over to India. This intelligence seemed the knell of my departed happiness. I hastened to the beloved idol of my soul ; I even wept at her feet, as I implored her to become my wife, and to accompany me to India. " Gertrude received this unexpected news with a composure that annihilated every hope. She counselled me to obey my uncle.; and to accompany him to London ; and,
and, as my departure from England would not take place immediately, I should be able to see her again in a short time, when our nuptials could be solemnized. Oh, my foreboding heart ! how plainly did it then tell me that our parting was an eternal one ! I clasped the beautiful inconstant to my beating bosom—I pressed my lips to hers, in an agony of woe í ' Oh, Ger- ;/ude!' I exclaimed, * in the eyes of Heaven you are mine, and mine only. Remember, that to me were pledged your virgin vows, and that if you falsify your oath of fidelity and truth, you will doom me to eternal wretchedness—you will break a heart that loves you with no com¬ mon passion, and that will ever remain constant to its first affection, though des¬ tined to become the object of your cruel indifference, your strange and singular neglect' " The seducing blandishments of Ger¬ trude lulled for a time my distracted mind ; yet I was no sooner alone, than all my fears
fears were awakened, all my suspicions confirmed, as my confused thoughts ran wildly over the circumstances of our re¬ cent interviews. My agitation was too visible to escape the notice of my uncle ; but he was silent as to the cause, and kindly redoubled his affectionate atten¬ tions, in order to amuse and divert me. în London I met all the members of my family, and among them my favourite sister, now lady James Osborne. ï was also introduced to the nobleman to whom I was appointed secretary, and from him I learned that our departure would be immediately. This information was fol¬ lowed by a letter from Gertrude, which nearly deprived me of life, and for a time entirely of reason. My situation alarmed my family; my secret was known to them ; my uncle was no longer silent; and, as soon as I could listen to any other voice beside that of my favourite Maria, I learned from him his knowledge of my unfortu¬ nate attachment, and his anxiety to sepa¬ rate
rate me from an object every way unwor¬ thy of a passion like mine. ** Pressed to the bosom of my loved Maria, and, supported in her arms, I at length gained courage to read over the faithless confession of my perjured mis¬ tress. Her sentiments were changed ; her heart was altered—so were her wishes; and she therefore made it a point of con¬ science to refuse her hand unless her af¬ fections could accompany it. " Deeply as she hadplunged the poisoned arrow into my breast, I had still sufficient command over my tortured feelings to con¬ ceal from my sister and my family the ex¬ tent of our fatal intimacy. Not a word, not even a hint, fell from my parched lips, which could cast a stain upon the purity of her conduct. « My uncle, who was but too well ac¬ quainted with the dark shades in her character, rejoiced at my having escaped what he considered as eternal misery, and felt no surprise at the inconstancy of Ger¬ trude,
trude, whom he hesitated not to pronounce to be one wbo was incapable of feeling a pure and permanent affection ; but I, who knew the excess of our tenderness for each other, could scarcely credit that a woman, who had given such strong proofj of con¬ fidence and love, could be the first to break asunder those tender and delicious ties by which our souls had been united. " More dead than alive, I embarked for India, having first given vent to my in¬ jured tenderness in a long letter, whicb I addressed to Gertrude, and enclosed tp a faithful domestic in our confidence. Time, wbich I vainly hoped would banish from my mind the image of a faithless woman, seems only to have given a temporary obli¬ vion to my woes. " After an absence of nearly nineteen years, I have returned to my native coun¬ try, rich in wealth, but a bankrupt in hap¬ piness. A stranger to the endearing names of husband and of father, I wander through life the ghost of former times, the shade of
of former years ; I feel myself alone in a crowded city—a mere blank in the uni¬ verse—a creature that, when it ceases to exist, will leave no trace behind, no be¬ ing to perpetuate his name, or to inherit his fortune. And who made me this mi¬ serable thing ? who blighted the first buds of youthful delight, and poisoned the sweet source of early happiness, early confidence ? who but woman ?" Mr. Colvill paused ; his voice became inarticulate, and his eyes were humid with tears ; nor was Edward less agitated, as he pressed within his own the hand of his injured friend. At length Mr. Colvill resumed his discourse.—" Such has been my fate, my dear Edward. Disappointed in my first expectation of affection and conjugal felicity, I could not bear to listen to any proposal of a second attachment. The functions of my heart were withered; it wanted power and spring to beat with another passion. The bitterness of blight¬ ed
ed love, the keenness of extinguished hope, had closed every avenue which before was open to the sweetest, the most delicious feelings of a favoured lover. She whom I had so fondly idolized had abandoned me for ever, and my weak and sensitive heart shrunk back with fear and disgust from the intrusion of a second idol. My re¬ turn to England has not, however, been without its consolation and its pleasures. My reunion with my favourite sister has afforded me the highest gratification which now I am capable of feeling; for, inde¬ pendent of my affection for her, it has been the means of introducing to my knowledge a young man who has singu¬ larly interested both my sister and myself in his favour." Mr. Colvill pressed the hand of Ed¬ ward as he spoke. A gentle tap at the chamber door interrupted their conversa¬ tion. It was lady James, who, uncon¬ scious of Edward's visit, had come to spend an
an hour with the brother whom she so dearly loved, before she accompanied her family to an evening party. The sight of her favourite Edward agreeably surprised her ladyship, who in¬ quired if he was disengaged for the next evening, as in that case she would request him to accompany her and her daughters to the theatre. Edward confessed his prior engagement, and remarked that, had he not already promised to attend the marchioness of An¬ endale, he should have been happy to have devoted himself to the service of lady James. The countenance of her ladyship under¬ went an immediate change^ while that of her brother became deathly pale.—" To which house are you going, Mr. Mac¬ kenzie?" said lady James, in a hurried tone ; and, upon learnmg that it was to Covent-Garden—*" Thank God !" she ex¬ claimed, (S I shall not then be compelled to
to breathe tbe same atmosphere as the marchioness of Anendale." Edward both looked and felt surprised at what he heard; he however did not venture to make any comment, but with¬ drew, greatly astonished that any human being coulel feel a repugnance to that ivhich he considered as one of the sweetest enjoyments of his life.
CHAPTER VIL
The next day Mr. Colvill called upon Edward.—" Our conversation terminated rather abruptly last night" said he, " oiv¬ ing to the entrance of my sister. After what then passed between us, my dear Ed¬ ward, you will not require any further- testimony of my regard, since I entrusted you with more than ever met the ear of my beloveel Maria." " The
u The confidence with which yóu have honoured me, sir," replied Edward, " I shall ever hold sacred——" ťť I feel that yon will," said Mr. Coi vill. "Alíthat I request of you is, that you will look upon me as one wbo feels for you the affection and interest of a father; and with these feelings towards you, my dear Mackenzie, you will not, I hope, deem as impertinent any question which I may ask, that is connected with your welfare and happiness." Edward assured Mr. Colvill that, on the contrary, he should consider any in¬ vestigation of his conduct as the highest mark of friendship, as he was too young and too inexperienced to judge in many respects for liimself. " It is this very feeling which brought me here this morning," replied Mr. Col¬ vill. *' You are young and an orphan, at least so I have heen led to understand; nature has been liberal towards you, in every gift which can render you an object of
of esteem, admiration, and envy. Your talents have gained you the friendship and the patronage of those whose rank alone entities them to be styled your su¬ periors ; and your personal graces have done more—tliey have obtained for you the notice of the loveliest woman in Eng¬ land. But beware, Edward, how you indulge in the dangerous charm of her society. You heard what fell involun¬ tarily last night from the lips of lady James—I say involuntarily, for she is not a being to speak ill of any person ; of this, however, rest firiiily assured, that she had just grounds for wishing to avoid the sight of the marchioness of Anendale, and, if possible, of that of her friends—you ex¬ cepted." " Good Heaven !" exclaimed Edward, " how singular it is, that every one whom I love and revere should, as if by consent, have formed the same opinion, while Ι¬ ί alone am blind to her failings ! Oh, sir, if you have not yet seen the marchioness, I am
I am sure tbat you will join with me in thinking her the most perfect of God's creatures ; you will think as I do 9 that no latent evil can lurk ivithm so sweet a form—that she ivhose look, whose smile, whose voice, remind us of heaven, can never be a being composed of all the gross¬ er particles of our nature——" Tbis rhapsody of our young artist was interrupted by the deep anel heavy sigh of Mr. Colvill, He w r as pale and trem¬ bling, yet he tried to compose himself, lest he should alarm his companion—" No, Edward," said be, " I shall not think as you do. At your age I ivas equally warm, equally enthusiastic, but experience has too fatally convinced me that an an¬ geľs form may conceal a devil's heart." Edward gave a sudden start at these v. ell-remembered words.—"What ails you, my dear boy ? can you wonder that I am thus ready in believing ill of the marchio¬ ness, after the disappointment which I received in my first attachment, and after vol. iv. τι what
ivhat feil last night from the lips of my sister ? Ah, my young friend, be warned by my example, and think, wiien your eye dwells witb rapture on a beautiful form or exquisite features—when your ear re¬ ceives entranced the tones of a soft and silvery voice—oh, think of me! think of tbe hours, days, years of misery wbich I have endured, and be convinced tbat it is possible, too possible tbat an angeľs form mav enshrine a deviľs heart !" Again Edward gave an involuntary start. " I do not ívonder that you should be thus startled at the idea of human depra¬ vity," said Mr. Colvill; "anel it is with reluctance that I have constrained myself to teach you tbe sad but necessary lesson of guarding yourself against the fatal influence of female beauty, when unac¬ companied by the virtues of the mind and heart. My sister, on wbose veracity I can rely, assures me that the house of lady Anendale is but a scene of varied tempt¬ ation for a young man like yourself. She loves
loves you sincerely, Edivard, and trembles for the consequence of so dangerous a connexion. Has your intimacy been of long standing ?" Edward, wiio saw no just grounds for concealment, briefly recapitulated to Mr. Colvill the origin of his first acquaintance witb tlie marchioness, concealing oniy the attachment ivhich subsisted between lady Elinor and Frederic Manningham, Mr. Colvill listened with the deep attention of one who felt highly interested in the subject. His countenance, during tbe narration, underwent several changes -, and wiien Edward bad finished, be attempted to force a smile, but it w r as so evidently forced, that it only gave pain to his ob¬ server. " I can but too ivell enter into your feelings, my dear Mackenzie," said Mr. Colvill, "and am ready to allowy r ou every merit for tbe romantic generosity ivhich led you to undertake so long a journey, that you migbt perform your promise; h 2 but
but did no selfish motive increase the pleasure of the act? no lurking passion for the lovely lady Elinor ?" " No, on my honour !" replied Edward, hastily ; *' I had not even beheld the pic¬ ture of her ladyship." " But you had seen that of her mother, and might have expected to find the daughter equally attractive." " No such motive, or even wish, in¬ fluenced my conduct, I assure you," said Edward ; ** but having once seen lady Elinor, I confess that I feel for her the kindness of a brother, and shall ever take a lively interest in her welfare." Again Mr. Colvill sighed.—'* My dear boy," said he, "you have confessed that your affections are engaged—surely the famed beauty of the marchioness has not enslaved your heart— ----" " Heaven forbid !" exclaimed Edward, with a sort of half shudder ; " Heaven for¬ bid that I should ever become so crimi¬ nal as to fall in love with a married woman !
woman ! for, if there is one crime more deep and deadly than another, it is that of estranging the mind and heart of a wife from her husband and her family. No, my dear sir, although I cannot analyze my tenderness for the marchioness, though I cannot define the nature of my feelings when in her presence, yet this I know, tlrat it is mixed with a veneration, a re¬ spect, that forbids every unhallowed senti¬ ment, which the beauty of her person and the voluptuousness of her manners might otherwise excite." " Well, my dear boy, we w r ill not at¬ tempt to analyze a passion so truly plato¬ nic as yours. But be advised, Edward, by one wdio is disinterestedly anel warmly your friend : shun the society of the marchioness of Anendale, if you value your own happiness, and the opinion of the world. In a short time you will be in her company——" Mr. Colvill now suddenlv rose, and looking at his ivatch, abruptly took leave и 3 of
of Edward, who, notwithstanding what bad passed, felt rejoiced to see the car» riage of sir Joseph Hennie stop at the iloor, ancl hastened to join him, with a smile of delight, wbich was heightened by the recollection of tbe fair being to whom they were now rapidly proceeding. The marchioness had a party to dinner, among whom were several very elegant young men, who were evidently the cap¬ tives of her beauty, and to wiiose flattery she listened with gratified attention ; but Edward no sooner appeared, than the mar¬ chioness exultingly introduced him to her admirers, and, by placing him next her¬ self, gave them to understand that, ivhiie be was present, they must be contented to receive only the occasional marks of her favour. Any other man but Edivard, thus situated, and thus surrounded, would have created a host of enemies; but his youth, his engaging affability, bis win¬ ning sweetness of address, and gentlemanly deportment, softened doivn the sting of rivalship ;
rivalship ; tbey envied him the smiles of tbe marchioness, but they could not hate him for receiving them. At the theatre the marchioness became again the object orgeneral attention. Her absence from England, which seem eel to have improved the natural loveliness of her person, had also made her a novelty in the fashionable world, and her re-appear¬ ance among its votaries w r as hailed by the universal gaze of public admiration. The marchioness was now in her thirty-fifth year, but so exquisite was the bloom of her cheek, so brilliant the lustre of her eyes, and so finely proportioned ivas ber figure, that tbe most critical observer would have pronounced her to be under thirty. The moment she entered her box, all eyes were turned upon her, anel upon Edward, who had the distinguished honour of conducting her to her seat, and who by tbe desire of his beautiful compa¬ nion placed himself by her side. He cast a hasty glance over the humbler inmates π 4t of
of the p ; t, and soon recognized among them his mother and his beloved Janet, with the mo-Jest Mary Mackenzie and her destined husband. The contrast between thei: sitliatiem and his own brought the blush of pride into his face ; he feared to notice either his mother or Janet, lest the marchioness should perceive them ; but the language of his eyes was sufficiently tender to satisfy the minds of those he loveei. At the end of tbe comedy, Mrs. Mac- kenzie^ who had cast several stolen glances toivards the box which contained the marchioness, stood up to take a nearer survey of the laely whom she had so faith¬ fully loved wben a girl ; her attention was divided between the maturer beauties of the marchioness and the youthful charms of Edward, wdio, glowing with health and animated by a variety of sanguine hopes, seemed born to fill the station in wliich his good fortune had placed him. Nor was the heart of Mrs. Mackenzie less san- guinely
guinely elated, though from different mo¬ tives, than that of her son. She gazed on bim with pride and exultation ; then turn¬ ed towards Miss Cameron with similar feelings, and thought tbat Heaven had formed them for each other. The eyes of lady Anendale, as they roved from object to object, soon caught a glimpse of tbe well-known features of her once favourite Alice. For a moment her cheek grew pale, then crimsoned with the finest vermilion, as she laid her hand on the arm of Edivard, and, pointing out to his notice her former confidant and friend, whispering told him that she would now put his professions of service to the test, and requested that he wo u lei watch the .au cements of Alice when she left the theatre, and tell her to call tbe next morning at Anendale bouse. " I shall depend on y r our vigilance, Mackenzie," said she, " for it is of conse¬ quence to my peace that I should not miss H 5 tlie
the present opportunity of knowing where that person is to be found." Had the marchioness been less agitated herself she could not have failed to per¬ ceive the embarrassment of Edward at tbis request ; he nevertheless complied with seeming alacrity, and joined his mo¬ ther at the close of the play, who at first appeared disconcerted by the message of the marchioness, but, recovering herself quickly, she said — " Tell ber ladyship that I shall cheerfully obey her commands ; and remember, dear Edward, that not a word escapes your lips that can lead the marchioness to suppose any intimacy sub¬ sists between us." Edward had only time to press the hand of his beloved Janet, and to assure his mo¬ ther that he would strictly attend to her injunctions; as he knew that the mar¬ chioness was \vaiting his return, and lest any unnecessary delay should excite her suspicions, he hurried back to the box, just fis her ladyship was on the point of quit¬ ting
ting it. A smile of pleasure irradiated her features on his approach, but it was evident to the perception of Edward that sbe laboured to conceal some mental agi¬ tation, which he concluded was occasioned by the unexpected appearance of his mo¬ ther. He w r as right; the marchioness ivas both surprised and pained by the sight of Alice, for it brought to her recollection the occurrences of her early life, and awakened in her bosom a train of emo¬ tions, which had lain dormant for years. Though an admirable dissembler, yet she now found extreme eiifficulty in smother¬ ing her newly-revived fears, and of wear¬ ing as usual the semblance of a mind at ease. She eagerly inquired of Edward if he had succeeded in speaking to the per¬ son whom she had pointed out to his no¬ tice? and upon his repeating to her the promise of his mother, tbat sbe would call early the next morning, the marchioness η 6 recovered
recovered in some degree her habitual air of careless and happy indifference. Nor was Mrs. Mackenzie more tranquil than the marchioness. She had indulged herself in gazing on the lovely counte¬ nance of her to ivhose partiality sbe was indebted for an education far above her birth, of her whom she bad loved with grateful tenderness, and for whose welfare she had been more solicitous than for her own ; she was now called on to re-appear before her, after tbe lapse of several years, and would be expected to give an account of her past life since their separation. Tbis was no easy task to perform, as Mrs. Mac¬ kenzie felt the necessity of concealing from the knowledge of lady Anendale her real name and some other circumstances, lest she should discover ivho Edward was, and thus, in spite e>f all her caution, he would become tbe victim of her resent¬ ment. The marchioness had ordered breakfast to
to be served in her private boudoir, to which no visitor was to be admitted that morning but Mrs. Mackenzie and Ed¬ ward. At length the impaticneïe of her ladyship w r as gratified, and Alice, pale and trembling, appeared before her—not the rosy, plump, laughing girl, as ivhen last sbe saw her at the castie of Fitz-Arthur, for sorrow and sickness had blighted the rosearon the cheek of Alice, and quenched the lustre of her once-sparkling black eyes, while time had only improved the glowing beauties of the marchioness. Alice, though altered in person, was the same in man¬ ners. She advanceel respectfully towards ïady Anendale, and pressed her hand af¬ fectionately to her lips, while the mar¬ chioness, throwing herself on the neck of Alice, kissed her tenderly, as she assured her that she had always regretted their se¬ paration. " But tell me, dear Alice," said she, with a look and voice of the most en¬ couraging
couraging kindness—" tell me, Alice, all that has happened to you since you left me. Have you been happy ?" " But for one circumstance, I should have been completely happy," replied Alice, with a sigh ivhich she breathed to the remembrance of her beloved husband : " but that one circumstance------" " I know to what you allude," hastily exclaimed the marchioness, looking anx¬ iously round the room, with a glance which Alice understood ; " and, as you may suppose, it has also occasioned me ma¬ ny an imhappy moment. But you have, no doubt, kept your promise inviolable ?" " I trust tbat I have dischargee! my duty faithfully," replied Mrs. Mackenzie. " I believe you, my dear Alice. Another time, and in another place, you shall in¬ form me of all that I wish to know. Did you take notice of the gentleman whom I sent to speak to you last night?" " My surprise and pleasure at being re¬ cognized
cognized by your ladyship overcame me for a few minutes ; but I remember that be w T as young and handsome." " Did he not strike you as resembling some one wdiom you had formerly seen ?" inquired the marchioness, with earnest¬ ness. " Not at that moment," said Alice, con¬ fusedly. " Well, ive shall have a better opportu¬ nity than the present," continued lady Anendale, " of renewing our confidence. I have often thought of you, Alice, and often wished to have you about my per¬ son, because I ielt assured that I could trust you with the dearest secrets of my soul. Tell me, as briefly as you can, what has happened to you since you left me." Airs. Mackenzie, who stated tbat her name was Cameron, now recapitulated to the attentive marchioness all that was re¬ quisite to satisfy her curiosity, assuring her that she was just as ready to devote herself
herself to her service as in the days of her girlhood. " I have ever regretted parting with you," said ber ladyship ; " but you know, Alice, that it was impossible to do other¬ wise. I believe that you bave served me faithfully, and that, in short, you are the only being in tbe world wbo ever loved me with a real, a disinterested affection." " Oh, say not so, my lady, say not so ! Dearly as I have loveei you, ivhat is my bumble attachment wl;..ľ compared to that of him who adored you in your early years? Ah, my lady, if you bad but listened to—■—" " Silence, Alice!" cried the marchioness ; " that is a subject on which you must ne¬ ver touch : rny hatred is as deeply root¬ ed as ever. But I have your interest anel welfare at beart, although I perceive that time has not diminished your foolish par¬ tiality. You say that you have a daugh¬ ter, illice : if it is the lovely girl who sat next you at tbe play, I may be of service to
to her—she has beauty sufficient to en¬ sure her good fortune. I will call on you to-morrow, as I have many things to cem- sult you upon, anel if any circumstance should in the interval occur to yonr mind, by which I can serve yon or your family, do not hesitate to mention it, Alice, for I am just as warmly your friend as ever." Mrs. Mackenzie felt anew the magical influence of her smile, and of her flattering t^on descensión ; it seemed to take from her all poiver of self-will, and to render her as much the slave of the marchioness as she ivas of Miss Fitz-Arthur; and she withdrew from her presence full of grati tude for her kindness, yet fearful lest she should not have sufficient firmness to re¬ sist tbe force of her eloquence and the sub¬ tiity of her inquiries the next day. Edward was preventeei from seeing his mother, as be had intended, on her return from the marchioness of Anendale's. He bad calleel at lady James Osborne's, and had been induced to remain there from the
the most powerful motives of curiosity. On entering the drawing-room he per¬ cei veel her ladyship and Mr Colvill in ear¬ nest discourse with a little thin olel man, whose benevolent countenance immedi¬ ately preposscssetl Eelward in his favour. Ilis dress was plain, even to shabbiness, and the warm heart of Edward fell a gene¬ rous desire to assist with his mite in re¬ lieving wbat he conceived to be tbe ne¬ cessities of the little thin old man. What was his surpri.se, tberefore, when lady James, starting from her seat, caught his band, and exultingly introdu ceel him to her father, the dean of H——-. " Mackenzie ! Eelwarel Mackenzie !" ex- c^imed the little thin old man. " Surely -nis young friend and favourite of yours, Maria, is not the son of the brave lieute¬ nant Mackenzie, who fell in America? If so, he is the boy for whom I felt so warm an interest, and for whom I stood godfather, when I christened him nineteen years ago." " I believe
" I believe that I am the same being," modestly replied Edward, * while his fine features glowed with a deeper crimson. The old gentleman flung his arms round the neck of his godson, and embraced him affectionately; then, surveying him with strict attention, he said, while tears of pleasure gushed into his eyes*-—" How X rejoice oneo more to see you, my dear boy !—and to see you thus—to behold you in appearance all that I had wished to make you—to hear that you are doing well in life, and that you are worthy of the esteem and affection which your friends feel for you ! Never, Maria, was I more deeply interested in the fate of any human being than in that of my little godson, and you have heard me a thou¬ sand times lament the circumstances whicii prevented me from affording him my pro¬ tection and assistance." " Suffer me to thank you, sir, for those generous intentions," said Fdward, grate¬ fully. " Heaven has thought fit to de¬ prive
prive me of my gallant father, but Hea* von has raiseei me up a host of friends, to whose kineîness 1 am not ashamed to oivn myself indebted for all that I possess." " Oh, father," cried lady James, " do you not think that Mr. Mackenzie is like my brother Richard?" " He was more like when an infant,'* replied tbe dean, " for then be so strongly reminded me of what Bichard was when a baby, tbat to tbat circumstance, perhaps, may be ascribed tbe uncommon interest wbich I felt for his welfare." Then, turn¬ ing to Edward, he said—" And since we have thus unexpectedly met, my dear boy, our friendship must not end here—give me your address, tbat I may call on you to¬ morrow, for I have many inquiries to make respecting yourself anel your pa¬ rents, both of whom pleased me exceed¬ ingly." ^ " The old gentleman, with all that loqua¬ city which iş natural to age, now began to repeat his first meeting with Alice in the stage-
stage-coach, relating minutely all tbat had passed at tbe inn, and her marriage with Mackenzie, down to the time of his being compelled to leave town himself. During this narration the feelings of his auditors underwent a variety of diflerent changes. Lady James felt delicately alarm¬ ed lest Edward should be pained by tbe garrulity of her father, while he sat listen¬ ing with tbat ñxed attention which made bim anxious to catch every word that fell from the dean, and almost unconscious that any other being was present. Mr. Colvill appeared equally attentive, but at times restless, impatient, and agitated almost to fainting ; he seemed as if he wished to speak, but was afraid of trust¬ ing his own voice, lest it should betray what w r as the internal struggle within him. The old gentleman, without noticing the effect which his discourse bad upon his hearers, proceeded to state with great exactness all that he knew concerning Ed¬ ward
ward and his parents, commenting again upon his oivn vexation at not being able to do for him what he had wished and intended—" But," said he, " it may still be in my power to serve you, and if I can I will ; therefore expect me to-morrow, that we may talk over old matters, and adjust new ones," The morrow came, and with it the ve¬ nerable dean of H ------, wbo instantly, and without any ceremony, inquired of Ed¬ ward if he ivas aware that lieutenant Mac¬ kenzie was only bis aelopted father? Ed- warel replied in the affirmative, assuring bim, however, fhat no real parent could have loved him more tenderly, or done more to forward his welfare than the brave Mac¬ kenzie. Encouraged by the tender con¬ cern manifested by the dean, Edward ven¬ tured to confide to him the long-cherished wash of his soul, ivhich was, that he might arrive at the knowledge of who was hig real father. *" It is a very natural wish, my dear Ed¬ ward,"
ward," said tbe venerable dean ; " and it is both improper and unjust in your mother to withhold from you so important a piece of knowledge. Supposing tbat in the days of her girlhood she hael been deluded by false promises, and robbed of her inno¬ cence by the artifices e>f a superior, no blame, no shame could attach itself to you, my child ; no liberal mind wrould think tbe worse of you— nogenerous soul would cast a reproach on you for tbe fault of your parents. You are now arrived at an age wben it is necessary tbat you should be acquainted with wbo was your father. Perhaps I may assist you in the discovery, if you can feel for me a similar affection to that wbich I entertain for you ; and in that case, my dear boy, lay open your whole lieart to my inspection—confide to me all that may seem likely to favour our search ; and trust me, Edivard, tbat not even my own children shall know more of what passes between us than you au¬ thorize me to disclose." Edivard,
Edward, grateful by nature, now warmly thanked his godfather for his proffered kineîness ; and, feeling that he was ivorthy to be trusted, he confided to him all the events of his life, beginning with his being placed under the care of his grandmother, tbe worthy Margaret Grey, on whose fond affection he dwelt with tender delight, while a tear fell to the remembrance of one who had doted on bim with blind partiality. Edw f ard was a faithful narrator of what had passed. He had much to say, and many a warm tribute of gratitude to pay to tbe friends wlio bad protected and as¬ sisted bim at her death, and wiiose steady kindness had enabled him to make choice of a profession wdiich would afford him ample means of support. He spoke with enthusiasm of his adopted father, not con¬ cealing from tbe attentive dean the fre¬ quent conversations which he had had with bis mother upon tbe subject of his birth. He however forbore to name the mar¬ chioness of Anendale, though he could not
not help owning that, until very lat dv, be was ignorant that the dean had ho¬ noured him by making him his godson. " It is very singular," remarked the dean, " that your mother should have kept you from the knowledge of every thing which seems most important for you to be acquainted with. When I first saw her, I was particularly struck by her ap¬ pearance and situation. I at first believed her to be a widow, but upon .a nearer in¬ timacy this belief vanished, and I thought, from several trivial occurrences, that you were the pledge of stolen interviews—the offspring of a father superior in rank to the mother, who seemed anxious to con¬ ceal her own origin and station in life, yet desirous to perform to the utmost her ma¬ ternal duties. There was a bashful re¬ serve about the manners of Mrs. Mac¬ kenzie in speaking of herself, or of those with whom she was connected, that con¬ vinced me she had a secret to conceal, and this secret 1 suspected to be attached to vol. iv. ι your
your birth. The mysterious mark on your arm, and her painful confusion on its being seen, increased my suspicions. A thought once crossed my mind, but it was too im¬ probable to remain, yet I felt as warmly interested in your happiness as if I had been convinced that thought was true. I will see your mother, Edward, and will try to convince her that she is doing you an act of gross injustice in withholding from you the name and connexions of your father." Edward again expressed his deep sense of the kindness thus manifested towards bini by the dean, but assured him that so firm was the determination of his mother to conceal from him who was the author of his being, or even who was his god¬ father, that he did not conceive that his friendly attempts would meet with any success; on the contrary, his mother might feel offended at his exposing her to the persuasions and remonstrances of a person to whom she felt herself greatly obliged, and
and for whom she entertained a high re¬ spect. " In tbat case," replied the dean, " I will trust to chance, which may throw me in your mother's company. I have al¬ ways called, whenever I came to town, at her old lodgings, and it will therefore not appear strange if I should now inquire of Mrs. Alexander Mackenzie concerning her." The good-natured dean had found him¬ self so completely at home witb his god¬ son, that be remained and partook of ba¬ chelor's fare, and did not leave him until late in the evening, when Edward, full of anxiety to learn tbe result of his mother's visit to the marchioness, hurried to her abode witb all the speed that love and cu¬ riosity could give bim.
CHAP.
CHAPTER VIII.
Edwaîio testified the greatest astonish¬ ment on being informed that the mar¬ chioness had that morning paid a visit to his mother.—" What do you think of her, dear Janet ?" said he, turning hastily to Miss Cameron. " She is very, very beautiful," replied Janet; ** but I dislike the expression of her eyes, although I seemed fascinated whenever she looked at me. Ah ! I see that you don't think as I do, and indeed it is un¬ grateful in me to find fault with one who has behaved so kindly, and who wishes to do me every service in her power." " The marchioness has desired me to let her have Janet as a companion," said Mrs. Mackenzie, " but I would not give my full consent until I had seen you. I am afraid
afraid tbat you would then have an addi¬ tional inducement to frequent her bouse, and I already begin to tremble anew for the consequences of your intimacy." Edward replied that be ivas surprised his mother should think of parting with Miss Cameron, whose soc-ety must con¬ stitute her chief happiness, and that, highly as he priced a wish of lady Anendale's, he trusted that his mother ivould frame any excuse rather than rflow Janet to re¬ side in a house wiiere he could have no possible means of access to her, without betraying at once his relationship. Mrs. Mackenzie smiled faintly on her son.—" I did not mean to part with Ja¬ net," said she, " but I wanted to see whe¬ ther you would yield her to tbe wishes of your beloved marchioness. She believes that Janet is my daughter, and therefore is generously anxious to promute her fu¬ ture establishment in life. She finds her sufficiently accomplished to makean agree¬ able companion, even to a woman of her I 3 rallk,
rank, and therefore proposed taking her under her protection." Miss Cameron appeared confused during this speech of Mrs. Mackenzie, though sbe endeavoured, but in vain, to hide it from Edivard, wbo now inquired of his mother tbe result of her interview with lady An¬ endale, and the cause of her visiting her so speedily ; to wiiich inquiry his mother replied by recounting as much as sbe judged proper of tbe conversation which had passed between them. " I find," said she, " that vou have created an uncommon interest in tbe bosom of the marchioness, and that her curiosity is upon the rack to ñnd out ivho ivere your parents. I know that she will not rest until it is gratified, and it is tbis tbat alarms me." " Why not tell her at once that I am your son ?" exelaimed Edivard, kissing his mother's cheek. " End her suspense, and give me a double claim to her favour. You know how Ì dislike concealments, and bate ml appearance of mystery: nay, ifit were
were not that you w T ere my own dear mother, I should say that I could not think well of any one ivho thought it ne¬ cessary to use disguise, since openness and candour is the ready ivay to my heart. But yon look pale, my fair cousin ; I fear that you are unwell." Miss Cameron made a slight excuse for her indisposition, and Edward again turned to his mother.—" What say you, my dear mother ? will it not be better to tell the marchioness what she may probably find out without our assistance? and tben wiiat a despicable figure I shall make for having lent myself to fonvarel so unnecessary a deception !" " Edward," said Mrs. Mackenzie, " I am tbe best judge of the motives for my own actions. I bave already tolel з т ои that the discovery of your birth would ruin you in the estimation of laely Anendale, and draw upon you her hatred and resent¬ ment." ι 4 " That
'· That must be on account of my fa¬ ther" cried Edward unguardedly, " for sbe is too mucli attached to you, mother, to dislike me for being your son," " Perhaps you are right, Edward," said Mrs. Mackenzie ; *** but let us drop the subject. My spirits have been sufficiently tasked this morning, and cannot enelure any fresh exertion ; yet once more let me caution you to conceal who you are, if you value my repose and your* own peace." She now quitted the apartment, leaving Edward alone with Miss Cameron, who. as be flung himself beside her, again be¬ came pale and trembling.—" For Hea¬ ven's sake, beloved Janet," said Edward, grasping her hand in his, " wiiat is the cause of this strange, this unaccountable emotion, whenever I adelress you, or offer to take your hand in mine ? Am I dis¬ agreeable to you, my dear cousin, or have 1 unintentionally offended you ?" " Oh no ! no !" cried Janet, in agitation, aneì
and trying to withdraw her hand. " You cm never offend* never be disagreeable to me, Edward," " Then why this mysterious emotion, tbis reluctance to allow me even a brother's privilege ?" Miss Cameron burst into tears, and Ed¬ ward, more and more alarmed, conjured her to tell bim the cause of her uneasiness. " Do not let me have to accuse you, my dearest Janet," said he, " of conspiring to make me miserable. Do not let me have to reproach you with wantonly sporting ivith my peace, and using concealment where concealment is unnecessary——" Miss Cameron gave a convulsive shud¬ der, and sunk back on her seat. Tbe cry of terror uttered by Edward soon brought Mrs. Mackenzie to his assistance, who, equally alarmed, applied with trembling hands the usual restoratives, and Janet recovering, opened her eyes, then closed tbem again, and leaning upon the bosom of bis mother, seemed relapsing into her 1 5 former
former insensibility, while Mrs. Macken¬ zie clasped her to her bosom in stifled agony, and Edward hung over her with breathless tenderness. " She is dying, mother," said he, in a faltering voice, " and you ivill be her mur¬ derer. You possess the power to calm her distressed feelings, yet you refuse to use it." Then, starting wildly from the position in wdiich he leant—" î will en¬ dure this no longer," said he, angrily. " Life is not worth håving, if it must be purchased by the sacrifice of ali that is va¬ luable." " Stay, Edivard, I conjure you," cried his mother—" stay, and tell me whither you were going ?" " To the marchioness," replied Edivard, his hand on tbe lock of the de>or. " She it is who rules my destiny, and with it is connected the peace of Janet. I am no longer to be misled by excuses. I will know at once my fate 4 , and the cause of Janet's v retchedness." " Stay.
" Stay, oh stay, my son !" exclaimed Mrs. Mackenzie, in an agony of fear; " sťiy, and assist me to convey Janet to her chamber. See, she revives. My child ! my beloved child ! why have you lost all confidence in my affection ?" Edward returned; he flung his arms round the waist of Janet, who suffered him to support her.—" Five words, my mother, only five words, you said, were necessary to ensure the happiness of my dear Janet. Will you promise me now to repeat them ? Upon no other terms ivill 1 consent to forego my intention of disclosing to the marchioness wdio I am J' Mrs. Mackenzie looked first at tlie poor trembling Janet, and tben at her son— " Oh, Edward," said she, " you know not what you ask; but I yield to necessity. Leave us, my dear Edward, and rely upon my affording Janet all the consolation and comfort which you elemand. To¬ morrow you will not find her averse to listen to your avowals of affection." ι 6 Edward,
Edward, trusting to the promiße of his mother, took an affectionate leave of his beloved Janet, with the assurance of seeing her weM and happy the next moriaing, at their usual hour of breakfast. But, al¬ though satisfied as to the veracity of his mother, ivho he believed would no longer trifle with the repose of Miss Cameron, he still felt he was unjustly treated, since he was no longer a boy without pruelence or without pride, both of which wouki en¬ able him to bear with proper fortitude any secret which his parent migbt have to communicate. With feelings but ill-suited to tbe scene,. Edward returned home to dress for a ball, to which he had been invited by lady Manningham, preparatory to the nuptials of Flora and Mr. Vivian. He was en¬ gaged to dance with lady Jane------, and he tberefore felt desirous to be there in time, lest his fair partner should have cause to accuse him of negligence. His spirits ivere harassed and depressed by tbe
the unaccountable behaviour of Miss Ca¬ meron ; and honest Oliver, who saw that his master w^s vexed by something which had occurred duringhisabsencefrom home, brought him a bottle of fine old wine, which had been sent him as a present from sir Joseph Hennie, and, with the freedom of pure and genuine affection, he, without asking leave, drew the cork, and placing it before him with some biscuits, besought him to taste, and decide upon its good¬ ness. Edward felt the kindness of Oliver, such as it was really meant, and, ordering him to bring another glass, obliged him to give his opinion first of its excellence ; then r finding that the wine was such as Oliver had described it, he drank pretty freely, in order to raise his spirits to a proper pitch of exhilaration, that all unpleasant reflections might be banished from his mind. Notwithstanding this artifice, some pain¬ ful ideas intruded themselves. He coidd not
not help feeling that, with ail tbe advan¬ tages of friends and of flattering prospects, bis situation was by no means enviable, since tîie happiness of his life depended upon the breath of his mother. It ivas in her power to satisfy one of the principal wishes of his heart-—it was in her poiver to do aivay the painful mystery of his birth, and to explain to him the singular cause of Miss Cameron's reserve and evi¬ dent uneasiness wiienever he approached ber. " Aìhì yet," said Edward, drawing from bis finger the sparkling present of lady Jane, " my disinterested affection might demand a gentler mode of conduct than that of repulsive indifference. The love wiiich ivarms my breast, and wbich is proof to the tender blandishments of the noble, the generous lady Jane, surely de¬ serves to meet with a ivarmer reception than tears and stifled sighs of hidden grief." Another and another glass was sw^al- loiveel, to drown, if possible, the remem¬ brance
brance of wbat annoyed bim. He then dressed liimself, and proceeded to the house of lady Manningham, where, as usual, his presence was greeted by every demonstration of genuine kindness. The rooms were crowdeel, but lady Jane had not yet arrived, and Frederic drew him on one side, that he might impart to bim the important intelligence of his having ventured to discover to his mother his correspondence and interview with lady Elinor. ** My mother heard me without testify¬ ing any expression or motion of disappro¬ bation," said Frederic, " and this encou¬ raged me candidly to avow my love for Elinor, and my hopes that she would fa¬ vour my intention of withelrawing the sweet girl from her prison, and from the tyranny of her jailors. My sincerity pleased my mother. She listened patiently to my description of my beloved Elinor's attrac¬ tions, and, when I repeateel to her our stolen
stolen interviews, and her innocent expres^ sions of gratitude for our proffered services, my mother confessed that, much as she disliked the marchioness, yet slie could not extend thai dislike towards her ne¬ glected and amiable daughter. Our con¬ ference took place this morning. My fa¬ ther is apprized of my attachment; and, ■as my mother is on my side, he has not attempted to start any objection to what she has sanctioned* Congratulate me, therefore, my dear Mackenzie, since my parents have consented to my loving the ill-treated Elinor—-nay, my mother half- expressed her inclination to afford her all the protection in her power ; and, thus en¬ couraged by the respected authors of my existence, I deem myself justified in claim¬ ing the hand of Elinor, to whom I have already written, that she moy no longer doubt the reception which she will meet with from my family, when she honours it by becoming one of its members. I shall
shall soon follow my letter, and in the course of a few days I anticipate the bliss of calling the lovely Elinor my wife." Tbis pleasing piece of intelligence had the most enlivening effect on the spirits of Edwarel, and when lady Manningham took the opportunity to question him respect¬ ing the neglected daughter of the mar¬ chioness, he described her in terms of such warm, such animated praise, tbat her lady¬ ship smiled on the young enthusiast, and good-naturedly cautioned him to beware how he rivalled his friend. The appear¬ ance of lady Jane ------ at that moment prevented the reply of Eelward, and he quitted the side of lady Manningham to join that of his fair admirer. Never perhaps had Edward looked hand¬ somer than he did this evening—never had he moved witb greater ease, elegance, and grace ; and lady Jane, as she gazed on him with affection and admiration, could not help flattering herself with tbe de¬ lightful
lightful hope that he was destined to be¬ come tbe partner of her future life. Lulled by this pleasing delusion, lady Jane looked and spoke with more than her accustomed kindness, wdiile circumstances, and the na¬ tural gratitude of hi.s nature, made Eel- ward equally attentive to lier ladyship. The rapture of her feelings was quickly damped as her eyes glanced upon bis ring- less band, for in the hurry Ô-Pdressing he had forgot to replace it on his finger. " See," exclaimed lady Jane, holding up to his view her own fair hand, " see, Mr. Mackenzie*, how constant I am in my frienelsbips. I have worn the pledge of your esteem ever since the hour in which I received it ; but j-ou ------" Edward coloured as he encountered her reproachful eyes—he stammered out his excuse, wdiich was readily accepted by her ladyship. " 1 was silly enough to feel pained, Mr. Mackenzie," said she, " on perceiving that you
yon had laid aside my ring. I thought— that is, I feared that it migbt have lost its value in your opinion." The reply of Edward was such as might be expected to come from a young and ardent character like his. It brought the life-blood to tbe cheeks of lady Jane, wdio replied with gaiety—" How could I tell, Mr. Mackenzie, but that some one existed who might possess a prior claim on your devotion, and for whose tranquillity my ring had been displaced. Ah, traitor, I was right—your blushes betray the just¬ ness of my suspicions. Some one does exist, for whose peace, were it necessary, you would not hesitate to sacrifice my gift." Then, sighing deeply, she added— *' If such is the case, Mr. Mackenzie—if your heart has already made its election, you have my sincerest wishes for the suc¬ cess of your passiói, and in my prayers I shall not forget to petition for your happi¬ ness." She rose hastily, but Edward caught her
her hand, and gentiy detained her,—« If your penetration has discovered the secret of my soul," said he, " let not that cir¬ cumstance bereave me, dear lady Jane, of ivhat I deem one of my proudest boasts, your friendship. Our affections are not idwpys within the bounds of our own keep-, ing. They are sometimes involuntary gifts, in whicb reason and prudence are little consulted ; but the bright flame which ■emanates from friendship's shrine burns, with apurer, holier light, unmixed by any of the grosser particles w r hic¡i hover rounel the lamp of love, dimming its celestial brilliancy. Suffer me, dear laely Jane, to retain the delightful hope of continuing to possess your esteem ; it has already softened down the asperity of my private vexations, and added another charm to reconcile me to my fate." Lady Jane looked tenderly in the face of Edward, while her eyes were moistened with tears.—" If I know any thing of my¬ self," said she, in a low tone, " you may safely
safely rely, Mr. Mackenzie, upon the con¬ tinuance of my esteem. Had your hap¬ piness depended upon——But that is at an end------yet if at any time you should re¬ quire either the soothings of friendship, or the assistance of interest, remember Jane." Edward raised her hand to his lips; at that moment Mr. Colvill passed, and lady Jane retreated to another apartment, to hide her painful emotions. The brother of lady James Osborne took the vacant seat, and, gently placing his hand on the shoulder of Edward, said, in a conciliating voice—" You seem dis composed, my dear young friend : ivhat has occurred to damp the joj^ous festivity of the present lively scene ? Has lady Jane offended y ou? If so, her ladyship appeared truly penitent for her fault, for I saw the tear of contrition glisten on her cheek as she abruptly passed me." " Lady Jane is one of the most disin¬ terested of human beings," exclaimed Ed¬ ward, warmly. " Insensible to her me¬ rits,
rits, and blind to her perfections, I have slighted a friendship, whicb, but for one circumstance, ivould havebeen the soul of my existence." " I am much mistaken," said Mr. Col¬ vill, " if either rank or fortune has any influence over your affections. I always liked lady Jane, but I shall now love her better than ever, because I believe that she has had sense and discernment to pre¬ fer untitled merit to the swarm of fashion¬ able blockheads who buz around her, and court her favour, merely because they have nothing else to do. But, my dear boy, I bave a question to ask of you, which would have led me to your lodgings, had I not expected to have seen you here this even¬ ing. It is this : my father, during bis narration of the circumstances whicb first led to liis intimacy with your mother, droppcei some expressions which awaken¬ ed in my mind the foolish belief tbat sbe was not unknown to me. I confess that tbis is extremely improbable, yet I cannot get
ţyet rid of tbe idea—it has haunted me ever since : I seem to feel that something connected with my happiness is attached to tbe discovery of your mother's name and family, and, from this circumstance, I am confident that you will not think me obtrusive or impertinent if I request of you to give me the information which I am so desirous of obtaining." " I would not hesitate an instant, my dear sir," replied Edivarel, " ifit depended upon me to gratify a wish of yours. But there is a singular mystery which hangs over my birth and connexions—a mystery ivhich I have vainly endeavoured to pene¬ trate, and which is the only alloy to my happiness ; it is the secret poison wbich, thougii slow in its effects, nevertheless en¬ venoms tbe most blissful moments of my life, converting tbe siveetest emotions of my soul into a source of pain and mortifi¬ cation. I have unwillingly r be^en obliged to promise that I would indulge tbe strange caprice
caprice of my mother, and conceal both her name and place of abode." " Then I will press you no farther on the subject," said Mr. Colvill, " but trust to chance to gratify my wishes. The un¬ common interest which I feel in all that concerns you, my elear Edward, and my unaccountable desire to become acquainteel with your mother, almost induces me to suspect that my feelings are guided by some supernatural agency, as the disap¬ pointments of my eariy years have taught me to guard against the fallacy of first im¬ pressions, and have also deadened within me those seeds of curiositv whicb, more or less, are planted in every bosom. But I detain you from the pleasures of the dance, and the bright eyes of my niece, Olivia, tacitly upbraid me for my selfishness." Edward rose immediately, on perceiving Bliss Osborne, and apologized fe>rnot hav¬ ing sought her.-—" Ob, I can well excuse you," cried Olivia, good-naturedly, " for there
there is such a honied charm in the sound of uncle Richard's voice, that I couid fiş¬ ten ţo it myself for ever." Edward, on re-entering the ball-room, looked anxiously around for lady Jane, and when informed by a lady who stood next him that her bdyship had complained of indisposition, and returned home, he felt a ¡sadness of. heart, .alowness of spirits, which took from him all power of enter¬ ing into the amusements of the evening. As soon, therefore, as he could, he quitted a scene which had now become discordant to him, and, like the generous Jane, re¬ turned home to meditate upon the con¬ versation wliich had passed between them.
vol. iv. к СЙАР-
CHAPTER IX. The next morning Edward felt a consi¬ derable degree of impatience to behokl what effect the five words, to which his mother had attached so much consequence, had had on Miss Cameron. All the vexa¬ tion of the preceding evening was quickly forgotten, when, on hastening towards her, she half met him, with a bashful blushing countenance, which seemed to say that she was no longer averse to the tender ex¬ pressions of his affection. Encouraged by her looks, Edward ventured to press his lips to hers, then, turning to his mother, ¿md embracing her, he said— cţ I perceive, зпу dear mother, the talismanic effect of your five words, and am content to re¬ main in ignorance of them as long as I behold the countenance of our dear Janet such
such as it now is, dimpled with smiles, and beaming with love and tenderness. Ah, Janet, if you knew what I have suf¬ fered from the dread of being regarded as the object of your indifference, you would feel a. double interest in assuring me that I have thought falsely, ivhen I feared that you did not love me," Miss ^Cameron's beauty was increased in tbe eyes of 'Edward by the sweet confu¬ sion of her blushing face, as she replied, that he had certainly erred in his judg¬ ment of her feelings towards himself; for, though cireumstances had hitherto com¬ pelled her to adopt a conduct foreign to her heart, yet if he had suffered by that con¬ duct, he had not suffered alona "That;! can. arış wet" for," said Mrs. Mackenzie, " and for more even than Ja¬ net's modesty woulel allow her to declare. This I may venture to say, without wound¬ ing her delicacy, that every pang which pierced your heart wounded her own." Edivard cast a glance on Janet of thank- K2 ful
ful tenderness.—" I feel relieved," said he, " of a heavy load which has so long op¬ pressed me : yet how, dearest Janet, can I be assured that your parents will sanc¬ tion my passion ?" " Leave the management of that affair to -w-f," replied Mrs. Mackenzie smiling, " and rely with confidence upon my word, tbat no impediment will arise from tbe parents of Janet to blight your hopes. From your friends, my dear Edward, you may probably receive many wholesome lessons of advice against your marrying a girl whose connexions are so far inferior to what your prospects, talents, and si¬ tuation in life authorize them to expect for you ; but I, who know the virtues and sweet temper of our Janet, feel convinced that, from those endearing recommenda¬ tions, as well as from another circumstance which you will shortly be acquainted with, your happiness will be more secure in her hands than in that of any other woman.!' Edward's heart most readily subscribed to
to this assertion of his mother. He never gazed upon the bright blue eyes of Janet Cameron without tlieir recalling to his mind his dear adopted father—he never beard her speak, or saw her smile, but his imagination almost cheated him into a belief that Mackenzie was before him ; and to this resemblance may principally be ascribed the tender preference which he felt for Janet Cameron, and the firm hold which, she had gained over his affections, even before he was aware of it himself. The change which had so instan¬ taneously taken place in the behaviour and appearance of Miss Cameron operated with equal force on the spirits of Ediyard, and he almost forgot that there still exist¬ ed an unexplained cause by which his peace and happiness was affected. With all the sanguine ardour of youth, he look¬ ed forward to the time when his profes¬ sion would enable him to claim the hand of his adored Janet, when it would per¬ mit him to support her with that elegance к 3 whicb
which her person, manners, and acquire¬ ments would not disgrace. Who among his friends'that would not rather commend than' censure" hk choice ?—he was at least certain of Frederic Máfttimghanľs.appro-« botion, which, strongly as they were attached to each other, was a circum¬ stance of importance in his estimations and that he might the sooner arrivé at the- bummit of his wishes, he resolved to five with thé Utmost frugality, &ftá to abstain from every unnecessary expence. At Üıe moment when this prudent resolution was made, Edward received by post several letters, and among them was one from Patty Äshford, giving so pleasing a· de-' scription of his little godson, that'Edward, who sat down immediately to reply to her, fo:;got his economical intentions, and enclosed a bank-note as a present to hh namesake. The agreeable account which she also gave of their improving business, and the*tender eulogiums bestowed on her husband, afforded Edward tlie purest gra- * tification.
tification. It also contained information of a circumstance of great importance to the happiness of Mrs, Ashford, namely, the death of the worthless woman w r ho had so long ruled the mind of her father, a, circumstance which had already affecteel a great change in Mr. Smith; be bad given up the house which he had inha¬ bited for many years, and had gone to reside with his daughter, paying her hus¬ band for his board, and behaving both to themselves and their child with extreme kindness. This intelligence delighted Edward; as he was well acquainted with the filial ten¬ derness of Patty, and knew that nothing could more conduce to her tranquillity than to see her father once more become a worthy and respectable member of so¬ ciety. The circle in whicb Edward moved, the brightness of his prospects, and the multiplicity of his engagements, bad not the least abated his affection for the friend and companion of his early years. He к 4 wrote
wrote her a long letter, in which he in¬ formed her of a variety of occurrences, all calculated to gladden the heart of Tatty; but that which would delight her most was tbe promise of bringing his mother and his intended bride to spend a week or two at the dear-loved village, which bad been the scene of many a pleasing pastime, many a delicious endearment ; and Edward, who had often talked of Fatty, and dwelt with grateful enthu- 1 siasm upon her conduct towards his ve¬ nerable grandmother, felt more ;al joy ut the idea of thus introducing to her knowledge the chosen partner of bis soul, than he had even done when anticipating the hour in which he should present his Janet to a few of his favourite friends ; and Janet felt an equal desire to embrace the kind-hearted Patty, and to caress the godson of Edward Mackenzie. Eelward, though no longer obliged to check the tenderness of his feelings toward Miss Cameron, though blest in receiving tbe
the delicate testimonials of a mutual affec¬ tion, did not, as might for a time have been expected, neglect either h-s professional labours, or the friends who had a prior claim to his attentions. He called upon Mr. Colvill the day before the marchioness of Anendale's masked ball, and, finding that he was absent, but shortly expected home, he went to pay his compliments to lady James Osborne and her amiable daughters, and was surprised to see on the drawing-room table two t' .ts of ad¬ mission to Anendale House. " These," said lady James, taking the tickets in her hand, " have been just sent us by lady Jane------ ; she left town this morning, for the seat of her eklest brother, and enclosed them to me, not being per¬ fectly acquainted with my opinion of lady Anendale, which is such as-will, I hope, prevent any of my family from attending her parties " Edward was silent, for it painpd him most acutely to hear the name of the mar¬ lt 5 chioness
chioness littered in a tone of censure. He was silent also from respect to lady James Osborne, whom he knew to be too good and excellent a being to falsify even the character of an enemy. But lady James was human, and therefore liable to err in her judgments, in common with the rest of her sex. Edward longed to know what she ivould do with the tickets, but it was a question which he elid not feel au' 1 őrized to put; he had receiveel one for himself, but he could not help wishing that, if the tickets w r ere of no use to lady James, she would transfer them f o him, as in that case he could grati*. / his Janet with the sigbt of an amusement perfectly new to her: but in this wish our young lover was doomed to be disappointed, for her laely ship shewed no disposition to make him an offer of the tickets. A servant now informed Edward that Mr. Colvill was returned, and requested his immediate presence. On Edward's entering his apartment, Mr. Colvill flung himself
himself upon his neck, and embraced him with the warmest affection, yet with an evident agitation tbat alarmed Edward.— " My dear sir," said he, " I fear tbat you are not well ?" " I have met with somethmg wbich greatly affected me," replied Mr. Colvill, " and I am not yet recovered from its effects; but it will afford me relief if I unbosom myself to you, ivho, I am per¬ suaded, will feel a lively interest in w T hat I shall relate. In passing tbis morning through St. James's Park, I was struck by the air and voice of a lady before me, who was conversing freely with a sweet look¬ ing girl, her companion, and who, in reply, mentioned your name in a way which convinced me that sbe was either related to you, or ivould be so shortly." Edward's blushes, for he bad not yet learnt the art of driving back tbe vital stream before it r ched his cheeks, be¬ trayed the truth of Mr. Colvill's sus¬ picion. к 6 "I folloived
44 1 followed them" œnthmed tľ? bro¬ ther of lady James, " with a double curio¬ sity, heightened by my own private feel¬ ings, and the belief that I had discovered the person whom I had long wished to see. They entered a large fruiterer's in West¬ minster, and I then heard the name of the elder lady, as a footman in the Anendale Jivery presented her with a letter. She threw up her veil—it ivas the person whom I bad been so solicitous to find out, ever since my return to England : but it was not Mrs. Mackenzie. " As soon as I could acquire sufficient self-command I entered the shop, anel hav¬ ing purchased some of the choicest fruits, and given my sister's address, I inquired of a youth who served me what family Mrs. Cameron had, and was told a son and a daughter. I next requested him to conduct me to her apartments, which he seemed to do witb reluctance ; I was, however, shewn into a neat drawing-room, where
where sat the object of my search, and her lovely modest companion. " I had expected that, after the lapse of so many years, my unexpected pre¬ sence would occasion Mrs. Cameron some surprise ; but I was wholly unable to ac¬ count for the confusion and excessive agi¬ tation which she now betrayed. I took her hand, and endeavoured to calm her emotions, by assuring her that I did not attribute to her the slightest blame in an affair which hael terminated so fatally to my peace. " Mrs. Cameron motioned to tlie sw T eet wondering maid to retire, and she imme¬ diately withdrew ; but all my endeavours to tranquillize tbe mind of JMrs. Cameron p.jved fruitless; she burst into a violent flood of tears, which appeared in some de¬ gree to relieve her. This extreme sheiy of distress in one whom I had always no¬ ticed with kindness, and to whom I had ever acted with confiding generosity dur¬ ing our short acquaintance, naturally gave rise
rise to well-grounded suspicions; but I checked these unfavourable ideas, and spoke to her of herself and family concerns, with a view toassure her of my friendly intentions. I found her singularly re¬ served, though she confessed that she had a daughter ; but, when I mentioned her son, her agitation returned, and she denied the cireumstance so positively^ that I felt obliged to acknowledge that I hael been better informed on that point, and that I could not guess the motive which led her to deny so dear a claim to her affection. She again repeated her denial, anel I began to imagine that the youth hael been mis¬ informed ; and I therefore apologized for håving so boldly asserted a falsehood. I then mentioned the conversation which I had partly overheard in the park, and in¬ quired if she had known for any consider¬ able time a young gentleman of the name of Mackenzie, to whom I was particu¬ larly attached ? To this question Mrs. Cameron replied, that she had know T n yoti from
from Infah^áhď that you were the be* trdthedbiišMrid cif her only daughteW*the lovely girl ivliom I had just seen." * ;. · "'- Edtraťdi whö^from the begičming of Mr: Colvill's narration felt Conscious that it w r as no othe-r than his j mother and Janet that he had met in the park, expressed by the changes 1 of his countenance the interest which he took in the recital. But he now found a eiifficulty in concealing his emo¬ tions of surprise and anger, at the com¬ plicated falsehoods uttered by his mother without any obvious reason. His feelings became so acute that he feared lest they would excite the notice of Mr. Colvill, ^ho now resumed his discourse. " When I saw Mrs. Cameron a little composed, I ventured to touch upon the subject of our first acquaintance : I re¬ minded her of the zeal she had shewn for my happiness, of tbe trouble she had taken to-gratify my impatient wishes, and : of my obligation to her on that account · γ I be¬ sought her to relate to me some circum- - ' -" · stances
strøces of which I was ignorar^ ançl ţa confide to me all that she kne w concern¬ ing the singular termination of an attach¬ ment щ which she h$d bprne no inconsi¬ derable share of difficulty and danger. My description of %\ h e şμffei?ings I had undergone in tjie disappointment of my fondest hopes, and the evident tenderness which I still weakly felt towards a faith¬ less object, softened the heart of Mrs. Ca* meron. She told me all that she felt au¬ thorized to disclose, and even hinted that she would say more, but that she was re¬ strained bv a vow which she had made- She however dropped enough to awaken in my breast the most dreadful suspicions, which were strengthened by her referring· me to another, for the trutb of what I feared. The result of this interview, she said, would perhaps exonerate her from her vow.—Edward, rny dear boy, you cannot imagine how this occurrence has unhinged me. I feel so terribly nervous, that I tremble to be alone; and to appear before
before my beloved sister while I am thus agitated would alarm her tenderness. Stay with me, therefore, my young friend, if you are not engaged, for I shall recover myself sooner in your presence than in that of any other person." Edward most cheerfully consented to the request of Mr. Colvill, although he hael several calls which he intended mak¬ ing, and ivas particularly desirous of seeing Frederic Manningham that even¬ ing ; but every desire gave place to that of being serviceable to Mr. Colvill, and he therefore remained, to the great gratifi¬ cation of his highly nervous friend, whom with pleasure he perceived to grow by degrees more tranquil and easy, as he endeavoured to divert his ideas into a different channel. In the course of the evening they were joined by the dean of H ------, whose presence and unassuming piety of manners had its due influence on Mr. Colvill. It ivas late before Edward returned to his
hisTodgings, when Oliver gave him a let¬ ter from Frederic, which he hastily broke open ; for, in the disordered state in which his mind then was, it was some relief to hear from the loveel friend whom he could not see, and to trace the well- known characters of a warm and feeling heart, which had ever been most firmly attached to his interests. Edward was, however, surprised at the sudden informa¬ tion it contained, as he had hoped to have seen young Manninghani at the marchio¬ ness's ball, and had felt impatient to learn his opinion of that beautiful woman. But Frederic was otherwise engaged : he hael received a letter from his Elinor, which had determined him to set off immediately for her prison-house, and from thence to Scotland, not doubting but that he should be able to persuade his beloved that his society was far preferable to that of her rigid duenna, and the cheerful and hap¬ py mansion of his mother more suited to her taste than tlie gloomy castle,of Fitz-
A A Fitz-Arthur. He took with him a letter from Flora, full'of affectionate hopes and pikyersďofithe happmess of Elinor, whom JiealrèâdyiStylédib^r sister, and on this, as muoh Jas on his own eloquaiccj Frede¬ ric dependexPfèr the success of his enter- |»kè. > Mkbel and ber lover v?êr& wanxi in his cause* and were intended tö be the сотрапюпв of lady J Elinor's flight. — "FèrgiVe røe^ dearest Mackenzie;" said Frederic í ťf fori breaking my engagement of to-pn^r-W nighfü Fallow hoiy aiixiotts ypu are that ï should behold the lovely march ionens | buti her more lovely daugh·*- ter hasi a soľorígeŕ claim ön my time, a· claim,-to, which evén yoii; friend of my soul*· must yield. Wheai Efeo^riaamy wife,; I shall return with all possible haste to London, and will then give you my opi·* moaof^tòrbeattti&fr aH a a / But Frederic w^as fated never to behold tbe marchioness, nor tbe sweet Elinor to receive the embrace and blessing of tbe l--u\ 'ί , parent
AN ANGEĽS FORM
parent who had so cruelly estranged her¬ self from her filial duty and affection. Edivard was vexed at this disappoint¬ ment of his wishes, yet he quickly be¬ came reconciled, when he thought of the. superior happiness his friend would enjoy by the side of lady Elinor, unalloyed by any of the mortifying and painful reflec¬ tions which woulel necessarily obtrude themselves on his gayest hours. Yet Ed¬ ward seemed to feel, though he lenew not why, as if the termination of Iris perplexi¬ ties and the gratification of his curiosity were both at hand ; and with this belief he strove to lull the turbulent and angry emotions of his soul, endeavouring to for¬ get what he deemed the disgraceful false¬ hoods of bis mother, by fixing his thoughts on the innocent and affectionate Janet, whom/ he now regarded as bis betrothed wife.
CHAP-
CHAPTER X.
Edward, in obedience to the wish of tbe marchioness, bad ordered his dress to bc sent to her house, as he was engaged to dine there with a small party of her select friends. But, as he was the acknowledged favourite, he had the privilege of being admitted to pass judgment upon the va¬ rious ornaments and decorations which ivere putting up in the grand suite of apart¬ ments, designed for the purpose of the evening's amusement. Edivard, therefore, was requested to breakfast with the mar¬ chioness at twelve, that he might assist her in her intended inspection. He had, however, {sufficient time to call upon his mother, who, unwilling to expose herself to his reproaches, in case he had seen Mr. Colvill, determined to be denied to him, which
which poor Janet performed with so trem¬ bling a voice and confused an air, that her lover suspected immediately the cause of her embarrassment. This proof of a pure ingenuous mind was not lost upon Ed¬ ward, and he loved her the more for her inability tò utter a falsehood without blushing/ The marchioness received Edward in lier boudoir, and, holding out her hand, invited him to h seat on her couch. She was elressed in a plain morning robe, and looked and sm iled divinely. During the) r repast sbe entertained him by the display of her knowledge in elegant literature. Sbe ¡spoke of poetry and · paintings and lastly of music, of ivhich she ivas a per¬ fect and delicate j udge. She then directed his attention to some exquisite pictures which hung round her little apartment ; tbey ivere executed by tlie best masters, and called forth the high praise of Ed¬ ward : yet even his favourite pursuit lost its principal charm in the presence of the lovelv
lovely marchioness. From the subject of painting she artfully recurred to that of his own affairs, and at length inquired if he had any relations living ? Edward replied tliat he had a widowed mother and a sister, but tbat he was igno¬ rant of any other claim to his affection, except that of friendship and gratitude. " I think tbat I have beard," said lady Anendale, " that your father was an officer, and tbat he died in America ?" " That ivas the husband of my mother," replied Edward, " for my father died be¬ fore I was born, at least so I imagine ; but no parent could ever be more sacredly dear to me than my adopted fatlier, the brave, the noble, the gallant Mackenzie. It is bis name tbat I bear, and it shall ever be my study never to commit a single action that can stain its lustre, or that ivould have met with his censure had be been living;." The marchioness looked thoughtful; then, as if by chance, she laid her beauti¬ ful
ful white handon Edward's arm.·—" With what enthusiasm you speak of ycu r adopted father !" said she, looking full in his face ; " with what ardour you appear to adore his memory ! I coulel almost envy him, though dead, the possession of a love like yours." Edward pressed the hand of lady Anen¬ dale to fus lips.—" Never," said he, " can ï »do justice to the parental care and affec¬ tion of my adopted father, or to my own feelings towards that dear and revered being ; yet there exists another, who bids fair to share wdth him all my tenderness and devotion." " Then," said the marchioness, with a look of irresistible sw r ectness, " you love, Mackenzie—you have aiready felt the in¬ fluence of that power, which more or less affects the peace of every human being." " Your ladyship may probably have judged rightly," replied Edward, " with respect to the state of my heart, but the love to which I allude is of a different na¬ ture
ture to that whieh you mean ; it is such that I will not attempt to describe, though I feel at this moment its full force, and, were it necessary, could sacrifice my own repose to ensure that of its object." " You are a strange creature, Macken- zie," exdaimed the marchioness. " Nowr would I give the best trinket in my jewel- box to know wbo this fair lady is for whom you entertain so singular a pcTwhant" " And yet were I to tell your ladyship who that person is, for whom I feel the strongest emotions of what may be called a filial tenderness and veneration, you would perhaps reprove me for my boldness, or, at best, laugh at me for my presumption" " No, on my honour. Although I am still young enough to enjoy the flattery of a lover, yet I think that I should not feel very, very much offended, if the object of your filial tenderness were even myself.'* Edward was no longer his own master: be fell on one knee before the beautiful marchioness, and, taking her hand, pressed vol* iv. i, it
it fervently to his lips, while tears filled his eyes.—" AVill you then accept of me for a son ?" said he, in a tremulous voice ; " will you allow me to love you, to adore you, as if you were in reality tbe blessed mother who bore me? fornever was there a heart more inclined to fulfil all tîie en¬ dearing duties of a child than mine." Lady Anendale gazed with fixed at¬ tention on the graceful youth, whose fine, manly, open countenance was a faithful index of his mind. The more she gazed upon the kneeling Edward, the more va¬ rious were the changes of her own fea¬ tures. At J^.gth she said, with a forced smile—" This is the first time, Mackenzie, that I have been solicited by a young and handsome man like yourself to allow him to consider me as his mother. However, the request is so perfectly novel, so incompre¬ hensibly strange, that I will not refuse to grant it, especially as I feel tbat kind of interest in your fate which forces me to accept what, from any other man, I should regard
regard as the grossest insult Rise, there¬ fore, Mackenzie, and receive a mother's embrace." Lady Anendale said this with an un¬ steady voice ; but Edward thought only of the bliss which he felt on finding him¬ self closely pressed to the bosom of the marchioness. He heeded not the convul¬ sive heavings of that fair and exquisite bosom, nor the pallid hue which for a mo¬ ment overspread her cheek—his own emo¬ tions ivere too powerful, too new, and too delicious : yet tliey were unlike those which agitated him when near the person of his betrotheu bride; they resembled, as far as he eould judge, tlie rapturous feelings of a long absent son, when clasped to tbe heart of an adored mother. Lady Anendale spoke first.—" Mac¬ kenzie," saiel she, " we are both of us very billy, I in consenting to your request, and you for making it. However, we will ■now take a survey of what is already done in the best suite of apartments." ь 2 They
They now quitted the boudoir, and pro¬ ceeded to examine those objects of whose external elegance and situation Edward's opinion was required. But the taste of the marchioness was so pure and classical, that no improvement could be made after ber orders had bee""- executed. The taste of themarquis, her husband, though equally good, had not been consulted, he never interfering in any ofthe pursuits or plans of bis wife, nor ever intruding on her time, unless when she found it convenient or necessary to request his presence. In the present instance, she had drawn largely upon bis purse, as this was her first public night since her return to England, and no expence was spared to make it the most brilfiant entertainment of its kind. It was in vain that the marchioness ap¬ plied to Edward to alter any thing that might offend his eye ; his charmed senses regarded every thing around him as a scene of enchantment. The exquisite beauty ofthe painted velvets which com¬ posed
posed the draperies, couches, ke. the glit¬ ter of the golden ornaments, and the rieh perfume of the innumerable flowers wbich filled the chambers, all conspired to give it the appearance of some fairy palace; and it was not without a considerable de¬ gree of pride and pleasure that the mar¬ chioness heard the warm praises of Ed¬ ward bestowed on the works of her own fancy. That lady Anendale should thus feel gra¬ tified by the encomiums of Edward Mac¬ kenzie, as well as pleased with the no¬ velty of his attachment to herself, may appear singular, and rather improbable, considering that she was a woman still in tlie prime of her beauty, and whose ear was accustomed to the sound of adulation almost from her birth. But a still stronger reason existed even than those to make the circumstance of her partiality appear strange : tbis ivas his resemblance to a per¬ son whom she iiad injured, and to whom she had taken, at an early period of her L 3 life,
life, a rooted, though ill-founded aver¬ sion. This resemblance bad struck her most forcibly at her first interview with Edward, but it had worn off, or become familiar to her; and, though her first feel¬ ings towards him had not been favourable, yet every succeeding interview bad weak¬ ened tbe effect of tbe introductory one, and strengthened the power wiiich, almost unknown to herself, Edward bad gaineel over her mind. Lady Anendale had sometimes heen surprised at tbe nature of her regard for Edivarel, wbich bad overcome the small share of prudence she possessed, and bad induced her to acknowledge him openly as her favourite. It is true, that he was far superior in personal attractions, and like¬ wise in talents, to the crowd of her fa¬ shionable admirers : but it was not to the beauty of his features, or the manly pro¬ portions of bis pliant form, tbat Edward owed tbe favour of the marchioness. He was too young to be admitted as her lover; yet
yet in what other light could she consider him, who in her presence seemed only to live upon her smiles ? The marchioness neither possessed prin¬ ciple nor common prudence. She had openly manifested her preference for Ed¬ ward ; yet, while her heart throbbed with the wildest feelings of unchaste passion, a sudden faintness ivould dim the lustre of her eyes, the bright bloom of her cheek grow pale, and an universal trem¬ bling seize her frame. What could oc¬ casion these qualms of conscience in the bosom of lady Anendale ? Not the pure and holy light of Heaven, which breaks in upon the dark midnight of a repent¬ ant sinners soul, giving fair promise of future days of virtue : not tbis—for every failing which had shewn itself in the eariy years of the marchioness w r as as deep- rooted as ever—pride, vanity, and envy, which had blasted her maternal feelings, and led her to stifle the sweetest emo¬ tions of nature, by turns influenced her L 4 actions ;
actions ; but no tear of regret for past er¬ rors had ever quenched the brilliancy of her eye, no sigh had ever escaped her lips, no compunction touched her heart, at the occasional remembrance of those whom she injured, of those whom she had wan¬ tonly made wretched. The singular request of Edivard, that he might be regarded by her as a son, instead of what was most naturai, a lover, produced for the time an effect quite dif¬ ferent from that which might have been expected in a woman of her exquisite loveliness, She felt not anger at a desire v/hich would have better become a stoic than the young and ardent Edward Mac¬ kenzie ; but he felt a sudden rush of new and painful feelings fill her soul—-a crowd of confused ideas, of half-formed terrors, crossed her mind, and she pressed the object of them to her bosom, with й ten¬ derness so free from any gross or unholy thought, that she laughed at the momen¬ tary purity of her conduct, when the my¬ sterious
sterious fear whicb had occasioned it had vanished from her mind. She laughed, but it was more forced than natural, for when she retired to her dressing-room, the same indescribable terrors took possession of her faculties, and she would have fainted, but for tbe timely assistance of one whom she had sent for purposely to attend on her for tbat evening, as ivell as tliat she might enjoy the gratification of viewing the characters. This person was no other than Mrs. Mackenzie, who, unwilling to offend the marchioness, by rejecting entirely her proffered kindness, had come in obedience to her wishes, though she could not per¬ suade Janet to accompany her. " No," said Miss Cameron, " I will not gratify my own desires at the risk of meet¬ ing with Edward in a place where he would be obliged to pass by me without speaking. When I am his wife, and sanctioned by his presence, it will then be time enough L 5 for
for me to behold the pleasures of a mas¬ querade." Mrs. Mackenzie hüd not determined upon going when Edward last called at her lodgings ; he was therefore wholly ig¬ norant of her being under the same roof with himself until he retired from the dining-table to the chamber where he pre¬ pared to dress for the evening. Honest Oliver ivas in waiting, and presented him with a note from his mother, which gave him the unexpected information of her being so near him, as well as the reasons of Janet for denying herself a sigbt ivhich would have afforded her, under any other circumstances, so much gratification. This delicate proof of self-denial was not lost upon her lover ; he fèlt its value, and was determined tbat it should not pass unre¬ warded. Edward, assisted by his faithful Oliver, now assumed the garb of a conjuror, which character he was enabled to support with proper
proper spirit and skill, as the marchioness had initiated him into all the secrets be¬ longing to her fashionable friends with which she was acquainted. She had chosen to personate Iris, and when Edward en¬ tered the grand saloon, now illuminated by a variety of classic lamps, beautifully painted, either with landscapes or flowers, he felt as if spelbbound the moment that his eyes fell on the figure of the mar¬ chioness. She was arrayed in a thin robe of the most brilliant and varied colours. Her neck and arms were bare, and entwined with Indian chains of the purest gold, clasped with many-coloured jewels, while from each lovely shoulder appeared to rise a wing, formed of the finest peacock's fea¬ thers. Her head was encircled by a beau¬ tiful ornament, which had the appearance of rays of gold, rou^d the base of which was a wreath of the same magnificent fea¬ thers, so arranged as to shew only that part called the peacock's eye. The mar¬ chioness, of course, was unmasked, and h Q never
never had she looked more youthful, more bloomingly beautiful, than she now did in the character of Iris. Tbe rooms were soon filled with a con¬ course of motley and fantastic beings; some were in rags and tatters, others in the most splendid apparel, while some were content to shew themselves in the humble garbs of a beggar-w r oman, flower-girl, milk¬ maid, pedlar, ke. The company was nu¬ merous, and chiefly, of the higher order of nobility, who all pressed forward to pay their court to the lovely attendant of Juno. Among them was a wandering minstrel, who seemed to regard tbe marchioness with trembling earnestness, and who in bis turn called forth the attention of the crowd, by tbe dignity of bis figure, tbe grace of his movements, and, abo T d all 5 the extreme agitation which he seemed Vainly labouring to conceal, and ivhich excited tbe sympathy and curiosity ofthe spectators, ivho now earnestly requested him to gratify them with some of bis minstrelsy
minstrelsy. Lady Anendale, w-ho had re¬ marked the conduct of the bard, seconded the wishes of her guests. The minstrel bowed respectfully to the marchioness, then beckoned to a little page who at¬ tended him, and ivho carried his harp. Lightly passing his hands over the chords?, he sung the following lines :— " Say shall ibe nı'mstrel'ö anìess theme " Of rural cot and streamlet d reara? " Tîie festive botird or rosy bowl, u Or glory fire the indent soul ? " Or these, thougii each may pleasing ^го\е, tť Lady, let me bing oťluve 1" The minstrel paused for a moment, and then suddenly struck his harp, in a wild anel hurried maimer, as a preluele to these stanzas : (t Yes! 'tis thys-elf, all gay and warm, " As when my beating heart first met tht'e, íť And still thine eye i e ta in s a charm, *- That dums my bosom to forget thee, «'Ye-.!
ŕŕ Yes ! it is thee, and still the same, " In all the bloom of youth and beauty— u Yes! 'tir. the smile that lit the flame, " Which banish'd reason, sense, and duty. " But thou art changed, η υ r boots it now " To learn uhat demon thus could move thee; " Fnough for me to know that tliou " Art false) and I no more must love thee. *' Thou know'st not wh.it my bosom felt, " When fust Γ found th'ju could'-t deceive me. " Or e'en Cht, cruel heart would melt, 1 And—no Γ thou can'hl not now reheve mr." The magic of the minstrel's voice still trembled on the ears of h.is attentive listen¬ ers, long after his form was lost amid the gazing crowd : but it was the marchioness who seemed to feel, even more than her guests, the influence of his voice, though the effect ivas different ; sbe thought that its tones bad once been familiar to her ear, as w r ell as the air and figure of the minstrel, and she felt that the ivords of the song- were addressed to herself—yet by whom she
she dreaded to conjecture. The emotion of the minstrel, the tearful tenderness of his eyes, which she hael seen through the mask, and his sudden disappearance as soon as the song ivas concluded, gave rise to the most alarming surmises-, and sbe could with difficult} force tbe smile of necessary gaiety to her faee, while her mind was a prey to the most distracting doubts. Sbe spoke to Edivard, and com¬ missioned bim to seek out tbe minstrel·, and by the privilege of bis art try to dis¬ cover who he ivas. Edward, whose curiosity ivas raised, and ivho half-suspected, as ivell as feared, that be already knew the person of the min¬ strel, quickly discovered him in another apartment. He was leaning on a couch, and seemingly indisposed. Edward placed himself by bis side.—" Parelon me," said he, " if I intrude upon your reflections ; but are we no more to be indulged with the sivect harmony of your lays ?" " No," replied the minstrel, sighing deeply,
** my soul is not attuned to harmony. The song you heard was the last effort of expiring melody; I have seen—I have heard—and have no longer the power to charm or to be charmed." " I thought I could not be mistaken," cried Eelward, " when I imagined tbat in the minstrel I hael discovered one of my best and dearest of friends. Ah, sir, with wbat exquisite pathos and feeling you sung that air, ivhich enchanted all your hearers, tho marchioness in part ; ular, for .she re¬ quested me to follow, and to find out who you were.'' " Did ¡die indeed do this?" exelaimed Mr. Colvill; "then sbe suspects who I am. Well, be it so—when 1 am more composed, ï will do myself tbe honour of addressing a few inquiries to the mar¬ chioness. Tell her, tberefore, my dear Edward, that you have seen me, and tbat ï ivas aware of the purport of your in¬ quiries ; she will understand me." " Ah, my elear sir, only tell me tbat you think
as 1 do," said Edivard eagerly—" only tell me that our opinion is tbe same respecting the marchioness, and that you believe that she is calumniated by those who envy her for bet* superior loveliness. It is not in the power of nature to form a ivoman more perfect than lady Anendale, and my beart rejects with indignation all that I bave heard against the goodness of hers." " It is tbe privilege of youth," replied Mr. Colvill, " to disbelieve the dark part of human nature ; nay, it is an incredulity so truly amiable, that I cannot contienili, though I may deplore it. Yet remember, Edward, tbat as you pass through life you will find that it is but too possible for an angeľs form to enshrine a devil's heait." These well-known words recalled to the mind of Edward his poor old granelmother, and a sigh escaped bim to the тетпогу of lier worth. Mr. Colvill beard it, and tenderly inquired the cause. Edward, forgetful at that moment of his mother's caution,
caution, replied that he could never hear tbat singular expression of an " angeľs form and a deviľs beart," without its reminding him of his grandmother, wiio, though one of the best and kindest of human beings, bad used the same words in speaking of the marchioness. " Ha!" ciied Mr. Colvill, as if a new light had that moment broke upon him, " and was the marchioness known to your grandmother, Edivard ? 'fell me, I con¬ jure you, my dear boy, who sbe was, for slie must have known Miss Fitz-Arthur when very young, anel must have been most intimately acquainted with her pri¬ vate character; tell me, t/crcfore, dear¬ est Mackenzie, the name of your grand¬ mother, for ï am more deeply interested in tbe question than you imagine." Edivard saw the error wiiich his want of pru donce hael occasioned, but it was now too late to remedy the evil. He therefore replied, in a tone of self-humi¬ liation ivhich be could not repress, that his grand-
grandmother, the ivorthy Margaret Grey, was housekeeper to laely Fitz-Arthur. Mr. Coivill grasped his band in violent agitation.— ťí Margaret Grey," so id be, in a hurried voice, " was the mother of Alice, of tbat Mrs. Cameron whom I have so long sought for. Oh, if my new-born hopes are true, if my suspicions are just, Heaven has still in store a blessing for me which will reward me for years of past misery and penance. Do not follow nie," said he, rising with an unsteady motion— " do not follow me, Edivard ; I go to seek tbe marchioness-—she alone can calm the fond fluttering tumults of my care-worn soul." Mr. Colvill rushed into the chamber, wiiere, as iie expected, be again beheld the marchioness. He stopped, for be felt a difficulty of breathing, and leaned against a window for support. The chief of the masks ivere dancing, and others ivere engaged in looking on. He saw the mar¬ quis of Anendale, wbo had been speaking to
to the marchioness, pass on to the further end of the room. Now then was a fair opportunity to address lady Anendale. Mr. Colvill approached her; their eyes met, and the colour receded from her lips and cheeks, as she tremblingly endeavour¬ ed to escape his observation by retiring into a private apartment, the door of which she had already opened, when Mr. Colvill hastily followed, and, closing it after him, caught the hand of the flying marchioness. " Gertrude !" said he, in a tone of stifled tenderness, " I come not to reproach you for your cruel inconstancy—I come not to upbraid you for having blighted my fair¬ est prospects, for having broke my heart ; I come only to solicit a few minutes' con¬ versation, and neveragain will the wretched Colvill obtrude himself on your sight." " Speak quickly then," replied the mar¬ chioness, lier whole frame trembling with terror and the stings of newly-awakened conscience : and then she addcnl— " 1 can¬ not
not imagine what Mr. Colvill can have to say to the marchioness of Anendale." " There needed not the mention of that name," cried Mr. Colvill, " to rouse my slumbering feelings. Oh, Gertrude ! Ger¬ trude ! and is your heart indeed so callous grown, .that, after ivhat once passed be¬ tween us, you can express surprise at my wishing to see you. Nineteen years of mise¬ rable exile have I passed, nineteen years of uncertainty, yet respect for your fame, which was still dear to me, made me stifle the only hope to which my withered heart had then to cling. You had condemned me to eternal wretchedness—you had for ever blighted my opening happiness ; yet, anxious to preserve yours, and'to shield your character from censure or reproach, I chocked the fond wishes of parental love, and in silence and solitude only dared breathe forth the prayer that, though liated and abandoned by you, at a time when 1 ought to have been most dear to you
you, still my child, if it existed, might share your tenderness and eare." Lady Anendale gave a start of con vulsive terror. She would have spoken^—she would, if possible, have ann iliiiated her former lover, and with him every trace, every remem¬ brance that he once existed, but fear and conscious guilt chained lier tongue. Her eyes no longer sparkled with the brilliancy wbich fascinated every beholder, her cheek no longer glowed with nature's brightest bloom ; рд1е and motionless, she stood like Niobe, wdien she beheld the last dear trea¬ sure of her soul a breathless corpse. " Tell me, ΐ conjure you, if my child vet lives ?" said Mr. Colvill, fallino* on eine knee before her, and throwing off his mask, that he might breathe more freely ; " only tell me where to find it, and, in the face of Heaven, I swear to preserve as sacredly as ever the secret of its birth. Gertrude, you tremble, you hesitate to bestow on me the only consolation in your power. You
You may be missed ; our being seen toge¬ ther may create suspicion ; answer then quickly the only request with which I will ever trouble you, and my prayers shall daily ascend to Heaven for your hap¬ piness." Tlie marchioness, more dead than alive, and but too conscious of her inability to answer the question of Mr. Colvill, as well as seriously alarmed lest any one should discover their interview, said, in a tremu lous voice—" Tbis is neither a time nor place to gratify your wishes. Leave me, I beseech you, and I ivill write and ex plain every thing tbat you require." Mr. Colvill rose.—" I obey you, Ger¬ trude," lie replied ; " but I inust bear from you to-morrow. Do not deceive me, Ger¬ trude ; for nineteen years of sorrow such as I have felt ivould rouse the tamest spi¬ rit. I obey you, but remember tbat 1 must hear from you to-morrow."—Saying this, he hastily resumed his mask, and quitted the chamber. CHAP-
CHAPTER X. The absence of Mr. Colvill seemed to re¬ move a heavy weight from off the bosom of the marchioness. She was no longer pale ; her cheeks now glowed with the deep crimson of fever, and her eyes sparkled with fresh lustre ; yet her heart was a prey to the most tormenting doubts. Sbe felt as if the secret which bad been concealed for years ivas now on the point of being made known to tbe whole world. With what justice could she expect that he whom she had so wantonly abandoned to the sharpest pangs of* disappointed affec¬ tion, should continue to sacrifice his feel¬ ings for the good of one who had so shamefully outraged the common duties of humanity ? She had promised to write to him, and to explain all that he had re¬ quested of her. Could this promise be per¬ formed ?
formed? Could sbe confess to a deed wbich would for ever stamp her name with cold-blooded cruelty, and make it the scorn and detestation of every tender parent, every generous mind? could she do this, and live ? The marchioness rose from her seat, and rushed wildly to her dressing-room. Mrs. Mackenzie, who was reading, felt shocked as well as alarmed by her appearance. " Alice," said the marchioness, sinking into her arms exhausted by her emotions, " I have seen Colvill—I have promised to write to him to-morrow. He has de¬ manded of me information respecting his child. Wbat can I say?—how can I reply to his questions?—how pacify hie anger?" " For Heaven's sake, be calm," exclaim¬ ed the terrified Alice. w Oo not look so wildly, my beloved lady—you alarm me beyond measure. You know that you can rely upon my affection, and tbat I will do ail in my power to serve you." vol. iy, m « But
44 But where is my poor abandoned in¬ fant?" cried lady Anendale, starting from the arms of Alice—" where is the son of Colvill ? From me, barbarian that I am, he expects his child !-—from me who, re¬ gardless of his heavenly smiles, of his help¬ less innocency, of the double claim which he had upon my care and my affection, inhumanly drove him from my sight, tore bim from my heart, and cast him upon the wide and pitiless world, without a home, without a friend, and without a name." " Ob, not without a friend," exclaimed Mrs. Mackenzie, weeping, " for my lieart adopted and received him the instant tbat his mother's had resigned him. I bore him safe within my arms from the walls which should have sheltered him ; I soothed his infant waitings, administered to his wants ; and when the poor baby smiled its artless thanks, and nestled close to my bosom, I felt how impossible it was to fulfil even a request of yours. 4 No, poor baby !' thought I, * if thy high-born mother, to preserve
preserve her fame, has been compelled to abandon thee to the scoffs and jeers of an unfeeling world, so am not I. Poor and humbly born, such as my fortune is, so shall thine be.'—I clasped the lovely boy still closer to my breast, and prayed to God to assist my endeavours for his future support. God heard my prayers. I no sooner arrived in London than I met with a friend in the dean of H-------, and a hus¬ band and a father to my adopted son in the brave and generous Mackenzie." " Mackenzie !" repeated lady Anendale, in a voice of surprise and horror : " but go on, Alice, while I have life and power to hear you." " The dean of H------ performeel the ceremony which uniteel me to my beloved husband, and at the same time christened my supposed son by the name of Edward Mackenzie. Ah, little did he think that the boy to wdiom he then stood godfather was his own grandson." The marchioness groaned in agony ; she m 2 .^cerned
seemed nearly lifeless, yet she motioned for Alice to proceed. " Mackenzie idolized his adopted son ; be was even dearer to him than his own children, and for this reason I parted with the boy to my worthy mother, Mar¬ garet Grey, when I accompanied my hus¬ band to Scotland. This selfish conduct, for which I have always upbraided my¬ self, was productive of the most pleasing consequences to Edward; it gamed him a host of friends—it enabled him to pursue his favourite studies, and has raised him to wdiat he now is. If, therefore, my dearest l-ady* your poor Alice dared to disobey your orders—if she ventured to retain the child, whom in your alarm and terror you commanded me to place in the hospital for foundlings —oh forgive, I beseech you, her fault ; for in every other respect most •sacredly has she performed her promise : Edward does not dream of his r^al pa¬ rents ; so carefully nave I guarded my painful secret, that even my adored hus- band
band died in the belief that he was my son* Say that you forgive me, dearest lady !—say only that you forgive me !" The marchioness pressed the hand of Alice ; then, raising her beautiful eyes to¬ wards heaven—" I would pray for you*, Alice," said she, " I would call down bless¬ ings on your head, but that I fear that the prayers of a wretch like me ean ne¬ ver reach the throne of mercy. Forgive you! Oh Alice, kindest, dearest, best ot* friends, I would thank you, but that-—-~" Alice flew like lightning to the toilet, and flung over her lady a profusion of lavender-water, which seemed a little to revive her ; she opened her eyes, and ten¬ derly pressed tbe terrified Alice to her bosom—" Edward Mackenzie then is my son," said the marchioness, with a cold deathlike shudder. " Poor youth! bow little did he think, when he poured forth at my feet all the respectful gratitude and filial tenderness of his heart, that I was in¬ deed his mother—his unnatural and un- M 3 feeling
feeling motber !" Tben, suddenly starting from her seat, and looking wildly towards the door—»" Fly, Alice ! fly, and inquire if he is yet below ; tell him that I wish to speak to him—that I must see him to¬ night ; to-morrow will be too late." Mrs. Mackenzie dared not disobey, yet she felt a strange reluctance to leaving lady Anendale alone. She had no sootier left the room, than the marchioness seemed to regain fresh strength ; she flew towards a small medicine-chest, which contained a bottle of laudanum, and, pouring some out into a wine glass, she held it for an instant in her trembling band.—" I have no alternative," said she, sbudderingly, " but this—no way of escaping the re¬ proaches of my son. My son ! Ah, my God ! am I then the mother of Edward Mackenzie—of him whom my guilty heart has loved with more than maternal fond¬ ness ? Can I live after this ? can I submit to drag on a miserable existence, a prey to the accusing horrors of my own guilty conscience,
conscience, and despised or pitied even by my son ?" The last question was decisive, and the marchioness instantly d-ank off the deadly potion ; a moment more, and the return of Mrs. Mackenzie migbt have saved her. Edward had left the house with the min strel, and Alice feared to send to him without the consent of lady Adendale. " It is all for the best, dear Alice," said the marchioness ; " I shall be saved the pang of reading in his ingenuous counte¬ nance the silent reproaches of his beart Give me my ivriting-desk—I will write a few lines to Colvill." Mrs. Mackenzie tried to persuade lady Anendale to defer her intended letter un¬ til tbe next day, but the marchioness shook her head; she already began to feel the drowsy effects of the laudanum, anel, snatch¬ ing up a pen, she vainly attempted to fonn tbe letters which were to portray the re¬ morse and agony of her feelings.—" Alice," said she, throwing aside the pen, " I am m 4 ill,
ill, and unable to perform my promise See Colvill to-morrow—tell him Mao kenzie is his son— let them not curse my memory—and, for the sake of my daughter, conjure them to preserve rny secret as faithfully as you bave done." Her head sunk upon the shoulder of Mrs. Mackenzie, who, finding all her at¬ tempts to rouse her ineffectual, rang vio¬ lently for assistance. The servants came, the marquis was summoned, and a physi¬ cian was instantly fetched—but all hu¬ man aid was fruitless, and that dwelling, whicb had so lately exhibited a scene of the most joyous festivity, was now con¬ verted into a house of tears and lamen¬ tations, aş soon as it was generally known that its lovely owner was no more. Poor Mrs. Mackenzie, who had been so blindly partial to the marchioness, and in wbose arms she breathed her last sigh, was most deeply affected by the manner of her death. She returned home the next morning, seriously indisposed, yet not
not tmmindfiil of the task which she had to perfeírm, though nearly incapable of the necessary exertion. She however desired Janet to write to Mr. Colvill and to Edward, to request that both of them would call at her lodgings, which request was immediately complied with. Her agitation, her evident illness, alarmed them. She desired Janet to withdraw, and then, endeavouring to collect all her strength and fortitude fcr the occasion, she disclosed to tbe anxious lover of her still idolized benefactress the fate of his child. Affec¬ tion for the marchioness made the faithful Alice soften down, as muchas possible, the barbarity of her conduct in deserting her helpless infant, and delicacy made her also touch lightly upon her own tenderness and humanity, which had induced her to adopt the innocent child às her own. I will not attempt to describe the mingled emotions of Mr. Colvill and bis son, as they listened to the simple and affecting narration of Mrs. Mackenzie. The former m 5 * 'exultingly
exultingly clasped to his bosom the youth wbo, above all others, he was most proud to call his son, while the latter, ¿most fainting from joy, surprise, and unexpected. pleasure, could but feebly return the passionate caresses of his father. A sud¬ den rush of joyful feelings filled his soul : he at length had found his father—one whom be need not blush to own, one whom he already loved and revered. But bis mother—-she for whom every pulse of his heart had throbbed with filial love, with filial affectioţjfi bordering on adora¬ tion, she it was who was his mother, and not, as he had always supposed, Mrs. Mac¬ kenzie. He broke from tbe arms of Mr. Colvill, and we>uld have rushed to Anen¬ dale House to lull the fears, and tranquil¬ lize the mind of his beloved» his agitated mother, had tiot Mrs. Mackenzie called Mm back. She flui?g her arms around him —she called him her son·—she reminded ^oim of all his promised kiadne-ss, md be¬ sought him not to forget that she bad taken Ыщ from the hour of his birth, concealed bim
hiin in her chamber, and finally adopted him for her own, after she had conveyed him from the Castle. "No,mother,no!" said Edward, warmly embracing her, " never while I live shall I forget tbe claim yoa have upon my duty and affection. To you, and to my re¬ vered father, Mackenzie, I am indebted for every thing: without your protec¬ tion, what should I now have been?— Yet, for all that, I cannot refrain from lov¬ ing the mother who bòre me-—I cannot be happy until I have seen her—until I have assured her that no unkind sentiment, no selfish feeling, will ever enter my heart, which is as tenderly devoted to her peace and welfare as if I had been reared under her maternal care. Let me but once hear her acknowledge me ая her son, once re* ceive her blessing and embrace, and I shall then be happy." Mrs. Mackenzie, deeply affected by the vain wish of Edward, burst into »violent åeed of tears, and at length, with extreme M 6 difficulty»
difficulty, discovered to him and to his father, who was equally anxious to assure her of his forgiveness, that the mar¬ chioness was beyond the reach of their ge¬ nerous kindness. The manner of her death she however thought prudent to conceal, until they were better calculated to sup¬ port the shock it wo»ild necessarily occa¬ sion them. Mr. Colvill recovered first from the effects of so unexpected and painful in¬ telligence. The marchioness had long been dead to him, yet he could not help feeling severely the suddenness of her death, al¬ though the rapture of possessing such a son as Edward took off the heaviness of the blow. But Edward, to whom the marchioness had appeared an idol worthy of the purest devotion, could scarcely cre¬ dit the assertion of Alice—that she, whom he had seen the night before blooming in health and luxuriant lieauty, was now be¬ reu of sense, of motion, and of life. His grief was excessive ; it seemed incapable of
of abatement, and his father hung over him in terror and dismay, until Mrs. Mac¬ kenzie assured him that Edward would grow more composed if left for a short time to her care. " In that case I will return to my sister," said Mî. Colvill, " and prepare her to re¬ ceive Edward as my son and heir. To her I can safely entrust the secret of his birth, without wounding the reputation of his unfortunate and imprudent mother. Most faithfully, dear Alice, have you per¬ formed a parent's duties, and, thank Hea¬ ven ! I possess the means of rewarding you for your fidelity and .affection." When Mr. Colvill had left them, Mrs. Mackenzie called Janet to assist in sooth ing the distressed mind of her lover ; and, though extremely unwell herself, she suc¬ ceeded in lulling the excess of his sor-· row, hy calling his attention to the cir¬ cumstances of her own life.·—" Remember, dearest Edward," said she, " the various losses which I have had to sustain. Think what
what were my sufferings when deprived of my little girl—what my agonies, my in¬ consolable affliction, ivhen fated to behold the partner of my soul expire in my arms Γ What is your loss compared to mine, and to that of many others ? Think of the goodness, the kmdness of Providence, my son, for such I shall still call you, ivho has thus benevolently restored you to the heart of such a parent as Mr. Colvill! think of your numerous friends, and of your affectionate Janet, who at this mo¬ ment is suffering with yourself!" Edward raised bis eyes at the sound of that beloved name, and beheld the weep¬ ing Janet hanging over him, in silent grief. He caught her to his bosom, and mingled his tears with hers. " Dear Edward," said Mrs. Mackenzie, €$ I think that yoa will now own the just¬ ness of my persevering concealments. I had solemnly promised to Miss Fitz-Arthur »ever to betray her secret, either by any áireet or indirect теащ* and for thia rea¬ son
son I, so carefully as I thought, guarded you from the knowledge of any of your relations—for this reason I so steadily, and at the hazard of injuring my own charac¬ ter, refused to drop even a hint of the name and connexions of your father ; and many a time have I regretteel that the old lady who attended on Miss Fitz-Ar¬ thur when you were born, put on your arm the mark of a coronet.— ' Alice,' said she, ' you will have to convey tbis poor infant to the Foundling Hospital, where he may live or die without our being able to dis· 1 cover him af any future time. I will put a mark on his arm which shall ensure his discovery, if ever he should be sought after.' And that mark, my dear Edward, though made in kindness, baa occasioned me many a pain and many a blush. But you forgive me, Edward, for not yielding to your wishes ?" Edward pressed her to his heart with grateful tenderness.—" But there is an¬ other act of concealment," said sbe, " whkh you
you may riot so readily pardon, as I was not compelled in that case to use decep¬ tion ; yet I had your happiness at heart- I know the excess of your affection for your adopted father, and how dearly you prized every thing which belonged to him. This, therefore, dear Edward, must plead my excuse, if I ventured to introduce to you the daughter of your adopted fa¬ ther, my own Janet Mackenzie, under ihe assumed name of Miss Cameron." " How !" exclaimed Edward, as if reco¬ vering from a trance, " and is my own dear-loved Janet the daughter of my ever- revered, my adored father? Yes, hewas a father to me, in the strictest sense of the word, and sacredly do I venerate his memory; nor will I ever relinquish his name, which he bestowed on me in the fulness of paternal love, for any other, however noble may be its origin. My Janet," cried he, in a voice of trembling tenderness, " my own Janet Mackenzie, thus rendered, if possible, more dear to me
me than ever, as being the child of ser* jeant Mackenzie." " I thought that you would forgive me," cried Mrs. Mackenzie, " for this harmless piece of dissimulation : but it nearly cost my poor ghl her life. I had concealed from her my secret motive for lier passing feir my niece, and she therefore met your kind¬ ness with the feelings of what she supposée! herself to be—your sister. Her aunt Ca¬ meron had generously given her an ex¬ cellent education, but when I hist re¬ turned to Scotland I found her usurping the authority of a relation, and on the point of forcing Janet to marry a man whom she disliked. I remonstrated, but in vuin, and therefore quickly decideel upon removing my child, which I did without any scruples, since her happiness depended upon it. It then came into my mind to introduce Janet to you as :лу niece, and to give her at least as fair a chance of gaining your affections as any other woman ; yet this could only be done by
by her passing for Miss Cameron. Poor Janet too quickly discovered that her ten¬ derness was more than that of a sister, and this will account for her behaviour towards you. At length I was compelled to sa¬ crifice in her favour a part of my resolu¬ tions, and the five woi*ds which had such a magical effect on her were simply these «—* He is not your brother :' but I pre¬ served inviolate the secret of whose son you were." " Oh, my more than mother!" exclaimed Edward, " how can I repay you for all your acts of goodness towards myself, who had no claim upon your love? How can I repay you for this last, best, dearest gift of your affection—your child ? Yes, mother! you judged rightly of my heart ; no woman in the world could ever hold so firm an empire over me as the daughter of serjeant Mackenzie. Now then can I per¬ form my promise, given in the plenitude of Ща\ love, which is still undiminished; now then can I take to my heart the Ja¬ net
net Mackenzie whom he recommended to my care and affection, and wiio shall in future be the partner of my life, the companion of my choice, anel the best and dearest friend of my bosom, Ah, Janet í how w r ell our mother knew tbe influence of those dear blue eyes—bow well she judged the power of thy soft tender voice, so like to that of my adopteel father, that I could almost fancy that I heard bún soothing and consoling me as he was used todo, when my young heartw r as bursting with its childish griefs I Oh, my beloved, my adored Janet ! it shall be the study of my life to repay in part the debt 1 owe your father, by watching over your hap¬ piness with ceaseless solicitude, and hy making the remainder of our dear mo* ther's life pass cheerful and happy." The joy which Edward now felt, at tha idea of uniting his fate to that of tbe daughter of serjeant Mackenzie, was per¬ haps the only thing which could have en* abled him to beai* up against the shock which
which he received at the sudden death of the marchioness. Had he but been al¬ lowed to see her once more, to hear him¬ self acknowledged by her as her son, his heart ivould have felt more satisfied All, however, that he could do he did, in ho¬ nour to her memory. He went into the deepest mourning, and folloived secretly her loved remains to the castle of Fitz- Arthur, where they were deposited ivith her ancestors. He then returned to the caresses of his Janet ; but he deferred his nuptials until tbe period of his mourning had elapsed, thus sacrificing his own bap- ness to the memory of one who bad not scrupled to trample upon the sweetest ties of nature and affection, that she might ob¬ tain the distinction of a British peeress. Mr. Colvill confided to his sister the se¬ cret of Edward's birth, but denied him¬ self the gratification of openly acknoiv- iedging him, that the character of his mo¬ ther might remain uncensured after her death. He however settled upon Ed¬ ward
ward a liberal allowance, and readily con¬ sented to his marrying the daughter of those generous beings who had so nobly and so tenderly protected him in bis in¬ fancy; nor did he forget to reward the too faithful Afice, by making her hand¬ somely independent, and by carrying his sister lady James to the lodgings of Mrs. Mackenzie, that both her and Janet might receive the testimonials of his dear Maria's friendship. Tbe fatal cause of lady Anendale's death was kept from the knowledge of her daughter, who, on her arrival at lady Manninghanťs, was received by the whole family with every mark of affection. A messenger was dispatched to the marquis, with a letter from lady Manningham, which soon brought the father of lady Eli¬ nor to her house. All past disagreeables were forgotten ; his daughter's clandestine marriage was forgiven, and old friendships were cheerfully renewed. Frederic and his lovely partner were re-married at the same
same time that Flora became the wife of Mr. Vivian, and Edward, who was present at the ceremony, felt one more addition to his stock of happmess, in the warmth with which the daughter of tbe marchio¬ ness received him. His Frederic, his true and steady friend, was now become the husband of lady Elinor, of his sister. What sweet emotions did that one word convey to the soul of Edward, as he gazed on the fair form of his Frederio's own be¬ loved wife ! Hoiv did he long to acknoiv- ledge the sweet girl's relationship ! but re¬ spect for her delicacy, and for his mother's fame, cheeked tbe fond wish, and he con¬ tented himself with giving way to those tender demonstrations of his regard which he ivas privileged to shew towards the 11 ife of his dearest friend. Charles Manningham was present also at the double nuptials of his brother and lister, but Clara prudently refrained from intruding herself on the notice of his fa¬ mily, conscious that whatever civility they might
miffht be induced to shew her would be owing to their regard for her husband, not for herself. Too proud and self-willed to acknowledge that she had deserved tlieir neglect, Mrs. Manningham haughtily kept aloof from all parties where it was likely she should meet with any of her husband's relations. She felt most severely their coldness, but she would not even confess this circumstance to Charles, wbo, in the moments of his anger, failed not to re¬ mind her that she had drawn down upon herself the contempt of his family, and the eternal displeasure of her own father. Clara could not brook these reproaches from one who had been at least the cause of her misconduct. She reproached him in her turn, and thus they mutually made themselves obnoxiousto each other. Charles consoled himself in the hired caresses of a mistress, and his wife indemnified her¬ self for the loss of his society by gambling away the fortune which his father had most liberally allowed them. Sometimes, in the
the moments of short-lived penitence, she would address a letter to her father, be¬ seeching him to receive her once more to bis bosom, and to rely upon the sincerity of her repentance, but these letters were never answered, as Mr. Lindsay preserved inviolate the vow which he had made on tbe death of his wife, and therefore re¬ turned all the letters of Clara back to her unopened. She applied to Edward for his interference ; she represented to bim tbe unkind treatment she received from Charles, and entreated that he would use his influence to persuade Mr. Lindsay to pardon and receive her once more into his favour. Edward felt pained to the soul to deny the request of Mrs. Man¬ ningham, but he was compelled, though reluctantly, to assure her that he knew all application on that subject to Mr. Lindsay would be vain, as he was in the habit of bearing from him constantly, and felt au¬ thorized in stating that his determina¬ tion remained the same as ever. Thus
Thus left to herself, tbe victim of her own heartless levity and selfish passions, Mrs. Manningham became a prey to every fashionable folly, and the associate of every creature as thoughtless and as dissipated as herself. At length it became necessary for her husbund to interpose his authority, in order to wean her from the destructive pleasures of tbe gaming-table,, His own honour was at stake, and lie reluctantly,, and with a very bad grace, consented to withdraw bimself from the .gaieties of Lon¬ don, and to go abroad for a few years, confining bis expences to a limited sum, wbich his indulgent lather still promised to allow him. Upon these conditions his debts were to be paid, and in case of Mrs. Manningham becoming a mother, and conducting herself witb economy and propriety, sir Charles and lady Manning¬ ham consented to overlook her past mis¬ conduct, and to receive her with all their former kindness. Tbi& was more than Clara deserved, or vol. iv. N had
had a right to expect ; yet the natural in¬ gratitude of her disposition led her to mur¬ mur at the generous proposal of sir Charles, and she quitted England without leaving behind her one heart that felt a pain at her absence^—a sad, sad instance of selfishness and ingratitude, and a striking example that disobedience in a child towards a pa¬ rent is sure to meet with its' punishment from Heaven.
FINIS.
Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-Strcct, Loudon.
