Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
An angel's form and a devil's heart: a novel
Α^ί
Angeľs Form S¡ a Deviľs Heart*
CHAPTER I. Л T was at the close of the last month of the year, and the weather was freezingly eold, vvhen the Monmouth stage drove cautiously into the inn yard. The snow lay thick on the ground, and the frequent tread of feet had made the path very slip¬ pery and dangerous. A tall well-made young man, belonging to a Highland re¬ giment, tendered his service*; to assist the passengers in alighting from the top of the stage, while the coachman was en¬ gaged in supporting to the inn an elderly vol. ι, в lady,
lady, wdiose years and infirmities made her the object of his care. A short thin man, whose threadbare coat and grey worsted stockings proclaimed liim to be one among the numerous sons of adver¬ sity, now alighted hastily from the vehicle, and presented his hand to a young wo¬ man, whose plump round form and laugh¬ ing face but ill accorded with the sable dress she wore. " Are your friends to meet you here ?" inquired the thin old man with the thread¬ bare coat : " London is a sad place for an unprotected female, and the weather is terribly severe." "I have no friends in London," replied the yOung woman, involuntarily sighing. By this time she had alighted from the stage, and turning towards the coachman, who. was now come up to them, she gave orders that her trunks should be conveyed to the inn, whither, with the assistance of the old man, she was proceeding as fast as the slipperiness of the way would permit. The
The soldier had caught a glimpse of her features—" No friend !" thought he— " yes, but thou hast a friend, and a true one, Alice, if thy heart still beats for Mac¬ kenzie." The old man and hbs fair companion now entered the inn, the soldier followed, and gently touching the young woman's shoulder, pronounced her name in a hur¬ ried voice. She gave a start of pleasure and surprise.— ** Edward!" said she, giving him her hand, " who would have thought of seeing you ?—How glad, how happy I апд to have met you Г' " Dear Alice, what could bring you to London, and alone?—But you are cold, and want something to warm you." He then drew her tow r ards the bar, and was about to speak, wdien Alice requested of the landlady to be shewn into a private room. The little old man was close behind her. —" You have unexpectedly met with a friend in this young man," said he, looking n 2 in
in her face vvith an expression of compas¬ sionate interest. " You will not leave the inn to-night ?—May I see you in a couple of liours ?" <ť Surely, sir," replied Alice gaily; " I should be sorry not to have an opportu¬ nity of again thanking a gentleman who has behaved so kmdly to me during my journey" Alice and Mackenzie were now shewn to a small apartment, ,where a blazing fire promised to afford comfort and warmth to the young traveller, who ordered some strong coffee to be brought immediately ; then going towards a neat tent-bed which stood in a corner of the room, she drew from beneath her cloak a bundle, whicli she placed carefully between tlie blankets, and tlien returned to tlie fireside. " Alice, dear Alice Γ said the soldier, pressing her cold hand in his, " how little did I think, as I saw the Monmouth stage come into the yard, that it would bring you to town !—Twelve months ago, when I atid
I and the colonel left Monmouthshire, I thought it would "be many and many a lonir vear before wb should meet ácsain ; and that thought would come across my mind in my gayest moments, turning all my pleasures into pains. But now that we have met again, Alice------" The coffee and toast were now brought in, and Alice, who appeared labouring under some internal agitation, gladly par¬ took of the reviving beverage, which Mac¬ kenzie kindly presented to her. Her spi¬ rits seemed to return, and she cast her eyes towards his. " Many things have happened since we last -met," said she; " and perhaps, Ed¬ ward, when you know all, you will no longer be my friend. You remember, when we parted, it was witli little hope of ever seeing each other again." 1 " True, Alice ; I remember it well. You were the friend and companion of a beau¬ tiful young heiress— I was then only a common soldier. I loved j on too dearly, « 3 Alice,
Alice, to seduce you from the patronage of your lady, or to astøyou to become the wife ofa private soldier I am now a cor¬ poral, and have the promise of being made a serjeant: if you have left your lady, Alice, you may perhaps consent to share my fortunes." Mackenzie kissed the hand of Alice, who cast a glance towards the bed, and then on her lover.—" You must first hear," said she, ** what brought me to London. You were well acquainted with the re¬ gard which my young lady had for me, and that which I felt in return for hen This regard made me yield to her in every thing, and I should as soon have thought of disobeying my own mother, as of deny¬ ing a request of hers. After you left Mon¬ mouthshire, a person paid bis addresses to me, whose connexions were far above mine ; and my young lady, who dreaded nothing so much as the idea ofmy marry¬ ing a soldier, advised me to become his wife, and to remain with her as long as he continued
continued in Monmouthshire. Her per¬ suasions and my affection for herself at length determined my actions. I never expected to see you again, and I had not courage to refuse the request of one who seemed to have my interest so tenderly at heart. I was married secretly; for lady Fitz-Arthur was then living, and, though quite infirm and confined to her chamber, yet she could not bear to see any body more happy and comfortable than herself." ',* Married, Alice !" exclaimed Macken- 2ie, in a tone of disappointed affection. " But you were right to secure to yourself a home, and a friend better able to support you than myself." He covered his face at he leaned his arm on the table. Alice continued—" I remained with my young lady—I could not leave her wholly exposed to the ill-humour of her aunt, who grew more and more tiresome every day. My husband died a few months after our marriage, and my little boy was born tliree days after the decease of my old lady." В 4 Mackenzie
Mackenzie dropped his hand from his face, and taking that of Alice, kissed it affectionately.—" You are still free, then, dearest Alice—still able to become my wife Γ said he, throwing his arms around her. " All that I have is yours : say, will you take me for better for worse?" Alice was not slow in giving her conv sent, and the grateful soldier imprinted on her lips the kiss of honourable and sincere regard. " Where is your child, Alice?" said Mackenzie ; " why is he not with his mo- ther?" Alice rose and moved towards the bed, then as quickly returned, bringing in her arms the slumbering infant. Mackenzie bent over her, scarcely daring to breathe, as she softly uncovered the little innocent. It was a scene worthy the talent of a painter. Alice was not yet twenty ; the glow of uninterrupted health bloomed on her cheek, and gave animation to her eyes, which now beamed with tender solicitude,
as
as they gazed on the lovely boy w r ho lay on her lap. Mackenzie, with one arm round the waist of Alice, leaned over the sleeping child, his heart throbbing with every r generous feeling towards them both, while his eyes vainly endeavoured to trace out a likeness to the mother in the coun¬ tenance of the boy. " He may grow up to be like yoti," said Mackenzie г "at present, I see no resem¬ blance ; but he is nevertheless dear to me, as being your son." " No, he will never be like ме" replied Alice tboughtfiilly; " he is already the image of his father." u Then* he was handsome ?" " Yes, very· handsome." At that instant the baby awoke, and as if conscious of the tenderness he had ex¬ cited, smiled good-naturedly on the kind- hearted soldier, who, taking him from the lap of Alice, gently kissed his velvet cheek, ns he ailed Heaven to bear witness that he vvould be a father to him in the stricţ¬ ii 5 est
est sense of the word ; then, seeing Alice busily employed in preparing his food, he inquired if she was obliged to bring him up by hand ? Alice coloured and looked confused, as she replied in the affirmative; but hçr lover was too pleasingly engaged to no¬ tice her change of countenance; already did he feel a father's interest for the son of Alice, which was increased by the sweet temper of the infant, and it was with re¬ luctance that he returned him to her arms, that he might receive from her hand his accustomed nourishment " But, my dear Alice," said Mackenzie, as soon as the infant was once more asleep, " you have not told me wjhat.brought you to London." " No," replied she; " but I will. You may remember that I told you that my husband's relations were much my supe¬ riors, and that I had married secretly. As soon as my old lady was dead, and her niece declared the sole heiress of all her vast
vast fortune, I thought that I would come to London, and try to find out some of my husband's relations ; and as my young lady will be married as soon as her mourn¬ ing is over, I got her leave to take the journey. But, now that I have found a friend in you, I shall not expose myself to any of their taunts, especially as I want nothing from them; thanks to the bounty of my lady, I shah 1 always have enough to make us all comfortable, witbout their as¬ sistance." " I am glad, my dear Alice, for your sake, that you and your lady parted friends," said Mackenzie, " and with my good will you shall never go near any of your husband's relations. AVith the bless¬ ing of God we shall do very well; and as for this dear eliild, he shall share what I have, and be as mucli to me as any of my own/* " Poor baby !" cried Alice, pressing him to her bosom with a look and manner which her lover could pot well translate—. В 6 * 4 poor
kí poor baby f what a fate is thine î —A stranger must be tby father, and thy mo¬ ther------" " Shall be my wife to-morrow," exclaim¬ ed the soldier warmlv. ** This evening I will go to my colonel, and get his sanction to our marriage. Stay here to-night, Alice. and to-morrow I will take you to the bouse of my sister-in-law, a very good and kind woman, wiio will do every thing to make you comfortable." They were now interrupted by the on- trance of the little thin old man, who, without any ceremony, drew a chair to¬ wards the fìre, and in a voice of concili¬ ating gentleness inquired of Alice bow she found herself nfter the fatigues of her journey ? This good-natured old man had only travelled part of the way with Alice, but he had evidently taken an interest in her welfare, from seeing her young and unprotected, а widow and a mother, and he had therefore been particularly atten¬ tive to her during her journey. He cast many
many a scrutinizing look at Mackenzie, but every fresh glance seemed to impress him with a favourable opinion of the ho¬ nour and moral rectitude of tbe soldier, Alice thanked him for the solicitude which be expressed for her safety, and; with the candour wdiich ever accompanies innocence, soon made him acquainted with the generous proposals of Mackenzie, which at once dispelled the fears of the stranger. liis countenance immediately became* iî- *-* lumined by a smile of genuine benevo¬ lence, and taking a band of each, he press¬ ed tbem in his own. " Since such are your intentions," said he, "let me have tiie happiness of uniting you. Business of consequence will detain me in town for a fortnight: Bx your day, I will make it convenient to attend vou ; the earlier the better, as an inn is not a proper place for a young and pretty wo¬ man to reside in alone." " To-morrow, sir," replied Mackenzie, bowing with a grace which would have become
become one of nobler origin, " we will joyfully accept of your kiud offer. Alice will be safe for this night, and to-morrow I shall liave a riglit to protect her myself/' ** You appear to be a worthy young man/" said the strange gentleman, *· and I rejoice that this poor widow and her orphan boy have found so good and ge¬ nerous a protector. 1 also shall stay here to-night; we will sup together, and to¬ morrow morning, as soon as the license is procured, I will unite you to each other." Mackenzie made a suitable reply, and then took leavf of Alice, that he might call on his colonel, promising, however, to return and sup with her. On passing by the bar, be stopped to speak to the mis¬ tress of it, with whom he was vvell ac¬ quainted, to whose care he recommended Alice and her son, and then hastened to the square in which his colonel and patron resided. Fortunately for Mackenzie, his officer was at home, and disengaged. His attachment to Alice had long been knowa to
to him, and his consent was immediately obtained, together witli a handsome pre¬ sent to procure the wedding-dinner. He next called on his sister-iu-iaw, with whom he resided, and imparted to her the change in his situation. The good woman, over¬ joyed at the prospect of his happiness, pro¬ mised to get every thing ready to receive his bride, and assured him that nothing should be wanting on her part to render her happy and comfortable, Mackenzie, satisfied with the sincerity of this assu¬ rance, returned to the inn, and to his Alice, with wliom he still round the little thin old man, who had ordered supper to be brought up to Alice's chamber, that she might not be prevented from paying proper attention to her little boy. Mackenzie quickly imparted to them the success of bis mission, and it was bettled that he and the stranger should breakfast with Alice the next morning, and that the soldier should then conduct her to the house of his sister-in-law, where they
they would be joined by the stranger, who vvaN to unite them in the presence ofa few friends, whom Mackenzie wished to be a witness to his happiness. * 4 1 will bring the license in my pocket," said the little old man, smiling encou- rairiiifflv on Alice, whose crimson cheek О Cj . ' and downcast look betrayed a native mo¬ desty of mind, which heightened the in¬ terest the stranger felt in her concerns. " Many are the couple«; whom I have jomed together, but I shall never have performed that ceremony with so much satisfaction to mvself as I shall feel to- morrow." " I hope you will not think me imper¬ tinent, sir," inquired Alico, who had all the while supposed him to be a poor Welch parson, " but may I ask if you hve in Wales?" " No, child," said he, smiling, as he in¬ stantly comprehended her meaning; " not exactly in Wales, though in one of the counties joining to it." " In
4k In Monmouthshire?" again inquired Alice anxiously. '· I hve chiefly in Herefordshire;' re¬ plied the little old man; ** and when I visit London, unaccompanied by my family, I generally prefer the stage-coach to any other mode of travelling. By this means í have an opportunity of seeing a variety of characters which would otherwise ne¬ ver eome under my observation, and not unfrequently of rendering a service to some of my fellow-creatures. The mo¬ ment I sas- you and your helpless infant, I felt desirous of being useful to you ; I pitied your unprotected situation, and wished to befriend you. Fortunately my good offices are not wanting—you have found a more suitable protector for your¬ self and child; but I shall always be pleas¬ ed to hear of your welfare, and ready to afford you every assistance in my power, should circumstances ever deprive you of the presence of your natural guardian." Both Afice and Mackenzie gratefully expressed
expressed their thanks for his proffered kindness, though, when they cast a glance at his threadbare coat and grey worsted stockings, they could not help thinking that the assistance he could afford them must be very limited indeed. The kind¬ ness of his deportment and the gentleman- liness of his manners made, however, his conversation and his presence delightful to them. After partaking of a light but elegant supper, which the old gentleman paid for, he withdrew with JMackenzie, that Alice might retire early to repose after the fa¬ tigues of the day. But the mind of Alice was too full of what had passed during the interval of a few hours, to compose itself quickly to rest : she pressed the un¬ conscious baby to her bosom, and as it slumbered within her arms, her thoughts recurred to its father, to its natural con¬ nexions, to its rightful home, and to vvhat would now become its destiny, reared as it would be amidst scenes, and amidst be-
m «f s vSo far beneath the familv of its father, —-" But I will do my best for thee, poor babe !" said Alice, pressing him still closer to her heart ; ** and though circumstances have cut thee off from what ought to be thy right, thou mayst be far, far happier in thy lot than thy father. I vvill do my best for thee, poor babe !" Alice now recommended herself and her infant to the protection of Providence, w ho bad raised her up a friend in the ge¬ nerous Mackenzie, on her first entrance into the busv scenes of the world; and after imploring a continuance of his good¬ ness, she sank tranquilly to sleep, conscious that she had undertaken the journey from the best and purest intentions ; and if those intentions were not fulfilled, it was because sbe hoped, believed, and trusted, tbat she should be enabled better to fulfil her duty to the infant, and to promote more effec¬ tually his happiness, than if she had pur¬ sued the plan whieh she at first intended.
CHAP.
CHAPTER II. А тле E had no cause to complain of the reception which sfie met w r ith from the relations of Mackenzie. His sister-in-law, who was left a widow with four young children, supported her family by the pro¬ duce of a fruiterer's shop, in a respectable part of Westminster; her husband had been serjeant in the same regiment in which Mackenzie was corporal, and as she was a woman of decent manners and re¬ gular habits, with a disposition hospitable and kmd, he thought he could not do better than to entrust to her care his youthful bride and her infant son. The widow JMackenzie had often listen¬ ed attentively to the account given by her brother-in-law of his first interview with Alice, of tiieir mutual attachment, and of his
hisfcai'b lest she should never become his; she not only listened to the regrets of Edward, but she entered warmly into his feelings, and half-blamed him for not per¬ suading Alice to do as she bad done, and become the wife ofa soldier. The happi¬ ness vvhich Mackenzie testified on meet¬ ing so unexpectedly with his beloved, was quickly infuoed into the bosom of his af¬ fectionate sister-in-law, who, though she condemned Alice for bestowing her hand on another man while her heart belonged to Mackenzie, nevertheless welcomed her to her house with a kindness of soul which was at once flattering to the vanity and to the hopes of Alice. The helpless baby was peculiarly the object of the good widow's care. It was only uve weeks old, and, though brought up by the hand, was a strong, healthy, and beautiful boy. Fain would this kind creature, wbo was on the point of weaning her own child, a little girl of eighteen months
months old, have suckled the son of Alice, but the young mother declined this hu¬ mane proposal, unwilling that the boy should be indebted to a stranger for its nourishment, or that his heart should be divided between them. The refusal of Alice did not, however, prevent the wi¬ dow from manifesting towards him a fond¬ ness which increased with his growth, and it seemed difficult to decide which loved hingest, the widow or his mother. The little thin old man, true to his word, procured the license which united Alice to Mackenzie. After the ceremony was concluded, the new-married couple petitioned him to stay and partake of the wedding-dinner ; but this he smilingly de¬ clined, saying that his presence might be a check upon their festivity—" I will, however, see you," said he, ** in the course of a day or two, when I hope to have some pleasing intelligence to communicate to you." Then, shaking Mackenzie by the hand.
hand, he left them to give way to their own joyful feelings, unrestrained by the observations ofa stranger. Who could he be ? what were his fa¬ mily and his connections ? were the natu¬ ral inquiries cf Alice and her husband. His appearance was not such as to justify them in supposing that he was a man of fortune, yet he spoke of befriending them» and of exerting his interest in their favour, wdiile the plainness of his apparel seemed to indicate that he was himself in want of that interest which he promised so freely to others. Notwithstanding this apparent contradiction, each felt a desire to know more of him; and when next he called upon*Alice, she ventured to inquire the name of the person to whose good offices she was so much indebted. The stranger smiled on her good-na¬ turedly, as he took from her arms the baby boy, and kissing its forehead, in¬ quired how long Mackenzie would be absent ?
absent? Alice replied, that she expected his return in a few minutes, and begged that be w r ould be seated, <£ I must see him," said he, " as I wish to speak to him.—So you are not exempt, Mrs, Mackenzie, from tbe hereditary cu¬ riosity of your sex ? You wish to know who I am, and whether I am rich or poor, and, in short, all about me—Is it not so ?" Alice coloured, and looked confused. " Well, your curiosity *ball be gratified, but not just now : before I leave London, you shall know the name of the strange old man who has taken such a fancy to yourself and to this little infant, I think you said that he was not christened?" Alice replied in the affirmative, adding, that she intended to have him named as uooii as possible. '* You will call him, I suppose, after his father?" ťí No, sir," said Alice ; (i I mean to give him the name of my Irasband, who has adopted
adopted him for his own, and to whom he will be indebted for every thing, until he can provide for himself." " And yet it is but just that the boy should inherit the name of his own father," replied the stranger : " in case of any pro¬ perty bemg left to him at a future time, it would be difficult to make out his claim to it, if he is brought up as the son of Mackenzie." Alice sighed—" It can never be of use to him to bear the name of his own fa¬ ther," said she mournfully ; " on the con¬ trary, it might subject him to many in¬ sults, many reproaches, if ever he came in the way of any of his relations. As the son of Mackenzie, he will grow up in igno¬ rance of his father's family, and all his love and obedience will belong to him who has so generously eome forward to befriend us both." The eyes of the little old man were, during this speech, fixed inquiringly on the varying face of Alice, who, conscious vol. í. с that
that she was the object of his scrutiny, kept hers bent on the ground. After a pause, he exclaimed—" Perhaps, Mrs. Mackenzie, you are right," Then, taking her hand, he added, in a voice of compas¬ sionate kindness—" You are the best judge what claim tbis infant has to the notice of bis fathers connexions, if you feel that his claim is not sufficiently strong to em¬ power you to ask for their countenance and protection, it may be better for him to remain in ignorance that he owes his being to any other than to the brave Mac¬ kenzie : perhaps, as such, he may grow up to be a blessing to you both—he may find friends who will interest themselves in his welfare ; I, for one, am disposed to bear in memory the kindly feelings which I felt on the first sight of him and his widowed mother. I am myself a father, and, though many years have elapsed since the birth of my youngest son, yet well do I remember the tenderness of my emotions as I gazed on his baby features, when he was no older than
than this child. They were, like his, hand¬ some and weli defined ; sense and intelli¬ gence seemed to beam in his bright glan¬ cing eyes, and my heart bounded with all a parent's pride, a parent's joy, as I said to myself—' This boy will be the hope, the staff of my declining years/ It might be the recollection of my son, who is now far, far distant from his family, that operated so powerfully in favour of your little boy : he was just such another fine promising infant, and, like him, equally good-tem¬ pered. May the future prospects of this little innocent be as prosperous and as bril¬ liant as those of my own dear boy !" Alice felt strangely affected by the kind and conciliating manners of the thin old man; her heart expanded towards bim, and more than once she was on the point of confiding to him as much as she dared of the secret which oppressed her mind, but she was withheld by an unaccountable something, which seemed to check and to restram her wished-for communication. It с 3 waá
was not the fear of reproach, or the dread of censure, which stayed her tongue; for in the features of her unknown visitor no harsh line, no transient frown appeared, to justify the tremblings ofher frame. The entrance of Mackenzie relieved the embarrassment of his wife, and the little thin old man, holding out his hand, con¬ gratulated the generous soldier upon his being made serjeant.—" I have a friend," said he, " in the army, through whose means I have been enabled to procure you your wish rather sooner than you had ex¬ pected. But 1 will not deceive you, Mac¬ kenzie : I first inquired your character and your merits; the result was my de¬ termination to serve you ; and so high do you now' stand in the estimation of all your superiors, tbat should you be able, at a future period, to gain a commission, they will not be ashamed to rank you among the number of their brother offi¬ cers. No thanks—I have only accelerated the wishes of your colonel, and gratified myself;
myself; and now r , as my time will be much occupied whiie I remain in London, ñx a day, Mackenzie, for the christening of vour adopted son, for it will add to my pleasure to perform that ceremony." A day most convenient to the stranger w r as now appointed for bestowing a name on the son of Alice. The old gentleman offered to become his godfather, which offer was most gladly accepted by Mac¬ kenzie, who proposed to stand fbr the se¬ cond, while his sister-in-law joyfully agreed to be godmother to her little favourite, who she could not help thinking was ra¬ ther hardly treated, by not being allowed to bear the name of his own father. Mackenzie, who already loved the boy with all a parent's fondness, was not a little gratified by the avowed intention of Alice to call tbe child after himself; yet, as she had said that his father was her superior in rank, and that his family would not on that account countenance their union, it appeared rather unjust to deprive the boy c S of
of his birthright, and to take from him all power of claiming, if there was any, a fu¬ ture share in the property of his father. He gently explained to his wife his ideas on this point; but Alice overruled the scruples of Mackenzie, by telling him that there existed no witness of her marriage with the father of the child, and tbat she could not bring forward any proof to sub¬ stantiate his claim to the favour and affec¬ tion of his relations. Mackenzie forbore to press the subject, or to question Alice upon a circumstance which evidently gave rìse to unpleasant reflections; but his own suppressed feel¬ ings rendered the child only more dear to him, and he resolved to do a father's part by him, and to bring him up as his own son. Such were the generous intentions of Mackenzie ; but how often are our best intentions frustrated by chance, or by a strange coincidence of circumstances, which renders all our plans for the future vain and abortive ! At
At length the morning arrived, fixed on by the little thin old man for christening the son of Alice; it was also the day be¬ fore that mentioned by him for his depar¬ ture from London, and she hoped that be would now satisfy her curiosity, by in¬ forming her who he was. The stranger came, and the infant received the name bf Edward Mackenzie. Alice, during the ceremony, w r as unusually thoughtful; a tear stood in her eye, which was observed by her husband ; but be attributed it to a headache, of which she had complained during breakfast, or it might perhaps be occasioned by the remembrance of him who gave being to the infant. When the little old man found himself alone with those for whom he felt so lively an interest, he again renewed his promises of service, should tbey ever stand in need of them.—" To-morrow," said he, " I re¬ turn to the country, and it may be some years be*ore I revisit Loudon; but tbat will not prevent my inquiring $fter your с 4 welfare.
welfare. Remember, my worthy fellow, that you have undertaken to be a father to this innocent child, and, jointly with myself, to see him educated in the prin¬ ciples of the christian religion. If ever you should feel inclined to part with him, either from your increasing family or from any other circumstance connected with your profession, send him to me, and I w r ill not fail to acknowledge the claim of my young godson. Yet stay,'" said he smilingly ; " is there any mark by w r hich 1 can distinguish him, at a future time, to be the boy I have just christened ?" " Did I not see something, my love, on the boy's arm this morning, while you were dressing him ?" inquired Mackenzie. " Yes," said Alice, colouring deeply. " When I was coming to London, a friend of mine foohshly persisted in marking the child's arm, lest he should be taken from me, and I become unable to distinguish him from the son of any other person." With considerable embarrass men t she now
now slipped down the baby's frock, and the old gentleman beheld the mark which had attracted the observation of Mackenzie., " It is a singular mark," said the stran¬ ger, as he gravely examined the boy's arm " but it is sufficiently plain for me to as¬ certain that he is Edward Mackenzie. Your friend, 1 suppose, chose this device, as being less likely to be selected by an¬ other for a similar purpose ?" " I suppose she did," replied Mrs. JMac¬ kenzie confusedly. " It is a good delineation of a coronet," exclaimed her husband. " But how cruel to torture the poor infant by putting it to such unnecessary pain !" íť Cruel indeed," said the old gentleman, looking steadily at Alice. " The motive, however, must excuse the deed. Should this infant live to become a man, this mark, unless it is explained to him, may give rise to many vague conjectures, which may also affect his future tranquillity. Perhaps," added he, forcing a smile, " he с 5 mav
muy be born to wear a coronet by his own winning; he may either ennoble himself through marriage, or by his own deeds of valour iu the field. At all events, my worthy friends, let us hail the omen as a good one ; many great men have sprung from humble ancestors, and tbis baby-head may contain the germ of splendid talents, whicb vvill create his own good fortune." " I hope tbat he will be a good and a brave man," replied the soldier earnestly ; " but as to his becoming a great one, I care very little about tbat—happiness does not always attend on riches and honours. I trust tbat he will become a soldier like myself; not that I shall ever seek to check the boy's secret inclinations, or force him to choose a mode of life disagreeable to his owm wishes." te You will do right, Mackenzie: but there is time enough to speculate upon what may be tbe choice of this infant/' said the stranger. " He is now become a Christian ; Providence will not desert him —-his
—his destiny is in the bands of Heaven, Bring him up to be just and honourable in all his deahngs with mankind—lenient to tbe faults of others, severe only to his own—pious, without being a bigot—tem¬ perate, modest, and humble; and, above all, teach him to do to others as he would wish they should do unto him ; and then I shall have no rear for his success in life, or for his own worldly happiness. And if you think that any assistance of mine is requisite to aid your laudable endeavours, here is my address : apply to me whenever you think fit ; I shall not be backward in performing my promise of befriending my little godson." The stranger now put a card into the hand of Mackenzie, and then took a friend¬ ly leave of his wife, kissing at the same time the soft cheek of her baby with a gentle touch, lest he ¡should awaken it from its slumber, The little thin old man had no sooner quitted the apartment, than Alice made a с 6 movement
movement to take the card from her hus¬ band.—" Stay, my dear Alice," said the soldier, " my curiosity is nearly as great as your own. Let me see— ť The hon. Maurice Colvill, dean of H ------' AVell, I should not have supposed that a man of his condition would like to dress so shab¬ bily, or to travel in a stage-coach, when he has one of his own. However, we may rejoice that our little Edward has gained so noble a friend.—You are pale, Alice— you are more unwell than you were at breakfast-time !—Let me put the boy on the bed, and then I will run and fetch Dr. Taylor." Alice was indeed as pale as death—her whole frame seemed to suffer from inter¬ nal vexation, which she strove to conceal from her husband. Sbe assured him that she should soon be better without the as¬ sistance of Dr. Taylor, and perfectly able to entertain the friends whom they had invited to celebrate the christening of Edward. Mackenzie's
Mackenzie's fears were í soon dispelled, as he again beheld the glow of health re¬ turn to the cheek of his wife. It never fbr a moment occurred to him, that her agitation had been produced by the per¬ usal of the card given to him by the little thin old man, or that he was in any way connected with the sudden indisposition of Mrs. Mackenzie. The presence of his friends quickly recalled her vivacity, and the evening was spent in that good-hu¬ moured merriment which the occasion na¬ turally called forth.
CHAPTER IIL
The affection which Mackenzie had thus early manifested for the infant son of Alice, did not diminish on his becoming himself a father. Dearly as he loved his own little girl, yet Edward seemed to have a prior claim
claim on his paternal care ; and it was with considerable grief and vexation of mind that he beheld in the conduct of Alice the influence of feelings dissimilar to his own. In proportion as her heart expanded to¬ wards the daughter of Mackenzie, it ap¬ peared careless and indifferent to the fate of his adopted son, and the birth of an¬ other child was fatal to the welfare of Edward: she complained to Mackenzie of the decided partiality which he evinced for the boy, in preference to his own chil¬ dren; and this soon became a continual source of disquietude between her and her husband. Mackenzie, who was sincerely attached to Alice, endeavoured to remonstrate with her on her increasing jealousy of an object who ought to be even more dear to her than to himself; but the good sense and sound reasoning of Mackenzie were ex¬ erted in wain-—Alice would not be con¬ vinced, and the generous soldier was obliged to content himself with the secret demonstrations
demcÄistrations of his regard for tbe ne¬ glected Edward, who was now past his third year, and who already began to give proofs of an understanding whieii only re¬ quired care and attention to bring it to perfection. , The sweetness of Edward's disposition wus visible in a hundred trifling actions, but it was t6o frequently put to severe trials by the Ш4шшоцг and petulance of the little Alice. Compelled to yield to her in every thing, and to resign to her all his sources of infantine amusement, Edward quickly discovered that the only way to gain the kindness <of Mus. Macken¬ zie Was to put np with all the fretful ca¬ prices of her eldest little girl, а рш*у sickly child, whose natural infirmiities of temper Were rendered more intolerable by the ex¬ treme indulgence of her doting mother. The continual disappointment of all his childish hopfes, joined to the increasmg dislike of Alice, begon to affect the spirits
as
as well as the health of Edward ; he be¬ came sullen and dejected, except in the presence of Mackenzie, to whom he was fondly attached, «nd for whom he mani¬ fested the strongest affection. Placed on his knee, or playing with the glittering appendages to his uniform, the counte¬ nance of Edward dimpled with smiles, his dark-blue eyes sparkled with childish rapture, and his laugh gladdened the soul of Mackenzie. At length tbe regiment to which Mac¬ kenzie belonged was ordered back to Scot¬ land, and it was rumoured that in all pro¬ bability it would soon be sent on foreign service. Alice determined to accompany her husband to his native land, and as they would have to pass close by the vil¬ lage in which her mother resided, she pro¬ posed to go before him, in order that she might spend a day with her aged parent, whom she had not seen for four years. To this Mackenzie readily assented, only re¬ gretting
gretting that he should be unable, from bis professional duties, to pay a visit to tbe mother of his wife. The day before the regiment quitted Lon¬ don, Alice appeared unusually thoughtful ; her eyes filled with tears as often as they rested on Edward, and all her former ten¬ derness towards him seemed to revive.— *' I have been thinking, Mackenzie," said she in a faltering voipe, " what will be¬ come of these poor infants, should you be ordered abroad." " What will become of them indeed !" eried JMackenzie, and his moist eyes in¬ stinctively glanced on Edward, who w T as rocking his youngest child to sleep. * ť I shall follow you," continued Alice, and her hand fell on his shoulder—'* 1 cannot, will not stay behind. Who then wih! take care ofour children?" " If I am compelled for a time to aban¬ don them," replied Mackenzie mournfully, " their mother must not desert them : no. dearest Alice, much as I love you, I will not
not take you from your children—I will not rob them of your care and protection ; you must remain—their tender years re¬ quire your presence, and I must endea¬ vour to bear our separation with firmness, for their sakes." " I love my children," said Alice, " as fondly as any mother can do, but I will never consent to be divided from their father. In case of the evil which I dread, my mother will take care of the children during our absence ; and, with her, I shall only have one fear, namely, that she will spoil them by over-indulgence." " That might be productive of bad con¬ sequences to some dispositions," replied the soldier, " but I should prefer it to too much severity : the former, like a hotbed, would nourish the growth of weeds around the cherished plant, while the latter would exterminate both plant and weeds toge¬ ther. From the ebara et or whicb you have so o^ten given me of your mother, I should not be afraid, Alice, to trust her with our children,
children, in preference to any of my own relations. My father, who sprung from a good family, disobliged all his connexions by marrying my mother: this circum¬ stance contributed to sour his disposition, and we all felt the occasional effects of his severity ; I should not, therefore, choose to place our children under his roof. My sisters are both respectably situated in Edinburgh, but I know little of their husbands, and less of the management of their families : they are kind-hearted and affectionate, but their homes might not be such as would make our poor babies happy. My father gave us all a good edu¬ cation, and with this we were to make our v/ay through life : I have never been indebted to a single relation for a guinea, and I hope that my children will be equally independent. If I am sent abroad, Alice, your kind and indulgent mother must have our little ones, and wê wdll reward her to the best of our abilities for her trouble." " Woult
" Would it not be better to leave one of them with her before we go to Scot¬ land?" inquired Alice, with the embar¬ rassed air oí a person conscious that her intentions are not altogether what they should be. " I see no occasion fbr that, my dear Alice;.it wifi be quite time enough to lose either »of them, when necessity com¬ pels us to bear with so painful a sepaia- tion." " But I have been thinking," continued Alice, with still greater embarrassment, *' that your family may censure you for having burthened yourself with the bring¬ ing up of a child not your own; and though I have a trine towards maintain¬ ing bim, yet it may occasion a coolness between you, which I should wish to avoid. I think Edward had better remain under the care of my mother ; I know he will be kindly treated, and my mind will be perfectly easy on his account/' The generous soldier gave a painful start ;
start ; then catching the lovely boy to his bosom, he pressed him in his arms with all a father's fondness, as the tear of con¬ firmed suspicion fell on tbe upraised face of the wondering 1 -child; while Alice, trembling with fear and expectation, half relented from her long-cherished purpose, as she gáied in silence on the beautiful object of' ner maternal jealousy. At ledili' Mackenzie spoke— <* It is in vain, Alice, tbat you seek to conceal from me tbe altered state of your heart towards this poor boy, who ought to be no less dear to you than your other children : you no longer love him—all your affec¬ tion is placed on your girls ; and this sweet child has now indeed become an orphan, since he has outlived his mother's tender¬ ness." Alice burst into tears ; again her mind wavered from its determination, and again it became fixed to its first intention, when she beheld the overflowing kindness of hei¬ li u sband,
husband, which he now r lavished openly on Edward. " I do not like," said she, tť to see you fonder of another man's son than you are of your own children ; and, but for this, you and I should nevçr have a w r ord. The boy is as dear to ще £i$ ewer, but I shall never be happy to see him røore fondly treated than either Alice or Janet, Jf I can trust him with niy mother, sorely, Mackenzie, you ought not to thwart ray wishes." Her husband was silent, but he still held the boy close pressed to his bosom. " You hardly suppose me to be ¡such a brute," cried Alice, " as to .part witb the child to any one who wpuld not behave kindly to him ; and as for my mother, she will most likely become too fond of him, for she was always more partial to boys than to girls. If I leave Edward with her, I shall not let him be a burthen to her, but pay her for his board." " And
" And who is to educate him ?" " He will want no other education, for some time to come, than w hat she can give him," replied Mrs. Mackenzie. " My mother lived as housekeeper many years in the family of lady Fitz-Arthur, the aunt of my young lady; she had been respectably brought up, and was much esteemed by her mistress, until she fool¬ ishly married a second husband, who car¬ ried her into his own village, where she still continues to reside, though he has been dead these five years. I was fortu¬ nately taken by lady Fitz-Arthur to at¬ tend on her niece, and it is now more than four years since I have seen my mo¬ ther ; but I have heard from her, as you know, several times since that period. Eld- ward will not be brought up in ignorance, if he lives with my mother ; and should you be sent abroad, I shall leave my little girls with her. If you do not go, I can fetch Edward any time you please, to live with us in Scotland." u Alas,
'· Alas, my poor boy !" exclaimed Mac¬ kenzie, as he kissed his blooming cheek, fi I see that Τ must part with you sooner than 1 had expected.—But why," said he, suddenly recollecting himself, " should you not apply for the promised kindness of his godfather? Such a friend as the dean of Η ------ is wortb preserving for the child. Perhaps Mr. Colvill will take tbe boy and bring bim up, when he knows that his mother is determined to part with hini." The ashy hue of deatii overspread the features of Alice at this proposal of her husband.—" No, no!" cried she faintly, ťŕ Edward can never be the better for Mr. Colvilľs promised friendship. If he was ever to find out who was the boy's father, he would instantly abandon bim to his fate, and the poor child would then be¬ come tbe innocent sufferer for his parent's fault. No, no ! Edward must not, cannot receive any benefit from the Colvill fa¬ mily." Mackenzie
Mackenzie gazed on her with astonish™ ment. After a pause, he said-—" Well, Alice, you know best: I have never in¬ quired iuto the secrets of your husband's connexions, have never wished you to be beholden to them for anything, and I cer¬ tainly tliink you must have very good reasons for declining the favours of such a man as tlie dean of H~-----, who not only behaved with extreme kindness to you and to your son, but has written to us re¬ peatedly with every assurance of friend¬ ship. Nothing could possibly be more unlucky for Edward, than that be should be obliged to shun the patronage of Mr. Colvill/ 4 " And yet it must be so," replied Alice hastily ; " I could not answer to my own conscience if î were to let him îıave the care of Edward. .Something might betray the secret of his birth to the dean, and I should be made miserable for life." " Then wc will not risk your peace of mind, my dearest Alice, for the uncertain vol. i. л prosperity
prosperity of Edward. A state of depen¬ dence is, at best, a painful one; and Ed¬ ward may be far more happy in earning his own subsistence, than ia living on the bounty of the dean." The mind of Alice was alreadv made up to part with the little Edward : her excessive fondness for her girls made her wish to monopolize for them all the love and attention of their father, and this she perceived would never be the case while Edward continued to reside under tiie same roof with them. In placing him vvith her mother, she felt assured that he would have strict justice done to him; and as it was not her intention tliat he should be a burthen to the old woman, sbe had laid up a small sum of money to insure his welcome. ît however required all her powers of pleasing, all her caresses, all lier tenderness, to win over Mackenzie to consent to the removal of the child; and vvhen at length he reluctantly gave her leave to act as she thought proper, it vex
was but too evident tbat his concession cost him a severe pang. Alice, fearing lest her husband should repent of having yielded to her entreaties, contrived to keep the boy out of his sight until within a few minutes of the hour fixed for her meeting the stage. Macken¬ zie, with a foreboding heart, folded the sweet child in his arms ; the soul of the warrior melted to all the softness of a wo¬ man, as he felt the lips of his adopted son press his own, and bis soft hands pat his cheek in < Mish fondness. The starting tears proclaimed the interest which lie took in the infant's fate, and Alice, who witnessed with fear and trembling the in¬ ternal struggles of Mackenzie, now more than ever felt the necessity of separating him from so formidable a n val to her daughters. " Remember, Alice," said the soldier, with an unsteady voice, " that I cannot give you a greater proof of my regard than by giving up this child : 1 have sa¬ il 2 crificed
crificed to your peace one of my dearest hopes. Tell your mother, that as slie deals vwth this infant, so may Heaven deal with her." Mackenzie then quitted the room, leav¬ ing Alice to follow him, vvith her little girls, to the place where they were to take the stage, which was to convey them to the village where her mother lived. When arrived at tbe inn, Mackenzie, wdio had preserved a melancholy silence all the way, except when he was compelled to answer the various questions of Edward, whom he still held in bis arms, stopped, and placing the child on the ground, helped Jiis wife and daughters into the coach. Again and again he kissed his adopted son ; at lengtii he gave him to his wife—" Take care of our dear Edward," said he in a hurried tone, " and don't leave him, Alice, with your mother, unless you are certain he will be happy " He then tore himself away, to the great mortification of Mrs. Mackenzie, who had expected that he would
would bestow on bis little girls the part¬ ing kiss of a father. But the heart of the soldier was too sorely oppressed with grief to think of any other object than the innocent child who bore his name, and for whose welfare he was so deeply interested. He had yielded to the persuasions of Alice, from a conviction that her happiness, and per¬ haps that of the boy himself, depended upon his temporary removal : from all that he had heard of his wife's mother, he believed that the child would be more kindly treated tlnn he had been lately by her jealous daughter, who envied him every caress which he received from the father of her girls. Notwithstanding this consoling hope, Mackenzie felt most bit¬ terly disappointed in being thus unex¬ pectedly deprived of the artless affection of his favourite. He had adopted him in heart and soul for his own, had already taught him to read and to spell, and look¬ ed forward to the time when he should be d S rewarded
rewarded for his labours, by the bright display of Edwards intellectual endow¬ ments. Slowiy he returned to Ids solitary home, and from thence to the head-quarters of lm regiment, which was ordered to begin its march in a few hours. It was to halt the next day, within five miles of the vil¬ lage in which tiie mother of Alice resided, and here he was to be joined by his wife and her little girls; but Edward, the be¬ loved, the smiling, playful Edward, no more would greet his adopted father with the laugh, the kiss of infant tenderness ; no more would climb his knees to lift the plumed bonnet from the head of Macken¬ zie, and place it on his own, in mimic sport and childish pride : Edward, the be¬ loved, the joy of his heart, was to be left behind ; and Mackenzie's soul again melt¬ ed with womanish distress, until the well- known sound of martial music, the sound of Caledonia's dear-loved harmonies, roused the languid soldier from his painful reflec¬ tions.
rions. His native land, his cherished rela¬ tives, the mountaimscenery of his home, tbe playmates ofhis youth, all burst upon bis sight at once ; and as the strains grew louder and louder, as they approached to where Mackenzie stood, as bis eyes quick¬ ly glanced over the joyful countenance- s of his brave companions in arms, the hap¬ piness ihey felt diffused itself into the soul of Mackenzie, and for a time displaced every thought or feeling unconnected with Scotland and its cherished treasures.
CHAPTEB IV. +·+ * •л*·*·*·*·*·.*··* r+wf-rj·*· Alice meanwhile proceeded on her jour¬ ney with no very pleasurable sensations : she was about to revisit her mother, whom she had not seen for more than four years, and to resign to her keeping the infant boy whom once she had hoped never to D 4 part
part from. Her mother was also ignorant of the birth if Edward, and Alice would therefore have to explain many particu¬ lars to her, which, if possible, she wished to avoid. But Alice had no alternative: dearly as she loved the boy, she could not bring herself to view with composure the preference wbicb her husband evidently felt for him; she would have been con¬ tented to let him share with Alice and Janet the affection of their father, but she could not tamely allow him to monopolize all the attention of Mackenzie. It was a pleasant and tranquil evening in June, when Alice reached the village in which her mother lived. She inquired for Mrs. Grey, and was directed to a neat white cottage, encircled by trees, and near¬ ly covered with ivy and creeping flowers, which formed a bower over the porch of the door. It was at the extremity of the villags 0 , and comfortably sheltered from all approach of the north-cast wind. Alice, delighted at the appearance of her mo¬ ther's
ther's dwelling, hastened with her chil¬ dren to partake of its internal comforts. She knocked at the door ; it was opened by Margaret Grey. In a moment the mo¬ ther and daughter were locked in each other's arms ; tears of rapture ran down the good woman's cheeks, as she separately embraced her child and infant grandchil¬ dren. " My owm dear, dear Alice !" cried Mar¬ garet, *' who could have thought of seeing you ?—And your husband, wdiy did be not come to share my blessing and my Jove ?—And these little ones, are they all yours, Alice-—all of them ?—Oh, my poor dear child ! how tbe sight of you gladdens my old heart! Blessed be the name of the Lord, who has thus permitted me to see you onee more before I die !" Alice soon satisfied the curiosity of her mother about her husband; and while the affectionate old woman w r as busily em¬ ployed in preparing tea for her daughter and her little ones, Alice quickly ran over d 5 the
the principal events of the years that had elapsed since she had last seen her mother. The good woman listened to her with mute attention : Edward and Alice sat on each knee, while little Janet, placed on the lap of her mother, divided with the others the fond notice of their aged parent. " Tell me, my child," said old JMargaret, " why did you hide from me your first marriage?—What a noble boy it is ! I have seen somebody like him, but my head is so confused just now, I cannot re¬ member who it is. What was his fatheťs name ?" " No matter, m other," replied Alice, wishing to avoid the subject ; " I have sworn never to divulge his name to any one: lie was a gentleman, and that's enough. The boy will never be the better for knowing who he belongs to, so I de¬ termined to call him after Mackenzie, who loves him, I verily believe, better than he does his ovvn girls." ** May Cod bless and prosper him for it !"
it !" cried Margaret warmly. " Who could look upon this handsome smiling face, and not love the little rogue dearly ?—There is a great difference, Alice, in the appear¬ ance of your little girls. Any one who sees Edward may tell he comes from a different stock—he has such a genteel look with him. Who can it be tbat I have seen like him?" " Never mind, mother, who it is," said Alice hastily, and half offended at the no¬ tice taken of him by her mother : " the boy is vvell enough; he was always more strong and healthy than either Alice or Janet. But you know, my dear mother, that you were ever more partial to boys than to girls. I think I must leave Ed¬ ward with you, mother, instead of taking him to Scotland." " God bless him ! and I would do jus¬ tice to him," exclaimed Margaret— i( he should share with me what little I have ; and he vvould not want for companions, for I have, ever since the death of poor D 6 Grey,
Grey, taught the village children to write and read, and that brings me in a tolerable living.—But you would not part with him ?" Alice now assured her mother that, on the contrary, nothing would make her happier than leaving the child under her protection, as she knew that he would be well treated and taken every care of, and that she herself would cheerfully pay for his support. The kind old woman was half wild with joy ; she hugged the lovely boy to her bosom, she kissed his rosy cheeks, his dimpled mouth, and stroked down the bright ringlets which clustered over his forehead, shading by their profu¬ sion the beauty of his sparkling eyes. The intelligent child gazed a few minutes in the face of JMargaret ; its mild benevolence and warm affection pleased him—he flung his arms round her neck, and laid his blooming cheek to hers, now wrinkled v/ith age. ' % I will love you," said he, in a sweet and
and silvery voice—" love you next to my father, whom I love dearer than any body." " What! dearer than your own mo¬ ther?" cried Margaret, returning his em¬ brace. " Yes," replied the sensible boy; " I love my mother, but I love my father best, 'cause he takes my part when sister Alice is cross to me ; and vvhen sbe and Janet vex my mother, and make her angry with me, then father takes me on his knee, and kisses me, and pats my head, and sings to me. AVill you come and live with us in Scotland ? We will all love you, and be so kind to you, and I will do every thing you bid me, and be such a good boy, if you will come with us." Margaret nearly suffocated him with kisses; and Alice, who felt some secret reproaches, now that she was on the point of losing him, caressed him tenderly, say¬ ing that he was on the whole a very well- disposed child, only that be played too roughly
roughly with his sisters, and made them cross and ill-tempered. Margaret quickly perceived that her daughter was most partial to her girls, and that poor Edwards best friend was his adopted father; this made her more anxi¬ ous to have the boy left with her, as she was not slow in discerning that both Alice and Janet were fretful peevish children, to whom Edward was expected to submit in every thing. After Alice had succeeded i u getting с? О her little girls to sleep, and had sat with them half an hour, lest they sliould awake and again begin screaming, she joined her mother below, who by this time had got ready a nice supper, and brought out a bottle of her best home-made wine, to ivelcome the presence of her child. Alice, on her part, had brought with her several presents, which she thought might be acceptable to her parent, together with чипе articles of wearing apparel, sent by Mackenzie
Mackenzie to the mother of his wife. After tbeir repast, tbey naturally reverted to the events of past times. " I know," said old Margaret, " tbat my lady never perfectly forgave my marrying poor Grey ; she was so fond of me, and I was so much in her confidence, that she did not like to lose me. But poor Grey was a good husband to me; and though I often felt the difference of my situation, yet 1 never repented having him, or quit¬ ting my lady, especially as sbe continued her kindness to you. But what did Miss Fitz-Arthur say to your leaving her, Alice? She used to make such a pet of you, tbat I thought it impossible she should ever part from you." '* She was very unhappy at my quitting her," replied Alice ; " but I was forced to go away. Oh, w r ell she knew that nothing but necessity could ever oblige me to leave her ; for I loved her as dearly as I loved my owm souk" " Well, tbat was very strange, and I have
have often said so," cried Margaret ; " for never were tw r o more opposite creatures in disposition, and in every thing else, than you and Miss Fitz-Arthur. I used to be sadly afraid, at one time, that sbe would make you as bad as herself; for I fear that she is no better than she should be. From her childhood, and you know that my lady had her when she was only ñve years old, she was ahvays so proud and over¬ hearing, so haughty to her inferiors, and so bold and forward to her equals, that not a servant in the house liked her except yourself. She certainly had the beauty of an angel, but vve used to say that she had a devil's heart." " Nay, mother, you are prejudiced against her, because she happens to be a little vain of her person. You should con¬ sider that she was uncommonly beautiful, and known to be the heiress of all her aunt's property. Surely she had some¬ thing to be proud of." " God forgive me if I judge her wrong¬ fully,"
fully," said Margaret ; " but, if I am not mistaken, she will have more faults to ac¬ count for than pride. Beautiful as she is, tiiere is a something in the cast of her eyes that I should be sorry to see in a child of mine ; and as for feeling or affection, I'm sure she has none, God help her husband, wdienevcr she gets one ! he must be a bold man who would venture his happiness to her keeping." " Motiier," cried Alice, " you are too severe. Miss Fitz-Arthur has been mar¬ ried upwards of twO years to the marquis of Anendale, and I dare say makes as good a wife as most ladies of fashion. She was a kind and good mistress to me, and I do not like to hear her spoken ill of." " Well, my child, then I won't name her again. I suppose you have seen her since her marriage ?" " No, mother," replied Alice, " I have denied myself tbat pleasure, because I know that she would not approve of my marrying a soldier " " She
'· She may live to do worse," m n tiered the old woman, ťi I only hope that she may never become a mother ; for, if she does, sbe will make a very bad one." " She has two daughters already," said Alice. " But let us talk of something more pleasing to you, mother. Teli me how many scholars you have, and whether your health suffers from the fatigue of your daily occupation? Tell me every thing, mother, for I must leave you to¬ morrow." Old Margaret confessed that her health was not so good as it used to be before the death of her husband ; " but I must not complain," said she, " for, blessed be the name of the Lord ! I have hitherto done very weli. JMy scholars are all good-dis¬ posed children, and 1 have friends in the village, far above me, who respect me, and who often call to inquire after my health." She now entered more minutely into her ovvn circumstances, not forgetting those
tïnse of her neighbours, whieh soon put Miss Fitz-Arthur and her faults out of lier mind; and Alice had also so many things to say, as vveli as to hear, that the night was far spent before either of them thought of retiring to their beds. In the morning, Alice felt considerably perplexed what excuse to frame to Ed¬ ward for leaving him behind. At first she thought of going aw r ay unknown to him ; but this appeared too much like deserting him ; and she resolved to have recourse to some plausible falsehood, rather than act with such apparent unkindness. Edward was therefore led to believe tbat old Mar¬ garet would follow her daughter to Scot¬ land in a short time, if he would stay to bear her company; and the poor innocent child was so won upon by the persuasive kindness of Margaret, that he readily con¬ sented to stay until she could conveniently join his adopted father in his native land. With all the prattling innocence of youth, Edward beguiled avvay the hours ; his
bis active mind found sufficient source of amusement in the novelty of all around him, and he saw Mrs. JMackenzie and her little girls quit tbe cottage, without mani¬ festing any very strong tokens of distress. Old Margaret held him in her arms—she called him her darling boy, her beautiful child ; she kissed him again and again, and told him lie should do as he pleased, and have what he pleased, and that tbey should soon go in a ñne new coach to meet Mac¬ kenzie. The sweet bov believed the well- meant falsehood; and as he clung with childish fondness to the neck of Margaret Grey, his little heart throbbed with all its natural warmth of affection, which had too often been chilled by the' frowns and jea¬ lous reproofs of his mother.
CHAP-
CHAPTER V. Edward became, as Alice had prophesied, the darling ofher mother, and, in short, the idol of most of her scholars ; though some there were who envied him the love of old Margaret, and who would jeeringly call him " the little favourite," " the fine gentleman ;" but these were few ; the ge¬ nerality of the children, while they felt and owned his evident superiority over themselves, loved him for his gay good humour, his quickness of perception, his warmth of heart, and, above all, for bis personal attractions, which made him the universal pet among the female part of her pupils. Edward, though barely turned of four years old, could read and spell better than many boy s twice his age ; yet he was not always
always in a mood for learning the lessons set him' by old Margaret—he vvould fre¬ quently play truant for the whole day; but the studies of the next amply com¬ pensated for his fits of temporary idleness. Nor was he wholiy idle during these hours of aversion to his book ; it was then that he would amuse himself, by the help ofa piece of chalk, on the floor ; and many a rude sketch was taken of the busy inmates of tbe room, of Margaret Grey, her high- backed chair and spectacled nose, which gave proofs of tbat embryo genius that at a future time burst forth with all the fire and brilliancy of a master in the art. Mar¬ garet smiled at the first attempts of infant talent, and in order to save her floor, as well as to preserve the good order of her school, whose attention was taken up by the idle exercises of Edward, she bought him a pencil, and gave him a hoard of paper, which he might use as often as he felt inclined to be lazy. It was some time, however, before Ed¬ ward
ward could make himself master of his pencil: it was repeatedly broken, and as repeatedly reçut by Margaret; but when be had accomplished it, he repaid her for her trouble, by drawing a tolerable like¬ ness of her old favourite cat, which was carefully placed over the mantlepiece, as a specimen of her darling's abilities. Nor was JMargaret the only one who used to view with delight tbe resemblance of poor puss : among her scholars, one more than all the rest was attached to Edward ; this was a little girl, two years his senior, and the prettiest of them all : she was the only chikl of a tradesman in the village, and had lost her mother, which loss was but ill supplied by her father, a drunken, pro¬ fligate character ; and poor Martha Smith w r as suffered to run about the village after her school-hours, seeking what companions she could find, without control, without advice, or a proper home to receive her. Martha was in her seventh year—a quick, Intelligent child—busy, forward, and curi¬ ous
ous to know every thing : she was hand¬ some and lively, and she no sooner beheld Edward, than she became his friend and protector. As she had money at command, scarce a day elapsed wkliout her bringing him substantial proofs of her regard ; but as Edward was neither mercenary nor greedy, her gifts would not have procured his affection, had they not been accompa¬ nied by the more persuasive bribes of flat¬ tery and tenderness. Martha praised his performances, and encouraged him to con¬ tinue them, begging, eveiy now and then, as a great favour, one or two of his draw¬ ings, to hang up in her own room ; then sbe kissed him so sweetly, and took such pains to make him happy, that Edward, whose young beart was formed of the soft¬ est materials, quickly evinced for Martha a decided preference, to the no small mor¬ tification of her jealous companions, many of whom were much older than herself. Margaret, who had long pitied the ne¬ glected situation of Martha Smith, and lamented
lamented the cruel neglect of her father, in allowing her to rove at pleasure up and down the village, now began to manifest for her a stronger regard, in proportion to the affection whicii the young girl testified for Edward ; she invited her to remain af¬ ter school-hours were over, to wdiich the child joyfully consented; thus becoming more and more the companion and play¬ mate of the " little gentleman." This was a title tbat Edward well be¬ came : his person, his form, his maimers, his every movement, betrayed an innate gentility, rarely to be met with among the lower ranks of society. As circumstances unfolded the powers of his mind, old Mar¬ garet, who was not deficient in discern* ment, was frequently surprised at the un¬ cultivated sense whicb he displayed in his questions and remarks, and still more so at the sudden bursts of pride which he be¬ trayed, whenever he was provoked into casual fits of passion by the rudeness of any of his playfellows. His anger was VOL. i. iî ahvays V
always transient ; for the haughty dignity of Edward, whose bright eyes flashed in¬ dignantly on the offenders, soon drew from them an acknowledgment of error, which instantly procured their pardon, and re¬ stored the crimson countenance of Edward to its usual serenity. One boy in particular seemed to take great delight in rousing the stormy feel¬ ings of Edward : be was the son of a re- vvpectable widow w r oman, wbo lived at a short distance from Margaret's cottage, and wbo, whenever be met Edward, made a rule of insulting him ; then, coward-like, he would run away, and shelter himself within the sanctuary of bis home. He was of the same age as Edward, but more strong and liea vily made. Ignorant, cow* ardly, and cruel, he hated Edward for the beauty of his person, the intelligence of his mind, and the bravery of his nature. Edward and his companion Martha Smith were returning home, with each a little basket in their hands, full of various cakes, nuts,
nuts, and sweetmeats», which they had been purchasing to celebrate the natal day of the former, who bad just completed his eighth year : they were met by Tom Cummins, wbo, spreading out his hands, declared they should not pass until be bad seen the contents of their baskets. Martha remonstrated witb Tom, but to no purpose; while Edward, wdiose face was crimson with anger, asked him how he dared to stop their way, and insisted upon his desisting from his impertinence. Tom screwed up his mouth and nodded liis head significantly, saying—" Ay, ay, my ñne gentleman ! do put yourself into я passion, do, and spoil your pretty face. Who the deuce are you ? Do you think that I should leave off at your bidding?— Why, your fiither is only a soldier, ray little gentleman, so pray leave off all your fine airs. My fatlier and mother are much better than yours, and I shall stay here as long as 1 like, and as short as I like, for E 2 all
all that you have got Miss Patty to back you." " Will you so?" cried Edward, flinging down the basket—" we will see to that. Patt} 7 , 1 command you not to move a step ; I'll soon teach this insolent boaster better maimers." Springing forward like an angry lion, he seized hold of Tom's throat, and nearly shook the breath out of his body, and then letting him go as suddenly, the affrighted eow T ard fell to the ground, bawding out for mercy. " Get up, Tom," said Edward, pulling him from his dastardly posture, u get up, and own that you have acted like an in¬ solent coward. Are you not always be¬ having rudely to me? do you ever see me without insulting me ?—Yes, mv fa- ther is a soldier—be is serjeant in the 44th regiment; he is a brave man, a good man, a sensible man : and what are you, Tom ? "Why, the most ignorant, brutish, and
and mean-spirited boy in the whole v il- lage. Get up, I say, and beg my pardon this instant, before Patty, or I'll beat you as long as I am able." Tom Cummins, wdio by no means re¬ lished the specimen he had already re¬ ceived of Edward's courage and ability to defend himself, instantly obeyed, and with the most fawming servility begged pardon, declaring that he was only in jest. Edward darted on him a look of proud contempt, then taking up the basket, and placing Patty's arm in his, he left the affrighted boy, gently admonishing him to be care¬ ful in future how he mentioned the name ofhis father, or how be applied to himself any terms which might be construed into derision. Tom took tbe hint, and ever after preserved a civil tongue. Martha failed not to report the whole affair to old Margaret, who hu&ffed the intrepid boy in her arms, and gloried in the courage vvhieh he had displayed so % beyond his years ; not that JMargaret в íj would
would have wished him to be quarrelsome or overbearing to his playmates, but she rejoiced to find him both capable and will¬ ing to defend himself agamst the attacks of vulgar insolence and low-bred pre* sumption. *' Grandmother," cried Edward thought» fully, ťí is there any disgrace in being a- soldier, that that ignorant boy Tom Cum¬ mins reproached me with my father's be¬ ing a soldier ?'' vi No, my darling," replied Margaret Grey; " it is an honour, instead of a dis· grace, to serve his Majesty, and fight for the defence of our liberties and laws. A disgrace indeed ! Any man might be proud to be the son of the brave serjeant Mac¬ kenzie ; but your father was a gentleman bred and born, and your godfather is a gentleman, and belongs to one of tbe best families in England." fit How, grandmother," exclaimed the boy, bursting into a flood of tears, " how can you be so cruel us to tell mc that ser¬ jeant
jean t Mackenzie is not my father?—Never, never can I love any one so dearly as I do him. Thougii I was a very little boy when he went to Scotland, yet I remem¬ ber him well: he loved me better than my mother, better than any body but you and Patty Smith." ťť My heart's treasure, be comforted," said old Margaret, as sbe fondly caressed him, while Patty wiped away bis quick- falling tears ; " in tbe warmth of my feel¬ ings I have suffered a secret to escape me, wdiich your mother wished to be concealed from you until yon were older." " Who then was my father?" cried Edward hastily, as he raised his head from the bosom of Margaret ; " and wby am I not called by his name?" " My dearest child," said Margaret Grey, 4i your father died before you were born, and when your mother married serjeant Mackenzie, you were not more than ňve weeks old. As your father's family were far her superiors, and as they would not e 4 acknowledge
acknowledge her, she resolved to christen you by the name of that dear good man who so warmly adopted you for his own, and vvho loves you as fondly as if you were his own son." ** And I will never own another father," cried tbe boy with earnestness, " never go by any other name than his. If my fa¬ ther s relations were to own me to-morrow, and make a lord of me, stiii I "would be called Edward Mackenzie, the soldier's son." Margaret now cautioned Patty not to mention what she had beard, as it might only increase the envy of the ill-natured, were it known that Edward's father was a gentleman; she then left them, to get ready a treat whieh she had provided for the birthday of Edward, wdio had invited bis chief favourites to spend it with him ; but not all their joyous hilarity could chace from the mind of Edward the secret which old JMargaret had inadvertently be¬ trayed ; although Patty redoubled her en¬ deavours
deavours to amuse him, in which sbe was assisted by all his young friends—although Margaret Grey forgot her age, forgot her rheumatism, and joined in all their child¬ ish sports, still Edward could not repress the starting tear, or check the involuntary sigh—serjeant Mackenzie was the being whom most on earth he loved, and serjeant Mackenzie was no longer to be deemed his father. Edward tried to be cheerful and happy, but he tried in vain. At length Margaret, whispering, said— " Enjoy yourself to-day. my dear Edward —be merry, and make your companions merry, and to-morrow I will read you a letter from your father, serjeant JMacken¬ zie, which is entirely about yourself. But you must let me see you look gay and animated, as usual." The coun tei lance of Edward instantly beamed with pleasure; he should hear or read the sentiments of his adopted father, be should learn his wishes respecting him¬ self, and kiss the dear-loved characters E 5 traced
82' AN ANGEĽS FORM traced by his hand ; with new-kindled vi* gour and buoyant spirits, Edward skipped back to his companions, and the next in¬ stant Margaret Grey lieard his joyous laugh, which made her old heart dance again wdth new-bom rapture.—" Ah !" thought Margaret, as she beheld bis grace¬ ful form bounding between those of the village children, as she saw the angel-smile of guileless pleasure play around his dim¬ pled mouth and sparkle in his bright blue eye, as eveiy bend of his pliant limbs gave to sight some new grace, some fresh beauty, " ah !" thought Margaret, ** now would I giv^ all my worldly goods and chattels to find out wdio was thy father, my darling Edward ; for nature, in spite of fortune, has cast tbee in no common mould—every look, every gesture, bespeaks the son of a gentleman."
VnU. л11 *■
CHAPTER VI. Edwajrd had now been four years under the care of Margaret Grey, during which time he had been indulged in every wish of his heart. At first he was very inqui¬ sitive to know when she vvould go with him to Scotland, but as she repeatedly formed some fresh excuse to delay her journey, and as he was perfectly happy in his new situation and with his new asso¬ ciates, he by degrees became less anxious to leave them, and less solicitous to join his mother and her cross, peevish, spoiled little ¿¡rls. Alice wrote constantly to old JMargaret, never failing İn her promised remittances for the support of Edward. Her letters were full of affectionate interest for his welfare ? but they betrayed no intention of e 6 withdrawing
withdrawing him from the protection of his grandmother. She said that she and her children were comfortably situated hi the bo ase of her husband's sister, with whom she meant to leave her daughters, in case of Mackenzie's being ordered abroad ; but that, much as they wished to have the boy vvith theni, they would not deprive her of his society, as it had become so necessary to her happiness. Mackenzie wrote also to the mother of his wife, and the fond guardian ofhis dar¬ ling child. He expressed his wish to have him sent to a good school, where the boy would be instructed in those necessary ac¬ quirements which were beyond the know¬ ledge of Margaret Grey; and, above all, he desired that his talent for drawing might be properly cultivated. Many a present did the generous soldier convey to his adopted son unknown to Alice, and many a welcome gift was also received by eld Margaret at the same time, for herself. At length the orders so long dreaded by
by Alice arrived, and the Highland war¬ riors prepared for foreign service. She had just lost her eldest little girl, and was therefore but ill able to endure a separa¬ tion from her youngest; but she strove to bear her heavy mistortune with fortitude and resignation, and the more so, perhaps, from a secret conviction tbat she had not acted so kindly as she ought to have done towards poor Edward. Again Mackenzie reminded Alice of the important patronage which she had now the power of claiming for her child, and besought her not to suffer any per¬ sonal pique or false delicacy to rob hini of the offered kindness of his godfather.— " Think, Alice," said Mackenzie, " of what may be the fate of this dear boy, should Providence, in our absence, take from him the only natural protector he vvill then have—your good old parent: think also of what he migbt be, if placed in tbe hands of the dean of H ------ ." <> Why
<ŕ AVhy do you remind me of what only adds to my distress?" replied his wife, with evident agitation. ťí Do you really believe, Mackenzie, that I would with¬ hold from Edward the countenance of such a man as Mr. Colvill, without just reasons for so doing?—Be satisfied, my dear luisband, that I act from principle, not from caprice, and from a firm persua¬ sion that Edward will be far happier if brought up to gain his own maintenance, than he would be if he were under the care of the dean, and reared at his ex- pence." " Well/' said Mackenzie, after a long and painful pause, " well, Alice, yon must know best. Some time or other, sliould Heaven spare my life, you may think me worthy of your confidence ; but I will not claim as my right what ought to be given me from affection." " Dearest Edward," replied Alice, weep¬ ing, " my confidence should be as freely your*
yours as is my heart, but that it is not in my own power to bestow it. There is a secret attached to my poor boy—■—" íÉ I feel that there is," replied the sol¬ dier, sighing from the bottom ofhis soul. " A secret/' contiuued Alice, " which I dare not trust to any human being, or you, Mackenzie, would not have remained in ignorance of it a day after our union/' '" Let the subject drop and be forgot- ten," said Mackenzie thoughtfully. " Ed- ward could not be dearer to me, were he my own son : to secure your peace of mind. Alice, I consented to resign him to your worthy mother. It has pleased Hea¬ ven to deprive us of our Httle girl, for whose sake poor Edward was neglected." Here Alice burst into a violent flood of tears, and Mackenzie, tenderly embracing her, said-—" I meant not to reproach you, my beloved wife ; but as I have so long been prevented from doing my duty to my adopted son, I cannot think of quit¬ ting, perhaps for ever, my native land. without
without once more beholding him. I have already obtained permission for two day г/ absence, and in an hour's time shall be on my way towards your mother's home." The heart of Alice w r as too full of grief for the death of her little girl, and too much oppressed by other distressful feel¬ ings, to oppose the generous intentions of Jier husband ; she vvould have accompanied liim to take leave of Edward, but she could not take Janet with lier; and to leave her, when sbe was on the point of separating from her, perhaps for ever, was what Alice eould not bring herself to think of: be¬ sides, Mackenzie expressed no desire that she should bear him company in his rapid journey ; and she therefore contented her¬ self with getting ready a vanety of ar¬ ticles which she had intended for her mo¬ ther and Edward, and vvitii writing as long a letter to the former as the short¬ ness of her time would permit. Mackenzie scarcely paused to take breath,
breath, until he readied the village which eontained bis darling boy. It was the same month, and nearly the same day, as that on which he had first beheld him sleeping on the lap of Alice. The recol¬ lection of vvhat he then felt towards both mother and child, now added to the ten¬ derness of his feelings; be remembered also that he had called Heaven to witness his solemn intention of being a father to the boy in the strictest sense of the word, and he prayed for the forgiveness of bis Creator, if he bad erred in too fondly yielding to the persuasions of his wife, and by so doing had resigned him to the care of another. The busy mind of the warrior pictured to itself what Edward was at four years old, and what he now was at twice that age. He wished to be¬ hold him, for a few moments, unseen by any eye but that of Heaven, that he might feast his own upon tbe form he loved, and gain sufficient self-command to encounter the
the artless questions and inquiries of his adonted son. As [Mackenzie approached the ivy-co¬ vered cottage of his mother-in-law, his heart bounded at the print of feet in the snow that covered the pathway to the door: they might be those of Edward. Cautiously he crept towards the porch, which, though no longer gay with sweet- scented flowers, could still boast the dark- green foliage ofthe constant ivy. Through its twisted branches Mackenzie got a com¬ plete view into the little parlour of Mar¬ garet Grey, while the cheerful blaze of a nice wood fire enabled him to discern its happy inmates. The good old woman, whose open and friendly countenance was a perfect index of her mind, was seated by the fire, in her high-backed elbow-chair, and by her side sat Edward and Patty Smith ; the arm of the former was thrown round the waist of Patty, while hers, with equal kindness, was
was placed around his neck. In the hand of Edward was a letter, which he laid on the lap of JMargaret, w hile his eyes spark¬ led with pride and exultation, and the bright crimson of his cheek grew deeper and deeper as his feelings became stronger. —" Grandmother/' he cried, and his voice shot through the soul of Mackenzie— '* grandmother, I will never forget all your goodness towards me, never forget your kindness in shewing me the letters of serjeant Mackenzie. How tenderly he speaks of me ! He says that I shall make a good man, and that night and day he prays for my happiness. Dear grandmo¬ ther, I will tiy to be a good man, that I may be a comfort to you both. I Would sooner die than give either of you a mo¬ ment's pain. Oh that I could but once more see my dear, dear father Mackenzie, that I might tell him how kind vou have always been to me !-^~I think, if he knew bow dearly I love him, and what happi¬ ness
ness it gives me to read his letters, he would come from Scotland to see me." * r I dare ¡say he would soon come if he were able, my darling," cried old Marga¬ ret, putting aside some of the dark curls that overshadowed his eyes; *' but you knovv, Edward, that serjeant Mackenzie's time is not his own, but his country's. I long to sec him as much as you do, but I fear that my old eyes will never be blest with a sight of him/' " And / love him," exclaimed Patty, " and long to see him also, because he is good and kind to Edward." * ť I would walk barefooted to see him, grandmother/' said Edward ; " but I would, not stay long ; I w r ill never leave, you, dear grandmother, unless it is to go for a short time to my beloved father JMackenzie, and then I vvould hurry back, for fear that you should want me." Old Margaret embraced and blessed him, saying that she made no doubt but tiiat
that God would hear his prayers, and per¬ mit him to see once again his dear adopted father. Mackenzie, whose full heart was near bursting with suppressed affection, now tapped gently at the door.—" Go, Patty," said old Margaret ; " I should not wonder if it is Mr. Lindsay, come at this time in the evening, dear kind soul! to inquire how I am." Patty, at the sound of bis name, flew to give entrance to the welcome visitor. Mackenzie drew back, and asked if the cottage belonged to Mrs. Grey ? Edward started from his seat, and advancing a few paces, rushed suddenly forward, screaming in an agony of joy that it was his father, his beloved father Mackenzie. In an instant he was close pressed to tbe bosom of the soldier, wbile Margaret Grey, scarcely daring to give credit to her senses, grasped his hand affectionately, and drew him to the fireside, with the familiar kindness of one long acquainted with bis worth,
wortli. Her high-backed easy chair was given up to Mackenzie, md Patty Smith, not waiting to be desired, heaped fresh faggots on tbe fire, to accelerate the boil¬ ing of tbe teakettle, and then slunt be¬ hind old Margaret, tiiat she might gaze unobserved on the adopted father of Ed¬ ward. Old Margaret was the first to break silence.—" Blessed be the name of the Lord !" cried $he, " wbo bath beard and granted my prayers, #nd who hath sent you here, щу dear son, to gladden all our hearts—just, too¿ as we were talking of you !—Edward, my darling—rouse your¬ self, my treasure—you have not asked af¬ ter your mother apd little Janet." Edward could not speak, snd Macken¬ zie even found it an effort to think of any other object than the child of his adoption ; he however recollected all tbe goodijess of old Margaret towaids thfrt child, and en¬ deavoured to make amends for his appa¬ rent neglect of her, by replying to all her questions
questions respecting his wife and Janet, and then delivered to her the letter and the gifts of Alice. Poor old Margaret, whose eyes were dim with tears of pleasure, and whose frame shook from the same cause, was obliged, for tbe present, to lay aside tbe Jetter, and give vent to her overcharged bosom, by manifesting to Mackenzie all tbe affection wdiich she had long nourished fbr liim, and wdiich he felt equally disposed to evince for her. Edward was their chief theme—Edward their mutual pride, their hope, then· idol ; wdiile he on whom they both doted remained locked in the arms of Mackenzie, as if afraid again to lose him. " Look up, my dear boy," cried tbe sol¬ dier, " and let me see you smiling and happy, as when I beheld you just now through the window. Where is that pretty-looking girl wdio so kindly ex¬ pressed a wish to see me because I was good to you ?" Edward
Edward instantly raised his head and called to Patty, who now crept from her hiding-place; but he would not leave the knee of his adopted parent. Patty slowly advanced, blushing all the while. Edward caught her hand and gave it to Macken¬ zie.—" Love her, dear, dear father," said the boy earnestly ; i( for she is very good, and very kind and affectionate to me and to ray grandmother." Mackenzie embraced the timid girl, and taking from his pocket a small gold coin, gave it her, as a reward fbr her affection to his adopted son. Patty looked at the coin with eyes which sparkled with de¬ hght, and whispering in the ear of Ed- ward, said that she would preserve the gift of his father as long as she lived. Edward would not be separated that night from Mackenzie, and Patty, who had her father's permission to stay at the cottage whenever she pleased, now re¬ mained and partook of old Margaret's bed· This worthy creature no sooner learnt that
that her son-in-law was ordered on foreign service, than she offered to take charge of the little Janet, although her own increas¬ ing ill health made such a charge extreme¬ ly hazardous; but Mackenzie was com¬ pelled to decline what otherwise he would have accepted with joy, as AHce had al¬ ready agreed to leave her daughter under the care of his sister, whose prosperous circumstances and fondness for the child -made the sanguine mother look forward to the advantages vvhich it might derive from the protection of its aunt. The next day Mackenzie overlooked, with surprise and pleasure, the infant spe¬ cimens of Edward's dawning genius, all of which Margaret had carefully collected together, except those which tbe boy had given to Patty Smith, to decorate her owm bedchamber at home. The discern¬ ing soldier no sooner beheld the childish productions of Edward's idle hours, than he unhesitatingly declared that, if his ta~ tents were properly cultivated, he would vol. i. f soon
mon be able to make bis fortune, and strictly enjoined his grandmother to send him to a respectable school, where he miglit be taught drawing and other branches of education. He next examined the boy himself in all that he had learned, and though his knowledge, as might be ex¬ pected, was very confined, yet it was still plainly evident that he possessed all the requisites necessary to form the scholar and the gentleman. JMackenzie sighed, for he recollected the proffered kindness of the dean of H ------, and lamented that the boy could not avail himself of so ad¬ vantageous a connexion. Edward longed, yet feared to mention to Mackenzie that he knew that he w r as not bis father; but old Margaret, who observed the changeful features of tlie boy, took an opportunity to inquire the cause. Edward was a stranger to false¬ hood or dissimulation, and he therefore told his w t ishes to his grandmother, at the same time generously expressing his de¬ termin ation
termination not to gratify them, if, by so doing, he should occasion any disagree¬ ment between her and his adopted parent. Margaret loved the boy too dearly to check any of his desires, unless they were such as would create his own unhappiness ; sbe therefore led him back to where Macken¬ zie was sitting, and by reverting to the story of his encounter with Tom Cum¬ mins, took occasion to mention her own warmth of feeling, which had drawn from her the secret of his birth, " But father, dear father," cried Edward, springing on his knees, " if I am not your son, I will never own another father—ne¬ ver go by any name but yours; for I huo you vvitii my whole beart and soul so very dearly, that I think I can never love an¬ other human being with the same love as that I feel for you/' Mackenzie pressed him to his heart— ** And I, Edward, can never feel towards another child what I still feel for you," replied the warrior, as he embraced him. г 2 " R
sŕ ît w r as one of the severest trials of my life to part with you ; but I did it for tho best, and, thank Heaven ! you have not wanted my care and tenderness since you have been vvith vour grandmother." * s I have tried to make him happy, and have done my best for him/' said JMarga¬ ret Grey ; " but thougii I know that Ed¬ ward loves me, and I believe does not wish to leave me, bis heart and mind have always been full of you. I do indeed think that never will he love any other human being as he now loves you/' The soldier smiled affectionately on the boy.—" Would to Heaven that I could do as ï wish to do for you, Edward !" said he; "no man's son sliould have a better education than yourself; as it is, I must content myself with giving you such a one as my finances will permit. You shall go to school, Edward, and I will take care to have transmitted to your grandmother what will pay for your education. Provi¬ dence may raise you up a friend when I am
am gone, more capable of serving you than I am; and as y T ou can novv write pretty well, Edward, you must let me hear from you very often, and tell me every thing that concerns yourself and your beloved grandmother." Edward's eyes filled with tears; they fell on his cheek, but he brushed them hastily of? with his hand.—** I will not cry," said he angrily ; " I am and v. ill be a soldier's son, and I will not cry, because my dear father is going to fight for his country." Again the tears fell on his warm cheek, and again his hand was raised to expel the offendei s.—" God uill protect you," continued the boy ; * 4 for God is all mercy and goodness, and he will preserve you safe from barm, because you obeyed bis laws, and befriended the widow and the fatherless." Mackenzie burst into tears ; he clasped the boy to his bosom in unutterable fond¬ ness, and as he kissed him be said—" Pro¬ vidence, my dearest Edward, orders every f 3 thing
thing for the best. If I live, 1 have no fear of being able to provide for you : if 1 die, Edward, you must do your best to comfort your poor mother, and. for my r\ike, you will be kind to Janet, I know that my sist* τ will bring her up as her own chikl; but should she ever, at a fu¬ ture time, stand in need of a friend or a I iome. and vou perhaps are capable of af¬ fording her both, you will not forget how dearly her father loved and cherished both you and your mother." Edward's iieart seemed ready to burst; he heard the sobs of old Margaret, who bad covered her face with her apron to conceal her distress, and hastily quitting the arms of Mackenzie, he flung his round her neck, and laying his blooming cheek to hers, besought her to be comforted.— " I vviil never leave you, dear grandmo¬ ther/' said he, wiping away her tears, ťí never give you another moment's pain, if î can lici p it ; and wlien I am old enough, I will provide for you myself. You símil do
do nothing but sit still like a lady, and Patty Smith shall be your maid, and work for you, and I will maintain you both." Tlie old woman smiled through her tears.—" And what, my darling, will you be? and iiow vvill you maintain us all ?" The boy paused for a moment, then suddenly exclaimed, as his eyes sparkled vvith delight—" I should like to be a sol¬ dier ; but then I should not grow rich— should Í, dear father ? so I must learn to draw, and then to paint ; and when I am a young man, I shall soon get plenty of money, and then, grandmother, Janet Mackenzie----- -" Here he was interrupted by lho entrance of Mr. Lindsay, whom jMargaret had ex¬ pected the preceding evening, and vvho now came to inquire after her health and· that of his great favourite, the courageous and high-minded Edward.
ŕ 4. CHAP-
CHAPTER VIL Mr. Lindsay was also one of Edwards great favourites, and, as such, he proudly introduced to him his adopted father, now ensign, instead of serjeant Mackenzie, which list rank had been procured for him by the sister who was to retain Janet, and who, as a mark of her affection, pur¬ chased for her brother his commission only a few days previous to his being ordered abroad. As Mr. Lindsay appeared de¬ sirous of speaking to old Margaret, Mac¬ kenzie took Edward into the back-garden of the cottage, which was kept in excel¬ lent order by one of her neighbours' sons, and which more than supplied the two families with vegetables and fruits, as it was twice as targe as any of those belong¬ ing t с the surrounding cottages. At the bottom
bottom of the garden the young man had formed a rustic arbour of climbing flowers, and here Margaret Grey and her darling, with Patty Smith and perhaps one or two more of her best scholars, used to drink their tea on a summer's evening, and en¬ joy themselves in all the luxury of inno¬ cent and unrestrained merriment. How changed was now the prospect from this favourite retreat of the youthful Edward! The lattice-work alone was vi¬ sible, except here and there the creeping ivy had taken advantage of its firm sup¬ port, and twined itself around the bower, while from the dark-green leaves now hung tbe pendent icicles, glittering as ihey half melted in the sickly rays of a winter's sun. Not a flower cheered by its presence the desolated garden, vvhile the snow, partly thawed and partly frozen, made the gravel-walk damp and uncom¬ fortable to tread on ; but Edward felt it not—his mindi his hearr was full of one .subject.— ťfr Father," said he, looking wist- r 5 fullv
fully in lhe fond £tee of Mackenzie as he <;r;r;ped his hand, ťí lather, I knovv you vill not be angry with me if I ask you a question ; grandmother tells me she can¬ not, but peihaps you will be able to sa¬ tisfy my curiosity. Who w r as my real father? and vvhat was his name ?" Mackenzie felt considerable embarrass¬ ment, as well as pain, at being unable to gratify the natural curiosity of his adopted son.—" My beloved boy," replied the sol¬ dier, tenderly caressing him, " I have so high an opinion of your understanding, that I would not hesitate one moment to confide to you the secret you demand, were I in possession of it myself. Your mother has never told me the name of your lather, and I have forborne to ques¬ tion her, because it evidently gave her urn ashless. ï have, however, every rea¬ son to beheve that he was a gentleman/' Edward sighed,— ic Do you think, my deir father Mackenzie, that I shall ever find out who he was? do you tldnk that mv
my mother will tell me when I am a man ?" " Probably she may, my dear boy ; but if she should not, you will not be ashamed, Edward, I hope, to go by my name ?" The blood rushed into tbe handsome face of the inquiring boy.—" Ashamed ! oh no! I shall be proud to own the name of Mackenzie, and will never, never go by any other. Yet I should like to know who was my father, and whether I have any uncles or aunts. Dear father Mac¬ kenzie, can you tell me wdio was my god¬ father? grandmother said that he was a gentleman too. You may trust me, im- deed you may, for I will never tell any¬ thing you bid me not." Mackenzie was now most painfully si¬ tuated ; he must either teli a wilful false¬ hood, or confide to the prudence of a boy not yet nine years old, the name ofa man who would have been his friend and be¬ nefactor, had it not been for the myste- ľ 6 rious
rious dislike of his mother to the con¬ nexion. Mackenzie still hesitated. " Are you afraid to trust me, dear fa¬ ther ?'' said the boy in a beseeching tone ; " indeed you need not. But perhaps my mother would be angry if you were to tell me vvho w r as my godfather ?" ** Edward," replied the soldier gravely, " y r our mother would indeed be angry if she supposed that I should confide to you the name of a man who, from circum¬ stances, I am led to believe must either have been the enemy of your father, or nearly related to him. It has cost your mother some trouble to keep your place of residence unknown to him, and it will cost me a considerable deal of uneasiness if I act in opposition to her wishes, and betray to you the name of a man wdiose friendship she has sedulously shunned ever since his family became known to her." u Oh then, dear, dear father Macken- aie," exclaimed Edward earnestly, * f äo not.
not, do not tell me who was my godfather. I would not give you a moment's uneasi¬ ness for all the world. I no longer wish to know anything that you think proper to keep from me," Mackenzie caught him in his arms— " Beloved boy," cried the fond soldier, gazing on the fine intelligent countenance of Edward, " beloved boy, that I could but see into futurity for thy dear sake! Oh that I w r as but gifted, like some of my countrymen, with a second sight, that I might read thy future destiny!—But come what come may, remember, dear Edward, this grand rule of life—Always do to others just what you would wish them to do to you ; trust in Heaven for protec¬ tion and for relief under every affliction; be just and honourable in all your actions ; and whenever you meet with a fellow- creature in distress, afford him all the assistance in your power. Never, my dear boy, if possible, give cause of offence to any person; preserve your own dignity and
and command of temper, and while you suffer no one to insult you vvith impunity, avoid all petty quarrels, as ihe bane of friendship and the source of serious evils. Remember, my dear boy, that while I live you can never want a fi iend, a father, an adviser; let me therefore Hear from you often, and do not fear to inform me of all your concerns, for I shall never, Ed¬ ward, be a harsh judge or an unfeeling father." Tlie call of old Margaret now broke the conversation, and Mackenzie, with his adopted son, returned to the house, and to the cheering comforts of a blazing fire, an excellent dinner, and a bottle of old Margaret's best elder wine. But these ŕ ould not dispel from the mind of Mac¬ kenzie the crowd of painful ideas which depressed his naturally-cheerful spirits; a few hours, and he should have bidden adieu to the child of his love, an adieu which mifľht bc an eternal one. What, then, ivould become of tliat child, left to
the care of a fond old woman, whose days must be nearly numbered, exiled from the home of liis real father, and from the bo¬ som of his sole surviving parent? what might be the future sorrows, the futuro cares, the future hardships of his darling Edward ? Mackenzie felt his heart chilled as if by a bolt of ice : the warm affection of the worthy Margaret, the endearing tenderness of his adopted son, and the watchful attention of the innocent Patty, all failed to rouse the sinking spirits of the gallant soldier; even the high-spiced wine of old Margaret barely communi¬ cated its glowing warmth to the benumb¬ ed feelings of Mackenzie, until glass after glass at length succeeded in producing a temporary elevation. Mackenzie attempted to laugh, and to call forth the laughter of his youthful companions; but their pensive features, and eyes so often turned towards the chiming clock, bespoke their inability to í/raiUy his considerate kmdness. Edward quitted
quitted his seat and placed himself on the knee of his adopted father ; he spoke of bis mother and of Janet, and sent each of them a little drawing, as a token of his affection, while Mackenzie carefully con¬ signed to his pocket-book all that Marga¬ ret had hoarded of her darling's perform¬ ance. Mackenzie looked at his watch, and then at Edward: it was a silver one^ of excellent workmanship, with a gold chain and seals ; one of them bore the initials of his own name, and the other a pretty de¬ vice of Cupid and a butterfly, given to him by his wife, who had it as a present from her young lady, st Edward," said Mackenzie, kissing bim affectionately, " I will give you this w r ateîv which will serve two purposes ; it w ill be useful to you when you grow older, and it will bring to your remembrance, every time that you look on it, a father who loves you with the warmest affection. I knovv that, for my sake, you will not part with it. Take equal care of this seal, be¬ cause
Cciuse it is one on whicli your mother sets a high value, as it was given to her by a lady to whom she was once strongly at¬ tached," lS That could be no other than Miss Fitz-Arthur," cried Margaret Grey. " She is one of the most beautiful creatures I ever beheld, but she bad a devil's heart and an angel's form. Well, I cannot help saying it, now that Alice is not by to hear me, that she certainly must have used some charm to make my poor girl so fond of her, for she was the only one in the house who liked her ; but Alice could not see a fault she had (and God know r s she had plenty), but she would have gone through fire or water to have served her, so dearly did she love her. My lady, God rest her soul í had always enough to do with her, she was so violent and untame¬ able, so headstrong and so self-willed ; but sbe has got a husband, Heaven help him, poor man! for 1 am sure I pity iiim, and that's
thaťs the real truth, and nothing but xiw truth." " She was indeed most beautiful," said Mackenzie; Cv î little thought, as I ¿raised with respectful admiration on her uncom¬ mon loveliness, that she v/as the unami¬ able bťiníľ vou have represented her to be, my dear mother. However, .she lias now been married seven years to the mar¬ quis of Anendale, and has several chil¬ dren."' Margaret sbook her head ; igni fi can tly. — u Better for them to have died iu their infancy than to grow up to resemble her," said the old woman carne Rİy; "she has no beart, no natural affection, no feeling for anyhodv bnt herself. It is well that rny poor Alice does not hear me, or she vvould be fine and vexed, for I v eril v be¬ lieve lhat she loves her just as dearly as ever.'" iC That I cvn answer for," replied Mac¬ kenzie: a out time wears apace, and this friendly
friendly monitor reminds me, that affec¬ tion and inclination must yit Id to neces¬ sity and to duty." He then gave bis watch to Edward, who, kissing it with enthusi¬ asm, promised to retain it ior ever, unless indeed he was compelled to part with it in order to save the life ofa fellow-ereat л re. " ín that ease, my son/' said Macken¬ zie, " you have my free consent to do vvith it what you please; but preserve this seal, vvhicii is so sacred to your mother/' He rose to depirt; Edward still hung on his neck, still begged him to stay a minute longer, while Margaret helped him to another goblet of hot elder wine. This was a timely relief to the fluctuating snirits ofthe soldier; never but once, and Jl '' that was upon a similar occasion, had he bad his fortitude so severely taxed ; but now his foreboding heart seemed to re¬ mind him of the chances and the dangers of war, of the distance which wonld so soon divide bim from the child of his af¬ fection, and of the possibility that tbe pre¬ sent
sent fond embrace migiit be the last he should ever receive from his beloved Ed¬ ward; while the boy, conscious ofthe in¬ ternal struggles which he endured, and unwilling to add to them by giving way to his agitated feelings, evinced a strength of mind and power of self-command which surprised them alk At length, after repeated caresses and tender admonitions, Mackenzie tore him¬ self from the clinging arms of the heroic boy, and rushed out of the cottage, as if fearing to trust himself with one more look, one more sound of the sweet voice he adored. The hospitable door soon closed on the flying warrior, and he who was brave enough to face with undaunted courage every danger in the field, now retreated with all possible speed from the magic arms of an orphan boy, who, had he possessed the power to call him back, would too surely have lulled for a time every sense of duty in the yielding soul of the generous and affectionate Mackenzie. But
But Edward bad no power to lure back to his embraces his fly mg father; he saw him dart from the cottage, he watched his quick-receding footsteps as they slid over the crarkbng ^ce, until his dear-loved form WPS no longer visible from the cottage. The door closed, and Edward, no longer master of his feelings, flung himself upon thf» floor and burst into an agony of tears, which his grandmother did not think pro¬ per to restrain, well knowing tbe effort he must have made to suppress tbem in the presence of his father.
CHAPTER VIII. After the departure of Mackenzie for America, tbe spirits of Edward were evi¬ dently less gay than they were before Ids farewell-interview with his adopted father; yet oibd thing had power to rouse them to their
their accustomed hilarity—the sound of the postboy's horn, when letters were ex¬ pected by Margaret from Columbia. It was then that the face of Edward bright¬ ened into a smile of rapturous delight, as he flew to meet halfway the herald ofhis happiness; it was then, while listening to the tender hopes of Mackenzie, that the eyes and features of bis darling boy melted with filial love ; and while tears of fond affection streamed down his cheeks, while his heart swelled with contending emo¬ tions, he vvould cling to the kind bosom of his aged grandmother, and pray to Heaven to enable him to grow np to be all that Mackenzie, in the plenitude ofhis ten d em с bs, foretold he would be. Alice also wouid frequently add a post¬ script to her husband's letter for Edward. The kindness of her expressions had their due eflect on his grateful heart, and all her former neglect and indifference were for¬ gotten, or, if remembered, his generous and active mind quickly framed some excuse for
for the petulance and harshness of her con¬ duct; and he soon learnt to write well enough to transmit to her, and to his be¬ loved father Mackenzie, the warm and du¬ tiful sentiments of their child. Old Margaret from day to day delayed sending this young í omfort of her soul to tbe school which she had selected for him; she found her health and strength gradu¬ ally become more and more enfeebled, and she wanted courage to part with the solace of her declining years, at a time when his presence seenied necessary to her very be¬ ing. SiiKC the deatii ofher husbaud, Mar¬ garet had been in the habit of always ap¬ plying to om· gentleman in the village for his opinion лип advice, v\ henever that ad¬ vice was requisite to regulate her actions, and she now resolved to inquire of Mr. Lindsay what he would do, were he in her situation. Mr. Lindsay was a gentleman univer¬ sally beloved by those who, like Margaret Grey, moved in the Immble walks of lire. He
He was the last descendant of an ancient family, more celebrated for the nobleness of its ancestors than for its wealth, w hich last Mr. Lindsay had contrived to dissi¬ pate entirely long before he arrived at the age of six-and-twenty. Notwithstanding this fatal extravagance, which reduced him to comparative beggary, he succeeded in retaining the affections of a lady vvbo had long been attachent to him, and by marry¬ ing her, he once more became possessed of a clear estate of four hundred a-year, which, however, would go from him at her death. This circumstance ought to have made JMr. Lindsay more careful and economical, especially as he had an increasing family to provide fbr; bat such is the force of habit, that he of u n found it extremely difficult to answer the demands of his nu¬ merous creditors. His* wife, doting on him to an excess, was blind to every failing that he possessed ; for his sake, she was content¬ ed to live solely in the country, on the estate bequeathed to lier by her maternal uncle,
uncle, and, as far as lay in her power, en¬ deavoured to manage with prudence the aifairs of his family, but Mrs, Lindsay, like her husband, had been educated in the school of prosperity, and, like him, was wholly ignorant of those means which would have enabled her to lay up some¬ thing out of her yearly income for the fu¬ ture wants of her children. Mr. Lindsays independent of his beset¬ ting sin, was an affectionate husband, a tender father, a sincere and steady friend, and a good and indulgent master. His wife believed that the world did not eon- tain his equal, his children felt that a kinder father could not exist, his friends knew him to be a man capable of sacri¬ fichi sf bis own interests for their welfare, and his servants only prayed that they might be allowed to end their days under his hospitable roof; while the village in Vvhich he had chiefly resided since liis mar¬ riage, experienced, in a hundred different vol. ι. α ways,
ways, the natural benevolence and humani¬ ty of bis heart towards its humble inmates. Out of six children, Mrs. Lindsay was ouly fortunate enougii to rear one, on whom she lavished the most unbounded tenderness, and to whose faults she was eoually blind as ehe was to those of her father. Her health, which was always delicate, suffered much from her constant devotion to tbe studies of her daughter, whom she resolved to educate herself, not being able to part with her out of her eight, and wishing to save the expence of havi пя a governess for her at home. This constant application to the duties of her family considerably impaired the constitu¬ tion of Mrs. Lindsay, and at length her walks were principally confined to the boundaries of her own grounds, which were extensive and weil laid out, and which joined to those of a fine old family- scat, whose possessor, an old bachelor, had iong suffered it to go to decay, out of spite
spite to him wdio would inherit it after his decease. Time and neglect liad not impoverished the natural beauties of Man¬ ningham Hall, and when Mrs. Lindsay felt inclined to extend her walks beyond her own garden, she generally strolled in¬ to those belonging to tbe Hall. Mr. Lindsay, on the contrary, felt little relish for the romantic scenery of his neigh¬ bour's grounds ; he loved to visit the lively haunts of tbe village-children, and to in¬ quire into their welfare and the various pursuits of their parents, some of vvhom he regularly called on as often as be passed by their oor; and as be listened with smiling complacency to their different sto¬ ries, bis smile, and the interest he shew-ed for their happiness, never failed to cheer tbe drooping spirits of sickness, or warm tbe heart of age or of misfortune. Not¬ withstanding his habitual extravagance, Mr. Lindsay bad always something to be¬ stow on honest indigence, and his advice was uniformly accompanied by substantial g Sí mavi ь
marks of his favour, wherever his assist¬ ance was found necessaiy. Margaret Grey was his greatest favour¬ ite, and he never failed to make her cot¬ tage his chief resting-place. Independent of his regard for the worthy old woman, Mr. Lindsay had taken a fancy to Ed¬ ward, which was strengthened by ever}' succeeding interview, and he longed to introduce him to his wife and daughter, but something or other had always frus¬ trated his intentions, and Kdward still re¬ mained unknown to Mrs. Lindsay, except by name ; she was, however, well acquaint¬ ed with him from the description given by her husband, and thought him a wonder* ful boy of ids years ; but her ill health pre¬ vented her from going as far as Margaret's cottage, and her own daugliter so com¬ pletely filled up both her time and her mind, that she had scarcely expressed even ii wish to behold the grandson of Margaret flrey. Mr. Lindsay called one morning, as usual,
usual, at Margaret's cottage ; he found her unwell and low-spirited. Edward wa? reading the Bible to her, while Patty Hmith was employed at her needle; the rest ofher scholars had just left her before Mr. Lindsay's entrance. By the desire of Margaret, Edward and Patt}' retired into another chamber, while she conversed with her kind friend on the subject which lay next her heart, and which actually contri¬ buted to affect both her health and spirits. The welfare of Edward required that she should part with him for a time, but she found herself unable to support the neces¬ sary separations and therefore applied to Mr. Lindsay for his adv iee respecting her co t, telling him all the while, thai she was sure she could not live without her darling boy. Mr. Lindsay with great kindness en¬ deavoured to reason her out of this belief, reminding her of the absolute cruelty which it vvould be to debar him from the advantages of receiving a good éducation, с Л end
and of cultivating those talents which be possessed in a superior degree to other boys of his age.—** Indeed, my worthy friend," said he, " you must try to fortify your mind agamst tbis necessary evil; Edward is now wasting that tirae whicb ought to be employed in acquiring useful knowledge, and since his rather wishes him to be sent to a good school, I know of none better than tiiat of Mr. Curwen, wluch is only four miles from our village; there he will receive a liberal education, be treated kindly, and, if you wish it, he can come home every Saturday evening, and stay till Monday morning. I have some knowledge of Mr. Curwen, and, if you like, 1 will speak to him on the sub¬ ject. Edward will be a credit to his se¬ minary." Poor old JMargaret thanked Mr. Lind¬ say for his offer, and acknowledged that it was time that Edward should be taught all that he was capable of learning.— " But," added she, with a sigh, " I feel assured
assured tbat my life will be shortened by our separation ; he is all and every thing to me; and when I no longer hear his voice, no ledger see his darling face, my spirits will droop under the weight of my cares and my increasing infirmities." " Not if I can help it," replied Mr, Lindsay, smiling benevolently on the sor¬ rowful old woman. " You must give up your school, the fatigues of which are too much for you ; Patty Smith will not leave you, for I am sensible that her father will be extremely glad to let you have her al¬ together; I will call on you every day, and on a Saturday evening your darling will return to you, full of Ins week's pur¬ suits, and full oí gratitude to you for the sacrifice you will have made of vour own comforts for his future advantage." JMargaret wiped away her tears, then pressing the hand of JMr. Lindsay respect¬ fully to her lips, she said—" Pardon, my dear sir, a foolish old woman, for the sel¬ fishness of her feelings. I w ill try to con¬ ci 4 quer
quer my unwillingness to part witb my heart's idol, try to live without him ; but if you knew how much he loves me, how tenderly he watches all my movements, hov/ anxiously be studies to gratify all my wishes, and to relieve me from all my cares and fatigues, you would then know, my dear sir, how great a sacrifice it will be for an old woman like me to give up tbe staff of her declining years. But God's will be done—I must submit. Ed¬ ward is a boy far superior to any I have ever seen; he will make a bright man. though I shall not live to see him. Well, sir, if you wid speak to Mr. Curwen, I will do my best to acquire fortitude, to part with him, since it is for his good. Perhaps the change of scene and plenty of young companions, more worthy of him than ine village youths, may help to bring back his vivacity, for he is sadly altered since his father went to America —he is not half so lively as he was before my son came to take leave of bim." íŕ He
α He is a charming boy," replied Mr. Lindsay, " and is undoubtedly far above his companions. But he never appears to associate with any of the village children,. except Patty Smith. I think, Mrs. Grey, that you keep him too much at home: youth is the season of enjoyment, and its amusements and recreations are absolutely necessary for bis health and spirits." " He does as he pleases," replied old Margaret; " I love him too dearly to force jiis inclinations. Sometimes I have wished liim to leave his drawings and to go and play on the green, but he speaks and thinks so much above the other chil¬ dren, that I know he can find but little pleasure in tbeir company. The other day be drew a little landscape from me¬ mory, and has coloured it quite like the life." J JMargaret now opened her closet, and took from out of a large book the above- mentioned performance of Edward. It was a view in part of Manningham grounds, g i> ynd
una sa like, that Mr. Lindsay instantly '-eeogmzed the scene.—" Upon my word," raid he, " this boy's talent must be culti¬ vated. The perspective is uncommonly well executed, and the foliage of the trees is so well done, that I should doubt its be¬ ing his performance did I not know you to be incapable of uttering a falsehood." " It is all bis own, I do assure yqu, sir," cried Margaret, " every bit of it. Patty and I walked with bim last Sunday to the Hall, to drink tea with Mrs. Norton the housekeeper, and the next day Edward shewed me this drawing, just before he was going to bed. There is tbe old sum¬ mer-house and the trees which hang over it, and there is tbe water at a distance, and the pleasure-boat and all, as natural ¿ls the life." *' With your permission/' said Mr. Lind¬ say, " I will take with me tbis specimen of Edward's natural genius, and shew it to Mr. Curwen ; it will give him a gocd idea of the boy's talent, and pave the way to
to his favour, fbr he is a great encourager of merit. Edward must certainly learn drawing ; a few years will shew, or I am much mistaken, that he is capable of sup¬ porting himself by his own abilities/' " God grant it !" replied Margaret fer¬ vently, " though I shall, not live to see it. My dear son entreated that I would have liim taught to draw, and I am. to receive from his agent in London what will pay the ехчрепсез of his schooling. God grant that he may be able to support himself handsomely! for he was never made for hard work, or any common employment " Mr. Lindsay thought with old Marga¬ ret, that Edward was indeed not made fbr any common employment; he therefore became more and more* anxious to have bim placed under the tuition of Mr. Cur¬ wen, whom be knew to be both the scho¬ lar and the gentleman, and he consequent¬ ly lost no time in calling at his house, and in shewing bim the extraordinary proofs G 6 of
of what be conceived to be the dawnings ofa first-rate genius. Mr. Curwen w T as a man of sense and of superior discernment; he saw in a mo¬ ment tlie powers of Edward's mind, as well from circumstances related to him by Mr. Lindsay, as by the specimen he hrought with him of his talent for draw¬ ing ; he inquired minutely into every par¬ ticular respecting the boy and his con¬ nexions, not from any pecuniary fears* but from a growing interest which he felt in his favour.—" Such a boy must not be lost for want of proper care," said this amiable man ; " and though the bumble rank of life in vvhich his grandmother moves may cause many objections to be raised against my introducing hini into my school, which is principally composed of the sons O' 1 gentlemen, yet I will run the risk, and, npon your recommendation, will consent to take the boy under my protection. He shall have aU the advan¬ tages
tages of the different masters who ottend my pupils, and I believe it is unnecessary for ine to say that he shall experience the same treatment as the rest." Mr. Lindsay assured him that Edward would not disgrace his patronage, or put to blush his more noble associates, " unless indeed," said he, " it is for thinking and behaving more like what they ought to be, than like what they are. Edward is by nature the gentleman ; but you must come and see him, my dear sir, and then you can judge for yourself." Mr. Curwen kindly promised to attend bim that morning, if he would amuse himself in his library until after the hours of tuition, to wdiich the considerate friend of Edward readily consented, not a little gratified at the willingness which Mr. Curwen expressed to promote the interest and welfare of lud ward. That gentleman was immediately struck by the appearance and manners of old ¡Mar¬ garet's grandson ; the instant he beheld him.
him, he felt assured that such a boy vvould not indeed disgrace his tutors, or sliame the society of his pupils. He could but look at Edward and at the worthy JMar¬ garet, wiiile he found it difiicult to re¬ member that such a child, so eminently gifted by nature with every personal at¬ traction, every mental qualification, was no more than the offspring of old Marga¬ ret's daughter. In tbe gentlest voice he questioned Edward on various subjects connected with himself and his favourite pursuits, to all of whicb the boy replied witli sense and intelligence blended with so becoming a modesty, that Mr. Curwen was perfectly delighted, and absolutely ex¬ pressed an earnest desire to* have him im¬ mediately under his care. This, liowever, required some little consideration on the part of Alargare t Grey, who could not at that moment ñ^ the day wdiich was to separate her soul from ber body ; and JMr. Curwen, in kind compassion to her agi¬ tated feelings, forbore to press the subject until
until her mind had acquired fresh forti¬ tude. Promising to call again in the course of a few days, he took a friendly leave of the poor old woman and her charming grandson, and with Mr. Lind¬ say left the cottage, with just sucli sei ti¬ ments as that worthy man had foretold would be excited by the sight of Edward Mackenzie.
CHAPTER IX.
A letter from Mackenzie at last deter¬ mined the doting Margaret to sacrifice her own peace and happiness to the welfare of his adopted son ; but the consent of that r on was necessary to be obtained before she could send him to Mr. Curwen's semi¬ nary, and she was obliged again to have recourse to tho powerful reasonings of JMr. I /indsav to convince the boy tbat it was absolutely
absolutely necessary he should leave, for a time, his affectionate grandmother. Mr. Lindsay found it necessary to exert all the eloquence of whieh he was master, to combat against the tender fears of Ed¬ ward, fears whieh were increased by the bad state of Margaret's health and her known repugnance to lose him. Young as he was, he felt the full force of the obli¬ gations which he owed her, and when Mr. Lint", ay endeavoured to convince him of the benefits which he would himself de¬ rive from being plaeed under the care of Mr. Cur won, the boy acknowledged that be was sensible of them, as vvell as of the kindness whieh Mr. Lindsay displayed to¬ wards him.-—" I should like tô go to Mr. Curwen's school, sir" said Edward—" like to go very much, if I could take my grand¬ mother with me ; but that is impossible ; and as I know that she will be verv miser- able witbout me, I cannot, will not leave her. She took me when I wns only four yeais old, and though I must have caused her
her a great deal of trouble, and often vex¬ ed her by my perversity, yet she has never given me an angry look or an angry word. She loved me perhaps more dearly, because my mother could so easily part vvith me; she has been both father and mother to me, and bow, sir, can I leave her now, now that sbe wants my assistance more and more every day? how can I leave her, just tbat I may benefit myself?" Mr. Lind say affectionately embraced the grateful boy.—" Such sentiments do ho¬ nour to your heart, my dear Edward," said he. " Happy the father who pos¬ sesses such a son as you are!—But, my dear boy, highly as I commend the gra¬ titude whicb prompts you to remain with your aged parent, yet I must remind you, that, for her sake as well as for your own, you ougiit to cultivate all the talents you possess, in order that you may contribute to, her support wdien she is past the power of contributing to it herself. By going to Mr. Curwen's now, you will be enabled to
to perfect yourself İn an art which will more than provide for the wants of your kind grandmother. Think how delightful will be your feelings, if, in a few years, you can not only support her and your¬ self, but realize all the fond hopes of your father-in-law, vvho seems to love you equal¬ ly аз much as your grandmother, and who, in his last letter, expresses his anxiety to hear that you have already begun your studies. His hopes, Edward, must not be disappointed." Edward burst into tears.—" I love my father Blacken zie," said he, " dearer than rny existence; and, next to him, my poor old grandmothej·. Oh, sir, you are all goodness, all kindness yourself—you will advise me for the best. I must not dis¬ appoint the hopes of my beloved father, yet ï must not desert my grandmother, now that í be crows more and more infirm. IIow shall I act ? what shall í do to per¬ form my duty to them both?^—I will go to-morrow to Mr. Curwen, if he will let me
me come back every evening to my grand¬ mother/' Mr. Lindsay replied 5 that he knew that such a regulation would be contrary to the rules of his school, but that he would apply to him on the subject. Tbis, bow- ever, was not requisite ; for Margaret de- dared that she should be miserable if he bad to walk four miles every evening in tbe winter, and tbat sbe had made up her mind to bear with his loss, if she could but see him regularly from Saturday to Monday. This Mr. Lindsay promised faith¬ fully she should; and, after much persua¬ sion and much entreaty, Edward at length agreed to become the weekly pupil of Mr. Curwen. Mr, Lindsay conceived the conduct of Edward to be so highly praiseworthy, that he could not help repeating to his wife all that the boy had said to hini ; and as he warmly expatiated on the gratitude and aflection of Edward towards his aged pa¬ rent,, he felt not a little surprised at the silence
silence of Mrs. Lindsay, who sighed fre¬ quency during his narration, and whose eyes glistened with tears as she encounter¬ ed those of her husband, " Are you unwell, my dear?" inquired Mr. Lindsay, as he tenderly felt her hur¬ ried pulse. " Not more than usual," said Mrs. Lind¬ say ; " but I confess that your description of young Edward's devotion to his grand¬ mother has affected me strangely. He must be a glorious boy, and will be a trea¬ sure to his family. Ah, Lindsay, would to Heaven tliat our darling Clara were like hhn !—Bnt I fear------" " Fear nothing, my love, but hope that every thing is for tbe best. Clara has been educated in the lap of indulgence—she has never been disappointed in any of her wishes—she is a stranger to tbe power of parental authority ; she is young and high- minded, and is now arrived at an age wlien the buoyant spirits of youth, like some in¬ toxicating draught, mislead the senses and betray
betray the heart. Clai a is a spoiled child ; but she may, nevertheless, make an ami¬ able woman." Agnin Mrs. Lindsay sighed, for now, when too late, she began to perceive that her system of over-indulgence bad not only injured the temper, but vitiated the heart ofher daughter, and, by making her selfish and self-willed, bad closed it to all the softer and tenderer feelings. She re¬ peated her desire to see Edward, and Mr. Lindsay promised to introduce hini tbat evening to bus wife and daughter. Clara Lindsay was, in every sense of the word, a spoiled child. She had been so uniformly accustomed to have implicit obedience paid to lier requests, that self was her sole idol, and her doting parents were only regarded by her in proportion as they administered to her pleasures. She was now in her thirteenth year, beautifully formed, tolerably accomplished, and with >a set of features pleasingly regular; but they wanted the ineffable charm of mind and
and heart to render them fascinating, and an observer of no very great discernment could easily discover that she was bad- tempered, selfish, and proud, Clara felt a great curiosity to behold Edward, but this curiosity was not raised by the description of bis virtues, but of his personal attractions ; she longed to see him, because her father pronounced him to be the handsomest and best-behaved boy he had ever met vvith ; and when at length this desire w T as gratified, and Ed¬ ward was brought to spend the evening with them, slie was in raptures with his beauty, as well as charmed by the extreme politeness of his manners, and his evident wish to court her favour. Even in this the gratitude of Edwards nature was dis¬ played ; he loved and respected Mr. Lind- sav, and he therefore endeavoured to ren- a/ J der himself pleasing to all his family, in which he succeeded beyond bis expecta¬ tions. Mrs. Lindsay felt little less interest than her
ber husband for Edw r ard; she was equally surprised at the inherent gentility of his movements, the intelligence of his re¬ marks, the elegance of his form, and the superiority which marked his whole con¬ duct beyond that of the village children. —Clara, unaccustomed to conceal her thoughts, even when they were most wild and extravagant, now expressed her re¬ grets that she had not known him before. What a delightful companion he wrould be for her ' what a charming pupil ! She would teach him all that she knew. Whv could he not come and live with them, in¬ stead of going to school ? Her father was capable of perfecting him in several lan¬ guages; she could draw and paint a little herself, and she would teach him, as far as her knowledge extended, both in draw¬ ing and music. " But, my sweet girl," cried her father, fondly kissing her cheek, " highly as I applaud this proof of your goodness cf iieart towards my young protege, I great¬ ly
ly fear that, notwithstanding all our en¬ deavours to the contrary, he would not benefit much by our instructions ; we bhould grow so fond of him, that we should forget the necessary hours of stu¬ dy ; we should spoil liim, Clara, as wo have done yourself; and you, my love, would assist as much as any of us to make Edward careless and idle." Clara was bent upon having Edward to live with her. and to become her compa¬ nion, and it required more powerful rea¬ soning than that made use of by her fond parents, to convince her that, in this in¬ stance, lier desire could not be gratified. She bui '»t into a passion of tears and fling- hm; herself on the sofa, sobbed aloud, from mingled vexation and anger. The doting mother vainly tried to pacify her child; she made use of every endearing argu¬ ment to sooth her into a state of reason, but the spoiled girl continued her vehe¬ ment lamentations, until Edward, terri¬ fied at so new a sight, yet grateful for her av owed
avowed kindness, stole gently up to tbe side of the couch, and in the sweetest ac¬ cents besought her to give over weeping. —" Dear, dear Miss Lindsay," said Ed¬ ward, " I would not have come, had I thought that the sight of me would make you so unhappy. I would do anything in my power to oblige you, indeed I would, for I should be too happy to live with you and your dear good papa, if it were not for my poor old grandmother." Clara hastily raised her head from the sofa—" How, Edward ! and is it possible you should prefer living with an old ailing woman like your grandmother, wdio must often be cross and disagreeable to you, in¬ stead of being with us, who would study to make you happy? You should dress as well as myself, go witu me everywhere, have money at command, and do just as you please. Would it not be more com¬ fortable to live in this nice house, and have servants to wait on you, than to live vol, ι. η in
in your grandmother's cottage, and be obliged to do for yourself ? M Edwprd warmly expressed bis thanks for her kind intentions, but modestly said, that never, while he had life, would he desert his poor old grandmother. She had been to him the tenderest of friends when he was a mei e child, and if he was capable of leaving her in her old age, for any other purpose than that of studying a science whieh would enable him to sup¬ port her when she was too old to gain her own living, he should never expect God to bless him in this world or in the next. It was for her s' ke more than his own that he had consented to go to school, but tint he should take care to be with her early every Satın d.iy evening, " Then am I never to see you again?" cried Clara, weeping. " Yes, dear Miss Lindsay," replied Ed¬ ward, kissing her hand respectfully, " you ».ludi sec me every Sunday; my poor m andmother
grandmother will spare me for half an hour, that I may pay my respects to you and your dear parents, who have behavod so kindly to me/' Clara grew a little more reconciled to the first disappointment of her wishes ; she wiped avvay her tears, and smiling graci¬ ously on her new favourite, led him into another apartment, which was hung round with beautiful pictures. Edward was trans¬ ported ; he became wild with joy, as he ran from frame to frame, greedily devouring with his eyes the specimens of the art w hich they contained. Sueh a sight was perfectly new to him; never before had he beheld an) thing half so beautiful, and he was at a loss which most to admire—tbe landscapes, the battle-pieces, or the resem¬ blances of some of Mrs. Lindsay's family, vvho seemed starting from tlie canvas. Clara allowed him time to examine mi¬ nutely each separate performance, and promised that, when he came to see her, he should try and copy from any of the π 2 pictures
pictures wdiich he liked best. She next ailovved him to look over the contents of her portfolio, which exhibited several pleasing sketches of landscape-scenery well known to Edward, as being views from the finely-disposed grounds of Manning¬ ham Hall. She presented him with those which appeared most to have charmed his fancy, and also with a box of colours and pencils, and every requisite for drawing. This was indeed a valuable gift to our young artist, wbo was lavish of his thanks for so precious a donation. Clara smiled, and bade him not fail to call on her on Sunday. If Edward w r as delighted by tlie sight of Mr. Lindsay's collection of pictures, his senses were spell-bound when Clara, touch¬ ing the chords of her harp, accompanied it with her voice; tears of painful rapture gushed from his eyes, and a new and ex¬ quisite sensation pervaded his whole frame. He had occasionally heard the wandering musicians who strolled through the vil¬ lage,
lage, and who sometimes stopped at old Margaret's door, by her desire, to play α tune to her darling, whose ñne ear and retentive memory enabled bim to retain all that be heard; but never until now had young Edward listened to the deli¬ cate touch of a female hand directed in its movements by taste and skill, and he ac- tually wept from the powerful effect which the harp and the voice of Clara had on his nerves. Though not yet ten years old, Edw T ard felt ashamed at his own weakness; the blush of anger tinged his cheeks, and he hastily concealed the tears which nature had called forth. Clara was not a little gratified at the evident power whicb she possessed over her youthful visitor; she sung and played nearly the vv hole stock of her knowledge, promising to afford him the same entertainment every time that he came to see lier; in short, the mind of Edward ivas bewildered with en¬ joyments, and when he returned to his и 3 expectant
expectant grandmother, he was at a loss which of his pleasures he should first describe, till, recollecting the flattering kindness which he bad received from Mrs. Lindsay and Clara, he first paid to them the just acknowledgment of bis gratitude, and then described to the attentiv e Patty and his grandmother the whole of his evening's amusements. As the countenance of the boy became more and more animated from the joyous state of his feelings, the heart of his ao;ed piren t kindled with fresh warmth and new-born hope. In the family of Mr. Lindsay she already beheld a safe asylum for her darling, should it please Heaven to bereave him of her protecting love during the absence of his father, and as this hope gained strength in her mind, she gradually became more reconciled to tlieir necessary separation. Patty Smith had sOt her father's leave to stay with her, and lid ward would return to them on the Saturday evening; he would be acquirin. tha.
that knowledge which was to provide for his future years; he would be kindly treated, and perhaps among his compani¬ ons would make friends, who would a* o iat his advancement in life. Thus did the worthy Margaret console herself for the temporary loss of her souľs dearest trea¬ sure, while Patty, the kind-hearted imd affectionate Patty, wept in silence the ab¬ sence of her young companion ; yet, true to the promise whieh she had given hím, she continued to redouble her assiduities to please and entertain old Margaret, and by every kind endeavour to make her less sensible of die loss she had sustained.
CHAPTER X.
A new scene was now open to Edward, and not an unpleasing one. Mr. Curwen behaved to him with peculiar kindness, H ê and
and this marked distinction, while it pro¬ duced the envy of some, only gained bim the friendship of others. The senior pu¬ pils were proud to extend their patronage to the eleve of Mr. Curwen, whose sweet¬ ness of disposition and readiness to oblige made them inclined to overlook the dis¬ parity of his birth. Mr. Curwen had in¬ troduced Edward as the son of ensign Mackenzie, but it w r as quickly buzzed about that his grandmother was living in the village, and that she resided in one of the cottages belonging to master Walpole's father. This for a time produced an un¬ easy sensation in the school, some of the boys pretending to feel themselves dis¬ graced by tbe introduction of one so much their inferior, and they in consequence resolved to unite together to have him expelled. Master Walpole was at the head of the mutineers : his party at first was powerful, and threatened to carry the day. A letter was to be written to Mr. Curwen, and signed,
signed, as is usual on such occasions, as a round-robin. This, if not attended to, w r as to be followed up by a circular letter to tbeir parents, desiring that they might be recalled home, as Mr. Curwen had chosen to give them for a companion tbe grand¬ son of the village schoolmistress. Walpole was a boy of family and fortune ; he had therefore great influence in the school, which he now exerted to the utmost, in order to obtain the expulsion of Edw r ard, who, unconscious of the cabal thus formed against him, closely pursued his studies, behaving alike to all with obliging sweet¬ ness, unmixed with one particle of fawn¬ ing servility. The letter was delivered to Mr. Curwen by one of the junior pupils, just as tbe school had broken up. It was Saturday, and Edward, light of heart and free from all suspicion of tlie intended mischief pre* pared to set out for the abode of his grand¬ mother. His friends saw hún depart, with¬ out informing him of what was passing in h 5 the
the school, thev being unwilling to damp the joy he now felt at being free to visit his dear-loved grandmother. Their spirits were depressed on seeing him leave them, for they feared tliat he would not be per¬ mitted to return to them ; they however determined to espouse liis cause to the last, whatever it might cost them. One boy in particular, a youth about his ovvn age, and youngest son to the gen¬ tleman who was next heir to the Man¬ ningham estate, followed Edward down to the garden-gate, and shaking him by the hand, said—" Good bye, Mackenzie— God bless you, my fine fellow! If you should not come back, I will find out where vou live, and come and see vou/' " I shall be with you early on Monday morning," replied Edward, as he returned the friendly pressure of Frederic; then darting out of the garden, be hurried forward, scarce allowing himself time to breathe, so great was his anxiety to reach the dwelling of his grandmother. Mr,
Mr. Curwen was not surprised at what had happened; it was no more than he had anticipated, and he resolved first to make use of lenient measures to bring back his pupils to a sense of their duty. He looked again at the crowded signa¬ tures, and felt pleased to find that the names of Manningham, and of several others who were secretly in liis favour, were not among those of Walpole's fac¬ tion. He returned to the school-room, and summoning the boys to attend him, de¬ termined to appeal to all their nobler pas¬ sions, to reason and to remonstrate, rather than to have recourse to harsh or violent measures. Mr. Curwen was universally beloved by his pupils, who were accustomed to obey him with cheerful alacrity ; they now ap¬ proached him with heightened colours and downcast eyes, conscious that tbey had made a request which would not meet with his usual approbation. Instead ofthe reproachful severity which л б their
their fears had led them to expect, they were surprised to hear themselves address¬ ed in the gentle voice of parental admoni¬ tion; and at length emboldened by the unexpected lenity of Mr. Curwen, they ventured to lift their eyes to his counte¬ nance, which betrayed more of sorrow for their weakness than anger for its effects. Mr. Curwen acknowledged the inferió* rity of Edward's birth, which he said was counterbalanced by the superiority of his intellectual endowments—" a superiority," added he, with a sigh, " which I had vain¬ ly imagined all my pupils to possess. I have been fatally deceived ; I allowed my¬ self to reckon upon that true nobility of soul whicb, casting aside the paltry consi¬ derations of birth and fortune, is ever ready to stand forth the generous advo* cate of merit and uncultivated genius, even were the object of it the son of a peasant. Edward Mackenzie, in point of mind, of manners, of abilities, is inferior to no boy in my school ; his talents only require
require cultivation, to make him the su¬ perior of many who now proudly regard him with contempt, because some of bis connexions are less indebted to fortune than their own. Had he been vulgar in his deportment, rude in his speech, quar¬ relsome or unprincipled, I should never have introduced him into your society; and if there is one among you who can bring forward any charge against him, ex¬ cept the humbleness of his ancestry, I am willing to wave all personal considerations in his favour, and yield to your request." A dead silence now prevailed among the boys; even Walpole, who was most !>oisteiOus and forward in the affair, had not one accusation to make against the absent grandson of old Margaret. Mr. Curwen, finding that no one was bold enough to speak, continued—-" I cannot express to you," said he, looking round him as he spoke, f * how severely I ¿im pained by the contents cf this letter, wliich proves hovv lightly you value my affection,
affection, how slightly vou have attended to my lessons. Yet I feel some little plea¬ sure in viewing the mode wdiich has been adopted of signing it, since it is a con¬ vincing proof that he whom I suspect of being the principal in this ungenerous business, is at least ashamed of placing his name at the head of a list wmieh was in¬ tended to expel an innocent and amiable boy from tbeir society, whom, had they felt like me, they would proudly have stepped forw r ard to encourage and support in his laudable endeavours of acquiring that knowledge which is to procure him bis future maintenance. Gentlemen, I have taken this deserving boy under my pro¬ tection, yet he is not indebted to my libe¬ rality for his education, which will be paid for as regularly as your own. I wish him to derive every advantage which my se¬ minary may possess ; I anticipate the plea¬ sure I shall feel in witnessing the rapid development of a talent which bids fair to place bini among our first-rate artists, , and
änd whieh will enable him to move in that sphere of life which his person and bis manners seem formed to adorn. When that day arrives, what will be your feelings of self-reproach, of self-condemnation, as you look back upon the transactions of this day—as you remember with bitterness of heart the ungenerous, illiberal, and nar¬ row-minded sentiments which could lead you to dictate a request like this ?" Mr. Curwen paused, and looking atten¬ tively in the changeful features of his pu¬ pils, felt convinced that pride alone with¬ held them from acknowledging their error« Pitying therefore their embarrassment, he tore in half the letter whicb he held in his hand, and consigning it to the flames, said in an encouraging voice—>* This, at least. my children, shall not appear against you. Should you relent from your present pur¬ pose, I promise you that not a reproach shall pass my lips ; neither sball tbe object of your temporary dislike ever be me.de acquainted with v» hat has passed ; tbe first boy
boy that dares to hint to him a word upoi? the subject shall instantly be dismissed the school. I shall now retire to my study r in an hour's time I shall expect to be made acquainted witb your final determination/* Mr. Curwen now left his pupils to their own secret meditations, hoping that what he had said would have its due weight with them, and that they would be con¬ vinced of the ungenerous motives which had helped to mislead their judgments and silence their better feelings. Nor were hi& hopes vain ones : half ar hour had scarcely elapsed before they were all unanimous in wishing to make amends for their fault; and Walpole* who bad been the most re¬ fractory, was now deputed to be the bearer cf the expression of their submissiveness and proper contrition to Mr. Curwen, whose gentleness of behaviour and w r ell- timed appeal to their nobler feelings, bad produced in the minds of all his pupils the effect which he had desired, /Mr. Curwen, vvho was anxiously pacing liis
bis study, no sooner heard the sound of approaching footsteps, than, eagerly open¬ ing his door, he held out his hand to Wal¬ pole, who immediately pressed it respect¬ fully to his lips. " I see," said Mr, Curwen, " that you come the messenger of peace : my beloved pupils have returned to their obedience, and to a sense of what they owe to them¬ selves and me. Let the past be forgotten : they have realized my expectations, and I now am proud to acknowledge them. Monday sliall be a whole holiday—it shall be a jubilee-day to us all; the anniversary of this joyful morning shall be celebrated yearly by my pupils, in remembrance of their noble acknowledgment of having acted with injustice towards a deserving object, wbo (and I will bind myself to answer for it) will never disgrace tb.eir friendship nor shame tlieir patronage." Thus terminated favourably an affair which might have been productive of the most mortifying consequences to Edward, as
ns Λν ell as injurious to his future advance¬ ment in hfe. Had Mr. Curwen adopted any other mode of conduct towards his refractory pupils, it is probable that they would not have yielded so readily to bis wishes; as it was, all were convinced, and ashamed of the part they had acted ; and though Edward remained in ignorance for many years of the transaction which might have proved so fatal lo his interest, he experienced ever after the good effects of Mr. Curwen's sensible and well-timed appeal to the generosity, proper pride, and benevolence of his pupils. Edward meanwhile hastened back to the home which had sheltered him for nearly five years. As he had expected, his grandmother and Patty Smith were watching his arrival : in a moment he was round the neck of the former, who, clasp¬ ing him fondly to her bosom, seemed for a while to forget all her bodily pains, as she viewed his darling face*, and heard the tones of his dear-loved voice ; while Patty kissed
kissed again and again his hands, as sbe rubbed them within her own to call back the animal warmth. Edward could not speak enough of Mr. Curwen's kindness—he made no distinc¬ tion between him and the wealthiest of bis scholars, and Edward thought him one of the wisest and best of men ; then again he had so much to tell concerning the dispo¬ sitions and manners of his young compa¬ nions, and í heir various plays ; and when Patty Smith inquired if he had already made choice of a favourite, Edward's beau¬ tiful eyes sparkled as he replied that he bad indeed made choice of one whom he should We all his life.—" Ob, grandmo¬ ther," cried tbe boy, " how I longed to bring with me Frederic Manningham! From tbe very day that I first went to Mr. Curwen's, has he singled me out for his friend and companion. He is so warm¬ hearted, so lively, and so affectionate, that you would love him, grandmother, as much as you do me." « No,
u No, my soul's treasure," said oid Mar¬ garet, hugging him still closer, " I can never feel for another child the affection which I bear you ; but I should love him, and I shall love him, if he is kind and good to you. I suppose he is the son of Mr. Manningham, who is the heir of sir Gregory Manningham, a spiteful old churl that he is, to let so fine an estate run to ruin, just because he and his nephew hap¬ pened to differ in opinion about something or other in politics. The young man, it seems, was rather too independent in his principles to please sir Gregory, so the old gentleman said that he should never have a shilling of his money during his lifetime, and that Manningham Hall should all go to ruin, that it might cost him a fine penny to put it iu order. The sooner such a good- for-nothing old carl dies, tho better." 4i I am glad," cried Edward joyfully, " that sir Gregory cannot take tl: j pro¬ perty with hiin when he leaves this vvorld ; are not you, grandmother? My dear friend Frederic
Frederic will be the better for his death, and there is no sin in wishing a bad old man like sir Gregory under ground. Fre¬ deric has an elder brother about twelve years of age, who seems to be rather proud, for he has not noticed me more than twice, and then, I believe, it was because I was walking with Frederic. But you know, grandmother, I cannot expect to be loved by all the boys. Perhaps master Charles may think himself my superior; but I will try hard to become bis in learning, before I have been at Mr. Curw r en's twelve months." Edward now shew r ed his grandmother and Patty a couple of drawings whicb he had done during his absence. One was for bis kind old parent, the other for Miss Lindsay, and Patty was to have one the next time he returned home. This pro¬ mise cheered the beart of the affectionate girl, as it proved that new scenes and new friends had not lessened the value of his old ones. True
True to his word, Edward, after church- time was over, paid a visit to Miss Lind¬ say. Her parents welcomed him with pleasure, while their daughter endeavour¬ ed, by every art, to make his stay as de¬ lightful as possible. She received the drawing which he bad brought for her with the most fiattering encomiums, and gave him in return the works of Milton splendidly bound, which Mr. Lindsay had purchased at her request, as a present for Edward. Notwithstanding the most pressing in¬ vitation from them all, Edward eould not be prevailed on to extend his visit beyond an hour, as he liad promised to return to bis grandmother by that time; yet he failed not to express his sense of the kind¬ ness which prompted them to wish his stay. After passing his word to Clara that she should see him on the next Sun¬ day, Edward was suffered to depart, though much against the inclination of Miss Lind¬ say, wdio thought it extremely singular in Edward
Edward to prefer the society of an infirm old woman like Margaret Grey, to that of herself, who was so capable of enchanting his senses, and who was so willing to la¬ vish on him every luxury which her own elegant home possessed, But the cottage of old Margaret contained a charm which the mansion of Mr. Lindsay wanted, for it sheltered his beloved grandmother, whose very infirmities of body only rendered her more dear to the soul of Edward. Her temper ι enticed unaffected by the debi¬ lity oflier fume, and lier countenance still preserved the same sweetness, the same be¬ nevolence, as when her health was stronger. Edward would not have exchanged the tender look, the fond caress, the fervent blessing of his grandmother, for all the valuables whieh the unbounded partiality of Clara might tempt iier to bestow on him ; yet Edward felt grateful for that partiality, and appreciated, perhaps too highly, the powers of birth and fortune. But the enthusiasm of his nature led him to
të devote liimself to his grandmother, with¬ out whose presence he felt a void which no one else could fill up, unless it was his father Mackenzie, To fulfil his hopes, and to assist in supporting his grandmother, was now become the primary object of Edward's existence ; he therefore paid the most serious attention to all his studies, frequently devoting ¿,^ t of bis play-hours to that science which was to crown all his hopes and his toils with success, except when the earnest entreaties of Frederic Manningham prevailed on him to throw aside his pencil and partake of those exhi¬ larating amusements which were congenial to them both.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XI. Edward had been scarcely a year at Mr. Curwen's when tbe most alarming appre¬ hensions were entertained by Mr. Lindsay for the life of Margaret Grey. This ex- celleftt old woman bad visibly declined in her health ever since she bad lost the charm of her grandson's presence, but she never acknowledged this to any one ex¬ cept to Patty, w r ho appeared to be equally sensible of the void which the absence of Edward had occasioned, Margaret had been obliged for some months to give up her school, the profits of which she could ill afford to lose ; but so generally was she esteemed by all her neighbours, that they vied with each other in sending her a va* riety of presents, which were extremely ac¬ ceptable to one in her weak state of body. vol. ι. ι Mr
JMr. and Mrs. Lindsay were particularly kind and attentive to the wants of old Margaret : the latter, since her knowledge of Edward, had frequently called at the cottage of his grandmother, sometimes ac¬ companied by her daughter, but more ge¬ nerally by Mr. Lindsay, as Clara had con¬ ceived a dislike to poor Patty Smith, probably from a suspicion that it was this young girl, and not his grandmother, that made Edward so anxious to spend every hour of his leisure at tbe cottage. At length poor old Margaret's high- backed chair was obliged to be carried in¬ to her bedroom, as her increasing weak¬ ness disabled her from coming down stairs m usual. Patty Smith was indefatigable in her attentions both d&y and night, only quitting her kind old schoolmistress when the affairs of the house calied for lier as¬ sistance ; and Patty took a pride in keep¬ ing it as nice as wdien Margaret was down, for she was conscious that it vvould give her pleasure to know that nothing was neglected ;
neglected ; and when Patty had finished» she hastened to return to the sick chamber of old Margaret, scarcely allowing herself d moment's time to change her own clothes, lest her helpless friend should require her aid. If the humanity of Patt}^ did not meet with its reward in this world, it is to be hoped that in the next it helped to lessen, in the eyes of a merciful Judge, those errors which, without the assistance of religion and example, are alike common to us all. Patty, with unexampled ten¬ derness, devoted herself to the comforts of old Margaret, nor ever once complained of the confinement or the disagreeables of a sick-room. Edward, when fir i apprized by Mr. Lindsay of the change in his grandmo¬ ther, was so much shocked, that Mr. Cur¬ wen deemed xt prudent to grant his re¬ quest of immediately returning home to see her, adding also, that he might sleep there every night until she was better. The kindness of this permission was never ι 2 obliterated
obliterated from the mind of Edward; long after the object of it bad ceased to exist, he still continued to cherish a grate¬ ful remembrance of Mr. Curwen's consi¬ derate humanity. With difficulty Edward repressed his feelings, as he beheld his tender and faith¬ ful parent confined to her chamber; he flew to her extended arms, for she w r as no longer capable of meeting him half way as usual, and hid his face in her bosom, that kind maternal bosom whicb only throbbed for his welfare. By degrees Margaret brought him to listen to her owm firm conviction that she should never again recover her former strength, or power of doing for herself. Of Patty's-conduct she could not say enough—it was beyond all human praise; but Heaven would reward her for her goodness to a poor infirm old woman like herself, and Heaven would also bless the Lindsays for tlieir kind attention to her comforts. Edward's heart swelled with the
the excess of gratitude; he flung his arms round Patty's neck, he kissed her glow¬ ing cheekj and blessed her for her affec¬ tion to his beloved grandmother. In proportion as the strength of Marga·* ret Grey decreased, the Lindsays redou¬ bled their kindness towards her grandson. Clara, forgetting her dislike i-o Patty Smith, called daily at the cottage, and though an enemy to all serious reflections, frequently sat and read by the bedside of the invalid, while Patty was busily en¬ gaged in the domestic concerns. Mrs. Lindsay also made an exertion to walk so far, that sbe might administer herself the nourishing things whieh bhe had ordered her cook to make; and, by her request. lier own doctor attended on JMargaret: but medical skill was useless—hers was a gradual decay of nature, whieh no art could check, no medicine prevent; but .Margaret was perfectly resigned—she had led the life of a Christian, and v/as pre¬ pared to die the death of one; nay, she í S would
would have prayed to have been released from her sufferings, had not her fondness for Edward, and her knowledge of what would be his afHiction whenever that cwent took place, made her still chng to this world and all its vicissitudes. Mr. and Airs. Lindsay, with great ge¬ nerosity of mind s proposed to take charge of Edward in case of the demise of his grandmother, assuring the fond old wo¬ man that her darling should not want for any tiling vvhieh was requisite for his com¬ fort and happiness, and that he should be treated in every respect like their own son. This kind assurance was alone suffi¬ cient to tranquillize the spirits of Marga¬ ret, who, relying on the tried friendliness of Mr. Lindsay, resigned herself with sub¬ mission to the will of her Creator, On the morning preceding that of her de. /i, Margaret dictated to Mr. Lindsay а к ^r u hieb she wished to be sent to ensi » n Mackenzie, and another to her daughtei. When these were finished, she warmly
warmly expressed her grateful acknow r - ìédgments to Mr. Lindsay, saying that as lie liad so nobly stepped forward to be¬ come the guardian and protector of her dearest Edward, it was but right that he should be made acquainted with all that concerned her soul's idol. She then in¬ formed him that Edward was not the son of ensign Mackenzie, but of a gentlemau to whom her daughter had been secretly married, and who died previous to the birth of his son. She then gave into his possession a letter which she had found among Edward's clothes, and which she requested miglit be kept until he was a man; it was from the dean of Π ----- -, who acknowledged himself to be his ¿rod- с? о father, and who appeared extremely well disposed to render the boy every kindness in his power. " 1 know not my daughter's reason for declining this gentleman's ¿jood offices" said old Margaret, i( but she has carefully kept from his knowledge, as well as my ι 4 own,
own, the names of his father and sfod- father. Chance discovered to me the lat¬ ter ; but as she wished it to be concealed. I have never mentioned to Edward my having in my possession the means of sa¬ tisfying his very natural curiosity. I have often been going to burn tbe letter, but sometbmg has always withheld me; and now I give it into your keeping, my dear sir, as it may one day or other be of ser¬ vice to my darling, when he grows up to be a man. I have endeavoured to do my duty by him, and I know that when I am gone, though he will meet with every kmdness in your family, yet I shall not be forgottén by Edward Mackenzie. Mr. Lindsay placed the letter in his poekethook, assuring her that he would preserve the secret most carefully, unless tliat he foresaw, at a future time, ihat any benefit would accrue to Edward by his betraying it; a^d, even then, he should consult vvith his parents on the subject. He questioned Margaret with great deli¬ cacy
cacy on the probable motives of her daugh¬ ter's singular conduct in concealing, even from her parent, the name of her son's father; but Margaret w r as as much at a loss to divine the cause as himself, only that she had always believed that the co¬ ronet which was marked on the arm of Edward had some reference to his family- connexions. Poor old Margaret, ever considerate to the welfare of others, now humbly en¬ treated of Mr. Lindsay that he would occasionally make the affectionate Patty the object of his care,-—" When I am dead and gone," said she, " my kind Patty will return to the house of her father, which is ill suited to her years and habite of life ; I understand that it is kept by a woman of dissolute manners, who manages entirely the concerns of Mr. Smith, and I have many, many fears on Patty's account. At present, she is good and innocent; but bad examples will cor¬ rupt, in time, tbe purest mind, and she is ι 5 just
just of an age when the prettiness of her person will attract attention. But God is good and gracious, and to his care I com¬ mend my poor Patty." Mr. Lindsay consoled the worthy old woman by telling her that Patty should not be forgotten, and tbat, if her father would part with her, she should come and live under his roof, to attend on Miss Lindsay. Thus was the mind of the dy¬ ing Margaret eased of a load respecting Patty, whom she loved sincerely, and whose interest she had firmly at heart, next to that of her darling grandson. Fortunately for Margaret, sbe was un« conscious of the dislike which Miss Lind¬ say had taken to the innocent Patty—a dislike which made her so strongly oppose her becoming an inmate under her father's house, that Mr. Lindsay was unwillingly compelled to relinquish his kind inten¬ tions, and content himself with bestowing on Patty, whenever he met her, his pater¬ nal advice, accompanied by every demon¬ stration
stration of real concern for her welfare and happiness. On the morning of Margaret's decease, Edward felt an unaccountable reluctance to leave her, and he therefore determined to remain from school that day, certain that when the reason was explained to Mr. Curwen, he would not be offended at his absence. By the advice of Patty, he however wrote a note to that gentleman, and then sat down by the bedside of his grandmother, who appeared much fainter dian usual ; yet, wbile life remained, she employed it in admonishing her young companions to avoid all the snares and temptations of the world,, and in bestow¬ ing on them the last sad proofs of her affection. To Edward she had bequeathed all the trifles she possessed, except a few presents to Patty, in remembrance of her tenderness and humanity,. Scarcely had she strength to direct the* former to a place in her bureau, where she had stored up a sum more than suflicient to 4 defray the 1 6 expences
expences of her funeral and to procure mourning for them both, when Mrs. Lind¬ say entered the chamber. Margaret had already made known to her compassionate visitor the hoard and her own wishes; she now made an effort to place the money in the hands of Mrs. Lindsay, then motion¬ ing to Patty to draw near, she embraced and blessed her. Edward's arms assisted to support her; she pressed him to her heart; it had almost ceased to beat, yet it gave one more throb of tenderness as his iips touched hers, and then was still for ever. The hands of Edward still convulsively grasped the lifeless body of his grandmo¬ ther, when Mr. Lindsay arrived. With extreme difficulty he at length succeeded in raismg him from the bed ; but no en¬ treaty, no persuasion could induce him to quit the cottage and retire to the house of Mr. Lindsay. Patty also begged that she might be suffered to remain, and perform the last sad offices for her beloved old friend ;
friend ; fearless of every thing but being separated from the inanimate form of Mar¬ garet, Patty determined to sit up and watch the corpse ; and Mrs. Lindsay, pleas¬ ed by the artless affection of the poor girl, kindly r consented to her request, and at the same time sent for a respectable wo¬ man to bear her company while she per¬ formed her melancholy duties. Edward would not leave the room which contained the mortal remains of her wdio had been his best and dearest friend ever vince he had been separated from his adopt¬ ed fatlier; like a statue, be continued sit¬ ting in the chair in vvhich JMr. Lindsay had placed him, wholiy insensible either to the kmdness of that gentleman or to the tears and caresses of the weeping Patty ; Edward could not weep—his heart and brain were too full—a weight of lead seemed to press on both ; he saw ail that passed, yet knew it not ; he heard what was said, yet it made no impression on his mind, and Mr. Lindsay began to feel seri¬ ously
ously alarmed for the effect of bis appa¬ rent insensibility. The day on which tlie funeral was to take place, Patty endeavoured to awaken him to a sense of what was passing : she took his· band and drew him towards tbe coffin.—" Dear master Edward," said she,- ** will you not take one look at your grandmother before tbe men- come to screw on the lid ?" Edward gave a shudder of horror, and then bent forward. Patty tremblingly re* moved the lid ; Edward started, burst into. tears, and fell back on her bosom* " Thank God !" exclaimed Pattv, sob- bing, " thank God, master Edward, that you can shed tears! they are the first I ? have seen since the death of your grand- mother/* At the sound of her name, Edward once more bent forward; he touched.witli awe the cold, cold hand whieh had.so often been raised to bestow on liim some token of her love ; again a shudder of horror seized him,. and
and Patty supported him in her arms, as he sobbed aloud in an agony of grief. At length he became a little more composed, nnd when Mr. Lindsay entered the cham¬ ber, he had sufficiently recovered himself to thank his friend for all his goodness to¬ wards him, wdien he was insensible to the trouble he had given him. Mr. Lindsay encouraged his tears tò flow again ; he reverted to the wishes of her who now lay cold and inanimate be¬ fore them, and persuaded him to return with him to the house which would in future become his home, at least until the return of his adopted father. Edward listened to him with reverence and affection ; his heart felt, for the first time, the cheering influence of hope, as the sound of Mackenzie's name struck on his ear.—** Dear sir," said he, in a voice scarcely audible, " I will study how I can deserve your kindness, I will obey you in everything, only let me follow my be¬ loved
loved grandmother to the grave; it is the last, last proof of my duty and affection/' Mr. Lindsay reluctantly consented, be¬ cause his kindness of heart would fain have spared Edward tbis painful trial of his firmness; he consented also, because he ivanted himself the power of self-com¬ mand necessary to deny the boy's request ; and Edw ard therefore prepared to follow to tbe village church all that now remain¬ ed of her who had doted on him to excess, and whose sole study had been to gratify every wish, every desire of his heart. Edward followed, as chief mourner, the corpse of Margaret Grey, accompanied by Pattv Smith and all the village neigh- hours, to vvhom the deceased had rendered herself dear by various acts of benevolent kindness. All her scholars attended at a respectful distance, demonstrating, by their half-suppressed sobs and tear-swoln eyes- the sincerity of their attachment. With a presence of mind far above his years, Edward
Ed wird repressed bis grief; he saw that Mr. jbindsay had stationed himself by the side of the curate, and he resolved, for hi& sake, and for the sake of poor Patty, wdio could not boast of much self-command, to subdue as much as possible his feelings in their presence. At the conclusion of the awful cere¬ mony, and when the nmek-fij-Hitig eftľtb bid from his view the last sad receptacle of all human greatness, the fortitude of Edward begaii to yield to the fulness of bis heart; he turned with unsteady feet as the mourners receded from the grave of his grandmother ; a film overspread his sight, his knees trembled, and he sunk breathless into the arms of Mr. Lindsay, wdio conveyed bini with all possible expe¬ dition to his house. The tender attentions of Mr. and Mrs. Lindsay, and oftheir daughter Clara, could not fail of thea' due efiect on a heart form¬ ed like tiiat of Edward Mackenzie: it beemed to be a positive duty in him to control
control his feelings, and to make an effort at least to restrain his sorrow, since, by giving way to it, he evidentiy inflicted pain on those vvbo appeared to vie with each other to render him iiappy, and to make him resigned to his loss. Gratitude was a powerful incentive to exertion m the mind of Edward ; the memory of his grami mother was r«ot the less sacredly dear to him because he strove to appear tranquil in the presence of his kind pro¬ tectors ; Ihey had now become, for a time at lea », the guardians of his destiny; to them be was accountable for his actions ; tbey bad voluntarily afforded hini a ten¬ der asylum, vvhen dealh had bereaved him of one of his h~si blends; they evinced an anxiety for his welfare, nnd a watchful vi- gikmee bo beguile au jy his griefs, whieh called forth all the warmth imd tenderness of his nature; his happ n *í', and his re¬ turn to the cheerful a\oeations of lifo, seemed to be the chief motive of ¿ill their movements ; iiow then could Edward dis¬ appoint
nppoint their hopes, or frustrate their friendly attentions to his comforts? Gra¬ titude and affection forbade it; and Ed¬ ward, wdio was kept from school for some weeks after the death of his grandmother, lest he should find too many opportunities to indulge his sorrow, and who was hu¬ moured, petted, and caressed by all Mr. Lindsay's family, at length taught himself to moderate his affliction, and to submit with proper humility and proper resigna¬ tion tn the will of Heaven, who, in taking from him his fond and affectionate old grandmother, had raised him up a host of friends in the mansion whicb was now to become his home, all of whom appeared inclined to perform for him every good office, that they might soften down his grief, and lessen, by every kind indul¬ gence, the severity of the loss vvhich he had sustained. The novelty of every thing around him, the elegance of the mansion, the parental tenderness of its owners, the studied kind¬ ness
ness of Clara Lindsay, and their supenoi mode of living, joined to the respectful willingness with which the domestics wait¬ ed on Edward, as being the favourite of their employers, and therefore of them¬ selves, soon filled his yotmg heart and active mind with new' feelings and new ideas; he was no longer the inmate of a humble cottage, but of a spacious man¬ sion, furnished by the hand of taste and fashion ; music, noetry, and painting held forth inexhaustible sources of never-cloy¬ ing amusement to the enthusiastic Ed¬ ward ; he eould not long resist their united influence, nor withstand the persuasions of female loveliness, female grace. Clara Lindsay touched her harp with such siren melody, Clara Lindsay entered into his owm favourite study with so much ardour, that the severity of Edw r ard's feelings by degrees abated, the poignancy of his grief gave place to a tender melancholy, and the name of his dear-loved grandmother seldom escaped his lips, except to one ob¬ ject
joet by whom her memory was sacredly revered, and to whom also he confided every thought, every wish that gratitude and a sense of obligation migbt lead him to conceal from tbe Lindsays; and this one object was his favourite companion and friend, Patty Smith.
CHAPTER NIL The style in wdiich Edward was now ac¬ customed to live had long been congenial to his taste and consonant to his wishes ; yet this change had no power over the natural kindliness of his heart, unless in¬ deed that sometimes it seemed to expand to all around him, and he longed to be¬ istow on others the infinitude of comforts he himself enjoyed. Both Mr. and Mrs. Lindsay became as strongly attached to Edward as if they had
had known him from his birth ; the inte¬ rest they felt in his welfare could scarcely have been greater had he been their own son, while Edward felt equally disposed to manifest towards them every sentiment of filial love and grateful obedience. Sa¬ turday evening was looked forward to by all parties with joyful impatience; Ed¬ ward, freed fmm the necessary restraint of a school, always rapturously hurried back to what was now his home, where he was welcomed by tbe respectful affection of the domestics, and caressed, and almost devoured by their employers, who scarce¬ ly appeared to know how to lavish on bim sufficient proofs of their regards or suffi¬ cient praise and encouragement, as they gazed with delight on every fresh speci¬ men of his increasing talents. Clara Lindsay, notwithstanding the many imperfections of her disposition and her love of self, was the warm admirer of Edward, and the proud predicter of his future fame. She loved him as much as it
it was in her nature to love anything be¬ yond what was necessary to the gratifica¬ tion of her pleasures ; yet this very love might be termed selfish, since she took a pride in shewißg him to everybody as her favourite, and in strolling with him far beyond the limits of her mother's walk, 4vho frequently allowed her to leave her home with no other protection than that of Edward Mackenzie. This was precisely what Clara had long wished for; she could now ramble at plea¬ sure through the beautifully-diversified grounds of Manningham Hall, and point- out to Edward fresh subjects fbr bis pen¬ cil ; or she could sit and listen to his har¬ monious voice, as he read to her the poems which she selected for him out of her fa¬ vourite authors; or could teach him to sing to her some of her favourite melo¬ dies. In short, Edw T ard was as much the pet of Clara Lindsay as of her parents; and as he so largely contributed to cheer Ле ^monotony of her life, and to create for
for her fresh and more pleasing sources of amusement, Clara was equally as desirous that he should share with her all that her parents had to bestow, as those generous but thoughtless parents were to heap fresh favours on the grateful youth whom they had taken under their protection. It was sufficient for Mrs. Lindsay to know that the Manningbams were the chosen companions of Edward, for them to receive an invitation to her house ; they accordingly obtained the permission of Mr. Curwen to dine one Sunday at Mr. Lind¬ say's, and were so delighted with their re¬ ception, and with the beauty and assumed g*)od-nature of the elegant Clara, that they could not help describing to their compa¬ nions, on their return to school in the evening, all that they had seen and lieard at the agreeable and hospitable home of young Mackenzie. Perhaps to this visit may be ascribed the change which ever after took place in tlie manners of the elder Manningham—-a change
change which gladdened the heart of Ed¬ ward, because Charles had frequently tes¬ tified a sense of that conscious superiority which birth and fortune had placed on his side, but which he now seemed inclined to forget; and as Charles was the elder bro¬ ther of his beloved Frederic, Edward felt no disposition to remind him that such illiberal feelings had ever influenced his actions or prejudiced his mind; with sin¬ cere pleasure he accepted the proffered friendship of Charles, and the Manning- hams were now become the frequent guests, of the Lindsay family. The juvenile enjoyments of Edward did not, however, erase from his memory the remembrance of her wbo bad so kindlv contributed to those of his younger days, neitlier did they cause him to forget the innocent Patty, wdio had shared with him the tenderness and care of his deceased grandmother. When the first burst of his! grief w r as over, he felt an earnest desire fr* behold his affectionate companion, and in. vol. j. ϊ: quired
quired rather eagerly, if Patty had never called to inquire after bim, since the deatii of their mutual fric nd ? ** Called!" said Miss Lindsay, in an angry voice, " yes, the girl made herself quite troublesome with her calls, so I spoke to her myself. Really she seems to think that she is to be still as much your companion as when you lived at the cot¬ tage. I hope, Edward, that you will now consider vourseif as far above such low society. The girl may be a very good girl in her wav, but she is certainlv not fit company for you ; indeed I know that my father vvould not approve of your countenancing her visits here. Young girls, like Patty Smith, ought to be bet¬ ter employed than in running after hand¬ some boys like yourself/' Edward coloured deeply; his was the generous blush of insulted friendship and offended gratitude, and never was the cause of innocence and artless tenderness ¡more ably defended than it now was by Edward
Edvgard Mackenzie. He concluded by saying, that, much as he should study to avoid giving offence to Mr. Lindsay or any part of his family, yet that he should consider himself the basest of mortals if he could ever forget the kindness of Patty's conduct towards his dear old grandmother, at a time when she was wholly unable to assist herself. Miss Lindsay muttered to herself that he might please himself, as far as remem¬ brance was concerned ; but that sbe wouhl not have Patty loitering about the house, and asking any servant she met with, bow master Edward was ? she should give fresh orders not to have her come there again. Again the colour deepened on the hand¬ some features of Edward, but he was si¬ lent, as he did not wish to increase the dislike of Clara towards Patty, who he felt pleased to find had not wilfully ne¬ glected bim in the hours of his severe dis¬ tress—he was silent, but he determined to see Patty, and to thank her for her friend- K ? ly
ly inquiries after his health, and afe the same time to advise her not to call again at the house of JMr. Lindsay, since it gave liis daughter such manifest displeasure. AVhen Edward returned to school fbr lhe first time after the death of poor Mar¬ garet Grey, Mr. Lindsay had intended to walk with him to Air, Curwen's, but something occurred which prevented this intention from her g put in execution ; he therefore wrote a letter to that gentle¬ man, full of the warmest encomiums on Edward, whom he now again recommend¬ ed to his protection and care, with all the anxH ty of a parent who felt conscious that his son would become an ornament to his family and connexions. At the sugges¬ tions of Clara, a servant was ordered to attend Edward to school, and to fetch him home every Saturday evening. * r Perhaps, master Edward," said Oliver, as they were proceeding on their way, *■ vou are not np to the tricks of my vouny ladv?—It was all her doings that poor
poor Tatty Smith was ordered not to call again at our house, and it's all her doings that I am ordered to see you safe back to school, and to fetch you home again. I am more obliged to her than sbe thinks, for it will give me some nice walks, be¬ sides that I love dearly to do anything for von, master Edward/' " Thank you, Oliver, most kindly," re¬ plied Edward, vvith winning sweetness; " and I am also much obliged to Miss Lindsay for her goodness, for I love to have you with me, Oliver; you are al¬ ways so ready and so willing to do any¬ thing that I ask of yon." * ť Ay, that I am, master Edward," cried Oliver; " and I was both ready and will¬ ing to give poor Patty Smith a sight of you, when she called so often and asked so kindly after you, but that it would have been as much as my place was worth. Miss Clara has taken such a mortal aver¬ sion to poor Patty, that sbe hates the sight on her like poison, and we were all order¬ it 3 id
cd not to let her sec you, vvhich was*cer¬ tainly a most brutal thing, seeing that the poor innocent girl must be just as dear to you, master Edward, as a sister. No of¬ fence, I hope." " Hone, none, my kind Oliver,'- ex¬ claimed Edward, shaking him heartily by the hand; " I do indeed love Patty as dearly as if she v.as my own sister. If Miss Lindsay knew how good she is, how tender-hearted, and how compassionate to all who are afflicted or diseased, she could not help loving her as much as I do." Oliver whistled a bit of a tune, then fi.sked pardon—" Oh, you do not know our Miss Clara, master Edward, ás well as I do; she cannot abide poor Patty, because she thinks that you are more fond of the young girl than you are of herself; she would give the world to hinder you from .seeing her. That's the reason, Lord love ve ! that I am sent to see vou to school, for fear '\it you should meet Patty by the way ; id I was told not to let you stop
stop a.moment.to speak to her upon any account, and to tell her all that you said to each other. But may I lose the use of my tongue if ever I tell a tale against either of you ! God bless you both !" " How!" cried Edward angrily; thou, checking himself, he said— " I have a great respect for Miss Lindsay, Oliver^ and am under many obligations to her; but never, while I have breath, shall she or any other person prevent my speaking to Patty Smith." They now approached the cottage which once belonged to Margaret Grey, and which was occupied by an industrious labourer and his family, Edward paused at the well-remembered gate, his eyes filled with tears, and, as if by sympathy, those of honest Oliver instantlv became moist.— The porch over the door, once the favour¬ ite seat of liimself and Patty Smith, was now green with the bursting foliage, and a variety of spring flowers blossomed in к 4 tlm
the ne&t little front-garden of' the cottage. Edwards heart was gladdened at behold¬ ing that it was kept in order, and tbat the house itself appeared clean and comfort¬ able. The biggest boy, a child about seven years old, came out with a broom to sweep tiie walk ; he stooped to pull up а weed wiiicb was near a tuft of eariy flowers, and breaking one of the flowers from the rest, he presented it to Edw ard, who ac¬ cepted the gift with eager delight. They had been planted by his beloved grand¬ mother, and were therefore held sacred by her darling. Edward cleared his voice, and then in¬ quired of tbe child if it was his office to keep tbe front-garden from weeds? Upon being answered in tbe affirmative, he gave him sixpence, telling him that he should receive the same sum from him every Sa¬ turday evening, if, on his return from school, he found the garden in the same good order, and the gravel-walk nicely swept.
swept.—" You must also," said Edward, " let me have at the same time one of your flowers/* The boy, overjoyed at the unexpected gift, made his best bow, promising to take double care of the garden, and to have in readiness a nice nosegay for his acceptance every Saturday evening. He then hurried into the cottage to shew his sixpence, and to boast of the generosity of Edward, who now turned his reluctant steps from the gate which he had so often opened, so often closed, with joyful exultation, while his whole soul w r as filled with gratitude and love for its dear and revered owner. In erossing the green, Edward, to his inexpressible delight, beheld Patty Smi tli ; she was slowly advancing, her eyes were cast on the ground, and she saw not the form of Edward until he was close beside her. " Patty !" cried Edw r ard, and his arms were instantly round her neck ; it was the к 5 first
first time they had met since the funeral of Margaret Grey ; both burst into tears. " Ah, master Edward," at length ex¬ claimed Patty, " I thought you had quite forgotten me, and that I should never be suffered to speak to you any more, now that you are made a gentleman, and are become the favourite of Miss Clara." Sk Then you thought wrong, Patty," re¬ plied Edward, kissing her affectionately. " If I could foiget you, I should expect my beloved grandmother to rise out of her grave and reproach me for my ingra¬ titude. No, Patty, dear Patty, I can ne¬ ver forget you—I shall always love you dearly for your kindness to my grand¬ mother/' ** That's riglit !" cried Oliver, in a thick voice ; (< that's as it should be, master Ed¬ ward. Rot me, if I eould ever forget any¬ body that was good to my poor old grand¬ mother." Patty, now for the first time made sen¬ sible
sible of the presence of Oliver, blushed at her own emotions; she however held out her hand to him, telling him that she should always remember with gratitude the feeling maimer in whicb he had at¬ tended to her frequent inquiries after Ed¬ ward—a manner so wholly unlike that of his young mistress, who had spoken to her with the greatest harshness, and wbo had rudely forbidden her ever coming again to tlie house.—" I am sure, sir," said Patty, *' that I am quite ignorant in what I have offended Miss Clara ; but I recollect, that w r hen she used to come with her mamma to the cottage, she always looked at me so crossly, and spoke as haughtily as if I had been her slave ; but, thank God ! 1 am neither her slave nor her servant, and if it had not been for master Edward, I should never have gone near her house; but I eould not live in· the same village, and not inquire hovv he was." " To be sure not," cried Oliver; " if v ou bad, you would have been as unfeel- R 6 ing
ing as Miss Clara is, and she thinks of no¬ body but herself, except it is master Ed¬ ward, Set me to w r atch him indeed ! and to hinder him from speaking to a poor girl, that he must love like his own flesh and blood!—Let her watch him herself, for I shall never tell her, I promise her, if he w r as to meet you and speak to you every day in the year." Patty coloured deeply.— " It would be hard, very hard, if I might not speak to master Edward," said Patty, nearly crying with vexation, *' when we have known each other ever since he was four and I six years old. Besides, his grandmother loved me dearly, and used to be happy to see us fond of each other; and though 1 own and have always said there was a great difference between us, yet I shall love him and speak to him when I see him, unless he tells me not," u And I will always love you in return, Patty, and always speak to you, though Miss JLindsay herself were near me," re¬ plied
plied Edward, grasping her hand. " But come no more, Patty, to Mr. Lindsay's ; I do not wish you to be insulted by any person on my account. I respect Miss Lindsay, and I love her parents, but it is well for her that she is not a boy ; I should soon see then what right she had to treat you vvith rudeness." They now r embraced each other affec¬ tionately, promising to have another in¬ terview on the Saturday evening; "though I must beg of you, dear master Edward," cried Patty earnestly, " not to take any notice of me should Miss Clara walk with you through the village ; I should be mi¬ serable, if I thought that you would lose her friendship on my account. I shall know% master Edward, that you will not forget me, and I shall try to make myself as happy as I can ; but," added she, with a deep sigh, " my home is not what I could wish it to be." . Edward, notwithstanding his high sense of obligation, persisted in noticing Patty Smith,
Smith, even when he was in company with the Lindsays, to the severe mortifi¬ cation of Clara, who frowned disdainfully on the humble companion of her favourite, never failing to make some illnatnred re- о mark on Patty and her disordered home, wdiich, while it pained the grateful soul of Edward, only endeared to him the more the poor object of her spleen and malevo¬ lence. The manly firmness of Edward, in thus openly continuing to notice Patty Smith, increased the haired and indignation of Clara ; slie felt angry with herself for not being able to brnîslı from her affections the young offender; but Edward kept his hold in her heart, though, in this one in¬ stance, he rebelled against her will: he was evidentiy the sole being in the world who ventured to thwai t the desires of Miss Lindsay, and who. having thwarted them, siili possessed her fondest prefer¬ ence. A circum- tance soon occurred whieh promised
promised to enliven the hitherto-monoto¬ nous life of Clara, and contribute likewise to the pleasures of her parents, wdiose sole acquaintance were confined to that of the curate and apothecary of the village, these being the only respectable families with whom they could associate within the dis¬ tance of their own village: this circum¬ stance was the sudden deatii of sir Gre¬ gory Manningham, whose whole fortune devolved to his nephews now become sir Charles Manningham. The conduct of sir Gregory had totally precluded him from possessing the affection of his ne¬ phew's family, and they therefore heard of this event without any symptoms of distress, or any indications of any other mourning than what decency required them outwardly to observe. The friends of Edward were sent for m haste by their parents, and never was their summons more joyfiilly obeyed than ît now was by their delighted sons. ,v He is gone at last, my dear boy," eried Charles
Charles exultingly, " and my father will now come in for every shilling of the old miser's fortune. We shall have famous doings at the Hall ; my mother will soon make the old building wear a different aspect, and the girls may wander up and down the extensive grounds until they fancy themselves tbe goddesses of tbe fairy scenes w T hich their romantic imaginations will create. The beautiful Clara Lindsay shall teach them all her enchanting songs, and the hospitality we have received from her parents shall now, thanks to old Gre¬ gory ! be repaid to them with interest, as soon as we come down to the Hall." " Yes," exclaimed Frederic, shaking Edward's hand with violence, (i and JMac¬ kenzie shall be introduced to my father and mother, and to my sisters. But re¬ member, Edward, that I have already be¬ spoke your preference for Flora" "That's unfair," cried Chaues hastily; ťí let Mackenzie see the girls, and judge for himself: they are both handsome and agreeable,
ugrceähle, and there ought to be no pre¬ ference." " Remember," whispered Frederic to Mackenzie, as he followed Charles to the chaise, " remember Flora; I have fixed my beart upon her being your fav ourite ; don't disappoint me/' Edward saw tbem vault into the chaise with emotions of pleasure little short of those they experienced themselves; had he been the declared heir of sir Gregory, he could not have felt more joy than he now did, on learning tbe good fortune of his friends, wdio were thus suddenly raised to the summit of their boyish hopes. The active mind of Edward followed them to the drawing-room of their home—to the embraces of their parents, the congratula¬ tions of their sisters; he tried to picture to himself the wildly-affectionate Flora, as be thought he saw her fling herself into the arms of Frederic, who kissed with lively joy the glowing cheek of bis fa¬ vourite sister; but Edward could not please
the morals and principles of the brothers and some little even in disposition. Fre¬ deric, the beloved friend, the second self of Edward, w r as frank, open, and winning¬ ly affable in his deportment ; he was, like him, warm in his affections, ñrm in his friendships, the soul of candour, and an enemy to all species of pride, except that proper one which creates a laudable ambi¬ tion, and exalts rather than debases human nature. Charles, on the contrary, possess¬ ed a large share r f false dignity ; be valued himself upon his ancestors, his connexions, his prospects in life, and last, though not least of all, upon his owm person, which he expected would be his best friend when he made his entrance into the fashionable world : he w r as good-tempered, unless when contradicted or thwarted in any of iiis wishes ; in that case, he became violent in his expressions of anger, and never forgave the offence, if the offender was his inferior, or wdiat he considered to be his inferior iu birth or fortune. Frederic was generous, even
even to profuseness; Charles paused to inquire if his bounty wouid be well be¬ stowed, unless in a case where his own gratification would ensue. Frederic ad¬ vocated warmly the cause of the injured, and interested himself as much for the welfare of a beggar as he would have done for a peer; but Charles contented himself with listening to the tale of complaint as repeated by bis brother, and in remarking that the poor should submit to tbe will of +hcir superiors witbout murmuring. Charles was the favourite of his mother, Fied eric of bis iather. Clara Lindsay was, in the opinion of Charles Manningham, one of tbe finest girls in the world, his ovvn sisters, of wliom he was deservedly proud, not ex¬ cepted. Clara's form was matchless ; then she sung and played so divinely—had such a good taste for drawing—was so lively, so hospitable, and so desirous of making tbeir visits agreeable, that Charles, tiiough only now in bis sixteenth year, was actually wJ .' what
what he called desperately in love witb the beautiful Clara, wdio, on her part, had conceived for him an equally favourable opinion, and who longed to behold his favourite sister Constantia, whom he had assured her she vvould find a most charm¬ ing companion. Clara hoped and expected this assertion to be true; she had long w ished for a friend of her own sex, to whom she could unbosom her imaginary vexations—one who would sympathize in the distresses of her own creating, and vvho, in return, would not fail to bestow a mutual confi¬ dence. Edward, it i& true, was her chosen iavourite, but Edward had too high a re¬ spect for her parents to listen patiently to the unjust complaints of their daughter; if they had erred in their conduct towards her, it was from over-indulgence, and the gratitude of his nature would not admit that to be a crime which sprung from an excess of parental tenderness. Although attached to Miss Lindsay hy feelings
.s feelings which reflected on bis heart and mind the 1 ighest honour, Edward never¬ theless preserved his own proper dignity of character ; he never yielded to her in any improper wish, nor agreed in any opinion whieh w r as not strictly his own. Sometimes indeed he had gone so far as to difer from her upon subjects whicb she considered as important; and though this would liave drawn down upon any other person her lasting dislike, yet she content¬ ed herself with uttering a few expressions of her displeasure, bestowing at the same time on him some of her terrific frowns, and wondering what that charm could be whieh bound Jut towards him in spite of all his perversity. Many and frequent were the terrors of her amiable Dut ill-judging parents fbr the consequences of Edward's firm and inde¬ pendent spirit, when placed in competi¬ tion with the whims, caprices, and unjust desires of their spoiled child. Had she taken a dislike to their protege, their ovvn peace
peace would have demanded his dismissal; for Clara WOuld not have slept, nor have suffered them to sleep in quiet, until she had obtained her request. Fortunately however for Edward, Miss Lindsay had no intentiori to punish him for his teme¬ rity beyond tbe frown ofthe moment; he was necessary to her happiness, and even when Charles Manningham divided with him her favour and her smiles, Clara would not have lost one hour of Edward's society, or permitted, could she have helped it, another to possess that regard which she wished to preserve exclusively to herself. It was this selfish feeling which made Clara Lindsay the decided enemy of Patty Smith, whose very name w r as offensive to her ears, particularly when mentioned by Edward; but this occurred but seldom, fbr though he still persisted in noticing poor Patty as often as he met her, he for¬ bore to speak of her before Miss Lindsay, as he was too well aware of her aversion. This was however only one among the many
many sources of regret that, at a future period, chilled the bright sunshine of his youthful уеащ. The timidity of Patty made her shrink from the frowning scrutiny of Miss Lind¬ say ; she felt that she was to be dreaded, and though she scarcely knew why, yet at the sight of her she hung her head, co¬ loured, and looked abashed, as if she had indeed deserved the deep-rooted dislike of Clara. This painful confusion, this fear of encountering her gaze, made Fatty avoid the sight of Edward whenever he was ac¬ companied by her enemy; but this did not prevent her flying to meet Mr. Lind¬ say when he passed through the village alone, for he still continued to manifest towards her the same friendly sentiments as usual, and in fact regretted most sin¬ cerely that the innocent girl should have become displeasing to his daughter. It has already been stated, that it was tlie intention of Mr. Lindsay to have taken Patty under his own roof, as he vol. L L felt
felt more and more convinced that the house of her dissolute father was by no means a proper scene for Iter ; but this kind intention was frustrated by the ca¬ price of Miss Lindsay, and all that he could now do w T as to bestow on her his counsel and advice as often as he saw her. Patty libtened with tearful humility, pro¬ mising to be guided by his rules foi her conduct ; but Patt}^ found this more diffi¬ cult than she at first imagined, for the very air of her father's house had some¬ thing in it infectious to a young and vir¬ tuous girl, warm in her feelings and cre¬ dulous ofall she heard, and whose actions were unrestrained by the voice of caution and experience. Patty loved reading, but she had no one to direct her in the choice of her hooks, and she therefore selected for her- s elf all those which pleased her by name, and which she procured once or twice а -week from the neighbouring town. The natural kindness of her disposition would have
have led her to treat with affection the woman vvho had the direction of her fa¬ ther's house, had this been possible; but Patty found, notwithstanding all her en¬ deavours to the contrary, that she could never bring herself to regard this woman vvith any other sentiments than those of abhorrence. Tbis painful feeling made the home of Patty at last become hateful to her; she passed the chief of her time either with her neighbours, in performing various little services for their children, or in reading, amid the seclusion of Man¬ ningham woods, the volumes from the circulating library, or in thinking of Ed¬ ward and his grandmother, and in visit¬ ing her grave, which she every morning covered vvith fresh flowers from the gar¬ den of the cottage wdiich old JMargaret bad once inhabited. In this cottage Patty spent many an hour; she kindly undertook to teach the children to read and work, and while thus charitably employed, would sometimes L 2 fancy
fancy that she beheld the revered spirit oi Margaret stand before kr, sailing on her with her accustomed benevolei! e, as if to encourage her in her present innocent anm .ment Patty h id likev. ise another u v, ive fcr giving so much of her time to these poor people ; she knew that Edward stopped there every Saturday evening for his nosegay, and that he would be un¬ happy if he saw the cottage neglected; she therefore assisted the mother of her little pupils in keeping it neat and clean, unknown to Edward, wdio failed not to notice the appearance of his grand mother's abode when they met, and to express his pleasure tbat it was inhabited by such careful tidy people as tbe industrious Wood and his hard-working wife. Patty, as vve have noticed before, was the keeper of áll Edward's secret wishes— to her he made known his very thoughts, while she, with equal confidence and love« made him acquainted with the chief of hen;. With her he continued to shed the tear
tear of grateful remembrance over the grave of his grandmother; it was here they now met as often as each had some¬ thing to communicate whicb required more privacy than usual—it was here that Edward first listened to the sole com¬ plaints wdiich Patty ever made of her fa¬ ther's blind partiality for the woman whose drunkenness and vulgarity made her home hateful. Edward, though two years younger than Patty Smith, was by far her senior in sense, inteľ 'gence, and power of rea¬ soning: be soothed, consoled, and com¬ forted her by the nssurances of his affec¬ tion, and by promises made in the open innocency of youth, without any baneful feelmgs of selfish return, that sh* 1 should live with him aid be the mistress of his home as soon as he had one to offer her. During one of these painful-pleasing visits, vvliich generally took place belorc the Lindsays were up in the morning, Edward, w ho had listened indignanti) to e íi a recital
a recital of a fresh insult offered to the delicacy of Patty by tbe improper con¬ duct of her father's housekeeper, endea¬ voured to afford her a new consolation, by holding out a hope that lady Man¬ ningham would perhaps employ her about the persons of her daughters, and thus prevent her from continuing to live un¬ der the same roof with a woman who w r as too often a disgrace to her sex. " Έο. dear master Edward," replied Patty, sighing bitterly, " Miss Lindsay vvill take care to prevent that ; her hatred to me wdll be a bar to my being noticed bv any oii n wbo is acquainted with her family ; besides, I w r as told by Mrs. Nor¬ ton, when I called the other day at the Hall, that lady Manningham is quite a woman of fashion—too proud to cast a thought upon her inferiors, or hardly to speak to them if they come in her way." " I hope this is not true, Patty/' said Edward; Si we must not always believe what we hear. I uppose Mrs. Norton gained
gained her intelligence from the servants, wdio were sent down to get the Hall in readiness for her reception. I also heard that they brought a letter to the old stew¬ ard, telling him that Mrs. Norton might continue in her present situation if she pleased, and all the domestics under her command might do the same if they liked, as lady Manningham did not intend to discharge any of the servants who belong¬ ed to the Hall, unless at their own request. This gave me a good opinion of her lady¬ ship, Patty, and I hope Mis. Norton will not suffer herself to Ix- prejudiced against lady Manningham by any report of her town-servants, wdio may want to get some one else into her situation." " I should never have thought of that," cried Patty innocently; " but they say that her ladyship is nearly related to the marquis of Aiiendale, whom she has not seen for several years, on account of a vio¬ lent quarrel whieh she bad with his wife the
the marchioness, and that the two famiiies have been enemies ever since' u We have nothing to do, Patty, vvith the private affairs of anybody : I shall think well of lady Manningham until she compels me to do otherwise, and so ought you. But where have 1 heard before the name of Anendale? It seems familiar to me, Patty ; perhaps you can assist my me¬ mory ?" '* I believe that I can/' replied Patty, " for that name always filled me with a sort of shuddering. The marchioness of Anendale was the lady that your mother lived vvith vvhen she was a girl ; that lady vvho, your dear old grandmother used to sav, had an angel's form and a devil's heart. Oh, I have never forgotten the speech, though she never spoke of her but twice, and then to your mother and rather." Edward felt the warm blood rush into bis cheeks: be was seated by the sod vvhieh
which covered tbe remains of one of the best of human beings, yet this very being was born and moved in the humbler walks of life. Angry with himself, be strove to check that pride within him which caused so often the blush to overspread his face at the mention of his owm origin.—" True, Patty," said he, " I remember now that the marchioness of Anendale was the young lady with whom my mother lived." Again he coloured deeply. " Surely she must have had some good qualities to at¬ tach my mother so strongly to her. We have all our faults, Patty; she had hers and I have mine." " You, master Edw r ard ! you ! Why, what faults can you have, since I and your grandmother could never see thern ?" Edward pressed the hand of Patty.— 44 You were blind to them, dear Patty, because you loved me; but I know that 1 have faults, great faults, Patty: I am proud, and cannot overlook an insult, if it
it were tc come from a prince : and what right have I to be proud, when my mo¬ ther was the attendant of lady Anendale, and my father------ " He was a gentleman bred and born," ( ried Patty hastily, " as every one can tell that looks on you, dear master Edward ; and if your mother was a servant once, she was made a gentlewoman wdien he married her, and is a gentlewoman still." Edward started from the ground.— " Come, Patty, let us walk ; the hour of breakfast draws nigh, and I would not be missed on your account. If lady Man¬ ningham is proud, so am I : some excuse may be found for her fault, but none for mine. Speak well of her, Patty, until you hear what I think of her: a few days more will bring her and her family to the Hall." Patty promised that she vvould not al¬ low herself to be prejudiced against lady Manningham without just reason, and Ed¬ ward,
ward, satisfied by this promise, now took an affectionate leave of her and ran all the way back to Mr. Lindsay's, lest Clara should be down before his return.
ТУТ) or vot , t.
ľunlMÍ bs .f D.ir' it" í-t.iílí iili,il!-.Str«et. I^ondcu.
