Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The highest castle and the lowest cave: or, Events of the days which are gone: Rebecca Edridge
CHAPTER I.
On a high rock the stately mansion stood : It was a place where Jove himself might seek A residence ; and Mars confess a home : Wherein the Paphian Queen might find delight, Or Juno roof her majesty !
Behold ! behold the morning sky ! The rising sun darts his soft beams, and the unclouded azure shines in cheerfulness ! So bright, so clear, so gay, shone the prospects of Matilda. Peerless maid ! sole heiress of the Baron de Montgomery, sole darling of her parent's age. The Baron dwelt in one of those ancient castles which our ancestors erected to protect themselves from the ravages of the Danes and other invaders, where he maintained with much haughtiness and pomp, the rough military character of a chieftain, and the rude magnificence of the days of yore. The castle was situated on the summit of a high rock, round which the river wound its course, and the adjacent hills were crowned with woods. Here Spring strewed her earliest flowers, and the last ruddy tints of Autumn lingered here : but VOL. и 3
2
lovelier than the early flower, and brighter than the flush of Autumn, was Matilda! The rose blushed in her cheek ; the Шу spread its white¬ ness on her bosom ; the plumage of the raven was not so black as the ringlets of her hair ; her eye excelled the diamond. With native grace she trod the mazes of the dance, and w r arbled her wild notes melodious. Yet her passions were im¬ petuous as the torrent. Her love was like the noon-day sun, her hate as the midnight storm. To make his child happy was the wish of Montgomery^ heart, and the only cause for which the Baroness sought to live. Thus, indulgence had marked her childhood, and gratification crowned her riper years. Far was spread the fame of her charms, and the greatness and power pf her father were knQwn to all. To celebrate the day on which she would at¬ tain her eighteenth year, the Baron de Mont¬ gomery proclaimed a tournament, to which every noble knight was invited ; when the magnificence and grandeur of his castle, and the hospitality of his board, exceeded every thing which had till then been seen in England ; for he commanded that every thing should display the high nobility of his house*s name. " Let all bespeak/' he said, " the pride with which I glory in my child. Let the echoes of my castle reply to nought but re-
3
velry and joy ; and let the lowest vassal that day make holyday, and partake the festival which cele¬ brates the birth-day of my daughter, and ushers her sweet beauty to the world. Henceforth, the pomp and ceremony belonging to her state, shall be decreed her ; and Montgomery's heir receive the homage due to her proud lineage. Yes, my child/' he continued, turning to Matilda, " the greatness of thy descent is marked in full display upon thy noble front, and I trust that thy future life will prove tliee worthy of thy ancestors." So saying, he led her to the hall where hung the trophies of many fonner victories. The heart of Matilda beat high as she surveyed them, and a spirit almost martial was awakened in her bosom. Needless to her it was to boast the pride of ancestry or the greatness of a name ; she felt their full force ; and the parade of rank, the ex¬ ercise of power, and the visions of ambition, filled her whole mind. The will of the Baron was a law. Obedience followed, when he spoke ; and each thought was turned toward the tournament. Every unrefined luxury of those ancient times was procured, to heighten the enjoyment, and adorn the pageantry of the festive day ; and guests from every distant county were assembled to prove their valour, and do honour to Matilda, the beauteous heiress of Montgomery. b2
CHAPTER П.
He fought я long fight, e'en through the whole day, Like a strong man he bore the prize away : From beauty's hand a bright reward he gain'd, And at her feet his sword, witli conquest stain'd, He humbly laid, his homage for to show, And bow'd his haughty head in rev'rence low« It was the lovely spring time of the year, the fields were beautiful with early flowers, the forests smiled in the soft tints of their first green, and the unruffled stream flowed silently along, reflect¬ ing the gay clouds, bright with meridian sun, when the Baron, surrounded by his family and friends, issued from the castle, and descended from the lofty eminence to the plain below. Host of the feast, he laid aside bis arms, and wrapped in the cloak of peace, preceded the train. Yet, eren thus arrayed, the martial air with which he trod betrayed the soldier. Tbe Baroness fol¬ lowed her lord. Rich was her attire, and a long veil shaded her matron cheek. At her right hand walked the queen of the day, Matilda, lea by the most noble knight among her father's de«
5
pendants. In honor of the tournament, she wore upon her head a plume of feathers, which waved majestic in the breeze. Her splendid robe was held by a young page arrayed in cloth of gold ; and all her mother's jewels graced her arms and bosom. They were attended by a train of noble warriors and stately dames, relatives of the Baron, and a lovely group of the young friends of Ma¬ tilda. The knights, esquires, and pages followed in the procession, two and two» As they proceeded slowly down the rock, the minstrels struck with energy the swelling chords of the harp, and chaunted the achievements of the illustrious ancestors of Montgomery. The tournament was held in an extensive plain, on one side of which rose a wooded hill; and on the other frowned the high rock whence Montgomery's castle displayed afar its lofty walls and stately battlements. When they entered the plain, the trumpets sounded a peal of joy, and the acclamations of the vassals assembled to receive them reverberated from rock, from hill, from grove. The Baroness de Montgomery and her fair daughter sat on elevated seats beneatii a spread¬ ing canopy erected for the occasion; as did the noble ladies who attended them. The Baron and the old nobles among his guests stood without the вЗ
6
lists ; while each young warrior was ready clad in steel to try his skill, and prove his valour in the mimic war. The prize was a silken scarf embroidered by Matilda. From her the victor should receive it, as the reward of victory, together with the privilege to bc styled her knight throughout the festival. All was arranged. The marshal charged that none should presume to touch the lists; the trumpet sounded a long and loud call. When it сеаь d, another trumpet sounded a reply: after which, a warrior on full speed advanced from among the knights who waited ready mounted to engage· " Who art thou?" said the marshal, " and wherefore comest thou hither ?"—" My name is Riebard de St. Evremond," replied the knight, " with all the world I will contend for the reward this day held fortli to valour. Here I throw my gage« and hurl defiance to each brave knight wbo dares to take it up." Again the trumpet sounded, and a youth ad¬ vanced, who dismounting, and giving his courser to his esquire, stooped and took the gauntlet from the ground. " Proud youth," he said, " I wül prove tbou art unworthy to be the knight of yon fair maid« Aly name is Hugh de Melville. Loudly I defy thee, and thus I throw my gage."
7
Then vaulting on his saddle he fixed his lance in the rest. St. Evremond did the same ; and each having wheeled to take his vantage ground, spur¬ red his courser and ran furiously against his op¬ ponent. Each was thrown back; their waving plumes almost swept the ground: recovering their seats, once more their fury met, when the lance of St. Evremond pierced through the mail of de Melville, and he fell. " Thou art vanquished ! yield !" cried St. Evremond. " Never," answer¬ ed Hugh de Melville ; but he could not rise ; his blood flowed fast till he fainted on the ground, and they bore him offthe field. At the repeated call of the trumpet, Robert de Varlenne advanced. The ceremonious gage thrown down and taken up, St. Evremond again disarmed his foe, and drove him from the field, and patted his black courser, who pranced exult¬ ing in the ring. The appellant's trumpet again called loudly on the foe; another answered the loud call, and a knight advanced ; again another, and another came; and again Richard de St. Evremond was victor. The applauses of the surrounding throng dead¬ ened the trumpet's voice, which still called on those who dared defy the challenger. At length the plaudits sank into silence, and they «at in mute gaze so long, that it seemed no one в 4
8
would dare contend with Richard, or dispute the prize and honour of the victory. In blushing pride Matilda rose holding the scarf, when a distant trumpet sounded again de¬ fiance· From the farthest extremity of the plain advanced a knight clad in complete steel : a full white plume waved on his helmet, and emblazon¬ ed on his shield glared a lion gardant. " Who comes thus late into the lists V 1 sternly asked the marshal. " The field of glory is open to all the brave,·* answered the knight. " Let a son of the once proud house of Nartonville regain its ancient honours· Let Henry de Nartonville arouse to hopes of happiness the widowed mourner of liis grandfather by bearing the bright scarf to cheer her drooping age. So may the deeds of Saladin and tbe siege of Acre be chased from her sad heart, and her son's son give full presage of future deeds of victory." So saying he took up the victor's gage and threw down his own. Long, long they fought ; often breast to breast their coursers rushed, their clashing arms sound¬ ed beneath tlieir strokes, and tbeir glittering swords struck fire from their helms. Neither had advantage of the other. The shock which threw young Henry from his saddle brought Richard de St. Evremond to the ground. They sprang up together, and hand to hand renewed
9 the combat. They continued fighting till the setting sun threw a lengthened shadow over the earth, when Henry broke his sword upon the shield of St. Evremond, wliere shone the tower¬ ing eagle. He instantly seized his rival in his arms, and grappled vvith him till they fell. In falling his visor unclasped, and his helmet fell to the ground, displaying a face on whicii the down was yet scarce visible. " Opposed so stoutly by a boy," cried St. Evremond, and springing up, he put his foot upon his breast and kept him where he lay. "Yield, yield," he cried. " О strike, in pity strike/* said Henry, " and let the last re¬ maining child of Nartonville be buried in an ob¬ scure grave, the name forgotten as the race is done." " I fought for conquest and the high reward held forth by brave Montgomery," said St Evremond, " those gained, I will not insult the vanquished." So saying, he raised young Nartonville : " Valiant youth," he said, " accept my hand ; thy well contended overthrow makes thy fall brilliant!" Then pressing him to his bo¬ som, he said, " Thy father was my father's friend ; early they fought, early they fell together, when thou wert yèt a nursling. For the king, for Henry of Winchester, both fought, both died» In a strange land they rest in peace» In an enemy's country unknown they moulder, far from BŐ
10
the tombs of their ancestors." Henry de Narton¬ ville pressed the hand of St. Evremond, and turned away his drooping head in silence. The voice of acclamation again burst forth in loud and reiterated plaudits, and no one answer¬ ing the appellant's trumpet, the baron de Mont¬ gomery advanced, and taking St. Evremond by the hand, he led him to his daughter. She rose in stately pride, and threw the scarf over the vic¬ tor's shoulder ; who, sinking on his knee, kissed her white hand, and laid his conquering sword beneath her feet. Hushed was the trumpet's voice. The harp resumed its harmonies, and the song of victory burst in unpremeditated strains from Alwin, chief of Montgomery's bards. The Baron again set forward to guide his guests to re-ascend the steep. St. Evremond, ac¬ cording to the promise made the victor, led Ma¬ tilda. The blush which heightened the carna¬ tion of her cheek, was the blush of conscious ex¬ cellence : and the pleasure which sparkled in her eyes, spoke the exultation of her heart. The orders of the Baron had been punctually fulfilled ; the great hall of the castle was prepared for the festival. The burnished arms and wea¬ pons, and waving banners of Montgomery, and the conquered foes of his house, in solemn gran-
Ιί
deur graced the walls ; while from the high-arched roof hung chandeliers of massy gold. At the upper end a table was dressed for the nobles, at the head of which, beneath a canopy, sat the Baroness and Matilda. At the lower end a table was pre¬ pared for the vassals. Profusion was spread on each, and the sparkling wine mantled in the flow¬ ing bowl. Yet order prevailed ; for it was the feast of Matilda : and while mirth diffused itself around, the gracious condescension of the boun¬ teous host supplied the wants of every one. With a master's hand Alwin touched the harp, and raised his mellow voice in songs of mirth and joy, while the surrounding bards in modulated harmony struck the chords in symphony, and joined the choral strain. The repast ended, the Baron drained the cup in honour of his child ; and each guest, rising, bowed ere he drank to the beauteous daughter of the castle. Again Alwin and his brother bards in raptu* rous chorus struck the quivering strings, and sang: Haii! hail, hail! Fair daughter of Montgomery, hail ! May peace be thy attendant, Prosperity thy handmaid» And length of days thy portion I вб
12
May thy childrens' children Flourish to the latest time, Ever lovely like thyself, And brave as their great ancestors I It was late ere they separated for the night» Next day they rose at dawn, and hunted through tlie forest. The huntsman's merry horn waken¬ ed the echoes from each lone dell and cave ; and the cheerful cry of the hounds rang through the lofty groves. From his lurking place, they rous¬ ed the cunning fox, and pursued him till the tangling branches stopt the coursers' speed, and the keen dogs were disappointed of their prey. Again the festive board was spread, and again revelry and mirth sounded beneath the hospitable roof of the Baron. Once more the minstrels struck the harp, and at the close of day Matilda led the dance. With light and graceful steps she moved along, and struck her feet in unison with the guiding air. On the third day the feast was again prepared, and the full bowl drained in friendly pledge : but not again the merry dance and sprightly air suc¬ ceeded. The hour of separation was arrived, and the closing gate of the castle declared that the feast was done« Every one departed save St. Evremond and Nartonville»
13
Long had the baron de St. Evremond owned the force of beauty's power ; long had his heart acknowledged Matilda for its sovereign. In trem¬ bling hope after the tournament he had declared his love to Montgomery, and begged permission to urge his suit to Matilda. " St, Evremond," said the Baron, " the heiress of Montgomery makes her own choice. Never will I force her inclinations. In her my father's name, in her my house's honours centre, and by her my line will be continued to posterity. Nobly descended, richly endowed, virtuously educated, she knows, she feels her value, and I dare trust to her the fame, the greatness, and the dignity of my family. Prolong your stay at the castle, and if the approbation of my daughter should favour the hopes of St. Evremond, she will gratify the wishes of her father.'*
CHAPTER III.
** In peace love tunes the shepherd's reed; In war he mounts the warrior's steed ; In halls in gay attire is seen ; In hamlets dances on the green ; Love rules the court, the camp, the grove ; And men below, and saints above ; For love is heaven, and heaven is iove.'* Lay of the last Minstrel. " Matilda, lovely Matilda !" said St. Evremond, ** if my victory be not displeasing to you ; if you ăo not regret that this cherished trophy was the prize of conquest, check not the presumptuous hopes which led me to the field. Say, beauteous daughter of the brave Montgomery, may the baron de St. Evremond sue, nor sue in vain, to be received into the favour of the castle's heir." ------He hesitated, and his softened tones and faltering accents declared what language was unequal to express. Matilda remained silent, but she withdrew not the hand he ventured to press ; while her rising blushes, and the soft smile wliich dimpled in her cheek, spoke peace to the heart of St· Evremond»
15
From that hour his assiduous care, and unre¬ proved attentions evinced to all the world the chosen of his heart, and the accepted lover of Matilda. О ! who can paint the transport of the youthful breast, glowing with ardent love? Time on his swiftest wing flies rapidly along in ecstasy, and the sun unheeded rolls from where he first lights up the east until he sink beneath the mountains, skirting the west with gold. So fled the hours at the castle ! when Matilda rode it was St. Evremond who led her palfry ; . he watched her footsteps when she walked, and led her through the woods which crowned the hills ; he strayed beside her on the margin of the stream; with her he joined the dance when Alwin struck the harp ; and when she sang he could for ever listen to the sweet sounds she breathed. With the impetuosity of her disposition Matilda loved with ardour. Her heart beat high when she beheld St. Evremond become her suitor. He was nobly born, and his family was as ancient as her own. Large were his domains, and numer¬ ous his vassals. Not only in the tournament, but in the field of battle he had given signal proofs of valour. His form was well proportioned, and his make athletic ; his countenance was open, and his deportment graceful : he was as well schooled as
IG шу nobleman of the açe m which he lived ; and his minners were polished to the full heioht ol ihose ancient times J| b ht\.rt dwelt on Matilda; ui her Ьь every wish wa*. centred: she v\as the hjett of his dad) thouoht^ and nightly dream«. Го be the husband of Matilda implied all happi¬ ness; and to lead her to hi> castle would be the ţ oîïiph tion of .dl earthly bh -. MoíUíiomer), meanwhile, and his virtuou IsaroîHss rejoiced in the fuliilment of all their v>bhcs, and anticipated the happy years of their ties lining age Near to the castle stood an old abbey, of which Vdtli/t, the Baron's sister, was abbess. She had taken the vedi after the death of her husband, md had ìesided thirty years withm the holy walh, which secluded her from the jo\s, and secured her from the insults of the vvoild. Her ри ty was sincere, her ht hav iour affable, and lier government lenient. There th.e afflicted fled fav comfort, and were cheered; theie the fnendlest nought a refuge, antl were succoured. She was highly beloved b) hei bi othei and -ister ele Montgomery, and to hei eare they had entrusted, in a very great degtee, the education of their darling child. To the abbe), tlierefore, would Matilda oft repair, and hsten to the ustnici io.s of the ab-
17
hess, whose energetic eloquence, graceful man¬ ners, лпа pleasing voice captivated the attention »ď her niece; but ahí thej* never reached her heart. The boast of ancestry, and tiie dazzhne, views of young ambition fired her lofty mind. while the humble joys of peace and resignation passed like shadows from her memory. Thither, after the tournament, in triumphant pride and vouthful joy, <die rode upon her pranc¬ ing palfry. '* Take back the palfry/' said she to her page ; u with the breeze of evening I will return on foot, and ticatl tho grace ciSpod hv the heat of day." Invited by the cheerful sun of eoily Μα), the abbess, attended by the nuns, had nought the proves and lawns of the extensive gardens of the abbey, its deserted chambers, and its silent ι loistcrs ill accorded with the feelings of Matilda ; she shuddered as she passed along their «loom, and the pomp of her father's castle, and the fond hopes of her illustrious marriage, clung elo-er to hei heart. She joined the sisters beneath the trees whose spreading branches overhung the winding stream, and she rejoiced when she compared the never- i hanging melancholy of a monastic life, with the spiring views of her own unbounded ambition. Among the nuns, Bertha de Clifford was cois
18
spicuous. She was young, lovely, noble ; and the favoured friend of Matilda. Yet grief withered her bloom, and sorrow blighted her charms. As thus they sat, the beautiful repose of the landscape, where every leaf was still, the plaintive voice of the nightingale, who sang his love-song in the grove, and the solemn notes of the bittern, which sounded among the distant sedges of the far-spreading stream, moved her almost to tears, and with a sigh she said, " To the shade of these proves, to the peace of these walls, I retire, for alasi in the grarc lie the hopes of my youth! О Matilda ! my friend !" she continued, " from the bier of my love I fled, from the tomb of Raymond la Faye!" ------"And I fled," cried the faded Blanch, " from infamy, from shame, from death ! from my betrayers perfidy, from my father's rage ; and thou, abandoned child ! innocent pledge of my guilt, I fled from thee ! О Adeliza ! ere thou wast known within this fane, I waked through the night in my cell ; I answered the shrieks of the owl !" Then clasping her hands, «he continued, " О pray for the soul of Montra¬ vers, for he fell to revenge his sister." During her long residence in the convent, Blanch had never till that hour breathed a sound which might betray the feelings of her mind. ------ Unhappy woman! austere in devotion, rigid in
19
abstinence, and severe in penance, she had passed near fifty years without one friend to whom she could confide her griefs. To night and darkness had she poured her sad plaint. Oft had the morning found her unclosed lids bedewed with tears, and often had the sound of her moan been uttered in midnight response to the roaring storm ! She had seen the sisters pass awr.y, and followed their cold remains to the gloomy man¬ sions of the tomb, without a tear, and seen their place supplied by many lovely victims of avarice and superstition, without a sigh. Never had she sympathized in the sorrow, nor rejoiced in the joy of her companions ; but in solitude had devoured her own unutterable woe, unloved, unsought, un¬ blessed ! The tenderness with which Bertha de Clifford had spoken of the melancholy cause of her holy retreat, had touched the heart of the morose Blanch. Sudden recollection flashed across her mind, and she spoke hastily : shocked at what she had said, she rose abruptly, and hurried from the garden. As with rapid steps she paced the avenue which led from the river to the cloisters, each eye pursued the path she followed, till she disappeared. A long silence ensued. Astonish¬ ment sat on the brow of the abbess ; and alarm marked the countenance of every nun. " Ah
20 me i " exclaimed the gentle Bertha, *■* what do the words of Blanch suggest? Her phrensied iooks, her incoherent phrases, her entreaty for « air prayers anil her budde» do})arture, betray a mind at variance with itself, a*id strongly indicate a eonscience ill at ease. 1 * "Judge not severely," said the abbess; " the abstinence of Ltmt has been члеге, and the penances performed by Blanch im iivts of Hipcrerogalion have been extreme. What exhaibíŕ, the body, weakens the mind. All die has spoken are the wayward fancies of a dis¬ ordered brain,—Follow her Cicely," she conti¬ nued, turning to a nun ; " calm and comfort her; it is a ôiiiy whicli we owe to each other." " My holy mother," said Cicely, " your goodness, your purity, vour sanctity, make you view too charita¬ bly the conduct of our sister Blanch. 1 have iffttn heard"-—'* i i ae \" said the abbess, with a í ommanding frown. Oli, my aunt," tlien said Matilda, *',·>top not \ош daughters tale. Blanch de Montrav ers must be guilty, for I have often heard my father say"—- u Peace," repeated Ade¬ liza; '' what may have driven her hiiher, is even to me unknown, Let no unkind Mirrane, no un- -isterly Mispieiois disgrace the daughť'i's of reli¬ gion. Let not the child of MontĽomev) def.tme -he familv of Monti'aven», hv sulfvini; the now onblemished reputation of the pioib Blaiuh.'
21
Ьо saying she arose, with unwonted anger, and harshly ordering all to follow her, led the way to the convent. Blanch had retired to her cell. On her knees they found her, earnest in pra) er. Her joineel hands, her uplifted eyes, and her frequent sighs, bore testimony to the anguish of her mind. Clos^ ing the door upon her, ' c Peace be with you, my daughter," said the benevolent abbess, as she retired, with sister Cicely, to the refectory. The haughty Matilda, who came exulting in the glory of the tournament, with sullen gloom retired from the convent while her aunt was ab¬ sent. The hill she had in pomp ascended, led by St. Evremond, she now paced alone. Yet, though the gathering clouds hid the early moon ; though the rising storm blew loud among the rustling woods, her undaunted bosom knew no fear ; her thoughts d wedt on the nun of the abbey, the aged Blanch de Montravers ; and with indignation she remembered that her observations had beer- checked. Her father met her at the portal. " Alone, Matilda! where is Sf. Evremond? where is Nar¬ tonville?'' " 1 saw them not," replied Matilda. as she passed quickly to the hall. The increasing tempest shook the battlements; the pealing thunder echoed among the rocks, and
the vivid lightning flashed from grove to grove, vvhile the drenching rain poured dovn in torrents, and the hailstones rattled upon the 4 lofty roof. The assiduous St. Fvremoud, accompanied by his young friend Nartonville, reached the great gates just as Matilda, thrtmgh the eastern clois¬ ters, left the abbeys Alarmed to lind hor gone, the> hastily retraced their steps, and quickly gained the foot of the ЬщЬ rock which frowned in gloomy majesty upon the plain below, A*s they ascended, they often stopped and looked around, to seek tlie lonely wandering Matilda ; and often St. Evrenund called loudly on her name; but the . t ,;i' ! oí his voice was lost amiti the roarings of the wind, and the light-footed Matilda outstepped the speed of her anxiously delayed pursuers. it was not for himself that St. Evremond trembled as the star«: retired, and the moon was hidden in darkness : it was not for hiim-elf he feared, when the blue lightnin«; spread a tran¬ sient gleam around, and the ionel thunder burst with tremendous sound. It was for his Matilda, —Imagination sickened, and his lieert died with¬ in him at the perilous sanation of his love. He felt her feais-, he saw her agony, he heard her cries, far distant and ahme, anel he smote his brea St, <> ţ he knew her not! She shrunk not
23 beneath the jarring elements ; undaunted she would have stooel tbe wreck of worlds. It was her pride to emulate the heroes from whom she sprang ; and had not hes* father's tenderness pre¬ vented her, amid the din of battle, and the clash of arm·?, she vvould have sought renown. Safe within the castle, she had no fears for the wan¬ dering St. Evremond, nor ^ver thought that he eould fear for her. Yet she loved greatl). She lov eel the victor who had gaineel the prize, and the here) wdio had bled in battle. When the bugle sounded at the gate she rose. Her fluttering heart in throbbing joy reproved the calm with which she waited his return, and with eager sfeps she ran toward the portal. " Art thou ín safety?" he exclaimed, as forcibly he »res h с to his bosom. ( ' We have sought thee through the storm, and pursued each murmuring semi id which s^bed amid the gloom, as tlie faint voice of my alarmed Matilda." Matilda frowned. 11 St. Evremond/' she said, tr I am thankful for thy vatťhťiJuess, but Matilda knows not fear. The daughter of Montgomery shrinks not be- ne.sh the whistlings of the Ы-Ы, or the roarings of the Sorm, Siie can be grateful for her pre- ч-*г\ ation, vet amiti the conflict she ever stand"» uibhakus'* St. Evremond, vvith glistening c)Cá,
•тхлгеа eagerly upon his heroine, and, almost to^t m admiration, again prest her to his bosom. The gentle Bertha, the ageel Blanch, and the лпогу abbess, were forgotten ; for in the balk where thev assembled, the arms and weapons led to tales of war.
CHAPTER IV,
» -----....... - " We are tho slaves of passion I Love-, joy, hupe, frar, rage, and revenge, by turns PosbC-s us ; and аь we resibt or yield Tu theii imperious '-way. our actions gain The moed of self-applause, the praibo of man, And the angelic ehoir ; or demons damn'd, With t'Mihatiun boas>t our overthrow, And bcoifiug, mock the \ictinib they have w ou. ''
However much offended Matilda had been h v the reproof of the abbess, she did not long ab¬ sent herself from the convent. There returning, siie found that from the hour the wretched Blanch revealed her grief, she sickened. Shame overpowered her, and she would not quit her cell. Confined, and cherishing her sorrow, she was for many davs restless, sullen, and silent ; but vvhen she found her dissolution fast approaching, .she bege ed to see the abbess. " O, Adeliza," she exclaimed, "pray,—pray for a child of sin! Let all the sisters join in prayer. Send for the holv iather Adrian." Then, clipping her hands in vol. ι. с
26 agony, she cried, "Can Adrian absolve the wick¬ ed í Yet ï will speak.— Yes—i will reveal what has been hidden for nearly fifty year> within my heart. Bitter, hitter concealment ! Send! send for Adrian. Yet ьа), — telime, —can cemfession make amends for es-imes committed, and for duties unperformed Ì Lead me, О lead me to the cha¬ pel. Let all attend ; let the penance 1 impose upon m) ielf he public ; let me warn the wxrlel by my example ; and may my grief, my contrition, my remorse, my shame, speak to the hearts of all." She strove to rise 1 , but could not. On a pallet fhey conveyed her to the chapel, vvhere, before the altar, they set her down ; while all the sisters the hoarders and visiters of the abbey stood around. Adrian was absent; therefore ihe superior of his convent sent another confessor to perform ihe church's rites, and receive the confession of the dying Blanch. When she saw a stranger stand beside her, she shrieked aloud—' f Where, where is Adriani Does he desert me in my List moment . will he not speak peace to my departing soul, nor absolve the daughter of his care ?" if Father Adrian," replied the monk, *-is gone on busines-s of much import to our convent, and will be long away: but, daughter. I shall supply* his place, and sooth
27
and comfort thy afflicted spirit, and assist thy flight to realms above the clouds ; to realms where thy long sojourn in this holy mansion has daily leel thee on." So saying, he fixed his sunken eye upon the ghastly visage of the expiring nun. His meagre form, his sallow, care-worn countenance, anei lus fixed regard inspired awe. The eye of Blanch met his, and her faltering tongue denied its oflice* After a long pause, the father, turning to the abbess, said, * r It is the hour of prayer." Then, turning again to Blanch, he said, " Join with ib, daughter, so shalt thou regain composure." They all knelt round the pallet on which the victim of despair was extended ; and after the service was ended they chaunted a penitential hymn. The contrite tones of the sisters pierced to the soul of Blanch, who, raising her head upon her hand, began,— (i The sisters confined within the walls of this our place of rest, need not surround my couch, nor press to hear my tale ; for here temptation never comes to lure the too prone heart to guilt ; or waken passions, vvhich, indulged, destroy our peace, and lead tt) such a death as mine. But let the young, the innocent and unsuspecting votaries of the world approach ; let them listen to the sad Могу of my woes ; let them listen while I recount
28
those wrongs, those injuries on which memory evei looks back with indignation ; and while I confess crimes wherein I still find cause for shame, for penitence, for fear, and for despair. ef I was the daughter of the brave Montravers, the sister of the gallant Henry. Happiness and peace each night closed my lids in slumber; cheer¬ fulness awoke me in the morning. How changed ! how miserably changed ! Cruel, cruel father ! Beloved, murdered Henry! ye hear me while 1 speak! Oh prompt my tongue to utterance. " Yes, I was fair ; Randolph de Neville con¬ fessed that 1 was fair,—that 1 was lovely ! The voice of flattery soothed my sou) : his words of praise delighted my fond heart : I heard him, and I loved. Methinks I live again to rapture, when I trace back the days vvhich passed in joy, vvhile a father smiled, and a fond moth' 1 !' gazed delight¬ ed ; while love breathed his tenderness, and ever¬ lasting bliss seemed spread around me. But ah! the sad reverse which I have proved. Must I,— darei say í was betrayed í Ono! Stretched on the copcii of agony and deatli, let me confess rny crime ; let me confess that I met love with love,—rapture with rapture. " Days, weeks, months . >lîed on, and I wn-. happy. At length my shame became apparent : could not raise my ejes unto my mother,— 1
29
trembled in the presence of my fii ther. i Blanch/ said he sternly, ť whence this change? Dare I suspect my daughter V I sunk on my knees be¬ fore him. He spurned me from him, and harshly cried ť Begone !' Henry, my brother, my dear brother, called Randolph out to combat. They fought,—my brother fell! To Randolph,—to my love, the author of my shame, the father of my child, I fled,—from him I souglit for comfort. * Hence, hence/ he cried, ' and hen? thy infamy alone. Thy wiles ensnared my heart,—thy lures entrapt my soul. For thee thy brother dies,—- the brave, the noble, the virtuous iriend of my youth V " Violently agitated, she paused : she cast an imploring look upon the confessor. " Alas ! re¬ verend father," she exclaimed, íť the gay, the sportive, the fond hours of love and happiness are at an end. Guilt, never to be expiated, mark«? my succeeding years ; and grief, corroding grief, has, from that period, been the inmate of my bosom. Oh î I have a tale to tell—let not the echoes catch the sound.—O, my son ! neglected boy ! miserable outcast !" The countenance of the monk became more ghastly pale : Adeliza trembled, and the listeners drew closer to each other. " O, holy man! where is the unction vvhich can с 'ό
30 purify d soul Hke mine ? Nighf and day his sf Kl . dow follows me. bpurned, despised, abandoned hv the partner of my crim<s 1 cast a piteous glance upon the groves which shedtered my fa¬ ther's castle. 'Happy, happy scenes of inno¬ cence,' I cried, ' fai ew ell ! The wretched Blanch will not pollute jour shades with her sad plaints. To rocks, to caves she Шеч, where human foot¬ steps never je*- Isne marked the way.' I fled.— wild toots and berries were my food,—the cok' damp earth my bod. Still I fled, furtlier and further still I fied ; day after day pursuing the traekless heath, or tangled vv ood. Fast approached ni) hour of woe, when, exhausted by fiitigue, I reached the poorest shed that ever sheltered mi-erj 1 found a meagre man and squalid wo- nsir t lies turned from my approach. ť Receive me. Oh receive the most unhappy of her sex/ ï fainii) ciied, 'and let a wretched mother hero find (l bhih-placo for Ьет child.' ·* XaSíľe and svmnathy spoke in the Ьомпп of tîıe h mah , -dio eime tov aai me, sîıe took mv hand aud led me· to hei miserable couch. \ few sad hi urs uf pani a'id agon), and a loved) baft -m led on hi guilt) mother, í pressed him to mv heaii, 1 lulled him in mv bosom, I wiapped him in tne taítt rs of his native hovel! Yor man) vu *ks Ьь cherub look*, aw.aged my giief, and
31 calmed my woe. The very little money 1 pos¬ sessed was soon gone, and my host informed me he couiel no longer shelter the wretchedness which was unable to reward his care. I caught my child in agony. 'Poor babe!' 1 cried, 'what will become of tliee ? 1 have uo mcins to Year thee ! 1 cannot see: thee perish—perish for want.' Oh, had 1 killed him as he ld\ } i hdd been merci¬ ful, for his blessed spirit would have flown toward its kindred sky, anel happiness had been th fi por¬ tion of the unpolluted innocence of his soul : but ah! remorseless, cruel mother! 1 only staid to name him at the font, then, wild with wretched¬ ness anel despair, 1 quitted the horrors of my asylum, and left my boy unknown, unfriended, unprotected !" The agon) of her confession overpowered the weakness of the emaciated penitent, who cobbed aloud, and groaned vvith convulsive struggling«:. The astonished friar sunk on tho p dlet, —** >*» iy •—speak,"—he cried, "what v\\b the паше 1 you цал e him ?" '' An-tin,"' feebly replied the almost exhausted nun. '" Aus+'m!'" replied tlie monk, starting from the bed,-—" Austin! miserable, de¬ luded woman!" he continued, in a more softened lone, "look ţq», be hold in me the 1 v. retched outcast you abandoned ! Behold î h' hold y our long-forsa¬ ken son !" Blanch shrieked aloud, and springing
forward, sunk on the bosom of the monk, and instantly expired. Austin involuntarily clasped the no longer ani¬ mated form of his mother, lie raised his dark, deep-sunken o)cs to heaven, and the big drops rolled down his pallid cheek, while a dreadful pause riveted the spectator^ to the spot. Sud¬ denly starting he sprang away, and the lifeless Blanch fell back upon her pallet, lie walked rapidly down the aisle,—rcturneel vvith hurried steps, and gazed again upon the corse. He groan¬ ed, and beat his breast, " Is this a meeting with a parent?—This my first interview with my mo¬ ther?" Again the tears chafed each otlier down his cheeks. He hastily dashed them away with liis hand. " For shame, for shame," he cried, ,f what have 1 to do with tenderness? I know it no' ; I ne\er found il." A sudden ilush erimson- ul his wrinkled visa oe, and when again he ca^st hi- eves on the di-torted features of his mother, апцеч alone sparkit el in their new!)-awakened lustre. Tim-lived, thus died, the скшц1иог of Montra- vers, the mother of Austin. Iks happiness de¬ st rosei!, it τ hf »pes bl.bted. Neglected, forgotten bv her friends ; imlamenled even in her son. \ tt, peace be to thy soul, frail, guihv Blanch ! Sev о reiv
33
hast thou suffered for thy crimes! Even thy joy was grief Witlx solemn steps, and pensive melancholy, Adeliza and her holy train retired from the cha¬ pel. The wretched monk returned to his monas¬ tery, but not to him returned tranquillity. He* attended vespers ; the prayer which passed his lips, rose not from his heart. He heard not the deep-toned organ, nor the holy choir. His every thought strayted to the pallet of his mother, and he was only sensible to the tale she told.
i ·?
CHAPTER V.
That which the Fates conceal is oft our joy, Our happiness ! the veil once torn away We see our lot with a distemper'd eye, And all things change their hue. " Randolph de Neville ! Blanch de Montravers i" said Nartonville, when Matilda spoke of the nun's sad tale. " O, those names bring back to memory the deeds of former times. Randolph de Neville was uncle to my father. Have you, Matilda, have you seen the sorrowful, the forsaken Blanch ? Have you heard the wretched story of her brother s death, and of her own mysterious flight ? Alas ! it is a tale of woe !" " A tale of woe, indeed," replied Matilda. " Never, never shall I forget the hour which gave it to the world. The dejected, the heart-broken, aged penitent detailed at large the varied scenes of happiness wliich blest her youth, the wretchedness which marked her flight, and the horrors which had haunted her from morn to night, and through the dreary night till morn again returned, for ever and
35
for ever bringing to her distracted mind the image of her forsaken son." " Her son," saito léartonville., " did you say her son ?" " Aye," said Matilda, ťť a son vvho almobt from his birth she left an outcast ; a son, who re¬ ceiving the sad history from her dying lips, stood before her in the person of her confessor. Wlien lier tale had manifested past a doubt that she was his mother, Miserable, deluded woman, he ex¬ claimed, look vp : behold in me the wretched out¬ cast you abandoned : behold, behold your long for¬ saken son / With agony too great to be endured, vvitii transient joy too exquisite to bear, she shrieked aloud, and springing on the bosom of the monk, expired." " I must seek the monk/' said Nartonville, starting from bis seat. " Pause a wiiile, young man/' said the baron de Montgo¬ mery. " О my lord," continued Nartonville, " Randolph de Neville bad a sister, Emma de Neville, in early life she was betrothed, and in the prime of youth and beauty married to my grandfather. Fired with the enthusiasm whicb marked his day, he alienated his inheritance, and took the cross. For the holy war he left bis wife and only child, a blooming boy, and witb other noble victims to the cause, was massacred at Acres. The widowed Emma reared her son in solitude, and living retired, she formed his mind c6
3G
to nobleness and honour. Then it was Randolph her brother injured the escient family of Mon¬ travers, and slew the hei,% y »g Henry. Then it was he fled his country, and wandered long from clime to clime, from kingdom to kingdom, on the Continent. My father, meanwhile, vvith all the gallant spirit of my grandsire, grew into manhood. He sought for fame among his noble peers. He sought renown in the embattled field. Robert de Nartonville shall be named among heroes ! future ages shall know the valour of my father ! plumed with victory, crowned with laurels, he sought the dwelling of his mother. To cheer the loneliness of the sequestered spot to which she had r retired, the beauteous Isabella d'Aumarleime blest the retreat with her society. Between her and my father a mutual passion grew, and with the approbation and the blessing of his mother, they were united. Again the voice of war called my father to the field. Mournfully he hade farewell to all he loved on earth ; and nobly fighting for his country, nobly died!"------A tear started to the e}e of' Nartonville, and a sigh un¬ hidden heaved his breast, and stopt his tale. ·' He fell, Henry," said St. Evremond, "on the plains of France, my father fell beside him. Grief shall for ever mark the day on which they died. You were then too young to recollect them/'
37
*' Alas !" said Nartonville, fi I never knew a fa¬ ther's care; he died ere I was born, and my dear mother lived but to leave me as a sad bequest unto the aged Emma, when her spirit fled to join my fa¬ ther in the realms of peace and joy. The care she had bestowed upon her son, with redoubled ten¬ derness she gave to me his child. 4 О my boy,* she often said, ť thy noble grandfather, and thy valiant sire have left thee no inheritance but ho¬ nour. Their riches have passed into the hands of strangers, yet their name still lives in thee. Tarnish it not, Henry, nor call a blush into the cheek which glow's with pride when speaking of the fame of thy fathers !' I longed to be a man. Time seemed to lag till I could emulate the deeds of my progenitors. While from her lips I caught the fire whicli glowed in the high praise she gave her husband and her son, Randolph de Neville died. To his sister he becpreathed his wealth, his castle, his domains ; and the heir of Nartonville became the heir of Neville. The ex¬ ternal pomp of greatness, the magnificent parade of stateliness again shall decorate the offspring of Nartonville, while the dignity of virtue shall beam from the eyes of Emma, and the fame of his ancestors shall kindle in the bosom of her grand- fon. They inculcate generosity, and the poor monk must not remain unknown," " Thou art a
3S
noble youth," said the baron de Montgomery, u the monk shall not remain unknown ; we will visit him at his monastery." " Aye, instantly/ 1 said Nartonville. " О the warmth of goodness, the glow of youthful virtue," said Montgomery. " No, Nartonville, not instantly ; the heart which has so lately felt the horrors of the death of Blanch, cannot so quickly turn to hope and joy. It is the sabbath of his grief ; spare him awhile." Nartonville bowed in silence. " After to-morrow," said Matilda, " the remains of Blanch will be con¬ signed to the grave. She will be deposited in her last mansion, among the sisters who like her have passed avvay. There may her failings be for¬ gotten, and may the many years of penitence which strongly marked the time she hid her shame within the cloister, make her peace with heaven." " May her ashes rest in peace," said the Baroness, " and her spirit rise in joy ! The course she followed, the life she led, and the death she died, should warn the young, the gay ; and may her example teach the world to seek for happiness in the paths of virtue." (f Peace to her soul," said Nartonville. A melancholy pensiveness stole on the party assembled at the social board, and when they separated, an involuntary sigh spoke their fare¬ well.
за
The frequent sigh heaved also in the breast of Austin. In the gloomy retirement of his cell he waked the live-long nigiit. « Am I then," he said, ťť the son, the only son of Randolph de Neville ! him whom in Italy I served ! did I wait the nod, did I follow the steps of my father ? did servitude disgrace the ehild of Blanch de Mon¬ travers ? О ! wretched parents ! your crimes pur¬ sue your offspring î vvhere are the joys, where is the greatness, where the fame that should attend yonr son ? Gone—vanished î —while he unknown hides beneath a cowl." Then starting, and pa¬ cing vvith hurried strides his lonely chamber, he exclaimed, " I will f eek my family, will bear the name, will seize the honours of my ancestors î Though by all discarded, I vvill declare my birth ; though by all rejected, I vvill tower aloft ; and like the soaring eagle gain the sun, and draw new life from the vvarm font of brightness.' 1 Had he never known hb parents, Austin had been happy. To the wretch reared by the boun¬ ty of a hind, and turned by poverty adrift to seek a doubtful livelihood ; to one condemned to labour through the day ίο gain a daily meal ; to one who served among the lowest of the soldiery; who spent his prime of manhood in a servile state, laqueying the pageantry of the exiled Randolph, the asylum of the cloister had been the retreat of
40
happiness ; but the vow he had taken, and the fraternity to vvhich he belonged, he now execrated as the barriers to his exaltation ; and the know- lodge of who he was, embittered every hour, which, unknowing of his birth, he would have passed in thankfulness for having found a place of refuge.
CHAPTER VI.
Let tim re<e'' em í>ad bc sung, And the .solemn beli be rung ; Let the priests in sable stole Pray for her departed soul ; While the sîhters standing round See her laid iu holy ground, Sprinkling on her mournful bier With holy drops the tender tear. The agitated Austin had been unable to perform the sanctimonious rites for wliich he had bees sent to the abbey. Unanointed he left his life¬ less mother ; and unattended she remained some hours upon her pallet near the altar. Conster¬ nation reigned through the abbey ; even the Ab¬ bess neglected the prayers for tlie dead. At length the solemn knell awakened al! to a recolie, г- tion of their duties. They returned to the chapel, sprinkled the coki remains of the departed Blanch according to their holy rites, and began the fune¬ ral solemnities by bearing her in slow procession back to her cell. On the morrow she was arrayed
42
in the habiliments of the grave, and the next day consigned ю her kindred earth. Covered with a black pall she was again con¬ veyed into the chapel. The solemn dirge was chaunted by the nuns, and the friars of the neigh¬ bouring convent. The soft voices of the sisters sang a mournful invocation, the deep toned voices of the monks mingled at intervals in the strain and the full chorus swelled loud and lofty, while the high organ gradually rose from low and plain¬ tive sounds to the grandest tones of choral har¬ mony. Again the strain was sacl and low, and again it rose as though the peeling sound would shake the arched roof. At the grave the priest read the awful service with solemnity and pious fervour, while mute at¬ tention riveted the auditors to the mournful spot. ihey lowered the coffin, they threw the earth upon the lid, when Austin suddenly springing from among the friars, who stood round the offi¬ ciating priest, seizing the sextorfs arm, cried 44 I told."—The prie.st frowned, and began austerely to reprove 1 his interruption. " О holy father," said the miserable monk, i{ the corse you now deposit in the grave was my mother. She never" —he checked himself-—he forbore the accusation which trembled on his tongue, and in silent agony he leaped upon the cofiin, and sinking on
43
his knees, with violent emotion he ejaculated a low whispered prayer. His uplifted eyes, and liis extreme agitation subdued the priest, who buf¬ fered him to pray without disturbing his orisons. Every eye was fixed upon him, wdien suddenly rising, he said aloud, " 'tis done, 'tis registered/ and leaping from the deep grave he again took his silent station among his brethren. After a long pause, the priest resumed the rites, and the sisters renewed in solemn tones their plaintive wailings ; then all turning from the scene of death, followed the priest through the vaulted passages back to the abbey. When they quitted the gloomy path wliere a few faint tapers guided the mourners tread, they proceeded through a range of cloisters to the fountain court, where the holy brethren separated from the procession, and vvith slow pace walking two and two, quitted the abbey through the lofty and wiele expanding arch-way which led to the surrounding wood; •and the sifters pursued their course beyond lhe comí to the spacious hall, through vvhich they proceeded slowly to the apartments of the Abbess. Thine ceased the solemn pageantry; but the ihdaied Liane h de Montravers long con¬ tinued the theme «^'conversation, aad the subject of seriou- contem plat ion. But thou, Austin! what were thy feelings?
44
were thy ejaculations pious? was thy regret filial? ah no ! revenge was thy contemplation. Revenge upon mankind! inger against thy mother; and execration of thy father ! upon the grave of his parent he had vowed to act his wicked purposes, and though treading on the cold form, which shewed the end of human power, unawed, unwarned, he called on all the saints to register the vow he made. To interrupt the priest wdiile performing the sacred rites of the church at the grave of a de¬ parted sister, could not, however lenient the su¬ perior, be passed unnoticed. Austin was con¬ demned to a severe penance ; he was many days conhned within his cell, and enjoined a fast so rigid, that merely to sustain his life sufficed the bread they gave him, with a cup of water. Unfortunate severity ! No penitence ensued, but anger and exasperated rage gained a stronger hold upon his mind, and his malignant heart formed various plans of action. He would assas¬ sinate ! he would unu ermine ! he would declare against the heirs of his father, and be legitimated! " Yes," he cried, e< I vvill avenge my wrongs. No remorse, no dread shall find a place in my deter¬ mined bosom, but hatred never to be softened, and implacable revenge shall possess me wholly— witness, every saint—witness, ye guilty authors of
45
my being, to the oath I sw ear ! mark my determi¬ nation, and register my deeds !" His penance done, he left his cell hardened and resolved. With anvious ear he listened to e\ery voice; with wily attention he marked every word; vith eager curiosity he entered every dwelling, and under the mask of religion, and sanctioned by his holy garb, he gained admittance into every famil}. To the castle of Montgomery he was invited. The hospitality of tlie Bai on, the gentleness of the Baroness, the urbanity of St. Evremond, and the geneiosit} ot Nai touville, opened a wide field for his dark schei ies я -nd he marked young Неш y for hih pre}. V\ lur ist iii nour du di» Do S li ıs no и ulune Lnmarked by the noble inmates of the castle was the rancorous gı m with which he heard the name of Neville: unnoticed the malignant sneer with which he «azed on Nartonville, and the contempt w hich sat on bib brow w hen he listened to the plan of kindness lie had pioposed to adopt It was with difhculty he pent within his breast the rage which kindled w heu Ыь father's, nephew would have made him a pensioner on Ьь boent) ;
46
and when he declined the proffered kindness, they marked not the blood which mounted to his cheek, nor the anger which flashed in his eye. To humility, to contempt of worldly pomp, was imputed his self-denial, and they rejoiced that the confession of the wretched Blanch had discovered her excellent son, and brought forward such ex¬ alted virtue to the world. " Vain boyV he cried when he was alone, " shall I become dependent on thy bounty ! shall I accept an eleemosinary gift, and receive a mea¬ gre stipend from the possessions of my father ? No ! shouldest thou give me all, I would reject thy offer, nor condescend to take from thy hand, what in justice should be my own ! I know thy nobleness, I acknowledge thy generosity, but the son of Neville must be the foe of Neville's heir." When not in the pursuit of means to further his projected claim, he sought the gloomiest and thickest shades of the vast woods which spread for many miles beyond the castle and the convent, Beneath their spreading branches he would ru¬ minate upon his neglected childhood, and all the hardships he had undergone ; and keep alive the vengeance he had vowed, by thinking on the for¬ tune he had lost. He saw his self-accusing mother stretched on a pallet; he felt her heaving breast against his
47
bosom, and heard the frantic shriek when she expired. " Daughter of Montravers/' he ex¬ claimed, " thou shouldest have lain beneath a canopy ; thou shouldest have expired surrounded by thy family, and been followed by tby friends to the tomb of thy ancestors !—shouldest have ex¬ pired !— О hadst thou been virtuous, hadst thou been just to thy own fame and to thine offspring, even now, that thou art mouldering in the grave, thou mightest have lived an ornament to thy race, and the pride of thy son !"—In spite of the acri¬ monious anger which raged uncec*ising in his bo¬ som, he could not forbear his tears when in ima¬ gination he beheld his mother happy, and himself a cherished child ; but the vision vanished : he returned to the reality of his deserted fate, and the meditated vengeance he was plotting. While his time was thus divided between his visits to the castle and his solitary, gloomy ram¬ bles, father Adrian, who had been sent to Rome, died on the road. The heat of the season, the length of the way, and the speed with which he journeyed, shortened his blameless life, and he quitted this world for a better in a small romantic valley among the mountains of the Alps. He had been confessor to the baroness de Mont¬ gomery and to Matilda, and to supply his place they chose the son of Blanch. 9
CHAPTER VII.
O'er rock aml o'er plain, tin ough wood and through elen, They vtaudei'd, attended bv aimvdnun : They roe eie the чт Нь ι ourse had betmii, And travell'd when he in the ocean w a«? laid, And the moon о ei the w aw Л softer lifihf euu\ And guided them safe thiough the ghmmeiiug gSd(
Ir was- a long daj's journey from the castle of Montgomery to that of St. E v remond, and bevond that three days of dreary travelling to the castle which the aged Emma de Nartonville inherited from her brother. Tei prepare for the reception of hi.s beloved Matilda, 8t, Evremond, accom¬ panied by the youthful Henry, left the hospitabk* roof of the baron de Montgomery. It was high bUinmiT ; at the first peep of dawn they rose, and ere the чт appeared above the mountains, they had proceeded many tedious miles. They at fir^t pursued the course of the river, then turning abruptly from it, they mounted a steep hill, and ihen descended inlo a deep valley, liven there
49
the Baron's castle, from the prodigious rock on which it stood, was in full view, and seemed to meet the clouds. Richard de St. Evremond stood gazing on the turrets, and hardly could he drawn from the spot where he could still behold the walls which enclosed Matilda. At length, quitting the valley, they entered the forest, whes the sun, iit highest noon, scarcely enlightened the deep gloom. It was the haunt of the bandits. The midnight plunderer and the dark as^a.s-m lived secure in its recesses. The numerou- < nd well armed attendants of the two young liai on- kept closer to their masters, while the distant halloo and the shrill whittle often made them start. After many hourt,' riding, tliey perceived the ground begin to rise, and the tree-, in thuinei growth, gradually let in the da}. At lussh emerging from the thicket, the} entered an exten¬ sive plain, and beyond that they climbed wsh difficulty a steep hill, from the summit of whitb they saw the western main extending to the ho» ¿ /on, and spari ling beneatii the га}ь of ao uo clouded sun. There the} stopped to take res t h ment, and rest their weary horses. When they thought that the horses were abı. to pursue their journey, they remounted, and be¬ gan to descend into the wide plains which led ihem to the chores of the ocean. Dangeroib and VOL, I. 1)
50
steep vvas the descent between two craggy rocks, and dreary the wild heath which led to the cliffs of the sea· They followed the shore till the full moon made a silver path upon the wave, when by a winding road, which again took them from the sea, they entered the domains of St. Evremond. It was near an hour ere they reached his castle ; when they arrived, " Ah, my lord," said the old steward, " I rejoice to see you once more within the gates. Oh, it is an age since you went away ! Indeed, indeed, during your long absence time has gone heavily along !" £( I thank your love, my good Walter/ 1 said St, Evremond, as he crossed the court, and led the way to the great hall. The high-arched roof was supported by- two ranges of pillars, and the saloon to which it led, displayed the full perfection of Gothic ar¬ chitecture» It was stone; four fluted pillars formed and supported the central arch, adorned with all the minute delicacy of the sculptor's chisseL Opposite to the folding doors by which it was entered, was a large arched window, which faced a lengthened avenue of noble oaks, leading to the margin of a majestic river, which ran toward the sea, and received into its waters the salt tide. This window was the centre of the south front. The various rooms of state extended eastward, and the chambers to the west were
51
destined for the future Baroness. " Here," said St. Evremond, as he led Nartonville round the quadrangle, " here shall my wife, my own Ma¬ tilda, dwell; for her this range of chambers shall be prepared. Here art shall shew its skill, here wealth shall display its splendour ; for hither shall I lead my bride, here shall I live with my love." Henry de Nartonville remained many days vvith St. Evremond, and the excellent qualities each discovered in the other, riveted their bond of friendship. St. Evremond attended Henry to the confines of his woods, where they separated vvitii mutual assurances of attachment, union, and defence. St. Evremond returned to the pleasing occupa¬ tion of his nuptial preparations, and Nartonville vvith his attendants pursued his way to the resi¬ dence of his aged grandmother. The hand of cultivation had not then diffused plenty o'er the smiling land. Dreary neglected plains, naked desolate heaths, deep gloomy un¬ cleared forests, steep hills, and abrupt precipices, in dismal change, succeeded each other, as he rode along, and few and distant were the towns through which he passed : the tolling of a con¬ vent bell was often all, for many miles, vvhich told him he was near the haunt of man. Toward the close of the third day, as he quitted ώ2
52
a vast forest, his eyes were blest vvitii the long- wibhed-for sight of home. The grey turrets of Randolph de Neville's castle appeared above the Sees by which it was surrounded, and his heart beat with joj, \\ hen \ it-ht hid thiown İRİ ciufmt o'ei the woi Id, And the p de Mom had ristii in the e i^t be reached the uplifted drawbridge. The lout! -oi liding bugle echoed through the courts; the v.atchful warder looked from above, and when he , 'Vv his lorel, he shouted a loud notice to the (л -líc. The iovful tidings reached the lontlv Emma. She ran to meet her hen, and pressing* hmi to her beatili« heart, exclaimed, " Make me 'h inkful, heaven." Ihe fame wliieh, though vanquished, he had •utpiired at the tournament, had reached the *>SÌe ere he arrived, and vvhen she clasped him to her bohons the glow of exultation tinged her s,ed visage, anel pride and rapture sparkled in Ihm e) es. Tbe niAirnifìcence, the pomp, and the splendour .»t Montgomery; the magnanimity and the prowess of St. Evremond; and the beauty of Matilda, u ore almost inexhaustible themes for praise and hu delight: but when the youth changed Ьь f one, and spoke of Blanch, or recommended
53
Austin to her notice, the tears of true benevolence trickled down the cheeks of the venerable Ba¬ roness, and the sigh she heaved at the recital oi their woeful tale, called Randolph her beloved brother to her sad remembrance, and the ddy-i which were gone for ever, passed in melancholy review before her. She beheld herself bereft o t every friend, of every stay, save her granebon Henry ; )et, when she gazed upon his noble form and animated countenance, the soother hope be¬ came again the inmate of her virtuous heart.
Ü.Í
CHAPTER VIII.
Within the cloister's gloom ail seek ι epose, And yet not llirre &ha"l peace be evt j r found, Unless pure thoughts, and \ h tuous deeds attend Tlie humble votai y~ Whei e goodness Uwelb Holy is ev'iy place, and onl> there Where vhe abideth can true happiness Be found.—
From the peace which dwelt within his convent, from the high esteem and marked respect he found at the Baron de Montgomery's castle, Austin derived no joy. He longed to view liis father's mansion ; he eagerly desired to range among the possessions of De Neville, To accomplish his wish, he obSiined permis¬ sion from his superior to undertake the journey. Few were the preparations for his departure · alone, and on foot, he travelled the long rugged wa}, It was not necessary to pass the castle oí St. Evremond ; there was a nearer road. Cross- imr, therefore, the river vvhich flowed at the ba^e of the rock on vvhich Montgomery's castle was- erecied, and then watered the verdant lawis
55 of his convent, he entered the woods, which foi many miles extended on the opposite shore. The sleepless nights he had passed in meditating on his future plans ; the various passions which con¬ tended in his bosom, and the rapidity with which he set forth, compelled him soon to halt, and yield unwillingly some rest to his exhausted body. He went a little out of his road to a fallen tree, which lay at no great distance, ami as he sat ruminating, he perceived among the tangling shrubs and thick underwood the low remains of an old wall. Sur¬ prised at what he saw, he approached the spot, and with increased astonishment, found many- fragments of cemented stone lying about the place. He sat down among the heaps of rub¬ bish which surrounded him, and being refreshed, he began to examine the ruins scattered round. While he felt his way with the staff which sup¬ ported his steps, it suddenly sunk among the bushes, and finding no bottom he was near fall¬ ing, lie moved away the brambles whicli con¬ cealed the hole, and, somewhat alarmed, beheld a flight of stairs. He descended a few steps, vvhen the idea that he was entering the retreat of robbers, checked his curiosity. He stopped, he listened—all was silent. He ventured on— açrain he stopped, and bent forward with attentive ear. Hushed was every sound, and he hastily rushed d 4
50 \ down. v At the foot of the stairs, he entered a dark passage : not a ray of light appeared through its dismal length, as the monk with his hand against the wall, felt his dark way. At the ex- frtmiity of the passage, he found a door. His Iieart sunk within him as he seized the bolt, ami when he bearci the grating of the rusty hinge, his whole frame trembled. He stood at the head of another staircase, vvhich, by a faint distant light, he perceived, led far beneath the earth. The time he was wasting in idle curiosity, he now re¬ membered, was lost to the purpose of his journey, and turning from the deep view, he would have returned the way he came, but a murmuring sound above him kept him vvhere he stood. ·' Foolish, foolish man," he said, '* could a crumb¬ ling wall induce thee from thy path I and the moss-grown steps of a deep vault allure thee from thy purpose? return, return, and dare what thon mayst encounter/' He retraced his Seps, but the increasing sound appalled him, and he ventured dovvn the stairs. They were steep and broken, and he descended with difficulty. So faint was the glimmering light, which entered ι hrough a grating at each end of the apartment mto which he landed, and the place where thev were iixed so higls that he could not surmise the use to which it had been put; but the naked
57
walls and want of furniture, assured him that i í vvas no longer occupied: and the hollow sound oí his footfall convinced him there were still vaults below. Directly opposite the stair-case, was ,ι door; it was unfastened, but grated hideously upon its hinges, like the one above. Once more the fear that he might rus-h into the bandit's haunt, arrested his timid step-. Again he listen¬ ed, and again he thought he heard a sound pur¬ suing him. Afraid to return or to proceed, he stood aghast. " I must pursue my way," he «aid at length; anel, darting onward, he found liimseli in a narrow passage, which wound in so man} various turnings, that he could hy no means con¬ jecture the course he was following. It termi¬ nated in another spacious and unfurnished apait- ment, which led to many more, all gloom) and deserted. At the end of the suite of chamba s through which he passed, he found his progress stopped, and lie was compelled to return to the one he hael ih? t entered. (< 1 lave 1," he said, and stamped upon the ground, " have I delayed my journey, and r.ddeel to the fatigue of my weary way by vainly exploring the chambers of a forgo*- ten ruin!"' llie hollow sound which vibrateti beneath hiá foot, when vvith angry fe>rce he stnú к the floor, confirmed the supposition that he had not reached the lowest apartment of hi« subtensa- n õ
58
sean search ; and the feeble light, which directed iiis steps, entering through small grated case¬ ments assured him there were still passages, or areas, encircling the chambers he had passed. He gazed around, buí found no outlet by vvhich he could pursue his way. Burning with rage and disappointment, he struck his forehead, auel curs* od the folly whieh had led him on thus far ; yet he felt impelled to persevere by a solicitude which -eemed to have no objeet. He approached the wall, and tracing the bounds of the extensive clumber, he tore 1 his hanel upon a rusty hook. With childish rage, he struck the cause of his dwster. The force of his angry blow moved a secret spring, and a small ^tone shook. " At this aperture/' lie cried, " perhaps the robbei issues to his midnight depredation 1 -·, and in the vaults below conceals his spoib, and shrouds him during da). ' lie ^unk on the ground, and in the agony of fear and rage, again bewailed the weak¬ ness which brought him into danger, and the foö) wliich led him on. Then recollecting the time thus vainlv wa>ted, he suddenly sprang up, mind striking the wall with his staff, the stone which held the spring fell from him, and rolling down¬ ward with a thundering noise, left him dismay eel and trembling. He stood some minutes lo'-t to recollection. The sound ceased ; a stillness, *ь oí
09
the grave, succeeded. '* I feel my »elf impelled, he cried; "perhaps it is the crisis of mv fate, and I will dare it, thougii it lead to deatli !" So saying, he eagerly looked round the small aper¬ ture made by the fallen stone, and enclosed wiihin another stone, he found a bolt, which, not witheet fear, undrawing, a small door opened abruptly upon a flight of steps. He stopped not to con¬ sider whither it might lead, but descended quickly. Breathless at the foot he stepped in a deep cave, The black spider spun his web upon the damp walls, the ewet and the bloated toad crawled on the moist ground ; and the involuntary groan he uttered, echoed mournfully through the giocar. " For what dark purposes, haa this cave bte¿i formed? How man) wretches» may have hngeiccl livre, and died in sad captivity? What deeds ol death may here have been committed, and been ior ever hidden ï Tiie now w ide- opened gaie.*», with all their m.is^y bars, never could have been ft i\ed, the uttered groan could not have reached the eai ! lía '' he continued, " can guilt be thus t oncealed Ì ' Then rishing forward, as if afraid ol ids: own suçotions, he struck his foot against a liirht subst шее, which bounded from the blow, and fell widi ι faint risting. The idimmeiing Som above served to mark the spot; and st( op¬ ini! to asceitain what he had removed, he sxijcd d 6
GO л roll of parchment. " This shall clear ni) doubt-/' he said vvith eagerness; and putting the ¡scroll within his bosom, he began to re-ascend. A steep flight of steps led him, without further interruption, to the glare of day. Yet it wa¿ with difh'i alty that he mounted the broken stairs, en- h^îitened only by the faint gleam which entered between the briars, which grew about the top. Often he stopped for breath, and ofte n he °taL- tercei ao he climbed. V> hen at length he set hi- loot upon the surface of the earth, how did he regret his most unprofitable delay, lie had wound among the turnings of subterranean pas¬ sages, beneath the very roael which he had gone dnd when he rose from the deep cave, he was not Jai from the margin of the stream, noi the bridge which he had crossed. Half a day was lost, his scantil)-provided vallet almost exhausted, and himself so much Слепей, that he was unable to proceed. lie sat (h)vvn upon the turf; he stretched himself dt h :igih beneath a tree, but hleep fled Ьь c)0-lieìs ins mmd, s C > ill at е\ье, couiel find no rest; and t mťoi t less he lay beneath the shade. He was ie-ohtd to prosecute his journey, and tlierefore, t hi í и eshed, pursued his wav. Ί he sim was set, the air was chili and damp» a d ne w a- still within the wood, nor saw the end
Gl of it» extent: he increased hús speed, but night overtook his steps, and long he walked in dark¬ ness. He had never roamed thus far before ; for, till the fatal hour which brought him to the know¬ ledge of his mother, he had liveel embosomed in his convent, nor wandered beyond the limits of its grover. It v/as when Randolph de Neville died in the court of Rome, that, disgusted vvith a world wherein he had no frienel, no relative, and where his lot was poverty and servitude, Austin took the cowl. î le hae! been taken "into France, among the soldier*· who hael accompanied King Henry in hi' unfortunate expedition to Poictou, against the voung king of France, Lewis· IX. and was left among the w emneled, who could not return. When he recovered, in miser) and tatter», he performed a weary pilgrimage, begging his way to Rome, lie thought it a blesseei lot to be re¬ ceived among the menials of the exiled Randolph de Neville. Ah ! little thought De Neville, that the lowly Austin was his son ; the son of Blanch ! of her whom he had betrayed ! It was not long before hi-- service ceased. Randolph suddenly expired. In the cloiatcr the friendless Austin souglit a refuge, and in the clois¬ ter found an asvlum.
62
Untaught, unschooled, unlettered was he ; yef his genius w r as acute, and his mind capacious; and his diligent perseverance in the acquirement of knowledge, was unremitting. The superior observing and approving hi^ eagerness for infor¬ mation and instruction, assisted him in his lauda¬ ble pursuits ; and while he continued at Romes he devoted all his leisure hours to study. Never¬ theless he wished to be in his native country, England ; and, with the full permission anel allow¬ ance of the abbot, he quitted the monks of the Virgin, and travelled, by easy stages, from con¬ vent to convent, till he reached Calais. From there, crossing the channel, a few hours brought him to the chalky cliffs of Albion. lie remained a long time on the coast of Kent, when again undertaking a long journey, he travelled into Devonshire, and took up his abode in a conveni near to the abbey where his mother hid her sor¬ rows from the world. He had dwelt five years in peace within the holy walls, when he was called to the d) 'mç couch of the unhappy Blanch. The tale she told was the exciting rause wh'ch roused to action everv latent passion of his soul. It waked ambition, anger, revenge; but it checked remorse—it still¬ ed the monitions of his conscience. It was that which drew him from retirement, and led him
63
through the scorching day and chilly night, to find the castle of his father—to seek the means to dispossess young Nartonville, and seize the wealth he owned. Onward he travelled, nor thought of &leej, save when the midnight convent bell tolled the monks to prayers. Then would he turn toward the sound ; and, the orisons ended, seek a lonel) cell, till the early matins again awaked the fa¬ thers : then would he start, and again pursue hi« eager way. Travelling thus, he at length espied the object of his search, the aim of his fond hopes. The ivy-mantled towers and grey walls of Randolph de Neville's castle, burst on his straining eye. He had heard the spot described ; he, b) descrip¬ tion, knew each turret; he could number the bat¬ tlements ; he could almost count the stairs. When he reached the cattle, the name of Aus¬ tin was a ready passport. With all the eagerness of noble generosity, he was receiv ed by the young baron, and led to the ancient baroness. When he was introduced to her presence, he for a mo¬ ment forgot that she stood between him and coveted greatness ; and the soft emotions of hu¬ manity played around his heart. The venerable baroness, though far advanced in life, was free from the infirmities of age. Her
64
person still displayed the perfection of symmetry ; she stood erect, and she trod with firmness : her still lovely face had not a wrinkle ; her cheek gloweel with the rudd)' tint of health ; her dark blue eyes were bright and cheerful; and her yet rosy hps were smiling : the sound of her voice was music ; grace was in every motion, dignity in every action: gentleness, nobleness, and goodness were the native inmates of her bosom, and then- character was impressively stamped upon her open brow. She rose vvhen Austin was announced ; and the gracious manner in whicli she receiv ed him, penetrated the soul of the monk, and struck him dumb. He stood motionless with reverence and admiration. " Be seated, holy father," said she; " the long anel painful way has made jou weary. ' The kindness of her words recalled him ; he sunk on a chair, and gazing round the spacious chamber wherein he was seated, he forgot the gracious Emma, the noble Ilei ry, and remem¬ bered only that the castle had been hia father's. During the long absence of Randeilph, the cas¬ tle had been neglected, and sufiered to fall into considerable decay. The dreary, desolate cham¬ bers, now unoccupied, Aibtin saw with anger : those apartments, newly put in order for the ac¬ commodation of the baroness- and her family, lie
65
beheld with envy ; and the repairs and decora¬ tions they were meditating, tortured his malicious bosom. The sacred garb in vvhich he was arrayed, though deemed by him a shackle on his actions, was a cloak which concealed him from observa¬ tion, and a guard which secured his safety. Wiienever he was found walking in gloomy thoughtful ness among the groves, the dee}) melancholy which marked his steps was deemed pious meditation : when anger glowed on his countenances it was to holy rapture they im¬ puted the fire of his eye : and when his pernici¬ ous vengeance burnt within him, to contrite peni¬ tence they ascribed the frow T n whicli scowled upon his brow. His eager search explored each chamber ; he traversed each lengthened passage ; and entered each dark vault. He mounted the highest bat¬ tlement, and cast an envious eye for many miles over the extensive domains of his ancestors. His long and frequent absences from the castle, and his apparent insensibility to the courteous and hospitable attentions of its noble mistress, were circumstances which much surprised her: but not at all suspecting that the illegitimate off¬ spring of her brother's dishonourable connexion with Blanch de Montravers, could aspire to the
66
possessions of his father ; or that a holy monk, now in the vale of years, could meditate an injury to her grandson, she strove, with the soothing gentleness of friendly kindness, to dissipate the gloom with which he seemed to be oppressed ; but vain was every effort to lure him to sociabi¬ lity ; he continued his lonely walks and solitary rambles, unmindful of the ceremonies of decorum, and ungraciously withdrawing from the anxious solicitude of the baroness.
CHAPTER IX.
No more the minstrel's notes shall here resound, Or gaudy pageants mark the festh e day ; But bats their (ircling flight shall wing around, While tangling shrubs o'ergrow th' untrodden way. Beyond the limits of the territories now possess¬ ed by Emma de Nartonville, Austin beheld the castle of Montravers fast mouldering to decay. After the death of Henry, who fell by the sword of Randolph de Neville, and the flight of Blanch, the old baron De Montravers secluded himself from society, and passed the remnant of his life in unavailing sorrow for the hapless fate of his son, and the degrading absence of his daughter. He had held a very large part of his estate by knight's service ; which, at his de¬ mise, reverted to the crow χ., in default of male heirs : and as he had ever been among the oppo¬ sers of the weak prince, his sovereign, and was particularly obnoxious to the court, the residue of hiá property was confiscated. The lands were granted to new favourites, and the mighty ruin 4
08
of his castle frowned a monument of fallen great¬ ness. When Austin ascertained the forfeiture, he feh more forcibly the ignoble conduct of his parents, and resented with greater acrimony the degrada¬ tion of his birth. In a neighbouring convent the murdered Henry lay beneath а sumptuous monument. A weeping cherub seemed to mourn his untimely grave, and an uncouth epitaph declared his tale. Thither did Austin wander. He joined the monks, and attended prayers ; he ranged the cloisters, and entered the cemetery. When he approached the monument, he shuddered. Mon¬ travers was a name which caused his heart to throb with quickened palpitation. His emotion was not unmarked by the fathers : chiefly was it observed by Theodore, an aged monk, whose ever-restless mind appeared to seek for comfort in the duties and austerities of his order, yet never derived satisfaction from their performance. lie paced the cloisters, he roamed among the dead, and wore upon his ever-frowning brow the marks of discontent. Congenial feelings betrayed to him the heart of Austin. <f Father," he said, as he approached him, " although a stranger here, evident it is that thou art not unacquainted with the noble youth who moulders in the tomb
69
below." Austin turned, and fixing his eyes with scrutinizing gaze on him who thus abruptly broke on his meditations, he remained silent. " Fear me not," continued Theodore ; f I also knew him, loved him ; and 1 also knew the wretch who slew him." "Tempt menot" said Austin, and started from the grave. (e Hold," said Theodore, seiz¬ ing his robe, " we part not thus : thou hast awakened thoughts which stray to former times ; thou hast betrayed emotions which shew thou art partaking of ihe sorrows which oppress my heart. Like me, thou seekest the dark and lonely hour to gaze upon the monument of Henry de Mon¬ travers : like me, thou smitest thy breast as thou surveyest it. Come then ; a sympathizing bosom may relieve our weight of woe ; and mutual con¬ solation may arise from mutual confidence." He relaxed his gloomy frown, and looked at Austin with an imploring countenance, which seemed to further his request ťt To-morrow," said Austin, " to-morrow I will meet thee." " In my cell,'' said Theodore. " Be it so," replied Austin ; " to-morrow, after vespers." So saying he turned from the father, whose t tger eye pursued him till he reached the portal. Punctual to the vesper hour, Austin returned to the monastery. When he entered the choir, the eye of Theodore met his inquiring glance.
70
With unhallowed kneeling, they presented them¬ selves before the altar; and, without devotion, they joined the ceremonies of the church. The •.ervice ended, Theodore conducted Austin to his cell. The anxiety of each, prevented both from .speaking. Theodore was the firsf. to break the silence. " Thy behaviour," said he, " at the tomb of Henry de Montravers, betrayed a know¬ ledge of his disastrous fate. In his death, in all which concerned his family, I had an interest : but it is past,'" he continued, looking earnestly on Austin. With his hands clasped, and eyes of fiery expectation. Austin listened to his narrative. ci Time was,'' resumed Theodore, tf when ihat name, now for ever lost, was joyful to the ear that heard it. Time was when the murdered Henry was my friend, and when the lovely Blanch''—— Austin caught his hand. " Didst thou know Blanch ?" he said. (( I did." Again they were both silent. cr Hast thou seen Blanch ?" a*ked Theodore. <f ï saw her once," was the reply. i( Where?" (b in a convent.*' " Lives she?" eagerly inquired Theodore. " She is no more," said Austin. Theodore trembled greatly. " Pro¬ ceed," said Austin. u Among the esquires,' 1 re¬ sumed Theodore, " who attended the Baron de Montravers, my iather, Stephen de Montage, was noticed as a favourite, anei 1 was the companion
7i
of the gallant Henry. Who couid frequent the castle, and gaze without adoring on the beauteous Blanch 'C Austin started. " O, she was nature's master-piece," exclaimed Theodore. Austin again caught his hand. " At humble distance 1 beheld her, dazzled by her greatness and the lustre of her charms : when a wretch seduced her purity, and betrayed her fame." Austin grasped him as he wonlel have wrestled with him. " Thou hast," he said, ' ť О thou hast awakened pangs"------but checking himself, he shook him from him. " Why ha^t thou provoked this meeting," he resumed. i£ For more than forty years," said Theodore, • 4 anger and revenge have rankled in this bosom." '· Ren enge!" said Austin, u 1 seek revenge." t£ Let us then unite," said Theodore. " Behold, behold/ he cried with vehemence, " the honours of Montravers how they fall. His lands have passed away to those who knew him not; his de¬ serted castle already spreads its desolation, and the massy fragments lay aroud ; w hile the domains of Randolph de Neville have been preserved ! Though the exiled murderer dared not return to England, his sister rears her pride within hb mansion; and her heir, Henry dc Nartonville, riots ín his undiminished honour^ ! Shall he erect Ьь standard ? shall he support a name, while Montravers is forgotten I Speak," he continued,
72 gazing wildl) on Austin. £í Thou dost not knows" said Austin, t£ thou canst not surmise, how much I am connected with those of whom thou speak¬ est î О that I could have confidence in what thou utterest ! that I dared trust thee with the feelings thou hast aroused ! but it must not be— away, away—we must not meet again." " I have committed myself to thee," saiel Theoelorc ; "what 1 would not have thee betray, I bhould be caieful to conceal." " Let our conversation for the pre¬ sent cease/ said Austin. íť I will ponder on thy words, and perhaps return again; for 1 would hear more." " Hear !" reiterated Theodore, and frowned. iC What passes in my breast," said Austin, " h* more than ai у tongue can titter; words can convey no sound so full of woe, so full of desperation. If we meet again, I vvill strive to í*I\ с it utterance ; if not, with my own secret sor¬ rows, sh til be buried the knowledge of this our meeting, and the conversation which we have held : for re st assured, that in the cloister's gloom, I hav e not learned to be loquacious, nor to betray the confidence which fourth my friend¬ ship." So »a) ing, he instantly quitted the cell. The conversation Austin had vuth Theodore strengthened his hopes of aggrandisement; )et he dared not sav , / a m the son of Randolph de Neville; the negtecttd child of'Blanch. " How/
73
lie cried, " shall the frienel of Henry de Montra- vers, the champion of the unhappy Blanch, the deadly foe of Randolph de Neville, act toward the man who represents them alh" Thus ruminating, he took from his bosom, al¬ most unconscious that he did so, the small scroll he found in the deep cave beneath the ruins he had explored. The damp had яо spoiled it, that scarcely was a sentence legible ; and as he un- wrapt the folds, they stuck together, and tore as he endeavoured to divide them. With difficulty he read the few following we)rds : . *.. pass away ere this be found. .. .lingered here .... alas ! in this dee]) vave .... the lowest eare of the ...... There were so many tatters between each broken sentence, and so little interest did he take in what was unconnected vvith his own fate, that he threw the scroll indignantly away. *' What have ï to do," he angrily exclaimed, " with the wrongs of others." Again he sunk in gloomy meditation —suddenly he caught up the scroll, when his eager eyes glanced upon the words, / stood be¬ hveen him antt his ambitious hopes. i: Ha," he cried, and the scroll again dropped from his hand, '· was İt even so. It was not chance which gave this story to me. So deist thou stand, young Nartonv ille ! 1S Again he took the .>cro!l, and again his eager eve sought, I stood between iiim and id, vol. ι. E
74
ambitious ¡topes* Again and again he repeated them. <; Thy fate, whoever thou wast," he cried, " instructs me." He strove to read further, but, alas î his busy mind imagined the sad tale, and, envying the perpetrator of the crime which he surmised, he could not" proceed, but again re¬ peating, I stood between hhn and his ambitious hopes, lie rolled the scroll together, and putting it once more into his bosom, where he ever kept it concealed, he exclaimed, after a long pause, " WTthout thy aid, Theodore, I can do nothing —thy co-operation must effect my purposes— ha! ha! ha!—effect my purposes! Thou shalt not know them. Thy ovvn revenge shall act. Thou shalt be my tool, unknowing that thou art so: Wlien they met again, the ofiended Theodore received with coldness the advances of the wary Austin. te I have passed a sleepless night," said he, " our conversation has sunk deep into my mind." Theodore bowed. " A friend o£ the house of Montravers must ever be dear to my heart." A slight inclination of the head was again the only reply he received. " The youth who now possesses the lands and castle of de Ne¬ ville," continued Austin, " is an usurper." " He is his uncle's heir," coolly answered Theodore. " He shoves aside the heir,'' said Austin. " The
75
heir !" cried Theodore. « Aye, tbe heir." « The heir of Neville !" " Aye, his son." " His son !" repeated Theodore. " I have said, his son/' « Name him." « The son of Blanch." Theo- dore's whole frame trembled. After a long pause, be faintly said, " The son of Blanch ! О miser¬ able, deluded fair ! lovely, beauteous, regretted Blanch ! thy son ! Friend," he continued, look¬ ing earnestly at Austin, " lead me to him. О ! I have cherished her image in my breast since the fatal day when she forsook her father's mansion ! I loved her! witness every saint how pure, how tender was the love 1 bore her ! I loved her for herself alone, uninfluenced by interested passion. I sought her happiness, and in her happiness I had been blessed. I could have sighed in silence and in peace had she been honorably allied : but"—he paused ; a deep blush tinged his cheek —" yet," he continued, " the son of Blanch mu»t be acknowledged." Austin was greatly agitated : conflicting passions struggled in his breast : he did not dare reveal himself: he scarcely could conceal the truth : he wrung his hands, he paced the cell : " I know the son of Randolph/' he ex¬ claimed. (i Aye, I know him well !" " О !" cried the heated Theodore, <f against his son I declare war: I denounce him as the object of my vengeance." " Will the spirit of the departed e2
76
Blanch look down with pleasure on your deeds V' asked Austin. ' c You rend my soul," said Theo¬ dore. ťí The son of Blanch ! the son of Neville ! Have I so long souglit vengeance on thy crimes, vile Randolph ! and shall 1 now support the base- born offspring of thy treachery !" " Pursue thine own plans," said Austin. i( Let Nartonville enjoy his uncle's vast domains. Let the chiid of Blanch remain an alien from his mother's family ■ let hinn rem-dii unknown among his fathers vassals, Henrv de Nartonville shall satisfy the friend who loved Montravers. ï lenry de Nartonville shall occupy thy place, forsaken son of Blanch !" " It musí not he/ eagerly returned Theodore. (i If thou be the friend of the degraded family of Montra- vers unite with me in vengeance. If we cannot regain its honors, we may yet revenge it on the line which caused its downfall." i£ In union with thy vengeance on Henry de Nartonville,'' replied Aibtin, r * who exclude^ the rightful heir—·"' (< О must I say," cried Theodore, " thy son, (> Blanch ! ь not his father's heir î ln thy fall hv fell Fell from his rank, hi.s honors! Vet for thy sake 1 will uphold him. For thee, for thine, L will stand forward : 1 will teach himhowto climb: I will instruct him how to seize the rights which ihou didst forfeit. There is mj hand," he con¬ tinued, eaoerly grasping that of Austin ţ <l Lead
77 on ! lead me to the son of Blanch." " Hence many weary miles he dwells,'' said Austin, " and many tedious ela) s shall pass ere thou canst know him. Meanwhile, rely on me, rest on my aid to further all thy schemes. Within the castle of Emma de Nartonville I am now a guest. AVitb her, as thou well knowest, dwelMh Henry, her grandson nnd her hch. Open violence shall mar onr purpose ; they ,\re so well attended. Nay, an avowed claim shall not avail us, so powerfully are they connected. Fraud, secret machinations — "' " The wafer," exclaimed Theodore. " I am not his confessor," " Who is?" " »Scarcely do we dare trust each other," replied Austin, '* aliali we then confide in strangers. The time may come—" " The time shall come,'* saiel Theodore. With difficulty did the crafty Austin conceal his joy, as he beheld the eagerness of Theodoie: jet he dissembled. ť * Till that time may arrive," he said, ' ť we must be cautious."' " Alas Γ said Theo¬ dore, " 1 am old ; I have almost reached the age of man My days are few ! If vengeance come not quickly, I shall pass away ere it arrive. Let me not die unsatisfied. Let me meet Blanch, and sav, thy brother is RĽVLNtíLD.'' ' ь Impatient as thou art, I equal thee," saiel Austin; 4i jet—I would no farther wade in blood than—" he hesi¬ tated— '- Emma, the ancient baroness, bears her ., i> L О
78
state so meekly—in nature's course she cannot long sunne— let her few remaining days of life be peaceful—our plans will then be ripe, and if I let occasion slip^ may thy vengeance light on me. Let us now embrace, and when we meet again, although thy tablets shall be fuller of contrivances than the sky of starb, yet will 1 match thy zeal, and Cijual thy indefatigable «¡enreh for meaîb to furdier our resolves. Conventual duties call me home : ere they can bc dispatched, winter shall wrap the world in all its horrors : but when the spring returns to cheer the earth, I will revisit thee/ 5 " When we meet again," said Theodore, f ' the fate of Henry de ISartonville shall tremble.'' lie caught with fei vour iho hand of Austin, as bespoke. The wíl) son of idanch pressed the hand of his coadjutor in renins and laid the otlier on his breast a^ he bowed assent to his daik w oreh, 'İdıen departing from lhe cell, he walked, deeplv mibin«, to the siknt wall& of the íb -гчакеп c.btle of Mostravas*
CHAPTER Χ.
W hn ал ful fJooui f heie silence c\er rogns, Si\(. when aQirn bird oi noft. ilt-omen'd ьЬпекз Am iì -ϊ the lutrluhuib , or how imp blis Sweeps thiough the \ че ant chambers, afirighting Aii who would approach ! Austin proceeded slowly through an avenue of j^ed oaks. The splendour of the setting sun trleamed amiel the dark foliage, and threw a dazzling lustre on the projections of the building» which reflected the bright beams. As he ad¬ vanced, bi-s elvins mother's words vibrated upon his heait. Here it was, peihaps, that the had t'irned to bid a s.ul farewell to the «roves wheie die Ileal often i4>amed, and here hael taken a last мел of the walh vvhich enclosed her parents. »Sîı. меч 1 contradiction! vs hile every hope he formt d wa> fixed m blood, hi- bosom heaved with tench mioss, чцЛ as he advanced, he shed tears of liquidi. О* had slu ίι It the dignit) of virtue, îIk u, ite he parsed with tiepidaSon and alarm had opened vude for hU reception, and the vacant thamber^, v\lu^e melancholy aspect and solemn L h
80
stillness now awakened terror, vvith joy and glad* ness woulel tlisplay baronial honours, and crowds of friends and relatives would smile to bid him welcome. Having passed the hall, he entered a spacious apartment, whose high vaulted roof was sup¬ ported by one massy column spreading in radii hke a fan at top. From that he passed into a room less harsh in its appearance. The walls were hung with tapestry, on which were inter¬ woven tales of chivalry. Still the colours glowed, the warlike champions held the spear, the rescued damsels smiled. In the adjoining chamber was a bed—perhaps the heel of Blandi. A door near it openeel into a small closet from which a window looked through a vista in the forest, full to the western sun, which, half set below the hori/ jn, fringed the glowing clouds vvith gold. He gazed with feelings almost rapturous, till its last rays were lost behind the distant hills. With a deep sigh, he turned from the fading prospect, and continued to wander from chamber to chamber through the vast extent of the cattle. As he stood at the entrance of a long parage, he thought he heard the sound of footsteps. The heavy treael approached; and while he gazed, a figure hastily crossed the path he was pursuing: the wind blew through a disant archwav, and his sable robe
81
Moated loosely as he passed along. Austin turned, he retraced his ¡steps, and passed again into the great hall. The faint light of the crescent moon glimmered through the narrow casements, anel fell on the dark form he had before beheld, and which, as he entered, passed the door-way to the room which led into the bed-chamber. It stopped and sighed, then suddenly turning round and per¬ ceiving Austin, it advanced with rapid strides. Austin fled with the speed of fear: he left the hall, passed the court, and crossed the tottering drawbridge. His pursuer gaineel upon his steps, and half-way down the avenue, overtook and seized him. Austin struggled for freedom, buí his antagonist held him with a powerful gi*a->p. While tht^y thus wrestled, the plaits of Austin's robe unfolded, and the scroll he concealed in hL· bosom, fell from its hiding place, lie stooped ίο ι ecover it, when bis opponent, taking advan¬ tage of his position, struck him to the ground, dnd supposing that it was a dagger vvhich hael fallen, hastily snatcheel the scroll from the hand of the prostrate monk. t£ Restore the manu¬ script/' he cried, and strove to rise. At the sound of his voices the other started. ** Have 1 pursued thees Щ fnend !" he exclaimed, and in his accents Austin recognized Theodore. They now walked felow ly on ; Austin informed hira h 5
82 where he had found the manuscript, and Theo¬ dore saving that he was acquainted vvith the tra¬ ditional history of the place of which he spoke, they agreed to meet again the following evening, m the clianiber of the castle where they had alarmed each other, w hen Theodore said that he would communicate the talc he had board in his youth. The moment they »topped off the territories once the property of Mont ravers they entered the domains of de Neville. Whose heart but must beat high with inilip nud on when treading» thus ignominiously expelled, the va S possessions of his ancestors ! Far as his straining eye cottiti view the pros¬ pect round, Austin might say, Those fields, thou woods, í ¡tose sf reama, vere eau my grandfather s. While by the guilt of hU p. senis he was de¬ prived of all inheritance, and the robe of his order uns th л onh t hint, t η ί arth which he could call his own. Vnhappv man î he felt in its full force in's abject state oí humiliation, and eaeh dav, eat h hour, increased his hatred a»ain&t the innocent representative of his f.miilv. Yet strange, even in the moment of hi bitterest raye, he ev-n heaved a 4gh at lhe mention of his mother's name, and the recollection that she had expired on his hos-om, ever drew a tear of tenderness, Í)
83 Emma de Nartonville had been the companion of her )outh, and it va& to that peihaps to be ascribed that he wished to defer the perpetration of what he termed hi» vengeance, till she shosld ¡dy in the tomb of her fathers. His impatience to hear the history of the ruin he hael v Hied on the road, led him, long before lhe appointed evening hour, ίο the forsaken castle of Montravers. Again he ranged the chambers, and eageil) contemplated the falling turrets. It was in the gloom of twilight that he wab joined by Theoelorc, who, after their salutation, thus began the short story of the cave where Austin found the scroll. " The cave )0U found beneatii the fragments scattered in the wood through vvhich )Oti parsed, has witnessed the murder of its lord, who once raised his head and hopes high as the eagle soars. " Oft has the sun brought round the sea»on% and seen the generations of man pa^s away, since the family of bt. Victor has been forgotten. It came to England vuth the Contpieror ; by him was. placed aloft, ^id in it-» elevation "Wb upheld by ro) il favour. Crowing in power, the family bıcı cancel in riches and by varioib grauta ex¬ it nded is p^-e-biun even to the fieltk of Devon. The cattle of St. Victor paneel from ¿áre to son, until to William ele bt. Victor were born two
84
boys. In the same day, the mother smiled upon her twins, and to her bosom pressed them both. Like two fair lilies on one stalk they grew, where one expands beneath the morning beam, and one is cankered by a worm. " With equal care, with equal love, their father reared them both ; but the elder, Edmund, was, as such, the heir. Excellent, amiable youth ! va¬ liant, honourable, courteous ! He was the dar¬ ling of the vassals, and the boast of his family. (t As they grew in years, Gilbert beheld with envy the advantage of his brother's birth, younger than whom he was but by a few hours ; and when William de St. Victor died, and Edmund took possession of his inheritance, Gilbert withdrew from the castle ; and although he forbore hosti¬ lities, avoided all intercourse with his brother, and shunned every mode of conciliation offered by the friendly Edmund. " A neighbouring baron, Simon de Vallery, sought the alliance of St. Victor, and invited Ed¬ mund to his castle, when the charms of his daugh¬ ter, the beauteous Joan de Vallery, captivated the youthful St. Victor. While at both castles preparations were making for the nuptials, which were to unite the families, Gilbert pursued the stag through the forest ; and near to the mansion of de Vallery was thrown from his rapid courser.
85
The hospitable master received the wounded hunter. The hurt he received from his fall kept him long an inmate at the castle. As all his passions were excessive, the beauty of his young hostess, Joan de Vallery, kindled an ardent love within bis breast ; and finding that even there his brother was preferred before him, his rancorous envy produced the most malicious ha¬ tred. He determined to possess the daughter of de Vallery at whatever risk, and by whatever means she might be gained. To that end he caused his brother to be seized in the forest as he returned from his betrothed, attended by few followers. Having so done, he attacked his cas¬ tle, which was unprepared for defence. Wlien be had made himself master of it, by threats and promises, he seduced the vassals and servants, who all, either from fear of the known violence and ferocity of Gilbert, or in expectation of re¬ ward, forsook the unhappy Edmund, who was become his brother's prisoner. After he had thus secured the person of his rival, and gained possession of his castle, he next proceeded to possess himself of Joan de Vallery. He strove to gain her a willing victim to his love ; but finding that she had resolved to pass the remainder of her life in a convent, he caused her also to be seized, and conveyed by force to his castle, where he
86
made her his wife. His passion satisfied, disgust succeeded ; for her constant upbraidings destroy¬ ed the little tenderness which such a character might be supposed to possess, and he permitted her to seek the monastic retirement, where alone she expected to find consolation. " After her departure, he gave himself up to riot, rapine, and plunder, and became the dread and scourge of the surrounding country : so much so, that many neighbouring barons united their forces against him. He defended himself a long time against their joint powers ; and when he was at length overcome, he and his followers were all put to the sword. They sought in vain, during many days, for the unhappy prisoner Edmund ; and when in a deep cave they found the gallant youth expiring, tlieir indignation was so great, that they razed the castle. *' So soon do the footsteps of man disappear from the face of the earth, that in a few years all traces of the dwelling of St. Victor were lost, and you are perhaps the only man alive who knows the spot where the forgotten mansion once reared its strength in pride, and who has explored the subterranean chambers where the heir, unheard, bewailed his doom, and fell the victim of his bro¬ ther's hate/* As the monk proceeded, Austin compared the.
87
situation of Gilbert with his own ; and when the tale concluded, he exclaimed, " Thus Narton¬ ville excludes the son of Blanch ; shall he not too destroy the rival who supplants him?'* Almost convulsed with tenderness, with anger, and with shame, Theodore repHed, " O, Blanch! lovely daughter of a noble house, long famed for valour and for virtue, why, why didst thou forget thine offsprings claims, and forfeit his inheritance ? Unhappy, wretched wanderer ! it was thou who broughtest destruction on thy family. Montra¬ vers was a name of honour, and de Neville bright in fame ! Thou, who shouldest have been their bond of union, sunk them both ; and he who should continue the proud line to future ages, re¬ mains an unknown outcast ! O, had I found her hiding-place," he continued, turning quickly on Austin ; t( had I been entrusted with her son, let every saint bear witness for me, I had made him known, and led him, though with diminished lus¬ tre, to the paths of fame : but now, grown old in grief, forgotten in the gloomy cell where I have retired to weep, I can only lend a feeble hand to punish, in his representative, the wretch who shared her crime, and slew her noble brother ! Yes, the murdered Henry, whose tomb I visit nightly, cries to me for vengeance ; and though î shake the kingdom, the race by which he was
?S8 destroyed shall perish, and the son of Blanch shall then"—*uddeniy he stopped; then, smiting his breast, he cried, " O, son of Blanch, thou «ihouldest have stood hke the deep-rooted forest oak, and spread thy branches far; but thou art blighted, and thy withering trunk falls, shorn of its honours." Aibtin heard vvith such keen an¬ guish the words uSereel by Theodore, that he could not reply : he sat silently ruminating ; then starting, he said, " We shall meet again," and abruptly left his companion. Deeply impressed by all that he had heard, he was more determined to conceal from Theoelorc that he was the outcast whom he had described ч> blighted. To rev enge the death of Henry de Montrav er* seemed to be: the aim of Theodore de Montage. To gain the eastie oí' de Seville, was the aim of Austin. " Though the love, vvhich thou elost cherish still, may lead tliee to со- perate vvith me in pull¬ ing down young Nartonville, wilt thou also join г о gain for me the riches vvhich he now enj oy S ? Till that be ascertained," continued Austin, as he paced his chamber, <r I must remain unknown ; and that thou hast seen the ьоп of Blanch, shall be unrevealed." The object of his journey was a * complished ;
80
he had seen the castle of do Neville, and had roamed within the spacious mansion of Montra- vers. Beyond his hopes, he had found one like him, the foe of Nartonville ; but in the further¬ ance of his great design, to seize or gain the vast possessions of his father, he knew not if he had advanced. To become possessed of the domains of Neville, he vvould destroy Nartonville ; but to revenge the death of Henry de Montravers, he would not embrue his hands in blood. Vaulting ambition was the spur vvhich goaded to the per¬ petration of any crime, which led to the high summit he would attain ; but against the murderer of Montravers he »-ought no vengeance. With rancour, increased by having beheld the castle and domains, which should have been his own ; and with indignation, aggravated hy all he had lieard, he took leave of Emma de Narton¬ ville and her youthful heir, and retraced the road vvhich led him home. Again he wandered un¬ attended, and again he sat him down among the scattered fragments vvhich had enticed him to the deep cave ; and as he passed the mouth, con¬ cealed from observation by the thick-tangled bushes, he waveil the scroll, as though he tri¬ umphed over St. Victor, and exclaimed, " 1 shall again explore thy caverncd chambers."
CHAPTER XL
ile ah\ ivs ь gloom) ; he always is, sail , lie nt\er ¡hiheirj, he ne\< r ь g S d , rhat ¡ь not H elision I ti cm. The man mily ¡nou-, \\Л1 cun he gay î And if good 01 col be 1 btitnui m his way, Нь ρ, -nh of aduimon will dıeennlly go, And b\ him, vjuhniib-ion hb picU shew.
u I xris thee what, Odo/ 4 said Toston, " ï like not ) on frowning Carmelite," " Iiow lost he thy good opinion?'' a^ked Odo. ŕí ílow lost he my good opinion, savest thou? he never had it." <· How failed he to gain it ? tell me that." " Why never did I meet him, morning or vesper, at the castle, but he glometl at our gooel baroness, and squinied at the young baron, as though he would have looked them dead." " O, if he stop shoit at a look," observed Odes "no great mischief will befall either of them. The eye of an old man ъ a blunt weapon ; the e)e of a prett) ) ening dám- jel i í- another guise thing; that indeed ia what may be termed keen. I vvill not answer for the
91
wounds whicli that may inflict.'' " Thou art right there, Odo ; thou mayest well term it in¬ flicting wounds." " О, О ; I may, may I V* " Aye, marry mayest thou ; for 1 tell thee, Odo, and I tell thee true," replied TVton, " that the eyes of the nut-brown Bridget, by the hill-side, do sometimes give me such an odd sort of a pain, and do set my heart a throbbing so, that verily I oftentimes think that it will burst through here at my breast, and fall down at her feet before her.' 1 " " That were a goodly sight to behold ; I would I might see it drop ; for as thou art already sense¬ less by her witcheries, thou wouldest then bc heartless also, and mightest defy her charms." i: How so 9 how so ? 1 pray thee shew me how so." " Why, being without sense to perceive, and without heart to feel, thou wouldest be like unto a stone wall, and all her casts would re¬ bound on herself." tC Ha! hat ha! well said, Odo ; well said, Odo." " What are ye two chat¬ tering and laughing about there V' said a surly voice. ** Pretty damsels, and their bright, keen eyes" answered Odo. íf Out, away, tell not me of such vanities, 1 ' said the same rough speaker, as he advanced toward them. *' Na), nay, gooel man Madoc," said Odo, " thou knowest as well ач another vvhat havoc a pair e>f bright eyes can make among the sons of men." ■' Out on thee,
92
varlet/' said Madoc. " Aye, aye ; little Rhoda of the dale knows how to deal her glances/' said Toston. " What dost thou mean by that ? who gave thee leave to speak of Rhoda ? hey, chub ! An thou dost not hold thy tongue," said Madoc, " this staff shall stop thy babbling. For thee, Odo, wert thou not a licensed prater, I would cudgel thee too." u Thou dost well to forbear," said Odo; " 1 bandy nought hni words; but as for Toston here, his staff may prove as »tout as thine ; and ma) hap he can swing it round as cle¬ verly as any who take a stick of oak for a prop, or for a defence : so make not thy words gooel upon him, lest thy sconce should pay for thy jactation." Madoc raised his staff maugre the warning, and was about to put Tostoifs skill to the test, when Odo, twirling it out of his hand, saiel, *' No blows between brethren. Do ye not both serve the ve nerable Lady Emma, and the noble Henry de Nartonville, lier grandson ? Deal your blows vvhen they need your strength; strike when they need your cudgels : there will be more gooel har¬ dihood ¡ahewr in that, than in breaking your staves on the pates of each other." (i We may do both/' said Toston. " Wliat, thou wouldest first break thy &larf, and then ibe the spoiled fragments in the defence of thy liege lord and laely. Keep it whole, man, keep it whole, and thv pate too, that
93
the one may guide the other to do good service at good need." (C "Vhy dost see any sign of fear, or dost smell any scent of danger ?" said Madoc. " Hath the black cat mewed in the dark ? or hath the raven flapped his wing against thy casement ?" " If such a one as I/ 1 replied Odo, "may dare to speak gravely, without derogation to my cap antl my hells, which should always jingle a merry peal, I will say that the black cat mews from one corner of the kingdom to the other, and that ravens flap their wings against the casements of every man. 1 ' " Iiow so? how so? tell me that," said Madoc, fi Dost think," replied Odo, " that I heed not what passes ? Those who sit at the lower end, sometimes hear what is said by those who occupy the dais.*' " Well, and what dost thou hear ? hey ! tell me that ; for I heed not what is going on when the meat stands on the board, and the horn is handing round," said Ma¬ doc. " I hear of nought but war," replied Odo. " War here, war there, war every wdiere. Is not King Henry at Newcastle? Hath not Alexan¬ der, the Scottish king, defied Him ? Are not the Welsh in arms c* And behold the barons ! are they not ready for a desperate onset ?" ťí Odo," said Madoc, " our cudgels will never be needed for such far-away dolings as thou art chattering about." ik Let come what may," said Toston,
94
" such as we are shall not be called out to meddle with such squabbles. Arms are not trusted in ä.uch hands as ours : yet it chanceth oftentimes, that while the master thinks of nought but bat¬ tles, the lowly serf, who never looks so high, be¬ holds the secret, skulking, craven foe ; and then it is the spirit of a man flies forth, and the collar checks not his daring." " How now, Toston; wdiat, art thou springing forward, and raising thy heavy weapon to strike? Hast thou met a mag¬ pie in thy path, and hath she chattered to thee of mischief ¿" said Madoc. " I met no magpie/' said Toston ; ťť but I met the surly monk, Austin the Carmélite." " Of whom we were speaking," said Odo, " before pretty little Bridget popped into ovir heads, and turned our thoughts into a new channel, which so tickled our fancies, that, instead of growling, thou dickst find us laughing." <& Worse is it to meet him than any pie that ever chattered/' said Toston. " A churl," said Ma¬ doc. " A muttering wanderer among the thickest shades of our forests," added Toston. " 1 would I dared do my will against him." " O, he is a holy man/' said Odo ; " touch him not, Toston." u Holy me no holies," replied Toston ; (( I tell thee, his coming hither bodes no good to the olel castle and its inmates; his white robe U a worse omen than the blackest cat that ever mewed, or
95
the blackest raven that ever flapped his dark wing against the casement : but, I warrant ye, I shall watch his comings and his goings, and as for touching him, if I find him faulty, and con¬ triving ought to harm my valiant dear young master, or the noble lady Emma, I will send him to tell all the saints he talks about, that though he be vs apped in a cowl, fidelity can peep under his hood." " Perchance, thou mayst pay for peeping/* i aid Odo. tŕ I shall pay him his due/' an.svered Toston. " On the pate?" said Odo. " I will lay his pate where his heel·: rest/' re¬ plied Toston again. " Hold thy tongue for a foolish swaggerer." saiel Madoc, " or thy pate may chinee to epiake on thy shoulders." " I hold it at nought if I lost' it for lady Emma and the В iron."' i£ Thou holdest it at its full value/' «•aid Odo, '- and as nought can do nothing, keep the king's peace and thine own." " And in proof of thy good service, do thy duty now,"' saiel Madoc. tr Dott thou not see that the sun is almost lost behind the hills { Call thy herd to¬ se ther, and trudge on toward the castle, or they will scarcely be pent by supper-time, and thou wilt lose thy share of the pasiv." " Which would be worse than losing the pate on vvhich he sets such little value/' said Oelo. ť * Here, Tough, Tough," cried Toston, " up there, boy, drive on."
9С
Tough was as faithful and as obedient to Toston, as Toston was to his lord ; he jumped and barketl at command, and quickly brought all into proper order, and thus men and beasts plodded their way homeward.
CHAPTER XII.
1Ы\\ ! hah ! from north to south the din of battle Hurtles through the nations! Discords and jars, Demestic broils, and angry discontents, Spread wide : and each one stands on his defence f Hurling defiance.
The half jest, half earnest talk of Odo, and the fears of Toston, drew a very just picture of the state of the country, and the danger of Henry de Nartonville. It may be said that all Europe was in commotion. From Portugal, as far eastward as intercourse had spread her dealings, every na¬ tion was in arms : and the zeal which stimulated so many to the wars, which superstition deemed holy, called loudly on to battle. The flower of chivalry again prepared to waste its strength, and to shed its blood upon the plains of Asia. Lewis of France was he, who, to perform a vow which he had made in sickness, sounded the alarm, and widely spread his banner ; while the Pope blessed the crusaders, and promised all who perished in the holy cause remission of their sins, and sure vol. ь F
98
admission to the joys of heaven without the pains of purgatory. Fatal presumption ! and stiil more fatal credulity ! How many rushed on death to gain rewards which they had forfeited by crimes! How many, who thought themselves thus spared the practice of goodness and of virtue, in perpe¬ tual sin went on, and with the sacred badge of their profession on their bhoulder, died exulting in the fullness of their hope * ! While thus the Roman Pontiff, by arrogating to himself a power so blasphemous, destroyed the spiritual welfare of those whom he misled, he was careful of the temporal comforts of the apos¬ tolic chair at Rome. He risked not his own life to gain the happiness with which he deluded others, but while by iallacious promises he drove awav, the powerful whom he feared, by anathema and threats he exercised despotic sway over the w eak whom he despised : and thus became the terror and the scourge of nearly half the globe.
99
As the eye of the basilisk fascinates all on whom it looks, and the power of resistance ceases, so did the thunder of the church, hurled by the Pope, astound, and all became a prey on which he battened. England, of all countries, was the most oppressed, because the king shrunk with the million. Let us not, however, wonder that such a feeble monarch as Henry of Winchester should be prostrate at the foot of Rome, when his grand¬ father, the first Plantagenet, was humbled at her footstool. Meanwhile the English barons smarted beneath their galling yokes. A rapacious pontiff, and au avaricious king, were evils too great to be en¬ dured. They were uniting themselves from all parts into a general confederacy, and when Odo and his two companions entered the hall, they were surprized to find a numerous assembly of nobles debating on the plans to be pursued. Randolph de Neville's family, and that of Nar¬ tonville into which his sister Emma had married, had ever been strenuous supporters of the royal cause, and steady adherents to the virtuous earl of Pembroke, who had faithfully attached him¬ self to John, through all his troubles, and dexte¬ rously brought in the rebels to lay down their arms, and to acknowledge the succession of his son.
p <9 A rmr
100
Among those now assembled, the lady Emma was placed ; she sat among them not only hs the honourable hostess of the castle, but as one worthy of consultation. She had lived during the turbulent reign of king John, and she had a perfect remembrance of the days of Ceeur-de- Lion. The dangers to which she had often been exposed, the conversations which she had often beare!, and the consequences of the turmoil of the times which she had often experienced, had imbued her mind with knowledge : and without assuming a masculine spirit, and without dero¬ gating the decorum of a female, she was enabled to bear a part in the deliberations. u War," she said, <r is always fatal to the country where it is carried on; and when it is domestic it wounds the very vitals of the state. the conquerors and the conquered become mutually sufferers : yet there are moments when to be inactive would disgrace us. The point to he decided is, how far in controversy each party may presume. Henry, our sovereign, has raised too high his arm against his people ; and the people say, f We will not endure the stroke/ and raise high their arm to check it. Let it be thy part, Henry de Nartonville, to follow the example of thy ances¬ tors. Advise the king to yield to those who re¬ present the griefs they suffer, but arm thyself to
101
check the encroachments of those who, loudly claiming liberty for themselves, would fetter the liberty of their supreme. O! that the limits could be drawn on both sidest" íf My ever- honoured lady," said Nartonville, " those limits are the very cause of contest. The Barons under John laid the first stone of limitation. Future ages shall build upon it, and royalty and loyalty go hand in hand, and the interest of king and people be the same, inactive during such strug¬ gles no one can remain. I display my azure ban· ner to enwrap my native land, and the white plume of my helmet shall ever wave defiance against her foes." Odo, who had sat immoveably attentive to what was said by the nobles at the upper table, when he heard his lord talk of waving the white plumes of his helmet, shook his head violently, and by jingling his bells, drew the attention of his supe» riors to the lower board. " What meanest thou by that, my good fellow ?" said Nartonville. " I make the bells ring for want of a trumpet," re¬ plied Odo ; " had I been a trumpeter, the blast I blew should have been heard through merry England, and every one should have felt that he was an Englishman—save and except the fa¬ vourites, against whom I hear so much. They diould have felt that they were strangers." " We f3
102
will make them find it out," cried every voice: tf and the k ; ng .shall know that hk best friends are his own subjects." " Let us join hands on that score, ' said Nartonville. They ali roso, anti etch taking the hand of him who was next to him. they formed a ring, bowing their heads as they thus· stood united : then breaking the chain. diey clapped their hands together and shouted * md the venerable Emma, vvith a smile of appro- bation, ft aid that it was well done,
CHAPTER ХШ.
The truly bra\e e\tr are tnu. patriots- lie who benajt his (ountiy is a wretch, Who bhould be thnmn i»(o the lion's' den; And he who ¡?!а\ь lib ftilow m íhe daik, should be fctung to death hy 4101 pious. Henry de Nartonville was now, for the first time, preparing to run his career of arms and Ins race of glory, and to lead forth his vassals. By the succession of his grandmother to the hereditaments of her brother, Randolph de Ne¬ ville, he was as her deputy become the head of his family : and though it was the female line which thus inherited, and the name had changed, still all his uncle's dependents had become his, and at their head he could appear in the field as л mighty chieftain. With the artliv· of youth, all his thoughts» were glowing with the welfare of his country. Full of honour, full of nobleness, he was devoted toEngland. For England he was arming: to rescue her he drew his sword: in her defence,he hst ved dll dangers, and set hU life upon the r l
104
chance of battle. Nothing below the dignity of her weal had place within his heart ; and nothing vvhich tended to her good w ľ as beyond his aim. Meanwhile, as Toston had observed, secret foes were to be dreaded more than the open field of war. The two confederate monks were re¬ tired, each to his separate convent and cell, to meditate on death by machination. Austin, the base-born son ofthat de Neville now represented by Henry de Nartonville, eagerly sought to dis¬ possess his father's heir, and to gain the honours from which the degradation of his mother's shame excluded him ľ and he found a desperate assistant in Theodore de Montage, the Benedictine monk, who had quitted the world, and taken the cowl, vvhen Blanch fled dishonoured, and Henry de Montravers had been slain by her paramour. He had loved Blanch with that rapture of admira¬ tion, and that devotion of fondness which glows İn a young breast, when gazing on the loveliness of female beauty, while jet the heart is pure. He never saw hei faded charms, but his enamour¬ ed fancy still beheld her in the garb of vouth, beauteous as when he had gazed delighted. Her flight, her shame, had not weakened his affection, and he doated with enthusiastic ardour on the vision his memory ever raised. With undiminished friendship he was attached
105
to the ashes of Henry de Montravers, and found iio solace but at his grave. The tale there re¬ corded kept alive his hatred of Randolph de Ne- ville, and stimulated his vengeance against his family. He was rigid in performing all the duties, and obeying all the rules of his order, but as Religion called him not to the cloister, so she never soothed his grief, nor calmed .his passions. Their power was not weakened by time, nor slackened by age. For nearly half a century he had cherished his love ; for nearly half a century he had meditated his revenge. The moment of its accomplishment seemed arrived. Randolph de Neville, who had been preserved by absence from his stratagems, was dead. Emma had suc¬ ceeded her brother, and her grandson, Henry de Nartonville, who gallantly assumed the lance, and nobly raised his standard, was at the castle. The tattle to which Blanch, had she been faithful to herself, would have been led in pride by him vvho scorned the shrunken blossom he had blighted. The castle where the son whose rank and honours she had forfeited, would have shone in splen¬ dour. " He shall so shme; Austin shall intro¬ duce him to my knowledge, and another shall be added to our confederacy," W hile thus the plans vvhich had for ever been the meditation of his retirement, seemed te г 5
106
ripets and the hopes of their fulfilment seemed to realize; Austin, in contemplating the aid of the Benedictine, felt himself already almost placed aloft in rank and honour: and as the months brought round the change of season*, every change brought forward to his irritated mind the views of his success. While in succession summer fled, and autumn passed away, and the snows of winter clad the earth in white, St. Evremond, with better hopes, adorned his castle. Fcr the reception of Ma¬ tilda he had prepared a range of chambers em¬ bellished with all that art couiel then prepare superb. The tapestry hangings were all fringed with gold ; the fretted roofs were gilt ; the massy chandeliers were gold ; the seats were carved in various fancies and devices ; and balustrades of curious workmanship guarded the stairs and gal¬ leries. Oft as the tedious months rolled on, unmindful of the summer's scorching heat, or winter's nipping frost, he traced the lengthened way to see his promised bride,* and ever to his fond heart and ardent gaze she rose in loveliness.
CHAPTER XIV.
The nuptial preparations for our child Renew our days of youth. With more delight Scarce doth the bridegoom view th' approaching day, Which gives to his possession all he loves, Than doth the doating parent.
Preparations for Matilda's marriage were also made at her father's castle. With all the pride of his exalted station, and all the tenderness of a fond father's love, the Baron de Montgomery commanded that the magnificence of baronial pomp should be displayed to grace the ceremony ; and that peaceful sports, devoid of every martial semblance, should announce a day of joy. He ordered that all the vassals, and each lowly hind, should partake of the feastings which, with hos¬ pitable profusion, were prepared to celebrate the day of her espousals. The pastimes were not chivalrie, but the ru¬ ral gambols of hilarity. Those rough times knew nothing of elegance or refinement, even F G
IOS
the sports were contending trials of bodd) strength. The powerful use, and dexterous ma¬ nagement of tbc quarter-staŕrj which often gave a wound as deadly as a battle-axe, was deemed playful ; and because the disputants met without a marshal to regulate the field, or a trumpet to sound the onset, a fall under a fierce blow alway? awakened mirth: and wrestling, though often fatal in its consequences, was deemed a sight befitting female gentleness ; and the loveliest maidens and the comeliest matrons sat among the throng, and the tripped heels of a sprightly wrestler, never failed to draw, even from them, a shout of approbation, which denoted the pleasure they derived from the more active skill of him who laid him low. The gorgeous trappings of bridal decoration, and the paraphernalia of Matilda, were excessive. Rings, bracelets, girdles, sumptuous garments ; massy cops anel plates of silver and of gold, were gifts she gained from the Baroness her mother : a sleek-skinned sloe-black palfry, and rich horse¬ cloths were given her by the Baron : and all the invited guests who were to surround the brieie, when at the altar she plighted her faith to St. Evremond, contended in their nuptial gifts to mark their love and friendship by the costliness of what they gave»
109
Amid the preparatory profusion, which wab multiplied to make the wedding stately, the Ba¬ roness was not unmindful of a mother's duty. She inculcated by precept tliose lessons of good con¬ duct of which her practice had ever been an ex¬ ample. With excellent monitions she counselled her daughter. " Thou hast been," she said, " the darling of our doating hearts; to promote thy hap¬ piness hath been our wish, our study : but now, Matilda, now, my child, that separated from us, taken from our love, from our care, borne to a distant dwelling, where thou art not known, far other scenes await thee. It now must be thy care to watch thy lord, and in promoting the happi¬ ness of thy husband to secure thine own." Unpleasant to the ear of Matilda were such sounds as these. Glowing with pride, she looked forward to her marriage as the time when her high mind might soaring, reach the pitch of her ambition. To be the wife of St. Evremond was a situation to be coveted, although the daughter of Montgomery could not say that she was ex¬ alted. Her dreams beheld her vassals do her homage, anel her husband crowned with laurels : and, sovereign of her domains, she in vision saw her palfry led by nobles. Adeliza, as Matildas marriage approached, felt
по
her heart again warm towards r the world. She remembered the time when de Beaufort led her to the altar, and recollected the hopes which glowed in her fond heart when he conducted her fo his eastie. She ahnost lamented her holy se¬ clusion, for she could not behold the pomp of Matilda, she could not witness the magnificence of St. Evremond. " Mayst thou find/* she said to her niece, if the happiness I found in wedlock, but, О ! mayst thou never know the sorrow my widowhood hath experienced." A sigh, a tear followed —she bowed with meek resignation : agnin forgot the transitory bliss of earth, and, raising her eyes, she breathed a fervent prayer for the departed husband of her youth, and the lost and tenderly lamented heir of his virtues. Every thing which partook of happiness was become displeasing to Austin: and the joyous occupations vvhich he beheld at the castle of Montgomery drew comparisons with his own se¬ clusion, and unconnexion with relatives and friends, which increased the hatred he bore to Henry de Nartonville : and being thus unable to endure the bliss öf others, and more than evar anxious to converse again with Theodore, he re¬ solved, ere the festive day arrived, to go to him again, and------♦ So strongly is the mind of man
πι
convinced of the atrocity of wickedness, that, at the moment when he determined to proceed, he could not bring himself fully to contemplate what was the mighty mischief he meant to undertake
CHAPTER XV.
* * * * Say, W Lo will not remove that which impedes lűs progrító!' iu \ n ь thy cry of ev'ry one who (lares To ..ct unjustly. Î500N as the snows melted avvay, and the earth began to smile after the gloom of winter, each heart expanded to the various purposes for which aii had been preparing since the tournament. Austin again set forward to consult with Theo¬ dore, and pushed on with eagerness to begin tîıe enterprize they were jointly to undertake. Nothing delayed him. He passed the entrance "f the cave wherein he had found the scroll of Edmund de St. Victor. He .stopt not at the castle of Nartonville. lie visited not the grave nf Monti-avers: but entered the chapel of the Benedictine convent while the monks were as¬ sembled in prayer. The white robe of his order was so conspicuous among their sable vestments, that he was instantly observed. When the aged Theodore thus suddenly beheld the Carmelite,
из
he uttered an involuntary scream, and started from his kneeling posture. Quickly recollecting himself, he resumed the outward solemnity of his devotions, thougii every thought reverted to the conversations he had held with Austin, and all his angry passions agitated his bosom. Austin knelt among the friars, and seemed not to no¬ tice the effect which his appearance had on Theo¬ dore ; and .vhen the vesper service was concluded, he walked from the chapel without looking again upon him, and without invitation, sough ι the cell vvhere they had before consulted : and when the solitary occupier entered his lonely chamber, he eagerly caught the other's hand and said, " I trust we meet resolved," '* We do," said Austin. " Where is the son of Blanch ?" asked Theo¬ dore. Austin remained motionless and .silent. ** Thou shouldst have brought him with thee," continued Theodore ; " meet it is he should be¬ hold vhat he has lost—well it were to farther our intents that he beheld the youthful heir, the Baron de Nartonville, vvith »-»ride and haughtiness assume the high dignity of leader of his uncle** vassals—he should behold the gardant lion on his shield displace the blazing svn which used to mark de Neville—he should behold his waving plumes when at the head of his dependant» he assumes command—he should behold how irra.ee·
114
fully he sits his war-horse ; how martially he- holds his lance within his steel gauntlet— О 1 he should behold the minion of the county receive the plaudits of the surrounding multitude which follows his proud march-—he should hear the orator who persuades: who teaches all around him how to act—he should behold the aged Emma, glowing vvith delight, look on, to witness how he speeds his course to glory—-—So should the son of Neville have appeared in arms !-—·so should the lady Blandi have gazed upon her boy !-—Such sights as these would spur him on te» join us. Such sights as these woulel kindle in his breast the fire he cannot fail to have inherited from such noble ancestors. We must not pro¬ ceed without him. What are we among the armed throngs, which, since last we met, have daily multiplied around Iiks standard! What are- two aged monks whose days of chivalry have parsed away, and whose quivering limbs airead) shrink beneath their load of years ! But the son of Neville, at this juncture, when all his fa¬ ther's feudatories arc assembled, would induce a change, and the flatterers of a vain boy would rail) round the man who bears the ancient name their youth had venerated, and their fathers loved !—Bring him, í sav —bring him to die test of a;» attachment whicli sleeps because it is not
115
roused. Let me behold him------ ** tť Behold him here!"' said Austin, off' his guard, and fired by the spirited loud call of Theodore. " Thou !" —The astonishment of Theodore was so great, that he couhl not proceed. After a long silence, " Thou !" he exclaimed again, i( Thou the son of Neville!" "I. Ask thib high-praised minion—- ask Nartonville. He shall tell thee I am hL· uncle's .son." Theodore sunk spiritless. The warmth which had animated his utterance expired; tlu gestures wh h had enforced his arguments were palsied ; and articulation failed. It was like the hush of the tempest when the thunder has ceased to roll. if Thou knowest me now/ said Austin. *' Thou hast anticipated all I feel: thou art jet to learn how much i dare. Propose—I shall not -brink.'" £i As the ball of snow which the wind el rifts," said Theodore, i{ gathers as it roll- alom», о doth his power augment as he proceeds, His power must be checked; his progress* mu*t be topped, or it will become unwielel), and we >hall he unable to resist it,—Where wa*t thou reared ť bow has thy life been spent?" Austin >mote hi- brea &t. ťí The tale I have to tell ; the main sor- uvwâ í have to recapitulate; and the manner mv parents were revealed to me, would waken -tones. The feelings they have aroused in me have de -troj ed all tenderness and the hyæna more e.\Ai% s
116
shall be tamed, than 1 shall be appeased," He then recounted the sad slory of his childhood and his youth, and his growth to manhood, till he brought down all events to that distressing mo¬ ment when he was called in to seiothe the dying couch of his repenta.it mother. As he proceeded, Theodore was violently agitated : he often grasped the narrator: he often gasped for breath : and he dievv figures on the floor with his foot : and when Austin represented the agony of Blanch, and named the ecstasy with which she sprang upon his breast, and breathed her last upon his bosom, Theodore fell lifeless from his seat ; and his com¬ panion thought that he and revenge were gone. He hastily openeel the door of the cell, and loudly called for help. With as much composure as he could assume, he said to the monks his out¬ cry had alarmed, " Our brother has, 1 fear, ex¬ pired." " Bc not them afraid," replied a munk, ' : our holy founder, blessed St. Benet, in his rule has ordered care of the sick. Ile ¡diali be taken to the chamber set apart for them, and the ofiicer who is appointed for their service shall attend him. All remedies will be ministered unte» him, and the baths allowed him. 1 ' b'o saving, he as¬ sisted his brother monks, and they carefully con¬ veyed the senseless Theodore to the apartment t, dh d the hospital, and commended him to the
117
care of Bromar, the person nominated to that charitable part of the establishment. Austin fol¬ lowed. AU his endeavours w r ere insuflicient to restrain the utterance of his exceeding consterna¬ tion. " О ! my friend î my brother î my adviser ï leave me not thus ! О revive, revive ! Let me once more hear thee speak !" " Brother," said Bromar, (( these violent ejaculations do not befit the robe thou wearcst, nor can they be permitted within these holy walls. Thy friend heareth thee not ; therefore depart in peace." " I shall watch beside him," said Austin. " Without permission ftom the superior, thou mayest not remain in the sick chamber," said Bromar. " Procure it for me, that I may watch his returning breath, and catch the first words he utters," The earnest desire that Austin had to remain and watch by the couch of Theodore, arose from the great fear he had that, unknowing where he was when he revived, he should betray the pur¬ pose which had brought him to the abbey. Hav¬ ing gained permission to remain, he sathim down at the fort of the pallet, and, in anxious silence, gazed on the aged monk, who lay extended he- fore him. He sat there through the night, and witnessed the vain attempts of Bromar to admi¬ nister medicine to the closed mouth of the pa¬ tient. It was evident that he was still alive, for
118
the chill of death was not on his limbs. When circulation began to struggle, Austin bent over the couch, and beheld the opening lids. In a few moments, he raised his eyes, and beholding the Carmelite beside him, he faintly pressed his hand, and said to him, " All shall go on." It was long, however, ere he left the lonely and re¬ mote t un et of the abbey where the sick were se¬ parated from the healthy. There he lay, unvisited by all but Bromar, whose constant attendance was a check to conversation ; and all that passed within or occurred without the walls, remained unknown to the suffering weak old man. Piously and devoutly as Bromar always at¬ tended on those who were committed to his care, he never sought to retain them beyond the mo¬ ment when he could venture to return them to their own ceil and pallet; and he was quite as anxious as Theodore himself for his removal When the time arrived, he assisted Austin to lead him forth, and the deadly consultations on the fate of Nartonville w ere instantly renewed : but no assistance beyond his counsel was Theo¬ dore able to give to the direful intents they me¬ ditated. A man almost arrived at that age deemed the age of man, regaineth not, like youth, his pristine vigour. His fit of epilepsy for ever unnerved his arm, and never again did he quit
İİ9
the narrow limits of his cell, which thu^ became his prison. (( 1 cannot act/' he said ; if alas ! be¬ hold to what I am ι educed. Is this the moment when exertion ought to fail í For thec, thou mayest not appear to act, or it will T last thy claim. Go thou to the castle, learn how r the boy proceeds. Meanwhile, 1 must find an able agent on whom we may rely. Among the monks, I have marked one, Gaston de Prestone ; I have taken his tale in part in his confession, v/hen he first fled here for shelter. He is a elog, a very caitiff dog, wdio fled to sanctuary, and put on the Benedictine habit to screen him from pursuit. To read to me, I will call him hither. I will sound the depth of his maliciousness, and find if I dare trust him. As cheerly as thou canst, de¬ port thyself unto the aged matron, now joyous in the bravery of her grandson, and let not the vouth observe that ihou dost pry into such thinsrs as do not pertain to vvhat thou wouldst be deemed among the worldlings/*
CHAPTER XVI.
The first step ta'en in vicc cannot be stepp'd back. Why then go on ■————~ ,St>e ! tho doubting, halťresolv'd, naif villain í What he hath done proclaims hirn ю the world For what he is ; while а U his schemes are mpp'ii, And he scorns himself equal to the t>rorn Of others—Thus it is ! False bhame Goads on the bad in their pernicious ways, And maketh them forget the greatest shame Is to pursue their course. Win le Theodore was stretched or a sick hed, and Austin was devoting almost all his time to attendance on his convalescence, Henry dc Nar- tonville continued the warlike preparations],vvhich had so greatly displeased the Benedictine. Though he was an object of hatred to the forsaken Austin, and to Theodore de Montage, lie was highly ex¬ tolled by every other member of the abbey, and in prodigious favour with the abbot. lie had caused lamps to be kept continually burning, and masses to be perpetually sung for the souls of lis uncle Randolph de Neville, and of Henryjde Mon« travers whom he had slain : antl had made liberal
121
donations to the abbey, to reward tlic zealous hymns thus chaunted, anel to induce every one to be fervent in their prayers for tlie departed. Anselm, the abbot, was a man who failed not to enforce all the rules which tended to the eli^- nity and exaltation of the abbacy, and the com¬ fort anel indulgence e>f the abbot« lie was parti¬ cularly observant of the fifty-third chapter of his founder's rule, which gave such latitude of re¬ laxation to the abbot on the dutv of fasts : and extending the permission given him of eating with strangers who come to visit the abbey, wlyi, as the blessed Benet says, must be admitted at the abbot's table, in an apartment by itself for that pur¬ pose, and he ought to break his fast to keep them company*. He also forbore to be abstinent at the tables to which he was invited, and often par¬ took of the profuse hospitality which was alwa} s spread upon the board of an English baron. While the feelings of patriotism were warm in the breast of Nartonville, his enemies vu t лг- öuing their machinations for his destruction. There never was a man so fitted for an act of eleath as Gaston de Prestone. He had lived a loose disorderly life among banditti, and had been concerned and borne an active part in many
VOL. j.
Ì22
učene·* of riot and depredation, and had never spared the life of any one who contended when he w as attacked. In a desperate conflict, he had killed the vassal of a powerful baron, and had been pursued from place to place, but he had ahvavs escaped, because the intricacies of the fores-ls and the hollows of the rocks and moun¬ tains were known to him ; and when danger j rested, he could conceal hiniself in thickets or in caves, and exist where others would not have found subsistence. When the hue and cry vas over, he fied to sanctuary, and took the monkish vows as a secure concealment ; but, de¬ voted to outrage and rapine, he did not mean to remrin secluded, and only waited for an oppor- tu:*i*y to leave the abbey walls unnoticed. By dark hints and ambiguous insinuation^ il 'Mdu e o-mded Gaston, who said to him, after uu ihr к hhiS had beeil often repeated, asit to pube into the recesses of his heart; íť Thou noedc-t not thus, my biother, go about vvith cun- 11İP1Î quc-tiops and "-criHimzing examination to ditover whom it L· that thou art thus ¡sifting. AS not thou tîıe man to whom, when fir*t I en- Si\d tliis retreat, I told tho (ale whhh drove me h Ί ι, and still keep·* me here? Do<S thou not Ki »«I -lev, ,ι mdn, not the first by many, whose I vifil connexions demand blood for Mood.
123
Thou dost not seem, if I may judge from vvhat thou sayest, less prone than I have been, to rid thyself of those who interrupt thee. What thou bast done little care I to know, that to thy&elf; but I can well guess what it is vvhich thou requirest from me. Thou canst no longer act thine own resolves ; my younger arm must strike, while thou dost guide the blow. Give me to escape the means, place me again in safety as I am at pre¬ sent, and he walks not now on earth whom I will not find out, and do thy will," " "When I left the world," said Theodore, " I possessed some treasure vvhich has lain long concealed ; ready to use when a day should come it would be needed. I will put it in the hands of one who shall well reward thy services, if thou clost clearly prove to him that thou hast executed my behests. With him I will consult, and then to thee fully explain what I require. Quick thou must be, and secret, and thy reward shall far exceed what thou ex- pectest from such a man as I am." Having thus spoken, he motioned with his hand toward the door, and Gaston rose and left him. The day previous to bis departure from the castle, Henrv de Nartonville determined to make a great feast, vvhich had been long proclaimed. Before that elay, it was arranged that Austin should depart for his own residence, that no sus- r f > Si ¿ν
124
picion of what was going to be perpetrated might fall on him. Full directions were left with Theo¬ dore for the instruction of Gaston, who, when next he attended the call of the infirm recluse, received full information of the course to be pur¬ sued. " Knowest thou," said the now exulting de Montage, " a monastery of Carmelites, full four da) s' journey for a horseman eastward hence ?" " I know it well." " Then thou dost know the bridge which, not far from the gardens of the fathers, crosses the stream vvhich flows around them.*' " I also know that," said Gaston. ic From that bridge/' continued Theodore, ac¬ cording to the minute description he had had from Austin, " is a narrow path, not much fre¬ quented, and scarce to be perceived: it leadeth to a blasted oak, whose riven trunk and blighted branches stand in decay near a eleep cave. When thou approachest its scathed stem, look around, dud on a bramble thou shalt see a girdle twisted, as if by chance it there had dropped : close by that bramble, thou shalt find concealed among the underwood and tangling weeds, a flight of steps which will lead thec strait into the place where thy reward awaits thee. Shew him whom thou shalt find within it, this signet ring, and give him proof that thou hast done what I require, and forty golden crowns, and many ornaments of
125
value, which graced my days of happiness anel youth, shall all be thine. Him whom thou must slay is Henry de Nartonville. The day vvhich follows the great feast he has proclaimed, as he issues in the pride of chivalry from his castle, thou must raise thine arm against him. Strike him and flee." " Thy commands shall be obey¬ ed," said Gaston ; and he instantly quitted the 1 presence of his employer. When Theodore was alone, he exclaimed, " Now, my beloved friend, my long-lamented Henry de Montravers, and thou deluded and be- trayeel dead Blanch, ye shall be revenged."
g3
CHAPTER XVII.
ïo dent, and caves impervious to the lmht of da\ . itohbfb uid murdeieia, hke beasti, of pie j, ìetire To hide the spoib, and till the tieabUits thev pin o n ΙΙιιςμΉΐί, themsehes in all the mibclncf they hive done, 1 Siey thmk the eye of шап ihali never find them theie , F\ti toi «etlui uf tint peneudtnc с)е д VV huh teaches to the centre
Tii e festive day at length arrived, to which every one w ho meant to follow the azure banner of do Nartonville was invited. The holy abbot, father Vn^ehn, was abo an invited guest. Not with more pomp and pride did warlike cavaliers bestride tiieir prancing steeds than the humble son of Benet set forward on his mule, wh(/*c splendiel trapping«; were all fringed with üt Id. The stirrups which kept him in safety on liis s uîdîe were of silver, ami they hung on either sivlo by чАкеп tiings. The bridle too, which guided his <s>ud) beaS, was si!k. Four inferiors of the abbev wtlked before him to announce his ciimníi* amou» whom G Ыоп de Pie-tone, m
i 127 'order that he might see and know young Navto,- ville, had obsequiously procured himself to be one. Others followed in a pompous train. When he was mounted, the large gates of Wie outer court were opened wide for him to pass avvay ; and when he reached the castle, the massy gate was thrown far back for his reception. The baron's self met him as he entered, and helped' him to alight, lie was led vvith all punctilious- ceremony, and placed at the right hand of the lady hostess, who sat at the upper end of rhe table on the dais, in all the splendour of the ЬцЬ dignity she had inherited. Her seat was elcvasd above those whereon the others sat, and she was surrounded by the women wlio always followed her in public. The pleasing manner in which she deporte si herself in her exaltation, banished restraint frcm all her guests, while the dignified decorum of her sex, checked all excess : and a refinement of be¬ haviour, rare in those times, graced an assemblage of men vvho, on the morrow, vvould assume the lance and cuirass. It had been agreed between Theodore dnd Gaston, that he should expose his visage as little as possible, but as he was the only one who ip~ peared careful of such concealment, he made himself the more conspicuous ; and Toston, the G í
128
h лКтап, vvho had never lost sight of the danger which he anticipated to his lord, watched him closely as he sat among the menials who occupied the í i wer table. Anselm partook vvith glee of all the viands s-et before him ; but the humbler monks did not de- vi ite from the rule which ordered how they ou- lit to feed : and they s,it mute among the many who weie cheered bv the plenty of the Baron's feast. The harp, which never was silent at the feasts ofour forefathers, enlivened the passini? goblet, and the bards raised high the song of battle, Vvm ' ann 1 irm ! for youi countiy arm f Hu ι 1 S 1 ^ le Snu oul di aw the bon : I iíl the sptat to g tud hei nom hamı · And nobh lush to meet the »ot ' loi ĽiUiind s gloı> ηολ\ к id on, ì ur lu pionii ι- í m с tu с uh bold ьоп ' Ί he roof rang with the choral sound, for every ν mV<* joined in the well-known war song of an¬ noit d ss. The fiust ended, Anzelm departed in the same p< mpou<ï manner he had arrived. Λ Vhen the man of peace had retired, the ai rangement* for the шла топши, weie settled, and they quaffed the рк(Це oí union. λ\ hui the mom arrived, every one according to is- stati »n and dutv, assembled fi r the march.
í ..uj
Trumpets aud clarions sounded to call out the leader, and every dependant of every degree, however lowly, waited in expectation to see him sally forth. The gates were opened. The stan* dard-bearer led the van, displaying the unfurled azure banner. Two and two next followed the pages of the household ; and after them, upon his black war-horse, advanced the youthful Nar¬ tonville. He had scarcely passed the gate-way, when Gaston raised his hand, armed with a iläg¬ ger, to pierce between the plaitings of his armou s vvhich he well knew how to trace. The check thus given to his steps, caused the neighing steed to rear, and the dagger glanced on the polished steel, and the blow was harmless. Gaston tied. Every one rallied round Henry who had seen the uplifted dagger as its bright blade advanced, mel loud had shouted ki Treachery." All were so eager to ascertain the safety of de Nartonville, that the escape of him who aimeil the blow was unheeded. No one pursued but Toston. Among the imvvarlike numbers to v, hom the use of arms was not allowed, Toston luul re¬ cognised the monk vvho, on the preceding day, had never dropt his coif. He had observed him by degrees, without appearing eager, get closer and closer to the gate at vvhich all were waiting and watching to behold the Baron; till at length, he о 5
130
was exactly there where the horse must tread. He foilovved in the same slow way, and was con¬ stantly at his heels. The sudden blow, the rear¬ ing of the horse, and the flight of Gaston were the actions of a moment. " Yonder he speeds," said Toston, and followed vvith equal swiftness. He soon came up with him, and seized his robe. The pursued monk, finding himself withheld, turned quickly round, and with the dagger, which he still grasped, he pierced the side of the faith¬ ful hind. He fell prone, but as he fell, he still held fast the sable garment of his antagonist, which rent as the wearer sprang from him, and all he caught was the small tatter wdiich had given way. Another pause to help the prostrate Tos¬ ton, gave Gaston time to flee, and he was soon concealed among the uncleared growth of the lorcst. " It was a monk who yesterday attended on the abbot. It was he who would not let us see his face. I knew that he was vile. An honest man never need hide liimself, nor fear to meet the eye whicli looks at him." " What of your wound ?" asked Madoc, who, thougii a surly fellow, had a snatch of human kindness. €€ Tend not me," said Toston, " I am but scratched, though the blood flows doughtily. Sec to our master." " He is «afe ; he is safe," every one cried out joyfully. The delay occasioned by the attempt on the
131
life of the young Baron, threw the array into some confusion, but every one being assured that the leader was in safety, hastened to his stand, and the troops werequickly marshalled. A march was sounded by the trumpets, and when the train had left the castle, each fell with order into the ranks, and followed the standard of Nartonville. The Baron being safe, and no one hurt among the soldiery, Gaston was not pursued; but as Nartonville passed among the eager gazers at his noble bearing, and numerous followers all in arms, he said, vvith kind anxiety, " Let my poor faith¬ ful herdsman be well tended, and assure the lady Emma of my safety." Wlien the news of an attempt on the noble life of the young Baron was carried to the abbey, and a holy Benedictine was denounced a murderer, Anselm set no bounds to the anger he expressed against a wretch vvho had thus disgraced his order, and brought shame upon the convent of which he was the head and chief. At the hour when all the monks assembled ¿it the vesper service, he caused the chapel doors to be closed, and having caged them all, he called on each to answer to his name. None vv ere ab¬ sent save Theodore de Montage and Gaston Ac Prestone. Theodore was found in his cell, from vvhich he never had removed smce he returned to gG
132
it from the sick chamber vvhere he had been taken when he swooned. Gaston was no vvhere found; therefore he was declared to be the person vvho had aimed the blow, and strict orders were in¬ stantly dispersed that the delinquent should he pursued and brought back to punishment. Gaston, vvho thought the story of his failure would not reach the cave so quickly as himself, sped forward, and on the sixth day espied the oak vvhich spread its withered branches wide,, and pointed to the bramble on which the girdle hung. It was not, hovvever, easily that he found the opening to the stairs. When he discovered it, " Here I shall be safe," he said as he descended. He had so often entered deserted ruins in liis course of rapine, that he passed down the broken steps as easily as a smooth hill, and when he en¬ tered the gloomy cave was as little moved, as if it were a hall for feasting. Austin vvas there. " What ! art thou here ?" he cried, " son of the exiled Neville !" Austin started. " What knowest thou of Neville ?" said he. ** Little—he slew the brother of Blanch, long ere I beheld the light of day : hut the tale which thy mother told is spread in the country round j for Montgomery here, and Nartonville, at whose castle thou hast sojourned, have spread wide her shame, though they know not the wiles
133
of her son. Oft have I seen thee at the convent with Theodore de Montage. But enough of this. He sent me to thee. I have done his bidding, fos vvhich thou dost owe me thanks, as I conjec¬ ture ; and by this token I claim my full reward." So saying, he put the signet ring into the hand of Austin. Austin took it eagerly, and said, " Shew me the proof of thy true words." Gaston produced the dagger. It was stained with the blood of Toston. " Behold," he said, fť the blood of him I slew." Austin took the dagger, little doubting it was the blood of Nartonville. He gazed upon it, then turned it round, then gazed on Gaston. He had long meditated this deed of death ; but the assurance of its perpe¬ tration chilled his inmost heart. It was done. It could not be recalled. He was at the mercy of one who, for further gain, or to exculpate himself, might betray his tvvo employers. To secure himself, in the phrenzy of the moment, and the terror of his fears, he plunged the dag¬ ger in the breast of Gaston, crying vvith vehe¬ mence, " My own safety makes thy life my prey." Gaston sunk lifeless at his feet, for the blow of Austin was the blow of desperation, and that en¬ forced the stroke. He gazed for some time on the form vvhich he had stretched in death, then seizing the torch
134
which had enlightened the gloomy cave of St. Victor, he trod it under foot, and groped his way to the steps, which he ascended, leaving the dag¬ ger and the monk to the conceahnent never likely to be discovered.
CHAPTER XVIII.
Can words express the misery of him Who ever bears within his guilty breast The consciousness of crime ? Howe'er conceaľd And hidden from the world, yet from himself The wretch can never fly. Perpetual fear Haunth him each night and day : eternal dread 0{ dire disclosure, and of retribution.
When Austin, forcing his way among the bram¬ bles, breathed again the fragrant air, sweet with the scent of spring, and felt the cheering sun, which, through the openings of the forest, darted his rays upon him, he found how terrible it was to be his own accuser. He closed his eyes, not daring to look up, and for a moment stood lost to sense and to the world. A momenťs pause !—a momenťs sleep !—a moment's rest ! He roused — О ! who shall now describe his pungent woe í The rushing of the cataract is gentleness com¬ pared to the fierce rush of his bad thoughts. The storm, the hurricane are peace, for they shall cease to rage: but say, when shall the rage of
130
conscience cease? when shall that heart be calm which beats within the murderer's breast ? Yet Austin, yet thou livest still, not cpiite lost to hope» He whom thine arm hath slain is gone—lost to all—lost to repentance! Smiting his breast, Austin returned to his con¬ vent ; but the peace which hailed his first retire¬ ment was gone, and rest forsook his soul. Meanwhile, by order of Anselm the abbot, search was made for Gaston. Many monks were sent in various directions to pursue his flight, and the Baroness, the aged Emma, sent numerous domestics to scour the country and to find his haunts. His haunts knew him not—-the secret cave of St. Victor hid the victim of unrighteous hire, and concealed the murdered and the mur¬ derer. When the monks r turned, and said all search was vain, Anselm replied, i( lie must be found. Though he lie hidden beneath the sea, deeper than any one alive can plunge, he sliall be hither brought, and undergo the punishment due to his malignant in." The monk«* represented that it w a- not pos-ible. " Possible or impossible/ said Anselm, ťí f will be obeyed." Tliough Anselm spoke like a fool, he never¬ theless spoke like an abbot, for in the sixty- eighth chapter of his rule, St. Benet sayeth, If
137
л monk be commanded any thing impossible, aftei having represented the impossibility of it with all humility to his superior, yet if he 2^ersist in his rom mand. the monk must at last obey, and r fir/ on the assistance of God in the performance of it *. The monks dared not reply again. The abbot and the holy founder was each in liimself a host. Theodore, vvho knew not hov Austin had re¬ ceiveel the wretched hireling of their crime, sat in his lonely cell, hourly expecting that Gaston vvould be brought back, and he himself denounced. It wa* a dreadful pause, for it was fear; fear vvhich alwavs is the companion of the guilty. Yet, to have committed the stroke to one who failed in the daring blow, and pierced an ignoble hind, while the grand victim escaped, doubled the pangs he felt. The mortification of disap¬ pointed vengeance brought on a second fit, vvhich provc-el fatal, and he died in full assurance of his failure, at the very moment when he thought to see accomplished the ireful plots of aiore than half bib hfe. The murderer's purpose thus was blasted, and Theodore'ö own life paid the forfeit of his attempt on Nai touville. While they bore him to the ^Vd^e. and laid him, according to the widi that he through life had manifested, at the foot of
138
Henry de Montravers, Austin again set forward. Not with the speed with which he travelled when eagerly he sought to view the castle of de Ne¬ ville ; for though he deemed the heir was laid in dust, and though he had for ever silenced the only voice which could betray the instigators of his fall, still an unwillingness to be found where the deed of death had been committed, seemed, like a heavy clog, to check his progress ; for he feared to hear recounted the manner of the as¬ sassination. He feared to meet the funeral so¬ lemnity of the brave youth he had destroyed. He could not bear to witness the grief of the lady Emma for the last of his noble race : and he trembled lest, at that sad moment, she might be induced to ask even him, the debased, the de¬ graded son of her brother Randolph de Neville, to bear a part in the mournful obsequies of his murdered representative. The first person whom he saw as he approached the grey walls was Odo ; who was sitting under a tree singing, SOXG, The moon groweth Jess, And the sun retire» ; The moon increaseih, The mir hath new fires ; But ihc man that retires no'tr cometh again. Α*ί ! no f ah î no! no, never again !
139
The tree it is lopt, And tlie branches fall ; The tree it is topt, The trunk stands it all ; lìut the man that is topp'd ne'er standeth again. Ah ! no ! ah ! no ! no, never again î The melancholy tune vvhich befitted the words, was chaunted by the simple fellow vvith such an expression of tenderness and grief, that Austin was confirmed in what he had understood vvhen Gaston de Prestone produced the dagger, and said, Behold the blood of Mm I slew. " Thy song/' said he, ' £ bespeaketh the sorrow vvhich no doubt sits heavy on the heart of every inmate of the castle/' " Bespeaketh my sorrow!" saiel Odo -, " neither I nor any other inmate here İs sorrowful." " Is he şo soon forgotten?" said Austin ; " has the darling of his dependants so quickly passed from love and from respect?" "Against what stone hast thou kicked thy foot?" asked Odo; " art thou to learn the truth of what hath chanced ?" iS I have heard, as I jour¬ neyed hither," said Austin, " the sad tidings of the death of Nartonville, slain by an assassin/' " Hast thou so?" inquired Odo; " go then, and tell thy false informer that he hath deceived thee." " Am I deceived ! Hath not the dagger reached his heart ?" " Wheu .... Beached his heart î 15
140
many, heaven forbid !" u Not slain!'* said An¬ tin. (l So. I tell thee ; no, no, no . . ." " How so?" 4aid Austin. *' I v^ill tell thee how so, with a rhi f jm a ding, dì ¡ψ dong>' taid Odo. SONO He r 'U'd the knife Λ <r uu^t bis hfe, L'ut tir г -trokt it was h о iiììee Saud. Hi. ihCík'd cai Cvi Made the hoisc ιοίι, Vnd neŞh, and pi anee, and uav\ the giound ; \Vi\\ the udei was ta\M bv hb sudden bound. Smj f rins; a din¿ ding, ding dong ! As Odo finished his carol he moved hib head according to the measure of his lay, and his bells jingled a noisy peal in the ears of the Carmelite. The consternation of the monk was so great while Odo went on with his ditty, that when the chime ceased, he exclaimed, " Why, my holy father, thou dost not rejoice ! Art thou not glad ? I am so glad that I can sing and dance all day. Гог 'he miei паз ? a\'d li) ÌVb bidden boui.d. Smg, η ,;a dinu; ding, dinj donc. If thou dost not rejoice, come not near the castle ; for nono but those who rejoice in the deliverance uf her gvandcon, must appear in the presence of
141 the Baroness/' So saying, Odo hic' away, caper¬ ing to his own song. A thunderbolt wouhl not ^o have astounded Austin as the iiccount he had received from Odo. u Nartonville not slain!'' lie could not under¬ stand it. He doubted his own ears, lie followed, however, the advice of Odo, and did no go to the castle. His footsteps mechanically traced the way to the convent of Theodore. When he had passed the portal, he went to the tomb of Montrav ers, as if the sculptured cherub could in¬ form him w init he feared to ask of mortal. As he approached, he saw the earth had been re¬ cently removed, and as he looked upon the new made grave, he recollected that it was the spot wliere Theodore had often said, i£ Here I shall be laid, anel vvith my long-lost, long-lamented early friend, mingle here my ashes 1" lie stood long in silence, gazing on the sod, when a passing monk said to him, (( We have here laid Theodore de Mioilta« e ; he was the oldest brother in our ah- be}. For neaily fifty years, he failed not each e\e to visit this sad spot, and now he* shall oc- cup) it for ever." it was not often that a Bene¬ dictine was so communicative, chieflv wlien un¬ questioned ; therefore he staid not ftir longer parle), but walked on, leaving the Carmelite to
i Aim*
his reflecuons. At the moment of his failine» it the moment of his crime, then when he needed aid, needed counsel, needed consolation, ís was left alone, a miserable proof that the wicked d ή not eck à fnend.
CHAPTER XIX
Ulien the plot negleeb the helm, and the ¡Лир ŕ endanţeied hv ¡негу viind, ьоше amoinj the crew must steer ihe ussel, or siie \u:l ¡si eoi ne a wie<K.
V'Ìslì; the individuals of the castle.* 4 and convents nero í hus pursuing íhe plans and schemes of theii various pursuits, the country at large was in a ïtaie of turbulence almost bordering on rebellion. The unsteady King, whenever he needed aiti, was ever ready and willing io promise all that was re- i'iired: but to his promises he was always faith- /v^ -ч and his end once gained, which usuali} vwb «> procure ni'*ncv\ he resumed his former la.ea- areN gave IiítsíS' up as before S> the guidance \ηλ rapacity of his favourites and c\hauSsd ihe \лА sums he frequently receivcil fre- m the Parli ι- ineiit upon the hnui.»ry foreigr.ers who came over ai (pue>'t of prev, and, like locibts, aie up the pro¬ duce of the country. To adıl to the cal „miu , hí- timidity and his bigotry subjected himself and consequently his kingdom, so devotediv to the
144 Pope, that the fulminant arm of the cliuich of Borne withered the root of the tree of liberty, while ¿he regal arm of the throne lopped its branches. Liberty is the innate feeling of an English breast. However occasionally deprevcd, Iiow¬ ever occasionally beat down by power too great to be repelled, struggles to regain it have never for a moment ceased ; and never lias there long been wanting some able man to lead the free in heart and mind to stand as bulw arks against the attacks of tyranny. Witness the many grants and chai ters our ancestors from time to time have gained. Witness the present glory of the English nation founded in freedom. May guardians of freedom never fail in our happy land! May champions of freedom be born daily, that as ge¬ neration succeedeth generation, libert) in its purest state devoid of base licentiousue s maj be cherished next in sacrcdncs» to the ahar of our faith ! In even part of the kingdom the 1 barons armed ; antl in eveiy part of the kingdom, the discon¬ tents of the people made all ready to follow their Kaders in defence of the privileges now beginning to extend to every order of the community; and as every noble gentleman was· a soldier, and all his vassals and the under member of vassalage
145 were soldiers also, the nation displav ed through¬ out Ss whole extent one grand field of battle. \et, though thus aimed, thus followed, i o un¬ willing .ue men, even in their rudest state, to 11- l ammisi established rulers, that notwithstanding that in pii vate wrongs they quickly meet in bold eleiiance, and, hand to hand, ıınhesitatinıç, con¬ quer or peiish in the field; )ei, in union against the paramount, the feelings of attachment an 1 vas^abge vibrate in tin ir bosons, and < lbei<- readv to stiike, they long hold the bword sus¬ pended ere they u^e it in execution. King Henry again made concessions; the neble·» were agtin appeased. Soldiers, who folkiwetl at their own cost il e standards of the lords of whom the) held, were soon disbanded* each returneii to his own dwelling, ami the personal concerno of his own affaiis d\\d pursuits, anel with the excep¬ tion of his domestic train, each baron was bft unattended. Nartonville, as α fiiendly gue&t, revisited the castle of St. Lvrcmond. He found him м totally d. voted to Matihhi, that the call of his corniti) h ul heen unheeded, and nothing appeared wonh) of his thoughts or his excitions, but what tended to promote her happiness, or indulge her wishes iweiy da) suggested some new work, some new airangenient which might add to her gnmdeui, YOb. i. и
146 or gratify the pride of her mind : and his castle, under hi- direction*·», was rendered the most mag¬ nificent in decoration of any tliat period had to boast. Tbc dav which was to unite him to the heiress of Montaomeiv, the day which was to give to his fond heart, the beautiful, the young Matilda., was near; the pomp of her reception was prepai Ìng f and tin pai ade with which he meant to fetch his biiue wai ready. The nuuiih'ccnc"* with which Montgomery had ordeled ihe nupti.d Vea t to be celebrated, and the splendour wiiich Ss Evremond had prepared for the 1(\Ы of her reception at his castle, were s t ) pompou-, that the tv>o barons appeared to vie vvith егк h otlu r in testimonies of esteem; and to do honour to Matilda seemed to be the ambition of ihem both. А ташаце between two such ancient noble L·- milit- v» as a t iicunistanee of importance, a& it united the inti rcsb of tvvo mighty chieftains, and blended two formidable powers. In that remote period, when the intercourse-, of polish« d life were unknown, unless called to v . r, his own domains marked the limits of a Ì iron's ialine, and except on «юте great occasion of iners.il nnpoit, or political concern, his own v > -ais vvt re Ьь sole asociate**. Women î.irely ι i\< d bun home, hut iound en.plt.vment m
147 domestic occupation's, and amusements in feats of chivalry at tilt-, and tournament ■>, or lhe Ь noble exeicises of rural sports among the lower ranks of tlieir dependants, who, on ьоше fíense dav s, contended in the iude games of theii humble station; enKvtned hometinus b) the niiii- -trels who sang the deed*» of htroci, and ic- eounted the actions of the brave. Consciousness. of her ovvn exaltat"on was e^evy noble ladv's su¬ preme bliss, and the parade of her own state- iiness her greatest gratification. Kverv- one iroimd her was so much below her own dignilv, that she could not he em iou?, but the haughti- ııc's-î thus eng( v ndered, while it kept her .dooi from companionship, deprived her of *hc plea- 411X\- of socie f v. The distances from castle to castle were, for ¡he mosi pait, beyond the rfadi of female cxei- tion, and except on grand occisión -> of lonu pre¬ paration and arranged removal, women oí' eqi al rank seldom met. No wunder, then, that the enamoured St. Evremond, who knew (hat within "he walls of his castle, hi& beloved Matilda must fmd her happiness, together with her home, should strive, by ever) device his ingenuity could suggest, to invent new sources of gratification to delight her, that she might never wish to go be¬ vond their bounds. u S
CHAPTER XX.
Devon î sweet land of druids and of bards, Oft have thy num'rous streams their murmurs check'd To list the song of sages, and the harp Which chim'd prophetic music, as the voice Decîar'd the fate of heroes : and thy rocks, Which frown aronnd thy coast, have echoed oft The martial cry which calľd the brave to battle, Or softer tones which spoke the tales of woe : And still amid thy fields the simple swain Repeats thine ancient lays, which scare the wise Though unbelieving, and with wild affright Amaze the humbler credulous.
The Baron de Montgomery, like every chieftain of liis day, deemed arms and all things martial to be the distinctive characteristics of a noble¬ man ; therefore, even for the nuptial feast of his daughter, the shields and spears which hung around his hall were newly burnished, that their bright gleam might strike the eye of each be¬ li older with veneration and respect for his ances¬ tors who had gained fame among heroes, and fought the battles of their native land.
149
Ilis ovvn shield, the shield of Montgomery, hung in conspicuous lustre over the mantle ; the device was a hand argent. It was indeed silver, embossed on a brazen shield. It was that vvhich his father had borne when he followed Richard Cœur-de-Lion to Palestine. Around it were ar¬ ranged, in various ways, spears, helmets, breast¬ plates, battle-axes, and all the many weapons which destructive war invents for mischief, or defence contrives for safety. Far more did such things suit Matilda than would have done the softer emblems of domestic peace. Even the chapel, amid the sacred vessels, had intermixed some shew of chivalry, and many banners taken from the foe, waved gravely from the holy walls. Montgomery strode among them with'a sol¬ dier's portance, and Matilda viewed them with Bellona's ardour. While thus the veteran warrior and his high-spirited daughter proudly surveyed the pompous instruments of the hostile field, tlie breeze wafted toward them the warbled wild cry of distracted woe : nearer and nearer approached the plaintive strain, till they could distinguish the melancholy air, and recognize the voice of Adela : the brain-struck Adela. She had gathered some flowers as she walked along, and as she climbed the hill she thus addressed them. n S
150
l liave cropp'd you in your primo, Ve uovei shall bloom again ; V c í.uiľ LS'oie >our tmie, Like a jouth ш battle bldin. íť Ifeiídi! ho!" she cried, (< the hill is high and steep, but it is not so deep as the grave !" Alı ! hapless Adela ! she was once beauteous as the robe-bud when it begins to spread its leaves to the mild sun of May ; and modest as tbe retiring plant which shrinks· from all approach : but in the wildness of her distempered fancv, she heeded not the blaze of noon, nor the chill of ihe evening dew: scorched was th ч blush of her cheek, and stained was her skin of snow : yet bright vûb the fire of her eye, and dazzling it-* i- antic Sare, î-ïhe w a« the daughter of one of Montgomery'.-. vassals, and liad been betrothed to Reginald de Dormaine. Ί hev had been trained together, fui Wilfrid ·ν Dormaine, his father, was the guar¬ di;,'» of Adela. In childhood they had plajed together ; and as- expanding reason iS'evv, mu¬ tually the had ioved. But ere the ρ rie.-, t had -.anet died iheir uni* »n, ere Wilfrid hral blessed iheir marriage, the youth was home to the grave. lie wa- slain at a gallant tournament, where hi.s an.Mou'.n-s to «dievv his skill, and prose liis va-
151
lour in the presence of Adela, led him to trv Ьь piowess. He gained the meed of fame. The plaudits of hundreds chaunted his requiem, and lie died while the shout was loud. The tenderne-s of Adela could not withstand the shock; her blighted love preyed on her mind, and nought was there but phantasy. She loved to roam in the wooeK, she loved to range In the fields. Her guardian indulged her ramHîng*·, but she ever was followed with care. She moved on, and approached the cattle : thv gates weie all uiv losed, no one opposed her ρ ь^ When she enterctl the hall, and beheld the „hi- tering arms, bhe stopped and sighed. Aftei . pause, she exclaimed, " Reginald гпчч! *lu «pear! Reginald bore the «hield I but Пед'п Iď- spear is broken, Bcss'nalďs shield π pierced ! ' She bowed her head аь she spoke, and then airan* beeran to -sng. ír rt) ıS^'ttt ini tri) Su ь t) e wo/ 'hme Яо \ r, Bricht w us my lou as iht noon-'nU I tarn , Ин sweets wue ьискЧ! m яп t 1 1 hour, ('ib hîightnc«s fled like ι moi nm¿ dreun S'ron^ wis mv lo\e аь the mom nn¡ , Strt ^ht was m\ lo\t n 1 - the bow m τι ô m ι lii *-rrttuïth маь qutil d b\ ι lit.iw r i t Нь ^trч!'îκ^s «аь bt nt b, % trus thvv t ΪΙ t,
152
Gold \^аь m) Io\e as a <himpion brave, \Iild наь my lo\e аь the galt of spring, Пь boUnt^is sunk m чп Cçiıly gra\t, Иь milducbb shrunk under dedth ь shut ρ bun¿ Äíontgomery advanced toward her. íf Adela/' he said, " how fares it with thee, sweet maid ? " '' It sires unfdhly/' she answeied, tr fe>r they boi e him avvay eie his eyes were closed; and they smothered his breath too soon." Then looking stedfastly on the embossed shielel of Montgomery. " Vh ! vvell-a-day/' she exclaimed ; and then sang with vehemence, Tlie fair white hand now thj bhicld doth gitcc, i '¡ fui wh te huid «·! ill til) blncld utfate, The fui white hand sini! wound thy bra\e race, lhe ftir vinte hand shi* 11 thine hen di'plue. (> Dost thou speak in saws, Adela ?" said Ma¬ tilda. u I speak the truth that shall be ; tell not me of savvb, for Tlic sun he slimes I. j di\, The ¡noon she bhiti" b\ mgh% Tne sun wilhdiaus hit. ι u, Iht moon douts hti light, Tiun thin сь euep out to steal, Vini mimkitb to s' iv, h d u kne s tlu \ cas dtal 1 ai Later 'hm b\ dd) "
1Ő3
As she finished the strain, she waved hei hand, and turned away. " Pretty maid 1" said Montgomery, <f see ľ.ovv she trips along, ач swiftly яч. the bounding doe : she scarcely bends the g ass she treads upon." Matilda stood musing on the words of the lovely maniac. " I like not these wild ravings," she said to her father. <ť The fair white hand is the hand of honour. The fair white hand shall nev er be borne from the shield of Montgomery.'* " Trust to the arm that bears it," said the Baron. As Adela departed, the harp of Alwin w, .s heard blending with the sound of his melodious voice. He had caught the notes, and likewise the words of the maiden, and he rang a load chime, and chaunted with energy the song υί tiu fair white hand. *' Prophecy pleaseth the baľd, said Montgomer). ** Prophecy 1" repeated Ma¬ tilda; " the unmeaning phrenzy of a cr,*zed brain. Let Alwin hre ak off the song." An « t- teneíant í olel the minstrel that the sonc: no loivci pieasei!, anel the chords were instanti) mate. Matilda was much disturbed by the w oreis < í Allelas lay, and more so by the immediate re¬ sumption of it b) Alwin. [Much more was she moved than suedi a mind as her's was willing s acknowledge possible. A fearlessness of all that might betide her, was *o decidedly the ft elin., * i и 5
154
Matilda, that she shamed to think that aught she heard ever could dismay her : yet in that dark age, the doating imaginations of a melancholy spirit, or the wild fancies of a wayward undei - standing, were received as soothsajings, and words vvhich seemed to partake of mv story, be¬ came awful, because they were beyond a sober compréhension: and after facts were compared with them, and circumstances strained into fulfil¬ ments of events which never had been pretended to be foretold. Tbe miracles ascribed to ^aints, and the fables which tradition preserved, estab¬ lished resting places for credulity to find terror, and superstition to gain confielence. \ belief in wizards and witches, and fairies and phantoms evdstcd, and stouter hearts than Matilda's were often appalled. Even he who would dare all dangers in the pei ilous contests of war, often trembled at the preposterous gesticulations e>f ..n ideot, or the crafty insinuations of those who knew their weakness. Madness as a dis¬ ease which might be tempered, was not known, and moonstruck and planet-struck was the opi¬ nion then held of phrenzy : and inspiration by familiar spirits was attributed to all incoherent ex¬ clamations. The rapture of simple poesy and music which sprang from the enthusiastic feedings excited by
155
the subject, gave energy to the lay and to tht (hord: sud аь the bards were always men of ¡earning, according to the learning of their day, there ever лмхь dignity in their expression, while ihe loo^e white robes whicli hung in ampl· 1 fohK around their persons, gave majesty to theii uçurt *-. it ь no wonder then, that like the druids oí old, the v*ere regarded as beings more thru moital, and that the character of prophets hould often be allowed them. Pardon ь there foi e dti(, ιί tin haughty daughter of Montgomeiy ^паЪ. \.}¡. η Alwin seized his harp and repeated ť ем u d- ot the betıothed ^pou^e of Reginald de Doımımı
CHAPTER XXI.
Look тапа the world bihold how \anouU) lhe biby sons oi men ťniplov the hours Which fleeting, pat.s aw aj and 1сд\е no tnce But in the numorj V oath umučili on, Old age his ««pei d with rapid s«cp¡s puisui^ And all orr daj> ait" dim. Sa\, in Time ^ еоигы, Гюга first to kbt, vliat ркаыие and what pain ΪΪ nc ouh othei follow'd Bugi ι hope dtbUoy d Vniple posesión piliM , e\i) pei fonn d, And injury sustain'd, niaik the Song wa\, 1 \\\ from the lading tabh t of tht brain ^11 is wip d awaj.
li was in all the pomp, in all the parade, in all the pi ide of abaron, that St. Evremond set foi¬ ward to receive from Montgomer) the noble gilt of Matilda's hand. He rode a milk-white -stee eh whtbc ga) harness shone with silverplåten; hi be-Srode a high-pummelled saddles and the bis saddle-cloth was embroidered ard botmd ronm 1 with gold. His vest was girded with a bioad golden gii die, and a short cloak was fattened uni-xi Ьь neck with a gold cla^p and hun¿. la-
157
hind his shoulders. The .bonnet he wore on his head was graced with a bunch of feathers. His esquires, his pages, and his grooms followed according to their stations, each mounted and arrayed 'm gay apparel. Henry tie Nartonville, on his black war-horse, rod° beside him, followed in the same manner by his train, and they passed on, a jov ous cavalcade, all elate with hope, all full of glee, all mirthful, and all happy. Montgomery, with equal pomp, met them at the gates of his cattle, anel they rode into the spacious court hetween two rows of his depen¬ dants of every degree, wbo were eluly ranged, to exhibit the grandeur of the Baron, and to mark their re -pect to his guests. As they dismounted, they were preceded by the usher to the great hall, and when all the ceremonies of greeting were exchanged, they were led to the splendiel apartment vvhere the Baroness and her beauteous daughter sat surrounded by the exalted female « who were assembled to witness the marriage cere- mon), and partake of the nuptial feasl. Unchecked by the many gazers vvho beheld him, St. Evremond ran to his promised bride, and pressed her to his heart. He presented her with a string of pearls^ which he placed himself round her bosom, and fastened it vvith а clasp on whicii »hone a polished ruby. Matilda blushed as Aie
158
received it, and delighted with the rich gift, she raised it to her lips, and pressed it vvith a raptu¬ rous kiss. He then approached the Baroness ; to her be presented a diamond girdle buckle, saying it had been bis mother's. An ornament wliich had belonged to his mo¬ ther could not fail to be a gratifying gift from her future son, and in return she took from her finger a sparkling ring, and placing it on the hand of St. Evremond, she said to him, " Let this betoken the satisfaction with wliich I receive thee for my own, and may the continuity of its form be a pro¬ phetic emblem of never-ending love between thee and my child." These interchanges of gifts of friendliness and of love, diffused an universal pleasure among the guests, and when they were led back to the great hall, and ranged tbemselves at the Baron's board, tbe mirth and good-humour which enlivened the meal, prolonged the repast, and they sat till a late hour. The day after his arrival, St. Evremond re¬ quested permission to visit Adeliza, the sister of Montgomery, the pious abbess of the convent where Blanch de Montravers had expired. He could onlj see her at the grate. He made fer¬ vent protestations of the love he bore Matilda, the respect he had for the Baron, and the vene-
159
ration he felt for herself. He requested her alvvays to remember him in her prayers, and pre¬ sented her vvith an ivory crucifix. The abbess, crossing herself, received it with joy ; and as she gazed upon it, " I accept it," she said, " as the best gift thou couldest have bestowed, and I trust that the prayers I sliall daily offer for thy welfare vvill be heard. Within these saered walls the remainder of my life vvill be passed, but the fame of St. Evremond, and the praise of my bro¬ ther's child will brighten the dreariness of age, and cheer the last days of my pilgrimage. I shall remember thee to-morrow, and vvhile the priest sliall join thy hand to that of Matilda, and bless and sanctify the faith ye pledge, the sisters shall join their orisons to mine, and chaunt an in¬ vocation that your happiness may endure, and that your hearts may ever be united/' With every mark of respect, and full of sentiments of veneration, St. Evremond left the abbey ; for his heart clung with tender attachment to every one connected with Matilda. While happiness was thus diffused through the castle, and peace blessed the land, the wretched Austin sat within his cell, and ruminated on the dis¬ appointment of the dire plot he had arranged with Theodore. He did not accuse Theodore of preci¬ pitance, but he blamed himself for his abrupt dis-
IGO
closure that he was the son of Blanch, and Ьь ready acquiescence in the attempt of Oaston de Prestone. Ilad he resisted, as he purposed, till Emma was no more, perhaps a surer way might have been found to rid themselves of Nartonville. But now it was too late. Theodore de Montage was become the victim of his own schemes, Nar¬ tonv ille had established his fame, and earned a name of honour and of valour, and gained the approbation of his sovereign. He was become α favourite at court, and the minions of power sought his friendship and alliance. To supplant him, therefore, was impossible. lie could not pull down the man whom rovsd favour graced, nor bribe nor pay abettors. With all the ran¬ cour which he long had cherished, still rankling in his bosom, he felt the keen remorse of what he had already perpetrated, without the penitence which bhould attend compunction. The only solace he had, if any thing can solace guilt, was that no one knew that he was concerned in the dark deed, no one sm pected his fellow ¡ship with the assassin. Assured that, maugre his own knowledge of his malignity, he was innocent in all appearance to the world, he reMimed, when he returned to his convent, his visits to the ca-tle of Montgomery, vvhere hi-, character and consequence as confessor, procured Jiim ai
ICI
«dl times ati mission. There he hoped that either in secret confession, or in open conversation, he might learn some means, or find some path where he mi «»ht glut his angry malice, for the more he was convinced of tiie impracticability of his plans of aggrandizement, the more desperate he beheld his chance of elevation, the more his hatred vvas strengthened, and the more determined he was to destroy ; bnt vvhile surrounded by his ovvn at¬ tendants, and guaì ded as the guest of Mont- gt>m»n. by all the domestics and retainers of bib ca.- 1 le, Nartonville remained in safety, and the ¡■on of Neville was compelled to defer his blow. The eh oad he had. felt v. nen he found hiimelf at the mercy of Gaston de Prestonc, and the deed his fear had impelled, determmed him to lock his secret in his ovvn breast, and be in perpetual watds He thus gave himself up to perpetual woo. While virtue, elate with hope, pursues its course iü joy, vice feels no joy in the pursuit it follow >, fen* the hope e f lhe vicious is despair.
CHAPTER XXII.
Grandeur and pomp the great bedeck, Unknown to an humbler lot ; Yet peace abides with the lowly hind, For envy molests him not While all that munificence could devise was pre¬ paring at Montgomery's castle, to celebrate the marriage of Matilda, and render the nuptials stately, the monks by order of Anselm, were making diligent search for Gaston de Prestone'; and Toston lay on his lowly couch, suifering from the wound he had received when he seized the assassin« He was attended by the physician be¬ longing to the abbey, to whom he continually spoke of his suspicion of Austin; but such accu¬ sations were insufficient to stamp him with guilt : for his intimacy with Theodore de Montage, who had, during his long residence, ever been punc¬ tual in performing all the rites, and strict in con¬ forming to all the rules of the order, had raised him high in the estimation of the brethren : and the sudden death οΐ the aged Benedictine had prevented the disclosure of his guilt, and that
163
anxiousness for confession and absolution, which often, at the moment of dissolution, induce the dying to tarnish their own fame, and to betray their associates. " If his robe had not torn when I fell," said Toston, " the wretch vvho raised his dagger against the Baron, had been checked in his flight, and we might have known the truth, if such a loon might have been believed." " He will be found, for the abbot says it must be," said the medical monk, " and then we shall hear his tale." ' ( I have preserved the skirt I tore," said Toston, " as a trophy." " Where is it?" said the monk. t( I have it here, it helps to pillow my head." So saying, he produced the tatter. " Behold how it is plaited up," observed he, " the hem at the bottom is turned and turned again, into a thick lump." " I must carry it to the abbey," said the monk; " Anselm shall inspect it. Who knoweth vvhat may be here concealed ?" " Do not take it from me," said Toston ; " It is all I have to make amends for my blow." " Peace," said the monk, " repine not at vvhat thou givest up. Who know¬ eth vvhat it may procure thee ?" Toston stretched forth his hand to snatch it, vvhen the monk, putting it under his robe, said, " It shall be returned to thee when it shall have been examined." " Well, well," said Toston, " return me the fragment, and
164
I care not v\ hat may be found within it/' When the monk was departed, Toston said to Odo, who was often in attendance on his wounded com¬ panion, u I would not lose that rag for more than will be found within it." " Thou shalt have it," replied Odo, ťí thou shalt have it. When Anselm shall have eaten the fish, who will may have the shell/' (i Hie thee to the monastery <o fetch it, wilt thou, good fellow ?" ťí My belb must not «omul there," f-aid Odo. When Anselm received the jat ged piece oí Ga-ton's robe, and observed the maimer in which the edge of it was ι oiled, he deeme 1 the inspec¬ tion a matter of too serious import for his single investigation. The search was deferred until he could be assisted by the superiors of the abbe), whom he assembled in holy conclave. île then presented with much solemnity the object for ex¬ amination to the fathers. They received it with grcut gravi* - }·. cc The faithful serf who pursued the man that raised his arm to slay the Baron de Nartom Ше," said Anselm, "and received from the fleeing miscreant the wound whicli still doth stretch him on his betl of pain and languishment, tore away this tatter from hi& robe ; and I much incline to hope that чипе concealment in the hem may lead to the detection of the plof, the aim, and the agents of the meditated mischief. Ob-
165
serve the tare with which whatever is within is here enwrapped, how strongly tacked the plaits which cover what is hidden. Let us proceed with caution, lest aught escape us." Then in the presence of those whom he had called together, he proceeded to unrip the stitches whicli held fast the folds. The first thing they found was a small roll of parchment, not a word was written on it, but it was indented at one end in a curious waving. " This, no doubt/' said Anselm, " an- swercth to the roll from which it hath been se¬ vered. It in a proof of compact. Let it be pre¬ served. Haplv, the other moiet) may be found. W hen this shall be deposited in a place of safet), we will proceed: but we will not overstrain our minds and our attention by searching further now : let us adjourn our meeting, and resume our labours after the hour of noon to-morrow." On the morrow, at the appointed hour, the holv men met again in council. The abbot again placed himself in his seat of elevation, and they proceeded in their examination, and within ano¬ ther fold of the hem of Gaston's robe they four. d a second parchment, the edge of which was also indented, but not in the same form as the other : on it was written Βουκη. ίι Bound!" exclaimed Anselm. ťí Bound!" exclaimed the reverend men around him, for they did not dare to appear
166
wiser than the abbot. " What may bound mean ľ" said Anselm. " Bound meaneth bound/' said the holy father Bertram. " True, it doth," said An¬ selm. " Bound in a bond, no doubt." " No doubt," saiel the same holy father. <( Bound in a bond ! A bond fen' what ?" said Anselm, í£ Aj e, for wdiat ?" said Bertram, " Por no good, be well assured," said Anselm. " We are assured. It could be for no good," said Bertram. " If for no good, ¡t must be for harm," said Anselm. " It must," saiel Bertram. " Then, my brethren, let us all unite that w e may discover the harm to w hich Gaston ele Prestone here acknowledgeth himself to be bound." " We are all united," said Ber¬ tram. " We arc all united," every one repeated after Bertram. " When this was given to me," said the abbot, "he who receivcil it from the hind, reepiested in behalf of the poor fellow, that it might be restored to him, after examination. Do thou, Bertram, see it convej ed." Bertram took the tattered fragment from the abbot with as much bending a^ if it had been a π lie. *' it shall be mj office/' saiel Ansdm, " to inform the noble Baroness of the probability there is we may detect the a^a^in by means of these tvvo rolL>, vvhich shall bc deposited among the many records of the abhej : and she shall be acquainted with our scrutinizing search, to the end that she
1G7
may know how dearly we esteem her grandson, and what a hiifh value we set upon his precious life." When Anselm had .so spoken, the assem¬ bly broke up. When Tonton had received back the trophy, as he called the black tatter, which he had gained in his scuffle, he replaced it under his head, say¬ ing, he should sleep the sounder for it. The first time Odo returned to cheer his faithful heart, u I man el," said he, " what the holy abbot found !" '' Nay, I know not," said Tonton, "hut whatever was there he has kept it, I have nothing but the empty bag." " Let me see what tort of \ figure it cuts now it is lightened," '-aid Odo. " Here it is, but handle it daintily," .said Tonton. *' It is but a dirty scrap," said Odo, as he looked tt over. " Good sooth," he continued, " the fi- t\er had not all his wits about him when he ^e-nt it home ; he has left something here." Odo Ье- _.in to unstitch, and soon produced a ring. " 'П/ь is but a shabby sort of a tiling to be so carefully putaw;'V," said iu\ as he handed it to To&ton. " it bears the lud»e of union," said Toston, ;ь he surveved it, " here are two joined hands gravou upon it. A)e, a\e; mischief is never done by one. I warrant the owner was not alone. Perhaps his companion wore a white robe." *· Thou dost always have thy fling at the Car-
168
nıelite/* said Odo. " Mark my words/* said Tos¬ ton, " his heart and his robe are not of a colour ; I sliould be sorry just novv that it is not sure if ever I sliall leave my bed till I be carr : ed by four, to know all he knows." " Just novv, Toston/' said Odo, " let that hare set. If he be concern¬ ed in this fearful business, he will be tracked and started." " Ajid hunted down, I hope," said Toston. " Aye, aye/ 1 said Odo, " and you shall be in at the death." " Yea, and the dogs shall tear him," replied Toston. The quiet though angry discussions and obser¬ vations by the bed of Toston, were very different from the hubbub, the event had produced in the castle. The attempt on the Baron's life, it was supposed, however lowly the agent, must be at the instigation of some one to whom his death was of more importance than it could be to an un¬ known Benedictine: yet, animosity against the Nevilles, or against Henry de Nartonville ap¬ peared impossible Neville had never injured any one but Montravers ; and he was gone : the last who bore the name was Blanch : his family had vanished like a fallen star. Nartonville did but just write man. Too young to have borne a part amid the troubles past, political or private, he could have no enemies. The mystery of the indented parchments, and the word bound caused
1G9
great alarm, and a constant watch was kept up in the castle. Wben Toston, as be deemed himself in duty bounden, sent the ring which Odo found, to the Baroness, a silver ring engraven with the emblem of union, appeared so like a confe¬ deracy, that preparations for defence were or¬ dered, and the watch doubled. Bowmen, vvith their quivers full of arrows, were despatched to give notice to de Nartonville ; and until instruc¬ tions could be received, or he should himself re¬ turn, the lady of the castle stood continually on her defence. The alarm was kept up by tbe Abbot, wLo, to shew bis attachment to a family wherein he vva» a frequent guest, and from whom bis abbey re ceived many gifts, confirmed every fear, and in¬ creased every apprehension.
VOL. I.
I
CHAPTER XXIII.
Adieu, ye streams, adieu, ye groves and bow'rs, By whose clear watera I have often stray*d, And under whose green boughs I oil have sate, At morn, and eve, and during mid-day's heat ! Farewell, ye tow*rs, farewell, ye battlements Of my paternal home ! To otlier scenes, Far uova your ancient guard, I now remove, And seek a settlement in distant lands. Say ! shall those scenes like thine my bosom warm Say ! shall new friends my sympathies excite : Or aught I ñnd a compensation yield For all I leave behind í
On the eve of her wedding-day, Matilda went to the abbey which was governed by Adeliza, to bid a long farewell to her aunt. The holy abbess had not forgotten the time when the pomp of greatness had made the world dear to her youth, and she still found pleasure in the happy prospects of the young who looked forward to a course of joy. The descriptions of the magnificent prepara¬ tions, and the presents which St. Evremond had made to her and to her mother, were delightful
171 to the younger members of the convent, many of whom had been imprisoned when tlieir tender years had incapacitated them from making a choice, and therefore they knew not the world from vvhich they were excluded. Such accounts as Matilda gave of burnished arms, glittering horse-trappings, and sumptuous garments, were to tbem like tales they sometimes heard of night- tripping fairies vvho danced in fantastical attire beneath the moon-beams· Matilda also spoke of tlie train that attended St. Evremond and bis young friend Henry. She then recounted the circumstances of the attempt on tbe life of de Nartonville, and the tidings which had been brought to him of the pursuit and escape of tije assassin. " Where be lias concealed himself/* si-he said, <c is not yet discovered, diligent search j& making to find the place of his retreat. It is ■already known that be is a Benedictine monk be¬ longing to an abbey near to the Baron's castle, of which Anselm de Gilpreux is abbot, and that his name is Gaston de Prestone." When Matilda named Gaston de Prestone, the countenance of the abbess became pale : she laid her hand on the band of Matilda, and said, " Stop, stop, my child ! That name too suddenly is mentioned : it brings back in rapid recollection sorrows long since past, and the painful remembrance of the ι °
172
friends of my worldly life." Every one was silent. " Gaston de Prestone," she resumed, clasping her hands, and bending over them as she spoke, " is connected with me by very tender ties. My la¬ mented and regretted husband, Edward de Beau¬ fort, had a sister, Margaret de Beaufort, who married the baron Philip de Prestone on that same day when I was wedded to my lord. After the birth of many daughters, she bore a son. O, how the country round rejoiced when the heir was born I The feastings in the castle lasted for many weeks. Justs and tournaments for the nobles: wrestlings and many sports among the serfs and hinds. On the day he was baptized, the castle gates were opened to every one who called, and no one went away without a gift. I never shall forget the ceremony : I was a spon¬ sor : I bore him to the font ; I gave him to the reverend priest, who named him Gaston." " Gas¬ ton !" exclaimed Matilda, " too sure the very man who raised his arm against the breast of Narton¬ ville." " Much, much, I fear it is so," said Ade- liza. " The fatal indulgence with which he was reared, left all his passions without curb, and lie was guilty of every action which can dishonour a nobleman. He was yet an infant, vvhen in child¬ less widowhood I forsook the world, and fled for comfort hither : but the tales of the crimes he
173 Committed, which brought his father vvith shame and sorrow to the grave, and shortened the days of his mother, reached me here in my blessed retirement. The last sad account I heard of him was that he had joined himself with a licen¬ tious wandering banditti, prefering the vagabond course of a robber to the dignity and high honours to which he was the heir. His various deeds of mischief often endangered his Ufe, but he ever escaped pursuit ; and for some years past, I have almost hoped that he was dead. His retreat among the holy Benedictines, whom Anselm de Gilpreux governs, must have been merely for a hiding-place, and well known to his associates ; for by any of the brethren of the abbey, he could not have been employed. They, holy men, in prayer, in penitence, and abstinence, pass their days, and meddle not with the stormy dealings of the world, further than to comfort the af¬ flicted, and lead the sinner to repentance. 1 " Such ought to be their occupations," said Ma¬ tilda, " I pray to heaven it be so." " It never can be doubted," said the abbess. Matilda then went on to tell all the circumstances of the rear¬ ing war-horse, and the wound of Toston who had pursued the caitiff. As she proceeded, she forgot nothing wliich appertained to the event, and the listeners were grieved when the tale drew .3
Ì74 «'o а еиье. u The world must be a very wicked place," caid a voung nun tk We Ime nothinç f о regret," said the abbess, fť in being shut out from all its ways. Tbe temptations to sin are so mimerons, and the peccancy of human nature so frequent, that those who arc early withdrawn лот the incitements of vice cannot be too thank¬ ful for iheir see e rity." " 1 should Hke to be put to tlie test, viid the 1 nun, "for methinks the sted- i Mness of those who withstand is more glorious din that which ь never tiied." " Rejoice, my t hibí/' ,aid Aeh lha, (t that thy strength is not l ni io lho hazini. Tlubc who fall, "all not through ignor uve. Л Ve dll know what is right; v ' all know what is wronq; anel thou mavest be- heve mo that the horrors of themind which is con- sd >us of is own evil, are more terrible than the sons of tho depart, or ihe roar of the troubled sea. Mayest thou, Matilda, ever be preserved from ihe allurement-, of vice whicli may surround thee, and ever be kept tale from the attiekr of juilt, bv whhh thou mau'st be availed." She the ' embraced her w ith great tenderness, and gav e her a very fervent benediction. The sisters were much moved b) die scene, and it ь to be feared that somo among them, notwithstanding the sage doctrines of the abbess would gladly have ac¬ companied .Matilda, and have slum d with her in
175
die pleasure* of the world whose joys she hau described so fondly. However tenderly Adeliza had embraced her niece, however fervently she had blessed her, the abbess vva« not the person in the abbey to whom Matilda clung. Amiable as she was, the dic¬ tatorial tone she alvvays assumed, as abbess, as aunt, and instructress, checked the love whicli doubtless was her due, and which bhe had cui sought to inspire ; vvhile the more gentle, the lovely Bertha de Clifford, by her softness had stolen into the heart of Matilda, and all slu seemed to regret as the hour approached which woulel lead her to a distant dwelling, was that Bertha could not accompany her. From her la¬ ther's castles from the groves where her child¬ hood had strayed, and the stream which reflecte ci their charms, she could remove without repining. Slie could quit her father, and forget his care; she could leave her mother, unmindful of her tendernes.-, but witiiout the kind, the courtcou», the affable Bertha de Cliiford, vvho wept is. ain the loss of Raymond la Faye, how should she depart ! Vias ! her head was bound vvith un¬ frozen hik-t of a vestal ; her sacred vows enclos* d her forever in tho .sanctuary; and beyond tiie walls which secure the hoi) fane, never mutt hoi footsteps wander. ι Ί
I/O
Entrusted to her sisters care, and to the sage instructions of the abbess, the Baron de Clifford had sent his youngest daughter to the abbey. Catherine de Clifford, now but nine years old, beauteous as the early flower of spring, and gay as the mounting lark, cheered with the innocent prattle of uncorrupted childhood the dreary abode of Bertha's seclusion. She was playful, in¬ sinuating, and affectionate. " I will be thy brideV maid,* said she to Matilda ; " I have often heard the abbess say that all good angels watch over children's ways, and attend their path. The angels who have the care of me, will follow me to the altar, and guard thee and St. Evremond the while." Matilda caught her to her bosom. " Thou shalt be my bride's-raaid," said she, " my aunt will permit thine innocence to attend me: and Bertha, for one day, will give thee up, and allow thee to follow me to the altar." They both consented, and it was agreed that on the morrow Catherine should be fetched, and properly con¬ veyed to the castle.
CHAPTER XXIV.
Bright is the flow'r that adorneth the spring, And sweet is the song of the grove ; Yet brighter the blush of the nubile maid, And far sweeter the voice of love. On the morning so ardently* desired by St. Evre¬ mond, he rose vvith the early lark. He arrayed himself in the most costly garments of his ward¬ robe, and wore round his waist a girdle studded with precious stones. He threw round his neck a golden chain curiously wrought, and on every finger he wore a sparkling ring. He went under Matilda's window to awaken his bride, and was attended by his own harper, who had followed in his train, to join the nuptial minstrelsy. He tuned his harp to the softest key, and after pre¬ luding with harmonious modulation, he sano; in pathetic accents to the accompanying chords he struck. Arise, sweet maid, the sun is up, And waileth to bid " good day ;*' Arise, sweet maid, the í un is up f And cbideth thy delay. 1 Ô
178
Апчр, sweet miid, thy love ib heie, Eagei thy smiles to see; Albe, sweet maid, thy love is here, Who livcth but for thec. Auso, sweet maid, thy fi lends are come, Ail diess'd in vestments gay ; Arise, sweet maid, thy fiicnds are come, To hail thy bridal day. Matilda rose at the call, and prepared for the ceremony which was to be performed in the cha¬ pel of her fathers castle. lier women hastened and fluttered around her, iind adorned her with the nicest care. She wore a robe which vieel ín whiteness vvitii snow drifted on the mountain top. She interwove among the ringlets of her glossy hair various wreaths of flowers; on her bosom hung the string of pearls which had been given her by St. Evremond. He, all eagerness tnd love, waited to meet her when she issued from her chamber, dazzling in youth and beauty. Henry tie ISartonville, as brideman, went to the abbey, in his gay vest, to convoy the youth¬ ful Catherine. The pains vvhich Matilda had received from her father, was appointed for her conveyance, and all his showy trappings were put upon him to render her young parade splendid. When she was mounted, the gallant Henry led the palfry by a silken rein, and a page walked on
179
either siele her saddle, each with a nosegay in his hand. When they reached the castle, Henry as¬ sisted her to alight, and conducted her to the great hall, where St. Evremond anel Matilda, the Baron and Baroness, and the numerous guests and attendants were assembled in preparation each to take his place in the procession to the chapel. The extreme youth of the little bride's- maid surprized the whole assemblage, whicii Matilda perceiving, she said, **■ This dear child is the sister of my beloved friend Bertha de Clifford, whose holy seclusion among the pious sisters of the abbey prevents her from gracing this solemnity with her presence. Catherine 1 de Clifford, whose sportive innocence enlivens her gloom) retreat, I novv introduce to my parents ; her inoffensive pla) fulness shall often soothe their regret when they lament their absent child." The spousal guests set fonvard. The galleries and chambers through which they passed were strewn with ribhes, and when they entered the court of that quadrangle of the castle on erne side of which was the chapel, twelve little girls, each hearing a laden basket, strewed the path with flowers. The minstrels were ranged around, and chaunted hymeneal songs as the bride ad¬ vanced leel by her father: the bridegroom fol¬ loweel leading the Baroness : next followed Ca-
180 liienne de Clifford, bhe was bedecked with flowers; thoy formed the girdle which encircled her waist, and the chaplet with which she was i rowneel. J ïenry de Nartonville, the brideman, h ehi her little hand. The relatives and friends of the two noble families of the union followed iu a numerous procession : a train of pages, depen¬ dents, servants, and retainers, completed the cere¬ monious march. The chapel w.\-, decked in all tlie ornaments of religious pomp- lie > old eu chalice*,, and salver*, and candlesticks were oil in order duly arianged. Vases of flowers adorned the altar, whereon. among the sacred nteıiMİs, were intermingleel many relics which Uenard de Montgomery, the Baron's father, had brought from the Holy Eand, and, although it va^ fuli eia), more than a hun¬ dred wax lights buns around; and perfume* nom the holv center filled the air vvith fragrance. Tho mitred iireille of tlie see, in all the gran¬ deur of his pontifical arrav, united the noble pair; anel tlie chapter of the cathedral atteneled in their priestly garment* to add magnificence to the solemnity. After the nuptial knot was tied, the retinue followed the bride, v ho on her return was led by her husband. Thev proceeded vvith the same pomp in which they entered the chapel. The
181
remplis again strewed the path vvith flowers, the minstrels again struck the harp and chaunted the bridal lay. The repast was more sumptuous than any of which the guests hael ever before partaken. A table still more elevated than that prepared for the nobles, was spread for the bishop; on which, to do honour to his reverend guest, and grace the nup¬ tials of Ids daughter, the Barem de Montgomery placee! the topmost dish ; and St. Ел remond brought a dish and set it at the upper end of the· table vvhere sat the mistress e>f his heart, the beau¬ tiful Matilda, b\ the side of her mother. Every costly viand, arranged in all the modes of ancient cooker) was ï lofusely spread on the bishop's and the baroifs boards, and the profusion of the 1 lower table was excessive : rich sparkling win^s, imported from the warmer climates of the conti¬ nent, flowed from silver ewers, while the horn passed merrily anions die menials. When the repast was ended, the exalted pie- hite rose from lib &eat to return thank& : he then blessed the assembly, and attended by his reve¬ rend brethren, and his pompous retinue, he de¬ parted before tliose sports commenced, at whieli it woulel not befit his sacred dignity to be present. When the holy men had retired, the к страну proceeded to witness the spoits vvhich the humble
182
dependents of the Baron had devised as fit to be exhibited before such noble spectators. The first feat they perftjrmed was a race. Six young men started from under the branches of a large oak, and ran toward a pole from which was suspended a peacock ; he who should first reach the goal, and pluck a feather from his gaudy »ail, was to receive the bird as tbe reward of Ьь swift running. They kept nearly together for the first half of the course, but then the odds frequently varied. The first poor fellow who began *o halt was so laughed at by the lookers on, that Ue stopped short in hih career, and walked away to hide his mortification beneath the trees which v'rew thickly around the plain they coursed. The ^econd who failed, fell. The mirth he occasioned аь he rolled his awkward length on the turf, in¬ duced him to lay a long time before he ventured to stand erect, and dared to f tee the grinners .md scoffers at his mishap, which was not unti! another fell, and drew a new laugh against a new object of derision. Cries of encouragement, and cheerings of applause pursued the remaining competitors. " Well run, Robert,"—" Hie awav, Wolfort,"—" Use thy speed, Mansel," — was ¡shouted as they gained or lost ground in the race. They were all three so near the pole at the same moment, that Robert, who plucked the first fea-
183
ther, owed it as much to the length of his arm, as the speed of his legs. He raised the feather, and waved it round his head with as much pride and as much delight, as a knight ever dismounted his opponent in the lists : and the shouts and ac¬ clamations which greeted his victory, were as gra¬ tifying to his exulting heart. Some of the spec¬ tators, as he walked back in triumph, raised him in their arms, and carried him to the seats erected for the nobles, anel set him dovvn at the foot of the bride. Robert had often been among the spectators at justs and tournaments, and had often witnessed the behaviour of the conquerors when they approached the epieen of the day. In imi¬ tation of them, he dropped on his knee, anel not daring lo aspire to the high honour of kissing her hand, he bowed his head and kissed her foot. " Rise, Robert/ said Matilda. She was too proud to say more ; hut St. Evremond said to him, u Thou hast run well—wear this in remem¬ brance of the beauteous Matilda, the queen of my love anel of my heart.'' In saying which, he took a flower from the wreaths which adorned his bride. " Wear this in thy cap," he continued. Robert caught it anel kissed it. " This shall be buried with me when I am laid in the grave," he ^aiel, as he received it : and then, placing it in his cap, he threw it up, and cried, " Long life to the 1
184
Baron de St. Evremond, and the noble lady Ma¬ tilda." The whole assembly shouted the same cry with that lively joy which ariseth from real attachment. The next trial of skill was among the archers of the forest. The Baron de Montgomery had promised a buck to him who should shoot his arrow into the middle of a target set up for a mark against a tree. Many archers came in suc¬ cession, and drew their bows, but none had a true aim. The meeting began to be dull, and it was feared that the prize would be again set at liberty, and returned to bound among the furze, when a stripling advanced and raised his bow and looked along his dart—** Too young—too young for competition," cried the throng. The lad, no way daunted, pulled the string, the arrow- whizzed through tiie air, and stuck in the very point. " Well drawn—well flown," cried every one. " There standeth thy prize," said Mont¬ gomery, " his antlers are fastened to the branches : take him." u I must kill him first," said the youtli, and instantly let fly another arrow, whicii hit him between the horns, 'f A brave boy ; a brave boy," was the loud shout that followed. " What is thy name ? and whose son art thou ?" asked Montgomery. " My name is Edwin," re¬ plied the lad, "lam the son of Aloe, the keeper
185
of the forest, and the grandson of Alwin, the minstrel of my lord." " Canst thou touch the harp ?" " I can." " Canst thou pull the strings of thy harp, as well as thou canst draw the string of thy bow?" " I can." " Prove him," said Matilda. " Fetch a harp, fetch a harp," said St Evremond ; " let him try his skill." While a messenger went to the castle, the wrestlers advanced on the green : Montgomery, who had ordered these sports, had promised the best wrestler a cloak well furred. The match was conducted somewhat like the ceremony of a tournament. A rustic came forward and pro¬ claimed that Ered called on all to try tlieir skill against him. He then stepped back among the throng, and Ered advanced. Several contended with him, and he threw them all. As he stood awaiting a new antagonist, he seized the little archer. " Come, my lad," he said, " canst thou wrestle as well as shoot ?" The boy struggled to get free, but Ered, willing to make more sport, shook him roughly. The indignant Edwin then stood finn, and as the other seemed to draw him on, and stood somewhat carelessly, and off his guard, he laid hold of him by the two arms, and suddenly putting his foot behind him, he tripped up his heels, and he fell. The laugh, the roar, the clapping of hands, were all so loud and so
186
•violent, that Ered, forgetting the presence of the baron and the nobles, cried out, ** A murrain take thee, varlet, I believe thou hast a familiar·" When he arose, he found himself disabled for further trial, and the active little fellow who over¬ threw him remained the hero of the field. " Give him the cloak ; give him the cloak." The cloak was brought, and thrown over the stripling, who wrapped it round him with much drollery, and was almost lost amid the thick furring. u Thou art a rare boy," said Montgomery, " now let me hear tby minstrelsy." " It is my grandfather's harp," said Edwin, as he took it, "I know its power:" so saying, he drew up the strings and began to play. He placed liimself in full view of the bride, and after he had rung a chime, he began to sing. SONG. When steiu War calls her champion forth, In fight he will valiant prove ; When peace again blesses the land, He tunes all his notes to love. O î he that is brave in the field, To Love is ever found true f For honour and valour inspire The fealty to beauty due. " Thou art good at all," said St. Evremond, " which dost thou prefer, thy bow or thy harp ?"
187
" I love them both/' said Edwin, " if ever I should be called to the field, I hope I shall draw a bow like a brave Englishman ; and when peace allows of minstrelsy, I shall wile away the hours with harmony." " Wilt thou follow me," said St. Evre¬ mond, " I am a soldier?" " I must ask my father, and my lord the baron de Montgomery," said Edwin, " they willing, I shall deem the day a blessed one, which gives me to thy greatness." u Thou hast my free consent," said Montgomery, " Such high permission gained," said Edwin, " I trust my father will not say me nay/' He made a respectful obeisance to the nobles, as he quitted their presence, and walked away, carrying his bow and his harp, while a quiver full of arrows hung at his back, which he covered with his cloak, saying that his father would carry the buck. " He is a brave youth," said St. Evre¬ mond, " I have gained a prize by his skillful deeds this day." All now advanced toward the nobles, and with loud shouts exclaimed together, " Heaven bless our noble baron and baroness de Montgomery, and the baron de St. Evremond, and the noble lady Matilda." It was an acclamation which vibrated in the hearts of those to whom it was addressed. They rose and left the merry-makers, vvho, as they saw them depart, shouted again
188
aloud, and cried out, " Long life to the noble and the brave !" The banquet was renewed, and the same hos¬ pitable profusion was spread on the boards : the mantling wine again in copious flow infused joy into every breast, and the enthusiastic minstrels struck the strings with delighted energy, and sang with rapturous ardour. The feasting and hilarity of the castle continued for many weeks, and every day was marked by different pleasures ; but as the longest day leads to the hours of darkness, so did these lengthened pleasures bring on the gloom of separation. When that moment arrived, the baron and baroness, whose child had never been from the shelter of their roof, nor from the anxious guard of their care, felt a grief so poignant, that it was almost equal to what they would have felt had she died : yet, however often they folded her to their bosoms, however often they took her hand to detain her, though but for an instant longer, the sad and last farewell, which gave her up to St. Evremond, was past. Matilda, thougii little apt to tender¬ ness, was moved to tears, which, in spite of all her efforts to restrain them, trickled down her cheek, and fell upon her bosom. She was placed on her black palfry, while her father and mother, and all the numerous guests who had partaken
189
of the feasts and sports stood around to witness her departure. St. Evremond, on the white steed on which he came in eager love to claim his bride, rode, exulting in the pride of his possession, at her right hand; and Henry de Nartonville, on his black war-horse, placed himself at her left. They were followed by Matilda's maids, and the numerous suites of the two barons, augmented by Edwin, who was added to the household of St. Evremond. It was slowly that the cavalcade descended the hill ; and when from the bottom Matilda looked up to the high castle wdiich crowned its summit, she heaved a sigh whicii she hoped was not heard, and felt a pang wliich she was unwilling to acknowledge, even to herself.
CHAPTER XXV.
'Тъ ^veei to sit beneath embuVrmg trpp While the hot &un bums in the cloiullces sk>, And darts lm scoi chingi ays upon the plain 'Tb bweet aho\e oui head·, to hear tac bhd Chin up among tht bi anther, to diu e And tht er the tender mother on her ne t There to tepore ь si\eet s but Such t tlu a \\ hen love attendi, and s>miU¡> with ¿enti», t au Tul unwillingness of St. Evremond to expose Ьь beioved to the mid-day sun, had induced him to leave Montgomery's castle while the early and harsh voice of the rook was. stiil cawing from tlu high boughs of the surrounding trees; and ere* the heat of noon the travellers had mounted and descended tho Meep hill whicli bounded hi« do¬ mains, and had pareti the valle) be) ond it. W hile the sun was at the highest lite) were -screent d hom hib «corching ra)s by the thick foliage oi the forest into which the) had immersed. When they approached the confine->, St, jsvremond pio posed that they should halt, and, on the givb*., on stumps of tree«, or on fallen branches, evei v one vub so ued.
191 Some horses in the train had been loaded with refreshments, and a sumptuous repast was spread for Matilda. St. Evremond sat beside her, and Henry de Nartonville partook with them; and ever and anon the attentive Richard presented her with a cup of wine, many flasks of which were ŕtovvcíi in the wallets. There was also an ample meal for the attendants. As tiie cool of the evening advanced they set forward again, and at the close of day they reached a convent, vvhere it was arranged that Matilda and her maids- {should remain a day or two, till the fatigues of a longer journey than die had ever before undertaken, should be overcome ; and the two )Oiing barons, vvith their i\ cinue, rested in a neighbouring monastery. Matilda's aunt, Adeliza, the abbess of the con¬ vent wiiere she had left Bertha de Cliiford, had given notice to Eltrude de Foix, abbess of a sister¬ hood of Carmelite nuns, nearly mid-way between the castle of Montgomery and that of St. Evre¬ mond, that her niece, with her maids, on their way homeward, would stop at her abbev. The daughter of Montgomery, the w ife of Si. Evre¬ mond, and the niece of Adeliza, was a person oí too much consequence nut to be received vvith all punctilious ceremonv ; and the veneration >dwa>s paid to religious women, caused Matildi
192
to greet intrude, who showed her ever) mark of respect consistent with her own holy dignity, with as much humility as she could possibly assume ; but ever) thing partaking of humbleness was so foreign to the feelings of her heait, that het manners cotdd not be called conciliating, and her deportment was very cold and very distant. Although the nuns had beheld the regard with which the abbess hael received, and perceived the deference with which she treated Matilda, to them ^he was no more than any other strangei who sought the shelter of their abbey. They pursued theii various tasks and occupations, un¬ heeding that she was among them. They rose to their midnight e>risons, and attended matins, with¬ out allowing any thoughts of her to interfere with their devotions : and when, after the meal of noon they strayed into the sp.tciou«· gardens, and set them down in the bower whereto Eltrude had invited her guest, careless of her presence they interehanijeablv communicated to each other such circumstances as could be known in a society wdiich had renounced .ле world. Memory traced hack the times when they were unconfined, and events of the days vvhich were gone supplied the only themes vvith which the 1 ) could amuse the dreary hours of their seclusion. Among them was an aged mm, who had taken the veil at an
193
advanced period of her life, and often, by recitals of what she had seen when acting a part in the busy world, riveted attention to her talcs: even the abbess loved to listen to her narrations. She was a woman of high rank, daughter of an ancient baron in Dorsetshire, and widow of a noble lord of Normandy, named de PlaisseheraDt. After his death she had returned to England ; but time had swept away so many of her early friends, that for the repose of her latter days, she had taken the habit and the vows of a Car¬ melite. " The tale I was about to recount when we last assembled in this bower, and which was inter¬ rupted by the departure of our sister Alice for a better world than we inhabit now, is one which many times recurreth to my recollection, and faileth never to bedew my cheek with tears. i( Among the many captives who were brought from Palestine by the warriors who accompanied Philip Augustus to the holy land, was a young girl, the daughter of a Saracen high famed in the armies of the infidels. She w r as fourteen years of age, and named Zarili. She was the captive of a young Norman, r/ho was enamoured of her beauty, but he never could awaken in her bosom a reciprocal affection. Young as she was, her heart had fixed its love on a youth of her own vot. i. к
194
nation, and she pined like a turtle whose mate had been taken by the fowler. None who re¬ turned from Palestine came unattended by the unfortunate brave whom he had conquered ; and v/ith unfeeling pride the Captors reduced their captives to those low ofïîces which marked their slate of slavery. Rollo the Norman had, among others, a captive named Mahmed. He used him for áll vilo employments: he fed his dogs, he cleaned his horses, and he tilled his ground. " While he was one day digging under a window of the castle, he heard a female voice singing a melancholy song in the beloved longuage of his country. The plaintive sounds vibrated in the inmost recesses of his heart. He ceased his labour, and rested on his spade. The voice sang long, for when the melting air seemed to sound a close, Hke the nightingale's, the closing notes reverted back to their first tone, and the thrilling melody often renewed the strain. When the warbler stopped, he raised his voice, and in the same tongue chaunted an amorous lay. To a wild uit of his native land he adapted the tale of his hapless fate, and his grief for the loss of his love : ' She was lovely as the uncrushed flower in the grove, but was plucked by a Norman hand.' " Dear to thé heart of Zarili vvas the sound of
195
the Saracen lay, and she approached the grating to behold a countryman. As he ceased to sing Mahmed dropped his spade and folded his arm* upon his breast, and in pensiveness his head dropped on his bosom. Suddenly he started and looked up. When she beheld his animated countenance, and the bright fire of his dark eye, she rapturously exclaimed ' Mahmed ľ —Mahmed looked toward the window, and in the captive bound in by iron bars, saw bis own Zarili. * Are we for ever parted !' he exclaimed. f Alas, I fear for ever. From the confinement where I linger there is no method of escape ; into it no means of entrance/ f Here, then, I will daily take my itand, and hold sweet converse with my Zarili, till we devise some stratagem to elude our keepers, and flee away together/ «One of Ц sycophants who ever surround the great, seeing a slave address himself to one within the castle, stole silently and unmarked among the shrubs. He heard the man speak, and he heard a female voice reply ; but he under¬ stood not the language, and therefore knew not what was said. Nevertheless, the strange tongue assured him the female could be no other than the captive Zarili, and he hastened to communicate to his lord what he had heard. The fiery Norman watched about the spot where his informer had Sm ev
196
said the parly had been carried on, and saw Mahmed approach and stop beneath the window of that room where he imprisoned Zarili. He understood enough of the Asiatic language to comprehend that they were lovers ; and he heard Zarili promise to go avvay with him if he couiel find the means for her escape. ' Wretch !' he said, seizing Mahmed, ' därest thou wrong me here V ' I do thee no wrong/ said Mahmed, ŕ it is thou who wrongest me. Thou dost here confine my own, my loved Zarili.' · I know í do. Both shall feel my vengeance.' So saying he pushed Mahmed from him with a violent throw. 1 Ye shall know to-morrow at this hour wdiat it is to injure a Norman lord.' (i Hapless Mahmed î He had him borne next day to the very spot where he had talked with Zarili. He then ordered that they should bring forth Zarili, and, putting an axe into Mahmed's hand, ť Strike,' he said, ( strike the doating fool vvho could prefer thy tawny visage to my love, which sued to her in vain, too gentle to enforce com¬ pliance,—Strike, I say; off with her head.' Mahmed stood motionless. s Strike, I say again.' Mahmed raised the axe, and, with a desperate blow, clove into his own brain. He fell at the feel of Zarili. She fell frantic on the body, and e'aiping it to her heart, she imprinted on his stiil
197
лапи Hps an ardent kiss, and then bowed iier head on his ho&om. The exasperated Rollo fired when he beheld her thus dare to mark the strength of her attachment ; and raised her from the earth, to bear what else his malice could inflict. lie raised her lifeless form; her spirit had burst its prison." The aged Agnes ceased. Horror and pit) contended in the bosoms of her auditors. "It is too terrible for tears," said Eltrude : " the indignation which such barbarity awakens checks the flow of tenderness, and chills the blood. Much do I lament that tho¿e who call themfelves the brave, and whom the world deems noble, should disgrace themselves and forfeit the cha¬ racter they covet hy such acts of cruelty as degrade a human being. Seldom cau we find л cause, vvhich, traced back to its first source, can justify the field of battle; the after massacres that flood the earth with gore, and the out¬ rageous tv "anny that slaughters captives, are among the deeds whieli foul our records. We do not often see a hero or a tyrant, who, at that moment when reflection brings pa?t conduct into review, does not lament the cornee he has fol¬ lowed, and repent the actions he has performed.* 4 " We are not proper judges of such matters/* raid Matilda, " we feel not enough the spur of к 3
Ï98
glory ; v\ e feel not enough the impulse of ambi- tion, to app. ciate the heh ^viour of the daring." " My child," said Eltrude, ť< the spur of glory never goads a warrior to deeds which misbecome a man. Every one denounces, every one pursues the assassin, who murders tliose whom he attacks : the warrior who deliberately, when the heat of battle cools, slay.: those whom conquest placets w ithin his power, isi a murderer. Call not that glory. He is equally base, he is equally vile as an assassin ; and infinitely more noxious, for hi» murders are more numerous." if The history of the holy wars," said Agnes, <£ teems with such tales of rude untamed ferocity .'- s f have just recounted; for alas! the croisses and the infidels were equally inhuman/' " What will become of the infidels heaves only knows,*' baid Editha, the mo^t serious nun among the «isters, " but the croisses, we all know, are &aved maugre their vil doings, by the cause for vvhich rhey take up arms ;—so his holiness the Pope has promised them." Every one was silent» No one imew what to ьа> to such an observation. At length Agnes, with some hesitation said, ** I hope their dependence к not ona broken reed/' Every (»ne was again silent. All turned toward the . bbe^s expecting that bhe would deliver hei (>\ in ion. Eltrude appeared to be somewhat asto-
i 09
oished at wn,s had been utturr d ; but not uai.i'j; to imagine a doubt of the realization fd' thi Ρορ*Λ promises, she raised her ejes piously, and joinns her hands, said, " I hope so too." The assertion of Editha acted like a n «.«j'u spell on every one; all conversation ceased. Per¬ haps some reasoning might arise in the minds ., some among them; but such topics were for¬ bidden themes of discussion, and therefore it ы«у be, that they all thought that they ought to agri í with Editha, and believe that it must be s» be¬ cause his holiness had said it. They did not long remain in tbe bower, 'f he abbess rose and walked toward the abbey, d\\d all rose and followed her: each resumed hu occupation, and the daily routine went on. If the instigators to sin are answerable for tht crimes they induce, what will become of iiu Popes?
iv 1
CHAPTER XXVL
The early morn awakes the l,trk, his note 'Ihe sluggard. louses, ami he starts and Ь.еь I liuiltmgto his daily t.ibk ; more prompt The master lises lo overbee and watch The lubbandnian : and the fond joutli libťtt» vothjoy tu preet hb best be]ov'd. Ov the second morning after Matilda's arrival at the convent, St. Evremond went there after ma¬ tins, leading her palfry. The parting hetween ESrude and Matilda was a ceremonious cool farewell, for little could the haughty daughter of Montgomery regard those who thwarted her hu¬ li our·«, or contradicted her opinions ; and she had ro" forgotten the reproof which she had received Som the holy mother on the preceding afternoon» At the foot of another high hill, to vvhich tho pi tin whereon the abbey was erected leel, the v hole party again assembled. It was vvith diffi¬ culty they climbed its steep side, A\ hen they h td gamed the top, and beheld the extent of vv i f 'Ts iwaehing far as the eye could see, Matilda, vd, > never bad till then beheld die ocean, ex-
201
pressed her surprise at the grand view ly uttu- mg a sudden scream. The wind was high, ..nd the waves followed as they mounted, in rapid succession, vvhile the noise they made as оье appeared to overleap the other, was heard even at the high summit fiom which she gazed. Si. Evremond left her to contemplate the sceLf* without interrupting her musings. After a ίοη<ξ silence of admiration, she turned to Ler husband, and said, " Is this turbulence wliat is named the dazzling surface of the sea Γ " My brined," rep ied St. Evremond, "those waters now rising in foam, are sometim s as smooth as the shorn field ; and oftentimes they mount so far beyond what we behold at present, that the raging billows seem to meet the clouds. О ! I once beheld, even from the very spot where we now stand, a noble vessel toss among them, now r riding on their angry tops, now dashed below their fall. I could not quit this height, but in terror stood, watching her as she reeled, tdl from one plunge she never more rose up, but sink fall freighted beneath the fury which overwhelmed her.'' *' Perhaps," said Nartonville, " with many а one on board, vvho had sot sail vvith hearts as gay as our-, and looking forward with ,.s fond hopes of happiness as we do.'' u Aye/' iaid St. Evremond, " and it may be that while к Ò
202 tht waters gushed around thern, some clasped to their despairing bosoms the darlings of their tenderness, and hugged their last agonies to their own convulsive strugglings." " I vvould," said Matilda, "my first view of the ocean had been a calm one, it would have met the picture my imagination drew. I wish it may not be an unlucky «men !" " It doth in some sort repre- íeiit the changes which we meet in life," said St. lîvremoiid ; " but as storms are rare, compared with the many sparkling hours the waves dance -porti veiy beneath а quiet sky, so the rough isiv ** which interrupt our peace, in comparison with onr days of joy, sweet love, sliall be few.''' li May your confidence be prophetic," said Nar¬ tonv die. " I do not doubt it/ replied St. Evre¬ mond. " Let us now descend from this high point, my dear one; the rock is steep and craggy, allow the palfry full scope, and his ovvn pace, and trist him he will tread safely." The road sunk between the rocks, and as they descended they saw nought but the path before tnem, and the sky above them. When they reached the bottom of the hill, they crossed the dreary lusuh which led to the cliffs. '· It grievcth me, my dear one/ said St. Evremond, u that tlie crags of the mountain and this wild heath aflord no shelter. We must for a little 10
203
while endure the heat, and the rays vvhich dd\ *■ upon us." *' Happy shall we be, »St. Evremond, if the heat of summer and the cold of winter be the only enemies with whom we may have to contend. It would ill become the daughter of an ancient warrior, and the wife of a young bol- dier, to shrink beneatii such foes as tliose. in assails auel perils, such as the times porti nd, thou shalt behold Matilda dare all she may en¬ counter as firmly as thyself. Trust me, tlie laely thou now earnest to thy cattle will support the dignity of its mistress with true nobleness." St. Evremond was so charmed with the brave spirit and high vaunt of his wife, that he said to her, " Not often to be matched is such bold daring in such a lovely form. It remindeth me of a tale recounted yesterday by a friar in the monastery where I have been staying. < During one of those dreadful disputes,' he told us, i which so frequently occur hetween the vassals of the French crown, it happened about a century асо that two of them had a ν iolent cpiarrel, and each summoned all his under vassals to the field. They met and fought, and on either bide slew many ; yet neither conquered. The animobities descended from sire to son through three gene¬ rations. At the time of the last combat one oi them had a vassal named Alix, lie was married к G
204
to a yo ang gentlewoman, who was attached to him by the strongest ties of affection. The last battle between the competitors was the first in which Aiix appeared in arms. He took a ten¬ der leave of his wife ere he departed, and set forward completely armed, and full) attended. Tiie fond Constance, after his departure, changed lier drebs, and m the habit of a page foilovved her husband's troop, and procured to be admitted to Ins presence, and received into his service. She was unwearied in attention, ami most dutiful in obedience ; but never intruded beyond the limits of a page s distance. The tvvo armies skirmished often before they came to a pitched battle : at length their full foices met, anel in a ilesperate conrhct Alix wat? wounded. He was instantly cai ried off the field by two soldiers, and con¬ veyed to his tent : when they set him down, he said to them, iC Waste not time here, the wound I have received is mortal, but I can die alone. Roth do your duties in the held, and if ye sur- vive the strife, tell my Constance that my last thoughts were with her, and that my wound is in my breast.—Go—dally not with me !" When the men retired Constance approached the dying Alix. " My poor hoy," lie said, (i thou art too young to fight—deave the tent. Go instantly to my Constance, till her that my wound is here,
205
before : and tell her that my last words bless her." Constance toe>k his hand. " Alix," she said, " Constance hath never left thee. Behold ! she standeth novv beside thee ; and she will tend thee while the warm blood circulates within thy veins, and watch and guard thy body shouldest thou expire : but I am an excellent physician as well as nurse, let me take off thine armour, and dress thy wound." He yielded ; and as she staunched the blood, he said, " I am happy in that I shall breathe my last sigh upon thy bosom, but never shall I leave my tent alive." The lance that had pierced his bosom had pene¬ trated so deeply that all her care and all her skill were vain. He died ere set of sun. " * When he had breathed his last, she threw a cloak over his couch, and placed herself at the door of the tent ; and of every one who in the hurry scurry chanced to pass that way she asked the state of the battle ; and to every in¬ quiry concerning Alix, she answered, that his wound was slight, and he had fallen asleep : and that when he awoke he would head his men again. " Bid them fight bravely," she said, if and deserve his praise." She thus kept up the spirits of those who would have drooped had they known their leader was no more. At the
206
close of day she had the satisfaction to know that the success w T as owing to the valour of her husband's troops, vvho emulous of a good name during their leader's absence, had exerted them¬ selves with such determined and undaunted cou¬ rage, that they had pressed forward to the front of danger, and standing firm by each other, hael formed an impenetrable line, and checked the foe ; while other leaders observing and admiring that although Alix had been borne offthe field, they defied all opposition, seconded their bravery so stoutly that they overpowered all who came against them, and the victory was complete. hi ' When the enemy yielded themselves con¬ quered, and the carnage ceased, all sought the tent of Alix, eager to tell him how mell his fol¬ lowers had behaved. α Is he here unattended 1 ." said they with indignation. " He has been at¬ tended/* she replied; his own Constance has attended him, and received his parting breath !" They all started. His parting breath ! She led them to his couch. " Behold/' she said, *' the hero lovely in death. His own Constance will watch his body, and his own troop will bear him like a soldier to his castle." They said they would bear him on the morrow—on the morrow they placed him on crossed lances, and carried
207
him on their shoulders. The mournful Con¬ stance wrapped lierself in a cloak, and again fol¬ lowed in the train of her lo T, d.' " As St. Evremond recounted the friar's tale, the cavalcade pursued their route on the cliffs which fence out the sea, and turned suddenly from them into the winding path which led to his own domains. He had scarcely ended, and no one had remarked on the circumstances of the story, when the numerous vassals of St. Evre¬ mond met him and hb party as they wound along. In the front rode the two mo3t honourable among them, Philip de Valonnes, and Brian de Rosenne. The moment that at a turning in the road they beheld their superior advance, they came forward and maele a military obeisance to St. Evremond. They then dismounted, and giving their horses to their pages, they advanced on foot with their bonnets in their hands, and courteously greeted Matilda, and welcomed the young baroness to the domains of her husband's castle. They then, with the gallantry of chivalry, each took her rein, and led her palfry to the gates. The other vassals, as she passed along, ranged themselves with all their glittering trains on each side of her path, and as she proceeded took off their cap* and shouted their cordial gratulations on her arrival. Richard de St. Evremond and Henry
208
de Nartonville still continued beside her ; and vvhen the attendants of the two barons had all passed their line, the pages who had received the horsea of Philip de Valonnes and Brien de Rosenne, turned into the cavalcade leading their coursers, and tliose who hael been the foremost among the vassals, turneel from either side anel followed, and ever as they went forward others turned and followed on, till all formed one grand and lengthened procession. When the outer gates were thrown open, the domestics of the house¬ hold filled the court to behold her as she passed, and when she entered the great hail, the minstrels vvho were ranged around ŕ truck all their harps and sang joy, happiness, and gladness to their new mistress. St. Evremond raised the hand of Matilda to his lips. *· Welcome, welcome to this castle, my own Matilda, my wife! I kiss this fair white hanel as the ruler of my destiny." Matilda could not forbear repeating his words—" This fair white hand !" she said, " Луе," he replied, " this fair white hand, on which I have placed the golden ring of love." " The destiny of both," she an¬ swered." iS Of both," rejoined St. Evremond, tf our destinies are united, never to be sepa* rated." Such fruits and comfits and cukci* as the season
209
and the times produced were offered her for re¬ freshment, together with some delicious wines ; and at the appointed hour she took her place at the upper table, as mistress and hostess of the castle. Everv thing that was in most esteem had ficen provided to regale her. At the upper end w as placed a cygnet, and opposite to that, at the bottom, was a fawn. In the centre, decorated with flowers, was that part of beef which tradition says was knighted by King James the First, and has since been called Sir Loin. There were pullets and peacocks, and many delicacies arranged with vari¬ ous seasonings ; and the copious goblets smiled to the very brim with costly wines. To display the riches and splendour of the noble St Evre¬ mond, numerous golden bowls, and cups, and salt¬ cellars, and dishes were interspersed among the viands ; and a large stand gorgeously charged with many more salvers and ewers, saucers and cups, than could at once be used to deck the table, was placed behind the baroness. On the lower table was an ox, which had been roasted whole ; and many luxuries not usual there were introduced, that every one in his station might perceive that he was feasting. Matilda, charmed with the pompous stateliness which gratified her pride, was gay beyond her usual manner, wliich increased the sparkling of
210
her brilliant eye, and softened the haughtiness apt to be repulsive. The next day all the vassals, under vassals, and franklins, and all entitled to bear arms of whirl a sling, or draw a bow, headed by Philip de Va¬ lonnes and Brian de Rosenne, paraded in military array before the Baron and Baroness, some on horseback, some on foot. They tdl appeareei clad as if in march for battle. Each on his left arm wore his shield, emblazoned with the dis¬ tinctive badge of his family and name ; and each displayed his banner. They marched on in solemn procession before the tent vvhich had been erected for St. Evremond and his guests, and then went through all the various warlike exercises, accord¬ ing to the tactics of the day ; and then dividing into two parties, with disarmed lances, they exhi¬ bited a tournament, and tilted against each other. Philip de Valonnes and Brian do Rosenne con¬ tended man to man, each for the horse he rode. They met, however, with so little animosity, and were so equaliy matched, that the umpires ad¬ judged that they should exchange coursers. After that the slingers advanced. Many things were successively set upon high poles, and struck down by their dexterity. At length a stuffed sky-lark was placed there for a mark. It caused much sport, но many missed it. At last a young
211
man flinging his sling round and round several time:s, and then casting with a well-measured throw, struck him off his perch. The little puppet fell to the ground. " That was a good throw," said de Valonnes. " Take up thy prize," said de Rosenne. Ralph the slinger did as he was commanded. " Draw it, and eat it for thy dinner/' said de Rosenne. " It will be a scanty meal," said Ralph. " Heed not that," said de Rosenne, " draw it, man, draw it." Ralph again obeyed, and drew forth a purse, with which the skin had been entirely filled. He peeped into the bag, and he found gold therein, " Hah! hah ! ' he said, " this will purchase sauce ;" and he shook the bag and made the pieces jingle. " This is as good music to dance to as the sound of the harp," said he, shaking them again, and cutting an awkward caper, to the amusement of the standers by, who laughed heartily at his clumsy hound. The archers followed next, They stood in a row, and drew so quickly after each other, that one arrow was in the air before his forerunner was lodged. When every one had shot his barb, they went forward each to claim his dart; and although all had struck the target, even the forwardest to the white was so far from it, that they agreed to
212
fchüot again. They looked more accurately along the level, and took aim with more deliberation, and every arrow flew from a well pulled siring. The last competitor for fame was an old man, who had followed the father of St. Evremond in many battles, and had known the baron from his infancy. St Evremond watched as the old man took his cautious aim, but he forebore to notice him, lest he should divert the direction of his eye. When he heard the bow twang,—*' Well pulled, my veteran," said he ; and ere he could add more, the arrow of Oswald had stuck in the target. " ƒ' ///' clout ! ľ t/ľ clout Γ * said St. Evre¬ mond. " My honoured lord," said Oswald, " many a good time hav e I drawn a bow in the service of my ever dear late baron Oswin de St. Evremond, and always did he graciously commend the bolt* which my string threw. The commendation now vouchsafed to me cheers my old heart, and seems to make me young again. It comes over me like the sun vvhich shines in winter, softening the frost." " And the manner in which thou speakest of my father," replied St. Evremond, " comes over me, Oswald, like the sun of spring, which smiles after an April shower, llie priz^ ap¬ pointed to the best archer, at the request of Philip de Valonnes and Brian de Kohenne, who
213
have this day done honour to my wife and me, is my father's bow, which he was wont to use, wheuj amid the troubled days he knew, perchance some interval of peace allowed the merry foresters to attend him in the woodlands." " Where is it ? where is it ? Give it to me ! give it to me ! There, take my own bow r . Never while my arm has power to pull a string, shall any bow but this which was the baron s be bent by the strength of Oswald. Ö! my gracious lord, i would not exchange this little bit of wood for the whole growth of the forest." There is no praise so gratifying as that which is bestowed upon our fathers. It is sweeter to the ear than the song of the nightingale, and more delightful to the heart than the incense which burns within the sanctuary. St. Evre¬ mond appreciated it at its full value, and w hen Oswald received the bow he said to him, i( May those who now follow me speak of me when í am laid in earth, as thou do t speak of my father 1" When the warlike evolutions were ended, all who hael come forward in the martial course were feasted in the castle. The next day St. Evremond ordered a quinten to be set up, for every one who had a iiorse, to run at, A quinten, according to the description
214
which Stowe gives of it, together with a plate in the margin, is a pole raised on a firm pedestal, and crossed near the top by a piece of wood somewhat like a fan : thus Γ ^^^Z*—*-^^ it plays in a swivel. He mentions one be saw set up on Cornhill, near the Leaden Hall, where thu attendants of the Lords of merry disports have runne, and made great pastime : for he ¿hat hit not the broad end of the quinten teas of all men laughed to scorne ; and he that hit it full, if he rode not tlte faster, had a sound blow in his necke uith a bag full of sand, hanged at the other end. The one set up by St. Evremond made as great pastime as the one at wliich the attendants of the lords of merry disports ran on Cornhill. The first luckless wight who attempted to strike ran so eagerly and so furiously, that he put forth his strength too soon, and therefore spent his blow in the air : the consequence of which was, that meeting with no resistance, he followed his own stroke, and pitched over the head of his horse ; and as in falling he let go tlie rein, the running steed disported himself by running on, and neighing, and snorting, and bounding, so as to call off all attention from the sprawling Hilbart. When the galloping nag stopped, the spectators
215
turned tovvarde the unfortunate Hiibart. There he lay, not very quietly indeed, for he rolled over, and back again, and over again, amid the laughter of the lookers-on; for every time be made an effort to rise, tbe raising of his head was answered by the rising of his heels, and be swang up and dovvn, as if lie played in a swivel too. " Help me up, Norman ; help me up, Hu¬ bert; help me up, Lionel;" be cried out, as dif¬ ferent people went to bis assistance ; but the eager manner in vvhich he put forth his bands, and the awkward manner in which be endeavoured to assist himself, were so risible, that every one lost bis strength in laughter ; by which means it was a long time ere Hilbart stood upright. When be once more found himself on bis legs, and was well assured tbat be bad not broken bis neck, he amused every one by tbe good humour with which lie met the mirtb be had excited ; and he joined heartily in the laugh against himself. " Mercy on me/' said he, " I verily thought that I was dead." " How didst thou like the thought V' said one. " Not at all. I did my best, as ye all saw, to bring myself round again/' The next who came forward, having struck the broad end, spurred bis horse, that he might quicken liis pace ; but poor Ball not being a Very
rapiel сошьет, did not mend his speed m obedi¬ ence to the pricks from ids rider's, heeL, and goodman Cuthbert received from the sancl-ba^ what Stowe denominate!) a .sound blow in his nech , which threw him forwaid, and as be was slipping over Ball's head, he placed his hancL hetween th'' animaľs ears, and impelled him forwaril also, and the horse and the lider came down together. hate was on their side í о far, that except the disgrace of the oveithrow, all ua 3 well. Man and horse arose. Ball had no inclination for another gallop, Init stood, as .ill the world sank quite stoik stiil. Cuthbert was not cpiite so still, He bounded and rebounded, as if he had hid quicksilver in his heels. λ\ hen he was asked why he jumped about so much, " 1 jump for jov, he answered. '" Jo) ! for what i for а fall > u ' No, for joy that í am а tall proper fello« Had í been as short as Hdbart, I bhould luve had the blow л little nearer my bonnet; and tlien wliere should 1 have been by this time''* r> Peihaps thou nughte^t have mounted/' ын! ί jotOìC )')uth, Cŕ and b) tins time hd\e been die man in the moon. ' A third tried his skill md л tivitv, and afouith, and α fifth, and α sixth, ind so on for man) more One fell, anothei nisscd the inaik, hog« as it «a-, nuu\y recebi d
2Ì7
*hc sound blom in ih' песку and tbe gnat ¡sa-sftn^ contuiueel for many hours, to the delight of all the lov eis of merry disports. So different were the feelings of great ladie - m those days from the feeling" of great Lidie- now, that even Matilda was pleased, and gave way to that joyous laughter which refinement had not then marked dovvn as vulgar : ft Methinks, Aie чпе! to St. Evremond, (i that it will be a difh cult mattet ίο decide vvhich does be->t among tlu -t nnmcrs; I would that some one hit the broad tnd of the quinten, and rode avvay clear of th» «and." " Now for is here comes another/* taut St. Evremond. At that moment a voung mai , mounted on the finest horse that had appearetl in the game, ran at the quinten, hit the bioad enei, then spurred his courser, who flew as if lie Iiaú been winged, and avoided the blow, which never failed to overtake those who elid not ride «it full speed: when the quinten sw шп; back, and ilio bag hung steady, he rcturneel to the pole, a- though he would have said, tk Have I not don» well?" The applause he received seemed to answer the question, "Wdl done* well done ч he has done best!" sounded from end to eml oi the plain. * ť lie deserves the prize' he has wo> the prize! give him the prize!" vvas the genera] cr) . it consisted of a handsome saddle and brief , voi. i, L
218
and a pair of silver stirrups. Cadwell de Meer» ţonne received them on his knee ; for though Matilda could not herself give such a weighty present, she rose from her scat, and as St. Evre- mond, to whom the prize had been handed, bestowed it on Cadwell, she put her hand upon it, and gently pushing it toward him, she said, <( Thou hast done best.'' Cadwell re¬ ceived his prize, enhanced by the commendation of Matilda, with transport. He almost tore the saildle and bridle from his horse that he might dress him with his prise. Having so done, he mourned and galloped rountl the plain two or three times at full speed, then stopping opposite the stand where sat Matilda, he made his courser prance, and bound, and rear, while he sat proudly and stcadilv, as if his beast were still: and the smile of approbation which she vouchsafed him, and the shouts of the multitude added to the joy of his triumph. On the third festive day, St. Evremond's gracious and kind condescension ordered sports for chil¬ dren. He and his baroness, and their guests, graced the plain vvith their presence, to behold the merry disports of childhood. Running matches, according to their ages, were performed by them. Little bows, according to their strength, were drawn, and little arrows
219 were shot ,.t maiks not very far removed from vvhere they toocl to shoot. Little wrestlers con¬ tended in feebleness against each other, and when all the appointed trials of skill were accom¬ plished, tlu y every one received a little prize: the conquerors because they had conquered, and ihe defeated because the y had done their best. Thus, everv child was made happy, and the seeds of attachment were sown in every little breast. Thus ended the nu rrtj dhports. with vvhich all had been ι leaded. Richard de St. Evremond was pleased with the proofs of attachment which had been siurwi to him by all degiees among hi.* vassals and dependants : Matild ι was pleased at the many maik« of respect wliieh 1 ad been con¬ ferred on her: and all who had bejn entertained it the hospitable feasts of the eastie, and had partaken kS the «ports, were pleaseii with their îeception nul the courteous urbanity of the Baron and Baroness; for the gratification the whole festival had been to Matilda, vvho may be said to have been conscious that she vub not only the magnet, but abo the ruling star, hral kept her m such const mt good humour and high flow of spirits, tint 10 every one she hat! appeared amia¬ ble; and evtr) one went away fui h persuaded that the loveliness of her mind equalled the loveliness of htr person ; and the) rejoiced in the L /v
220
happiness which would for ever bless the cattle : while the fond St. Evremond, when he clasped her to his bosom, thought no prize equal to tbc prise he had in her.
CHAPTER XXVII.
New scenes ! New frienel· !
Wuh them new hopes, new wishes rise ; perhaps New jovs : yet the fond heart for ever clings ľo those uf early years. Friends of our youth, When constant femnd and true, are like old gold, More valuable for age : or like the ore Which has been tried by fire, still more refin'd, More purify'd becomes by the essay. An ancient friend is like another self, And when by time remov'd, or otherwise Cut otf from our society, he leaves A void in life which nothing new supplies.
During the days of festivity whieh had filled St, Evremond's castle with inhabitants like untu л garrison, Matilda had feit herself placed aloft in a manner which suited the haughtiness of her mind. She had been the admiration of all, and every one had made hei the object of their atten¬ tion, their respect, and their homage. By her such high distinction was considered as her due : for she may verily be said to have been infected by pride. She felt, even to boasting, the pride of high birth and ancient lineage; she also, in its L 3
222
amplest extent, had the pride of wealth ; to which may be addeei the pride of beauty, which wa 1 * constantly fed by her vanity. When the sports in honour of her marriage- were endeel, and the guests one by one retired, and at length left her vvith no companion but St. Evremond, Matilda became sensible of the value of those friends whose society and care she had enjoyed, unconscious of their worth. A thousand things, wdiich at the moment of their occurrence had been unprized, as they were re¬ newed in recollection came clad in charms, which till then she hael not observed. Fond as St. Evremond was of her, and attentive as he was to her, and anxious as he was that every hour .should be the harbinger of pleasure, yet hb station in life, and the occupations and duties which that station rendered imperious, necessarily called him much away, and she was often left alone. She then missed the company of hei mother ; she lamented that she eould not visit the abbey of vvhich Adeliza was abbess ; and she sighed for the sweet converse of Bertha de Clif¬ ford. To supply the place of those from whom she was removed, she had as yet found none. No nobleman equal in rank and dignity to St. Evre¬ mond dwelt within a day's journey of his castle ; therefore intimacv with their con oris was not to
223
be obtained. Among the vasjals of her husband she had seen none but the wife of Philip de Valonnes who had at all attracted her notice. Eor the least likely reason she had selected her as most worthy to be esteemed: not one of all die female guests had so little appeared to court her favour as Eleanor de Valonnes. Be it that she therefore deemed her of the noblest mind, or that she sought to gain from her what all the others had so freely olfered, she distinguished her as one to whom slie might extend faiailiarity, which, perhaps, in time might ripen into friend¬ ship. No nobleman throughout England had among his vassals a man of higher honour than Philip de Valonnes. lie was also one of the wealthiest ; and he was a distinguished valorous knight, vvho&e ancestors had, as the times had called them for¬ ward, acted as true Koge men, and done signal service in the field at home and abroad. Eleanor, his wife, was from a distant county, from the other extremity of the kingdom, from Kent. Their fathers had served together in the same battles. in his boyhood Philip had been taken to Dover, where he firbt beheld Eleanor. The impression which even in childhood she had made on his young heart, remainetl; and when arrived at man's e&tatc, lie had again crossed the countrv,
224
and asked the hand of Eleanor. He found all the charms he had admired in the bud expanded into full perfection ; and he bore away the lovely daughter of his father s frienel to the luxuriant elime of Devon. They had at the time of St. Evremond's nuptials, been married four years, and she was about that number of years the senior of Matilda. Philip de Valonnes ioved her and honoured her ; anel however courteously he had demeaned himself toward St. Evremond and his Baroness, his watchful care of Eleanor sedu- ïotish guarded her, and procured for her the respect and deference due to the wife of his choice, and the daughter of a soldier and a knight. In her, therefore, Matilda would find a companion worthy of herself. One by whom slie would be regarded with proper consideration, but from whom she would receive no submission bevond her absolute due. ml * 'Vhe manner in vvhich Matilda had been reared > as the heiress of a noble and rich baron, had accustomed her to habits of expense and luxury ; and the indulgence with which St. Evremond allowed her to continue the pomp and pageantry' as well as the hilarity and banquetings wdiich had been almost perpetual at her fathers, made her new dwelling the scene of festivity and joy, and all rhe va^ab who were within reach of \m
225
castle became his frequent guests, and one in¬ cessant round of pleasure went on during the summer. When the yellow leaf announced the approach of autumn, the sports of the field com¬ menced. St. Evremond, attended by the foresters and many others of his retinue, and accompanied by his vassals, hunted and coursed, and hawked, and often ranged widely in the plains and wood¬ lands. One day, when he and de Valonnes had out¬ stepped, in a coursing party, all those who had engaged wita them in the sport, as they descended α knoll they were attacked by three men. They struggled stoutly; but the men who attacked them were, by the c atests in which the vaga¬ bond life they led frequently involved them, so used to all the modes of parrying blows as well as striking, that after a long scuffle, one of them overthrew St. Evremond. Just at that moment, those vvho had been more tardy in the pursuit ι eached the f op of the little hill, and saw him fall under the more powerful strength of his opponent. Among the attendants was Edwin, the little felľow who had won the prize from the irchers at Montgomery'« holiday. His youth .sid activity reached the summit the first of all the train. He saw his lord fall, and he instantly threw a dart, which, as the distance vvas short, L 5
226
reached the man who stood over him. He im¬ mediately fell. The shot went true to his heart, he never spoke more. The third man advanced, and as St. Evremond attempted to rise, Edwin took aim again, and the arrow lodged in hL· thigh: he also fell; for the arrow had nearly passed through the limb. To draw it out was more than he couiel accomplish, and the attempt absolutely made him roar in anguish. The man who had contended with de Valonnes hael found 'm antagonist as stout as himself, and one who had resisted all his efforts to overthrow him. When he s-aw Ьь two companions fall, and the numerous attendants coming at full speed down the hill, he ran into the thicket and made Iif escape. As «oon as the attendants joined their mastei, St. Evremond ordereel some of them to convey the wounded man to the castle ; and to put him under care, and under guard. It was vvith diflî¬ culty that thev contrived to bear him by means of huntina poles, and when he was placed in some degree of security, and thej began to тагеЬ vvith the load, St. Evremond ordered other * to search the body vvhich lay extended on the turf. On his finger they found a silver rin«:, on vvhich tvvo joiuçd hands were engraven, exactly hke the one vvhich hac' ' een found in the hem of the
227
tatter which Toston had torn from the robe of Gaston de Prestone, and which the venerable baroness de Nartonville had sent to her grand¬ son. On searching further, they found in his pouch tvvo bits of parchment similar to tho^e vvhich had belonged to Gaston ; on one of which was also written bound. They were by these assured, that they w ľ ere both linked in with the same herd of robbers: and were thoroughly convmced that there must be an association of banditti, who by these tokens were known among each other. St. Evremond ordered him also to be taken to the castle. When this second party was dispatched, en- quiry was maele into the mode of his delivery, and when they all said that both the arrows had been shot by Edwin, St. Evremond very highly commended his dexterity ; but the youthful Ed w in, who had never before slain ought except the oucks and the birds of the forest, was insensible to the high praise which was bestowed upon bins He could not be cheered. ťí I rejoice," he said, ·' in the wound which has disabled the man wiio received my second shot : but it grievcth me sore that I reached the heart of the other. A wound woulel have checked his career, and that wot Id have been enough." St. Evremond, who altiiough he was as brave as any nobleman that ever took L 6
22В
ihe field, and dared the brunt of battle, was gentle in times of peace ; was infinitely more pleased with the sorrow of Edwin, than he woulel have been had he exulted in the deed. He drew him to hL· side as they returned home, and from that hour he felt an attachment so strong toward him that he became his favourite attendant, and he had him always near hím when he went abroad. When they reached the castle, all had been г areful to conceal from Matilda and the females of the household the chance which had befallen. The dead body was carried to a remote chamber, «sid the wounded man to the porter's lodge. When St. Evremond and ele Valomies, and those who had accompanieel them in the chace* met Matilda and Eleanor at the board w hich was daily festive; it was with great caution that they gradually told the occurrence of the morning, mild as notwithstanding that they had been at- taekec* they were both there unhurt : the fatal /lose of the adv enture was heard without pro¬ ducing more horror than such lecitak never fail to occasion, even when the parties are not con¬ nected with any of those concerneel in the event. After all the circumstances had been detailed, and the ring and parchments found on the dead m ti n had been examined, Matilda recounted th< i nhappv history of Gaston de Presione' 1 · piofíi
229
gary vvhich had been related to her by Adeliza. iť When I was a boy/' said de Valonnes, " I knew Gaston dc Prestone. His father and mine were fellow soldiers. Gaston was a mischievous lad; and ever in our sport* and gambols found means of exercising childish tyranny, and of doing acts of sucli extreme unkindness, as would in time degenerate into cruelty. I remember the time of hi- elopement from his father's castle; and I was eme vvho bore a part in the ceremonies of the pompotus funeral vvhich the baron decreed, to do honour to the memory of the lady Margaret his wife, who did not long survive the absence of her von. Tales of his deeds of outrage often reached his father as they did his aunt the abbess Adeliza, but till now I never had a clew which might pro¬ bably be a mean to trace him out. I have often heard that there is in Devonshire a lawless band of robbers, and I make no doubt that Gaston is united vvith it, and that the men by whom we were attacked are also of the number. Pei- chance the wounded man vvho is become our pri¬ soner may reveal the secrets of their union and h ad to their discovery. The wretch who had been wounded in the thigh was surly and sullen. After the arrow had been drawn, which tore the flesh extremely, he lay some time in a stute e>f stupor. Cordial me*
ZÒO
dicines were anxiously administered to recover him, in the full hope that he would reveal the place of their abode, and betray his companion*. Wlien he began to revive, the body of his asso¬ ciate in crime was brought into his apartment. His vest had been taken off, and his breast, in which the arrow was still sticking was exposed to view, and the blood, vvhich had flowed copiously, was unwashed. When he had looked at him ven stedfastly for some time, " Well Arthur,'" he said, ť£ 1 am better off than thou art still.. ' " Ilis fate," said one of his guards "might have İsen thine. Behold his blood. So might thine have flowed.'' tr Thinkest thou/' he answered, *' that Hoger Valionce is afraid to look un blood ? 80 might my blood have flowed ! 80 hath my blood flowed. The cc *ch 011 which 1 lay is covered with it. Bear Arthur hence ! If his blood say aught, it say? be true! lie Mediasti Bear him hence." Much was said, about hmi whom he had called Arthur, much about hi. uwn condition, hut he had relapsed into süllőimen, and ť bev coniti L ain no information from h\<
CHAPTER XXVIII
-Flow 'ry summer fled, and autumn
Crown'd with fruit" paired by : winter clad m snow Advanced The howling winds blew thiough the gro\i s And nippmg fiosta check d слегу growth, cheerier The hhdb <*i* mute upon the spn\, and man, VV uhm hit, walb coni m'd, sought in his home Γοι comfoit. Hippy he who theie can find Content, and round hb hearth domestic peace ■ Γοι Пан, and only theie, when NStuie frowt Aiound the woi Id, true happiness ь Iound And when ftom theie -ihe fhe», vu ld btd i^ oí ¡л ey Within tht» a\age dins, are Inppıet fai Ί lun the uni L")t mastei of a palace I г is vvhen the stern season of the year compels mankind to seek in their own bosoms, and their own homes for joy, for happiness, for comfoit, and for delight, that the mind becomes couscous of its ovn powers, and of its o»\n resomces. Then it is that the stores of knowledge which we have treasured up nnd their value. Then it is that the good or evil actions we have performctl solace or scourge the gloomy hours. it was as the gloomy hours approached that Matilda found how necessary it was to seek from lierself amusement, and from the due emplovment
232
of her own time, pastimes to supply the place of tliose merry disports vvhich had made all the months since her arrival at her new borne like one continued holiday. The rain which fell rendered the woods im¬ passable. The snow vvhich followed lay and choaked up the roads. Eleanor de Valonnes, who was her nearest neighbour, could not stir abroad ; and she herself was pent within the walls of her own castle. Books were not in use. Ladies even of the highest rank could rarely read. Music was confined to the minstrels. Ladies were not musicians. Tradition furnished many tales, and observation, which ever leads the wise to contemplation, furnished knowledge. The in¬ tercourse t>f conversation, and the interchange of thought endeared companions to each other, and vvhile the blazing faggot burnt on the hearth, the ¿tores of the mind were poured forth ; one story led the way to another ; various anecdotes which had descended through many generations, and went back to ages far remote, followed one the other, and St. Evremond and Matilda were sur¬ prised to find that without extraneous guests, the cattle was a happy mansion, and the da) e passed on in cheerfulness. As every man of high rank was a warrior, and as England had for nearly two hundred year-
233
been often involved in foreign wars, occurrences of distant nations were become familiar : and as histories of war and warfare were always pleasing to Matilda, St. Evremond was never at a loss for entertainment. One night when the storm was loud, he said, " these winds, which roar among the forest trees, remind me of an event which I have heard my father recount. The difficulties in which Lewis the seventh was entangled in consequence of the divorce of the Cemnt of Thoulouse, who afterward married Petronella the sister of his queen, caused a war between that monarch and the Count of Champagne, uncle to the wife whom the count of Thoulouse had repudiated, who had in her behalf appealed to the Pope, and as Lewis persisted in upholding the count of Thoulouse, and maintained his marriage with his sister-in-law, the Pope ex¬ communicated him and put his kingdom under an interdict. To revenge himself on the count of Champagne, who had procured the harsh bull, be entered his dominions with a numerous army and laid waste the country. The count, unable to resist his power, sued for mercy and obtained it, on condition that he should use his influence vvith the Pope to have the excommunication with¬ drawn. The count, while the victorious troops were at his gates promised all that was required
234
and Lewis disbanded his army. No sooner was ¡t dispersed than the thunders of the holy see were renewed against the king, who suspecting what part the count had acted in the business, entered Champagne widi fire and sword, and burnt and destroyed the wretched country. He besieged the tovvn of Virrey, in Perthois, and took it by assault; and being enrageei at a more ob¬ stinate defence than he had expected, he set fire to the church in which the terrified inhabitants had taken refuge, and, it is said, that nearly four thousand persons perished ia the flames. i( Many of the French soldiers who nad assisted in the siege were too severely wounded to return home with the king, and they remained victims e f their own victory« Among others, one named Chilperic was left near the church which he had helped to fire. Ci When the conflagration stopped, the few in¬ habitants, who had not been able ίο reach the place so many had sought for refuge, flocked to the scene of horror to seek out their friends, hut all had perished, and the mingled and mutilated bodies could not be recognized. (i Among those who came bewailing to the scene c f woe, was a poor widow vvho came to seek hei *«on. bhe sat heilelf down near the spot and in -dent agony wept for her chod \s Au- thus ^s
235
in grief, Chilperic, who Jay near to her rest¬ ing place, put forth his hand, and seizing one oí hers, said f O î take pity on an expiring man, and soothe the last moments of a soldier.' ' A ï-oldicr!' exclaimed Clarice, 'an enemy. Who took pity on my countrymen? who took pity on my son ? my only son I my excellent bo) ! my Jortin ! not thou. Art not thou one concerned in the sacrilegious death of those vvho had taken refuge here !' ( О good tender woman/ said Chilperic, ť blame not a soldier who when he de¬ stroys, destroys in obedience to his commander?. Had thy son lived, he, as a soldier must have done 1 tlie same. Had the fate of battle been reversed, had the conquerors been the conquered, what Jortin might have done against the foe would not have set heavy at thy heart/ \s he thus spoke, he again took her hand, * I have a mother in Pari·**. Pity me for her sake, if not for my own,' A comparison of the state of the speaker's mo¬ ther vvith her own, had a powerful effect on the feelings of Clarice. She looked at the helples*- supplicant; and pity, the inmate of the female breast, spoke in his behalf. " Chilperic appeared to be nearly of the sms icre as the son whom she deplored; and as he wriihed with pain, he ever and ation pressed her band, vvhich he still held, and seemed to draw hc v
23G
toward him. ' Poor youth,' she said, ' even ag 1 now weep for Jortin ; doth thy mother weep for tliee ! Shall I not save thee for her ? Yea ; I must; I will; I cannot think of her and leave thee here forlorn. Canst thou not rise V Chil- peric strove to rise ; he could not. *■ Lay thy hands firmly on this great stone,' said Clarice, ' and draw thyself on thy knees/ with some diffi¬ culty he did so, * Now give me both thy hands over my shoulders/ He did so, and she dragged him up. ' Now throw thy right arm round my neck, and I will put my arm round thy waist, and prop thee as we walk along/ Thus assisted, Chilperic frequently stopping, at length reached the widow's dwelling. It was a poor hut, wherein was not much comfort. Little, save a good heart, and a gentle disposition had Clarice wherewith to cheer her guest : but ¿he shared with him the scantiness of every meal, and he remained there concealed. When by rest and peace he was re¬ covered, he began to pine for his native country. ť I have a better home than this in Paris' said lie to Clarice, * and I have a dear mother, who will rejoice to see the friend who has been kind to her son. Let me take thee to her. I vvill bea son to you both/ Poor Clarice ! She loved the mise¬ rable hovel where she had dwelt so long. She loved her husband's hou^e, and the birth-place
237
of her child : but—her husband was dead, and alas ! Jortin was no more. She hesitated a long time, but the repeated solicitations of Chilperic prevailed, and she consented to accompany him to Paris. They set out in autumn, but having no means of travelling but on foot, his weakness, and her no very great strength, prevented them from performing their journey as expeditiously as they had hoped, and they could not push on. As they reached a wood not far distant from Paris, they were both so fatigued that they were unable to proceed. They were compelled to halt, and pass the night beneath the trees. Chilperic took off bis cloak and wrapped it round Clarice, and stretched himself by her side. Ere morn the storm arose; the wind blew, the rain poured down in torrents, and the leaves seemed to sigh above his head. At dawn he called to his com¬ panion. She answered not. She lay a lifeless corse. " Imagine, my beloved Matilda, the dismay of Chilperic as he gazed upon her. His kind hos¬ tess, his tender nurse ! He bore her, stiff in death, to Paris, and when he presented her to his mo¬ ther, he told the tale of her benevolence." " The melancholy ending of thy tale," said Matilda, " is like unto one which Adeliza de Beaufort, my aunt, was accustomed often to re-
238
count to the nuns. It occurred in the abbey of which die was abbess. fi Some few years before she entered that holy- place, when the aged mother, Philiherta de Auvergne, governed where she now presides, a stranger one day brought thither a girl of fifteen years of age, and leaving there a large sum of money, said she was to go through the probation of a novice, and then be professed a mm. lie called her Agatha de Luxcombe, The girl de¬ clared her unwillingness to enter into the holy life for which she was designed. Nevertheless she took the noviciate vows, but steadily pro¬ tested against those of a nun. Thus she con¬ tinued within the abbey, unprofessed, long after the expiration of her noviciate. She was ob¬ served frequently to continue longer in the abbey gardens than the other sisters remained, and ever to stop at the same spot. As she stood she appeared motionless; and she was supposed to be performing some penance she had imposed on herself in order to gain that perfect resignation which would reconcile her to her secluded holy life. * r It was Li the depth of winter, when the world was wrapped m darkness, that at the hour when all the nuns and novices assembled, Á gatha wa& absent, it was remembered that she had been
239
seen/ according to her custom, standing m t he- garden, and search was made to find her, but in vain. It caused much consternation, and through 5 the night the sisters forbore their rest, and in anxious alarm awaited her return. The morning came, and Agatha did not appear. The gardens were again searched—no Agatha was found. The following night a dreadful storm arose. The rain rushed down the hills like cataracts, and the stream which flows amid the groves of the abbey was swoln beyond its bounds. The overflow cover¬ ed the lawns and alleys. When the flood subsided ""Ί the waters returned within its banks, the body gatha was found on the margin, claei in the ι ufjes of a novice, l'he first person who after tlic havoc of the wide-extending storm had ceased, entered the abbey, gave information that against the wall was placed a scaling ladder. On exami¬ nation it was found exactly answering that spot where Agatha had been always seen to stand; and it was consequently surmised that she had there held converse with her paramour, and had, by his assistance, fled. Silence for ever veiled the mystery. Who seduced her from her holy abode never was discovered. Philiberta failed not to represent the awful warning to the daughters oť her abbey, and imputed the dreadful catastrophe of her disobedience to the judgment of ofiended
240
heaven. She left the tale and the terror of its conse¬ quences indelibly impressed on the mind of every nun ; and my aunt heard it ere she had well taken possession of the dignity, to which, by the death of Philiherta, she had succeeded. She never failed to draw from the woeful fate of Agatha, the same instructions as her predecessor; and never repeated the tale without such pious admo¬ nitions as were best suited to keep every one within the rule of her duty, and to enforce the sanctity of every vow/' St. Evremond sat in mute attention listening to the story of Agatha. When Matilda had finished the tale,— α It always appeared to me," he said, *' that to impute any thing to the judgment of heaven is, in man, most arrogant presumption. Individual and public misfortune and prosperity are, no doubt, in the hand of him who knoweth what is best. Mortality knoweth not the cause nor the import of what occorre th. If Agatha was destroyed in judgment, what shall we say of the death of the gentle, the virtuous Clarice ? I should he loth to give so daring an opinion on those events which í myself have known. Shall î presume to say it was in wrath that Osmond perished on the coast of Cornwall, while yet the friends from whom he parted stood to see his vessel sail ? Or shall I say offended heaven, in
241
judgment, snatched avvay young Coldric, who, when from foreign climes returning to his native land, was by the raging billows washed from the deck, and perished in the turbulent salt main ; and when his parents hastened to receive their -on, the fatal tidings of his death blasted their hopes, and the direful story of the storm was all they found. " Let us, Matilda, endeavour so to act, that we offend not heaven ; and if misfortune overtake us, let us bow beneath the stroke, and trust it is not in vengeance that we are afflicted." (£ 1 have sometimes been inclined to make the same reflections," replied Matilda, " chiefly on a circumstance which I have heard my father many times repeat concerning a nobleman named Er¬ nulph de Prumaire. He was married to a beau¬ tiful wife named Familia, the sifter of a Sicilian lord : he had espoused her during the time when Richard Cceur de Lion, and Philip, king of France, were detained in Sicily. Dining his absence in Asia, he left her in that island ; and when king Richard quitted Palestine, Ernulph sailed tc Sicily, and brought away Fai nilla. After his return to England, at a tournament v.hich my grandfather exhibited at our сачк% Justín de Mastrombe beheld the beauteous- Familia, and vol. s M
242
became enamoured of her charms. He tilted vvith Ernulph, and when he could have dis¬ mounted him, he forbore the triumph, and per¬ mitted him with honour to recover his seat. The generous Ernulph allowed himself conquered; and in return for Justin's noble forbearance, prof¬ fered him the hand of friendship, and invited him to his castle. It had been with that deep view that Justin did not strike. The passion with wliich Familia had inspired him at the tourna¬ ment increased during the time he was her hus¬ band s guest; and, practising those arts of in¬ sinuation which he well knew how to use, he prevailed on the faithless Familia to accompany him when he quitted the hospitable friend who had so gratefully entertained him. The same quick feeling which had rendered Ernulph sett* sible of the conduct of Justin in the lists, was alive to the great injury he did him. He pur¬ sued the traitor ; and he overtook him. ' Turn, wretch/ he cried, f I will not strike thee dead, because thou didst spare me when I was in thy power, but hand to hand I will contend against thee in vengeance for thy breach of the sanctity of the roof which sheltered thee.' They fought. The fight was desperate. Each fell beneath the other's stroke. For ever has it been deemed a
243
punishment on the worthless Justin. Like thee, concerning Clarice, I have ventured to doubt the judgment. For, why was Ernulph slain?" " It is," said St. Evremond, " one more among the events which we can both recount, which justifies us when we doubt. Calamities, which strike alike the injured and the wrongers, should teach us all to refrain from passing a sentence which only can be known to higher wisdom than that of man."
m Й
CHAPTER XXIX.
In times remote, ere visitings began ln coach and chair ; when every gentleman On his own land was much compelľd to stay, And seidom but to combat went away : When 'mong Ids minstrels and his jesters plac'd, And, in the chamber which his presence grae'd, Surrounded by his household at each meal, He eat in ermines in the stead of steel ; Old warlike stories were by bards rehears'd, And gossips, who in hobgoblin much were vers'd, Recounted how brave knights and ladies gay, Flew through the air, or pae'd their midnight way; And ever and anon some merry song Was trill'd, to help the heavy hours along ; E'en then, in such unpolish'd converse, lie Could find good homely pleasure, and could happy be.
After tbe sports which bad been performed at St. Evremond's castle, in honour of bis marriage and the arrival of Matilda, were ended, Henry de Nartonville bad returned to tbe venerable Emma, bis grandmother; and when the winter put an end to the amusements of the field, and the dogs could no longer run nor the hawks fly, be enter¬ tained her with accounts of the grandeur, the
245
variety, and the hilarity of all that occurred : and when night brought all the family together, he enjoyed the hospitality vvhich assembled his household to share in his presence the plenty of his lower board. On that stormy night vvhen St. Evremond and Matilda recounted to each other the many events which its turbulence renewed in their recol¬ lection, while all were placed, and partaking of the night's repast at Nartonville's castle, the loud sounding of the bugle at the outer gate alarmed them. The person dispatched to ascertain the cause returned and said, that a man requested a nighťs lodging. " He tells me," said the porter, " that he is a sea-faring man, and that his boat has been upset in the storm; that he swam to shore, and vvith much difficulty had reached the castle, where he begged for shelter." Such re¬ quests were not uncommon ; and an ancient baron's castle was always a place of refuge from which the suppliant never was turned away. " Let him partake with us," said Nartonville. Altrim, the porter, quickly returned, and in¬ troduced a man, whose appearance attracted every one's attention. The account he gave of his wreck and swimming, was obviously true. His garments were wet ; and his hair and beard m 3
246
liung straight and lank around him. He entered undismayed, and with little humbleness made hb ibeisance to the master of the hall. He then looked round the large, apartment with a stem - ч уе and a ferocious countenance. He stood gazing around, till he was told by Odo to take a seat. As no one spoke to him but Odo, he walked toward him, and the good-humoured fellow mack room for him at his side. He partook ahjosi voraciously of what was before him, and took copious draughts from the horn. He appeared to be quite careless, of observation, and though silent, there w r as a freedom in his manner which shewed that nothmg incommoded him, nor put him out of his way. The meal was scarcely ended when Odo began to testify great perturba¬ tion ; he rose, and he sat down, and he rose again ; and every time he moved, the sound of the balls on his cap drew the eyes of every one upon him. At length he twisted about so violently, that he produced a long continued jingle. " What is the mat tei í" said Nartonville, who knew that the noise of Odo always imported something, either of amusement or advice. " Much is the matter/' said he. " Tell us what," said Nartonville. In¬ stead of doing as he was ordered to do. Odo Ьч-^ап to sing.
247
Some things Rn the ear of α man, Ami some for the ear of two : But he that speaks to three men, Will buiely unwisely do. Though the jester was often denominated his lord's fool, it frequently happened that he »va·* the wisest man in his lord's house: and on many occa¬ sions Otlo had, in the way of his licensed prattle, given intelligence which had been found worth the listen. When the domestics retired, the bell* that hung to the cap which adorned Odo, who remained the last in the hail, sounded again as loudly as he could contrive to rattle them, vvhich induced Nar¬ tonville to say, " Draw near, my good fellow.*' Odo advanced, and the lady Emma motioned to the maids who stood behind her chair to depart, ¿nd then Odo said, íŕ Let my lord be on his guard, and let the stranger be kept clo.se. When lie laid his hand on the table as he sat beside me, I saw on his finger a silver ring, on which was engraven tvvo united hands like unto the rína ■vhich Toston found in the robe of the monk, w ho raised his dagger to take away thy life." Emma and Nartonville started. After a pause, Nartoib ville said, " Thanks, my gooel fellow, for thy ob¬ servation and thy caution, Send Altrim the por¬ ter hither." Altrim came. " Altrim," saiel Nar¬ tonville, " put the stranger in the small chamber m 4
248
beyond the room which looks toward the moat. Be careful to lock the door, and bring the key to me." Altrim did as he was commanded, and when he gave the key, his master said, *' secure the outer bolts. Go—do as I have said; and then to rest—speak not of these directions." in all ancient castles there were chambers which served as prisons for foes taken in battle, or others who were obnoxious, and the apartment into which Nartonville had orderetl the stranger was such a one. Having thus imprisoned the sea-faring man, Emma and her grandson debated on the measures to be pursued. That the man they had secured and Gaston de Prestonc belonged to the same band was evident; that they both sought the destruc¬ tion of the young baron appeared to be indubi¬ table. The one had attempted to assassinate him, the other hael gained admittance perhaps by a false tale, into his castle, no doubt with the same mischievous intention. After much deliberation, lhe) agreed that it vvould be proper to consult vvith Anselm the abbot; and they determined to send to him on the morrow. When Anselm was informed that Nartonv ille and the baroness wished to consult with him on a matter of much importance, and requested his presence at the castle, he instantly ordered his
249
palfry to be prepared, and vvith his accustomed parade he set forward. The snow lay and the track was hidden, and the beast's tread was un¬ steady. Two brethren led him, and straight by the eye they pursued their way to the grey wails which the leafless trees made visible afar. When he reached the castle, Nartonville re¬ ceived him with ceremonious honour. i4 I trust/" he said, " that the holy Anselm will pardon hi> son for making a request which has subjected him to such a perilous journey. He will consider the advanced age of the lady baroness, and charita¬ bly find excuse in that." " My son," replied An¬ selm, *' we have all in our stations duties to fulfil. To administer comfort, and to give advice are mine. The lady Emma's sex and her age demand attendance, but even to thee, my son, young a» thou art, I would not have refused to come, were my presence and my counsel needed." They then proceeded to the apartment of the baronets, and when the attending maids withdrew, Narton¬ ville informed the reverend father of the arrivai of the stranger, repeated the tale of his wreck, and told him of the ring wliich Ode had observed on his finger. Anselm listened to the communi¬ cation with profound attention, and did not in¬ terrupt the observations which the baroness and young Henry made on what had occurred. When m 5
250
thty had mentioned all the conclusions they had drawn, Anselm said, " Every man in the nation is acquainted with the desperate attempt wliich was, some few vears ago, made on the sacred and anointed person of our sovereign lord the king ; that the conspiracy has not yet been fully traced, nor the conspirators discovered. I do not doubt that the prisoner here confined, and he who took refuge in my holy abbey, and afterward attempted to kill thee, were both concerned in that atro¬ cious plot. The corresponding rings delare their union, and, if the prisoner be searched, most pro¬ bably such parchments as Gaston de Prestone had hidden within the border of his robe, will be found on him. Perchance vvith them may also be t oncealcd a dagger designed to do thee harm. Let him therefore be examined. Thou hast men enow attending here upon thec to protect thy hie, Let him be seized instantly and suddenly. Ti e advice of the abbot appeared most whe; and Nartonville immediately summoned his numerous aU' ndantsj and gave them directions how to act. The baron and Anselm both accompanied them. Nartonville gave the key to Altrim, who unlocked the door and drew back all the bolts. The mo- nití,* the dooi was opened four men entered the apH-Lii.ont. Two of them sciz-ed his hands, and two of them held down his arms, The ring w;s
251
drawn from his tìnger, and given to Nartonville, The prisoner struggled to get free, on which many advanced. W T hen he beheld the numerous attendants who surrounded their Lrd, he ceased his unavailing resistance. Concealed within his vest were found two parchments similar to those the abbot had preserved in the abbey, one having on it the word bound. A dagger was also found, and a long knife : they were all given to the re¬ verend man who, as he took them, said, (i Thou dost doubtless know Gaston de Prestone. The^c parchments, and the ring like unto his betray jour wicked union. What hath been through him discovered criminates thee. We leave thee for the present to consider vvhat hath befallen thee, and when again we visit thee in this chamber A thy imprisonment, thou wilt make thy full confes¬ sion, and reconcile thee to the fate which doth await thee." So saying, he turned avvay in the solemn manner which abbots well know how to assume. The door was again closed, locked, and bolted. In the door was a small sliding pannel through which food was conveyed to the prisoner. When Altrim carried him his meal, he said to him, ci hy what name must I call to thee?" " That import- eth not,"' was the reply. " Nay, but it doth, Every one hath a name to vvhich he answerers m G
252
When we feed the dogs, we call each dog by hU name to take his share. Art thou below a dog?" u Were I not here confined, thou därest as well take a wolf by the muzzle as speak thus to me." " Mayhap," said Altrim. " Yet tell me thy name. It is more seemly to be known by thy proper name, than to be called the ruffian/' " Call me what thou wilt ; I reckon not upon thy calling. The ruffian shall do as well as Walter de Clo vinne." f ' O í sa} est thou so ?** said Altrim. <c Walter de Clovinne is then thy name," u What an ifit be! It is a better name than thine. Servitude never hith degraded it." íť But crime hath," said Al¬ trim, "far, far below servitude hast thou degrad¬ ed it. Though my lot be servitude, I would not change with thee, and have fifty golden crowns to boot/' So saying he presented the meal he had brought to Walter, and replaced the pannel he had withdrawn, and left the prisoner to swallow Ьь allowance. Meanw idle, Nartonv ille and the abbot had re¬ turned to the baroness, and theii deliberation* were relieved. They deemed nothing so prope r as to ьспа trusty messengers immediately to the кпщ and parliament with information of the de- tension of Walter de Clovinne, and the attempt of Gasion de Prestone on the life of the baron: and to detail the circumstances of the ungs and parch-
253
ments ; and to declare their suspicions that they both belonged ' ^ the band who had conspired to kill the king. Messengers were accordingly dis¬ patched. They were directed to take the road which led to the castle of Ht. Evremond, to inform him of all that had occurred, and of their own errand with despatches to the king. They were further directed to consult with him on their proceedings. " Some of the party must return to me," said Nartonville, íť to let me know bt. Evremond's opinion on this matter.'* Among the numerous vassals of Randolph de- Neville, vvho now deemed themselves bound to follow Henry de Nartonville, vvho, as heir to Emma, took on himself the military command and honours of a chieftain, was Milward de Rosen¬ dale, a valorous young knight of ancient family. With all the expedition that might be, Narton¬ ville sent for him to his castle, requiring hh at tendance with his followers. Milward de Ros¬ tendale obeyed the summons. When he arrived. Nartonville and the abbot, who had been en¬ treated to remain, that he might assist with his sage advice the less experienced youth of the baron, informed him of the affair in hand ; and to him was en rusted the command of those who were dispatched to Westminster, and to ¡St. Ev¬ remond, and a large detachment set forward on
254
'he perilous march. The steep and slippery hilL and the deep valley*', all one continuetl path of frozen snow, were almost impassable, and the difficulty of going on was almost more than they could overcome; but the love they bore to Nar- t oa ville, and the importance of the business with which they were entrusted, gave them that daunt¬ less perseverance, which overcomes all obstacles. When they reached the ca tie of St. Evremond, and recounted the circumstances of the wreck and detention of Walter de Clovinne, they heard from him the story of his attack, and of the imprison¬ ment of Roger Valionces vvho had been wounded. ' f On him, and on the man whom Edvin slew," aid St. Evremond," such parchments, and such rings were found, as have been found os Waltei de Clovinne. The wound of Roger Valionces ь not yet cured ; his suíľerings render lum sullen, ι. al he will make no confession, Peiv hance a man who hath conversed with Walter, may draw some secret from him. Let the experiment he- made. Do thou, sir knight," 1 said he to Milward de Rostendale, " select him thou dost deem fit for such a trial." From among those who were in hb train he selected William de Sarbsr.e. He- was instructed to give such hints as he might deem sufiicient to draw such information from Ro* loi· Valionces as might tend to thu discovery of
255
what they sought. " Thou must speak to him/ said Milward, " as if thou wert sent by Walt -л·." In the first place, the porter was ordered to say to his prisoner, that there was a man without de¬ sirous to speak to him, but would not send hs message by another: and before Roger could give лп answer, Willi im de Sarlonne entered the cham¬ ber. " Roger/ said he, <( í come to thee from Walter de Clovinne." lie then stepped toward him, and shewing the ring on his finger, which had been purposely lent to him, he said in a whis¬ per, " thou knowest this token." " No whisper¬ ing," said the porter. {i What 1 have to say, is matter of importance," said William, ťŕ of more miportancc than thou dreamestof ; but it is not for dice to hear." " Then thou mayest depart : for í mist hear all thou sayest.' f ' Not so, go«>d man/ said William, ť ' lea' e us togethei' a few minutes. We shall do no wrong to any one, thou art well ^nred ofthat, we cannot if wc would." Well nserved," ^aid the porter, "ye cannot, there- 'Are for a short space I wiil indulge you." When 'hey were left, William said, '-" 1 mibt be brief. Wdterhnth been wicked, the vessi 1 lo-t, aml ί 1 .' 1 new drowned, all but him-elf; he .swam to s' ie. and has betn received at the castle of a in ok baron, who not knowing who he is treats Imn with hospitable kindness He savs when
256
thou wast wounded and another slain, thy friend who Med, joined all Ins co-mates, and told of thy mishap, and said that he conjectured thou wast here." (( Aye, aye, it was Humphrey Flistrone. What of him V st He perished in the storm. Knowest thou aught," continued William, " of Gaston de Prestonc ?" íť A desperate man." said Roger, (C He has not joined the band to vvhich we are all bound for many months." '* 1 have a parchment here," continued William, ť * I do not understand it. See ! * This word/ said Walter when he gave it to me ť is suíhcient. He has such another, that is enough. I shall tell thec no more/ .said he. i Wlien Roger shall see it, say unto bins ♦hat the king hath been informed of all. Tell him I shall for the present flee to Wales. Telt him to make his peace as quickly as he can w ith the great baron who confines hini, and then to follow me." " The king know all X\ said Roger. tť Make my peace ! If the kin¿> know all, so cloth St. Evremond." William then raised his voice, which was the signal for the porter to return, and said aloud, " What sendest thou ío AV.iher.'* The porter instantly appeared. " Come, my ıran," he said, " thou hast tarried long enough; it is time thou shouldest retire," " Tell my friend," said Roger, ik that I am a prisoner." William then left him alone.
257 When William ele Carlonne returned aud re¬ peated hib conversation with Roger Yarionce&, "thou ha-bt well performed thy part/ said St. p]v- remoiid. " Tiiougli we know not the full parti¬ culars, it is clear that we have in custody, two vvho were concerned in the dark plot to kill the king. From one, perhaps from both we may yet learn the whole. Lose no time. Go without delay to Westmmstei. L>y all )e know before the king, and letu* await his royal pleasure. Ile^t here to night, to-morrow ye shall set forth agahı. Thou, мг knight, with those appointed to attend thee, east w aid shall bend thy course, on to king Henrv \ palace. Т1кье who return to my young friend Nartonville may tarry somewhat longer; haply we ma) learn more from Roger Valionee->." When the deliberation-» on what had been dis¬ covered by means of William de Sarlonne's. con¬ versation with the prisoner, and the coıvsccpıent proceediuû4 of those vvho were bound to the co irt were ended, St. Evremond introduced his ba¬ ione^·* lo the a^embly, Lovely in beauty, dnd di unified in manner, she did honour to her hus¬ band's station, and as mi&tress of his cattle sh rt delimited all hi* циелЬ. Every elegance of the time·* w,b dispJaved, ever) luxury of the day wa> proffered, and even gr.it^fication that could ho procured w 'is enjoved; and baronial pomp wa-
258
exhibited in full parade and brilliance. The plate shone ; plenty crowned the board, the co¬ pious goblet passed around, and the minstrels cheered with the songs of welcome. On the morrow, Milward de Rostendale at the head of his party rode from the castle amid the shouts of the surrounding spectators. Many re¬ mained, while Winstone the porter strove to lead Roger Valionces to speak about the conversation he had with William de Sarlonne : but no ! He returned to the same sullenness with which he had behaved ever since his confinement in his so¬ litary chamber : and when they departed on their way to Nartonville, they had gained no more intelligence.
CHAPTER XXX.
Journieä which now are easy found, And run through in a day ; Were formerly to compass hard, For bad was ev'ry way. Yet time and patience led folks on A s ancient proverbs say; And perseverance prov'd this truth, " The will still finds the way." The extreme difficulty of getting on at such an inclement season of the year, caused Milward de Rostendale and his party to be a long time on the road. It was a month before they reached tbe end of their journey. When they arrived at the city of the royal re¬ sidence, they found the nobility and the clergy involved in disputes with the pope's legate, and all ranks ready for revolt and rebellion ; for the weak king subjected himself with such mean ti¬ midity to the encroachments and tyranny of the see of Rome, that he had lost his due respect and consequence with his people. Complaints were daily made : promises were always ready to meet
260
remonstrances, and when the turmoil of distur¬ bance sunk into calm, the promises never were fulfilled. Nevertheless, though all thought they had a right to seek redress of grievances, all had felt the horror of the attempt vvhich had been matle em the life of the king. Demands for re¬ dress, made openly, and as subjects, and despe¬ rate attempts of lawless banditti to destroy the head of the state w ere, with proper ducrimination, distinguished ; and when Milward de Rostendale w as introduced, and laid the affair, which he had been deputed to represent, before the king in council, he was received with that honourable notice which the promptitude of his loyalty mei ite d . There did not appear a doubt that the prison¬ er* with the tvvo barons were concerned in the attempt which had been made to kill Henry ; and ¡t appeared probable that the gang had their haunts somewhere on the coast of Devon. For that reason full powers were sent to Richard de ï->t. Evremond anel Henry de Nartonville to act under the king's commission in the eliseovery and punishment of the offenders. Milward de Rostendale, and those hy whom he vwb accompanied, leniamoci man) weeks, at \Vcî4- тлыег, and thev held frequent conferences with tîıe great men of the nation on the mode of
261
procedure to be adopted; and tliey were every where welcome guests; and were every where entertained with all the marks of respect which their attachment to Henry, and the journey they had undertaken for his service deserved. When they left the court, the king, who among all his follies, was ever liberal to those who served him, gave such gifts to all as befitted a monarch toward those who had proved their attachment to his person, and their lojalt/ to his crown. They departed satisfied with their reception, and gratified that their conduct had been so highly approved and extolled. The >ear began to put on a softer aspect as they journeyed back ; and when they once more gained the castle of St. Evremond, the lovely spring was smiling in revived verdure. They had been most anxiously expected, and were greeted with such a cordial welcome, that they deemed the difiiculties they had encountered to he over¬ paid ; and the fiattering commendations that were bestowed on them, seemed, even to themselves, to exceed what they had earned. St Evremond urged them to remain, saying that Roger Yalionces suffered greatly from his wound, and that those about him did not think that he had many dav* to live. \t that moment when all earthly hope vanghelii, and all his views
262
are on another world, it is not improbable that he may seek consolation from a priest, and make con fession that he may be absolved. The prisoner daily became worse without shew¬ ing any sign of repentance, or expressing any wish for absolution. Winstone sometimes spoke to him, but he never received an answer. One day he thought he would be round with him, and he said if Go to, Roger, İt will be well for thee if thou die in this chamber : if thou do not, thy death may not be so quiet. There are persons in this castle from the king. All is known, and thou wilt be made a public spectacle. Thou hadst best confess. Silence will not save thy comrades; and we have thee safe." " What sayest thou ? Per¬ sons here from the king ! What is that to me ? The king and I are nothing to each other/' " True ; and if thou couldest have had thy will, the king by this time had been nothing to any one: but truth will out at last; and by hook or by crook wickednebs is always caught in the long run. Yet, what betidcth thee is no busines^ of mine. Take thine own course, Die like a dog, an thou wilt." He did not await another answer, but left his prisoner to ruminate on vvhat he had said. The next time he went to him, he found him much changed. He breathed hai d χ his eyes were heavy ; and hi* lip quivered. Η » said quietly to
263
Winstone, " My good porter, what was it thou didst say unto me yesternight Γ " 1 told thee/ re¬ plied Winstone, " that here were persons from the king : and I advised thee to speak thy mind in truth, that thou mayest go off snugly, for í fear me thou wdlt not last long. Thou hadst best listen to me. Thou hast no time to lose. Here, eat what I have brought thee, and let confession help thy digestion." " Good man/ saiel Roger, " thou art somewhat rough with me." tr When wast thou otlier than rough with any one?" asked Winstone, " but all that is past and over. Thy roughness shall never again do injury : but thou mayest repair the injury thou hast done already, by speaking up like a man. Yet, as 1 said to thee once before, that is no business of mine. Thou knowest vvhat thou hast to teU; thou know¬ est what thou hast to settle. If thou canst make up thy account alone, why so—if not, it were fit thou shouldest get one to help thee." During the time that Winstone held this discourse, which was, as Roger had observed, somewhat rough, he had perceived that the more he said, the more the listener's countenance changed, and that, hael in¬ duced him to say so much. When he stopped, Roger said, (i If I thought that there were any good in those said priests, who hover round the couches of dying men, I would have one." ' f That
264
as thou takest it," said Winstone. fí There are many such things to be had, I suppose?" u Aye, aye, plenty. Shouldest thou not he glad to do a little good ere thou die Γ "Yea," replied Roger. t£ Then ere thou see a priest, who will settle thy matters for thee on the other side of the grave, make reparation to the man whom thou didst at¬ tack, by telling thy tale to hini." u What, to the king !" " Thou hadst a hand in that, then ?" ob¬ served Winstone, ·"' That is no busine.-s of thine/' said Roger, f ' but say. dost thou mean the king ?" "No, I mean the baron do St. Evremond, in whose castle thou art confined.'' " Let him come to me," said Roger, " for I cannot go to bini.* 1 ' Winstone made report of vvhat Roger had said, and St, Evremond immediately went to the prison chamber of the dying Roger Yalionces. He was accompanied by Milward de T 'Stendale. ίζ Why art thou not alone ?" said the prisoner to St. Evremond, when he saw Milward de Rostendale follow him. u Good man/' he said, i( 1 come at thy request, to hear what thou canst say, which may be easing to thy mind to к peak. The man) acts of rapine, and of death, in which thou hast been concerned, never can be recalled, but thy confession may prevent the continuance of their efiects. This friend, by whom 1 am accompanied, hath t poken vvith the king, when îhou hast greatl)
265
wronged. To repair as far as may be in thy power, the injury which thou hast done to him and to society, it is meet he also should hear what thou wishest to discover.'* The natural tone of St. Evremond's voice was sweet, and his manner was gentle. He spoke mildly to his prisoner, who replied, " To tell thee all the long story, and the many actions of my life, would be a tedious task, and would do no good to thee, nor to the king. It may suffice to say in general, that all my days have been days of wickedness. In regard to thy parti¬ cular self, I and my companions bore thee no ill will. We live by plunder, and we would have rifled thee, and him with whom thou wast. In regard to our attempt upon the king, thou art not to learn that after such a deed as that, anarchy and confusion always follow; and such as I am, should find an ample field for depredation ; and mingled with the mass who would then have risen in riot, I and others would have robbed secure, and would have escaped in safety. It is by petty crimes that rogues live on, but it is by daring crimes they grow T to be great men. Thou knowest, better than I can tell thee, the many stories which our fathers have handed dovvn ; and thou knowest how many of them speak of men, who by atrocioib crimes, which success upheld, have risen to rank, to affluence, to honour. It ever was so. It ever VOL. I. n
266
will be so. How far success may tend to keep the mind serene I know not, for I am cut off in the midst of my days, and my wings have been dipt while I had full strength to *fly. I have no hope left on earth, and that hath called me to contem¬ plate on the hope I have beyond the earth : and now I am deprived of the power to extend my mis¬ chief, I am about to check the mischief that may be done by others. North of Devonshire is an island, called Lundy Island, known no doubt to thee. There is our resort. There we meet at stated seasons, and account to our great captain, named Morisco, for the plunder we have taken, and the deeds we have performed. We are all bound to him- We have one common stock on which we all have claims. Some range the seas, some scour the country, Morisco is a pirate. The ring we wear is the token of fellowship; and the parchments the bond by which we bind ourselves. The word boţind on one of them expresses our subjection to our captain, and the plain one is ready for liis orders, for he is an excellent clerk. The indentures at the edge correspond with those he keeps with him. We ever find a home in Lundy Island, and on May day, all who can, repair to it. There we make a feast, there we recount our acts and deeds since our last general meeting, and there we lay our plans. In the assassination
267
of the king I made one, I and six more, Morisco being at our head; but it was ill-timed. When we laid our plan, the king was out of favour with the people; but ere we reached him, he had made up matters by his promises, and we were not se¬ conded as we expected. I need not tell thee more. Thou knowest enough, make thy best of it. Give me thy hand in token of forgiveness, and let me have a priest to shrive me." St. Evremond took his hand, and said to him, " I forgive thee freely ; and I pledge to thee the word of a nobleman, a soldier, and a knight, that let what will betide, thy life shall be in safety." Afler St. Evremond had quitted the chamber, a conusor was sent to Roger Valionces. The holy man performed all the customary offices which tend to comfort the dying ; and Roger wa» greatly calmed and consoled by his pious exhor¬ tations and admonitions. He saw him daily, and declared to him, that he should die in peace, and that he wished fifty such men would go to Lundy Island, and reform his comrades, and bring them back to goodness. " For I assure thee, holy fa¬ ther/' said he, " that since I have conversed with thee, I have more joy on this my bed of sickness in my prison, than I had when I ranged at large.'" He survived the confession he had made to St.
Ná
2G8
Evremond ten days, and he breathed his last sigh while father Denis was in prayer beside him. St, Evremond assembled his domestics, and the father took occasion to represent to them the fatal tendency of crime ; and admonished them never to deviate from the path of rectitude. He expa¬ tiated on the calamitous end of Roger Valionces in the prime anel vigour of life, and on the more wretched enei of his companion, who had been slain in the very act of his guilt. St. Evremond caused him to be buried with more ostentation than was needful for such a cha¬ racter. He was borne to the grave by some of the domestics, and foilovved by all the others ; for he thought that such a scene woulel make a deep impression, .nul be, perhaps, more efficacious than the pious warnings of the holy Denis. The confession vvhich had been made by Roger Valionces concerning the assassination of the king, and the history he had given of the proceedings in Lundy Island, enabled St. Evremond and Mil- ward de Rostendale to ad »pt and to pursue mea¬ sures for the capture of Morisco, and the despe¬ rate banditti under his ride and management. St. Evremond invited Philip de Valonnes, and Brian de Rosenne to his castle, together with man) others of his more distant vassals. He гееопь
2G9
mended secrecy to them, that the knowledge of their intentions might not reach the island before themselves. He called upon them all to attend him as his vassals, attended by all their under vassals ; to whom the purpose of the meeting was not to be made known till the) were on the march. He sent persons in whom he could confide to hire vessels, and send them round to the noi thern coast of the county, to be ready to convey them to Lundy. When St. Evremond and his vassals had de¬ cided on what was deemed fitting for them to do, Milward de Rostendale, and those by whom he was accompanied set forward for the castle oí Nartonville. They were there also expected with anxiety; and they received nom Henry and the baroness the same cordial welcome, and the same high encomiums vvhich they had receiv ed from Ss Evremond and Matilda. Nartonville was of opinion, that St. Evremond had arranged the proceedings in the most ju¬ dicious manner, and he adopted the same plan. lie summoned his vassals to attend him, attended and arra) eel m full militar) preparation, and he found an able and active second in Milwaid de Rosteiidaîe, whose /eal, lovalt) and braver) were increased bv the high honours and distinguished N 3
270
attentions he haeí received while at Westminster, irom his royal master, and the nobility of his court. As the two barons nent on with their prepara¬ tions, messengers passeei freepiently between them that ever) thing might be done in concert. When St. Evremond's vassals were ready, they assembled at his castle. He reviewed them in a large plain; and he afterwards feasted them ac¬ cording to the rough ceremonies of ancient days. The minstrels raiseel the lofty song of heroes, and the high-spirited Matilda, fanned the fii с enkin¬ dled in their bosoms, and praised the deeds of the biave. They then marched on to the castle of Henry tie Nartonville, where the whole party was to 'iute, and jointly proceed to Lundy Island. Emma remembered the fame of her husband, and the valour of her son ; she felt the pride of their exploits, and dismissing her fears for the loss of her grandson, the last of his race, she ex¬ ulted in his noble demeanour, and in his valiant bearing : and the spark of glory vvhich still glowed 01 her bo-om, expanded, and spread to all around.
CHAPTER XXXL
Sow on, my friends, to where the darmg band v In naked congress deeds or outrage plan, And meditate on mifcthi«*f Where murder^ High аъ the hfe ufking^, some lav less hand Oil undertakts. Where euih direful purpose, Or pei formier, tends to dbturb the state bene we the tranors í and desti oy a c<ni£ More hurtful than a nebt of vipers '----------— 'Vim castle of Nartonville was not far from Bidde¬ port, to which place the two barons and their at- iendant.' repaired. Before their departure thev were informed of the whole business, and eaeh was instructed in what he was to perform. A ge* neral enthusiasm animated every breast. The) felt the honourable distinction of being selected to deliver that part of the countrv, from such a formidable and powerful body of depredators, ami the) were proudly sensible of the confidence winch was renosed in them. They were alive to the feelings of lov alty which considered the lift» ot fbe king as a sacred trust, and the redress and pis N 4-
272
mshment of his wrongs as the most glorious mo¬ tive for their exertions. Full of such sentiments, they separated into 4iiall divisions, and proceeded to the coa^t, where St. Evremond took upon himself the chief com¬ mand. They went on board the vessels, stationed according to orders, ready to receive them, and while Morisco and his myrmidons feasted in full security, they surrounded the island, and landed in various parts, forming an impenetrable cordon. Lawless as Morisco and his companions were, wdien considered as members of society, yet, as an associated body, they were well disciplined. They w r ere in a much greater degree of subjection than any other set of people in the country. The power of their captain was more uncontrouled than that of any man's on earth. When he said, ťí do so," it was done: but the freedom of fellow¬ ship, independant of command in matters of scr- vice, placed all on a footing, and between the captain and his rm-n, as friends, there was a licen¬ tious equality, and an unrestrained conviviality, no where permitted but among free-booters. On the first of Mav, the day of the general meeting, though the) indulged in riotous excess, and kept wassail, yet, a consciousness of their dis¬ orderly couises, and a conviction of the perpetual risk of their detection, kept them so much on the
273 alert, that they were never unprepared for de¬ fence ; their daggers were always in their girdle?, and there were many places where they had de¬ posited swords and battle axes, and other wea¬ pons, whieh had accumulated by being occasion¬ ally brought in a^ part of the spoil. They might чу far be haul to keep watch, that scouts strolled about the island, beyond the spot they occupied ; but Lundy Eland was so little re&orted to, that they were ïarely alarmed or interrupted: anel vvhen em the day of the descent of the barons and their vas»als, ahips were seen hovering round the coast, so little idea had they that any thing like an attack w аь intended by a regular party numerous enough to reejuue btich an eepiipage, that theii securit) vwb increased bv the magnitude of thtu «langer. It was about noon, and while the banditti, vvhich tonshtid of more than three hundred men, weit carousing under the gieen-vvootl shade, that Tho¬ mas Dultrerine, one of the bconts,, eame almost breathless, to tell the m, that as he stood Ьюктц out, the vessels they had all described, taking ad¬ vantage of high water, had approached the shore and poured forth a host of armed men, whe», a^ they landed, had formed in militar) order, .ακί marched, some to the right and some to the left. '* Hold thy peace/ said one of his companion^ > к
274
** the sun hath made thee a blinkard, and thou mistakest crows for soldiers." " Go forth, and blink in the sun thyself, antl see if thou canst re¬ turn them back to crows." " Come, come," said Morisco, " leave the flaggon, and let us away. If thy soldiers prove crows, Thomas, woe betide thee." Just as he finished his half angry threat, DunstanTarltone came running in,"Defend your¬ selves like men," said he, " yonder is landed from the ships which have been sailing round us, a mul¬ titude of armed men, I may say an army. They march in battle array." "Arm, arm ! prepare, pre¬ pare ! each do his best !" said Morisco, They were as desperate a set of men as ever united. They were brave, as far as indomable daring may he termed bravery. They exposed their persons to every danger, and their lives to every risk. They never yielded till so totally over come, that they could not strike another stroke. On the other hand, they were ferocious and cruel; and never gave quarter to a foe. They were, hovv¬ ever, seldom called on collectively, to an engage¬ ment with an opposed body. Perhaps not one of them had ever seen a battle. Those who have mere¬ ly been accustomed to rob in parties, know nothing of contention beyond seizing a man unexpectedly, or struggling with one unwilling to be rifled. Though they have bye words, and watch word*>
275
and signs and tokens among each other as thieves yet they had no military discipline, vvhich enabled them to act as a military body. Morisco, albeit he knew how to steer a vessel, and as a pirate to direct his crew, knew nothing of marshalling an army, or of commanding as a military chief. The men, however much in subjection to him as cap* tain of the gang, could not obey as soldiers, for tliey knew nothing of regular and gradual sub¬ ordination ; and though willing anel desirous to behave themselves Hke soldiers, they had no sol¬ dierly requisite but courage. They ran tumultuously to their stores of arms, and each took the weapon which hit his fancy at the moment. One took a lance ; one took a sword ; others took elaggers, though already pro¬ vided with them in their belts : and they made an irregular outset, without arranging their various duties. They were met by St. Evremond at the head of his vassals. The banditti had neither cuirass, nor helmet, nor shield. The troop.«.- from the ships were armed cap-a-pee. Nothing distinguished Morisco from his men but a heron's plume in his bonnet. Every soldier had orders to be careful not to hurt him, but to make him a prisoner. *' Let no one," said St. Evremond, " rush forward, but stand firm against the rogues *N 6
276
as they advance. Spare every life that may be, and take as many prisoners as ye can." Nartonville, who had sailed round and landed with his vassals on the other side of the island, gave the same orders. With the magnanimity of a true hero, he allowed himself through the day to be guided by the experience of Muward de Rostendale. According to what might be expected, the ban¬ ditti rushed on without order or consultation Each man with an uplifted weapon ran against the first with whom he came in contact; and being stimulated by an unyielding spirit, and con¬ stantly aiming to pierce through the œilets of the visor, the soldiers were compelled to use suedi rough means of self defence, that however spa¬ ringly they dealt their blows, the slaughter wa- great. As the number of vagabonds decreased. the ferocity of the survivors encreased, and thev rushed wildly on destruction. Though half their comrades were extended on the earth, d)ing or dead, they would not yield. Morisco, as if he preferred death to' life, was ever foremost, but t very stroke avoided him. At length, when the numbers were still more lessened, and the troops closed upon them by advancing, every one wa*- elisirmed, and every one was taken prisonei -
277
Their arms were fastened behind them, and thei* they were tied three together, and kept thus, under strict guard, till high water on the morrow. When they set forward in order to be put on board the vessels, the outward two of each linked three were held, and on each side of the five who thus walked abreast, the troops were regularly ranged, encreasing the number of each rank. St. Evremond, Philip de Valonnes, and Brian de Rosenne marched in the front; and Nartonville and Milward de Rostendale brought up the rear. All the vessels sailed round to the south of the island, and when all the prisoners were on board, they crossed over to Biddeport. The order that had been given to stand hrm, and emly act on the defensive, which was the .surest way to gain advantage over undisciplined bravos, hael been strictly obeyed; and though more than two hundred of the lawless ruffians had been slain, no one hael been personally attacked, but had perished by his ovvn desperate attempt to do mischief. The knights and other gentlemen vvho resided in the neighbourhood assembled on the coast to hail them as they landed, and the inhabitant« greeted them with joyous acclamations, and vied with eaeh other in doing honour and bestowing gifts on men who had delivered them from a da-
278
ring gang that had infested the county, and prowled far around, spoiling and plundering with inhuman cruelty for many years. Every house was opened for their reception, every table was spread for their entertainment. The prisoners were strictly guarded and rigo¬ rously watched, and were separately kept by threes. The same three who had marched toge¬ ther, were lodged together: and with the assis¬ tance of the inhabitants, who entered readily into the service, and were proud to bc so employed, they were held in security -. and the troops by divisions returned a few at a time to search those who had been left on the field, and to take posses¬ sion of whatever should be found deposited among their hoards. " Bring all over," said St. Evre¬ mond, " and ад all have contributed to the success, let all share in the spoil. It shall be duly divided to the satisfaction of every one." From among St. Evremond's vassals, Philip de Valonnes was deputed to accompany mem, and from among the vassals of Nartonville was depu¬ ted Milward de Rostendale. On every hand was found the silver ring of fellowship, in every belt a dagger. The garments were rough and coarse. Money was found in every pouch, and some few jewels. The rifling ended, they began to search about in quei- 1 of
279
plunder. They found several bowers, and many tents, all containing rude furniture of mere utility. They went on from tent to tent, searching all : and after having examined many, they came to one larger than the others, the entrance to which Was closely fastened. They burst it open, and when they entered, found a beautiful young wo¬ man absorbed in grief, and weeping bitterly. There was an instantaneous pause and hush. It was not of long continuance, for many voices cried aloud, " Whose shall she be ?" When she be¬ held herself surrounded she became pale as death. " Take her to the ships! She is a rare prize!" they continued. " Ye shall take her to the ships ; hhe is a rare prize ;" answered de Valonnes. ,ť Sir knight," he went on to say, turning to Mil- ward de Rostendale, " thou shalt guard her, and convey her to St. Evremond ; he shall decide upon her fate. We reed not desist from our pursuit ; thou and a few can conduct her to hi« presence. She will bc safer there than here." She was seized, though with gentleness, and put on board a vessel. The sails were spread, and they reached the other shore, before she had recovered from her astonishment. Those who attended her on her little voyage, carried her without delay to Richard de St. Ev¬ remond. The moment she approached him, she
280
fell at his feet, and clasping liis knees, she ex¬ claimed, " О mercy! mercy! mercy! Have mercy upon me!" "Arise! arise, fair damsel,' 1 said St. Evremond, " I hope none will ever sue in vain to me for mercy. I did not head my vas¬ sals, and sail to Lundy island to injure any one. I sought the traitor who raibcd his arm against the king. Morisco the pirate. I liave him novv in prison, w r ilh many of his lawless crew. I war not with thy gentle sex. Say! How can 1 or mine befriend thee. Speak !" " О ! let me not bland the gaze of such a numerous band. Let me not be mocked as I relate my tale of woe. Lead me, in pity lead me among women. They will respect ni} sex, and save me from insult and disgrace." " Lad}/' said St Evremond, " where I and Henry de Nartonville preside, and when our honourable vassals are around us, ever} one is safe. Thou wouldst not be intuited here ; but the tenderness of women is most soothing to <i woman, and thy request shall be accorded thee. Tell the mb cress of this mansion," said he to an attandant, " that I entrust our gentle captive U her keeping, to her generous care, but to hei .strict guard/' She was taken to another chambo and delivered to Githa de Briormesse. About an hour after, St. Evremond, accompa¬ nied by Nartonville, Brian de Kosenne, and Mil
281
ward de Rostendale entered the apartment of Githa, where they found her sorrowful charge still in tears. ( ' Thou wast found," said St. Evre¬ mond, " in, the largest tent. Art thou Moriscos wife?" "O no! О no!'* she answered, "not the wife of Morisco. O ! ye behold the veriest wretch that ever survived to tell her miserable tale. Wretched through grief, not guilt." She- then again burst into tears. íŕ Weep not," said St. Evremond, " haply we may redress thee. We came to rescue Devon, and the king from that base traitor Morisco, and his lawless comrades. Having so done, how may w T e succour thee?'' " Alas ! I shame to tell the horrors of the injury I have received. I am a Korman. The daugh¬ ter of Clóvis de Pierreporte, the wife of Eustace de Breux : and, О ! í have a child, an infaut non. He shall blush to own his mother. The name о Macrina shall be scorned in the Norman land. In happiness and peace í dwelt with my husband anil my father on the coast of Normandy. In joy 1 lived with them, and with my child : But the sun sets in darkness, and my joy is turned to grief. How shall 1 go on? One day, one luckless day tıs 1 stood fishing in the sea, a shallow vessel came close to shore, from which descended a man. He seized me roughly, took me on board, and sailed away. It is now six weeks ago, lie brought me
282
to the island where I have been found. He sailed away, and took me out again to sea. He brought me back to Lundy. We have been there a week. Daily his loose companions joined him, and on the day ye landed they held their annual feast. Retired within Morisco's tent, I heard the shouts, I heard the outcries of your meeting. I wished some dart might find its way to my retirement and pie. ^ my wretched heart, that so I might liave died unknovv n and all my sorrows might be hushed: but I survive. O! think not that I have been consenting to my shame. Henceforth I shall loath my life, and only seek redress be¬ yond the grave. Yet I cling to home, I cling to my young son. Take me to him if ye have mothers, if ye have wives and children ! Let me see my boy ! Let me tell my sorrows to my hus¬ band ! Let me pour my griefs into the bosom of my father î О hear me ! Listen to me ! Re¬ store me to my family 1" She turned away abash¬ ed. " Macrina, 1 ' said St. Evremond, " thy woeful tale, thus simply iole!, thy genuine sorrow, and thine honest indignation, warrant thy word* for truth. Soothe her, Gitivi de Brioimesse. ï leave her to thy care. When every thing per¬ taining to our expedition shall be finished, "he shall be conveyed with due respect to her so dear connexions." She again threw herself at the feet
283
of St. Evremond, but she could not speak. He raised her from the ground ; and when she had recovered from the extasy of her great joy, " We have little to bestow," she said, " which may re¬ pay such kindness ; but that little shall be thine : my father and my husband will requite the noble generosity with which thou hast treated their Macrina, and the prayers of my wretchedness shall for ever be poured forth to call for blessings on thee. Yet, scant as my ovvn means of reward may be, I can direct thy search to the stores ef lawless plunder. Behind the tent wherein I was concealed is a irge stone ; bushes, and turf, and pebbles are thrown over it for concealment. 1 saw them all removed, and 1 was led beneath it by Morisco« It covers the entrance to a large cham* ber dug in the earth, and propped up by trunks of trees. It is not very deep, but high enough for a man to stand erect within it. There every one deposits his contribution to the general stock, and from there all receive assistance wdien they need. in many places there are arms ready for use, but î cannot direct thee where to find them/' Those who had the charge of Macrina imme¬ diately returned to the island, with the informa¬ tion which had bees gained from her. The great stone behind Mcrisco's tent was removed. From the opening, they went down by a gradual descent
284
without steps into the store-room of depredation» By the help of torches they examined its whole extent. They did not find much beside money, but of that they found good store. There were some few golden girdles and buckles, and some gold chains ; a few rings, and many such things as travellers may be supposed to have about their persons : but stores of plate, either of gold or sil¬ ver, there were none. If ever such things came into their possession, it is probable they were con¬ verted into money, as being useless in their course of life, yet of too much value to be kept as lumber. A large collection of weapons was taken from the slain ; and ev ery thing of every descrip ion that was deemed worth carrying away, was brought to Biddeport. There it was all sorted, and every various kind of thing put by itself. The money was all told : and then St. Evremond eliv ideei it all into hits, and distributed it in such equitable pro¬ portions that all were batisfìed. Before their departure, Macrina was conveyed to Normandy in one of the vessels, on board of which sailed Githa de Brioimesse, vvith several female attendants. Some of the inhabitants of Biddeport accompanied them; and Philip de Valonnes, and Milward de Kostendaie were also of the escort. She was delivered to the aged (lovis tie Pierreporte, and her ousband Eustace
285
de Breux in a state of agony nearly approaching phrenzy. " O! I have a tale to tell," she cried. '* О ! I liave a tale to tell !" but she could not teH her tale. It may be because she could not again recount her injuries', in the presence of those wdio had already heard them. She was left by the party, who had undertaken to restore her to her friends, and the vessel returned to England. As every gentleman had in his castle, places of k trengt h always used as prisons, the prisoners were divided into greater and lesser companies, md each, according to the si/.c of his castle, and the establishment of his ЬешьеЬок!, was entrusted with a proportionate number of captives. Morisco was consigned to the custody of Nartonville. The affair thus terminated, they marched from Biddeport amid the shouts, of the people. Those of most consequence among the inhabitants, ac- t ompanied fhem to their first halting place, and the others went w ith them to the extremity of the tovvn. They left Biddeport in one large body, but •s tls 1 roads tliv erged,each vvith his attendants and prisoners returned to his own home. When they reached Nartonv 'die's castle, all the pnsoneib who had not filed oft" to their different destinations, were assembled in the outer court. ä< Blow the horn, Altrim," said Nartonville, "and -ound the general call." At the sound all the do-
286
mesties appeared in the court. u Behold/' said Nartonville, "I and my friends are here returned triumphant. We have taken the pirate Morisco, and many of his c* n ew ; many more have been de¬ stroyed. Even on the day of their great feast, did we take them in the midst of their carousal. To every one who contributed to their destruc¬ tion a part of the spoils which they had treasured up has been awarded. Come forward, Tos¬ ton, thou faithful hind, who didst risk thy own life, to revenge thee on the assassin who had at¬ tempted mine. The tatter thou didst tear from the robe of Gaston de Prestone, first led to the discovery of the wicked association, which con¬ gregated in Lundy Island, And do thou advance f oo. Oelo. Thy observation of the ring upon the iiand of Walter de Clovinne, made sure the fact, which Gaston's ring had only made suspicious. To v ou two we may ascribe assistance in the enterprize therefore hat share, which in the division of what was found within the chamber beneath Morisco's rent, hath been awarded me shall be divided be¬ tween v ou t w am Farther, I enfranchise \ ou both . and vour emancipation shall be made secure bv fornir·, i will allot to each a hide of land, and in r hese purees ve will find wherewith to spoeti the plough." So saving, he gav с to eaeh a bag,contain¬ ing half the sum St Evremond had assigned to him,
287 и О ! rare !" said Odo, shaking his head, and fingľmg his bells, " if my pate lose its merry chime, my heart shall be gay forever; and thou, Toston, mayest make a dame of little Bridget." forton said to his generous lord, " Thanks ! thanks ! and ten tinier thanks again. The attach¬ ment of the lowly hind will not be lessened in the franklin." " I do not think it will," «aid Norton ville. '* The»e Morisco, ihou whose daring а ч гл γ» as raiseel to kill the kmg, thou art fallen into th ft power of him whom thou wouldest have shun Ii a lonelv ch imhei thou shalt be kept confined until thy ¡sovcıeıgn'ö pleasure ihall be known. No one shaH с immune with thee. Take from h's < Lip," he "-'did to Altrim, *' his heron's plume. No proud di tinction henceforth must be his. All Ьь pre-eminence, İs p^e-eminence in crime. Bear him to the chamber over that wherein thou has put Walter" v ' A- 1 despised thee wben I -oas at lir^e," baid Monaco. *'^o I '-corn thee ικ w." О V w ay w Sii bim," ^idd Nai touville. The cord which bi unti hım to his twe» comrades wa& w stanth loo4^ioei, dnd \hrrn, accompanied bv чипе of iht -.e vh«» had guarded him fiom Bidde poit, cois t ved lum to Ьь prison room, \^ none of the pi ï*- oners were individuali ν know η, thev w π considered л» t quaK m evil, and
288
as such confined in various chambers of the castle without preference. A guard was set to keep them constantly secure. The watch was regulari} changed, and some were on duty night and day. When the business which was deemed of most importance was dispatched, Nartonville laid aside his military character, and became the geiieroms host. He feasted every one in his hall. " Ma¬ dam," said he to the baroness, as he introduced his followers, *' all have done well ; all have acted like soldiers ; all have behaved like heroes. We return with full numbers/* " Where every one has done bib duty," said the courteous Emma, " none can be called the best. Ye are all wel¬ come. Ye all deserve my thanks ; and the thanks of your countrymen." u My holy father," then ^aid Nartonville to Anselm, who by his request had continued at the castle, " thou hast heard what ï have said ; thou also wilt biil ns welcome home/' " I have sometimes regretted," said An¬ selm, u that the holy life to which I have devoted myself prevents me from wearing a helmet and raising a lance in battle, for the noble ardour which animates the brave, warms me even in the cloister. Yet, though the votary of peace by vow, I had a iather who was a soldier, and a spark of his he¬ roism glows in my bosom; and I never tell my
289 beads, but some of them fall for those who stihe in the 1 field of war : and therefore cordially 1 say, welcome !" Many of the proceedings at Lundy Island were mentioned during the repast, and the story oí Macrína was recounted to the baroness. " Tales of warfare," she send, " alwa)s involve among their circumstances Sties of the sufferings of wo¬ men. The fate of Macrina brings to my recol¬ lection, a story 1 h.ve heard of the fate of a )oung maiden, named Claudina de Miertoneaux. She was the daughter of a French nobleman, and in the first crusade sho accompanied her father, among that vast multitude which followeel the standard of the сш*--.. Ye all know the mi-eric·» endured by thos-e zealous travellers. I need not expatiate on their want of food, of raiment, andoi tents as they traversed s.o many various countries and climates-. Ye know how many perished by the w ay. One of tliose who died on the road was Theobald de Miertoneaux. As Claudina watched bim in his sickness he said to her, ť weep not for me, Claudina. It İs true. I shall not fight for Palestine, it ь tuie 1 shall not behold the holy sepnHire; nor shall f é» ain a prec'ons holy relk to reward my »eai: hut í have opened vuele 1 the t,ate,s of heaven for my oul, and all my sins are expiated. Rejoice, therefore, in my certain vol. s о
290
bliss; and go thou on/ He expired and left Clau¬ dina among his followers, to pursue with them her holy pilgrimage. Though she left France accom¬ panied by none but Frenchmen, yet as they jour- nied many of other nations joined the cavalcade, which ever increased as they went on. A young Hungarian named Humbert, who had joined the train, became enamoured of Claudina, but she was so totally rapt in her devotion to the Holy land, that nothing he could say was capable of awaken¬ ing in her bosom a return of love« Maugre the sacred enthusiasm, which he saw had taken pos¬ session of her whole heart, and maugre the piety with which all who followed the standard of the cross professed to be influenced in all their actions, he seized her in the dead of night, and carried her beyond the reach of help. * Claudina,' he said, ( thou shalt be mine. Thou nevertheless shalt go to Palestine. Talk not of honour ; talk not of shame. All is wiped away hy the holy cause in which we are both engaged ; and heaven shall be ours hereafter, live how we may live here/ He detained her some time in tlie place whereto he had conveyed her, and then placing her behind him on a war-horse, and riding swiftly over the plains, he joined the more slowly marching troops who sped their dreary way on foot. She conti¬ nued her route ; she was with the troops at An-
291 tioch ; she accompanied them to the siege of Jeru¬ salem ; and she beheld, without repugnance, the horrid massacre of the infidels. She went with the pilgrims when they were satiated with blood, and knelt with them on the holy spot which they had fought to gain. She prostrated herself upon the stones of the holy sepulchre, and possessed herself of a minute fragment as a holy relic and a sacred jewel. Then seizing Humbert, who with much humility was kneeling at her side, she re¬ lated the story of her wrongs, and cried aloud, * О pity me! O! revenge the daughter of the noble Theobald de Miertoneaux !' The beauty of Claudina; the meekness with which she had pros¬ trated herself at the holy tomb ; the fervour with which she had prayed ; and the vehemence with which she called for vengeance ; had a powerful efiect on all who saw and heard her ; and a young French knight, wdio had known her father, struck Humbert to the ground ; and setting his foot on him, said, * we are here unarmed, we laid aside our weapons ere we approached this holy place, but I call on all around me to revenge Claudina, and to do her justice by slaying thee, when we resume tbem.' ' He shall die/ said every one. ' Be it so,' said Humbert. * Ye may deprive me of my earthly bliss, but the joys of heaven are mine, 1 gain them by dying at Jerusalem.' " o Ü
292
i: Ì cannot but lament/' said St. Evremond, '* that the dictates of honour and religion, do not operate in tlieir genuine purity, in the breasts of those who boast that they are gentlemen. Surely, that character is disgraced and forfeited by men, who though always ready to assert and to defend their own rights, so frequently forget the rights of others ; and injure all who fall into their power by every insult they can offer." '* It is/' said An¬ selm, ťí onc of the most inexplicable contradictions in the world. To defend his own rights ; to main¬ tain his own honour; and to protect his ovvn de¬ pendents, are indubitably the privileges of every gentleman ; but to insult another is the privilege of no man." " It is a melancholy reflection/' said the baroness, ťí that Christians, united as such, should almost beyond all others-, have forgotten the mu¬ tual privileges of mankind. The horrors of the holy wars are so great, that they appear to he un¬ deserving of the name assigned them. If all the histories be true, whicii have been handed down concerning the cruelties of the crusaders, the badge they wear ought to be torn from them ; and one of other import should be substituted." '* Daughter/' said Anselm, " the wars of vvhich thou speakest, are deemed holy, because of the holy motives which called the Chiistians to the held. Though we must rejoice vvith the troops,
293
who rejoiced greatly, and shout with the nation,«, that shouted when they attained the object oi' their enterprise; yet Christianity for ever must deplore the conduct of her sons ; but the badge they wear must not be torn from them. It is not only the badge of their cause, hut also the badge of their faith; and with that badge as a perpetual monitor, they will at last reclaim." The baroness bowed to the assertion of the abbot, and replied not. The next day the guests who had been enter¬ tained by Nartonville quitted his castle, and de¬ parted each for his own home, taking with* him the prisoners entrusted to his keeping.
о 3
CHAPTER XXXII. Hail, hail, sweet home ! there dwells true pleasure ; there The ties of love and kindred all combine To give delight !—Wherefore are there any Who heedless of the links by which each man, Either by blood or by connection, helps To form one great chain, too severely rude Tear ьоше away, and break the union Nature meant should be continuous? Ah ! Who can tell how many are thus riven ? Who can tell the pang of being thus dibjoin'd ? St. Evremond who was alive, not only to the noblest, but also to the tenderest affections of the human breast, approached his castle, his home, with joy and gladness. His heart bounded when he beheld the battlements, and when near enough to hear the hum of his household, he instinctively spurred his steed to hasten his arrival. He first of any was at the portal, he blew the bugle with impatient breath, and when the warder opened, *■ spread wide the gates," he said, "give entrance to my follovvers," Upon the wings of love he Hew to meet Matilda, who advanced to bid him wel¬ come. " My dear one !" said he, " St. Evre¬ mond/' said Matilda, '* I rejoice in thy return»
295
Dreary have seemed the hours since thy depar¬ ture." The glistening eye, which spoke more than the tongue uttered, beamed with pleasure, and the fond St. Evremond strained her with rapture to his bosom. " Greet our friends, Matilda. The pirate, the traitor Morisco is a captive, and his vile crew are overcome Î" With ali the stateline&s of mistress of the cas¬ tle, with all the dignity of baroness de St. Evre¬ mond she descended to the outer court, and re¬ ceived the followers of her lord with gratulations. They were all conducted into the great hall. *' As all have done their eluty to evince their loyalty," said Matilda, " all are welcome to this castle. AH must partake the hospitality of St. Evremond. All must share in the rejoicings which have been prepared to greet the baron and his honourable followers." St. Evremond had dispatched a messenger from Biddeport to announce the safety of himself and vassals; and Matilda had consequently expected him and them ; and she had occupied herself in getting ready for their reception every thing which might duly testify her pleasure in his return, and her approbation of the behaviour of those who had accompanied him. A sumptuous feast, and a grand parade of all the pomp which belonged to baronial greatness, о 4
29(7
were again displayed with magnificent ostentation : and every decoration whicli wealth could pur¬ chase, and female vanity couiel devise, was pro¬ fusely spread arouud; for the pomp of the feast of his hall was the pride of a feudal lord. The majestic chords of the harp sounded their fullest tones, for Matilda loved their harmonies. and the minstrels chaimted with fervour, for St. Evremond inspired the lay. Welcome, welcome, welcome home î The hail has been cheerless, The castle has been sad, For the master was far aw ay ; But lhe hall resounds with mirili, And the castle smiles in joy, For the master returns again. The early hour of the banquet vvhich Matilda prepared in her husband's hall, nearly six hundred vears ago, was while the hiui shone in full splen¬ dour, and darted his bright rays upon the board, where the plate, gaudily and lavishly interspersed among the loaded dishes, reileeted the noon-day beams, and doubled the brilliance of their own lustre. It was wdien sbe presided at the head of such a board, that a baroness of ancient days received the homage of all vvho sat around her. It was at the head of such a board, that Matilda was conspi¬ cuous for doing the honors of a hostess vvith dig
297
nity, with grace, with kindness, with attention. There she shone the brightest ornament of hei husband's castle'; the most dazzling gem vvhich sparkled in his hall. The occurrences at Lundy Island were again detailed, during the repast, and the story of Aia- crina was again related. ({ After the baroness de Nartonville had recounted to us the melancholy tale of the wrongs of Claudina, to which our Ude of the injuries of Macrina led the way," said de Va¬ lonnes, " I was about to tell another wretched one 1 concerning a relation of my mother ; but I was in¬ terrupted by the observations which led the con¬ versation into a new channel. The maiden, whose story I would then have told, was named Beatrix de Wartinne. Her father was among tliGse who went to Palestine with Richard Cœur de Liom When he sailed from England he took with Ыт, his lovely daughter Beatrix. They accompanied the monarch into Guienne, they embarked with him at Marseilles, and landed with him in Sicily ; vvhere the English and the French armies conti- nueel many months. The fatigues of the lois march from Guienne to the place of embarkation, antl the discomforts of the voyage so totally over¬ came the strength of Beatrix, that when Jatpielin, her father, went to the east, he was constrained to ieave her at Medina, in the care of a fcneiliau hd\ о 5
29В
the wife of Bruno de Corsenza, who had joined the Croisses, After the departure of the English army, Manfredi the brother of Bruno, persuaded hh sister-in-law to accompany him to Naples, where he had an estate, and she took with her Beatrix, her young charge. " The tleligbtfulness of the situation of Naples, the magnificence of the bay, the luxuriance of the clime, and the superabundant plenty of the coun¬ try, render Naples and its neighbourhood, the pleasantest abode in Italy. The pure air, the clear blue sky, and the charming scenery of if* fruitful plains restored Beatrix to perfect health and they prolonged their stay at the mansion of Manfredi, it was situated so very near to Naples, that they went almost daily thither. The beauty of the churches, and the pontifical pomp of all re¬ ligious ceremonies, and the frequency of proces- Mons, were perpetual allurements. The lovely Beatrix had not so often been seen without at¬ tracting the notice of those who beheld her, among others Peter de Medina had often observed her in the streets anel churches, and had often watched her home. He saw that the only persons vvho accompanied her were Manfredi and Va¬ lentina; andhe one night w л > laid them as thev were returning. As they passed the place vvhere he was concealed, he suddenly seized Beatrix and
299
fled with her in his arms. Manfredi instantly quitted Valentina and pursued his flight. Though Peter de Medina was a powerful man, the weight of the struggling Beatrix slackened his speed, and he was quickly overtaken, * I have a sword/ said Manfredi, ' so hast thou. Draw therefore, and defend thy life, or yield the damsel thou hast seized/ c I never yield/ said Peter de Medina, anel he drew his sword. They met furiously. Their first thrust wounded Manfredi, and dis¬ armed Peter, * Thou mayest keep my weapon/ saiel he, £ I shall retain the maiden, for thou canst not follow/ So saying he was again about to seize the trembling Beatrix, vvhen Manfredi as he lay extended on the ground, caught her robe, and drawing her tow arel him, pierced her bosom. * Death is better than dishonour/ saiel he, * thy father shall bless me for saving thee from shame, but he woulel сигле me if I suffered thee to be dis¬ graced. Thy unpolluted soul shall reach the bkies, and the name of tie Wartinne shall be ins &ullied/ * De Wartinne! art thou the daughter of Alicia de Medina, who wedded with an Eng¬ lish baron V * I am/ replied the expiring Beatrix, a'as! wretch that 1 am! what guilt have I com¬ mitted 1' saiel the astonished youth. * AHeia was -istorio my father. O! that my life could restore thee, sweet maid; gladi) w ould I lay it down; but o U
300
it cannot be! Yet will I make thee all the repa- ration in my power, I vvill renounce communi¬ cation with the world, and retire within the cloister, wliere I will pass my days in penitence, and in prayers for thy repose/ lie then sunk on hi·» knees beside her, * Forgiverne! О, forgivi 1 me ! Let me take thy hand in token of my pai¬ don/ Beatrix made a faint effort to give her hand, and closed her eves for ever. When he {»erceived that pulsation ceased, he started wild with grief, lie went back to Naples; and then nought again the scene of his iniquity attended by his domestics 1 hey bore the lifeless Beatrix, and the wounded Manfredi to the castle of Peter de Medina; <t id messengers were bent to bring the terrified \ alentina to behold their fate. A pompom fund al w a- decreed to Beatrix, and Peter de Medina fulfilled his vow, by entering л Cistercian monaster}. " When Jaqueliu de Wartinne returned froni Palestine and .sought his* ehild on the Sicilian îdıores, he heard the sad narration of her untimely death. lie forbore reproaches to the man who saved her honour and her fame, but he could not bless the hand which pierced her heart, ih returned to England sorrowful and sad, and in joyless, holitude- sunk beneath the cruel stroke." The fatal catastrophe of de Valomies' taie.
301
earned a long silence after he had concluded it, *' The tale thou hast related," said St. Evremond, *'justifies the comments vvhich I made on that related hy the baroness M the feast of Narton¬ ville ; and í must novv repeat the opinion w hich 1 then asserted, and .say again that forgetfulness of the claims, the rights, the privileges of others causes, the woes which desolate the earth, and bring di&tre&s on man. Hid we, ere we offer vio¬ lence, make the case our own, injury would nevei be committed. The horror whicli Peter de Me¬ dina felt vvhen he discovered that the insult against Beatrix vvould bring disgrace on his own family, would not have seized his heart had his victim been a stranger. Contrition had not driven him to a monastery; remorse vvould not have produced repentance." The honourable opinions of St. Evremond concerning justice, equi t ν , and honesty wert the innate feelings of an upright heart. Ran in those ferocious» times; and, much is it to Ik feared, not very common in our own. Let every manin the station which he fills bring Ьь beha¬ viour to the tcbt of St. Evremond's opinions, and how many will smite their breasts, unable to гаье their eyes from the rev iow. Matilda, whose aspiring ambition ever aimed at dominion, said *' w here then v ould the hero prove
302
his valour 1 where would the brave seek out the path of glory ť' " If the halcyon days of peace and goodwill were ours," said St. Evremond, " the valiant and the brave would find delight in kinder deeds of glory than those which stimulate them now ; but while malevolence prevails, and tyranny exerts his power, injuries will subsist, and we must defend ourselves against them: we must defend our country; we must defend our king. That is now true glory ι but no aggressive actions, however they may be upheld by power, can he glorious : therefore my position stands, and my opinion is confirmed/' " But the ardour of am¬ bition/' said Matilda, " cannot be suppressed within a generous breaí-i." u It is true, my best beloved," replied St. Evremond, u that no one loves to fall from the high summit where he may be placed, but if he strive to rise by shoving ano¬ ther from his round, he usurps dominion where he has no right to sway, and he gives way to a desire of increase wliich he has no right to possess. Against such all have a right to rise, all have a right to contend in opposition/' A frown knit the brow of Matilda, which being observed hy Brian de Rosenne, he turned the discourse from the subject in debate, and said to de Yalonnes, " the horse which in exchange for mine, I liad from thee, sir knight, when we tilted In honour of
303
the noble lady who now graces the upper seat among us, has done me much good service ; he bears me as he were conscious how I gained him." " And thine/ replied de Valonnes, " bears me with equal pride." The good qualities of the two beasts were then extolled, which not being at all interesting to Matilda, she withdrew with her maids. When she had retired from the table, the dis- posure of the prisoners was discussed. " Though the king has vested Henry de Nartonville and mc with powers to punish the offenders we have overcome," said St. Evremond, " yet we should be well pleased to know his royal pleasure on the matter. Our stay at Henry's castle was so short, that the deliberations there begun, led to no de¬ termination ; and 1 await a messenger who will bring dispatches by wliieh we shall be informed of the consultations which have taken place since our departure. Therefore let every one for a short space remain with me." While yet St. Evremond was speaking, the loud sounding bugle at the gate announced the importance of the arri¬ val : and Milward de R ostend ale quickly ap¬ peared in the hall vvith many followers. " We have travelled rapidly," he said to St, Evremond, " to liring thee word of our proceedings and re¬ solves. 1 and those who, once before accompa- 6
304
nied me to Westminster, are, if thou approvestj going to the king. The young baron is of opinion that the royal pleasure should be known, before* the powers with which j/e are entrusted be used in condemnation of the vanquished." " It was, sir knight, the subject of our discussion here, when thou madest the bugle sound. It seemeth also unto me that it is right his grace should be advi¬ sed with." " We purpose," said Milward, " to travel on through the day, and each night to rest us at one of the many convents which are яо thickly scattered on the way, that no day's jour¬ ney need fatigue us. On our arrival at West¬ minster, we shall instantly wait on our sovereign, and lay before him all the circumstances attending the capture of Morisco and his comrades. We also mean to see such noblemen as entertained us courteously when we w r ere there in winter. We shall then return in the same manner as we jour» ney hence, making thy castle the place of our first stay." " Make it also the place of your first stay now," said St. Evremond. " The road hi¬ ther from Nartonville's is a tedious one. To morrow ye and your horses will be fresh again. The arrival of new guests at the castle caused a renewal of hilarity. Matilda not only loved the gaiety of festivals, to which the gladsome heart of youth is ever prone, but she delighted in the
305
parade of the pomp which displayed her povves her btateliness, her wealth ; and drew around bei all the gallantry vvhich knighthood ever devotee! to the fair. Ancient castles werealwa)s prepared with that bountiful substantial provision wliich constituted ancient hospitality, and the board of an ancient baron was constantly supplied with an overcharged load of rude magnificence ; and the cup of fellow- ship ever passed gaily. The harp was dlvva)- ready, the sprightly air invited the dance, and the' stdemn song awakened valour while it praised the deeds and recounted the fame of heroes ; anil the tales of tradition or drew the tear, or taught the lessons of virtue. Milvva d de Rostendale and his train were en¬ tertained vvith such rough welco ie ; more cordial. though less refined than the polished ceremonie- of later times. Gratified by their reception, pleased with their cheer, they remained till the call of birds awakened them on the morrow. Then, each briskly mounting his steed, thev «e' forward gay in heart, and proceeded on theu embassy.
CHAPTER ХХХШ.
—------ —Careless cf cold or heat O'er hills and dales they plod their way, And thread the tangled forest dark ; For duty calls them on. Be it winter when the frost chills the wanderer, or summer* when he is scorched by the blazing sun, the traveller must endure the extreme of seasons, for the days, as they roll on, pursue their changes, and the year, beautiful in her variety, blossoms, ripens, and falls, nor stays at the rebuke of man. She heedeth not the plaint of the beggar when he crieth out, *' freeze not, thou bitter sky! for these tatters cannot shield my limbs from thy biting!" She listeth not the call of the noble when he sayeth, ť ' burn not^ for I would be cook" Milward de Rostendale had endured the sharp fang of the stern season, and he now set forward to expose himself to the hot rays which glow in the fierce season of the ardent summer. He was impelled by duty, and without repining he rode through the long hot day, and thankfully at night
307
partook of the scanty meal of the monastery, so different from the feast of the castle. After many days of expeditious and fatiguing riding, he and his companions reached West¬ minster, where they were receiveel by the king and his council with every mark of respect, and greeted with the kindest welcome. They also received the thanks of their sovereign for the testimonies of attachment and loyalty which they had evinced. They continued a long time at the court, and w T ere graciously treated during their stay not only by the king, but also by the nobles, who all entertained them in the same hospitable and sumptuous manner they had done in the winter. When they departed for Devonshire they were presented with many rich gifts, and charged with others for tlie tvvo barons and their vassals, who had, in a manner which merited the highest approbation, assisted in delivering the country from a desperate banditti, and in taking the traitor vvho had raised his arm against his sovereign. All vvho had been taken at Lundy Island were or¬ dered tobe executed as vagabonds and robbers; antl Morisco, their captain was ordered back to the island to be executed in the place where he had established the fast-holds of his iniepiitous gang*.
308
They had found Henry, who through the whole of his reign may be said to have been in perpetual warfare vvith his subjects, involved in dispute* vvith the nobles, and in quarrels with the citizens of London, They, more than all others, were ever oppressed by the tyranny of that capricious and irascible monarch, who by every unjust mc- thod which avarice could devise to extort money, fined and taxed them to supply the prodigality with which he profusely lavished his treasures on his favourites. The murmurs of the people in gene¬ ral were loud, and vvhen Milward and his train left Westminster, the faithless Henry was still con¬ tending, and still deceiving those whom he had seduced to confide in his promises. It was now that zeal for the holy wars began to revive, Lewis the ninth of France had, during the paroxysm of a dangerous illness, made a solemn vow, in the presence of his whole court, to take the cross if he recovered. His recovery was by many ascribed to his holy vow. Be that as it may; he received the orifiamb and the staff from the pope's legate, and began his preparations for his holy cxpeditioii. The enthusiasm spread to England. Henry took the cross from the hands of the legate here, and vowed togo again«! the infidels in Palestine. Ilis example was fol¬ lowed vvith fervour by a great number oí' noble*, knights, and esquires, and a prodigious multitude
309 of persons of inferior ranks, and people of the lower classes. But the plea of the crusade was a fraudulent pretext to raise money, and I > vow the profane mockery of a faithless hypocrite. Those who had taken the cross vvith the king prepared themselves with alacrity for the holy vosage; and wdien they perceived that he made uo preparations, they offered to go without him. This anient haste, though they saw Ыь unwilling- ness, and unreadiness, angered Henry greatly : and being mortified and ashamed that their speed should be a reproach to his tardiness, he applied to the pope to forbid his subjecb to depart till he was- read) to head them. The pontifi', unwilling to disoblige a prince who allowed him to fleece hih subjects and drain his country, immediately forwarded the prohibition. Henry also applied to the pope to absolve him from his vow; with whicii request he aho com¬ plied. By which he gave а proof to the world of the ungodliness of his ovvn heart, and con¬ vinced every body of the foil) of trusting to the faith of vows, since by him vvho sided himself »n.s iioiiXESs, their sacreihuss was not acknow¬ ledged, l'he English were thus preveniteci from aiding the piou* enterprize, and their zeal and their valour were checked when both were highly
310
enkindled. Few ventured to disobey. The earl of Salisbury however, notwithstanding the ex¬ communication by vvhich the mandate was accom panied vvith about two hundred English knights joined the croisses*, and sailed with Lewis for Cyprus. Among that number was the young baron Henry de Nartonville- Fired hy the same cnthu- feiastic zeal which hael animated his grandfather, and leel him to the field with Cceur de Lion, he quitted his castle, and the bright hopes of his in¬ heritance, and left the aged Emma a third time to lament the spirit and valour of her family. None who remained at home could be stigma¬ tized with cowardice, fc the command of the pope was a powerful curb; and the spirit of en¬ terprize, and the fervour of zeal were reined in by a hand not easily ior often resisted. St. Ev¬ remond therefore, without reproach, continued in his castle with Matilda. The peace and com¬ fort of his home, was however much disturbed by the painful duty imposed on him concerning the prisoners taken at Lundy Island ; and the kinsfs orders, which were sent round to all those who had captives in charge, for a while troubled the neighbourhood as much as if the depredators had still been at large.
Vol.1, p. 156,
311
The melancholy fate of so many daring offen¬ ders, bound by such strict bonds of union, sur¬ prised at the moment of their appointed braggart meeting, overpowered, seized, dragged to punish¬ ment, and publicly forfeiting their lives to the so¬ ciety they had injured, was a dreadful warning, and a terrible example, and spread an universal idoom around. Amid the horror of such severe chastisement, the tvvo barons willing to save life where mercy could be shewn, spared Walter de Clovinne, be¬ cause he could not be named among those who had been taken at Lundy Island. He was, hovv¬ ever, led under guard, to behold the sad fate of his companions. The agony he endured at such a spectacle was so ex' mie, that he almost died when he saw them expire : and the sentiments he expressed when he was again consigned to his prison, induced Nartonville, in order to remove him from a country wiiere no one ever could con¬ fide in him, to admit him into his squadron, and to carry him to the east. Morisco was conveyed to the seat of his outra- ueous and lawless raie, vvith rude and martial ce¬ remony. A trumpet was sounded when he entered Biddeport, and a vast concourse of pt opie flocked So see him embark. When the boats reached the Hand, he was landed with an armed escort, and immediately led to his tent, where he was executed
312 pursuant to the sentence vvhich had been pro- nounced against him. When he approached his old haunts, he said, i( I never returned to thi* place unconscious that I ran the risk of detection, and although I was taken, vvhen I least expected to be surprised, yet I met a fate, I knew was al¬ ways to be apprehended. The solitude in wliich I have been kept, and the length of time which elapsed ere the decision on my destiny was known, have made my own breast my monitor, and I ap¬ preciate duly the brink on whieh I stand. Ay je have shewn jour loyaltj to your king, by coming aíf.iinsí me and my companions, and b) bringing u^ iojuitite, ^o novv bhow ими hnahy to humanít) , anel alleviate my sufferings h\ jour prajer*." The unexpected calm resignation of the ferocious leader of banditti, so subdued the rage of those who -tood around, that as he passed from life to death, every one exclaimed, H May heaven have mercv on hi c souk"
í mi er v'- L» s
ÏO OO f FU*l ľi IN ΓΙ fi, sJT, johnV squa ri ,
