Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Santa-Maria: or, The mysterious pregnancy: a romance
SA NT A-M ARI Α.
CHAPTER j.,' They fay miracles are paft ;— I have heard, but not believe, the fp*rits o'th* dead May walk again. Shakiplah.
jij OW*4ø return to the Lord Rodolph, whom we have quitted for a fliort month, ?? fo ï*** ' * J' !
* · i
It was on afine mornmg, in the «uddle of ^anu^ry,- wtøtt tbe piimt pàroeeede4 Vol· III. ? β ' > % <mward,
( 2 ) onward, with a compofed and undaunted humour, to take poíleílion of his caille, which was not quite two leagues from Bell'ito. As for Drofi, he was punctually in the ^ fame difpofition as hism after—experienc¬ ing, for his part, no terror from what he had heard, and thinking, in fact, of no greater pleafure than that which Ihould hereafter arife -from the comforts and in¬ dulgence of good eating, and plentiful drinking. But as for Carlo, he thought and felt otherwife :—in the firft place, he did not well digeft the idea of leaving the Countefs, and particularly Sylvia, be¬ hind; not, however, entertaining the leaft furmife (for his heart was too well cafed againft fuch mean fufpicions) that Eranco- lhTe could extinguiih a flame which had a , * t i - f î; been
( ? ) been fo long and ftably burning;—but that in Sylvia he loft a companion, and one, not only ftrongly attached to his per¬ fon, but alfo to his opinion, counfel, and principles.—In the next place ------ he now conceived, that they were on the point of inheriting an ancient caftle, where no¬ thing but dreary-chambers and fubterra- neous caverns were to be met with— and hearing all the ftrange marvellous ftories that had been related by Franco- liffe, he had formed another idea—that its towers were 'tottering—that its old walls bent beneath the iron hand .of Time —that the buttreffes were mouldering or rotten—that the ramparts were only the midnight rendezvous of ghofts and fpi¬ rits—that murdered beings held familiar converfe on the platform, and to each other told—and faid—as how, and how— ? 2 and
( 6 ) ful pitch of gloomy horror, with doleful hiilories of dreams, ghofts, magic, and for- cery.—Particularly—as Carlos rode along, he confoled his uncle, with folemnly af- furing him, tliat when death fliould ter¬ minate his mortal exiftence, his fpirit fliould ever prove favourable to him—his beloved Sylvia—and the good Count and Countefs of Rodolph—and, in ihort, with the whole human fpecies—" In no ihape whatever (concluded poor Carlo) will I opprefs or harrafs the quick, guiltlefs or not—but flutter harmlefsly through the regions of air, and contentedly await the laft awful and decifive day—the day, my dear uncle, when-----." " Hold your damned nonfenfe (replied Drofi, interrupting Carlo in the very marrow of his obfervations)—you—you flutter.
( 7 ) flutter harmlefsly through the regions of air ?—you be ------. Marry, what mean you by the regions of air ?—What !—would you be be flying about on an old houfe- worn, dunghill-decayed, ftinking broom- ftick, like that witch, your mother? Why, thou wilt fpeed to thy grand-fire, the devil, as foon as the breath is out of thy body— aye—and all thofe, 1 hope, that are in any wife near akin unto thee—thou dying em¬ ber of witchcraft and fuperftition ! old Beel¬ zebub, with his brimftone-tinted beard, will hold thee faft, my boy—He won't mind your plunging and whining, your toffing and kicking, no more than he has done your mother's. Though, by mý truth, Ί have heard ihe could plunge and tofs, even with the very beft of us here— No, no, he will keep thee where you ought to be—in found infernal limbo, and ? 4 all
( 8 ) all thofe, I hope, likewife, who ever be¬ longed to you—aye, or could ihake a kindred little finger with thee—or that howling witch, my moft damnably-begot¬ ten fifter l"— " Lord have mercy, uncle (replied Car¬ lo, turning up the whites of his eyesj upon your poor foul, as 1 fee that you expect none—for, if roy poor mother and myfelf are io be damned, as you fay, you alfo, according to your own impious willies, muft certainly be one of the number." €t Hold your tongue, you forry cur (re¬ torted Drofi) or I'll crack your knave's fconce— But—hemi^-talkof the devil,they fay, and there's fomething belonging to his dæmonihip that is fure to appear— LfOofc yonder—fee ! he has already hoift ? ed
f 9 ) ed up his black flag, to welcome your approach !"— Here—a black banner was difcovered, fure enough, waving at the top of one of the fouth turrets. At this time, they had juft begun to afcend the firft adivi ty that led to the caftle. The fun had ihone fo full upon their faces, till they had turn¬ ed off from the main road which directly led to Martorana, into a fide plain, that winded off towards the fortrefs, that none of them could perceive this ill-boding pre¬ fage of their reception till now. This was a difcovery that gave full latitude to the fupernatural credence of Carlo : and he was on the point of reca¬ pitulating and. commenting on what Francoliffe had related concerning the ? 5 dancing
( '? -) dancing of thefe fame black banners from one turret ro another, like black-birds hopping from one branch to its neigh¬ bour, and other moft marvellous conceits, when he was interrupted, to his great dif¬ appointment, by Lord Rodolph, who thus addreffed him on the occafion, in an ac¬ cent that carried with it infinite folem¬ nity, and in an air of command, that de¬ noted implicit obedience to what he was about to enjoin: " Carlo, if you expect ftill to enjoy my friendihip or confidence, or to find a quiet and comfortable afylum in my hereditary Caftle; qr> to receive á dower from me with Sylvia in marriage,'you muft alfo abandon thefe bafe, idle, and unmanly fears, the moment you put footftep into yonder fortrefs.—By farther indulging '. ; them*
( " ·) them, they may not only ultimately affect your own reafon, but the fenfes alfo of my brave and moft ftaunch followers i —for tbe ignorant, tho' ever fo naturally coura¬ geous in the field, may in the clofet in¬ cline and yield themfelves to terrors, (thougli born ofthe mereft trifles) if they once imbibe a marvellous creed like your's.— : By a continuance, therefore, of thefe your idle difcourfes and comments, upon fupernatural caufes and events, they will in time imbibe your, ways of thinking, and at length, turn out difaffect- ed to mc and to my fervice—they will all abandon my caftle, left they fliould be carried off by fpirits, ighofts, and devils—and leave me to regret that I have i ι. men of fuch tried proof and in¬ tegrity, whofe places I cannot probably afterwards fupply—but tu >their>! ftead, ? 6 perhaps,
( ία ) perhaps, get a horde of intriguers about me, who may plot and contrive againft mc and mine, and endeavour at laft to turn me out of mine own hive.—Such things as fupernatural agencies and imma¬ terial beings have now long gone by-5 and if there is any thing extraordinary oc- cun, when we gain our feating in the caftle, yield rather to ά fecret fear, then by betraying an open one, difturb the minds of thofe, who though inwardly poliihed by the fmooth workmanfhip of virtue, are roughly fet in the cafe of ignorance. —The black banners may be raifed as eafily as tapers could be extinguiftied— but I well know, however, the fecret fprings, caufes, and channels of thefe fuppofed phænomena, and fliall, with our joint activity and induftry, be foon ena¬ bled, to difco.verjihe cunning intriguers r " concerned
( '3 ) concerned therein.—whom, when detect¬ ed, I will deliver to all the torments of the Inquifition;—the torture and the flames fliall be their inevitable and rao'ft horrible doom.— " Thus far, Carlo, have I fpoken to you friendly and mildly—ftill continue, there¬ fore, to keep me fo by your prudence and obedience.—But, on the contrary, youth, if you ever attempt to run wide from what I have admoniihed, either by en¬ deavouring to fow or nurture the feeds of terror and fuperftition in the minds of our men at arms—then, indeed, I will render your future exiftence as miferable as flavery, and the moi\ hideous mildew¬ ed dungeon, can make it.—The black cell —mark me well, Carlo—the black cell - (that
f ? ) (that 1? of old—as the records of mt caftle tell us—the prifon houfe of the an¬ cient foes of the Lords Rinaldo) and whofe ftair-cafe is ???? with age, and fo dark al noon day—it was neceffary, as they &y, a century ago, to have lighted torches to iad tibe way upward— fach alfo (concluded Rodolph) m the lodg¬ ing I have in my mind's eye for you, boy, in cafe of an obftinate difobedience to my wi&es and commands/' * I recollect ?? Iota (obferved Drofi) of hearing, alio, fome horrible adven¬ tures relating to this black coom, wkh the black flak-cafe ^ and likewife, of the old lords Rinaldo making their prifoner« eat black bread, and drink black water ; and have black men, dreffed up like black devils, to ferve up thefe their de¬ licate black dilhes."
( »5 ) <* My good Dtofi (replied Rodolph) let us drop thefe idk fubjects, of devils and fpirits—alike, ferioufly or gtoosmly inclin¬ ed, they are not worfty to felt frcmr a foldier's tongue ; and as for your nephew yonder, he muft henceforward act up ?И? to the dignity of a ma»—he has been led, k m tme, to talk and think of thefe unna¬ tural romances, from early habit and edu¬ cation.—Perfeveraitee» however, and a Httle refolution, will ihortly conquer all foch ridiculous propenfities—from what (fome four years ago) that had come be¬ fore my own obfervation, and from what I have been fince told by the chevalier d'Arcos, there is no doubt, but what fome invifible, though mortal agent, is in or about the caftle—their artful intrigues at firft may lead a weak mind to fuppofe, that they proceed from fome preterna- turai
( i6 ) tuml phænomena; but when we draw •fide the thin—unfubftantial veil of their artifices, we kugfa and ridicule thofe very ν trifles, wbich but an hour or fo before kad given us fuch roil terrort." Poor Carlo had liftened with atten¬ tion, though not, perhaps, with much con¬ viction to tbe philofophical difeourfe of Lord Rodolph ; at tbe feme time alfo, he gave s dofe ear to the terrible denuncia¬ tion of the black dungeon, if he ever at tempted to converfe upon the only fami* ??? fubject be was a fcientific mafter of. —This part he treafured up in his me¬ mory with fear and horror—The lad (as wc tove obferved before) was far—far from being a coward—he was a fuper¬ ftitîous coward indeed ; but not an atom of it fo wben oppofed to objects mate¬ rial.
( *7 ì rial. He was, therefore, determined tø fummon all bis worldly courage, to bear him through this prefent critical moa ia- aufpicious juncture of his life—ftifl beep¬ ing in his thoughts tbe prophecy «r his mother—" That he ihould fee and bear " ftrange things about his twenty-third " year; * ?4 that d th« ftimrM Håe " place in a ftrange caftk."~One part of the p r ophecy had already been fulfilled, for be had heard ftrange things indeed— aad what appeared to him ?% woift, he oow reduced it to a certainty that ? fhould ihortly >r them alfo.
CHAP.
( 1» ) CHAP If. ??· taftk hMh * pledant feat ; the air Nimbly and Areetly rccomroencU irlcif Unto oer gentle fenfes. lTlm»ke the flatue move, indeed» defcend, Aad taàe you by âe hand, but then you'll thmk, Wkkblpcotcftagaiaû, lamaÄfted % wicked po wen. SflAUrSAlI. X\oTWiTH8TANOiMG all thofe fecret four» that Carlo had imbibed, and was ftrongly nouriihing more aid more in his bofom; ftill he could not refrain from launching forth into eulogiums on the majeftic and venerable ftructure that he faw juft before him—proudly fituate, as it was, on the folid rock, and fided on the eaft and weft by extenfive forefts; whilft the
( t 9 ) the river Savuts, with which it was flank¬ ed (but whkh was at prefent concealed from his fight) loudly bellowed in bU ears, denoting the rapid force its bodf contained ; ma again, the fedi profpect of the mafly gate which fronted hini, with its fouthern afpea, difplayed tbe general ftrength that every where coated this hoge and formidable caftle. Wben the cavalcade approached tbe great gate, it was unclofcd by Gabor, who convoyed tbe ponderous key which bad formerly been reftored and made life of by the good Chevalier d'Arcos, on a former occafion, about four years ago. As it was flowly and gradually .opened, however, with a loud and grating clafh from its folid iron hinges, Drofi, in his ufual dry fignificant manner, obferved to Rodolph«
( *? ) ** Do you mark, my lord—Notice the " knocker, and fee that grim lion's head ** over it—that was not there when we fr left it laft —No, by St Marco was it ! " (continued Drofi) fome one hereabout " has had fome leifure on their hands— ° aye, and ingenuity too in their heads, to " have made th» addition to the main ·« portal." Carlo on hearing «tâ obferving this» forgot the Xevére injunctions that bad been laid on his curiofity, and was going to launch forth into bis old habitual lo¬ quacious fuperftitîous ftile, when Drofi checked him, by fuddeniy clapping his band over his mouth, *md facetióufly whifpered thefe magic words in his ear :
" Beware,
t 21 ) <ζ Beware, nephew, ot the infernal " black chamber." Rodolph looked ftedfaftly at tbe lion's head, and after furveying it with much attention, he fomewhat ferioufly obferv¬ ed, u I did not fuppofe, indeed, the fel- <f lows had fo much ability, to execute a ** piece of workmanibip (however ©fdi- * nary as it may be) thus highly finifhed, w and curioufly conceived." After they entered the great gate, Ro-» dolph had again occafion thus to obferve mito Drofi : *' The villains, I perceive, have not been idle ;.but J can only account for this their induftry, witbtheifole view of paffing away that inactive life, they müft other- wife
( a* ) wife have carried on for fuch a long time paft." « What villains (faid Carlo, afide, to Drofi) are they, that my lord alludes to ?" u I know no more than you do, at pre¬ fent (returned he) ; though I have fome reafon to fuppofe I ihortly (hall— Still, if I do, ? ?? moft certainly will not; therefore be filent. Don't be inquifitive, boy, for if the Count overhears you—mark me—you underftand—humph! the black chamber." t€ Obferve, Drofi (continued Rodolph) notice the winding afcent to the ram¬ parts on the eaft and weft fides, that have been propped and repaired, fince we laft weie here. The rock feems but newly cut, where the fteps have been mended ¿ at
( ? ) at that time the fhrubs Were growing be¬ tween the ftones, and the grafs was knee deep. They are now plucked and fhav- ed like one of our Neapolitan greens— the fellows have faved us fome pains, and it is but fair, that we fhould one day repay them for the fame." « May I afk, my lord (faid Drofi, apart) excufe me for the libery—but may I know, who you conjecture thefe fame villains to be ? Pardon me—but your lord- fliips knows my fidelity and fecrecy may be depended on." « Seek not to know at prefent (replied Rodolph) ; I would entruft you, Drofi, it ,' fooner than any foul I have about me ; perhaps, however, you will fhprtly^know as much as I do myfelf; but for the mo¬ ment,
( ? + ) ment, I will not have any queftions put Pr anfwered, left they ihould find a chance circulation among my other do¬ meftics. In fhort, my good fellow, you cannot have fo foon forgot the reafons that I lately gave for the fame, in my late ' difcourfe with your nephew." If Drofi's curiofity was not fatisfied by this anfwer, his honeft pride at leaft was gratified with it ; and the uniform fidelity he had, in all feafons bore his lord, was more ftrengthened, if poflible, than ever, by this inftance of his promifed confi dence. When they tiad reached the outer court-yard, in which was convenient fta- bling for fifty horfes, and afpacious gallery for the caftle retinue, Lord Rodolph ap¬ pointed
( ? ) pointed Gabot firft to fee the cattle and his fellow domeftics properly taken care of, and then to attend him in the great hall. As they paffed through the armoury, the Count was at firft greatly furprifed to fee all the old war-horfe furniture, the fhields, cafques, helmets, faulchions, fpears, &c. as bright and as fplendidly furbifhed up, as when they firft came from the fmith's forge, two centuries ago· When the fever, however, of his firft fur¬ prife was over, he involuntarily burft in¬ to a loud ftrain of laughter, and looking about him, exclaimed— <ç By my future falvation, I cannot refrain from fmiling at all this I fee about me—the fellows have a mind to make me laugh at their intrepid affurance :--Well be it fo—but by the faith of a true Neapolitan, they íhall Vol· III. ? fliortJy
( rt ) fhortly be well paid for the diverfion they havefo unexpectedly provided me !" They now paffed through the wide avenue of orange and lime-trees, that led to the great court-yard. When Rodolph, however, had proceeded thus far,he halted, as though he had been arrefted by the hand of fome fupernatural genius ; his already palid countenance turned ftill rearer the livid hue of death.. He ftretched forth his right hand, and placed himfelf in fuch a horrible attitude, as though • hell itfelf, and all the devils therein, had burft forward to grapple ' with him. When his fpeech, however, revived, he franticly exclaimed— c< In heaven's name, wliat is this î fee before me ?" y^ £< A ftatue (replied Carlo, furprifed and trembling ail over)—a ftatue, my lord, that's all" You
( ? ) fí You He, flave (thundered out Ro^ dolph, and at the fame time felling him proftrate and fenfclefs to the ground) it is no ftatue—it 4 is my brother—the pld prince Rinaldo !■—What ?—fay—do I not fee him look—breath—fpeak—fee—»fee —he ihakes his truncheon aj: me—de¬ fcends from his proud charger, and leaps from that marble pedeftal. By heaven ! injured man—I'll not look farther on thee—but if Contarini ever fees thee— well full well—let him look to it mofi. u Upon which, he beckoned Drofi to fol¬ low him, and hurried forward to the great hall. * *» Droii, as we faid before, was a man poffefled of great perfonal courage .and prefence of mind. In Ihort, he was a man, - , · - ' -' ? ; That
{ 28 ) That apprehended death, no more dreadfully but as A drunken fleep ! carelefs, reckleu, and fearlefs Of what*s paft, prefent, or to come. Sha ?. Notwithftanding this, he was more then ordinarily furprized at this more then ordinary incident. He dearly loved his màfter, though he had had many reafons to be convinced that he had been former¬ ly guilty of feveral irregularities and ex travagances. Still he never believed that he had either ftained his hand or honour with the difhonourable knife of a mid night affaffin ; nor, in fact, did he believe knôtu, great as prefent appearances might ' warrant fuch a foul fufpicion. Rodolph, he knew, by frequent expe¬ rience, was a brave captain. As a fair, open, courageous foldier, therefore, him¬ felf, nothing but ocular demonftration could convince him that his lord, who had ? fought
( 29 ) fought fo nobly in the field of battle, for his king and country, would ftoop to ex¬ ercife the mean, ignoble, unfair craft öf a clandeftine murderer. Drofi, juft àt this critical moment, con¬ ceived it a happy circumftance (for faving when intoxication conquered his reafon¬ ing powers, they were in general ftrong, acute, and ready) that his lord's retinue had been elfewhere engaged, and that his nephew, Carlo, had received a blow, which made him infenfible of what after¬ wards paffed. He loved the boy, and knowing long his loquacious, fuperfti¬ tîous difpofition fo well, he alfo knew that the black chamber muft ultimately have been his certain fate, if he had ever inadvertently betrayed the mental per¬ turbation, and fubfequent frantic behavi¬ our of his noble mailer.
( ?? ) Drofi, neverthelefs, was ihiçirered K>r fome moments, what to think of this ftrange bufinefs himfelf. The firft thing he did, to be convinced, was to examine the equeftrian ftatue before* him ¿ he at¬ tentively regarded the features, and to the beft of bis recollection, found in them a wonderfully ftrong refemblance of the old Prince Rinaldo. Still they undoubt¬ edly appeared to him, as merely chifel- Jed out from white marble. Then, far- ther to fatisfy his curiofity, and confirm his opinion, he climbed the pedeftaf, and placing his hand on the right cheek/ found it as cold as marble ; he grafped the arm, the hand, thé truncheon, found them all as ftill and cold as marble------- „,-.,. — (for nothing more than marble we can hardly fuppofe it to be)—felt the ftatue all over, from head to foot, from top
( Ji ) * top to toe ; nay, the proud charger did not efcape his fcrutinizing touch ; but fiill—all were cold, durable, and inani- mate, as marble. Drofi, being thus far fatisfied within himfelf, began to confider, what in St. Marco's name, could have induced his lord to behave himfelf in fuch a mad and unaccountable manner? Then bethink¬ ing himfelf again, he conceived it would be moft prudent, ??? to fet about recover¬ ing his poor proftrate nephew. On this he pulled a flagon òf lachryma chrifti -from his pouch (the beft reftorer, as he thought, on this, and every other occafion) and applied its contents to his mouth. This precious infallible balfam,'had its defired effect, much indeed to Drofi's fatibfaction -, and perceiving re-ani mation work through every part, he could not ia ____ ? 4 juftice
( 32 ) juftice help bellowing another compli¬ ment to this faid lachryma chrifti, in ad¬ dition to thofe thoufands and thoufands that he had heaped upon it before. As Carlo began to recover his fenfes and his fpeech, Gabot came up, and on enquiring what ailed the page ? Drofi an¬ fwered, that he had met with an acci¬ dent from a fall, over one of the project¬ ing ftônes; but that his old doctor, Sir Lachryma Chrifti, had happily brought him about again. " It is falfe, uncle—(replied Carlo, in a faint voice).'* " Humph ! nephew—recollect the black chamber (returned the other). " '* True—true^—aye—I recollect, yes— yes—. I recollect—my fall, as you fay, uncle, over the—the—what did you fay ? —The projecting ftones! Good—aye— the
( 33 ) the projecting ftones. In very truth, my fall came fo fuddeniy and heavily withal, that I had nearly forgot it had been over the projecting ftones." Drofi could not help fmiling at this pliable anfwer of poor Carlo. His fatif- faction, however, was ftill farther in¬ creafed, when he difcovered no external injury on his nephew. He had been only ftunned with the blow. But, when his uncle propofed that he ihould retire to couch, he pofitively declined it»ë and declared that he would keep with his '•i „ * comrades wherever they might be for that day.
? 5 CHA&
í 34 1
CHAP. И?. Now does he feel * His fetret murders flicking on his hands j Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach > ■ ■ --------- Now does he feel his title Hang loofe about him, like a giant's robe Upon a dwarfiih thief— ShakSP£ARE.
JL/ROSI having left Gabot with Carlo to fuperintend the refrefliments, &c. of their fellow domeftics-—hating well pro- vided themfelves (as it fliould have been obferved before) with viands and wines of all difhes and forts, before they fet out from Bellito—he went in fearch of his Lord, whom he foundtittingdifconfolately ? in
( 35 ) in the middle of the great hall, expecting his prefence. As Drofi approached his mafter, carry¬ ing with him as he went an attitude oi forrow, and a countenance full of enquiiv 4 ing anxiety after his health, Rodolpli thus faintly obferved to htm— <t My good fellow, I peTceive your an¬ gui ih on my account—for that fame an¬ guifh I, thank you—Lam now, it is true,. fomewhat ill at heart, but ihall, I hope,, amend by the morrow. In the mean time, J will for this firft day retire me to> fome private chamber—no matter as now, for its conveniency or inconveniency·. The adjacent town of Martarona will fupply us in the «morning with what ne¬ ceffaries of forni turc'and accommodation, as may on our early inveftigation of the prefent ftate of the;ci$le^ appear defi- ? 6 cient-
( ?? ) cient. At all events, I will fleep on the eaftern fide, this night." " But, why not, my lord (obferved Dorfii excufe me, but why not fleep on the other fide ? The weftern part, I believe, was where the ancient Princes Rinaldo held their abodes and councils/' " Nomatter foi that (returnedRodolph) I have my reaforis—Be fatisfied now, and to-morrow you íhalr learn farther. In the mean time, I depute yourfelf and Gabot, \vhom, next to you, I regard with the* ut¬ moft confidence, to fuperintend the do¬ meftic concerns of the caftle. And— mark me, Drofi—I conjure you, on no confideration whatever, whether on life or death, to fuffer a fingle man to depart thefe walls, without my fpecial concur¬ rence." On this, they creffed to the eaftern point ~ tho ugh
( 37 ) —though almoft at every ftep, Rodolph turned his penetrating eye toward the chapel, where, with increafed wonder and amazement, he could diftinguifli the tapers ftill burning through the crevices of the door—He took no notice of this,, at prefent, to Drofi, whom he intended hereafter to make his moft active agent hi jointly difcovering all thefe united my¬ fteries—but afcended the fteps that wind¬ ed into the gallery, which brought them to the range of apartments formerly oc¬ cupied by the principal captains and of¬ ficers, who had fought under the ban¬ ners of the ancient and magnificent Lorda Rinaldo. Here, upon infpection, they found all the chambers far from being decayed* or in diforder; but, on the contrary, ele¬ gantly fitted up, and fuited with acco- _____^ modations.
( 38 ) modations, ns though preparations had been made for their arrival, months pre¬ vious to its commencement.—Rodolph, without exprefling any farther ufelefs furprize, then feparately examined the chambers over as they ran ; and at laft fix¬ ed upon the fartheft one of all for him¬ felf, and appointed the three adjoining ones for Drofi, Gabot, and his page, Car¬ lo. This done, he ordered the former to go and fee that all was right among the domeftics ; and, after defiring him to bring him fome little refreíhment, to obferve that every one was fafely houfed be¬ fore midnight, he wiflied him a prefent farewell. It would only be ratiguing'our reader's patience, to follow the melancholy train. of reflections that ftarted in Rodolph's mind, when he was left filently alone. In faft,
( 39 ) ? faci, it would be almoft a recapitulation of paft defcribed events. The equeftrian ftatue, however, of the old Prince Ri¬ naldo, difturbed, perplexed, aftoniihed, and actually confounded the very foun¬ dation of his fenfes. It ihook them from their very centre—Rodolph had all along imagined ? that his two defperadoes, Ber¬ nardine and Goddard, w T ere the reclufes of thè caftle. This fuppofition, now, however, appeared doubtful—nay, almoft impoifible—could they—meanly-ungift- ed by nature, for any other employ but that of arms, have carved from marble the ftatue of his brother?—incredible! Even if nature and art had affifted them with their fupereminent qualities, where could they have caught the re¬ femblance—how chizzled out the exact, flriking, living features of old Lord Ri¬ naldo ?
? 40 ) naldoP-ftatures fo perfectly—wonderfully confonant as to make him lofe himfelf, and even to debafe his arm, by ftriking fenfelefs an honeft youth, who had fpoke from the pure fimplicity of his unconta- minated heart— If not Bernardine andGpddaVá (thought Rodolph, again perplexing himfelf ftill more and more, as he waded through this intricate labyrinth of myfterious conjec- ture)-if not Bernardine and Goddard, who could have thus fo ingenioufly carved this extraordinary and ikilful piece of work¬ manibip? At this moment, Reflection ftand my friend— Manfredi —aye, Man¬ fredi —he was a man deeply verfed İn all arts and fciences—perhaps it is him that has done all this— He was mafter indeed fuificient to perfect it all—But hold—if Rinaldo's murdered—dead—and gone^— how
( 4* ) how is it, that Manfredi couldexift? Their lives were united—their perfons undi* vided—their thoughts unfeparated*—If Rinaldo fell by the bloody hands of thefe fame clandeftine ruffians, Manfredi muft have fallen alfo —by the fame token, if Manfredi was e'er overpowered by the crimfon blade of dark affaffination, Ri¬ naldo's heart was probed by the felf-fame dagger. For if Rinaldo had furvived this Manfredi, he would have avenged his death; and again, if Manfredi had outlived Rinaldo, he would have ftirred up Report with her thoufand tongues, to circulate his young Lord's murder through every diftant corner of thé habit- abb world. When Drofi entered the menial hall, he found all his brother domeftics anxioufly waiting for him alone, to fit down,
( 42 ) down to a plenteous repaft. He heartily joined them, though not with that wonted degree of hilarity as always attended him, till now, on thefe cheerful and convivial occafions. When all, however, were fatif- fied, and the generous glafs had gone trebly round, he rofe fomewhat folemnly frpm the table, and in an accent of much unaccuftomed gravity, he thus addreffed themrpund: " Brother foldiers and fervants, I have received moft fpecial orders from, our Lord Rodolph, to enjoin,you all and feve- rally not to ftir out of thefe caftle-wails, without his exprefs concurrence. Ihe Count is at prefent fomewhat flightly in- difpofed; but will, on the morrow, give farther directions in perfon. In the mean tirne, fee after your particular apartments in the gallery over the fiables ; and agree ? among
( 43 ) among one another reflecting them, as well and as friendly as you pofiibly can for this day. At fupper time I will meet > ou here a^aiu»"—— This brave handful of men, all knew, that on thefe occafions, Drofi was the Count's viceroy; and therefore obeyed his commands with thefame ready cheer- fulnefs as they would have done their fuperior officer. ' They having departed, Drofi felected fome of the choiceft dain¬ ties for Lord Rodolph; and then, accom¬ panied by Carlo and Gabot, they pro¬ ceeded towards his chamber. As they all jogged along the great hall, Gabot jocofely obferved tp Drófi — " I marvel if the cellar you once fo acct- dently and marvelloufly difcovered, is fo well furniflied with the good old choice lachryma chrifti, as it was wont to fye ì" ít In
( 44 ì * In good faith, I hope fo (replied Drofi as merrily) at all events, Gabot, we will try in the morning. In the „mean time, I hope alfo that we ihall be entertained with a little of that mufic we were fo unexpectedly treated with before j not but that I wifli likewife, we, could have the pleafure of feeing thef muficians, as well as hearing the mufic. It is a great pity, methinks, they ihould not partake ? our conviviality, and tafte our lachrymti ehrifti for the pains they are at, and the pleafure they mpft afford m Γ' ** Heaven forbid (added Carlo) that we fliould either ???? the mufic, or fee the muficians ; for no doubt the founds pro¬ ceed from fome aerial fpirits, who are playing over this caftle, to foothe and re¬ pofe fome haplefs beauteous virgin's ghoft, ijvho inay have been untimely cut off by the
-■( 45 ) the bloody hand of à mercilefe ruflian, frorn whom ihe preferred the rude blow of death, rather then the lois of Ipotleis cliaftity."--' Both Drofi and Gabot, laughed loudly at this foperftitiöus fimplieity öf Carlo ; and on the former's turning round, he eX- ultingly cried out, pointing to the chapel door—" By St. Marco, I have now ftrorig hopes öf finding the old lackryma chrifti ftored up as plèntifolly as eyer-Mo hear our choice mufic agáin : for— t( Behold, the tapers irr theehapel feem to burn as brifkly, and as freflily, as they did fotir years ago!" -r ν ífthis difeövery hàd ? foch à trifling eflect on Droit and Gàbot; it afforded Cario thë rnoft fenfible ???????, both In trílhd ?& body; tìis cöuníehabce scârne ??? as the Äafblfe
( 46 ) ftatue, and his limbs were fliook with thè fever of an ague. Even if he had dared to exprefs this electric acutenefs of Jiis feelings, he could not have done it. The fight of the ftill burning tapers w r ere al¬ moft as dreadful to his weak and credu¬ lous imagination, as the ideas he now fo dreadfully entertained of the threatened black chamber. Though 'he could not fpeak, ftiU however, he could think, and the direful thought was—the prophecy of his mother ! They now afcended the gallery, that led to lord Rodolph's chamber; where they found him ftretched on his couch, uncommonly pale and dejected. After he had fparingly partook of the dainty refrefhments that ??? been brought hám; a$í| diftinguifhii}gitl}e ^fliduity ^and cpn- GørjaUCr' fìopr Carto, \)Q bcfeeebed his pardon,
( 47 ) pardon, for the blow he had in his paffion beftowed upon him. This condefccnfion ivas a balfam that the boy did not ex¬ pect, for the injury he had received ; and, overpowered by its healing qualities, he kneeled down ?? the fide of his Lord's couch, and bedewed his qutftretcbed hand with the fincereft efiufion of tear¬ ful acknowledgment, as ever efcaped the eye of Chriftian forgivenefs. Lord Rodolph after having repeated his former,commands to Drofi, wiflied them all for the prefent farewel. Then, as they proceeded along the farther range of apartments, the latter pointed out to hb companions thofe that were refpectively v allotted to each by their lord's command. Carlo was fuperlatively happy in being fixed fo clofe to his uncle and Gabot. The latter he well knew, did not fear - the
( 48 ) the devil himfelf, the other, not even the devil, or hell alfo, and all the devils like- wife in if, - Upon this, they returned to the me¬ nial hall, where after haying fpent fome hours in general conviviality, they fet jo¬ vially down to fupper. Drofi and Gabot, however, were rather difappointed in not having their mirth heightened by a fere- nade, aš they had expected. If it prov¬ ed a difappointment however, to them, it was a fource òf exquifite comfort and happinefs to honeft Carlo.
CHAP.
( 49 )
CHAP. IV. ■ — «■! rl ?И ftartle you, W r orfc than the facring bell ;———— „^---------------- »Xi s much he dares, And to that daiintlefs'tamper of his mind, He hath a wifdöm thatdoth guide his valour To aci in fafety » r ι , SHAKSPBARI. Τ Χ N thé, morning when Droß, Gábot, and the page, attended the Lord Rodolph, they found his iridifpofuion cncrtíaíèd to an alarm · ing height. The former immediately propof¬ ed difpatching a meffenger to Bellito, forche Countefs Ifabella, and for fome medical af¬ fiftance to Martorano, The Count on this faintly enquired^ iif they^ had heard any noifes* ih the nigítt; vòver the caftle ? Vor. III. D « None
? so ) <t None, my good Lord," they all re¬ plied. u Then, for the prefent, I will not have the Lady Ifabella fent for ; but if all re¬ mains ferene and quiet, ihe ihall be dif. patched for in a week or fo—Though mark me, not tife upon your lives. See, Drofi, that none depart from thefe caftle walls, as you value my friendihip und con¬ fidence. As for affiftance medical, I'll have none, as yet—ye three ihall be my prefent: —: fole phyfíciansU PU have no jpbifonous drugs adminiftered to my parched fever¬ ilh lips. Sit ye all before me*-I have fome¬ thing of import briefly to communicate. 1 ' Thefe lift fentences were pronounced in fuch a feeble tone, and with fuch palpi* tations from the heart, as equally moved thefe three, as equally faithful domeftics.—> Carlo, in,particular, løfiVfight of all his ri« diculous
( S' ) diculous— fuperftitîous ideas; and at this for¬ rowful moment, would have run the devil himfelf, if he could, through the body, had he entered to grapple with the finking foul of his agonized mafter. When they were all feated before the couch, Ro^bh thus proceeded! addrefs fing himíèlf chiefly to Diofi: " My faithful old foldier, I promifed you but yefterday, to make you in fome meaííire, acquainted with the fecrets I think hang over this Caftle. The invi¬ fible, and, as yet, undifcovered agents of all the myfteries that have alarmed my worthy kinfman, and even aftoniihed my¬ felf—-I fufpect—to be Bernardine and God¬ dard— Drofi you know them well, you know them to be deep defigning knaves. I fufpect them—to have been the cunning defpoilers of the Lord Rinaldo's, immenfe D α wealth—
( 52 ) wealth, of rriïné the fame—hereditarily fo— s , f ? ' * for-^-héré I fwear by all the immortal faints abbve^—and by the mortal avouchment álfò of Sir D'Arcos—That when I firft, by right and defcent, took poffeffion of this fame Caftle—not gold—nor filver—were to bé -found therein—-----." Here the Count paufed through weakneis, a weaknefs, however; that afforded leifure for reflection —-" This fame Bernardine and Goddard, mar ? me, were fent by me, on a fpecia commiffion, to my Lord Rinaldo, reflect¬ ing our loft/ w.prthlefs, fugitive daughter, Santa-Maria. All thefe melancholy events áre too freih in ? ου r memory. You all know, moreover, what,afterwards fucceed¬ ed. I cannot recapitulate them now; foon, if my weaknefs and indifpofition will allow it —I grow faint, and wiih to be brief, there¬ fore, Oh ! mark mc well j I fufpect, moft ftronMv
( £3 ) ftrongly fufpecl:, ttøt thcfc i villains are the fecret inmates ofthe caftle. Exert att youf vigilance, and I will reward you tayour fouls extent. To ye three I delegate my - power. Drofi being the head,, till health and vigour reftore me to my wonted ala¬ crity and ftrength, have a ftricl guard upon the chapel. The tapers are ftiU burn¬ ing there, they cannot be r&-Hluminçd but by fome fecret mechanifm that thefe mau* rauders have under their command. There, and there chiefly, is your criterion for » fpeedy detection. They cannot elude your vigilance and courage, eyen for the few hours that I may expect to join in your re¬ fearches. My heart invigorates with the bare idea, to fee thefe villains detected and puniíhed, —Oh! damned villains For—none but villains could lay and execute a fcheme D 3 f»
{ 54 ) fo xomplexed-Jò' diabolical from its very bafis." « tz*s Mìe, Lord Rodoch—! ! ?' * Who? who I (exclaimed the aftoniihed, tnfecbled Count, looking at all the faces fiill before him) who faid—It's falfe Lord Rodolph ?— ** Not me.—Nor me (returned Drofi and Gabot, looking fomewhat furprtftdly about them).'* * c Nor me, by the holy virgin" (faid Carlos in a trembling.voice; his hair ftand¬ ing of an end). " Then (replied Rodolph, collecting him¬ felf) it muft have been only a fantafy of my brain/ 1 " Then, my gracious Lord (added Car¬ lo) İt muft have been a fantafy of my brain aïfo j excufe me, but I heard the words as plain as I now fee my uncle here before nie*
? $9 > me ; and no doubt it muft proceed from the fame invifible being that warned Che¬ valier D'Arcos, fome time ago, to depart from the caftle," « r And, prithee, Sirráh (faid Rodolph knitting his brows, and greatly incenfed at finding that Carlo had beard the fame ftory as had been related to him by D'Arcos) Prithee, I fay, boy, who told thee this fame tale !" « Francoliflê, my Lord, and many dread¬ ful· things befide. My heart ftrangcly mif- gives me, but it will come to our turn foon to hear this fame, frightful warning, for I dreamt that—." ** Peace, Sirrah,—Drofi* mark me, be it one of your firft employments to look after this fame black chamber, I lately told you of. It muft, to the beft of my remem¬ brance, lay above the cloifters. The mafly « ·* D 4 door,
( s« ) door which leads to it, ftands at that ex¬ tremity of th« hall which fronts to the cha¬ pel. Do you and Gabot commence your moft active refearches immediately, for if the villains Bernardine and Goddard, are hot foon ftopt in this, their alarming career, we íhall have the Caftle ihortly deferted. Carlo- fliall remain with me tfll you return. Be¬ gone, therefore, and fpeedy profperity ar tend you." On theif departure, Rodolph, after hav¬ ing once more admoniihed his page to~ have a more prudent guard over hir actions and expreflionsj and afterwards folemnly vowing, that if he ever knew him again to give way to fuch idle andfuperftitious fears, that the« Mack çharnber fliould be his in-' evitable doønv— he funk into a profound fleep. Drofi and - Glftofc having { takon their I v* morning
(sr ) rnornittg repaft widi the other domeftics (whom they found! ?, be welbíàtísfied witb their níghts fodging> bw they midged^ thoughtlefs and carelöffe through the grcalf hall; and from thence^ sdoifg*4he winding paffage that led into\ the ???????. Here the former foon difcovered thè pamielwhicb had, many years agOi fo fortuitoufly and ihddenly let him into the choice fecrets of the wine-cellar. T&make himfelf certain* however, that this was the identical fpot, h< examined about for the letter— D^btít td his^ infinite forprìfei anu^tothe great mer¬ riment of Gabot (w;ho hfuit ???? before heard ofthe farne ftory, and ^h^hâd^lfo ihared in the jeft of iti about? four years ago) difcovered' four additioiot letters aifixed~ which were no^ other Hm thfànofc^ É V LL* * ^ -î . > -. hw * f ?? ?? ^????^??^????????-
(: 58 ì only the laft four letters over) who have we had here ?i»Sonie,one has had the fame good fortune with myfelf in difcovering the my¬ fteries of thiswine -??????— and who have, like myfelf, cunningly cut out thefe letters next to rnioc» that they fliould be the fooner enabled to find it out again. "* Who* indeed J (cried Gabot laughing, heartily) why, man, cann't you fee, to put all thefe letters together.—If you could,, you would only find an old friend of your's has fucceeded you m the difcovery of this fecret, and who, in compliment to ancient friendihip,. or perhaps to fave himfelf a little trouble; has honoured jou fo far, by fcaying ,unferarx;he4 the yer$ &?? word, that uiher$b)t>0th your crimes álike^^ead agahy ?^???????? you^ will find th^m altogether to be—-the D, E, V, I,]L·----/* , > «^^ i , ' . , -? fixing sl 1 "" "''■■. '"
r & > fixing.his elbows in his fides, and making the refectory re-echo again with a fudden and vociferous (hout of laughter· - - - *)." , " Come, then, my friend (&id Gabot» after he had enjoyed himfelf in the felf- fame ftrain)—Come, open this pannel, and. let us defcend, and fee if your old companion (that is to be) has^runk up all this choice. Lachryma-Chriftu which I fomewhat fuf¬ pect he has—for ï do not fee rightly what. his bufinefs in this world well can be, with¬ out that of quenching the thitftbe muftne- ceffarily experience in his own fultry do¬ minions." . <c Ah I—good Gabot (replied Drofi) when diougpefl; there, J hope,, frorn my very foul, it may alfo be in thy ppwçn to have fre¬ quent refortto a cellar fo choice as this has proved to me." On; this, Drofi put his^ihoulsler to the D 6 pannel,
( ??; ) pannel, and ftraight it flew open. We then defcended, followed by Gabot, and fpent near an* hour in fearching every avenue of the cellar, but, alaå f-^nbt a fingk fiagon of Lachrymä-Chrifti was to be difcovered any where about !—. After they had afcended with flow and melancholy fteps into the refectory again, and made faft the pannel (which feemed hinged by fome fudden fpring, from the velocity of its opening and clofing) ...... Gabot—(ekclaimed with a deep counterfeit¬ ed figh)— <c Äh ! comrade, I fear yout wor- ?? —good~-old friend has taken all the choice Lachryma-Chrifti away with him to his own territories, and referved it for his own needful occafions/'— « Ah ! then, comrade (retorted* Drofi with his wonted dry humour)—you may, think yourfelf fuperlatively happy in the idea
( 6t ) idea that you will ?????? have, a tafte of it again—for the Devil muft be a ehurliih being indeed, not tp afford one of his moft particular; friends,.^ fmall portion ofwine* to one who, like you, my dear Gabot, ha? beenfo frequently a bofom-friend and inti¬ mate of his." In this unthinking manner they retorted on each other, till they reached Lord Ro¬ dolph's 1 chamber, to relate to him what had already taken» place—(moft grievoufly in* deed to poor Drofts difappointment) and to receive farthcn orders.-^- They found the Count juft awaked from a found flumber,, and apparendy much reliev¬ ed^ with. Carlo fitting- attentively-—moft anxioufly by his fide. Rodolph defired them to, be feated, and after hearing Drofi's firft advenrure^ he replied*-(after a few 4 moments*
( G* ) momenti' reflection)-^« Itis well—lam not forry for it,"-^- "-But, by St, Marco, I am (thought Drofi within himíèlf) and heartily forry for it too^ withall."— u Drofi : and Gabot (continued Rodolph) I know you fear no fervice of danger—much lefs one tbat I propofe fetting'you about this night—let the chapel be your peculiar watch till morn—The villains cannot pof¬ fibly re-illume the tapers, while you remain fteady vigils within., Boílibly, did í fay ?— nay, incredible—of certain: they muft have their fecret pannels—their trap-doors, or fomechndeftine means to effecr. their intri¬ cate purpofes---------fBut—mark me— ithough you ,catch~r-kill them not—bring ihem.to me alive—tremblingly alive—that through me they.xnay.,experience all the dread&L tortures that the inquifitorial power
( 63 ) power can, with its inflexible hanoV inflict upon them. This be your prefent office—and as far (my good fellows) as re¬ lates to die myfteries that hang upon thefe defperate bravadoes,, may it be your laft.r—~ Till the morning, therefore, fareweh 1 — Carlo will attend me...... Adieu—and may proiperity attend your vigilance and fidelity." Carlo was pleafed to his foul's extent, that Lord Rodolph had preferred him to be his inmate and companion for that night; and, in return, he entertained him with* feveral pleafant ftories, that difpelled the prefent heavy thoughts and anxieties which would otherwife have preyed upon his dit tracted imagination. Drofi and Gabot, in the mean time, join¬ ed their comrades in the menial hall, and retiring at an early hour, with their good long
( ? 4 ) long fabres, and a flagon of Lachryma- ChrifH each, they pofted themfelves at each fide of the chapel-altar, having previoufly extinguiihejd all the tapers, fave two, that were the neareft to them.
CHAP.
( ¿s )
CHAP. V. — ■----- —.—The midnight bell Did with his iron tongue and ?????? month Sound cue, unto the ? -owfy race of night. SHAKSrEAftE. ΓΊΓΛ JL HE two centinels paffed this whole night, not meeting with the leaft inter¬ ruption or alarm, either from material or immaterial objects. At dawn, therefore, Drofi left Gabot to continue his watch,. whilft he haftened to his Lord, to acqpâint hirti ofthe fame and receive his Earthen or«* ders. Rodolph's mind, agitated with the thoughts of the chapel> all night, and the unknown voies, had received little repofe, and
( 66 ) in the morning he'found his fever consi¬ derably increafed—Drofi's relation, how¬ ever, of the filence and uninterruption that they had experienced in the chapel, had a temporary effect and happy relief on his fpirits.— Ah í then, my faithful fellow (faid Ro¬ dolph, faintly but comfortedly) it muft be- as I have conjectured, and all thefe feeming myfieries muft be the concealed deeds of thefe dark and invifible intriguers—for— if, Drofi (Continued the Count) thefe ta- . pers were formerly re-illumined by fome fupernatural agency—why is not that felf-fame agency veiled with equal powers to effect tantamount wonders now, even if yoa and Gabot uere thus prefent—be¬ ing, as it is reported they are—invifible ? — And now, my valiant foldier, after aiafring due grateful acknowledgements-; te*
( 6 7 ) to your trufty" vigilance, then to my fu¬ ture orders.—We will not let them have an opportunity again (it having fo fallen out) of renewing our furprife and appre- ? ^henfion, without a certainty of their coming into our power.—Make there* fore, Andruccio and Phillippello (the neareft akin to you, Carlo,' and Gabot in our good efteem) in part acquainted vvith my fufpicions, with ftrict injunction* to fecrecy—-Ye four can relieve each other,till we can find fome clue that leads to this firft great myftery.—By perfeverance and vigilance the villains may probably be led off their guard, and precipitate them¬ felves into our fnares—Ah ! woe to them whene'er they do, nay, we will profe- cute watchfulnefs even by day—let An¬ druccio, therefore, relieve Gabot, and ftand the firft guard—then fee that him and
( 68 ) and Phillippello be relieved every three hours, till twilight, when they muft take the watch together, your's and G a" bot's turn fliall be on the morrow,, and fo on fucceflively.—This, done, Drofi, proceed with farther indefatigability to explore the cloifters, and every fecret avenue and intrieate winding where it is poflible the villains can probably conceal themfelves from our external view and knowledge. Drpfi having taken his leave, the Count and Carlo fet down to their morn¬ ing repaft. Rodolph then feated himfelf near the window, and enjoyed one of the moft beautiful profpects^ that the eye of man could poffibly furvey.—A pro¬ fpect, however, that notwithftanding all its romantic charms, often coft him a deep and poignant figh. -" ' . - Gabot
( 6 9 ) Gabot being relieved by Andruccio, he now accompanied Drofi down the hall, where after Ibme time, and with great difficulty, they at length got open the maffy door, that evidently led in¬ to the cloifters; here, after exploring every dark paffage and intricate winding, they found themfelves at the mouth of an old gate, black with age, which was only faftened by a long iron-latch. This they eafily lifted up, and difcovered themfelves apparently in the cymetery of the Rinaldo family ;—here ' again they examined every where attentively about, but could difcern nothing either feeming¬ ly marvellous or myfterious.—All was gloomy, filent, and awful. The monu¬ ments of that noble houfe, were regular¬ ly ranged from* the right to the left,, of this magnificent charnel-houfe, accord- 5 \ 'ins:
( 70- ) ïng to the eariieft and different periods that they became deceafed. Statues of - white -marble, reprefenting the Princes and Princeffes of Rinaldo, were carved recumbent on a ftately black monument; fome feparately, others united— fome with their hands raifed pioufly to heaven <—others with their gauntlefs and dag¬ gers in their hands—armed in knightly habits, with their cotes depainted in an¬ cient fluelds. On the bodies alfo of thefe monuments, were carved in various niches, the leading faints of the Roman Calendar. In fliort, every thing around evinced the moft gloomy grandeur, and ftruck both our adventurers (hardy as they were) with a lively "glow of awe and admiration. lo be brief, Drofi and Gabot, after having pryed every where about, could diftinguith
( 7* ) diftinguifli nothing of any farther import¬ ance ; excepting indeed a large pondrous bell, that depended Jfom the dorne of the cymetery—the fame awful herald, no doubt, that had often announced through thefe dreary avenues, the approaching re¬ mains of thofe departed fouls, that now lay enheaped mingled in duft and cor¬ ruption. Having quitted this receptable of death, this melancholy tell-tale of decay ; they proceeded to fearch after the black chamber that Rodolph had fo lately al¬ luded to ; but notwithftanding the moft deligent, refearches, no fuch a chamber (particularly or pointedly anfwering to that clofe defcription) was to be found. —They went indeed through a range, of chambers (orr a í her cells), tlfat might have been formerly inhabited, and, pro- batøy
( n ) bably fo, by a fociety of fecluded monks, from the fituation and appearance of the place. Thè ftalls appealed once to have been adorned with -ancient carvings, and the walls it was true, were all and indif- eriminately black with age ; but not one ? of them appeared to come up to the ex¬ act account of that defcribed by Ro¬ dolph. On their return to the Count, this laft intelligence was well digefted by Carlo ; and-ftom the brightening up of his coun¬ tenance, as it was related, evidently de¬ monftrated the gladnefš of his heart. When Drofi therefore, had fitiiíhèd the narrative of his firft day's adventure, Ro¬ dolph gave freih orders that he muft ftill purfue his refearches, arid that with re- nerved deiigence" and indefafigabiliry.* För (continued He) there müft enevita&ly ^-~ exift
( 73 ) exift fome fecret clue—pannel—paffage— or trabochetto, in the Caftle ; and, in rnoft probability, on that very fide where ftand / thefe fame cloifters; and which, if difco¬ vered, muft inconvincibly lead to the recefs where thefe villainous intriguers have concealed themfelves.—But (after a long paufe of reflection)—but, that large bell —bells, it is reported, when the Cheva¬ lier D'Arcos refided here, rang fponta- neoufly—idle conceits—effufions of a fliallow brain—Spontaneoufly!—no—no^— fome ftill unfathomed artifice of Bernar¬ dine and Goddard. —Rung, indeed, they might have done, affifted, as they were, by human hands." Here Carlo would have given both his ears to have reheârfed the difcourfe of Francoliffe on this fubject; and, at the fame time, to have given the Signora Vol. III. E Lauria's
( 74 ) Lauria's learned commentaries on thefe fame fudden ringing of bells, had he not been fpeedily awed, by the continuation of Rodolph's addrefs to his uncle. " Drofi (continued the Count) I will have fome watch placed near this fame bell.—So anxious am I grown, to find frQm what immediate caufe the ringing fprings?—It isin the cymetery,you fay?— Why fliould it be that thus they found a dead man's knell, when his decayed car- cafe, has been*refted in the ground, fome ten, fome fcore, or ten fcore years ago ?— For why, for wherefore, fay ye—to feare .the living t —Oh ! full well we know, it cannot be to fcare the dead!—And now, by St. Januarius, I do fwear (continued Rodolph, with the faint fmile of irony on his palid countenance)—ii would glad me much to hear this fame bell once more
( 75 ) more ring again."* --------And no fooner had thefe words efcaped his lips, when the bell did toll one^ and that one in a tone fo folemn, fo awful, as chilled Carlo to his very foul, curdled his very blood. —It tolled in death-like accents—mourn¬ fully welcoming (as it were) fome freih refident to that dreary avenue of decay, from whence it was never more to re- turn, in its earthy ihape and fubftance. ------As for Rodolph, and the reft, it ftruck them fomewhat with furprife; they were aftoniihed, indeed, for the moment, but not in the leaft daunted or alarmed. —The Count fat, for fome little time, over¬ whelmed more with rage than aftoniih- ment. Recovering himfelf, at length, he more with ordinary calmnefs Obferved, (looking ferioufly up in Drofi's face, and his head obliquely reclined on his clinch- E 2 cd
i 76 ) ed Bánd)— What can be rnoft effectually done to unravel this artful rnyftery, and difcover "the audacious intriguers and authors of the fame ? ------ At thefe words again (as in apparent mockery) the lufty bugle horn was heard without, and a loud knocking was diftinguiíhed, as though reverberating from the great gate. Rodolph inftantly difpatched Dro¬ fi, to learn the caufe—and that with an air of fuch feeming unconcern, fuch veri¬ table and palpable indifference, as indi¬ cated with it a fixed and future determi¬ nation to repel all hereafter idle moc¬ keries; added to an equal regret, that paft puerile circumftances ihould ever have occafioned fuch prefent unmanly fears ; now convinced, as fuggefted by himfelf before— Tbat artful intrigues, at firfi, may kad a *weak mind to fuppofe that they proceed from
( 77 J from fome preternatural caufe, but wben we ι draw afide the thin unfubftantial veil of their artifices, we laugh, and ridicule thofe very trifles, which but an hour or f ? before, had given us fucb real terrors.
E 3 CHAP.
( ?δ )
CHAP. VI. Thus ftands my fiate.- 1 -------------- Like to a ihip, that having 'fcap'd the tempe/r, Is ftraightway calrn*d and boarded with a pirate. 6HAK6F£ARt. -LİROSI foon returned to the gallery, and relieved the furprize that the two late circumftances, combined, had vifibly created. He then announced a meffen¬ ger from Beliito, and delivered a pa¬ quet to Lord Rodolph; in which was con tamed a letter from Sylvia to Carlo, (for pretty Sylvia could letter well, from the joint inflructions flie had early re¬ ceived from the Ladies Ifabella and Santa-Maria.)
( 79 ) Had the Count offered Carlo a bag full of ducats, a barony, or even the mitre of Naples, he would have refufed all, for the preference of this, his deareft Sylvia's correfpondence/ The youth, therefore, retired to an anti-chamber, and with the moft fenfible joy and exultation of heart, perufed and reperufed his let¬ ter, which contained the ftrongcft pro* feflions of Sylvia's unalterable love and attachment towards him. The kind and modeft attentions ihe had received from Francoliffe, who begged hard to be ftrongly recommended to Carlo's prefent and future friendfliip. She alfo had let¬ tered a long firing of dreams,, the princi¬ pal of which, went to foretell a fpeedy and fudden death of fome one in the Caftle of Martorano, Thefe dreams, how¬ ever, we will leave for Carlo to digeft, E 4 twift,
( 8ο ) twift, and torture, as his fuperior fcience and judgment may think fit. In tbe mean time, Drofi and Gabot having retired to a little diftance, Ro¬ dolph read as follows, from his Lady- wife : " My deareft Lord and Huiband, a Urged by the fenfe of my own life- peace—-liberty—and honour; and incit* ed alfo by the fears and the declining ftate of our kinfmaiden Lauria's health, I now earneftly entreat a fafo and fpeçdy efcort to convey us hence unto our Caftle of Martorano ; for, fituated as we are now (expofed by land, to the attacks of bar¬ barous plunderers; and, by fea, to the. ftill worfe attacks of the corfairs of Bar- bary, who now appear in formidable fwarms
( Si ) fwarms upon the bofom of the River Crati) our future fafety ilands upon a frai! aíTurance —Our good kinfman D'Ar¬ cos, will acquaint you farther—Fare¬ well, for the prefent—Though abfent, my thoughts are never from you. «Bellito. "Isabella.'* " My Lord, " It is with concern I now apprize you, that a ferious rebellion has broken out in Sicily, and that feveral parties of outlaws and robbers, taking advantage of the confufion which prevailed, parti¬ cularly in the city of Meffina, had en> barked for that coaft, and landing in diC- traöed numbers at Fiumara, have com¬ mitted the greateft cruelties and dépréda¬ tions —That feveral Corfairs of Barbary,. E 5, alfo*
( 82 ) alfo, feizing the fame opportunity for plunder, were cruiziag in great numbers on the Eaftern Sea, and that fome of thefe defperate pirates were now actually failing in their tartanas down the River Crati, carrying aw r ay with them women, children, and cattle.—I have already put my fmall Caftle in all poflible ftate of de¬ fence, but, to obviate all dangers, your good Countefs cannot be removed too foon, to the ftrong fortrefs of Martorano ; and to your mutual cares and protection I alfo fliall recommend my niece Lauria. —To conclude, I muft advife you alfo, to order your efcort to take the bye road, which leaves the fmall village of Biagio on the right, the better thereby to pre¬ vent any fudden furprifts. .«Bellito. * "D'ARCOS." Scarce
( 8i ) Scarce had Rodolph finiíhed the laft letter, when Drofi was again fum¬ moned to the Caftle gate, by the ar¬ rival of another meffenger, and foon after that by a third—both of whom inftantly rode off without attending an anfwer. The contents ran as follows : " Count Rodolph, " As an old friend, and an ancient brother captain, 1 ? recommend you to look well and diligently out againft all private and public enemies.—Civil war and dark confpiracy arc on foot.—Thefe times have a ftrong and wifhful eye to¬ wards anarchy and rebellion—Report fays, and firmly too withal, that a certain popular Sicilian nobleman, aflift¬ ed with his well-known creatures, Con¬ tarini and Montoni (though profeffed ly E 6 on
( 8 4 ) on the king's fide) have ftirred up this infurection, and rebellious confufion, to injure the reputation and popularity of our right trufty viceroy, and, at the fame time, by their plaufible and exterior vi¬ gorous preparations, to fupprefs this rifing tumult, to infinuate themfelves fo far with royalty, as to raife themfelves upon the ruin of his noble and brave re¬ prefentative.—Whilft others add, that the Duke and his party, vefted as they are with fuch great civil and military powers in the ftate, will make many a good Neapolitan's fhoulders fmoke with blood. —Their black file, holding (as they do fay) many a noble and ftout catholic's name·—From hence, I fhall fpeed with all difpatch, to my Caftle at Terracina. <· Naples. « PlETRO FOSCARIMI." * Lord
f »5 ) **· Lord Rodolphe " Your enemies have preferred an ac¬ cufation againft you, before the fecret council of the ftate, for the murder of your kinfman, Prince Rinaldo, with other great crimes and mifdemeanours attached thereto—The pleadings are pre¬ paring with great fpeed againft you, and a grand court is nearly fixed for your ar¬ raignment—Mate what ufe you choofe of this, but as you regard my friendihip and perfonal fefety, do me no wrong for this hafty caution. « Naples. « c Scipio Montalto^ Here was news on news, indeed, that might have ftaggered the ftouteft he who ever clenched a fword—It ftruck, at firft, like electricity, to the foul of Rodolph.-« But
( 86 ) But fo it is, when the fierce foldier finds himfelf inevitably entangled in the toils of his bloody and vindictive enemy—he ftrides forward with defperation in his eye—refolution on his arm, determined to keep the field, or periih hi the attempt —Defperation is often found to outlive the dangers of the day, when a -fteady valour finks in the oblivious *grafp of night—So with Rodolph ; for now, puih- ed as he was, on the brink of extremity, he became furious at his approaching danger, and fupported, alfo, as he was, by his own fierce courage, and the brave handful of men he had about him, he was refolved to defend his caftle, till its proud walls fell upon him, and cruflied him among its ponderous ruins. And now, the late diftemperature of Rodolph's foul and body both changed their
• ( »7 ) their natures in one fhort moment. The, aaion of the mind ihook away the imbe- cillity of the other. His feveriih habit, and the relaxing inactivity that had been » gradually faftening themfelves upon his once hardy conftitution, vaniihed away, like goffamer when impelled by the im¬ petuous north wind. He now once again —looked—ftepped—acted, and thought like the veteran warrior—Rodolph. The firft meafure that the Count adopt¬ ed was that of deftroying the two laft letters he had received, left fome future accidental difcovery of them might in¬ volve his anxious friends in ruin and dif¬ grace. * Fofcarini was an old Captain, and his grey-hairs (Rodolph generoufly * conceived) ought to defcend to the peace¬ ful grave unclotted with blood. Mon¬ talto was a learned councellor of Naples, and
( 88 ) and on his fecurity depended the well- being ofa nurnerous offspring. This done, he difpatched an anfwer to D'Arcos, de- firing the Ladies Ifabella and Lauria to be prepared on the morrow, as he would then difpatch Carlo to efcort them to Martorano Caftle. After which, he wrote letters of other import, the fubject of which will, fhortlycome to hand.
CHAP.
( 89 )
CHAP. XII. It is one unalterable property of phitofophy to make feeming ftrange and preternatural phenomena fami* uar, and reducible to caufe and reafon· AKMOTATtOM 0« IHAKftPKAtf* R ODQLPH ordering his attendants to follow him (and that with an air which denoted the matter of import he had in view) he defcended quickly down the gallery flairs into the great hall, and the» darting up the fteps which led into the chapel (as though refolution and difpatch were haftening hand by hand on this, oc-^ cafion) the Count next commanded An¬ druccio and Phillippello alfo to follow hira—.« For (faid be) we will henceforth
( 90 ) drop this freíh and fooíiíli fancy of watch¬ ing thofe blind tapers—thofe monaftic fymbols of fuperftition—The great confe¬ quence of the moment demands all our time and vigilance—let the villains conti- nue in the practice of their idle whims, till we catch them in our toils 5 and when perchance we do, not even St. Januarias's felf ihall fave them." From the hall, they precipitated (as though they were on the point of making a furious charge) into the inner court¬ yard, where ftood the marble ftatue —Ro¬ dolph had not fe^n the fame fine« the firft ihock he had fuftained from it. He now pailed it, however, with the utmoft indifference and inattention (as much as inwardly to fignify " what a very afs muft I have been, to let fuch unfubftantial ter¬ rors overmaftcr the natural courage and fortitude
( 91 ) fortitude of my temper !") As Rodolph paffed the ftatue, Drofi cautioufly marked his countenance, and obferving its fere¬ nity and fteady compofure, he now attri¬ buted his recent conduct thereat to the ftartling fever of the moment. Havingnow reached the outer court-yard, he ordered all his men to ftand forth ; and making them form a line, he read aloud the let» ter he had received only from D'Ar¬ cos, and then afterwards harangued them, as thus : " From this, you perceive, my brave fellows, the danger we have to combat with, in the attacks of our external ene¬ mies ; I now, therefore, exhort ye all, to preferve that unanimity among one an¬ other, which is the fecureft chain that can enfure our lives, our liberties, and our property. If private animofities, and little mean
í 92 > mean jealoufies creep unguardedly among you, then farewel to the general fafety. Though but an handful of men y as you are, ftill can we defend this Caftje, ftrong¬ ly fortified as it is, both by art and na¬ ture, againft hundred of affailants» It can yield only but to treachery. But mark me, brave comrades—tbat treachery Γ fhould never think of imputing to any one amongyou—no—thereby I mean that we bave fome feçret enemies in the Caftle —concealed within fome enlabyrinthed place of mechanifm, that has hitherto deceived all our refearches. Them we muft watch, as carefully as the open foe. The former once difcovered, we could the more fecurely defy all attacks of rebel¬ lious plunderers, or fanguinary intriguers. They will endeavour, perhaps (as they have already*done) to raife our fears, and unnerve
{ 93 ) unnerve our courage and fortitude, by idle and boifterous noifes -, by exciting our at¬ tention and wonder, with ftrange emble¬ matical fentences, iffuing from fecret en¬ gines, and unknown channels. Thefe things, in weak unguarded minds are apt to produce fenfations which render both iituation and life a melanchoiy burthen to them. Thefe,cowardly yieldings, how¬ ever, my brave foldiers, will never (I can well foretel)creep through the channels of your fouls' beft blood. Thus have I pre¬ faced my fubject, to place you on your guard. I would feign be mild and tem¬ perate with ye all ;' feign would live with you in fatherly efteem and foldier-like friendfliip. " And now, Gabot, do you take this let¬ ter to Captain Orfini, commander of the garrifon at Cofenza, and ftraightwith bring back
( 94 ) back all tfid provifions you can pofiibly be fupplied with. Do you, Andruccio and Philippello, take horfe on the fame er¬ rand, and hafte to Monte-Leone. You, Michael, hence to St. Biagio, and as it ftands but two leagues' diftance, you can double the journey by your comrades' re¬ turn. Be it your joint-cáres, nimble feet- ed Laurence and Pietro, to beat the fo¬ refts round, and make the browfing deer the captives of our Caftle.—On the mor¬ row , you fhall efcort Carlo to Bellito, to bring our Lady-wife, her kinfmaiden, Lauria, and Sylvia to our fortrefs here. The remainder fliall be flationed about our walls, as we fliall hereafter think fit. —In the mean time, I will, with Drofi, infpect the outward works, and prepare every thiqg for our general fafety and de¬ fence. Thefe
C9İ ) Thefe waflike orders and preparations feemed to give a frefti life to Rodolph, whilft he was iffuing them ; and freili vi¬ gour alfo to the brave fellows who receiv¬ ed them.-—Each one pulled forth his fword to infpeci the temper of its fteel ; and in mock oppofition fought o'er their former battles once again. The Count, however, left them, accompanied only by Drbfi and Carlo, to confult farther what was to be acied. As they paffed along, difcourfing upon the late extraordinary events, thev treat- ed them now only with ridicule and mirth—what had fo recently ftruck them, in many meafures, with anxiety and fur prife, now excited their utmoft con- tempt. And—fuch is the eftefl: of ufe upon the habit and conftitution—for— by being a little accuftomed to fee the ftrangeft
( 9? ) ftrangeft things, and alfo experience thofe momentary anxieties which at firft muft accompany them, we foon become har¬ dened to both ; and as foon forget that they were ever really fo—and what was once a ftrong fubftance, dwindles into a ftadowy nothing.— Such was it now with Rodolph ; for in paffing through the hall, the tapers were again re-illumined as light as ever—In¬ ftead, however, of gaping and wondering as he had done before, the Count laughed heartily—which was loudly re-echoed by Drofi, and fomewhat faintly by Carlo— for even the latter, by ufe and habit, had become a little more callous to thefe ftrange fights—Rodolph, however, briefly obferv¬ ed on the occafion- - " That the villains had been at their old tricks, in their ihort ab¬ fence. But if we once catch them, Drofi 2 (added
( 97 ) (added he) we will roaft the rogues, till all the fat is drained from their bones—a fit combuftible, and a fubftantial one withal, that may hereafter fupply us with tapers, if future occafion ihould call them into ufe. From this time, Rodolph treated all the clandeftine noifes in the Caftle with fi¬ lence and contempt, and, by his example, taught his men to do the fame. The belle indeed rung that very night, like thunder« peals^—but he heeded them no more than he formerly did the bells of the Carthu¬ fian monaftery.—Strange voices (as be* fote) were alfo heard, but he attended to them no more than the whiffling of the winds, as he matched to and fro on the m ftout ramparts of his proud Caftle. Voi. III. F CHAP.
( 98 ) 'S n'' CHAP. VIII. . ? ., . ? . When the mind's free, The body's delicate ; the tempeft in my mind Doth from my fenfes take all feeling elfe, Save what beats there. SHAKSflSAllE. V/N the following day, the Caftle of Martorano was nearly in a complete ftate of defence ; Rodolph and Drofi had minutely examined the outer works^ and had fqund them capable of refifting the moft vigorous attacks· Captain Orfini, bad fent all the provifions the town of Cofenza could well fpaie.—Andruccio, Fhillipello; and Michael, had been equal¬ ly fuccefsful.—Laui ence and Pietro, had made
( 99 ) made a collection of nearly all the deer in the adjacent forefts ; fo that the Caftle ftood well provifiohed for fome months to come. " t * *' On the fucceeding evening, Carlo, wai difpatched, with Laurence and Pietro, to Bellito, with ftrict injunctions to keep to the right of the village of St. Biagio, and not to venture fronb the Chevalier's Caftle without ftrong affurances of 'their* convoy being able to reach Martorano in fafety. Rodolph's caution fuggqfting to him on this occafion," that fliould his- Countefs be -captured on fuch an emer¬ gency, the enemy might retain her as an hoftage for their own fafety, if taken themfelves'. , * t On the following morning, however, as Michael and Riccardo were watching on the ramparts, near the eaftern tower, ». ~., F ? they
( 1<? ,) they difcovered three horfemen ikulkittg in the foréft, about two hundred yarde from the walls of the fortrefs.—They im¬ mediately gave the alarm to the centinels around the other walks.—The Caftle was íböö ráifed-^the alarm bell was rung, and the bugle-horn was founded. Rodolph, accompanied ftraightwith by Dro$k «nel the other men at arms ftation- ed in the court-yard, ready to rel'eve their comrades' watcb above; haftened toward the eaft tower, from whence the alarm at firft could be eafily diftinguiíhed. —They arrived thither, neverthelefs, too late, for tbe party (fmall as indeed it waa) perhaps taking the alarm, or fear¬ ful of being furrounded in tlie foreft—■ (having only ^»e way of <Hgbt, the nor¬ thern fide of tbe ???? being flanked as it was, by thè ¥apîà river avèrto) &aå made
( 101 ) * made a precipitate retreat, and favoured as they were by the thicknefs of the trees, neither Michael or Riccardo could r" diftinguifli the exact circuit they had taken. This firft alarm, only animated Ro¬ dolph to redouble his energy and vigi¬ lance ;*for he feemed to have no doubt, but that the horfemen were merely a ikirmifhing party, to reconnoitre the pre¬ fent ftrength of the Caftle. This maiden apprehenfion being paft, the Count, attended by Drofi, went to the oppofite gallery—-(being the ftate apartments of the ancient Princes of Rinaldo) to felect a proper fuite againft the arrival of the Ladies Ifabella and Lauria, As theylvere furveying them fepárátèfy over with" forne degree of at¬ tention, a fudden guft of wind ruihed in
( 102 ) from the north window, and blew acrofs a crimfon' hanging on the fide wainfcot of the chamber, which difcovered to their view the pictures of Rinaldo and Santa-Maria, large as life ; and in the fame fiyle, effect, and defign, as they were formerly fketched by Manfredi, in mînia|ure, on the firft and Jaft rapturous meeting with each other in Naples. After a long and moft ferious paufe of reflection on the part of Rodolph, he caught Drofi by the arm, and with great agony,of mind exclaimed— u Am I then always doomed to be thus unhappy and molefted.—Always to be the ftanding tar¬ get for thofe dark intriguers to fhoot their venom and their malice at ?—Miferable Rodolph t *—-And here his ftubborn na¬ ture, forgetful of its hte determined energy and refolution — yielded to a wo- rmrn 's
( ?? ) man's foftnefs— and Rodolph>-the bold Rodolph— wept!!!------« But hold (ex¬ claimed the Count, awed and embolden- ed by perceiving Drofi turn fuddeniy afide, which he wrongly attributed ,to the fight of feeing him let fall an unmanly tear—though in fact it was only to con¬ ceal a manly one, he had dropped him¬ felf)— ci Hold, I prithee, Drofi (continued Rodolph)—fay, is not this impoflible ?— Some fuperior, mortal muft have touched thofe almoft living pictures—for living they appear to be—having life nearly in all their limbs, looks, and geftures.— Oh! my child (looking ftedfaftly on SantarMaria—the rough foldier loft, mo- mentarily loft, in the feelings anct fufcep- tibilities of the father) oh ! my daughter, thou haft been the eaufe of,all.thefe thy parent's woes—thou alone difeafed,my F 4 _ , ^mind,
( ?? ) niind, unorganized my very foul, and made me the moft unhappy of thofe who might bave been the happieft*—And now, Drofi, markme— RecolleÖion comes ftrong acrofs my difordered mind—For I dreamt me laft night—nay, I charge thee do not mock me with the ftern re¬ buke of that thy faithful countenance- Yes, I dreamt laft night, that the late Signior Manfredi, came to my couch-fide, and taking me by the felf-fame hand I now grafp thy honeft, fteady arm with— he moiftened it with his tears-—he faid, withal, he pitied me/* α Pitied thee! my Lord (exclaimed Drofi, fomewhat roughly r anxious to fopprefs thefe rifing and un accuftomed emotions of agony and diftrefs ; excited, as he conceived^ from the paft remem¬ brances of a opee beloved daughter)-^
( ios ) Pitied thee! for what İ pray,?"— r-Arid here> let the reader ftill fupfjofe, as he may have fuppofed all along, tbat Ro¬ dolph was, is, and yet may be, a villain.— But trace the villains through the whole biÔorïc fcene, and (how me fcarcely one, but, foon or late, betray the feveriih com- punñions of remorfe; or feel, at times, the milk of human commiferation ftart occafionally in their lavage hearts; for wounds they have given to faultlefs, on* protected innocence» ■'*■ No matter (continued the Count) he feid he pitied me-—-much pitied ?, Drofi." Drofi attempted to withdraw bis arifle- ** Bade nie be of eomferti for in the end all might yet be well· Dreamt, however (continued Rodolph, recovering^ in fome little meafore from^ this uimanly ravings
( toó .) dreams are to me as idle fancies—nor fliould I, boyiili—-Carlo like, have men¬ tioned this, but that it brings Manfredi to my mind ; for— methinks— Manfredi, and only Manfredi could have executed fuch ,able pieces of right noble workman- ihip— Bernardine or Goddard it could never be." " Think no.farther of them, my Lord— Let it be my duty to fee them removed hence, before my Lady the Countefs ar¬ rives"— " Look, then, that it be quickly done —but theji the ftatue, Drofi—the execu¬ tion of that required time, great labour, and infinite genius/' " Beihrew me, my good Lord, but that, indeed,'is'not eafy to be accounted for—without, indeed, that Signior Man¬ fredi had carved a little niarble Duke—a little
{ I07 ) little marble horfe — a litle marble pedef¬ tal, &c— and fown them in the court¬ yard, from whence, in due courfe of time, they have ihot up like a vine, to the height and fize they now are—Carjp could, demonftrate a thoufand fuch pof¬ fible things.—In fact, his mother (they re¬ port) once received a hundred pieces of good fterling gold, from the order of the Cathufian friars, for raifing them (as they do alfo add—and that upon prieftly authority withal)— fifty convents, after fomething of the felf-fame manner, out of a fmall marble quarry, only fourteen feet by ten."— ct I thought v faid Rodolph fternly) that I forbad you to talk of fuch idle fan cies.' '— " And I humbly thought, my Lord (anfwered Drofi ferioufly) that you had F ? determined
( to8 ) determmed to mock all the idle fontane» which this Caftle has already created, and may ftill create—that you had refolv¬ ed to feoff them in whatever dark and ambiguous fhape they might hereafter appear in.------Pardon me, my Lord (continued Drofi, perceiving that this retort was felt too feverely)— pardon me for this boldnefs—but you, my Lord, gave me my cue, and I, like a grofs, blunt actor, have, perhaps, followed up your fpeech fomewhat too uncouthly." This retort, neverthelefs, made Ro¬¬ dolph, ortee more, himfelf again.—Their prefent care was to fecrete the pictures that had unexpectedly given rife to fuch diftreffing and unpleafant reflections. The Countefs Jfabella was expected, and watched for, the whole of that night, but
f *°9 l but from fome unforefeen delay, didnot arrive. Then now let us quit, for a ihort whiles the embattled towers of Martorano Caftle —the warlike and fteady refolution of its brave, though little garrifon, with the undifcovered myfteries it internally, and, as yet, fecretly contains ¿ for -------------- — the humble cottage of Launcelot and Mopfa, where the poor wandering min* ftrel had accepted a temporary refuge and protection»
CHAP.
f ÏÏO }
CHAP. IX. —__----- Patience and forrow flrove Which fliouîd exprefs her goodlieft ; you have feen Simuline and rain at once —her fmile; and tears Were like a wetter May. Thofe happiefr firnles, That play'd upon her ripe lip, feem'd not to know What guefts were m her eyes, which pared thence As peads from diamonds dropt. SHAKSPEARE. LaUNCELOTs little cot (our lafl place of the forlorn Valentine's abode) was fweutly fituated on a fmall eminence, that commanded a delightful profpect of the furrounding country.—The fojourn ofthe ftranger, and his fmall party there, on the morn of their departure from the monk's
( m' ) monkVrecefs,wás but of ihort duration, for th ey only accepted a little refreíhment, and, mounting their horfes, took a narrow path that defcended into the eaftward glen. Valentine, however, who had been ftruck by fome intuitive motive or another, at thofe words of Sebaftian— - " Meet me, on the firft evening in the month of April, at Meßna's Port" —conquered, for a w T hile, both his fleepinefs and·fa¬ tigue ; and watched the departure of the ftranger, whom, with his eye, he alfo purfued into the body of the glen, but foon after loft him in turning through a narrow defile that directed to the left. Valentine was not fuffered to yield much farther-to 1 reflection, for, laying himfelf down upon his pallet^ be facri- ficed fome hours to the god øf fleep/not quitting
( **2 ) quitting his balmy embrace till tbe firn bad nearly fet in the Weft. cc Our minftrel having arofe, much re- frefhed, he defcended to>the lower apart¬ ment, where he was firft faluted with the fight of his hawk and his lute, from both of which he promifed himfelf more entertainment than hitherto, as his mind already began t& feel itfelf unburthened of thofe fears, and that gloominefs which preyed upon it in the monk's dreary recefs* ? -^His heart alfo began to experience that lightnefs, occafionally felt by us all, "which inclines you to forbode fome ap¬ proaching favour of good fortune near at band.-*-Valentine next faw his polagyric, placed upon a neat table, carved from the body of a vine, which he eat with all the Spetite of a young fturdy goat- herd. Then having joined Launcelot and ^Mopfa,
*.' ;..·, .■■(■ **? ) '???{?*??????? Aling contested olí ? fent ^?. jutì^ from of the cottage, and, after wiftih% them a good evening, he placed himfelf or> the fide^ of the former, and liftengd with much attention and fatisfaciion to th^ fini fhing part of the ftory which- Laiince^ lot was telling to Mopfa-^refpeñing the late circumftances that partly came \m~ . der his knowledge at the Monk's recéis, and which he related with a peeuliarityb and dry nefs of humour, not forgetting to make fome refle&ions on his own fears, on that occafion/ as rendered thcxfe paft events, but fo lately, tá him^ Itótrible âné gloomy, now ridiculous ató a^ tations to laughtefc /Such> ;Äe^ :: tt;|h#;:. eháh^abfe témper^ p^ mafeingjé^s ttf thoie fe
f 44 ) Like waking pleafures fucceeding the agonizing illufions of a recent dream. Valentine, from the paft fubject, here took an opportunity of queftioning Laun¬ celot, how long he had been abfent from his cottage, and what brought him, in company with the ftranger, to the monk's recefs ? enquiring, at the fame time, the latter's name, rank, and fortune ? " It is not many days ago (replied Launcelot) fince í left my Mo'pfa here, to go to Naples to procure a grant for fome few acres of land that adjoin my cottage, to increafe my vintage. The fe¬ cond day, however, after my arrival there, I by chance fell in with my fofter-fon Se¬ baftian, at the corner of the Strada de Fo- lido. I did*not immediately recollect him, though he inftantly recognized me. After the firft effufions of our joy were : ' · . over,
( "5 ) over, and feeing me anxious to enquire how he had fared, and with whom he had fhared his pail fortunes, he took me to his hotel 5 and feeing me anxious to repeat my late queftions—the fly boy very briefly defired me to hold my tongue for the fu- ture*on thofe fubjects, as they were more than he evetdared to anfwer. So—ftrip- ling (concluded Launcelot) you know as much about the matter as myfelf, fave that I accompanied the ftranger from Naples to where we firft fell in with you." This unfat i sfactory reply damped on a fudden the rifing comforts that had bee;n kindling in Valentine's breaft. He feign would now have gone to his pallet to give a freíh and full run to his former gloomy reflections, but both Launcelot and Mopfa infifting that he ihould play a little to them on
( "? ) on his lute ; he took it up, mingling the fweet fmile, with the fiolen tear, and fung in delicious unifon the achievements of Godfredi, as difplayed upon the plains of Paleftine ; in ftrains, withal, fo fweet, a$ raifed their humble fouls to the higheft pitch of celeftial ecftafy. After fupper, Launcelot was fo en¬ chanted with what he had heard, that he ran and opened a fmall cabinet in one corner of the room (and in which the rninftrel could clearly diftinguifli the two caikets brought from the monk's recèfs) and produced a brave flagon of lachryma- chrifti* which Mopfa and her hufband Joyed almoft as dearly as did the veteran YaltQtijts haying.left ? hoft and ^efrtafoiJbtl^ir : W(Qe^ he œtîrçd.tc* 1? $?&* ??? refleja feÄenmg upoa him,
( И7 ) bim again, he began to caft a retrofpeU once m ore over the mingled and ftriking adventures that fo clofely and conftantly accofted him through the latter journey of his life.—He then attempted to look for- ward, .and penetrate into the freih roads he muft pafs forward in ; but here his ideas were confufed in a mafs of dark¬ nefs and perplexity, which he thought, however (Hope taking him, for the mo¬ ment, kindly by her cheriihing hand) might fuddeniy and fpeedily burft—and— burfting, throw an extenfive irradiation over all his fenfes. And here again—the myftery of the the parchment fcroll intuitively ftruck him, as to contain the arcana of his future fates and fortunes; and I know «ot (thought Valentine) from what fecret tepuHe I have it ; but there muft ?? fomething ,
( u« ) fomething in this myftery which attaches itfelf moft ftrongly and marvelloufly to my future deftiny— alfo to my future happi¬ nefs or mifery——I have the keys of both the caikets in my poffeffion—why, there¬ fore, not try to take the advantage of thefe cottagers' abfence, as they purfue their morning labours, and indulge the impulfes of my foul ? Shall I?—no—fays honour:—my fate—my happinefs—cry— yes ! ! !—At this laft reafoning thought, a warm glow ran through his whole frame, and which feemed to raife him up, as though an angel gave its aflifiing hand. Or, like hope elevating the dying Chrif¬ tian, whofe laft moments are fixed on heaven. But then—hold !—how fliall I anfwer this to the noble ftranger ?—Oh ! how mayt--------------Here fleep ftopped the doubtful reflections of Valentine, and, favouring
( IJ 9 ) favouring his beauteous votary, compen- fatcd for the mixed occurrences of the day, by the illufive tranfports ofthe moft flattering dreams ; ftrengthening him, however, ilJufive or not, as they might hereafter prove, in a refolution to infpect the matter of the myfterious fcroll.
CHAP»
( «1 )
CHAP. Χ. -»-Since I was man, Such iheets of fire, fuch burfts of horrid thunder. Such groans of roaring wind and rain, I ????? Remember to have heard. IHAKSPKAKK· IN the morning, therefore, when Va¬ lentine met Launcelot and Mopfa to breaftfaft, he cheerily obferved, that he ihould wiih to treat them with a fight of the great wealth that he poffeffed in one of thofe caikets. At hearing this, Mopfa was dancingly alive, and urged Launce¬ lot to open quick the cupboard door, and bring it forth, who wanted no incentive ?? occafions of this kind; for though poor himfelf,
? 121 )" himfelf, he loved to contemplate the wealth of others, which iii fact could only have given bim more pain than pleafure, envying, as he muft, the very bauble which he could not himfelf poffefs. The cupboard door being unlocked, and the caiket being placed upon the table, Valentine opened the fame, and dif¬ played the full treafure to the cottager's aftoniihed views. Perceiving their wifliful eyes ftretched to their utmoft limits, with the power of gazing, he generoufly took this opportunity of obferving to Launce¬ lot, that if he recollected right, he faid fomething of a grant, which he went to Naples for, to procure forne fewmore acres of land, to increafe his vintage*—' c I 4id, boy (replied the Cottager,turning hislooks from the caiket to the ceiling," and then* alternately from the ceiling to the cafket) Vol. III. G —I
( }*?) i -? did— 1?."— « Then (fáid Valentiae) tóünt out a hundred crowns, and ] kèep them, 4o fulfil thy induftridus wiíhes." * e What^—what? (exclaimed Launcelot) oh U the holy porringer ! what's this 1 bear?—ebiint ms out ^ hundred crowns ! Do you jeft, boy, or art in earneft ?"-^-In earneff, truly, Launcelot—all this wealth is mine own,' Why art thou fo furprized^ to find me part with one little lot of crowns, when age and induftry have need and appropriation for the fame ? Come, count them forth i and when this thy pleafurable labour is done, thy old faithful Mopfa fliall do the fame—Come, my kind aged hoftefs—do not thou be furprized ¿jf 0# _Oh, fliame ! do not weep—The fight of thy - venerable tears will fcald riiine own cheeks. Come cheerily—they may partly be a legacy for thy fofter-fon, Sebaftian ;
( 1*3' î * Sebaftian ; that is,if your own lives do not outftretch their expenditure." Launcelot and'Mopfa having counted forth a hundred crowns each, and depo¬ fited them in two leathern bags, Valen¬ tine propofed thai they fliould then pur¬ fue their refpective employs and recrea¬ tions. On this, he took his hawk upon his 'fift, and iallied out to a little diftance, but foon took an opportunity of haftening backwards to the cottage. As for poor old Launcelot, never did he trip fo lightly over the velvet green before ;—never either did he prepare to clip his vines more cheerily—no, nor never till now, did Mopfa warble out fo fweetly the fongs of paft times as flie prepared to kneel down and milk tier fiiowy coated goats. Buréalas !—how fearfully wouldeft thóu,
( *¿4 ) honeft LauceJot, have tripped o'er the velvet-green—how defpairingfy wouldeft thou have prepared to nip thy tender vines :—and thou, Mopfa—thou too, in¬ ftead of warbling out to fweetly the fongs of paft times, wouldeft have fong the fong of black defpair—wouldeft have hung defpondently around the woolly necks of thy foowy-coated goats— hadft thou either been capable of fore- feeing the concuffiye revolution of one poor, fliort, folitary foornent ; for—on the very inftant that Valantine was prepar¬ ing to-unlock the fatal caiket, which contained the myfterious fcroll, the hea¬ vens and earth, as though feemingly re¬ folved to preferve this great and mo^ mentous fecret in the womb of partial darknefs* for fome remoter and conve¬ nient period—opened their immenfe bodies,
( 14 ) / bodies, and emitted fuch extenfive and dreadful flaihes of fulphur and lightning; as ftruck the trembling minftrel motion¬ lefs with fear and horror.—To them the equally dreadful peals of thunder, fuc¬ ceeded, crufli after cruih, as though the elements would have burft. The earth, moved by the fame convulfive agonies, fliook fearfully beneath, and every awful attendant^circumftance, denoted a fpeedy annihilation. Valentine, during tnis dreadful ihock, fupported himfelf as well as his tender nature would adroit, agamft the wall of the cottage, and had nigh funk beneath the bulk of bis apprchenfions, when Launcelot and Mopfa camet* running breathlefs in, overwhelmed with equal terrors. The fight of them» in fome mea¬ fure, revived the minftrel; for fociety, G 3 even
■ ;i; ; ?2δΓ).;· ■.■■ .= eveii i^ the e^tr^rnitic)Sf pf danger, :;,?. els^ringan^fo however, jvas loft ; and* iaye wheri^rever an4a^ojn> they efe eye^ to, the .a,ngry hf a cÆg()ne aliq ; and thusr-^it was, in thi^ awf^ftate of fofpenfe and dread, they cobtiniied fqr ap ι hour or more, till the warring elements, wearied witb thegre^t- nefe of tShekiftr^^ fisrcjttefe of their conflict, funk gradually intere^. Qa t l^Sythey venturedr^ otljer^ar^tben^i^ knqes, ; tl^ pojrjd fortbth^r th^^îv^ ingS)to th^ rninifters aboye,, for their, pe* cullar iafety and prefervation.--^ ^aculatfons, boweyer, on this, ocicia- fm$ tìm moft .fervc^y^ hí^wele thsfe of V^entUie, though Wïâ§ ? finire th^ii thofe öf t^e pppr CQt- tagersr—
( **7 ) tagers —for when the diftraction ofthe moment had ceafed, and reflection cam# fwelling upon his nicer imagination, the idea of what he had been about to do, when the convulfive ftorm of nature firft broke forth, made him appear little and contemptible in his own eyes—-had he fallen one of the victims, among the thou-, fands that fell on, this melancholy day, he had fallen in the momentary attempt of a violation andi breach, of truft: and confidence—an act, to the fufceptlble and honourable mind, /the moft ungracious tòd^ infupportable—for, trifling as Vafen-t rine*s s meditated purpofe then was» ftill the immediate fenfe of danger, or convic¬ tion, magnifies the fmalleft things even to immeniities—make mole-hills— ???? tains.—The horrors, however, oí .that day, Valentine was not weak enough to G 4 fuppofe
íiippöfe; cöujd Jä átttíbutéd to the ftrajF- Mgfóf prié poor jparticular ihèep, aíriong the unirerİal flock ; but ftill it ihowed hini, among the whole general example, tøvr cautious we ihould bepf yieldihg to tìie fligbtcft indiicretion, when we may be fo fuddeniy involved in the urifore- feen and general ruin. t When Valentiney therefore> had ve* gained his compofure and ferenity, from the late ihock, and rendered himfelf in mind, fteadý; bý^ re€eöion, he wasí re¬ folved to iubmit himfclfj for thé to rather to the flow, though certain decree* of Heaven; than yield to the flitting te* cies of an idle dream, or thé impulfes of a diihonourable ■ çuriofity^r^-The j noble flranger hâd promifed him, oh his ho- hpur, fin the M6nk ? s recéis, that he fliould become acquainted with the fe- ; :-i-v.'--,.i cret
( t*9 ) cret of the myfterious parchment* in fe¬ ven days from thence, and, as a pledge, of his own intended faith, had entrufted both the caiket and its key to the min- ftrels truft and confidence—holding bright honour, as he did, fo pure and ib lumine^d in his own breaft, as to fix it equally facred and uncontaminated in the bofoms of others— Ohi fliame! ihame! (thought Valentine within himfelf, as thefe ideas recurred to his imagination) —How couldft thou fufter that momen* tary curiofity to poiTefs thee» which thou haft fo often reftrained and overpowered in others ? . But, to proceed— t Cruel, however,, was tjhe fpectecle that prefented itfelf to Launcelot, when he ventured to look from his cottage door* His little vineyard wae deftroyed— ths i G5; tre^
f l 3o ) trees were torn from their roots*—the herds lay breathlefs on the parched-up fields,-and everything around afforded a rnfclancholy preíage of ruin and famine— flfflM-evén now, as the poor grateful cot¬ tager furveyed the general deftruciion, he had reafon and religion (humble as he was) to tell him, that Providence feldom íhowers down misfortunes upon us, with¬ out following them clofely up with fome concomitant good:—"The'divine power ha* been'pleafed (he faid) tobare his. blooming vintage, and fweep away his flopping herds *¿ but then, had he not* again, fent him a kind—an tmforefeert protector, in the generous mmftrel, whofe KbeíaHtý would enable him, by mduftry Und perfeverance, to re%öVaté what háá beeÉ fo unexpectedly et*t off from the fact cf day ?? nature— ? î" * % CHAP.
( I-3I )
CHAP. XI. Either there is a civil ftrife in heaven, Or elfe the world, too faucy with the gods, Inccnfes them to fend deftruâion. > Now does my project gather to a head; My charms crack not, my fprites obey, and Time goes upright with bis carriage. ' ÎHAK5PJ&A15. t XXT the moment the dreadful concur* fion of the elements prevented Valen* tine from examining the myfterioua fcroll, Rodolph and his now infeparable ???????? Drofi, were walk'mg to and fro upon the ramparts> watching tbe ap* proaeh of the Countefe Jfa^lla and ?? foite. The flogt walk of the proud Qaftfe,.for the firft tijm, feoiagd tó, ??? ; G 6 ble
c m ) ble ¡beneath this hideous fopck of nature; If they ihook, however, thofe who had moft reafon to; feel and dr^ad it, did not éven flinch.r-^They few, nevertheleis, the dangers that hung oyer their prefent fituation ; and retreated from^ them with the feme calmnefs and fteadinefs, as though they were retiring irom fome fu¬ perior, irrefiftible danger in the hour- of battle; It may be a matter of furprize, that one who could ftart, pränce, and tremv ble, at a ftatue of marble—the found of a facringbell, or at a few wordy conceits from an invifible agent-r^would not have fliook, ^marrow, hones, and all,*' at the tremendous fight of this elementary conflict—or, that it did not fill him with a momentary awe, infpired hin* (even though, perhaps, for the firft time
a»
ns it might have been) with the mofbfe- cred fenfe of the divine attributes—led» him into the moft pious confeffions, of the immenfity of God's great and irre¬ fiftible powers?—No, to thoughts like his, imaginary and fuperftcial terrorr i rife fuperior to real and fubftantial* ones. , The mind, indeed, is prepared to» meet the one, whilft the other comes 5 like a frightful ftranger.'—Storms and* earthquakes were the familiar enemies of his country. Whenever they appeared, even in their moft frightful forms, they were naturally to be expected, and of courfe in the beft manner to be guarded againft; but when an invifible (we will· fuppofe* in this inftance) » fupernatural phænomena rifes againft you, we are pav plexed, tortured, fretted, and weakened» ? a fuperior degree. Whilft
( 134 ) 'Whilft the Gbünt and his companion were walking filently and flowly up and down the great hall* no ways intent upon the crashes that were burfting over their heads> ana the broad flaihes of lightning that were ever and anon darted acrofs them, they were fuddeniy thun*· derftruck—^-with a moft tremendous noife, that appeared to have iffued from tbe arched door which led into the cloif feis. The cruih fliook the whole haU, and reverberated over every part of the %ftle.^-They hotîj drew forth their hardy ftejels* ???> ífew undaunte^ towards the fpot from whenee they fuppqfêd th^ QQife'to have proceeded. ????$$ they haftened> jWitbout dtítove^riög/ the jf aft fymptoms øf tbeb alarni,, tiili ??? reach*, cd the cymetery, where th^ caufe ¿mä» inftantly perceived as %? as they had entered.
( ns ) enteredU-ZThe great bell had faflei* from. the dome, and occafioned the hide· ous crafli and fuch alfo was the weight with which it fell, as to force apart fome of the monuments nearçft the centre of this gloomy and awful chamel-houfe.—Here, and efpecially at this dreadful moment,. when the thunder rolled impetuoufly from above.—When the vivid lightning threw its broad expaniive flafties every where around; the mind, at leaft the religious and the feeling mind, muft have been ftruck with uncommon awe and terror.—The forked ftreaks darling through the gloomy avenues of the cloif¬ ters, and from thence, penetrating into the ftill gloomier recefs of the dead, exhibited the bare, unfleihed, uncarcafed remains of thofe, who bad be$n &r year« depo¬ fited ? thefe defptîikd fin$ fluntej^d monuments.
( ?? ) monuments. To minds indeed, more capable or fenfibility and reflectori, than fell to the lot of thefe rough» unpoliftied foldiers, it would have appeared, as though the laft day had come, and that thefe graves were now opened, ready to yield up their mortal tenants. Another flaih of lightning, fiercer than any of the former, now darting into the cymetery, and Rodolph ftanding then be¬ neath' the dome,- he could plainly dif¬ cover large ironí-bars above, fomething in the fhape ofa portcullis, and light alfo ??? amazing height, which he conjectured *muft defcend from* the mou^hof the north tower. ri * * And now Drofi (faid he, áftet&few moments recolleciion^l think •We can make fonte good account of that fettie belt foúndkigy vfti&frfas fuppofed to* pfoceed frota 1 the nortb to\Ver, arid which
( m ) which afforded fuch alarms oyer the? whole Caftle. For the found afcending,. and then emptying itfelf into the^ air, gave a probable caufe for this conjecture. This fecret, at leaft, therefore,» is now ac¬ counted for ;—but (continued Rodolph) where is the facriftan all this time?— Would we could difcover him likewife í —By St. Janarius, if we could, we would pay, him bravely for hfc chim- ïngs." " Anon, no doubt we fhall, my Lord (replied Drofi) if thç devibjbi* protector, has not taken ?? off in this tremendous ftorm/' They now quitted the cymetery, and returning tp the ball, drowned the thoughts of the dreadful ftorm tfeat bowled around the Caftle, in forming plâns for beft defending it, againft all the efforts
( t$8 ) «flbm of human: attacks, though it wa«r %n fo ftrötïgly oppofed' by the attacks ofa fuper-human power* When all nature was once mofe huili- ed into reft, weary witb its pail con¬ vulfive ftruggles, the Count and Droft went to fee what effects the ftorm had produced upon the mmatee of the outer eourt yartf. They haä nöt occafion, hò#ever> to proceed quiteño ft^ for they found them all in the armoury, regaliny themfelves, over two haunches of a fine fet deer, and fomc choice flagons of wîhe, u wítbr thè vi&vr (aè^Andrudoiot ob¬ ferved to the latter) of keeping up theis fpirits agamft the terrors of the.ftorm» FrotiHhis/ their undaunted tempers in the hour of fuch fuperior danger, Ro«^ dolph drew a more fubftantial picture faxán ever öjphís. ?a's courage, refolu* tion»
( »39 ) tion, and conftancy* The ftorm, how¬ ever, being over, he ordered them to* their different jjofts/ and then retired with Drofi to his own apartment -, wbere he fhortly followed the example that had been juft fet before him in the ar* moury. About the third hour, however, be-* fore midnight, they were called ofr ftorft the ?>? lachryma-chriftii by '^èdkébtö; who ihformed them, that Carlo's èfëör* was feen off the ramparti; r^tH' the Countefe andtWo other 1 *fettftfes, : riding in füll 1 gallop toward the CafHe. " Ru¬ dolph was fomewhat furprifed at'this fudden intelligence, not in theleaftex- pecting their arrival thai night, and f6 foon åfteir the furious tempefts of the day; but as he ftrongly confided 1 írt Carlo's diforetion and valour, he gave / credit
" ( 140 ) credit for its propriety, and having order¬ ed Andruccio to hafte to thè great gate, with jk party of hi& comrades; himfelf and Drofi alfo haftened to the platformy where finding the information was all good, he gave orders that the gate fliould be inftantly - opened, when he made the fignal from above, and at the fame time for them to form a femi-circle around; the entrance. All this being. executed with the utmoft caution and circumfpection, he then defcended him« felf into the court-yard to meet and wel· come hie l^dy-wife, with the beautiful Lauria, to the Caftle. Various were the fenfetions that at- tacbed themfelves to the fair vifitors, as they entered this ftrong and ftupendous fortrefs. Ifabella and Lauria had of late opened their whole fouls to each other, and
{ w ) and made their t minds : ^nd fancies one and infeparal>le. The former^upable ??? longer to view the rapid decay that Was feizing on the tender conftitution of the latter, had convinced her that the mia- , ftrel, Florizel, was no other than her poor fugitive daughter in difguife; and that too from fuch an incontrovertible chain of proofs, that left not a doubt of it either in her's or the Chevalier's opinion. Sa¬ tisfied, therefore, with the knowledge of her Florizels fex, the violence oi Lau- ria's pallions ceafed, affection only re¬ mained—tbe pure affe$ton of a fifter—*A perfect pe^ace of mind fucceeded, an4 rofy health once more bloomed with fummer vigour o'er her beauteous countenance, On the other hand, Lauria had related, and, if poflible, exaggerated, the dreadful adventures (which ihe had at firft neglect¬ ed
( 14* ) «d to communicate, from the deep fofröw. Æe experienced for the lofs of Florizel) which ftfe hard met with'in the Caftle tøme years back. And, in faa, it wai -wilh fonie difficulty Æe bard been per¬ fuaded 1 by her uncle (notwithftanding the filial affection flie felt for Ifabella, and the dangers that the Caftella flood expofed to on the fide of the river Cräti, from the attacks of the Coríkirs) to return again to the aplace of her former fears. As for Syl¬ via, ihe trembled only on report, like the vine leaf in autumn, when ihook by the rude north-eâft wind, as flie rode beneath the broad arch of the great gate-way, and her fpirits were only fupported by the Mpingrèbdléclíon that ihe Was going to ¿bid¿ brider inebrile roöf witb her con* ftak and beíóVedCarlo. The wèWied femJt&were fo fatigued with
í ?? ) wSÖï the expedition öf * their Journey ι ^fo harraffed alfo^ith the alarms they had fo recenti/ experienced, and the idetì -??*· ^ers like#ife that might haye accofted them oa their; w^y/that 'they h&d fearce powerìto difniount Trom their horfes. — Aflifted, however, by Rodolph and Dipoli, they once nioie'foùnd themfelves bn fafe ground.-^-The apartments prepared for them (as obferved before)'were on thé weft gallery—the fame fide^which had been for fome reafon, avoided till this time by the Count—Thither, therefore, he prepared to conduct them. ' Lauria (as formerly remarked alfo) pof- feflèd a nice difcrimination, added to a ítròng tincture of fuperftition· WhenlIÉe paffed, therefore, through äie great court* yard, flie w%s fdddenly truck (wearied and depreffed as ftie was ín mind and w body)
( 144 > body) at the novel fight of the marble equeftrian ftatue. She collected and re¬ collected her thoughts, rapid as the wind, but could not for her foul, call it to her imagination, when fhe bad been at the Caftle before. This feemed more ftrange, as ihe well knew the place had been but fo lately inhabited. Rodolph's fcrutiniz- ing eye, however, in a moment, caught her's, and with it her thoughts—he, there¬ fore, haftened on, toward the weft gallery, though not without Lauria's having fatif- fled her curiofity with a full retrofpection of the chapel, where flie was happy to find no tapers were burning, as for¬ merly. #The Count and Drofi having efcorted their new guefts to the grandeft chamber on that fide of the Caftle, he propofed leaving them alone for a while, whilft he went
( fits ) went to prepare all fit accommodations and refrefhments for the firft night—But j how great was both the furprize and aftonifhment of him and his trufty confi¬ dent, when they turned round and dif¬ covered a full and fuperb affortment of the moft beautiful female garments they ever beheld, heaped unfparingly upon a fettee at the farther end of the chamber. Ifabella, Lauria, and Sylvia perceived them, with equal fwiftnefs> and Rodolph alternately received com¬ pliments from them all on this occafion. Thç one praifing him for his conjugal at¬ tention, the fecond for his exquifite tafte, and the third for his great judgment of choice.—" As for my part (faid Sylvia, turning the habits very curioufly over) I cannot perceive one but what ¡s too coft¬ ly and magnificent for me." Vol. III. H The
( i4<r ) The Count, however, paid no atten¬ tion to the compliments now paid him fo liberally, but withal fo unmeritedly.— His eye was fixed alternately on the fet- tee and then upon Drofi ; but perceiving at length that Signiora Lauria began to make acute obfervation of his fudden fi¬ lence, his fixed reflective attitude, and ready alfo to queftion the motives of his prefent apparent furprize, he took like- wife his almoft as fudden departure ; pre¬ vioufly obferving, however, that he would depart and give orders himfelf, for the preparation of their fupper, whilft they could refrefh themfelves with changes of apparel. When Rodolph was fufficiently diftant from bearing and obfervation, he joined Drofi, in thoufands of conjectures, rela¬ tive to this laft and freih myftery.—" Be¬ fhrew
( 147 ) ftirew me, my Lord (exclaimed the lat¬ ter, in the end) but there muft be fome fecret pannel, or concealed trabochetto, on this, and, I firmly believe, on this fide only, of the Caftle , and, by St. Mark, we muft, by fome means or another, fet about, ftead ily and refolutely, to find them out.—To accomplifh this purpofe, therefore, fecretly and fecurely; I would recommend that my good Lady, the Countefs, with Signiora Lauria, fliould take occupation of our fide, left thefe hidden, and moft audacious villains (whoever, or whatever they may be) ihould attempt to work upon their wo- manifli fears, and thereby create any unne- ceffary alarm over the whole fortrefs.— We hitherto have met with nothing par¬ ticularly interruptive, or myfterious İn the oppofite gallery;—befides, I well H 2 know,
( 14» ) know, that both Signiora Lauria and Sylvia, are as credulous as Carlo.—Fran- coliffe, at Bellito, told me a good round ftory of the marvellous ftrange things that they had heard and feen, when they formerly tenanted the Caftle ; tacked with a long firing of fuperftitîous opi¬ nions and arguments, broached upon that occafion, by his young and beauti¬ ful miftrefs. With fubmiffion, therefore, my Lord, I would rather diffefít the en¬ tire weft fide of the fortrefs, to the very body of the outward wall, but I would difcover this laft and moft infolent endea- deavour to play upon your fancy and your paffions.—For it is evident, that there muft be more fecret pannels or tra- bochetto's, from the firft trick of rekin¬ dling the tapers, to this laft audacious piece of buffoonry, in furprizing us with thofe coftly
{ 149 ) coftly robes, than that which I formerly difcovered, under the guidance and influ¬ ence of my old friend, lachryma-chrifti. and I really think, that thefe fecret chan¬ nels, nuift incontrovertibly lay on this fide of the Caftle;—particularly fo, as here were the apartments in which the an¬ cient Princes of Rinaldo chiefly refided ; and thefe myfterious clues were in every probability, invented and formed by them, as leading to ultimate places of fecurity, when attacked and overpower¬ ed by the neighbouring chieftains." The Count liftened to Drofi's obferva¬ tions with unufual attention, divided with fome degree of aftonifhment. The hardy foldier delivered his fentiments with a ihare of gravity that had fcarce¬ ly ever been, till now, the companion of his nature.—To the former rough, »unpo- jj_* Mied
( i#> ) liflied temper of the man of war, he feemed now to aim at the fubtlety of the man of ftate—As his arguments, there- fore,arrived fo unexpectedly,they faftened themfelves ftill the ftronger en Rodolph's mind ; — for, from great authorities we generally are led to infpect more than much, but from weaker hands, when they, in the leaft degree, excite furprife —that furprife fwiftly increafes to afto- niihment—fuch, therefore, had the weight of Drofi's blunt and unconfidered fenti¬ ments on the judgment of his Lord, that he was determined to adopt them in their fulleft extent. As they were proceeding, however, towards the armoury, purfuing this their converfation, the Count fuddeniy halted, and reclining on Drofi's flioulder, fignifi- cantly obferved— <c But how, my fellow, co uld
( 151 ) could the fudden arrival of Ifabella and Lauria come to be known to thefe invi¬ fible mortals, that fuch fuperb garments fliould be provided for them fo appropri¬ ately—fo timely—and fo openly auda¬ cious withal, for their immediate recep¬ tion at the Caftle ?" " Why, my good Lord (replied the other) that may, in a great meafure, be afcertained ;^ for, if they (if T ;they> they are) can creep out, like rats, from their holes, with fuch a quantity of attire fad- died upon their backs, they could eonfe¬ quently overhear our difcourfe, when we went to overlook the range of apart¬ ments, againft my Lady the CountefiVs reception."— " Good !—excellently good (obferved the Count, clapping his hand to his form head)—and, now, befhrew me, Drofi, H 4 but
but my fenfes have been fo blunted with the keen edge of trouble and difappoint¬ ment, that they are dead to every quick- nefs of apprehenfion." - " As for the garments themfelves (continued Drofi, much flattered with the firft part of Rodolph's obfervation) they may ftill more eafily be accounted for ¡ and the caufe of their fo fuddeniy re-ap¬ pearing aš they have done, may, alfo, be as eafijy attached to it.—The general fack ing that took place in the fortreis, previous to your Lordftiip's firft arrival hither, anfwers for the original difappear- ance of this coftly attire ; and this their fudden re-appearance can anfwer no other defign than to throw the gauntlet óf defiance even to our very teeth; and, at the fame time, to fignify boldly unto us, that they ftand fecure againft our moft
( .«53 ) active powers, and impregnable to all ??? meditated difcoveries."— " Then let them look well,- my right good fellow (exclaimed the Count, in a fierce and and animated tone) to this their boafted fecurity.—But come, we will· fpeak farther of this fame bufinefs to¬ morrow· — To-morrow ! — Aye, to-mor¬ row, we will begin our work—Therefore,! fliall transfer the provifioning of our fup¬ per for the prefent, Drofi, to you, and fo now return, till bed time, to the Coun¬ tefs' and the fair Lauria's fociety.—In the mean while, let all my brave follow¬ ers regale themfelves in the great hall, on account of my Lady-wife's fafe arri¬ val at our caftle—half relieving the other moiety of their comrades, during their hourly watches on the ramparts.—Do you and Carlo attend us at fupper. —In H 5 the
( «54 ) the morning early (concluded Rodolph) let your nephew attend me in my cham¬ ber, as Γ ihall require fome fpecial con¬ verfe with him, relative to his journey to Bellito ---------------------------- . w
.otyyg,
f; 45 Y/ GH ??. XI. ι , ' By mine art I have from their confines caH'd V /?, to cnaét , My prefent fahcies. ■·■■ SHAKSPEARE. χ\.Τ fun-rife, Carlo,agreeable toliiscom- mands, knocked at the door of Lord Ro¬ dolph's apartment ; and being ftraight- way admitted, he fcarcely gave the Count time to make a fingle interrogatory (his uncle haying anticipated the whole of them the night before) before he proceed-* ed, as thus: " Agreeable to your directicyis, rny Lord (faid Carlo), I took the road on that fide St. Biagio, as you mentioned, and Heaven be praifed that we got to Bellito H 6 in
( ISO ) in the critical period we did: for we came up juft in time to affift the good Chevalier in repelling a party of banditti or rebels, who were attacking his Caftella wkh all their might and main. Your kinfman, my Lord, as I afterwards heard, had made a defperate fally from the front gate upon them, at the head of about ten followers, againft whom the villains alfo made an equally defperate ftand.—My¬ felf, however, with my two brave com¬ rades, vigoroufly affaulted them in the rear ; and they being thus taken by fur¬ prife, and unconfcious, perhaps, of the fmallnefs of our numbers, fled in all direc¬ tions. The Chevalier, on this, not think¬ ing it prudent to hazard a purfuit, as the villains were ambufcading all about the coaft, we all entered the Caftella, without a fingle man being either killed or wound¬ ed. Your good kinfman, my Lord, offer-
( »57 ) cd to make me a handfome pecuniary re¬ compence for my fortunate affiftance; but had he been a ftranger, your poor fervant, Carlo, would have done the fame for him, with equal zeal and good_will. Befides,, my Lord, I was foon repaid, and re-over- payed, by meeting with my Sylvia, and once more folding her within my arms· For, indeed, I have thought more than twice or thrice, from the ftrange and un¬ lucky dreams that have come over me in, this Caftle, that fomething wouid --------- Pardon me, my Lord (faid Carlo, alter¬ ing his tone and fubject, on perceiving a dark frown clenching itfelf acrofs the Count's fable brow) Pardon me ; but, fome how or another, I think that Sylvia is marvellojufly improved fince ihe has been in this falubrious part of Sicily. Now, do not you really think, my Lord, that Sylvia is fuperlatively pretty ? Fran-
( 48 ) coliffe, indeed, fays, fhe is a moft charm¬ ing little angel ; and that I may think myfelf a happy fellow in being the object of her choice and affections. And then, again, that rich habit, which your Lord- ihip*s goodnefs and generofity has beftow¬ ed upon Sylvia, makes her look fo" ------- i€ Ceafe this fubjeñ, boy (exclaimed the Count, half pleafed, and half ruffled) and tell me what brought you back to the Caftle, fo foon after the fury and violence ofthe late tempeft ? " ** Ah ! heaven knows, my Lord (conti¬ nued Carlo) it was furious and violent enough ; and it would be difficult for me to defcribe the dreadful fenfations we all experienced at this terrible b^ad awful warning, for it muft certainly forebode fome more approaching ills ; for I recol¬ lect a prophecy that was tranflated from my
( 49 ) .ily great grandame to rny grandatne, and from my grandame to roe —" €€ Curfes for ever light (exclaimed Ro¬ dolph, with fo much vehemence that made the other ftart agam) upon your prophecies and your grandames ; tQ the purpofe, Sirrah, oir ------ '* <f I íhall obey you, my Lord, with all refpeci and duty.—Well, thank heaven (continued Carlo again) we all efcaped the tempeft, and as the greateft calm, as I have heard, generally fucceeds the greateft ftorm, we feized the opportunity of its happily proving fo. Signiora Lauria, in¬ deed, laid down many found precedents« to eftablifh this principle; for the fudden ringing of bells, as ihe very wifely ob¬ ferved on this occafion, wore fure to—" <c St. Dominick feize all your ringing of bells (once more exclaimed the Count» fcarcely able, at hearing this, to keep his
( i«o I features in their ordinary traces) but fay —any thing particularly farther from my kinfman ?" ♦ , '* Nothing more than his furtherance of mutual efteem and friendihip to your Lordftiip, with kind recommendations of the learned Signiora Lauria to your good will and protection." " WeU, Carlo (concluded Rodolph) I have much to fay in commendation of your courage,, prudence, and difinterefted conduct ; and, in recompence thereof, I now appoint you the ceremonial and con¬ fidential attendant of my lady-wife and Signiora Lauria —affording "you, ?? this truft, the full opportunity of profiting by the learned difcourfes of the latter, and being continually in the fociety of your charming littfe Sylvia^ The ramparts will prefent than with the moft delight- ?
( i6i ) ful profpects; and whilft the eye is in¬ dulged, the body alfo will be recreated by exercife, and the purity of the air. But mark me, boy ; your privilege of atten¬ dance muft extend no farther. There¬ fore, hafte tp the oppofite gallery ; and in the firft antichamber await their morning fummons." On this, Carlo (hot by his uncle, who was attending at the door öf 'hi» own ap- partmént, for the Count's call, with a ftep, light as feathered Mercury, and with a heart, if poflible ftill lighter—Rodolph then joined Drofi, with whom he occu¬ pied himfelf about the Caftle, till dinner hour, when they joined the Countefs and Lauria in the great hall, which was to be appropriated in future for the place of general and convivia^affoeiation. Dinner over, the Count conducted the Ladies Ifabella
( 1?? )■ Ifabella and Lauria to his ow r n fide ofthe Caftle, to fip their beverage (as he pre¬ tended) but, in fact, to domefticate them there for the future; giving orders for that purpofe, as he went along, tp their page Carlo, to fee that every thing necef¬ fary for their ufe and accommodation, fliould be immediately removed from the weft to the eaft gallery. (i That part of the Caftle affording (as he added) the moft beautiful profpedts, and being lefs pregnable withal to the damps arifing from the bofom of the river Savuto. This bufinefs being effected, without the leaft idea of fufpicion on the part of Lady Ifabella or Lauria, the Count and Drofi foon after left them, to begin their firft watch on the other fide ofthe Caftle. The firft thing determined upon be¬ tween them was, that they fliould retain a cautious
( i6$ ) cautious and mutual filence. When they, therefore, entered the apartment where the female attire had been fo fecretly de* pouted, theyplaced their trenchant fwords and daggers on a table, feating them¬ felves oppofite to each other, with their elbows fixed thereon, and fupporting the fides of their heads with the broad palms of their hands, in anxious expectation that they might be fpeedily fummoned to call their good weapons to fome effectual ufe. In this fituation, they continued for fome hours, till at length, they conceived that they could diftinguifli the founds of ap¬ proaching footfteps, as proceeding from behind the back wainfcotting. Their at¬ tention, from difcovering this, was raifed to the utmoft pitch. They, neverthelefs, con¬ tinued immoveable on their feats, faving their intuitively griping the hilts of their and
( 1 64 ) fwords and daggers. The footfteps (feebly as they founded at firft) now became more diftinct anà"diftinót, till, at length, it ap- appeared to4røth as though they had fuddeniy halted. The Count, on this, made a motion for Drofi, to rife, and then they flowly creeped towards the wainfcot, againft which they placed their eager ears, ihooting at each other alternate glances of the moft feVagíž exultation. They now Iifteiied for revenge and death, whilft revenge and death were perhaps nearer to them than they could poffibly divine.—The found of voices next attack¬ ed their ears, but in fo weak a ftrain, and apparently at fiich a diftance, that they could not trace them to the leaft degree of intelligibility. 'Again and again, they almoft cracked the very organs of hearing, till at laft they could diftinguifli the utter¬ ance
( t «í ) ance of the following unconnected fen¬ tences : " Garments—furprife-~unequal punifhment — meditated villainy-~pity-~CoHntefs-~ no far¬ ther alarms — difpatches — Prince Rinaldo~*~ fpeedy re—firfi evening in the .month of April—« Santa-Maria—four years pafi~~villain-rem- brace — die in piect—to prayers — God be with m — fredi — to-morrow — *tk well. On this the found of the footfteps feemed to re¬ turn backward, toward the fame way from when it alfo appeared they muft have advanced. Here Drofi became fo furious and im¬ patient, that he had already prepared both hands and feet, to exert their utmoft ftrength againft th$ wamfcotting, to foice himfelf through^ when the -Count, with hia fward pointed betwixt- hia breaft and the wulkprewtóed his purpofe, and then made
( ι*« ) made a fignal to be followed immediately from thence.—He next ihot along the fpa- cious corridor, and then defcending ra¬ pidly from the gallery into the hall, he proceeded to the ramparts.—Thither ar¬ rived, he ordered Gabot and Michael, who were upon the centinél, to remove to fome diftance, and then thus addreffed himfelf to his fiery and maddened fol¬ lower > and that withal, in the fame ftrain of deliberate meditated revenge, as marked the firft traits of his character, in the former part of this Narrative. *' Droll (faid he) had you been fuffered to yield to the fudden, though honeft, im¬ pulfe of your heart, our defigns, perhaps, might have been fruftrated for eyer. — The energies of my mind,bave now come înto re-aâión. —This laft difcovery has re-infpired—"ha« re^nfpirited me.-^-It now wants
( "i«7 ) wants—mark me, a watch and a half of midnight—To-morrow, therefore, we re¬ pair again to the fame place, and firft difcover if that particular hour is the ap¬ propriate time of rendezvous.—Should it prove fo, we will ftraight fet about mining that fide of the Caftle, and in cafe of future unforefeen emergencies, deftroy both it and its fecret refidents, at once. Could the latter be happily accompliihed, it would be a mafter-ftroke, indeed ; for it is ap¬ parent, that I have been deceived in the impoftors.—Though to Bernardine and Goddard, J always attributed the defpo- liation of my hereditary poffeflions, ftill I always difcredited this, my fancy, when I turned my thoughts back on the diffe¬ rent executions of genius and induftry that have prefented themfelves ever and anon to our view.—The ftatue-r-the pic¬ tures
( ι68· ) turee — oh ! and every thing, went to con¬ tradict this now too falfe conjecture.— No—it„k now but too evident, as I have ? at ftarts imagined, that Manfredi^ has been the rock of all the wrong conftruc- tions my imagination has been ihattered on.—You heard, diftinct, this late dif¬ courfe—heard the divided parting found oí— fredi. —What could that fplit w T ord be coupled..with, but Manfredi. —Oh ! the inftinct of my foul convinces me, it muft be fo __That there is a fecret panntl, then, no doubt can poffibly remain, but ftill the fame caution, fkill, and prudence, which wrought the formation of this as yet un- jiifcovered channel of egrefs and regrefs, muft alfo have raifed an intervening ob ftacle, which by tempting us too fudden¬ iy to purfue, would have likewife im Iv¬ ed us in mifery—moft probably, in d ah. Had
t 169 1 Had we attempted and fucceeded in burfting open this clandeftine trap, fome dreadful brink, leading to a vacuity be¬ twixt us and our enemies, might have precipitated us into inevitable annihila» tion. —Inftance ftrongly confirms this fup¬ pofition ; for anciently, in many of our ftrong fouthern fortreffes, vacuities have been formed from the main body, to the utmoft extremity-of its wall; fo that in fact the fecreted perfon, by the conftruc- tion of a wooden bridge, might pafs to the interior of his Caftle, which when drawn up on the, oppofite fide, as danger or detection might make it neceffary, rendered him inacceflible to his foes.— The interval was a dreadful chafrn., and deftruction, the inevitable doom of thofe whofe fufpicions, pr ftate employments, led them to attempt the fatal difcovery î Vol ?И. I and
( i;o ) -andas they felUnto the womb of death and oblivion, fo arfo fell the fecret with them· —And/ perhaps, a fimilar fnare brought on that unconnected converfation, that we might the more unthinkingly fuffer a hafty curiofity to overcome a neceffary caution.*—«Thofe feven fentences (con¬ tinued the Count) following " gannenfs" indeed, Drofi, I cannot with any certainty comprehend. ------But then——what of " Prince Rinaldo* s~fpeedy re" —turn, muft have fucceeded of courfe— '* Firfi evening —(too methinks they faid) in the month of April" —Can Rinaldo too, then be alive? —It is almoft plain, Manfredi is—But then, why thus feparated ?—But hold— " Firfi evming in the month of April."— ?? St. Januarius, that falls on the morrow ! They faid fomething alfo ôf " tc-mcrrow." —It is ftrange—I have long conceived him
( 17« ) him dead.— <t Die ík peace"—Would to heaven, they were dead,—in peace, or not *—above or below.— i* God be with us" — God grant that they may be with him.— Nay, I thought that I had taken fafe and fufficient pains, to fend them thither.— Thought that the daggers of thofe per¬ fidious villains had been reeking, and by this time ftaunched, in their blood ;—ruf- tied alfo, with their crimfon gore, thefe fome four fummers paft 1"—-" In whofe bipod, my Lord (exclaimed Drofi, afto· niftied at this laft fanguinary exclama¬ tion ;—for he ftill continued ignorant of that fcene which had been the fubject of Rodolph's bloody attempt upon tbe lives p/ „Rinaldo, and. Manfredi) —Pardon me, but in whofe blood, my Lord r'™ — " Now befhrew me (continued Rodolph perplexed and confufed, at this fudden I 2 ~ queflio ;
.".'■ ■■.."'' ( \7 ? ï queftion ; enraged; iööreoveiv that \ hîs »paffions ihould fo foon overcome his caü- tiöb, and whith, in feet, inow made him forgøt to draw fome inferences,.» that rhight otherwife háve occured to his me¬ mory, relative to the pilgrim in Afla and Tufeany ; alfo to the prominent circum- V i|ances pf the ring, and his daughter's por¬ trait y aH of which, concentrated in one viewy might probably ha him fome more matter for the exercife of his reflections and conjectures)—-^Aye, be¬ ihrew me, Drofi, but my fenfes, purfuing diftraction, ftill lead me on to winder from the path of reafon, into a vortex of incoherences.—But come, we will give areipite for this night to thefeto^menting ■ fancies l^for ? : ??- : :-? ??'-?:/' 1 ·^ ? -·.
( 173 ) « They wound ?? thoughts, worfe than the fword my flefti; But thought's the flave of life, and life time's fool ; And time, that takes furvey of all the world, Muft have a ftop.—— SHAKSPEARE. On this, Drofi, who was not perfectly fatisfied with this laft explanation, but who ftill, however, found a freíh flow of duty and affection increafing for his Lord, as the rough ftream of ill-fortune was dafiiing againft him ; inftantly re¬ commended the Count to have a focial recourfe for the prefent evening, to that cheriihing relief of all thoughts and cares—honeft, old lachryma-chrifti ; and this friendly counfel was no fooner ftart¬ ed, than refolved upon. They, therefore, fallied into the hall, where the women were waiting to receive the Count at I s t fupper,
( 174 ) fupper, and where Rodolph might have exclaimed, with Anthony — Some wine, within there, and our viands j—fortune knows, Wc fcorn her modi when moil ihe offers blows.
CHAP.
( »75 ï
? II A P. XIIL ------ Oftentimes, to win us to our harm* The inftruments of darknefs tell us truths^ Win us with honeft trifle?, to betray us In dtepeft conference. * SÄAKSTEARK* ^NOTHING farther occured in ?? Caftle from that night, till noon the next day, when the Count difcovered from ofF the ramparts, a numerous body of troops marching about Cofenza, and filing off by different circuits.—Their fpears and helmets received freih effulgence from the beams of the fun, who was now in- the full meridian of his journey. Ro- I 4 dolph,.
( I7Ó ) dolph, on this ftrange difcovery, imrac- diately difpatched Drofi and Gabot, with orders to difcover the caufe of thefe war¬ like advances, but in a marnier fo fecret¬ ly withal, as to defeat every furprize and detection. Iri this interval, he was rack¬ ed with the utmoft anxiety, whilft his It hilled foul, whifpe;ed to his ill-boding imagination, that fome fatal mifchief was upon the move againft him. In two hours, Drofi and Gabot return¬ ed with the intelligence, that the late tempeft li3d been attended with a vio* lent eruption of Mount Vefuvius, which had nearly reduced all Naples to ruins, and that the principal inhabitants who had efcaped the wreck, were all emigrat¬ ing more fouthwardly. Duke Reignier, the Viceroy, alfo, being informed that a fecond eruption, was likely foon to fuc- cee ^
( 177 ) ceed the firft, had quitted the capital, for Cofenza ; where he propofed for a fliort time to remove the Neapolitan court.— " It was them, therefore (concluded Drofi) whom we diftinguiíhed marching in fuch warlike array, from off the ram¬ parts." This information ftruck fike a forked arrow in the heart of Rodolph*—The court fo near him, and that court (at leaft the creatures of it) his enemies, gave him more iubftantial apprehenfion, than could the whole eonibmed forces of the Sici¬ lian army.—Contarini and Montóni vVere alfo thé leading creatures of ibis farrie court'. THe letters of Fofcarini and Montalto now came frefh and hot in his mêrnory ; l —fiercer far, than the bláftéd lnquifiV riaí carnei of tríe' helf-howtmg bominick^ —« Many a good Neapolitan's Jhoulde^l^è
( 17» ? the former had obferved) fhall fmoke with blocdl —And, by St Januarius (thought Rodolph, fiercely) many a flioulder shall fmoke with blood, before they beat me off thefe tough and hardy walls.-The accufa¬ tion, however (as reported by the latter) being preferred againft him before the fe¬ cret council of the ftate, for the murder of Rinaldo, vrith other charges of high crimes and mifdemeanors, pulled his very heart- ftrings, till they made him chafe again* with terror and apprehenfion.—No time,. or opportunity, however, was to^bç loft for want of confideration ; and therefore, or¬ dering Drofi, his beft and moft faithful counsellor, in all cafes of danger, to fol· low him info his new apartment ; he be-- gan to reflect what was to be done, in » * -j this cafe of extreme danger and emer¬ gency- The
f *79 ) The Count had partially communicated the contents of Fofcarini and Montalto's- letters to his companion, and to hira alone. The danger, therefore, that now feemed to threaten him brought a*quef» tion from Drofi, which he did not think proper on a former occafion to put, as he had met with no encouragement fo ta do» —But he now aiked (after Rodolph had. expreiled his fears from the CourtV coming to hither Calabria) what charges, they could have againft him, for high* crimes and mifdemeanors? " That point (replied the Courrt)_doÊSL_„ not convey^hè^mãhT charge againft me. The pjinçipalone r I^d-tiot^mL'properl at firft to difclofe to any one, from motives of delicacy and honour.—No! the grand accufation agamft me—is the murder cf Rinaldo Γ¬ Ι ? « Indeed!!
C i8o ì fC Indeed ! my Lord (rejoined Drofi, with great aftonifhment) but then on what grounds can they accufe you of fo heinous a crime ?" " Let the charge, Sir (added Rodolph, fomewhat iharply) be heinous or no, they have accufed me of it.—But ftill, they cannot fupport the charge, fave on the ~ evidences of Bernardine and Goddard ; but they, by accufing me, muft eonfequent¬ ly and ultimately condemn and criminate themfelves." u But who can be the chief accufer^ my Lord?" " I know of none, whofe malice would ftretch fo far, except it be Philip Con¬ tarini." " But then, dare thofe villains, good rny LoroVblacken your fame, your ho¬ nour/and your courage, with the foul crime
( i8i ) crime of a fecret murder ? Can they come forward, thus to perjure themfelves, for Count Contarmi ; a villain only equalled in the villanics of their own?" " Hold—I can retain no longer the dreadful fecret from thee, Drofi, that now fwells my agitated breaft, and Cows the ^better part of me!—I will be brief and open. Mark me, then :—You recollect when I fent Bernardine and Goddard on a fecret errand to the Caftle, and from that day, as you well know alfo, I have never beheld them fince. You likewife , are acquainted with the correlative ideas I have entertained on this myfte¬ rious fubject. ------Know then—that the errand 1 fent thera on was to— r — mur¬ der Rinaldo and\Manfredi" Drofi, on this, ftarted frorn his feat, and retreated fome paces backward i for (as we have
( 18*2 ) have already remarked) he was a brave, fair foldier againft an open broad-day foe ; but a bitter enemy to the night-dark affaffin). —" Nay then (continued Rodolph) if thou wilt be gone, go—leave me—leave nie m this the hour of danger and perfè- cuton—abandon the Caftle ftraight, left thou fliould be crumbled in its ruins — Coto the court and evidence againft me. Oh ! fool that Ì was (rifing from his chair, and' clafping his forehead with his hands) fool that I was, thus to open the fluices of my foul', and drairr its moft fecret re- fources in the bofom even of confidential regard itfelf." Drofi's nature, though it thus militated againft the idea of fecret murders and midnight affaffinations, could not wkhv ftand, however, the agony, remorfe, and diftrefs that were fo ftrongly and fiercely depictured
( ih ) depictured in the countenance o|hi^Lord and Captain. Bending, therefore, on his knee, he caught hold of Rodolph's cfoak, and fvvore by the honour of a foldier, that hé would ftand by his fortunes to the laft drop of his blood.—The Count, on this, re-affumed a degree of calmnefs, that al¬ moft made him reconciled even to the ill fortunes that every where furrounded hini —For, oh ! folacing ever is the voice of fidelity and attachment, even in the laft and bittereft agonies of death. He then raifed up his fteady foldier, and folded him with fervour to his aching breaft. * Oh ! Drofi (refumed the Count) the retrofpection of Montalto's Jetter per¬ plexes me more and mote—No evidence can impeach and convict me, but that of Bernardine and Goddard ; therefore, jhey r could never be the myfterious refidents of
í 184 ) the Calile. On the other band, by înv peaching me, they muft have murdered Rinaldo and Manfredi. —If fo, Manfredi alfo cannot, as I have fuggefted, be the fecret refident. Oh ! by St. Januarius, but it is a dark and intricate affair. Per- haps, again, Manfredi efcaped, and Ri¬ naldo alone fell beneath the aflaflihs' ftrokes; for Montalto's letter fays nothing* of him in r the accufation. Then, this is moft probable, though detached from a complete certainty—Oh ! Drofi, woulci that niy kinfman vifere alive, and in pof-' feflion of this Caftle, could I but' regain my peace of mind by the dear-bought ex¬ change !" ------ " Then know, Lord Rinaldo was not mur¬ dered, but lives!!! tr —faintly exclaimed a voice, as iffuing from fome hollow place, and apparently from the fame part trie f™™**
( x"8¿ ) former unconnected founds had pro¬ ceeded.— The Count and Drofi, on hearing this, ihot up like lightning from their feats, and immediately the former, with a firm undaunted voice exclaimed—■" Oh ! un¬ known mortal, whoever thou art, do not thus conjure up my furprife and fears, by idle and cruel mockeries. If Rinaldo lives, prove thy happy words fubftantial, by in¬ forming me of thy name, and the fecret avenue to thy myfterious recefs.—And by the immortal powers, I fwea r Swear not — Neither of thefe fecrets can I yeš difclofe —/ have on oath, regiftered myfelf to preferve them mviolablyfo. — As for ihe fecret avenue that leads to my myfterious ghomy cell, it wculd be death inevitable for any one to at* tempt the difcovery tfit. -Tuer ef ore, at prefent, be content. — Thy remorfe has raifed my pity — Rinaldi
( i86 ) — Rinaldo Uves. — Re firm, therefore, and meet thy accufers with confidence and fortitude — no more—farewell.—* " Anfwer me, but this—knoweft thou, if Manfredi lives alfo? M ~ Here a folemn paufe enfued, but all was filent, as the dead of night. The inviiible reclufe anfwered no farther. The Count* however, from the laft folemn declaration, did not feel himfelf greatly difappointed -, but neverthelefs, to make recompence for this, he found his mind foftened and alle¬ viated—and his fpirits. invigorated and raifed by the ftrengthening affurances he had already heard. Then, fcarce had this laft myfterious bufinefs ended, when Gabot entered the Count's apartment, and announced the ar- val of four horfemen, in the Viceroy's uni¬ form, waiting for entrance at the great gate.
( i«7 ) gate; Rodolph was fomewhat ftartled at » this early and fudden fummons ; but c?ol- Jeâing renewed courage from what he had juft heard—" Be firm, and meet thy ac¬ ci f er s with confidence and fortitude ;" he haf¬ tened to the platform, and finding that they hâd a difpatch from the Duke Reig¬ nier, he ordered the gate to be opened ; and the meffengers having delivered their credentials, they turned, their horfes*beads again» and rode off toward Cofenza. The official letter contained, firft, a formal charge againft John Count Ro*¿ dolph, for the murder of Prkce Rinaldo 5 and fecondly, for the unlawful pofTeffion hè maintained of his caftle and domains. His accufer was alfo formally announced to be Philip Count Contarini. This notice was followed up with a fpecial fummons that he ihould appear on'the ninth hour of
( 188 ) of the following day, at the Caftle of Co¬ fenza, before the grand Council there to- be affembled, under the pains and penal¬ ties of perpetual baniihment, and conni- cation of all his properties. The Count having perufed this fum¬ mons, he then delivered it over to^Drofi for the fame purpofe, his heart burning with indignations and his thoughts teem¬ ing with iiis ? wnpand wiihe& for God's curfes againft that fell enemy of his peace and honour—the foul fiend Con¬ tarini. ' - ï il. - , , ' " Another note was contained in the dif¬ patch, which ran briefly as thus : " Noble Rodolph, " You bave been a valiant captain, * *' and a firm friend to both the Si- *' ciUesr and the King my mafter. " Your
( i89 ) <ζ Your enemies.are numerous here. ** They feek your life and for- <c tunes—beware of them ere it is " too late. « Cofenza. - « RfiieNlER." Oh ! generous Duke (exclaimed the Count) how much do I thank you for this friendly, but * fruitlefs ' warning— ala s— thou art all goodnefs—thou art too mild to combat with thefe wolfifti courtiers, clad in the lambkin's coating ! Thou art but the fhadow, not the reprefentative of royalty; but a mere ftate-wheel that every man among them can turn about. Didft 'H 1 thou but wield the iron fceptre ruftied over, and clotted thick with blood> then wouldft thou be feared and'reverenced But the innocent nature of thy temper, 3 leading
( ?? ) leading thee ever on toaös of gentlenefs and mercy, renders thee but a bauble for them to play and tofs about withal.------ Ohi Drofi (continued Rodolph, fhowing him the Duke's letter) fee^-our noble Viceroy here, bas warned me of my dan¬ ger, and has tranfmitted me clear intima¬ tion and opportunity of efcaping there from—But no ! by St. Januarius, I will not flinch a fingle ftep.-----Boldly and refo¬ lutely, I'll ftand the brunt, face to face, I will meet them, hand to hand, I'll fight them ; methinks, fo great is the defire pf my revenge, that, cannibal-like, I could eat the very flefli of Contarini, and after with my teeth fcrape his very bones I— But come, to-morrow—at the eighth hour Drofi (concluded the Count) we muft be prepared and nobly equipped, fuitable to the grcatnefs of my rank. Gabot, Mi- ¡ chael,
( loi ) chael, and Pietro ihall accompany us to Cofenza. Let it be fq ordered, and alfo reported over the Caftle, that I go to wel¬ come the Viceroy on his arrival at the capital of hither Calabria. That done, meet me ftraight in the hall to fupper, whither I will now go and make the fame rumour to my Lady-wife, and the fair Lauria—" But come tc-mcrrc-w," did I fay ? (thought Rodolph, as he parted from Diofi) well, come to-morrow then— But then, will to-morrow prove welcome unto me. Let next day then, be ?? more welcome—but next day ftiU muft have a morrovV, and that morrow, a to¬ morrow, which v/e might wiih for, even to tlie very end of time.
CHAP*
{ ? 9 ? )
CHAP. XIV. If his own life anfwer the fWightnefs of his [>to* cceding, it fliall become him welî ; wb.ercin if he chance to fail, he hath fentenced himfelf. Is there no exorcift Beguiles the truer office of mine eyes ? b*t real, that I fee? SHAKSPEARE. XIlT the feventh hour the following day, Lord Rodolph was fuperbly equip¬ ped and accoutred, as were Drofi and his three comrades. They met together in the hall, where the Countefs, Lauria, Sylvia, and Carlo, were alfo affembled to receive them. The former looked unu- fually fad and cheerlefs, for which her huiband
( 193 ï huíband greatly rebuked her ; though at the fame time, this prefage of melancholy did not tend much to ftrengthen that fortitude which he had been told was fo neceffary he fliould poffefs on this mo¬ mentous occafion. Carlo, m the mean time {who thought no otherwife than that his Lord was really going to pay hie duties to the Viceroy) was ! reporting to Sylvia his laft night's dreams, which pro- phefied no good, whilfti on the other hand, her's very much correfponded with his own. Between the feventh and eighth hour, the Count and his party were mounted, and immediately proceeded on their road to Cofenza. The former often looked back upon the proud walls of his ftately Caftle, and moved with that kind of fym¬ pathy, which there is no actually ac- Vol. III. ? counting
( 195 ) counting for, he regarded them with the, fame uncommon anxiety, as when the tender father commits his beloved fon to the doubtful mercies of the tempeftuous ocean, 'and take« his laft farewel, tinc¬ turing it at the fame time, with the bit¬ ter uncertainty of never beholding him again. The» Countefs» with Lauria and Carlo, had afcended the ramparts, and there the former waved to Rodolph, till diftance robbed her of his fight ; and here alfo, whether it was from the prefent noble appearance and deportment that her huiband carried with him on this occa¬ fion, or forne other^ fecret caufe, but flie moiftened her waving hand with many a fcalding tear;—whilft Carlo, ftill more to encreafe the depreflion of her fpirits, was amufing Lauria and Sylvia clofe by, with
( >9¿ ) with telling them on what he dreamt laft night, arid which fimply purported— " That his lord had been carried, off in a terrible whirlwind, and that he had never been heard of afterwards." This con¬ verfation, however, was cut off in its in¬ fancy ; for, on turnin g round to another part of the ramparts, they difcovered five horfemen, galloping with the utmoft fury, at the diftance of about two miles from the Caftle. In this manner they rode onward in a direct- line to them, till they halted in an open extended plain, ^ « thinly encumbered with trees, to about a mile farther, where, after difmounting one by cne, both men and horfes fudden¬ iy difappcared. Here arofe a fine field for conjecture and argument, between Lauria, Sylvia, and Carlo. The former immediately declaring, that there muft ? ? be
( I0Ò ) ?? fome fecret paflage there to the Caftlo, as ihe had often read of fuch things in ber grandame's great book of fpirits and • necromancers.—" Oh! Jefu Chrifti! I have no doubt of it, Signiora (rejoined Carlo, after exprefling a wifli that the Count and Drofi had been prefent to have feen them) and no doubt alfo, they are fomc robbers, who have haunted this Caftle, .and frightened all of us, as they have «done, out of our fenfes, merely to drive us away, and fecure it to themfelves. Lady Ifabella, and the reft, having abandoned their fituation on the rampärts, the former flowly retired to her own chamber, there to indulge her forrowful refleâions (for forrow will ever have iti* melancholy indulgences) in privacy and folitude. ' Signiora Lauria, however, with her page and Sylvia, quickly de¬ fcended
k m ) fcended into the great hall j and now, for the firft time, the arched door that led in¬ to rbe cloifters, and which had been pb- liquely and carelefsly left ajar by Ro¬ dolph, caught Carlo's attention. At ftir¬ ring inclination immediately poflefled him to furvey this dreary part of the Caftle, but his fears and fuperftition checked thefe rifing emotions.. Whatever, never¬ thelefs, was his fecret and intuitive dread, they were coinpelied to yields to the ur¬ gent felicitations of Signiora Lauàa, to accompany her thither ¿ for whenever any inyfterfous object appeared, her curiofity was fure, ? general, to predominate over her fuperftitîous fancies Gown the ????^ of ttie cloifters, th^refote, at lier requeit, they all fallied, though with ??? ??,?- tiovts, and trembling fteps; Sylyia hoging dofe upon Carlo's arm, the fears of tune ? 3, communicating^
( *9δ ) communicating themfelves infcpaiably tu' the other two------At length, they reach- ed thé cymetery, where, like Rodolph he- fore, they foon difcovered the great bell, a proftrate object, ofthe heavens frrefiftible powers. The fight of the gaping and fhattered monuments, however, had a far different effect on their refpective feelings than" they had upon thé ftubborn ones of the Count and Drófi. They infpired them with the moft religious awe, which found an innate and confolatory vent, in devout acknowledgments tó trie fuperior and vaft powers of the Suprèrne Being. For Carlo's good ferife and quick difcrimina¬ tion'had immediately attributed this de¬ vastation to íhe laté furious tempeft. Hav¬ ing mW, however, fatisfied their untaint¬ ed-conferences, by pouring forth their x holý and fincere orifons, they prepared to abandon
í m ) abandon this awful charnel-hòbfe ; whetíí lo \ — anotheV freih circdmflance (to them horrible indeed) faftened upon their fight, and almoft momentarily deprived them of their fenfes :—For, neat 1 the porch of the cymetery they difcoverédar ihalfow grave, fcarce more than two feet; deep, and in which lay a corpfe,apparently quite freih. The features were quite diftinci ; and by the few hairs left on the-head and beard, which were as white as filver, they denot¬ ed the appearance of good old age. Luu- ria and Sylvia, had nearly fainted beneath their fears. Carlo, neverthelefs, had the courage left to re examirie the corpfe, and thought he bad feen thp features be¬ fore, but where he could not ïpoflibly di- vine? The women, however,.*cried out " to he gone. 1 ' —The only words, in hü, that they could articulate. . Carlo, imme- K 4 diately
( 200 ) diately took'each by the arm, and moved quicker backward through the cloifters |nto tbe halb by three leagues in pace fwifter than that in ^hich they came. The page, however, before he finally aban¬ doned the cyøletery, could not refrain from obferving a pick-axe and chifel laying on the paverhent, noar the grave ; Which difcovery inffiáhtly implied to him, <c That the còrpfe had been but juft conveyed into the charnethoufe, and that the fe¬ cret refident,* ofr refidents of the Caftle, bad fled en diftingnifliing their approach¬ ing fcotftëlpé« tod muiißautfeg voices j I * hâve it in evidence^ however (bethought Carlo innately) that' no frefh rnurder has been committed within thefe myfterious Walls, as neither fymptoms of violence, or figns of penfør* wère perceptible on the body or eounHenance of the corpfe/' But
( aoi ) But bö|d—the wil}^ff^te ^raw? near, and we mx& now fe^ve the finisle Carlp;, the beauteous Sauria, and the hjnpcent Sylvis tö enjoy thejr refpective arpnieiits and reflections upop th^s İste grange oc¬ currence, whilft ^e retp^ tf W»tter$ sf greater iniport, The Count, after he &«d|oijr. $ght QÍ tfee fortrefs, rode qS ? ?} fy%f$ tQ .Çofep^a* s&4 was r^ce^iv^d at ?? Çfflç pte frith afl due military ??/??$ ?$ <??? by ttie Viceroy's body-giffird f ar^ç] yrhere ?$ çar- ^er^cl <?ίφο^ ¡?^???^ ^ISctip tQ a^a.it hk return, fo 4he t court-^r^l f whiire crowds ^a<L alfemltk^. tp $?? $?? çu, fiçfity, ^ was nie¿ bj t}ie ???????? í>'4rços, wlio fjprf ^g $??$ to jçejBt ??????? hinist Ψ«γ%5Ρ ?5?? r n jp ag^d .^rns, f ^ifh t atl ,t^ t en^r^r ^ ^ ^aken Fîiendftiip ^ irnniu|ab^ gg$* K 5 ^efe
( 202 ) nefs of foul. The Chevalier, however, not being able to refrain from Iettino; fall the deep* figh of regret, Rodolph fupported his drooping fpirits with the affurance that all would go íhortly well, and as he could wifli. ' ? Then heaven be praifed for that (exclaimed D'Arcos) and on that confir¬ mation I can fupport this trying fcene with fortitude and patience !" On the flairs leading into the grand hall, the Count was received by his old friend and brother-foldier, Orfini, cap¬ tain of the Citadel, to whom he took this opportunity of delivering up his fword. 'Benig 'then conducted by him to the mte- teribr; attended by the Chevalier and Drofi, Rodolph made his obeifance to the'Duke Reignier, who was fitting in his robes, at the top of the hall, in the great chair of ftate. In the centre were the judges
( 203 ) judges and the counfellors of the law, to whom, he alfo made his fecond obedience. A feat was then prepared for himfelf and D'Arcos (Drofi taking his ftation behind; towards the lower part of the hall—All was now huflied—an awful ferenity every where prevailed—and all fat in filent ex¬ pectation for the accufer, who foon after¬ wards appeared from an antichamber, on the right fide of the hall, magnificently habited ; and from his fpiendid figure he feemed more fuited for the celebration of a royal nuptial, than the folemnity óf a court of juftice. Having made his gene¬ ral obeifance, he delivered his fword over to captain Montoni, and then feated himfelf with thorough calmnefs and bold affurance, oppofite to Rodolph, though at fome paces diftant. At the fight of this, the Count's blood ? 6 fluflied
( 404 ) fltííhed up like a fountain to his palid countenance, whilft his big heart almoft bura With anger and revenge. The prefident of the council having read over the charges of accufation, Lord RQdolph pleaded guiltlefs j and then de- lied his enemy to come forward and fub- ftaritiate, if he could, what he had fo trai- teroufly advanced. Philip Count Contarini on this, coolly rofe up, and pledged the forfeit of his head, 1f he did not make his cafe appear clear and incontrovertible to the court and the Whole face of Italy .-With that he began his primary charge ; and in order to render the foundation of his impeach¬ ment the ftill ftronger, by fixing a ground¬ work, laid by the dæmon of revenge, he opened firft by criminating Prince Rinal¬ do himfelf With having debauched the Count's
( 205 ) Count's daughter ; and which he affirrned was the main caufe that afterwards led to the perpetration of the murder. ?? this firft point, Contarini dwelt with much diffufenefs, more cunning, and moft exquifite cruelty, cutting the heart of Ro¬ dolph in twain, almoft at every word-— piercing his agonized mind with the moft bitter retrofpeâions of his long-loft, ruin¬ ed, abandoned, and beauteous Santa-Ma¬ ria. He next proceeded to relate the minuteft circumftances of Bernardine's and Goddard's firft interview with Count Rodolph on the fubjeci of Prince Rinal¬ do's aifaffination—The fair promifes wirb which he allured them on to perpetrate the infernal aâ —The Wilful manner in which he formed his plot for carrying the murder into effeÖual execution ; and the ftill more artful method he contrived fo* preventing
( io6 ) preventing all poflible means for an here¬ after difcovery—" But God is juft (ex¬ claimed the impious hypocrite) and will not fuffer murder even in this world to go unpunifhed. Contarini began next to relate the moft particular circumftances of the actual perpetration of the Prince's af- faffination.—He boldly afferted that Ber¬ nardine and Goddard had laid in ambufli for Rinaldo and Manfredi, in the adjacent woods, and that ftrictly conformable to the directions of Lord Rodolph.—That they fell in with him and Manfredi there, and ruihing upon the former by furprize, üke hungry tygers from their covered dens, had favagely murdered his noble kinfman, with wounds as innumerable, as inhumanly dealt.—But that being too intent upon the lion, they had fuffered the
( 207 î the jackall to efcape.—Now fearful, therefore, of detection, from the.vigi¬ lance of Manfredi (againft which my Lord Rodolph, gave them fit leffons arid due caution) thefe miferable tools and victims of his great revenge, and ftill greater ambition, fought for their future fafety in their immediate flight. Thefe laft words of Contarinls cowed indeed, the better part of Rodolph*— His fortitude from them encountered wounds, iharper than the keeneft fcyrni- tar could deal. Still that natural anxiety, which every man experiences for life and honour, when plunged almoft to the very verge of defpair and infamy^led him to reft his all upon the folemn aflTurances of the unknown reclufe in the: Caftle; and if he indeed is the faved Manfredi, then (thought £odo!ph) he and he alose* muft
( *?8 ) muft beft know his Prince's real fate 5 ; and, as yet, I will venture boldly on the hazard of this fatal die.. Contarini having gone through his firft charge, he ordered his tyitneffes to be called and placed at the bar—when-p- what was the aftonifhment, terror, and the feelings of Rodolph, when he faw himfelf confronted by Bernardine and Goddard.' —He trembled, turned rnpre Bvid than livid death itfelf, arid fo great were his agitations, his tumults of body and mind, fo ftrong and vifible, as ftruck the attention and excited the pity of the whole court. Perceiving, however, that the prefident was about to proceed in the examinations, he rofe with much perturbation, and requefted that the Witøefles might be examined apart; whicb bemg irnmediately affented to by the
( 209 ) the court, Goddard was ordered to with¬ draw. Bernardine then entered upon hîs evir dence, which was a mere echo of what the Count Contarini had himfelf ad¬ vanced. Goddard being next brought forward» his evidence alfo tallied fo exactly with his comrade's, as made the guilt of Ro¬ dolph appear in the cieareft manner, ur> on the firft charge. The Count was fo choaked with rage, defpair, and furprize, at the clofe tutored ?? manner in which thefe villains gave their refpeäive evidences that his paffions for fome moments, checked his utterance. He, however, rofe, and interrogated the former, how he and his comrade had paf« fed their lives, fmce the fuppofed murder of Prince Rinaldo? "We
??? ) " We have lived by plunder and de- ftruflion (replied Bernardine) in forefts and ην caves; for expelled through fear from all fociety, and hardened by the firft bafe murder we had committed, we did not ftoj} at committing the very worft of cru^^^ St. Januarius (exclaimed Ro* uting a look of the utmoft fierce* Contarini) but you have been id well.—But fay again—how came to the knowledge and tutorage of *ount Philip there ?'* " In this our fong career (rejoined Ber¬ nardine) juftice at length overtook us; for having heard by a fpy, difpatched on purpofe from our party, that my I^ord Contarini, was on his route to Sala ; we concealed ourfelves in a little foreft, near the River Molfe* and then pouring upon thera
( 211 ) them in their rear, in the Vale of Diana, we plundered his whole fuite, and in the fkirmifh feverely wounded Count Philip. By the vigilance, however, of Captain Montoni, and one Hurtado, we were traced and detected in the haunts and caves we had formed in the fides of the Jppenine Mountains.—- -Confcious, there¬ fore, that we had too much injured him and his already, we begged^ to fee him in our dungeon, and there made a full confet fion of Prince Rmaldo's murder, and our being engaged by you, my Lord, to com¬ mit the bloody deed." Rodolph was now doubly'ftruck with furprize and confufion, at the well con¬ certed ftyle in which Bernardine gave in his evidence. Every paft circumftance that had taken place in Bianca** cottage, now occurred with terror to his imagina^ tion»
( 212 ) tion. The names pf Mønt pni and Hur¬ tado were more terrible than the block, which he now few ftaring him in the face. Every collateral, occurrence ihot like furies through his recollection, and almoft forced him into the credit of that, which moft of the court h&d already be¬ gan to regard as incontrovertible. Sure¬ ly (conceived the almoft felf-convicted Coutijt) tht& bitter enemy of mine has converfe^ with the feme fecret reclufe, tbje fame tnyfterious mortal, fpirit* devil, witch, pr whatever it may be, who has difcovered all the truths to him, the more to abufe and deceive me. " But then (continued Rodolph) were ye not fuborned or menaced by fome fair promifes or cruel threats, thus io come* forward, and fwear fo faifely againft my Hfe ??! honour?" Here
( *? ) Here Bernardine hefitated, but the court immediately infifting on a replica¬ tion, he anfwered — "Yes —We were pro¬ mifed a full pardon for all our offences, and abfolution for all our crimes, if we would come forward, and confefs our murder of Prince Rinaldo, before the grand council of the ftate." " How did Count. Philip (repeated Rodolph)—how did he exprefs himfelf, when you made this confeffion, was it in pity or anger, joy or exultation í" "In joy, my Lord." " This evident fubornation, inou reve¬ rend Signiors (rejoined the Count, with more than ufoal energy) will, l hope, in¬ validate this man's evidence, and prove that malice, hatred, and treachery, were thé ground-works of this bafe accufa¬ tion." "My
( 214 ) * ζ My Lord Rodolph (replied the {vre- fident of the council) though this con¬ feflion 'may ihow malice on the part of Count Philip, ftill it cannot cruih or weaken the witnefles's evidences, with¬ out you can adduce proofs of à ftronger nature, to invalidate his teftimony. The accufed, on this, addreffed the Court as thus : ** I now rife in the moft folemn man¬ ner, to declare my innocence againft this foul accufation, that has been fo artfully made againft me ; and n fo far as regards the murder of Prince Rinaldo, I have the moft prefumptive evidence to prove, that he is now actually in exiftence." On this, Rodolph conveyed jthe moft bitter retorts on bis ^cpufer^ whom ? directly charged with having fuborned both Bernardine and Goddard, under the fpecious
( ??$ ) fpecious pretences of promifing them pardon in this world for their enormous crimes ;—*' an immediate implication (he faid) on the juftice, wifdom, and integrity of the Neapolitan laws, and its admini- ftrators;"—and afterwards buoying them up with falfe hopes of ablution in the world to come, thereby fignify ing that the church was as much in his grafp as the law, and both equally at his controul and dis¬ cretion.—Impioufly making fport of the' rninifters of ecclefiaftical, as well as of ætherial juftice, to gratify his malice, re¬ venge, and ambition. " Place before your eyes (exclaimed Rodolph with encreafed animation) a miferable criminal, con¬ demned to fuffer torments on the rack, for one poor murdered fellow-creature; and let the man of power defcenct to his dreary dungeon, and promife him life and
( «6 ) ànd abfolütion, if he will not afterwards new-fet the edge of his already bloody poignard, and plunge it in the hearts of fcores, to fatisfy his redeemer's meditated revenge. There are fome kingdoms (continued the Count) where liberty and the laws are refpected and adored, and where they would tell you, that a man condemned, is afterwards dead, both to the law and the world, and therefore, no fit tool, to cut out the work of yon accu¬ fer, there.—Oh ! moft reverend Signiors, from this, I tax not the equal equity of our Neapolitan laws;—but when L be¬ hold that ------ Count Contarini! who would faifely fwear away my life, and defpoil me öf that fame which my good fword has ac¬ quired by the dint of arms, and that hon¬ our alfo, which ever had been attached fo the houfe of Rodolph, until it was a fullied
( 217' ) fullied by the kindred name of Conta¬ rini. My very heart boils with the over- fcorching heat that fires my blood be¬ neath. To ftrengthen, alfo, his artful ac- cufations, he has even criminated the noble perfon whofe caufe he has at¬ tempted to efpoufe—Has cruelly, too, endeavoured to wring and cut in tw r ain tlie tender feelings of a parent, by draw¬ ing, in the moft glaring and infamous characters, the misfortunes of his child. Had Count Philip come forward to im¬ peach me as the murderer or* our lioble kinfman» on the folid ground of fair and impartial juftice; had an honeft con¬ fcience ftirred him on, he might have then been entitled to the acknowledg¬ ments of this courts and his wholp ???? ? try. But, no ! to, the extreme of; thi§, tø has founded his elairns on malice, hairctf, Vol. III. L treachery,
( »ι« ) treachery, and fubornation—felf-intereft, unprincipled felf-intereft, is the bafis on which- he fprings—to build his fortunes upon the ruins of my "head and houfe. But you, moft noble Duke, and yè, wife counfellors- of impartial juftke, cannot (concluded Rodoìph) pay aught atten¬ tion [to the evidence of thefe confeffed plunderers and murderers; they that have fo long exifted on the miferies and deftruction of their fellow-creatures; and at laft, to fave themfelves, under the fa¬ ble wìng of power and corruption, from thofe heavy punifhments which that per¬ jure, Bernardine himfelf, has even con¬ feffed he merited long ago, have now come forward to fave their carcafes from the torturei of the rack, to impeach me of a crime which never had * an exif¬ tence, arid which nothing but the extre mity
( 219 ) mity of malice, and the proverbial arti¬ fices of Count Philip there, could ever have found invention fufficient to main¬ tain with the fuperficial glare of proba¬ bility, as he has already done." ' Having thus briefly replied to the firft charge of his accufer, Rodolph produced Drofi, as an evidence, relative to the cir¬ cumftances that had lately taken place in the Caftle (and with which the reader has been fo recently acquainted with) j but as they appeared of fo weak, fictious, unfubftantial, and improbable a nature, the court would fcarcely hear him through with patience. Count Philip then rofe up, to make his fecond charge ; but the prefident in¬ terrupted hira, by obferving, that pre¬ vious to that, the court would take the firft into confideration. He then order- La ed
( 220 ) ed the accufer and the accufed to be conducted into different chambers, under ihe¡r refpective guards, till the opinion of the council could be decided. On this, they made their obeifances as they entered.—Far different, however, were the fenfations of Contarini and Rodolph, at this momentous period.— The one retired with exultation in his countenance and deportment ; the other departed abforbed in anxiety and defpair; and what touched him moie poignantly than all, on quitting the court, was the fight .of his friend, the Duke Reignier, who fat difconfolate in his chair of ftate, with his purple wrapped over his face, evi¬ dently regretting the unhappy iffue ofthat day's eventful # trial. The council, after a few minutes' deli¬ beration, unanimoufly agreed, that John Count
( »21 ) Count Rodolph was guilty of the mur¬ der of bis kinfman—the moft noble Prince Rinaldo. —It now, therefore, only remained with the Viceroy, to fign and feal the fcntence—When------------------ * Captain Orfini fuddeniy entered the af- femblý, and faid—«* That the noble and valiant John Count Rodolph, was no more ; having poignarded himfelf the very inftant he had gained hvs footing in the anti-chamber of the hall."---------But hold—for here muft we dedicate a tri¬ butary tear to the memory of the brave and honeft Drofi, who like a Roman liv- ed, and like a Roman died.-—Drofi could not furvive the blemiflied honour of his generous mafter, and undaunted captain. —No ! Lord Rodolph had led him on to battle ; fought on the fide of him, fpear poized with fpear, fword raifed with fword L 3 —With
( ??? ) —With him, therefore, he was refolved to die ; and plucking the crimfon poig¬ nard from his mafter's heart, he buried it in his own, embracing him as he fell; whilft the guihing blood, —In friendly kiifës told, 4 Like fome fond and amorous pair, the intermingling ecftafies of paft mu¬ tual endearments.—And now, farewell, honeft Drofi-*thou favourite darling of my fancy ! and o'er thy grave, be this thine epitaph:— <—_-———~-A merrier man, Within the limits of becoming mirth, * I never fpent an hour's taik withaî. SHAKSFIAftE.
CHAP.
( 2^3 )
CHAP. XIV. . ;, , y, , tit Lo! by thy fide where rape and murder Sands ; , Now give fome 'iurance that thou ait revenge : Stab th^m, or tear them on thy chariot-^wheels, And then 1*11 come and be thy "waggoner, And whirl, along with thee, about the globe ; Provide, too, proper paliries, black as jet, To hale thy vengeful waggon fwift away, And find out murders in their gpilty caves ; And when thy car is loaden with their heads, I will difmount, and by thy waggon-whëel Trot like a fervile footman all day long., SHAKSPEA1E. , * Philip contarini, having been ftraightways made acquainted with thefe welcome tidings, he ruihed exultmgly into the hall, and prayed that fcntence might be paffed upon the fecond chargé, L 4 before
( 224 ) before the council broke up. Lord Ro¬ dolph had given a negative proof of his guilt, by the impious fteps he had taken to refcue himfelf from the horrors of a public execution. The court on this, was on the point of confulting relative to this death-hunting appeal of the Count, when they-were difturbed and alarmed, , by á fudden and violent noife in the yard, which was fucceeded by the diftractcd appearance of a noble ^and beautiful youth, Who precipitately entered the hall* and begged protection and juilice for himfelf and his friends. Before this requeft, however, could be immediately acceded to, the Viceroy demanded to know the caufe cf this abrupt and un¬ precedented intrufion into the prefence of reprefentative majefty? ·* To feek protection and juftice from the
( **5 ) prefence of that auguft reprefentation, 11 firmly replied the ftranger. " The protection you require (an¬ fwered the Duke, ftruck with the noble mien and intrepid air of the youth, which· eonveyed with them much honor and an undaunted fpirit) fliall be granted to youi? friends. Therefore, let them be forth.- with admitted into the open court.-—But fay—againft whom do you thus boldly demand our juftice /* " Againft yonder Count, there (faid he, cafting a look of the moft penetrating fiercenefs on the aftoniihed Contarini^ and which ftrucjc the whole court with equal amazement;!—it is there, I point the finger of accufation,tuid do direaJy charge him, in the open face of this whole coun¬ cil, with the foul and complicated, crimes of murder y facrikge % and incefi ^ upon the L 5 immediate
( 22? ) immediate forfeiture of my head, if I make not good all thefe my accufa- tions." f< Your name, ftranger ?" " Ferdinand, fon and heir to John Count Rodolph— ------------ The unhappy victim of fome feven fummers' miferable captivity, from the hell-inventive artifices of my father's moft perjured accufer, his moft rancorous enemy—Philip Contarini, there.* —But now, armed with truths—moft damnable truths—and protected by the impartial arm of juftice, I will even fink him lower than thofe howling fiends he has fo long worihipped with fecurity and fuccefs !" At'thefe laft firm and folemn affu¬ rances, guilt, with ber fable wings, perch¬ ed upon the firinkiftg creft of Contarini, and he was attempting to retire from the * hall—
( '2iy ) hall-t-dartmg, as he turned, the moft ar¬ rogant glances of difdain and diftruft up·* on his bold accufer, as though none dare to circumvent his purpofes when the Vice¬ roy interpofed, and immediately ordered Signior Örfini to place à captain's guard over him, till he fliould fully anfwer the charges made againft him by Ferdinand, with fpecial care, alfo, that Bernardine an4 Goddard fliould be clofely watched, and lodged in a ftronger place of fecurity than that in which they now were* " |n the mean time, youth (continued the juft Reignier) fee that you bring thefe heinous charges directly home to the nobleman you háve fo boldly açcufed, or your head becomes tbe juft forfeiture of your failure —for-^lb juftiçjB muft hereafter guide our councils, and the laws direct our fen- tøice." L 6 « On
( 2^8 ) " On them, moft noble Duke ¡rejoined Ferdinand, with more calmnefs, but with equal fortitude) I reft my doom." " My Lords * (exclaimed Contarini, ftung with doubt, rage, and difappoint¬ ment) this muft be fome young impofter, inftigated by the intrigues of Rodolph's friends, to feek my life, and fave their confifcated properties.—Count John's fon and heir has been deceafed thefe fome years paft.» ' " To the world I have (retorted Ferdi¬ nand, with a moft contemptuous fneer) and thanks for that to thee,, Lord Philip. But thou fee ft withal, I have once more rifen from oblivion, to precipitate thee into a worfe abyfs than flavery—aye, into irrecoverable fliame and ignominy." " Knoweft thou, youth (faid the Vice¬ roy
( a¿ 9 ) roy in an accentof much foftnefs) that thy once noble parent is no morer" ?( I heard the rumour and manner of hisdeatîvmoft noble Duke, before I could force my paflage to the hall. Oh ! haplefs delay (exclaimed Ferdinand, ftruggling hard to check his rifing emotions) Oh í had we but rode fwifter on the back of time, and fpurred his ftirring tides more deeply even in the hafte and gallop, of but fome few five minutes fooner, then had we ftopped the fatal blow. But hold (continued he, recollecting himfelf) let me not dedicate one fingle tranfitory tear to the memory of the facred author of my exiftence, till I have refcued it from the infamy ,arid guilt with which Lord Phi¬ lip-would ^ have difpatched it to, the grave!"—'· « Knoweft thou, youth (added the İ-' . Duke
:'."■". f ??^ ) .'■',■'' Duke J that the wife arid re verend jçoun- ciî here afiembled, have upon the cieareft arid moft perfect evidence, found your deceafed father guilty of the heinous charges preferred againft him, by the noble Lord that you have in turn ac^ cufedr" ■■-. r : -?·": u I know not much of thaty rnoft noble Viceroy (returned Ferdinand^Hvith an air of modéft triumph and rebuke) but this I know (and ftraight on purpofei to lave the time and patience of the reverend judges here affembled) I will- now (riroducing ajt the fame iriftant^4a : ftranger, who had ruihed forward» with four others, al¬ fo, to the council cháni ber, and in the heinbte attire of t'tîlgrm) that I haye here byought íor^arárr^^^whQÍt] powerful teftimony will altogether provethe inno¬ cence of my facrificed S irei— the malice, :ì; i 5 g ui &
( ? 1 ) guilt, and infamy of Count Philip there— and how cautious even the wifeft among the wifeft of us ihould be in adjudging their fellow creatures to death and in¬ famy." ----- On this—the" ftranger threw off his pilgrim's attire ; and to the afto¬ niihed eyes of the Viceroy and his whole court—appeared — — The Prince Rinaldo!!! ----- Fain would I delineate the looks, ac¬ tions, and emotions of the contrafted cha¬ racters, who reprefented this eventful fcene. Let the villain Philip, however* be drawn ihrinking deep into the fell abyfs of defpair, guilt, rage, difappoint- ment r and deftruction inevitable: and, now would he have followed up his vic¬ tim's late r¿% example, had noè Orfini ftopped his arm, and wrenched the po¬ niard from his grafp— thus haply preferv¬ ing
( ?%% J mg his life for a few ihort hours, that he might hear and feel fuch charges of hor¬ ror, and compunctions of remorfe, as would fend him freezing to the dreadful fcaffokL At the other part of the hall ; and, on the fide of Ferdinand, had ftood all along a rude and boifterous looking man. His beard was black and bufliy. The ocean appeared to have been his natural element, and the general fiercenefs of his counter nance and mien formed,, in ihort, a ftrik¬ ing contrail to the youthful, modeft,* and beautiful features- of the rainftrel Valen» tine, who was ftanding clofe by, with tha fatal caiket in his hand, and his lute 4 ftrung acrofs his íhonlders; whilft'behind them, finiihing the groupe, ftood the healthful and vigorous Sebaftian, with the aged and filver-bearded Launcelot 'Rinaldo,
( 43 ) . Rinaldo, after having received the con¬ gratulation of the" whole council* was on the point of making his way towards the Viceroy, who was prepared to receive him, when the general attention was for a ftiort time called off, to the lower part of the hall, by a frefli fcene of difcovery, which roufed the general fympathy more forcibly than the one already made— For, Valentine, furprifed,and overcome at the fuddeq change made from the pil¬ grim to the prince* had fell lifelefs at the feet of Ferdinand ; whilft D'Arcos, on the other hand, who had continued in the anti-chamber, laving tbe gaping wound of his dead kinfman with many a fcalding tear, being now informed of the ftrange reverfe of circumftances that had taken place, ruihed into the hall, and the firft objecl that came acrofs him happening to be
( 234 ) be the fainting minftrel, who was fupport¬ ed on Ferdinand's knee, his head reclin¬ ing backwards on his breaft, and his long treffes hanging over his fupporter's ihoul- ders—he exclaimed aloud—" Gracious God 1 can this really be, or do my aged eyes, dimmed with tearful forrow, deceive my fenfes ?—Nc^—it is him*-At is ¿¿r-r-it is Florizel—it is—Santa-Maria. The dear child of my murdered friend^—Oh ! Ro¬ dolph, would that the fight of this thy long-loft daughter would re-animate thy cold body ! * But that being now im¬ poifible, I wiU be her future parent— Yes, thou darling of my fancy (perceiving her revive by degrees) I will hereafter be thy father—thy protector—thy all in ali."— The lively intereft that this affecting groupe excited among the noble fpecta- tors
( 45 ) torswho fürveyed the tender fcene, re¬ quires moft the command of the pencil than the pen. Rinaldo, indeed, expreffed the firft and greateft emotions of furprife ; for as the Minftrel's head lay reclined on his friend's bofom, he difcovered his. own picture depending from the youth's neck. —Eut, as Santa-Maria (for we will call her the minftrcl no more) began to ihow gradual figns of recovery; fo did they be¬ gin to regain their fpeech; and Ferdi¬ nand firft catching up the tender declara¬ tions of D'Arcos, joyoufly exclaimed, " No, believe me, my good and right no· ble triend, that muft not be—for—I am the brother of Santa-Maria, and to that en¬ dearing title muft hereafter add thofe of father and protector." Now, by mine honour (rejoined the Prince)
( aj6 ) Prince) that muft neither be—I have a claim fuperior to ye both—a claim regif¬ tered in heaven, and which muft be re¬ corded on earth. None, therefore, fliall difpute my title of protectorfhip to San¬ ta-Maria, as i" already am ------ her huf- handr— The generous Djjke, after having taken the opportunity of congratulating Ferdi- nand on thus happily recovering a fifter, and Rinaldo alfo of having recovered a wife ; he next recommended them to entruft San¬ ta-Maria to the tender care of D'Arcos, a$ the fudden influx of furprife that might come upon her when perfectly recovered, at meeting with them both fo unexpect¬ edly, would probably once more fufpend the re-action of her intellectual powers* In the mean time (concluded the Vice¬ roy),
( 47 ) roy) I fliall requeft of the good Signior Örfini here, to fend the Lady Santa-Ma¬ ria all neceffary female attendance, and procure for her, apparel fuitable to her fex and dignity." The noble-hearted D'Arcos being there¬ fore entrufted, for the prefent, with the foie charge of his adopted child, he led her to an interior apartment, where he was foon after joined by Orfinls wife herfelf^ and her beautiful daughter. " And now, my young friends (faid the Duke, preparing to refume his chair of ftate ; and the judges being again re-feated) we will once more proceed to the conciufion of this day's eventful trial.—That done (concluded he) I fliall expect that you will relate to me the myfterious fource from which thefe mar¬ vellous 4
( 2 3 8 ) vellous circumftances have fo unexpect¬ edly burft upon us, and which have even almoft made us difcredit the very power of our fenfes."
CHAP.
( *39 )
CHAP. XV. And thus the whirligig of time brings in his re» venges. Then gave I her (fo rutor*d by my art) A fleeping potion, which fo took effect j As I intended; for it wrought on her The form of death·— » ■ ....... a thoufand knees Ten thoufand years together, naked, feiling, Upon a barren mountain, and itili winter, In ftorm perpetual, could not move the gods To look that way thou wert. ' * V SHAKSPEARE, I INURING this interval, the guilty Phrjip attempted to take the opportunity of the confufion and furprife that prevail- ed, and effect his efcape \ but the guards placed over him by Orfini, were too vigi¬ lant
{ Ho ) lant for him to complete his defign.—* Upon queftioning, therefore, one of Mon- tont's creatures, relative to the caufe that had excited this interruption ; and being informed thereof, the dreadful anfwer crept like poifon through his veins. His- whole body ihuddered at thefe por¬ tentous founds of his approaching deft iny with horrors inconceivable.—He could have ftooped and daíhed his head againft the ftones with defpair and rage¿ had he not been («pported by his infufferable pride.—" What (thought Philip within himfelf) has Santa-Maria rofe up in judg¬ ment too againft me? Am I not, more¬ over, about to be accufed for facrilege and inceft ?—Then it is but too evident that I have by fome means been betrayed by Father Conrad. Oh ! hell and torments! But as I have been caught in my own toils
( »4* ) toils (internally concluded the exafperat¬ ed Contarini) and can find no means tó extricate myfelf, I will not meanly crouch to thofe who have thus entrapped me, but bay them with my malice to the very iaft !" On this, Count Philip, perceiving his accufer prepared to open his fecond charge, he arofe, and begged fome time to get himfelf ready to make anfwer thereto ; but Ferdinand replied, " That if his guilty confcience had not already anticipated forne frefli foul deeds, he could not poffibly be prepared to anfwer tiil he, had firft heard what was now about ta be brought againft him.—Befides (added he j the importance of the prefent charges; (more momentous by far than were ever recorded on our Sicilian annals), cannot admit of delay, as they immediately in- Vol. III. M volve
( 2 4 2 ) volve the general happinefs, innocence, honour, and * character of two noble houfetf in this day's awful decifiori." The Duke and council, on this, re¬ qucfted Ferdinand to begin his charges of accufation. He then took the caiket from Sebaftian, and thus addreffed the Court: ' 4t Moft noble Duke, and reverend Sis- nîors— —Before I enter upon the grand charges of facrilege and inceft, 1 will briefly difclofe a chain of wickednefs, malice, and treachery, upon the evidence of this ¿aval captain here—that will ihow in the moft glaring colours, the farther guilt of Count Philip, and at the fame time throw a ftrong light upon the remarle? able events that have attended the fate of ?? day.K ** The combat (continued Ferdinand) which
whSh |ob# placé feniefe^ b^w^eiï Coulis bé ftill remembered iri íí conc]ueror---Thls fatal corrqueftí ho#e%iri «ftuek clofe tbithe engaged atió^ etfContarihif ????? he^^ opportunity of "glutting his i hatred aiid re¬ venge; for iid fooner had he recovered from liiswoundsythänVgett^ by a party of his creatures, he fell upon myfelf and cmy fervant, Sebaftian [there j ??! forprifecH feized, hoodedrand hound us as we^ were returning, oné dark teni- peftüous night, to Naples, before wé had leifure for thought, much more refiftäncé. From thence we were hurried onwards for fout leagues with rtie greàtèfft rapidity^ till w§ arrived at the port-töw^ # Saler¬ no, where there was á veifel· prepared for ?, riding under the command of Captain Corfifnow before the court]. We were in-
( ?4 ) ftantly conveyed in a tartana, and hoifted aboard like a couple of galley flaves. At this tioie, we were, alike ignorant of our futu/edeftiny ; and the villains who had thus treacheroufly deprived us of our rights and liberties, for Count Philip and his party feized us were all maiked.—I will not fatigue the Court with the dread¬ ful thoughts and fenfations I experienced , on this cruel occafion.—Torn, as I then conceived, for ever, from my family, my friends, and my country—Suffice it, there¬ for^ to fay, that Captain Corfi had been fcarcely one day out at fea, when he was furprifed, attacked* and captured by a barbarian floop of war, and carried into Angola,, where, we were immediately hurried ferther up the country, and all fold for flaves to a Giaga chief. í« Captain Corfi on this occafion, ftung with
( 2 4$ ) with remorfe, .difappointment, and de¬ fpair, took the opportunity of confeffing to me, that Count Philip had induced him, from the alluring promifes of a con¬ fîderable bribe, and honourable appoint¬ ments when he returned, to convey us into the Mediterranean, to land us after¬ wards on one of the mofi: unfrequented iflands, and there to murder both myfelf and'my fervant.—But to- return to Ane¬ góla. There, my noble Lord, we con¬ tinued nearly feven years in the moft mi¬ ferable ftate of abject flavery, tiil the Giaga chief« having engaged in a war, with a neighbouring tribe, the «few of u* that were left alive, made our efcape back to the capital· where we claimed the protection of Don Gonzago, the PortugMefe Viceroy, The chief, how¬ ever, on his return, fluflied with conqueft, M 3 and I
( ?? ) and exafperated on bearing that we had fled and taken refuge in Angola, tif patched an Ambaffador thither for our • immediate reftitution. The^King of An¬ gola, willing to arvoid the enmity of fo powerful a Giaga, was compelled to re¬ fift all entreaties of Don Gonzago, for our future protection. From this, we be¬ gan to give up all thoughts, of ever returning again to our native fliore ; when a fortunate ftar fuddeniy appeared, that refcued us from the horrid gulph of flavery. and wretchednefs in which we were once more on the .brink of being plunged in; for-as it foon happily ap¬ peared, there was in the Viceroy's court a noble traveller, who in the humble dif¬ guife of a pilgrim, had gone far and near to adminifter the fweet bilfam of hope
( *47 ") hope and comfort, to the difconfolate and needy Chriftian. " I need not add (continued Ferdi¬ nand) for I perceive you feem to fufpect it all around, that this good pilgrim was no other than Prince Rinaldo. —It was even fo, and having foon made ourfelves known to each other, we told the ftories of our mutual fortunes. . 1 now, for the firft time, heard the fad tale of my lifter's fuppofed fliame, which had drawn my noble kinfman from his native Caftle , determined (as be then faid) to wear the humble attire of bpilgrtm> till time had revealed (vvhich it has now happily done) the caufe and myftery of her deep dif¬ grace. Having promifed, however, if, of this world, to return to his Caftle, in four years from the period of his firft fetting out, either to behold again his friend and M 4 guardian,
( 248 ) guardian the good Signior Manfredi, or lhed the tear of tributary gratitude over his honoured duft ; we immediately fet out from Angola for Italy, whither we fafely arrived fome feven days ago.—As I wiflied, however, firft to learn the for¬ tunes of my houfe, after fo long and cruel an abfence ; Captain Corfi landed me on the liland of Capri, from whence I croffed the gulf to Naples, whilft he fleered his courfe to Meflina; where I had previoufly appointed to meet 'Ri¬ naldo, u on the firft evening of this month" In my way thither, however (concluded Ferdinand, unfaftening the caiket, and taking out the fatal fcroll) I by a provi¬ dential train of miraculous incidents (and all of which, I will afterwards relate and fully prove to the whole court, if necef¬ fary for me, to be called upon fo to do) obtained
{ ?9 ) obtained this pàrbhítíent, which will evi¬ dence againft Count' Philip, both" bére and hereafter—Aye, will fink him mib lions of fathoms deep in hell —deep, as that once facriligeous and îrtcéfluous tool of his-------- Conrad — the Carthufian friar ! ! ? ------ Uere, Contarini was about to object againft any written teftimonies being , produced in court, when the found of Conrad's name cleaved his tongue to the roof of his mouth.—Defpair and death now flared him in the face, and he already felt the avenging axe 'comjng in contact with his guilty head. Ferdinand now paffed the myfterious fcroll over to the prefident of ?^? coun* cih requefting him at the fame, time, to publiih its contents aloud to the court 4 " They being (he obferved) of too bor¬ ivi 5 rid
* <250) rid a nature fot r a brother, to read himfelf —nay, almoft too horrid for a brother, or a Chriftian even to hear/' On this, the prefident read out the manufcript as thus; but with what fur¬ prize, horror, tumult of mind, and agita¬ tion of foul, the reader can beft conceive. " Sacred to the memory and " honour of Signiora Santa- u Maria, fole daughter of John *' Count Rodolph and Ifabella " his wife," " Oh ! moft amiable and moft injured u lady, read this and tremble ; and " trembling, curfe—curfe bitterly; <c for at every curfe, muft my tor- ff tured foul feel frefli agonies, in *· the unavoidable, inextricable, ? " abyfs
I ? 1 f " abyfs of damnation.-^Big drops " of fweat fall down my guilty " cheeks, like fnow-drops from the, " mountain tops.—But, ohi not " to relate this tale of horror, would " make me doubly guilty.—Involv- " ing thee, thy fame, thy chaftiryv " and all, in one myfterious grave " of infamy and oblivion.—Secrecy, " avaunt !-----For lo ! methinks, I " view old Time ftiaking his hoary " head, and with his finger point- " ing to my peri, advance and fay « — This my fiery mufi not, fiali not " he buried with tb& dead*' Qh ! " Time, I thank thee for this con- " folatory hope—Thou haft made " me more eager to purfue my pur j " pofe, left death comes too quick- " ly, and fnatches me from the M6 "deed.
í ?* í u deed,—------- 4ínow then, moft " lovely and injured faint, that the u guilty writer of this, is named " Conrad, once a monk in the Car- " thufian monaftery—Youngly ini- <f tiated in the luxuries and debau- " chéries of that order—I dedi- " cated my whole time and " thoughts, to the gratification of " my lufts and parlions. —jGifted, * c neverthelefs, with the exterior " appearance of piety and devo- if tion, I acquired accefs to fome of « t the firft families in Naples, as " their ghoftly confeffor. Among * c thefe were your injured parents, " that of the Count Contarini, to- " gethtr with the Counts Manzini, iC and D'Arcos ;—proud, mighty, " but fatal connections,—fatal ! in- ι (i deed,
( *53 ) " deed, to my peace and happinefs, " as they firft led me on to infamy c< and blood.—^The fenior Prince ce Rinaldo was the innocent caufe. cc Oh ! noble martyr to jealoufy and <c revenge, if poffible look down " upon me with an eye of commi- " feration—but that cannot be—fo, " to proceed—the marked prefe " rence that Count Mazzini's beau- " teous daughter gave to Lord Ri- " naldo, when betrothed to the fenior " Contarini, ftung him to the foul ; tc their fubfequent marriage, how- " ever, irritated him to madnefs and " defperation.—Thus enraged and " difappointed, he watched clofely " for fome deep revenge ¿~for three «' years, however, the Prince and it his wife entirely refided at their « Caftle
í 2 S4 ) ** Caftle in the fouth; but when * t they returned to Naples—here '* lét me be brief-^He had recourfe α for vengeance, to poifon-^yes, to " pifen —and prevailed on me to be w that poifùuer —aceurfed deed.—-— " Full occafions fuited the infernal " purpofe, for though then but i4 young, I was the Prince's confef- " for, and in recompence for all " his bounties, I took the foul op- <# portunity of Signior Manfredi 's « abfence, when4iis Lord was afflict- ** ed with a fevere indifpofition, " to remove a phial qf medicine " from off the ihelf, and in its place u fupplied a mixture of flow, but '* certain poifon. This had a gra· " dual and fatal effect, and Rinaldo, * w my firft patron, fell an untimely " victim
( 4i ) " vicii m to my arts and treachery. " His death, however, did hot ef· " cape the fufpicions of Manfredi^ " and he had them pbyfically con- " firmed. ------ Underftanding, there- " fore, that thefe fufpicions fell " ftrongly on me, I immediately dif- * ς appeared, and took ihelter for " feveral years in the Abbey of " Fojfa·Nuovas ------ Returning, how- " ever, once more to Naples, I foon " gained the protection of the pre- " fent Count Contarini, who foon " made me the confident of all his " thoughts------ nay, perfuaded me, " not only to be the councellor, but " partner of all his moft guilty ac- (t , tions.—The two following,.ftand " foremoft on the infernal fable file; « —The firft (they both moft fatally ** relating
f 25b ) " relating to thee and thy kindred) " was the depriving Ferdinand, thy " brother, of his liberty and his life, " by ftratagenis ihe moft diabolical. " —The youth (oh ! horrible to re- " late) was murdered by our' joint " contrivances on one of the iflands " in the Mediterranean, with a fa- " vourite domeftic, called Sebaftian. « ^-The other—iiold------ my blood " thickens and congeals ! I ihake u with terror at the thought.—My (< fleih cfeeps upon my very bones " as I do ruminate upon it—-But it t( muft come forth—then forthwith " let it come—deed of darknefs í — " heíls own díreâ progeny !— : ----- ' u Count Philip had long furveyed " theé (if it fo be, that thou, fweet Sánta*María, riow perufeft this) ζζ with
( 41 é a with a luftful eye. His foul burn- " ed impatiently to poffefs thy beau- " teous perfon. The enmities, how- tt ever, that had fo long fubfifted be- " tween your families, prevented all " chance of any accefs or intcrcourfe ; " for the elder Contarini died, like a " fecond Hamilcar, making his fon, " in the fourteenth year of'his age, <f take the moft facred oath before " the image of our Saviour and the " Virgin Mary, that he would never ** make peace, alliance, or friendihip " with the family of Rodolph ; but, " on the contrary, perfecute, afperfe, " and purfue them to the furthermoft - ic boundaries of hatred and revenge. " But to return—Count Philip's paf- ** fions became inflamed to thç top- " moft pitch of madnefs, when he dif- tt covered
í *5* ì (s covered that you was deemed by " mutual contracts and inclinations "to wed the Prince Rinaldo. He u flew tome, like a tyger difappoint- " ed of his mate, for counfel—vow- <% ed to flìare his fortunes with me, if " I could concert any plan to make '* thee the"victim of his luft. —I me- ' 4t ditated—I racked my thoughts, <c and at length hit upon a ftratagem i( to f4tisfy his diabolical purpofes, u which, in the end, but too fatally " fucceeded.—-Accident, however, " greatly aflifted our defigns, for Fa- " ther Matalone, a pious brother of u our order, and who was the vir- " tuoiis confeffor of the Lady Ifabel- ** la, at this time lay fick > and as I " attended him (or rather pretended i( to do fo) with fraternal anxiety, I " won
( 49 ) (i won his % artlefs efteem. When any " devotional call, therefore, requeft- 9 " ed his abfence from the monaftery, " he deputed me, as his holy repre- i( fentative on thefe occafions. So, " then, it fatally happened, on the " holyday of St. Januarius, that I fc< came into thy father's houfe, like ** fome viper, to fling the deareft part 4> of it. I found eafy accefs toyour * t perfon, and complaining of thirft, Si you gave me fome copling beve ct rage to drink. "Soon after, I in- £< vited you to drink alfo, in honour " of our patron's day ; and, alas I " you but' too readily acquiefced; ft for, during that fliort interval, I fe- " cretly contrived to mingle a ftrong " fleeping potion, which upon its 1 " taking due effect, I too well knew " would
( ??? ) |? Xvould anfwér tbc feeming appear- " anees of death— Oh ! wretched me, ** too well I faid I knew it. —For, a when (horrible remembrance) any " of the virtuous females of our con- ** vent held too rigidly out againft ** my luft ful purpofes, I did admini- " fter this fame fleeping potion, and * b ' when dead to every fenfe, enjoyed ** my will upon them. Then fatif- f( fied and'palled, difpatch them to ? the filent receffes of our graves, " there to awake in all the horrors "of a living death. Oh! my foul " fickens iu" the impious recollection. " Defpair is all I poffefs in,return; " for repentance after crimen Üke cl thefe fore can never avail !—But " once more to return—This fame (i fleeping potion had all its intended «* baneful
( 2.&.1 ) f< baneful effects·on thee, thou love- " lieft facrifice ; and as thou wert " fuppofed to be deceafed, I was " difpatclied for, to fing requiems " over your beauteous body. In this " folemn office, Count Philip attend- " ed me, difguifed as a brother- u monk ; and in the abfence of thy " mother, the Lady Ifabella, fully " and grofsly fatisfied his impious " lufts. —Nature, however, fleeping " as you were, here gave a faint " ftruggle againft------But hold—no <c more—-M odcfty forbids me to re- <c peat the vile abufes he made of * c all his opportunities, nor the hor- <e rid fatisfaction he enjoyed in the <c idea of fending thee violated to the " bed of Prince Rinaldo. —I can no « more— fave, mcjee^l, that I after- *' wards heard of your pregnancy,
( ? ) <ζ and your fudden difappearance * t from Naples,—Stung now with u remorfe, guilt, fear, and defpair, ** I fled the monaftery, and retired to α this cave—a miferable victim of 4i God's prefent wrath and future u vengeance—for, of God—nor of * c thee—or of the world, can I ever ? look up to, for pardon or for pity. « Conrad." Never was horror and amazement more ftrongly depictured upon the features of man than on the prefent occafion. The prefident was fo forely fliocked, that it was with difficulty he had been able to conclude his office; and as he turned round to demand of Count Philip, if he had any defence to make to thefe heinous charges, his lips trembled, and his Jegs almoft denied him their fupport* Contarini
í ??? ) Contarini row perceiving the juft in- dignation that the Court entertained againft him, and forefeeing that if he was to attempt a vindication of his villainy, it would ultimately prove ineffectual, and only an aggravation of his ftaring of¬ fences—he pleaded— guilty —appealing, the fame time, to the clemency of the court, to mitigate his fentence from— death—for perpetual banifliment. Rinaldo aiid Ferdinand, on hearing this, requcfted permiilion to withdraw, unwil¬ ling^ even to witnefs the laft" bitter feenes of a man whofe life and thoughts had been fo villainoufly employed in work- m ing their ruin, their mifery, and deftruc¬ tion.— Immediately, therefore, that they left the court, the Viceroy, with the unani¬ mous confent of his council, proceeded to pafs fentence on Philip Count Contarini
( 2? 4 ) —which was— -" That he fliould be im¬ mediately conducted from the Caftle to the market-place, and fuffer decapitation on the public fcaffold' —the Duke being apprehenfive on this occafion, that if the leaft delay was granted, the villain's friends might effect his efcape. He now, therefore, loft fight of his wonted clemen¬ cy, left, in this glaring inftance, it might defeat the end of juftice. He next proceeded to pafs fentence on his accomplices, Bernardine and God¬ dard; which was—" That they fliould firft undergo the torture extraordinary, and afterwards be racked upon the wheel."— , Count Philip being conducted to the public fcaffold, under a ftrong efcort, he met his fate with all that haughtinefs and hardened fortitude that had marked the leading
? MS ) leading and cruel features of his character through life.—The wretches, Bernardine and Goddard, having made their confef¬ fions, in which they folemnly declared ' c that they had been aSually inftigated, by the Count Rodolph, to affaflinate Prince Rinaldo ; but that their hearts failing them when they came under the walls of the Caftle, they had refolved to return homewards ; but in their way back, they fell in with a defperate banditti near the Appenine mountains, whom they imme¬ diately joined—That being afterwards taken (as before related) and recollecting the enmity that had fo long fubfifted Jbe- tween the families òf Count Philip and Lord Rodolph, and at the fame time, having heard it reported that Prince Ri¬ naldo had been murdered by fome un¬ known means or another, they fent for Vol, ?. N Contarini
?""" :ί 2?? ? Cofttarini*(in hopes to íávethéir lives) to whom they fully related the ftrong chain oJ^irçumftârices (as recorded before alfo) iri which they had fo ^At this (they finally added) Count Phi¬ lip immediately caught, and promifed theni both pardon in this world arid in the nextriftliey would abèr hini; iii 'thè purpofes he hø alrea^ ¡?? te hiditàte ägamfihti^kw/tä íheti, bSrİg' next brought, almoft lifelefs, upon the ícaflbld, íurfered the moil inven¬ tive torture that the rack could invent¬ ând having expiated their heinous crimes by the moft cruel death, their mangled bodies were afterwards gibbeted on the banks ofthe river Crati.
CHAP.
( ??7 /
CHAP. XVI. Peace, ho ! I bar confufion : 'Tis 1 muft make conciufion Of thefe moil ftrange events. SHAKSPEARE, J\.S Rinaldo and Ferdinand, with Cap¬ tain Corfi, Sebaftian and Launcelot, were departing from the council-cham¬ ber, they were met in the middle of the hall by D'Arcos, whofe apparent anx¬ iety of countenance and manner ftrongly denoted forne frefli misfortune to be up¬ on the wing. He didnot, however, keep them long in fufpence, but proceed¬ ed to inform Lord Ferdinand, " that San¬ ta-Maria could by'no means be diffuaded N ? from
( 268 ) from changing her minftrel's apparel, and even had folemnly affirmed, that flie was neither your" fifter, nor the daughter of Lord Rodolph—Then, ever and anon (contmued the Chevalier) ihe would fran- ticly exclaim— c My vow—my folemn vow, which is regiftered in heaven, and which all the powers of earth could not ever make her break.' Then again, flie would aík me, if I had feen the fatal caf- ket, cr heard the myfterious fcroll ? And upon anfwering in the negative, the dif- tracted Santa-Maria ftarted, and wildly exclaimed— t No-—didft thou fay?—— What, haft thou then not feen or heard them F-^-It's well.' Upon which, I faw her piercing eye darting towards the door, as though flie once more meditated efcaping from my parental care and pro¬ tection. I have, however (concluded D'Arcos)
( *? 9 ) ' D'Arcos) left her fafe with the Signiora Orfini, and her tender daughter ; and am now come to confult with ye, my young fiiends, how I fliall proceed;—myiter/ fo hangs on myftery, that I would fain not act up to my private judgment." " But thefe myfteries now, my virtu¬ ous friend, and fecond father (exclaimed Ferdinand, prefling the Chevalier to his grateful bofom) fliall vanifli ihortly, like a fummer's cloud, before us.—And 'firft (taking the manufcript from the caiket, which Sebaftian had brought with him out of court) receive this, and perufe it well—But let not horror blaft and dim thine eye-fight, till thou haft read it out. This is the myfterious fcroil my fifter talked of, and which her fudden lois of reafon, with the fubfequent confufion that fucceeded, pre vented, both you and N 3 her
( *7? ) her from hearing read in open court.* 7 On this, Ferdinand turned round upon Rinaldo, and with a fignificant fmile, ob¬ ferved.—« That he íhrewdlý fufpeüed Santa-Maria's vow bore a very clofe ana¬ logy to his own/'?-And after perceiving that D'Arcos had done perufing the monk's guilty confeflion (and that, too, attended with thofe fenfations which may, from paft circumftances, be eafily conceived) he then requefted him ?? convey the fame to his fifter ; firft open¬ ing the fubject of it as delicately as pof¬ fible, and then fofteníng the horrors of it, according to the apt terms of his own tendernefs, judgment, and difcretion. " This charm, my noble friend (conclud¬ ed Ferdinand) will, perhaps, diffolve the vow you heard my fifter, in her frenzy, mention.—And now commend my bro«* therly
( *7i ) therly to her fifterly affections —my Lord Rinaldo's love to her loves ;—whilft, in the mean time, we will employ, a fad hour in melancholy offices, and. filial for¬ rows, o'er the breathlefs corpfe of our lamented father." When Rinaldo and Ferdinand, there¬ fore, entered the mournful chamber of death, they were fomewhat furprized, on difcovering three men in armour, with their beavers up, leaning their heads de- fpondently upon the baikets of their fwords, whofe iharp points were firmly fixed in a broad bench, midway from them and the ground, and on which were ftretched two crimfon-clotted bodies* They foon, however, recognized in one, the features of Lord Rodolph ; but not immediately recollecting the other, they enquired of Gabot, who was neareft to N 4 them—
( 2 7 2 ) them— (ί To whom the other had once belonged ; and by what ftrange fatality it claimed fuch death-like friendihip with that of Count John's?"—for the head of the former was lying obliquely upon the bofom of the latter. " That was once (replied Gabot, with the deep figh of regret) our comrade, Drofi, who being bravely determined not to out-live his Captain's blemiflied fame and honour, died as he did, and expired with him, al· moft in the fame ftruggle. As you be¬ hold them now, my Lord (continued the warlike mourner) fo it was they firft fell together; and we equally refolved (Gabot ftrongly endeavouring here, but in vain, to conceal the ftruggling tear, which fell upon his burniihed breaft-plate) that as they had died undivided together, in the fame manner as they had latterly lived, fo they
( * 2 73 ) they fhould ftill continue tö retain the fame pofture and fituation frorn whicb we raifed them ; for as you now fee them ftretched upon this wooden bier, fo lay they on this bloody floor. Ferdinand, on hearing this plain- wrought tale, with infinite fympathy and energy, exclaimed^— ffC By my foul, Lord Rinaldo, but I recollect this Drofi well, a plain blunt ???, of undaunted mettle, a favourite ever of rhy deceafed father's, both at home and in the field.—And, many a time and oft, has he lulled my childifh hours away with quaint con¬ ceits, full of mirth, but withal as inoffen- fiveí^Now, by the facred fpirit Pf my fire, thou moft faithful fervant and fol¬ dier, thy fteady love fliall aot pafs unre- membered.—Thy great valour, thy un- {haken firmnefs, and thy heroic friend· N s fhip.
( *74 ) ihip, fliall have a monumental teftimony, which íhall bear thy name with glory and admiration to the lateft times ; and though religion forbids me to applaud the manner of thy death, ftill gratitude and efteem cannot force me to condemn the motive of it !" ? This, laft fubject now brought on a conference betwixt Ferdinand and Ri¬ naldo, how the bodies fliould be difpofed of in burial? When the former obferv¬ ing—That the conveying of them to the Caftle of Martorano, would only tend to throw a difmal gloom, and an unavailable increafcof forrow and affljc- tion^over the mind of his lady^niQther, .which otherwife would be allayed and foftened by their unexpected prefence, . jaftet the abfence of fo many years : « This .point, therefore, weighed (continued Fer¬ dinand)
i '*75 1 dinand) it will be moft prudent and con¬ genial to the general feelings of us all, to have the honoured remains of my depart¬ ed fire interred here at Cofenza, in the family cymetery of our kinfman D'Arcos. Where alfo the body of the brave and faithful Drofi fliall likewife lie, couch¬ ed as he now is, in death's cold em¬ brace, by the fide of his beloved lord and mafter." From this, they had fcarce time to pay the laft tributary tear over the remains of Rodolph and his earthly affociate, when they were fummoned from without, by the voices of D'Arcos and Orfini, the lat¬ ter of whom had come with an invitation from the Duke, to requeft their prefence in the vice-regal apartment; before they joined them, however, without, Ferdi¬ nand firft beftowed on Gabot, Pietro, and N 6 Michael,
( *7* ) Michael, each, a purfe of gold, as a re¬ ward for their prefent fidelity, and as a memento of his future friendfliip. Enjoin¬ ing them .at the fame time tô keep ftrict watches over the bodies of their Lord and Comrade, till they ihould fee him again at Cofenza, which (he faid) fliould be in three days' time, when he intended to prefide over the funeral ceremonies him¬ felf. We will now briefly pafs over what occurred-to the feelings of Santa-Maria (as related here by D'Arcos) on reading the fatal, though fortunate manufcript.— Her fenfations, indeed, muft of courfe have difplayeda higher colouring of horror and confternation than any of thofe which have as yet preceded us. But ftill, as we 1 have touched upon this chord fo often, and with fo many variations; and as our hiftory
( *77 ) hiftory alfo, draws fo near to a conciu¬ fion, we will forbear to fpeak ofthe fub¬ ject any more—There, then, let us con¬ demn it to the fame darknefs from whence it had its birth. The Chevalier, however, notwithftand¬ ing the folemnity that had poffeffed him at firft, infinuated, with a fmile, that now indeed he believed that the charm was diffolved, and from whence would fpring a ftar that would force all eyes to go a gazing, and make you, ray deareft Prince, the happieft of ethereal beings. For, oh 1 often has Santa-Maria, in the .fimple, though becoming attire of a minftrel, raifed my very foul to celeftial joys. ** But your's, my Lord (concluded D'Arcos) íhe will elevate to tranfports almoft as envi¬ able." This kindred party having joined the Duke»
( 2 7 3 ) Duke, in his private apartment, wher Orfiril hinted to Rinaldo that Santa-Ma¬ ria, with his wife anddaughter* were alfo íhortly expected ; where nothing, in fact, of any particular confequence, occurred, faving fuch interrogatories and replica¬ tions that tehded to lead into the main points of the former parts of this hiftory, and which being only a .kind fatisfaction to the Viceroy's curiofity, we fliall here alfo pafs over, Upon the Duke, however^ aflcing Ferdinand how he became acquainted with his father's re verfe of fortunes, when riot finding him at Naples—the fudden event of his trial at Cofenza—and the cri¬ tical caufe of his arrival thither, being, as it proved, only in the fmall period of five minutes betwixt his life and death?—.The young Lord Rpdolph briefly anfwered, that
( ? 79 ) that the veffel in which Prince Rinaldo had failed in, witb Corfi, from the ifland of Capri, had been driven put tp fea to a little diftance, by a contrary wind, and de¬ tained them beyond the appointed bow of rendezvous. That the moment, how¬ ever, he had effected his landing, he baft- Cued to relate the happy difcovery he had made of Santa-Maria's innocence in the recefs, of Father Conrad, which infufedin him the fpirit and activity ofthe bound¬ ing rein-deer. From Meflina, therefore, attended by the Captain and my fervant, we rode on like lightning to the fkirt.pf * a wood, which leads directly to Marta- rano Caftle ; and.where the Prince, anxî- , ous to embrace his old guardian* SigniQr .Manfredi, not doubting alfo, at the fame time (fo natural is inftinct in the human breaft) that he mujt hav# hmu? fomething of
( ô8o ) of Santa Maria's fortunes, during his long abfetíce, and thofe likewife of my family ; wé alighted from our horfes, and pufhed forward to a fecret and interior part of the Caftle, through a long fubterraneous pâf- fege, known only to himfelf and his guar¬ dian. But here (continued Ferdinand) I fliall pais over their firft and tender mu¬ tual congratulations, the fweetnefs and reciprocity of ivhich can only be felt and known by thofe pofleiTing the rnoft ex¬ quifite fufceptibilities. " Prince Rinaldo, however, on this oc¬ cafion, had the difappointment and mor- h- tification of finding that Manfredi had heard nothing of Santa-Maria's fortunes ; for mý rambles (faid he) have extended no farther in your abfence, then the old foreft, artd that only when darknefs would conceal me from tbe fight òf rnan- kind.
kind. But hafte (continued the reverend Signior) to Cofenza, and fave Lord Ro¬ dolphe life and honour, which are now in imminent peril. He ftands accufed by his moft implacable enemy, Count * Contarini, for murdering of you, my child, and feizing on your -Caftle. " Old Paul Ignatius, and myfejf— For poor Baptifi — heaven refi hisfoul, isjufi dead, though, alas ! not yet buried 5 for as I was employing myfelf in this lafi pious office, in the ancient cy met ery , to wbich you know I have ac- eefs, from a fecret communication in the nor* thern aifie of the chifier; I was difturbed by approaching footfteps and murmuring voices, and, 1 muft add, furprifed, as that dreary part of the Caftle had never, as J believe, been in* terrupted before.^-Bxit to contmue, as old Paul Ignatius and myfelf, overheard the purport of bis danger, in a converfation laft
( 282 ) Jaft night, betwixt Drofi and himfelf, from the fecret pannel which leads in¬ to the: weft gallery—Struck with the remorfe that Rodolph expreffed on this occafion (and confiding on your return exactly at the time mentioned by you in the laft pacqùet, which Ignatius brought me from Naples ; and whom I regularly fent on the fame errand twice a year, and as regularly was fure to receive a* pacquet each time — to me the greateft confolation lexpe* rienced in my recefs, happy reliefs to my la¬ bours in repairing the ramparts, and even to my pleafures in painting, - and my exertions in roughly modelling the ftatue of your de¬ parted fire)~\ cheered him from my cell within—bade him be of good com¬ fort, and meet his accufers with forti¬ tude and refolution;—But no mbre, my children^— hafte —begone -----fly to Co¬ fenza
( *8 3 ) fenza on the wings of fpeed, and with God's providence, all yet will turn out well. To conclude (moft noble Duke) we haf¬ tened, with all imaginable fwiftnefs, back again into the foreft; and had we di¬ rectly purfued ManfrediV council, my ho¬ noured, calumniated fire, had been faved. —But, alas! too anxious to give blow -for blow, to Count Philip's black re¬ venge ; we took a circuitous route to¬ wards a cottage, where I had left Santa- r' Maria (then, as I fuppofed,the minftrel, Valentine) with charge pf the cafket, which contained the certain guilt and inevitable doom of Contarini.—It befog my purpofe to bring them both as evi¬ dences againft the Count." Rodolph ! how nearly was thy fate al¬ lied to eternity—The ftretch of five* mi¬ nutes only ftood between thee and fate¿ —Thjr
" ( *84 ) —Thy guilt, however, overpowered thy manhood and thy fortitude.—But it was heavenVdecree, that thou fliouldeft fuf¬ fer for the intent, though not the deed ; —for dying, thou moft afluredly could only expect to meet the divine miniftefs above, with the bloody hands ot a real murderer. -------Rodolph ! farewell—and future peace dwell with you ! Só may he reft, his faute Ik gently on him. —- " ..... ■ ' ■> — -We are aU men, In our own natures frail, and capable Of frailty j few are angels. SHAKSPEARE. D'Arcos, for his part, paid particular attention to the latter part of Ferdinand's concife narrative. , He now eafily ac¬ counted for all the ftrange noifes, myfte¬ rious alarms, and fupernatural phæno¬ mena, that had formerly frightened him away from the Caftle, and which
( *»5 ) had occafioried fuch dreadful fuggeftions among alî his family and houfehold. After the Chevalier's taking this opening . of briefly touching on thofe paft events, and relating the adventures which had formerly, and fo forcibly ftruck him at the time, when he refided at the Caftle ; he then enquired of the Prince, what particular fecret communications could have led into the chapel, whofe walls ap¬ parently confifted of folid marble?------ 6< On thefe points, Chevalier (replied Rinaldo) all my anceftors were bound to fecrefy ; but as I cannot deny any thing to your virtues and goodnefs, and more¬ over, as ftate pcrfecutions feerh daily to lòfe their cruel influence, I can novr briefly and fafely, fatisfy your curiofity. % Know theni that the two principal fecret com¬ munications came from the eaft and weft gal~ 1 : ? i ¡trits
( 286 ) lenes ofthe Cafile ; frem the latter of which, a narrow winding paffage, under tbe fpa- cİgus corridors, led underneath the chapel, and to which it communicated by a fquare marble trabochetto, tbat was governed by a fpring be¬ low, and invented with fuch art by our an¬ ceftors, whom the turbulence of paft ages often drove, fpr fafety, to thefe deep receffes ; that by drawing this fpring afide, they afcmded [ thnugh the fquare trap, to the centre of the chapel, where they were wont, in the dead hour of the night, to offer up their picus ori¬ fons, to the rninifters of Heaven." The Duke's curiofity, being now hua great meafure fatisfied, he invited Ri¬ naldo, Ferdinand, and .all his^ party, to cdminue with him that night,, in the : 4 t ff" í' * ! Caftle of Cofenza. But tins latter offer, the latter cQurtepufly declined— (c Fpr (faid he) though there ¿s no. honour, or ? t gratification
( 28? i gratification I could enjoy upon earth,.; more than that now proffered ; ftill, my gracious Lord, I have a beloved, and now widowed mother, who has not beheld me thefe feven years and paft, and to whom I muft bend the knee of duty, gratitude, and affection------nature's firft ftrong ties, and deareft claims. But (concluded Ferdinand), if our noble Vice¬ roy will honour our Caftle with his princely vifits, and lead the joyful cere¬ monies of my fifter's happy , nuptials, then, indeed, will my cup of joy be full." Scarce, however, had the Duke time to accept of this fweet office and invitation, when the Lady Santa-Maria was led into the apartment by Orfini, followed by his ' wife and daughter.—Oh ! for the powers of our immortal favourite, Shakfpeare, to defcribe
( ?88 ) defcribe în full fufficient tonest the ecftafy, admiration, and delight, inexplicable, of % this more than earthly fcene ! for, like an angel came the all-beautiful Santa-Maria, to diffüfe a general happinefs around. Her form even partook of the divinity, whilft her long treffes, winding through the fil¬ ver foldings of her fnowy garments, trim¬ med By the pregnant hand ornature, and foftened by the animating touch of fancy, gave the bold finifhed colouring to perfec¬ tion itfelf. Santa-Maria, as fhe entered the apart¬ ment, ruihed forward with confcious in¬ nocence and uncontrouled affeftion, to meet the embraces of her Lord and bro¬ ther, Then turning round to D'Arcos, whofe hand fhe eagerly and tenderly clafp¬ ed in herfs ; and at the fame time reclin¬ ing gently and fmilingly on hiš neck, fhe . , called
( ?8 9 ) called him father, brother, and proteftor. " For here (exclaimed Santa-Maria) here, my Lords Ferdinand and Rinaldo, muft I divide my gratitude and affection/^ " But, by your leave, fweet Lady (faid - the Duke, faluting her) I muft difpute the former title with my Lord d'Arcos, and here is my authority (pointing to Ferdinand) ; for in the very whifper of a moment previous to your entrance, he had delegated me to lead the joyful cere¬ monies of your intended nuptials; in which appointment, it was, as I fuppofe, included for me to be the adopted father, who is to difpofe of you at the marriage altar, to the happy Lord Rinaldo." Santa-Maria, after gracefully acknow¬ ledging the honour Duke Reignier con¬ ferred upon her, flie turned afide this fub- Vol, ?, ? jea
( *9° ) ject (though not without having firft be¬ trayed a crimfon fuffufion in her cheeks, — ■*■■ ..... -Whofe red and white, Nature's own fweet and cunning hand laid on ; and which would have refleöed luftre even on' the full-blooming rofe) by aflcing Fer- dinand, at what hour he propofed fetting off for Martorano Caftle ?—" For, oh ! (continued ihe) my foul is fick, to throw itfelf in the fond arms öf my adorable mother."—" Anon, will we depart, fifter (replied Ferdinand) for I am as eager as thyfelf—But left I fliould grow jealous of thee, in our mother's love, we will to¬ gether ihare the mutual, dear embrace." The Duke, however, on hearing this, immediately interrupted them, and infift¬ ed that they fliould remain in the Caftle to dinner* " For this your compliance (continued the Viceroy) my word is pledged
• ( -291 ) pledged to my niece, the Lady Lucy-. Miranda ; and here alfo, I muft declare, that 1 feel myfelf particularly anxious, on this occafion, for an unlimited ac¬ quiefcence, as it will afford me the oppor- * tunity of bringing together fuch amiable virtues, and inexpreflible beauties, as are blended in the tempers and features of the Lady Santa-Maria and my Mi¬ randa." " Well, well (exclaimed D'Arcos) do ye, my children, remain to dinner with the Duke, whilft I fliall employ my time upon a more effential purpofe.—Beflirew me, but I feel myfelf grow young and vigorous again !—Thy bright eyes, Ma¬ ria, have ihot new powers into mc.— They have ftrung my old chords into a frefli time, and filled them with as much harmony, as thy fingers were ufed to fill ° ? thy
f 292 ) thy lute withal.—Ah î rogue—haft thou after all forgot thy dear Lauria, whom thou hadft nearly fent into the grave ?" is Pardon me, my dear Sire (replied Santa-Maria) but on this fudden influx of good-fortune, I had forgot my Lauria— pardon me, and how fares ihe ?—-Oh ! brother— my Lauria (for fuch I was wont to call her) is the paragon of virtue, beauty, and perfection." " Well child, I forgive thee (rejoined D'Arcos) andin return, thou, having dif¬ appointed thy Lauria of one huíband, it is but juft, you ihould endeavour to re¬ commend her to another; and if my thoughts forbode truly, yonder is one (looking obliquely at Ferdinand) who could well fupply thy lofs, Maria." " But all this time, Chevalier (obferv- « ed the Duke) you have not told us how you
( 293 ) you intend employing your time upon a more effential purpofe, than in the divifion of our repaft." 4C In truth, my gracious Lord (replied D'Arcos) I am refolved to go forward firft to Martorano Caftle, and prepare the Lady Ifabella's mind to meet the ftrange revcrfe of fortunes that have attended the various turns of this day, with rcfignaiion and fortitude. It ihall be my taik to fof¬ ten the bitter potion------ (Here a de-'pftgb tfcaped the bofom of Santa-Mai ia) and make the fweet one ftill fweeter, tempering and alloying the rougher ingredients, by mix¬ ing with them the healing balfam, and reviving comforts of once more clafping her long loft children in her fond mater¬ nal arms. So, for the prefent (concluded the good Chevalier, haftening away, I will to horfe, and inftantly fet off. In the G 3 mean
( 2 9 4 ) mean time, mutual happinefs and gocd cheer attend ye all in all." On this, the Viceroy's page entered, and informed him, that the Lady Lucy-Mi¬ randa attended for him to dinner. The Duke, on this, efquired Santa-Maria to an adjacent apartment, where he had the generous fatisfaction of blending in one embrace, and raifing the foundation ofa Jong and lafting friendihip between two of the moft accompliihed beauties in the Sicilian territories.
C H ? P.
( ?? )
CHAP. XVII. I have lived, To fee inherited my very w îihes And buildings of my fancy. •HAK5PBARI. XjLFTER a few cheering goblets of wine had fucceeded the Duke's generous entertainment, and his guefts had taken a fincere, though a ihort farewell of him¬ felf, his beautiful niece, Lucy-Miranda, and the Orfinis, they fet out on their way to the Caftle of Martorano, accompanied only by Sebaftian, and a few horfemen belonging to the Viceroy's body-guard— whither having foon arrived, they' were ? 4 received
( 20? ) received by Carlo and his comrades, un¬ der arms, at the great gate. Rinaldo having, previous to his departure, liberally prefented Captain Corfi, with the veffel he had purchafed to convey him from Angola. Here again, fain would I attempt to defcribe the mutual ecftafies and tranf¬ ports that enfued between the Countefs Ifabella—her daughter— fon —and her no lefs beloved Rinaldo —as they all entered the hall abreaft. The fond anxious Mother precipitated forward with ex¬ tended arms, and embraced them—all in one* Words cannot do juftice to a fcene where fuch burfts of various paffions, fen¬ fations, and emotions, convulfed the hu¬ man breaft; love, affection, tendernefs, joy—nay, forrow ¡if indeed the overflow¬ ings of the heart, gliding to the eye, and
( 47 ) and iffuing in tears, could be called for¬ row) if fo, it was indeed—fweet forrow. After many a mutual endearment had paffed and repaffed between Ifabella and Santa-Maria, her attention was fuddeniy caught and called off by the contact and fight of Carlo and Sylvia, who kneeling, had plucked her by the train of her gar¬ ment, fupplicating, as it were, one glance of attention from their adored and long- loft miftrefs. Kindly, therefore, did fhe raife them up, and after folding her faiths * ful Sylvia tenderly in her arms, flie ftretdh» 1 ed her fair hand to Carlo, in token of her paft and* prefent efteem, and whiuLhe moiftened with the tear of gratitude; and affection. '. } „ ': \ < Santa-Maria, however, could difcover an extrenle dejection hangbg over, Car¬ los features, which fhe immediately and ? 5 eafily
( 208 ) eafily accounted for, though flie paffed the obfervation over in filence, unwilling herfelf to indulge emotions of a fimilar tendency, left they might àlfo infea the fufceptible feelings of her mother $ being now refolved to fupport her fpirits, by the gaiety of her own. Poor Carlo, indeed, had dearly loved his uncle, Drofi; and, notwithftanding the influx of happinefs and good fortune that had fo fuddeniy flowed in upon them all, fiill he could not but feel·—and feeling • —lament his fate, and mourn his me¬ mory.— If Santa-Maria's firft attentions from her mother had been fo fuddeniy called off by the tendernefs and anxiety of Carlo and Sylvia, it was nearly recompenfed in im¬ mediately afterwards finding herfelf cn¬ clofed in the embrace of her amiable Lauria ;
( 299 ) Lauria ; and which fhe returned with the fondeft fifterly affection. The Countefs* on perceiving this, immediately feized the favourable opportunity of introducing Ferdinand and Rinaldo to her fair kinf- woman's attention and future friendihip» ** That, my Lauria (exclaimed Santa- Maria, pointing to Ferdinand) is my bro<- ther.—Do you think he refembles Flo¬ rizel much? Nay, Lauria, do not thus fuffer your blufhes to confefs the myftery. —You loved Florizel once (continued fhe with an arch look) tenderly loved him* my Lauria." " This F lori zel,, then, fifter, muft have been b happy mortal (returned Ferdi· nand, with a figh, and clafping Lauria's fair hand in his) ah 1 would that I had been this Florizel!" " Then (retorted Santa-Maria, witli a 5 finite
( S 00 ) fmile) thou wouldeft have been me—Oh ! brother, cry ye mercy, or fliame fliall run thee down. What ! wouldeft be a woman ? —Ah ! beihrew me, thou mayeft fmile too, but I was that Florizel.—Nay, I prithee, do not queftion now, and thou fhalt know all anon.———However, I will give up my Lauria to thee, Ferdinand ; therefore, how think thyfelf the happy Florizel."— Then turning round to D'Arcos (who had ftood a filent, though a feeling.fpectator, with his niece, at the pathetic meeting between the Countefs and her children) " My dear father (continued Santa-Ma¬ ria) I havenow, no doubt, your full pardon, having fo far, and fo fairly recommended ypur Lauria to -a^neWc hufband, and as you yourfelf remarked Upon a late occa¬ fion, I really think my brother may prove the better huiband of the two." 1 Thefe
( 39 1 ? Thefe innocent effufions of gaiety, and a happy returning flow of fpirits, were, however, interrupted by the approaching prefence of Manfredi, advancing down the hall, betwixt öld Paul and Ignatius. His venerable appearance caufed a gene¬ ral awe and fympathy, whilft his filver beard, reaching to his girdle, gave him an auguft and patriarchal appearance. Ri¬ naldo and Santa-Maria flew to meet and embrace him ; for the grateful Santa* Maria recollected his perfon and his fea¬ tures well. On this, they difplaced Paul and Ignatius, ami led him to the Countefs Ifabella, Rinaldo exclaiming as he ap¬ proached—" This is my beloved Manfredi, the guardian and protector of my youth .'" And here—no farther to fatigue our readers with tedious retrofpeÖions to pail events ;
? 302 ) events ; we fliall now concludevi humbly fo we may prefume to call it, 14 This ftrange, eventful hiftory,'* The two firft days, therefore, of Prince Rinaldo's happy arrival at his caftle, were fpent in the enjoyment of all thofe convi¬ vial feftivities, and mutual endearments, which might be naturally expected to "flow from the unexpected tide of happi¬ nefs, and the fudden change of fortune that the divine hand of Providence, in hi« benign wifdom, had now thought fit to j>our upon them, as a juft recompence for the religion, virtue, conftancy, and forti¬ tude, that they had all difplayed when un¬ der the iron {courge of adverfity, danger, and perfecution. In this interval, alfo, the Caftle was once more adorned and provided with all the
( ?°? ) the riches, neceffaries, and fufficicncies with which it had been anciently laid out and decorated ; for Rinaldo, determined alike to throw off his princely grandeur with his princely habit, had difcarded all his domeftics but three, with whofe aflift- ance and Manfred i's he had alfo removed and concealed his immenfe wealth and coftly trappings of ftate, to the feçret and interior parts of the Caftle, previous to his departing therefrom in the humble dif» guife of a pilgrim. On the third day, Ferdinand privately fet off to Cofenza, and prefided at his fa* ther's and Drofi's funeral, who were bu¬ ried there with all due military honours ; and in the evening returned to the Caftle, with Gabot, Michael,and Pietro, And, in a week after the death of Lord Rodolph (a circumftance that was cau- tiouíly avoided, all over the Caftle, ever to
( 3°4 ) fpeak of ) the moft noble Duke Reignier gave Santa-Maria away at the facred alta r of the chapel, to Prince R in aldo;- the fuf- fragan of Naples ofix lating on this hap¬ py occafion, and the Lady Lucy-Miranda acting as bride-maid to the former. At the fame tirne, alfo, Captain Orfini acted the fame friendly part towards the fon of his departed friend, and bleft Ferdinand with the fair hand of Lauria. And, laft of all, to render it a general day of nup¬ tial joy, the generous D'Arcos made the honeft Carlo happy anthem all in the pof- feflïon of his long'loved Sylvia* And, now, to fum up the laft page of our hiftory, we muft not forget that the Countefs Ifabella (never fufferiiig the cup of profperity to overflow and drown the remembrances of pail adverfity) took the firft opportunity of fending for Rachel and
( ?°? ) and Rofalie to the Caftle ; an invitation. kind and acceptable to them, indeed, at the prefent juncture, as they had then juft loft their father, and with him their fupport. The former flie placed under the protection of the Lady Lauria; and the once love-fick Rofalie flie kept about her own perfon—whilft Sylvia ftill conti¬ nued with her former miftrefs. Lady Santa-Maria having taken the firft opportunity of fending Sebaftian to Launcelot's cottage, ihe ordered him alfo, to bring both the old man and Mopfa, with the iiawk, to the Caftle, together with the caiket, which contained the Monk's rich bequeft. This being per¬ formed, flie called a fpecial levee of her own, in the great hail, with orders that all the domeftics fliould indifcriminately meet her, there j when, in the prefence of
(??? ) of her huíband, her Lady-mother, and all, ihe ihared the whole contents of the caiket, with her own bountiful hand, im¬ partially and equally amongft them, in token of their paft fteady and faithful fervices. As for her faithful and amufing com- panion, the hawk, he alfo participated in the general comforts ; and Santa-Maria, ftill intending to purfue her favourite di- verfion, affociated him with feveral others, training the ftrangers in fuch a manner, as to make them feel and pay a kind of obedience and homage to her firft fportive and chance bird ; rendering him (as it were) king ofthe mews, which (he foon after formed for their general convenience, in the great court-yard. The lute was conftantly ftrung in Santa- Maiia's private chamber, where, with Lauria,
( 3°7 ) Lauria, flie played and fung the fongs of paft times, of paft loves, and paft dan¬ gers. Whilft heaven, bleffing and -che¬ riihing their virtues, crowned alike their happy, focial years, with offsprings fo lovely, and fo numerous withal—that many an after time and oft, the ancient w'alls of Martorano Caftle ; and the thick furrounding ihacly forefts, refounded o'er and o'er with thé féraphiç founds of in¬ fantine and divine harmony. THE END.
