Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Santa-Maria: or, The mysterious pregnancy: a romance
S ANT A-M Α iL Ι Α. ■ *— t— — ?— ^— CHAPTER I. Ail things that we ordained ácftivil,, Turø from their office to black fuaeraJ ; Oar inftrameots to mehuichoiy befli, Oer weddiag cheer ta a fad fonerai leaft ; Our folemn hymns to allien dirges, Our brillai flow'rs fex^tfSf ? bxrfà coarfe, And all things change them to the contrary. Shakspeaie. İHE palace of Rodolph, which for a feries of fome months had been the fair fpot, and agreeable fource of every hap· pinefs and pleafure, was rendered on a fudden the abode of melancholy and de« fpair. The funíhine of jr^y, in.one luck- Vol. I. B lefs
( 2 ) lefs,niojncnt, hid its fmiling afpeñ, whiift - the dreary forms of grief and horror ad¬ vanced to .change the envied fcene. The morning that had been fixed upon for the nuptial celebration of the young Prince Rinaldo with the daughter of his kinfman, Count Rodolph, proved the moft difaftrous day to both thefe noble farai- milies that ever w r as annexed to the fate of human beings j-—- For—when the Lady Ifabella repaired to the chamber of her daughter, ilie was aftomined at the profound filence that reigned throughout the apartment ------ With a trembling accent fhe called on Santa-Maria ------ No Santa-Maria replied ——The Countefs on this ran towards her daughter's bed ; aud, opening the cur¬ tains
( ? ) tains with a fearful ill-boding hand, ?? difcovered her offspring clafped within the icy arms of death ! ! I Weak would be any attempt of mine, to defcribe the agony and diftraélion of Ifabella—The pencil, tather than the pen is wanting moft —For here, the poor mo¬ ther funk Îİfcîefs on the more lifelefs body of the ftill beauteous Santa-Maria ——Beauteous indeed even now. For—in this cold torpid flate, fhe was lovely, as when motion leaped through lier veins—nor, had the rofeate hue of her cheeks or lips loft their wonted freih- nefs- -----She lay extended, like air angel on the bed of fleep—in whofe placid brain, nor fallacious dream, nor horrid fancies could interpofe with reft. ? ? The
( 4 ) The palace was almoil inftantly raifed by a fudden ihriek that efcaped the Lady Ifabella, before ilie dropped inanimate— Prince Rinaldo, attended by his old faith- *· fuJ friend, Manfredi, and a fplendid fuite, was waiting at this critical moment with count Rodolph, for his fond und Joveiy bride—— Aias ! how changeable is the face of fortune '—The delufive phantom at one infiant holds to our view the fpecious glafs of happinefs and profperity ; on the next, flie as fuddenly veils it with the fable covering of mifery and difappoint¬ ment—then mocking, leaves us— -viâirns to credulity and defpair. Count Rodolph,' ailonifiied at this un¬ expected and lamentable fummons, firft afcended
í 5 ) afcended the ftairs that led to his daugh¬ ter's chamberí Prince Rinaldo foUowed. accompanied by Signior Manfredi —They entered the apartment of death almoft at the fame moment—They all appruachcd r the bed abreaft, and-----Oh! horror in¬ conceivable!-—beheld the beauteous^ the ftill beauteous Santa-Maria—not a blufli- ins: expecting bride—but a ftill inanimate corp fe !— How fhall I paint the general concera that prevailed at this mournful fcene r~- Oh! painful tafk, thus ever and anon, will it be to recount the difmal tak of woe— The Lady Ifabella ftill continued infen¬ fibly ftretched upon the body of her .life« lefs child. ? 3 " Count
( 6 ) Count Rodolph ftood at fomè little diftance from the bed—his arms folded in each other, and wrapped beneath his cloke—his eyes at the fame time fternly fixed upon the motionlefs features of his daughter—whiift his heart thus inwardly arraigned the omnifcient decrees of hea^ ven's facred minifters :— Providence—(bethought Rodolph)·— Providence fuddenly fnatched from me Ferdinand, my only fon— the brave— the illuftrious heir of my now declining houfe—His unknown fate, however, re¬ mains concealed beneath the veil of fome undiscovered myftery—Ferdinand may yet cxift—Haply, I beheld not the boy thus fadly ftretched upon the dreary couch òf death—If heaven is juft and merciful, he may be again - reftored—But here, for- footh,
( 7 ) füoth, all hope is baniíhéd— The fole re¬ maining ftern of my illuftrious houfe lies there, a difmal corp fe—plucked in her very bloom, from the opening nuptial bed, to be tranfplanted ia the wither ing avenues of the dead--Oh i curfed— oh! doubly accurfed be the envious powers, that wrought the dire exchange. Whiift the Count was thus arraigning the unfearchable decrees of Providence, Prince Rinaldo, after beftowing a moft piercing look of regret on his lovely de¬ parted bride, fo fuddenly clafped within the chilly arms of death 1 he raifed his hand and eyes to heaven ; then piouily, patient - ly exclaimed—God's will be done !- -As for the good Signior Manfredi, ho alfo looked filently—poignantly on, whiift * : The tears ran down his beard, like winter-drops ct From eaves of reeds—»"* Shaksp. ß 4 CHAP.
( 8 ) CHAP. ?. Death may ufurp on nature rrr* » ???, And yet the nit of life kindle again The c/erptefsM fpirits—— «» ?? "? JL HE ufual catholic ceremonies being performed over the body of Santa Maria, the laft mournful duty now approached— the family adieu—the iivinç, mcetimr to take the dreadful and murtal farewel of the dead. Both Rinaldo and the Count refufed to participate in this awful cere¬ mony. The Lady Ifabella pofieíled greater fortitude—With the moft poignant ma¬ ternal fondnefs, ilie approached her dear¬ ly beloved daughter's, remains, to take the parting kifs...... Trembling me flood, e'er
( 9 ) cornature would aJbw it \ her body, half reclined, remained fufpended betwixt the alternate balance of grief and affection— Ä mother's fondnefs at length prepon- dered----- ano! —folemnly ftie ftooped to prefs her daughter's death-clofed lips to her's.......but-^Oh God' 1 -- ί -Öb gracious God!—what were her feelings ?*-*Whati< were her &nfations?—Defcription can* fearce obey the happy fummons—It muft --it muft come forth— For, here, the mother—Oh thrilling' tranfport!—-difcerned refpiration in the mutual contaci—a ble fb—a· fenfible* -ré¬ animation tin through hêr^whële^Hmé. -^-Thc' ftern demeandííf òf fortitude U8W gave way to ihe foft eft features ôf N mater¬ nal ecftafy; joys unutterable fucceeded^ tire black profpcclf of "defpaSn' 1 wWlfft* ? 5' the
{ ΙΟ ) the happy mother, in the overgrown greatnefs of her blifs, fell again infenfi- ble in the arms of her domeftics—not/as heretofore, the poor victim of diftraftipn *—No—flie fell drooping, like the poor agonized criminal, who after having been ftretched upon the horrid wheel, ready to receive the executioner's uplifted tre¬ mendous blow, hears the unexpected welcome refpite, and who, overpowered with the joyous tidings, finks ftill deeper beneath the irrefiftible influx of happi¬ nefs. The tumultuous founds of tranfport and furprife in Santa-Marian chamber, in¬ ftantly caught the attention 6f Rodolph j who was fitting difconfolatély in his own adjoining apartment, brooding over his cares and difappointments.—The lofs of his
- ( ii ) his only daughter was not, then, fo much the fubjeft of his gloomy meditations, as the loft profpeft of his glowing ambi¬ tion. On hearing the noifes, however, at hand, he ftarted from his chair—and with knitted brows—arms foIded^—and a ftern ftep, he entered the chamber. . Whiift the fierce Neapolitan's eager enquiring eye looked round for explana- tion -, Sylvia pointed to the hed, and tu* multuoufly exclaimed—" Sec—fee—rm lord—our Santa-Maria—our Lady Santa^ Maria lives—ilie lives to blefs us all again 1" The Count ilood thunderftruck—he gazed towards the bed—and gazin?-- gave the lie to every fenfe he had.
^ 6 During
( ι* ) During this folemn interval, the Coun¬ tefs recovered, and Santa-Maria again rolled her eyes within their fplendid orbs. —With light—came reafon—fenfe—per¬ ceiving her mother hanging over her with rapture and aftonifliment, fhe ob¬ ferved with an angel's fmile : " What áils my honoured—dear— '* bekwed parent ?" The Lady Ifabella's feelings were too far fptung to give the glad reply—the ex¬ ulting mother could only anfwer with her eyes—ihe hung over her reftored child, with the moft expreffive filence—kiflfed her re-animated lips with ecftafy inde- fcribable, and preifed her warm renovat¬ ed hand to her palpitating bofom.
When
( ? ) . When the Count became convinced that the» fcene before him was real, the harihnefs of his features relaxed into pa¬ ternal foftnefs ; and whiift he ciaihed his daughter's hand in his, the big tear rolled in his fombrous eye. Then, regarding the chamber of death with a look of divided horror and fatif- fáciionj he exclaimed : " Would that my young kinfman— t; the Lord Rinaldo, was now here !"—- At the found or Rinaldo* s name, Santa- Maria faintly exclaimed—■———«*" How * c does my dear young lord?—I dreamt, *< my mother* that I war ffiortly to call " him huíband. ------ Oh! my lady—I have *' had fuch dreadful—and fuch pleat 4 l ing
( ? ) " ing dreams alfo.— -Methought—the " younger Contarini had by forne infer- " nal unknown means, conveyed a dead- " ly poifon to the lips of lord Rinaldo -, u and forced me afterwards to receive— * f his loathed embrace.—And then, anon, " I thought my noble brother, Ferdinand, " rufhed impetuous to my aid, with a " bloody faulchion raifed o'er his head, " whiift with a voice'like thunder, he ex- ** claimed— Fear not¡ Santa-Maria, Ferdi· ** nand β i II lives — Ferdinand fidali guard thee " from oppreßon and injufiice." u On this, methought, he levelled Conta*· «' rini with the duß" — Rodolph, all this time, was alternately abforbed in anxiety and pleafure—he turned pale with the recurrence of paft circumftances- ftarted and looked wild-- then
t l $ ) then on a fudden, with a mixture of grin¬ ning—(if I may be allowed the expref¬ fion)—and fenfations—half pleafant—half morofe—he took his daughter's vifion to be a good omen of his fon's prefent exif¬ tence, and future reftoration.—This happy —foreboding prefage, united to Santa- Maria's recovery, repelled his wonted gloom j—and he once more beheld, with ambitious joy, the proud towers of Marto¬ rano caftle rifing majeftically to his view. Thefe fudden and affecting viciffitudes of fortune had fo wrought upon Ro¬ dolph ---- the Countefs—and every one around them, that they all furveyed the apartment wherein v they had affemhled with an unconfcious and carelefs eye.-— No one at the moment reflefted that they ftood in the dreary chamber of death- encircled
( ι? )· encircled on every ñde with the mourn¬ ful peraphernalia of an approaching fu¬ neral t and that the living Santa-Maria lay (hrouded in the awful apparel or the dead. When reafon, however, began to re- aftttmeher wonted vigour, the beauteous Neapolitan looked about her with terror and aftonifliment—then raifing herfelf upon the bed-—ihe exclaimed ------ w Am I awake—or do I dream ?— ίς What means this winding iheet, that's " wrapped about my body thus ?—Oh î e ^ what -would that coffin there> whofe <c Wide extended jaw feems ready to re- " cèive fome hclplefs corpfe?— -Why is " this fable pall ftretchcd thus acrofs my α bed ?-Hand why thefe-dreary hangings, " that
( π ? (i that diftufe a gloom fo hö&íble around " my chamber ?-^Oh 1 my mother~*fay *' —whither tend thefe palling figns of " death?—Alas!—«I dreamed my wed- <c ding was at hand—and not my funeral. u —What mean thofe doubtful looks— <c 'thofe tears and fmiles ι alternate—— l· * ff grow faint, my mother—I ftern lick at " heart—I anv-I———^—" Oft this, the lovely rofe drooped once more cheerlefì on her death-clad pillow· * The palace of Rodolph was again» plunged in a feries of grief and confterna* tion.—Lady Ifabella, who began to ar* raign her dîfcretion, for not removing Santa-Maria on the firft indiftìnn dawn- ings of returning reafon, now begged the Count precipitately to retire, whiift flie could have her daughter removed to an¬ other
( iß ) other chamber.— In the mean time, my lord—(exclaimed the agitated mother)— fee that the Signior Baflano be nftantly fent for, to afford our daughter all the af¬ fiftance he can give. Rodolph having immediately com¬ municated this order, and a feparate one alfo to the Lord Rinaldo, hy Drofi—(his favourite domeftic)—he went in inftant fearch of Baffano, and foon fent him for¬ ward to the palace.—He then proceeded to that of the Prince—the young lord was abfent, but happily his friend was found», Manfredi being haftily made acquainted with Droffs happy errand, he as haftily conducted him to Rinaldo; who was then fitting in his gardens, beneath the rough branches of an aged hawthorn, on whofe old
( ι* ) old trunk he had reclined his defpondent head. In the mean time, Santa-Maria was re¬ moved to another apartment, and afte** the phyfician Baffano had retired, the Countefs thus briefly related to her daugh¬ ter what had pafled in the dreadful in¬ terval of the laft three days. I need not defcribe (faid the Lady Ifa¬ bella) the poignancy of a fond mother's diítreíled feelings, at this paft mournful crifis,—Providence, doubtlefs, for fome fupreme and allwife defign, funk you thus deeply into the entranfed abyfs of death —- refembling fleep-----Either to make trial of our patience—or to harden us, with this
( 20 ) this fécond fevere leflbn of adverfity, againft fome future concealed calamity. On the night, my child, of your fup¬ pofed death, two Carthufian friars faid mafs over your fleeping body.- 1 occafion- ally mingled İn their holy orifons.^—The Count, your father, retired, alone, over¬ whelmed with gloomy horrors, to- his chamber.—On the fucceedins: dav, Svi- via undertook the mournful office of pre¬ paring your body for the fihnt and dreary enclofureof the tomb. ------Death, however, on this awful occafion, feemed to advance with rapid ftrides to feize a fécond prey; for whiift the blooming rofe' iliil gliftened, my child, on your cheek, the pale lllly had planted its filver hue over the fair countenance of the affectionate —youthful Sylvia. Alas ι—
( « ) A las ^--my —poor—dear—dear— Sy !- via! (ejaculated Santa-Maria.) On the firft dawn of returning reafon (continued the lady «Ifabella)—you told us of your dreams.—Attentive to your voice—your looks—and aclions—-I obferv¬ ed not the dreary appendages of death, that every where furrounded us. —My overfight had nearly coil me dearly ,; for no fooner had your intellectual powers began to grow ftrong and ftronger, than they were feverely wounded with the mournful fpeftacle of all thofe fable ac¬ coutrements for the grave.—In that fé¬ cond interval, however (—concluded the countefs—) of loft reafon, my child— now—my only child-'was conducted hi¬ ther, and againhappily breathes—moves— fpeaks—
( aa ) fpeaks— and lives to make me once more —-a happy mother.
Scarce had thefe happy tidings diffufed the firft tranfports of joy and tender¬ nefs, when the Count entered, followed by his young kinfman, and his guardian, Manfredi. Santa-Maria momentarily perceiving the violence of her lover's indefcribable happinefs, difengaged her hand from thofe of her mother—and—ftretched it forth to Rinaldo— The young prince kifled the rapturous gift with the moft enthu¬ fiaftic blifs ; and nature, coming boun- teoufly to his aid, he fhowered down the plenteous
( ? ) plenteous ftream of tearful ecftafy on the dearly beloved boon-- Reader !—if thou haft ever feen an ho¬ noured parent—an adored wife—a tender huíband — affezionate brother-—fifter— kinfman-—ftretched upon the fuppofed bed of death---and— then—(Oh! tumul¬ tuous blifs)---beheld them—either—by the gracious interpofition of Providence, or the efforts of human ikill, unexpected¬ ly refcued from his icy grafp—If thou ever haft feen thy deareft bofom friend topping headlong into the dreary recefs of the grave ; and then beheld him rife fuperior to his prefent powers- yøu beft —and, only beft can tell, what the Lord Rinaldo, and the happy parents of the reftored— Santa Maria could feel at thefe over- joyous moments 1 ! ! CHAP.
( ¿4 )
CHAP. III. ν * * . , ■ ; ■' M y mînd itii&iices Some confequence yet hanging in the ftars. ' SbaksíeareI ITT"* JL HUS bappinefs ¿once more eçlifp- «d t the frowns of îdifappçintment-r-fo'ï- ro w—— and defpair------- Djfappoint ment— forrow—and defpair however, foon puihed their fair predecesor from ber too welcome feat^ and again as un¬ happily re-affumed * their jealous angry afpeQs. \. ' For, alas! no fooner had Santa Maria jegajmed her wonted vigour and cheerful¬ nefs, than the Lord Rinaldo, overcome, by his
( ? ) late grief—the cold damps of the noc¬ turnal air—-(he having obftinately re¬ fufed the warm fhelter of his princely roof, whiift his dear bride laid dormant upon the fancied bed of death)—and the exquifite keennefs of his anguiih, fell into all the agonies aud diftraöion that attend the progrefs of a violent fever. This was the period (melancholy as it proved) that afforded Manfredi the gene¬ rous opportunity of manifefting his love, friendihip, and attachment, for the νοιιηρ· lord Rinaldo,— Ever v. hour—everv mo- ment furveyed his attention and anxiety, ■—His eves had rigorouflv eftranrcd them- felvés from fleep—he was the watchful adminifterer of every medicine that touched the lips of his young patient; for though Manfredi did not carry on his ihoulder Vol. Ι. Ω that
( ?? ) that flaviih national badge of his coun¬ trymen—the hideous monfter fuperfti¬ tion—nay, nor is it to fuppofed, he now contemplated on thofe words which had fo lately fprung from the vifion of Santà- Maria. ----" Methought the hated Con- ct tarini had, by fome infernal unknown " means, conveyed a deadly poifon to the « lips of Lord Rinaldo/' ------ Still ------ what ?—he may have had fome fatal hif¬ tory as fatally engraved in the deep re- ceffes of his honeft heart—known there alone—unfearchable— undivided.— Con¬ tarmi^ name and character have been but ilightly touched upon, in this humble page.—Surmife may fpread her broad ex¬ panded wings—may foar—may flutter— and then may—droop—may—aye, may, at laft, fall feebly as the air-blown gofli- •mer.—Somewhat of this hereafter— things MAY
( *7 ) may come out, perhaps to chill—to make the fenfitive foul thrill with horror—to make the very hair ftand perched on its native habitual rooft, where fo long it had lain recumbent.------ Manfredi knew much—aye, more then we can be ena¬ bled now to tell.—The dreadful fecret is enclofed deeply—and now myfterioufly within his own faithful bofom.—Let at¬ tention, therefore, accompanied by her meek-eyed fifter, patience, look up to ex¬ pectation, whiift virtue and pleafure proceed, wûth fairy fteps, to fing the prai fes of Manfredi.
Manfredi was the only fun of a Neapo¬ litan officer ; who, though rich in courage and virtue, was neverthelefs poor in purfe and preferment.—The brave foldier had, ? ? however,
( 28 ) ·, however, means fuffícient tobring uf his darling fon to the higheft pitch of iffiiver- fal knowledge ; and had there been a few fteps farther to the temple of feience, Manfredi would eafily have overtopped them.—He had been the very firft in Naples that led the way to accompliili- ments of every complexion—equally alike —as a fcholar—a poet—hiftorian—mufi- cian—painter—and fculptor. Thefe com¬ bined and happy excellencies were alfo tranflated to, the late prince and his prefent fon and heir— Rinaldo— to whofe guardianihip and prote&orfhip he was preferred, by his old friend, to his brother— the prefent count Rodolph. —Nor was Manfredi lefs aftiduous in the improvement of the Lady Santa-Maria— omitting no opportunity whatever to inftruft her pliant mind—-giving her lef¬ fons,
( 20 ) · fons, alike, of worldly and religious know¬ ledge—and, at all times (the hours of piety and devotion apart) making her perfect miftrefs of the mufes—the pencil— and the heaven-founding lute.—In ihort, Manfred was n voices well divulgai free, learn'd, and valiant, $???5???*?.
?? CHAP.
30 ì
? H ? P. IV. A thoufand moral paimings I can ûiow, That íhall demonftrate thefc quick blows of fortune More poignantly than vvouìs. SHAKSPEARK. J/ ROM the atiention— vigilance— ■ and medicinal knowledge of Manfredi, Lord Rinaldo's fever and delirium had confi- « derabjy abated.-—His gnardian> however, for reafons known only within his own bofom, wi (hed him— moft anxioufly wiílied htm—to be removed tó his caille, in the South.—This fame caftle was fecure—im¬ pregnable—was --......... But more of that hereafter................... Manfredi, in ftiort, wiflied him to be fafe there
( ?» ) there—and there alone—and was deter¬ mined fpeedily to effe£t what he fo ea¬ gerly and myfterioufly defired. The palace of Rinaldo had been daily vifited by his kindred, fince his fevere and fudden illnefs.—It was their cuftom early fo to do.—On the morning that Manfredi had plotted his clandefiine departure from Naples to Calabria, he watched the coun¬ tenance of Rodoîph with an anxious vi¬ gilance ; fo much fo, that it might feem like fufpicion, to a guilty mind. — The Count,however, maintained his cuftomary looks and deportment, and though it was feldom that his features had relaxed into a fmile, fmce the fudden abfence of his fon Ferdinand, they aflumed cne, never¬ thelefs, when'he entered Rinaldo's cham¬ ber, and difcovered the happy change ? 4 that
( 3* ) that had taken place, fince his yefterda} 's vifit. If the hardened feelings of Rodolph could thus for a moment foften, and change their churliih rugged nature------ Oh! what muft have been the delicious ftnfadons of Santa-Maria, when, in an after-vi/it, ihe.entered her lover's apart¬ ment, and beheld the rofeate hue of health once more returning on his manly cheek, and the animating fparkle once more gliftening in his commanding eye! Tlie moment Lady Santa-Maria had ap¬ proached the fide of her dear RinaIdo*s bed, he fondly clafped her hand, and at¬ tempted to exprefs all the raptures that he felt on that inftant, but in a voice fo feeble, as gave caufe for Manfredi to en¬ join *
( 33 ? join a prudent filence, at this—their pre*· fent happy interview. Difcourfe, therefore (at his beheft) gave way to filent looks of mutual and expref¬ five tendernefs. To words fucceeded— glances of joy—love—tranfport—and in¬ nocence. Manfredi, ftruck with this exquifite and affecling picture, inftantly caught up his pencil, and, with that enthufiafm fo natural tobis genius and inclination, gave a fécond life to the fcene and characier before him. Juft as the artift had Tfmiihed his iketch, prudence and modefty whifpered to Santa-Maria, that ilie ihould procraftinate her vifit no longer. She therefore took a . ? 5 fond.
( 34 ) fond adieu of Rinaldo ; and, after Man¬ fredi had feated old Pausiti his own chair, by the bed-fide, he attended her to the faloon. <c Faireft young lady ! " faid Manfredi, halting for a few moments in the faloon, " how diftrefting are the changes of our flitting exiftence !—at one moment bloom¬ ing in full vigour, and on the next faft falling to the grave !—See what Lord Ri¬ naldo was a few days paft !"— (Drawing a fmall portrait from his fable pouch J — ζ( Be¬ hold !—what animation gliftcns in his eye —what health runs through every fea¬ ture !—What command—what virtue— what benevolence, fparkle in his noble countenance! — Now, look at this!— .( Producing another portrait.) —View—what a melancholy change is there !—Behold ! how
( 35 ) how your lover, but the next fucceeding morn, is altered by the wafting arm of ficknefs !■—His bright eyes are funk—his cheeks are pallid—his lips parched—his ftrength exhaufted—and all his former vigour and beauty, in a few moments, eclipfed by difeafe,—Thefe fad viciffitudes of fate will long be wholefome leffons to you both—will teach ye, as ever and anon you gaze upon them, to confider life as the fhort road to a happy eternity. What is man's life?—Fifteen years or fo— Not more, ev'n if his coffin bears the ftamp Of good oíd age»—Compute his infant years— The time he lies entombM in Morpheus' arms !—» There fpeds at once the moiety of life : — ' For what is fleep, but death'refembled, ■> A pleafing midway on Life^ fliort road, Where each poor trav'iier, burthen' ? and fatiguM, With pleafure takes a ilion rcfrefiling ???, Then fwiftly hies him on his journey's aid ? — ? 6 " Ncä
{ 36 ) Next comes ficknefs—man's laft forgetful ftate? His corp'ral faculties abforb'd in pain, • The feat of Mem'ry extinct and torpid lies. Then Death envoys him on his dreary wav, And folds the door—on Recollection ! * c My poetry, I fear, is as deficient as my paintings. Accept them, however, my deareft pupil, from the unfkilful hand that defigned them.—You will lire long, I hope, to watch over your beloved Ri¬ naldo. — My anxious watchings, however, foon muft ceafe ; for the natural decay of life cannot long pre ferve me from that fate, which, foon or late, muft be our univerfal doom· Take the contrafted portraits, my child, and carefully preferve them!—They are the deareft leffons that your friend can beftow upon you."
Santa-
( 37 ) Santa-Maria accepted the pictures, fcarcely knowing that ihe did fo. Her feelings, however, were re-animated, when Manfredi pronounced, " My beauteous child,, adieu!" cc Adieu !—Not fo, I hope, my deareft friend !—I ftiall fee you ihortly again— fliall I not ?" « You fliall, my child »—(for fuch I muft ever call you).—But, for the prefent, adieu ! " ** Then for the prefent," replied Santa- Maria, with a tearful eye and faltering accent, u my deareft father (for fuch, alfo, I muft ever call you)—adieu—adieu—- adieu ! ! ! " On
( 38 ) - On this, Santa-Maria left the faloon, and joining Sylvia^ who was waiting for her without, fhe reluctantly— defpondent¬ ly quitted her dear lord's manfion—pof¬ feffed with a trembling and diftrefting anx¬ iety, that flie had never felt fo poignantly before. This was an adieu—an unexpecìed— a melancholy adieu, to all ;—for, on that night, Manfredi, accompanied by the prince's favourite domeftics—old Paul— the moß faithful old Paul —Baptift—Igna¬ tius, and Pietro, fecretly conveyed Rinaldo to his tartana, and, coafting along the ihore, fafely lodged- him at his ftrong caftle in the. South» That the Count and his family, how¬ ever, fliould not think that infult was wan¬ tonly
( 39 ) tonly intended, as a fucceffor to this fecret rneafure, Manfredi left a letter behind, previous to his departure from the palace (apologizing for the fudden abfence of Rinaldo —from the danger of a relapfe— and the neceffity of enjoying a freer air than Naples could afford, &e.) with the ftricleft injunclion, alfo, that it ihould be delivered early to Rodolph, to prevent his experiencing the difappointment which muft have naturally followed, if he had called in the morning at the palace of his nephew. When the letter was delivered to the Count, Lady Ifabella and her daughter were walking to and fro* with him in the gallery.—After he had perufed it, Ro¬ dolph threw it with the utmoft vehemence on the ground, and then uttering the moft horrid
( 40 ) horrid imprecation that could poftibly efcape the lips of man againft the vir¬ tuous Manfredi, he flew, full of apparent fpleen and difappointment, to his own chamber.—His rage was exceftive.—The Countefs immediately took up the letter, and read it to her daughter.—When ftie had finiilied the fcroll, Lady Ifabella invo¬ luntarily exclaimed, " I am glad of it ! ** " For why ?—For why ? my deareft mo¬ ther ! " uttered Santa-Maria. "Becaufe-------" u Becaufe what ? " " Becaufe, my. child,'* anfwered the countefs, " I think that my Lord Rinaldo is more likely to recover his health in the country, than he is in the city of Naples !" CHAP..
( 41 )
CHAP. V. If I know more of any man alive Than that which maiden modefty doth warrant, Let all my fins lack mercy 1—O! my father, Prove you that any man with me conversai Reftife me, hate me, torture me to death í My chaflity's the jewel of our houfe, Bequeathed down from many anceftors t ? Which were the greateft obloquy i* th* world For me to lofe. ΙΗΛΚΙΡΖΛΚΚ» ?^? O U Ν T Rodolph received weekly expreffes from Manfredi, in Calabria.— On the fixth, however, of his departure from Naples, the whole family were elated with the happy intelligence, that Lord Rinaldo had nearly recovered his former health,
( 42 ) health, ftrength, and fpirits; that he burned to fee his Santa-Maria again, and anxioufly prefled a fpeedy confummation of their nuptials —---------------------------- -------.------- at the Caflle!! ! But, how alterable are the decrees of Fate!—how ftrange and inconftant are the fortunes we are heirs to !—for, the next day after the arrival of the laft courier, Santa-Maria was feized with the moft violent agonies and continual faint- ings: — her body was fwcîled, and her beauteous countenance became again pale, languid, and fickly.—Signior Baflano being fent for, he foon difcovered the caufe—the fatal caufe, of his fair patient's malady, and, in private with Ladylfabclla and her daughter, he pronounced — — 4 —,— — . — (with the greateft degree of concern)..
( 43 } concern)— that Santa-Maria — was PREGNANT ! ! ! The Countefs., on hearing this unex¬ pected declaration, was ftruck fpeechlefs —motionlefs—with doubt,horror, and fur- prize.—Santa Maria, however, confeious of her own innocence, and alarmed by' fuch a falfe fuggeftion, with energetic fortitude exclaimed, ** that the furgeon had belied his conference;" arid bitterly reproached him, as an intended deftroyer of her virtue and chaftity.—BaiTano, con¬ ceiving himfelf deeply injured, alike in his judgment, candour, and reputation, by thefe reproaches, haftily left the apart¬ ment. In an outer one, however, he was encountered by Rodolph, who anxioufly flopped him, and, with his wonted eager¬ nefs of enquiry, demanded the nature of his
( 44 ) his daughter's indifpofition — The Sur¬ geon, without the leaft demur, repeated the caufe, frankly, as he had done before. —The Count was ftaggered—thunder¬ ftruck ; and, perceiving that Baflano was more inclined to depart than ftay, he caught him furioufly by his cloke, and peremptorily commanded him, on his life, to recall what he had juft faid,— The furgeon (a man of the firft ikill, ho¬ nor, and integrity, in all Naples) coolly replied—that he could not belye his judgment and his conference, " There¬ fore, truly believe me, my Lord Rodolph/' concluded he, with much emphafis and equal feeling—" your daughter is preg¬ nant!!!" Upon this, the Count fuffered Baflano to depart—ftaggered, more than ever, at this
( 45 ) tiiis folemn and fécond aflurance of his daughter's incontinency. After Rodolph had recovered, in fome meafure, from His aftonifliment, he made his way to Santa-Maria's chamber, where he found IfabeiJa, with her forehead clafped between her hands, and her el¬ bows defpondently fixed upon her knees. . Santa Maria, on the contrary, w r as lean¬ ing patiently and refignedly upon her pillow, feeling more for her mother than for herfelf—AVhen Rodolph, however, burft into her chamber—with fury in his eye— diftraöion in his looks—and venge¬ ance on his arm, flie refolutely exclaim¬ ed, " Advance, my fire!—Uniheath, at full, that threatening fword, and bury it in this bofom, if I have afled aught againft
( 4« ) againft the honor of our houfe !—I per¬ ceive, in your angry front, that Baffano has confirmed what he fo folemnly de¬ clared to my honored mother here,— Innocent am I, neverthelefs, as the holy and immaculate Virgin!------And now (raifing her hands and eyes to heaven) I earneftly conjure my Almighty Creator to fink me with lightening into the bot- tomlefs gulph of hell and everiafting per¬ dition, if my chaftity is not as bright—as pure—^as it was in the very moment that refpiration firft iftued from my lips!" Rodolph's fword (notwithftanding this folemn and bitter appeal) was prepared to do the bloody purpofes of its enraged mafter, when Ifabella interpofed, and falling on her knees, in motherly anguiih exclaimed, ** Oh! fpare my child!— Spare
( 47_2 Spare — fpare — my adored — my only daughter!" iC Then let her lips inftantly proclaim*' anfwered the enraged father— iC who was the partner of her guilt and infamy ! " " Upon my foul, then/' warmly replied Santa-Maria, ?\ ounded to the very quick by fuch a bafe fuggeftion— " upon all my hopes of future happinefs, I know not of what you queftion me about ! " "Have patience, Rodolph ! " obferved Ifabella, perceiving that this anfwer had encreafed his fury and impatience— " have patience, and wait the event for a few days ! " " At your requeft then,Dame, " replied the
( 48 ) the Count, " it filiali be fo.—At the expi¬ ration, however, of a few davs, if this myftery is not difclofed—mark me !—let your daughter there look to it!"—On this Rodolph difappeared from the cham¬ ber, and retired fullenly to his own— there to meditate ou the eventful and diftrefting circumftances of the day. From the ftrong and confident aflertions of BaiTano, a man of unftained repute and integrity, how could the Count think otherwife, than that Santa-Maria ¿nuft be pregnant?-—On the other hand, the fo¬ lemn declaration that ihe had fo fervently made of her innocence, weakened that of Baffano's. --------------"The latter's fldll might be for once miftaken!—If not (»thought Rodolph to himfelf) ?? fliall die!—Death, or fomething worfe than ς that—
( 49 ) that—falitude—imprifonment—tortures, (hall be her certain doom. Immediate annihilation will be an atonement too merciful for infamy like her's !" And now------(again bethought the Count) let me indulge one bitter reflec¬ tion : for it is indeed indulging, if it can lead to vengeance. Who can be the partner of my daugh¬ ter's incontinency ? This horrible íuggeíHon led Rodolph into a thoufand revolving and intricate perplexities, which had nearly untoned his feiifes. Who could be the father ? Wiio ? —Why, no one but the Prince Rinaldo— —Santa-Maria would not be fo low—fo bafe —and degenerate, as to fub- mit to the embraces of a menial—Blafted fuppofition U.could Oie, the lawful de· Vol I D f cent
( 50 ) fcent of the moft illuftrious houfes in Naples, be fo mean, fo luftful—as filently to court, in the dead hour of night, fome flaviih domeftic to her arms ?—Damned be the foul and ignominious thought!—No- no—if flie is really pregnant, it muft be fo by the young and captivating Prince Rinaldo. Santa-Maria had never liftened to the addreffes, nor had ilie ever been alone (tobis knowledge and confent) with any other man but himfelf-----But why fo eager, when the nuptial ceremony was fo clofe at hand? For the prefent, no matter why ? Let me for this time (rccon- fidered the Count) conclude thefe bitter reflexions, and await the event, as I have promifed, for a few days. The circumftance of Santa-Maria s fup¬ pofed misfortune could not Jong remain a fecret, either at home or abroad. The ? ordinary
( 51 ) ordinary domeftics foon caught the intelli¬ gence j and of courfe, it foon reached the public car. When the Count, therefore, received a mandate from the Viceroy to attend a private council, his court-friends perceiving the gloomy fufpence that hung upon his fable brow, and but too well knowing the cruel caufe from whence it fprang, kindly condoled with him on his domeftic misfortune-----Condolence, Innvever, like unto this was excruciating torture—reflneii cruelty, and pierced the heart of Rodolph, lharper tlr-tn could a thoufand daubers. lhe Count, both anxious to avoid this inquifitorial commiferation, and to learn the fubjeci of the Viceroy's fummons, preifed,eagerly onward to the prefence- chamber. A iter being gracioufly receiv- td, he was informed of his Excellency, 1) ? \h it
( $? ) that he had appointed him to the com¬ mand of a regiment of cavalry, which would ihortly take the field, in union with the allied Chriftian powers, againft the Turks ; and which he requefted of Rodolph immediately to infpeft ; to re¬ place all that was deficient both in men and arms—and that he fliortly afterwards ihould be re imburfed by the ftate. The Count, by this unexpefled in¬ ftance of royal favour, now found his dreary mind more furcharged than ever. Here, he reluctantly faw himfelf yoked to an inconvenient burthen, which he was fcarcely able to carry—a load, neverthe¬ lefs, which his duty, as an old command¬ ing officer, and his unfliaken allegiance to the will and profperity of his fovereign and country, compelled him to bear. CHAP.
( S3 )
CHAP. VL — as this is true, Let nie in fafety raife me from my kneu, Or elfe for ever be confined here A marble monument î — > . ■■ —?. ---------I have mark'd Λ thoufand bhrfhing apparitions To ftart into her face ; a thoufand íhame.·? In angel vvhitenefs bear away thofe bluihos;. And in her eye, there hath appcat'd a fire To burn the errors that the Court -dut U hold Againft her maiden truth— Shakíteare. JaX)DQLPH, after having left the pre¬ fence of the Viceroy^ became ftill more and more the viftim of anxiety» fufpicion, and defpair—His battered fortunes little enabling him to comply as he could wiih D 3 with
( 54 } with thi- honourable truft afli inted to hi* ? charge and command. The flattering hope of feeing the rich heir of Martorano caftle wedded to his daughter, flitted paft his tortured imagina¬ tion'like a fpirit in the air.--The fup¬ pofed incontinence of Santa-Maria, fruf¬ trated every golden projeci ; for Rodolph icducedit to a fixed point, that if hi\ daughter had been anual ly debauched by Rinaldo, he would never regard her afterwards in any other view than a mif¬ trefs— Moft falfe and unfriendly fuggef¬ tion !—utterly difconfonant and inappli¬ cable to the nobkf virtues of his generous kinfman—the baie phantom only of a dif¬ tracied father's tortured brain. Though fathers, like lovers, often think every every thing poffible which they fear, and, with Rodolph— -— ??
{ 55 ) ,. — ^ ------To be once ín doubt, Was once to be refolvM ------ Whiift, on the other hand, if Santa-Maria had yielded to the embraces of a ftranger, that Rinaldo would break oflevcry nuptial treaty, and ihun her, as a pellilence. He too fatally knew aifo, that the younger Contarinls hereditary—implacable ven¬ geance, would lofe no occafion to blacken his daughter's already tainted fame in the bittercft colours ! and feared too much— (and too true, alas ! were his fears) that through his artifice and his emilTaries, he would pour the fubtle poifon into Rinaldo and Manfredi's ears, before the myftery could be explained either to him cr them* for this vounç Italian had now become as fuperior to his power, arts, and ven¬ geance, as he had formerly proved him- D 4 felf
i 56 ) felf to be above thofe of his father's -, fo much fo, in faci, as to have made him long fufpefr, that his fon Ferdinand [in whofe young breaft the fame cruel family animofity had fiercely taken root) had by fome myfterious aft of vengeance, fallen a victim to his fuperior artifice. Thus tormented with Santa Maria's fuppofed violation of her chaftity, and a long chain of other diftrefting reflections , Rodolph flew, like a madman, to his chamber, and after tearing his hair, and beating his diftraöed head againft the walls, he fell proftrate on the floor, like a ftout oak overcome by the tempeft of adverfity. The noife of his fall, foon brought the Countefs to his chamber, where ihe be¬ held her Lord the fallen victim of mad¬ nefs, anguiih, and difpair. Ifabella, in> a m«.diaK*h'
( 57 ) mediately forgot her own forrows, to foothe thofe of Rodolph. She foftened his agonies, cherifhed him with the heal¬ ing balfam of conjugal tendernefs -, com¬ forted his bleeding foul, argued him by degrees into a ftate of reafon, aflifted in raifing him from his proftrate fitua¬ tion, and, leading him to his chair, prefl¬ ed his feverifh hand with the warm kifs of affection ; and by every paft idea of their mutual affection, entreated him to be of better cheer. By thefe tender remonftrances, Ro¬ dolph rc-aflumed his fenfes ¿ thea reclin¬ ing his defpondent head on the bofom of his wife, he bitterly exclaimed— ik Why did our evil ftars ever curfe us with a child ì Then looking wildly 'upon Ifa¬ bella, he demanded to know, if Santa- Maria was innocent ?~She continued ñ- D 5 lent—
( 5» ) lent.—He began to ftart and rave--" Say! - anfwer me (exclaimed Rodolph) is my daughter— -pregnant l' The Countefs de¬ jectedly hung down her head. " She is really guilty, then ?" On this, Ifabella threw her arms around his neek, and wept bitterly.— The C^unt, on this palpable conviction of Santa-Maria's guilt, ftarted from his chair, and drawing his fword, fwore by St. Mark, that he would inftantly facri¬ fice her to his honour, if ilie did not pro¬ claim the partner of her infamy, Rouf¬ ed by this frrious menace, Ifabella in¬ tercepted ber enraged Lord in his bloody purpofe, and catching hold of him by the cloke, fell upon ber knees, and with maternal, conjugal tendernefs, entreated a few moments of difcourfe. Rodolph confented to hear lier. My
( 59 ) rt My Lord, then (faid Ifabella) our Santa-Maria, I believe, is really pregnant— a myftery, neverthelefs, hangs over this dark bufinefs, which time only can dif¬ cover.—Attend, that event, I do moft fer¬ vently conjure you.—Providence, fooner or late, will reveal the whole—Nay, do not thus look fo dreadfully, and roll your eye balls as though they would ftart from out their very fockets ! As a mother, and the tendereit of mothers, have I con¬ jured my child, to reveal the fecret that has caft fuch a dark cloud over our pre¬ fent domeftic happinefs. She, notwith- ftanding this, afferts her innocence, per- feveres ftill in the enjoyment of her virtue and chaftity.-—-Nay, has moft folemnly ap¬ pealed to the great God of her creation, that ihe is as pure, as uncontaminated, as D ? the
( 6ο ) at the awful moment in which I gave her birth," " Unheard of obftinacy î —unparalleled perjury !-~impoflible !--it cannot be !" " Have a moment's patience my dear Lord. There is ftill one refource left, which may lead to a difcovery, that our daughter's confidence cannot well with- ftand. Santa-Maria has been hitherto accounted good, chafte, tnodcft, virtuous; flie entertains the moft fenfible reverence for Friar Matalone, her confeifor. He íhall be fent for. His piety and holy per* fuafions may wrench the fecret from her thoughts. If he cannot fucceed in this unhappy, myfterious affair ? aft after- Wards as your dîfcretion think moft fit. My will fliall then be guided by your's. But oh! my dear Rodolph (concluded the
( 6i ) the Countefs, foftening his hand with hef tears and embraces) my dear—dear Lord, in pity fave our child—now alas ! our only child.— But one, poor one, one poor and loving child ï SHAKSlEARE. " Do not fuffer her to fall a fudden vie - tim to your wrath—if guilty, repentance will, in time, wafli away her guilt. Be you to Santa-Maria, the fame merciful judge and father, as you may hereafter expeft to behold, in the great and lenient author of your prefent being." __— ---------«—How would you be, If he, which is the top of judgment, fliould But judge you, as you aie? Ohi think on that) And mercy then will breathe within your lips, Like man new made. Shakspeare. Rodolph, wiihing to believe that his daughter was innocent; and, if not fo, anxious
'( '«* ) anxious to learn who was the partner of her infamy i confented to delay his ven¬ geance for a fécond time. And already had he flamped the fixed determination in the receffes oí" his heart, that if Santa- Maria was realiy culpable, that all com- punftion ftiould be obliterated. His honour, his happinefs, his every thing de¬ firable in this world, were now fatallv at ftake, and he became therefore defpe¬ rately refolved not only to deftroy the weak and beauteous objeci of his mife- ries, but alfo to remove the fufpefted ob- ftacle that had long ftood in the way of his ambition, aggrandifement, and wealth. Friar Matalone came to the palace, early on the next morning, and after two hours dedicated to confeffion with Santa- Maria, he joined the Count and Coun¬ tefs, who were attending him in an anti- chamber,
( 6 3 ) chamber, with all that anxiety, as can be poftibly conceived in fuch a momentous fufpenfe and fituation as their's. The prieft, with all that calmnefs and Chriftian fortitude, which had ever cha- racterized his religious tenets, and with that bigotry alfo, which enveloped the completion of thofe times, thus related what had pafted between himfJf and Santa-Maria : " Never (faid Maialone, with the ftrong- eft emphafis of aftonifliment)—-never, in the whole courfe of my function, did I experience fuch an unfearchable, fuch an unparalleled myftery.—Your daughter has protefted her innocence, in the moft folemn manner. Thrice did flie moft devoutly kneel before the holy crucifix, and thrice proteft the fame. It would be impiety to fuppofe, that her internal crea¬ tion
( 6 4 ) tion proceeds from the extraordinary powers of heaven ; though ftill (faid the Friar, after a momentary paufe)—no¬ thing is, or ever can be, impoflible to God. Therefore, oh î Rodolph, delay your ven¬ geance, your daughter may be innocent. The proteftations of her chaftity have confounded me.—They were fo folemn, fo inflexible, and fo Chriftian like, that I was ftruck with amazement. When flie lifted up her eyes to heaven, they feemed infpired with the fame innocence as beams upon the celeftial purity, ibe was fo devoutly appealing to. Therefore, I implore you, once again, to poflponc your wrath. Let time reveal this extra¬ ordinary myftery.—Nay, Count (exclaim* ed Maialone, fomewhat harflily, on per¬ ceiving Rodolph's brow curling with ven¬ geance, diibelief, and indignation) dare not
( *5 ) not attempt to commit unmanly, un- fatherly violence on your child !—No, not on the fevereft pains of ecclefiaftical pu» niíhment ; for on the revelation of this intricate myftery depends not only the future fame or dilhonour—the everiafting happinefs or mifery, of an hitherto un¬ charged mortal;-but,perhaps, fome won¬ derful inftance of fupernatural agency." When friar Maialone had pronounded this laft fentence, and which he did with uncommon energy, he returned to his monaftery; leaving Ifabella overjoyed that her child had gained a third refpite. Whiift, on the other hand* Rodolph re* mained overwhelmed with fpleen, impa* tiencc, rage, mortification, and all* the other tortures that the malignant furies could infpire him withah
CHAP.
( 66 )
? ΓΙ A P. VII. ———Were I imder the terms of death, Th' impreflion of keen whips l d wear as rubies And ??? myfelf to death, as to a bed That longing I've been fick for, ere I'd \ield My body up to fliame. The bow is bent and drawn, make from the rtuft I There's fome ill planet reigns· We muft be patiea% till the heavens look With an afpec~t more favourable. Shaksfeart. JJ URING this «melancholy fuf¬ pence, the unhappy Santa Maria was haf¬ tening on to the mournful goal of mifery and death. Her fine commanding fea¬ tures were ihaded by the yellow leaf.—- Her black, penetrating eye, became lan¬ guid
( ? 7 J. guid and funk. —Her cheeks had wholly, loft their rofeate bloom, and her \*hole perfon appeared the pale image of uu- ieafonable decay. Our hclplefs viclim had by this time,· become fo fteady in Jier opinion of a' tpecdy annihilation, and the impoflibiiity of her ever experiencing again the re¬ turn of her parent's formel* afieclíons; and, what was ftill .more bitter to her gal¬ led imagination, the once pleafing hope of being fond İyimi ted to -Rinaldo; that flie manifefted fuch a cal mne" fs of miñd, fuch an equanimity of temper, and fuch a de¬ gree of fortitude and rèfignation, as ex¬ cited the admiration and pity of the whole palace. Sometimes, indeed, flie entertained the flattering refleftion, that her fuppofed pregnancy was throughly impoflible 3 and that both the furgeoits and
f 68 ) and her mother's decifions would prove falfe and abortive in the end. Supported by thefe pleafing ideas, ilie would ever and anon draw forth the contrafted por¬ traits of Rinaldo, from the foft receffes of her agitated bofom. Stedfaftly and tear¬ fully would flie gaze on one or the other ; and as they refpeciively ftruck her tor¬ tured fancy, file would affimilate her loveiv when depreíled and emaciated by ficknefs to what Ihe now was -, and, again, refemble what ilie had fo lately been, to what Rinaldo might be now. On other occafional ftarts of reflection, Santa-Maria would wonder what had be¬ come of the young Prince ; and would queftion the domeftics who were moft en¬ deared to her, when her father had heard from the caftle? The laft tima flie was revolving; this fubject in her diftracied mind,
( 6 9 ) mind, Sylvia came running breathlefs in¬ to her chamber, and with a trembling agitated accent exclaimed—That a cou¬ rier had but juft now arrived from the fouth. " What, from my dear Lord Rinaldo ?" u No, Signiora, not from my Lord Ri¬ naldo—" " From Manfredi then—fay—anfwer me—Sylvia—is the young Prince dead--is he relapfed—is he—" " I know not, Signiora—The courier came not from the caftle—but from your Lady-mother's near kinfman—the Che¬ valier D'Arcos—But have patience, my dear young miftrefs, and I will relate every thing that Carlo has this moment communicated to me ——" " I have patience, Sylvia—I muß have patience— patience now is a cardinal vir¬ tue,
( 7° ) tue, which I look up to with reve¬ rence," <( And, indeed (obferved Sylvia with tears in her eyes) ¡t is a virtue that we muft now all look up to—But as I was going to obferve, Signiora—Carlo, but a few moments ago, came almoft breathlefs into my chamber, and faicl that a courier had juft arrived from the Chevalier. He knew it was from the Chevalier D 'Arcos, as his uncie, Drofi, who conveyed the paquet to his mafter, recognized the fellow's carriage. However, in a few mo¬ ments after my Lord had opened the let¬ ter, and caft his fombrous eye over its contents, his countenance became asri- tai ed beyond its wonted degree of rage, fternefs, and difappci.itment. Poor Dro¬ fi. alwavs too much concerned and offi- ctous in the Count's affairs, now ftopped incautioufly
( r ) incautioufly forward (notwithftanding the check that Carlo faid he had given his uncle, with pulling him back by the cloke) and in the moft fubmiflivc man¬ ner imaginable, requefted to know if the contents favoured aught of ill news ? This ill-timed queftion ferved only to ia· crcafe the flame, which had already be¬ gun to rage with fuch uncommon fury, and Drofi foon experienced a mare of its fcorching heat, for fearce had he time to finirti his fentence.before the Count dealt him fuch a violent blow with the back of his left hand, as felled him proftrate on the floor. Carlo was afraid to come i\ r- ward, and aflift his uncle to rife, left he íhould meet with a fimilar reception. Drofi, however, did not much need his help, for he foon recovered his legs, ob¬ ferving, with the greateft patience «md good
( ?2 ) good nature, as he got up— " That thofe whqfali, muß rife again" At thefe words (as Carlo tells me) the Count was won¬ derfully moved ; and that the anger which had funk his brow into the very eye-lid, was on a fudden raifed to the very height of refleftion. His rigid countenance, from that inftant, began to relax from its late feverity ; and after carefully putting the paquet in his doublet, he turned round to Drofi, and proceeded fo far as to entreat forgivenefs for the blow he had given him —This done, he repeated what he had juft heard him fay, c< That thofe who fall, muß rife again " —On this, my Lord Rodolph fmiled, and afterwards defired Drofi, in the gentleft terms poftible, to follow him to his private clofet.
Oh!
{ 73 ) Oh! Mifchief! thou art fwift To enter iti the thoughts of defperatc men ! SHAKSPEARE. Sylvia having thus far related as much as flie knew concerning this myfterious* paquet, was on the point of commencing a long ftring of doubts, reafonings, and arguments upon the words— " That thofe <ivho fall, muft rife again 1 * — when (lie wa» interrupted by the footfteps of the Coun¬ tefs. When her miftrefs therefore enter¬ ed the apartment,Sylvia refpccrfully made her obeifance, and retired. The unhappy vSanta-Maria, rofe at her mother's appearance, and falling on her knee, moiftencd the outftretched parental hand with the guthing effufion of bitter forrow. Ifabella, after having helped to raife her daughter, clafped her ¡n her arms, Vol. L E and
í 74 ) and, in broken accents, faltered out— * My child, it is at length our doom to part l " " To part !—(exclaimed Santa-Maria, hanging her difconfolate head upon her mother's ihoulder) to part ?— What ? to part forever?"— '* Be feated, my child, and comfort your¬ felf with fortitude and calmnefs—Part, we muft—but God forbid for ever—My life and your's, both depend upon that awful neceffity.—Your father, in the zenith of his rage and impetuofity, has menaced your life !"— " Then let him have it :—if my death will fatisfy and obliterate his unkind fuf¬ picions, how welcome would I refign my¬ felf to his wrath and vengeance." " Oh! my Santa-Maria, are his fufpicions then wrong indeed ? This is perhaps one of
( 75 ) of the laft times we flmll meet for fome diftant period—open your foul, therefore, to a mother who adores, who reveres you. If, in an unguarded moment, your ten¬ der heart has been led aftray, to me confefs it.—From my very foul, íhall I forgive you ; and may I never behold the awful prefence of my God (to whom my prayers íhall be continually offered up for your happinefs and welfare, here and hereafter) if t ever reveal the fecret to my lord, your father." " Oh ! then (exclaimed Santa-Maria falling on her knees, and raifing her hands and eyes to heaven)—thus let me moft fo¬ lemnly appeal in your revered prefence, to the great Almighty that muft judge me hereafter, if ever 1 deviated, in thought or deed, from thofe facred rules of chaftity and virtue that have £ 2 been
( 76 ) been inculcated within me, both by his -divine precepts and your maternal in- ftruciions.—Oh ! may that fuperior - - -" " It is enough—it is enough, my child (faid the Countefs, interrupting her daughter, in this her intended fécond folemn ejaculation, and raifing her once more from her pious proftrate fituation) indeed it is enough, I am fatisfied of your innocence ; neither in thought or deed, do I believe you guilty.—Heaven's will be done ; under that blefled divine affurance, my foul moft ftrongly prepof- feffes me, that I fliall live to fee your ho¬ neft fame cleared to the whole world, and once more ftiall I behold you reftored to happinefs and honour." After thefe mutual proteftations and aflurances of innocence and affeciion, Santa-Maria and the Countefs became en- 4 tirely
( 77 ) tfrely calm and refigned. They now expe¬ rienced fuch a flow of fortitude and tran¬ quillity, as to render the one perfcäly ca¬ pable of encountering the moft faial rmf- chaiices, and the other, of adminiitring the moft painful counfels. (t My child (faidLady ifabella, with the moft collcfled emphafis) my deareft, and now only child, we too fure muft part ; your father, 1 am too fatally con/ineed, de¬ igns ultimately to facrifice you to his re¬ venge and honour—you cannot fly from his wrath too fuddenly. He is now alone in his clofet enraged, beyond con¬ ception, with fome fatal bufinefs, that has lately been difpatched hither, by the Chevalier d'Arcos. I encountered him but now in the gallery, and anxioufly en¬ quired the caufe of his dillraBion, and alfo aiked to know the contents of my E 3 kinfman 's
( 7» ? kinfman's correfpondence. He only an¬ fwered me with a frown, and churliíhly haftened from me. Suipicious, therefore, of fome cruel defign againft my child's exiftence—I have brought with me a dif¬ guife, that will not only conceal your fex, and the fuppofed evidence of your guilt, but enfure you fafety and protection wherever you may chance to bend your wandering footfteps. It is the equipage of a pilgrim, worn formerly by my grand- lire, when he travelled to the Holy Land. Beneath it alfo you may firing your lute ; whofe dulcive founds fo oft have raifed my admiring foul to feenes of future blifs.—But, alas! I wander-—-—though every houfe will meet my unknown child with the fweet fmile of " Welcome, holy ftranger"—ftill it is neceflary for thee to be provid ed againft accidental neceflities. Take,
( 79 } ????, therefore, this fcrip,whkh contains neceflary provifions;— Here, alfo, take this bag of gold, and with it accept this dia¬ mond crofs, this bracelet and necklace— Wear them for your mother's fake. The former will afford the choiccft folace to your private thoughts and pious medita¬ tions.—Nay, do not weep, my deareft Santa—(import your fortitude—live for a fond parent's fake—live for your own fake—and live for your future fame alfo. I have fcattered the Count's domeftics among various parts of the city. Drofi, is enclofed with him in his cabinet ; ad- vifmg, perhaps, with his mafter, fome hafty rneafure to effeñ your death and ruin. Carlo and Sylvia, are only ftirring about the palace. Their fimplicity will not fuffer them to harbour the leaft fur¬ mife. Hafte, th<5n, my child, and gird this E 4 holy
( So ) holy mantle on thee. Time is on the wing.—This pilgrim's ftaif, will affift and fupport your weary fteps.—An hour's de¬ lay may coft me a dearly beloved daughter." " One word, my mother before we part ? anfwer me but this, and I fliall £o hence with patience, fortitude, and refig- nation—Say, have you heard aught of Prince Rinaldo r" " But briefly—report has told me, that «his malady has returned upon him.—Nay, do not weep, my child, all yet will one day, I hope, be well." " It is ftrange my mother." ** All now is ftrange my child.—Every thing is changed to darknefs and per¬ plexity.—But we loiter, Sarita-Maria— hark !—methought I heard your father's voice,—Terrible apprehenfion—adieu- adieu
( Si } adieu.—Hafte— oh í hafte! from this abode of mifery and deftruftion." α Farewell, my deareft mother." " For the prefent, my deareft child, farewell." —— ——???? íhe íhook * Tlie holy water from feer heavefìly eyes ; And clamour motioned,'then away ilie ftarted . To deal with grief alone.— Once or twice, ilie heav'd the name of father ? Pantingly forth, as if it prefs'd her heart. Shak.sfk£Xi¿* On this the Countefs conducted her daughter to a poftern, and, with mingled I joy and grief, beheld her flying from the manfion of death. She had dire'fted Santa-Maria to fleer her courfe weft- ward ; that, in cafe of a fudden difcovery and purfuit, ftie might take fanftuary from her father's wrath in the Carthufian mitaflery. E 5 CHAP.
( «? )
CHAP. VIII. For by the facred radiance of the fun, The myfteries of Hecate, and the night— By all the operations of the orbs. From whom we do exifr, and ceafe to be- Here I difclaim alt my paternal care, Propinquity, and property of blood ! I would diflemble my nature, where *My fortunes and my friends at ftake, requir'd I ihòuld do fo in honor ! S#AKSf£AKB· Χ Τ was late in the evening before Ro¬ dolph quitted his clofet ¿ and when he met the Lady Ifabella, his countenance xather bordered on cheerfulnefs, than otherwife. The Countefs, at the fame time, encountered her Lord with a kind of timid fatisfaftioD. Both feemed fome¬ what
( ? ) what pleafed—for both, perhaps, inter¬ nally poíleífed their fecret motives for the fluciuating fenfations they then expe¬ rienced* At fupper-time it had been cufromary for the Countefs to fend a diih of viands to Santa-Maria's chamber, fmce the pe¬ riod of her difgraee. Ifabella prepared to perform that ceremony this evening with an uncommon degree of terror and anxiety. Sylvia was always the embaf- fadrefs on thefe occafions, and ihe was difpatched therefore, as ufual, with the fupper to her young miftrefs's apart¬ ment. It is eafier to imagine, than defcribe, the acute fenfations which the Countefs experienced during this momentous h- tervah The inftant» however, that flie diftinguiflied the returning footfteps of E 6 Sylvia^
( 8 4 ) Sylvia, Ifabella fummcned up all her for-» titude and prefence of mind, and pre¬ pared herfelf, with the greateft compofure, for the fatal difcovery. When Sylvia, therefore entered ¿he fupper-hall, with palid afpe£t and trem¬ bling limbs—unable to articulate a fingle fyllable through forrow and furprife—the Countefs ftarted from her feat, and, turn¬ ing round to avoid the fearching eye of RodoJph, with great agony exclaimed— " Speak, Sylvia!—Say, what freíh difafter is now upon the wing !—Oh! fay—Is my Santa-Maria dead again?"—The Count, on the other hand, confounded by the girls terrors, and alarmed by his wife's afflicting expreffions, rudely caught the trembling Sylvia by the arm, and per¬ emptorily infifted on immediately know¬ ing the caufe of her extraordinary fears. The
( 8¿ } The poor wench, after fome moments* paufe, with difficulty replied—" That her young miftrefs was not to be found ; — that fhe had fearched her's, and all the adjacent chambers, and no traces of her were to be difcovered-------" If hypocrify, under fuch circumftances as thefe, can poflibly be accounted a crime, the ftain of it muft be concealed under the partial veil of maternal tender¬ nefs. No fooner, therefore, had the laft ex¬ preffion efcaped from Sylvia's lips, than the Countefs haftily quitted the fupper- room, and flew to the deferted chamber of—her well-known fugitive child ; —at¬ tempting to conceal, by this precipitate ftep, the feigned diftrefs that ihe had been fo fatally compelled to counterfeit. Rodolph, in the mean time, fummoned all
( 86 ) all his domeftics to the fupper-hall, and queftioned them, one by one, concerning his daughter's efcape. The laft he inter¬ rogated were Carlo, his young page, and the faithful Sylvia. Thefe two had ever been Santa-Maria's chief attendants and favorites, from her infancy upwards : the Count, therefore, was particularly pointed with them. Carlo and Sylvia, on per¬ ceiving that the eye of fufpicion was le¬ velled at them, fell together on their knees, and folemnly appealed to Heaven to be the avoucher of their innocence.— The page in particular, after this fervent ejaculation, with great emphafis exclaim¬ ed, " Would to God that I did know where my young miftrefs was! for, to the very extremity of the earth would I follow her, and devote myfelf to her fervice ! " On
( «7 ) On hearing this enthufiaftic exclama¬ tion, Rodolph doubly knit his brows, and ftood for a while abforbed in reflecìion. His thoughts were bitter—difgraceful to himfelf—and the honor of his child. He regarded Carlo, for the firft time, with the glance of peculiar attention. He dif¬ covered a ft riking beauty and fy mme try in his countenance and fhape, that had never been duly remarked by him before. His pride, however, at prefent overcame his fufpicions} and, with a ftern voice, therefore, he now only ordered both him and Sylvia to retire to their refpeciive apartments. Juft as the Count was ordering his horfes to be prepared for a purfuit, Ifa¬ bella returned with great compofure to the hall. When the Countefs difcovered his purpofe, ihe forthwith ftrongly endea¬ voured
( 88 ) voured to diffuade him from his purpofe. " It is dark, my Lord (faid the alarmed mother) tempeftuous—and the gloominefs of the Iky portends an approaching hurri¬ cane—Behold yonder—(as though at this . moment heaven aufpicioufly favoured a parent's anxiety, and a daughter's misfor¬ tunes) turn thine eye to that window which has a weftern profpeci, and fee what black and thick clouds of fmoke and fire that now hover over the dread¬ ful Monte di Somma. Indeed, my Lord 3 you muft not go to-night. Be perfuaded, dear Rodolph, and delay your purpofe till the morn ing.' * Whiift Ifabella was thus exercifing her diffuafive powers, the Count obferved her anxious looks, with his wonted fcrutiny. After a fhort paufe, however, he ordered his domeftics to depart—Then turning to the
( ? ) the Countefs—" Dame (faid he, with his ufual folemnity) I fliall purfue your coun¬ fel, though I fliall neither purfue our un¬ worthy daughter now or on the morn. I will not caft frefli fuel into an overfcorch- ing fire. The" womb of yonder flaming mount cannot vomit things more bitter and dreadful, than what our enemy has al¬ ready done. I mean our enemy (faid Ro¬ dolph, obferving the Countefs prepared to interrupt him) our bitter enemy— Sana¬ ta-Maria. That guilty foe againft our honour and our houfe. Her crime, how¬ ever, will now be her daily punifliment. Now an unhappy outcaft, ihe will expe¬ rience the fulnefs of her guilt. In folitude and mifery fliall flie wafte her future days : for whiift I have exiftence, I will hunt her, like a wild beaft of prey, from the haunts of fociety—--But, Dame—3 have fome
( 90 ) fome reafon to fufpeft — no matter -my fufpicions, notwithftanding, have their foundation. Be not furprized—but I think, that the young page Carlo was— privy to her efcape, and—oh ! torture, fure it cannot be—ftill fuch things have been—have been—aye—but have they been fo now ì —Hell and diftraftion—no —they could not be—" Ifabella on this, interrupted the Count, and lacking her former circumfpeftion and counterfeit carriage, with much anx¬ iety exclaimed—" Your fufpicions, my Lord, are ill-founded : Carlo is innocent« He knew not of your daughter's efcape— the page"------Here the Countefs began to recolleft, and foon found herfelf both overwhelmned with confufion, and laid open to detection. Rodolph, aftoniflied at this plain decla¬ ration,
( 91 ) ration, and ftruck, moreover, with Ifa¬ bella's confufed appearance, darted fuch a look upon her, that feemed to penetrate to the innermoft receffes of her foul. The Countefs, flirunk from this mental enquiry — ihe ftood angry, abaihed, and enraged, with her own indifcretion ; whiift Ro¬ dolph, on the other hand, became every moment more and more convinced that his wife had advifed and effefted her daughters efcape. Her ftrong diffuafions againft the purfuit, ftrengthened and con¬ firmed thefe fuggeftions. Nay, his fufpi¬ cions now proceeded ftill farther—hurry¬ ing him on, as it were, from the mid-road to its fartheft extremity—He concluded, therefore, that Ifabella muft alfp know the caufe and partner of her daughters infamy— " Dame, then—{faid the Count, with yncommon
i ( >a ) uncommon fierccnefs, and lion-like aP pe£t) knowedft thou ought of our daugh¬ ter's- efcape, before the alarm -was given— r" " No—I—did—not—my Lord"—(he- fitatingly replied Ifabella, and tuning her mind on the occafion, like unto our bard—) 1 » ■ ' ' ' If Τ do lie, and do No harm by it, though the gods hear, I hope They'll pardon it——— * , " No demurs—no faltermgs, dame— but plainly anfwer me—fay, therefore, knowedft thou ought of Santa-Maria's flight before the alarm was given; or who was fharer,in her luft and maiden wantonnefs ? To heaven, and to your ho¬ nour, make true reply, according to your knowledge or ignorance of thefe fame facis
f 93 ) f a Q s ------- » Ifabella hefttated and wept— " To heaven, and to your honour (repeat* ed the Count, doubled irritated and con¬ firmed by thefe palpable fymptoms of guilt) make anfwer, I fay—-" ic To heaven, then, and to my honour, if it muft be fo (replied the Countefs, with much fortitude and compofure) I know nothing of either—" The fame recording angel that oblite¬ rated the oath of our brave veteran with a tear, now looked down, it is hoped, with an equal eye of fympathy, and from the fatal tablet effaced this falfehood of the grief-charged Ifabella. Rodolph was ftaggered at this reply, which tended greatly to cripple that won¬ derful infight, he ever thought himfelf unerringly poffefled of. Notwithftanding the folemnity, however, of the Countefs's declaration,
( 94 ) declaration, and the calm dignity with which flie had protefted it, he could not lofe fight of his fufpicions. For, fufpi¬ cions with him foon haftened on to affu- rances of guilt· He, therefore, ordered Ifabella, for the time to come, to provide an apartment for herfelf alone, as he nei¬ ther defired in future her company or her counfel. On this Rodolph ftretched on¬ ward through the corridor to his clofet, fully determined from that hour, to ihut the door of confidence againft his fufpeft- ed wife·
CHAP.
( 95 )
CHAP. IX. " One that lo* es a cup of hot wine, with not a drop of allaying Tiber in't ; faid to be fomething im¬ perfect in favouring the fìrft complaint, hafty and tinder-like upon too trivial motion ! one that con· verfes more with the buttock of the nighr, than with tlie forehead of the morning. What he thinks he ut¬ ters, and fpends his malice in his breath. ' SuAKSFKAtl, JVODOLPH, for that evening, chur- liftily left the Lady Ifabella in a ftate. of the utmoft diftraélion and anxiety. In the morning he fent for Drofi, and then ordered him to fend Bernardine and God¬ dard up to his private clofet.— " Humph— (fays Drofi to himfelf, as he went out) here is fomc mifchief going forward
( S>6 ) forward ----- Bernardine ånd Goddard are terrible rogues —By Saint-Marco, they are moft bloody rogues—my Lord knows beft who to employ on his old errands— I fliall not ftand the hazard, therefore, of another blow for my officioufnefs—(only thinking of the laft, which had been a^ repetition of hundreds)—for freely fpeak¬ ing my mind— " This fame Drofi was a good-natured— witty—though a mifchievous rogue with- al-r-He \vould not hefitate at tranfafting a trifling bufinefs for his Lord—but no· thing—nothing that favoured of blood— Rodolph knew his chara&er, genius, an<^* temper, well—Drofi, was already deep in his fecrets—Drofi, alfo, Wa« too fond of the lachryma-chrifti, and the true faler- ???, to retain a deep and fecure one 1>? —Drunkards might let out fecrets of importance
( 97 ) importance —and— Rodolph's was a fa¬ tal one^ —Drofi, befides, was fond of a joke, which would efcape him, even at the expence of his mafter. Brave as a- lion in his own, or Lord's defence, but tame as a lamb to the feeble and diftrefT- ed—he would fight for you, bur, barrings great provocation—not with you—nor would he knowingly injure a worm- much more a fellow creat ure —Drofi would beat an infoiente hoft, and afterwards wait upon one of his meaneft wenches with a loaf of bread and a flice of cheefe— Thought little of carrying off* a pretty damfel himfelf, but would knock down the firft man that he faw attempting to do the fame --Would put a whole houfe into the greateft confufion and confterna- tion, and then appear like the very pic¬ ture of innocence, when taxed with the Vol. I. F mifchief
( 98 ) mifchief he had been fo wantonly guilty of—would fend his Lord ten leagues out of the way ona cold ftormy night, when he might be at his deftination in one—To conclude the briefeft chapter, therefore, this fame Signior Drofi was a moft mif¬ chievous rogue ; and as fuch, perhaps, you may find him to the end of the book.
CHAP.
í 99 )
CHAP. X. —————Whatever fiend it was That wrought upon thee fo prepofteroufly, He hath got the voice in hell for excellence; And other devils that fuggeft by trcafons, Do botch and bungle up damnation. ------ Shakspearl. IVODOLPH fummoning together all his brutal feverity to aflift and harden him, thus ordered up Bernardine, his crofs- bow man—and, Goddard —his bow and hatchet-man, to attend his commands— When thefe warlike villains had en¬ tered the clofet, the Count eagerly faf¬ tened the door, and making them be feat¬ ed, he thus addreífed them in an under voice : F 2 " My
( ïoo ) tC My brave foldiers (faid he) you are fummoned privately here to hear fome things of great importance, and which I mean to entruft to your twofold care and confidence :—It is now ten years fince I raifed you from the ranks, during the whole of which time you both fhared with me in the tumults and dangers of war abroad ; and alfo have divided with me the domeftic comforts of happinefs and independence at home—fay, has it not been truly fo ?" The men bowed aftent. " Then anfwer me, without fear or he- fitation --Are you yet acquainted with the eternal ftain that our daughter Santa- Maria has fixed on us, and our houfe ;— with her fubfequent flight to avoid my revenge, and conceal her own difgrace ?" (t We do, my gracious Lord (replied ι Ber-
( ιοί ) Bernardine) with heartfelt forrow, have we both heard this mournful news." " Do you likewife know from whom proceeds this curft, contaminating blot r" <t No—my good Lord.". " Then know, my foldiers, it comes from our kinfman—the Prince Rinal¬ do—" This fuggeftion had never efcaped from any one in the palace till now, and had only, as yet, exifted in the Count's brain ; when Rodolph, therefore, perceived the cffe£fc and aftonifoment that it had on his dependent auditors, he immediately put this queftion home and fteadily to them, and demanded— <t What reparation he could have for the ingratitude of his kinf¬ man, who had taken the advantage of his generofity to debauch his child ; and what fatisfaciion could atone for the Jofs F 3 of
( 102 ) of her honour, and the íhame he had an¬ nexed to his family for ever?" w Nought but death (replied Bernar¬ dine eagerly.) u Nothing but his blood, my Lord (ad¬ ded Goddard favagely) ihould fatisfy me. tt Noble-minded—brave-hearted men ■—Oh! how well deferving are you both of my efteem, protection, and admira¬ tion !" Rodolph having worked up thefe weak - fanguinary men to anger and revenge, he next prepared to introduce his favou¬ rite point, that required fome fuch infi- nuating difcourfe, with which he had fo artfully prefaced his main defign—The loft fame of poor Santa-Maria had forely touched his heart. He could not, how¬ ever, pofitively realize the caufe thereof in
( I0 3 ) in the perfon of the Lord Rinaldo. Sur¬ mife, neverthelefs, had given a ftrong co¬ lour of fufpicion. At all points, he re¬ garded the fubjeft as gone too far by, to be ever again recovered. The dilhonour, he knew, did not altogether attach itfelf to him. He was not the caufe of it— therefore, could not divide the fliame, except (as he conceived) among the illi¬ beral part of mankind. The principal objefts before him, awake or afleep, that tormented his mind, w T ere the fore apprehenfions of his lofs of fame and honour. The idea of once more fighting at the fide of his Viceroy i and in the caufe that his countrymen w T erc about to efpoufe, warmed his ambition, and ex- ultingly made his heart afpire to farther deeds of Avarlike glories. But thefe flat¬ tering hopes were now fruftrated by the F 4 diíhonour
( 104 ) diíhonour of Santa-Maria. He could not juft at prefent raife ten men at arms; whereas, the deficiency of the regiment he had been appointed to lead to the glorious field of battle, was reported to lack ten fcore, to make up the accuftomed comple¬ ment—What, therefore, was to be refol¬ ved upon ?—What could be refolved up¬ on ?—what ? Why, nothing more or lefs than the af- faflination of Prince Rinaldo, to whofe great fortunes and proud towers, he was the indifputable heir—A deed, that, to be brief, the Count had fully determined upon in his own mind ; and, therefore, had fent for thefe fellows to be the im¬ mediate inftruments of his fanguinary pur¬ pofe. tc My brave foldiers (continued Ro* dolph) in your prefenfmafter, behold the moft
( io 5 )" moft wretched being in exiftence—One misfortune is in general certain of coming upon another : for, but lately our Vice¬ roy fent for me, to hold a private confe- rence. The fubjecl ofthis interview was an appointment to a regiment of cavalry, with an order to reftore it to its priftine difcipline, and former warlike quota and appearance. The regiment, however, lacks two hundred men to render it com¬ plete—But, alas ! my good fellows, this glorious bufinefs cannot be now accom¬ pliftied— " <f And why not, my Lord ?" (faid Ber¬ nardine, with the moft anxious emotions in his voice and countenance). " You know, good Bernardine, that I have already fpent vaft fums of money abroad hi our Neapolitan wars ·, and that at home I havemaintainedmy houfehold with F 5 all
( io6 ) all the munificence likewife of a Neapolitan baron. Thefe fucceed ing expences have exhaufted my means—I looked up, how¬ ever, fora reftoration of them, in the al¬ liance of my daughter with my wealthy kinfman. Thefe expectations, you per¬ ceive, are now banifhed for ever; and your old Captain muft now fink with dif- honour to his grave. For—it cannot be expected, that if Sánta-Maria has conde fcended to become Lord Rinaldo's mif¬ trefs, that he will ever condefcend alfo to make her his wife." " The young Prince's puni/hment, my Lord—(exclaimed Goddard) cannot be exceeded by his ingratitude." " Say, my gracious mafter (added Ber¬ nardine) can we revenge jou ?" " My brave, my honeft foldiers (re¬ turned the Count, rifing, and folding them
( ro7 ) them both in his arms) how ye have re¬ vived my hopes, raifed my falling fame, and cheered my future profpecb ; yes, my beloved comrades (for Rodolph, when he wiihed to carry a favourite point, would (loop to the ?????? equality) yes, ye can revenge me." " Point out to us (faid Goddard) point to the way and means, my Lord ; and we will give you your revenge." " It is, then (anfwered the Count in a ftern, folemn, and emphatical accent) To furprife Martorano Caflle ------ to affaßnate ihe Prince, and with ?? his favourite tutor and guardian, Manfredi ! ! l* The fellows paufed and were filent. The cunning determined Rodolph, however, after having thus far fucceÍT- fully baited his hook, now took the op¬ portunity of throwing in a freíh lure, F 6 which
( io8 ) which the halr-refoiute villains very foon and eagerly catched at. " I perceive (thus artfully continued the Count) that my propofals have ex¬ cited forne alarm, a ridiculous interval of fufpence, unworthy of your brave and dauntlefs minds;—unmanly apprehen¬ fions ! The deed accompliftied, will lead us all into the field of glory, and into the plains of affluence. For, on the faith of a Neapolitan baron, 1 promife ye both, that the recompence of Rinaldo's and Manfredi's deaths—(for here again, I fay, that that ufurper of my kinfman's affec¬ tions, muft go on this fame long journey ·, he is cunning and fufpicious, therefore mighf pry into the act; he is faithful #nd moft loving withal to his lordly maf¬ ter; therefore, be cannot but hereafter thank us, if to heaven he may go, that we
( .109 ) we had fent them on the fame happy paffage together, undivided as they have lived) -----fliall not only afford you great riches, but ftill greater honours. You íhall have 500 crowns each, when I take poffeifion of the caftle. You íhall after¬ wards be dubbed my ancients, accompany your brave viceroy to the heart of trea¬ cherous Conftantinopte, vanquiih the bafe marauders of our fanftioned territories ; then return home with the glorious title of champions of Italy ; and thereby en- fure yourfelves immortal honour in this world, and eternal glory in the next !" Thefe delufive promifes and allure¬ ments, had their defired effect on Bernar¬ dine and Goddard ; for at every latter word that the Count had uttered, their eyes flaihed fire ; and, overcome at laft, by the natural courage, or rather, ge¬ nuine
( iro ) nume ferocity of their difpofitions, and the enthufiafm of their difordered imagi¬ nations, they both drew their fwords at the fame moment, and fwore ;— " By the Almighty Saints above, that they would not delay an hour in facrificing every thing, to the honour and vengeance cf their lord and captain ! ƒ /"— Thele laft expreflions were fpoken with fuch warmth and vociferation, as to alarm Rodolph. He, therefore, anxioufly recommended them to be cool, and to lif¬ ten difpaffionately, to what he had farther to fay.— " In the morning, you íhall fet off for the caflle, which is fix and ñfty leagues from Naples, an eafy journey of fix days. ît is not far diftant from the town of Martorano, from whence it bears its name. Advancing into the mountain», you
( »ι ) you come to this important fortrefs. It is fituated on a high rock 5 the way which leads to it is dug out of the fteep fides of this fame rock on which it ftands. The young prince Rinaldo, fecure in the affe£tions of the neighbouring town and people, is always thinly attended, and was accuftomed almoft daily to faunter in the adjacent expanded forefts; accom- companied only by Manfredi; his bow, his quiver, and his angle. He is eafily to be furprized out of the Caflle-> being never atrned, but with thefe fame puerile weapons ; for his natural bent has ever been more inclined to peace, ftudy, and devotion, then to the more manly occu¬ pations of war. His nature partakes of the idle pilgrim, and not the aclive fol¬ dier. His
( "2 ) HU hand is made to grafp a palmer's ftaff. SüAKSFEAftË. In fhort, he will afford you little pains : both his and Manfredi's worldly concerns can be fpeedily concluded.—And now, (Bernardine and Goddard, alike my trufty friends and brother foldiers) moft efpe- cially de ye mark me—The rear of this ftrong fortrefs is flanked and protected by the deep and rapid river, Savuto. The current, if I recollect right, is fomewhat fmooth on the weft fide, and the moat there may probably be eafily or<ffled.—I fliall provide you with a .ftrong rope lad¬ der, made with four iron hooks, which you muft contrive to throw over the wall, and which catching at the other fide, you will find yourfelves on the rampart of the caftle. The glorious deed being per¬ formed, convey the bodies afterwards under
( »3 ) - under the mantle of night, to this fame guardian river—there fink them both.— But lift—be cautious in this laft perform¬ ance; for, without all due precaution, they may afcend, and float upon the fur- face. By thefe neglects, and want of forethought, it thus falls out, that honefi murders—felf-interefted ones at leaft—one time or other, fo often re-appear before the broad face of day. To obviate all thefe accidental difcoveries, therefore, will I provide you alfo with long iron chains, with which you may attach the bodies to fome ponderous ftones, that have fallen from the adjacent mafly rock. There then they muft remain, till the de¬ cayed flefli affords liberty to the bones* Ropes or thongs might yield too foon, and give them fpeedier accefs,—So far, fo good i and thus much for the furprife and
{ 14 ) and affaffinations.— : In your abfence, I will methink what fteps fliall be next taken ; but be cautious that you are not difcover- - ed lurking about the caftle. The neigh¬ bouring mady forefts, which o'ertop the mountain brows, will afiord you ample ihelter, from which, like the enormous ka, ye may dart forward when occafion offers to ieize your prey. The deed ac¬ complilhed, return homeward immediate¬ ly—avoid al! the principal towns on your journey from Martorano -, —halt firft at Mara de Pagani; the obfcurity of which place, and the unfufpicious innocency of the poor fcattered inhabitants, will .baniih all furmife. There refreih your- felvés* then proceed with difpatch to the fmall town of F.voli, where you may re- pofe and refrefh yourfelves during the meridian fun. From thence do not hah, till
( »ij ) till you have pafted the Appelline moun, tains, and reached Lauria, another finali town, in the province of Baftlicaîa ; there you may refreih again, as at Evoli, which wiJl make the equal fhare of diftance and of time. Proceed then to Cafro Fillari, a poor forlorn town, and there watch the coming of twilight, when you may poft unobferved through Cofenza, and avoid the enquiries of the guards in the for¬ trefs. Laftly, be cautious in avoiding Bellitto, where my kinfman's d'Arcos Caftella lies i leave that to the right, and and make the moft fecret way to Marto¬ rano, near which ftands, eminently aloft, the proud towers of the Prince Rinaldo's Caftle. And now mark—this journey meafuring the diftance of fifty-two leagues, muft alfo meafure the fpace of five days i on the fixth, therefore (concluded Ro- dolph 4
( ?? ) dolph with a firm emphafis) I íhall fix the deed as done" This infernal plot being thus far adjuft- ed, the no lefs infernal accomplices con¬ cerned therein joyoufly retired to their joint apartment; and left the arch-fiend to contemplate on what had paffed, and to ruminate on what was to come.
CHAP.
{ »7 )
CHAP. XL The image of a wicked heinous fault Lives in his eye: that clofe afpect of his Does ihow the mood of a much-troubld breaft. All is oblique ; There's nothing level in our curfed natures But direct villainy. SHAKSPEARE. X H E incoherent and unaccuftomed manner both of fpeaking and acting, that had lately accompanied the beha¬ viour and converfation of Rodolph, ftruck the anxious Lady Ifabella wJth exceffive pain and aftonifliment. She, ever and anon—and anon and ever— plunged herfelf into the rnoft ferious, perplexing
( «S ) perplexing contemplation. Her reflec¬ tions, however, afforded no other convic¬ tion, than that of every thing foreboding fome "freíh difafter being near at hand. Filled with thefe melancholy anticipa¬ tions, and overwhelmed alike with ma¬ ternal—conjugal tendernefs, and a ftrong pre-fentiment alfo, that all might not be well intended towards her favourite, Lord Rinaldo; íhe was at length deter¬ mined to purfue her hufband to his private clofet, and, by the fondeft endearments and perfuafions, endeavour to wrench the lurking mifchief from his heart. With flow and trembling fteps, ? there¬ fore, flie had made her way to Rodolph's clofet : but—on the moment—the very critical moment—that flie had put her hand forth to knock at the door—Ifa¬ bella's powers, already overprefled with doubt,
( »9 ) doubt, tumult, and fear, were ftruck mo¬ tionlefs, by that dreadful, uncertain ex¬ clamation, which then efcaped the horrid, threatening lips of Bernardine and God¬ dard —» <c By the almighty faints alove, that they would not delay an hour, in facrificing every thing to the honour and vengeance of their lord and maßer ! ! ! Lady Ifabella immediately recognized the voices of Bernardine and Goddard. She knew them—too fatally knew them —to be the keen tools of their mafter's defperate purpofes. A chilly fenfation creeped through every limb. She re¬ treated from the clofet-door with filent horror—with unfpeakable dread. Utter ance was then impoflible : —motion could fcarcely afford its tardieft afliftance. She retreated ftep by ftep. Even the filent ruftiing
( 120 ruftiing of her long fable mantle kindled terrors that thrunk her very foul. , With difficulty, fcarcely credible, flie reftrained herfelf from fainting; — for—oh! moft agonizing were her fears—her tender— moft tender feelings !—The idea, how¬ ever, of her hitherto unwonted attempt to intrude upon the privacy of her Lord ; the anger, moreover, flie would heap upon herfelf in confequence thereof; and, fuperior to all thefe confederations, the*hopes that flie might, by forne happy means, hereafter difcover whom the threat was levelled at—at length proved the victors of her fex and her fears :—and, on this foothing impulfe, and momentary tranfition of recollection, flie retreated, unheard, to her folitary chamber. What a melancholy interval of reflec¬ tion here occurred !-—Lad\ .bella was not
( "i ) not only too fatally acquainted with the inveterate temper of her Lord, but knew too well the favage difpofitions of hii followers at arms. She firft faw the blow» pointed to the bofom of her child, and once more beheld her (in imagination) within the icy arms of Death. '· Would to God," exclaimed ihe, on the firft re¬ flection, in all the agonies of maternal diftrefs and affli&ion,—" would to God that fhe had then happily paffed from mortal exiftence to tranquil eternity!—* and; not thus, from everiafting joys, to worfe—far worfe, than death— perpetuat- infamy, and difmal perfecution ! " And then, on a fécond and a mature deliberation of thofe dreadful chilling words :— « By the almighty faints above, that they %mld not delay an hour, in facrificing every Vol, L G tbiv Z
( *22 ) thing to the honour and vengeance of their lord md maßer!!!" What could ftie poffxbly and ultimately conjecture thereupon ? , Santa-Mariá, happily {Ifirbella conceiv¬ ed) was beyond their reach ; nay, even the original purfuit had, by her maternal {I caimot fay artful) perfuafions, been given up—for, oh! what will not a fond' mother do, or fay, for a beloved—menaced child !—Who, then, was to be the facrifice of Count Rodolph's honor and vengeance? —Who?—if not the unfortunate Santa- Maria, the virtuous Lord Rinaldo ! Con- jefture—furmife—fufpicion—were all at ftake, and Ifabella was refolved to wait with patience—till time ihould throw the uncertain and fatal dye. After the Count had, for a time, in¬ dulged his favage profpefts in filence and the
C t*3 > the over- grown fulnefs of his heart, he entered Lady Ifabella's apartment*—and entered it with a fmile of joy on his coun¬ tenance! This hypocrify of demeanor impreffed his wife with an idea, .which flie had never entertained before------- : »—Her huíband flie always knew to be a man of violent meafures—of great ambi-* tion— implacable hatred-—and, fince the fuppofed death of his fon, Ferdinand, of unmoved feverity. But never, till now* could flie conceive that he was fuch ? cruel and accompliihed^r— her ideas were on the point of ftarting the word -----—--------villain!!! but ihe fuddenly recollected that flie w.as—his wife ! He had never, hitherto, given her occafion for the horrid furihife. To her, he had G 2 ever «
( IH ) ever been an indulgent huíband. She might be miftaken »—Upon that refleñion, fhe awaited the hand of Time. rk < Uh true (thought Ifabella within her¬ felf) that my Lord has ever been kind to me ; but to Santa-Maria—my poor, dear Santa-Maria!—he may Bot prove foî— nor, perhaps, to my almoft: equally beloved Rinaldo! ----- 1 will delay my thoughts for the prefent, hafty as they may be, though I have every reafon, from what I have heard, to be fufpicioufly on my guard— for Santa-Maria ; though again, thank God! I think íhe is now diftant from her fatherly enemy!*' The Count retired early to his couch j and in the morning, meeting Bernardine and Goddard in the hall, he let them fecretly out of the poftern:—the fame poftern
( i*5 ) poftern through which maternal Tender¬ nefs, with a trembling hand, had fo lately led Affliftion, in fair Devotion's gatb, fupported by the ftaff of patient Fortitude.
G 3 CHAP.
{ i*6 )
CHAP. XII. Between the a&ing of a dreadful thing And the firft motion, all the interim is Like a phantafma, or a hideous dream ; The genius and the mortal inftruments Are then in council ; and the ftate of man, Like to a little kingdom, fu fiers then The nature of an infurrecìion» He that ftands upon a ftipp'ry place Makes nice of no vile hold to itay him up. 6HAKiPBARft« RoDOLPH, after this laft interview with the difconfolate— diiìracìed Lady Ifabella, fecluded himfelf from domeftic fociety. All his old fervants, faving ho¬ neft Drofi, were ever encountered with a frown; and as for Carlo and Sylvia, he could
( Ï27 ) could not look upon them with ordinary patience. ?И his hopes and ideas were now centered and employed in the return* of Bernardine and Goddard : this fubjecl entirely engroíled his imagination—fleep¬ ing or waking, fitting or ftirring.—Dread¬ ful fufpence! pending, as it did, upon the elölted beam of kindred blood ! On the tenth day, however, after thefe fame villains' departure, a fpecial courier arrived at the Count's palace, with di f- patches, from the South. He knocked loudly at the gate, and with great .hafte gave the fubfequent letter to the porter, to be immediately delivered to his Lord, as it contained a matter of extraordinary importance. Rodolph, at this time, was in his clofet; and after Drofi had deliver¬ ed the fame, he opened it with all the agi¬ tation that can poflibly be fuppofed, from G 4 the
(128) the violent conflict of mind that he was then labouring under· To the Μοβ Noble Count Rodolph. " AS a kinfman whom I greatly efteem, it is urgently requefted, for the honor and fecurity of your hereditary caftle and ex- tenfive domains, that you would imme¬ diately fet out for the South.—The Lord Rinaldo has not been feen, or heard of, for thefe four days paß. An accident of an extraordinary nature, muft have dif pofed both of himfelf, and his old com¬ panion, Manfredi. —No one has, of late, been ever fecn to enter, or depart from, the caftle. The great gate is clofed, and no one can prefume to force it, till you arrive.— Hafte Count, therefore, on this unwelcome fummons 3 to the South ! Belato. D'Arcos·" Nothing
( i*9 ) Nothing could exceed the aftonifliment of Rodolph, on the perufal of this letter. —Bernardine and Goddard had not been departed more than ten days.—The jour¬ ney, to and from Martorano, exceeded that time, fetting apart the neceflary fpace that they muft unavoidably have had oc¬ cafion to eniploy in the execution of their embafily. — On refleftion, however, the deed appeared as though accompliftied, by fomc means or another ; and it now was evident, almoft beyond a doubt, that Rinaldo and Manfredi exifted no longer. Inflamed wkh this idea—panting, more over, to take pofteffion of his kinfman's immenfe riches and ftately caftle^—and not doubting, withal, but he fliould meet Bernardine and Goddard, on their return homeward, he was determined to fetoiF early in the morning, and therefore com* G 5 manded
( ?? ) manded Drofi to be prepared for a jour¬ ney to the South, by dawn of day, to attend him to his caßle<~-Orofi ftared with aftonifliment, when he heard this fudden news s but fearful of making fome of his old officious interrogations, filently re¬ tired. Early in the morning, Rodolph, with Drofi, and a chofen few of his retinue, fet off to take poffeifion of his caftle in the South· During the whole jcourfe of his journey, he expefted the trampling of every horfe's hoof to be thofe of Ber¬ nardine and Goddard. Left he might have miffed them on the road, he made private enquiries, not - confiding, on this occafion, even in Drofi. At every houfe of rendezvous he halted at, enquiries were made, by himfelf, whether any fuch per- fons had lately made any abode thither on
( 13« ) on their way.—From thé mimite defcrip- tions given of them, Lord Rodolph found that they had firft heen obferved at Nocera de Pagani about nine leagues from Naples. When he reachediSalerno, two leagues onward, his attention was ar- refted, for a ihort time, at the fight of an immenfe number of peafants on the mar¬ gin of the bay, fome^ dancing and playing. The major part, however, appeared more fixed upon another objeft, Which, on ap¬ proaching nearer, he difcerned to be a conteft between feveral fmall veflels off the bay, in the Tyrrhenian Sea. On en¬ quiring the caufe 3 (mingling with this enquiry an air of furprize,- particularly fo, on feeing feveral tartanas beating againft the Ihore, and naturally fiippofing, 1 aHrie * fame time, forne conflict theh happening betwixt the natives 1 and the cotfarrs of G ? Barbary)
( ?* ) Barbary)he churliíhly received ror anfwer, 4< That it was only a fham-fight between fome veflels in the bay, at the expence, and by the command, of Philip, Count Contarmi." -—This reply, which came alike unexpefledly as uncouthly, in a mo¬ ment converted his air of furprize to that of vexation and afperity. " That Conta¬ rmi (thought Rodolph, turning his horfes courfe, and fpurring him iharply up the adjacent hill)—that this Lord Philip ihould fo overtop me in character and appearance, is more diftrefting to my afpiring foul, than was I to mingle in the meaneft, the very meaneft rank, of the Viceroys army 1—There, indeed, the loweft file may ftart forward to the poft of honor :-r-the brave foldier, then, thinks not ?ί his title, or his purfe.—But, when Rodolph thinks of Contarmi, the profeffed rival,
t m ì rival of his honor and of his houfe, thut vaunting forth upon the velvet down of opulence and profperity, keeping the mouths of fools agape with pride and of- tentation, inflaming and torturing the very fea with his fuperficial (hows !—then, again, Rodolph forgets his fuperior title, and regretting, damns the poverty of bis turfe. This was the firft, but not the only point of vexation, that overtook him in his way to Martorano Çafilt, For fcarcely had he reached the afcent of the neigh¬ bouring hill, when he difcovered tw<* di¬ vided battalions of horfe and foot, at¬ tacking and defending a heap of ruins, fuppofed once to have belonged to the ancient Salermm. On Rodolph*s enquir¬ ing alfo the caufe of this from the neareft piquet, he received for anfwer, c * That the
\ *J* ƒ the battalions before him had been but tiewly levied, and that their refpeÖiye generali were now marflialling them, previous to their marching into Afia." u And whofe company (rejoined the Count) is that on the right, defending the ruins, and whofe fuperiority of fize and fplendid appearance, render them fo much more and martially confpicuous, than their fellow foldiers ?" « That com¬ pany, Signor (replied the out-poft) is captained by the Lord Contarmi; —and yonder he is himfelf at the head ofhis troop, on the point, as I conjecture, of at¬ tacking tbfe befiegers upon their left flank. We know him (concluded the piquet) above moft of our other captains, by his fuperior mien and fplendid ac¬ coutrements.^ rt Tortures and furies (in- inwardly exclaimed the Count, wounded to
( 135 ) to the heart's core, at this mortifying eu- logium paid, and nót untruly fo, to his bitter and fuccefsful enemy) why have I been led into 'a fécond track, that has * thus croíled and cut my pride and ambi¬ tion to the very quick ? On this he clap* ped his fpurs clofe upon the fides of his charger, and puíhed him upon its utmoft ftretch, till he readied Evoli, a diftance of fix leagues from Salerno· At E voli, Bernardine and Goddard were recognized ; alfo at Caftro Villari, but at no other place. To his infinite mortification, none fuch were elfewhefe to be heard of; vexed and difappointed, he haftily proceeded to the fmall Cartella of the Chevalier dArcos, which lay about half a league fouthward from Bel· lito, and another league firom Martorano; wltpre after meeting with the ??? hofpi¬ tabie
( ?? ) table reception, he was eafily perfuaded to take up his refidence for that night. . Here chagrin purfued Rodolph, with all its baneful influence. He could learn no more from d'Arcos refpefting the Lord Rinaldo, than what had been briefly related in his letter. What touched him, however, ftill as forely, was the latter information he unwillingly acquired. For^ on aíking the Chevalier refpe£ting his nephew, the Count Contarmi, Rodolph was informed as thus : . " My nephew (replied d'Arcos) is now prepared to attend the Viceroy, againft the unprovoked enemies of his country. Previous to his departure from my Caftle> I amply furniihed him with money, and one hundred men> fully equipped and ac¬ coutred«— ?? volunteers like himfelf, in the vice-regal caufe. The youth, though naturally
( 47 ) naturally brave, and of the moft undauni- ed mettle -, is, I am forry to obferve it, my Lord, rafli, vindictive, and malicious.** Here Rodolph, frowned conviction. " Prone to every debauchery, and in* flamed with every luxury, that youth and the court can yield.—Lneednot allude to the "great and implacable revenge his father bore to your houfe, and which, by his leffons and perfuafions, have defcend¬ ed to his fon ; feeds of animofity that ftill grow ftronger as age increafes, notwith¬ ftanding all my pacific efforts to allay them." u My fon, Ferdinand, 1 fear, is the fe¬ vered fufterer by this family animofity," thought Rodolph within himfelf, en- creafing the fable frown that had al* ready overíhàdowed his dark yellow af· fpecb " For
( '38.) ? For thefe ill^growfeig evils (conclud¬ ed the chevalier) I have, by way of ????- ïiviöus antidote, enabled him thus to pro¬ ceed with the Viceroy, in his view- of penetrating into the very heart of Turkey, to revenge the repeated inftilts and op- preffions made on the houfe of Napless hoping, that by time and refleftion, he may eradicate thofe baneful qualities that have taken fo deep a root in his youthful, and, I may add, his prefent de* praved heart»" 4 The force and propriety of d Arcos' fpeech, ftruck the Count with the moft prepoffeifing fentiments in favour of his hoft. He therefore gratefully thanked hin%for the goodnefs of his intentions to¬ wards himfelf and his houfe. A bitter thought, however, came acrofs him, which wrung his very foul—That the bated
( fc 139 ) hated Contarmi, was prepared to fet out on his expedition, with great fupplie* of money, and 100 men at arms, when he had not procured a fingle frefti re¬ cruit, pierced him to the very quick.—> A happy thought, however, ftarted itfelf on a fudden, which relieved the greatnefi pf his paft anxiety. This fame happy thought fuggefted to him, that he was % on the eve of becoming pofleflbr of the rich Caftle and'domains of his deceafed kinfman, the Prince Rinaldo; the bare idea elevated his drooping fpirics to the zenith of exultation.—I will (conceived Rodolph) encreafe my regiment to a double compliment of men—will fuit my equipage to the greatnefs of my rank— will alfo furprife our Viceroy with the greatnefs of my loyalty.*—I will be ac¬ counted foremoft in avenging our coun- fry's
( *4Q ì try's wrongs, and then return tea times richer in vengeance, honour, wealth, and PofleiTed with thefe flattering pro- fpeâs, the Count, became uncommonly cheerful and elated,-^He called heartily for the goblet, and. drank unfparingly* The hofpitabie Chevalier welcomed this friendly difpofition of his gueft;—his honeft heart, however, on reflection, fug¬ gefted that merriment was ill-fuited to the appropriate melancholy of the occa¬ fion. Rodolph, having obferved in the height of his hilarity, that he ihould take pofteflion of Martorano Caftle early in the morning; D' Arcos obferved, that it would take fome pains to effeft an entranced* the large caftle-gate is ihut —the furrounding foffe is filled to its very
( Hi ) ???? top, from the influx of the rapid river Savuto ;—faving indeed, the fouth front part of the Caftle, whofe entrance is defended by the great gate. Thè only poffible means, therefore, of penetrating into the caftle, muft he effected by the means of a fmall tartana on the weft fide of the fortrefs. On that fite only, the thick walls have yielded to the iron hand of Time ; and there alone, the water is {hallow and fteady, from its conftant eva¬ cuation into the fmall loops, that have given way to its rapidity, and which have of lale been neglected. My tartana which is now moored in the river Crati, that waihes the rear of my Caftella, will enable you tp ford the ditch ¿ though the ponderous mins of the great eaftern tower, that has lately concealed its proud head bemeath the precipitate floods of Savuta.
( ? ) Savuto, may render the paffage fomewhat dangerous. A fcaling ladder, with grap¬ pling irons, which I can alfo convenient¬ ly provide you with, will enable you (in this fole fliattered part) to afcend the once impenetrable fides of this ancient and formidable caftle. Refiftance from within is not to be looked for, as I have already not only ordered the bugle-horns to be founded, till they have re-echoed through and through the thick branches of the circumjacent forefts, but alfp ihot repeated arrows over the walls, on all fides with letters infixed, to lejarn fome kind of information, from thofe fuppofed to be fo fecretly enclofed within,—But have never feen mortalr-even upon the hjghçft tuirets of the fortrefs.— Weje there refidenis within, even but the fcan- tieft cumber—and thofe prepared íor de- fence i
( 143 ) fence—no friendly or hoftile intrufion 4 could annoy them v/ith impunity. Thefe circumftances, my Lord, being duly, weighed, we will attempt this plan, let the confequences and difcoveries provo what they may. If the young Prince is found hereafter aliye, then let us kneel to heaven, and thank our omnipotent Being for his fafety ;—if not—let me then hail thee—Lord of Martorano Caftle ! ! !"— Though the welcome gratulation of— Hail ! Lord of Martorano Caftle, afford¬ ed Rodolph the moft fenfible pleafure* ftill all the obfervations of d Arcos ???? the Count with this perplexing, compii·» cated refleftion : That ifit w as Jo difficult f or him, as the le¬ gal owner cf Mar tormo Caßle, to gain admif- fton, by what means could Bernardine and Cod» 4 dard'
( 144 ) İar à have entered, to accomplit their fan¬ guinary deßgns í Rodolph reflefted on this enigmatical point over and over again, but could gather no clue whatever to fatisfy his cu¬ riofity. Having fifted his imagination for fome minutes, he was interrupted by the good Chevalier, who mifinterpreting his thoughts, in the moll anxious and friendly manner, obferved—That the im¬ pediment he had reprefented was of little import, as it could be overcome by the fetting of to-morrow's fun. The Count nodded convißion, and dropt the refleftion, with this conclud¬ ing idea : " That Rinaldo bad been dt/pofed of, by fome means or another, through the artifices of Ber* mrdint und Goddard* CHAP.
( 45 )
CHAP. XIII. But here it is ; prepare To fee the life as lively mockM, as ever Still fleep mock'd death ; behold, and fay, 'tis wtll. Mafterlv done. * The very life feenU j #árrrí ιφοη her líp*— Thus are my bloffbms blafled in thé bûd! And caterpillars eat my leaves away.— SHAKSPEARE, XjY dawn of day, Count Rodolph and m the noble Chevalier D*Arcos, attended by the greateft part of his retinue, with the fcalingrladders and tartana, which was thrown acrofs a litter, and forne oki do¬ meftics, who had ferved under him, ¡n the warlike capacity of pioneers, proceed- Vol. I. H ed
( ?? ) ed on the other fide of Martorano, to take pofteffion of Rinaldo's caftle.— They had not advanced above a mile from Bellito, when they obferved the ma- jeftic caftle of the loft—unfortunate Ri¬ naldo. It there appeared before them on one of the fteepeft rocks in all Italy. Its proud front ftood full before their view : its fides were defended by extenfive forefts, that appeared envious of the lofty towers that overtopped their wondrous growth :— the murmuring breezes, however, fhook their pride, and forced them to pay obe¬ dience to the neighbouring battlements— whiift, as they approached, the dalhing billows of the rapid Savato, could be di- ftinftly heard reverberating againft the northern wall of this hardy and long- famed fortrefs. D'Arcos having attained the weftern 4 fide
( И7 í ftde of the caftle, ordered the tartana to be launched ; and then, accompanied by the Count and the pioneers, they crofted the foffe, and with fome difficulty affixed the fcaling ladder, and made faft the grappling irons to the mouldering wall— ----------This effefted------- Rodolph pro¬ pofed afcending alone——The Chevalier, however, infifted on accompanying him, as well as the pioneers, left they ihould not immediately find the great caftle keys $ in which neceffity they ihould be obliged to force and undermine the gates. " And —if my Lord ----- (anxioufly obferved the Chevalier, at this momentous crifis) our young and amiable kinfman, Prince Ri¬ naldo, has been treacheroufly dealt with— (a circumftance, I believe, but to be too fatally true) the villains, no doubt, have H % taken
u I4S ) ttak^î^very method t© fortify themfelves ag?ft immediate difcoveries.■' ι The Count made no reply to this touching obfervation. He now wiflied that he had; made Drofi acquainted with his infernai defign— ??? wiihed him much alfo to have been with him at this critical junfåure. But Drofi was left on the other fide of the (???? with the other donieftics, whom he had already begun to regale with a haunch of ven ifón, and fome ex¬ cellent lachryma-chrifti, that he had brought with him, for fear of anyuncx- pefted delays. Rodolph, however^ to conceal the agi¬ tation of his countenance (which the laft obfervation; of D'Arcos had made upon it) firft afcended the Iaddery and after he had croffed the broken wall, was followed by the Chevalier and his pioneers· When
( 149 ) .When Rodolph and D'Arcos had lodg¬ ed themfelves fccurely on the ramparts, the latter ordered his followers at arms to continue there, till they ihould be fum¬ moned to the interior of the caftle. The Count and Chevalier then defcended to the inner court-yàrd, from thence to the great hall. The latteiy perceiving his compa¬ nion much exulted with the fplendor and munificence of his hereditary acquiihion, complimented him—(though with every due refpect to the late unfortunate owner) ------on his fudden and wealthy poifef- fions—" Let us, however (faid D'Arcos J lofe no time in contemplation of our fur- rounding jjrandeur, but afcend to the apartment of my Lord Rinaldo, where we ftiall find the depofitory of his immenfe riches—If it fo happily chances that the H 3 fpoilers
('ίο ) fpoilers of his life have not alfo been the defpoiJers ofhis property—" On this, the Chevalier and Rodolph, pofleffed with far different fenfations, afcended the ftair-cafe, and haftening through the fpacious corridor, foon found themfelves in the Prince's fuite of apart¬ ments. They firft examined his bed-cham¬ ber—all was filent and gloomy there— not the leaft traces of blood or pillagç were to be perceived. The rich damafk curtains, rendered ftill far richer with the broad gold galoon that encircled them at every point, continued as they heretofore had ever done. They then entered through a fmall door into the anti-chaïöber— The firft objects here that reprefented them¬ felves to their view—were two immenfe iron chefts, with their hinges disjointed— The ftaples hung loofe, and the huge
( ?* ) padlocks lay on the floor. One trunk had a plate of gold on the top, and the other, one of filver, with the arms of Rinaldo but freihly engraved thereon. " Thefe ohefts, my Lord (faid D'Arcos, as he entered the room) are doubtlefs the repofitoriesof our kinfman's wealth and family records." Rodolph eagerly opened the firft----- when—!!! to his infinite aftonifliment and horror, he beheld-------a frightful va¬ cuity------! ! ! The Chevalier was equally alarmed and furprized. He looked alfo into the cheft, and perceiving fomething gliften at the bottom,he ftooped and took it out. It was a portrait of Lord Rinaldo, enclofed in a cafe of rich diamonds—The melancholy portrait of the unhappy youth when he lay in all the agonies of death— His fine fair face was pale and wafted— His cheeks were funk, and his eyes were
( 15* ) lifted up with rèfignation to that great Being whom he hoped foon to vifit in the bleft regions of heaven. D'Arcos, with a trembling hand, refigned it to the Count: —that taik performed, he retired on one fide, and bedewed his cloak with the moi ft tear of fenfible regret. Rodolph, inftead of regarding the por¬ trait with pity, viewed it with horror in- expreffible—Guilt ftruck him to the very foul—his heart's blood became chilled, and both his mind and body experienced the bittereft convulfions of doubt—re- inorfe—and terror.—The unaffected fenfi¬ bility, however, of D'Arcos, became a mantle to his guilty fenfations, and he poignantly endured them all, without lay¬ ing himfelf open to the glance of an ho¬ neft fufpicion, J ne
( *53 ) The good Chevalier having recovered from his foft emotions of pity and regret* in an apparent cheerful manner, he turn¬ ed round, and then obferved, " Let us, my Lord, examine the other cheft—^The Count, on this,, indignantly returned the portrait of the Prince to D'Arcos—" It is your's-^-" 4 (faid Rodolph, with afperity). <c Then I accept it—(returned the other) with gratitude and refpecV* 4 The Count, on this, proceeded to the other cheft, and likewife--—found alî empty there.—Inftead of expreffing fur- prize and anger, as before, he now be¬ came on a fudden fikmt and gloomy :— * his faculties appeared abforbed in extreme ftupidity: his hand took its courfe to¬ wards the hand le of his fword—Perceiv¬ ing, however, a fécond glittering beneatny he ferocioufly feized hold of it; andj orf . H ¡ examination»
( 154 ) examination, difcovered it to be the por¬ trait of his— daughter, Santa-Maria!!! Not réfembling that of Rinaldo 's, wan and deje£ted, but full of joy and expecia- tion. Or rather, as the aftoniflied father mifinterpreted, full of luft and wanton¬ nefs. Her beauteous countenance was replete with animation, and with eyes fparkling like thofe of a lovely and long expe£ting bride. Rodolph*s indignation at this fight ex¬ ceeded all bounds :—he threw the pic- ture from him—beat his head againft the wall, and launched out into all thofe ac¬ cuftomed incoherences which ever ac¬ companied his a£tions in the moments of difappointment. The Chevalier took up the rejected portrait* and had fcarçe time to put it in¬ to his doublet, when he was horror-ftruck with
( 45 ) with the fight of Rodolph's drawn fword ready pointed to his heart. He ran ea¬ gerly towards him, and with much diffi¬ culty WTcnched the weapon from his fu¬ rious grafp—Rodolph ftormed with anger and difappointment—he curfed himfelf— his fatal ftars—and the Being who gave exiftence to him, and to all thofe with whom he had ever been conjoined. D'Ar¬ cos endeavoured to allay his wrath, but in vain—It was ineffectual he faw, to ad¬ min i fte r reafon— " The villains (inadvertently exclaimed the Count) have ruined—have plundered —have defolated me !—" <f What villains, my Lord ?" u Thofe villains, Bernar--^—" Here the Count fuddenly checked himfelf. "Speak on—do you know ought of them?" H 6 " The
( ?? ) " The villains— alas ! would I could find the villains? Would to God we could, my Lord—" Again Rodolph paufed—trembled, not with fear, but rage. His ferocity at laft gave way to prudence and reflection.— Then fuddenly whirling his cloak round his face, he bedewed it with the big ago¬ nizing tear of enraged difappointment. The Chevalier, now moved more by the Count's anguiih, than his former rage a advifed * hini to be calm, till he had fearched farther over the Prince's fuite of apartments, which extended over all that part of the Caftle. u The villains, yet (faid he) may have miffed their booty. I will fearch farther." Then carefully exa¬ mining about the chamber, that no in¬ strument of deftruftion was at hand, he hurried forward, with hiskinfman's drawn weapon»
( 47 ) weapon in his grafp, to make farther re- fearches. After D'Arcos had quitted Rinaldo's anti-chamber, Rodolph bitterly exclaim¬ ed—" Oh ! yes—it muft be fo—thofe vil¬ lains, Bernardine and Goddard, have be¬ trayed me-----they have murdered the Prince and Manfredi ;—have, by fome in¬ fernal ftratagem, difpoftefled the caftle of its riches, and here left me a beggar— have deprived me of the fubftance, and left only the íhadow behind—have erect¬ ed their fortunes on my ruin : and, oh ! what is ftill more piercing—may defend their claim by title of their murderous embaffy. I cannot accufe them without expofing my own life and honour.—But -------.......(recollecting himfelf after a ihort paufe) how could they have ma¬ naged the deed, and defpoiled the Caftle of
( 158 ) of its wealth, fo quickly?—Time will fcarcely allow its probability. Some dæ¬ mons muft have conveyed them hither on the wings of darknefs; or how could they poftibly and fo eafily have gained adrnif- fion into this till now inacceflible for¬ trefs ? when -------- -" Here he was interrupted by the return of D'Arcos— « My Lord— (faid he, on his entrance) I have made diligent fearch over the whole range of Rinaldo's apartments, and not even the keys of the Caftle can be difco¬ vered. We will, therefore, proceed, to break open the great gate—Sentinels íhall be placed round the ramparts, and in all the watch-towers. That perform¬ ed, you íhall return to my Caftella, and continue there till we can trace out fome charme!* where the murderers of our kinf- man.
( !¿9 ) J man, and the maurauders of your property can be difcovered." " That is impoflible—" " For why—my Lord ?—" <ζ I will explain the matter to you, Che¬ valier, more fully this night—" They then defcended to the great hali¬ but as they walked onward, they difcover¬ ed feveral lights at the extremity—~ " What can that bright illumination mean (faid Rodolph anxioufly) which re- flefls on the fteps, that I recollect leads to the chapel ?" " Let us on and fee, my lord (replied d'Arcos) with equal anxiety." On this, they precipitately^ hafted for¬ ward, and, afcending the flight of fteps, foon found themfelves in thechapeh the fides of which were* all of black marble. The payement contained little pieces of
( i6o ) of jafper, porphry, ferpentine, and mar¬ ble of divers colours, which formed com· partments quite different from one an¬ other ; and though in fome places worn, it ftill iho wed the figns of ancient gran¬ deur. The fight øf this fuperb little edifice of fan&ity and woríhip afforded no iinme-; diate f^tisfaéUon to Rodolph -, another objeci of more importance attracted Jus deepeft attention—-which was momenta¬ rily ????? with the number of brilliant tapers that ftood burning on the altar, ançl apparently as though but freflijy kin- » ¿led.— " This is ftrange, my friend—" " Wondrous ftrange,, my LordW v u How can thefe t^peçs, Dóreos, be prtfeiyjtd/q |re% fgl^iUp^ > whe%tbefe: is
( léi ) îs no mortal exifting in the Caftle, to rer place and renovate them?"— " I cannot account for the myftery, in¬ deed, my noble kinfman"— " Then—(faid Rodolph, after a Ihort * paufe, and with that quicknefs of thought and penetration which marked the lead¬ ing features of his characier) I will ex- tinguifli them, and fee if they are re-illu¬ mined when we return hither in the morning. ,,e *~ " Hold, my Lord^will not this deed favour of facrilegious difrefpect to the holy images that furround us ?"— " Pfliaw!——(fneeringly, replied Ro¬ dolph) Why this objection, Chevalier, fa* vours more of a monkifli dilpofition than that of an old warrior," On this, he twitt¬ ed the corner of his mantle together, and extinguiihed all the tapers one by one, and
( 1?2 ) and that—with all the unconcern which characterized his unthinking, inflexible, and undaunted temper- Scarce had the Count extinguiihed the holy tapers, when fome voices were dif¬ tincily heard—vociferating—" My Lord D'Arcos—which way is our Lord D'Ar¬ cos—Rodolph inftantly fnatched his fword from the grafp of his kinfman, and bid¬ ding him to draw his own, they defcend¬ ed the chapel ftairs, and haftily advanced to the fpot from whence the noife pro¬ ceeded—where they foon difcovered the pioneers in the centre of the Hall—ftand¬ ing abreaft, with no fmall degree of anxie¬ ty and alarm depictured in their counte¬ nances. " What means this fudden appeal ? (exclaimed the chevalier)—Is there any freíh adventure at hand or abroad ?"
( i«3 ) " Nothing fo very particular, my Lord (anfwered Martin, for himfelf and his comrades)—but as we ftood waiting your commands on the ramparts, we were fuddenly alarmed with a loud noife, that feemed to proceed from the foreft, on the eaftern fide of the Caftle.—The clamour favoured more of humour and jollity than any thing elfe. —We looked with all our eyes, but could diftinguifli nòthmg,lfronV the thicknefs of the wood. We, there¬ fore, thought it our duty to warn your lordfliips of the fame, and having held a long, and moft deliberate council on the affair, it was unanimoufly agreed that we fhould leave our pofts, without general orders, and defcend in fearch of your Lordfliips." Rodolph and the Chevalier, accom¬ panied by the pioneers, with drawn fwords»
( 1Ó4 ) fwords, haftened through the extenfive court-yards, and intricate ' windings of the caftle, till they reached the great gate, -which was with infinite labour and diffi¬ culty broke open. When erTecied, they difcovered, to their infinite amazement, the real caufe of this dreadful alarm.— For on the other fide of the foife, were feen Drofi and all the Chevaliers domef¬ tics, placed in battle array—though fo much intoxicated with the lachryma- chrifti that they bad imbibed, as to ren¬ der it a fubjeñ of prudence for them to form themfelves into a clofe phalanx, to keep fteadily together. When Drofi, however, difcovered the features of his mafter, he waved his cap, which was a fignal previoufly given by him, for the others to fet up a loud huzza !—Huzza !— huzza !—huzza '—re-echoed through the forefts.
( i«J ) forefts. Rodolph and the Chevalier, not¬ withftanding all the unfavourable occur¬ rences that they had fo momentarily ex¬ perienced, could not refrain from fmiling, at this grotefque behaviour and appear¬ ance of their domeftics.—The pioneers laughed heartily, particularly at the droll geftures and deportment of the captain ofthis Bacchanalian groupe. —When the Count, however, appeared, Drofi, waved his cap again, and they each falling on one knee, vociferoufiy exclaimed—Hail ! Lord of Martorano Caftle.—Rodolph, on this, half pleafcd and half angry, fmil¬ ing and frowning together; pleafed with the fellow's innocent drollery, which he attributed, and rightly fo, to his affeftion and attachment to his perfon and for¬ tunas, but ftill irritable from the difap- i pointmcnt
( ?"«? ) poîntment he had experienced—fternly commanded Drofi to leave off his buf¬ foonery, to rife, and follow him to the Caftella of the Chevalier d'Arcos.
CHAP.
( i6 7 )
CHAP. XIV. An apple cleft in two is not more twin Than thefe two creamres. SHAKSPEARE- HAT with the unexpected adven¬ ture in the chapel, and Drofls drunken, raifchievous frolics ^ the Count and Che¬ valier had fo far forgot themfelves, as to neglect not only placing fentinels about the ramparts and towers of the Caftle,.as had been propofed, but to leave the great gate open; the fcaling ladder on the wall, and the tartana riding in the fofle. ? As it was rather late in the evening, when they arrived at the Chevalier's Caf- tello, the fupper had already been pre¬ pared.
w
( i68 ) pared. Lauria, the niece of D'Arcos, ac¬ cording to her ufual cuftom, was in the hall, bufily overlooking the female do¬ meftics, in providing her uncle's fupper. —When the damfel, however, difcerned the entrance and commanding figure of Rodolph, ihe would have retired. The Chevalier neverthelefs requefted her to ftav, and then introduced his Niece to the Count.—The elegance of her mein, the Beauty of her countenance, and the modefty of her deportment, reminded the latter of his loft, fugitive, Santa-Ma¬ ria, The ftrong refemblance they bore to each other in every diftin£t point, drew a heavy figh from his bofom. He de- fpondently approached the amiable Lauria with a kinfman's refpectful fond¬ nefs, and joined his wifties to thofe of his kind hoft, Rodolph
( i69 > Rodolph fcarcely partook of any food, though, agreeably to his old cuftom,when adverfity puihed clofely upon him, he drank freely. The Chevalier, with infi¬ nite emotion, difcovered the frequent glances that his gueft beftowed on Lau* ría, and the apparent anguiih he ex¬ perienced at every look. He eafily divined the caufe from whence they fprung. He had heard of his daughter's reverfe fortunes, from his kinfman, Con¬ tarmi, and with an exaggeration that made her guilt, though almoft incredi¬ ble, ftill difputablc. This family misfor¬ tune became the fubjecl of that letter which brought Drofi the violent blow he had received for his officious and un¬ timely interrogatories. Condolence, in¬ deed, prefaced the epifille —Though an Vol, I. I honeft
( í? 0 ) honeft: propofal fucceeded of fuffering Santa-Maria to take up a retired abode at his manfion, till the myftery of her pregnancy could be elucidated. The fa· tal caufe of this domeftic torture, had been alfo exaggerately attributed to Ri¬ naldo, by the artful Contarmi (though fecretly fo) for which reafon d'Arcos had cautioufly forebore to fpeak much of the Prirjce ; but when the neceffity of the fubjecl could not prevent his name being brought forward—then, indeed, notwithftanding all the imputations of fe- duöion that had been laid to his charge {a crime that, of all, he moft abhorred) the partiality he bore for his great vir¬ tues, and, till now, unblemiihed purity of mind and manners, could not prevent him from affixing the words of affection and refpect to his name and characier. J^he^
( 17* )' The fupper being removed, and the beautiful Lauria having retired, her uncle attended, with filence, to hear the mo* tives that had rendered it impoflible for his noble kinfman's refiding in the here¬ ditary caftle.
i a CHAP.
ι fi *;»- ) CHAP. XV. l -η. "f ï i f « «-t ■ " ■ ■ ...... To wilful men, The injuries that they themfelves procure Muft be their fchool-mafters— ■ How he glifters Through my dark ruft í and how his piety Poes my deeds make the blacker 1 3HAXSPEARE. RoDOLPH, perceiving his hofts fuf¬ penfe, after fome paufe, thus relieved his anxiety :— " Some little time after the intended nuptials of my daughter with Rinaldo — the abrogation of which, I fuppofe, Sir Chevalier, you muft be acquainted with by this period ?" HereD' Arcos only anfwering with a figh of condolence,
( ? 73 ) condolence, Rodòíph iríihiexhátcly càught the affirrnution/arid thëhpróceedetl :— " I perceive it Is eveh To !—SlandeV hath the wings of a lark, and fóats 'beyond our hearing and our fight.—Soon, then, Sir Chevalier, after that event, We Vice¬ roy fent for råe to his prefence, aripoíntíríg me to the command ôf ~a mutilated 'regi¬ ment, to be ready,In á fhort rprce of time, to nlarch, fully equipped', arid with Tfs former fuíi complement of men', aìfó; againft the vindictive Türk,— I íhall pâfs over the encomiums he paid: to my former fervices, and to the zeal I had ever ma¬ nifefted towards my country and his Vice- royalty.—When I became informed off Rinaldo's extraordinary abfence from his- ■t caftle—(the caufe of which you have at¬ tributed to Tome foul, unnatural deed—- and which I indeed fuppofe to be but toa 13 fatally
( '74 ) fatally founded in truth)............ -.....- - Excufe thefe emotions !—The dreadful idea overpowers me!......" And here----------- The Count covered his face with his cloak—not to conceal the emotions of regret* but the glaring and impulfive co¬ lours of blufliing—irrefiftible guilt. 4t To continue, however:—When I was informed of my kinfman's fate, the fer¬ vices I owe my coumry, and the Vice- regent power, fondly led me to imagine that I might now ferve with treble zeal and ardour—and that, by the acquifition of my dear departed kinfman's wealth, I might not only add to the fame and fplen¬ dor of our houfe, but, by the immolation alfo of fome thoufand infidel legions, make my prayers more acceptable above, for his eternal happinefs·" Had
( '75 ) Had the really pious Chevalier pof- felled the flighteft fufpicion that Rodolph had been the moft diftant author of at¬ tempting and plotting the deftruclion of Rinaldo, this lall expreilion of hypdcrify and impiety would have harrowed up his foul. The Count, however, knew fcarcely any thing of pure religion, but by name; and even the fcanty knowledge of her excellencies that be poíleíTcd, better de¬ ferved the title of fuperftition :—for, like moft of the leading Captains engaged in this, and other fanguinary contefts of thofe . dark ignorant times, his mind was more engroíled by a brutal valour, and a per¬ petual thirft for plunder, than any fixed religious confederation. " But howreverfe," continued Rodolph, ** has fortune proved !—I poflefs a caftle, it is true, but deftitute of thofe means to I 4 cherifh
( '76 ) cheriíh and maintain its ancient fame and fplendor.—Pillaged of its immenfe re- fources~;—its late Lord, and great wealth, removed by murderers and robbers;— nay, as it hitherto appears, not even one fingle man of his magnificent retinue re¬ mains behind—How they could all have been difpoftefled and deftroyed, confounds and diftracis my difappointed foul!" " That point I can refolve, my Lord. —Rinaldo's retinue has not been all de* firoyed : his men at arms I can partly ac¬ count for. As for Paul, and all his do¬ meftic favourite fervants, I cannot poftibly furmife^what can have become of them, mote than of their young Lord ! Their fate, however, appears interwoven with his own and Signior Manfredi's. " But, to proceed :—^When Count Con¬ tarmi came to the South, it was my great exertions
( 177 ) exertions that procured hini followers. F raifed him feventy men at arms; thirty only remained to fatisfy his eager hopes and glowing ambition. Difappdiritment was furioufly depiftured ori his counte¬ nance, when I intimated to Kim that I had done my utmoft to promote his honor and his wimes. He thereupon left me churliíhly, and authoritatively exclaimed at his departure, " that the remainder tie muft have—and would' Kave — ίο mâkë ufi his complement of a hunaren ! "—Thè in- folence of his fpeech and manners corf founded me ; but ftill, as I had launctieä his little bark on thè ocean of Fortuné myfelf, and unwilling that it íhould tìe crippled for lack of a few more hands to weather it through the uncertain viciffi- tudes of a perilous voyage, I inftantly re¬ paired to Martorano Çâftie~—" I 5 « To
( *78 ) " To Rinaldo's Caftle! Sir Chevalier ? * f Even fo, my Lord." " And did Rinaldo affift the enemy of our houfe—the moft inveterate, the moft implacable Count Contarmi ? " " Lift, and have patience !—He aflifted me, and me only.—Now hear and admire the generous conduci of Rinaldo! ------ For, when I related to him the feveral circumftances that thus agitated my mind (excufe my weaknefs here, arifing, as it does, from the natural -almoft unaccount¬ able affeñion, notwithftanding all his vices, that I muft ever bear for an only brother's fon!) — Rinaldo gave me this brief reply :_— " Sir Chevalier, " I have always admired your known great virtues and proverbial good quali¬ ties,
( m ) ties, as much as I have condemned the vices and profligacies of your nephew. You are not accountable, though you muft naturally feel for his actions and indifcretions, but rather, like a ftar of pre¬ eminent luftre, diminiih them by your fu¬ perior effulgence. The Contarinis have been the profeffed enemies of Rodolph's houfe (a houfe the neareft and deareft to my heart) and, alas ! I fear their inve* teracy has afforded that family anxieties diftreffing and aflliÖing. There is no¬ thing, believe me, my foul more abhors than kindred malice and perfecution ; and we have both heard and fcen fo many fa¬ tal examples of thefe unnatural bitter ani- mofities, as to make every feeling Chrif- ftian bofom endeavour to quench, rather than add deftrufitive fuel to the cruel flame. An unexpected honeft kindnefs I 6 (divefted
( i8o ) (divefted of all felfiíh, mean, interefted views) therefore, may produce conviction, —convittion, repentance, re—pentance gratitude, and a confcioufnefs of having been precipitately led away by the fallibi¬ lity of our natures, and the depravity of the human mind—All thefe reflections combined, may probably and ultimately effeft an everiafting re-union of fenti- nient — love —and ancient family affec¬ tion. « f With thefe happy views, therefore (Concluded Rinaldo) honour me with a vifit, Sir Chevalier, in the courfe of two days, and I will fupply you with the defi¬ ciency of men you have to raife." €t To be brief, my Lord, I took my de^ parture for that time ; and when I return¬ ed to the Caftle on the appointed day, I found the exact number of promifed men, drawA
( 1*1 ) drawn up in the outer court-yard, equip¬ ped from head to foot. Surprifed and pleafed at this inftance of aclive genero¬ fity, I ran into his arms r and expreffed the deepeft emotions of gratitude. " Do not thus opprefs me (faid the noble youth) ; for the brave fellows you behold before you, have been long weary of the inactive life that they have led of late in my cheerlefs Caftle. They were the un¬ daunted followers of my departed fire, and pant to engage in the patriotic war, againft the cruel enemies of our faith- Oh ! cheerfully do I refign them to my virtuous kinfman—(for fuch, though flat¬ tering and undeferving, my Lord, were all his words on this occafion) you will be the means of fending them onward to vi£tory and glory—fuccefs and honour accompany them all—aye, to all, and all, who
( i8* ) who never flinch from their country's caufe ! May conqueft wreathe its deareft laurels round their brows ! It is true, my faithful feliows (addreftmg himfelf with uncommon energy to his armed retinue) you have loft a young inexperienced maf¬ ter; but there (pointing to me) you have found one—aged—and experienced, one who will appoint you------(Here Rinaldo paufed ---- —) a valiant —captain—" D'Arce ¿, without obferving the agita¬ tion of Rodolph f s countenance (fo deeply were his feelings interwoven with his fubjeö) thus continued: " Still amazed and pleafed with this difinterefted generous conduft, neverthe¬ lefs, I could not refrain from arguing with Rinaldo, ίο give the affair a more delibe¬ rate confideratiom You cannot—(I ex¬ claimed) thus rob your wealthy and mag¬ nificent
( 18 3 ) nificent Caftle of its ftrongeft bulwark. Retain the one half for your own fafety and defence. In thefe rude times, it may become the envy and attack of rough de- fpoilers. Not only your riches, but your perfon may be rendered the objecis of their invafions and brutality. I befeech you, therefore, do but retain the only one half, for my fake and'happinefs. Mv Lord Rinaldo, however, continued inflexible to all my remonftrances—" I thank you kindly, Sir Chevalier (faid the noble youth) for your friendly folicitude in my behalf.— Manfredi, and a few an¬ cient chofen domeftics, will be all that I fliall now require. The world is loft to me, and I íhall foon be loft to the world.— Seek not, my worthy D'Arcos (conclud¬ ed the Prince, on perceiving me to at- attempt to fpeak) to learn farther—I have ????
( i8 4 ) been deprived of all that was moft dear, and the whole earth now appears in my fight a vail and miferable vacuity." " On this he took of me an affeftion- ate and laß farewell, for never have I be¬ held him fince." After fome moments' filence, Rodolph, with affronted haughtinefs, exclaimed— " Methinks, Sir Chevalier, you have not fpared encomiums on my guilty kinf¬ man!" " I will not difpute .a father's feelings (tenderly replied D'Arcos)—forgive me, my Lord, if I have erred.— Rinaldo may be guilty—I cannot defend his faults— though I cannot, from my foul, refrain from praifing his virtues. I will admit that he may be guilty, and, as fuch, I will alfo fay, that, of all mankind, he is the moft guiltlefs,
( i8s ) guiltlefs, amongft the huge record of the guilty." The Count, on this, rofe from his feat, and walked to and fro with hafty ftrides* —He endeavoured to reflect on what had efcaped d*Arcos ;—refleftion, however, failed him, for the more he thought, the deeper became the myftery· The chevalier, too confeious of Ro¬ dolph's hafty and incoherent temper, fuffered this momentary impulíê of paf» fion to take its vent. When the Count, however, had refumed his feat, he thus once more addrefted his haughty gueft : ίς I have now another fubje£t to dif- clofe, my Lord, more important to your happinefs and honour, than what I have juft briefly related:—It íhall be ftill in your power to obey the Viceroy's re¬ queft, and depart for the wars with twice a the
( i86 ) the fplendor of Philip Count Contarmi,— Be not furprifed, For—" (Rodolph, ever attentive to the mighty call of ambition, drew his feat clofe to that of the Chevalier's, that not a word might efcape him, on a point fo wel- comej fo gladdening to his ear)—" The purpofe can and fhall be eafily accom¬ plilhed.—»A very few daysfmce, a courier arrived at my gate, and left a large pon- drous leathern bag, with my name fuper- feri bed thereon, and rode off without waiting for an anfwer. The man imme¬ diately brought it to me, as I was fitting with my niece, Lauria, in this apartment ; and when I opened the fame, to my great furprife, it contained four thoufand crowns j—my aftonifliment was exceffive. —I immediately conjeclured that I owed the gift to the liberality of Rinaldo.— Ordering
( i87 ) Ordering my horfe, I as inftantly rode to the Caftle, but could neither obtain ad¬ miffion» or make any one anfwer, to tke loud and repeated ftiouts I gave, for the great gate was ihut ; I therefore difap¬ pointedly returned home, and difpatched my fervants on the different crofs roads, to gain fome information of the courier, from the defcription given to .me, of him by the fentinél. No horfeman however, of that account had paffed the roads, either direei or crofs way. After, this ftrange and perplexed event, I almoft rode hourly to and fro, to the Caftle, and finding every thing as at firft, I then dif¬ patched a melTenger to your palace, in Naples." * c By holy Saint Mark (exclaimed the aftoniflied Count) myftery hangs on myf¬ tery moft marvelloufly !" D*Arcos
( i85 ) D'Arcos then rofe from his feat, and taking the leathern bag dut of a private clofet, put it info the hands of Rodolph. " There, my Lord (continued the Che- valier) yom will find the fum untouched. This will, in a great meafure, enable you to fulfil your duties as a faithful Neapolitan, a renowned captain, and a zealous, va- liant advocate of your country's unpro¬ voked (Juâïfels.^-As my friend and kinf¬ man, yxni muft accept it."—That fum,, however, may nót exactly complete your noble and laudable defign.—I can add two thoufand crowrls more, without in¬ juring myfelf or family, which, added to the fum promifed from the public purfei will enable you to advance forward on your expedition, equal to the greatnefs and fplendor of your rank and courage. —Hold, my Lord, oné fehtehce more and I hava Uf " " ' —'--------- ■"
{ *8? ) I have done ;—time will develope, on fome future day, the myftery that hangs over the fate of Rinaldo, and his moft íharaefully plundered Caftlç. Heaven does not fuffer murder and facrilege to go for eyer undiscovered. An hair-breadth event, often brings the molt fecret crime * to light j on that allwife and interfering power, therefore, let us both depend. The finger of man may point the arrow ,- of fufpicion againft each other ; but the- finger of God alone is able to point oqjt thofe fecret, foul, and murderous deeds which for a timt have often lain obfcur¬ ed; but which on forne, future, though diftant period, the,omnipotence of Hqai ven, never, fails to bring into lightne/s, to Ararne^ and. puniihment^ ------------------ If .that day arrives (and oh! Gpd.gratøk it one day maj) w¿th¡Q { tit& fcîmiy re-
í *9° ) mains of our lives ; you may iepuy me the laft two thoufand crowns—the other four thoufand came to me by chance ;— happily fent me to affift (in your repre- fentation) our king and country. Of that I make ho account, it is a dedica¬ tion to courage and virtue. The nobleft facrifice a Neapolitan can ever make. But if, on the contrary (and oh ! may hea¬ ven avert the contradi ???) this myftèry extends beyond the fpan of our exiftence, the laft two thoufand may be reftored, by teftament, to myheirefs, my fole heirefs, my dearly adopted child, Lauria." The Count was fo ftruck with this un¬ expected generofity and candour from D'Arcos, that he continued filent for fome time. After a few moments reflec¬ tion, he thus as candidly and honour¬ ably, replied to the chevalier: * " Sir
( I9 1 ) cl Sir Knight, I accept of the fix thou¬ fand crowns, on this fole condition,—Nay, let me be heard,—I have not interrupted you —for, on the honour of a foldier, and as much I efteem my fame and my word, I will not retraft what I am now about to fay—In compenfation of thefe fix thoufand borrowed crowns— " * c Two thoufand, my Lord." " Well then, Sir Chevalier, let it be two thoufand. I will deliver over to you the Caftle of Rinaldo. —Mark me, I do not offer that ?? a pledge ; your acceptance, on the contrary, will only tend to its honour and fecurity. It will prove a mutual advantage; I fliall immediately prepare my regiment for their intended expedition. I have only one now re¬ maining that is dear to me—The Lady Ifabella. With her, I fliall leave only two
( ï£2 ) two young domeftics ¿ the others I íhall take with me to the wars. Thefe folid terms you cannot reject. In friendfliip to us all, immediate compliance is necef¬ fary. A weak woman cannot defend the Caftle, ftrong as it is, in every part -, my wife will, therefore, remain at her palace, in Naples, where flie can refide in calm fecurity." The Chevalier D'Arcos, without the leaft ^hefitation, acceded, to thefe indif¬ putable, and, we may add> honourable terms« It was therefore mutually agreed upon, that in the morning, according to the old feudal cuftom, he ihould take a limited poffeflion of Martorano Caftle.
CHAP.
l· m )
chap. xvi. »Tis wondrous ftrange, the like yet never heard of; Either forbear, Quft prefently the chapel, or refolve you; ¥ For more amazement, if you can behold it. SHAItSPlAftl. doUNT Rodolph and the Chevalier D'Arcos, with their refpective donieftics* fet out for Martorano Caftle by dawn of day· Drofi (by a fpecial beckon from his Lord) accompanied him clofe oit horfe -????, and with whom'he ihåred^ the principal part of his converfation— during which he received the ! "ílríctift* ? injunftions that he fliould be" alWays" at Vol. L K hand t
( »94 ) hand, and ready to receive the flighteft commands. When they had attained the acclivity of the fteep rock which led to the Caf- ftle, they were furprifed, nay, momen* tariíy thunderftruck, to behold the great gate apparen.tly^-ajrnoftindifputably ftiut. " This ? .ftraBge again, moft wonder* ous. ftraoge," obferved Rodolph. « Still ftranger and ftranger, my Lord, (replied D'Arcos)—but let us proceed to the weitem øde of the Caftle -, where, at all »vents, we can gaip admiffion as before»*' 4< Sut who (obferved Rodolph, with his faJbJe bçow knitted to the nethermoft deptk of reflection)—who could have thuscİAfed the'gate ? ?? abfence ? AU tip is ftrange, very ftranse indeed 3—all thçfe c<ttet^ral cireumft^ces, Sir Che¬ valier,
( l 9S ) valïer, muft have proceeded from fomc fecret, reclufe habitants within." ** But where can they be (replied D'Arcos)—--where can they . be con¬ cealed?" <€ Heaven knows," returned Rodolph* " And I believe only knows (anfwered the Chevalier) -, let us, however (con¬ tinued he) await the event of futurity— the myftery is ftrange—at prefent appa¬ rently unfearchable ¿—»let us proceed, however."——When, therefore, they had reached the weftern fide of the Caftle, the fcaling ladder, which through the oblivious anxiety of the moment, had been left depending on the fliattered wall -r-was rnilfing. " Where co^ld that baye goee, and how? (furioufly exclaimed Rudolph;— Moreover (added he) where i* the tar^ ? ? tana
, < «96 ) tana we left floating on the furface of the foffe ?" e< The influx of the river Savuto (re¬ joined D'Arcos, ever anxious to place a thin veil over the intricate countenance of myftery) may have forced it in¬ to her rapid' ftream.—Let us, there¬ fore, ride toward the northern fide of the Caftle 5 and in the mean time (addreíTing himfelf to Martin, who was clofe *at hand)— go you to my Caftella, and bring my other fmall tartana, and another fcaling ladder, which you will find hanging near the armoury, in the outer hall. . When they had rode to the northern part of the Caftle, and reached the mar¬ gin^ of thé river Savuto, they almoft im¬ mediately recognized the fcattered planks x>f the tartana —partly floating on the 2 furface
( 197 ì furface of the ftream, and partly daftiing againft this impenetrable part of the for¬ trefs.— " Thus (faid D'Arcos) the lofs of the tartana, at leaft, is palpably accounted for."— " But how (rejoined the Count} can the other events be accounted for ? The , great gate clofed, &c, &c." . It Was thus they pafled their time in this perplexing argument, till Martin ar- ' rived with another tartana, and a fcaling ladder. , They then afcended the battered wall, as before, not leaving one fingle man behind. The pioneers were immediately ordered once more to force the great gate, whiift Drofi was appointed the temporary captainof his comrades,—* A During this interval, Rodolph faid to the Chevalier, " Let us probeed to the ? 3 chapel,
( 198 ) chapei, and fee if the tapers I laft night extinguiihed are re-illumined." Drofi, alfo, feeing his Lord advance one way, with a view (as he conjeftured) of fettling fome affair of concern and im¬ portance, gave a fignal to his comrades, and putting himfelf at their head, ordered a quick march, and immediately proceed* ed on a different courfe. " My mind mifgives me (obferved D'Arcos, aš they ftretched along the hall) but I think they muft be re-ilhimined, from the (ame light reflecting, as it did before, on thè fteps which lead to the chapel." " It fo appears to me alfo (rejoined the Count) but no matter—let us go on—I am already too. well prepared for my· ftery» and too firmly cafed, for fear or danger,'* They
í m ) They then afcended thé chapel ftairs, and as they unfolded the door, difcovered - - - - ....... all the tapers hrighter and longer than they had found them on the preceding evening* f< By holy Saint Peter (irfftantly ex¬ claimed the Chevalier) this ils a myftery indeed ! 1 !" «J Tum— myftery forfòothi (returned the Count, contemptuoufly) Pfhaw î Thefe muft be fome one concealed in the Caftle. It is human agency that efle&s thefè myfteries, and not a fupernatural one." " Then let us fearch it all over (replied D'Arcos) and endeavour to unravel the ftrangenefs of thefe myfteries/' " We will—we will—(anfwered Ro¬ dolph, unfheathing his fword with un¬ common impetuofity) and damned be be who fitft comes acrofs my vengeance !" K4 On
( 200 * ) . ,, Ofthis, they precipitately defcended the chapel ftairs, and direfted their fteps once more upward, to the apartments of Rinaldo. After they had fearched over all 'the uppers and all the moft intricate parts of the Caftle, they once more defcended, flowly and difappointedly, to the great «ball ;, and from thence proceeded to the refçftory -, as they reached, however, the lower fteps, they diftinguiihed a clamor¬ ous noife from below. They liftened with anxiety and attention—the noife ceafed—they then proceeded with flow fteps, and endeavoured to purfue what they had heard. As they advanced, the noife changed. Inftead of clamour, as heretofore, they diftinguiflied an exchange of the moft dulcive nature. For, here their ears were ftruck with the celeftial founds of
( 20I ) of the heaven-horn lute. They followed the mufic (tuned by the divine arm of Cecilia) but fearce had they afcended a fcore of fteps or fo, when they difcovered a pannel in the wainfcot, h alf open (which ^ never before nor perhaps would now have caught their attention, had it not been for a plain reafon, which will ihortly be evi¬ denced) from whence their ears were again affailed by the moft vociferous ftiouts of apparent humour, and too ap*- parent inebriety. " There are robbers in the Caftle (ex¬ claimed the Chevalier) fome banditti—· and doubtlefs the deftroyers and mur* "derers of Lord Rinaldo's life and his im* menfe properties/* . ? Huili —(replied Rodolph)« they are ?» robbers—no banditti—hark^—cannot you diftinguifli the voice of my old fervane ? 5 Drofi ?
( 102 J Drofi î This avenue leads to fome cellar which he has difcovered, well ftored, I warrant ye, with fome choice lachryma chrifti, of the true falerman.-Lift—it is bis voice—I know it full well, and we will purfue it—" Scarce, however, had they defcended a narrow flight of fteep winding ftairs, when they were irrefiftibly ftopt by a re¬ petition of the harmonious lute - ..... The founds, fo heavenly and attractive, perched them immediately on the ftair— which they were preparing to quit. " What harmony like this—(obferved the Chevalier) can lay concealed within the Caftle-walls ? " If the exquifite founds really fpring from fome fecret fource, and that within the Caftle-walls, they muft be diligently fearched after—that fome inhabitant» ? however,
í *<>? J ho\v%ver, clandeftínely abides here, there cannot remain the fhadow of a doubt. The chapel muft be an inxUfpufc- able proof of this ; and the foft mufic thai has faftened on our ears confirms my fuf¬ picions. Let us defcend, therefore, Siir Chevalier, and fatisfy thefe doubtsl* Rodolph and his companion them haftened to the cellar, down a flight of about a hundred fteps, whete iat Drofi and all his comrades, with feveral flag*· gons of Wine before them, and all hften> ing attentively, moft, however, with great agitation, at the unexpected fotoda of thifc exquifite harmony. When they had all fou 1 , må btéôtné uncovered, Rodolph queftioned Droit how he came there, after the particular injunctions he had laid upon him tò fee always prepared, and near his perfòn t * ? 6 Drofi
( 204 ) 4 Drofi replied, " That he really thought his Lord and the Chevalier were about to tranfacT; fome bufinefs of importance before the latter took poffeflion of the Caftle. Recollecìing, therefore, that this cellar was, formerly ftored with the choiceft wines of Italy, I thought that we might fpend a few leifure minutes here more pleafantly than wandering about the rampart«—Some good-natured hofpitabie fouls, it feems,,were of the fame opi¬ nion ; for they have not only provided us with fome good wine, as your Lordili tp may fee, but have alfo been entertaining us with the choiceft mufic, by way of accompaniment to oitr excellent .beve¬ rage·" it , ** How came you to know the paffage to this cellar—or that fuch a cellar exift¬ cd ? thye^ Caftle i'* Why,
( 20 5 ) " Why, if youxLordíhip recolleQs^hen you was on a vifit fome years ago to the late prince Rinaldo, he held a jubilee for feveral days in this Caflle. I was not backward to promote the fport, whiift the lachryma-chrifti was circulated fo briikly about. One night, however (though I cannot well account for fuch a thing hap¬ pening) I chanced, by fome ftrange fatality or another, to imbibe more than I could conveniently carry, and fell faft afleep in one corner of the refectory. When I awoke, however, I rofe and endeavoured to grope my way to the ftairs ; but in creeping forward, I ftumbled againft thç wainfcot, and it inftantly gave way—Down I rolled as inftantly from the top of thofe high flight of fteps you have juft defcend¬ ed. I fliall never forget it, for I thought as I pitched over and over like a wine calk,
( ??? } éaflt, Tnever fliouM have gòt tô the bot¬ tom $f my deftination. tíere, however, I arrived at laft, covered with bruifes from head to foot ; and what is more ex¬ traordinary, fcbérer than ever I was in my life. When I got up, and looked about me, 1 began to guefs, from the number of flagons that furrounded me, my misfortune was not fo great and af¬ flicting as I might have expeÔed. Feel¬ ing my fpirits, therefore, exhaufted with the violence of my fall, I uncorked one of the flagons, and foon afterwards found myfelf fo far recovered, that I could afcend with tolerable eafe and pleafure to myfelf. That I might not, however, forget thé fpot where I had fo nearly endangered my life and my Hmbs-(and Which I might very eafily have done from the clofenefs of the aperture of the wainfcot, and its being
( so; ì being fo apparently, to the eye of a ftranger, connected with each other) that I took out my fword, and with its point marked a fmall (d) on the other fide of the door/' < έ It was with the greateft impatience that Rodolph heard Drofi through his cu-^ rious drunken adventure ; and which, though highly probable, from his ftrange conduft and difpofition, was fomewhat of a marvellous tendency. " Well, fir (faid the Count) as you have accounted for one myftery, know you aught of this mufic ?" cc Not a fyllable, my Lord.—I never heard any mufic here before, though I vifited this cellar many a time and oft, after the roll I had down thé fteps, but the favourite mufic indeed of uncorking the flagons," Rodolph
( ??? ) , Rodolph, on this, ordered them all to afcend, and attend hini in the hall, till he followed. Thf Chevalier and him then fearched all over the cellar, to endeavour if they could difcover any farther fecret progrefs—but not the flighteft profpeft of one was to be found—After this fearch^—the mufic refumed its plaintive— dulcive founds ;—it was, however, for a few moments only, and feemed fuddenly to break off, as though haftened away by fome unexpected fummons.— The Count's afpeft changed at every note—his lips trembled, and a cold fweat hung ihivering over his whole frame. " Be not thus agitated, my Lord (ex¬ claimed D'Arcos, fenfibly pierced with the harralfed fituation of his kinfman)— perhaps it is only fome love-fick ihep¬ herd, who, in thefe plaintive ftrains, re¬ cords
( 2t09 ) cords in celeftial metódy, the cruelties oí ? fome faithlefs Ihepherdefs/'— * ¿ " It may be fo, Sir Chevalier, but I think—no matter—thefe ftrains are not unfamiliar to my—Indeed-*-I am wander¬ ing—Let us afcend—I am anxious to put this Caftle into your immediate pof* feflion.—I am anxious alfo to leave it for the prefent—Time may, and, no doubt, will, unravel all thefe ftrange myfterie·— In the mean while, my country and its wrongs quickly call for my affiftance.— At my return, all, perhaps, will be elu¬ cidated—I will lead the way—follow mc—noble—generous—virtuous Cheva- valier." — T|> conclude, therefore, the eventful myfteries of the day—Rinaldo's Caflle was taken poffeflion of by D'Arcos, in prefence of both their houfeholds, and early
( 2ÎO j early ?? tòt moirnirig) Rodolph fet out for Naples, matemg every prudent en¬ quiry, às before, on his way, relative to Bernardino and Goddard, but in vain, alfe, M before. When the Count returned to his pa¬ lace, he deceived Lady Ifabella with great rnarks of itifeftion ; when flie quef- tiohed him> however, about the partie u- teri of hh yrønty ; , be bntfly related thofe circumftances which did not To dì- reftîy concern himfelf.^-^In three weeks after, Rodolph completed his full regi- melit of cavalry, and, by the end of the month, joined the viceroy, at the head of fixty thoufand chofen men at arms.
C H A P.
( 4» ?
CHAP. XVII. ■ '■ ■ '■ ———I talk of dreams Which are the children of an idle brain, Begot of nothing but vain phantafy, Which is as thin of fubftance as the air, And more inconflant than the wind; who woes Even now the frozen bofom of the North, And being anger'd puffi away from thence, Turning his face to the dew-dropping South., 8?????????. ¿jLFTÈR ^little better than four year* abfence, Rodolph returned from the Ot¬ toman wars, with only fifteen followers* however, out of his whole retinue. The Count had not only acquired great glory and reputation, in this four years' war, but alfo confiderable wealths
( ¿12 ) He had been fortunate enough, thrice to furprize a party of the Turks, and to take from them immenfe booties —Thefe fkirmifhes, however, coft him dear, for in the attacks he loft the moft part of his brave troop». Thus crowned with laurels and with riches, Rodolph returned fatisfied and 'elated home. The exploits he had done for hie, country, and the fervices he had rendered the Chriftian caufe, by his zeal and valour, was a fufficient atonement (as he wrongly, though fuperftitioufly conceived) for the fuppofed facriligieus murder of His voung kinfman. Two dreadful and eventful circumftances, how¬ ever, which had overtaken him in his warlike > career, creeped continually athwart his imagination, and ftruck him with fuch frequent pungent horrors, as feemed
( 213 ) feemed tefolved to mar the fulfilment öf his future hopes of peace and happi¬ nefs. , The Count having difpatched a mef- fenger onward to Naples, to announce his return, he was met in the hall by Lady Ifabella, and her domeftics Carlo and Sylvia, with whom ihe had been fe¬ cluded from the world, fince her Lord's departure. Rodolph when he firft ap¬ proached them, was grieved and fur¬ prized.—Both the Countefs and her two graceful young attendants, were clad in deep mourning ;—their countenances correfponded with the gloominefs of their habits.—That of Ifabella, which till of late years had never loft its health and animation, was now changed to palenefs and dejection; whiift, on the other hand, thofe of Carlo and his fair companion,
f *? ) companion, that had till lately affo íhonc with youth and gaiety, were now altered into all the concern and thoughtfulnefs that accompany the furrowed cheek of good old age. The Countefs having left her page and Sylvia to diffufe every refrefliment and accommodation atnong her J-ord's retinue, ftie 1?? him on by the fond hand of conjugal affeÔbn to hi& own apartment, where ihe bad conftantly re- fided during his abfeaee—Rodolph re¬ turned not a word—and even dared to look—fo flaibing is the pure flame of in¬ nocence to the contrafted eye of guilt— Still—a mournful· and paternal folitude engrofled his agitated mini—His daugh¬ ter, Saata-Matia* came fearfully—fright¬ fully acrofs hU tottured fufpended imagi- røtfcn—thi* thought—this bitter though* wotpg ???? his hearts core,
f **5 ) Carlo and Sylvi*, in the mean timt, provided tàeir Lords retinue with an ac¬ ceptable abundance of viands, arid feveral ftoups of wine.—Having fet thofe already arrived down to tfee firft table, the page was preparing afiother, when his uncle, Drofi (who had been one of the brave and fortunate furvivors ofthis fanguinaijr bout) obferving his attention and alacrity, called out, and aiked byn, what he was preparing next ? ** There will be a fuf- ficiency, my boy (faid the vetran) for us, where we are."·*— € * What, uncle (returned Carlo) are not your brother-foldiers ou their way htther ? Muft I not therefore provide for thofe brave fellows alfo l* ff ??? boy (replied the other) all Aat is left of us are now here.** Droit, oil this, perceiving furprife and horror mak îng their
( aio ? their^ayintö the ¿outitenancë òf hiš ne¬ phew^ requefted hini to allay his ¿uriofity aiid ferrow; till théý had refreíhéd them¬ felves frornrôheir fatigue and hunger, with the excellent yenifön and choice lachry- ma-chrifti,that he had (pread before them, —/'- Do not let us embitter the prefent moments (íaid the hearty Neapolitan) by refleÖing on the misfortunes and dangers of thole that are pafled»" The obedient page íaid no more. He retired to a remote corner r of the hall. The melancholy idea of fo many brave fellows being fwept away from his Lord's retinue gave him anguiih unutterable— My forebodings (thought he to himfelf) told me as much.-^-My prophetic dreams have ww come too fatally true.~lhe bloody fword that has ib often appeared uniheathed,$o mein thelilent hourof fleep, ■■■*!<Υ*{* ··■ ■ :■ ' Will
( *2i7 ) will now, I hope, find repofe in its peace¬ ful fcabbard. Carlo had not only ever been the fa¬ voured page of the Countefs and her ba* niihed daughter, but was loved indifcri- minately by the whole houfehold, for his good nature, humour, and affability. > His attention, however, was peculiarly attach¬ ed to Sylvia, between whom a mutual friendihip, now mellowed into love, had fubfifted for years, in both their bofonis. His Lord, indeed, had never diftinguifhed him by any particular marks of kindnefs, for the rough nature of the foldier over¬ looked the 'fiender abilities of the page. Carlo; neverthelefs, was of a brave difpo* fition, and honeft withal, as*aà Hdßeuter t handfome in perfon, and poffeffed of a manner and addrefs that diftinguiihed him Voi. L L from
( ai« ) from the ordinary file of pages. Not¬ withftanding, however, thefe fhining good qualities, his mind was ftrongly tinflured with the fuperftition of the times.—His foul was feared when any uncommon event took place, and his intelleftual fa¬ culties were always obfcured with the idea of beings once departed from this world, capable of optionally returning to it again, Thefe failings, which were the cha- raäeriftics ,neverthelefs, of thofe ignorant times, had tbeir feeds from4he principles inftilled into his mind when very young by his mother, who had attained fuch a name all through the fouth of Italy, by the gift of foretelling, that íhe at laft became a reputed witch> and was obliged to fly from her cottage, when Carlo was only fourteen years of age. On her flight, his uncle,
( 219 ) uncle, Drofi, got him into the fervice of Lord Rodolph, where, under his inftruc- tions, he became by degrees to lofe fight of thefe unnatural fancies· This difpofw tion being thus corrected, and being na¬ turally gay and full of good humour, he was foon remarked by the Countefs and Santa-Maria, who took great pains to im¬ prove his mind, and regulate his mîfguid- ed underftanding. When thofe fudden calamities had fprung upon the houfe of Rodolph, and in their malice had fwept away the lovelieft and moft amiable of all its proud branches, his earlier notions be* gan to revive. His fuperftition increafed as freíh misfortunes occurred, and he be¬ gan to revive thofe defperate ideas of foreknowledge, and the whole train of fa¬ talities that miflead, corrupt, and degene¬ rate the human mind. L ? Carlo
( U20 ) Carlo Was particularly impreffed with the fatality of dreams, . The fickle jtenfioners of Morpheus' train. Milton. The gloom that had prevailed in the palace fince the pregnancy of his banifhed miftrefs -, the dejection of his lady, and the ill fuccefs that had attended him in the embaffies ilie had employed him in, to gain fome knowledge of her daughter, İn which he had confulted every human creature who had the leaft appearance of being a witch or a magician, that came in his way, gave his imagination the moft melancholy turn. Thoughts, therefore, that are ftrongly inculcated on our mind when awake, though bearing the moft" fancied complexion in a gr« ater or lefs degree, appear as lively realities in our nightly dreams. The idea or perfon who are
( 221 ) are deareft to us, or ever have been fo, often accompany or revifit us in the wild delufions of romantic fleep. Some bor- dering on the excefs of wildnefs,and fome keeping within the ordinary limits of do¬ meftic occurrences. Such was the influence of the more hor¬ rible defcription on the mind of Carlo, and which oh refleftion of forne paft difaftrous vifions made him utter the above appa- rently accomplifhed prophecy. 4
L 3 CHAP.
( 222 )
chap: xviil ■—- ? '■ " ■ ■ ■ " Some ftrange commotion Is in his brain ; he bites his lip and ftarts, Stops on a fudden, looks on the ground, Then bys his finger on his temple j ftrai^ht Sj rings out into faft gait, then ftops again, Strikes his breaft hard j—————— >'■ .......... ■■■ -«■— ....... ■" ■ « ........... It mzy well be r There's a mutiny ill's mind. ØBAKSriAKS» VV HEN the Count and Countefs were feated, the former, after a long paufe, and with an agitated voice, 'aiked his Lady, for what unhappy caufe ihe ap¬ peared before him in thofe difmal weeds ? ....."Do not—Oh ! do not keep me in fufpenfe ------ Say—is our daughter dead ï —
( ?%? ) dead ?— Oh ! fpeak it ....... Are San¬ ta-Maria's woes and fliame buried at laft in the filent duft ?"— " I fear, my Lord (replied Ifabella) that you have foreboded but too true;— for—when you had departed for the wars, I caufed the moft diligent fearch to be made after her deftiny and abode* From the fetting in of fpring, to the 4 fall of autumn, Carlo yearly travelled far and near, to feek our daughter—but in vain.—He-left no fecret or religious place without apt defcription and diligent en¬ quiry .—Her difguife, when flie departed hence ------ ." "What difguife?" eagerly exclaimed the Count. " The difguife, my Lord of a pilgrim, which /provided her with, on the morn¬ ing of her flight from hence." L 4 «It
( 224 ) " It is even as I then furmifed.—For what caufe, Ifabella, did you thus con¬ nive to increafe the diflionowr of our 4 houfe? for Santa-Maria's fudden depar¬ ture ferved more fully to confirm her guilt and fliame." (t This fame caufe arofe, dear my Lord, from the affeñion and follicitude of a mother—irrefiftible temptation !—I aflift¬ ed Santa-Maria in her efcape, to fave her from the fearful and impending wrath of aniiritated and much inflamed father." " Indeed !—How, my Lady, did you firft reduce thefe lignais of my juft rage, to a certainty of fucceeding punifli¬ ment ?" « Oh ! pardon me, Rodolph (replied Ifabella, in accents of fear, anguiih, and defpair) forgive a weak woman's curiofi¬ ty—but— Oh i do not appear thus alarm¬ ed
( *?$ ) ed and agitated.—But------------------- ■— I bent my fteps towards your clofei, when you was in clofe conference with Bernar¬ dine and Goddard ---------------and there 1 heard----------- ." " What ! (furioufly exclaimed , the' Count, ftarting from his feat) by holy St. Mark, anfwer me quick, or----------." " Thofe fellows (coolly replied Ifa¬ bella) making the moft facrilegious ap¬ peals to heaven and the faints above— to----------- ." " Diftraaion!— hafte— to what r" link¬ ing his fore-head, and fpringing towards the Countefs. " To facrifice our beauteous Santa- Maria, to your vengeance and honour." At this laft unexpecìed anfwer, Ro¬ dolph immediately recovered himfelf— the mighty conflift in his breaft, was al- L 5 together
( ??? ) together as fuddenly appeafed as it had been raifed—He divined other more far¬ tai difcoveries—he now faw his error, and, to wipe away the fufpicions that his hafty temper might excite, he refum¬ ed his feat, and, with unufual gentlenefs, foftly rebuked his Lady's curiofity and want of confidence, in effefting Santa- Maria's efcape, without his knowledge. Ifabella, on this, equally becalmed and reftored, went to her clofet, and, taking out a paquet, delivered it unopened to the Count—" There, my Lord (obferved flie, with an air of fatisfaftion) though my curiofity might lead me beyond my duty, when a daughter's happinefs and life were at ftake, ftill I have not prefum- cd to fearch into your private concerns.— That paquet was fent fix months after your departure to the wars 5 it comes from
( Ä27 ) from the Chevalier D'Arcos, and con¬ tains, I fufpeft, matters of the molt fe¬ rious import " ; — Rodolph anxioufly broke open the pa¬ quet, and read to himfelf as thus : w To the Noble Count Rodolph. " I have been compelled, through the fears and fuperftition of my niece, and my domeftics, to abandon your caftle, after a ftiort, though painful refidence of four months. The caufes were briefly thus—An almoft perpetual, gloomy, and oftentimes horrible noifes, craflies, and groans, have been diftincily heard from all parts of the Caftle, and, notwithftanding all my rc- fearches to difcover the motives, and my endeavours, likewife, to calm and remove the continual apprehenfions of my family L ? and:
( tii ) and retimie, my efforts have altogether been in vain-—I have, therefore, once more, retired to my old manfion, there to enjoy thofe fecure and domeftic com¬ forts, which now muft be the fupports of my declining years. " ????. « D'Arcos." The Count had fearce finilhed read¬ ing the paquet, when Ifabella gave a fudden and violent ihriek—Rodolph, alarmed—with unufual fear and anxiety, enquired the caufe.—" That ring, my Lord—(faintly exclaimed the Countefs, pointing to-his finger)—that ring—Oh! whence, and how came you by that ring?--- Rodolph, through greatly aftoniflied, laconically obferved as thus :—- " You
( 2*9 ) " You know, my Lady-wife, I hate your long tales and babbling difcourfes ; but, if I muft fatisfy your curiofity, know then, that I partly owe this ring to the implacable rancour of my old friend, Contarmi —I*or, wandering on a hot fum- mer's day (continued Rodolph) a few miles from the camp, I was befet by three men, one of whom I foon knew to be my bloody kinfman ; for, on the firft attack* I cleft his helmet in twain.—Unable, how¬ ever, long to ftand againft numbers, I fell, over-powered and~covered with wounds. When returning fenfe came to my fuc- cour, I found myfelf couched in my own tent, furrounded by Drofi and fome others of my retinue. When the former difco¬ vered that I was capable of liftening to reafon, he informed me—that he and fome more of my choiceft domeftics being alarmed
( 2JO J alarmed at my long and uncommon ab¬ fence, went out in fearch of me, and af¬ ter fome time, and with much difficulty, found me ftretched on a bank in a plea¬ fant meadow, with an old ihepherd fit¬ ting by my fide. Upon his queftioning the aged ruftic, it appeared, that my wounds ihad been carefully healed and^ bound up by a poor pilgrim (poor, it feems, however, irr garb alone) who hap¬ pened to pafs by foon after I fell. By their joint endeavours, he added, that I was conveyed to the bank where Drofi had found me ; and that after this fécond Samaritan had pronounced me out of dan¬ ger, he had given him a piece of gold to. watch over me till I could be conveyed to the camp.—By St. Peter (obferved the. Count abruptly here) this fame tale-telling outdoes my breathing !" « Then
( fcJ 1 ) " Then to the ring, my good Lord (exclaimed Ifabella impatiently) quick—. the ring I befeech you—fay aught of the ring. " This ring difturbs you marvelloufly, my Lady-wife—what myftery hangs on this fame ring ?— 1 will be anfwered firft, or not reply at all." " Indeed, then know, my Lord, that that fame ring, was once the pledge of a parent's love.—That it was bequeathed by my departed Sire, on his dying couch» to* me, with this pious injunction", never to beftow it upon an objeft who did not deferve the wearing of it.—I obeyed this laft requeft, and refigned it to an ob¬ ject that his happy fpirit could not but approve of—Yes, for it was on the noble Lord Rinaldo that I beftowed it, juft on the eve of his marriage with your ba¬ niíhéd
( 2,3* ) niihed child, Santa-Maria." ? At this iaff exprefllon, the Countefs relieved the anxiety of her feelings by a violenc flood cf tears. Rodolph, on the other hand, wasitìruck with far different fenfations. His pre¬ fent aftonifliment »at firft outweighed all that he had experienced before on fimilar wonderful occafions. He took the hold, however, of Ifabella's grief, to refleft for a few moments. He thereon difcovered that he had'been led into unfoldierlike babblings—The ring certainly and une¬ quivocally denoted fome frefti myftery— that he could become pofteifed of it from Rinaldo, was almoft impoffible.— Rings might pafe,like other baubles, from hand 'to hand, from perfon to perfon.—if the Prince ftill exiftcd, it was hardly to be fuppofed (notwithftanding the pacific tendency
( 43 ) tendency of his nature) that he would prefer the wandering life of an alms-aik- ing vagrant pilgrim, to that of being the lordly holder of Rinaldo Caftle.—It could not be—fuch idle fancies, therefore (be¬ thought Rodolph) were only fit to raife the fears, and fix the fufpicions of a ro¬ mantic woman, and not thofe of an old weather -????? foldier. The Count was ever a man of brief difcourfe. When he related the circum¬ ftance oìf nis being attacked by Conta¬ rmi, he clothed it in as few words as poffible 5—in fact/ he thought it of fo little confequence to any one but him¬ felf, that he never intended mentioning it all, particularly ta the Lady Ifabella.— The fubject probably was to reft with himfelf, and* himfelf only. He had al- ** ready
i *34 ) r^adý planned his dèfigns of revenge^ and as he had no opportunity of accom- plifliing them" with fafety and iecrecy abroad, he had delayed the matter till he could effeei his defigris at home. An¬ other fubje£t of female enquiry was alfo at hand—the Chevalier's paquet. Re¬ folved, howe ver, that this matter, at leaft, ihould proceed no farther, he fuddenly thruft it into a fire, and on the Countefs expreffing the moft ardent curiofity to be acquainted with the contents—Rodolph briefly replied—" That they moftly tal¬ lied with the myfteries of her extra¬ ordinary fing, and that, both alike, were fubjefts fit only for the handling of beardlefs youths, and Credulous young girls." Ttie Lady Iiahella finding all entreaty and
■■'.■■■.. i-m ? and remonftrance in vain, patiently fub¬ mit ted to her Lord's will, and retired, opprefíed with all the anxiety and fur¬ mife that a inind like herV was fo ca» pable of feeling.
CHAR
t *3? )
CHAP. XIX. -An honeft taîe fpeeds beft, being plainly told. SHAKSPEARE. JlLaRLY in the morning, after Ro¬ dolph had gone to the Viceroy's palace, the Countefs fent for Carlo, and making him ftand near her chair, queftioned him concerning his good uncle, Drofi. The page on this aflumed a moft woeful countenance, and ihaking his head, dole¬ fully exclaimed— i( Strange things, my Lady, have happened fince his departure from this fpot." Ifabella's curiofity being raifed to its utmoft pitch, at thefe ill-boding ihakes of the
( 2 37 ) the head, and ambiguous expreffions, re¬ queued Carlo to inform her of all thofe ftrange things that he faid had happened; The page, on this requeft, which he was proud to receive^ and ftill prouder to obey, commenced a long exordium, with as long a ft ring of the dreams and prophecies, that he had made upon each difmal occurrence, that had afterwards but too truly and too fatally (he faid) taken place.—Such as chargers throwing their riders—armies, attacking r armies with red-hot fwords and flaming ihields. •—Chiefs hurling burning mountains at each other's heads.—Soldiers throwing women and children h<uT a mile up into the air, and then catching jltem upoa their fpears as they defcended, . Carlo, after having related his full of thefe horrible dreams, and after recapitu-
( 2' 3 8 ) lating the liumberlefs battles that his uncle had been engaged in, and the loffes they had fuftainëd, he at length reached the circumftance of the Count's being attacked by that young venomous cur (as he faid) Philip Contarini. This he related to the fame effeft as his Lord had done before, but in a ftyle infinitely more co¬ pious and fublime. ifabella, fatigued at laft with his pro¬ lixity, interrupted him, by aíking if he had been told any thing about the ring ? —" Yes (returned Carlo) my uncle men¬ tioned a great deal about a ring -, but my Lord, I fuppofe has related all before."— " He has (replied the Countefs, with great anxiety) but I am ever fond, Carlo, of liftening to your difcourfe, and therefore, can cheerfully endure it repeated once more/'
( *39 ) more." The page, flattered by this dif- tin£tion, this proceeded : u The Count, my Lady, took no notice of the ring, till Drofi was buckling on his armour, when faftening the gauntletè on his hand, he obferved this ring. My Lord was greatly furprized, but recol¬ lecting awhile how it could come there, he obferved to my Uncle, that the good pilgrim, no doubt, who paid the peafant to watch over my wounds, placed this rich valuable on my finger, to enfure my „ farther fafety and protection." Here Ifabella, raifing her hands and eyes to Heaven, filently offered up a fervent ejacu¬ lation to the great ruler thereof, to blefs and preferve the charitable donor.—" The ftrange incident, however, that after¬ wards followed (continued Carlo) flruck me far more forcibly -, for when the Count
{ 240 ) halted at an inn in Tufcany, on his jour¬ ney .homewards, Drofi faw my Lady Santa-Maria!!!"------ " Sanra T Maria, did you fay (exclaim¬ ed the thunderftruck Countefs) Oh! God—fay it once more—was it my child—my Santa-Maria ?—Repeat the glad founds again—I conjure you, Carlo. —Moft merciful Creator!—My Santa- Maria, my long loft daughter, then is found." " Pardon me, kindeft Lady (anfwered /the page, interrupting his joy-diftrafted Lady) for having thus raifed your expec¬ tations to a height I did not intend.—Be patient, hear me out----- Oh I if you weep and look thus, I cannot proceed,—It was not- Santa-Maria in perfon, but her pic¬ ture he faw,hung up againft a wall; and fo gr,eat was the refemblance, that Drofi ? thought
Jr ?^
? ? 1 ) thought he faw his young Lady in reality. He immediately pointed the picture out to my Lord.—The Count Rodolph ftart¬ ed from the objeft—appeared amazed beyond conception ; and then after a paufe of fome moments, concealed his agitated countenance under the ikirts of his mantle· After my Lord Had recover- •cd from this fever of aftonifliment, he fummoned the hoft to his prefentce, and anxioufly queftioned him how he came by that pifture r —The man as briefly re¬ plied, that it was painted by a young pilgrim, who had been overtaken by fick¬ nefs in his houfe, about three years or nearly that ago· That when he had re¬ covered from the firft fliock, he had a- mufed himfelf (when not engaged in re¬ lieving poor, worn-out, exhaufted, indi¬ gent travellers) with drawing that pier
( ?* ) ture, and, by St. Marco, a moft beautiful divine pifture it is ;—·■more like an angel, than a mortal. To make ihort, how*» ever, of the ftory (concluded the hoft) When this Chriftian pilgrim departed hence, he gave me five pieces of gokt» and promifed me as many more, if I would preferve it, till he returned. The Count on this appeared fetisfied, though my uncle informs me, that this difcovery Tendered him melancholy, thoughtful, and unfociable, the remainder of his journey." Carlo had fcarcely concluded his nar> rative, when Ifabella heard the folding gates open, on this flie immediately dî£- mifled him frorti her prefonce, with in*· junftkms of fecrecy. iThe page promis¬ ed acquiefenee, and then as ibón haf» . tened to Sylvia, to lay the whok bufi*» * ' - éefs
( ?$ ) nefs before her ; and afterwards to fub¬ mit a few reflections he had made on the fubjeft, for her opinion. When the Count entered the apart¬ ment, he paid no attention whatever to the emotions of his wife, which were ftrongly vifible, both in her countenance and manner, but proceeded without any ceremony to inform her, that he ihould iet off for his caftle in the fouth, on the day after the morrow; and therefore re¬ quefted her to be prepared for the jour¬ ney, together with all the valuable mo¬ veables (lie moft efteemed, and conceived moft neceffary for their future fplendour » and accomodation. Intending (as Ro¬ dolph faid) to fpend the remainder of his days at the Caflle. Ma CHAR
( *44 í
CHAP. XX. faft by the road her ever open door Oblig'd the wealthy, and relieved the poor. POP*. VyNthe appointed day, Rodolph and Ifa- * bella, with their retinue and men at arms, fet out from Naples, leaving only three domeftics in the palace, and proceeded on their journey to the more fouthern part of Italy. The Count and all his followers were mounted 'on horfeback. Part of whom rode forward, whiift the reft (among whom were Drofi and Carlo) attended the
í 45 ) the calaíh in which were the Counted and Sylvia. tr The advanced party had received or¬ ders to halt about twilight at the moft convenient place of rendezvous they could find, and prepare therein every thing fuitable for the reception of the Count and Countefs. Drofi and Carlo endea¬ voured to perfuade their Lord to ftop for that night at Salerno, where, they faid, moft excellent accommodations were to be found. As the van of his retinue, however, had paífed through that place fome time before, Rodolph refifted their applications, much to the diílatisfaftion of Drofi, who affirmed that there was fome of the beft lachryma-chrifti in Salerno as ever was drunk — Twilight, however, approached before any tidings could be heard or feen of the Mi advanced
( ?? ) advanced party, and it was completely dark before one of the horfemen returned to meet the calaih. On approaching the Count, he informed him, that he and his party had made towards an inn, which they 4 had formerly known to be a place of excellent cheer, and a conftant rendez¬ vous for travellers paffing to and fro from Naples to Meflina. On their prefent ar¬ rival thither, however, not a „foul was to ,be feen, ??? bed, chair, or any other con- yenience to be found, though, ou fearch* ing the place, they had fortunately found their way to the cellars, which, ashappily,. feemed well ftored with wine* Gabot, in the ???? time,, my Lord,,wa« ftill more fuccefsfully employed ? for at a fmall dit tance from the inn, he had difcovered a neat convenient cottage. The tenants are only an old womaa aad her fon, who are now
( m ) now bufily preparing themfelves io receive your Lordíbip, and my Lady the Coun¬ tefs, This latter information was highly ac-r ceptable to all parties, particularly to Carlo "and Sylvia. The former having long ago inftilled his fuperftitious doc¬ trines into the mind .of his fair fweetbemt. —Both of them trembled every limb, when they firft heard the horfcman'š bar¬ ren and difconfolate relation of the defert¬ ed inn. The latter fellow having conducted the qalafli to the cottage, the Countefs and Sylvia alighted. Rodolph, m the mean time, diftinguiihing the bleating of fteep at forae little diftance, aíked the funic to whom they belonged ? " To us, my Lord* (replied Thomijiafo) and an you wmi % fine fat wether for our noble rømue, I Μ φ will
( ?* ) will get them one anon, ¿ut now I be¬ think myfelf of it, we have got one, in our yard, which was killed laftThurfday, that will anfwer better both in the cooking and the eati?g. ,, The Count accepted this hofpitabie offer of the honeft ruftic, on condition, however, of paying for the fame j and on its being produced, it was delivered over to Drofi and the horfeman, who immediately fet off with it to thefr companions, at the deferted inn. This un¬ expected acquifition, together with the wine, amply atoned for the, badnefs of their lodgings. Fuel was eafily and in¬ ftantly provided—down, therefore, went the flieep.to roaft, and in a few hours af* terwards they commenced their Ihbftan- iial repaft, not forgetting to pay due ho¬ nours to the purpureal regalia of the eel* br. Hunger was the grand fauce they bad;
( 49 ) had to their mutton, and thirft afforded art additional zeit to the wine. Happy in their prefent enjoyments, they all fet tO like princes—but, alas !— misfortunes and difappointments will often obtrude thenv- felvés in a cellar as well as a palace.-*-* Thus unluckily it fell out whh Drõfi and his comrades—but more of this anon— for it would be cruel, as yet, to difturb thefe honeft fellows at the very onfet of their hilarity. The Count and Cøuntefs being feated,, Carlo and Sylvia aflifted the peafants in preparing their fupper, which confifted of a nice antipafto—two or three fmall diihei of different ragoos—an excellent mineftra —with fome boiled fnails, and a diih of fried frogs. Ifabella was greatly furprifed at tl\e unexpected good accommodation they had raet with, and the neatoefs*o£ M 5 ewy
( ?& ì every thing around them—particularly at the fight of filver fpoons and platters, which were prepared for their hofpitabie meal—an unufual luxury in thofe oppref» live days among people fo apparently humble.—Her furprife excited her curio¬ fity—She enquired, therefore, of the old woman to what good fortune ihe ftood indebted for her prefent comforts and .bappmefs?- · " Ah* my Lady (replied the aged Bianca) we owe all that you fee here to charitable and benevolent ftranger. 1 '— She was going to proceed, when Ro¬ dolph fofefeerøg a long ftory on the point of takrøg place, røtamipted her, by aik~ ¡ng, " the caufe of that inn, which ftood hard by, being fo fuddenly and unac¬ countably deferted ï" . * About four years ago, ? Lord, or fomewhat
( ?* ) fomewhat approaching thereunto (an¬ fwered Bianca) our hoft, Hurtado, who was a right good, valiant, and religious foul withal, took it into his honeft heart to join his countrymen in the late Turkiíh war». On the eve of his departure, he fold off all his valuables and plate (for many an Italian Prince would fojourn at good Hurtado's houfe) to purchafe him¬ felf and a few of his neareft kinfmen, the neceffary equipments for their diftanr journey. For Hurtado, my Lord, was a man of mettle, and would go only as a vo¬ lunteer i fuch as you now fee before you,^ was once his property, and pUrebâfed of him by a ftranger, who lodged uftder ?? humble roof—Alack! is me, for, I fhall never forget the day, when—it was, í thinks fom years and odd, fomc next- Shrove-tide eve—aye—aye—it was even M 6 fo,
( ?* ) lo, when -------- " The fupper being at th& critical moment ferved upon the table by Carlo and the ruftic, poor Bianca was once more interrupted in the thread of her fe cond ftory.—The Count and Countefs, however, were amply recompeníed for the old woman's procraftmated hiftory by the plaintive notes of a fweet-chirping night¬ ingale, who, it feems, had long courted and claimed a welcome ihelter in fome jfhady recefs of thifr hofpitabie little cot¬ tage, Where woodbines clufler round the door, Where (hells and roofs o'erlay the floor, And on whofe top an hawthorn blows, Amid whofe thickly woven boughs Some nightingale ftili builds her neft. J. WA*TO*.
CHAP·
í ?% )
CHAP. XXI. Admirable Ì How this grace Speaks- his own ftanding I What a mental power This eye (hoots forth I How big imagination Moves in his lip f To the dumbnefs of the geftuw One might interpret. I'll fay of it, It tutors nature: artificial ftrtfe Live» in thefe loaches, livelier than Ufe* "■-■- T hat fhe is living Were it but told you» ihould be hooted at Like an $ld tab, but it appears ihe lives Though ?? fpeak* not—mark a little while. SHAJUfXAU* JL HE Count and Countefs now began their meal with pleaíure and appetite.— Rodolph ihortly called to the page for fome wine, for Thommafo bad alfo dif¬ covered
( ^54¿ ) covered the fecret ot the cellar, and had laid in a little ftock therefore for Bianca and himfelf—Carlo's attention, however, was too much eftgrofied fô attend to the fummons. The Count repeated the or¬ der—Carlo walked to and fro without heeding this fécond t call. —Rodolph turn^ $4 angrily round to learn the caufe of his unaccuftomed inattention. The page on this retreated fome paces from the wall, and with great emotion exclaimed ------ " Yes-—yes-—it is*—it is—it muft— it muft be him !"—The Count and Coun¬ tefs, both furprifed atiihis wild and-fud- dèïï exclamation, demanded of Carlo, what he meant ?~The page immediately f pointed r to the wa\!,*and difcovered to· .their vieyv.the— r —Picture* of Prince Ri¬ naldo ------ * » \ \ I ^lall, notr^X cannot attempt to de- /cr^e^the emotions of either at this ^nexge^ed
b m ? unexpeflted adventure- ???? ?????- cíb and not the pen, wcnJdKere íucçeêcT the beft*— The Tuicanportrait now Storied- with redoubled vigour on their aftpniibed; perturbed imaginations : aStuated hy the iame feelings¿ they arpie from their, feats,, and viewed the refemblance with mutual furprife— —The ancient hoftefs, ftruck with;the rapidity of their alarms, befeeched them to conclude their meal, and ihe would afterwards rçveal the caufe of their preferit— fudden aftonUliment."-» " Ah! me (continued Bianca with a long flgb) I a|way^ dreamed there was fi>me myftery hanging pn .that ????^ and the good angel that drew it I| has always been my prayer both night and day, fitting, and ri^· tq Ij^ |? I ^mi it out—my.tremblingheart ftno^^ mp ;tp ?? quick, when the hörfemeri announced j^t^rdRpdolph and his Lady Isabella
( ¿5« ) wiihed fo be my guefts this night, for of¬ ten have I heard the fair creature who .formed that picture, pronounce their names with forrow, tears, and anguiih. Ah ! lack-a-day 1—I ihould have told you all before (obferved Bianca, wiping the fcalding tear from off her withered cheek) if my Lord had not interrupted me about the ftory of honeft Hurtado." — u Then begin it now," exclaimed Ro- 1 dolph, with a tone of impatience and ???? mand. " Aye, prithee do ; my good old hof¬ tefs," íaid the Countefs in a different ac- cent—an accent replete with mildnefe and anxiety. (< About four years ago, my worthy Lady (continued Bianca) a young pilgrim wa$ difcovered^ard by> by my deceafed huíband, under a fpreâding oak, in all the : \ ' agoniei
( 47 ) agonies of ficknefs and defpair.—He im¬ mediately raifed her—(I fay her, for un¬ der that difguife was the lovelieft of all women) and conveyed his drooping bur* then to our humble cottage ; for humble indeed it truly was, till heaven fent the fair ftranger here^for our comfort and pre¬ fent happinefs· The extreme pangs foe laboured under, could not long efcape my penetration. I foon difcovered that ihe was a woman, and m a ftate of f r/¿- nancy. For fome time ihe perfifted that my fuppofitions were wrong. Finding her labours, however, hourly increafe, ihe called me to her bed-fide, ?md grafping my hand clofely between her's—Yes—grafp* ing my hand clofely between . her's— ((aid Bianca, repeating her words, and rendering her hiftory ftill more diftreflmg and affecting by a tearful effufion to paft __ rememb rances),
( ?* ) remembrances) the dear young Lady, with great anguiih, exclaimed, " Alas ! my poor old creature (fuch were hetvcry words) I am, what you have fuggefted, mç to be—a woman—and a forlorn mi¬ ferable woman withal—I fear—I am alfo, What you have fuppofed me to be— preg* nani —Oh/ I feel, indeed, the pangs of child-birth grow heavy ?? mc— but ?? heaven— aj God is to be my great and awful judge, Ì am Innocent as the babe that is in my womb—·And, how that in¬ nocent, came there, the Almighty only knows for mer— pn this, my dear young ebild (for fuch I muft ever call her) paufed for fome time, and afterwards ap¬ peared much, collected—When Santa- filarie recovered herfelf forar— yes, truly, my Lotd (feeing Rodolph's countenance .change), for that was her name—ihe re¬ quefted
quefted me to fearch w^ her pilgrim> habit, and there I íhojuld find plenty pf gold; to fend tor fome me¬ dical afliftance, and likewife íuffiçient to recompenle me for all my Içindneís and hofpitality* I heeded not what related tø myíelfi but foft no time in difjpatching my fon, Thomrnafor~Ye$, my dutifiil bøy there, whont you now fee liftning before ypu/^T-^Here a paufe of fome moments enfued \ fát Thommafo, affeÖcd by the remembrance of paft event** fo artlefsly revived by hit mother, turned on one fide, to conceal the tender emor tions of his heart, which had fprung into^ l^bs eyes ^ whiift his, honeft, unaffected: fympathy, produced a fimilar effe£i on the aged hiftorian. Alas L ato 1 if they,, poor ftrangers-^(ftrangers, as i ?? fay, in comparifon to moll ???, prefent) if:
( ??? ) they could thus feel for the haplefs fugi¬ tive, what muft the emotions of a tender mother bave been ? Carlo and Sylvia ex> perienced almoft equal v forrow and re¬ gret. As for the Count, he was enwrapt rø filence, wonder, and attention. Bianca continued her tale. " Thom¬ mafo, in a few hours afterwards returned with a furgeon from Evoli, and early in the morning Santa-Maria was delivered of <f A dead-born child, " Fatigue and anxiety, of mind h,ad brought on an early conception ¿ for, as the furgeon told me, his patient had only been ieven months gone/* On this laft information, Rodoîph broke filence, and exclaimed— " Fortune, then, has fo far at leaft been kind to the honour of our houfe !" Ifabelia, on the contrary, filently offered upt
VpP her prayer— - t< That the innocence and happinefs of the mother, might prove one day equal to thofe of her de* parted infant/' " To conclude my ftory (faid Bianca) Santa-Maria foon after recovered her health, and alfo her fpirits in fome de¬ gree. Her time was then always ??? ployed in forming that portrait on the wall. In thefe hours of recreation, fte would often figh and weej>—Often have I beard her figh forth the name of Ri¬ naldo —Often have I feen her weep, when ihe mentioned the names of Ro¬ dolph and Ifabella.—Ifabella (as íhe was wont to fay) that very beft of mothers and of women.—To make a finiíh, how¬ ever, of my doleful tale, for I am very old and weak (faid Bianca) and cannot relate every particular circumftance that took
? »?* ) took piace at that time, røy yorøig Lady hearing that Hurtado (who had aflifted us ♦on thfc trying occafion with all the ne- ceflaries his houfe afforded) was determin¬ ed tö iet out for the wars, mid wanted ????? for the undertaking, than fhe made-ltty^httiband go and purchafe thofe articles of luxury, (and that âtHurtado's own valuation) which you now fee be- &*e you; Immediately after that, íhe got Thommafo to get hera neat fliep- herd's dréfs, and when equipped there- io—Santa-Maria, after giving me ten pieces of gold, took me into her cham¬ ber; then thawing a rich crofe from her bofom, (he fell oa her knees, and in the prefence of God and myfelf, moft fer- vwïtfy vowfcd never to divulge the fecret of her fex, till time or chance had deve- lëpefl ??? /hfy of ber pregnancy. The following
( *? 3 ) following, morning, ihe departed early fromoyrjfâpttage,^ herdep^rtur^wa· foon followed by the .death pf my poor hulband, who took her abfence fo fore at heart, that he never after held up his head. My years, happily withftood thefe cruel ihocks—I fay happily, my good Lord arid Lady, as I have furvived to tell this eventful tale. I fliall now pafs as happily to my grave, and in a far happier world, ftill continue to offer my morning prayer to the merciful God of our exiftence; to Ihower his bleffings and his comfort on my Lady Santa-Maria— if fo, by chance, I meet her not, where with faith, hope, and repentance, I muft ihortly expeâ to go." For oh! If ihe had partaken of my tieih, and coft me the deareft groans of a mother» 1 could not have owed her ? more rooted love. 8?????£???.
( £04 ) ©ι* this, Carlo put his hand to his heart, and with à fervent wiih, rejoined v-Ame*bHamen*
END Ob THE FIRST VOLUME.
