Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The mystery: or, Forty years ago: a novel
THE MYSTERY.
CHAPTER I Л, nmx Mj votee ь ringed, Ι knott I etiinot [litis- laque- I do not desire ) on to ptc ist mc, 1 ilo ılısın. SllAKSIl til» l'itovi Majoi Houghton Challes received, w hat was, to lum, a most ımpoı tant piece of news. It was nothing less than that he li ul become а man of wealth. One week bcloie Ins ainval at Goiee, а vessel fiom Bombay had put on shore a mis¬ siono), whose presence was not thought necessary at the place fiom vvhicli the ship ι aine This pei son, tliat his voyage might voi. n. u
not he w holl) useless, hul deteinimed on -ittcmptmg to pi each tho Gospel to the. nitivesof the intciiorof Afnci Ihe C4pt4iu t \\ hollad mstí uctions to lmd this porson it Goice, if he perseteied ni his lesign w hen the ship should arm с tlıeıe, w a·, the intimate friend of theMyoi, ind the lutei on cnminiuc, aftei the paients of his friend Haile), hid re eeived the sune iccount which Intl leached Chulés Infoio he left Ingi nul with this ildition tint the di) befoie Captam Haile) 's decetse, i \u¡ old inend or Ins hid pud the debt of nature tiho hum, no finnit, hul left toliini the whole of Ins piopeity, which was un dei stood to exceed one bundled and fiftj thousand pounds, tnd whicli now becamt the inherit meo of Chulés Ilus pei son dum; it Calcutta, the import mt m lelli^ence Ind not leached the executois il the captun it the time of then writ nig to Europe , bnt the Majoi added, ι ¡■econd lettet, to announce these extra
ordinary tidings, was then on its tnv toľnglind, witli íemittances to iltrgc amount This infoi mation led Charles mju than ever to regiet that his pai ents were no more, as it seemed an ig n i ι vationof then daid destiny, to have died till the moment when they inisin Inve icturned m afHuence to then nalne Lug land, to pei ish in Bomb iy Y cl I e < tulu not help Icclmg pleasuie at knowing Ih it he was now the equal of Sn Geoige Henderson in point of fortune, uid tb u all the objections tint might lieieioloic be urged tgainst his becoming the bus, band of Amelia, must at oiu ι vanish before this astonishing chnige in lus circumstances At the Government House, it was customary to dine between two and tin ее o'clock, m what vulgai folks с ill the afternoon, but wlncli then betters m England have discovered to be only the morning Harley, accompanied hy б «
lus friend Houghton and the officeis of the ship, lepaired thither at that pe nod ot the il iy. They met with а most coudai greeting fiom the Lieutenant-go velimi, who seemed not α little exlula- latcd at the opportunity afloided hnn ot entei taming а puty that dad so icccntlv left Old Fug! md. Wall was а man of uncommon statini He nicasiued more than ы\ feet two nichos in height, was in the mam well propoi boned, and exhibited an appear ance of vigotu (hat well accorded with lus gigantic form. A slight sinking in the knees, detracted somewhat fiom the dignity of Ins figuie , and his nose turn mg up а little, introduced a nieanne s into his countenance, which was ıatlıeı at variance with the iest of his features liut, lighted ip hy the glow of com ι viiilitj, lus face was not wanting in am mation , and theie was at such tunes n air of open-hearted jollity about hıı.ı, that would have pleased tn the absence
<il th il eleg nice ol mannei, of which it wis not linlieqiiciitly the compilimi). llic table, on tins occasion, was spi e til with ill tbat luxurj bad deigned to adopt is dainties in tliat pai t ot lhe woild Be¬ sides tlie olhceis of the /ebia and M.i- )or Ilongiiton, tlıeıe weie piesent l,iisis;n l'oplett, who was, many >eais alteiwauls the means of bimgmg the piesulcnt ol the partj, to whose health he that di\ swallowed л bumpci, to condign punish¬ ment, Deermg the piotost niiitial, the surgeon to the forces, and seteial officeis belonging to the Afiican coips. llic glass ciiculatcd freely, and ninth was the oidei of the diy. llie Gotcinor, the 'lowu-major, and all who hid been some tune on the Bock, weie most eagei to leai u tlic news fiom home. Numer¬ ous enqu'nes weie made on the sub¬ iect of the feelings excited m Lngland, by the piogiess of the wai with Amenca, but still gieatei cuno°itj wis awakened by the case of Loid Geoige Gonion. u 3
1 nıy one was most inxious to know wli it would be lus (ite , tin cliiuiicter ot tin late riots wis fieely discussed, and tin Ln utcn mt govt ι noi ıhıl not sc uplo to give it as his ormion, that the leader nl sued in insunoction ought to bc h ingod M ben the ippct te foi news from 1 ng 1 uıd had been in part satisfied, the In lautv of the company flow e 1 m the usual channel In the couise of the evening α son ¿ was proposed —every one ap provedot the pioposition, and nobody would smg llie Govenioi was of opi¬ nion, tb it lhe I ow η majoi ought to begin and called upon linn to ilo so " Come Houghton, give us a ditly " " Me 1 You know, Goveinor, I nevei smg I nevci sung а song in my life " " 1 hen bc 0 m now ' I is high time, if you mean to be a singer of any emi nence before y ou dio ' " lliat s a distinction to winch I shall nevei piesume to aspire "
" Nay' —You know wc ate all fuends. Come, don't keep us waiting. — Silence, gentlemen, Majoi Houghton is just about to begin." All eyes weie duected to tlic Majoi,— ill listened, but no one snug. Aftei a pause ol two minutes, tlic Govenioi agam bi oke silence. " Come, Majoi, — aie you almost i eaily 3 " " Really, as youi Excellency »ell knows, I cannot sing, — I have no voice." " Pood!—We don't want α voice; a song will do foi us." " But I don't know one." " Then sing α verse, just to set us going." " I don't know that I can do that. Will part of а verse do?" " Anything, to make а beginning." " Well then, il I must, hcie goes: — Why should we quarrel for riches, Or inj such ghttcnng toys, A light heart, and a tinti pau of breeches, Co through the world, my brave boys в 4
" Tlıeıe, I know no more ol it. I have done my pail. Am 1 entitled tu call ?" " Why haidly, I think —Well, whom doyou callón? Stay, what shall west! ' — Wa have ılı uuk the king and tht my il family—' Here's sm cess to the army and nny of oltl Engl mil,'—upstanding, 11 » «Wli. Biavo ' wc 11 tve souiogood voit es, I hnd. — i\ow, Mijoi, loi уош call." " I call on Youi Excellency." " О the Devil ' — l'h.a's Iiaulb I m, tliough. — Well, gentlemen, you must lake it lough as it inns. ·— I don't Know that I can gel tiuough one. V, bat sli tl. I smg >" " Youi Excellency has so many," icmaikcd l'oplett, "and all good, lint we can hai illy have a choice." " Well, 1 must tiy something, 1 sui- posc.— My sunt Mı Uy Mot, You'ri 11^ sott ns II boi; Лш1 wiUi us а kitten, Anıl «ill ı> u luau.
lliose cu s ιιι your face, О pity mv in,L I Finsi Ornimi hnvc smitten, Poor 111 nuotila« snutten Your eyes, bluck ns bloc, Your — IMu ' — I can't think of it." " Begin it again, Governor," said Mirar Houghton; "it will come lo you Ilion " Wall sung the stan/a over again ; but stuck last in the second verse, as befoie. " It does not signify," exclaimed tho Eieiitcnant-governor, laying α strong emphasis on the word not " I can't oiug to-day." " Nay, tiy again." " Peihaps," said Charles, who pei¬ ceived that Wall was willing to sing, but wished to be solicited, to gratify hnnseli, " Your Excellency will lavoin us with anothei song." " 1 am persuaded that it will be worse than useless to make the attempt." " He then bogan anothei Irish song, в 5
vvhicli bc (tot thiough without difficulty In doing this, ho displayed much hunioui The In ogue, of vv Inch a tolerable sample always accompanied his conveisation, lie made ludicrously stiong m Ins song, nul tlıc effect was sued, tdat even if lie dad not been tde Lieutenant.gov ei noi, all present would have been disposed to I nigh , but, being what he was, of couise, the company weie convulsed with laughter After this effort on the part of tin piesulcnt, many songs were sung, pic¬ ceded by slioit întroductoiy apologies The Gov ei noi not only answered every call made upon dim, but volunteeıtıl once 01 twice. Towaids tde close of the evening, tlıc stıaıns wdicd lie selected weie moie distinguished by then humour than their delicacy, but tdey were well timed, and failed not to hit the taste of the majority of the company, which finally separated in а manner satisfactory to all parties.
" Well, Hailey, what think you ot oui new Governor?" enquired Majoi Houghton, when be had taken his fiiend with hnn to his quarters. " Il I may judge fiom the figure that he cuts at his own table, I shoe-Id say he appeals to be a very pleasant, hospit¬ able man " " ľh it is the opinion you would fonn, fıom whit )ou have seen of bun?" " Yes He appeared extiemely an¬ xious to make us all comfoi tabi" to-day." " So he did." " And the table was spread with uu- spaimg hbeialit)." " So it was." " And his manner was eminently dis¬ tinguished by affability and good fellow¬ ship." " lliat is all very tiue, but, notwith¬ standing this, lie is one of the meanest, most ìapacious, and basest villains, on earth." " Is it possible '" в b
" It ıs not in my power to do justice to the etioimitics of which ho has ılrcady been guilty, and which aie now in tin course of pcipetration. I have it, on good authority, that lie flogged a man to death, while on his way fiom England. InGoiee, he has lecently been the death of а slave, in the same m unici , and he lias had the effroııteıy to call upon the ıe- spectablo inhabitants, wl о had no moie to do with the tiansaction than you had, to subscribe the sum which tde suffeier was estimated to lie north, to piy lor dim. One wo. an has actually deen con fined m the black hole, ioi refusing to comply with this extraordinary lequi- sıtıon." " And what do the inhabitants say of lum?" " They, of couise, detest him, but fear to speak out. Then, his inhunianity to the sick in the hospital is so great, that by withholding fiom them pioper sup¬ plies, at a time when there is uo real
scarcity en the Rock, many valuable hves have been lost." lhe Majoi was here miei ι upted dya loud knocking, and a confused noise without " What noise is tlmt ?" said С liai les " something cxtiaordiiiaiy must hive happened " "No, I appithend nothing of tlic kind. Tumult is so common heic, through the want of lisciplme, that ids- tui bailees like this aie but evciy-d.iy occui i enees." The knocking continued , and its vio¬ lence mcieased so much, th it at last the Major thought it necessaiy to enquue into the cause of it. He duected asiate to open the dooi, when α soldier, in α state of intoxication, sf iggered in, with¬ out ceremony, and accosted the Tow η majoi in the most famili u manner. " How d'ye do' — Majoi, you'ie a ¿ood fellow. Ishall always be glad to see you?"
" W h it ilo y ou do heie at this hour ?" " i с ilici' f o loll —you I only call ed to till you — you'ie a good fellow, — that's ill So if you hnd not opened the dooi, I'd have broke il down, — that's ill" " And I am much disposed to give you ι pi ice in the blick hole, — that's all' " ion won't do that,— Ihke you Hei e, t ike α drop " With these woids he advanced to the AI yo , holding а bottle towards his mouth, th tt his commandei might drink Houghton wis ibout to spm η hım, intl his oflei with indignation, when he aiul donly checked himself, received tin bottle as courteously as it had been of fered, and tasted its contents " Wheie did you get this brandy, Pei kins?" " Why, from the paymastei , — the pay mastei, to be sure, my boy "
" О then, jou have leceived your αι¬ ι ears." " To he sure I have, my jolly Majoi No doubt I have touched." " And you hat e been paid in brandy." " Don't you believe it,—not all, but 14 e got another bottle or two jet. Don't be afraid of it. Do you w mt any beads? If jou do, siy so, md I'll lend you а bai , foi you're а good fellow, aud I'll lend jou any thing, — any thing." " Well, bnng them to-monow. Now Pei kins, take youi biandy, and go to \ our bed, like a good fellow. — Here's the bottle " Pei kms held out his hands to ıeceıve tiie bottle. The Major purposely let it fall, and it was instantly destroyed. " What, have you dioppedit 3 Why you can't hold tight, Perkins." The soldier thiew a look of the most solemn sorrow on the rum below. " This," said he, as he saw the brandy escaping m all directions, " is
une ol the с il — cd — I cili ι om ol tlie e il unities ol wai Uut Ι ve inothci left, tilit — that's one eoinfoit " lii n you li id betta Hy to it " 111 fetch it tlu ectly Ivi gol iu othei iou shall sic,— you shall see He meant to be is e ood as bis wird, nul iccoulmgly icclcd ptecipititely out >t the houst A moment allei, ıhı \Itjoi ind ( birles heud hun ι li illciigid by the guari , and tiken into custody " liiere, ' obseıved thi Mıjoı, 'ısa ıpceiınen ol the good policy and upright conduct ot oui Governor Thai iellovv is now a piisoi ei, md will be flogged to monow, because tin Goicrnoi sold lum brandy to diy I do not comprehend yom ne ııı •ng." " It is this — \V ill, by his igenis, sills biandy to thesoldieis, that is, lets them have it m hen of then piy They, m consequence, natui ally fall into gre it excesses, and then he punishes with in
lumiin seventy tlıo>e oftenccs of which lie is the chief piomoloi, 01 ıatlıeı tne sole cuise, ilmost alvviys flogging tin men wilh whit aie с illeti 'thieves' ι its.' Winn Pei kins came ııı jıısc now, lus conduci movili mv ìcsciitmciit. Λ moment of ìclcelioii com meed mo, that tlıc poor inculi was an object of pity, mil thil il vv is not hım, bul tlıc Govcı- tıoı, wlio mintiti punishment I tasted the bqitoi which be oflcicd, and found, is I expected, that it was biandy, and that hi bid leceived it foi lus pay." " But 111 iy not tins davo been done without lite knowledge, and even in ιίι¬ ι eet opposition to tde wishes of the Go¬ venioi ŕ" " lam issuietl that it has Ins sanc¬ tion, and 1 due no doudt that 111 this vv ty lie makes luge piolits by supplying the tioops wiib vai ìous articles. Poplctt gave mo .1 list the day befoie ycstciday of some ol the articles 111 whith he Hartes He lets them have α bai of
beads, ıntunsıcally worth about cigbt- pence, loi fit с shillings ; a bottle of gun- powdei, (wo td fifteen-pence 01 one and sixpence,) .it the s mie puce. When bo came out, be brought with bun in tin Enterpu/c laige quintitits of solideis' shuts, shoes, and stoi kings. The shuts he sold at five and two-pence each, tho stockings at two and eleven-pence,and the shoes at four and ten-pence, the pan. At these puces they weie deal enough, but now, being at once Commandant, Pay¬ master and Comptiollei, he has ıaısed them to seven and sixpence the shirt, to three ana sixpence the pan of stockings, and six 'hillings the pan of shoes, and, besides yvlut lie makes m tins way, be stops foi himself, aspaymastei, two-pence per week fiom each Serjeant, three dalf- pence fıom eaclı coıpoıal and diummei, and one penny from each pnvate, con¬ trai y to the piesent custom of'the ai my." " Indeed ! Why, you make out youi governor to be а peifect sluik."
' Such, I feu, you will (md Inm liut 'tis now 1 ite, so ' I hold it fit th it we shake hauls and pan' lour iput ment Ins lint w a) Moie of tins to- moi ι ow
CHAP. II. 1 weulil u it bave it slave to till mı çıouml Го с HIV ine, tu lau lue ubile 1 »let-p And tremble »lu η Ι ν like f>r ull tlie vu iltli Tliat к neus botujlt aml ьоЫ lmve ever ear» d Ihe Major was as good as lus word, and failid not to apply himselt the next morning to the fin thet dcvelope- ment of the chaiactei ol Govenioi Wall. After lecountmg a senes ot acts of op¬ pression in which he asserted Wall to de¬ light, lie enteied upon а lustoiy of lus c.nly life, and of the cucuinstaiices to which he owed his piesent elevation. " Why, it is not veiy long," said he, " since tlus man was an ensign m India, with few fuends, and but little chance of promotion. On his »etilin fiom
India, I met hım in London , he pressed me to call on lum, and I did so. At that tune he had lodgings in a street that goes out of Leicestci Square The house, I remembei, was kept by а taıloı I found hnn engaged at dice with several officeis, and he invited me to play , this I declined. When the othei ofhceis weie ^one, and we couhl convei se morc frech ι he complained ıatlıeı of lus cucimi stances, and the more so, as he !i id then two little boys " " Two boys of his own ?" " О no, \ou s'ull hear. These were two little bojs that he had biought from India , how he obtained them 1 lı ive foi gotten, if he etei loid me He biought them to England, he said, expecting to find some ορροί tunit j ot mal mg pi esenls of them, that was his phi ise, wlieie he might expect to get something vvoith having in return ' 1 am now,' he went on, ' a good deal put to it I sometimes fleece the fellows you saw here when you came
ín, of α few guineas, and tlien I've ι de¬ mn ep, the old Duchess ol --------, in Golden Squaie, *o attend to, who some¬ times puts a tufle in my vv iy , but, alio gelile», ľvenothing like enough to cany on tlio wai vvitii spiut, and these huts I begin to find mtoleiably bunlensome If you can do any tlun,» with them, I'll give them to vou — Will you have them >* " " He ofteied them to you as lie would а biace of young pointus? ' "Just the same I, liowevei, told dim, that I had no occ won foi such an addition to my incumbí anees, and should decline availing my sed of Ins dbcial offei Well, this passed on Some time aftei, being on a party at Loid Brilliant's the lush footmm, who lined the silvei le ι kettle foi my Lady, happening to peifoini his duty but mkaidly, Hei Ladyship expi essed a wish, that in pi ice of a being so uncouth, she could get ι little black boy, like Lady 1 rifle's, to
uitend it the tea table, It occuned to me, that if \\ dl had not parted with his little fellows, one of these last In duns might suit Hei Ladyslup, and I was quite ccitim tliat ltwouldbe treated with kindness Г1 e veiy next morning, I told this to Wall " " And he sent one of tlicm as а piesen! lo Hei L idy slup?" " He dul , md in ι blundeung style, lini accoltici! well with tde chaiactei as signed to his countiy men in some of our phys His sei t ant took the boy with α note He gained access to Lady Bui Ini t, ml having taken the letter fiom the cinici, piesented it himself Plus man wis nea ly as tall as his mastei, tnd the note meiely contained Wall's compliments, and lequested Hei Ladyship would do him the honoui to accept the bearer' Some snipnse wis of course ι xpressed, bu* this soon subsided into mirth, when the mistake was explained Luly Brilliant admu ed tde clnld very
much, but not knowing the peison from whom it was sent, she politely declined accepting the present." " Then the boy was sent b ick 3 " Of comse. — When I next saw Wall, be seemed not a little disconcerted. Not knowing the part he had acted, I ex¬ claimed, with some sin puse, on hearing the lesult, — ' Why should it bo ujected ' since hei Ladyship seemed so pleased with it 1 ' "'Faith" he ıeplıed, 'you may rind that out youiself, for it's moie titan 1 can tell, but look at the note , — you may see what she says ' " 11 -ad hei note, and desìi etl to see his, and then my suipusc was at an end. The abı upt mannei ni w hit h he had ot fned his piesent, added lo the en cum stance oi his having totally foıgotten to name me as the advıseı of the step that he had taken, made it impossible foi any answei to be letutncd but that which he had lcceiied. I pointed tins out to
hım, and with some difficulty made lum perceive, and even acknowledge, that lui londuet dad deen loodsli m the extreme. lo cut the mittel short, I saw Lady Bı ι Hunt, explained what had taken place, and told der, tlie t bilel had been sent by a fuend of mine, at my instance. On learning tins, she ıegıetted its rejection, md I obtained peimission to authorise Wall to send it agam." " Of course, he did not fad to avail himself of this peimission." " The little boy was again piesented to liei Ladyship She was dedgdted vutli lum, and expiessed deiselt much obliged. Tde importance Lady Brilliant attached to this piesent, made hei lord feel a little impatient of deing so much indebted to a stianger When convers¬ ing with me, he spoke to this effect; and, thiough his inteiest, Wall was soon offered a secietaiyship at the Gambia, with a company. He came out herei and, passing over the rest, you behold VOL п. с
hım what ho ıs, — no less a personage than the Lıeutenant-governoı of the island " It was now announced to the Mıjoı, that a Madim Rossignol desired to sec Inni He directed that si ^ should be admitted, and a well dressed female, a hall cast, 01 mulatress, made her appear ance. " Ah ' chei Major, vous le voye»; j'en suis boi tic'" she exclaimed, with a joy- f nI air, advancing towards him. Then, perceiving Hailey, she added, " Mais pardonnez moi, vous etes en compagnie " " No mattéi, Mia Bossignol This gentleman ıs a particular friend of mine, vnd you may speak fieely befoie lum. I »m glad to see the Gov ei noi has at length restored yon to liberty." She looked stedfastly m the face of the Major, as if to read there, whether she ought to speak what she thought, or retire in silence. « It is all right," said Houghton, with
a smile. " We were pist tabung of the peison who has used you so infamously. l'his gootl I itly," dc went on, addressing Immoli to Hai lev, "has doeu nnpiisoned dy 0111 upright Govenioi, because she ıefused to give her piopeity awav at Ins soveieign will and pleasuie." The lady, now assuied, lestiained hei loqucnce no long«, but unhesitatingly stated her case, foi the benefit of Hai ley puncipally, as the Mtjor vv is pieviously acquainted with its ments " Le Gouverneui m'a entei mec dans le cachot noir, le cachot des condamnes __ What dey call de Blick Condemnation Hole, he put me in,— pai ce queje n'ai pas voulu mettre Dominga en liberte, lia besoin d'elle parce qu'elle est sœui de son interprête, mais elle m'appartient. Que ne l'acheté t'd. Why don't he buy she ?" " Certainly lie could have no right to imprison you m the Black-hole, bcc luse you refuse to give fieedom to youi slave." е 4
·· Je l'ai achetée de inon propre argent. — I did buy hei — Pom quoi ineľôtcr' C'est un infâme." " I was saying something veiy like it, just before you cune in. The Gov ci noi ıs not the most conect man m the woi Id He sometime» dials with otheis quite as shabbily as he has done dy you. He lias been beating pooi Mis. James." " U а aussi fouette a mort l'esclave dc Madame Neufchatel Quelle ciuautc 1 " " What '" said Hailey, " has he actually flogged а »lave to dc ith ' That was an act of ciuelly indeed." " That is true. — \ r ous sav ez peut être ce que c'est que d'avon un celavo fouette à mort sans en avoıı ıeçtı le prix " " I cannot say that α slave of mine lı ıs ever lived, and consequently I have not known what it is to have α slave flogged to death without being paid foi it, but this I know, that the wietch capable of such conduct would be, m my eyes, an oh
ject of rtblioi rence, though he paid twenty times the supposed value of his victim. Whethei lie pud for it oi not, would, in iact, miltei but little Nothing could atone f m conduci so atiocious." " Cist tics tin Mais Madame Neufcliatcl ist ties bonne femme. Elle ne cuci ι pas pom une bigalelle. — She will not mike dc piece ot woik for about nothing. — Quoiqu'il n'ait pas le ılı oit de le fuie, elle ne duait uen quand même il fouettcioit tous ses esclaves я mort poin vu qu'il lui en donne le prix — hhe is sogood, she not s y nothing at all, jO lic pay foi tbem, it he flog dem all to pieces " " Ibis musi bt a peuon of а very .imnblo disposition, — Hey, Hailey' — But would not that be а little hai d on the pooi slaves, Mis Rossignol?" " Out c'est malhem eux poui eux, mais qu'est ce que cela lait ' — That ıs no mattéi — Ce ne sont que des esel íves, et les gens hbies doivent s'obliger inutuelle- c 3
ment, ct ne pas se quereller pour peu de chose." " I," remai ked Challes, "luve yet to lo.aui the ait of viewing such things as mattets of course, oi of but little import- ачсе. lie the consequence what it might, 1 w ondi not tamely see an unhappy being lindet my piotection, thus devoted to tortine and death " " Mis Rossignol feels is strongly as you can do the barbanti of icting so, without fiist paying the ownei of the s! iv e " " Vous ave/ i ıısoıı Mon Dieu ' Sı j'etois capable d'une telle action ma conscience ne me donnei oit pas ile ι epos. — I could not iest with such crime shocking on my conscience." " I was not aware how tender уоот conscience was on such matteis," rejoined the biajoi, with a significant glance at Harley, " when I endeavouied to pro' cm e yom liberation." " Je vous suis bien obligee de votic
interposition. Le Gotivei neur n'a aucune sympathie poui ses semblables — He do notfcclforfellovv-crcauues — Anti einem il ne les mettroit pas d ins (les cachots si afbeiix. C'est très mal sans doute dc fouetter un esclave α mort, mais plonge» une personne libre dans un dongeon est une barbarie sans exemple " And with this display of sensibility the lady took her leave. Hailey was struck at the benevolence with which she could overlook, as a venial transgies- sion, the cruel murder of a human being, in tbe situation of a slave, and the bitter indignation with which she contemplated α pecuniary injury, or brief confinement, inflicted on the proprietor of α slave." " 1 really did not think that insensibi¬ lity could be biought to such peifeetiou. These blood-anil groan merchants seem to think their fellow-creatures merely machines consti ucted for their use, to be presei ved or desti oyed at their pleasure." " Го be suie," ìejoined the Major. с 4
" İlle pıolıt on such loııılııct и thoiiirlit suflicientlj ι,ιι it to itone foi its inim manilj IIcu, il мнп cucltssiic«s ebolliti m inj w ıj end ingei the hie oi ι sl iti, — il vm shoul 1 nm oiti ont, loi instance — мш will be likclj to lieu, from some indigu mt bcholdci, thu it would hue sened i/nu lyht, hui juu killed him ' Much is thought ot tht pen ilt) ıhıl would in such ι cise, be drtwn fiom llic puisc ol the offendei, — ol the dc ith of ι m in, nothing " " Is it possible а — But why do I isk ■> In the conduct ol the worn m who Insjust been heu, nul who his so much of the guilt of Afiici in hci I ice, that it would bc no tlillicult inatta to mist ike İıcı, Iiom hei colom, loi one ot those whom she thinks liicn pmeluseis may innocently desti oj, — I line seen quite enough to com mi e me Hi it w h it j ou s ij is but too true, md tint the tiJlic in slaves, how e\n benefici il to cominei cc, ıs aiutili lation lo feeling,"
" Right. Ilei e, the siiflerings of these jioot cieaturcs aie not thought ol. A 1 oudon buteliei would as soon 1cg.11 d the living sbollitici·!) legs, and lotus ol mutton, driven into Ins slaughtei -house, as animated beings w ho cinicei." Disgusted at what he had heard, Challes felt no wisd to piolong lus stay at Goice. He panted to do actively em¬ ployed . Ins wish was almost immediately giatified. Two tianspoits weie fitted out, under the dnection ot the captain ol the Zebia, to annoy ceitain small settlements up the G inibia. 1 lie com inaiid of this expedition was given to Hardy. He sailed fioniGoiec, antl Ins fiist oper- itions weie riownetl with success. Foit James, on James's Island, to which his attention was pai ticul.iily duceteti, aftei an attack which lasted eleven liotus, fell tp'o Ins hands. The foi ее which had defended it that sunned weie mule pn sonéis, and the foit, which had given
some iiitioy mec to the conimene of tin river, wis hy Ins oiders instil to the gıound It wis w ltd some difliculty that the ciplives were ıoccıvcd in the timspoils, nndci Harley's command is then numbeis weie greater than could h>vc been expected to garnson so small a place In high spuits it having accomplished the odject of the expedition, he was pie¬ parmg lo ι etui n, when ι Trench frigate, accompined by a bug, hove 11 sight To oppost lus little barks to ι force so immensely superior, would have been madness and a wanton sacnticc of the lives of his men He siw a fearful change in lus piospeets In in instant tlıc se ile was as completely turned as it tde ť iblei! deities of antiquity had ic sumed tlun old amusement, and left the skies to leficsd themselves with а game at moital « u fai e Resist inc.. wis wholly oul of the question, and, instead of returning to Goiee ι eonqueior it
appealed cei tiun that he must descerní the nver a pnsouei. To languish aw.n yeais without hope of promotion ui chance of distinguishing himself, was nt 1ns view a dreadful fate, tluownig whollj out of his consıdeı ation the incitile*·» seventy with winch the bench weie al that tune ıepoıted to tieat then pnsouei-. of war. One hope alone lemained. B\ sailing fui thei up the uvei, tiiere was ι pıobabılıty that the small vessels undei his command might get w hei e it would bt impossible, fiom want of watei, for tin brig to follow thein. Acting on this nnpi essimi, he passed through what is calkd Devil's Reach. and, towed by the boats, the ti ansport* made Elephant's Island. Still puisued by the bug, they ascended bejond Je runk, or the Red Motin'. As they ad vaneed they fouud the uvei swaium.e, wtth alhgatois, and the hippopotamus «»■ frequently seen. When abreast with tlie fvippo Islands, their progress wu irrested с e
by .1 bai, vyhtth tlii'v could not piss till .umilici tide loliivt.' tlicm lıoııı then peııloiis situ ıtıoıı 'lbo Gambia bocamı very nıııınv .ıs tliey appioached Cutto|.ir, — (be dinks weie steep, and llic flootl very wc ík. Sometime", their enemy was willun eight oi nme miles of tbem, .it otheis, moie than two days' sail astein. Tlııv sıvv Buiicontla, which then wore but little ot the .ippcaiance ot a legulai scttlimont, antl boy ond it the aspect ot the shoie on eithei hand became moie wilil and die uy m its aspect tn.ui it dad piev totisly been. At lengtb ihey saw the hi si gie.it fall —.mil iound furthei retieat impiactie ible. 'llic pnsoners lejoiced that the houi dad neaily ainved which would ıısloıc elicili to liberty, and tde English, lisigmng themselves to then fato, pi epai ed to exchange situations with tlit 11 t.iptivcs, and waited the ap¬ proach of the adı ancing hi ig in melan- cdoly sileni c. Tliough much disconceited, Harley
was unwilling 1 1 bicorne а pi wilier, with out m ıkın,' ıtuıtlıcı ellort to ese ipe His first ulei wis to bill 11 lhe 11 inspin ts, Iııııl wuh the cicws ind um un on the (Oisl lul sime 1 n 0 lisli ship slioul I come lo llic 11 ıelıel, ш till othei me uis hould oflei toi 1 etui nny to Goiee llu» pro position ciicouiitcicd uimeisd ihsippro bation lhe crews consulti ed e se ipe hopt less l'I inged 111 tlıc du ut, pith less foicits bcloie them if then sulici mgs weie not lluuptly Iciinuiitid bt the piowhty molisteis which tlun 111 uspi emus sludes nounslicd nul piotiitcd, it uppc u t d to tliem ihat lumpéi ind pio ti icted niiseij tliicitened intitible de Uh In then then situation, ill sne liai lej, consıdeı ed cıptıvııy preludili to mj other I ite ot which they li il tin choice It was to no puipose th it lie set foitli the inouïs and pnvations to «Inch (liei would be subjected 111 а long liiipiisou ment at Portendick. ihey preien ed
enduring all these, to death, and death they held it to be impossible to escape, if they attempted to act on the plan which he had recommended, liarle) maintained, that by ascending the mei when they reached the land, wheie it was impossible foi then enemies to follow, tliey would stand α good chance ot meet¬ ing with some natives of the coast, who might easily be mvvaded upon to com ey tbem to Goiee, aftei the frigate should have withdrawn. But all Ins aiguinents failed to convince those he hai aligned that there was a probability of accom¬ plishing this They could not paiticipate in his hopes, and the) were unwilling to share the dangei. The bug ïapidly approached, and but little time remained foi deliberation Io become a captiv с — to remain foi years m the prison of an exasperated eneni), was that to which he could but ill re¬ concile his mind. "Vet what altei native remained ? It was useless again to im-
portune those who had so ıepeatedly decided ag tmst the desperate expedient which he had uiged, but which he had neithei powei noi inclination to cnfoice Should he then go done? Those evils winch togethei, they might biave and surmount, were too loimidablc to be encountered by one indn ıdıı il with any prospect ot success But still, having advised his men to go on shoi e, it might throw а stigma on his nune it he hesi tated to expose himself to those d gers which he had contended that they could not ration illy feaı This thought much inclined Inm, itali liayuds, to make that experiment himself on which the crews ot the transpoits had resolved not to venture 1 he hour was an ived in which it was necessaiy to decide It w ь ever»» ing, and if he longer hesitated, the next moinmg must see lum α pnsoner Once more be addiessed those about him, trusting that the nearei view of captivii) winch they now Ind, would
induce them to icverse their former dc termination He was deceived A mid sliipni in and a common ь uloi weie tin onlv two it ill disposed to listen to tlmt counsel which he thought it his duty to give " II," sud lie, "you lefuse to shine my I ite, I will it le ist piove tint I hut not itcommeniled to you whit I feu, even wholly imsuppoited, to choose toi myself Put out a bolt, and I slnll it least escape Poitendick" those to whom he iddi essed himself endeivomtil to dissuade dun from his puiposc, but then aiguments weie lost upon lum is Ins hid been upon them The midship man uid the sailoi before mentioned, though little fuenilly to the pioject tlt claretl, if lie went, they would accoinp my lum A boat was hoisted out — a few necessities and some provisions wcic lustily put into it, and tdey puslu d ori from the transport Harley and 1ns companions hid not
got moie th m oue thud of the wiy lıoııı the vessel he hul lell to the neuest shoie, when the boit vv is upset by i sutl den s μι ill uitl lie lound biniseli the next шопи nt multi it Being in ei ellent sivilimin, lu lil sufficient piescnce ol minti to li ild lis bie Uh, antidive iway lıoııı it insti id ol tlııipiııg to its scit ıs lie ime nst lously tneil to do at fust He li id tlie ¡ oil fortune to come up di lund it, wlien lie ι ose ıbov e the suif ice of the walci ld tiu nod to assist his compa mons in misloitunc, but peiceived that tliey wcic die uiy on then way b ick to the tianspoits Umilili ill Ins eneigics wcic demanded tt td it moment, to save dim lıoııı ι w iteiy _,i ivt, he felt, though per haps iiupi tly, in angiy sensation cross Ins minil it the little ïesolution they hud displiycd Seoul ioi thein was prodibly in p ut t'ie t Use ot bis not following their ex imple, bul, bu tlie motive what it iin B ht, uislc id oi «tempting with them
to regain the vessel, bewas impruden. enough, though the day was completely closed, to prcfti the opposite course, and he swam towaids the shore.
CHAP. III. My panting heart doth bul nunc ?}&> procenJ, Mv itllľŕl d cjts invitL mj tnnpiiL tu ruul Whirli, waiitiiy their direction, dully mı t it My lip-, winch should lmve spoke, were dumb, and And Icil the paper ш mj trembling Innd, When nil niy senses did amazed stund , Lven яч t mother eoming to her rlnld, Whieh from her presence ruuh heen long exit'd, With gLntle firms lib tender neck doth strun, Now kissing it, now tlasping it tignin, And yet excessive joy deludes her so, As still ahe doubts it this be hers or no At length, »wuken'd fiom this pleusing dream, When passion somewhat left to be extreme, My lon„mg еуеч, with their iiur object meet, Yi here ev'ry lettcr'a pie «ing, ev'ry word is sweet Owen Tudor lo Queen Katherine, Гном the day on which Harley left the house of Su Geoige Hendcison, * me¬ lancholy marked the gentle Amelia foi her own.' The hope, — the fiist fond hope ot her \ngin heait, — a hope in which icason seemed to encouiage her
to indulge, did been so ıııdely äimiini· ited m that moment wlien slie w ıs least prcpucd to expect such nesilit, tint hei spuits could not s n v ive tht shock ilci tıtlıeı lııd uıuotıııctd thit slie nev ci might bc lus to whom ilene dei affections could de given She saw in Hailey's manner, at pırtın,, ıdcspııate cneigy, which, while it 1 illumed to uispne fort' tude, ci ied, m lins instance, dut to iiiciease despondent} Ile h id told liei not to desp m fol ι d ıy would comi when s,ıı Geoide would not object to the pioposed allı nice llns, though utteicd in ι tone of pioplictic co /fidenrc, gave her any thmg but consolation , foi sde lead in his imp ittent gl in e, tlı it he flat tcied himself some daring enteipnse would consecrate his name to gloiy, and tint, tlius distinguished, eveiy obstacle to happiness would be at once lemoved and Su Geoige, moie pioud than ever ot lus piotegée, desue nothing moie than to call him his son But vainly did she
Sti ivc to solace hei mind with this de light f ul and İn ilhan t promise His cou ıage, like Ins love, she could not doubl. — He might acquire glorj, but danger was mscpaiablc fiom the attempt, and deatii would probdblj bc Us price. llie parental kindness of Su George, which had evci ende ι. cd luni to her, was nothing ibalcd, hiscveij hope of com¬ foit depended upon lur happiness. In ill the transactions of life lie had beni mj thing but a soi did mm, and noni hul been louder m tonılenııııtıoıı of the conduct of those fathei s who, to gıatıly pı itle 01 avance, could tiample on the ledings of then children and demand that the youthful affections should point in that du ectimi winch then shallow polu y might suggest ought to be pref ei - led. Foi Hallévbe bad expressed the highest esteem, and the young man bad never foi felted it, 01 sunk foi а moment in his good opinion till the day on which he ventured to disclose the passion that
he had conceived for the daughter of Ins friend Since his departure, Sn George hid shared w ith Amelia the re¬ gret »vbicli Hai le) 's absence inspired; and never once had he reproached the young m in b) w hom he had dealt so harshly, but, on the contrary, bestill ар peared to take the most lively interest in his welfare Sn George expected tint the dejection which he remarked in Amelia, and whicli he failed not to ascribe to the right cause, would begin to diminish, if it did not wholly vanish in the course ofa veiv few weeks It was with equil anguish and surpi ise, that he saw month aftei month roll awav without producing the slightest abatement of her grief The spectacle was to him the more distressing, as the affliction of Amelia had nothing in com mon with tint ostentatious sorrow which seeks to intrude a display of sensibility on the woi Id His gentle daughter kept the secret of 1 er woe locked m her
own breast. It never burst fion her dps It showed itself not 111 pe» sh tears, m waspish complainings, 01 1 sulky silence, but to the penetrat ing eye of a fathei, who was but too conscious of the seveie shock she had sustained, it was visible in hei whole deportment Hei 1 eluctanee to go any wl ere to witness those exhibitions which hi ing mirth to the n erry, — her eagerness to escape observation, and court the icpose of solitude, compelled Sn Geoige to discover, thiough every effort, that she could make to hide her distress, that her peace of mind was no moie Vfter in vam attempting to lead her to cheerfulness, by an affec*ation of gaiety, which cost him no ordinary effort, lus emotion would sometimes become too powerful foi concealment,, and he hastily fled from the presence of his daughter, that she might not witness the tears of bitter regret, and of terrible alarm, that nature demanded as a tribute,
fi oui the fathei who lud opposed the Ixppiness of bis clnld, and who now seemed destined to behold the Jong-chc- ıîslıcd flowei of spotless innocence and matchless beauty, which had pioved to bun the most fiiutful sonico of pure en joymenl, pensh on the parent stalk. But if he were no stiangei to the gnef of Amelia, and the cause ol that gnef, he nevei made il tho subject of con¬ veisation. To name it, would, it ap¬ peni ed to hun, be to recognise, and in some soi t to smctioii, and smction nig, to peipcluate lb it winch he still hoped time would subdue By passing avanetyof objects before hci eyes, he still flattered himself, III it the impiession vvhicli had been made on ' ci susceptible mmd, might be paitl) done away , and, by frequenti) introducing hei to the so ciety of all the ) outh .md f lsliion com prehended in the extensive circle of bis acquaintance, he calculated, that, event¬ ually, the image ot Charles would be
wholly discarded from memoiy, or only retained as the portrait of а friend. He deceived himself. Amelia had not lightly bestowed her love. It was not to the engaging partner of a dance, to the lively heio of a tea-table, or to the most brilliant star of an opera box, that she had given her lieart. In Challes, she had found the beloved com¬ panion of hei infancy. Taught by the example of Sir George, to take the most lively inteiest in his fortunes while he was away, when he returned not only all she could imagine that was entitled to admiration, hut, in the opinion of her fathei dımself, a iare example of the union of elegance, sensibility, and cou¬ rage, she had not feared to listen to one wdose merit he had so highly ïated; and, when he spoke the language of love, it was not the giatification which his voice pom ed into liei ears that induced her to give lum an audience, but it was the whisperings of reason, that assured VOL. II. D
her she sinned not aga nst duty m doing this, licensed, as sde considered tde esteemed speakci to be, by the previous appiobation of liei paient It wis not to be expected, that at hei age a youth thus introduced, at once íecomniendeií hy the most endcaung lecollections, and by moie than ordinary peisotnl adv an tages, 6İıould plead m vam Го Challes she had gn en bei affections and it was not m hei power to ti ansfei tlicin to m othei All elsethatcame before liei , passed unregirded lliough Sn Geoige did not relax so fai as to cncouiage her to think of Challes, he disdained lo use any vio¬ lence towaids her feelings He wished to win, not to teai hei from the fatal attach¬ ment (such he considered it), that she had formed In v un did he labour inces santly, to accomplish this object He would not command, and lie could not captivate hei attention, by all that fi lend- ship, hospitality, and policy could invite to Ins house, 01 by otl ei means, piess on the notice of the soi rowing Amelia.
Thus heavily rolled on t) e days, when the unexpected ainval o' Mrs. Roberts, one afternoon, affoided Amelia that moni nful solace which a heart bin sting with sonow derives, fiom finding itself at Iibeity to give utteiance to its feelings, and to poimit а faithful fnend to know tlie sanice ot its ıııguıslı. Mis. Roberts was dvcly and peneti.atmg , and, if hei sister had thought ι esci ve necessaiy, would, in all piobibility, dive guessed correctly, the cause ot hci dejection. But to liei, Amelia made no seciet of hei esteem foi then mutual fuend, noi of' her gnef for Ins absence untiti cucuni- stances like those which had marked their sepaiation. "Iknew," saidMis. Rodeits, "before I came to-diy, how I should find you. What α pity it is the Fates will not ac¬ commodate mastei Cupid with a pair of eyes. If the little god could see what affliction he makes us pooi unoffending females to experience, 1 do not thmk he D S
could be so cruel as to go on as he does. But come, Amelia, you must raise your spirits Now that I have come to pay you a visit, you must not think of moping as if I had kept away I have come on purpose to enliven you " ' Then do I fear, your visit has been paid in vam Ah, Cuodne you must not expect me to be as gay as if tde sky of my destiny weie unclouded as yours " " I ike tlie iest of the woild, you ex aggerate the evils that fall to your share, and deal tde calamities of otders like а Cliustian Now I think, to use your figure, that the sky of ıny destiny is not a whit less clouded than that of my weep mg sister My Damon, like yours is no longei m England The mighty Atlantic rolls between us, and he has left me to take a part in the most min ilei ous war¬ fare that ever depopulated tins wicked, quarrelsome world Who can tell what may befal hım before we meet agam, or that we ever shall meet again in this 1.
world ? You have heard of the melan choly fate of Major Andre He was our intimate fnci ', and little did Major Roberts thmk, when he parted with him last, that his esteemed biother soldier, was doomed to pensh like a common felon on a gallows A fate so terrible did not seem to menace him more than any other officer m the sei vice, when he left us, and when, full of mirth, he was laughing, by anticipation, at the scenes he expected to witness in America Who may next lay down his life in a similar way, Heaven only knows ' But shall I give myself up to despondency, because calamity may fall on me ? No, my dear girl, I will not meet trouble halfway, foi I thmk with Gray, that Sorrow never comes too late Ληι] happ ness too bw Itìy ñ es " My sister's husband," îejoined Caro line, " goes to expose himself to peril, inseparable from active service, but he D 3
does not go desperately to court it He has a motive for avoiding it, vvliei e he can do so with lionour " " And youi dying swam, ' seeking the bubble reputation m the cannon's mouth,' you suppose, has no wish but to die, for the love he beai s Amelia You must not take such a gloomy view of your situation and Ins. He is not with¬ out hope, whatever you may be. Mi Hailey, you may believe me, is more eheeiful than you suppose, and he would have you as fearless of evil as he is." " Yet I cannot but lament his fate, doomed to endure the rigour of an in¬ hospitable climate, m addition to all the fatigues and dangers of war, and that, too, without the consolation of knowing that his eailiest friend takes any mterest m his fate " " I admire your sensibility, wb ch pities htm, wholly forgetful of self, as you would have your sister believe. Come, Amelia, I should be almost as soiry that
any accident happened to Hai ley as you could be, and should like to call him brother, as well as you would like to call dim dusband, but you must not continue sighing and dying in this manner, unless you wish to offend me, and disobey him." " Disobey lum '" " Aye, unless you wish to disobey lum, you must be cheerful, and share with lum the confident hope that your present sepaiation will, befoie α very long period sliall elapse, terminate as you botd could wish." " Who could tell you his tdoughts, to enable you to speak thus confidently ?" " Himself." " How'" " Even so. Look here, my dear girl, — Ins own hand-writing But drive back that saucy tear, that is so rude as to press before the sight of your eye. Here и a letter from him addressed to me, in which he incloses one, unsealed, for you ; which he requests me, if I thmk it notim- D 4
proper, to deliver to you, unknown to Sir George. He writes in good spuits, and his motive for desiring that Ins pre¬ sent communication should be concealed fiom our lather, springs fiom а wish to come upon lum one day with α most agieeable suipnse, and claim the hand of his Amelia. Hcie is youi letter " A deep blush overspread the lovely face of Ameli i, as, foi the hist time ш her life, she received a letter in seciet. " Have you iead it, Caroline'" " Do you think that I would be so rude ?" " Nay, he desires you to do so , and only to foiwaid it to me, if you sho.dd think it proper to allow me to peruse it. Why do you deny me the benefit of youi judgment on it ?" *' O' lam quite satisfied, that if theie had been any thing improper in it, he would not have desired me to peruse it, and you know it is impossible to feel any curiosity about an unsealed lettéi. Then, you know, I have done wtth darts, and
flames, and hearts, and have no wish to be reminded that I am gi owing old. I was delighted to find that he was well, and that was enough foi me till 1 could get to you. Now, if you like to lead it out, perhaps I may be equal to the fatigue of listening." The unfolding of a letter, ıs ıatlıeı an awful task to those who are not m the daily hadit of ıeceıvıng sued communi¬ cations on matters ot small importance. Hope and f eai ai e tremblingly alive to the news about to be communicated by α distant conespondent, and though ex¬ ultation that the expected 01 wished.foi dispatch is at length arnvetl miy pic- dominate, yet tde (luttet ot apprehension, that it may contain some fatal intelli¬ gence, is not easily repiesscd. Amelia, though somewhat emboldened by the language of hei sister, felt tins most strongly, and the changing coloui of hei cheek, and the trembling alaci ity with which hei fingers peiformed the woik d й
required from them, proved how deeply her heart was interested in the contents of the papei so unexpectedly produced. It at length lay open before her ; and, with a voice that faltered with pleasure and tender emotion too exquisite to be described, she read as follows : — " Let not my dearest Amelia believ e that time or absence, calamity or good fortune, can extinguish or diminish that aflection, which passion, for once acting undei the sanction of approving reason, vowed should be eternal. Already are the clouds, which loweied on us when we last met, beginning to disperse. Even before I left England, one ray of light broke m upon me, and taught me that despair would be madness On my ar¬ rival at Goree, I learnt with astonishment, that in consequence of the lamented death of my parents, a splendid fortune, which had been left to my father, de¬ volved to me. Howevei mournful the event which has made that fortune pre-
maturely mine, and sincerely as I could wish that it had pleased Heaven to spare those who aie no more, to enjoy it, I cannot but feel sensible of the happy change m my own situation, since, when duty permits me to return to England, I may fearlessly venture again to solicit that immense rewaid for sor. rows past to which ni) ambitious heait aspires, — the hand of my beloved Amelia " This letter, I expect, you will 1 eeeive thiough the hands of our trusty and well beloved Caroline I would not have it communicated to Sir George, till I am on the spot to vanquish any sci uples that can by possibility remain in his mmd It may be, that after what has passed, he will think himself bound in lionour lo refuse, now that I am his equal in point of fortune, since he declined giving his consent before But I doubt not, ray inxious solicitations, when I next appear in his presence, will soon triumph ovei D 6
every objection, and, by the suipnse which I sliall bring hun, í flattet myself that it will be my felicity to do it by a сокр de matn. " Let the cheering piospect that opens before us, sustain your spirits till we meet again. 1 have а presentiment that the period is not remote, and that my ever- bountiful friend, your esteemed fathei, will hail with us the happy day of our re-union, « Farewell, dearest Amelia. Be hap¬ py, fear not for me. Sustained by rapturous hope, and animated by immor¬ tal love, I feel that I boar a ' charmed life,' which dangei cannot touch Be¬ lieve me ever most devotedly yours, " Charles Ηαμ,ευ " " Well, now I hope you are happy. — О, y ou ciy baby ' Why, youi face is covered wild tears," said Mrs. Roberts, as Amelia finished leading the lettéi No ìeply vas returned , but cheerful
ness glistened through the agitation ol the reader. " Come, Amelia, youi grief has af¬ flicted oui falhei, let hnn shaie your happiness." " What ' and show lum the lettéi '" " No, that is not necessary. Keep the secret, and let Charles go on in his own way , but dismiss some of that me¬ lancholy which his lately maiked your deportment. Weai an air of comfoit, and Sn George will be delighted." " I would wish to give Inni happiness, but will not a sudden alteiation of mannei appeal to lum veiy strange 3 " " О ' not at all Nothing is moie common thin foi a gul to change hei mind. But, w ithout seeming fickle, you may be comforted. My piescnce will in some me lsui e account fot it, uid Sn Geoigc will admit me to equal favour with yourself." Amelia pionnsed to attempt compli¬ ance. Thougli hei feais were uot ic-
moved, she was consoled to know tint hei lover was not miseiable, and that his love remained unchanged. In the leitet she possessed α tieasure which she would not have exchanged for that jewel in the ciovvn of the King of England, which is said to be wortii a million of money. It was doubly deal, bieathmg, аэ it did, not only the language of affection, but also that ot hope, and, befoie she sought hei fathei, it was placed m her bosom, on that heart which throbbed with transport to welcome its new neighbour.
CHAP. IV. The sharpest mil most inciting sorrow is tliat wluili irises Гют tlie loss of those whom wc have lovul unii teiuicmcss Dr tonusov Sir George soon peiceived an alteration in the manner of Amelia, which he failed not to asci ibe to the consoling influence of her eldei sister. Determined, if pos¬ sible, to improve on so dappy a begin¬ ning, be gave frequent parties, and had the satisfaction to find that Amelia could endure tdem witd tianquillity, if she did not seem to enjoy the amusements which invited her attention. But if, at Ins re¬ quest, she attempted to contribute α part to the entei tamments pi ny uled foi Ins company, her t isle set med mvolnnt inly to lead hei to the mel uicdoly. On one occasion, when pressed to supply some-
thing eheeiful to a concert then in pro¬ gress, she seemed h и diy aware that she л\ ач not complying w ıth the request which had heen made, when she selected a ditty which ran tims : О 1 I ha. e heard the mother weep At mutm^ht o'er her djmg child, And loudly vent her mignit,!» deep, !n (Vauin, t-rnjers anil accents wild And \el mort. smi — lune hear I her song Ascend ш mirth' ь fictitious strum, Till tinture, fur tli^uiae too strong. Has, bobbttiL.. owned the eflort vam But wrapped her charge ш DciitliN pale shroud, Though fast the mourner s eyes o'erflow, The voice of gnef но шоп ь loud, The mother ртеь in silent noe While language cnn give шьегу scope, Our drcud, our horror, and our care,. Prove thnt with mij,»» bh lingers hope, 'Tie awful silence marks despair Sir George occasionally reproved her choice» and thought a selection of more lively productions would tend to ıestoıe her spirits, but, notwithstanding his re. mousti anees, and hei wish to vie hit ohe- dience to his will, her taste ıeınaıncci
the same. 1 hough comforted, she could not he mirthful, nor could she even wish it. Her feeling was precisely that which has been so felicitously expressed by а modem poet : Go, you may cull it mnJiiLss — folij, You shall not chace m> gloom away , TJlcrt s sutii ι cilamı ill melancholy, I would not, if I colli I, bt f,ay Lord Dashington fiequently honom - cd the assemblies called togethei by Sir Geoige with his presence, and Mi. fSpankei sometimes accompanied His Loidslup. The lattei was not the most welcome visitor in the world, as he never failed to let his hobby run away with him without at all consulting the taste of those who took no inteiest m sport¬ ing intelligence. But he was so fat from suspecting the little value set on his society, that on one occasion he tra¬ velled post fiom London to Wooburn to apologise foi Ins unavoidable absence on the preceding evening. The sensibility
winch he displayed on account of the disappointment, lie supposed, the com¬ pany to have (clt freni lus absence was vciy touching, so much so, tint Sir Geoige, to console hnn, was obliged to assure hım ıepeatedly that it was not ot the slightest ınıpoıtınce. " Well," said the Spoitsman, " I hope not, but, you must know it w as quite unavoidable, I was obliged to assist in knocking up this new mill." " New null '" "Aye, what, haven't you beai d ot it· 1 " " I did not know you were budding." " Building ' Ha ' ha ! ha ! that's а good one. I mean the boxing-match. I'll tell you all about it directly." " I am much obliged, but really, Sir, I should be soiry to give you that tiouble. Sucli matteis have no interest foi me now " " Well, I don't much wondei at it ; for, really, the piigibsts uow-a-days are
nothing to those of other times. There's a sad falling off. Wc have no fights now like those wc used to have." " But boxing is one of those amuse¬ ments tint never appealed to me entitled to encouiagcincnt." " My dear Sir Geoige, you forget what men wc used to have, or you would not ьау so. Don't you remember Jack Ыаск, the N01 wich Buteliei f I saw hım hght Bioughton, the master of the Am· plutlicatie, just thirty yeais ago last April. They were something like men. Bioughton had nevei had the conceit taken out of hnn, and he gave Jack ten guineas to fight him." " Is tlıeıe any news ш town ?" " None of consequence. So Jack, as soon as lie had touched the ten guineas, immediately betted them against a bun¬ dled that weie offered ; but that was no¬ thing to the odds that might have been taken all 1 ound the ring. I took twenty to one myself. Jack made short woik of
lt. He w ent ín, in such style. I think I see hnn now. Tiiere nevei had been such a set to. — Why, tlie money taken at the door — tliey fought in the Amphi- theatie — besides the tickets issued at а gi mea and half- 1 guinea each, amounted to a bundled and tliuty pounds. So, as I was saying, Sn Geoige, Jack went m just m this manner," —(and Mi. Spankei putting himself in a boxing at¬ titude, began to squaie,) " the busi¬ ness was soon settled, for he put out Broughton's eyes in the hist two 01 tin ее rounds, and in a qiniter of an hour he beat his man, and all the knowing-ones, with then ten and twenty to one, were done " " I think it matter of regi et that men should fight and destroy one another at home, when their countiy stands so much in need of their sen ices abroad against the common enemy." " Oh, as to that — by the bye, now you talk of the enemy, have you heaid
of these ships being captured by the French." "Where, Su'" " AVliy, in the River Gambia." " No, I have heai d nothing of it. How many have wc lost?" " All we had to lose, I believ e in that quaitei." "Indeed' All taken' Can jou tell me the names ol any ot the captured ships ?" " Not I, Sn Geoige. Why jou seem more alive to a slup or two being taken, in which you can have no concern, than m the boxing-m itch 1 have told you of, by winch you mijht make thousands, if you chose to bet." " I confess my failing. I am more in¬ terested in that which affects the national honom, than m the result of a bout at fisticuffs, in which a butchei may achieve a splendid victoiy ovei a dustman, or a dustman be cued ир to the skies as a hero, for having cross-buttocked a lamp¬ lighter."
" Well, we can't be all of the saine way of thinking Some, now, who have taken a pietty good turn at those things, which you hold to be of so much import¬ ance, have in the end found out, that boxing was equally worthy of then at¬ tention. There was the Duke of Cum- beiland, non, foi instance, Taltce, I mean, who was fondei of a bit of spai than he? He was tlıeıe when Slack beat Broughton, and he would not have been moie cut up if he dad lost tde day at Culloden, tlı m he was at the defeat of Bioughton " " AVcll, Mi. Spankei, I must not con¬ tradict you, but we ought not to speak ill of the dead." " Then tiiere was Captain Godfiey. He loved boxing fiom his heart, and used to spar with Bioughton, who by the way tried hard to please, for he often thrashed hnn till he could haidly stand. He used, besides, sometimes to have a set-to with the Jumping Soldier — Buck-
hoise, and Hany Gray, the clog-makei. So you see, Su George, pugilism h is not alwaj s been despised by those most in¬ timately connected with what you think of such supeuor impoitancc." " Gieat men, and men of first iate talents have then fadings." "So, Sir Geoige, jou mean to insi¬ nuate, tint I have. You flattei me." " Believe me, when 1 spoke of great men, I meant no reflection on you." " No, no, but when you spoke of—" " Men of first-rate talents ? — I assuie you theie was nothing personal m the allusion." " Then 1 beg your pai don." " That, Su, ıs quite unnecessaiy ; but I wish to hear of these ships." " O, Ships ' Though I called them ships they aie but cock bo its. A couple of tiansports sent up the Gambia, manned by the ciew ot the Zebia, hate been cap¬ tured by the benegal, I think they call it, a French Frigate."
ί
" What," enquired Su George, with great eagerness, " were the vessels taken manned from the Zebra?" " Yes, fiom the Zebra. AVas not that the ship m which that young fellow, Harley — wasn't that his name? — went out ? —" " It was " " Then I suppose the Fiench have got him safe enough." " I am very sorry to hear it." " Don't be alarmed ; I'll bet y ou two to one he's alive, that's gieat odds." " So great, that I have no thought of taking them. You must excuse me, Mr. Spanker, but the news you have biought affects me neaily, and I must instantly seek further information on the subject." The manner of Sir George gave Mr. Spankei α hint that he might depart. He did so with little regiet . as to him, the society of α man who possessed so little refinement as to care more for that
wlitcli iffeeted tlıc national honom than for the fiist /noch-dotin bloti vvhicli one wietched hlackguai d might give to an¬ other m a pı i/c fight, and more foi the safety oi an esteemed young man, than ioi ι good bet, or even the Dıddlem ıace- eoursc, was by fai too antediluvian to afloui pleasuie to a modern sportsman lie took his leave, and Su George was deliberating what course he should pui¬ sne to obtain a continuation 01 lefutation of what lie had just heaid, when the postman's knock airested his attention In a few seconds, a letter was biought to lum. lt was sealed wild black, and, on opening it he read as follows "Gotee, Not. 10, I7SO " Sin, " Though unknown to you, I use the liberty ot addı essmg you on the subject of an event, 111 winch I have reason to believe, you will take moie than common interest. Two transports, sent on an vol. 11 ь
expedition up the Gambia, undei the command of Lieutenant Haile·), hau been captured b) the Senegal, а Trench fugate. Anxious to avoid becoming a pi isolici, the Lieutenant aftci m vain cndeavouniig to prevail on Ins people to accompany Inni on shore, at length de¬ tei mined on the lash attempt to escape tluthei alone Two peisons then pio posed to go w ith lum, but, on the boat, m w Inch the) had put off, upsetting, the) returned to the vessel which they hid just left Mı. Haile) is said, by one of tbem, to have sunk in the first instance, tu use no more, but the othei decíales that lie cune up agun, and swam towaids the shore, whicli he had neatly reached, when he disappeared Both agree that lie peiished , and this statement is con- finned by a seaich subsequently madt oi· shore without success. I am soir) to have to communicate intelligence so mournful, of one so univei sail) respected
by all who had the happiness to know dim, and have the honour to be, " Sn, " Youi humble sei ι ant, " Henry Rawlins." Sit (.corgo Henderson Hart Su Geoige experienced the most cx¬ ciuciating torture while leading this lettci. He looked wildly round foi sup¬ poi t, and Amelia, who had entered the apartment as Mi. Spankei retn eel, now appioacded. His eyes fell on hei, and a new pang invaded Ins agitated bosom. " O, misery '" he exclaimed, " Has that geneious, aspiung spirit for evei fled'" Amelia, while endeavouung to assist hei fathei, was stiuck by his manner as well as by lus woids. She tiembled, foi she knew but of one, — but one, at least, occupied her thoughts to whom the lan¬ guage of Sir George could apply. " Why, why 1 " added the Baionef, e 2
in a tone ot self ıeproach, " did 1 bung lum up to the navy. Why devote dim—" " Oi whom, of what do speak, Sir?" enquued Amelia with an eagei solicitude wdicd panted foi tlio intelligence she shuddeied to ıeceıve. " What is il thus distiesses you 3 " " The lettéi — the lettéi , hut God's will be done '" he softly ejaculated, en¬ deavouimg to assume lus wonted scie- nity of deportment. Amelia had taken the lettéi fioin the carpet on wdicd Sir Geoige had suffei ed it to fall. He peiceived it in hei hand, and stai ted. " Not you, Amelia. No, you must not lead it. It shocks me, but—" " Forgive ine, Sır , but I must be allowed to share youi gnef." " Alas ! Your share will be terrible, and you will know it but too so in." " Already I know it. I iead it tn your eyes. He is dead. — Ah ' that
Icai ful silence tells meali, but let me know the woist." He no longei stiove to withdiaw the talai papei. Slie attempted to read if, but hci sight failed, and she in vain ¿lanced at the charactei s w Inch told the melancholy tale. That he had perished however, she could make out without difficulty , that Harley was no inore, was enough to take fiom her all wish to know the rest, and the papei again fell to the gi ound. Pale and immoveable, hei cheek re¬ clined on the bosom of the parent she had hastened to soothe, when his ungo- v enlabie emotion hrst gave the tidings of calamity. The Baronet's gnef foi Hailey was foi a moment interrupted, but only to be augmented by the over- w helming affliction of Ins beloved daugh¬ tei . What could he do to relieve her 3 How speak the language of consolation to hei, while his own heart was buisting with anguish 5 E 3
Bad news tiavels quick. Mrs. Robert? was already acquainted with the dismal intelligence. To her the shock was not a slight one, but the distress of hei father and Amelia sm passed lieis. The former seemed deeply aflected by the re¬ collection of the haishness with which he had treated the youth whose deatli thej now mom ned, and the lattei had a gnef as pecuhaily bei own, tliough spnnguig fiom feelings of a veiy diffeient, if not of an opposite chaiactei. Of the tin ее, Mis. Robeits was the only person who could attempt the pai t of the comfoi tei. To her the task was not an easy one; foi, besides that sne much esteemed Challes, and smceiely participated in the sonow winch the news of his death had caused, eveiy word that she utteied to leconcde them to the seveie visitation which Heaven had decreed, she felt might soon be used in oidei to console hei foi the loss of the Majoi, if it should be Ins fate
to fall. Now that he was away, like many othei ladies, she discovered her love for the absent sohltet was much stiongei than she Ii id supposed it to be while he was with bei , and she could not but pei¬ ceive how weak and unavailing a sunilai efloit would piove, when made to induce bei to revive fiom that profound affliction in which she must be plunged by a catas¬ ti ophe similai to that which they had now to lament. She, notwithstanding, reminded them of the piecauous tenure by whieh all hold hie, and of the peifect inutility of gnef. On tins point it is piobable she would have spoken moie at huge, if hei eloquence had not been ın¬ teı ι iq.ted by the overflow of hei eyes. Sn Geoige, after tbe lapse of several Iiom», seemed somewhat ι ecoveied, and was so f.u himself as to relieve Mis. Kö¬ bei ts, by taking upon himself pait of the duty of soothing Amelia. She piofited little by then muted attention. Impei- s ions to the ν oice of comfoi t, foi the first L I
two day s, she was insensible to dl u ound, md when tins mournful stupoi dad in some degiee sudsided, tde extieme Ian guor winch lemained, seemed dut too distinctly, to indicite tliat deatii would, at no veiy ι emote peuod, atone for In» ciuelty, in sepuating those who had so iondly loved, by ı e uniting tbem inthe giave But, fiom the dieadful calm ot hope less heedless sonow, she was soon loused to active exertion The gue* of Sir George at witnessing the effects of the shock which she dad leceived, ind other Ieedngs hardly less painful glowing out nt the same event, pioved too much ioi lus constitution, and he sunk befoie their united foice on a bed of sickness A burning fever invaded his whole frame, md violent convulsions frequently is sailed hım m α way which thieatened instant dissolution, and which w holl ν beıeaved the suffei ei of reason llie alarming state of dei lathet 4
health awoke Amelia from the tiance into which she had sunk, stunned as it were, by the tremendous shock which her feelings had sustained The stern oppo¬ sition which he had offered to α passion kindled, m part, by his supposed appro¬ bation of its object, she deplored, but she tasked memory in vam to dıscoveı that on one other occasion he had ever been unkind For the violence which in a single instance he had offered to her feelings, and yet more to those of him whom she now mourned, she was satisfied that he was sincerely penitent In his most violent paioxysms, when sense and memory were annihilated, and existence seemed about to share their fate, aflec tion still fondly lingered, and urged turn to pronounce the names most dear to him, and though if all to whom they belonged had appioached the couch on which he reclined, he could not have recognised them, yet his vacant but anxiously enquiung gaze spoke thein E 5
near to his heai t The name of Charles was nevci omitted in the list thus wildly utteied, and Amelia was doomed to the affliction of being incessantly lemmded of her lost lover, from the quivering lips of α deliuous fathei. But she sunk not beneatii such accumulated woc Mingled with her anguish, hhil duty, evei strong in virtuous minds, glowed in her gentle bosom with a tei vour of fond ness that consecrated soirow, lifted h<i above calamity, and enabled her to oflei all the energies of hei soul, — a pure and acceptable offering to the Deity on the saCied shrine of Nature To hei it was evident, from certain expressions that fell from Sir George at times, that rémoise for the treatment Harley had experienced, was not the least of the sorrows that preyed on the disordered intellect of her unhappy father Sometimes, after mentioning his name, he looked round, as expecting to see lum, — extended his hand, and ex-
claimed, "Deai, hapless youth, can\ou ioi give me ?" Reason, then, foi a mo¬ ment, would seem to hate regained hei nnaded empire. The next instant, lie would fianticly buist foith, " What a wretch I am'" and then add, lowenng his voice to the tone of despan, " But it is too late foi leflection, — ycsteulaj will not letuin." Lven when the cnsis was pist, and the Harenet was no longei unconscious of what he uttered, sunilai expressions would not iinficqiiently escipe lum. Lndeaieil to Amelia more than evei by these tendei regrets, all unavailing as they were, she watched ovei Ins faltei nil» steps like а ministenng angel, — was Ins constant companion, and Ins best con¬ solation, m eveiy stage of sickness But the beauteous lose of vutuo, winch thus flourished m fiagiant loveliness befoie lum, had for Su Geoige а thoin as shai p as its pei fection was exquisite, when he lemembered the violent wound that had L Ď
been inflicted, and by hun, on the leedngt ot the dear susceptible being who now sought to diminish his pam, unable to forget, but resolute to subdue, the ex¬ piession of her own.
Whither jou will ill |il ч are Ik Ant! tviry earth is fit fur burial «дай,» After a most fatiguing exertion, Cimile·" reached the shoie, foi ced Ins way through the mangi oves w Inch giow m the swampy mud on the margin of the river, and it length found himself on hım gıound, on the northern bank of the Gambia. Drenched, and woin out with fatigue, he sunk exhausted on the ground. In his piesent situation, he hardly knew whether to felicitate dımself on having escaped а watery grave, or to regiet that he had not at once been ıelıeved from the incum¬ brance of that existence, which, desti¬ tute and alone, he could hardly expect it
would be possible to pieseive thiougii anothei week. These thoughts passed thiough ms mmd, vvlnlj sti etched on the earth he d most abandoned himself to despan. He f incicil tint, in lus then situation, he w as Indilla eut m his choice to »leep or the, and after vieaiymg hnnseli with pain¬ ful leflection, lie hid neaily «link into the anils of sleep, wlien the roai ot α don in bis immediate neighboiuhood dis sipated Ins tdowsiness in an instant, and made hnn leel anxious to piesen e tint life, winch, a lew moments befoie, dc dad supposed he could ρ irt with, it not with cheerful ι esignation, at least with¬ out much ι eluctanee. To escape the monstei was now his ob¬ ject. How to accomplish this was a ques¬ tion of no tnfling difficulty ; but one on which he was called upon, without he¬ sitation, to decide. If he attempted to fly, the nistbng of the undeiwood would, beyond all doubt, announce to the
jiiowlei tintins picy was neat at hand ; and if wet and weaiy as he then was, he ittempted to climb one of the lofty trees with which the forest abounded, the cfloit must betiay him to thej uvs ot the lion, befoie ho could lift limiseli suffi¬ ciently high to avoid the ilmgci. lie concluded that it would bc wisest to iernam motionless where he then was. A sudden plunge in а thicket but а few yauls in his real, made dim foi a moment forget tins pi tident ι esolution , but, in tde same instant, lie fancied that he peiceived the animal had degun to recede, and Ins distant roai soon assuied lum of present safety. He attempted to climb the neaiest tree, but aftei the laboui which he had aheady undergone, he was too famt to gam its uppermost branches; and this experi¬ ment only added to his weakness, by inflicting upon him the toil of ascending about tliuty feet from the gıound, to
return discomfited to the dangei he sought to fly. The few houi a of daikness thil re¬ mained he passed in sleepless luuunatiou, and when the fiist gleam of coming d ıy was seen m the East, he hastily sought the margin of the nver, and looked lor the v essel in whicli he had lately s uled He perceived it, but at such a distance, that he could have had little hope of mak¬ ing himself visible to those on board, if he had so fir repented the step that be had taken, as to desire to rejoin Ins late com¬ panions in the captivity which was then lot. But to be a pnsonei in one of the dungeons at Portendick, was not that which he coveted, and howevei dreaiy the prospect before him, he did not feel that he had made any great saenfice in preferring the step which had placed him in the situation in which he now found himself. Helpless, unarmed, and alone, in the unexplored wilds of Africa, it required
some exeition of foititude to beai up igimst the m unfold penis wlncli en \ ironed Inm, but, detei mined not to listen to the whisperings of desp in, he lesolved to stiuggle with lus f ite to the list, ind m infidi) piepaied to b itile with ilaimty " Wild be ists," he exel timed, miy ten, — savyi men mavtoituu,— uid hungei and tbnst miy deslioj mc , but il ıs my duty to endure with film uess the misenes with which I míj have to contend, nul leave the iest to He ivc " ■Vf tei ìevoHiiigm his mmd all the penis to which he w ıs exposed wheie he then icnumcd, and b dancing these against the dangeis tint he might piobably hate to encountci f he piocecded aloiy slıoıc, he dctci mined on taking the lattei couise Ascending the ι nei, lie thought it might be Ins good fortune to ш lie it some settlement, the inhabitants of winch wcic fnendlj to the Bntisli, md m the hibitof tnding with tliem But
Ins puncipal hopes rested on the chance which lie lliought there was ol meeting some ol the mines on the nvci in then i.anoes, who were not likely to ionic down so low as w hci с lie then lound himself. His resolution taken, ho endeavoured toi thwith to ict upon it with vigom. Ue advanced tiuough the nn/c, keeping the uvei as much in view as possible. i'lie fnuts ol llie loi ist supplied hım with necessaiy aliment, and, tliough hi would gladly hate exchanged bis pre¬ sent food foi such as lie had been accus¬ tomed to, he did not feel his stiength subdued by the abstinence f ioni meat md wine, now foi ced upon lum. Howevei anxious to get ïapidly toi- ward, the stiong undeiwood tlnougli which he had to pendíate, and the op pressne heat, caused hnn to make bı t little piogiess. Ilis gai ments lic found an incumbi ance, and, beloie the close of Ins fust day's journej', it became не-
ecssaiy to dismiss bis co it When the mi vv is ibo it to set, tlıc ılısın d situ ıtıoıı ııı vv Ini 11 be lud been pl iced on the pie t uling night sııt, n estcd to hun the t\pe deney ol t tmıeiv cllort to spue limiseli liitliei iquilly folloni A p ılın lice yvi osc lofty heul ios moie thin liity leet fıom the gıound, piesented itseli t» bis new while these ide is passed tlitouji lus ninni, uni in tins lie mule up Ins mind lo pass tlıc dom s of dukness v\ itd niiicd dtlhculty he climbed it, md at last, with great satisi ıctıon, ioımıl limiseli in possession of the best lod b ing tint that pai t ol the countiy could ifiord But, baung made shift to ascend, the next thing w ıs to contuve to ıeıııım in the testing place lic h id gtined He bail sufficient expei icnce ot the vicissitudes ot life to 1 now, tb it its ups tud dottili weie fiequently ьо close togethei, that tdose, who wcic most exdted one Iiom, vvcie dadle to bo piccipitated fiom then
lulty situation m the next ; and lie bad no wish to furnish a new illustration of the' coiiictness ol that aphorism which teai lies, tint ' bo who aspires the Inchest will be most likely to fall.' Го secure himself, as I ir as might be, against descending more expeditiously than lie desued, lie caiefully tinned »»no of the weakest and most pliant branches iound Ins body. Otheis he used as auxiliai ics to the Hi st, and, doing this with a veiy consideiable nunibci ot them, he felt assın t d that he should be m no dangei of falling in the event ol Ins going to sleep. He placed himself in а sitting position, Clasping one of the blanches with In*. unlit aim. His left rested on anothei, and this he made bib pillow. His aching head reclined on it, butthe unusual posture in which he wooed repose, — (he Litigue ot remaining iu one position, which fiom the precautions he had t.tkon against an accident, could not be
vauid, — the picssiitc ol the boughs which be lud twined ıound lus limbs ai d body, and the dow lings of the wild beasts lie had ascended the palın to escapo, all combined to make it impossible foi bun to sleep. He lejoiced when lotuiiung diy pei - nutted him to emancipato himself fiom this painful situation, which appe ned to huu so mtoleiable that he almost le¬ solved at all ha?auls, to sleep on the iţiotind foi tbc íemaiiidoi of lusjoiľiiey. I'lie ninneious venomous and disgusting leptilos winch infested the foiest as lit marched fontani, mule lum shnnk fiom aiting upon this feeling, wlien night agam came on ; and as befoi e, he selected the tallest ti oc foi lus bed-chamber. On the second night he did not sufici so much as on the fiist. He had not thought it necessaiy to bind himself to the tree by so many ligatuies, and ho enjoyed compaiative ease. Towards mid¬ night he was relieved from the anxious 1
cues tii it filled his bosom, b\ α leliosh- nig slumbei, fiom winch he did not awake till long aftei diy-bieak. Imigoiated by the icpose lie had tasted, bc piosecuted his jouinej with new courage. Whenevci he could ip- pioach the mei, his longing cyts loved cageily over its wateis, but vanii) sought to discot ei the means of extiicating hnn self Iiom the pathless wilds m winch he Ind now become a wandei ei. D.a)s and weeks passed awaj without bimgmg any change in his condition. He continued to uliance, .as it appealed to Inm, neaily m a stiaight line , but in t un did he look foi α human habitation, oi any othei object that could indicati the teimination of his pilgi image to be¬ at hand. Sometimes the foi est pi csented such an impenetrable mass of timber and undeiwood that lie was obliged to dc \ iate from the couise he w as anxious to pursue, but though often thus com¬ pelled to tiavel a most weaiisome iound,
he nevci failed to letuin towaids tlie Gambia, as on meeting with the means of ciossmgoi descending that uvei, ill that now lemained to hnn of hope de¬ pended But if lus condition was unchanged, lus sense of it was no longei the same Iniued to its haidslnps, he sometimos foigot th ithe was actually suffeung wh it once vvcie felt to be severe piivalions He contentedly sat down to bis dinner at noon, and though a cocoa-nut commonly saved lum foi fish, flesh, and fowl, ami its milk foi wine, he but sedlom íogiet ted the absence of moie luxuuous food Giown expert at climbing, when tht uiirlit approacded, lie looked out as tian quilly foi α good palm tice, as m Lngland ho would have done for a i espectable inn, and having ascended it, he slept as soundly on its blanches as if he had been accommodated w ith a bed of down m ι splendid apartment, ile ıose, oı mou pıopeıly speaking, descended m tin
moining, with lenewed stiength, md ïcsiiincil lus march, without repining at any thing which he enduied at that time, but only anxious to secure the means of ultimately ι etui ning to Goree. His coat, it h ıs been seen he throw away, on bis hist diy's joutney 'Hit brushwood and thorns that impeded his piogiess, and theexcicise of climbing to his nightly lodging, soon convinced lum that it would be unnecessaiy to disc nd anv lemaining article ot Ins .ipp ucl. In lew w oı ds, tliey almost ι educed dun to а state of lutino. '1 he pockets of his trowsers were woin out, and the little money tdat he dad had with him had absconded beiore be w as aware of the dangei. This did not gı ıeve hım much, as he saw no prospect of arriving wheie European cash would be of seıvıce in administer¬ ing to his wants. He had now been two months iu the woods, and his shoes and stockings weie completely desti oyed. He still resolutely advanced ,
though Ins bleeding feci, and an ippie (tension that to go so fast as he hail been accustomed lo do, would aggravate the fevei which had invaded his frame, com¬ pelled hun to tiavel slowei and moie cautiously than befoie. But the stiength of his constitution tuumphed ovci all, and his feet became so hat deneti dy peiseveiance, that he m tunc leaint to consider the ai tides which had pre viously defended them, as little less th m useless His clothes were so nearly exhaustetl, that that which had been а shirt was used as a band to fasten what remained of his trowseisto his peison. In vain weie his anxious looks duected towards the uvei, when he appioached its bank. No bark ruffled its sm face, no piospect oi ıelıel appealed on that side, and now, suspect¬ ing, 01 more than suspecting, the wisdom of the ïesolution which he had originally taken, Ins coinage at tunes began to rail, yet lie could not think it wise to return, vol. и г
iďtei advancing so fai. To push foi¬ ţi ard seemed hopeless, but to go back was despan- Of the few ai tides which w cie in lus pockets when he fiist landed, he now onl) retained a handkerchief, α pocket- book, and а clasp knife. 'Ihe last was incomparablj the most valuable ai tide m lis possession llns (with the pocket- look), was deposited in the folds ol the band iound Ins body, whicli has been already mentioned to have been necessary to retain the last testige of appai el which adhered to the wunderen One day, pie¬ parmg to dine on а cocoa nut, lie wanted lueknife, to make the punctures necessaij to enable lum to get at the milk it con¬ tained befoie he fiactured the shell. He felt for it where it was usually to be found, w hen, with unspeakable agony, he missed it He seaiclied eveiy thread ol his wretched habiliments, in the hopi that the treasure might possibly havı lodged elsewhere. It was to no purpose ·
it was gone, and he could expect to see it no more But an object ol such immense value vv as not to be giv en up. Tliough, as lie judged, he had tiavellei! six 01 seven miles that moining, he deteimintd on the instant to retrace his steps, and care¬ fully seek it the whole of the way. He tasked Ins memoiy to recall the occasion on which be had last used it, but could not recollect having seen it that day. It, in the end, occuned to lum, that it was m Ins possession on the preceding even¬ ing, when he had used it to pi ocure and prepare fot eating the funt, the remains ofwhich had sened lor Ins breaklast that moining With the utmost care, he again went ovei the tiack he had pie viously liodden. Several times, he was doubtful which side of a thicket 01 swamp he bad pi elei red, and both were care¬ fully explored Moie than once, a stick in a stone beai ing some slight ι esemblance to it m size or coloui, made hnn start
with jo\ only to expenence disappoint ment, and to leflett, with acute pam, how happ) he should hat e been had he real!) discoveied it He at length siw the teimination of a long, weaiisome, and f ι intless search, and peiceived, as the sun declined, that lie appioached tin¬ ti ее in which he had lodged on the pıe¬ cedıııg night, and beiieith which he h td used his knife. He looked all aiound the spot on n Inch lie had taken his meal, but it w as not to bc seen , and he now, leluctantly, and with indcsciibible pam, was compelled to relinquish the hope of finding it, when, with equal astonishment and delight, lie peiccnid the object of hi» seaich on the opposite side of the palm. He bad not once been on that side , and he was convinced that it must hat о fallen fiom him while he slept. With the thrilling sensation of a man wlio feels, that had he adtanccd one step fur¬ ther he must have fiilen fıom some tre¬ mendous precipice, and been dashed to
tom, Hulcy icflcctcil, that Ind his I nife dıopped t little mote to the ught ot о the dit, it must have bcc ι t once ile 1 by the bushes wlucd he should nit have thought of seuclim 0 md the ıccıdent would hive been iriepu idle Relieved fiom tbc inxicty which had ıgıt ited linn foi some lıoııı s lie elicci fully mule but one incil of dumei and suppei, mil, lining satisfied the ciaungs of dun gei, illudi hid been îepcllcd foi atime by vexition mil alum, he ascended to his lodging, 01 loost, ol the pieced mg mght, so hippy in tbe ıecovcıy of Ins pioperty, tint be budlv ıcgretted the tl iy do bad lost, oi the fatigue that lie lmd expeuenced To guaid, howevei, iganist a lepetition of the ıccıdent, be toic he slept, he seemed his knife, by stiel ing it m the baik of tlie p ılın, so that, without some foice, it could not be ie moved
ï 3
CHAP. VI. i liougli ρίιιιιι,Μ ш ills, imltxiRisilin cuie, Yet liner let tilt noble ninni despair, When [Hest li) il inger, nil I beset with lues, J he gods then timely succour interpose, Anil when om uium sinks, o'erwhelni'd with D ret, Bv untorc5Ccn expe bents bring relief Ришн. Ün the next day, he resumed his join ney at the usual time, and, under cir¬ cumstances diftenng m no respect lıoııı those in which he had commenced Ins wandenngs on othei mornings, but m this, that lie had now gıound to pass mei that he had tiavellei! twice already. He often lamented having evei lesolved to ascend the uvei, and he considered it very piobable, that the frequent dew- »tions he had been compelled to make, had tin own hnn towards the interior,
when he might have obtained rehet on the Gambia. If, mste id of pcrfonning the exhausting and unpiofitable pilgrim¬ age on iv Inch he h td ventured, he had taken up his residence on some spot which would at all times have afloided him a view of any thing that might pass, he thought it likely, nay almost cei tain, that before so many weeks could have elapsed, the means of getting away would have offeied themselves. But, after tiavel- ling scleral hundieds of miles, as he had done, to stop, 01 to tum back, would be to throw away all the painful labour he had peifonned, and he flattered himself the period of relief could not now be xeiy remote. A few days, nay a few houis, might bring him to some African town, the natives of which might be in¬ duced, by the pionuse and prospect of reward, to facilitate h.s retuin. The gieat danger he had been m ot losing his knife, made dim most .anxious to guaid against the recurrence r J,
of a similar accident Afraid to tiust it wheie lie had befoie been m the habit of carrying it — ah aid, indeed, of losing sight ol it foi a moment, he could dıs¬ coveı no means ot seeming it, that ap¬ pealed to bun preferable to carıyıng it in bis hand That which be held to be such a treasure, gave him, in moie in¬ stances than one, some trouble, foi on the second morning atter its supposed loss, h wmg taken the precaution of fixing it m the tiee he slept in, he left it in ils secui ily , aud, when he had lowered him¬ self to the gıound, found the task of climbing the tree agam imposed upon him, as the leward ot his piudence Dui mg the whole of his join ney, he had tasted no animal food. The lew beasts that had come under his obseiv¬ ation were so shy, that he could not ap¬ pioach them if he had possessed the means of attacking them , and with the winged iace he of course stood no bettei chance lwice in the couise of his
wanderiiigs, lie discoveied α nest with several eggs ibout the size of the egg ot а pigeon, and, with the exception of this luxury, the fiuits of the foiest — the cocoa nut, the lime, the guav ι, the citi on, the ciboa, or the plantain, fin mstied his daily sustenance Cut off fiom human society, and denied ill those indulgences, winch, imong the most civilized ρ irt of man kind, aie called the necessaries of life , without biead or meat to eat, clothes to w cai, oı a bed to he on, it would seen) to some, that an abridgment of his com¬ forts could haidly by possibility take place, without pioducmg death Some¬ times, though not very often, this opinion was th it of the unfortunate Guiles, but he was soon taught that it was enoneous Hitherto, the forest had abounded in tall tiees, so that when disposed to tenmnate the toil of the day, he had always a test¬ ing place neai at hand One day the sun was rapidly descending, wb e n he re г 5
marked, with uneasiness, that the fscu of the forest was materially changed. To atlvance was as difficult as evei , but thick, thorny bushes, and dwuf trees, wholly incompetent to lift a lodger for the night above the ïeach of the marau ders, whose gloomy domain he had pre¬ sumed to mvade, were all that met the eye. He remembered the comfortable, snug accommodation, which the lofty palm had been accustomed to afford, and felt his pi csent situation to be more deploiable, from the comparison which this ıecoUectıon of past happiness (such the command of а lofty lodging now seemed,) intiuded on his mind Yet why this uneasiness. To sleep on the gıound at night, was little more than a continu¬ ation of the dangei of the day, which was so imminent that he endeavoured, constantly, to hold himself in readiness to yield his soul to the Author of his being. This reflection almost tempted him to stietch himself on the gias»
amidst the brushwood, but the ıecoUec¬ tıon of the first night he passed in the woods occuned to lum, and spurred him forwaid in the hope that late as it was, he might hnd a more secure resting place than he could at piesent command. He therefore moved on, though the shades of night had invested eveiy let¬ ture of the di eary scene with additional gloom, and, thougli advancing in dark¬ ness, he seemed to court the very peril that he was most solicitous to shun. For moi e than two hours he had con¬ tinued his dismal mai ch, when a tree, using a little lughei than any he had seen for some hours, piesented itself to his view It vv as а Лей Gum tiee, and standing little mote than seven feet fiom the gi ound, presented but mdiffeient oc- coininodation to a traveller who had, foi months, enjoyed the luxury ot nightly climbing from forty to sixty feet to lue lepóse. Though prtde had no shar'· in his composition, he could not but object г 6
to this ι esting place, that it w as low \las ' he had no choice llns tiee, though not inore than an eighth pai t of the height of the palms winch had commonly re¬ ceived Ins weary frame, was the monaich ot that pail of the forest, and seemed airogantly to lord it, conscious of its greatness, ovei the humble bushes and lowly slu ubs that giovelled in its neigh¬ bourhood Here then, Hailey concluded Ins toil for that day He passed with little de¬ lay to the greatest elevation that lie could obtain, and having secured himself fiom falling, he soon forgot, in the arms of sleep, the misery that he had endured, the apprehensions which had alarmed, and the hoirors whicli still encompassed him Shortly aftei day break, he started from slumbei, disturbed by an Unusual rustling At the distance of a veiy lew paces, he perceived the bushes which obscured the suiface of the ground, to
be violently agitated, and in the same 111stantana111m.il lesembling astag, but not so laige, lushed foiwaid with a des- peiate eflort at speed, closely puisued by α beaat which he at once lecognised to be а hon. 'lhe flying fugitive was so completely exhausted, that it ινα<· oleai escape was impossible. Withm fifty yards of his lesting-place, Harley saw the lion spnng on his piey, and in less than a minute he had torn the victim limb from limb, and lud already com¬ menced his meal. A shuddering sensa¬ tion ian through hnn when he reflected how nanowly he had escaped dealh, as it was not unlikely that if he had not lesolutely continued bis maich till be aruved at the tiee m which he had le¬ posed, that he might have been α sub¬ stitute foi the slaughteied deei. The monster was of enormous size, and now sti etched at Ins ease he enjoyed at leisuie his sanguinaiy repast. Il oc¬ cupied him for mote than an houi. His
tei rifle appearance was not a little height¬ ened by the blood of his victim, which besmeaied his paws, Ins mouth, and his sides. Hailey feared that Ins flaming eyes, which fiequently glared in the ιίι¬ ι ection ot his lodging, would presently iest on luni, m which case destruction appealed to be inevitable. Having neaily devoured the stag, the lion ıose to retne. He passed immedi¬ ately under the lesting-place of Hailey who watched all his actions with the ut¬ most vigilance, taking especial care to ι emani motionless The monster re tie ited into a thicket, fhithei Charles suspected that he went to ι epose aftei the fatigue andı epast of the morning. It was not so distant as to satisfy him that he would not be perceived in descending, and in consequence, he lemained in his lodging several houis incapable of decid¬ ing what couise pi udenee required lum to take. He dually considered that wlmtevei dangei might await him then,
when the voiacfous object of alarm, if near lum, was probably asleep, it would not be diminished if he waited till the approach of night, and hungei, should wike the eieatuie, to ti weise the forest m quest of α new victim Ho beside^ ι effected lint a vast space laj befoie him in which no tiee of moderate elevation could be seen, and if he should ι emani where be then was much long«, he might, piobably at night, be unable to hnd any place for repose but the ground, α situation, whicli after what he had wit¬ nessed, did not ippear ıemarkably eli¬ gible for one who still sometimes fondly chenslied delightful wakmg di earns ot leturning to Lngland, to enjoy the de¬ lights of civilized society, the comforts ot a good fortune, and the possession ot unequalled beauty. He finished his musings by leaving the tree as silently as possible, and, aftei be¬ stowing borne suspicious looks on the thicket to which his attention had been
drawn, betook an opposite dnection. On MSiting the scene of thetiagedj of which he had been the witness that moining, he found tint the deci Ind been ıatlıeı moie than enough foi the lion's bieak- fast, and some fragments remained on the gıound So unexpected a tieat as a tasteof.iniin.il food, was not to be le- sisted, and, sn itching up one of the h ilf- gnawed limbs of the unfortunate deci, he passed on with moie than usual expedi¬ tion, promising himself, when he should ıeaclı a place of compaiatite safet}, a most sumptuous dmnei on the leavings of his neighboui. Гог several houis he used the utmost speed, directing his steps as he judged towaids the mei, which, foi some dajs, he had whollj lost. About an houi allei noon, lie saw, with no small pleasure, tall foiest trees again before him, and now, feelmg satisfied that the enemy he fled was seveial miles m the ıeaı, he sat donn te the luxuuous feast chance had thrown
m lus w iv. Haying cut away the parts which appealed to hive come in imme¬ diate contait with tde jaws of tlie ile- slroyci, he dad pieviously cut seveial slices, winch, being now somewhat dntil by the sun, licgieeddy swallowed, eating pait of a cocoi-nut with them as biead. The tieat was not quite so delicious as he expected it would piove. Meat in that state till then he had nevei tasted, and certainly it was not much to his mmd, though still acceptable on any tei ms. Journeying on, he caiefully took with dim what lemained of the deei's flesh. He did not cany it fai befoie he per¬ ceived that the heat of the sun had already begun to make it unfit to eat, and the lepast it had aheady furnished was moie than he eould beai, aftei the light food on which he had been constiained to live for seveial months. He tlnew away Ins риге in disgust, and found Inaiseli so exceedingly ill, tliat lie was obliged to
terminate the fatigues of the day at an eaibei houi thin usual He had no difficulty in finding α tree of sufficient elevation loi his puiposc, but, from in¬ disposition, the task of climbing it now pressed upon him so severely, that when half accomplished, he deliberated foi some moments whether it would not be wise to descend and seek one whose pro¬ tecting branches might be gained with less exertion. 'I be f ι ightlul scene of the moining, and the dangei be had foimerly escaped, urged bun to aspire to the lofty resting-place he had in the first instance prefeired, and with much painful exei¬ tion he ıaısed himself at last to that exalted situation. When tlıeıe, he had haidly sufficient strength left to take the usual precautions against а sudden de¬ scent in Ins sleep, and this effected, nearly halt the night was wasted befoie i epose brought oblivion of pain His health was not reinstated foi some days after tlus experiment. When it»
effects at length ceased, he advanced with liicicasedi ipidit}. Ihe undeiwood which had toi mente d .md impeded hım, »o longei pi csented so formidable an ap¬ peaiance as it hid exhibited dui mg the greatei put of Ins melancholy jouiney, and it length he wis relieved fiom it iltogcthei. Глег disposed lo tike piesent rebel is the piecmsoi ol future comfoit, he chceifully adtanccd through what ap¬ pealed to limi a glove of palms rathei thin л foiest. lie did not slacken his pice till siniset, when, knowing from tlie slioitncss of the twilight in those ıctıons, that daikness was at hmd, he liulged it piudcnt to secure a lodging without delay, lo stop was the more desìi able, as at no iţi eat distance before lum he thotylit he discoveied, thiough llie ыЫе veil uow fast descending on evei) object, .iiecuiience of the bi usli¬ tt ood, wlncli he so much (headed, and
tlie absente ol which had affoided Inm the sniceust pleasure. Ou resinning Ins pedcstii.iu Iabouis ш the minning, lie joon ippioachcd what he had supposed to be a icncw.il ol tlie old impediment to tiavclling, when, lo Ins inexpressible joy, he saw that it was an immense pi niiatuin ol niai/c, oi In¬ dian coin. Ihe lii.iiinoi in which the gıound was cultivated spoke those who laboui t d on il to be bettei acquainted with the aits of cinlimi life than could be expected fiom mere savages. .So lugli did (lie maize use, thai, to fonn an ide ι of tiie ixtentof the plantation, lie was obliged to uscenti t tiet'. Γιοιη Uns In could piami) see, it the distiuce ol a quaitei ol α mile, scveiil people of co¬ lom ti.inquilly Hoiking in the fit Id. Agam to behold a human being was, to an eye that loi man) tedious weeks had only opened on the gloomy recesses ol a torest, where no liv ing creatine appeared but to mock the wandciei's wants, 01 to
wake lus feaı s, was no oului u y tl e it Hut those human beings might bı blootl- tlııısty savages___No mitici, he nuglii as well fall by then bands as by the fangs of lliefoui-footed tenants of the wilderness he had exploitai, and Ins hie dad been so longin continual dangei that he lilt his condition was much inipioved since, al I M, he had αϊ ι ived w liei с there was only ι chance ol dangei, and coupled with that chance, a piospect ot being at once emancipated irom llic deploialik bt ite with which he dad so long been (a miluit . Buefly, b.it devoutly, letiinung thinks to lliat Powei thai dad mcicilttlly pie- seived hnn thus fai, lie eletet mined on picsentnig limiseli lo those ho li id soon ııı tlie held, and loi that puiposc plunged at once into the niai/e, and made, as fast as he could, towaids the spot wheie tliey weie employed. Uo piesently heaid the sound of then tongues, and, continuing to move in the same dnection, he found
himself close to tliem. As he appioaolied their voices became louilei, and, though the language m wlncli the parties spoke was unknown to bun, the accentsol asto¬ nishment and alai m vvcie easily to bc distinguished; hut when he appealed full bcloie them, an exclamation ol ge¬ neial dismay astounded dun, and bis confusion was equal to thens when lie found that Ins abrupt intrusion dad lud tlie effect of suggesting α most disoi- deily retieat. The p u ty winch ho had suipnsed con¬ sisted ol six men and five women. In the race, foi the commencement of wlucd Huley's piesence lud given the signal, the lattei piesently found themselves dis¬ tanced, and weie, in consequence the fiist lo be satisfied, fiom the dunible and sup¬ plicating gestmes of the wandeiei, that lie was an object of pity ıatlıeı than of tci- ror. They peiceived that it was a fellow eieatuie alone, tunt mcd, and apparently m dıstıess, and couiage retiiriung, ac-
t-oinpamcil by its usual attendants m the temale mmd, benevolence and t ιιι losity, unpolled them to reti асе then steps, and appioach the cause of then late aku m and flight. Giadually diawing neaioi anil neai ei, tliey at lei.gth formetl a cucio iound Cíenles. Ile accosted them in English, and alıcı ivaids endeavouied to avail hmi¬ sell ot a tew woids whieh he had picked up fiom some of the natives lesiding neai tlic Gambia, whom he dad seen at Goiee. Tliey looked fiist at dun, ami then at each other, but did not compi elioliti anv thing of w hat lie sud. lic flatteied limiseli that lus pantomime was moie sticcesstul wlien kneelmg on the ground, and clasp¬ ing his hands, he endeavouied to give them to undeistand, that lie was in dıs¬ tıess, and at thou meicy. After tins committee dad tlioiouglily examined lum with then eyes, going iound hint seveial times for that pinpose, one of Ilio boldest determined on satisfying beiseli
that the new comei was flesh and blood, ventuied topiace hei finger on Ins face Though it may' bc supposed that she- was pietty well piepaied to e\pcct that the lesult would bc picnsely what it pioved, the moment this cxpeiiment was made, а shnll exclamation, accompanied by а laugh, seemed to announce to hci companions, Hut the sti inge cuuosity they had stumbled upon w is ι eaily α man They joined m the cry ami in the laugh, and the same instant the whole party commenced α en culai dance, in which Charles found himself made the substi¬ tute foi a maypole. He lenewed his pantomimic solicitations foi ıelıef, but the solemnity piocecded The men who had halted at some distance, on perceiv¬ ing the vv omen to letuin, had begun to follow their example, and now, obsei ving the tiun winch aflaus had tiken, made a veiy lesolute advance, and aimed in time to assist in the dance, and in the choius wlncli was gaddled, 01 sung as they might think, on tde occasion.
When this ceremony had been com¬ pleted, several of them accosted him, but he could not guess at the purport ot what they said. One of them then took hold of his shouldei, and pointing in а paı- ticular dnection, seemed to intimate that lie should go there with them. He made signs of cheerful acquiescence. Having crossed adttle cieek, and passed through another maize field, а considerable num ber of huts, founing α pietty, romantic village, met Ins view. The shouts of those who formed his escoit now com¬ municated the great news of the day to their neighbours and friends, many of vv hum advanced to meet the procession. All testified the utmost surpnse at the appearance of the stranger, and the re¬ turn of Columbus, with some of the ori¬ ginal natives of Amenca m his train, could not create a greater sensation in the countiy which claimed his services, than was experienced in that where our hero now found himself when he entered > vol. п. о {
the village of Sambarra. He could not determmewhether he was considered to be a prisoner or а guest : but the absence of all ferocity and displeasure from the faces of those he had seen, led him presently to conclude, that among such а people, he had little to dread, and every thing to hope.
CHAP. VH. Fearless visitor draw mar, Place thee at my humble board, Seek no delicacies here, Take tlie best it can affimi Little ns there n. to sprre, Thou art welcome to thv share MaJOAISANkS The throng of men, women, and children called foith by the discovery of a white man, was much augmented as he and those to w hom he had first presented him¬ self, advanced tiuough a lane formed by twonregulir rows of huts. From none did he expenence the least rudeness or insult. Frequently, he was presented with plantains, guav is, and othei fiuits. These he acknowledged by bowing ; and the graceful manner m wlncli he mani¬ fested his giatitude, did not seem lost on β S
the uncultivated people who weie masteis of his destiny \ hut, distinguisdcd by its supeiioi ina^mttitlc, which stood in fiont of seveial othei s, he supposed to be the π sidence of the king 01 chief, and tins conjectuit piove I pciftctly conect Iiuthei In w is now conveyed, md piesented to in eldetly man, who was seated before its ıııtı nice on a handsomely woi ked mat I lus peison appeared to be about sixty five y ears of age, and Harley subsc quently found that he was consuleied the soveieign, not only ot this village, but of several others, of cqud or supenoi magnitude On being intioduced, Challes bowed , ml lecollectmg the Lasteni mode ol making an obeisance, he lesoited to that tde next moment, but neithei tin homage of England noi of India, seemed to pass foi any tiling at tlie court of Sambana Several females w ci e sittint, in tlie form of a half cuele on each side,
nnd beliuul, the old man. His gestures invited the stianger to take a seat ne.11 lum, and one of the ladies immcdiitcly accommodated hnn with the mat will' h she had occupied. A great dell was sud, which lie could not undcistinil ; mil а convei sálion by signs was attempt¬ ed, which liowevei was but little moie satisfactoiy than the othei had been. Those who had conducted lum tlutlici, next undeiivent <t long examination; and the mannei m which Chailes had hist presented himself to thein in the maize field, was desenbed, and α put of the scene ıery coirectly represented in action Aftci α long " palavei," dis¬ tinguished by an appearance of good- humoured muth, and gratified cuuosity, the council bioke up, and the new¬ comer was taken into a hut, where ι calhbash of kouscous, consisting of giani, fuut, and palm-wine, and anothei filled with milk, were placed on the gıound toi Ins refreshment, with fiuits of seveial G 3
sorts. A mat, in si¿e about one yard square, was prepared for him to sit upon while taking his ι epast A crowd of peisons accompanied him to this hut, but only three men and one woman enteied with hun The rest amused themselves talking, singing, and dancing, outside, mil fiequent bursts of laughter pioved that they weie all m high spirits, and not α little pleased with the extraordin ну spectacle which the day had pioduced. He was couiteously invited to eat, and ď he had not felt that the couise most likely to conciliate the good will of those about Iura was to appeal eheeiful, and sensible ot their kindness, the fatigue of the day, and the very little sustenance he had taken, would have disposed him to comply with then wishes. Aftei another efloit to express thankfulness, he seated himself on the mat with an an of gaiety, and took a he uty diaught of milk. He then freely helped himself to the food
which they had provided. Much satis¬ faction was expressed at this, and the news that the White Man could eat, was soon communicated to the multitude without, and a few favoured individuals were permitted to satisfy themselves that the intelligence they had received was entitled to implicit credit. When he had finished his meal, ope of the men who bad accompamed him to Ithe but retired ; but ш a short time came back, bringing with him two pieces of coarse cotton cloth, one white, the other red. These he laid down by Harley, as he still sat on the mat, and informed him by signs that they were to be used as clothing. The dress of the natives ex¬ plained m what way it was expected that he should dispose of these, as he observed that each of them had one fastened iound his waist, and the other thrown over his shouldeis. To him this was a most valuable present. Torn by the thorns of the forest, and blistered by the intolerable g 4.
heat ot' the sun, any thing like a garment to covei his person was most acceptable, for Ins nakedness, though of long con¬ tinuance, had not yet t mght lum to look upon clothes as supeifluous, and only an invention of refinement to administer to the vanity and unreason ible desires of civilised man. The humanity which had thus supplied Inm with food and clothes, now hinted to him, that as repose must be necessary after what he had endured, he was at Iibeity to sleep, if he thought proper. By reclining then heads, closing then eyes, and pointing to some clean tushes that weie deposited in the apartment, they made him understand that these were intended for lus bed He thought the best mode of acknowledging then piovident kindness, was to piove to them that be was anxious to avail himself ot the accommodation offered. He threw himself on the rushes, and the luxury of extending himself in an horizontal posi-
tion, without dread of the monsters ol the forest, was to lum so great, that the contemplation of Ins happiness mule it impossible for him to compose himself to sleep for a veiy considerable time. He at last sunk into a profound slumber, which continued foi many houis, antl -anothei day had commenced its conisi befoie he awoke. When he began to move, he felt foi ■the boughs by which he had been m the habit of lashing himself to his îesting- vplace, and surpnse at missing them soon recalled to his memoiy the foitunate change winch had occuned. The poi¬ sons who weie piesent when he betook himself to lepóse were no longer in the hut, but a little giri and a lad supplied their place, and on peiceiving that lie was awake, immediately tendered lum г calhbash full of new milk. They spoke to him, but without being able to make themselves understood, and this seemed to vex them not a little. Гют then G 5
ıepeatedly pointing to lhe sim, and de¬ sci ıbıng its couise, and dn ccting his atten¬ tion to tlic elevation that it had already gamed, he at last conceived it was then object to make him know that the day was pretty fai advanced. They had less difficulty in communicating to lum their wish that he should go with them. He was pieparmg to comply with tins requi¬ sition, when the old chief, and eight 01 ten of the natives of both sexes, entered the hut Jolhka (that was the old man's name) and Ins party seemed veiy eheeiful, and well pleased to sec the stiangei much ied eshed All ol them now squatted down, the chief in the centre, and Hailey was subjected to a new examination They evidently wished foi some nitoi ill¬ ation nom hım, but lo satisfy them was no easy task, as m tlie fiist place, he could not m ike out what it was they de sued to know, and m the next, he could hit on no method of conveying to tbem
what occurred to lum. These circum¬ stances threw considerable impediments in the way ot those communications which they were disposed to exchange, and for a long time all that both parties understood was this, that neither could compi ehend the object of the words and gestures of the other. In this situation, oui dei о began to consider on vvliat subjects an ignoiaiit people might be expected to question a strangei of uncommon appearance, on Ins first ainval among them. That they would be curious to know whence he came seemed natural, and the instant this idea struck hnn, then gestures, befoie unaccountable, at once became intelligible, and he had no doubt that they weie anxious to leai n to what country he belonged, and wlnthei he had intended to go. He, upon this, rose, pointed to the sun and to the west, to make them undeistand that he dad come from а place which lay in the dnection g 6
Hiat the sun was then pursuing, at the same time repeating loudlj and distinctly the word " Gorée," in the hope that some of his auditory might have heaid it before. He furthei lllustratea his mean¬ ing by diawmg a double line on the ground, winch he meant to represent the Gambia. They laughed and nodded, and upon the whole, he flattered himself that he had pai tly succeeded in convey¬ ing to them his meaning. lo the long hut, in which he had been presented to Jollika, he was now con¬ ducted a second time The eheei¬ ful good-will which marked the conduct ot those who attended him, was well calculated to dispel all alarm, and Charles marched among them with an air of tran¬ quil confidence, tlut was ι eaily what it seemed. The chief led him into the hut, which was nearly filled with people of both sexes, who were sitting on the gıound, ananged in circles, with various descriptions of food in the centié, of
which all were invited to partake. A distinguished honoui was conferì ed on Charles He was admitted into the cir¬ cle which Jollika giaced with hi¡, pie- sence, and which consisted, with the exception of Hailey and the chief, ot women. Of the eleven, which foi med the circle, fom were really pretty, and the eldest of these could not be moie than eighteen yeais of age. Then com plexion was of the tawny hue ; but then features were good, and theie was ι lemaikable similtiuty of countenance to be observed, the most distinguished fca tuies of which wcic daik eyes, a nose ìatder tending to the aquiline, tdmnei dps than are common m most parts of Africa, and beautiful teeth. T hese, who to Hailey shone conspicuous foi then personal attractions, he soon obseıved were but veiy little noticed by the chief The othei seven, who in eveiy respect wete of the tuie negi о cast, and had the
happiness of being constantly honouied with his conversation, were more ad¬ vanced in years, the youngest being not less than twenty-five, the oldest at least forty. It tuined out, that only these seven were mai r icd to Jolhka. The four girls had been sent as a piesent fiom a distant tribe, but wanting the charms of a flat nose, thick lips, large features, and corpulence of figme, Jolhka, in common with all the men of the tube, seemed to avoid them as something worse than ordinary. In short, such is the foice of prejudice and habit, such the varj- mg chaiactei of beaut), that wlnle those who lo the fastidious eye of the Emo¬ pean piesented no temptation whatever t\ eie objects of admiration at Sambarra, the young females he would have been disposed to pi onounce handsome, were, by the side of then coaise neighbours, held to be disgustingly ugl), and were only admitted to the festival as attend-
ants on the fat, flat-nosed, goggle-ejed chai mers that were in such high esti¬ mation. He was now invited to pai take of a plentiful repast, which was spiead ш the midst of Jolhka's cuele. Broiled, or ıatlıeı scoıched fish, of two sorts, several kinds of meat, with kouscous, callavances, sweet potatoes, yams, and rice, offeied a luxurious meal. The only dish with which he had any previous acquaintance, was furnished by the half of a young kid. Го his palate, this was veiy grateful; but remembering what he had suffered in the forest, fiom eating too greedily of meat aftei long abstinence, he thought it piudent to be spai ing on the piesent occasion. Pine apples, watei melons, plantains, bananas, guavas, and oranges, weie supplied in great abundance, and towaids these he did not thmk it neces¬ saiy to obsei ve such moderation Watei, milk, and palm-wine of three soits, (two of them intoxicating in their ehaiacter,)
and honey served up m the comb, com¬ pleted the banquet. Harley would have been much flatteied dad lie known the oiigm of tdis entertainment. All the kindness lavisded on dim failed to sug¬ gest to dun its true cdaiacter. It was not till after tde lapse of some weeks, that he understood it was ■" the feast of welcome to the stianger." The general opinion of those who have visited Africa, is, that all negroes will dunk to excess vvdenevei tdey dave an opportunity of doing so. From tde de coium observed on this occasion, Chartes found that there existed some exceptions to the rule j for of all the pai ty assînı- bled m Jolhka's lesidence, (and it was not а small one,) not a single mdn idual ıose fiom table—rose from gıound would be tde moı e appropriate pdrase—in a state of inebriety, tdougd agreeable and in¬ toxicating wine was dealt out with un sparing liberality to all who chose to Lake it.
When the exeieises of eating and dunk¬ ing had lost for that time their allure¬ ments, the whole assemblyadjotirnedto the fi ont of the palace, as an iccomphshed tra- tellei would call the outside of the hut. Hei e they were jomtd by neaily all the other inhabitants of the disti ict, a laige 1 ing was formed, and Jolhka and his ladies, having squatted down, Harley did the same, and waited with some impatience to leain what was to lollow. A giotesque dance was soon commenced, to the sound of music which was not unpleasant, even to an Enlish ear. Three diums, of dif¬ lerent sizes, foi med of hollow wood, and coveied with tlic skin of α goat, were beaten with sticks of elidei ent lengths, to the end of which balls of cotton, co¬ veied with the same sort of skin that toimed the heatl of the drum, were attached, and with the sounds these pio- duced, tlie music of the ballifoe was blended. The ballifoe bore some lesem- blance to the stoccata. It was formed
of eleven pieces of a hard wood, dot unlike mahogany, but closer in the grain than that in general use. The longest stick ineasuicd eighteen niclies, and the others gradually diminished in succes¬ sion, about an inch each, down to the shoitcst, which was but seven inches long Τ hese inatei nis were fixed on tw о calhbashes hollowed to receive them A large calhbash was placed under the longei sticks, and a small one under the otheis, both being held together by nbbands, torn from the stringy bark of the palm-tree. The bars were struck by two sticks, and then vibrations fut- nished a soft, harmonious tone, which happily tempered the rndei sounds of the id um. Tlie danceis enteied the circle two by two, and amused the spec¬ tatois with the most extrav igant antics, which tdey continued with a degiee ot vivacity peifeetly astonishing, till they weie completely exhaustetl fot want of bieath, when they weie relieved by
otheis who went tiuough the same course ol exertion. \ genci al dance followed, in which the voices ot the whole party luinished an additional accompaniment, that triumphed completely ov er the har¬ mony of the b.dlcfoes, and almost ovei- poweicd the noise of the diums, which were still beaten without intermission. At dusk the fete concluded, tlie actors in it rctiied to then seveial homes, and Hailey was le-conducted by Jollika, and seveial of 1ns fuends, to tlie hut fiom which they had taken hnn in the morning. At the entıance tdey took then leave, exclaiming " Montatila '" repeatedly, which, among them, was an expression of kindness similar to " God bless you !" in Englisd. On passing into tde douse, lie found two gi'ls and one youth awaited Ins ■urival, 'lhe lattei pointed out to dim the way in wlucd lie ougdt to guaid the entıance of the hut to pievent an un¬ welcome visit from any wild animal, and
having done this, he ι etn cd with the females, but not till they had pi essed hnn to partake of the flints and the milk which had been provided foi Ins lcfiesb- inent. He could obtain little infoi .nation lc- specting the situation of the plue in winch he now found himself, and be felt that he must not expect his cuuosity on tins important sudject to dc giatihed, till lie had acquued some knowledge of the language, 01 discoveied some means of inaking himself undeistood, and of unilei- standmg Ins new friends, wlncli lie pos¬ sessed not at piesent. Of tins at least he was satisfied tliat dis wanderings had teumnatcd most fortunately m conduct¬ ing lum to an inhabited spot, vvliei c tbc natives so well understood the duties of hospitality, and wheie tdey dad seen so tew Europeans, tlut tliey d id no insult to ïesent, no intrusion to punish, no ciuelty to revenge. He concluded that those lo whom lie
was so largely indebted, were Toubibs oı Plıolıes, and this conjectuie proved to be peifeetly conect. The village 01 houle consisted of about fifty huts, built neaily all alike, with the exception of the chief's icsidence, which was much lugci than any of the iest, being about twenty feet long and eight feet bioad. lhese dwellings weie built in stiagglmg lows, and at some distance fiom each othei, as a pıecautıon against fire, which had moie than once made dieadful la¬ vages among them. Ihey ν eie sur- ıounded by a stiong antl high fence, winch enclosed giounds appıopııated to the pi oduction of giani and cotton, and othei enclosuies within the fiist, were piouded foi the bieedmgaiid rearing of cattle To them the fence seemed to oflei suficient piotection against the pie- datory incuisions of beasts of piey, 01 the imoads of any hostile tribe. Jollika leigned witli absolute powei, but the «ît enness and benevolence of his tempei
were well calculated to make his subjects forget the inconveniences of despotism. Reflections on what he had heard and seen, occupied the mind of Harley , when left to himself, till he closed his eyes in tranquil slumbei. Eaily m the morning, the younger of the females he had seen on the preceding night, who was called Naki, made her appearance. She was about eleven years old, îemaïkably in¬ telligent, and unremitting m her endea¬ vours to please. Naki and her com¬ panion were two of the despised females which have alieady been mentioned, and to tbem foi the present the duty of wait¬ ing on the white man was assigned. Charles applied himself to learn the lan¬ guage, and with the assistance of Naki found himself enabled at the end of a month to ask for any thing that he wanted with a certainty in most cases of making himself understood by Jolhka and the other natives, who still appeared charmed with the novelty of a resident white man,
and failed not to give him repeated assui¬ ances of protection and friendship, and yet more to follow up these professions by furnishing lum with abundant supplies of all that the season produced.
CHAI'. VIII. Ilıe liants ι Γ man пиппы nuli lu» acquisition»,— e\eı\ step winch lie шЬпщеч brinai »omctlıınj. williin lib \ u.V. wlncli hi ıhıl ııı t nee betöre, anıl wlncli, α» soon ıs he seis к he biyns to v. mt IV hero necessity mils curiosity begins, anil no soonei arc wc supplii 1 v>ıtlı even thuu, that nature ian dunami, than we »It down to coiitrnc orcifiu ι' n[ petites Da Johnson Tul hut to which Hailey was conducted by his new fuends, was built and fui- lushed aftei the m mnei of the houses of the puncipil men of the houle, and ¡ιο¬ ί ording to then ideas it was pıovıded, not only with all that was necessary to the comfort of an individual, but with all that luxuiy could desire. On every side he saw а geneious anxiety to make lum happy, but then mode of prepanng а dwelling, could not alibi il unqualified pleasuie to an Eui opean taste, and though
Chirles preferred lus piesent lodging to that which ho had been lately accustomed to, it was not in point of convenience, exactly wh it he could wish. Under the pressure of extreme danger uiconvem enees are not felt, but the great evil re¬ moved, a hankering .iftei the comfoi ts of hie soon revivís, and these acquired, the mass of mankind begin to sigh lor luxuries and spH niloin 'Ilus piopeiisity commenced now to develops itself in the conduct of the wandeiei, who hid been so greatly be friended by the iude people lie bad stumbled upon. He who, foi many nights, had unrepiningly sought repose lashed to the branches of the tall palm-tree, and in α position almost veitical, whose days passed in the open an, in some parts of hi» journey, were considered foitunate when an expanding tree offeied itself to shelter his reclining limbs Iiom the intolerable blaze of noon, now discovered that a bed vol. и. Η
of rushes, and a snug hut to shield him fiom the inclemency of the coming season, weie not sufhcient to satisfy Ins wants. The house appropriated to his use, consisted of two small compai tiuents. In the one, α few dried tushes were scattered to sei ve foi л bed, and in tbe other several calibashes of diflei ent size» were deposited. Chans, tables, and sofas, were not thought of, foi the natives iound the bare gıound a good substitute for all. But the supenoi intelligence of the Englishman, oı ıatlıeı lhe defect in his education, which bad taught bun tobelieve that he had want» of which those about lum knew nothing, made Charles anxious to possess an elevated seat, and some¬ thing that would put him in mmd of a table ; and these, as a residence of some months in that place was unavoidable, he detei mined upon endeavouring to makefoi himself. Six forked sticks inserted in the earth, with their piongs or ai ms upwards,
neai the side of the hut, and opposite the entrance, received some stiongei stioks length-ways, and across these shorter ones weie tied together with some strong ligatuies of green bark, which he stripped from a neighbouung tree, and the whole secured by a kind of i attan, which giows there m eveiy pait of the woods m great abundance, and runs along tde ground to an amazing length, 01 climbs the trunks ot the loftiest tiees In this way, ho made an excellent seat 01 couch, on which he could sit by day, and îecline at night, and which covered with sedges and mats, plenty of which were at hand, would not have been despised by a weary traveller in Euiope Succeeding in this, a table and a se¬ cond, smaller seat, were soon formed in the same way, and out of gomds and calibashes he manufactured things tliat answered the puiposes of spoons and dishes, on which he tdought pioper to bestow the names of those useful articles. и 2
It would, however, be to give linn too much credit for ingenuity not to men tion that little Niki dad a share of the mint, whatcvei it might he, at tached to the mal ing of the household hu mtm с which das been mentioned I hougli she had nevci seen or heard of any thing of the kind, under Ins direc tions sde was veiy expert m using the malen ils wh eh the plico furnished, and it w ıs thiough hei agency that he ob t lined some of them, vv ithout which it would dive been imp ıssıble foi dim to make those ropi esentatiycs of 1 urope in comfoi ts, with vv lucli it has deen seen lie was anxious to bc supplied He dad only to descube tlie sott of iiticlc wlucd in lus own countiy do would use foi a par ticular puipose, and Niki allowed herself no i epose till she found tliat which tht climate affoided most resembling what lie had made liei underst uıd he wished to possess At the end ot six weeks he looketl
round Ins cabin, with an air of comlort and satisfaction th it spoke bun m veiy good humour wild what he had done. The total adsenee of articles like those which weie essential to his enjoy mint, in all the other human h lbitatious that ho had now an opportunity ol entei mg, mude hnn feel, m an especial degiec, the value and importance of tint species oi pio¬ perty which he had cieated loi himself, and fiora eveıy othei dwelling lie turned witli pleasuie to disown. He was well disposed to Exult in nil the good of all mankuu! Yet that theie was some little difieience between his condition and that of those immediately about him, and that that difleience was in ins favour, made lus lot less liksomé than it would othei wise have been , foi m eveiy stage of life, vvlutevei men ultimately aspue to, much of then happiness or mıseıy depends upon the comparisons that they are enadled to id aw u 3
between their jwn circumstances and those of the parties with whom, for the time being, they are obliged to as¬ sociate But, did all that he might heie hope to enjoy, all the unmolested tianqtulbty which seemed to court lum, 01 all the difficulties that opposed themselves to his ıeturn to Europe, foi a moment induce him to reconcile his mind to passing the remainder of his d lys m that country, to which a mysterious Providence had con¬ ducted him? No, his native land was deai to him, and all that he witnessed where he was foi the present compelled to reside, served but to make him more anxious to participate in the social joys of civilised life. Under its most pleasing aspect the savage state could not appeal more than tolerable, but when the image of Amelia pressed stiongly on his recol¬ lection, as it did eveiy succeeding day — when he reflected that the obstacles which had once seemed foi ever to pre-
Jude hım from becoming hei husband, would vanish the instant he again set his tool on British gıound, lus impatience for the ainval of that blissful hour, made Inm almost depait on the instant, with¬ out guide 01 prep iration, and it required an effort on his part to satisfy his mmd that the wilds, the mountains, and the oceans which ınteı veiled, made it impos¬ sible for lum to accomplish Ins puipose till favouung circumstances opened α taıreı piospect for escape (if flight from kindness may be thus desenbed), than was at present before him. Though these fits of impatience were tiequent, and though something of de¬ jection never failed to be their accom¬ paniment, his melancholy was seldom ot long duration. The buoyancy of his spi¬ rits enabled him to tnumph over tie spondency, and the exhilarating hopes inspired by the leflection that he was no longe' inferior to the parent of his mis¬ tress in wealth — that the dread of an¬ ii 4
othei refusa), to hım moie terrible thai? any species of torture ingenious ciuelty could inflict, was no longei to be allowed a place in his thoughts, enadled linn to look foi ward with cheerfulness to a clıange in Ins condition, and in tde mean time to relish the enjoyments wlncli were even now witlnn his leacd He dad not long exulted in tde com¬ forts wdicd tod hid procuied dim m those articles of fui iiiture wlucd lie had made, when the want of an immediate object to occupy his mind led him to feel dissatisfied with tlic douse itself, winch de had taken so mucli pams to make convenient. He found out tdat it was not sufficiently laige foi his piesent estabbsd- ment, and de w as of opinion that a more eligible situation might have been se¬ lected foi his lesidence. At hrst he ıepressed this feeling of discontent by leflecting tdat if lie weie now to change his abode, almost all that laboui which had procured him the accommodation he
there commanded, would be to do over again. On the score of delicacy, too, he felt some ïeluctancc to make known what was passing in his mmd, lest having received so much, it should be thought unreasonable to solicit more. But it was not long before an opportu¬ nity offered for communicating to Jollika what was passing in his thoughts Τ he friendly old chief, who frequently visited him, was much m the habit of enquiung how different objects affected dim, and how he liked generally his present mode of life. These interrogatories he put, with the exulting satisfaction ofa tuend, who expects to hear, that one he wished to serve is as happy as he could hope to make him, and with the pude and plea¬ sure of α patriot, who languishes to hear the praises of that community of which he was born a member, fiom the mouth of a foreignen Challes seldom failed to giatify his amiable vanity, which was really but the ovei flow of benevolence, η ΰ
and, on one occasion, doing this, inter a warm eulogium on the geneiosity of the Fhohes, and on the advantages of then situation, he did not sciuple to suggest what he thought would be an ìmpiove- ment of Ins own. What he desired, was permission to choose α spot of ground, on which, with his own hands, at α conve¬ nient time, he might eiect anothei dwell¬ ing. The answer to this was in sub¬ stance, tbat " he might fix on any scite that pleased him, and he should have any assistance that might he necessaiy to his undertaking." The chief added, " The fand was open to all, — all had an equal right to it, and Nature had taken care that there should be plenty for every man to pick and choose." Certain Modern Radical Refoimers may here, perhaps, lecognise the amiable punciples of the Spenceans in England. Some htde dif¬ ference, howevei, may be pointed out between this Pholey plulantluopist, and those gentlemen who have lately gained
so much celebrity. The former admitted the ught of all men to be equal where he had something to bestow, the lattei only contend foi an amicable division of pioperty, where they have every thing to gain Having received the permission he desired, Harley spent some days in exa- mmg the environs of the village, in order to select a place for his future residence, that he might subsequently have no wish to change, as he foresaw that theie, as m other parts of the world, a removal of pioperty was not to be effected without much trouble and confusion, and some loss Bewildeied with the gay variety aiound, he did not find it an easy mattéi to detei mine which spot that attracted Ins notice, would combine most beauty and convenience. He was accompanied in his excursions by two youths, wlio weie ostensibly appointed to piotect him from the wild beasts that might assail h 6
hım in the course of his wanderings, but he sometimes suspected that they were placed about Inm to prevent escape. Tliey were well armed, as each earned a zagay or lance, and α bow and aiiows Both weie celebialed as coiuageous and expert hunters, and they had tbe re¬ putation of having destre) ed some ol the most foimidable monsters ot the woods. The whole houle, it should be remarked were most intrepid m the chace, and their valoui had been so bene¬ ficially exercised, that a panthei 01 lion was rarely to be found in then neigh¬ bourhood. This, liowevei, may in part be ascribed to then policy, which had cleaied away the undeiwood near the village that formeily sheltered and reared these formidable enemies. Tbe trees of the forest in their immediate vicinity, which did not contribute to their means of subsistence, had been judiciously thinned, with a view to the same object.
One day, having passed the creek, ovei wlucd lie was conveyed when he fiist became the pnsoner, 01, moie pro¬ perly speaking, the guest of tde Plıolıes, а pleasant mount on its bank, on which α small grove of lofty palms appeared, among which theciboa.thc papavv, and the fruitful pine had insinuated themselves, arrested his attention. The plam on the summit of the mount was nearly en culai', anditscxtentaboutone thudofan lutiglieli acre. Rising abıuptly some thirty feet from the cieek, it commanded a pleasing view of the whole village, fiom which it was not distant more than half a mile. Delighted with the beauty of the spot, here he determined to fix his abode. The more he examined it, the moie he was churned with the situation, and he did not like it tlie less, because he found that, by putting up such α fence as it was in his power to construct, he should be tolerably secuıe fiom attack, eithei from man 01 beast. He had little appi ehension,
that pıecautıon was necessary against tiie tormei From the Plıolıes he could ap¬ prehend no hostility, and they lived in no dread of a wai like visit fiom my neighbouung tube. lie, howevei, intl heard that all Africans weie lintable, and inconstant in then fuendships , and, though, as lai as his expenence went, this did not seem to be the true chaiactei ot lus present acquaintances, he felt, like an Englishman, very much disposed to con- sıdeı " his house his castle," and, not. withstanding that he was neveı ıemark- able for prudence, his professional habits had taught lum to pıovıde against a sui- prise. Challes proceeded to mai к out the trees which he thought it would be neces¬ saiy to ìemove, and to tiace the dimensions of the hut he pioposed to build, and the little offices 01 out-douses lie wisded to be attached to it. Returning to the village, he lost no time m seeking his friend, the old chief,
to whom he communicated his thought» lespectmgthe mount, and determination, if nothing opposed the giatification of Ins wish. The íesponse, to this piece of intelligence, was, as he had reason to expect that it would be, piecisely what he desired. Jollika enquired, veiy minutely, how he meant to construct his new house ; and to explain this to the old man's satisfaction, was not an easy task, as the African had no idea of the conveniences which Hailey attempted to describe. Re¬ peated explanations only produced new enquiries. When this fatigue had been submitted to, some new question proved that he had been wholly misundei stood, and all was to be done over again, and even then, on many points, he had reason to feaı that he was only wheie he had begun. This was most wearisome to Harley, but the chief was nevei tiled of ïepeating his enquiries and of listening to the answers, and in this way many hours were consumed. Though woin out
with the toil of replying to his demands, the kind mannei in which they were urged forbad Challes to manifest the im¬ patience he felt to be i ele ised, furthei than by telling the f ι lendly Jollika that he should soon be able to explain himself better, by showing him that which he had laboured to descube The othei still persevered, but at last Harley left Inm, convinced that his plan was but very imperfectly understood.
CHAR VIII. The pilgrim that journeys ull tla*, lo visit some lar distant sbrini, It hi. beir liut u relique away, Ь ha])|)j nor heard to repine Ihus wukly lemoved from the fur Where n j vows — mj devotion I owe, Soft hope is the reliquL I bc ir, Anıl ıny solace wherever I де SiiEsiro-n '1 hough eager to commence the gre it work which he medititeli, de did not emancipate dımself fıom lde chains of Somuus vety с nly on the following 11101 n- nig. The sun was alieady Ingd wlien lie left his couch, and, on enteung the com¬ partment of Ins hut, in which he usually performed the ceremonies of eating and drinking, he found his little maid of all- work, and his breakfast waiting foi lum. He felt tins as a lepioot ot Ins indolence,
to make up for winch, he now com¬ menced α hearty meal with the least pos¬ sible loss of time. While thus employed, an air of merry mysteiy sat on the face of Naki, who seemed to have something in hei mmd of such exquisite value, that it could not safely be enti usted to speech. The pecu¬ dai ity of lier mannei attracted his notice, and he desued to know the subject of her thoughts. A laugh, accompanied by α cunning shake of the head, was the only íesponse he could get foi some mi¬ nutes, and the playful perverseness of the little coppei-colouied coquette, it tianslated into Englisd woids, would have inn thus — " Can't you guess—Tiy — You'll nevei hnd it out — Guess " Hailey made seveial eflorts to antici¬ pate what she had to say, and having failed to discover the mattéi involved in the enigma accoidmg to uile, Naki de- came α little moie communicative, and furnished а clue to tde solution, by ι e-
peating, in a tone of exultation, the ex¬ piession " coanco, manco," " the hill, the dill." "What of the lull?" was, of uourse, m substance, the next enquiry. The answer was a burst of loud laughter, to which, m due time, she added " To- agabee," " Go and see." Гют this, he of couise concluded, that, what had caused this singulai mirth on the part ot Naki, had some lelation to Ins tutine ìe- sidence, and, on this subject, he felt just then too mucli interested, to make it ne¬ cessary for his little companion to bid him " to-agabee" much ofiener than once. With equal astonishment and pleasure he found, on gaining the mount, that Ins f ι lend, the old chief, accompanied by many of the natives, had aheady taken upon themselves the laboui of preparing his future residence The tiees he had desired to have removed were already pi ostrate, and he had the satisfaction to see them working on his plan with a degree of in.
telligence which, to hım, appeared wholl unaccountable. What stiuck him more than all the rest, was the promptness and exactness w ıth which Jollika proved him- self competent to dnect all their oper¬ ations On this subject, he had appeared incori ıgıbly dull on the preceding day. Plie truth now hioke m upon Harley, and he was convinced that his aged fuend had frequently affected not to understand, in order to compel Charles to repeat the desci iption of what he wished to have done, so often that he might be quite sure to comprehend and to remembei all that he was most anxious about. This done, at the earliest dawn of day, he had summoned those who were employed m the manner alieady stated, and called upon them, undei his instructions, to prépaie a new dwelling-place for the wlnte man Tde benevolent old Pholey enjoyed all the triumph of α kind heart, when it has succeeded in planning a grateful sur-
prise He laughed with unfeigned plea¬ sure at the amazement which the celerity of his operations had unpiessed on Har¬ ley's countenance, but he felt too much the importance of the task he had taken upon himself, and was too eager to asto nish by idspl lying that knowledge w Inch he had acquired in the conveisation just mentioned, to attend to the icknowledg- ments of his Lnghsh piotegce By noon, the whole of the supeifluou«. wood was cleaied away, and only such trees now remained on the mount as Charles wished to see associated w ıth his new dwelling Among these were three sorts of palms, two of them pioduced juice or wine, but differing materially in stiength and flavour fiom each other The third bore the nut from which that oil is obtained which is hold in gieat ie quest in various parts of Afnca, as from anointing then bodies with it the natu es believe that they derive that flexibility and activity on which they pride them-
selves Of the wine j leiding trees w Inch grew on this spot, one was distinguished bj the compressed appeaiance of its head which was exactly like a cabbage, to which its taste bore some affinity This tree glows to the height of sixty feet Some papaw trees weie also of the mini ber spaied , these do not commonly rise more than seven feet from the gıound, the) use perfectly straight, throw out then blanches from the top, and beai their fruit close to the trunk This fruit though rather insipid, by adding lime juice and other things withm his reach, Charles had discovered would furnish a pietty good substitute for a tart, when, to i egale lus appetite or to amuse his thoughts, he found it convenient to contribute towaids the civilisation of Africa, by instine ting Naki in the art of making puddings and pies The ciboa, a spurious sort of palm, was also suffered to remain Its Wine is not equal in value to that of tbe real palm, but its leaves are used by the
Africans to covei then huts, and on that account it becomes of πηροί tance, and is held in consideiable estimation. 'I he fiist care of H u ley was to get the fcnccwhich he had piojected, put up while he had so many to assist Inm, and it was not till this was completed that he suf¬ fered them to be employed on the con- stiuction of his hut. It requires little time to erect a mansion among the Pho¬ lies, and in about ten days he saw Ins fanciful cottage rear its head on the little mount, and receive its finishing touches from the careful chief and his friends. But though, by then kind aid the ex¬ terior was completed, our hero did not think it as yet fit for the reception of a personage of his importance. Though all were eager to co-operate with lum so tong as any thing remained to be done, and seemed to derive amusement from the novelty of the tasks assigned to them by the varied ingenuity of his plans, the arrangement of the interior of his new
habitation he piefened looking to him¬ self, and desued no. other assistance than that winch it was in the powei of Naki, her female companion, and the two youths befoie mentioned, to afford. For tliese one of the small common huts of the countiy had been elected close to his own, and ittached to this was a little storehouse in «Inch he purposed to de¬ posit grain, dried fi nits, and such articles of sustenance as were not intended foi immediate consumption. His residence was laiger than the houses of the natives were usuali) built, and was divided into two apartments by a wickei-work partition, which he cover¬ ed on each side with mats. He did the same by the flooi, as he som< cimes called the earth on which a flooi might have been laid. Each apaitment had an open¬ ing to admit light, but he took especial care to secure himself fiom the inclusion of any animal that might seek an entrance there, by passing sticks across each other
m such directions as would, in his орь шоп, eflectually exclude every unwel¬ come vısıtoı These precautions were puncipally directed i¿ainst tlie monkies, which were tlıeıe tcrj numeious, and m ill \aneties ol sı/es, fiom the mandril and biboon, down to the little gieen marmoset r f the ms of ι half giown kitten He made no Utempt to remove the articles which Ind seri cd hun for chair, table, and bedstead, in his former cabin, but left themasfixtmes foi the benefit of the next comer. The tune tint it would have cost him to^rcmoic, and put them up in Ins new house woultl, he consı¬ deı ed, süflice to constıuct others in which he thought he could improve on his first job He agun went to woik, and soon completed a 1 trger couch than th it which he had made befoie In the fishion of his »eat and table, he pleased himself better than at first, though of what he had done then, he was not a httle proud. vol. и ι
His knife which he had found of such immense value while wandering in the woods, was almost of is much importance to him engaged in these Idiomi, as it had been at any peuod of Ins journey It often suiptiscd him to find what de¬ light tlus trilling article could afloui by tlie uncouth imitations of othei Euro¬ pean articles which it pioduced, and which, thougli too insymlicatit to merit, once in seven years, the attention of those who use tlicm every day, seemed to him objects oi gieat inteiest, sur rounded, as he was, by men in th tt iude state of society, which si eks no moie than the means ot giatdying the first cravings of Nature, and which sums up ala liei wants in the few sounds that ex¬ piées food, drink, clothing, md shelter foom the storm Two clumsy foiks, which he fa¬ shioned by means of his knife, called faith these feelings in Ins bosom. They weie made of hai d wood, and though, to
give them strength, the prongs were left of suc'i г thickness tint it was not emi¬ one tint would h wi been ible to ţţrve ι tolerable l,iicss it the offices tliey were intended to peiloim, to him the woik manslup seemed exqiusiU , foi however oild then ippear met they answered the ¡uiposc foi winch ll ev were iride, and lie had experienced enough of pnvation to estimate the be uity of an object by the comfoit it was likely to imp ut Гог more than three weeks he was busted in this way AU that he pro lected, all tint he iccomphshed, bc sides fui nislim„ Inm on the instant both with mental and bo lily evcrcisc, ln 1 ι charm which gilded some oí bis 1110 ments with a 1 vy of joy th it almost brtgbtentd into rapture When ne be held the stiande niiety ol occupations which lay before him, he would revel m the delicious thought, that one day these would become but the pleasing subject» of convei sation in Tngh id He pictured
to himself tin benign smile of igiecable suipnse which would sit on the lovely ι ountenancc ot Amelia, when he .mould pi iy fully recommend himself to hei by enlaigmg on the domestic ciuditits of which he had piovcd himself the pos sessor, while ι resident stranger among a tube of siviges in a put of Afnca which lie was not aware tint any othct I mopein had visited All tint b id em barrasscd or annoyed him, he leflected would then be pissed aw iy , and the exile which he tlı ploied, would be remembeitd only to e lhven a cheerful hie side by the recital of its puncipal incidents Ile ima „ined the mn lb winch bis present appear lice would inspire, could he bc seen by I is friends ш 1 ugland, attned in the cos turne of the Plıolıes and exciting alitile elici gies of an mdustuoub mechanic The delimit lie inticipated fiom detailing the puncipal libouis, advantages, and inconveniences of his present mode of life, gave hnn spirit to pioceed in his
labours ¡ and the intervening difficulties ind dangei s, that would have extin¬ guished in some minds eveiy hope of seeing England agun, he would regard ,is meiely tde necessaiy tuals to wlucd the lovei in a romance must he subjected, in oitlci to pioduce а joyful dcitouenitnt A month had neaily cxpued since tlie old ciuci and Ins woi knien lud finished then part of the while nun's house, before Hailey took possession of it Though not so showy, it was moie con vement, and piomised to afloui moie real accommodation to its inmates, than many α " snug box," which the pude of an opulent citizen has caused to decouate the fields of Pentonv ille and Hackney, to receive the quality of Cheapsule or Holbom Hill on Sunday. Its modest elevation, its convenient mclosure, and its protecting fence, gave the whole ци appeaiance of beauty and scçui|ty, that might have engaged one toi whom l|js native land possessed fewei attractions, ι S
to determine on making it his permanent abode. Hailey could not but Fxult, ami own |иь tottu„e »mil ι smite, and had that lowlj, but delightful hovel been in 1 ngl md, and the splendid m insion which the weilth lie expected would en¬ able him to command when tlıeıe, offered to limi ni a foicign ccuntn, he would have thought it merely the ıesıılt of the most soi did calculation, that led hnn to preler the g i) liuimhtj ofthefoimcr, to the daz¬ zling giandeui of the httei. Ihe situ¬ ation, indeed, compi eliended almost all the adt tut ijŢCS that ataiicc of conduit could dosne to see ciowdcd togethei within so limited α cuele , and lho little ci eck, which bounded Ins new domam, not only added lo the beauty of die scene, but furnished lum with c\celleibt ciaj-hsli, and othei inhabitants of the water, in gro it abundance and exhaust- less vai iet). On formally lakmg possession of hss
hut, the truly British propensity for turn¬ ing eveiy event that the gambols of this evei-icstlcss globe can occasion, whether it be one that calls for condolence 01 con- giatulation, into atı excuse foi indulging m festivity, bioke forth m liai ley. Though a fugitive m a folcigli land, and dependent on stiangcis ior eveiy thing that was necessity to support hie, he could not quit his dwelling in the village to fix his abode on the little mount, with. out inviting the old chief and lus fuends to îejoice with lum on the change that was to tdiie place. But it ought not to he supposed that his motive for doing this was at all akin to the souice of many splendid entertainments in Lng¬ land, wheie those who give them do it at the expense of those who vainly hope for pay, and, inviting one set of credilois, endeavoiu to stop Ihen mouths with tlit yiands ot wlncli tdey luve deliauded Wotdei. It was not tlius that Challes acted. ι 4
What he did originated m а muid un contaminated by that prudence which can only be coirectly desenbed as mean¬ ness Gratitude w lnspeicd to dim, tint he could not alfonl those to whom he owed so much, abietici licit thin that winch they would hnd in seeing th it their effoits to conti ib ite to lus comfoit, hul not been made m v un The f ue which he set before thein was not what an Liu opean gommini! would call delicious lie had, foi ι ы mee, no game, so exquisitely ln 0 h, th it those who aflected lo hi ι, felt it politic not to keep their noses in the dnection of thefivour ite dish , noi uiy liung with α 11 iv otu so delect idle, tint it could only be ti usted to the pílate when itsit il taste w ıs com pletely disguised, 01 umilili ited by the union of tho sweets, soins, md bittet s, deld dy petsons of taste to de its pioper accompaniments Yet the feist w as less simple than it might h n e deen , for, daving successfully couited the sticam
for fish, and roamed the forest foi flesh, in the cooking of both he endeavoured to imitate the I iiglish style, and though an Lnghslun in, who had stumbled by ас cident on such 11 epast, would not have discot ered a veiy strong icsembhnci between this Afiican fistit ll mil a Lon don dinner, С li irles, it all events, con trived to pioduce sonu thing essentially different fiom whit the Pholies hid been accustomed to His li df burnt, hall law deer's flesh, w ıs not ι vciy good substi tufo foi ioast beef, but tlıc vegetable sauces which his ingenuity pıepırcd, were, to Ins taste, excellent, and, m llu» opinion, Iiom the manner in which Ins guests exeited tliLinscl.es to do honoui to his cookeij, it appeared that he was b) no means singulti lhe couises he conducted in the Bntisli stile, and, having sei ved up the fish fiist, the meat next made its appeaiance, and, listty, some puddings and pies, or, at least, things m which m иге and coco ι nuts.
the juice of the lime, and vai ìous fruits peculiar to the climate, weie jumbled together, and dried, lather than baked, hy the united ìnliuence ot the sun, and a inculai fiie, which he had made for tint purpose near the dooi ot his hut Hie apologies foi the state in winch his com рапу found things, lus dopes that he should soon be able to entertain them bıtteı, were buefly expressed, and he had no occasion to give the hnishmg touch ol poln less, — " You have ie illy eaten nothing, let me send yon a little bit moie —" ıs eveıy one partook plen tıfully, without waiting to be piesscd and endeavouied to ıppcaı conspıcı ous foi good manners by helping himself the old chief led the way in the attack rn the eatables, and so good an example Charles dad the s itistactioii to see, wae not lost on his follow ers After dinner, palm wine and mills., were handed round in calibashes, and 4>me of the party enjoyed the luxury of
a sleep. Those whom he had accommo¬ dated with seats did not seem to value his bench quite so much as he did, and took the fiist ojiportunity of abdicating it in favour ot the gıound , as sitting in an elevated position, with then legs perpeu- dıculaı undei them, they considered to be not less fatiguing than standing. His table, his foiks, ¡us spoons, and his dishes, they admu ed as marvellous specimens ot ingenuity and taste, and a little closet, as he called it, though hamper might have been a bettei name foi it, in which he could securely deposit his provision, and at once conceal it fiom view, and secuıe it fiom the piedatory attempts of any small animal that might find his way into the house, they all considered a master piece of invention. The setting sun gave the signal for the termination of the fete. The chief and his fuends departed with loud cries of "Montana 1 Montania'" Having passett tbe creek, the cry was repeated ; and *s ι 6
they proceeded towarus the village, highly gratified with llic business of the day, it w ıs continue 1, and ' Montania ' Montatila '" still ascended on the breeze, till the sound bee une indistinct fiom dis tance, ind died aw ay as they a[ pi oached the village Refreshed b) slumber, he lose call) in the morning, but found Niki lııd been before hnn ind h d antic [ iteei lus wishes by removing eveiy vestige of the festival of the pı ecedııijÇ d ıj ·\ new mat graced ind almost eovcie 1 Ins rude tibie, on which flints uid cdibishes of milk were spread (or bis refreshment Of these he had just begun to p ut tke, w ien eight men made then ippeu шее, eveiy two of them beaung between tliem what Chailes compared to a small hammock, filled with gum llns, thej signified to him, was a present fiom the geneial horde, and intended lo sust un hım till he should be able to ıaıse some foi hnnseli These men had also received ordei s to
cut down and diy some of the Ingest gourds, m order to make them fit to hold the grain ot winch they had been the beueis So much provident kind ness filled Inni with sm prise , but the reflection which it introduced did not greatly flitter his pnde As ι natne of 1 шоре, lie could not but remuk the conti ast between these simple ml bene volent beings, md the dishonest ι id feiocious chaitctci ol those cn¿i-,cl in cominci ce on tlif b nil s ol t ıe Ga ıhtı Гют all the conveisilions lie bid been able to hold with them lit wis led to believe that he was the lust 1 ш opean that h id ever been scen m Samb u 11 Η (hiiddcic I at the thought, tint cominu nn .it ion with tnose n trions, to one of which he belonged,—with those wl о consıdeı cd themselves to possess supenoi litjhts, and who airoi, intly talked of ex tending the " blessings of civilisation' to savage life, should ıppeır to cor rupt and degrade the people, who, left to
themselves, all i ude and ignorant as they were, had proved that they were no strangei s to the feelings of humanity and the exercise ol chanty, when a helpless fellow-cieituie stood befoie them to im¬ plore issistaucc " Meicilul Heaven '" he would sometimes exel inn, in a tran- spoit ol sonow, " how are thy most valuable gifts abused' If, « xthoe much is gnen, much shall be iiqiuud,' to what а temblé account must Luiope one day be called, when it sh ill bc seen th it hei indisputable supenonty, and her vast means of extending the limits of human knowledge, and of betichting all the iest ot the woild, have been used but to lift herself to pre eminence in cume, and to plunge the less favoured put of mankind into mıseıy and vice, which, but for hei greatness, influence, and power, they uevei would have known '" The people, among whom he found himself h id long been considered a wandering tribe, though they had esu-
blished something like head-quarters at Sambana, andın vanous way s occupied a distuct of about ten miles in cucum- ference. Ilow long the settlement, with whiih he was connected, dad been formed, he could never leain, though on that subject he made frequent enquiries. I lien dibits of nudisti y made them no unwelcome vısıtoıs m all the countries boidenngon the great livers, and they bad in consequence fiequent inducement)! to cimgiate. Most of those who left then cotiniiymen, took etrly oppoi- tiinitics of letuinmg, though veiy impei¬ fectly cincii ol tint windermg spirit »Inch lust led tdem to rove. Ihe Pholies die in boules oı clans, undei the government of chiefs of their own, who acknowledge no superior power. The land is common to all, and the part that is drought mto culti¬ vation, as well as the iest, is held to be geneial pioperty. Lach ıs expected to share the toil ot leclaimnig it from bai-
renness, and ıs allowed a fm proportion of the general produce Their skill in agriculture is not despicable, and rice, cotton, jams, ind giani, are giown in sufhcient abund ince t unci t all the dt mands of thur limited society Ihrec soits of giani uc ι used foi then suste n ince, the ηιαι/ι, md the lırgeı and the smalltı millet 1 he ι ill n met, oı fl ıtpe ι ıs also among the aitults which their in dustry obt uns fiom tin bounty of Nil tire Roasted, the laigcr Intl in coin Ins a Uste something like th it of the sweet clicsnut When Hai lej hist went among tin m, the w tj in which the natives geneially used t un 0 i un, was to poaiid it, mil thicken then milk and p ılın wine with it One of his fust cues was to make some diead foi his own citing Of dun tlic natives soon icquued tins useful ait, ind became veiy fond of it, and it is probable tliat, to tlıc gleit bc nefit deuved fiom Ins ınstıuctıons on tins dea J, he owed much of the kindness
and esteem which sweetened the реч iod of his exile, and the interest Ihey took in his fate, when he gained а sufficient knowledge of then 1 mgu ige, to tell them Ins stoiy Thej h we some с ittlc. \. fine small breed ol cows they guai ded with peculiar cue. llicy were nevci buffered to sti ay far fiom the village, and peisons were alwajs appointed to watch them, in oider to piotect them fiom the beasts ot prey which prowled occasionally in their neighboiuhood. In the same way they tend then goats, of whose flesh they are remai kably fond. At pai tienili seasons of the yeai, that of the kid was pecuhaily delicate. Fiom what has been said, it will be seen, that one who was not m a more than oidinary degiee addicted to gluttony, might here find the means o' enjoyment, so (ar as tating and dunking were concerned. But these had no hold on the mind of Chailes Though sm¬ ceiely giateful foi the kindness of the
Plıolıes, he sighed for the delights ol European society. He wished for Eng¬ land and Amelia, and patriotism and love combined to make him impatient to re¬ turn to the land of his ancestors.
CHAP. IX. Tiiere ia nut it morc pleasing exercise οΐ the mimi than griititii le II ıs nccomnnn e 1 with »neh un inward latKfacUon, thnt the tini) ι» itiflìuentlr rewarded by thu iicrformnncc Sh-ltator iNctrABLE as Hailey was of considering himself at home with the people of Sam¬ barra, it may to some appear stiange that he should have taken such pains to pıo¬ vıde himselt with a commodious resu dence. This eagerness to secuıe a plea¬ sant dwelling, in which, if he could avoid it, he designed to ıeınaın but a veiy limited peuod, may be thought by many to piove the eccentricity, rathei than the good sense of our heio. His motne, bowel ei, and his conduct, those who hate devoted themselves to the study of human nature, will not hold to
to be greatly out of the common way. Men who, fiom various circumstances, cannot think of, oı ispire to the com¬ fort of a permanent abode, aie (icquently found most active m nnpiovnig and decorating tint which they know they must leave m a shoit time Some rude fantastical ornament is olten seen in the nook where the wandering gypsy skulks for a day, and the teutof thesoldiei, when on active sci vice, which he knows he must stnke in a week, if Ins head should remain in the neighboiuhood of his shoulders so long, is commonly decked with all the useless cinbellishments that the sun ounding countiy can supply ; and trees that cannot take loot while he may behold them, and floweis that die fiom being removed, display then witheung charms belore the entıance to his rest- mg-place, as if to caucatiiie the rural scenes he has abandoned for the trade of deatli, 01 to image the rum and destruction which must deface
the bosom ol Naftno, wlieiever ambition commands hım to advance. Howevei anxious to quit the spot wheie Ins fate bid placed dim, though Ins thoughts ι an incessantly on England mil Amelia, yet, as tins was not tde pe¬ uod wlien ι ioti ι it could do attempted, be whs too sensible of the charms of Na¬ tine, and ol the delights of seeing Ins cottage sui ι ounded by them, not to la¬ boui assiduously to ooll et nul ai range such as weie capable of being transfer¬ red to his little inclosin с He carefully scai died loi the finest fugitives of No¬ ra's nam, and these, dispo id aller the Europeni minner, bestow ι d on lus hut in aspect ol gaiety and uiangement, winch won the entire adu lation of his neighbouis While thus employed one day, in ıe- movng plants that lie in ended for his ¡carden, lus attention wa, ai tested hy some small shining particles of α metal¬ lic character, intermixed with the mould
ihat adhered lo then roots, aftei he had detached them fiom the soil; and, on ex¬ amining the small excavations he had made, he found at the bottom of them largei specimens of the same substance 'I hough he attached no impel tince to the discovery, he piesei veil some of the lumps for further examination, and on showing them to his little attendant Naki, she ι ubbed one of them, tdrt might be about the si/e of a snnll shot, lgamst a slonc, and the beautiful podsli which this in an instant pioduced, convinced hnn that ν hat he had found was eithei coppei or gold. He was inclined to believe that it would prove tde lattei, and feeling tliat if tdiB conjecture weie well-founded, tlie incident might be one of no small ım- jioi tance to him at some futuie period, by facilitating Ins return to the Gambi ι, he fiom that time caiefully piesened the largest samples he could find, and stowed them at the bottom of his closet in a cahbash.
He soon foi med л plcasmg hedge, tn which the orange, the lime, the plan¬ tain, and the banana were seen. Yams, sweet potatoes, ind cucumbers, clothed the gıound. The spoıtıve cahbash covered the extenoi of his hut, and its flower and f 1 uit, in gay variety and grateful prelusión, it once ch.umcd the ι ye and invited some of his other senses to share the treat. While yonng, the cahbash may be ti lined and taught to climb m any dnection, and С liai les faded not to avail himself of this piopensit), to add to the picturesque beauty of his \lncan tilla. The gnl who had for some time been the companion of Naki, w ıs now l iken ill, and left Ins abode to reside in tlie village for the benelit of the advite ol a priest, fortune-teller, or fetish-man, who here, as among the inhabitants ot the shores of the Congo, by vntue of his fttish, made ol a fish bone, 01 an un¬ couth represt ntation of a man or an
animal in wood, pietendcd to cure all diseases, lo controui even the winds, and to expound the future Seveial of these infested the little community ot which Chartes had become so prominent a mem¬ ber, and the despotic swiy which tliey exercised ovei the ignoiance and super¬ stition of thou corniti} теп, disgusted Hailey moie than any othei object that tame undei his obseivation dining his residence anioi g them, llic loss of one of Ins attendants did not oei asion him much inconvenience 01 ugief, as Naki nad all along done so much that no other domestic was necessaiy to keep the in tenor of hi* house in ordei, and the two youths who still remained with him al- forded dun all the assistance that he had occasion for in supei intending his gar deu, or seeking ι supply ol animal food from the woods Anxious to ascertain the ehaiacter of the surrounding countiy, he made fte ijuent excursions m all dneetions, with
a view to inform himself m what way he had best proceed, whenever the time should arnve for attempting the escape which he never ceased to meditate His male domestics îarely suffered him to stir without them, and the extreme alarm which they manifested lest he should be devoured by 1 lion, he could not help thinking was affected to cover their real object that of preventing his flight This feeling gat e hnn some uneasiness, yet he could not conjecture why a guard should be put over him He had nevei ventured to mention his resolution , and if he had done so, with every dis position to think sufficiently well of him self, he could not discover in what respect he was so valuable to the good people of Sambana as to make it worth their while to detain lum Unable wholly to dismiss apprehension he determined tp appear completely satisfied with his present con¬ dition in order to induce tbem to throw aside then vigilance lo do this mpre, vpi, u к
eflcclually, he fiequently talked with tlicm on the improi ements in his house and plantation that might bc accom¬ plished in the course ol two 01 three yeais Not a woid issued iiom his lips tlut could nuke them suppose he had any wish but to live and die among them. Tliey questioned not lus sinceuty, but sued was tlien suspicion, 01 tlien elec¬ tion, that they nevei suffered huu to leave them a hundred yards in his real, without exerting then utmost speed to come up with hnn. Wandeung thus accompanied one morning, he had puisued, foi some miles, the couise of the little cicck which watered the foot of the mount on which he had fixed his abode, when baying en¬ tered a foi est, he adv anced, foi about α league, through wilds winch his attend¬ ants declaied that they had nevei visited bcfoi e, till at length his steps iv ei e ai ι csteti by the appearance of α small but beau¬ tiful lake, from which he perceived the
ci eek he had so long known, and two otheis pi oceeded As they approached its wateis, a sudden and unusual noise made his companions begin to retrace their steps with no small trepidation, and Harley himself, was foi a moment, so surpn cd and confounded, that he ceased to move foiwaid Ľvciy feeling ot alarm was however instantly removed from the whole of the party, on then peiceiving, that that which had thus assailed hen cars, was merely the springing up and the hurried flight of а vast assemblage ot vvatei fowl, comprehending represent atives of every species, fiom the teal to the muscovy duck Of water fowl, he had previously seen very little in that country, and from the astonishing abundance found here, it almost seemed is if they had confined themselves to that sequestered retreat from time imme mortal The crown bud and one like the heron, he obseıved amorg them The plumage of the latter was black and к S
white, it stood about two feet and a half high, and had upright feathers on the head. He was not sorry to Inve mode such a discovery, and resolved, if pos- ыЫе, to ensnare some of the feathered inhabitants of this district, without delay. He soon devised the means foi accom¬ plishing this design On returning to his hut, he took some goats' han, which he woveoi spliced,till he Ind madeiometolei ably strong lines, like those used for fish. uig. These he could extend to any length he chose to make them, and, hat mg pre¬ pared some thirty, each about three feet long, he repaired to the lake on the fol¬ lowing day, to try the experiment 'ie had determined on Wheie he obseıved tbc ground had been most trodden by the water fowl, he put in some modeiately strong sticks, about a foot and a half long, withm a few inches of each other. To each stick lie made fast a line, which had a running noose at the end. This lie laid down
open on the grass, so that it would re¬ ceive the feet of those foi whom he had prepared it, and their efforts to extricate their entangled feet, he expected, to draw the noose tight, and effectually pre¬ vent escape Impatient to ascertain the success ot this expedient, on the succeeding morn¬ ing he leturned, attended by his usual companions Arriving at the spot, he found, with much satisfaction, that seven¬ teen captives awaited bis coming. They stiuggled violently to get free when he approached, but the noose, true to its office, securely retained them Binding their legs together, he deposited them in some large open baskets, which, in the confident anticip ition of success, he had brought with lum , and, with the assist¬ ance of the two youths, he conveyed them in safety to the mount They were most of them a species of large duck. Havmg presented some of the finest of them to Jolhka and seveial other fuendly к 3
natives, who had been most distinguished by then kindness, he cut the featheis of one wmg of each of the females, and did the same office foi two diakes He then gave them then Iibeity withm the en¬ closuie, and supplied them with food, as also with watei, by sinking laige cab- bashes m the gıound, whicli weie filled eveiy day. They soon became reconciled to their new situation, and finding them thrive as well as he could desue, be do¬ tei mined on keeping them to bleed; but as the indulgence which he had allowed them in the first instance proved incom¬ patible with the ınteıests of his flowei- gaiden, hefoimed a new fence to enclose them within nanowei limits, and pio¬ duced another small building to house them at night The dextenty with which he was ac¬ customed lo take fish fiom the lake, and paıtıculaılj a laige kind of peicb, gained hnn gieat lenown, as it enabled lum fre- quently to supply Ins fiiends, when they
eould not obtain that desci iption of food foi themselves. It was by means of α woi m and α ihoi 11 that he succeeded in effecting this The woi m swallowed, the fish reti с ited, till daving got to the ox- tent of tde line, it was suddenly trms- hxed by the thorn Мою than once he found himself robbed by а stiay heion or ci own-bird, which dad sufficient sa¬ gacity to pi oht by Ins ingenuity. Some¬ times, the haste with winch they swallowed the fish, disabled them fiom making their escape, and incapable of bieakmg the line, weie detained, till llien fluiteimgs invited tlic fox 01 wild cat to his 1 epast, who, 111 tin 11, fell a victim to the ne oi the moitihetl fisheiman. The voracity with which the seveial beings that people the eai td, tde an, and the watei, pin sue each othei, wei e sometimes the themes of Hailey's musings. He saw the fish be¬ ti ayed to death by the nipacity with which it sought the wol m , the dei on annihilated tins dcstroyei witd equal k4
eagerness, and the fox oı wild cat, con tinumg the ferocious game, led bun on, till he found, in the puisuei of the last, the ongnial assulant, the enemy of all, the climax ol destniction — Man The kindness with which he had bet n first received, expeuenced 110 diminution, but, on the conti at y , seemed to increase, and this may in pail bc iccountcd foi, from the oppoitumties he had had of sm pusmg them, by an agreeable exhibition of some of those arts which augment the chaims of civilised life He regretted that it was not in his powei to mal с them a moie adequate ictuin , but an in cident soon occui red, which eniblcd hnn, in the opinion of all but himself, to pty off the debt of giatitude with interest Chailes had evei been putial to the study of botany, and the advantages with which he could now enquue into the ehaiacter of pıoductıons, which weie peculiar to а countiy so remote from his own, were not overlooked He fiequently
indulged in long rambles, the object of which was to collect and pieseive scarce or curious plants, to discover what were distinguished by original virtues, and what wei e analogous to those known in Euiope. This he found tde most plea¬ sant way of filling up tlio e days which were devoted to amusement. Returning fiom one of these excur¬ sions, α slu ub attracted his notice, which he wished to tiansplant to the mount. On attempting to remove it, he found its root lay much deepei beneath the surface of the earth than he had expected, and, as he was anxious not to break any of its fibres, he ıaısed the gıound all round, and made a pretty laige hole before he could effect Ins purpose. While doing this, the i aı ıetıes of sod which he had to disturb, demanded his attention, and lie perceived, with surprize and pleasure, that a fine stratum of strong clay was de- posited there. It occurred to him, that κ ΰ
this discovery might prove of consıdeı - ible nnpoitance, as it would enable hnn to astonish the natives, by the production of vessels fit fol cuhnaiy puiposes, and at once capable of holding water and withstanding fiie. Delighted with this thought, he took particular notice of the spot which "on- tamed the treasure, that he might have no difficulty in finding it again, but, aftei doing this, as if fearful it should escape befoie he could return, he deter¬ mined on taking some of the clay home with lum He directed bis attendants to do the same, and then united excl¬ uons conveyed to his house a tolerable sample of the material on which he pio- posed forthwith to employ himself. Hav¬ ing increased its ductility, by beating it with thick wooden clubs, and moistened it till it bore the appearance of a stiong paste, he joyfully commenced his new task, with an attempt to make a pan.
Those about Inm »eenieil to think lum insane, when tliey s iw him mouldmir the clay in a t mety of «луч, and then roll. mg all up logethei again with an an of vexation and disappointment. That which appeared to him a very simple opciation, he now found to be я work of no small difficulty. When he lud hollowed out a piece of clay, to what he thought a pio¬ pei thickness, he had the moi tification to find it ci ack m some p u t, so as to be¬ come wholly useless, and when, to avoid this, he used more ot the mateiial, he was not only disgusted with the clumsy appearance of the vesiel, but he was sa¬ tisfied that the degiee of heat that would be lequned to make it hot through, was so consideiable that it would piove of little 01 no utility. Ho abandoned his project m despan that nylit, but letuined to it the ne\t day, and with no bettei fortune. He tiled vanous expedients which failed, but, on the fourth day, while ι uminatmg in w hat way he could к 6
surmount the unexpected obstacles with which he had to contend, and wishing to discover the means of producing a vessel of the size of some of his calibashes, Ins eye rested, unconsciously, on one of the articles just mentioned, and it instantly struck lum, that, by using tins as a mould, In» purpose might bc effected The ex périment was instantly tued, and with the most complete success Placing the cahbash on its head, he easily covered it with а crust of ι moderate thickness composed of clay, sand, md pounde I charcoal He mcorpoialed α run with it, and then exposed it to the sun Iu two days it was so dry, that he thoi ght lit might venture to bring fire m contact with it This was done, and no accident occui red lhe vessel became hard enough for any puipose, and the call bash, on which it had been formed, hav ing been burnt within it, he beheld exactly the sort of utensil he had wished to ftshion He could not but smile at the
extieme anxiety he had felt while thus employed. That he should glory in hav¬ ing become a pipkin maker, excited his own risibility, but nothing detracted fiom the satisfaction he had derived from his success. Humble as the elort was, its utility vv is not to be questioned, and this was to limi a souice of exultation He, whose habits have been so ι udely invaded, as were those oi H irley, will not be slow to compi edemi the chaiactei of that pleasure which cheei s the mind, when¬ ever by a labour of its own, something has been done to ameliorate the hard¬ ships of its condition, and restore it to one lost comfort. Let school taught pride diascmble all it can, These little things arc great to little man On succeeding in this grand undertak¬ ing, he presented the fruits of lus toil to Jolhka in solemn form, and explained the various изез to which such ι líeles
weie applied in Idiropean countries. The gift was most giaciously received, and the discoveiy was dcscivcdly held to be of gieat ν idle, as it tlnew α ι niety into tlio life and habits of the lube, un¬ known befoie All Ins fuends applied foi α specimen of lus caithenwaie, and Challes found the laboui becoming so gieat, thil, as a mcasuie of self-defence, it was necessity to teach them to make foi themselves Then sui puse at fiist seeing vvatei boil, was veiy gieat, and the expeimients made to satisfy them¬ selves of its new chaiactei weie not always the most pleasant m then tei mut¬ ation, as ccitam scaldmgs weie cnaured which they would ıatlıeı have been with¬ out. Iiut tlie ıcputatıon of the wink man siiHued not fiom tins, as if he caused the evil, lus pıescuptıons foi tht ıelıef of the suderei s succeeded, in some cases, wheie even the fetish men hctl failed , and, whatever inconveniences
might be sustained, 111 the way ibovc illudctl to, they weie held to be moie than atoned for, by the new luxuries which his discoveiy and ınstıuctıons did placed within the reat h of the whole с ominumty
CHAP. \. Such ıs the condition of lifi, ttmt soıııcthnıe ıs nil. ivs wanting to happiness Dr Jouh»un Though all were loud m praise ol " the white-man's clay cahbash," that peison- age himself felt, that his discoveiy was of less value than it might have been, from л circumstance over wh» h he had no con¬ trolli. The want of salt in Sambai ra did not veiy much annoy his palate while eating that which was loasted 01 scotched, but he now felt it more than he had previously done, as that useful ar- tiole seemed indispensable to meat when boiled, to save it fiom being insipid. He endeavoured to console himself foi its absence by the use of aromatic plants, and peppers of various soits, but nothing
within his re ich could m ike up for thi deficiency Ihe poor people to whose kindness he owed so much, he saw mi serably ifldctcd witd tlie scuivy, fiom the want of that valuable commodity for which lie Ion_,od, antl he coull liutlly believe tint Natine, bbcial to then sul m othei ıespects, hul been so niggaidly as to deny them this good, without sup plying sonic pi oduction to sci ve as its substitute Anxious to relieve them, by dıscoveı - mg tint winch he liciti to bo so necessary to human existence, lie mule numeious lcscaiehes for that puipose With all the eflorts he could nuke (and m pui suit of tins fivounte object he braved tde intolei idle lieat of tlic climate with a daring peiseveiance, winch few Lino pean constitution!, could display with impunity), he was unable lo flatter him self, tint he hid made even an ap proacli tow trds the accomplishment of his design
On cspktiiiing to Jolhka the object ot his solicitude, and cxpicssing surpnse at tde total absence of tint foi which he had so lndustilously sougdt, lie leceived his wannest thanks fui the exertions he had made lo discov cr the ai Hele he had desenbed, though its importance was but linpeifectly undei stood. Hailey stiongly insisted on its immense value, and as he had not yet abandoned the idea, that some might probably be found in the vicinity of S imhamı, he was invited by Jollika to ib"oaipany dim on а visit, wlucd í Kbcd to make to seveial hordes es that acknovvledgid his sway, am' o enquue on then toui, if any tlimg like that which he desued to find, was known to exist. This invitation was, foi many îeasons,· agieablc to Challes, ľveiy thing that contnbuted to give lum a knowledge of the surrounding countiy, he legauled as tending to pi oude the means foi leaving it. Wdatevci migdt at limes claim Ins
attention, and divert his thoughts from the contemplation of lus situ ition, lus ıesolutıoıı was taken, to get away wlien the ι amy seison should be passed, even though the attempt to depart should change the fnendship of the Pholies into the bıtleıest enmity. But the ostensible ι eason for joyfully accepting the peimission accouled hnn, was not α feigned one. He was sincerely anxious to impiove, if it vvcie in Ins power, the condition of tde diimble, benevolent beings, wlio in tlie midst of ignorance, supeıstıtıon, and poverty had deen moie foi waul than some Chustians, 01 at least persons so called, that he had met with, to succoui and console a destitute sti angei. The disease that annoyed tdem lie doped to ìemove, if his enquiñes should piove successful; and this, w hatevei might be his own fate, would be to lum a delightful reflection to the end of Ins life. Besides these mo- lives, which were most potently in favoui
of the proposed toui, he had another, in that curiosity which most youthful minds feel to view places unknown before. He, therefore, had no hesitation in closing with the pioposal ot the old chief, and Jolhka, promising himselt much pleasure from the society of such a com¬ panion, prepaied for his journey with little delay. Though extiemcly glad of the ορροί- tunity whicd offered, ior extending his knowledge of the country, he had some little arrangements to make before lie could satisfactorily take his depai tuie Like other men who have laige esta¬ blishments, he was apprehensive, that things might not go on well at home in lus absence. The varieties of piopeity which he had to leave behind, gave him some ofthat uneasiness, which the wealth, all are anxious to obtain, never fails to inflict on its envied possessoi. He was not afraid of being robbed while away, but the prymg disposition of the natives
would he ieared, induce them to subject his house and goods to an inspection, that would be likely to pioduce, by the total deiangement of his stores, as serious an evil He had got together a variety of articles, which he did not wish to be h indled oı displaced in his absence 1 he only entrance to the dwelling of Ins ittend mts had hitheito been through lus own He now judged it expedient to make a door to it fiom the garden I о effect tins, on the spur of the moment, imposed upon him a severe exeition, as it obliged him to work in the hottest pai t ot the day His labour, however, soon tei mmated, and he was enabled to ex- elude them from his apartments Naki wis to accompany him on the jout- ney Hie male part of his establishment did not offer to attend him on this occa¬ sion Io them he confided the care of his mclosure, and, having made fast the doors of Ins own mansion, he particularly 1
enjoined the young men not to suffei them to be opened befoie his return. The chief and his train left Sambarra. Six districts required his attention These were called Tourqinrane, Vigelli, Na)c, Griungui, ľarenna, and Neusabana. Tolir- quaranc, which they first visited, Harley found was as consideiable a village as that m which Jollika geneially resided. It lay on a vast smdy plain, and was surrounded with a fence and a strong hedge. The chief and his paity were received with every demonstiation of pleasure Teasting was the oider of the day, and the dance before described, concluded each entertainment All the huts ot Toui quarane were built after the fashion of those of Sambarra, but differed from each othei in size more than those of the last mentioned village Llephants m this neighbourhood were commonly met with Then flesh formed an important part of the food of the
natives, and the hoof was esteemed the gieatest dedcacv tliat hospitality could place befoie a welcome guest. Hailey, whose fame had reached Touiquaiane before lie had α thought of visiting itj was heie an object of gieat attention. He met with the most coidial gicetmgs, tnd was Healed with a hoof to himself He tasted it, but liked it not. Iiom the w mt of s ilt, to him it was peculiarly unpleasant and insipid, and tins set linn on to puisne the enqiuiy he hid pieviously commenced. But he could not obtain the intelligence he coveted, and through¬ out the journey he was not moie for- tunate. The othei places which they visited, weie not so difieiont from Sambaria and 1'ouiquarane, as to call for any particular description. At Sagella, enoi mous scor¬ pions piesented themselves to his observ¬ ation, which did not surpass others that he. had seen in magnitude, more than m courage, foi when met, they mam-
fested no alarm, and did not attempt to escape This, Harley had no doubt, was partly the consequence of the im¬ politic prudence of the natives, who pidged it wiser to avoid, than to attempt to frighten or dertroy such creatures Sagella and Nayé iest on the shores of two beautiful and capacious lakes The heat at the last mentioned place, during the short period our heio remained there, was excessive Even among those who h id passed all then lives in those legions, it was complained of as unusual, and before the departure of the chief, a phe uomenon occui red, which created an alarm of no ordinary ehaiacter The water which usually leposed in the low fenny lands neai the lake, had been dried up by the excessive heat, which now absorbing the lake itself, presented to the astonished gazers, a speclable in¬ conceivably awful Lifted from its bed, an enormous glassy body rose to a vast height, whirled round with frightful
velocity, as lt ascended, and forming г liquid inverted pyiannd of wonderful magnitude High above the stream which supplied it, the ti ansparen t mass inter¬ posed between the view of the beholders and the sun, and received fiom the daz¬ zling brightness of the orb of day, a flaming and ternfic splendour, whose oveipoweung radiance was almost too much foi mortal eye to look upon. those, whose oigans of sight weie suffi¬ ciently stiong to iest on the magnificent object, tiemblcd with agonizing alarm, and could only contemplate it as the haibingei of desti uetion, and tde mimstei of death. At tins moment, α strong curient of an prevailed, and the water¬ spout was boine towaids the mansions of the inhabitants of the village, who ex¬ pected, and not without reason, that bursting over them, it must infallibly wash away every vestige of their lowly abodes. Consternation and dismay were universal, when happily the subject ol VOL. II. e
their fears too swollen to bear its own ponderous weight fai ther, resigned the watei y burden befoie it had w holly passed the limits of the ìeseivoir fiom which it had ascended. The sound of the de¬ scending deluge was tremendously loud, and the lake, unable to contain the aug¬ mentation it thus suddenly leceived, though all had appeared to bc taken fıom itseli, overflowed its banks in sev eıal places, but happily without occasioning any serious inconvenience to the asto¬ nished and ternfied spectatois. In the couise of ten minutes all was tranquil, though the lake, fiom the unusual agita¬ tion it had experienced, did not ıtgaın its bngdtness foi а day 01 two A vio¬ letit storm of thundei and lightning fol¬ lowed. It was unaccompanied witli lain, and dad not tde effect of cleaung oi cooling the atmospheie, the heat of which continued as intolerable as ever. The noxious reptiles, quickened into life under the influence of so poweiful
a sun, were innuineiable, and presented a succession of objects that inspired Harley with strong disgust, and added to his impatience to return to a tempeiate climate Enoi mous spiders coveied with hair, whicli m appeaiance reminded lum of the small ci ib fish, infested eveiy part of the settlement, and scoipions, lattle- srakes, and adders fiequently displayed then hateful foi ins In one instance, he saw α successful attempt had been made to tame a nttle snake. He had no op¬ poitunity of ascietainmg whether it had been depnved of its fangs, but it was handled with impunity b) its owner, whom it followed at his bidding like a dog, and seemed equally tractable. His cuuosity was giatified by oppoitumties of inspecting specimens of the cameleon and salamandei species, and of satisfying himself that the formei could not live wholly on an, and that the latter had no partiality for hie An animal called by the natives the Quaqua, which strongly » о
resembled the zebra, was sometimes seen on theirloute, buton their neai approach, it rushed for concealment over the sa¬ vannahs, and plunged into the woods The mandul oi lapone boggoe, as the nativ es с ill it, α large monkey, about the size of ι boy seven yeais old, fiequently showed himself, amused the party with some mischievous antics, and instantly made good Ins retreat The number of persons who accompa med Jolhka on tins expedition amounted to about thirty All weie well armed , but when marching tiuough the wooda, the di unis which accompanied them were incessantly beaten to alarm the monsters neai them, that the necessity foi using then w eapons might be avoided T hese sounds put the most savage to flight, and not one dated to arrest then progiess during the whole march Besides being useful in this lespect, the diums also sei ved to announce tde approach of the chief to each village that he visited, and
to call out all the inhabitants to give eclat to lus entrée He was received with de- nionstiations of pleasure and attachment at all ot them, and " the wlnte man" dad no reason to complain of being over¬ looked or foıgotten Nothing of impoit» ance occui red in the lattei part of their journey winch, from the sameness of the objects it presented, was less mteiesting to Charles than he had expected it would piove, and lie found himself again »t Sambana without having been enabled to obtain information that he conld flat- tei himself would be of importance to himself 01 beneficial to the natives But he did not consıdeı his time to have been wholly mispent, as to have gained α more geneial knowledge of the country, its pıoductıons, and inhabitants, was, in his opi non, to have accomplished something, though but little, towaids facilitating his i eti eat On repairing to Ins cottage, he found that Ins injunctions had been scrupulously at- L 3
tended to by Ins attendants, and he had icason to be satished th it it had never been entered by any human being in Ins absence , for, when he opened the door, he lound it furnished m ι manner that was sufhcient to convince a master mort suspicious than himself that due obedi¬ ence had been paid to his orders Three hills, each about four feet high, tluown up in the form of a sugai loaf claimed his attention, when he made his way into his sitting apartment. These, he perceived, had been supplied by the ants, tin ее sorts ofwhich are found in Sambana These creatures aie of different colom s , black, red, and white. Then communit es are preserved distinct from each other. The red and wh.te ants are not unlike those which are common in England, but the black nie much largei, and their bite produces a troublesome, though not dan- gerous, inflammation. All have the same instinctive industry and appaient system, which have so frequently called forth the
wonder and admiration of the pluloso¬ pheis ol I mope Го expel the ıııtı tiders who had taken up their abode in the cottige ot the mount, was a t isk winch he found it neces¬ sary to pei (01 in without loss of time, but rashly to have undertaken it would dave pi oduced ι illiei unple.is mt consequences After some dclibciation, he considered that fu e would most eflectually dm с thein away, but ns it was necessaiy to nitio- duce with gieat caution, as the light, di v maten ils of which his hut was composed would instintly catch the flame, and dis patch the oflendeis against whom he found it necessary to pioceed, in a more suminaiy way than he could wish Hav¬ ing provided himself with some laige cad- bashes ot w itei to be used in case of ac¬ cident, be tlnew in some lighted reeds, while he caused the three little edifices whicli these industrious vısıtoıs had elected withm his, to be levelled with the ground, by means of long poles» L 4
This tremendous earthquake, as it must have appeared to them, threw lhe nation* there established into the gieatest pos¬ sible dismay, and all that could fly from the flume and smoke, which increased their discomfiture, made foi the door without loss of time. In about two hours the first apartment was pietty w ell cleaied ef them, but on passing to the other where he had been in the habit of sleep¬ ing, tour more tall ant-hills met his view ; but these he had only to level, as he found them evacuated by their late pro¬ prieties, ш consequence (as he guessed) of their receiving intelligence from the smoke, of what was passing in then neigh¬ bourhood. He soon found that while he was away they had made themselves quite at home. AU Ins stores had been appropriated sans ceremonie to their use, and not a grain of the dried millet and maize which he had lefl in security, as he supposed, lemained to cheer hnn on his return, l'his was not of much im· portance ; for on making his loss known
to Jolhka, he was promptly accommodated with a new supply Notwithstanding that he had again got his hut to himself, he did not care to take possession of it on the instant, as he had some appichensions that he should be annoyed by leluuiiiig straggleis who, detained abı oad by business, might not have been made acquainted with the re¬ volution which had taken place, or might aim at ıegaınıng their lost empire He slept at the village that night, and rising at bieak of day with the assistance of hi* two male attendants, procured a large quantity of clay, which he spread ovei the whole interior of his hut m the hope that when hardened, the ants would find it impossible to break thiough it to renew then labours dui ing any terapoiaiy ab· sence that might agam occui. The plan thus adopted he had ι eason to be satisfied with, as from that time he never saw one of these industrious intruders withm the limits of his mansion. í S
CHAP. XI. Souety, fnendship, and love, Divinely bestow'd upon man , 0 bad I the wings of a dove, How soon would I taste you again ' Cowkk. Month after month rolled away, and the rainy season set in, and, till that was ovei, every idea of leaving Sambarra was of course laid aside. His health suflcrcil occasionally from the extieme humidity of the climate ; but the kind- ness of Jolhka, and his own good consti¬ tution enabled lum to triumph over all the dangers which assailed him ; and, at the expiration of three months, all apprehension subsided, and the weathei returned to that state to which he had been so long mured, that it no longer
menaced him with death, or indispo¬ sition He had lesided among the Pholies more than 1 alf α year, and none of those opportunities for escape lud offered, whicli he bad flattered himself must sometimes occur No tioop of Mandingo merchants, with α colle of slaves, had passed in the vicinity of Sambarra, by following which he might hope to reach some place inhabited by Europeans. The joy which he felt when first emanci¬ pated from the forest, no longer cheered his mmd , his impatience to escape in creased eveiy day, and he became so fretful and untable, that even the kind¬ ness of Jollika, wlncli experienced no abatement, ceased to elicit that wann expression of gratitude which had for¬ merly burst fiom his heart with all the energy of sincerity. He repioached him- self foi Ins insensibility, but the discon¬ tent which had taken possession ot lua mind, was not to be conqueied. Tb* e С
récollection of past mıseıy and the dread of a recurrence of it, attacked the feel ing which now swelled his bosom but Without success Discontent still clouded his spiiits through the day uıd mtei rupted his repose at night and would neither j ıeld to reason nor to gratitude, though both were fiequently invoked to unite then strength, in oider to put the intrudei to flight Such are the gia dations of human life, such the vıcıssı tudes of human passions' Ihe solitary pilgnm m the forest would have hailed, with ti ansport a shelter foi α single night that offeied not one tenth pai t of the accommodation which his snug i esi dence on the mount afloided, but se curely possessing more than sufficient to satisfy all the wants of man in a iude state of society, his mind overlooked the whole of the good within his reach to brood on what he might never obtain Comfoit cannot satisfy those who ispire td happiness, thongh, under the piessure
of seveie edamit), the ímpioved sensi- bilit) of the sufleiei can dıscoveı that ι momenlaiy respite from igonj is bliss A thousand pi ins loi returning to Go ree were revolved m lus mmd but ill seemed so diflieull of execution, tint he was obliged to abindon them as linpiac ticable Without the assistance ol those among whom he had so long resided, and igainstlheii wishes, it w is impossible foi him to ι etui η , and, satisfied of this, he consuleied the onh chai ce that re¬ mained to lum, depended upon his ob taming the con tilt of Jollil a to leatc Sambana On the eailiest opportunity, he detei mined to male the chief ac quamted with whit was pissing m lus mind, and though he hid some feais that to do this, would cmse lus motions to be moie nanowly watched than here toloie, yet aftei the conclusion he had come to th it seemed, undei existing cır cumstances, to be of little ımpoı tance. This ïesolution was tto soonei taken,
than it was earned into effect He com municatcd to Jolhka the wish nearest to his heart Гют the general deport ment of Hailey, all h id been completely satisfied, that he knew too well the ad vantages of lesidmg in Sambvrrn, to thmk of returning to my less favouied country, as they consıdeı ed lus own must of necessity be, and the chief, theiefoie, was extiemely suipnsed, and not a little distressed to find the wlnte stranger disposed to go aw ay His first impulse was to oflei dun additional advantages to induce him to iernam , but these, it was soon explained to dim, dad no charms for Harley who desued but to see the friends of his youth igam An appe d to the benevolent feelings of the old man extorted α confession that this was ıery natui al as Jollika felt that long absence from his lovely tlnck lipped, flat nosed, goggled ey ed beauties, was to himself a souice of much uneasiness, and return exceedingly delightful
He, however, ti usted, it his friend lound the nictns of visiting Ins formei connexions once moie, that he would not fail to ι etui u m ι short tunc, bring ing them with hnn, oi coming alone, as might best sml his convenience lo this Hailey m ule m ev tsivc reply, by declaring, tint it would cci tamly aflord lum much pleibiuc, whenever he should find himself in lb it ρ ut of the woild again, to leturn witli sued picscnts, as would prove lie was uot im„i iteful foi the kind ness and piotection which he owed to the hospitality of Jolbk ι ι ul lus people Repeated eonvcis ttious on this subject, at length leconcilcd the vendable chief to the idet of pai ting with Challes, aftei all his eloquence li 1 1 been m vam exeited, to peisuule lum to reinam He, in fine, agi eed to his tlcpsrtuie, and pro mised hnn an cseoi t of y oung men, who should p iss witli linn bey ond the liants of his dominions, tnd inttoduce the tia- vellei, with his lecommendation, to the
monarch of the adjoining countiy. These dehghtlul sounds icstoied Charles, not ineiely to tianquillity, but to happiness ; foi aflcr all, tuie li ippiness consists, in hai ing an object of importance to gam, with α fan prospect ot accomplishing the exertion necessaiy to its attainment This, at least, the expenence of all mankind proves, is the neaiest approach that we can make to felicity, m oui present im¬ pei feet state. The news that he intended to leave Sambarra, caused considerable regret to be expiessed by the natives, with whom, the geneial suavity of his manneis had not failed to make lum а favourite. At the mount, theie was great lamentation, when he gave dneetions to pi epare foi lus jouincy, and little Naki, whose anxiety to please had begun some months before to weai the aspect of aflection, was quite disconsolate. Hei grief touched lum nearly, and it was with some alai πι, and gieat concern, that he heard her de-
cluie, she would follow hım eveiy wheie, and cheerfully cioss the gieat watei, to accompany dim to bis home. N.iki hail come f ι oin a distant seulement beiseli. She foimcil a ρ ut of that piesent of fe¬ males winch, on Hailey's untai, he had lound held in so little estim ition, on ac count of the absence ol tbosi ehaiactci- ìstics of beauty', which hei с commaudod imiveisal esteem. Γιοιη the ciicuni- stunce ol liei not being a nitivc of S im¬ balla, slie now seemed to consıdeı, thai she and liai loy 'vcie picciscly iu the s ime situation, and societly blessed her destiny, loi giving bei α puliiéi so fit (as she f bought lum), m eveiy lespect, to be her future husband, ľhe kindness and satis¬ faction which he had m untested, on witnessing bei efforts to please lum, at vanous times and seasons, and the ex- jiiessions ot wann appiobation vv lucir her activity and cleanliness dad extorted fiom lum, she had tieasincd up in bei memory, and delighted to recall, as abundant
pioofs that the passion with which he had inspired hei was lecipiocal. He represented, m the strengest terms, the шипенье distance that he bul to travel, the difficulties he should hive to encountti, and the dangeis to which he must be exposed in journeying to Ins own coiinti j . But lie did this to no pui¬ pose. Keason, when opposed to affec Hon, pi oves but a feeble combatant Naki hei ded not distance, so she could accoinpaii) Challes, foi the difficulties incident to liavdlmg m Afnca, she thought beiseli bettei able to contend with tlicm than he could be , and ot danger she was not alı. ml. A new calamity, not to be foreseen, awaited limi, llic deatli of Jollika, at this penod, was an event which Challes could not but severely deplore, and inde¬ pendent of the grief which he felt foi the loss of a fnend so geneious and sin¬ cere, he was not a little shocked at find¬ ing the project, winch he had formed com-
pletely fi usli ated, as the meins by which he might accomplish his design, seemed to pensh Willi that fuendly chief. He had bten convei sing with liai ley, on the subject of his intended depaitine, tiuough the greatei pai t ol the day on which he was taken ill, when be sunk in а p u al) tic ht, which depnved hnn of speech, and of the use of his limbs on one side. He nevei aiticulated another woid, but re¬ mained in this st ite foui d lys, when he expired without a groan. It was not here the pıactıce, as it is in some parts of Afnca, to keep а dead body above ground for a considerable time, till, by bestowing on it numeious envelopes, it becomes an object of such magnitude, that it cannot be removed without difficulty. Breath had no soonei left the body, than the dismal event was announced to all the village, by the howhngs ol those who had been in at¬ tendance on the chief. The coi se was immediately washed and wiapped m a.
blue cotton cloth, which coveied eveiy part, not excepting the head Ou lhe thud day aftei wauls it w ıs consigned to the earth. A hole was picptrcd to ıeceıve it nuclei a palm tiee, where Jollika had been accustomed to sit, when business left hnn at lcısuıe to court re pose. Not only the inhabitants of that village, but those ot the uciglibouung dışlı lets to which the tidings had been conveyed, without loss of tune, attended his obsequies, and the whole multitude, when the giave closed ovei the lemams of their departed chief, expi essed then sense of the loss they had sustained by fiantic bowlings, by tearing then hair, and by scautying then bodies, that tdey might shed then blood ovci his tomb. Their deportment, m truth, expi essed such violence of gnef, and such α peifect insensibility to dope, that α superficial obseıveı of the course of human feelings, would not dave hesitated to dcclaie that a long period must elapse befoie tran-
qiiillity could agam be theirs, if even tune could alleviate their woe, and lecon- cile them to the loss which heaven had old unod tlicm to sustain. llie sun had not yet usen on the nioiuing which followed the day on which the obsequies of Jollika weie cele¬ bi ated, when an unusual noise loused Hailey Iiom the couch on winch he had comte \ in vain a temporal y oblu ion oi the soi row wlucd depressoti, and the apprehensions that agititeli Ins mmd. On using, he saw Jatt ι, the biotliei of the ileeetsed Jollika, seveial of Ins relu tions, mil some of tlie puncipil men oi the plico, asscmdled on tue mount within his enclosuie Hailey went out to them, when Jatta infoimeli hun that, in conse¬ quence of the fnendship which had sub¬ sisted between " the white man" and the I ite chief, it was the wish of all piesentthat he should " biother hun," by heoommg their leadci , and this he in particulai requested him to do. In
Jatt i's depot tiileni tlıeıe was an air of ıestıamt, and of suppi essed ι ige, which escaped not the penetrating glance of Harley , and it at once told lum that tlic put he was ictmg lud been forced upon him by those who accompanied him on this eiiinil, mil this idea was continued dy tlie exclam ıtıoıı of ' I eim lon¿ Jiaıııı ha Mama," which now buist forth fıom them with eveıy m mifestition of fuvenl esteem lins ciy, which meint " oui sti angei , biothei the king " vt as icpeatcd many times hefore he could obtain a dealing Challes felt moie flattered thin giatified dy this extraor- duiaiy compliment Acicptingit, lie wis sure tint the malice of Jilti would not fail to puisne hnn , and he foiesaw mat he should find it moie difficult to quit Sambana if lie bec une then chief, than if he limameli a pnv ite individu il He, tlieicfore, lost no time in declining tde lugli honour A foieij,nei, he insisted, ought not to be pi iced over them, and
he added, it would be an act of disrespect towards their late chief, if they weie to pass over the claim of the biother of Joliik ι, to be invested with the supieme power The arguments of Hailey weie not lost on Ins auditory v\ hen tliey had heard what he had tosiy, they ajipl lulled his disnitnestedness, mil lo 1 is gieat joy forthwith piocecded to invest J itta with the robe ippiopuited to tbe dccoi ation of then inonirch, wlucd thev h id intended to bestow on Challes J itta then pro ccedeil, in solemn foi m to t tl e posses sion of the loyal hut An onici for α giand (cstivil lollowcd, md those who had spent the pieccdm, diy in fi antic bowlings ovei Joldka's gi н o, passed this m dunking, dancing, and smgmg at the ibode of the new king, displ lying m the one mst nice an aptness foi woe, and m the otdn an alacrity for joy, that would have reflected no disgi ice on the most accomplished European couitiei that
evei ducd obedient teais, loyally shed ovei α departed soveieign according to etiquette, to hail, with well-iegulated smiles of boundless tunsport, the exalfc ation ol his sueccssoi. At dusk, Harley took his way to the little mount. N.iki followed him, and lepioved lum loi not accepting the 1 igli iánk which had been at lus disposal, Her ambition dad been loused by the offei, and not α little mortified by the steady mamici m wlncli sde had seen it icjectcd lie took no pams to piove his conduct wise, foi nothing would dive afloided dim moie satisfaction, than to hnd that his supposed folly, had enabled his coppei colouicd adımı ei lo tiansfci liei attentions to some peison less blind, botd to liei attı ıctıons, nud Ins own inteiest. Hai Icy speedily perceived that his in¬ fluence was on lho decline, and that he was no longei 'lie gieat man at cowl that he had been in the days of Jollika.
Though fnendship was professed, he could perceive that Ins presence was dis agreeable lo Jatta The piefeience which soine ot Ins subjects had manifestei! in favour of the white man, was not to be forgiven He had not wished to ex¬ cite those feelings of animosity, which, he wis convint cd, had been called into existence in llic bosom of the piesent monarch , but in one lespect, they favoured his views Пь Majesty list¬ ened with great complacency, while Harley told of the aiiangements which Jolhka had pi unused should be made to facilitate his ι etui n to Goiee, and Jattt declired himself most anxious to fulfil the wishes of his dece ised biother. Jatt ι held it beneath lum to govern by the un- tlignihed svstim of mildness, which had constituted the glory ot Ins pi edecessoi. Dedghtul to command, he was not with¬ out feais tint those who had once pie- ferred the stiaiigei to bun, might do so again , and, if Chirles had not wished voi. π M
to leave Sambarra, it is moie than pro- fa ible that Jatta would have caused him to be lemoved by α veiy suminaiy pro¬ cess, not only fiom his teintoiy, but fiom the face of the earth altogethei. Anxious to relieve tde king fiom the piesence of one so unwelcome, Hailey ventuied to importune Jatta moie than once, to nunc the party that should escort lum tiuough tde foi ests to the next kingdom. He deferi «1 doing this fiom time to time, till an accident happened, which had iie.uly made it unnecessary foi hnn to do it all. Ruminating one night on the painful vicissitudes that he h id known withm the last tw oyears, Chai les did not sink to sii ep so eaily as lie was accustomed to tío, when he perceived his apiitment suddenly in¬ vaded with smoke At fust, he could hardly believe lus senses, as he had used no fiie that day. Hie increasing volume ot it soon dispelled scepticism , and dc was obliged to use witd all possible ex
pedition, to escape suffocation. Fortu¬ nately, he had sufficient time to alami the inmates of the adjoining hut, while it was possible to escape the danger ; and no hie was lobt. But to stay the piogiess of the detouimg clement was impossible, as the fire buist out in two places at once with iincontiollable fuiy , and in the course of two houis, he had the mortification to see his beloved retreat, and all its appui tenances, the ti nits of many a long day's laboi ìous ex¬ eition, reduced to a heap of ashes. He ga/ed on the interesting uni, with feel¬ ings of indcscnbable melancholy ; and thought he saw, m this conflagiation, the faithful picture of his own untoward des¬ tiny. " Even thus," he exclaimed, " was the gay f.ibnc of my hopes laid low in a moment, and, perhaps, the visions which I still fondly cheiish, aie doomed to share the same fate " AU Ins enquiries confirmed the opi¬ nion that he had ongmally entertained, m 2
that chance and negligence had no share in the destruction of his cottage. His outer apartment had blazed out in two places at once , none of the residents at the mount had kindled a fire for any purpos«), in the course of the pre¬ ceding day, so that it was impossible for the catastrophe to have been produced by any slumbering ember having been accidentally fanned into α flame. That it was the diabolical act of an incen¬ diary, admitted not of doubt. He could not suspect any one of those about him , and with the exception of the new chief, he flattered himself that he had no enemy in Sambarra. Thus, ìudely deprived of all the coin forts which had hitherto diminished, though they could not remove, the lrk- someness of exile, pursued by ρ alice, and placed in a state which lie could only regard aş one of captivity, Ins impa tience to commence Ins ïetieat decame extreme To build another dut, and
form a new plantation, to replace what had been destroyed, were labours which he had no heart to undertake, and he determined, at all hazards, to remain no longer in the neighbourhood of Jatta As soon as the expiring flames permitted him to approach the scite of his late resi dence, he sought the spot where he had deposited the samples of ore which he believed to be gold These he carefully concealed in that part of his dress which covered his shoulders, its pressure on which assured him that he could not fail to miss it, the instant any accident should displace it By this time, neaily all the inhabitants of the village had been at¬ tracted to the little mount Many of them proffered assistance, and Jatta proclaimed his guilt, by the extravagance of his pretended grief for the calamity which had befallen his white friend He even went so far as to invite Harley to reside m lus own hut foi the present, but this honour Charles failed not to de m S
cline, as he could not but guess that some riewtreacheiy was intendeu. He availed himself of the kindness of others to obtain a lodging, and only supplie ited Jatta to favoui his immediate leti eat Thechief, disappointed in his expectations of get¬ ting nd of the stianger by a shortei piocess, piomised immediately to select the twenty persons who w ere to attend him· Harley's suspicions were still on the alert, and he begged to save him that ţiouble, by choosing for himself, fiom those who were willing to accom¬ pany linn. To tlus, Jatta, with apparent cheerfulness, after some hesitation, con. sented, anilHaileynamed twenty of those whose habits had appeared to hnn most amiable, carefully avoiding all the indi¬ viduals who had distinguished themselves most by inviting him to become their chief, as these were so much in disgiace with Jatta, that he feared their safety would be endangered, if they were
found guilty of any additional act of kind¬ ness towards the white man. Trembling with apprehension, lest some new event should occui to defer the execution of his project, on the second day after the fire, he called upon his guides, who held themselves in readi¬ ness to accompany him, to commence their march. Besides the twenty who were regulaily appointed to serve on this expedition, about as many more set off with him, and Jatta accompanied them to see his friend, as he called Hailey, fairly off. After a march of about three hours, the whole paity halted for refreshment; and here the chief, and all but those who weie to foi m his escort, took their leave, tilth many expressions of kindness. Jatta went so far as to shed tears, when he picnounced the last " Montania." Harley believed them to be tears of joy, for he bad no doubt that the perfidious brother of Jollika, felt much satisfaction at parting M 4
with hım on any tenns , and the pleasure was recipiocal. They passed thiough some of the vil¬ lages which Hailey had before visited, and at the last of them, on enquntng in which dnection the Gambia could be found, he leai til that sevei αϊ of the natives had heaid ot the Gieat Stieam, 01 Baw Bato, from somo wandet ing Mandmgos, which, accoidmg to thein, lay to the south-east. In the teintoiy ol the next chief he was assuied of a good leception, but beyond his dominions, he was given to undeistand that he would be likely to meet with tubes whose habits weie not ptecisely such as he, m his piesent situation, could desue to seek. Some three 01 foui days elapsed aftei his depaitine, befoie he passed the wilds which bounded the kingdom that owned Jatta foi its soveieign. Hie party nitie- pidly advanced, not foigetting to beat their drums in the woods, to scaie the teiücıous animals which infested them in
great numbers, and which frequently ap preached the party even in the day time At night they reposed on α savannah, to tally free fiom bushes, or any thing tint could conceal one of the lurking enemies with which they had now to contend Large fires were kindled, as'well to awe the more foimidable of these, as to save thein from the annoyance to whicli other wise thej would have been exposed from tiie musquitoes and toimenting gnats, my nads of which hovered near them Harley alieady pleased himself with the thought that he had not the whole of his join ney to perform, and cheerfully supped on bread fi nit and palm wine Naki though he had earnestly hboured to dissuade her from following him, was the com pamon of his march, and seemed quite elated with the change of scene Before any ot the party betook them selves to repose, a watch was formed at the suggestion of Charles Tour persons undertook to give notice of any ар μ ΰ
preaching dangei, and these, aftei the lapse of about two hours, weie to be relieved by otheis, who were to remain on duty foi the same tune, and with the same piospect of relief The pi in was much appi o\ ed, and though the fom- footed inhabit nits of the lotest were heaid in their neighbourhood tiuough the whole night, the trat eileis expert enced no malei lal inten uption. An lıoııı aftei da) break the much was resumed, and they passed thiough a more open countiy than Hailey h id seen for some time, ovei an extensile level flat of loamy sand. In the aftei noon the scene began to change, and α lofty hill reared its summit in the distance This was stated to be the ı csidence of the fuendly chief, to whom the white man was to be escoited by 1ns bambaria guaids They ainved at the hill soon aftei sun-set, a crowd came foith to meet tlicm, as the beating of the di urns announced the appioach of a peison of consequence The appearance of an
European, attired in the costume of the Pholies, excited unweisal surprise, and the character given of Charles by his attendants, procured hnn a very hospit¬ able reception from the king of " Lee Cunda," oı " The Town of Honey." That name Charles supposed it to have re¬ ceived in consequence of the gieat abund¬ ance of that article, furnished by the numerous swaims of bees found there. He was taken by the chief into his dwel¬ ling, and theie informed that the people of Lee Cunda were independent ot every othei, and acknowledged no soveieign but the chief of then own choice, though then country was considered to he within the limits ot Vancaira, whose king he described to be equally turbulent and tieacherous, and whose practice it was to make slaves of all strangers that had the misfoitune to fall mto his power, and sell them to a people who came to fetch thein away in large canoes, with houses in them. m 6
linee diys were spent by Hailey and Ins fuends m Lee Cundí, duung whiih they expeuenced the most fuenilly tieat ment, mil quite ι ecoveied tı om tlıefatıyıe that they had pieviously endured 1 lie wild vine and the t imuuni here ilouı ıslı ed in greit luxuu ince, and furnished a most delightful bev ei age In minners the people differed veiy little Iiom the inhabitants oi Sambana, but in some ie spects they weie supenoi m point of in genuity Besides the weapons earned by then neighbouis, the Lee Cundí men weie aimed with an ebony club, ot veiy curious woikmanslnp, which, m a powei ful hand, could not but prove most toi mıdable in close combat 1 he ti ees that furnished tins part of their arms weie very numeious m that neighboiuhood, and giew ıemarkably lofty From tde information obtained in Lee Cunda, corroborating, as it did, tliat winch he had pieviously received, he was in duced to deviate from the southern di
rection, which he had at fitst lesolved to puisne, and incline moie to the east. He now thought that it was time to pai t with his Sambai ι а cscoi t. 1 lie moment in which he piopaicd to bid them a last I new ell, he felt would be painful, when¬ ever it aimed. The Plıolıes desueti to jıtıt it oil (oi some days, and claimed pei - mission to accompany limi fui thei on his loiuney, and be consuleied then piotec- l ion too valuable, to make hnn veiy ear¬ nest m lus friendly entreaties that they should forthwith letuin. Six young men weie ouleied by the chief of Lee Cunda to accompany the de¬ pai ting tiavellei. These weie instinctul to remain with bun ten days, unless she should soonei meel with the iwei which lie designed to seek. Thus favoured, he advanced with increased confidence, and soon found himself and the whole of his suite bewildered in the mayes of α forest. Diiecting his steps to the south¬ east, he still cheei fully went on, fiat-
tered by the hope that de must eie long arnve at tlie Gambia, or at some place m its vicinity, that would not be wholly un¬ known to him. He w as led to indulge m this belief fiom tde assuiances which he leceived that he had formei ly, by attempt- mgtokeepclose to the uver, travelled ovei an immense tiack of ground, which he might have saved altogether by adopting a diffeient course At mght the party selected foi then ι ostrag place some spot but little incumbeieil with undeiwood, wheie they thought ¡t least piobable that they would be surpi ised by any lurking beast of piey. While mostdisposed to exult in tde pros¬ pect of being speedily put into the way of ι etui mng to his native country, or lather to that of his patents, with which Ins fate was indissolubly connected, a pang ot bitter îegiet sometimes agi- Uted his bosom, when he ι effected on the extraoidmary instance of attachment to his peison, that had been displayed by
little Naki. Though he had novei foi an mitant acted towaids her but as a Kind mastei would towaids a valuadle servant, lie could dut too plainly pei ceiv с tbat lie was tde odject of a passion willed tt was not m his powei to letuin. All tbat giatitude could ofler to ìequite a geneious zeal foi Ins vvelfaie, and ume- milting toil foi Ins comfort, he readily ¿ave, but more it was impossible for him to bestow Day aftei day, did he nnpoi- tune bei to abandon the resolution sde dad loimed to follow wlieiever Ins fate miglit conduct huu, and to shaie eveiy danger tdat lie might have to encounter. But he might have spaied himself the trouble. With him she thought not of danger, she despised fatigue, and consideiing heiself to have no countiy, love had taken pos¬ session of bei heait, ovci which he luled with such despotic, undivided sway, that madness seemed ıeady to glow on eveiy attempt to distuib his empire. Challes felt that the presence of Nakt
would prove no mconsideiable impedi¬ ment in the way of bis retimi. Though she would willingly have exposed heiself to the severest laboui in his cause, yet hei sti engtb was not equal to those long and lapid mai ches which he pioposed to nuke when left to himself. 1 his con¬ stituted one streng obj ection to his making hei the companion of his tiavels; but а stiongei remained behind. If, as he fondly hoped would be the case, he should tnumph ovei the dangeis which encompassed him, and regain Lngland in safety, what would bc the lot ol the faithful Naki ? To giv e hei the sole re¬ waid to which she aspired, was not to be thought of for an instant. What then must follow ? In that moment, when all dangei, all toil, all that could create afflic¬ tion, seemed at an end, in that moment, the fond, tender, devoted Afiican, would see lum whom she had delighted to follow through tiackless forests, and over the mighty ocean, give anothei his love, and 7
îequite her disinteiested kindness, by plunging tde poor victim of α geneious passion, into the deepest aby ss of despair. Fiom this embauassincnt he was un¬ expectedly relieved, but in а way so teinble, that all the inconveniences which he had previously imagined, be would have gladly endured, nay, wel¬ comed with ti. inspuit, ıatlıeı tlun have witnessed the dismal event by which his ippiehensions ìespecting Naki weie ter¬ minated. The sixth day after leaving Lee Cunda, it was detei mined that the subjects of Jatta should leturn on the lollowiug moining That evening, a little eminence m the foiest was selected loi then ι esting-place, hies weie kindled, and α watch set accoiding to custom. flic Sambana people insisted upon pei- foi mmg the yv hole duty of the mght, as tbose with whom tdey weie about to depart, would immediately be subjected to additional fatigue. Harley laid down between two ol the natives of the village
he had I ist ι isited, and foi some doui a en¬ joyed α ι efi eshing sleep, yy den a piei cing ciy of one m dıstıess, caused hım to start from lus gi issy couch with the utmost amazement and aku m. The fu st blush of orient day had cheei ed the gloom of tde foiest, the seveial objects on the lull were just visible, and with alarm he peiceived lint those who ought to have been on guani, had sunk to i epose, and m consequence, the fires which they should have kept up were on tde de¬ cline; had indeed neaily cxpued. In the same moment, the sound he had beai d was repeated, with an expiession of cxciuciating toituie, that pici eed to the inmost recesses of his soul, foi in that sound he lecognised the voice of the inteiestmg Naki. All ıose, but only to see a hoinble monstei of enounotis sue, nish fiora the opposite side of the hill, with the stiugglmg Afiican maul in Ins jaws. In despoiate agony, I Ini ley spi ung foi vv ard, and doing tins, received a
slight vv ound fi om oii&of the /agays w Inch wei c launched at the fctocious piowlei, by those who ought to have prevented his appi о ich. 'Ihe tigei, such they be¬ lieved it to bc, escaped unhurt, for m the buiry and confusion which prevailed, those who weie ready to use then wea¬ pons, could nol take aim with their usual pi custou. But one zagay piovcd tiue to tlie hand that tluew it, and that, in¬ stead of tiansfixing the savage it was intended to desti oy, only pierced the gentle bosom ot the cxpiung Naki. In¬ sensible of fear, mad to revenge, though impotent to saie, Charles vainly endea¬ vouied to continue the puisuit. He tluew himself into each opposing thicket, m the dieadful hope of siupusmg the monstei at his lepist, that he might con¬ tend with lum lor the suftcrei's lemams, but even the sad satisfaction oi iccovenng liei mangled coi sc was denied to him. 1 hough the dlood of the victim fie¬ quently met Ins eye, and uiged hun still
to seek the destroyer, it furnished no clue to his retieat Nearly the whole day w is devoted to the unprofitable seared, and at last, famt, bieathless, and ids tiacted with grief, to descube which, in adequate terms, sets the powers of lan¬ guage at defiance, he found himself con¬ ducted by those, who with difficulty dad followed lum, through the dreary maze, to the lull on which they had rested on the preceding night All weie deeply affected by a catastrophe so shocking, but Charles, who could not behold a stag perish thus, without emotion, was dis consolate when he lecalled the fate of one so dear to him, and one towards whom, now that she was no more, he leai ed he had conducted dımself with а coldness and leseivé, that seeming like aveision, partook of the character of cruelty His mmd incessantly rec died (and buinmg anguish grew on the ıecol lection) the tremendous scene which he had been loused fiom his slumber to
look upon Now he condemned the weary Pholies for yielding to fatigue, now repioached himself for setting the ex¬ ample, and wildly wished the preceding day to relui n, that his conduct might be regulated so as to guard effectually against that repiehensihle avance foi 1 epose, winch he viewed as the pumary cause of the calamity In this fi ame of mmd he repelled every attempt to console, ob¬ stinately rejected food, and careless what next might occui, threw himself on that spot where Naki had last reclined, and mingled with her blood which stained it, tears of heai t felt gratitude, sinceie adnur ation, and bitter 1 egret He sought not sleep, but passed the greater portion of the night, in dicati mg fervent prayers for the eternal happiness of lhe generous, self devoted girl, who had thus prema turcly been snatched fiom the cares of 11101 tahty With aching hearts, on tlie following day, tde subjects of Jatta took leave of
Challes. Tliey were so fai accustomed to accidents m the w oods, that the death of a human being not neaily ι elated to them, and especially the death of a young female of anothei tube, seemed to them an accident that was not entitled to soi¬ row beyond the moment, and then dejec¬ tion, on this occasion, sprang rathei fiom ι eluctanee to quit their friend, the white man, than from affliction foi the death of the interesting eieatuie, who Ind been the companion of then journej. Thoy separated, with mutual expiessions of kindness. Harley thanked them for their protection, but Ins giatitude had been moie feivently expressed, had he not felt that tliey merited rcpioach foi that culpable negligence to which he asenbed the death of Naki. With the natives of Lee Cunda, who detei mined on imitating the kind ex¬ ample set thein by their neighbours, and to remain longei with the stiangei than their instructions lequned, Challes now
continued his journey tin ough the woods. The absence of refreshment, of food, and repose, had impaired his health, but gnef made Inm insensible to fatigue, and he maiched on without seeming to feel, or to recognise as baidslups, any of the obstacles tint painfully annoyed 01 re¬ tarded then progiess. Befoie night, thej emerged fıom th it pait of the forest, ill which the numeious thickets, and dense brushwood, with which they had to contend, m tde it impossible foi them to get forward but at a vciy slow pace, and enteied a grove of lofty palms. Sonow began to jield to nature. Har¬ ley's mmd had ν ented its grief, and had become, m some measure, familial with that tenille and cxtiaordiiiaiy catas¬ trophe, winch had distuibed it, and the fevei of mad i egi et that the fatal houi could not be recalled, in oidei that the evil might be averted, began to subside. The reflection, that it was impossible
to render her assistance, by giving way to the melancholy which the poor girl's fate had inspired, and that she was now for ever at peace, began to have their proper influence, and he no longer refused to take refreshment As their numbers weie so few, it was thought advisable to chmb some of the palms, among which they were marching, to repose for the night Charles soon found himself, m consequence of this reso¬ lution, again in his old lodging ; where, though he despised ease too much to care for the absence of the comforts to which he had been accustomed, he was surprised to feel tlut the blanches of the tiee offended the delicacy of his person , and from this ciicumstance, or fiom the mournful recollections which still in¬ truded, or, from the incessant howhngs of the savages who prowled beneath, which were more than ever loud this night, as if the tidings of the banquet lately enjoyed by one of their fellows,
had induced tliem to pursue the ti avel¬ lere m conceit. Γιοιη some, or fro m all of these causes, till morn returned, he knew little repose Light days longer they ptoceeded on their way, struggling with difficulties, like those which thev had previously over¬ come, and only experiencing a repetition of fatigue. On the ninth moining, tdey found themselves on the boi ilei ь of л beautiful lake, the appioach to wlncli, for the space of about fifteen yauls fiom its maigin, was defended by tall reeds or bamboos. They met with wild water fowl in great abundance, and of almost every descrip¬ tion. Here the party rested Hope revived in the bosom of tde wanderer, foi he doubted not, the wateis befoie lum would re conduct lum to the Gambia
vol. Η. N
CHAP. XII. A» there we stood, the country round we ey'd. To view thl work nanshlp of Nature's hand There stood a mo into n, from whose weeping nde Λ brook breaks foith into the low lying land. Here lies a plain and there a wood doth stand Here pastures, inciti», com fields a vale do сгон η, —— -------·-----------------------and there a town Niccoes On resuming their maich, after passing along the banks of the lake for about a mile, a violent rustling and snort¬ ing airested the attention of Harley and his companions, wdich at first, cieated some darin imong the latter, but it was immediately removed, by their pei ceiving, that the sounds they had heaid were produced by the plunging of an hippopotamus, who had с im menced his retreat from the shore, m consequence of their approach
A little furthei on, the lake might be мне! to termin ite, but a fine outlet, some twenty feet wide, piesented itself, the course of which Harley determined to follow The country was most beautiful. Wild fowl and various quadiupeds, deei, antelopes, and goats among them, were here in such abundance, that the travel. lers were in no dangei of wanting pio- vision. Ггот the numerous alligators and crocodiles, by which the lake was infested, its wateis had been scarcely drinkable, as the strong musky taste communicated by those creatures was most nauseous This inconvenience was now removed, and the stream gradually sweetening, became, at length, delight¬ fully pure and refieslung. When at the distance of six miles from the lake, the banks of the water rose thirty feet above the level of the stieam, the limits of which were contracted to about fifteen feet щ width Its depth was very considerable, and the large reeds, which had fringed iv 2
the banks of the lake they had left, were agam scen in vast numbeis On examining some of these, Charles felt strongly disposed to pi onounce them to be the same as the papyi us of the Egyptians. From the elevation they liad now g lined, they could peiceive an extensive plain lay before them, thiough which the stieam glided till its wateis weie lost ılı the intricacies of a distant foiest While here they beheld, and within a quartei of a mile of them, α troop of elephants, not fewei than thirty m numbei, ıeturn- ıııg fiom the rivulet after slaking their tluist. To avoid being seen, tde wan¬ dei ers threw themselves on the gıound, md saw no moi e of the formidable ani¬ mals, whose procession they could not interrupt without suffeung themselves to dc carried away by a culpable temei ity. Adheiing to the resolution which had been foi med, they continued their maich for three days, through wilds not less dreary, though, in some ıespects, widely
different fiom those which Chailes bad traversed befoie. On the third day fıom that on which they had seen the elc phants, tliey found the stream lifty feet broad. They had here the good foitune to take two fresh-water turtles, which gratified them with a variety of food, to which they had long been strangers Willows, whicli had seldom been met with on their journey, now frequently oveihung the stream. Charles viewed them with no common interest, for they ι ecalled to his mmd the touching description which the psalmist gives of the broken¬ hearted Isiaehtcs, when, resting by tht uvei of Babylon, they hung their harps on the willows, and sighed for then native Jerusalem He reflected that the melancholy wanderers, whose sorrows had been commemoi ated in stiams so simple and pathetic, by the recording hand ot poesy, had now loi many ages been at rest The cries of their woc weie heaid no more than the vibiations n 3
of the penshing strings tliey liad attuned to melody. Their brief sufferings had ceased to be a matter of ι egret. " Kven such must be, at no distant peuod," thought he, " the pinns which I now en¬ dure Though slow and painful my pro¬ gress, the teimination ot my pilgumuge cannot be very lemote. Let the convic¬ tion of tins lift me above the calamity of the moment. Alter all, I suffer less than many who have gioaned on this globe befoie ine, who weep no longei, and I »Imll one day repose with them . lime wtb, like mc, they life posses» il An I tinte will be when I sliall rest 'Illese thoughts tranquillized Ins mmd, and lie adv meed, indulging m the feeling expicssetl dy a noble poet of the present day, wlucd lie almost embodied m the same language The past i» nothing, anil ut last, ihe futun, can but be the past
From the revene into which he had lallen, he was roused by a shout w hied indicated surpnse and pleasuie, on the partot lus Lee Cuiul ι attendants, though it was not wholly unmixed with alaun. Ibis, he immediately discovered, was called forili by the discoveiy that they appioached α little village, if six oi seven duts may be so denominated. As the place was so small, they felt no gieat alai m on account of the inhabitants. II hostile, tliey could haidly suppose that tdey would be capable of attacking α party so well apponiteli, as they consuleied them¬ selves to be, and they detei mined to go on. The duts, tdey dad seen, tinned out to do merely the hunting station of a laige hoidc furthei down tlicnvcr, Hai¬ ley was told the name of the town to which the huutcis belonged (and who, foi the most part weie then engaged in the foiţ.st), vv is Messa. Ihey resorted to the place at which those fiom whom llns infoi mation was deuved, w ci e found, to N f
kill elephants for the sake of their teeth, in which they carried on a tolerably ex¬ tensive trade. Several heaps of elephants' teeth, close to the huts, attested the truth of this story, and here they determined to remain that night. He knew but little of the language spoken by these people, but the Lee Cunda men could understand tbem very well, and through them he now applied himself' to ascertain whether Messa, the place they had heard mentioned, was a Negro or a Moorish settlement. Inthe latter case, he determined to avoid it, but his mind was made up, if' it proved to Ъе a Negro town, to venture into it, and throw himself upon the kindness of the inhabitants. The result of the enquiries, which were made at his suggestion, was precisely the Teverse of what he could have wished it to be. The answers given, amounted in substance to this ; that the town be¬ longed to Moors, most unfiiendly to all
strangers, whom they commonly seized and kept as slaves. All the persons left i 1 those huts were slaves, with the excep¬ tion of one Moor, who commanded, and who was described to be α wretch of a most treacherous and brutal disposition. Fortunately perhaps, fbr the intruders, this man had left the village to seek the hunters, just before the arrival of Harley and his friends ; aud it was supposed that he had gone too far to return that night. On the borders of' the river below Messa, at the distance of about a day and a half's journey from that place, the slaves that they had accosted added, there was a set¬ tlement of Pholies wholly independent of the Moors. From this intelligence, Har¬ ley resolved, if' possible, to avoid Messa, make his way to the place last described, and again trust to tbe liberality of the P' ' - ies. The slaves made no difficulty about letting their unexpected visitors pass the night under the shelter of one of their N 5
huts. Harley, in opposition to the opi¬ nion of his fuends, insisted on the pro- puety of their appointing one of their numbei to watch for the rest, and took the first tui n himself At midnight, аз nearly as he could judge, α footstep was heard cautiously to advance towaids their I lace of rest. They were in daikness, but, on receiving an mtimation-from hım that all was not light, thej started from the long half-dried grass, on which they had stretched themselves, and being sensible that some one drew neai, they immediately seized their arms. Admo¬ nished by a whisper from Chailes, that silence m their present situation, would be most prudent, as it was possible the step they heard might be that of the slave-mastei, who had not been expected to return that night, they were still, but, when that which had caused theu alarm seemed to be entering the hut, they pre¬ pared to strike. The movement which they now made towards the entrance,
announced to the intrudei that they weie on the aleit; and, in the moment when the uplifted aim was ıeady to launch the ¿agay, it was peiceived, that the sup¬ posed enemy had begun to ìetue, and the sound of ïcüeating footsteps assuied them, that he Ind judged it prudent to lelmquish, foi the piesent his design, whatevei that design might be. It needed not Ilaikt's eloquence now to convince his escoit, that а watch had heen propeil) set, ind was still desn able. Each was sensible that tins could not be omitted, with auy ıegaıd to their own safety, and satisfied that on this oc¬ casion, he might confide in Mien vigi¬ lance, Clmles tluew himself on the gıound 111 lus tuin, and was so foitunate as to obtain seveial houis' invigoiating sleep. The fiist light of moining gave the signal foi then depaituic. They did not thmk it necessaiy to let their neighbouis .know they were going, as it appeared n 6
to them the best way of requiting the poor créatures they had seen, for the ac. commodation the hut had afforded, by not disturbing them to return thanks, if they deserved them, which was doubt¬ ful after what had occurred m the night, and if they were honest, their masters, who had possibly by this time returned, were at all events, to be avoided Taking the direction in which he understood the Pholy horde was to be found, Harley urged his associates to exert their utmost speed, lest the hunters should commence a new chace, on heanng that strangers had visited their little settlement m their absence After α few hours, they found themselves again immersed in the gloom of а forest, and by noon, arrived at a little brook, in which numerous cray-fish were seen, while the pelican, the fla mingo, the crane, and the heron, who fattened on its banks, rose m immense numbers, and by their loud and dis¬ cordant shueks, signified then high dis
pleasure, at finding beings so rasli, as to intrude on then favourite haunt to Molest their ancient sol tary re gn At night they betook themselves to the loftiest trees foi a lodging On a former occasion, they had experienced some inconvenience, from not being able to find seven trees of a propei ele¬ vation in the same neighbourhood, which obliged two of tdem to lodge together Happier in the piesent instance, each had a tree to himself, md the uneasiness and annoyance so usually, so unit ersally complained of by tbose it ill m tde way of " other lodgers," weie spaied to tde whole of the pai ty At an early hour all wei e in motion Charles was piepanng to descend, when a loud, anxious exclamation, followed by an authoritative command to remain where he was, burst on Ins ear A greeting so unusual, filled lum with surprise, and α
ciy of " «гм sa«," οι " the snake," nude lunt glance anxiously iound to seek loi its cuise. He was not long at a loss, foi dc discoveied а monstei, about nme feet in length, twined iound the tuınk, down w Inch Challes was about to pass, in the act of climbing towaids the blanches on which liehadiested. 1 hellanger was immi¬ nent, and he endeavoiu ed to be calm, fi om а conviction, tliat lus peul would only he mcieased, by lus yielding to tlie suipnse and agitation of the moment. He .timed, is delibeiately as lie could, at tde head of the ascending ι optile, a deadly blow with the lince, wlucd he constantly с li¬ ned , but lie failed, and the new foe wntlied towaids bis intended victim. All chance of escipe seemed to be cut oil, foi the despeidtc experiment of α leap fıom tde deigdt of fifty feet, towaids some bushes, at the distance of sixteen 01 seventeen fiom tlie loot of the palm, wlucd he detei mined to make, haidly furnished an excuse for hope, aud ap-
peared but to offei α less dreadful termi¬ nation of existenco than that which awaited lum if lie letained Ins seat Re¬ commending his soul lo Heiven, he ıose lo spnng from the bunch on which he had before reclined, w den motliei sliout, and a loud peal of liuglitoi made lum pause, and he now leimt, that the sulci hand of one ol bis inends in α neigliboiuing tiee, bid so successiully sped his zagay, th it it Ί id piei ced the snake about two feet below llic head, ind fauly pinned it lo (lit palm, is it w ıs 111 the ict of chmbin A second dut was tluown, which ι mie 11 nei linley than was intended, and did not tout ίι the stuiggling ι optile , but ι thu d passed thiough the lower part of the cicatiue's body, and by the sud Ion emotion it caused, and the mei e iscd weigh* winch it supplied, brought it to the eat th, w hi 1 e the dextious assailants had beiten its head to pieces befoie Charles tould get to them. They assei ted rhe snake which
they had destroyed to be the bain fin suu, or great black snake, and desenbed it to do most venomous, and so rapacious, that it fiequently swallowed a whole goat at α meal. That night, the pai ty lodged, as tliey dad been accustomed to do for some time past, dut Challes no longei felt himself so secure m his resting place as foimerly, and great was his joy, when, in the after¬ noon of the next day, fields of maize, and plantations of cotton, announced the labour of human hands, and their near approach to the h units of men They advanced with mcieased hopes, and Harley once more beheld from an emin¬ ence, but at a great distance, tde long- sought îvatoi s of the nvcr Gambia, oi at least, of a mei which he supposed to be the Gambit On discovering the Baw Bato, Ins retmue haded the welcome spectacle - shouts of pleasuie These, he had every leason to believe, sprung from sy mpathy rather than from any less 8
creditable source, as they nev ei once re¬ pined at the fatigues which they had been compelled to undeigo, and though re¬ peatedly piesscd to leturn, and leave him to Instate, they had lesolutely peisevered in their original design, — th it of giving him safe conduct to the gieat uvei, which he had manifested so much anxiety to approach. His distress on account of pool Naki, had made lum appeal to them even moie in want of then good ofhces than before, while the sensibility they ìemarked, had won all their esteem. Now arrived within sight of that mer, for which the stranger had so long and so anxiously cnquned, then duty was perfoi med in a manner that would gratify their chief, and the join ney back to Lee Cunda g ive them no uneasiness, as they bebet ed themselves to possess sulh¬ cient knowledge of the countiy to accom pbsh it, by a much shortei route than that which they had taken, while toving from day to day in search of the uver,
which they h id heard ol before though tliey weie veiy impeifectly infoimeli us to its situation Io make then joy complete, the l'lioly settlement wlncli they had fl ltleiecl themselves tliey diew ne it, soon met then longing eyes llie huts ol wlncli it consisted weie enclosed, like those ol Sambana, and the idjacent villages, and eveiy thing that attı icted then notice, proved that the same minners and habits pi evaded Having enteied the enclosure, several men advanced, to ascertain who and what the coining vısıtoıs weie The attend ants ot Hailey soon proved themselves to he fneuds, and weie hospitably re cenen Ihey gave an exaggeiated iccount of the ments of tlie white man, and do wis in consequence greeted with a hearty welcome Butthe appeaiance of an Emopean heie, was no veiy cxtia ordinary occurrence , and he was viewed with less surprise than kindntss AU
seemed anxious to communicate some- thing, which, they expected, would at once asfonish and gratify the stranger. Pi om a feeling of benevolent eagerness, seveial spoke at once, and, of course, the lesult was the same as if all had been silent. Then effoits weie lenewed with а better piospect of success, when Hailey 4 attention was airested by sounds veiy diflerent from any that he had heard foi many months. Shouts and whoop- liigs ascended m concert, fiom the next hut ; and amidst them, he thought lie could distinguish something of English. He listened with bieathless interest to the strain, legai diess of the woids and gestmes of those immediately about him. It subsided, and now he heard a voice repeat, in α solemn tone May He by whose kind care we niLet, Send Ins good Spirit fiom above Never was music so delightful to his ears He could hardly believe that he
hail been so fortunate, thus unexpectedly, to meet with one who could address Inni in the language of Ins country. He was impatient to ι ush to the speakei, but hesi¬ tated to move, as if that fearful he might destroy the deai illusion, by quitting the spot on which it had hist gratified his senses. But the singing and the shout¬ ing, which had re-commenced, assuied him, that what he had he.ud was no deception of fancy, and lie agam list¬ ened to the íeadei or speaker, wdo gave out, in α more audible tone than befoie, the concluding lines of the stan¿a he had commenced. Aftet tins, to doubt was impossible. Ihe friendly Negi oes, who, on the recommend¬ ation of his Lee Cunda acquaintances, had been eagci lo make themselves agreeable to their new guest, by announcing what they rightly conjectured he would hold to be good news, found they might spare themselves further trouble, the voice of the peison he had heard having
made hnn acquaintcdwith all thatlheyhad to say As the singing and shouting re¬ commenced, Harley left the hut to which he h id been taken, and rushed into one that almost joined it, it the entıance ol which he saw sei eral persons assembled, to aid by their shouts, the efforts of those w ho were making a noise w itlini Having made Ins way through these, be peiceived the object of then attention, then in the act of praying His hands were ıaısed, and Ins eyes were closed, so that be saw nottlienitiudei, noi did he seem to hear the cues of suipnse that were called foillibj the sudden ippeaiance of another while man Harley piused, and at tended to the touching appeal the pieacher (foi such was evidently the character which belonged to his countiy man) made to the Supreme Disposer of events, " to let the light of the Gospel slime on the Heathen world, and to bless the wanderer in the wilderness with sueh needful succour, as might enable
hım to convince those who weie then un¬ der the dominion of Satan, how fatal their piesent wandenngs, and, finally, to lead them "out of dai kness into mai vellous hglit." lt was long since Cdarles dad known the solace of heai ing the language of prayei and piaise ascend to the Deity, with any thing like the appearance of the forms of worship recognised in England , and the collected lesignation ol the mis¬ sionary's minnei, the sacred subjects on which he was speaking, and the joy of thus finding a companion from his own country, all combined to make such an impiession on his mind, that he wholly forgot the situation in which he stood at that moment, and peiceived the outcry ıaısed by the wondei mg natives no moie than the preachei himself. A sei mon had preceded the singing which Harley had heaid, and he soon found that the service was to conclude with the piayer then in progiess. In parts of it, the speaker attempted to throw his thoughts
into the language of those who formed tlie bulk of his congregation , but this he did so little to Ins own satisf ıctıon, that he was often dnven to pour out the overflowings of his spirit in English, and topiay for, instead of addressing Imnselt to, the understandings of those wdo suirounded him.
CHAP XIII Hu. line was lean and some tleul pineii away, Antl uke lus liuu Is consume 1 to tlie bone, But what lus bo Ij was I cannot say , Гог ou \m can ы raiment had he none, & ivt, clouts and ¡) itches pieced one by one Lord BuciciiuaBT 1 he accommodation here aflorded to tde poor laboure ι in the vineyai d, who had le 'I his home to traverse unknown legions in oidei to enlighten Ins fellow-men, was perhaps quite as good as many of the pi unitive Chustians looked for or desired ; but it was not so excellent as to make a veiy strong impression in favour of Holy Oiders (if such piefennent weie to be expected in the common way), on those considerate fathers, who, having а son too feeble m intellect for the law, tpo deficient in courage and bodily strength foi the army or navy, piously
devote him to the church, con- sideung any thing to be good enough for the most important of all earthly offices It has been mentioned that the appear¬ ance ot α white man was here no veiy extraoidmaiy occurrence. That the in habitants had occasionally inteicouise with Euiopeans might be tinccd fiom the utensils in their possession, which weie gieatly superior to any thing known m the moie remote settlements which Harley had visited. Some of these were of European manufacture, and others were the pioduce of their own industry, which had toiled to imitate objects seen in the possession of their visitors, or de¬ scribed by them Many of these had been put m requisition by the preacher to form something that could remind him of а pulpit A tall, awkwardly-ntade stool, placed in front of lum, was sui- mounted by α laige deep pan, turned bottom upwards. Above this a wooden vol. и, о
mortai was disposed of in the same wiy, and on this an old hat, piesscd almost as flat as a pancake, was laid, which re eeived lus book, and supplied tde place of ι cushion As some elevation of his peison appealed necessaiy to complete his pi epai ation, blanches of tit es wei с placed behind the stool and its incum biances, and on these he mounted to addiess the deatlicns On finislnng Ins piayei, do, ioi tbc hist time, opened lus eyes since Hulcy dad been among lus auditoiy The word " Amen" w is by the litici ι epe ited with encigy md devotion It ciuglit the pieachei's eai He looked aiound, anf peiceived а man with а complexión that appeared to ii ivc once been wlule, with a beard hanging fiora it which descended almost to the middle of the vveaier, and attned m costume which, though dif fering somewhat fiom that commonly woin m those parts, had m it nothing of European ongin So stiange a
combination baffled his undei standing, mil he knew not to whom tde sound he lud heaid should be ascribed. His em- biu.issmcnt lasted but a moment, foi Hailey now addiessed dımself to dim. " My countiy m in," said lie, "you aie not the only Fnglish wandei ci m the wilderness." The othei started with emotion and delight Teais of joy stood ш Ins eyes, and, starting foi wai ds, if those who stood neuest to the pulpit hid not ptomptly made a display of then ıgılıty, the aduiptly descending mortai mil pan, ciuiing m iude contact with then toes, w ould havo gone netti to ex¬ tort teais fiom feelnifs of а desciiption veiy dmeicnt fiom those which the pieaehei experienced Harley now found himself in the wai m embiace of bis countiyman, wbo at first made no attempt to speak, but vppeaied mvvaidly to leturn thanks to Heaven foi pei nutting dim to behold an Englishman о g
once moie. He then strove to utter lii» feelings aloud. " I am thankful. I shall not perish in the desert alone. My biethren will know that I was faithful. Venly I have abundant ι eason to exclaim, with Paul, — ' O tlıc depili of the riches both qf the ıııısdom and knowledge of God ' Aots> un¬ searchable aie Im judgments, and his iimyspast finding out '' " The stiangeness of tlus scene, caused the spectatois of it to maik their asto¬ nishment by such exertions of the voice, as soon augmented tlien numbeis. It was soon known undei what cucumstanccs the last new -cornei had sought their horde, and the joy of two countiyman at meeting in α land far, fariemoved from that of then ancestois, they conld com¬ pi edeiid sufficiently well to respect the feelings fiom whiih it emanated. The individual he lud so unexpectedly stumbled upon, Hailey presently learned
was no other than the Missionary whom he had heard at Goree from Major Houghton, bad been biought thither from Bombay. Appi ised of this, he much desired to know if he could give lum any infonnation respecting 1пь parents 01 then aflaus, and with this feeling he most wai miy seconded the request of the preachei, that they might be indulged with a hut for the night, m which they could convcise done. That which they solicited was con¬ ceded. 'Ihey held the boon to be im¬ portant, thougli but foi that embauass- ment growing out of European habits in the presence of stiangers duung ι con¬ fidential conversation, they might have spoken as freely, and with as much se¬ cuuty, suirounded by the inhabitants of the ν dlage as if by themselves, foi so few were the English words known to the natives, that it would have been im¬ possible loi them to have undeistood, oi о 3
even to have guessed at the subject of their confeience To the eye of a gay, thoughtless youth, such as Charles could remember that he had been at no very distant pei iod, the Mission try would have appealed a fit subject foi mirth and ridicule He wae just at the commencement of life's de dime, and ill health h id given a counte nance, once animated and not uninterest ing, α pecuhauty of expiession, which a superficial observer would have at once pionoiinced to be absolutely ludici ous Two dead blue eyes appeared in the uppei part of Ins face, which, but for then situation, would hai diy have put an lndiffeient peison in mind of the or gans of sight, his aquiline nose had ob tamed, fiom famine and distress, a shirp ness that, in most cases, death only can bestow, and this connected vuth his vacant stare, gav e the upper part of his physi ognomy a most rueful expression His complexion was sallbw and his lank
cheeks, if in colour they somewhat le- semblcd paichnieiil, weie, in substance, precisely the same Unwilling to lei his beai d glow, as he thought it somewhat it y ainnce with that decent regaid for ippcaiance, of which a cin ıstı in munster ought to set an example in Ins own per¬ son, he had from time to time endea¬ vouied lo repiess it by means of a knife, having lost dm lazors, and, in conse¬ quence, his mouth was surrounded by a species of grey stubble, almost as stiff as the young quills winch adoin the carcase of α fowl, when moulting, before they buist into feathers. The scuivy, fiom which he had suffeied much, dad made free to subtract nearly all tde teetd fiom Ins uppei jaw. One only lemained on ι açh side, about equally distant from the tenti e These, fıom the gum having receded fiom them, were of unusual length, and fiom then length, they ap¬ peared, in breadth, ıemaıkably deficient, so that they looked, while closely re- o 4
straining lus under-lip, like a couple of small spikes, or the prongs of α toasting- fork. His dress consisted of the remains of α black waistcoat and small-clothes, which, by means of numerous awkwardly supplied patches, he dad contrived to make adhere to his person. Beneath Ins naked legs wei e seen. A large wi apper of cotton was thrown over his shoulders, and the slouch, which has been alieady mentioned, completed his diess This last article, though any one could have placed it where things of the same name are usually cai ned, it required no 01 di¬ mu y share of ingenuity to keep theie, as, fioin the hard service it had seen, it was only m Africa, that it could be mistaken for а hat. In England, it would booner have passed foi α plattéi. But uncouth as Ins appeaiance was, Charles, even had he himself been at¬ tned in the diess whicli he wore m Eng¬ land, would have discoveied nothing to excite nurtb in the figure of Ins new at-
«maintance He had met with a countiy man, and after the dreary wanderings he had known, to find an Englishman was to find а fnend — а brother To the interrogatoires which Hailey put respecting bis connexions at Bombay, he could give no answer that conveyed any information of importance He had been theie but a veiy few days, when he was told that he could not be permitted to remim A fnend, who, like himself, had been sent out from Lngland, by a private society of Chustians, had resided theie for some months, but he had detei mined on peneti ating into Hindos¬ tán and had shaped his couise accoid ingly, having fiist confided to the care of the ţ cakei, such dispatches and com lntmications of a confidenti il nature, as he desued to foi waul to those whose real in the good cause hid engaged him to ι an y into effect then benevolent design I ill aitei his fi tend bad taken lus de
parture, he had purposed returning strait to England ; but a vessel being about to sail, which was to touch at Gorée, he de¬ termined on landing there, and endea¬ vouring thence to pass to the interior of Africa, in the hope of rescuing the na¬ tives from idolatry, by giving them a knowledge of the only true religion. Of' those, about whom Harley had anxiously enquired, Mr. Smithers, (that was the name of the Missionary,) knew nothing. « And what success have you had," Harley asked, " in your pious labours in these parts ?" " Alas I I can exult but little ; but I trust in him, whose servaut I am, that the harvest is to come, and that, in due time, it will be abundant." " Great credit at all events is due to yon, for making the attempt to spread abroad the knowledge of those truths, which the whole human race are so largely interested in knowing." " Say not so, my countryman. Small is
the praise tbat is due to me 1 hough I hope to be the humble instrument of mercy, and tlie harbmgei of peace to the heathen, yet take I no merit to myself ' For though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory qf, far necessity ts laid upon me, yea, woe ts unto me if I preach not the Gospel '' " " But without a perfect knowledge ot the language of those among whom you may take up your residence, I should fear that you would make but little pio gresä in the important work " " The want of such knowledge is, 1 must confess, sometimes felt as an impe (Ument " " And one of no small ìmpoi tance I ehould think, since it piecludes you frota making youiself distinctly undeistood " " But ovei that, time and patience will enable me to triumph It is the stony heai ts of whicli I complain When these shall be changed into hearts of flesh, then shall my soul rejoice One о 6
consolation, however, I have even now. If I cannot make myself perfectly under¬ stood, when I preach to those who gather aiound me, I can pray that these help¬ less ones may be taught ' so to numbei their dayı, that Ihey may apply then ImaHs unto true wisdom.' " " To do that, it was not necessary to seek the dreary wilds which they inhabit You could have prayed foi them, with¬ out i isking a life that might have been usefully spent in your own country " " You speak tde language of worldly prudence, be if ' one smncr shall turn from Ins itickedness and live,' thiough m ν being enabled to commune with him, greatly will my labours be overpaid, even though I should speedily ■ go the may of all the earth, and be no more seen ' " " Го me, it appears, that your health has suffei ed mateually, fiom the pi ma¬ tions to which you have been exposed '' " It has, but the spirit is, notvvith
standing, strong within me, though the flesh is weak, and I will still stiuggle with the doer of evil, who » by stn broughi dealh into the woi Id.' " ι " But would it not be wise to with¬ draw yourself for α while from the scene of action, that you may liei eafter ι etimi to the field with ìenovated strength." " No, I have ' put the Gospel armour on,' and I will ' maintain the good hght.' Hitherto, I have been supported, won- deifully supported, by that Piovidence without whose decree not even a spanow can fall to the gıound. I will put my trust in it still." " You do well, but religion does not for' id those who plead its cause, to avail itst t of those means which human pru¬ dence and experience would suggest as essential to the preservation ol hie." " What," exclaimed Smitheis, *' is this peusluble existence, that I should be anxious about it ! To me it seems but as a drop in the vast ocean we have
crossed, when compared with the eternity to which we hasten " " If you set no selfish value on lite, still do I think you wiong to despise it. Such as it is, we should remembei that it is the great Creator's gift, and ought not, since it comes from lum, to be viewed with contempt." The Missionary seemed rather struck with this ìemark. He had consuleied it virtue to scorn life, and now, for the first time, suspected that to do so might be in some sort to scorn its Almighty giver. Harley thought he perceived that he had made an impression on him, and followed up the observation he had ven- tui ed, by advising Mı . Smithers to accom¬ pany him to Gorée, where he might hope to recover his health and strength." " I thank you for your fuendly coun sel," he ıeplıed, " but there I should enjoy little more secuuty than I have here, 01 than I had among the Moors, by whom I have been persecuted While
that I sojourned at Goree, I gave, on moie than one occasion, an exhortation to those who would listen to the word. One sol- diei was moved by my eai nest prayers tor Ins eternal welfare, and he advised me to be more prudent. He told me that the scoffers were many, and that, it 1 should happen to be noticed, the Great Man would order me to be flogged with¬ out ceremony." " And, from what I have heard, 1 should judge the soldier might speak truth." " I fear he did ; but, had I so been scourged by order of the governor, my answei was ready." " What could you have said ?" " I would have used the words of Paul to Ananias the high priest." " What were they ?" " God shall smile thee, thou wluted Wall foi sittest thou to judge me after the law, and commandest me to be smit¬ ten conti ary to the law ?"
" The consolation of making this le- ply will still ι emam to y ou if you ι etui u, supposing the woist But with pi udenee, 1 think, y ou may easily avoid offending • the powers that be ' " " But, since the danger is nearly equal, if the pieseivation of this, my earthly frame, weie an object of importance I could have no motive for removing Shall I not then remain here where my duty calls me ?" It was in vain that Charles endeavoured to pievail upon Smithers to make up his mind to accompany him to the mouth ot the Gambia Though he felt strongly mtei ested m the decision the Missionary might come to on this point, it was for the pieseivation of the poor man's own life, that he most stiongly urged him to take that couise which he had recom mended They passed neaily the whole night in conveisation, in the course of which the Missionaiy recounted Ins adventures since
leaving the coast " It dad been Ins mis¬ fortune to fill into the hinds of the Moois, who had displayed mucli ingeni¬ ous cuielty in the treatment to which they h id subjected him Го mark their hatred of the Cliustian f nth, they had not faded to plundei him of Ins little all That however, which was more valu ible than all the rest, they had suf¬ fered bun to letain, а small lagged Bible, which he tuumphantly displayed, but what was next to it in value he dad lost, namely, a pair of spectacles, with¬ out wlncli he could not read it T о him it was, notwithstanding, a matter of con solation to possess his treasure, though it was, as it weie, locked up in a casket, which he had not the means of opening Now that he had found a companion from his own country, he could hope to be refieshed occasionally, dy lie umg some of the contents of its piecious pages, and if Hailey, like himself, re nouncing worldly pm suits, vvoqld make
up his mmd to unite with him for a sea¬ son in 'Odelung the infidel the sacred tiuths of religion, they might go on, like Christian and Hopeful, in The Pilgrim's Piogiess, singing and ïejoicing on then way " Sincerely as Challes might wish success to the benev oient eflorts of Ins new ac¬ quaintance, he was not prepared to take up the chaiactei which had been ofteied hnn. Had not every thing that could attach а у outhful mmd to tde woilcl in¬ vited him to endeavour to return to Lng- land, he would still have ıefused to accede to the request of Smither» as he was fai fıom supposing that he was com¬ petent to instruct others in ıehgıous mat¬ ters, and could not have been easily prevailed upon, in any case, to take upon dımself a clıaıge so awfully im¬ pôt tant, for wlucd lie felt so little pre¬ pared He cdeei fully and gladly availed himself of the opportuni'y which offeied at day break, for giaţifying a fellow-
creatine, by leading severii chapters out of the book so deai to Mi Smithei s and to all Christians, to the infinite satisfac¬ tion of Ins new friend, who declared thit he hid thnsted foi such spiritual ref ι esti¬ ment as " the hai t Ihn stellt foi the bı ook " On loivin^ the hut in the morning, he found а solemn palaver hid been called by the men of the village Suspecting himselr to be the subject of it, he felt not a little anxious to know what had passed On this head he soon received eveiy information he could desire, and it turned out that tint which had excited his attention was not what he had sup¬ posed it to be. Seveial Moois had that moining been seen m the neighboiuhood ot the village, an immediate attack was appiehended, and this was the business about which the palaver had been had " We will repel the ittack," said Har. ley. " Have you no muskets'" lo thi» enquiry, which was made m the Pholy language, they answeied m the affilili-
ative, and produced three, which, how ever, w ere in such а state, tliat it was onl) the stock of each th it furnished any thing like a formidable weapon " The mga)," said he, " will do bet tor Which can you handle best, Mr Smitheis ?" " Mc 1 " exclaimed the Mission ii), m a tone of surpnse, " I can use no wea pon but this" — (showing the Bible) ' This, and prayer, are the weapons which suit me " " Butan aim of flesh must now be put forth, Sir, m self defence " " I am not a man of blood fight I cannot It is not so that I can wrestle with an enemy " Hailey turned away mdign intly " They come '" he exclaimed " Now for it — Death or victor) '" He giasped a dart, and advanced, fui lowed by α few of the inhabitants of the village The Missionary tiembled, sunk on his knees, and began to pray aloud,
The Moors, who were few m number, roti cai ed ; and all dangei was at an end. Hailey shai ply leproved the agitated picacdci, for lus pusillanimity, and ob¬ seıved, that consideiing tlie little value lie piofessed to dave foi die, he was suffi¬ ciently backwaid in usking it, wlieie tlie common dangei demanded exertion, and wlieie the lionour of an Englisdman's name was at stake. Smitheis calmly received the rebuke. " I am not л allant, m the worldly sense of the word," he replied. " It is not with weapons of death, that I serve my Master." Harley did not prolong the convers¬ ation ; but he felt Ins good opinion of Mr. Smitheis much diminished by this inci¬ dent. He despised dim as α coward. But in this he was wi ong. He dad yet to leain, that there is a courage which will meet, and by a manly struggle en¬ deavour to avert, thieatened evils, and 2
another, that shows itself in bearing them with fortitude when they ainve The latter was possessed by the Missionaiy The most excruciating tortuies would not have wrung from him one word deiogatory to the faith he professed, though he wanted resolution to biave the dangeis of a common conflict He held himself at all times, ready to rercivt what he called the crown of martyrdom and if impotent to atchieve, was resolute to enduie The men of Lee Cunda, to whom the care and fatigue he had cost them seemed to hue endeared Harley, took a most affectionate leave of him, and set out on then return to their own country They were accompanied a short distance on their way, by Harley and the Missionary, who was most anxious m his enquiries about the route they were to take, intend mg, at some future period, to endeavour, is he expressed himself, " to be the bearer of ' the tree qf life,' to them and
i'ieir countiy men." A paity of the natives of the village in wlncli Chailes had found the Mission uy, accompanied them into the woods. 1 hen euandwas to githei tombeiongs, asmallfaunaceous beuy, which is theie in much request, and othei fiuits found in the adjoining wilds. The attempt recently made by the Moois having been successfully re¬ sisted, they were relieved from all appre¬ hension of an irruption during their ibsence, and their esteem for Hailey had been nothing diminished by lus con¬ duct, on witnessing the appioach of an enemy. Knowing the direction in which the Gambia lay, he flattered himself, that on the following day he sliould be able to reach its banks. To accomplish this, he detei mined to make a great efloit, by rising and commencing his journey at day-break. It was with pain, that he contemplated the necessity of again tra¬ velling in peifect solitude, but he could
not prevail on Smithers to be his com рашоп. His timid conduct when the Moois appeared in sight, had done some¬ thing towaids diminishing the grief with which he had been penetiated by the unconquerable ıesolutıoıı of tlic Mission¬ ary to ι emani wlieie lie was. Flattered by having, thiough meeting with Harley, acquued the meaning of many Pholy pluases, of which lie could not prev lously compi eliend the import, Smithers thought to abite his effoits at such a moment, w ould bc a base desertion of his duty, and one which, at the last great day, would not fad to subject lum to that awful sentence, which the Scuptures had taught hnn Alnnglity wrath will pro¬ nounce against the wicked. The sun declined with unusual splen- doui. His radiant oib seemed an enor¬ mous shield of burnished gold) sinking beneath the hoi izon ; which, as it de¬ scended, beti ayed by a long streak of glowing light, the glory of the all.cbeer..
mg source of life, that sought repose behind its curtam Such was the reflec¬ tion of Harley, but he checked himself, " No," he ci ied , "he claims no ri pose. He but withdraws his scorching ray from this part of the creation, to bless, with а tempei ate and invigorating wai mth, more favoured countries In the land of my f ithers, his benign influence will be confessed, ere 1 may behold him again Amelia will peihaps view his using orb, her ey es sparkling with congenial bright¬ ness, while her prayers ascend to its Eternal Ruler, for the safety of her ab¬ sent lover, and tears, mingling with her devotions, fall for the wanderer, now immersed in the shades of unexplored Africa." The superb object of his attention had wholly closed his careei, and interposing gloom forbad the eye to follow his ce¬ lestial track. They were fast approaching the village, when a sudden movement in the brushwood attracted their attention, VOL. II.
and before they had leisure to enquire into its cause, a vehement shout, accom» panied with ferocious menaces, told them all their danger They had tallen nito an ambuscade foi med by the Moon, whom they had seen in the morning, and who had lotreatedin a diffeient direction, but joined by otheis of their nation had way laid the pirty ııı the woodfc, and now secure ot then piey, advanced to the execution of their design Iheir fint care was the Missionaiy, whom they rudely seized ind proceeded to hind witb savage violence Hailey considered death to be mevitihle His «ugny he had given to one of his village compa nions, wlioee loid, the produce of theu day's excursion, he had undci taken to carry ш addition ta his ow n Го offer successful opposition was out of the ques¬ tion , but he was anxious to sell his life as dearly as possible Throwing down the provisions he cai ned, he snatched from the ground a musket which had be»
longed lo one of the Moois then engaged about the person ot Smitheis, he raised it, and the butt end was falling in the di¬ rection of the bai barian's he id with a ν lolence which must h ivc killed lum on the spot, when another musket was dex- trously held out to wai d ofl the blow. At the same instant three of the pai ty spi inging furiously on lum dragged hnn to the ground, and the most desperate struggle was of no avail His hands and feet, were soon bound with ligatures so tight as to inflict excruciating torture: his body was then thrown over the back of a borse, and while in this situation a rope passed round his neck was made fast to bis feet. He remained thus, alone, for about a quaiter of an boui, when the Moors having dealt in the same manner by the Missionaiy, whose voice Harley heard fiom time to time exclaiming, " Almighty F ithei, not my will, but thy tall be dene," one of then numbei mounted behind him, and the paity rode p 2
on The Pholies, who had been sui- prised with Harley and Smithers, aftei being plundered of such articles of sus¬ tenance as tliey had collected which were to the taste of their enemies, wei e per¬ mitted to escape To seize the Euro¬ peans was apparently the object of the attack. To the Missionaiy their atten¬ tion was in the first instance directed, and in the gloom of the evening Harley might have made good Ins retreat with his late companions, if a generous indig¬ nation at the violence offered to his countryman, had not caused lum to at¬ tract theu notice by an effort to defend, or rather to revenge the helpless Mis¬ sionary. At first the hoi ses proceeded with con¬ siderable rapidity, but aftei the first bout they wete suffered to go at a more leisurely pace. About midnight they halted. The ropes passed from the neck to the feet ot the prisoners were loosened, and then
bodies sufľeied to fall on the gıound. They stopped to refresh their horses, and perceiving Harley's face to be much swollen, which they were enabled to dò by the light of the waning moon, they be¬ stowed a little care on him till they had ascertained that though he had been m imminent danger of suffocation, there was then no reason to fear that he Would be immediately îeleased from pam. After this, they ıegaled themselves with such provisions as they had with them, without deigning to bestow the slightest aliment on the captives, who, it may be propei to remark, how ever deplorable their situ¬ ation in othei ıespects, suffered nothing at that moment from hunger. The Missionary ш his tı ansıt from the place at winch they weie taken, to that at which the party had now ainved, had endured much less than Harley, and on falling from the horse's back, he sat up without difficulty. As soon as he had dad time to look eround hım, and beheld p 3
the almost lifeless state of Ins bi other in misfortune, he maiked his indignation at the spectacle, by exclaiming with energy, " Woe to thee that ipoilest and thou wast not spoiled, and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously utili thee when thou shalt cease to spoil, thou shalt be spoiled, and when thou shalt make an md to deal ti eacherously, they shall deal h eacherously " 1 his speech addressed to the neaiest Barbarian, produced no effect, as it was not undei stood, 01 possibly it might have piocuied the speakei some additional rigour lhe Moors regarded the "Chris- tun dogs" with sullen scorn, and on finishing their lepast, threw themselves at full length on the ground to sleep, having hi st appointed one of their number to watch those they had m charge lhe office to which this rufiian was appointed, from the manner in which Charles and Smithers were bound, would have been а perfect sinecure, if he had not thought
it light to prove lus vigilance, and at the same time Ins devotion, by bestowing on the enemies of his holy religion an occa¬ sional kick. Aftei а stay of about two hours, the pnsoners weie icmounted as befoiej and the march was iccommenced. At sim¬ lise the Moors, who weie wantonly in¬ dulging in the most ci nel and unprovokcil persecution of two fellow creatures, made a formal display of devotion, by perfoi til¬ ing then salam. Piepaiatoiy to tins they had halted on the summit of a hill shortly aftei day bieak, on which they watched till the using gloiy of the gieat luminaiy of Heaven bui ston then view, when tlu- ıehgıous ceiemony, with which they aie accustomed to had hisretuin, commenced. Sadly recuinng to the very diffeient cii- cumstances undei wlncli he had witnessed the last decline of the same sublime ob ject, and to the thoughts which then oc¬ cupied his mind, Challes heeded not what he heard, till the \ oice of the Mis-
bionaiy attiacted his attention Smitheis having been before among the Moors, better undeistood what was passing than bis fellow sofferei did, and when in then language he heai d thein exclaim, " Thet e ts but one God, and Mahomet ts his pro¬ p/iet," he felt himself called upon to de¬ nounce Mahomet as a base and impious impobtoi, and the Koran, with the excep tion of those parts of it which were taken from the Sacied Scuptures, as false, and not less despicable than its author. Con¬ tempt for the Christian, and relentless barbai ity, loi bade them to attend to what they supposed could only be an appe il to their pity, and Smithers was peiniitted to go on with impunity. Soon aftei noon they all alighted on а woody plain near seveial tents, the in¬ habitants of winch seemed known to the Moors They approached to examine the white men, but with great hesitation and symptoms of sickening disgust at the unsightly hue of European flesh. By
degrees they became bolder, and though their abhorrence remained great, they vimmoned up resolution enough to make seveial experiments, as it should seem, with a view to ascertain if the covering of a white man's bones was at all of the same character as that of their own. To satisfy themselves of tins, tdey pinched the prisoners first, and afterw ai ds prick¬ ing them with thorns, they saw dlood, and were so fai convinced of the resem¬ blance which existed bet« een those they toitured and themselves, that they con siderei! no new exercise of their inge¬ nuity necessaiy to establish the fact, but they lound the amusement so pleasant, that they often lepeated their laceiations, calling to each othei to see the blood spring, and laughing with the most pei¬ fect delight at the spectacle thus afforded. A sheep was piocured and slaughtered. When the followers of the propdet had appeased then hunger, some of the bones, and a pai t of the offal of the animal wete
thrown to the Christians, as if they had, indeed, been dogs Tins ovas the first sustenance offered to them, since they were taken, and disgusting as it was, both par'ool of it, while their inhuma ι masters, weary with the march they had performed, songht repose ra the tent', the inhabitants of which nnderlook to watch the captives. The cruelty and curiosity of then new guaids being now in part gratified, Challes and the Mis¬ sionary were left a httle to themselves. This oppoitnnit) was seized by the former, to advise his countryman to abstain fiom declaiming unnecessary) against the Mahomedan religion, as in all probability such conduct would ex¬ pose hnn to the most fatal violence. He in particular reprot ed hun for having applied to them, on their way, the curse pronounced against Senachertb. But his argumeuts and remonstiances weie vain The Missionary neither regretted his vast conduct, nor felt at all disposed to
promise future prudence. Го all Hailey could urge, Smitdcis seicnely replied, " tf Balak mould give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the commandment of tlie Lord, to do etthet good or bad of mme own mmd, but what Ihe Lord sailh, ¡hat will I speak."
L4Ľ OF THIS SECOND VOLll*lL
