Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The mystery: or, Forty years ago: a novel
THE MYSTERY.
CHAPTER I. Λ hundred thousand welcomes I cot M weep And I could laugh I am hght and henvv VV «.iconic «V curse begin nt very root of his heart That ь not glad to sec thec tan «кч ьл« t ll was at the close of a lovely evening that Sir George Henderson, having dis¬ missed lus sei vants to repose, retired to Ins study with the intention of devoting the hours that were vet to elapse befoie midnight, to reading md mcdif it>on 1 he solitude and si! in.» w huh thus Ici' to himself he might eijoj, l«a chpin toi hnn which he would liave ben veiy unwilling to exchange against the vol. ι в
most ipptovel expcihints foi nuking tune pass unheeded that fashion includes. in the series of idle occupations com moni) called pleasuies Though no enemy to gnety, moments like these, which could be devoted wholly to ief.ee tion, he called α luxuiy, and, raentilln he attached to thein a moie exalted chi neter To commune with himself to lecall the actions of Ins ρ ist hie and to compite his present views with those which he had formerly entertained, he had urought hunsell to considei a ich gious exeicise Heie calmly reti icm„ his conduct, as memory piesented to his " mind's eye" all its uregulauties with out disguise, he seldom felt flattered bj the letrospeet, and tlie self lepioach, contrition, and humility which it mspii ed, he held to partake ot the character of preparation, for reudeung his last ac count to the Creator of man His study, which was, but a coutmu ation of lus librai y, had been built out
from the house, so as to occupy the cen¬ tié of a beautilul sluubbeiy. A door had opened into it 'ioni the back parloui, but this, m consequence of certain nrup- tions which had ta.'»eii place to the gieat discomfiture of tlie Baionet's papeis, had lately been closedi; and, when the hh'aiy door was fastened,, it coultl only be entei ed fiom the gaiden, .u. d that by passing the window of the apartment, at which Su George usually took his seat in those houis ot listless enjoyment, usheied in by the glass aftei dinnei, antl closed with a short nap. Shame and grief oppressed his heart, when he ι efleeted on the scheme of life that he had resolved to adopt, c ι tlie op¬ portunities he had had of embodying and bunging to inatunty the fan. embiyo, and on the weakness and want of virtue which he dıscoveıed ıı the negligence which had prevented lnm fiom. carrying his good resolutions, into effect. At the commencement of eveiy year, he had re- u 2
solved on avoiding the errois into whicli the last had betrayed him ; but a repeti¬ tion of' them had invauabiy followed, and he still found it more easy to lake creď't for the life he intended to lead, than for that which he had actually led. The prospects and connexions which he had formerly expected would cheei that period of existence at which he had liow arrived, had given way to others, in which new actois weie biought upon the scene, and those with whom he expected to be associated were remembeicd no moie: oı only lemembered. At the age of fifty, a man finds himself in a vv orld wholly différent from that in which he passed his yquth. A few of the faces which were once his constant attendants are still occasionally seen, and some of the names once most dear to him may be found on the list of his friends ; but the changes in habits, situations, and opi¬ nions, which the ivifijssitudes of' thirty years nevei fail to produce, doom the
traveller on the road of life to pursue the phantoms of happiness which Hope still holds out through channels, and by means of which, at the commencement of his journey, he'had no idea. It was 'not without a sigh that Sir George read, in the volume of the past, the fate of those visions of felicity in which he had once indulged. The ap¬ prehension that those to which he still fondly clung, would not experience a milder destiny, produced a feeling of melancholy which, too long entertained, vvould not fail to introduce its neighbour Despair. He was anxious to dispel it. " Well, well!" he exclaimed, as if sud¬ denly consoled, " it will not last for ever. The Deity has wisely taken care that onr anxieties shall not be allowed a very long period to accumulate. A few years at the most, and this feverish dream must terminate, and others with hearts as light, and hopes as deceitfully gay as mine were once, will pursue the same idle round in n 3
my pi ice, ind experience the sanie dis appointments, Ishall then be at Test, on that shore — Ha ' where ? Have I so temperately enjoy ed the blessings placed within my reach, while here, that I cm reasonably hope the awful change, which I nm fated soon to undergo, will only trinsport me to a h ippiei stite of being ' Will no angiy spectres rise to accuse me of sins which doomed some unhappy mortal to poverty, slnme, and suffering in this woiid, till, sinking fiora misery to crime, he did that to which he may owe m the ne\t-----------------But, no' it shall not be Thank Heaven it is not too lite to guard against this^ --------" A slight noise it the wmdow of the aputment Interrupted him He looked towaids it, and distinctly perceived the figure of ι man The window was a little open, and, disconcerted at the idea that he hid spoken loud enough to be heard, he began to hum a stanza of « Hanover Dobbin," to turn asule those
ideas which he suspected what he had previously uttered might inspire. He finished the second verse, and pioceeded to begin the first, with . 11 the older and legulanty which us»tally accompany the mirth th.it is assumed to conceal 01 obli¬ terate what it is suspected may be noted »is stiange or ridiculous; and now, m a moie assured tone, he went on, * 1 tt.ll you lio talc of u cock or a bull, Of a young sighing ass, 01 an old (touting fuol ,'* when it occui ied to lum, that the ¡qi- peaiance of a peison m lus shiubbeiy at that hour was an extiaordmaiy if not an ihrming, ciicumstuice, and his song abı uptly ceased. The seiv.mts weie all at iest — no one could get theie at that time, without previously scaling the will, »ind why any one should thus include» but loi puiposes of depiedation, it was not easy to conjecture. On peiceiving that he was obseived, the unknown, pie- cıpıtately letired. A ïetieat, on the one a 4
side, ïarely huls, in all belligetent case*, to produce an advance ou the othei, tnd Sn George, who, though nothing deficient in courage, bad till now ie mained motionless m his chan, rose .is the stianger vanished, and appioached the window, but could see no one. He ν ıs leluctant lo call 01 make Any unusii il noise, lest the family should be unneces- saulj dıstuıbed, but а feeling of irre sistible cunosity soon triumphed ovt tins piudenti.il consideiation, and he ı't m inded, but not in α veiy loud tone, " Who is theie i'" No answei was ìeturned. He ıepeated the question, ıaısıng Ins voice considei ably above its oıdınaıy pitch, and thi words " A fnend," spoken in a mannei tb.it evinced anxiety to set alai m and suspi tion at icst, caught his eai. The speaket was evidently at α consideiable distance, but tbe sound ol remming steps weie now heaid, and the Baronet listened to
ascertain if he could distinguish those ot more thin one person In a few moments, the figuie he had seen igain presented itself befoie the window, and the voice winch h id replied to his question, now, in the most lespectful 1 mguage, solicited foıgıveness foi tlie speaker's intiusion, nul for the suipri7e of which, not with out ıeısoıı, ho suspected himself to be the cause " What may be your business ?" enquired Su Geoige, somewhat linpi- tiently " I know not whether tint winch is the ciuse of my being heie, maj bo called busi"-ss," was the stringer's replj " If you have youi doubts on the sub ject, I think you might have selected α httei opportunity foi paying vom visit " " I camot sufficiently apologise foi mv intrusion, but impitience to see the ıesı deuce of an old fuend,\nd a kind bene İActor, may, peihaps, furnish some excuse в 5
loi ine, inil prove my motive bettor than my manners." " And pnj, who miy this old fnend and kind benofictoi be?" demanded the Baronet, with an air of wondei, mingled with inci etlulıty. " Whnt is his name ?" " Sir Geoige Henderson." " And what then miy jouis ber" "Challes H u lej." "Wlnt 1 — Clinics Harley' Impôs sible * — W ilk m — it can't be. — How have you been my deai, dear, boy?— Why, what astiappei youhave giovvn' — Where do you come Irom?—-Why, it seems as but »he other day that jou wtie, — were — that I was — phaw ' — that jour mothei But why not comeui J ' It was thus tint Sir George, in the sur¬ prize of the moment, endeavoured to give utteiance to some of his ideas, but without being able to do justice to one ot them The name winch had been men¬ tioned, recalled scenes which, though
long passed, could ncvei bc obliterated fiom his memoiy, and, in the tumult of emotion, he continued to press the jouth tow ilk iu, while eagwly giaspmg his hand tiom the window, he efiectually guarded iguiist ¡us making his way to the dooi. »\llei а tew moments lecovenng hunsell ι little, he leleascd his pusouei, and a tail young mm entered the loom, whose finely .minuted countenance andpieictng cj e, m «lit have m elted the attention ot in indifleient spedito! ţ but, in Su George, it converted the istonishnicnl pieviously excited, into ecstasy, lie embraced ¡us guest, and while his anient gaze ictraccd those features, which, when he hid hist seen his young friend, had uot begun to expand into manhood, the Lipid march of time, and the changes winch maik the seveial stages of his ca¬ ieei, again stiuck most foicibly on the nunc! of fhe Baionet, and tears, lhe off¬ spring of joy, and of a sensation of a veiy diflerent character, hlled his eyes, and в 6
assured the young sailor, (tbr Mr. Harlej wore the uniform of a naval officer,) that his welcome was sincere. " I expected," he said, "to meet vvith a kind reception from the friend, whose bounty is connected with the recollection of' all the most important scenes of my lite, and this must be my apology for so indecorously intruding on your privacy. When I saw your abode, and perceived that your family had retired torest, I wds unwilling to disturb their ι and you, by knocking or ringing ; bul, at the risk of being mistaken for a robber, I could not deny myself' the pleasure of walking ¡a your grounds, where 1 had passed so many happy days ; and this, I flattered myself could be accomplished without giving you any annoyance. I perceived your light, and having had the happiness ot' beholding you, prepared to eflect my escape ; but recalled by your voice, I re¬ turned, to prevent alarm. I cannot but exult in what I have done, since my old
pation forgives me, and has ıeceıved inc with a generous warmth,"wluch suipasses even the exalted opinion tlut I hat! foimed ot his kindness Γιοηι a fathei I could not have expenenced л more cordial gieetmg " « Indeed," replied Su Geoige, " I do not think my feelings could have been moie agreeably surprised than they have been on this occasion You know, I always used to call you my own boy, but you were such a wild little rebel, that I was sometimes obliged to use moie authonty than you found agiee¬ able." " But not enough to pievent the lepe¬ tition of the graceless fiohcs which dıs¬ tuıbed your repose. In the midst ot your chidmgs.youi good humoured laugh, (by way of paıenthesıs), I always ıe- membered with more distinctness, than the reproof which it seemed intended to mitigate." " You must want refreshment, Charles."
«· None, 1 thanh you, «Sır Geoige. Some delay occuired in piocuung hotses for my last stage, and I hlled up the time thus sacrificed, by filling up a certain vacuum, vvhieh I just then dıscoveıed, with ι suppei." " flien take some wme, boj," sud the В nonet, filling a glass to lnm, md taking arothei lumself. " Health, joy, ш J pei manent happiness to yon, iny deai Charles '" The glow of meflable delight which sal on the countenance of his fnend antl benelactoi, afloided Chulés the purest and most unalloyed satisfaction. As none could moie acutely feel than he, that • Rith gifts wnx poor, when givers prove unkind " So none could better appreciate the ad¬ ditional values conferred upon them by the affection of their donoi remaining un¬ exhausted It was not because from this circumstance, he might hope to gain
furthei advantages, but it was honest exultation, that swelled his heait, at finding that the favoni s, which he was proud to acknowledge, he owed to unaf¬ fected kindness, md not to ostentation loi any thing tint might follow, Challes could feel no anxiety, and foi those aids which ι hbeial h mil ind ample purse could supply, he had no dosue, as he anticipated no want of them s for whatever his other q dhhcations might be, he certunly hid, as yet, made but little progress m cilculatmg the value and importince of those essential mgre dienta of human inteicourse in certiin paits of the woiid, called pounds, ¡,hil lings, and pence It soon occui red to him, that to pro long his visit at this time, mi¿ht be m convenient, aid he rose, aftei inquiring mto the health and situation ot the othei membeis of Su George's family, end or those of his fnends who had formei ly been known to him, to take his
departure This, however, could not be permitted Sir George insisted upon it, that the young sailoi should slepp undei no roof but Ins It was m vam that Harley îemonstiated with him, and assured his fnend, tint he had alieady engaged α bed at the neighbounng mn The Baronet vv ould bi ook no conti aihction, and eveiy objection was vanquished as soon as stai ted His stay would occasion no inconvenience, — α spare bed was ready to ïeceive hun, — he could send woid to the inn that the expected lodgei would not return, and unlike ^ome well behaved peisons, who say all these obhg mg things to send then guests away in good humour, but who mal e no effort to detain them, though the hesitating step, and the " No, I thank you, it will be as well to get home to night," or, " it will be tioubhng you," sufficiently indicate that the offer would not be unacceptable, if it w°re smeeie, Su George, even while he spoke, rang his bell, and puoi
Thomas was roused fiom his fiist sleep, to apprize the inn-keeper that Mr. Hailey would remain at the mansion of his hos¬ pitable friend ibr tlie night.
CHAPTER II. Honour mil shame from no condition rise, .fxct M ell jour pait, there all the honour lies Tertuin, in men has some su ill ilifiertncc made, One Haunts in rai.s, one flutters in hrocaile, The cobhtel- apron*d, and the p-i son gown'd, The finr hooded, und the monarch crown'd lo siy Sn Geoige and ¡us jouthful fiiend closed their evemng m convers¬ ation, would be to give the readei veiy little infoimatioii, yet, peihaps, a dia¬ logue between a stnphng and his pation, would seem to many to furnish л very good excuse for passing on to the next chapter. Those who most plume them¬ selves on then discernment, will, no doubt, anticipate, fiom the diflerent ages, and relative situations of the parties, that no¬ thing but pompous lectuies foi the guid-
ance of the young man in futili e, fell from the lips of the one, which were replied to by the other whenevei he could subdue an inclination to jawn, sufficiently to be master of his tongue, with so ne gi aceful expression ot hypo- cutical asseiit That this may fairly enough be suimised cannot be denied. A neh man, who has been kind to one who can boast of little wealth, is very apt to thmk ms duty but naif perfo- ned till he has bestowed on his protegee a sample of his wisdom. Sometimes from the Feal and self-complacency with which this is pressed, it may be suspected, that to flou i ıslı away as а gıveı r-f advice, was the only inducement to give any thing else. The possessoi of riches seldom suspects himself to be deficient in wteU lect, and finds an exquisite treat in Iec. turing a youth for his unpiovement, some¬ what akin to that which Lingo enjoys ui the bulliant and erudita display which he makes befoie Consltp. Having con-
feŕred a benefit ou a felloiv-creature, manj' are of opinion, that whenever they stbmble on that fellow-creature again, they have a right to be eloquent. But such was not exactly the character of the conveisation which occupied Sir George and Charles ; and giving the former all possible Credit for impatience to add to the bounty of the patron, the lessons of the preceptor, it was hardly possible to commence in the usual form a course of lectures that night w.th- out'a mixture of other matter. They had so many questions to put, and each being not less eager to answer, than to be answered, the various recitals they had to go thiough, and to listen to, afforded the senior but few oppoi tunities of bestowing advice. The Baronet desired to be in- formed of all that had befallen the youth he had been the means of sending out a midshipman nine years before. He wish¬ ed to hear what Harley had seen in the several voyages he had made, and most
especially he panted to enquire what tie; had learnt of his parents and friends in India, his birth-place, which he had visited within the last twenty months. Charles briefly recapitulated some, of the most remarkable scenes that he had witnessed ; gave a short sketch of his own experience in the navy, and charmed tht- Baronet with a series of interesting state¬ ments relative to the situation of several of his old friends in India. His own pai ents he had found somewhat impioved in their circumstances, but his biother and sister were both dead, and the health òf the captain (his father) seemed lapidly to decline. " And his lady, — your interesting mother ; does the climate seem to agree with her constitution ? is she happy ? Does she retain a large share ofthat beauty for which she was formerly celebrated íj" " My mother, Sir Geoige, is now fast declining in ' the vale of yeai s.' andthe climate is certainly not the most pro-
pitious for Гш opean beauty On these points, theıefoıe, I cm say but little that you would be gıatıfied to heai As to the question " Is she happy," I can only siy that she ippeared, during my ibode it Bombaj, moie cheerful t in she was accustomed to be in hei youngei days lor then, I think, mehncholj was one of her distinguishing hanc teııstıcs This may be accounted foi, fiom the fiequent deaths that she had to mourn, as she had the iffliction to follow, within my memoiy, one child and seveni ot her most esteemed friends, to the giave My presence might be the cause of bei spu its being somewhat exhilarated, and, I am sure, that her joj was git it when she learned how kind, how constant ι fnend it had been my happiness to find in her much esteemed cousin, Su George Henderson " He spoke with energy, and Su Geoige much affected, agam clasped lum by the baud while he replied —
' And I tiust, my deai Chilles, to afloid hei gieatei satisf ıctıon ycl Con tmue assiduously to devote youiseif to the duties of youi profession, ınd I daie flattei myself jour life will prove equilly glonous and happy You aie now a fine dashing young fellow A tliousand mci dents may occui to help you foi wild in hfe Be piudent and fear nothing Iu ι day or two, you shall accompiny me to Loid Dashington' 0 , who may have it in his powei to ıendeı you a stucc Iheie, peihaps, you may see voun ladies of the uchest and best families ш Lngland, md an illiance with one of tliese might hfl j ou foi ev er above the fıovvns of Tortune " " But sink me, peihaps, lowei in the estimation of all, whose pıaıse it should be my stduy to deserve To many, foi the gratification of avance οι ambition, is tlut to which I hope I shall ncvei descend " " Are you then plulosophei enough to d spise wealth and honours ?"
" No, Sır George, I despise them not. I could wish to possess both, but gold, and even greatness, may be bought too dear, and, if happiness must be their price, any one maybe the pui chaser for me What felicity can any ıatıonal being promise himself who mairies a woman not because aflection selects hei as one whose smiles would cheei him through life, but from an idea that her money will enable him to move ni a higher sphere than that to which he would othei- wise belong I will not be a vvife-tiadei. I would prefer the lowly shed, occupied by the meanest labouier on anj of your estates, with the consciousness that I had disdained thus to sell myself, to the most supeib palace that ait could ıear, haunted by the recollection of its having been pıocuıed bj the abdication of all generous feelmg and honourable senti¬ ment , for to me it would seem like out of the stupendous mausoleums which at once decorate and degrade the countiy
in which I hist saw the hght; to attest the meanness, while it commemorated the pude; to blazon the vanit), wlule it recoi ded the fall of its insignificant inmate." " But poveity, my dear Challes,— poverty in the piesent state of society is an insupportable evil. Hunger and rags do not suit the taste of modern virtue." " And I appiehend that they weie not veiy giateful to ancient pnde. Yet want is suiely piefei able to contempt. Ihe one, tune 01 accident may relieve, -ţ but the othei must stick to the wretched being thiough hfe, and hover like a vampne on his tomb. I can submit to puvation with moie satisfaction than to merited scoui ; and though I wish not to take cıedıt foi thinness which 1 have not been proved to possess, I thmk, when rags become the badges of independence, that I shall not be »ashiuned to wear them " " But you must not assume that the vol. i. с
possession of wealth goes to annihilate virtue. I hope you luu e not made up your mind never to tiust уош heart to the keeping ot a female who labours undei the imputation ot being ι ich and well connected ?" " lhat bn, Geoige, if such weie my detei mination, ought not to give my fnends uneasiness. It is not piobable that my resolution would much inter¬ fere with my foitune. Few families of funk and wealth would feel muth dis¬ posed to add to the mnnbei of their membeis a pool nameless lieutenant like myself." " By my soul, I think the proudest family in the kingdom, might, without repioach, receive a j outh of youi spuit, entei pi ise, and sentiments, into its bosom." " I am flattered by joui favourable opinion, but fear I owe it to the little knowledge you have had of my conduct since we last pai ted."
" You aie too modest ; but I observe an impetuosity of manner »ibout you that m»iy prove fatal to your peace Suffei not your passions to lead you astray, noi let a romantic generosity (I wish not to suppress, but to legniate the feeling), betiay you into engagements which, ìashly made, may prove desti úct¬ ivé of future comfort." " loi your caution, I thank you But, Sir George, I luve been very ι emiss in not following up the sever.il enquiries which I have made after the heilth of your familj*, by asking more particula* ly about the fan companions of my child¬ hood. The public papers convejed to me the melancholy intelligence that Lady Hendeison was no moio. Your daughteis, I hope, are both veil. The playful Caiohne — is she still undei the pateinal roof 3 " " It so happens that at tins π ornent she ıs, but in the care of her husband, Major Roberts. They have been hen* с 2
on a visit Ιοί the list foitm^lit, ind take then deputine to monow On thc (ol lowing daj , 1 pui pose going to London You will not objtct to itcompany me theic, when I ttll jou the objttt ol my jouippy is to fttch Aiutili, wlio is at piesent with Lord ami Lidj Dish ington " " I slnll be lejoiced to set the ptn sive Amelia yam, mcl am onlj sony I cannot hive thc fclicitj of enjoj ng her society at the same tunt with th it o hei laughlti loving sistci The into tating contiast tint wis foimerh furnished by their opposite habits I base olttn ie meinbeitd with dtli B lit But the hdy ol the Mijoi, I suppose, bt 0 ms to 13 sjme the in of *i miti on and the decorum of imtuiitj has no douut, put the vivacity of joutli in ittttis " " She is uot iltogcthei the lattlmg plague she used to bt " " Oui meeting will bc an odd one I shall haidly be able to ltfiam fion
smihng while I e ill bei Madam, instead ot Car line Now ι id then, I fear, I bhill folget mysell ' " No η ttci ' Sufficient foi the d i) is the с I thei cof,' in I is it now glows late, wc 1 ul bettci ictne foi }ou must be fatigued iftei youi join ney ' " And I feu that I have kept you up inconveniently late " " Peihaps, I have said one word foi you and two foi mjself Though not in the Inbit of going enly to bed, I feel, after the surpi ise and pleasure that you have afforded mo, that I want rest He agun embneed Ins young fnend, and both ι etnei!.
с 3
CHAP. III. I have somewhere re-id of an eminent person, who use I, in hi, private eBees οΐ devotion, to give thnnlts to lit ivtn thut he was born a Frenchman for iny own pirt I lunk upon it a« a peculiar blessint, that I was born an Englishman Speltaior At an early hour Cliailes left his bed, and hastened to ramble over the grounds winch had been so familiar tc him when а child, that even the lapse of nme years had failed to make them seem other than his home. He lemembeied, when he 'ast saw them, what a vast, what an inter¬ minable pei iod to his infant mmd, seemed to intervene between him and manhood. It was now past ; and, looking back upon it, he was astoiished at the swiftness with which it had flown, while he re¬ flected, that when a similar number of months and seasons should have rolled
away with equal ìipiilitj, he would be almost entitled to take ι mk аз л middle- aged man At cveiy step, a variety of interesting lecollections weie inspired bj thc objects willen piesented them¬ selves, but, m many nist luces, such exten sive alteiations had taken place, tb it the precise spot on which some of those moments hid been pisscd which he loved to îecall, he sought to discover in vain The infant trees whicn, when completing his edueition, he had as¬ sisted to plant, now ι eai ed their lofty heads on high, and almost deserved the name of a foiest. The new hislnon in which the giounds weie then laid out, he peiceived had been discatded as obso lete, and tbe fanciful windmill, repre¬ senting a giant with four aims, which was intended to fnghten buds fiom the fiuit, and was ìeputed to have succeeded to admuation, had been suffered to get out of lepan, and the nmauders it w»is erected to distui b, had now fixed then с 4
lirbitations on the form of the monstei, who once seemed to menace the whole feathcicd tube with destuii tion. Su Geoige, whose ıepose hul expen¬ enced less benefit than his spmts tiom the unexpected visit he htd ıeceıved, was tempted to use beloie bis usual hoin, antl soon made his appeaiance in the garden. Aftei exchanging the customary gieet¬ ings, the Baionet pointed out thc im¬ piovements tlut he had effected, and descanted at gi cat length on those he had in contemplation to make. Many of these, Chartes icmindcd hnn, would tend to ι estore the scene to vv hat he ı einem- beied it bad been some ten oi twelve yeais befoie, and be did not sci nple to laugh at the whimsical levolutions of taste, which, having expended huge sums to change the appearance of the gai den and lawn, fiom vvhat they had originally been, weie now pioceedmg to make a simi¬ lar disbui sement, in oıdeı to undo all that
bad been done, md give them the »ispcet which thty hatl foimeily worn. The Bironet did not leidily acknow¬ ledge the coi ι ectness of the reuni к, but Ch irles made so successful an appeal to Ins memoi), that, in the end, he wa» convinced of its tiuth, antl good liu- inoui edly joined in the laugh, asserting his ught to do so, as it was pioduced at hts expense. A playful conveisition suc¬ ceeded, which listed till they weie sum¬ moned to the hi eakfast-tible. Cliailes was now intioduccd to Major Roberts and Ins lady, and the mirthful play fellow ot his eaihei diy s stood before him а fine full giovvn womin Their mu¬ tual lecogmtion vv is accomp uned vv ith ex- pi essionsof suipnse, andthe irdentgaze of astonishment and pleisui e, in which Cliailes indulged foi some moments, pre vented hun f ι o n beai ing, οι , at least, fi om attending to the piehminaiyeftoitatcon¬ veisation on the part of the M ijoi, who, to getovci the fiist emb massaient of in с ΰ
introduction to a stranger, had com¬ menced operations with а rcmaik on the fineness ot the morning. The mteiest with which his paitnerw.is suivejed by the newcomer, seemed rather to annoy him, and Sir George thought it necessary to in¬ form lum of then having been playmates m their infancy, lhis was sufhtient to explain what at first might appeal a little extiaordinuj', and Charles hid by this time sufheientlv ïecoveied luinsel. to keep up tlie ball of conveisition w ith Ins accustomed case and spu it. '1 he Majoi had ft sternness ш his countenance which Challes thought ra¬ ther at vii i.ince with the gay, affable dis¬ position ot Ins old companion, but his manncis weie not repulsive, anil, m con¬ versation, any soldier-like toughness was atoned loi by the intelligence which he display ed. He had seived in America, und some of the scenes which he had witnessed he detailed with а minuteness that delighted Charles. His statements
did not seem to have the same chat шч for the lady, who, it is moie than pro¬ bable, had heaid some of them beloie, and the vivneily loi which she had onti been iernai kable, now maniltsted itstll in her nnpitienee to bie.ik the line id ol these det uls, »mel eveiy niomenlaiy piuse was filled up with some such remai I» as, " Well, my deal Majoi, but Cha—, I beg paidon, Lieutenant Hailey knows it all." Ihe Majoi, howevei, with tin chaiactenslic ìesolution ol aBittishsol diei, nevei loi »» moment sulici eel the maicb ol Ins nauative to be niteriupttd by а sortie of this chaiacter, but calmii brought up Ins columns ol information, picked up his sti agghng facts, nud mcor poi ated them with the mam body of hts hıstoıy, till he had biought down the events of the w at to the close of the last campaign. Though hitherto foiled, Mrs. Roberts knew the moment was at length tañ¬ ed foi interposing with eflect, befoi«. с 6
her lord entered on his plan for re¬ ducing the revolted provinces, and be¬ fore hc began his disquisition on the probable ìesiilt of the contest, it new measures weie not adopted. Mie, ac¬ cordingly, now addiessed heiself to Charles, and enquired hovv he had left his father and mother, whom she under¬ stood he had ìeeently seen in India 3 The reply «as, of couise, neaily the same that he had pieviously matle, in answer to a similir question fioin Su George. To anothei intoriogatoij, n huh, in ef. feet, went to call loi moie minute paiti¬ cuiai s, he ι ephcd with bicvitj, as the ciicumstances of his patents weie not rcm.iikihly lloiuishing, and he was most .in\ions to guud himself against letting any thing eseipe fiom his hpsth.it might appear с ilculjtcil to dneet attention to then situation oi Ins own. He h ul re- ceiud too mini) ( ivours fiom bu Geoige not to feci the most cai nest desire to avoid cvcij statement th it might by pos-
sibiliti* be mistaken for α new appeal to tlut kindness, to which he was m«- dchlcil (01 his education; for his intio- duction to the navy, lor his piomotioi) in the sei vice , in а woul, foi all but his existence. the lady pei ecu ed that he felt some 1 embanassment, and hastened to change the top'c of conveisation. " Aftei all that Jou have seen," said she, " pray which countiy do you most admne, England or that which counts jou among its natu es ?" " \οιι moitifj mc, Caiohne,—Madam, by the distinction jou have made. lliough the accident of my buth hap¬ pened in Inilii· immediately alter the ai¬ ri, .il ol mj patents atBonibaj, yet, to the land ol iny piogemtois — to that or my education — to Old England — I considei m>sc*lf to belong, as much as if my fallici and mothei bad deferied taking «hen vov age, till aftei I had seen the light. In Bl.iekstone, it is laid down,
that the son of Butish patents, though born in α folcigli countiy, ıs an English¬ man by I iw, and that 1 nv sh ill never be repealed vv ith my consent " " Well then, which countiy do yon pieter, tint to which you luve latelv been, oı youi own, Lnglind?" " The question is very general, em- biacing, as it do«*s, the vaneties of ch mate, society, modes of living, laws, social institutions, and government yet 1 have no dillicullj in lepljing to t at once, that En¿land, so fai аь I am com¬ petent to judge, his, in all, the advantage Yet luxuiy and pude may find delights, and enjoy giatification*, theie, which here it would seek for in vam. But the va¬ rieties of tyranny and slaveiy aie not to my mind The state of the degiaded millions who there cultivate the earth, foims a contiast with that of the haughty resident Eui opean, who cinnot pass ev en fiom one apaitinent to anothei, without causing some half dozen of his fellow-
creatures to move with him, to fan lum, to shade lum, and to nimista to wants artificially ci eated, which I cannot con¬ template without feelings of di ,gust. For my own part, if duven to the altci native, I know not whetiiei I would uot prefer mingling with the mem ds who swell Ins tiain, to actimţ the part of the bloated idol himself." " And aie you sine that α something like envy has no sh tie m this seven* philippic against 01 lental state* ■* Forgive the lieedom I use, but, you knov, you formei ly were iccustomed to t ilk with îaptuie of the tiam of clephuits and palanquins, which, on piv mg us a fi lendly visit, as you may do now, you piomised should stielt youi train." " The idle hopes of the boy ou^ht no more to be connected with the feelings of the man, tban the wild lovings of imagination while we sleep with the sober realities to which we awake. While a child, my eye was caught by spletu
dom, and had not sufficien* ::* f c!l«gence to know that its pi ice was sl.iv eiy, or something so like it tint I know not how to distinguish between them, but, for mc, call it want of taste 01 what )ou will, I had ıatlıeı be in Lngland, exposed per¬ petually to the insolence of а iude mechanic, who takes offence at the su¬ penoi lextuic of anothei's coat, or to the blackguaidisin of а hackney-coach man, whose feelings arc luut because lus cus tornei objects to being lobbed, than 1 would have befoie my eyes the ni etched sei ν iht) of the bemgs I have mentioned, 01 the measureless airogance of those on whom tliey attend." " He) -da) '" ci icd Su George. " Why, I am ariani )0ti aie becoming а leveller Would )ou annihilate all distinctions m society ?" The Major observed, suboidination was absolutely neccssar). " Fai be it fiom meto deny it, Major. No, Su Geoige, I .im no leveliéi. 'Hie
absind and chiinciic.il scheme of miking all equal, nevei enteied into my contem¬ plation. I know the thing is impossible, and, if it weie not, itwould be unpio- fitable, foi, while men diflei in their Inbits and piopensities as they do in complexion and statuie, weie all made equil m wealth antl importance to day, in one month the dissipiteli and the restless would demand a new anange- ment. No, this ean nevei be done, and society could nol exist, it the occupa¬ tion and the destiny ot all weie the same. For ji st experience tells m ever· soil, That thosL who tlunk lilibt govern thosp who toil. And all thut 1 reedum's lushest uinis can rcadl, Is but to 1 y proportioned loids on culi But though great vaneties of ι ank are demanded loi the pi esei vation ol all the membeis ot a community, jet surely eveiy englishman will concede to me th.s, that the diffeience between the proudest clcv.ition ol wealth and ıank,
and the dark abyss of slavery, is gi eater than is absolutely necessaiy f or the w ell- being of α state, and this is all I contend foi, to justify the displeasuie that 1 have expressed " " But, in the piesent situation of our Eastein dominions, that to wlueh you object cm in no waj be pievented." " lhat I admit." " Do you, then, blame your countrymen for the part that they have acted «- Do you condemn the povvei which achieved, or the policy which retains, oui posses¬ sions in lhe Last ?" " I condemn neither, llie English, in my humble judgment, merit nofthe obloquj* which mortified ambition in otliei countnes attempts to heap on them for their onental conquests. Step by step they have been led, or ıatlıeı dnven by ciicumstances, much fui thei than they originally intended to pioceed ; and they must still go on to acquire more, oi give up what they have ah eaily won. In their 8
triumphs I rejoice, and considei them generally to have softened, ι atlier than aggravated, the destiny ol those over whom om rule has been extended. Wh it I condemn is, the wi etched and abomin¬ able superstitions winch piepaicd the Asiatics foi the state in winch they now are, and even made it a iefuge from greatei evil. This it was tlut first taught them to destioy and toituie each other, that made the fertile soil on which they Head a desert to them, nay, that made even the human mmd a desert. Prejudice among them ıejected, with a steady antl unflinching hand, the best blessings of Piovidence. The bounty of the Cieatoi was made useless by the folly of man, and genius, com age, antl virtue, blasted by its baletul bieath, were called into being m vain." " In this I concili with jou," said the Baronet, " but, foi the false religions which desolated India, it would have ex-
lnbitcd a very diflei ent spectacle at this day " " It is mom nf ul to ıeflect on what those of whom we speak aie, and on wlnt thty might lnve been." " 'Ihen »tetuai state, howevei, is no repioach to the government and the po hey ot this countiy." " Howevei benevo'ent the views of the ministers at home, they have but feeble means of making those thev em¬ ploy act up to llie spiut ot then insti uc- tions. In most colonies, the individuals sent out fiom England aie impatient to ıetııı n. Some ot thein aie needy αά- venluieis, and anxious to amass »ι fortune befoie they fall victims to the climate, theu ıap.ıeıty but too fiequently knows no bounds. Hence, oppi ession and acts of thc most baiefaced injustice ensue. Tbe sufleier, howevei, conhdent that he coultl make out what lawyei s call ' a good case' against thoăB-in power who have mjuied bun, shi inks f ioni the expense,
the toil, and the uiconi emente to which he must be exposed, il he should appeal to a lugliei powei " " That," lemaiked Sn Geoige, " is sometunes the case, no doubt." " If these considei ations lestmn lum not, and he date to dem ind justice, the supenoi means possessed by those with whom he has to contend, lately fail to pioduce such а numi eı oí soi ıhıl vouch- eis in then behalf as ci ush the accu ition. The government at home, though sin- ceiel) anxious to do justice, aie* olten blinded by the aits of then unwoithy sei- vants, and considei the answei give ι to the chaige so exculpatoiy as to pictlude fuitliei enqun). Should tins hi* lefuted in the most convincing mannei, the le- futation cannot ainve till the ciicum¬ stances to which it icfeis aie foigotten , and the fatigue of lecillmg thein to memoiy, geneially suggests that the com¬ plainant is а veiy tioublesoine peison, to revive the investigation of a tiansaction,
which tliosewhofelt no peisonal interest m the business considei ed to Inv с been long ago set at 11 st in the most s it tsi ictoi y man¬ ner Defectsm lusst ¡tementaieeasilj dis coveied, and the time th it el ipses befoie these can be collected, and the delays which follow before the result is known, weir out the patience md exhaust the substance of the mjuied party, and Ins fate, well disposed plodding folks hope, will piove a warning to all othei persons who mav have similar leasons for com plaint, uid teach them th it it is better to enduie much than to ıesıst a little, and wtsei to bend submissively before the insolence of powei, than to attempt to ovei thiow its pnde " " W hj, cei tainly, povvei in ev ery state of society is h ible to abuse , b it I do not know tint this is felt whei e you have been m an extiaordinary degiee " " I feai, it is not Ihe ev ils of which I speik aie inseparable fiom colonization Think not that I liowwish it teimtnated;
but I can easily imagine, that it would hive been happy foi millions that it had nevei been, and theie aie moments when I could almost venture to piophesy, that the splendid anomaly, which is now the ejoiy of my countrymen, will one diy till then bents with sonow, and covei the hnd with mourning I cinnot but fen, that the mighty held which lodi ι opens to ambition, will yet be the theitie of ι tiagedy tint all I шоре will shuddei to hear In the couise of humin events, I anticipate that some daring mm, full of com ige, destitute of pnn ciple, but possessed of darling talents, will folget his duty to Ins soveieign, and endeivom to lend foi evei fiom the ciown of Gieit But un, those te intones which he has swoin to defend against all assnl mis " ' I pi otest, you have become quite a politician," said Mis Roberts, "But, pi ay, how do you like the climate of India » '
"You aie awaie, I piesume, that of the pemnsuh of Indi ι I lunt seen but little , but, without hesitation, I must de¬ cide m this, as in e\eiy otiiti instance, in f »oui of Engl uid lliough a blading ridiance theie decoi ates foi m my weeks in succession, the whole corniti j, ot which heie we ha\e bnt pulul mil impeifect gleams, jet it Ins no clnniis foi me. Ihe supeib spectacle is followed by changes, which, in this tempeiate latitude, woultl be consideied tei ι ihc btonns rage with all the sudden uoltnce winch has distinguished many of then despots. The lattei ma\, indeed, be sud, in some in¬ stances, to ha\ e left then n unes a legacy to the winds A tiemendous hunicane seldom uses in that pait wheit I have been, without calling foith, and that too fiom those who have no ambition tobe thought facetious, the e\tlamation — ' We shall have Goveinoi Hough heie to day '' " " But} ou are not perpetually exposed
to those annoying showers, which pci se¬ cute the unfortunate inhabitants of Eng¬ land." " No, Caiohne — I beg youi paidon, Majoi llobeits, foi the mvoluntaiy free¬ dom.— No, Madam, but we have m their stead, the enoimous water-spout, which the inhabitants all declare, fiequently ıaıns fish on Bombay Gieen " " Well '" excl umed Sn Geoige, " I see with pleasuie, fiom the lemaiks which you have made on oui Indian system, that you aie English at heart. With all the causes for discontent, which Englishmen cm always find m abundance, I nevei knew an instance of one leaving this countiy to seek a bettei, 01 one wheie he eould be moie secine fiom the uit ι usions of povvei, who did not ıetuın disap¬ pointed. He who most ıepıned while at home, nevei faded to extol its laws, its institutions, nay, even its genei al adnuni- sliation abioad. A beautiful pictuie will sometimes appeal a miseiable, umntei- VOL. I. D
tsting, uunit nung, issoention of colours, lud co iisely, ınd without in object, on the e ıııv ıs to in eye tl it poıcs injudi¬ ciously close But when the ¡, i/ei begins to retne, oıdeı spıııı n s doni chios , dis tance gives evciy tint its just effect, a eouect and ununited ıepıcsentıtıon of Natuie's eli ums bmsts on his view α mistel piece of ut, and demands m voluut uy adımı Шоп of the heid thit could design, and the hand that could so felicitously execute, that winch picei pitition had ventuied to aıraıgn — niy, moie, to condemn So it is with the Lnghsh constitution Though in its woikuigs miou, ouiselvcs, we eveicly cııtıcıse its puts, jet those who contem plate it il a cbst nice, see in the greatness, that it b is bestowed on ш insi 0 nific int island, itsv due mil importance is ivvhole, and hold Lngl uul, as its possessoi, to be entitled to the envy and .idnin ation of all the vvoild "
CHAP. IV. lf><uuhic push \онг fortune, ď jou Jare Hut b" resolved and press tlic j ichling f-iir, îîiıccess anıl glory \«ill joui hbotirs crown, Гог I Uc «loe i ıreİT on thc τ ainut Irowii Гонит Airen bieakfast the Majoi and lus lady took then dcp и ture, but not till they hid sevei tily giv en to Ch ules α most piessing invitation to visit them it then seat m Leieestci shn e. The lady assuied him that she should delight to t ilk ovei their childish amusements with hnn, whom she had been taught to ıegaıd »ıs α bıotlıer. The wai mth of hei invitation, foi α mo- ment attiacted the particulai attention of the Majoi , but the last w oı d, and the smile of silicei itj which accompanied it, came too dnectly fiom the heait, and had the maik of tiuth too stiongly un¬ ii 2
piessed on it, to leave any unpleasant ft ehm* lu lund. When (hej had loiiimenctd then joui- nev, Su Geoige w ıs loi some* шише uts silent, and appealed lost in ılıoımht. Chartes had taken up »m idea tint the Majoi and Ins lady did not expei lence all the Icheity which the ni.itiiiiioiu.il state oiuht to pioduce, and now ven¬ tuied lo enquue ii the Majoi and Ins consort mixed mueh «ith the f.ishijn ible w oild » " Ratini moie than the М.Ц01 eould wish, I believe," said lie , " lui Caiohne 1 claim a huge portion ol hci foimei gaiety, and, vou know, slie alwajs bad a will ol hei own. fhc}, howevei, upon the whoh, agiee veiy well, and I know not how 1 could have done bettci, than to mateli my «Spitfiie agiinsl а man of wai." ILiilej was 11101 e gıatıfied bj the cheei¬ fulness ol mainici with which Su Geoige gave the icply he hud just 1 eeeived to
tlit " Ιι ι lilla; (|iı< stinn," il о к ¿il ι plu ise miv hi util winch ht hul vui¬ turi 1 lo pul linu lij tlie ıeply itself, ıs lio I ικ w lii ııı Iı ııl ılıt violiti to be pel (tilly ıvv ııı tint 'Üıey iL,ıet upon tht wlule veiv will, celici ıllj meins ' thty lo ml upon the whole tgicc vuj well' I Ik cuise ol the moment uy ılıştı ıctıon wluth ht Inti umul td w ι , howevei, piesently ıccoııııteıl loi I mı Ilınıl nig,' sul Su Geoige, wt sii ill be dull lıeıe in the countiy by oui se lits It wis not inj intention to j;o to London till to monow , but, it jou hue no objection, we will stut to diy, mil look foi Ameln What siy you, C Ini Ies > ' " lust ıs jou pleise lo see any incmbu of )oıu family would ifford me plcisuie, but my kind Aintlu I sli ill bi delighted ti stt onct igim' It will indeed suit in) convenience lo ictuin to town with all possible speed, as I Invi i> 3
business to ti ms ict ıt seveni pliccs, which nullit not to bc postponed, though I consideied it my duty, ш I, loi once, inclininoti, wis nothing U vu imee with tltitv, to m ike neiy thing give vviy to nv mit Unnte to ippiu bi (me my kmd luciul Su («eoi^i ILuktsni ' ' \\ ill, thtn, w ith j ir moie ido, wt ut uf İhı bustle ot tlie tıpıtıl will, I know be mou ı„ıc ible to jou th in the uni secties ol tlie eoııııtıv, whuh we ill 1 utenti to ulnıııe, but ioi thtgipilei poition ot oui tune, tike txcellentme Io noul lhe ıeıl enjojmentof sylvin alı itles ıs confined to but few. Most ol those who keep ι lesidence in the coun¬ tiy, while it it, do ill that lies in then povvei to make theh lives as much as possible like whit they ue in London. Let me see — we aie not above twenty miles fiom St Albin's, and not more thin forty fiom the capıtıl A chaise- nul lom will at iny iate get us theie
bj tinte o'clock or so Allons, vvi'll pic scntlj see St 1'mi's " Veli usi md I nu wuesoon pioeured, mil Su Choi» md ( hartes pitsenlly found themselves ulv menig towuds London, it the ι iti of leu miles m hoin Ou the vv ıv, lu Geoıge i cem ι cd to the topic on winch he hul touched lhe piecceling night Ile exp ılı ited with muih sitisi ıctıon on the oııpoı tumties tint his visitai would shortly hive ot seemj; some of thc best foi tunes in the 1 modom, mel stiongly set forth the ad¬ vantages which must lesiiltto him fiom a matinnonial union with one of a list of ladies, whose mines he ı in ovcı Mi. Harley contended, that it w ıs folly for him to enti rtaın hopes like those winch the Baionet sought to excite Con¬ vinced that the mediocnty ot his cn- cumstances piesented an insuperable baníci to success, to aspne so high, it appealed to lum, vvould only be to court d 4
mortification, ind m ike himself gi Umt oiislj the subject oí lidíenle 'It is in v un " he s ud, " tint you vv ould eliconi ι ι me lo oflei myse!! to nv Inly ·! it y nti luv n η 1 II in ılıt Inst t uc , in y ti lion ml my pi aspects ι li hi ν ıı mv ı t vv 11 bc dis cr ni ed onci ind weie the с con tolled fo i umi smell v u (in iot but "с tint uh mı' İv I must b fejteted ıs ııı impostili ' "O vou не mist ilen Iheie ι ıııt such ι supei ıbııııdıııco of voung men ot vom peison and iddi ess is to mike join cise hopeless Youi pnents ne lespeetible m point of link }our connections, (unless I flitter myself,) not despic ible , and, upon the whole, if vom pietensions weie meisuied with those of halt ι dozen voung fellows that I hue seen с m у ой heiresses, I am sine tint yon would not be found w înting " " Youi benevolence makes you par¬ tial— I daie almost s iy bhnd, when you
attention ïests on me. That some dow- agei, oi ohi maid with а faded peison, and doubtful leputation, who begins to think she has been forgottén in heaven, wheic all m linages aie saul to be mall«, might be found icady to bestow heiself on a joung man of tolerable appeaiance, I can easily conceive : but such aie not foi me. No — wlieie tlie only choice is between wealth iinwoitiuly acquued, and honoui ible poveitj, I mike my elec¬ tion foi the lattei, and would soonei many the cottagei's dauglitti, with an agieeable peison and a geneious hcait, than th< sister ol an empcioi without them." "Theie jou go' When tins subject is mentioned, off jou fly like the hei о of a sentimental ìomance, antl at once as¬ sume that age, ugliness and vice, must fol¬ low in the tiam of wealth, while all then oppositcs aie to be found in tlie plump, pietty, pig-teedmg cottagei. Will no¬ thing suit jou but a chubby cheese- D S
eburnei, oı a Cmdeiilla with hei glass shppei ?" " I am not aware that I have avowed any such peculiarity oftaste , but—" " But youi head I hnd filled with ideas of lowly ueauty, and уош nu.id prepaied to admire the first comely wench that throws herself in yoni way, provided she is penny less " " Believe me, Sir, 1 could marry no woman, whose only ïecommendation was beauty, though, certainly, 1 should think of no one, who, to my eye, appeared ugly." "But you w ould presently decorate with all sorts of imigmaiy accomplish¬ ments and л u tues, а female with whose person you happened to be smitten. Bright eyes and losy theeks would soon make you oveilook all deficiencies Now do not suppose tliat I am the advocate of ugliness 01 of age I torn my heait I should despise you, if you were capable ot mairymg eithei, but, on the other
hind, 1 would not have you thmk too much of jouth uid beiutj lbe fiist must soon vmisli, mil the othei must sun cndei that diívlmg Insti e winch seems to piomise endless ecstacy A veij few months suffice to cm e the most passionate love the eye grows fimi- hai with the object that it wildly desired, and the uiby hp, on nhľ-'i the suitor fmcied he could dwell loi ever with out pause of clelyht, soon bicornes m object to be gized on with pei lect com¬ posuie by the husband " " I feel the couectnes ol join ie nniks, Su Geoige, but allow me osi), they do not dnectly bear on an) tliinj, th it Ins fallen fiom me The peushable cha racter of) outh and beauty, Ihave nol now to leai n, and I think that I hav e some idea of tue pei manent chai ms ot vv eaith All that I hive to uige in opposition to what you have advised, is founded en the ım¬ pı obabihtv, I had almost said the impossi D 6
bihty, of success, wheic success would administei to my h ippmess." " And why should you suppose this?" " Because the wealth} naturally look for alliances among then equals." " And do you think that none but the poor can diseovei, as you hive clone, that lnippmess, ıatlıeı than gold, constitutes thc real wealth of life ? Do you think the affluent so insatiate, that they must ever continue gasping for moi e ? Behev e me, none know bettei thin those of whom I speak, how insufficient ι icbes aie to bung the mind that content, without which, hfe is а buiden They cannot but be sensible, as I am, that the god of hap¬ piness is an eccentnc deity, and selects foi his temple, not the m.uble palace, the splendidly illuminated mosque, or the gilded saloon. These he otten passes with scoin the music which fills the supeibly decoiated dome suits not his cai , the voluptuous couch on which the loid of millions ie-
clines, cannot invite bun to ıepose, and the cosily viands spi e id on the table of luxuiy pall his appeille , and while all these aie spui ned as tulles be¬ neath his notice, the cloudless eye, smiling face and unconscious song, tlut are seen and heaid, wheie burnitici beings meet, confess his piesence beneath the lowly iool, in the manufactutei's woik- sbop, 01 on the ti enabling mast of the vçssel, which but feebly sustains an une¬ qual conflict with opposing winds and waves." " Why this is exactly my aigument! You now justify my indiff oı ence about nches, to the possession of winch you aie so anxious I should aspne." "No ; I would only piove that those who aie neh nuv have feelings so fai ìesemblnig join own, as to lemove those obstacles to youi advancement which you aie disposed to regaid as lnsupei. able." " Inteiest, my tletn Su Geoige, I
think you must admit geneially to be the i uling passion, till the last gasp of life ; and that the calculation 1 have made is coucct, I can haidly peisuade mysell you senously mean to deny." " Inteiest tei tainly is that whith all endeavoui to puisne, but inteiest vanes its chaiactei m the seveial stages of life. In my youngei days, it certainly appeal¬ ed to mc to bc my mteiest to acquile wealth, m m dei to piovide for a family that might be nimieious, but now haung succeeded in that object, and ascet tamed the extent of the claims which Natine сап make on ine , it is my mteiest to see that what I have, is well bestowed. Do you not believe the comfort ot my tu¬ tine life must depend on the happiness of my childien? Should you not think me insane, if I weie to attempt to force my lenummg daughtei into а marmge, m oıdeı to connect mysell with gicate-i opulence, legal diess of liei feelings? A misei able old age would be my lot, if I
weie capable of sacnficnig liei peace to my ambition ; — if, lm ing fi\ed hei afîec¬ tions on а woithy object, I could, with cold-blooded baibanty, içinse in} con. sent, because bet lovei was not neh. These aie my feelings, and certain I am, theie aie many men m eiieiuiistances not dissimilai to mine, wlio aie animated by the same sentiments." Cliailes made no lepl}. Ihe last speech of Su Geoige had made such an nnpiession on his nnnd, tliat Ins tongue Ioigot its office. When lie consideied the situation in wlueh lie then found himself, — the mannei in which Su Geoige had biought foiwaid this subject on the list night, — Ins aiiviotis ìecui- lenee to it so soon, — Ins impatience to present hnn to Ins daughtei, — all combined with the kind partiality ot the Baionet which had attended lum fiom Ins infancy, led him to tlunk that his geneious inend vvas well disposed to consider the object ol his bounty, his
nis futuie son-in-law. Such a conclusion vvas certainly not unnatuial. few J oung gentlemen ol good peison would have had much difficulty in coming to it nuclei ciicumstances like those m which Mi. Hai ley was placed. But, how¬ evei fiatteied bj this new maik of esteem, he was fai fiom denvmg unmixed plea¬ suie Iiom it. A few houis, he ι efleeted, might place lum in а situation that would be to lum most painful. That Amelia, whom lie had loved as a child, might, »is α woman, have no chaims loi hım, and, m that Ciise, it must become his duty to blast the loudly cheiished hopes ol his geneious fnend. But he was by no means certain, that the views ot Sn Geoige weie what he had supposed them tobe, 'lliough Ins woids and certain inci- dents seemed to beai out the idea which Cliailes had suddenly taken up, Ins man¬ nei, while uttenng what so paiticulaily .urested his attention, was certainly only that of a man, who, to support а general
pnnciple, supposis ι puticulii cisi, without inv expect ition 01 desne tint tt should be ipplied to limiseli, bejond the noment when lie used it in tlie couise ol his ncumint
С ПАР. V Auli NiliiiL-Mcii Ihc Imcli di il«, Uir iubii Ι «oik lu ılı ı> O, Iki pinuutliin hc imd onniin, Anil then ,1u. in uk the. |ь с О Iîun\< lııouGiiT s giowing o'it o( the supposed wish ol bu Geoige*, to set* hım .nul Aiutila not disagici' ıbic to each othei, occupied his mind so mueh, that, dunng the last stige of then jounicj', the comeisation between hım «ind the Baionet consisted but of desultoiy lemaiks on ihc pissing objects. The post-boy took Ins w iy down Higligate Hill, though directed to tuin off to the ι ight, and had accomplished so much of tlio descent btfoie Sn Geoige, who had become as thoughtful as his companion, peiceived what he was doing, that he thouglit it would be ciuel to nitìitt on thc boises (he had only been
ible to obtain two when lie changed at Buntt) the seveie toil tint would ittcnd the efloit of climbing the enoimous steep, such is it w ь loi tj j с us ago, by oı der¬ ing the fellow totuin iound. He theıe¬ foıe suliéi td himself tobe сан itd foiwaid tow nils tint i mieii stone on wluth Dick Wluttingtoii, aftci w uds Su Kith ml, mil tlnice Loul Mayoi of London, is siul to have ι esteti, till tlie bells of Bow-tluuch sa\ed the city, tint enjojs thtn music, fiom the eul with whith it wis then tin catened, — the loss of tint s.ige and upright magisti ite wlio siibsoquentlj pie- sided ovei its councils, and who at that eaily penod of his hfe gave earnest ot the sagacity by which hc was one day to be distinguished, in wisely tui mng about, on tianslatiug the ' ding dong' of the afoiesaid bells into Tuni v l| u. Wluttingtoii, Loid niijot ol London Passing tluougli Holloway, tliey *en-
teied lhe city fıonı Islington. While the vehicle made* its vv iv along llolboin, they eould nol but tem.uk that the sheets wcic unusually thioiigcd, and the chaise, as it advanced, was not initieqiiently impeded bv the multitude, while the post-boj wasuidelj commanded to wave his cap in the an, and join in the ciy of ' No Popci y.' Ignoiant of the cause of the singulai movement which had atliaeted tin u no¬ tice, Sn Geoitte, considenng it to be meiely the ι esuli ot some local upioai, expected, when he saw the boises turning down Clianceiy-l.ine, that it would im¬ mediately subside, 01 at least that he .and his companioni would soon ¡*et out of it. In this he was disappointed, as eveiy moment seemed to give new cneigy to the mob, and hundieds wcic now seen uuinnig towaids llect-stieet with »ill pos¬ sible speed. At the end of Chanceiy- lane thej weie detained a vciy considei¬ able time ; and heie a most extraoiihnai y
scene pi esenlet! itself tolheu obseivation. Many thousands ol peisons weie seen moving foi vv «ml, and not without some show ol αϊ ι aiigeiueiit, tow u ds 1 empie Bai . Then hats wcic dceoiated with blue ub· bons, and «in attempt had been made to foim them into divisions, at the head of which b.unieisof the same coloni weie cai ι ieel insci ibed ' No Popeiy,' and beanng also the name ot the distnct f ioni which those who followetl it hatl matched. Thev weie accomp lined by a lew sttag- ghng cqucsti i.uis, who claimed α nght to command, and aflected gicat anxiety to pieseiic the oıdeı of then match, »uul guud against tumult. One of these, mounted on α la/oi-backcd steed that was as bhnd as Cupid is supposed to be, and whose whole appeaiance was sueh as to nispiic pity loi the pool dogs, who in the next week, would have to peifonn thc haul task of tlevottutig the skin antl gustle that now assisted his tatteied »mtl
mangy hide to hold his bones togethei,ad¬ vanced to the chaise m which Sn Geo-ge and Chartes weie seated The aspect of the nilei was not a wlnt bettei thin that of Ins hoise, and il no gieatei diffeience existed between the Spaniaids who on¬ ginally invaded Mexico, and the animals they bestiocle, it was not the most as¬ tonishing thing m the woild, that the South Ameucaiis should suppose man and hoise to be but one cıcıtuıe. This important pei sonage mule his way to the ch use, aud peiceiving the gentlemen m it to be uneoveied, took fiom Ins head α thing which Steine would luve dcsciibed to hav e been ' once »ι bat,' and the ι with emphasis ind linguage tlut attainably htimoni/td with his hoise and appaici, begged " to assuie thein that they need not be undei 710 uneasiness, as In was deteimined to piesetve good 01 dei." He added " thc committee is resolved there shan't be any outiages. Wc don't
mean to do mischief but when our reli¬ gion is 111 dangei, d —11 me, something must be done." He seemed to giow wann with the subject ; and, it is piob ible that he might have afloided those hc addiessed some fin thei specimens of Ins eloquence, if a drover who hid just left bimthheld, (the pnncipal business of Finlaj, theniaiket- day, being ovei,) 111 01 tier to suppoit the lhottstuit establishment, had not con¬ sideied tlie oiatoi's nig pievented lum at that moment fıonı getting foi waul in the vvoild. Untier this impression, he applied his goad to tht haunches of Bu¬ cephalus with such vigoui, that thc pa¬ tı lot's collisti soon matle an exeition tint would have done honoui to his btttti dajs, and tossed his muster f 1 om his back with а spnng, which, at hist, seemed to give lum a chance of being Mined in tin Umpli, without the usual tenns, tlelajs, and ceieinoiues He, how- efci, happily pitched ou his head, aud
wis not m ilei nlly hurt, but the t ısk οι catching his boise, and ìesuming his seat on his bick, occupied him too much it tint moment, to illow lum to pioceed with the interesting lecture which he hid commenced Om triv ellei s, to whom wlnt they witnessed hid foi some time piesented an mcxphcible scene of bustle, began now to undeistand what wis, passing Thej lecollected having seen m the nevvspipeis, a fewdijs befoie, ι stung of lesohitioiis thtt had been tome to tt ι metting of peisons cilling themselves "the Piotestant Associ ition," inviting those who disappioved of the ι ehet which had then lecently been given bj in act of the Icgishtuit to the Ношш Cithohcs, to mett ou tint vtiy thy m St Gioige's Tields, neu the Kings Bench pusoi fhe binneis cai ued m piocession, md the cues igunst ' Popery,' which weie oci ision illy heaid, piovcd the mov ing spcct iele bcf oi e thein, to hiv с some
connection with the proceedings ol the meeting that hid been с died, .nd they soon leunt fıonı the postboy, who, com pelled to lemun stition ii}, hid engaged 111 conveisition with some of the crowd, that " the countless thousands passing w ere but a small p u t of ten divisions, which, wilh Loid Geoige Gonion at their head, weie then pioceeding to Saint James's Palace, to compel His Majesty to 01 de¬ lus mimsteis to ìepeal the act foi " to leiating Roman Catholics," to make peace with Amcnca, and pa} off the 111 tional debt " Hie absuulit} of tl is stoi}, and the elated counten nice of the fellow fiom whom they obtained it, pioduced tn m volmitny buist of hiuiţlitei fiom Sir Geoige and Mi Hailey, but the im mense ciowds which continued to block up the wíj, thej could not view without feelings of a moie senous character Vv lutever the object of the society fiom which they were supposed to emanale, vol 1 Ľ
might be, whatever the ostensible motu e for pai aduig the streets as they now did, and howevei distinguished for integrity then original leaders, it was impôs- sible not to entertain some apprehen¬ sion foi the consequences of putting so enormous a body of the people in motion, and connecting then operations with the politics of the day A thousand mad rumours were buzzed about eveiy mo ment, and one which announced the landing of General Washington at Dover with an army, to co-operate with Lord Geoige Gordon, was not the most extra¬ vagant Some, however, were anxious to have it believed, that the crowd who wore blue favours ш their hats w ere onlj on their way to Westminster, to pre sent a petition, which was stated to be carried on the head of a man, and the appearance of a drunken tailor, who was treated and huzzaed bv the mob, and who claimed, thougli falsely, the merit of having conti ibuted to the salvation of
his country, and thc support ol the Pio. testant faith, by stitching togethei the skins which foimed the petition, seemed to giv« some coloni to this ìepoi I The crowd at length began to diminish, and they passed without committing any serious outiage, and even with something like an au of decoium through Temple Bai liequent exclamations of 'No Popery,' aud 'Down with the Papists,' weie heard, but no extraoichnaiy vio¬ lence manifested itself generally, though one ìough looking fellow roared out, w hile he gazed on the upper part of thc city's bound iry — " In the good old tunes we used ilvvays to havt some Pa¬ pists' heads up theie, on poles, — we'll have some moie soon " This was but a piece of insulated fien/y, and wholly failed of gaining tlut applauding Jiout, which the speaker evidently expected would be its rewaid, fiom those neai lum At dialing cross the numbers of the e 2
crowd receıv ed an immense addition, and seveial coaches, the hoi ses of which weie decoiated with blue ribbons, now foi med a part of the piocession, which took its way towirds thc Houses of Parliament The post-boy, who had fiequently filled up his leisuie time, by shouting in the good cause, felt his ardour somewhat suddenly cooled, by a small sample of mud, foi wai ded foi his approbation, which accommodated his face with a mask, and almost extinguished one ej e This honour was tonfei red on him in consequence of his not having found the means of spoiling the distinguishing oi¬ nament which was to indicate its wearer to be no fnend to popeij That one so friendly to the Piotestant ascendancy as himself, should experience such tieat- ìnent, evidently hurt his feelings, and satisfied him that some malignant Papist had found his way among the good peo¬ ple , and, as he considered Ins religious ?eal, in attiacting the notice of the evil-
disposed, had been the cause of his get¬ ting made а muddy martyr to his fútil, he wisely resolved to hold his peace foi the present, and, if possible to elude ob¬ servation. A full stop neai the stilne of Kmg Chartes was unavoidable, »md the im¬ mense ciowd which, descending from the Haymarket, pressed on to Westmmstej, and seemed intei minable, made Sn Geoige almost despau of completing his journey in the chaise. He would have left it, and proceeded to Ailington Stieet on foot, but he foi esavv that equal il not superior difficulties would still impede his progi ess ; and, upon tbe whole, it seemetl most advisable to ıemaın in the cai- l ıage, though certain missiles, which vvcı e at intervals pouied m at the windows, made him more than once call in ques¬ tion the wisdom of this decision. With difficulty they made then waj into Pali-Mall, and thence, with compaıatıve ease, proceeded to then destination, and е 8
ılıghteıl, well pleased to have seen at last the tei mination of their journey 'Ihey weie soon mfoimed that Loid Dashington was fiom home. He was to luve dined with tht Eul of Hillsborough, and pioposed going to the House befoie he .etui ned 1 uly Disillusion ι eeeived them with much coi ch ılıty, and the com¬ pliments winch Su Geoige filled nol to bestow on his young companion, when intiodueing lum lohei Ladyship, pıoved lhat he lud Ins vveliaie sincerely at heart, and, (is Chartes eould not but suspect,) tint he consideied himself to have.in in¬ teiest in his fiitme fortunes Sil Geoige lud sc u cely enquired »afiei the health of his beloved child, and been sitished that she vv is well, when the dooi opened and Amelii enteied. She em¬ biaced hei falhei, ınd, in her joy at seeti'g hnn thus unexpectedly, did not perceive that he h id a companion. " What," sml the Buonet, hiving ıe¬ ceıved the tubute ol hci aftection, " does
my Ameba turn her back on an old fnend who has been biavmg the winds and the waves these nine ye us, that she ind her father might ıepose in undisturbed tianquilhty -it home !" Amelia blushed w ith surprise In the hrst moment of her peiceiving Mi. Hai¬ ley, she expected tint hei fathei was about to introduce some gentleman whom she had nevei seen before. His w ords now directed her to a scrutiny of the coun¬ tenance of Charles Hei embanassment was of short duration, and she icknovv- ledged, with unaffected delight, the gay companion of her infancy. Charles, on his part, was equally stiuck. Had she appeired befoie him undei other circumstances, assuredly he would hav e had no suspicion that he had evei seen her befoie — much less would he have surmised that foi jeais she had been his constant companion, — m all, but μι name, his sistei. Since he had left Woburn to become a sailor, she had E i
moie thin doubled hei yeais. When In- last beheld her, she was а pietty child ol little moie than eight years of age, she was now a blooming gn! of seventeen. Hei fine open counten nice wis embel¬ lished with the glow of losy health, and the contented timqiullity ol innocence. Hei daik blown ban gave atlihtion.il value to a complexion iemaik.ibly fan , and, beneath two nmjestically aicheel blows, a pan ol pieicmg eyes, in which the hie of intellect was seen sweetly tempei cd by an expiession of benevo¬ lence, darted then rays with ι lasein ıtıng ıadidnce that few could enduie without emotion. Hei nose seemed to be the oftspung of a conipionnse between the GieciaiLind llonim models ol beiuty, in which the foimei had gained the ι cend- ancy, though the elamı ot the lattei was not wholly disiegaided, and hoi coiai lips only seveied to ieve.il teeth ol ex¬ quisite whiteness and legulanty. 'Ihese chai ms, combined and connected vv ith a
figure of surpassing elegance, lefl ima¬ gination nothing to ìequiie moidei to fonn α peifect picture of female love¬ hness. This, at least, was the impicssion on Hailey, when the daughter of his fnend and benehictoi stood before lum. The appiehension that had filled his bosom, as he journeyed towaids London with Su George, was consideiably diminished alieady, for he felt that if hei mmd was at all to be compaied with hei peison, Amelia Henderson was, in herself, ι tieasure that no man on earth could view with coldness, 01 indeed see but foi α moment, without burning to possess. At dinner a rational liveliness distin¬ guished her conveisation, while common¬ place topics weie its subject, but when hei memory was dnected to the penod at which Chartes had îesided undei the same roof, joy at seeing him again, and the winning sensibility with whicli she touched on the recollected pleasuies of E 5
infancy, gave her mannei md hci Ian guige additional interest When the popular assembhge seen by Sir Geoige and his companion were mentioned, she evinced α geneious apprehension, lest the infatuated multitude should be be trayed into some outnge, and when then designs, exiggented tnd iggravited is they were by repoit, vvere mentioned, though her good sense ι efused credence to the whole, she manifested а bene volent alum lest ι put of the evil designs imputed should cv с ntually prov e to belong to them, md a ıeal inxiety for the welf ue of hei fellow creatines, cnibled hei to expiess her thoughts, liei hopes, md feus with eloquence antl force, md lifted her ibove tint avv kw ird embairassmentwluch sometimes depi esses the femile elm ictei, though it is not unfiequenllj afltcteil, in oıdeı to ι ise it in the estimation of the loids of the creation Of *he part tl at Clinics icted in this
scene, but little need be said. He felt too much emotion at finding himself des¬ tined, as he supposed, at no very distant period, to become the husband of one so amiable, or, if it weie allowable to use the expression vvhieh to lum seemed most appropriate, we should say divine, that he did not laigely participate in the con¬ veisation any more than in the festivity of the table. He merely supplied α lew of its connecting links, and gieedily seized the opportunities afloided him by the lengthened st itements of bir George, to give up his whole soul to lapturous contemplation. " Well, do you thmk Amelia nnpioved since you last beheld her '" said Sn George, during the ibsenee of the ladies iftei dinnei " She was a lovely child when I left you, Su Geoige, and I never doubted that she would become a most fascinating woman, but, highly as I always thought e G
of hei, I could not believe it possible that she would evei be what she is." " I am glad y ou think that she has some ittraction, but I flattei myself that she has accomplishments to display that y ou hive not yet been able to diseovei, wlueh .it least equal, antl, in my judgment, sm - piss, what has called forth youi pıaıse. In the evening you shall beai hei on the piano, and I think she will piove heiself no contemptible musician , and foi her voice — but I will siy nothing. Talheis aie fools. Aflection invades all then senses depi iv es them of sight, perverts then heaung, and annihilates their jiuls? ment." " In some cases this may be tine, but you are not a man to be so ovei¬ come." " That is moie than I can ansvvei foi. Sometimes 1 visit »ι friend, who always makes Ins daughter favoni me with a song, and the girt theieupon sets
up such a diabolical screech, that, com¬ paied with it, the sounds produced by the shaipenmg of a saw, indifleientlj fixed m the Jiggling apparatus of the pool cieituies who occasionally exhibit be¬ loie the shops of the London buteliei s, ıs hai mony divine. Yet tins abominable discord he has the face to call music. Hie diawings of the same lady aie next biought foiwaid; and some wretchedly coaise caricatures ot the Evangelists aie extolled as hne , though, could the pool saints know what hgui es of fun she makes of them, they would be justified in consi¬ dering it л continuation of then maıtyı- dom, and to ci own the whole he nevei fails to worry me with а labouied eulogium on liei giowing beauty, though she has a snub-nose and a hare-lip. Knowing this to be no veiy uncommon instance ol parental blindness, I am sometimes afıaıd of acting a similar part. To me the peison, manners, voice, and yet moie
than all, the heart of my Amelia appeal so much what I could wish them to be, that I feai nothing but the jnfiimity, which I have so often noticed, and hughed at in otheis, can iccount foi the unaJloy ed sitisfaction that I feel " " So fai as I can judge," said Charles, " bei pei fection, and not your infirmity, is the cause of youi hippmess " " I hope it is so A father cannot beai his child admn ed, without feeling pleasure — Tlo g/ Vane can tell vhat ills from beauty spring And Sedley cur í ti e forra ti at pica, d a å ng yet I cmnot but pi ize her moie than I think I should otherwise do, fiom the homage tint is paid to bei charms Worthily to bestow these on some one who deseives to enjoy them, who, de spising the effeminite and degiaehng pleisures of what is cilled fislnonable life, has devoted himself in some way to promote tbe glory of his country, or to
mmistei to the happiness of mmkind, is now the gieat object which demands my care on tins side the grave. Such a man, I tiust, will ere long declaie himself the lovei of Amelia ; and 1 think I can ansvvei for it thai the pei ν erse objections and chuihsh piudence which some fatheis interpose, inflicting ical miseiy to avert nnaginaiy evil, will not be expenenced wheie I am concerned. But finish youi glass, we must not wait foi anothei summons. The ladies expect us at the tea table." Challes bowed and lose to accompiny Su Geoige To lnm theie appeued in the speech just made a distinct intiinition, that he might ispne to the hmd of Amelia without diead of a lepulse fiom hei fathei, if he should be so fortunate as to win the affections of the joung lady heiself. A sensation ol delightful hope swelled his heirt, and gave lnm piesent h ippmess as an earnest of futuie
bliss. His exultation, like the long sti canı ot bin nished gold which the smiling sun leaves to the leluct.intlj deserted hon/on, seemed the ıecoıd ot one bnght day, »mil the piomise of anothei still moie supei b.
ОПАР. VI. Are tliLsc tlie fruits o' tli' protestation, 11 с prototype ol reformation, VVhith nil the saluts, and sonic since martyrs Wore in then 1 nts like wcddiuc, cartels -* Did they loi this d iw down tlic rabble W uli »c il and noises formidable J Ikricn In thc evening veiy unpleasmt intelli¬ gence was biought to Lady Dashington. The crowds that had paiaded the stieets thiough the day, weie stated to have attempted to ioice then way into the two houses of paihament, and several membeis of the Louis, as well as ol the Commons' house, had been severely dealt with lhe Lari of Ilillsboiougb's μι¬ ι ìage h id been attacked, and it w as said that he himself had been sicnhced to the fiuy of the mob; but α subsequent ıtpoıt stated hnn to have escaped un-
hurt in consequence of then hiving mistaken inotliei peci, who iccompamed him, for the noble Secietaiy of St ite L idy Dashington wis ilaimctl it this news asshe consideied it piob ible that LoidDasluiigton might have iccompamed the noble eul to the House Sn George ind Chilles endeivouied to ilhy her une isiness, bj reminding her of the wild v aneties of fiction, which, in the eailj pirt ol the daj, were inilustuously circulated While they weie thus employed, inforni ation arrived of a moie consoling cha ractei Loid Townshend, it appened, wis the nobleman who went with the bail of Hillsborough to the House, ind both hid csciped without material injuiy. But still, as nothing was .«aid about Lord Dashington, the uneasiness previously excited ıhıl not wholly subside Sn George stoutly insisted upon it, that at such a time no news was good news, and in oıdeı to beguile her of α few restless moments, though it ought in fairness to
be slated, that this, mall piobibihty, was not bis sole niotuc, he desired Amelia to enliven them with a song. Kager to endeavoui, by any means ш het powei, to rcbc\o the anxiety or anothei, Miss Henderson requned little solicitation to comply with the Baionet's ìequest. bhe piomptly took her seat at the instrument, and warbled a little ditty which bad come out but the day befoie. THE SUN and 1ÏIE DEW rhe Sun, Ггощ lus tlmnot of yo\ 1, saw the Леи/, «ntum'ii by tlic fmt glenin of orient tJ ty, In splendour lit buist on the lowly ont ь view, Who, truublmj, reflected his curliest rnj 1 ľair Dew ■"* hc exclaimed, " 'tie with gHef and s îrpnse, On j on rugge 1 bramble such brightness I ьее , Ο ι ascend to the place jou bliould fill in tht skies — Hustr, dearest ' tome shine liere with int ' finrprisM mduhiniM Midi n lo\er to meet, All-bliisliin^iJeiíí Bİırımk,his regards while she hurt But felt, in htr soft trembling bosom, n he \t She never Imd f\ıı nvn till tlmt moment, before And listening now to thc temptu's labe tongue, Inhaled tin, «wcet poison, and soon, piss on toss d, 1 rom the huinblt, but fostering bramble she sprung,— J hut moment for evil wat. lost
Thui oft soriini 11 talih, the poor coltnger'b charm« Pcrimttt-it by bomc futat chance to liehold, Lures tin. fair to abandon n parent's fond arms, For gieutncss and rauh, faUch proner'd nnd gold, And dazzled hy these, if unguarded tlie maid The heartless deluder with favour shall view,— Destroy *d ull her peace, to shninc meanly betrni d, bhe fades, like thc vanishing /»fm To the impassioned eye of Hailey, the keys of the instrument seemed to bound with unwonted elasticity, beneath the delicate fingers that piessed them, as it they loved the hand that taught ťiem to vibiate to harmony. He adunici! her musical skill ; j ct the exquisite accompa¬ niment which she produced he could not but lepiove, fordanng to intrude on a voice, which, in sweetness and vanety, so greatly surpassed all that its boldest asptnngs, and most felicitous inflections, could accomplish The unfeigned tubute of admuation, which spontaneously burst fiom the lips of Charles, was unaffectedly viewed by the joung lady as an effort of politeness, on his part, which the occasion did not
wairant, but Sır Geoige could not con- ceil the satishiction he felt, at finding tliat the opinion of Mr Hailey corresponded so exactly with his own The delight which he experienced would have been without »illoy, had not the growing un- eisiness of L uly Dashington demanded his attention, and forbid him to expiess anv thing like joy, — any thing that should speak his heart at ease, while heis was the seat of excruciating anxiety. News hid arrived that the House was up it nine o'clock, yet, contrary to his usual piactice, his Lordship was still absent fi om home At such a moment, Lady D lslungton concluded that he would hav e lost no time in histening to allay those ap¬ pi ehensıons which the tumults of the day weie so well calculated to excite, and the most dismal thoughts agitated her bosom Charles endeavoured to satisfy hei Ladyship, that a vai ıety of causes might have detained her lord at such a time, 6
be* ond his usual houi. Had any trifling .trident happened to hun, the probability was, that it would have been exaggerated by ι umom till it assumed the* shape ol the most f uglitful calamity. As nothing of the kind had been ι eporled, the safety of Lord Dashington, he was of opinion, might be ìcgaided as completely ascer¬ tained. " But wheie can he stay?" said her Ladj ship. " He would call no wheie but at------" and heie she iau over a list of ι dozen places, which were the only ones at vvhith he vvould be likely to ni.ike any staj . Chartes btgged that he might be pei- mitted to make enquiries wheie his Lordship might be expected to be found, and suggested the expediency of dis- pitching the seivauls to otheis without delaj. This proposition met with a most gia¬ cious reception , but her Ladyship had only time tp express her gratitude for his
olici, when a cainage diew up at the dooi, and the cntiance of Loid Dashing¬ ton dismissed the appiehensions which had pieviously pievailed, and terminated the conveisation. His Lordship, on coming into the apartment, seemed to have been a little uiflled, anda laige patch ol mud ovei his stai, attested the violence of the mob hatl not spared Inm. The gi eetmgs be- tween him and Sir George were bnef, and the introduction of Chartes to his Lordship followed of couise, but the impatience of all pi esent to heai what lie had seen of the noters, pievented those protracted civilities from being exchang¬ ed, which might have been looked for under other ciicumstances. He was about to commence lus îecital, when Mr. Spanker was announced , and immedi¬ ately aftei, that gentleman nished in with the eagerness of α sportsman when the game is just started. " Ah · my dear Dashington ' I'm so
glad to see j ou salu ' — I beg j mu Ladj - ship's pardon. — I hope I ha\ с the plea- suie of seeing you wtll. — I need not enquue of Miss Hendcison how she is, as she cai nes а cci tifíente of health in liei face. — «Sir Geoige, I am glad to see jou m town. — bir, youi sei vant." Challes bowed, aud looked at Mi «Spanker with the most eager attention, nevei doubting, fiom his hiuritd and unceiemonious mannei, that hew«is tht beaier of some information connected with the extiaoidmaiy pioceechngs of the daj', that made him forget the de¬ cai um usually obseived m such societj. " I am veiy glad to sec you ι etui ned," continued Mr, «Spanker; "for when I heai d they w ere gone to attack the Loi ils, I was afıaıd you would have stood but a queer chance. Г01 mj own part, as good raen giow scalee, I took caie not to go to the Commons to d.iy, though, as I am an the right side of the question, the mob would have dealt more lementlj
with me, than jou, who vote with mini ters, eould expect tlicm to do bj vou Pray, hovv did jou get on in join House P I have not hcud the putitili us " " His Loidslup was just iboui to f tvoii us with i ıtpoıt of what had f illen undu lus observation," s ud Sır George, "v hen you cime in We are ill impitieiil to hear" — " And -.0 im I I was extrcmelv afraid the mob would have roughly h ind¬ led my Loid , so I run down, (though I hardly expected to hnd him to night ) to show him the pi in ofour new race couise, which I have just got completed " With these woids, he unfolded ι roll of paper — " Here, my Lord, you w ill see the improvements marked in red Su George, you knot» the ground — I his is the old starting post " " Can you not favour us with a sight of it in the morning? At this moment I am afraid it will not be m our power io do justice to its merits " vol i ŕ
" О, it's so plam, a child might under¬ stand it' Will youi Loi dship look? This Is the old one-mile course." " Really" said lus Loi dship " 1 parti¬ cipate m the apprehension expiessed by Sn George, that we shall not be able to do justice to your improvements to night " " Besides," added Sir George, " the ladies, who perhaps have not paid suffi¬ cient attention to these things, are eager to hear the relation with which his Lord¬ ship was about to fivoui us." " So am I, I came on purpose But I knew Dashington would not easily have pardoned me, if I had not kept my pro¬ mise, by giving lnm the first sight of the plan Here you see was the one-mile couise. Just here, there used to be a hollow ; and here was a pond, where a poor old woman who sold gingerbiead- nuts, was once pushed in, basket and all, and almost drowned befoie any body could contrive to get her out." While speaking thus, he passed, his fin··
gei over the paper to indicate the seveial objects that he had mentioned Anxious to hear Loid Dislnngton those to whom he addressed himself would not just then h ive been veiy much concerned, if Mr Spanker and his plan had taken the place of the gmgerbieid nut woman and her basket, but he, mounted on his hobby, serenely proceeded " Now, this pond I have filled up, and the course just here I have raised five feet, from those three dots to this cross, that is, neaily half a quarter of amile, and it not much more thin two thirds of the expence the club calculated upon, so I think I have managed veiy well " Here he looked at Miss Henderson for applause, and received as such, a smile which ι something not far removed from deusion caused to bieak through the disappointment, of which he was the cause " It is certainly a great improvement The business could not have been en- p t
trusted to a peison more competent to superintend such works. Now will your Lordship favour us ?" While Sir George spoke thus, Mr Spanker was busy marking on the proof of the plan some corrections which he wished to have made. " Here," said he, just as Loid Dashing. ton was beginning to speak, " your Lord¬ ship knows, stood a wind-mill. Its sails, you know, once made Brunswick take fright, and threw Jack Tibbs over this rail I've taken the mill from here, and earned it up to this corner. In this nook I have built a snug little house for the clerk of the course " — " But, Mr. Spanker," said Sir George " I am sure you will excuse me, when I remind you that the ladies aie impatient to hear how his Loi dship sped to day." " To be sure they aie , so are we all I was only just going to show you what a bend I've got out of the course." " Now will your Lordship have the goodness to pioceed," said Sir George,
With some appeaiance of nutation, and in a louder voice than he had previously used. " Perhaps Mr. Spanker had better finish." " O, no, by no means. 1 was only going to show what a bend used to be heio, and how I have managed «— " " We are all attention, my Loid." bu George mteirupted, and Mi. Spanker, checked in the midst of his new heat by the peremptoiy tone of the Baronet, was silent. "I dmed," said Lord Dashington, " with the Eail of Hillsborough, but went to the House befoie him, and passed at that time unmolested through the ciowd. The Duke of Richmond rose to bring on his motion that has been talked of so long, about annual parlia¬ ments. He was just growing warm with the subject, and preparing to piess on the House a wild scheme for giving everv man in the nation a vote for the election f 3
of a lepiesentative m the other House, when he was mtenupted by Loul Mont- foul. This opposition, as be considered it, nettled lnm very much. Tt was not that he cared а pm about lbe question, but thc disloc ition of his eloquence on such an occasion, was more th.ui he could beai He m consequence appealed to 1 oid Mansfield, who sat on the woolsack, (the I ord Chaucelloi j ou know is ìndisr posed, and at Tunbndge Wells,) if he were not in cider, when, befoie any an¬ swer could be given to the appeal, Lorrl Montford begged his pardon, declai ed that he had not opposed him for being out of ordei, but had usen to mf oi m then Loid¬ ships that Loid Boston was m the hands of the mob, bad betn diagged out of Ins I'.iui.igc, and was at that moment exposed to the most sei ıous pei il. Tins produced a strong sensation in the House ; the usual founs weie forgotten, and an ınegulaı conversation on the subject took place, in which all agieed that something ought to be done, but no one coulil determine
what. Lord Townshend proposed, that a party should be formed to rescue him, and offered himself for one. Several other peers, myself' among them, oflered to ac¬ company him, when the Duke of' llich- mond thought proper to say that he would be of the party ; but added, evidently witb a view of' frustrating the plan, that if' we went as a House, the mace must be carried before us, and the noble Lord on the woolsack ought to put himself'in thc front of the battle, by marching first." " Ha! ha! ha! that was a good one," «xclaimed Mr. Spanker, laughing heart¬ ily. " Don't you think that was a pretty good rub on old Mansfield, Sir George? — Don't you, Sir ?" he added, looking at Charles. '' To me it appears to have been a piece of ill-time'diroiiy;", * " And," observed Sir George, " such is the view that I take of it« There was sometliing unfeeling, if not malignant in it. But what was the result ?" F 4
" Just what might be expected " " Aye," said Mi. Spanker, « the mob did what they pleased with my Lord Boston, and jou did nothing." " Ihanks to the inteifeieiice of his (ji ice, such was indeed the f ict. Lord Mansneld said lhat he was ıeady to go, it then loidships thought it piopei , but the (ollj of ittemptmg to awe ι despei ile body of noteis in the veiy ict of out- i u,e by displiv mg the mace, stiuck every one, and the pi esence of the »iged and infuni I out Mansfield at oui beid, might h ive conti ibuted to gratify the vengeance of the mob, but could rot have fiv ош esl the ieşene ol Loid Boston " Mı Spankei lephed, "tint it was a pity the expenment had not been made He undeistood that the nibble had had one pull at the Loid ( hief Justice's wig, on Ins way down to the House, and did not doubt bul they would have lejoiced at being treated with an opportumtj of having another as he went home "
" 1 ventured to insinuate that the pre¬ sence of the noble Lord on the Woolsack would not greatly furthei the object in view. The Duke was disposed to start α question on the ancient usages of Paiha¬ ment, upon which I said, " I think, my Lord Duke, it would be well for us to procuie tbe assistance of Loid Boston at this discussion," and, with these w oids, advanced with Lord Townshend and se¬ veral othei peers towaids the door, when Loid Boston met us, covered with pow- dei, and Ins hau and diess altogether in the greatest possible disorder. Such a scene as the House now piesented J nevei witnessed in my life. Hillsbo¬ rough — Stormont — Bathurst — Abei- deen — Denbigh — Cholmondeley — N01 thumberland, »md some others that I cannot lecollect — O' — Loid Towns¬ hend and the Archbishop of York vvere among them, — had all been assailed as well as Loid Boston, and otheis, moie foi tunate, who had only been pelted with r δ
mud, exhibited the stiangest contiast to then gener.il appeaiance that imagin¬ ation can conceive. Each had some statement to make, all spoke at once, and the gieatest eflorts Loul Mansfield could make to pieserve, 01 iather to re- gam ordei, were of no avail Some called foi an adjournment—-otheis de¬ manded that the guaids should be sent toi to protect the House, while many complained that the magisti ates, who had not interfeied to dispeise the noters, de¬ setved all the blame, and ought on the instant to be biought to the bai, ìepii- manded foi then negligence, and ш dei ed to lake eflictent meisiues to lestoiethe public peace Duung the whole sitting, thc scene was the most e-stiaordmaiy and disoideily that can be imagined. While the Duke of Richmond was speak¬ ing, aloud muuiuu fiequently rm round the House, in consequence of some new intelligence being ıeceıved of the pro¬ ceedings out of doors, and these weie
followed by a loud cheer at the unusual appeaiance of some membei, who, with dishevelled hau, torn clothes, and be¬ spattered face, gave additional evidence of the violence of the mob The Duke was so wrapped up in his own import ance, thai for a time the disturbance which pievailed, and even the mten up tions he expenenced, seemed to flattei Ins vanity, and he, no doubt, consideied that the nothings he was uttering had made а prodigious impression on lus an* chtory When, at last, he was acquainted with the real slate of the case, he declined going on, and of couise will cluni the nght of inflicting the whole speech on some futuie day " " And did any further pioceedings relative to the uots take [dace befoie their lordships separated ? ' enquired Sir George " Hillsborough and Ravenswoith had some altei cation The httei seemed to doubt that the magistrates had received f 6
an intimation that, in consequence- of Loid Geoige's advertisement, it was then duty to guard against any excesses into winch the mob expected to assem¬ ble might be betiayed, and he very pai¬ ticulaily enqmied n lien such intimation hid been given. Hillsboiough had lmrdlj recovered fiom the irritation caused by the ι ough tie.itmcnt lie had expenenced from the rabble, and was, as it appeared to me, foolishly peevish. He ìeplied, ' Yesterdaj,' and saicastically added, he w ould, if it wei e desired, ■ endeavour to isceitam, loi his (Rivcnswoith's) satis faction, llie picase hour mil minute at n Inch the coiiimumctttinii to winch hc had iclencd was made ' Opon this, Lord Hai ensw orth took it into Ins head to be v ery gi iv e, and he solemnly announced that ' hc had almost done with hours and minutes ' He iheu pioceeded to lecture imnisteis on then misconduct. The noise outside, which h td long before re sounded through thc House, now became
loudei than ever, and, foi my own part, 1 really began to expect an attack. The tumult was tremendous when the lobby ot the Commons was cleaı ed, and I ex- pected those who weie baffled theie would console themselves by pay ing us α visit Wugbt, one of thc m.igistiates, was biought befoie the House, and de¬ nied having ıeceıved any instructions from ministers foi the reguhıtıon of his conduct. lie was dismissed, as was Sir Fiancis Moljneuv, who came with him, and both weie dnected to dispeise the noteis Lvcıy one then began to think how he could best take cue of himself Iheie weie not above six left in the House, when I judged u expedient to aet on this saving pnnciple, and took my departure. I came aw ,\y in mj cai - ruge , but, not being leeognised, escap¬ ed with a few missiles being tin own at me" " 'Ihe Duke of Northumberland," said Mr «Spankei, "wa»not let otl so easilj on
his way to the House. Youi Lordship, pei¬ haps, has heaid that a gentleman with lnm was pıonounced to be a Jesuit Both weie dragged fıonı the cainage, the ciy of ' Hoot out Popeiy,' w»is ıaısed on all sides, and, as one step towaids it, some of these hopeful Protestants, made shift to root his Gi.ace's watch out of his fob." " 'Hie Aichbishop of Yoik, too, fell into then hands. His lawn sleeves vveı e toi n and pıonounced to he ' Komisii rags.' This was an expression used by a fanatic in fonner days to insult one of the Ьь shops. It seems thai they aie disposed to act upon ptecedent, and I have been told that once m the afternoon, the well-known levolutionaiy cry of 'To youi tents, oh Israel '' was general among the mob, as if to indicate а resolution to copy the conduct of the desperadoes of Cı omu ell." "But," ìeturned Mr. Spankei, "did youi Loidslup hear how they pursued the Bishop of Lincoln. He was in great
danger, when Atkinson, the attornej', made shift toget hım into his house. The populace, Jiowevei, were so bent on his destruction, that they broke m, and if the lawjei had not provided the Bishop with an alibi, by sending hun out again, in disguise, and over the tops of the neighbouring houses, they would certunlj h.ive_torn him to pieces. Sandwich, too, was in great danger. I saw him attacked. The mob swore that thej would < do foi him,' and really I thought he vvould never have occasion for another Miss Hay. Had not his coachman used the whip just at the moment, — tinned the horses in the midst of the crowd, and foi ced the ıabble that were nearest the cainage, to tike to their heels, it would have been mipos sible foi him to escape with life. Tht Jehu, however, acted Ins part famously well, and so did thc hoi ses then s, and coined lnm back to the Idmualry in triumph. By-the bye, I nevei saw finei going horses in my hie. Ihey carried
inni back, I am persuaded, at the rate ot a mile in two minutes and a half; or theieabouts. 1 hat's immense, you know, (I don't say they could keep it up,) with α cil nage »mil footman. It's ν ery well without any thing of the kind. At least, so we think on oui îace-course, which is now as good ι one as any m the king¬ dom. For my part, I ilon't believe а word about Ľchpse having done a mile m α inmuto, l'o be sme, they tion't take upon themselv e i to say that it was done ti om the stai ting-post, and it makes all tbe diffeience m the vvoild between the fust set ofi of α hoi se, »ind Ins being at his speed. W hen at Ins speed tbey do pielend tint he got over а nule of the heat m a minute, but I vvould not be¬ lieve it unless I saw it with my own ejes, would you, Su Geoige»" " Piobably I might, it it weie attested by Mi Spankei." " lhank yc, Sn Geoige, but if it could be done at all, it might be done on Did-
diem ıace course, as it has lately been laid out undei my duet tions If you just nispeti this pi in, jou will see the old »tin upt tin n ıs done »ıvv iy, and a fine magnificent sweep thrown in, that will give cv eiy one »i capit il view of the racéis, and enable those who stand immediately opposite, to see exactly the sıtu.ıtıon ot the horses, and bet with precision " "lhat is of gieat importance," sani Sır George, and without dugning to look at the plan or the speakei, he enquired of Lord Dashington, "how the mob had conducted themselves towards the House of Commons " " О ' they are toleiably impartial. We weie favoured as much as they were Then lobby, however, was so ciovvded, th it, till the magistrates and constables had been haul at woik foi half an houi, they could not divide on Loid Geoige's motion He himself went out from tune to time, and was well disposed to favour the wildest schemes of the
ruffians ¡it his heels, but I ini tolti that his ardoui soon abated, when his iclition Colonel Gordon gave him to understand, in no very delicate linguage, that the instant а rioter enteied tint house, his sword should pass through Loul Geoige's body Colonel Hei bel t i epi oved hım foi wealing the fivoui which was the distinguishing mark ot the noteis, and threatened if he did not ι emove it, to tear it from lnm lumself. His Lordship after this thought it prudent to let his friends take it away. Geneial Conway jspoke shai ply to lum, but something more than words will bò found neces- ary to bring lnm to his senses. For his rabble, by this lime, I hope that they are dispersed, and pioper ineasuies will be taken by Government, to guaid against a repetition of the scenes of this day." The extieme anxiety which all piesent, save one, had felt to be informed of what the noteis had done, or attempted todo, was now so fai satisfied, that Mi. Spankei
at last found an opportunity of enlarging on the prodigiousimpiovements which he had efleeted on the Diddlem ïace-couise , an undertaking which to Inni appeal ed of moie importance to mankind, than any measuie that could lie deviseli to check thepiogiess of insuucction, and cnsuie public tianquilhty. Hc expatiated foi a long time on prize-cups — competent um¬ pires—handicap stakes— hoi ses at speed, and good jockeyship, till the lateness of the hour made it necessaiy for him to drop the pleasing theme, and he de¬ parted, happy ш the conviction that the admuation of the company was only di¬ vided between lnm and his improved îace- course, and satisfied that, m attending tp this important concern at such a tune, he had deserved the gi atitude of his country, and perfoımed lus duty as a member of Parliament. But though such were the pleasing ideas which elevated his spints on his taking leave, it happened to lum, as it
sometimes docs to others, tlut the im¬ pression nude on those he had desired to enlighten, was not exactly that which hc intended to nuke. His character, and the value ol his race-course improve¬ ments, wei e bı icily sunnicil up by Loi d Dashington and Sir Geoige, in the two expiessivc words "ndiculous" antl " ab¬ surd." His Lordship even thought it necessaiy to account foi Mr. Spankei's being on such an intimate footing with his family, by lemaikmg that Ins follies would be intoleiable if he weie not a man of veiy huge fortune and gieat in¬ fluence, who might one day be brought over. Chilles thought it stiange, that, on this account, such а being should be sufieied to infest the house of а noble¬ man , foi he was so lamentably deficient m worldly knowledge, that he had no con¬ ception ot the case with which wealth and influence can cairy then possessor to the table of the fiist peei of the realm.
CHAP. VII. For wlio woiiM leave unbrilicd Hibemin'» lund, Or change tlio rocks of Scotland for tlit Strand « There none are swept by atuldiu fate away. But all whom liunger snares with age decay Here malice, rapine, accident, consnirc. Anil now α гаШс ragea, now α »tre That Charles passed a dehciously restless night, the 1 eader will be prcpaied to ex¬ pect, and may perhaps hardly do justice to his [sensibility, when tolti that he en¬ joyed a good 'vulgat sound sleep.' For the last two or three days, he h id bad so little leisure foı ıepose, that Nature, like an often-disappointed creditor, now refused to be put off any longei, and insisted on having hei debt of slumber paid in full. Yet, ere he went to rest, he could not but reflect, that, aftei all he had heanl and seen that day, extraordinary as the
limges pressed upon his attention had been, one beloved object was ever pre¬ sent to his mind's eje, and all the rest were as faint shadows which had Hitted before lum but for a moment. In lm heart he had repioved Mr. Spanker, he¬ ciuse, at a tune ol public danger, he for¬ got all but that m which he was immedi¬ ately interested. Charles, not less than hnn, lost sight of the general alarm in the contemplation of his own pecuhir good ft» tune. But, if those only should censure him, who, having been placed in a sımılaı situation, have devoted them¬ selves wholly to patiiotism without one thought of self, but few of the readers of tiue hıstoıy will be veiy forward to pronounce his condemnation From this time forward, Hai ley's every thought had some connection with the fair Amelia, and, during the week or ten daj-s which, from various circumstances, necessarily elapsed before Sir George could return to the country», the oppor-
tumties which he had of conversing with her, comprehended the most tlehghlful moments that he had expei lenced, since the light ot heaven first met his view. He was not the dupe of а bright pan of ej'es, a coiai hp, or a fascinating dimple. Mental excellence, personal beauty, and foimei tiiendslup, united to captivate Ins affections. N01 prudence, nor ambition, had any shaie in the triumph which Ame¬ lia carried over his heart, for, though both would have urgedhimtoseekan union with the daughter of his ever-indulgent friend Sir George, despotic love claimed m his bosom such undivided sway, that these could obtain no seat in the con¬ gress of feelings assembled 111 his mind, to fix his destiny. For Amelia, though she transgressed not for an instant beyond the line w ithin which ugid decorum should confine mo¬ desty, it often happened that she found opportunities ot conversing alone with hei old acquaintance. With him she de¬ lighted toretrace thegay scenesof infancy.
She rejoiced that he had escaped the dangers, and triumphed over the diffi¬ culties, with which he had once to con¬ tend, and which she, joung as she was when tbey parted, had trembled to con¬ template With affectionate zeal, she ex¬ ulted m his re-appearance , she anticipa¬ ted, with lively pleisure, the delight tint they should experience in returning to the country, and revisiting the scenes ovei which, in other dr.ys, they had roved to¬ gether. She chai oied him by ingenuously professing sincere fnendsliip, and it was not in nature, feehng and acknowledg¬ ing so much, that she should "ot soon prove something more The uots, which, at this memorable period, filled all London with dismay, need not be minutely described. Day after daj', while Sir George remained at Lord Dashington's, the most afflici mg accounts of public disoi der and pnvate calamity tianspired The ciy of ' No Popeiy' was raised m all parts of the metropolis, and used, alike bj Catholic
and Protestant ıobbeıs, to extort money fiom those who came m their way. Sır Geoige felt most anxious to escape fiom a scene so tumultuous, wheie he could not flatter himself that his piesence 01 Ins advice would be found of any use. Before leaving town, it was necessary to see seveial membeis of the adminis¬ tration, but the general confusion was so gicat, that these were unusually inac¬ cessible, antl, in consequence, some dajs weie wasted in useless attempts to get to those whom he wished to meet, or in heaung fiom them, when seen, " that, at piesent, the business connected with the nots wholly occupied their tune, and they could attend to nothing else." Accompanied by llailey and Amelia, on one of the d lys winch followed close on the fiist day ot outiag«*, bn Geoige paid а visit to a fnend at Woodford. He had fiatteied himself that, by retummg eaily, and by ciossing London-budge and pioceedmg on the Sun ey side to West- VOL. I. G
minster-bndge, he should avoid the rioters, it, unhappily, the spint of insur¬ rection should again break out. De¬ tained later than he expected, it was night befoi с he reiched the metropolis. As he drew near, he and his companions perceived that neaily all the houses were bnlliantly illuminated. " This looks well," said Sn Geoige. " If some great victory has been achieved at this time, the event will be doubly for¬ tunate, as it will humble the prit'e of our enemies abroad, and yet more subdue discoid at home." " But who are those rough dn ty-look- mg men, that are running backwards and forwards?" enquned Amelia, " I cannot guess any thing in their favoui, and I hke not the shouts that they give as they pass, accompanied as they are, with cries of ' No Popery' and ' Lord Goidon for evei.' " By this time, they had arrived at tbe 15
top of Cornhill. The stieets were much crowded, and he was about to turn off towaids the Bridge, when the voices ot several men, all exclaiming, w ith an air of triumph, ' The King's bench is burn¬ ing,* met his ear, and conoborated as the statement was by a tremendous glare, which reddened the sky in that direction, it induced him to altei his determination, and he directed the coach- man to pioceed straight on thiough Cheapside. It became soon but too apparent, that he had little ıeason to felicitate himself on the ìesolution that he had taken. As he approached St. Paul's, he saw enough to convince lnm, that Sm rey was not the only scene of conflagiation. Harley and Amelia beheld the same teinfic spectacle, and the lattei tiembled with ahum. Sir George peiceived hei agitation, and could not help shanng it m some de¬ gree, on hei account. Anxious to avoid о 2
doing oı s ijmg »my tlung tint might ш- cicise bei fens, he sufieied no expres¬ sion of senous appichenston to escape him, and H.ulej, fiom α significant look which the bh/e .uound enabled the Ba¬ ionet togive* wilh . ι teitiiiitj of its being seen, as well as fiom bis own feelings, undeistood what was passing in his mind too well, to uttei a syllable it v.uiance with the wishes ol the Baionet. With a Uboined efloit to appeal wholly undistuibed, Sir Geoige, »it length, con¬ fessed that tlio awful specticle which filled bei with afliyhl, had not escaped his obseivation, by saying — " I anı afıaıd that theie is а house on fil e this way." " I sliould think theie must be," said Hailey. " 1 his ι cfleetion can haidly bc pioduced bj the ilhiinin ıtıons," " Tins tcinble light," snd Amelia, " cannot ciorne I mm one house on fiie: I feai a scene of moie extensive miseinél than any we have yet heaid of is about
to open on us. We had bettei not pro¬ ceed." 1 he ciowd now mcieased so much, and the igitition imong them was so violen·*, that Sn Geoige hid no wish to go foi¬ waid, if to get b ick had been pi.icticable. Some gentlemen ol thc London Associ¬ ation, who weie undei turns, mil who vainly strove to resti .un tliefrintic po¬ pulace, now advanced to the carnage; and one of them, accosting Sn Geoige, infoimeli hım, " that Newgitc was »it that moment m flumes, and the multitude weie proceeding to the most culpable outiages. The cıvıl powei hid piovcd wholly une¬ qual to the task of lepiesstng them, and, »ıs yet, th" mıhı iry had not amved in suflicient numbeis to oppose then fuiy. Under these ciicumstances, thc speakei suggested the expediency of spai mg the lady the pain of witnessing the disgiace¬ ful scene then acting, not by going back, foi that seemed impossible, but by turn¬ ing ofi at St. Martm's-le-Gi and, and pio. о 3
ceeding thıoııgh Aldcı sgate and Goswell. streets, tow»utls Islington, whence, by passing up the New Road, the West end of the town might bc appio telici! by а route inconveniently eucuitous, but, loi »ill that w.is at th it moment known, pei - tectly safe. Sn Geoige and Ch.ules thanked llie gentleman foi his advice. His inform¬ ation ι espccting the operation which the mob weie .it that mstant engaged in com¬ pleting withm a furlong or two of the spot ou winch they then found them¬ selves, had been anticipated, by the cries of those who impeded then progress, " Newgate is on fire." — " Newgate will presently be down to the ground," or woids to that eflect, weie in almost every mouth. The counsel that they had re¬ ceived was so judicious, that the trio were unanimously of opinion that it ought to be followed, and Sir George prepared immediately to act on it, but at the very moment in which the coachman was
tinning the heads ot the boises towaids the north load, α squib, which fell be¬ tween them, e uised the animais to take flight, and the jell ot idle delight and of boisteious appiobation called loitb by this feit, added to thc tenor of the st utled annuals. No longei yielding to thc rems, they spiang funously foi waul, and presently foiced a ρ issage foi them¬ selves and the vehicle to which they vvere attached, which Sit George hatl no more expectation of finding, than he had ■or escapmg by means of a balloon. The horses continued their advance, and affoided some hundí eds of the noters and their abettois and spectatoi s oppor¬ tunities of displaying then agility, which but few of tbem could I1.1v e looked for, and peihaps still fevvei desned Though not a little alarmed by the incident, fiom the expedition with which Sn Geoige peiceived the nibble applied themselves to cleaı the way on this occasion, he had some hopes that he and his companions ο Ί*
would be canicci bejond the pnncipal scene of .ıctıon, with α speed dangeious in itself, but well calculated to enable* lnm, and those undei his piotection, to escape a sıtıı ition ot still gıeıteı peni. But lie deceived himself, lbe next minute dismissed the hopes he had entei¬ tained, and lcihsed tbe vvoist appiehen¬ sions which litici dıstuıbed luin. The annojancc thcy had expenenced at the beginning of Newgate stieet, earned them w ith tiemendous velocity to its end ; but when they diew neai the burning pnson, and one dieadfully splendid sheet of fue was displayed beloie them, the boises stopped on the instant, as much »istonished and confounded as the heio of lasso,on encounteung the blazing foiest. Unluckily they could not go on, like Ri¬ naldo, and piove that the teinfic vision was no moie than the unsubstantial woik of enchantment. The awful scene which now demanded then attention no language can ade¬ quately desci ihe. I he devouring element
was seen bursting fiom a massy pile, on which all the labour and ingenuity of man had been exhausted to make it fne- pioof, and in the estimation of many judges with uncommon success. Yet m a few shoi I houis the îuthless flame had been t night to invade it, and was now lapully ι educing it to ι heap of nuns. Suive)ing the piogress of destiuction, a gi oup ol nois), disoidcily, and ılı unken beings, exulting in the nun of the night, took cıedıt to themselves for having essentially seived the cause of the tiue re¬ ligion, by m iking bonfii es of the pıopcıty of then fellow-subjects, and by destroying those buildings which had been ıeaıedat an immense expense, to fuither the ad- liniiisti ition of justice. Hcie vice was to be seen weai ing hu most hideous aspect, m all the vaneties of cinne. The countenances of these men, illuminated by the confiagi ation which they had produced, piesented all the appalling characteristics that ferocity, senseless g 5
fanaticism, and the love of depredation could supply to complete the deformity of the human visage, and nevtr did a more stern or relentless bandittigive importance to the canvas of the painter. They were irregularly armed, Some carried the spoke of a wheel, a ciow, 01 an iron bar ; while others appealed with the imple¬ ments of agriculture, piessed into the service of not. Here and theie a still more formidable show of arms might be observed, and a cleaver, a cutlass, or a pistol, in the grasp of some superintend¬ ing ruffian, indicated greatei pioficiency in crime, and superior despeiation. One wretched woman seemed most ambitious to make her words at variance with their pretended object, by incessantly using the most hou id imprecations, and thiowmg them into the form of an exhort¬ ation to all good Piotestants, to fill Eng¬ land with bonfires in the cause of their holy religion. Several were seen mixing with the crowd, who, from their fetters,
it was cleaı had but lecently effected then escape ftom the interior of that edi¬ fice, on the destruction of whicli they were now feasting their ej es A man of colour seemed to considei this a fit oppoi¬ tunity foı pıovıng thit he could be is fe¬ rociously depnved as any of bis white brethren , and his language ana example equally conti ibuted to sustam and encou- l ige otheis who had eng iged in the woik of desolation It was to this man that a dirty, tagged fellow, ian up, while Su Geoige and his party were detuned witnin heaung, and accosted hnn as an old friend " Well, I say, Snow ball, we've done the job " " Its a'most time, I am thinking, some o't should be done," obseived ano¬ ther " Aye, aye," ıeplıed Snowball, " I think we've pietty well settled colle 0 e Did you see Ned D nnıshere just now ?" " Who's Ned Dennis ?" g 6
" Why, Jack Ketch to be sine I think you ought to know lnm. I daie say youi b ick has knowed his sa atch cat in your time. Heie he is by------. Well, Mastei Neddy, what do you thmk of it now ? You ncv ei saw the stat t look so pretty m youi life, did you Ned ?" " Wh}, no, I can't say as how I did." " I suppose now it hurts youi feelings to see youi shop on file." " О no ' I likes а little noting as well as another, now and then." " What, 1 suppose it makes business brisk with }OU? hey, Mi. Ketch 1 " " I don't say nothing about that." " No ; but I say, Ned—this is a senous thing for you. Theie'll be no hanging on Thuisilay I suppose you know that s That's bad news foi you. Ihe fellows that was to have been tucked up is let loose." " Well, I arn't sony foi that. I wish they may nevei come no other time." " That's a flam. Don't speak against
youi conscience. What would Parson Villette say if he heaid you tell such a bounce? It's almost a pity that Thuis- d»i}'s job is ofl. I thmk they weie veiy pietty L,ame buds, and would hue died well. That's something out of youi pocket." " No , I shall hav e my quai tei all the same as if nothing had h ippened " " l'ooh ' that's nothing. You won't lui e the clothes, and you w on't bleed 'cm beloi e they go oft. I suppose, now, if they won't stand something, befoie you get out of the cart, you make 'em pay foi it. It's e isy to put the knot so as to slip undei the chin 01 go behind, isn't it, Jack ?" " I believe, Mr. Snowball, you want to get out the secrets of my business. I can't st ird that, if }ou don't come'pien- tice." " You cuil' t expect the man to let you into his liade without," anothei of the mob remaiked.
" Well," added Snowball " I'll thmk of it. You ι s ıs au linpioving tiade I be¬ lieve. Pei li ips you'll take me on liking." " Aje, ije, and let jou into the seciet at once. \ou'll be dıffeıent dom most of my tustoineis " « M by?" " Because jou'll be black in the face befoie you'ie tumid off." This snee ι at the jokei's complexion m ıetunı toi the laugh raised, oı at¬ tempted to be ıaısed at the hangman's trade, tluew Mi. Snowball into such л passion, that ıaısıng his bludgeon, he aimed a blow at Mi. Dennis, winch, if it had taken effect, would not only have pre¬ vented lum fiom ıesumıııg hisprolessional labours, but would cei tainly have saved his own neck fiom the jeopaidy into whicli it was biought by his share in the riots which took place on the day aftei the confiagi ation of Newgate. Ned, liowever, finding Ins peison known, and fearing that all his zeal m the cause
might not be sufficient to countciacl the piejudice raised against him on account of his being recognised as a public cha¬ iacter, had judged it piudent to take ineasuies foi securing Ins ìetreat, before he ventuied on the sarcasm which closed then tonvei sation. He accoi dingly threw lumstlf mto an opening which just then appealed, and left his late auditois io shaie among them the favoui about to be bestowed on his head, by the descend¬ ing coath-wheel-spoke ot Mr. Snowball. " He just took to Ins heels in tune," sud the black, boiling with lage, "I'd have given lnm a toppei foi luck,—hut what's tins here row about." Heie he peiceived the coach, with the ainval of which the leader is alieady acquainted. He saw those within it wei e beset by some of the mob, and to the questions and commands, " Wheie are your colours?" " Who aie you foi?" " Sing out ' Loid Geoige Gordon for evei,' " " Shout ' No Popery,' " he could
beai no satisf ıctoıy ansvvei. To the fiist question hc heaid α voice ıeply, " AVe havenone," but all othei demands appe lied lo be met with in obstinate silence It did not occui to bun tint " silence gives consent." On the con- tıaıj, m this nist шее, he bestowed quite a difleient mteipietation on the tacitui- nity which he supposed to be peiveisely lnainUined, though it would have le¬ quned no common exertion ol the voice on the put of those in the coach, to make themselves he ucl above the cl»i- morous ging, which suiiounilecl them. Having bioke his waj thiough a part of the mob, he dem miied some inform¬ ation on the subject ot the proceedings then going on. " What's this fuss about ?" " Hei e's а Papist p.utj, I believe," loared a feiotious looking fellow in a ied jacket. " They won't show then colours noi sing out ' Lord Gordon ioi ever.' "
" üıey won't!" exclaimed Snowball, 111 in indignimi tone. " No, and I somehow think, I saw the old chap 111 Akcunau's house*, atone ol tlio Windows, befoie I got in." " Peihips he's а justice, then." " Then let's sai ve hım out. Pull open the coach dooi." Ilus wis no soonei suggested, than it was clone, Sn Geoige »ittempted to cvpostulite with them. " Believe me, gentlemen, I am no Papist." " We don't cue," ıeplıed Mi.Snow¬ ball. " I am »is sınceıely fiicndly to the Piotestant cause as any man." " That won't do," vocileuited anothei, " He's not going to humbug us." And, encouiaged by these vvoids, the fellow neai est the vehicle, seized the Baionet by the collai, and diagged lum, notwithstanding all the lesistance he could
oflei, into the midst of the motley gioup by whom he had been intei ι ogatcd. Hailey was spi inging out ol the coach to assist lum, when the pieieing stuiek of' Amelia lecalled to lus ι ecollection, that taking this part, he left bei wholly exposed to the violence ot the mob. But he was now on thc giound, »mil the dangei of Sir Geoige was most imminent Bursting through the ciowd, he sei/ed the aim of the fellow who had hold of the Buonet, with а giasp so unceiemo¬ nious, that the ruffian judged it piudent to consent on the instant to an exchange of pnsoneis, hy leleastng his captive. Several blows, aimed at Sir George fell upon Hailey without inflicting senous mjuiy, and now, snatching а bludgeon from one of the assailants, he found little difficulty m making his way back to the carnage. He had just leached it, when he perceived that it lud been opened on the othei side, and α rufhan was then en¬ gaged in despoiling the tenified and dis-
ti acted Amelia, of the gold chain which she woi e iound liei neck, to winch the poitiait of liei mollici vvas appended. llie fui) with which Cliailes was in¬ spned by the sight of this outrige, sui- passes descnption, and may safely be left to the imagination. He flew into the vehicle, and the same installi the ìobbei was piecipitated head foiemost fiom the dooi by whith he had entered, with a blow that took fiom hnn foi the moment eveiy fi audulent design oi nnpioper view oi any descnption. But the violence with which he ejected this intrudei pıoved moie fatal to Hailey than to the wietch whom he had so piomptly punished. The effoit was so gieat, that he could not save himself from falling with the rioter. A ciy of ' It's a shame to use the mau so,' was raised by the accomplices of the lattei, and severul blows weie dealt to Cliailes befoie he could lift himself from the giound. He howevei, did not think it wise at that
tune, to gıatıfy those neai lnm, by ac¬ knowledging these to hive been duly ıeceıved. He assumed an an of cheei¬ fulness, and endeavouiedtoappeal wholly unhurt. He vv is again mounting the cauiige, when a blow fiom .in non ciow dislocated his left wiist, and he felt him¬ self deeply wounded in the bick by some slm ρ insti ument, ,iud while turning iound to seuc the viilun who had so »itiocmusly attempted his life, the hoi ses goaded by the mob, and pelted with squibs and pieces of flaming wood, agam moved on, with all theu foimei lapulity, and Hailey, sunouncled by the ıabble, lost sight of the coach, ignoi mt whethei it contained either of those for whose safety he was most anxious. The mob, with thai pusillanimity which usually accompanies bi uttihty, had tamely seen one bold and poweiful aim depnve them of the object they had selected for vengeance 01 depiedation, if not foi both, and only revenged the defeat ol
then baffled comi ade by faintly bı eıthıng dtsapptob ıtıon , but now that they saw Hailey wounded, faint, ind wholly alone, all then coinage revived, md he ıeceıved ι slıovveı of blows, which depnved lum of the means of making furthci lesistance " Ή ho the devil's he 3 " blusteied Mr Snowball " He thought he vv is going to fughtcn us, I suppose ' " Aye," said the heio in a militai y jacket, who had piecipitately ıetıeıted when Chulés first left the coach , ' he thought we weie ill going to urn away fioin him " " What shall we do with him ? ' " Why, let's see if he's got any thing worth taking caie of, and thiow him in the fiie?' The first part of this pioposition both, with one accoid begm immediately to act upon Whethei they senously thought of any thing moi e, cannot now be known, as they had not time to complete the fiist pan of then undertaking, befoie α
violent panic seized the great body ot' the mob, and the cry of' " The Horse Grenadiers !" produced a general feeling in favour of a retreat. Mr. Snowball and his colleague shared the general alarm, and remarking " The sræadd'tes and traps are coining for certain," they left the bleeding and almost fainting Charles to his fate, taking vvith them his hat and one skirt of his coat. In the hurry ot' the movement whicli now took place, many of' the rioters fell over him as he lay on the ground ; but, thougli in the most immi¬ nent danger, he received no serious hurt at this time, and succeeded in getting on his feet, when the pressure had become less violent, and the most outrageous of the desperadoes whom he had en¬ countered, were no longer to be seen. With much satisfaction he perceived that a partial clearance had been inaile, and the staff of office, borne by a man who advanced towards liim, assured him of the immediate protection and assistance of' a
peace officei He drigged limiseli я few steps to meet thc constable, and had just begun to accost him, with a view of de¬ scribing the situation fiom which he now found himself impei fectly e\ti icated, and ilso that in which 1 e then found himself, when ι violent blow on the temple from the staff of the worthy, whose ippioich he had beheld with such pleisui e, com pleted what hid till then been left un¬ finished, and Chulés sunk senseless on the giound The peace officei who had made this seasonable display of vigoui, h id, by his pievious exeitions, acquired the chai ictei ot " a veiy active man," from the police magistrates, and, on the piesent occasion, a fivourable oppoitunity offeied for sustaining the fame of his courage, by ittackmg one who hid been pieviously cnppled, mil who, if he could be mis¬ taken for a i loter, it was quite cleaı was equally nicapible of flight or lesistance. The appeaiance of Hai le), coveied with
dut and blood, vv ithout α hat, and with little moie than half a coat, was certainly veij deploiable, and, in the eje of most of the ν ei mm of the hvv, wietchedness is guilt. When Hailey agim opened his ejes, he found himself in an apai tment neai ly filled with police oflicei s and watchmen. A peison of shabby extei 101 was acting as magistrate, and the olhcei by whose means he hid been conveyed th thei, was picfeiiing his einige against "the pusnnei." Much of what he sud vvas lost upon Charles, but the ingenuity displayed at the close of his speech caught Ins at¬ tention. It ι an thus — " And so, Sn, they w.is all fiightened and ian iway. But tins one, w ho seemed to be their leadei, stopped behind, holdet than any of the ι est, and come *owai ds me, mutteiing — but I won't iepc«it the expiessions he nude use of — and so we fought, and I knocked lum down."
"Youi conduct entitles )ou to gi eat cıedıt ľiisonei, Have you ui} thing to siy foi } oui sell ?" " But little, and, indeed, I Inv e not povvei to siy much All ihc tiuth tobe found in the utilement you have just hcaul is cont uncd in the list »hi ее vv 01 ds,. — lie Inochdmc dorm '111 it is certainly tiue." " If he bid not, I suppose jou would have knocked hnn down. What biought jou theic»" In as few vvords as possible, Charles attempted to explain the ciicumstances which had pliced hım m his piesent situation. " And so,"said His Woislnp, " that's youi stoi y, is it ' You would make us believe that jou line been uding about in а gentleman's с image all day, would you ? Why you must suppose that I am blind Is it likely tint a pooi lagged fellow hke you would be idmitted into any gentleman's coach ? This js α veiy' vol. i. n
serious business The state ııı which you are found proves tliat you must have been m the thickest of the riots, and no doubt, fiom the wounds you have ie cciv ed, you have been one of the most active among the mob I see you feel the force of what I am saying " Charles was cei t unly α little discon certed, foi he felt that lus appeiiance made fearfully agnnst him before such ι tribunal " However," contmued the migisti ite in a relenting tone, " if you aie ι gen¬ tleman, you, of couise, know how to be¬ have as such " This hint was lost on the inexpei lenced Hailey It nevei occuned to him, that he could, without offence, talk of money, or of spending money foi the general entertainment of the company in the pi esence of а magisti ate Suspecting that he was not peifectly understood, the sage went furthei " The least you can do, in the first ■1
instance, ıs to remunerate the ofhcer for the trouble he has had with you " " That," said Hailey, " if the means of doing it ıemaın to me, Will be the last thing I shall thmk of" The words, " tj the means of doing it remain to me," appeared to the magis¬ trate very suspicious The expression, " ţf, " he felt convinced, could not, under such ciicumstances, have fallen from the lips of any peison disposed to ict hi e a B entleman, by sending for wliat might contribute to the jollity of the evening To use the linguage in which this con¬ stable would have expiessed himself officiali} , he found that he had not got "a calf that would bleed wells" he, theie foie, thought it necessary to put on his most important look, while he addressed the pnsonei as lollows " Young mm, joung man," and heie he gave his head in admonitory shake, aftei which he pioceeded with appro- H 3
pinte solemnity, " this lıeıe ıs a veiy -senous Шап, md miy pi ob ibi} cost you youi life I have told }ou vvlnt you ought to do , but since my advice is not to be t iken, I must do m} duty, by de¬ taining you, to give some iccount of youiseif before the sitting il leiman m the inonnng You must now be locked up Heie, officei, take him away " The dooi of ι misei ible dungeon w 19 opened, ind Ch ules wis desìi ed to walk m He started back, md igain id dressed the constable of the mght " If I must ıemaın m confinement till the moining, can you not permit me to sit heie' Must I go into that ınısenble hole, weak and wounded as I am ?" The inflexible monaich of the watch- house, the piesiding soip boilci, lud lecouisc to his dignity again, and the lequest of Hailey pıocuıed hım the benefit of а new admonition
" You see the awful effects of keeping bad company. II you lud been at home, this would not have happened Now, gentle 01 simple, m y ou must go. The law knows no distinctions of persons, and —" Heie lie was mtenupted by news, that a gieat nobleman, who had been att icked by the noteis, demanded an immediate audience. This intelligence induced His Worship to save the íemamdei of the speech, which was at tlut moment in the course of dehveiy, foi some other occasion, and he finished with — " take lnm away 5 " " Suiely, Su, you will not lefusethe indulgence that I have solicited ?" " It's like yout impudence to ask such α thing," replied the soap-boilei. "Don't you heai a gieat nobleman wants to ьреак to me, antl do you thmk I can have a fellow hke you heie, without a coat to joui back, when he comes?" Η 3
Hirley síid no more, but entered the dungeon in silent indignation Here he was immediately gi ceted by the exclama¬ tion, " Ah, my den, I'm ghd I've got companj It's a sad thing to be all night alone, isn't it, iny deu " This silutation came fiom a miserable woman She was intoxicated, and the fumes of the liquor she hid been drink¬ ing would at any time lnve disgusted, but they now almost overpoweied, the weaiy and bleeding Hailey. He endea¬ voured to avoid her. She staggered after lum , and till a fall interrupted the pui- suit, he was denied the little repose that this dreaiy hole could afloid. But the door soon unlocked, and he was told to come forward. " Is this the ruffian that seized you, Sir ? lie was brought in just now, and can't give a good account of himself." " Can it be possible ? — Charles '" Indifferent about what might happen,
hopeless of lelief, Chartes had disdained to lift his eyes fiom the giound till now, when the well-known voice of Sir Geoige Henderson lecalled him to himself. " Ha' Sir Geoige, lam most happy — But Amelia—she is not with you? Wheie, where is she?" " Safe in my carnage " " Safe? and alone 1 " " No I have foi tunately met with a fnend who commands the London Asso¬ ciation. A pirty of his men guaid the coach. I stepped here to obtain assist¬ ance to seek you But, my dear boy, you aie sadly mjuied." " Not at all, nevei mind it, so Amelia is safe, and you are unhurt, I slull do veiy well " " Is this, Su, the young gentleman you were speaking about?" enquired the constable of the night. " It is , and since he is found, I will tiouble you no further." и Ί
" О' then I'm afi aid theie's been а little bit of а mist ike , but mistakes will hippen m these tıoublesonıe times. Howevei, it's soon set to lights Wë shall not detain you longei, Sn You must confess, joung gentleman, that appeaiances was against you " " Certainly I looked like one in disti ess, and, of couise, could have no claim on youi humanity 01 youi justice." This ìetoit might have been spared, for the soap-bodei was too stupid to com¬ prehend its meaning, and supposed it to be an admission that his conduct had been peifectly piopei. Impatient to hasten to Amelia, foi whose safety he still tiembled, Chulés wished not to entei on his own sufleungs. He, howevei, could not help lepelhng with scorn, not unaccompanied by me¬ nace, the application ot the constable who had knocked lnm down, foi α ìewaid. The title of Su George, and the unsus-
pected ìmpoitance of Hailey, had taken the fury out of this vigilant peison, and though the truth, that he was a f eı ocıoııs cowaidly scoundiel was told him to his face, his depoi tment continued submissive and respectful m the extreme. The con¬ stable of the night was equally cıvıl, though his modesty was almost put to the blush, when, in compliance with the eagei and intelligent glances of his myi- midons, he attempted to connect a hint that something was due foi indulgence, with the apology foi its absence, which he felt constrained to uttei. The hint alluded to was lost on Charles, as his sarcasm had been on the peison from whom it tame. Sn Geoige, who knew moie of the woiid, and undeistood the drift of what had been said, was not suffi¬ ciently infoimed of what had passed, to treat it with mented disdain, and he m consequence bestowed α giatuity, which so far exceeded the ments of those who η 5
were to pıofıt by it, that it satisfied their wishes. He then conducted Harley to the coach, which he found guarded as when he left it The road was now tolerably cleaı , but the fires, which still crimsoned the firmament in various di¬ rections, the clouds of feathers which filled the air, and the universal constern¬ ation, formed a most stitking contrast with the symptoms of ıejoıcıng which the illuminated windows exhibited. Sir George knew not that these were caused by the House of Commons having come to a vote, which it was hoped would put an end to these disoiders, oi by the dread of attack in the absence of such a demonstration, and thought the exult¬ ation of the people of England, at seeing London in its then situation, somewhat akin to the merriment of Noro when Eome was buinmg. Even tbe alarm and joy which he proved on account of Hailey, could not tear his mind fiom the
contemplation or a scene so awful, and though, for the sake of his sinking com¬ panion, he exulted at finding himself once more safe at Loid Dashington's, he lamented that it was not in his power, by any individual exertion, to arrest the progress of public calamity.
η b
CHAP. VI. Wtmt ıs f rnntiL frenzy, srornM so nitidi. Arni dreaded more Umu n contusions touüı ? I gunit it tlan^'ıous, nnd upjirovc your leur — Tlmt fire is cntcllini,, if yotl dlnwtoo neir ľvery assistance that medical skill could supply was promptly pıocuıed. Unwill¬ ing to be thought hot s ıhı combat in con¬ sequence of such an accident, Hailey would not submit to be confined to his chambei, and accoidingly made his ap¬ peaiance on the following moining, at the breakfast table of Loul Dashington. Mi. Spankei was there. The al inning outiages of the pieceding night had sug¬ gested to lum several new alteiations in the Ditldlem race-coin se, antl on these, аь he thought il becime lnm to do at so
awful a crisis, he lost no tunc in taking the opinion of Ins Loidslup. When H.ulcj enteied the mom, lie instino¬ ti! tly pioduced hi» plm, but hiving pieviously succeeded in inflicting his ideas on Loid D lslungton, he foi once sufieied himself to be tepicssed by the enquineseveiy one made altei the wound¬ ed man's health, by the condolence tendeied on account ot his misfortune, and by thc compliments paid to his, coinage. The conveisation then tinned onthe al Hilling chaiactei wlueh the nots had assumed on the pieceding daj. Mi. Spankei on this subject became eloquent. " Aye, it was veiy au fui, but the binning of Newgiite was a ver} hne sight I was m the thick of it as well as you, Sn Geoige. I went yesteichy to look at а hoise at Islington, md as I was coming back, hang it, thinks 1, as I vv is p issing Sadici 's Wells, I'll see what they aie do¬ ing heie. So I went in, and saw · Hid-
die ine ìee,' and ' Huiry-scuny, 01 The Ruial Rumpus,' but little thought when that was over, I was going to see ' Hurry Scuri y, or the Town Rumpus." " It would seem," said Lord Dashing¬ ton, "that the noters must have some ob¬ ject in view with which the public at large are not yet acquainted. An an of arrangement, and of systematic depreda¬ tion distinguishes their operations, which demands the most seuous attention on the part of ministers." " Why, my Lord, I must agree with your Lordship, that the most serious at¬ tention is demanded fiom the executive at this moment," but added Sir George, " I do not participate in the feelings you entertain, as to their having any ultimate object which is not at present befoie the public. When once a lawless mob has gained sufficient confidence m its numbeis to pioceed to outrages like those committed yesterday, I care not what the word, 01 what the pretext may
be, plundei and mischief are their ob¬ jects " " Tint is ti ne in a greit measure, but still it stukes me that the present riots are different from common nots " " Unhappily they are, but to me it ap peais that their principal distinction will be found in their supenoi magnitude Be the original object what it may, the mmds of the mob, as soon as they find that they have any stiength, are natu- rjly carried towards plunder, and it is their impatience to enjoy that privilege to which they fondly look forward as the consummation of their tnumph, which leads them to celebrate their vıctoıy be foie it is atchieved, that effectually se- sures the nation at large from the calamity which their success would not fail to entail upon it " " The conduct of the mob was singu- laily atiocious They attacked indivi¬ duals of whom it was impossible that they could have any reason to complain.
You, for example, wlnt hid you evei done th it you shoul I be singled out by them ' Could such in acculonthive oc¬ cui ι eel, Ind there not been igencnlphn of eombinition wl ich went to ai ι ty the pooi indisciiminitely igainst the neh 3 " " Tint they itticked me, not knowing who I was, ard ignoi int of my politi cal and ι »ligious opinions, I tike to be the stioiigest pioof that can be adduced to show the view I tike of the pio ceechn^s to be conect Your Loidslup, I daie siy has not foigotten the not that took phce some len oi twelve years igo, it the Middlesex election, when Su William Beaucli imp Pioctor contested it with Mi Glynn ?" " I ìemembei it well," said Mi Spankei, '' Jack Bioughton, the boxei, wis inSii Willi un's mob Jack hid left off fight¬ ing then , his imphitheitie, you ktiow wis put down and he had got made a yeoman of the guaid " " At that time I wis going to iem uk,"
continued Sı« Geoige, " the cry of the mob was ' Libeity and Pıoctoı fot evei.' But what bad liberty oi Sn William Pıoc¬ toı to do w tth then ntt ick on the Hi>m- lneismith Linen Ditipci, <ind on the Hai- ness ro licei in Piccadilly ?" " Aye, Ellett you mean. I ìemembei lum well, and veiy elevei he was too m the harness line. Then you know the Quack Doctoi fiom Leicestei Fields, he was there, antl got α bioken head by the business. But the wotst of it was poor — what was his name — the tumblei of Sadlei's Wells. I thought of it last night, they've a fellow a gootl ileal like lum. Oh ' Sturgess. Pooi Sunless, turned out on hoiseback that day And the mob dismounted him, cut him about a gootl deal, and accoiding to the papeis, beat Ins hoise's head to a jelly." " Mi. Spanker's memoiy comes veiy opportunely to iny assistance. He is quite conect. Now, I submit to youi Loidslup, tlut tliese occuncnces had no
moie to do with Sır William Pıoctor or with Libeity, m whose name the outrages just mentioned vvere committed, than the ι lots or the piesent day have to do with ' the Piotestant Ascendancy,' 01 any deep laid scheme for the oveitluow of the existing authoi Hies." " My dear Su George, there is all the diffeience m the vvoild between the two cases. The foimei was an electioneering tumult, formidable, I giant, and con¬ nected with the politics of the moment, but without any object other than that of insulting oi intimidating those who were not friendly to the populai candidate. Now, thc featuıes of a regulai plan, most extensive m its character, begin to deve- lope themselves Ihe diflerent prisons of the metropolis are foiced m succession, and the mob pioceeds m a veiy dehbe- ıate mannei to the houses of the most distinguished chai acters in the nation, intending to saenfice then- possessors. « No Popery' is the ciy, and all who are
supposed to have favoured a late act of the legislature aie selected foi vengeance. Surely such ι geneial commotion has nothing in common with the trifling dis¬ turbances to which you have alluded ?" " In their origin, certainly, nothing can be moie distinct, in their piogress, greit varieties may be íemarked, but the object, which the majonty of the in¬ dividuals who foim the piesent mob pur- sue, I submit, with all deference to Lord Dashington's judgment, is the same with that of the formei band of rioters. The love of confusion, wanton delight m mis¬ chief, and the hope of booty, unite the idle and the profligate, and, whether the avowed object of their meeting be to bnng a favounte candidate into parha- ment, topreserve the Protestant religion, or to pull down houses of a certain de¬ scnption, it is all the same to them." " But, I am inclined to think," said Hailey, " fiom the zeal displayed by many in the good cause, as some of the
rmtcis called it list night, that they are really led awny by а false idea that their ıelıgıon is in dangei. Unquestionably theie aie many deludeis among them, but the multitude, I am much disposed to ıegaııl as laboiiinig uudei α ratal de¬ lusion." " I thmk," Lephed Loid Dashington, " that the people of this countiy aie too well mfoimed to be so giosslj misled as Mi. Hai ley's humanity supposes them to be." " Your Loidslup is awaie of the powei¬ ful effect which ι ehgious poi suasions havo on sonie minds. At vauous penods in the hıstoıy of the woiid, that energy which, lightly dnected, hid nsen an ас- ceptablc oflei nig of chanty and devotion to the tin one ol the Most High, has spiead its biletul files fai aud wide, and men of might) minds hue been found to appiove and to uige its desolating couise. The fatal madness which united such im¬ mense numbeis as weie seen combined
to peipetritc the cnmes winch mirk the commencement of tie Mussulmin's he gin in clinactcis of Ыоо I ittist hovv feai fully disoi dei ed ι ciso i c m vv u ig unst the hippmess of muikuul N01 is the fact less moni nfully ilhistntcd b> events of compnativel) modelli dite, when tho emigi ned spu it of M iliimiet icturncd, with tht cinsitleibof Liu opt, loi editate on \sn the lionois ind enoimifies ot wluth it α foimei penod, she h id been the fi uitiul paient When I knov tint so mighty 1 mind is tint of tin git it md good Sn Thomas Moit could so fu folget its own dignity, and nitunl bene volence, as to toltine α wietched iillow- creatuie, foi difienng fiom lnm on points of faith, whtn I see tint 1 mm jlliistiious m all othei ıespects, toniti, whue ıelıgıon wis concerned, so lose sight of leison md humanity, is to take upon himself thus to ivenge the "U- might), in a case wheie the offender sinned not agnnst his ft'low men, I cm
easily believe that the uneducated thou·« sands, who may be found in this metro¬ polis, may be led, by similar enors, into excesses quite as gieat as those which we have now to déploie." Sır George admitted that such motives might stiongly opeı.ıte on the minds of some of the noteis. 'Hie eneıgıes ol fanaticism had evei been such as to astonish the woild He instiiiced the eflorts of the Covenantcis in Scotland, and of the Revolutionists in England, and by quoting some of those " forms of ımpıecatıons," as Hume calls them, which had been theu substitutes foi prayers, showed that it was no easj task to determine within what limits the absuıdı- ties and atrocities of meu whose minds weie thus wai ped might bc confined." " If further pioof weie wanting," con¬ tinued Charles, " 1 would again tui η to that penod in which Sn Thomas More lived. What can moie sti ikingly prove themonstious folly of which great masses·
of men are capable, than the pilguinages to the tomb of Thomas à Becket? These, though not so afflicting to humanity, were not less derogatory to its dignity, not less pieposterous m themselves, than the crusades which had long been decried by the common sense of m inkmtl. Till the useful tyiant, Hemy, put an end to the folly, by an eftort of salutary violence, cveiy yeai saw thousands of devotees seek the tomb of then saint, as they called the hypocrite Becket. 'lhat wi etch's remains weie annually lifted ftom then sepulclne to aid the monstious joy of a geneial holiday. Nay, to so extia¬ vagant a pitch did they cany then reve¬ rence foi the mai tyi, that, if a judgment may be formed fiom the ofleimgs made at his shnne, he was held in higbei esti¬ mation, by the pilgrims, than the Deity himself." *
" This ïwniiiiig," rejoined Lord Dash«-· ington, " I .-uinui to be fairly urged to- support the general principle for which you contend. You have proved that fn. naticism will betray men to the wildest follies and (be greatest crimes, but I do not sec that whnt you Imvc advanced' applies to the particular case now under considerat ion. At this time <«f' thiy the people ol Kngland are too well intbrmed to be leti into it repetition of' those follies which you have brought to onr 'recollec¬ tion, 'fhey have too much sensé to be so imposed upon." " I know not that, my Lord," inter¬ rupted Sir George. " When 1 see what attempts are daily made to delude them, and which, as they cannot be made with¬ out expence, would not be continued if'
they were not, to a cci tain extent, ci ow ned with success I am foi ced to suspect the thinking Luglish aie les«, ıatıonal than jou suppose. 1 allude to the piactices of the lotteiy-offiec keepers in our times Would any man find his account ш laj- mg before a people so difhcult to mislead, so competent to the t isk of thinking foi themselves, an aılveıtısement like this," (heie he diew a paper fiom his pocket) " which I have copied from the Dailv Advertiser." " Foity thousind pounds may be g uned foi half -а guinea, on the following new plin of lnsuiance in the lush state lot teiy, now diawing Messrs. Wiiipenuy and Co adjoining St Dunst in's eliuith, Hcet-stieet, aie now taking down num beis at only hilf α -guinei cicli, to ictuin two English lottei j tickets, worth upw ai ds of ".Jl, it the numbti insuicd is drawn anj prize above 20/, thiough the whole thaw¬ ing; and thnty state lottery titKets, woith upwaids of 400/., if the number 1* VOL. I I
the last drawn. If the number is eithei a *20/ 01 10/, the piemium will be re tui tied. This is the most beneficial plan yet ofleied to the public." " And by this ' most beneficul pl in,' continued the Buonet, "the publicare daily gulled out of then half-guineas, each uisuioi' holding it to be veiy piob.i- ble, tlut it will be lus fale to leahsc forty thousand pounds for Ins ten and six pence. This too, is not the most extrt vagant scheme submitted to the* well infoimed people of London, as I see that anothei advertisei offers his customers 7'5,OUO/ »it the same price " " 1 his, begging youi pardon, Sn Geoige, is not veiy mueh to the puipose 'Iheie is, m almost eveıy mind, at cer tain peuods-,of life, a disposition to hope, — an expectation of success, that spurns at i ational calculation, and delights to en¬ tertain the most extiavagant visions of future piospenty. This feeling, oi per suasion, I hold to be distinct from every 0
oilier, and it ıs one th.it will occasional!) hud ι place in the best 1 egulated minds Because schemels, like Mcssis. Win- penny, md Co, flouush, I do not con¬ ceive that }0ii luve pıoved, tli.it I at all ovei-iate the intelligence of the British pubin , and, aftei all ) on have said, I »am still satisfied tli it these tumults have 11101 e m tlicm, linn j ou suspect. Depend upon it, some gicatpohtic.il object is con¬ nected with tliein." " Well, my Loid, I see oui debate must close 111 the way, in which most debates finish L ich of us will retain his own opinion, and lament that otheis shut their eyes against conviction. I can onlj saj, that I hope you will find you are in ei 1 or. But, pi ij, may I ask if there is any ti util in the ltimour, that the offenders, at piesent in custody, aie to bc tued by inai tia! law ?" " You maj be assured, Sir George, the report has no foundation. The pnsoners vul! only be tried 111 due course of law, 1 2
I have suggested to Lari Bathurst, (he, by-the-bye, sits as speakei this day , for Loid Mansfield, fiom indisposition, is as incapable of attending as the Chancellor himself,) that it would be right to let this be known from authority." " Efficient measures will, of couise, be taken to put an end to these disturb¬ ances °" " The most efficient that can be devi¬ sed. Withm these three diys, vou will see preparation i ipe foi laying the axe to the toot. The pumaiy cause will be attended to, and the walls of the tower of London will enclose α new state pri¬ soner. This, mind is only my opinion, but 1 think it will piove a conect one. By taking that step to which I allude, terror will be stiuck into eveiy nest of conspir¬ ators throughout the kingdom , and the people of England will piesently be re¬ lieved fiom the daring outiages of those who presume m this country to emulate the ' White Boys' of Ireland."
" At all events," said Sır George, " 1 hope the piogress ol outiage will be effec- tu illy checked In every part of the mettopohs, and its vicinity, I observe associations of the inhabitants for the defence of then piopertj. 'Ihe Lord Mayoi has devised α plan foi the protec¬ tion of the dıfîeıent waids of the city, which seems, fiom the communication to be established between them, to pro¬ mise well." " Then, the students of the Temple have »umed themselves, and lay aside Coke and Littleton, to pıactıse military manoeuvıes eveiy day. Report says, they make an astonishing piogiess in their military studies." " So the late Attorney-geneial has informed me, though, how Ins reading enabled him to decide on such matters, I have yet to learn. He, however, has made me promise to accompany him on Satmdaj, if I remain so long in town, to see them go through their evolutions." 1 3
The conversation was now interrupted by news, that a mob wis appioachnig Arliugton-sticct. Evciy weapon of defence that could be found in the house, was put in immediate icquisition Loid Dashington and Su Geoiy piessed Chartes to ıetue in conséquence of lus gieat we ikncss, horn the uijin ies winch he hatl sustained on the pi eeeding night. To this he would by no means »ague He insisted on being »dlovvetl to ai n with the iest, and declaied, 'nd felt »hat he was, at that moment, ль well as cvci he wasin his life. His eyes bnghtened with aidoin , and the feelings wluth then ani¬ mateli hım, made hım, fot the «listant, lose sight of the »avvitii situation in which he stood , though, had theie been lime foi icfleetion, be would luve shutldeied at the idea of a sti uggle, in vv Inch it might be his lot to shed the blood of Ins coun¬ ti ymen. But the intelligence which hid caused this pi epai ation foi hostilities, tinned out
lo be α false* alarm, .and the mob weie* now leported to bc on tlieu waj to Lci- ».estei-fields. All lejoiced that the clan¬ gei, by which Lord Dashington's familj vv as supposed to be menaced, had passetl ofi, but Ch.ules, as the feelings vvhieh .1 sense ol peni liad cic lied, subsided, began to discov ci that he had icted un¬ piudcntly, m neglecting tlic advice of his incdie.ll attendants. He had, ni conver*·- »ition, made an ofl'oi t beyond his sliength, and though the appioach of the notei«, by sueldenly calling foi th all the cneigj of his mind, had made him feel peifectly lestoied foi а short peuod; now that the impulse was withdiaw n, he was almost unable to stand, 01 even to sit. I lis situ¬ ation attracted the notice, and cilled forth expiessions of smeeie concern, fiom all piesent, but, Sn George was extiemely aflected bj lus app.upnt dan¬ gei. His feu s exaggeiated the malig¬ nity of tlie symptoms of unexpected exhaustion, wlueh he now observed with ι Ί
indescribable alat m. He saw his 'dear gallant boy,' as he called lliuley, dying That the wound he hid ıeceıved w .u mortal, he hid no tloubt. A moi tificatioii would infallibly tike phce, and his biave ( hules would liy down bis viltuble hie, .mil dl thiough the nicoiisideiate lolly winch lud taken its couise tluougli the* heirt ol the city, wheie icfleetion might hive wluspeied, the seal ol dingei was sine to be főnnel, instead of piefeiung a moie eucuitous loitte, by which it would h ivc been avoided Such weie the feelings of sonow and of self-iepio»ich which tounented Sir Geoige. Huley was conducted to lit·, loom , the attendance of the most emi¬ nent physici ins was summoned , and, though the lemcdieswliich t'iiysiig¿ested did not immediately pioduce tlut change which Su Geoige was anxious to witness, they bail at least the good ellect of ìecoti. cilmg the patient to confinement, and foi the next week they saved those about
hım some trouble. The exeition of their eloquence was not .it all necessary to per¬ sunie Challes that he ought not to leave his chamber, as it was no longei in his powei to get out of bed. The anaichy which still pievailed in the metropolis, made Sir Geoige most impatient to leave London Il<* was fai fiom bting satisfied tint the known politics of Loul Dashington would not expose lnm to the vengeance of the mob, and he ticmbkd lest lus blazing mansion should become tlie funcial jule of his joung fnend. He, besides, fiatteied biniseli that the tianquilhty and purei ur of the countr) would be of esaenti.il sei vice to Challes, and he incessantly importuned the physicians foi then opi¬ nion on the propncty of lemoving lum. Medical adviseis do not alwa)s thmk change of air so necessary foi a patient who io neh, 01 who is known to have wealthy fnends, as foi a pool man, who has hardly the meaus of tianspoitmg 1 5
himself fiom one phce to mothei In this case, they opposed lemoval At the close or a week howeve , lliough still m а veiy languid state, no appiehensions weie entert uncd of any iiiifivoiuiblc change, fiom his beingcutfiillyconveved to а moderate distance fiom to v n On obtaining this much wished fot statement or confession, Sn Geoige tie termmed on canying Hule} to ι smill seat which he hid newl) puitlnscd in Heitfoielshnc lhe nceossiiy 11 ιιι 0 ι ments weie completed with much expe dition, and the B u onct, beai til) tired of London, felt gre it sitisľiction it find ing the sick }Oting man sustiinc 1 little or no inconvenience fiom the journev Heic, the woik of ıecoveı} having pie viously commenced, he I) ul the pit isure of finding its piogiess soon btcomc moie rapid , thoii n li not so much so as to keep pace with his wishes, 01 even with hi» expectations He, howev с ι , id ımpı ov с , and tcu d vs Ind nol elap d befen e the
pıtıent could w ilk igam in the open 111 , his strengtli begin to 1 etuin, and eveij day intioduccd an ılteııtıon foi the better It ought to be lemul eel, that Sir Geoige, in his anxiety foi Ilailey's îeco veij, did not lose sight of what it was necess uy should bo done to piomote his mteiests when health ictuincd By cvoiv me ms in Ins povvei, he labouied to direct the attention of the Eail of Sindwch then hrst Loul of the Admn iltv, to the mentsof Lieutenant Hailej, md, befoie heleftlondon foi Ilcitfoidshne, he suc¬ ceeded m obtaining а distinct piomise that the recommendations he had pio cured should be attended to with the least possible delay
1 б
CHAP. VII. Too weil know men wfint our Creatoi m-idc in, And Nature too well taught tlicm to unadc us, 1 hey but too well know how, whnt, when, und wherr. Го write, to speak to sue, a id to forbeai, Hy siţţns, by si B h tiy motions, and by tears IV hen \ ows sliould stive, when oaths, when bimles, Vrhen prnycıs Ε/ «Λ ƒ Mulle I Jam Morr le Fil,arıt Un hai uh 'lira days of sickness aie usually made moie painful by vain impatience foi re¬ covery. Ihe debility biought on the nnnd by thc sufferings of the bodj, gent l.illj makes tlic afliiclid individu il so fittfu! and ptcvisli, tlmt those about hnn desile to ste hım ıecoveı, less foi his «ike, thm foi then own But it w is not so vv itli Hai le) . '1 he pe¬ riod of his indisposition was bnghtitled by ti inspoits so txquisite and so puie, that nothing gave him moie tontein than the «head of а too speedy ımpı ovement.
The delightful seat to which he had been conveyed was so piofusely adorned by the bounty of nature, and the inge¬ nuity of art, that it presented a sufficient number of objects to occupy agieeably the mind whicli had nothing else to employ it. These weie not overlooked by Charles; but it wis not these tliat gave bis tonfinement those diaiins to whith allusion has been made. It was the fiequent oppoitumties which it af¬ forded bun of enjoying the conveisation oi Ameli i, and the kind attentions whicli she consideied it liti ilutj to bestow on lum who had siifleicd so inatcually f ioni lus geneious attachment to Sir Geoige and his family, tlul constituted the hap¬ piness which made indisposition enviable, ind lecovery ten ihc. Behind the cott ige, at the extremity of a spacious gaiden, a lawn piesented itseli, in the cenile of which a noble bheet of watei ıefıeslıed the eye Ihe stream was supplied fiom the Lea nvei,
«hich bounded the lawn, and it lias constantly passing in а gentle cui ι cnt, being admitted on the one side by α simli opening fiom the bank, and pei- nutted to escape tluougli a coiiespoml- nig outlet on tl с othci. Close to it α small iibtic temple icaied its giaceful head, decorated with loses and honey¬ suckles m gay piofusion , and a vnde- ţpieailuig oak, against which it ι ested, thicvv a giateful shade all iound this pleasing ïetieat This hid been the fivoui ite чшпнн ι lesidence of Sir Spencei Haitnigiield Tint his son might not be led into those excesses which but too fiequently m ngle with the studies of a college, he had competent mastei s engaged to attend lum at home, and here .Sir Spencei, who designed his boy for the nav} , had been accustomed to pass Ins evenings in hne weatlier, while the jouth amusing him¬ self with a small ship, consti ucted to sail on the sti cam just descubed, dehghteo
the sanguine father b} a display of nau¬ tical talent, which he fondly believed, groitly sui passed his yens, and pıoved tint lus son was boni to excel in that distinguished piofession, to which Lng¬ hnd has, tluougli so m iny cenluncs, o*ved her salet}, and to winch she will cei stand indebted for împeiisliable glory. Bnef is tlie period of mortal joy. While bn Spencei exulted in the success of lus ettorts to pi esci ι e his son fiom con¬ tamination, w bile he bo isted that the } outh had grow» up all his heirt ι ould ilesu ι to see bun, while eveiy tongue was loud in his piaisc, and boldly picdictcd that he would become one of the gleitest orni- ments of the sei vice, α disc ise incident to an inhospitable climate, tei minateti Ins caieei, and piematuiely consigned lum to the grave. Ihe wietched fithci received the news, while .it Ins favounte countiy seat he was revelling in waking dieams of future tnumph, and hippy
greetings. It was too much for him. He soon became insane, and sunk beneath the awful visiUtion. Chartes, in one of his earliest visits to the little temple, observ ed a vv ntten paper fiamed »ind glazed. On looking closely at it, he found it to contam some verses on the catasti ophe just mentioned. They descubed the happiness the wutei had foimeily known in that beloved ïetieat, and the misery which he had sub¬ sequently expenenced, in language winch pıoved the »iffliction of the fathei to sur¬ pass the genius of the poet, and, in¬ deed, weie well fitted to justify Tickell's often quoted assei lion, — 1 Gncf uni tlcctcd suits but lit with art, Or tlowin 0 numbeis with a bleeding lieait " Ihey concluded, expiessiug a hope that whoever might possess this once delight¬ ful lesidence, when his eyes should be sealed in eteınal ıepose, vvould permit the tubute to the memory of his son, which he had penned with a trembling
band, ίο ] eroini in the little temple, where he should leave it at the close ot his mom nini pılgı image. A similar paper appealed on the oppo¬ site side or the bummei-house. Π u ky ex¬ pected to find that it contained something to the same eflect, by the same water, but on appioaching it, he peiceived the hand to be dıffeıent. He lecognued the wnting ot Ameln, and iound that that which had attiacted hb notice, was an answei to the pıaycı ot bn bpencei. It ran as .follows : Sad pilgrim on lift's theerJe я roid, Groaning bentath tliy Being s loud, Doom'd still to linger m despair, Aud ttar tliy venei alile hair, Aml weep with bitter, wild rc n ret Thy htar of hope for ever set, 1 see thec, like a restless ¿.host Still haunt that spot bUov'd the most, Whtre once 'twas tlunt to t iste ol joy, And smilt upon thy hloomin 0 boy Even now, us 'ere thy bosom s throes Were lutehM in Dtatlı s profound repose, I murk thee lingering on tlmt btream, ßcene of thy gayest wikinţ, dream,
Ihtın thee rage with fien/j чини, Court midnight's ¿,Ιουιιι, miti biave tlie stonn And m thc howhn¿,s uf the wmd, Λ Tit ıııcoın pain ment Tind Ihc rill which once iiiyht phjŕful dtintf. Bright fiom thy rapture speaking ginnet, Now ııeglı D cntIy liuincs Ъ\, Augmented from tlij ышкеп tje, And bears the teir on tow'uls thc mnn, İo hım for whom it fnllb iu \am Now bending o'er the tioubled wave, Ihou call'st thc sluinbcrci from his grnve Go thou to hnu— It muy «ot be Tli it hc thall e'ci retuin to thec No rainbow detki> thy closing daj, lo promise thee a bii 0 htti riy On с irth, — but ill is awful O loom, ihy only refuge is the tomb Thc fearful struggle now is o'er, Thy souows and thyself no more Remcinbertd here, and stranger feet Seek d niy thy sequestered *c it, And in thc scene wluth glads their cyci Thy eailj р1с*ьигсь realise Sentene'd peril ips, in tui n to know, Not less unutterable woc Suiľciei farewell The last request Wrun B fiom thy fi antic, bleeding breast, Maj never bc neglected here Long — Long through each succeeding jear, Shall be picservcd thy mournful lay, And pity shall her tributt pay
Ibr tale each feeling hcait bhall thrill, Laughter shall hear it unti hi still, And sacred to a lather's v\oc, The tear of sj mpathy shall flow Challes wai miy applauded the feeling which had thus commemoiated the noes of a sti angei, and the cue taken to pie- serve the sad memorial of Sn Spencei's sonow well accoided with the sentiment expi essed in the verses which Amelia had furnished as its ansvvei. The cucum¬ stance made the little nistic retieat most inteiesting to Hailey, and it was not less so to Amelia. In Challes, she fancied that she saw the living image of tbe accom¬ plished youth, the distiacted fathei had been doomed to mourn, aad a shuddenng sensation sometimes ian through hei whole fíame, when she leflected that both weie of the same dangeious piofession, and that the fnend of liei lathei, m whose agieeable society she could now indulge, might bef 01 e a j eai sliould have elapsed, be hurried like joung Haitmgfield, to his giave.
Then visits to the little temple weie cliai.ictensed by no idle mirth When the weathei was fine, as the indisposition of Hailey i esti uned lnm fiom exposing lumself to the heat of the day, they would ıetue to the inviting shade of the siimiiiei-lioust, antl he «* leading to each othei the favounte work of some esteemed poet, —the reviving fiagiance of the bieeze, — the soft muimunngs of the stieim, — the recollections attached to the spot, and the inexpiessible chai m whicli the voice of the ìeadei had mvau- ably foi the admning listener, seemed to revive some of the most exquisitely imagined scenes of tianquil enjoyment, that mspuation evei consigned to the pen ol the Baid. One day as Hti ley was reading aloud, fiom Falconet's " Slnpwieck," the power¬ ful picture which it presents of " th' un¬ speakable disti ess" to which manners are exposed, it caused an emotion on the part of Amelia, which it was not in her
power to conccil It attı icted Hai ley's attention , he looked oft the book, and pei cen ed lus gentle companion's ejes fixed on lnm with an expiession of tender appiehension, whicli could not be mis- undeistood. He saw that she tiembled fiom the appiehension lliat what lie then read of otheis, it woukl, at some future penod, be heis to read of lum This feai was so decidedly indicated, that the agency of the tongue to make it known was not required, and without the encura- locution of mtioduction, oi the foim of apology, both of which weie unnecessary, without even thinking of either, he con¬ vinced hei that he had corredi) read her thouglits. " You let this exaggeiated scene of calamity take youi attention too much, Amelia It is seldom that any thing of the kind occurs. I have made many voyages without encoimtcimg even tlit shadow of dangei, and doubt not I shall do so again. A ship will sometimes
foundci it sn, ind i house will now and then be blown down on shoi e , but you hive no more ıeısoıı to fen that I sliall be exposed to the peril of the one, thin I to issume, that it is ihnost impossible foi )ou to cscipe the ılıngeı of the other " A well tutoicd coquette, would upon this luve icplied, "Ορια}, Sir, do not alum }ourself on my account You, perlnps, llnnk α httlc too highly of }Oui sell I hid no thought ot you I as¬ suie you " But Ameln hid never been taught ifleclation, and despised falsehood , and the consequence wis, she had the sim plicit} to icply ■ \ou, thnlcs, hive been micie so famili ir with d ingoi, that you cease to be conscious of its existence Unfortun atei}, tint which }ou siy happens only sometime is ol fiequent — of constant occurrence A month seldom passes ■without bringing tidings of seveial ca
sualties at sea You are as much ex poscel as anothei, and, peihaps, bclore the mniversaiyol this dav shall unve, ¡ou miybe the subject, instead of tin icailei, of itale not less mournful than that now in your hand " ' And, if I should, would Ameln pic senc mj name 111 veises as tcndci is those winch hei sensibility bestowed on one she lud never seen ? ' " Anothei md in ablei band, will I hope be chaiged with the task ol wiitinj, youi epitaph " * I desire not th it " ' Bui I sincerely desne tint it may ncvei be possible foi it to come fiom my humble pen ' Ihe wish, thus uuhi ectly expressed, tlul she might not sui vive hnn, was not lost on Chartes lit hailed it as a new pioof of kindness " And may I then hope that one teai would tall to my memory, if the tlu cad ol my being vvere prem Uui ely snapped ? '
" Manj woultl, no tloubt, mount your loss " " But jou, Amelia, would you be of the numbei 2 M'ould you weep for the death of Hailcj '" " I should îegict the untimely death ol any one whom I hail cv ei know ıı ıs ι fucnd, and ми ely jou have a claim to that title?' " And to no otliei, Amelia » Can j oui kindness go no fui thei ?" Amelia was silent. " May I not aspuc to a still noblei title? Maj I not claim to be consideied a lover ? О ! if thc feelings of the heai t may give а chaiactei to its possessor, ev en tins distinction I h we a ι ight to hope will be avvauled, foi bicathing ıran never yet glowetl with love moie aident, than that which join beauty, join ac¬ complishments, j our v u tues, h ive kindled in this anxious breast, l'oıgıve the fiee¬ dom of my language. The tiuth has buist unconsciously fıonı me. Let me
hope that it will not move your displea¬ sure ?" No anger beamed in Amelia's eye. She smiled a negative, without intending it, while she called on him to proceed with the poem " May I then hope, Amelia ?" " lhat I am not very angiy ?" " That you will not disdain to view me as your lover, — that — blissful tliought ' I mav cherish the idea, that it is not impossible you will, at some futuie period be mine. Will jou not inswer me ?" " This question it is useless for me to answer. I have a father, whose appro- bition must be obtained, before I can presume to make a promise." " And that fathei is my kind, constant, bountiful friend, and I would rather die, —nay, I would rather live without the hope of ever possessing; you, than seek for one moment to make you forget your vol. i. к
duty to him This onlj would I pie¬ sume to ask, tint, m tlie event of liu, fa\oumigraypietciisioiis ) you would not oppose Ins will ?" " Now why, in tlie inme of loi tune," sin! Amclii, issuming ι moie cheerful •ııı, " should you ask me such a ques tion ?" " Because it is one, on the answei to which my eveiy hope of happiness de pends " " Well, I think it quite an umiecessai) one to bc addiessed to me " " Why so, mj deir Amelia ?" " Because, you know I im generalij an obedient daughter, ind,' — " I may, therefoie, intei" — " Even what you please " — " 1 hat you would not, on such an occasion, fail in jour filial duty? Is it ao, Amelia Ρ That you would not reject the suitor he offeied jou, even though that suitor should be Cliaries «5
Hailey ? May I fhttei myself that such α construction may faul) bo put on joui woids?" " If you never deceive yourself moie, you are less the dupe of self-flatteiy, than many gentlemen " " Iheu I am happy, foi jou aie nime " " Howl' " Yes, beloved Ameln, mine. There wanted but this to complete my happi¬ ness " " You folget iny fathei " " Not for an instant I am suie it is his wish that we should be united His inxiety to see us agieeable to each other, manifested itself, even before he took me to Lord Dashington's, on the morning itlei my amvil al Woobuin " " Surely you mistake I have some¬ times heard him speak of otheis, with whom a family alliance would not be dis. agreeable, but he nevei mentioned you " " No, Amelia, his delicacy is such, к 2
he is so truly anxious for your happiness, that till issuied ol oui mutual love, he would not name etthet to the other in a formil mannei But theanxiety that he has shown to know what I thoughtof you, — tbc delight hc has testified when I spoke m youi pıaıse, and tht scoin he Ins re peatedly expressed for those fatheis who make fortune a sme qua non on the part of a suitor , aU convince me that he de¬ sires nothing moie tban to find our inclín ations favomable to aiutine union " " It did not stuke me befoie, but I am now of opinion, tlut what you say is not wholly without foundation When speaking of you to me, his mannet and language have certainly been piecisely such as you desenbe " " No doubt remains on my mind A hundred times has he touched on this sub ject, as it seemed to me, with a view of encouraging me to avow my passion But till I knew what I flattered myself it would eie long be my felicity to know,
tint youi lient would not oppose Ins geueiositj and my love, I refi »lined from making bun tcquainted with iny sentiments Now, I sh ill joyfully seize the flist f ivoui.ible opportumtj " " 1 liei e ıs no occasion for such haste, Chartes" " Nay, but it will be a satisfaction to Sir George, to find no obstacle exists to the completion of his generous plan. Foi mjself, I am already happy. The promise you have giv en is sufficient 1 I know you too well to feai that it will ever be foigotten , and foi Sir George, — do not ι eprove my arrogance, — I am sure that he will raise no objection." " Youi mad brain runs away with you. At all events, years must pass before we can think seriously of such matters. In the mean time, you, sail¬ ing to almost all parts of the world, if your life should be spared, will find some one better entitled to your love, "and I for you may wear the willow." к 3
" Dismiss the mjuiious sui mise, and heai me sweai unshaken constancy, un¬ alterable love. — By all the poweis — " My father is coming." And Su Geoige, who had just an¬ nounced hts appioach by a * hem '' was now peiceived walking up the garden , but he was too distant to hen then conversation. Though both were free from eveiy thmg that could ment re¬ proof, they felt abashed at the situ¬ ation in which thcy found themselves. Nature, though bold enough m most in¬ stances, w^ere but two pai ties »ue en¬ gaged, finds her movements very mate¬ rially disconceited by the mtiusion of a thud ; and hence probably the saying, " thiee persons are no company." In the present instance, the loveis ìetuined to their formei amusement. Hailey re¬ sumed his book, and Amelia, who had rarely, if evei, attempted to deceive be¬ fore, seemed, as Sir Geoige drew near, to be eagerly listening to that of which,
distui bed is her mmd then was, she uii- deistood not one svoul. bu George en¬ teied the suiiimei-house, the book was thiovvn aide, and conveisation on gene- nl topics, filled up the niterv U which oc- curied belore dinnei was announced. Ihe party obeyed the summons. Sir George took the heid ol the table. Charles and Amelia sat opposite to each othei In this thei e vvas nothing unusuil ; but then feelings weie so difieient fiom what they had evei been before, that both found the common-place scene, m which they weie accustomed every day to take a put, fin nished for them a situ¬ ation of novelty and embanassment. Amelia could no longei look on Charles with that playful ease and self-possession, which, till now, had invariably marked her deportment. He feaied to give himself up to that umestiained and eager ga¿e, in which he had on foimei days indulged without dread oí observation. If it happened that his glance met hers, к i
he peiceived that her eyes were that mo¬ ment averted in confusion Sir George, cheered by the fineness of the season, and rejoiced at seeing Harley nearly recoveied, was in high spirits, and well disposed to engage in the gay jocular conversation which had heretofoie en¬ livened that penod of the day. Buthe in vain waited to hear his own mu th re¬ plied to with coiesponding vivacity by Harley. Brief closing observations put a stop to the chace of pleasantry, at the instant when be expected Charles would join with ardoui in the puisuit, and sometimes his sallies were suffered to go unanswered, and seemed to be even un¬ heard. This mortification, which a man who keeps a good table, is happily but seldom exposed to at dinner-time, was felt by Sir Geoige to be rather extra¬ ordinary. He, however, sustained the shock with becoming firmness, and did not suffer the fate of his wit to sour his temper. To his credit it should also be
added, that he was above affecting to un¬ dei value his own humour. He took care to hint, that if they did not laugh, itwas no fault of his, by remarking, that they both seemed out of spirits, and nothing could amuse them. How far he was jus¬ tified in coming to such a conclusion, from the indifleient success of the expe¬ riments he had made, it is not our pre¬ sent object to enquu e. In health, Cliailes continued to im¬ prove, and soon found himself perfectly ïestored Thougli he had eveiy rea¬ son to beheve Sir George would re¬ joice to learn that his affections were fixed on Amelia, and that there was a probability his love would meet with no unkind return, he wanted resolution to break the matter to his friend. He fre¬ quently came to a deteimmation to de¬ clare himself in foim , but when he had led the conveisation to that point which he thought most favourable to his views, he wanted courage to execute his design. к 5
Day after day was thus lost, and still ht " lesolved and re resolved," without dar¬ ing to do more, and when they left Hert¬ fordshire for Wooburn, the important dis¬ closure was still to be made But, alone with Amelia, he feaied not to plead his passion ; and she, convinced, by all she had obseived, that such con¬ duct was not opposed to the wishes ot hei only surviving parent, listened to him with indulgence To detail, with minuteness, the tender interviews which they enjoj ed, vvould add at least a vo¬ lume to this history, and we therefore, to escape the toil, without ceremony avail ourselves of a very useful phrase, (the invention of some sensible vvnter to save himself trouble and flatter his readers at the same time,) and say, " they are easier to be conceived than descubed."
CHAP. VIII. Atı, life of caret in fears or hopes consuni'd, Vain hopes ! that wither ere they welt have bloom'd How oft, emerging from the shades of night, Laughs the gay morn, nnd spreads n purple light ! But soon the gathering clouds o'crshade the skies, Red lightnings pin}, and thund'ring storms arise How oil a day, that fair and mild appears, Grows dark with fate, and mars the toil of «cars · SirVV Jones, " My deai Charles," said the Baronet, one day aftei dinner, when they were left to themselves, " the late uots dis·- conceited my plans not а little. In con¬ sequence of the bustle which prevailed everywhere, I did not introduce you to half the families where you vvould have been a welcome guest, and wheie it might have been your interest to visit. I have, howevei, given you an opportumty of knowing some of those whei e I tliought there were daughters that might engage к 6
your attention, but you have not afforded me the pleasure of knowing that any of them touched join heart. You are too reserved with me. I wish you freely to unbosom yourself. Speak to me as you wouid to a father, who had wished, through life, to avoid exacting that sub¬ mission, by authority, whicli he could gain by kindness." Charles stammeied out an expression of gratitude, and appeared confused. The opportunity foi disclosing to Sir George the passion which he had conceived for Amelia, seemed at length arrived, he panted to avail himself of it, but feared to begin. " Come, young man, speak fieely. Do nbt suppose that you have to address a morose old fellow, who, having exhausted the varieties ot folly in his eaily days, cannot bear the ideas of youth, unless they exactly accord with those which dis¬ appointment, expenence of the fleeting character of happiness, and appioaching
infirmity, may have induced hım to adopt for himself You see not, and you dread not the vicissitudes which, in all proba¬ bility await you, and I have no great wish that jou should, befoie joui time. Too much prudent apprehension at youi years, vvould damp hope, repiess ambi¬ tion, and make you unfit for exertion in thc piopei dij of enterprise. But, as much of your futuie comfort depends upon the decision you may shortly come to on one point, I feel anxious to know your feelings on tbat. You know vvhat I meni " " I presume you mean --------" "You piesume I mean —now don't be so forma! You know I mean to ask you, hav e j ou been thinking any thing at all about α wife? Have you seen any young lady jou could wish to become youi partner for life ?" " Why, Sir George, you are acquainted with my sentiments—" " Well, and you are acquainted with
mine. — Now, why can't you give a direct answei to ι plain straight-foiwaid ques¬ tion ' Do you ïcgict any of the beauties w e left in town ?" " I cannot say that I do." " Then I think you aie veiy particulai. What, was there no one of all I have introduced you to, whose beauty and accomplishments could awaken youi de- sues, and command youi legiet. Really you have a heart of fimt, though some¬ times, when you steal a glance at a fan face, you have »in eye o' fiie. — Ha ' I'm punning without u«g it. rimt, sleal, una fin, harm ei/ piettilyj, Well, I can only sa. I ara suipnzed that no one has yet appeared to captivate your affections." " But that is not the fact, Sn Geoige, and ------" " Hey ' what------" " I only said that I regretted no lady ш town." " О ! 'we must speak by the caid,' I
see, so then you sigh for some nymph in the country. Who is it? — I am im¬ patient to heai." " I am afıaıd to tell you, how high my presumption soars above the humility of my condition." " Presumption ' nonsense ' You might, without lepioich, aspne to the daughter of a Duke Well, I am glad you look upw ai ds. Your toi mer i omantic speeches, about humble lovehness and rustic beauty, 01 something of that sort, ı athei discon- cei ted me. You need not feai meeting with in uni ivouiable ìeception, provided that hei fathei is a man of liberality and good sense, and values the happiness of his daughtei." " I am sure that he is а man of bound¬ less libeiahty, of excellent undei standing, and sınceıely anxious foi the happiness ot his child." " Why then it is all safe. — And the lady?" " Every thing that man could desire,
or * the pomp and prodigality of heaven' prepare, for lus enjoyment." " And her foitune " " Most ample " " Indeed ' Why then the affair is as good as settled. Ah ' Charles, you are a sly lellow. I did not think j ou could have formed such an attachment, without my perceiving something of what was passing in your mind — But, the lady, does she give yon my encouragement." " If my passion h id the approbation of her father, I do not think that she would prove inexoiable " " That's all «ight. — You rejoice me beyond measure. Her fathei, if he be the man you desenbe, can have no objec¬ tion." " О yes, manj . My want of for¬ tune" — " Pooh, pooh ' — Never think of that. — You have a profession, and I will see that he sliall not find you destitute. You may be assured that I will take care
nothing of lhat sort shall stand in the way of youi happiness " " I alieady owe so much to your bounty" — 11 Not a woi d of that — we hav e some¬ thing bettei to talk about. So as I was saying, hei fathei, unless he weie one of those close-fisted, ciaek biained cur¬ mudgeons, who have infested the woi Id so long, that they hav e out-lived their hu¬ manity, and feel they have nothing in common with the younger and moie in¬ teresting part of their species" — " He is not such a man." ·' Why then I say you may give your fears to the wind. You will confer an obligation on him, by declai ing yourself. Suppose his case were mine. Suppose a young, well-made, well disposed, well- connected spng like youiseif, weie to be smitten with my daughtei. Do you thmk that I would make him unhappy, and my daughtei miseiable at the same time, lor the chance of a more splendid offer
at some futuie pci iod ? No, no, I should know my dut) aud my mteiest better. Who is she ?" " Emboldened b) )0ui kindness which fust taught me to piesume, I wilt make vou acquiinted with that which, but for the encoiuagement you have been so kmdly anxious to give, should have been consigned to eternal silence ; which, thoiurh despau festered in iny heart, should have had no voice, but have passed concealed fiom all the vvoild witu me to that gi.ive, fiom which the seciet could not esc ipe " " Where are you running ? What ' is it а Pnncess of the Blood ?" " No, Sir George, but it is one so fai exalted above me, and yet moie, so lovely in heiself, that the language I use is not extiavagant. Confess its justice when I tell you that she to whom, en- couiaged by )0ui kind pai tiahty Ihave dared to lift my eyes, is no other than
Ameba — tlie deai companion of niy childhood,— vom beloved, adoied Ame¬ lia " Su George seemed tliundeistiiick. He hdd coidiail) clispcd the hmd of H ule}, while he was speaking, hut he now ie- leased it, and leceded one step befoie he «ittempted speech i I lien, with an an ot coldness, veiy difleient fiom what Cliailes had been accustomed to, and with an ex¬ piession of ineffable amazement, he ex¬ claimed in a faltei uig accent, " My Amelia ' — Impossible " " I know the temei ity of my love. I know my own dements and her surpas¬ sing excellence too well to believe foi a moment that if Justice held the scales, hope could sui vive hei decision. It ıs on the partiality of my fnend, — my be¬ nefactor, — my more than f atlier that I thiow myself." The Baronet seemed α little to recover from the suipnse which had at first over¬ come hun, and he endeavomed to re-
sume lus wonted air of tianquilhty and cheeiful goodwill. He replied with a forced sniiL»· "O' my daughter ! — She is but a child. She is but α little more than sixteen. She is—is—that is—at pi csent, quite out of the question. No, no, you can do better for youi self than that. I can't suflet you to thiow j om self away on the daughter of a simple Baionet." " Higher, Sn George, human vanity cannot aspire. Rejected by jou, I shall nevei oflend another fathei in the same way. Poigne, forgive, my boldness, but do not foi bid me to hope." " Really Cliailes, Amelia is too young." " I do not seek, I do not desire to be made happy immediately, but by the as- suiancc that at some futuie period you ν ill not disdain to receive me for your son-in-law." " There will be time enough to talk over this mattei some years hence. — At present, the discussion of it is quite pre
mature. In fact, jou yourself aie too young to become a husband." " But, Su Geoi gc, j ou h ıv e ı cpeatedly advised ine to thmk of making choice of a wife." " Aye, bul — but not my Amelia." " You have told me that I might aspne to the richest and noblest in the land." " But not — not to my daughtei." " That ıeproof for my boldness which I always expected others would not fail to bestow, if I acted on youi counsel, it is my misery to receive from you. Would to Heaven that I had been deaf to it ' — I know I am culpably dai ing, but from youi kindness —" " My deai Cliailes I — I am not angry with you. If m any thmg else I can serve you—" "No, Su George, I am too much your debtor already. — I will întinde on your kindness no more. I was weak and vain enough to think when you
desired me to seek the hand of some neh heu ess—" " Why, lookje Cliailes — When a mm gives advice, he does not expect it to be used agnnst himself Piesent com p шу is always undeistood to be excepted 1 hive advised you foi vour good, ind still I siy jou have nothing to feai in uldiessing one who may be join supe noi in ıank or fortune Now theie is Lady Dennmgville, l would have you tiy there Tiust me, you need not feai ıejectıon ' ' The expenment I hive alieady mide ıs quite sufficient " " Make youi advances any where else, and my connections, my influence, my fortune, shall support you beyond your most sanguine expectations " " No, Sir Geoige, since my worthless ness ıs such, that you, who first laboured to vanquish my diffidence, and who have heretofore been blind to my most pıomı- nent failings, cannot suffer me to think
of becoming voui son, I disdun to ex¬ pose vou to the suspicion of recom mending to others an ilh шее which, tor youiseif, you despise " " Despise · — I do not despise you, nor — nor — I tell you, its quite another thing I am still sınceıely youi fnend The match you hive pioposed is not exactly wh-* f I could wish, but in any thing else you can commind me Be¬ lieve me, if I had not particulai leasons ior acting is I do, it would give me inex- piessible pleasure to meet your wishes, as I am persuaded that almost any othei man vvould do.whose sitintion resembles mine But theie aie ciicumstances, (I cannot at this moment explain them,) whicli create an insuperable obstacle " " I know there are, Sir George Too late foi my own peace I perceive them, and all explanation on your pait would be superfluous Weak fool that I was, to overlook them foi in instant '"
" Come, Challes, let us drop the sub. ject 1 о morrow I will take you to see the Miss Radiants We will then go to theBlooinboroughs, and afteiwards — it» short, I wil' feast your eyes on such a gay succession of youth, ıank, wealth, and beauty, that you shall be moie than con¬ soled. Lven youi politeness shall be overpowered by truth, and you shall be constrained to acknowledge my Amelia surpassed. Come, don't walk backwards with that disconsolate an. Resume your seat, take youi wme, and think of the charms that I promise it shall be yours to see to morrow." " Youi piomise, Sn George, is lash , your offer very kind, but it is one of which I cannot avail myself, as I leave Wooburn to night." " I cannot allow j ou to think of that " " My mind is made up My deter¬ mination is irrevocable. No powei on earth shall keep me here till morning
You will excuse my retning now, Sır George, to prépaie for my depiitur«· " He bowed, and left the loom Su Geoi ge rose to follow, and if possible, to detain the young man, whom he loved nom his heart, though he could not think of cilling him his son in law, but before he had passed fiom his chau to the en¬ ti mce of the apartment, the closing of the outer dooi told him that Harley was no longer undei his roof He looked iltei hnn, but he saw hnn not, and igno¬ rant of his immediate intention, he, in ν nn sought the means of preventing him nom carrying his ìesolution into effect. \ sudden tremot ian thioiuïh Ins whole liame lhe с ılın despeiation which he tl ought he saw m Chulés as he letired, suggested, that he might commit some rash action ' Woul I to Heaven I could consent '" he exclaimed * And why ean 1 not ? \\ here will be the — ? But, no , — it shall not be I must not think of It VOL t I
He gioaned heavily as he uttered tlie last words, and started, at finding the sound had called Amelia to his assist¬ ance. " Are j ou not veil, Sn ?" " Not quite " " Shall I send loi any one." " No." " P»ay, Sir, have advice." " No, no," ne ι epeated, w ith some nu¬ tation. "I want no advice. A little an will be sufficient. I will walk." "Shall I accompany j ou ' Will you Ict me support ) ou?" " No," said lie, and with that feverish impatience with which peisons m pam usually îeject pioffeied kindness, as hc turned avv»iy, lie peevislily added, " I wish to bc alone " He adv ance ï a few steps towaids thc gaiden, wnen he felt that he hid spoken to Amelia m a «one which she eould nevei htai without pain, uul the soirow which lie siw expiessed in her counte-,
aance touched luni neaily. He ap¬ pioichcd hei with tciidciiicss. " I am not," he ened m a softened lone, " I im not angry, Amelia, with ijon. But I am α little ι uffici!. A lew moments vv ill en ible me to compose myself Amuse youiseif with a book, 01 with your instru¬ ment I will presently retuin." Accustomed to obedience, Amelia questioned not hei f ıtlıeı on the sudden eliange in his deportment She acknow¬ ledged his ıevıvmg tenderness with a smile of consoled affection, and entered he* apirtment in which she had pievi¬ ously ι ested But, though hei tongue made no en¬ quiñes concerning that which had so iiniisuillj disconcerted Su Geoige, bet nunii was not quite so well schooled. *>hc could not b it inwaidly ask, and ask with exti eine anxiety, wlut coultl have caused the emotion vvhieh she had ìe- uiarked. His woids too weie alarming — " I am not angry with you." With L 2
whom then was he angiy i Was it with Charles ? О no ' He could not be angry with hnn. She would fam peisuade her¬ self that that was impossible. A gentle knock at the dooi of the room disturbed her leflections. Harlej entered. She was about to enquire of him what had disturbed Sn George, when she thouglit she dıscoveıed as greit a change in him as that which she had previously lemirketl m liei fathei. His accustomed mu tli was no more, and solemn sorrow had given lnm an aspect which in htr piesence, he had nevei woi n till now He took lier hand, and piessed it against his hps with ι waimth that asto nished hci, and slie hastily endeav oured to withdi iw it. " Yel one moment, 1 implore }ou, lei me cl isp this ileal hand, whicli tlie hope of the moi mn„' told me that 1 should eit long chim is mine " Illese voids, utttittl with an espies-
sion of affection, which well accorded with the mournful air she had noticed when he came in, commanded all her attention. He added, " This is, peihaps, the last time you will evei be appi о iched by the wretched Hailey." Amelia trembled with involuntary emotion, but making an efloit to appear calm, she stiove to listen, while he pro¬ ceeded " The die is cast. My piesuming ν anity has deceived me. I have solicited Sir Geoige to appiove the passion which I anogantly supposed that it was his object to inspire. He ïejects me." "Be more youiseif, Chartes. This wildness alarms me. He may not alvvays think as he does now. I know Sir George has a great aflection foi you. He is hasty, but not unkind." " Before Heaven I sweai, I tliought, from his whole conduct up to this fatal hour, that he already viewed me as bu L 3
future son. Nevei wis disappointment so bıtteı, so iinlooked-loi. lhis stolen interview is oui hst. lhe vehicle will be »it the dooi in α few minutes, which is to beai me away " " О Charles' )ott ue too hist}. Re¬ main at least till to-monow."' " No, my Amelin, it is impossible. Su Geoige wishes to-monow to intio· duce me to those, whom he woultl have me prefer to his daughtei. He would hawk my heart iound the countr), and sell it to the highest bidden But no, if he cannot approve me foi his oon, he shall nevei tlespise me as а toitime- huntei. Why did he encoui ige my passion ? Why make me believe that the mediocnty of my ciicumstances pre¬ sented no impediment to my manying the uchest, and best connected lieu ess in the countiy ? Why tell me all this, and make me folget myself, only to feel that poverty (which till now I heeded not) can raise an insuperable obstacle
(he spoke to this eflect) between me and happiness? Was it not cruel » nay more, was it not—" " You forget that you are speiking of my fathei. An indulgent father he has hitheito been found." " True, true, and a munificent friend. I know not what I am saying. I would die for lum But I must away." " You are too precipitate." " Aftei what has passed, I cannot ıe¬ maın. Yet a few words before we part. I know your sense of duty to a parent too well, and reverence it too sınceıely, to suppose it would be possible (or to wish that it were,) for you to think ot forming an union now, or at any future period, in opposition to the wishes of Sir George. Honour and gratitude foi bid me to do, or to advise any thing, that might embitter his days, though he should blast all the happiness of mine. But one request I venture to prefer. Do not for. get me, do not yield your affections to an. L i
othci, till cveiy piospect ol mj gamın,. ıhı. -consent of Su Geoıge ıs .ıııııılul.ıted Let me be animiteli to exertion, bj the hope, that if 1 succeed m leeommendmg mjjell to lnm, as one in whose case the wint ot fortune miy be oveilooked, Ins appio bation will not be accompanied with the intelligence, that Amelia lus become the wife ot anothei " The tender, eai nest energy with whicb he spoke might have moved one whose heart was 1сзэ susceptible than« that of Miss Henderson, even though no pie- possession had existed, to give his vvoids lesistless eloquence. She no longer at¬ tempted to withdiaw bei hand but, labouung to ìepiess the stiong emotion which shook hei delicate flame, Amelia, in л low tone, utteied that winch she hoped would in some degiee, sootlie him whom she tiembled to ıeflect thai she, peihaps, gazed on, as hc had sug gested, foi the last time. " lo allect indiffeience now, would
be to play the hypocnte my heart abhors. What you have told me respecting youi interview with my fathei, affects me but too nearly in the same waj that it affects j ou. I nevei yet knew lnm act haishly by any one, but retuimug kind¬ ness soon labouied to atone to the injured party If in tins case, he should not relent, tiust ine, Chartes, youi peace ot nnnd will not be the only saenfice He taught me first to esteem and love you ; and I can never unlearn the lesson. lliough I may not lebel against my (athei, you shall ever be tendeily lenieni- beieil. Let your fate be what it may, no competitor foi my esteem shall evei uval you in my love , and if I m»iy not call you husband, believe me these hps shall never bieathe that name on .nı¬ otheı." Chartes gieedily listened to the sounds which, dictated by pity and by love, flowed warm tiom the heait on Ins de- L 6
lighted eais, and felt m tint instant л sensation of joy so exquisitely thrilling, that it almost consoled lnm foi his recent disappointment, his piesent sonows, anil the gloomy futuie that laj befoie lum. But Amelia, exhausted by tlie stiong sensibility, the w aim emotions she had la¬ bouied to controul, while making a last exertion to soothe bei lovci, now seemed about to faint, and would have fallen, h»id not Cliailes ıeceıved her m Ins aims. His aident expiessions of giatitude, lus vows of eternal fidelity, were scarcely heard, and the kiss which he uncon¬ sciously presumed to impress on hei lips, passed unreproved, foi it was unp<»iceived. « llevive, ıevıve," he at length ex¬ claimed, " you have given me new life. We shall yet be happy. Feai not foi me, my charmer. A day will ainve, when Su George shall no longei object to that alliance which he now thinks it his duty to spurn. But I heai the wheels of the
chaise which ıs to cany me hence Гаге - well, farewell, my Amelia, I must ıemaın no longer " The sound, to which he dnected hci attention, stiuck on the ear of Amelia, now m some degiee tianquilbzed, like the knell of death She gazed on him with a mournful eagerness, as if anxious to impress deeply on her memory the beloved image it would no longer be heis to behold She waved one hand foi him to ıetue, while, without knowing it, she retained him with the othei At length, funtlj sobbing " adieu," she disengaged heiself, the stungs which bound her to existence seemed to snap as she released him fiom her giasp , and she saw lum depart in agonizing silence But befoie Harley stepped into the chaise, he ielt that he had a painful duty to perform He had to take leave of Sir George, foi the many favours he had ie ceived, which he could m no way repay, L 6
foibade hım toıetıre, without seeing luni again. The Baionet had heaid the vehicle* diaw up, and had suspected that it might be some visitoi fiom town. Labouring to subdue the emotion which grew out of Ins Late conveisation with Hailej, lit appioached the house fiom the gaiden , when the lattei, attned in his tiavelbng dress, advanced to meet lum. Sir Geoige started at peiceiving his guest was alieady on the eve of taking his depaituie. He fiist bioke silence. " Why, suiely you aie not about to leave us, Mi. Hailey." While speaking, he endeavoured to assume an air of indifference. He wished to look on Hailey as he had been accus¬ tomed to do, but his eyes involuntarily shrunk fiora encounteung the glance of his departing friend. Chartes had îaiely heaid himself ad¬ dressed by the Baronet as Mi, Harley.
He (elt all the heeding Ioice of this in¬ ci e ise ot politeness, antl ıeplıed — " Yes, Su Geoige, I have alieady mtiuded on your goodness too much. My giatitude is insolvent, but let my piomptness to lehevc you from the so¬ ciety ot one whose piesence must anno}, ittest that it exists." " Niy, speak not thus. Ľvei welcome to 111} house, evei deal to my heart, I cannot but complain of the ìesolution you have taken. Foi ego it, Charles, and every thing that 1 can do, I .all do, to make you happj On one point only can you solicit me in vam. In eveiy other in¬ stance, ray labouis to piomote vour wel- faie shall outstnp youi expectations, nay joui wishes." " I thank jou, Sn Geoige. Γιοιη my heart I thank you, foi all that your mu¬ nificence has bestowed, on one who had little oi no claim on joui generosity. Believe me deeply sensible of the many
obligations contened. May the evening of your days abound with eveiy felicity that indulgent wisdom can compiess within the brief span of human life. And now, my levered benefactor, fare¬ well, faiewell." He lespectfully chsped the hand of Su George, who started at its burning touch, and now made an effort to detain him. " Stay one moment. — At all events, you must not leave me thus." Hailey peiceived Sn Gecrge had opened his pocket-book, and had what appealed to be α bankei's check in his band. — He quickened his letiung steps at the sight, and only ıepeated the word " faiewell," as he passed to the car- i ıage. " At least, tell me wheie you mean to take up youi residence," said Sir George. " I do not know mj self."
" Then promise that I shall know wheie you hrst go, when you leive f ondon " "Well, well, I will laiewell, Sir Geoige " While speikmg, he stepped into the ch име, antl immediately oidered the post¬ boy to go on He bowed to Su Geoige, nul vimshed fiom his view Ameli ι had listened, with agonizing dieid, for the sound which announced that Challes depaited, is she feared, foi tvei Ihehoiseshad to pass a coinei of tlie house bef oi e they could be seen Iiom the window of the apaitment in which she íemamed At length, the post boy's voice innounced the mo ment to lnve nnved, and her hands weie lnvoluntiniy raised towaids the tin one of the Tternal, to supplicate his blessing and piotection for hei lover, now about to go foith a needy, fnendless fugitive Thus employed, the waving
of a hand attı acted bei notice, mil, her thoughts descending from heaven to cai tli, she insweicd by α similar action It was past, she could see it no more, but the lattlmg wheels still detained bei attention. Suddinly thej seemed less remote than they had been She was certain that she bend them plainer It w as possible tn.it Su Geoi ge had relented, and found means to ι ecall the object of his bounty.— No —such a chanjje, so unexpected, so happj, was too much to hope foi. He had, peihaps, forgotten something. He had one word to siy, before he abandoned the mansion of his old friend. She might see hım, foi an instant — she might hear his voice again. But the noise of the wheels no longei seemed to announce his ıetunı. He came not. An indistinct lattle was heaid foi an instant, but it was cleaily íetiring, and now it mingled with the winds.
Such weie the anxious flııtteungs in the bosom ot Amelia. Though Cliailes enduied not the same suspense, he ex¬ penenced equal igitation, and deeply felt the contiast afloided, by his present situation, to that m which he lound him¬ self when he fomierly passed ovei lht* sime giound with Su George fiom Woo bum. He was then afıaıd that he might disappoint his benef actoi, by inability to love Amelia. Tlut feu was no more, and lie was now an exile from the Bai o- net's hospitable mansion, tin ough loving hei too well. He remained in London, no longei than was neeessarj, to make anange¬ ments for ıeceıvıng the eaihest notice of any thing tint might tianspne at the Admnalty ltspectmg lum. To an mn, which had been foimerly recommended to lnm at Chatham, he now shaped Ins course, as he lud hopes of meeting with one of his late bıotlıer ofheers m
that neighbourhood, and from the in¬ foi mation which he had ıeceıved, he per¬ suaded himself that he had so little time to remain on shore, that it was not worth while to engage a private lodging.
СНЛР. IX. Nou ¡un I pmudcr of if ıs poverív, wíticli I Anoivis ni) own, than а waiting gentlewoman ь of -ι frizzled yont ь Mortlı of hair, that neier |,rew on her lie ul DttKEH By indulging the hope tlut he should be pıolessıonally occupied in a few days, he* stiove to mitigate the cureless grief that grew on Ins late disappointment. He had ıcsıded at Chatham but »ι short time, when he heaid Ins name pıonounced without, by some one who desired to know if such a peison was there. Never doubting but that that which he had ex¬ pected tiom the Admiralty was arrived, he eageily sprang forwaid, to ıeceıvethe messengei, when, to his gieat surprise, he saw Thomas, the confidential sei vant of Sn George Henderson. A momentary ray of ti ansport flashed
acioss his mmd It was possible Sir Geoige hatl lepented his conduct, and desned to ìecall lnm. " Ah, sn '" said the man, " we misses you so sadlj. Oui house ar'nt at all the same thing now jou aie gone. Sir George used to be so merry and good- natured while you weie theie. Now he's clear an altered man, and so fictful one can do nothing to please hnn " " And jour young lady — is she well ?" "O' she is very good-natuied, but one don't see much of her. She so sel dom leaves her own room, and, when she does, she's quite melancholj, because master's so beside himself, and because jou aie gone away, who used to make us all so merry and comfoi table." There was nothing m what Thonus had said, to dissipate the flatteung idea which he was beginning to indulge, but this was effected, in an instant, by the letter, of which he was the beaier. In
that Sır George expressed the most lively ıegıet foi the loss of Harlej's society, and begged of him not to suppose, fot an instant, that what had recently oc¬ cuned, would at all diminish his fnend¬ slnp, 01 make him less anxious foi the welf ire of lus piotogée. Foi piesent use he desired him to accept a Bank-note fot five hundred pounds, which was enclosed s α parting token. He concluded with stiong expiessions of regaid, and pro¬ mises of futuie support But the lettei gave Chartes no con¬ solation, for the name of Amelia w as not theie, and the determination of Su Geoige, he had therefore a right to con¬ clude, had expenenced no change. He buefly ι ephcd, by thanking Su Geoige for this new proof of his munificente , hi t, .it the same tune, declaring it to be 1 is fixed ìesolution, not to add to the debt of ¿ι ititude, (alı e uly too great), winch appealed agamsl him, by accept¬ ing anv pecuniary favours.
And having sud thus much, and ex¬ piessed his sincere wishes foi the hap¬ piness of his patron and bis beloved daughtei, he enclosed the Bank-note, (in spite of the piessing solicitations of Ί hornas to retain it as a keep sake, - ) and ι etui ned it to the Baronet by Ins tiusty servant, who declaied he was stue that tins circumstance would make Sn Geoige moie fiettul than ever, and most leluct- aiitly took his depaituie, aftei ıepeated experiments on the inflexibility of Hulev. But ifhe obstinately ıefused the piof¬ feied assistance of Su Geoige, itwas not because his ciicumstances vvere such as to rendei it unnecessaij. Economy was not one of the most pi eminent vu tues that adorned his chaiactei, and, in mo¬ ney matteis, he had eveiy thing to leain. When Thomas had ı etired, it occui red to him that an enquny into the sUte of his finances might not be impropei, and on acting upon this piudential feeling, he found with some amazement, if not con-
tern, that he possessed but teu pounds in the woild, and in the event of his not being appointed, he had no nght to look for а new supply till moie than two months should have elapsed W bile his mind was thus emploj ed, he saw α j oung man of genteel appearance, though seemingly in dishabille, enter the room He immediately lecogniscd in bun, a peison who had been singing foi the amusement of α party up stans on the da} of his ainval lhis gentleman, whom he had entounteied twice at the dooi, now advanced is an old acquaint ance, took Challes by the hand, which he shook most coichally, and, at the same time, enquned veij eai nestly aftei his health They soon fell into conv eisation, and Harley found that he had stumbled on a man who had nol been unused to polish¬ ed societj, and considei ed himself fortu nate m having met with one whose com¬ panj might ι eheve lum fiom а tedious hoir He invited the sti angei to partake
of a bottle of wme, whicli he oideied the landlord to bring in, and tlie invitation wis cheeifully accepted " Put that down to me, Mr. Bung," said the gentleman, as the landlord entered with the decanter and glasses. Charles ι ephed, that as be had called for it, he must consider the wme to be his. "O'l give you my word of honour I had no idea of that I must insist — upon my honour — put it down to me, Bung —" " I shall pay foi it, landloid," said ( liai les, in а rather а peremptoiy tone. " Well then, the next must be mine." " O, I say, Mr. Flash, did j ou get that bill again 3 " enquired the innkeeper. " I did, I give you my woid of honour." " But will you give it to me " " I give you my word of honoui, I will in a minute. — Its in my pocket- book.— A vciy odd circumstance this. 7
" You must know," he contineed ad¬ dressing himself to Cliailes " 1 am m Irish hw student Having come ova hei e to keep my terms, I found it con venient, m consequence of an aflair of honoui, in which I had the misfortune to wound my man, to come to this ob- scure place, where nobody knows me, to íeside for a short time And, is the Devil would have it, some ot my ι emit- tances fiom the othei side of the vvater, have failed to reach me, I suppose, through changing my abode. The con¬ sequence was, I began to get out of cish. 1 speik to jou as to an old tuend. It will you know sometimes happen, when one gets away from one's con¬ nections." Cliailes felt that there was something very just in this observation, ind could not help signifying his assent to it, by saying, " It will, indeed." " So, Sir, as I was going to tell you, at last а twenty pound bill came to hand, vol ι M
which I intended foi my friend Bung. — Take a glass of w ше, Bung — So I went and got it accepted, and then I give you my woid of honour, I lost it on my retuin, A pooi man found it, and came here with it while I was out I oideied Bung, when he came again, to present him with five shillings, but the fellow wanted moie It had a fortnight to run, so I did not care to give a great reward, as he could not get the money, and upon this, my gentleman caines it to the aeceptoi, who gave him what he asked for it, and kept it m his possession I had written to my fnend for anothei bill, but as pooi Bung wished to have lhat, and as the aeceptoi had no right to it, I determined to make him give it up, so I went to him, and have at last suc¬ ceeded in frightening lum out of it. He gave it up to me this moining How¬ evei Bung, here it is, and you may do what you will with it Its as good «is »>
Bank of Lngland note, 1 give you my woi d of honoui " With these words, he took a papei out of a pocket-book, pioduced from beneath his coat, which he seemed particulaily caieful not to unbutton, and handed it to Bung, who, forthwith, made his exit, m oıdeı to give it to the Dover coachman, then on his way to London, to pay it to a grocei in Greenwich, where he undeistood the aeceptoi lived, that it might be presented the next moining. Chartes directed Mr. Plash's attention to his watch-cham and seal, which, m the effort to pioduce the bill, had fallen onthe flooi. Mi. Flash picked them up veiy ex¬ peditiously, and with some confusion, " These rings aie always breaking," he remaiked, with an air of vexation. " Is your watch nght," sud Charles, " I behev e mine is slow " M 2
" Upon my honour, it is not It stop¬ ped 1 ist night, and 1 can't make it go, so to tell you the tiuth, Ihave sent it to Pendulum just above, to see what's the matter with it. At least I oideied the chambermaid to carry it to lum, but tlie jade Ioigot " " That was not veiy exti aoi dmary, as jou omitted to tike it out of jour fob " " Upon my honoui, you aie right, Sir, your veiy good health." And now changing the subject, Mr. Flash pioceeded to notice the proceed¬ ings which had taken place m Parliament respecting the disabilities undei which the Catholics of Iieland laboured, He pleaded with much animation the cause of his " fellow-subjects, and suffering bie¬ thien," eloquently asseited the right of eveiy rational bemg to woi ship his Maker m the way which best suited bis capacity, and exposed the idUacy of that ι easoning winch labouied to show that if what the Catholics then demanded, weie conceded,
they would use the advantages so ob¬ tained, to endeavoui to possess them¬ selves of otheis, and never rest satished till they were admitted into Paihament itself. Charles difleied from his new acquaint¬ ance, on this point, and thought the Catholics would natuially be led to aspire to a lai gei paiticipation in the blessings of the Lnghsh Constitution, than they now claimed, but it was his opinion that the ovei whelming superiority of the Pro¬ testants in numbers, would effectually secure all the existing establishments ot the countiy. " I give you my word of honoui, I be¬ lieve you are right," was the reply of Mi. Hash , and he was pioceedmg with Ins speech, when a violent tumult in the house dıstuıbed then conveisation, and in a few moments the landloid enteied in the utmost agitation and dismay, look- mg appıoprıately enough like him who Drew Pnain s curtains in the dead of night, M 3
to innounce that thi ough some careless ness on the part of the sei vint, i fire had bioken out in Mi Hai ley's bed loom, ind though the fhmcs weie now extinguished, the ipirtment h id been so much injured, tint it would be impossible foi lum to sleep there that night 1 Ins lecident Mi Bung obseived, was the moie unfortunate, as ill the othei beds weie full, md they weie quite it a loss what to do if Mi Hailey objected to sleeping in а two bedded 100m " ' 1 h it is not what I have been used to I certainly prefei ι room to my¬ self " But this unfortunate iccident puts it out ol my powei to accommodate you is I could wish, and if for one night ' — " Why, Sn, to sleep in the same chain ber with α peison I hav e nevei seen, ι not agreeable " " No, Sir, I should not think of that but if Mi Hash would have no objection
to } oui taking a bed in his apartment, you peihaps would not mind it " " You shall be ν ery welcome to take wi ich bed you please," said Mr Hash. " I am much obliged by your ofler ; if you have no objection to be so intruded upon " — " О don't mention it." — " Then I shall feel much obliged by the accommodation." The business being thus airanged to the satisfaction of all parties, Mr. Flash supped with Charles, and both shortly after retned for the night. It struck Charles as somewhat singular that a man of Mi. Flash's appearance should lodge fiom choice in so mean an apartment as the two-bedded loom proved to be, but the failuie of his lemittances might per¬ haps make this necessary. In this idea he was soon confiimed, for an accident having suddenly extinguished the can¬ dle, when Mr. Flash was beginning to undress, Hailey perceived by the light M i
of the moon, that Ins ciavat and coat foimed the best half ot his appaici, and that the lattei had been kept closely buttoned, not so much to hide the want of а waistcoat, as to conceal the absenee of a shut. The evils of poveity now piessed stiongly on his nnnd, ind while* he lamented that he could offei bis neighbour no eflectual jelief, an »uvk waul leflection, that it was possible he might shortly find himself in а sımılaı condition, made lum for α moment re¬ gret that lit had not availed himself ot the libeiahty of Sir Geoige. But this idea he instantly dismissed, and mentally resolved that iather than accept rebel from his hand, he would change situa¬ tions with Mr. Flash. Itwas but just light when he awoke, fiom peiceiving some one to appioach his bed. On opening his eyes he saw Mi. Hash in thc act of reaching his watch ftom the little bag in which he had deposited it when going to ıest. Mi.
Plash was quite dressed, and his coat w,ts buttoned as closely as it had been on the pieceding day. " I beg your paidon," said he, " foi distili bing you. I took the libei ty just to look it your watch, to see what time It W lb." " Aie you going to walk so soou '" " Yes, foi I give you my woid ot honoui, I thmk the opening ot the moin¬ ing the most delightful part of the diy. Will you do me the favour to bieakfast with ine on my ıetunı. — S»ij you will." " I iather expect a peison fiom Lou- dos on business, so I cannot piomise." " If he don't come, 1 shall expect the lionoui of join company. Let me not bieak m upon youi iest. I am sony that I mtenupted your ıepose " " It is of no importance I slnll use piesently myself." " Well, I shall soon be back, I give you my woid of honour. I look foi two gentlemen heie this moining. Captain M 5
ü'.Tumps, and Counsellor ľitz-Wigsby piomised to dine with me God bless you — atı ι evoii ." And with these words he left the ıoom. Cliailes had it in contemplation to get up dnectly, but taking »t few minutes to considei of it, he fell asleep, and did not open Ins eyes »igam foi moie than tw o hoin s On percen mg that it was late, he hastily left his bed, and dressed him¬ self with all convenient expedition, w ith the exception of Ins waistcoat, which he could not find Aftei a pietty care¬ ful seaich, he felt satisfied that it was not m the loom, ?nd at last thought it possible that Mi. Flash had put it on by mistake It was m his estimation no veiy seuous inconvenience to sit with¬ out it till that gentleman retuined to bieakfist, when he expected the euoi vvould at once be lectihed To put on anothei waistcoat was not just then m his powei, as the key of his portman-
teau vvas in the pocket of the waistcoat that was missing. He had waited moie than an houi with¬ out seeing Mi. Flash, when he judged it wise to ordei breakfast. After some further delay, he determined to infoi m the landloid of what had happened, and to make some enquiries about Mi. Flash. 1 oi this puipose he had iung the bell, and was about to commence hisintenogatones, when Mi. Bung made bis appearance in gieat tubulation, and without giving him time to speak, began an 01 ation himself. " A rased · — Theie's a scamp — Hei e's a pictty commence' — Did you ung, Su ? — It selves me right. — Tins comes of ti usting." " Is any thing the matter ?" " Mattel, Sir ! That villain Tlash has ìobbed me. He's can ied oft ten laige silver spoons, and the bill you saw him give me last night is not worth a penny. m 6
No .icceptoi is to bc lound No sudi peison evei lived in Gieenvvicli." " Do jou know nothing of bun ?" " Nothing, but that he has been living heie hve 01 six weeks without ρ lying foi any thing," " But why did you give lnm cıedıt '' " Aye, Sn, its easy to say so, now the mischief is done Why did 1 give linn cıedıt ' Sn, the fellow pi etended he'd verj neh fnends, and kept feeding me up with stones about lemittances eveiy day, 'Ihen the niicinal bill саше in ι letter, which lettei 1 now find he* wiote to himself, — then thc bill was lost, — then it was found,— then lie would not give a large lew αϊ d to the hndei, ai» it w ıs of no use to any body but the ow nei , — then it got into the aeceptoi 'a hands, — then he got «t back again , — and then he look to his heels " " But I thought that he was ι Gentle man, obliged to be out of tlie way loi a time, on account of a duel."
" Unt wis the stoiy he told ot himself, but I now hnd fioin two gen tlemen just come from town, tint he's nothmg but л notoiious swindlei, though theie is some tiuth in his tile about the iflin of honoui is he talked ol He got into some sciape of tlie kind, and being too cow u diy to hght, came ind lud himself heie to escape a hoise whip pni{,, and ι ob those vv ho were such fools is to tiust hun " " I am astonished it vvlnt I beai It is now plain tint he h is stolen iny waist eoat " " His he indeed? Bless my heart, 1 mi veiy sony foi it Let me get you one of mine " " No, I thank you, but send foi ι siuthtopiek the lock of my portman le ιιι, loi the kev wis iu my vvaistcoil pocket " ' Pi iv wen one ol mine in the meni tune,' indsos lying the landlord left tl e loom, md immediately letuinedv ith Ins sciilel Sund u vviistcoit
Cliailes yielded to Ins solicitations, ind put on this piece of finely , and vv bile Mi. Bung.nmisedhimself with a stnngof moial icflections, and passed a vanety of sage ìesolutions foi the ìegulation of his future conduct, it occimcd to Haile} that Flash had in all probability approach¬ ed his bed to steil lus watch, which had only been sived by lus awaking just it the moment the ìobbei was about to accom¬ plish lus design " 'Tıs fortunate foi me," said he, " that I have not expenenced a more senous loss." He was on the point of illustrating this, by telling Mi. Bung how providen¬ tial!} his pioperty had been piesei ved, when letting his hand fall on the pocket in which his cash had been secuied, he started. " What's the mattei, Su ?" " By Heaven, the scoundiel has lobbed me of my money." » Su i" " My notes .ue gone."
" Is ít possible !'" " The villain h ıs not lelt me а guinea in the v/oild." fhe landloid looked at Chartes fust with amazement, next with alann, and tin ill), with lnciedubty impiessecl on his visage Ihe concern which he had felt loi the loss his customei had sustained, vvlnl** that loss appealed to be tnfling, vv as no moi e, now that he beai d that all his money was gone He eyed him for some moments, befoie one worel escaped m uisvvci to the last piece of intelligence with which be had been favoied. He Ielt the ıespect with which he had befoie viewed his customei lapidly diminishing, and the obsequious civility which he had befoie thought lcqinsite, was at once disciidcd both fiom his vvoids and m ni¬ nei, when he at length bioke silence " W hat ' all gone ' Not α guinea Itit ' Nonsense' Yon'ie not coming that ov ci us, aio jou? It won't do." " It will not do v ei v vv ell Sir, indeed ,
but I tlo not know exactly what jou mean." " Mem' nothing, but that I ain't going to take .1 stoiy »ibout youi being lobbed loi my leckonnig." " I am still somewhat at a loss to undeistand " " Why then, Sn, yout bill comes to thiee pounds twelve »md ten.pence, which I'll tlunk you to settle dnectly. Hut's coming to the point, and I hope you un¬ dei stand me now " '· You lnve certainly become suffi¬ ciently explicit, but at this moment it is not m nn powei to satisfy y ou " " l pietty thing' A pack of shabby swells, to come to α îespectable inn, ind e it, dunk, uid sleep without wiieiewittial to piy then way I'm not going to be hummed " " Look vc, Sn, I enne not heie to impose upon you, but 1 İmi e been loUjPtl iu vom house by one ol youi lodgeis." "\ib that's α veiy good stoiy I
dai с sij you and Flash understood one anothei veiy well I wondei ed to see you so devilish thick on α sudden He In» t,ui ied oil the booty, and you, I suppose, know wheie to hnd him to claim vom shaie." Chulés now lost all tempei. "Scoun¬ diel," he exclaimed, seizing Mr. Bung by the throat, " in addition to bein¿ swindled by you in the regulai way, am I to be robbed bj one of your gang, and insulted to my face besides ? Uttei one woid moie like what has just fallen fiom your hps, and I'll dash your teeth down your thioat to teach youi longue bettei mannei s." 1 he tone in which the foiegoing speech vv as delivered, and the manner in which tlie action was suited to tlie woi d, satis¬ fied the nm-keepei that, m this instance, it ¡eist, Harley was no impostoi, but ι eally meant what he piomised, and he theıefoıe thought, like a ıatıonal mm, that, to put lum to the pioof ol his sin
centy, would be to make an experiment even worse than useless. Instead, then, of attempting to bully his customer, he thought it better to make an appeal to his finei feelings, by tijing his hand at the pathetic. He accoidingly lowered his voice, and declaied that he did not want to insult any body. He desired only bis own, and that eveiy man had ι right to demand. " True ; and I only desire my own, and that, I believe, I have a nght to de¬ mand fromyou.smce I have been deprived of it thiough mistaking youi inn for a respectable house. It was howevei my intention to settle your paltry bill, ui some way or othei, and, luckily youi fnend Mi.l'lashwas mtenupted m his opeiations, befoie he had succeeded in putting it out of my power to find the means of doing that." " That's all I desire." " And its moie than you have a light to demand, fiom a customer who has
been pillaged, ıs I hive been, beneitb yout iool Ihe landloid, who had by this lime gamed the dooi, said " Il wis veiy well lui people to talk of having been íobbecl, but belote thcj got ofl fiom ρ lying then leckouing m tins Way, it would be neces míj foi them to prove tint they had had something to lose '
CHAP, λ 1 шп not cnumoiiretl of tins ρ inted ι lol This »trumpet World, for her m Ы beauteous lottki* Arc poiboned bnits hung upon golden hooks. When fools do swim in\u dih herCjnthnn lieairn Will wintonly tl »ice on the silver stremili But when this ¡squint ejed Л^с sees Virtue ρ >or And by a little spark ait sliivtrnig Btggini, of nil rcliL\ed nt no man s door She smiles on lier (as the sun sinnes on fire), To kill that little heat, and with her frown, Is proud that s>he cnn tread poor Virtue down Duckfb НгропЕ lie could pay his bill where he now was, 01 transfer his person and his custom to any othei place, it was neces¬ saiy in some way, to obtain a small sup¬ ply oí money, and theie wis but one lesource leit to him His watch, he had no doubt, would sell foi so much as would meet his immediate wants, and this done, he should ha\e leisuie to ıeflect on what
aids he must fot the tune to come, depend. As he had no choice, his mind was soon made up, to take the only step th it coultl at once mike hun ι fiee igent He ordeied the landloid to send some one to show hnn the way to the neaiest watch-makci. With this leqiusition, the obliging ΛΙι Bung piomptly complied, shrewdly guessing the natuie of the enand on which Charles was going. He was even so obliging as to ordei his underting to "wait" till the gentleman retuined, outside the shop, while he wins peied hnn aside to look slurp thatjie did not ι un avv»iy On entenng the watch makei's shop, α voung woman announced that Mi Pen¬ dulum was wanted, and α veiv discreet looking peisomge forthwith made his appearance He bowed to Hailey with piofound ıespect, while he requested to know Ins pleasure.
" I wish to know it jou buy watches as well as sell them э " " Yes, somttimes, teitainlv , but, at at piesent, we have so luge a stock in hand, that------" " I have not come to invite you to make any gieat addition to youi stock. I have but one to part with. Will jou purchase this ?" Mr. Pendulum took it m his hand — opened it — shook it gently, at the same time shaking his head, and ejaculating— " Aye — Yes — I see what it is. — Not exactly m my way," and, after caiefullv shutting it up again, he made a show of formally retui nmg it to the owner " And how much do you want for it s " " Will you give me twelve guineas ?" " O, bn ! that's quite out of the ques¬ tion Twelve guineas ' Really you are ν ery much out of the way." " Am I indeed? 1 gave twenty foi it within the last three months." 7
" Is lt possible ' Whei e did j ou buy it?" " At Vertical's, m Cheapside. Did you not obseive tlie name?" " Yes, I did, but the name is nothing m its favoui. It is not whit we call a good name m the tiade. What shameful impositions are piactised in town ' I could not ask half the money that you vv ant foi it here But there, you know, the ìents aie high, and living is very ex¬ pensive. Now look »it this watch. Do you considei youiseif a judge of the vvoikmanship?" " Not a veiy good one." " I'm soiry for that. But, however, I dare say you can perceive some dif¬ ference between the two. You must, m fact, see theie's no companson to be made between thein " And be was not umeasonable in ex¬ pecting Charles to discov er that the two watches were far fiom bemg alike, foi that which lie pioduced, as a superior
i tide, wis not quite hilf so vihiable as the one which hid been ofleied to him loi sile ' There now," he continued, "you see how much more shewy this th it I hold m my hand is, md indeed better in eveiy lespeet , but these 1 sell for seven guineas, new, as you will obseive this is Ot couise I could not give so much foi a second hind watch " " Tins was new withm the last three months " " Aye, but thc beauty, is we call it, is gone off I could not dispose of it, without sending it to London, to get the cises burnished, ind a hard em nelled dial put to it, in place of that common eighteen penny face that it has now got Some of the diamonds, too, look almost like sham jewels I could not offei you mote than four guineas for it " " Then it is useless to part with it," said Hn ley, leplacingit in his fob mil preparing to leave the shop
" I have ofleied you the most. You'll not get inoic any wheie. But will you let me look at it again. Well, Sir, as you wish to dispose of it, I'll give you five " Hailey, who had just ι efleeted that he could not stir fiom the place wheie he then was, if he refused the offei which had been made, had begun to debate whethei, undei existing circum¬ stances, he had not bettei saenfice his time piece toi the f ош, no soonei heaid five mentioned, than he closed with the oflei, ıeceıved the money and de¬ paı ted. When half vviy between the watch¬ makei's shop uul the inn, he met Mr. Bung out of bieath, coming as he sup¬ posed foi his money. " You had no occasion to tiouble youi¬ seif to iun after me, Sn. I did not in¬ tend leaving ) out house without settling my bill." " Don't mention that," said Mr. Bung} vol. i. N
and his voice and deportment had again returned to that wheedling tone, which usually passes for civility, and which eveiy keeper of an inn understande to be politeness. "I hope you will not think of parting with any thing on my account. I beg pardon foi the hasty mannet m which I spoke this moin¬ ing " " Do not give youiseif unnecessary tiouble." " I was ruffled at the time, having just been ìobbed, and did not know vvhat I said haidly. I never wish to offend a gentleman." Meaning by gentleman, one out of whom something was to be got. " I'll pay your bill directly " "Don't mention it, Su, I beg you won't. I won't take it. Let it stand as long as you please. I'm quite ashamed of having said a word about it. The minute I thought you were going to dispose of your watch, thinks I, ' its a
pity the gentleman should do any thing of the kind for me,' so I ian after you to say so." " You have come too late," said Har¬ ley, as he re enteied the mn, " so send m your bill aud a glass of vvater " " The watei, Sir, I'll send. You wouldn't like a little brandy m it 1 sup¬ pose ; but pi ay let the bill be till some other time." Harley was suiprised at the altered deportment of his lindlord He was little disposed to avail himself of his civi¬ lities, and could not account foi the sud¬ den tiansition fiom insolence to obse¬ quious attention Peihaps, thought he, a spark of feeling has lost its way, and stopped to rest for a moment m this fellow's alehouse, 01 piobably he feais my evil report. Mi. Bung brought m the water, made a very handsome bow, and wa» about to retne, when he suddenly halted, and again addı essed Mr. Harley. N 2
"O'l beg your paidon. — What »I head I have ___I had quite foigot, theie's a gentleman been asking foi you. He wanted to come bolt in, but 1 would not let him till I had asked your pleasure. He says he has business with you, and seems m α gieat bui ι y — I don't know what it is he wants." " Desue hnn to walk in." " Certainly, Su, I would befoie, only I did not like j ou to be intruded upon, as I did not know at all what it was he wanted jou foi." Bung vanished with anothei hne bow, and a joung man decently diessed in half thread-baie bhick, made his appeai¬ ance, with а simpei on his countenance, that did not announce his eirand to be of а veiy solemn chaiactei. With each step he made a bow, aftei which lifting up his face to bestow a smile, he made α new advance, and thus pioceedmg, bow and smile, and smile and bow, he at length found himself within three feet of 4
Ch irles, and began to mike known the object of Ins missit?»]. " Sn, youi точ obedient — I give yon joy·" " Of what ŕ" " Fortune, the blind goddess, whom we all vvoiship, has been most giaciously pleased to distinguish you fiom the throng of hei worshipper»." " In vvhat way '" " By giving you a pnze in the lotteiy." "I believe, Sn, you mistake me foi some moie fortunate individual I nevei had but one shai e of a lottery-ticket in my life, and that came up a blank." " Who told you so, piay Sit ?" " The keepei of the office at which it was bought, Mi. Hazaid, I believe, 01 one of his pnncipal cleiks, I am not sine which." " I think y our ticket vv as № 2, j8S. " Yes, I believe — indeed I know that was the number. It was an eighth that I held." N S
" Right Then, Sn, I have greit plea¬ sure m 'etting you know, tint you ire entitled to ι share of the 5000/ drawn in the list lottery ' ' Hovv is thit possible, if tei the answer I ıeceıved at the olhce 3 " ' Mistakes will occui in business, and α mistake Ins been dıscoveıed here, which I was instructed to travel post to ıcctıfy I was fiist dnected to Bedford¬ shire, and, on arriving theie, obtained that information which has biought me heie to pay you the money " " Well, Sn, if jou aie sure you are not now committing a mistake, I shall not be so unpolite as to doubt joui veia city, or to ıefuse you the gratification of handing over the cash, to which I may be entitled " " Here it is, Sir Will you favour me with some little acknowledgment in writing," and with these words the as- tonished Harley saw himself put in pos- session of six Bank of England notes for
one hundred pounds each, and smaller notes amounting to twenty-five pounds. While handing over the latter, a very expressive glance from the new comei, caught the attention of Chai Ies The formei had no occasion to make the usual appeal to a fortunate adventuier, " We geneially look foi something." Harley saw it, and the same instant re¬ duced his wealth to an even six hundred pounds. The congratulations of his visitor were renewed with more fervour than ever, and he depaited in an ecstacy of gratitude. It was not till this hour that Charles had any idea of the pleasure that wealth can afford After being subjected to the insolence of a sordid 1 uffian by po¬ verty, it was delightful to find himselt in a condition that secured him from its repetition, and would not fail to bring the party to repentance, which indeed he rightly concluded had already been done. The sudden change in the deportment N 1
of Μι. Bung, and his uncalled for assu- r luces, ti it he knew nothing of the bu¬ siness on which the ambassadoi of Г01- tune had sought the mn, sufficiently cxpliined his conduct, and pıoved his good manneis to be the legitimite ofl- spnng of liai ley's good luck Besides the piesent ıelıet which this unhoped foi windfall brought, Harley consıd ied the incident an auspicious omen, it inspired him with hopes of futuie success, m which foi some days he had been afraid to indulge as formeilj', and he experienced an elevation of spuits that an houi befoie he would have pıonounced it to be impossible for him to know with¬ in so short a period One of his hist cai es was to îeclaim lus watch, which he had reluctantly parted with. On returning to the shop, lie perceived Mi. Pendulum was so much engaged with a gentleman, befoie whom he was displaying some of his tieisuies, that he eould nol aUend to hım at that
moment. His attention was indeed, al¬ reidy so completely engi osseci, that the entiance of a thud peison wholly escaped lus notice. Chartes did not wish to in¬ tei rupt the pai ties, and felt a little un¬ willing to let the business which had biought him theie, come out in the pre¬ sence of a stiangei. He, theıefoıe, ıe- ceded, and took his station at the dooi, with Ins back tow ards the shopkeepei, that the negotiation which he pei ceived was in piogiess, might be earned on by the high conti acting parties, without any embanassment on his account. " Fifteen guineas is too much," said the would be puichasei " I beg j oui paidon," retuined the seller, " It is remarkably cheap. Look at it. See hovv it is finished off. This, Su , ıs a complete ai tide. Then tl e name,—look at the name,—the name, Sir, will tell y ou vv hat it is. The nime of that watch will always sell it." " Oh ' as to tlut, one name is as gootl n 5
as another to me. That can't make it any the bettei." " But the name, ¡mi, we consider of veiy great impoi tance. Suppose now, you sliould evei have occasion to part with this watch' Why, Sn, the name ■would be enough, and any watch maker would give you what I now ask foi it withm a few shillings, and jump at the bargain. So it will prove cheapest in the Ioiig i un. Then, the satisfaction of having an aitiele fiom the hand of a good makei, is something " " I'll tell you what, I'll give you fouiteen pounds, and I won't give a fai- tlung moie." " I am much obliged to jou, I should be very hippy to take money, but с innot let it go foi that Look it it, Sn lake it wheie you pie ise, and it you match it lor less than two and twenty guineas, I'll give it you for nothing. Considei, Su, how deal the haid enamel is. Why,
the dial alone is worth two guineas. It is the best watch I have m tlie shop." " Well," said the customei, " I'll ad¬ vance ten shillings, if that will do." " Really, Sn, if I reckon my own time woi th »my thing at all, it waa not mine for the money. It cost me fouiteen pounds ten, or I stole it, and it then took me between five and six hours to clean it, and put it m its piesent state." Charles turned and caught a glimpse ot the artide, m which he instantly re¬ cognised the watch that he had sold for five guineas, within the last houi. " However," continued the dealei, " as I hope to have the pleasuie of seeing you again, and alway s wish my customers to thmk of me another time, —you shall have it foi pounds insteid of guineas, and parting with it on those terms, it will be only like giving 1 shilling for two sixpences " As he ütteted these vvoids, his eye encountered the repiovmg glance of N 6
Harley. The sensibility of the shop- keepei seemed to bc somew lut wounded, for though like honest Fag, he did not mmd " telling a he," yet it hurt his con¬ science " to be found out " He faltered a little, and anxious to get rid of so tioublesoine a customei, as it stiuck him Hailey might prove, he forthwith left the person with whom he had been pre¬ viously engaged to attend to him. " What is youi pleasure, Su ?" " I have retuined foi the purpose of lepurchasing my watch, if you please." " Sn ?" " I have no longei occasion for the money you advanced foi it, having just received a consideiable letmttance fiom town, and should theıefoıe wish to have it again." I his intimation burst like a clap of thundei, on the tortured eai of the watch¬ makei He saw himself compelled to lestoiethe watch foi little moie than it had cost him, or i un the risk of having his
talent foi fan dealing exposed, in a way which would not gieatly laisc bis charac¬ tei. He had supposed thatHai ley's busi- nessmightbeto compiamo! ihghtgiunea, 01 some such Infle, and thei cal chaiactei of his enand had so completely taken him by suipnse, that be could not im¬ mediately ι ecovei biniseli. He, howevei, made an attempt to ape ik, as if nothing particular had happened. " Why,—I've no great wish — that is —certainly,—but to sell a watch, and then want it back again immediately, is something like ehildi en's play.—Theie's a diffeience you know between buying and selling " " I know theie is, Su. You have taught me that, and I am willing to pay any thing m reason." " But I have partly sold it to this gentleman, foi just vvhat I g»ive you. You know I let j ou hav e foin teen pounds ten shillings loi it jestenhij." Here Mi. Pendulum winked unob-
served as he supposed by the fiist cus¬ tomer, to Charles, and the latter, if he had been possessed of that woildly piu¬ dence, by meins of which many lofty minded gentlemen have made their foi- tunes, would have taken it, as the phi ase ıs, and backed the falsehood, in the hope of sharing the profit of the fiaud, about to be committed, undei the name of trade. But he was too inexperienced to get forwaid ш this way, and instead of an¬ swering Mi Pendulum's intelligent wink, with an amicible leer, and an expression of assent, he was simple enough to feel offended at this attempt to make him participate m what he thought no bettei than a robbeiy, and he theiefore answeied with some nutation. " I am suiprised that you should have the effrontery to tell me this, knowing as you do, that I received but five guineas for it, and that withm tins hour, when
jou ïepiesented it to be worth little 01 nothing " The customei st ued fiist at Μι Η ιι ley, and then at Mi Pendulum The latici fiilgetted about, moving the ai tieles that weie spiead on the counter, foi two or tlnee seconds, without any apparent ob¬ ject, befoie he could ventuie to utter a word Deciding at length, that the best couise he could take, would be to brazen it out, he took his tone accordingly. " What do you mean by that 3 Who »ue you, Sir ■'" " I mean what I saj. Who I am, you shal) pieseutly know, if you have any cu¬ nosity on that subject " " Sn, I don't know who you are, and I don't caie who you aie , but I am not going to be insulted in my own house " " I do not wish to insult any one, and sliall only ıemaın in youi house, till I have aaceıtaınetl whethei 01 not you will let me have my watch again." " Kiwi watch, Sn ' It is now my
watch. Mj money paid foi it. I bought it." " I own that. The watch that j*ou offer this gentleman foi fifteen guineas, you had of me foi five, having, at fust, oftered but foui The name, that of Vertical, which jou assure this gentle¬ man, will ilwiys make it sell foi what yon would nosv extort fiom him, you told me was a bad one, and rathei mju- iious than otherwise." " It is not the same watch " " Then I beg joui pardon In that case, you can have no objection to let me see mine. It was you led me into the en 01, by telling me, when I enquired for that whicli I had sold, that you Imd partly disposed of it to this gentleman " Mr. Pendulum, however highly he might value his eloquence, had no wish to make a further display of it on this occasion, and in 01 del to bring the de¬ bate to a speedy conclusion, he now passed to the front of his counter, and
advancing towards Hailey, with his arms α knnbo, and an abı upt forwaid lnchn- »ıtıon of the head, whicli was a sort of pantomimic participle, shanng equally the chaiactei of bowing and butting, he moved an adjournment, by ıoaııng out, " Walk out of my shop, — W alk out, Sır." " 1 hen, j ou will not let me have it ' " Walk out of my shop, oi I will im¬ mediately have you taken mto custody." " I can have no objection to that." " Walk out Sn , I insist upon it " And heie his hand seemed to manifest some alacnty to compel obedience to the mandate. " Do not lay your hand on me, Su. I am about to quit youi shop , but, if I feel the weight of jour 'pickets and stealeis,' by him who made me, I will chastise joui insolence on the spot." " You have no ught to insult a trades man " " And I have no intimation to do so.
A tradesman— ι fan, honest tiadesman, 1 esteem and honour I see in lum, the suppoi tei oí all the othei classes of society, antl think Ins mdustiy as much entitled to piotection and applause, ae the moie dazzling qualities, which ele¬ vate those on whom public attention »ilvvays ïests, and to whom the adminis¬ tration of the state, and the defence of its geneial inteiests, are confided But, when, in one short houi, I see allthe va¬ rieties of meanness, falsehood, and fraud, exhibited by one despicable individual, who airogites to himself the rank of a tiadei, I eannot pay that defeience to the usutped title, which is due to the ıeal charactei In such a degraded being, I see, not a respectable mei chant, fauly exercising his talents m business, but, a base and cowaidly robber, behind л counter " With these woids, he left the shop, before Mi Pendulum could make any re¬ ply. The sti angei too, so immediately
tollowed, that he had the satisfaction to know his lecture had not been wholly thrown away, and that the modest dealer, had lost foi that time, a customer. Hailey had been so extremely dis¬ gusted with the conduct of Mr. Bung, that he had resolved on leaving his inn without delay What he saw ot Mr. Pendulum, made his landoid cuta less contemptible figuie m lus eyes, than he did before He had ıeason to believe that theiudeness of the lattei, giew on a fiaud, of which he was the uctim , and, the indignation, which the dishonesty of the watchmakei hid inspned, taught him to make some allowances foi that, at which he had been so highly offended. Besides, he began to think that Messi» Bung ind Pendulum, might, aftei all, be no unwoithy repiesentatives of mankind in genti αϊ , oı , m otliei woi ds, that honesty, and libeiahty of sentiment, weie become so scarce, that avoiding ill who weie not distinguished by these, it would be ne-
ct'ssaiy to pass no small portion of his hfe in solitude. His detei mination, in consequence of these leflections, vv is against changing his inn. Anothei diy or two would pio¬ bably bring bun news of Ins appointment. A letter might miscairy if he changed hi= lesidence, 01 some pei son who sought, might not be »ible to find lnm , so, undei all ciicumstances, he concluded that it would be wise to oveilook the lnnkeep- ei's mistake, andto avail himself of the civilities, which weie now ofleied, as an atonement foi the p.ist.
CHAP. X. tt plens d tlie Loid to tnke ray spouse it Inst I toie my gown I soil'd my locks wiUi dust, An 1 be it m> 1 re-ists ns wretched wi tows must Before my fnce my hnndkerchief I spreid, lo lude tlic flood of tears 1 did not shed Fufe Rcturnino to Ins inn one »ifteinoon, aftei a short ι amble, he noticed a beai se at the dooi, but did not suffei it to occupy much of Ins attention befoie be p»issed mto Ins sitting-ioom. Heie he expenenced no small suipnse at finding it occupied by foui peisons attned m black, who evidently had some connec¬ tion with the vehicle that he had just seen. These peisons weie employed in putting by the featheis, which had lately waved in pompous solemnity ovei the heaise; and besides that they weie busy, and deeply engaged in conveisation on their
own concerns; they all seemetl to feel themselves personages ot too much im¬ portance, to bestow one word on so humble an individual, »is the peison whose apartment they hid invaded. " You knows we sleeps here," said one, " so I've taken care of suppei before the mourners comes. I've ordered two pair Of ducks to be roasted. You knows if I had not done tins when they come, ten to one if we should get a bit of hol¬ low foi love or money " " Well, but do you think they'll stand it?" enquired anothei of these grate gentlemen. " Stand it' Why, to be sure they will. A black job like this, that takes us away fiom our wives and families, wouldn't be worth having else. We must always live well on these jouîmes , and if we don't care of ourselves, who the devil will take care of us, hey ? Can you get over that ?" " No ; only ducks is dear."
" What signifies' We don't come heie to starve. Who do you thmk will make any bones about it. Old Snatch¬ all died rich enougli to admit of his being buried decently, and his relations get too much money, m consequence of his kicking the bucket, to think much of tins last expence " " Why, it's no moie tlian's perfectly piopei, that's certain," said ι thud, " that men like us, who have boi ne so much, should live well " " О certainly '" said the second, " and if you think they'll stand it—." " Stand it 1 " uiten upted the person who had opened the debate, " what do you keep botheung about standing for ? What's this to stand ' You should have been with me and Sam Solder, when we went down to buiv Aldeiman Longtwist at Exetei Then you might have talked about standing. Why, we'd game and venison eveiy day. When we wanted a hare, we used to tell the landlord he
must find us a lion. He was down to it, and took caie to get the nght thing." " Aye," said one who had not before spoken, " but that, you know, was a very busy time. We weie then, all hands at woik, haid and fast, boxing 'em up, night and day, and could not rid 'em fas,t enough. Then we could do it just as we pleased, but we mustn't come it so stiong now, while business is so dead." " O! don't tell me. Ihe season's coming on. We are getting fast towaids Novembei, and then the fogs, and winds, and ıaın, you knows, will make business busk again. It won't do for 'em to kick up no hi cezes, because we enjoys ouiselvcs a bit. Suppose we weie to leave, just as the woik comes in, whei e the deuce would they get men to fill our places. They might get men, to be suie, who know nothing about the business, and a pretty higgledy pigglcdy concern they'd make of а decent black job like this. I should like to see a set
of these new ones lifting a coffin, like Old SnatchaH's, out of the hearse " " How even and steady they'd lug it into the church ' ' said another, with an air of loidly contempt for the supposed awkwaidness of the sable ïecruits that might be enlisted in the regiment of Death, if the present company were to retire from the service " They would hardly stand still enough to let Shovelem throw the pall over it," added a third " And, perhaps, they'd can y the head of the corpse hrst, ' continued the fourth This sally was too exquisite to be endured with composuie, and а hearty laugh, at the extiemely ludici ous eflect which the appear ince of a coffin so ear¬ ned must produce, convulsed the quin¬ tetto each deci u mg that he should not wondei if such a blunder were actually to be committed They had not ceased to exult m their own eminence in the Death line, and vol ι о
were still laughing at the embairassmenta and vexations to which their employers would be exposed, if chiven to confide in persons who had not, like themselves, been regularly bred to tlie church, wheu the mastei undertaker enteied the room, accompanied by the landlord. On seeing Mr. Harley, the inn-kecpei apologized for the liberty that he had taken during his absence, in permitting the loom he had occupied to be used. He, however, hoped Mi. Hailej would excuse it, as it was of great importance to hırı to have the custom of such a number of peisons as were in attendance on the funei.il ; and a knowledge of this had led his friend, Mr. Shovelem, to bring them to his house, though there was another not fuithei oft tbe church ; which ш some respects, would have answered his purpose bettei. The uudei taker was a busk, short man, about foi ty-six years of age. His nose, and that part of his countenance in its
immediate vicinity, bore evidence to the goodness of the wme — ш colour at least, which, for some yeais he had been in the habit of drinking at the funerals he had performed. On hearing the address of the landlord to Mr. Harley, he immedi¬ ately chymed in, and saved his friend the Double of introducing him, by perfoim- ing that cei emony foi himself. " Servant, Sir, — hope no offence. My name's Shovelem · been m the un¬ dertaking line some years. Happy to see you in Fleet-Market, or at my coun¬ try house in Goswell-Street Road— Yes, Sir, as my friend Bung was saying, I gave his house the preference over one that would have done better ; but, people in business ought to give one another a turn. Hegave me one when his wife died. A veiy pretty funeral that, hey ' Mr. Bung." " No fault to find, Mr. Shovelem." " No ; that's my way of doing busi¬ ness. So, Sir, as I was going to say, as my men have almost filled your apart- о г
ment, have the goodness to step up stairs We remain here to night, and shall be very glad of your company " " I thank you, Sir, but I can retire to my chamber " " Pray don't do that You will be very welcome up stairs We are all friends together, and a very pleasant party, I assuie you" " The presence of a strangei on so melancholy an occasion, must bc mi proper " " O, not at all I'll intioduce you as a fi tend of mine — that is, as my f ι ıend's friend, and as we are all friendly together, I'm sure you will be veiy welcome " " But the distress of the relations of the deceased, vvould make it unpleasant to me " " Vt hy, Sir, my neighbour Mr Snatch all has left а good deal of money behind him, and so it 19 not like a case wheie there is nothing to console the sui vivors To be sure, Mrs Snatchall is veiy much
affected, but, between ourselves, I don't know th it she has so much reason, as she used to quarrel with hım eveiy hour in the day, till within a week of the finish, and sometimes he tieated hei with a good thiaslung, though he geneially got as good as he sent." " Was Mi Snatchall carried ofl sud¬ denly ?" " He was, rather. He was always a litigious, close-fisted old ras ----- gentle¬ man To be sure, I have no right to speak against hnn, for he always paid for what he had, and I buried his two sons, the last of whom died, some said for want, in the Fleet But, however that was, the old gentleman gave thjtn veiy good funerals, whu h, you know, proved him an affectionate fathei, ajtei all. A month ago, he arrested a man who had failed in business; and, somehow or othei — I don't know hovv it was, the bailiff made a bit of a mistake, and poor Mi. Snatchall was saddled with all ex- ΰ 3
penees, and obliged togive up the caption. It went to his heart, Sir, he nevei held up his head any more , in fact it thiew him info a fever, and aftei the loss he had sustained, he could not think of call¬ ing in a physician, till he had the uttle» in Ins thioat He then threw away his guinea ; but it was too late. I was the only person that could be of service to him" The light, thus thrown on the chanc¬ ter of the deceased, stripped the occasion on which the undertaker and his neigh¬ bours had met, of the melancholy which it had at first seemed to wear, and, on account of which, Charles had thought it would be indecorous to intrude. He yielded to the importunities of the under¬ taker, and consented to join the company up stairs. Mr. Shovelem begged to be excused for a few moments. He had ordeied the coachmen to drive slowly from the church, while he came forward with al L
expedition, to see tbat cveiy thing was ready foi the ìeception of the mourners. When he left the loom, his journeymen, who had been silenced by his enti ance, found then tongues agam. ihey looked upon Mi Hailey now, to be а person of moie importance, than they had at first suspected, but the most loquacious of them having mistaken the smile of scorn, which plaj ed on H irley's cheek during part of their fonner conveisation, foi that of approbation, commenced a new recital, to the full as facetious as any that had preceded it. " The best joke, howev er, I was going to tell, just as Shovelem came m. You'll excuse us, Sir—we aie all fnends." " O, certainly." "It was at Highgate. Dick Dead- flesh and Jack Mattocks got diunk at Isluigton, so that we weie obliged to leave them behind w hen we got to the Cock, at Holloway, So, as I was saymg, two othei fellows were obliged to be got о 4
ftom the parish work-house. BiH Wind- itlgäheet was then quite green ; so I was the only man that could shoulder a corpse in a workmanlike manner. When we entered the yard, and came to the grave, one of the parish bearers went blundering on one end of the outer plank, — and, my eyes! up it went, and sent a spadeful ot' the mould smack in the parson's face, over his book, and all; and the coffin caftie bang on the other board; and if I hadn't held devilish tight by one of the handles, would have gone in end-ways. However, it might as vreli as it turned out; for, when we had got it in the ropes, the parish fellows did not let down fast enough. ' Lower the foot,' saj*s Bill ; but they, poor devils I did not know the foot from the head, and let the head still lower, so that it fairly slipped out of the ropes, and bump went the cof¬ fin to the bottom of the grave, face down¬ wards. I never saw any thing like it in my life. I thought I should have split
my sides a laughing, while the parson was saying, ' ashes to ashes,' for it bad taken Bill half an hour's sciabbhng to get matters to rights again." Either the dioll scene whic' he de¬ scribed was better to see than to hear as α tale, or the presence of Harley put some restraint on the merriment of the men ol Death, foi they did not laugh at the stoiy, and the speaker was under the necessity of perfoimmg that cei emony over the joke for himself, which he accomplished apparently with but little difficulty. All, however owned that the thing was odd enough, but it was no more than was to be expected from men who enteied upon a profession for hich they they were not duly qualified. Mr. Shovelem now ìeturned with news that the mouiners were m sight, and would ainve at the mn in a few minutes He requested Charles to accompany him up stairs, and this he had no objection o S
to do, as he had had quite enough of'the society of' the understrappers. Ushered into the large room, he found a profusion of wine and cake prepared for the sorrowing train who were ex¬ pected. It was the latter end of Sep¬ tember, tbe afternoon turned out rather damp, and, in consequence, the under¬ taker had caused a rousing fire to bc made to cheer then- spirits. He had tew opportunities of making observations on the excellence of Mr. Shovelem's anange¬ ments, when the coaches stopped at the door of the inn, and the noise of their falling steps announced the mourners to be about to enter. The widow of the deceased was the first to make her appearance. She came forward with a languishing air, carefully holding her handkerchief before the up¬ per part ofher face, to hide lhe culpable disobedience of her eyes, which refused even on this occasion, the moderate supply
of tears, that the tender Mrs. Snatchall was extremely anxious to shed, in ho¬ nour of her dear departed lord. As she advanced, she drew in her breath, and retained it as long as she conveni- ently could, to give a stronger aspir¬ ation to the word " Ah !" which she at last threw out in a sighing whisper that might have been heard all over the house. The undertaker introduced Charles, in few words, to the widow ; and with an economical glance of his eye, and inclin¬ ation of the body to all who followed, ail a very particular fjiend of his, who, hap¬ pening to be detained a few days at that; inn, had most obligingly given up his' apartment for their accommodation. The widow curtsied, and obliged him with' a pathetic repetition of her former as¬ piration. Young Mr. Rattler was the next,' whose sorrow, though fully equal to that' о 6
of his aunt Mrs. Snatchall, was not quite so conspicuous m lus deportment. Mr. Cadav erous, a short, pale-looking attoiney, and Miss Blobbei, an oilman's daughter, to whom he paid his addresses, and who hatl been invited ш compliment to him, to be of this party of pleasure, fol lowed, lo them succeeded Lieutenant Bobstay, who had known Mr. Snatchall from the time of his fiist going into the spirits line. This hero had lost his leg, as he said in battle, but as otheis wins pered, ш consequence of a li act ure which he had the misfortune to receive through а fall from the window of a house he once lodged at in Wapping, vvhith be judged it prudent to evacuate, in his hurry to attend to his duty, without wast ing time by stopping to settle his ι eckon mg. From the peculianty of his gait, the judicious Mi Shovelem had assorted him with Mr. Waddle, aietired sugai -brokei, who from the possession of an nutated
coin, was enabled to supply a hop that very well couesponded with that of the Lieutenant, and by this foi »unite co incidence, the march fiom the heaise to the centi e aisle, had been made per fectly ícgulai Mr Lapstone, ι boot mikei, from Guttei lane Cheapside, who fiom ι cancel in bis face, had had the misfortune to lose moie than half his nose, and a till skeleton, then the pioperty of a stationei in the Mi noues called Mr Wafei, closed the pro cession The discerning Mr Shovelem having placed the widow next the file, deposited the fat caicase of Mi Waddle tn the chair on bei left hind He manifested a disposition to yield the post of honour tp the Lieutenant, but the man of w ar politely desired lum to keep his seat, and to use, was too serious an exertion for Mi Waddle to think of making it on «iny trivial occasion Mi Bobstay took his seat by him, and Mi Lapstone be 3
came his lelt hand supportei. On the othtr side, care had been taken to place Miss Blobbei m opposition to Mrs. Snatchall, and Mr. Cadaverous, as a mutter of couise, took the next seat. Mr. Wafer pressed on Harley that by the side of the attorney, but it was de¬ clined , and the stationer had the happi¬ ness ot sitting next the lovers, whose good opinion it was his interest to culti¬ vate , as it might be the means of helping him oft .vith а valentine or two in the coming ľtbiUíiry. Between the boot- niaker and the stationer, Harley found his resting place. The sable torps of Mi. Shovelem ap¬ plied themselves to relieve the party fiom then hoods and cloaks, while the mastei, after giving all requisite direc¬ tions foi tea and coffee, which he did with an air ot dignity and importance, that the piesent Lmperoi of Kussia and the Duke of Wellington would find it difhcult to assume at a ïeview, or on the
eve of b ittle, pioceeded to pour out wme to cheei the iflhcted mom nets, and sustain them under the affecting solemni¬ ties of the day. One glass he filled with bi andy foi Lieutenant Bobstay, who was a little afraid of taking cold, fiom standing on the damp giound without his hat, while lhe sei vice was being read over the gravo. IV ι. Shovelem, m person, politely handed the vvnter on which several glasses v.eie placed, to the widow. Ab¬ soibed in sonow, she did not, at first, peiceive, noi comprehend the meaning of the gentle tap, which liei nght aim received fiom the Epping satisage-hke fingeis of Mi. Waddle. At length, how¬ evei, her attention ìeturned to mortal affaus, she made an effort, and, by acci¬ dent selected towaids hei consolation, the glass which had been filled with brandy foi Lieutenant Bobstay. In a low tone, she wished hei fnends good health, and had,unfortunately, swallowed
more than half of its contents, befjie she dıscoveıed the fatal mistake She, howevei, then made ample amene 1 s, by her cries and gioans, for any neg' gence previously observable in hej* deportment, and though a glass of wine to neutralise the irdent spirit was prudently administered with the least possible delay, she would certainly have fainted, but for а pm in hei hood, which Mi Shovelem had left foi a moment on the rail of the chur, and winch insinuating itself through one of the lace holes m her stays, as she was sinking bitk for that purpose, spared the company this additional calamity, and caused the relict of the late Mr Snatchall to spnng up again, with an ıgılıty that would have astonished Mr Parsloe or Madame Saqui, m ordei to resume hei former attitude of graceful despondency More brandy was brought for the lieu tenant, as also a small glass foi Miss Blobber, at the suggestion of Mr Cada
verous, who was of opinion, that she might take cold as well as the heuteinnt. l'he young lady insisted upon his tasting it hi st, and this affectionate request having been amoiously complied with, Miss Blobber soon disposed of the iest, in doing which however, she enteitained the company with a veiy respectable imitation of the emotion which the brandy had called foith m Mrs Snatchall The rest of the party now took their glasses, bowing in silence to each othci, and to the widow with an air of distress, which inflicted ι eai pam on Charles, who nevei having acted a pa* t in such а scene befoi e, found it so intolerably faicic.il, that he hirdly dared venture to bieathe, lest he sliould be earned away by a buist of laughtei, w Inch, at that early penod of the day, would have shocked the mourneis exceedingly. Tea and coffee were next mtioduced, and disposed of as silently as the wine had been. There was something very
touching in then taciturnity, andın the intelligent looks and expressive panto¬ mimic gestures, by which some of the numbei intimated occasionally, that it would be expedient to ring for moie muffins, toast, 01 tea. One cucum¬ stance was ver} consoling. Gnet had not mjuied the appetite of any peison present. With the exception of liai ley, each made a hearty meal. He, from the strong provocatives to mirth befoie bun, felt tint he risked being choaked by ev eiy mouthful he ventured upon, and in consequence was little disposed to eat. When the cups and saucers had been ìemoved by oıdeı of the Commander-in- chief, tliat pi ovulent pei sonage came to Mrs. Snatchall, and desned to know, what she would like to have procured for suppei. The widow was still so much overpoweied, that she could give but faint answei s lo all his questions. The confeience proceeded m the following manner.
" Can you «ay, nia'a·*!, what you would like? We с 1.1 get any thing." " It's all the same to me." " Would you hke a quartei of lamb?" " No mattet what." " Oi a su loin of loast beef ?" " What you please___/shall not be able to e»it any thing." " O, my deal ma'am, you must not give way to grief.—Would you like a fillet of veal and ham ?" " I've no choice." " Or labbits, smothered in onions?" " Any thing." " Oi а boiled chicken ?" Ih '" " Oi some roasted ducks ?" « Ah '" And heie the aspnation befoie men¬ tioned, was ıepeated in Mis. Snatclialľs veiy best style, Mi.Shovelem peiceived that she wished to be considered aseempleiely exhausted, анс! looked upon her lading to answei
the two last questions, as she had done those that preceded them, to be sufficient to indicate a preference for what he had then proposed. He accordingly at once desisted, as the learned dog, aftei going round and round within the circle appro- pnated to his exhibitions, when his mas¬ ter's voice diops, at once halts, perceives close to his nose the happy lady who will be married first, and gives himself no furthei trouble. Having issued the necessary duections for preparing a lepast befitting the oc¬ casion, and, with most commendable fore- east, taken especial care, that nothing would be wanting to make that part of the ceiemony completely satisfactoiy, Mi. Shovelem seemed more at his ease than he had previously been, and socially took his seat among his neighboms. A pause of about three minutes' duiation succeeded, in which the whole of the dramatis pei sona actively employed themselves in endeavouring to think of something to say. Mr. Cadaverous was
very near succeeding, and a preliminary hem ' caused all eyes to be fixed on him He was about to begin, when Mr. Shovelem gave his hem ' and the attoi ney, with all the modest diffidence whicli be longs to his profession, at once gave way The undertaker could biook no furthei delaj', and forthwith mide α begtnntng. " Well, Mrs. Snatchall, you must not let your loss prey upon joui spints too much The will of Heaven, you know, ma'am, must be tlone. You have nothing to reproach youiseif with " " Ah' Mi Shovelem, you're verj good," and the white handkerchief went up to her ejes. " You know we must all go when out time comes There is no help for it " This philosophical leflection at once set the tongues of the whole company m motion. Mi. Cadaveious íemarked, that " those who were youngest, and in the bloom of life, did not know how soon they might be cut off."
Mrs. Cadav erous, as vv as to be, assented to this, and conti ibuted her mite of con¬ solation, by adding that, " neither wealth uoi beauty affoi ded any pi otection against the gum dtstioyer, Death." The widow, who was travelling post towards fifty, and who had vu ago wutten in legible chai attei s on a clay-coloured countenance, seemed to considei the last speech to apply particulai ly to her case, and admitted the correctness of the ob- servation, by stating for the benefit and edification of all present, that " it was but too true, and foi hei own pait, she did not think she should be long after liei dear Mi Snatchall." Heie she again displayed strong symptoms of sen¬ sibility, by concealing hei face in the usual wiy. Lieutenant Bobstay, who had been first mtenupted by Mis Snalchall's remarks, and afterwards by hei emotion, made three attempts to secure his turn without success, in consequence of hartshorn
being called foi to solace the lady. He was at length happily delivered of his speech, and gained an audience while he informed the widow that, " they must all cast »inchoi one day, and it would be well il every one stood is good a chance of getting safe into the hai bour of heaven as the deceased did." Mr. Waddle, Mr. Wafei, Mi. Lap- stone, and Mr. Rattler, said the same thing m other vvoids. Charles now felt that it was his tuin. As he could not speak to the virtues of Mi bnatehall, he was obliged to give them something of a moie general chaiacter, and accordingly told them, that immoderate grief for those who, in the language used by the ancients on such occasions, " weie no longer among us," ill became oui precanous condition, and if perseveied in, would seem as much like sorrow foi oui own inevitable doom, as îegiet for the loss we piofessed to deplore. The uncertainty
oT life ought to teach all to be piepared to lay it down whenever the Supremo Being should think piopei to withdiaw the loan of it, and he who stedfastly pursued the courst of dutj, would be consoled iather than depressed by the ìeffection, and inclined to exclaim with the poet, — I am nut concerned to know Wlnt to morrow futo may tlo, 'Tıs enough tlmt I can « \y I possess myself to day Ihe compiili) unanimously approved of these sentiments, and the widow be stowed a glance on the speaker, that seemed to indicate slie thought him al¬ most as gootllj an object to look upou, as even the lale Mr. Snatchall had been Mr. Shovelem, now, partly from a wish (verj common to most men) to hear his own praise, and partly with a view to give the iebct of the deceased a little ad¬ ditional consolation, led the coiiveis>ation to die mumei in which the funeral had been perfoımed
" I hope, ma'am, my little arrange¬ ments were to your mmd." " Quite so." " Nice deep grave '" " I could not see its depth. To look at it was too much for me." " It was very deep indeed," said Mr Waddle. " And quite dry." "O' quite diy," said Mi. Rattler " In eveiy respect, it was perfectly proper." " I am glad you like it. Mr. Snatchall was an old and particular fnend of mine. I should have been sony to have found any thing had been neglected," Mr. Shovelem put in. He waited for a compliment, but no one speaking, he proceeded, addressing himself to Mr. Rattlei. " I hope you have not seen any thmg neglected by my people, Sir." " О nothing, nothing." " Nothing, nothing," was repeated by vol. ι. ρ
every mournei in succession, and Miss Blobbei condescended to add, " eveiy thing she was suie, w as very comfortable, and this, she thought, must be veiy giate¬ ful to the feelings of Mis. Snatchall." " Certainly ; I wished all that could be done should be done. Foi now he is no moie, 1 know I shall nevei see his fellow, — pooi deal Lamb '" " Well, ma'am, don't fiet. No doubt he* is happj." This speech at once tinned the con- \eisation into the oidmaij luneial clun- nel, and biought foiwaid the piesent happiness and past virtues of the de¬ ceased m the legulai waj. The icm.uk, lhat Mi. Snatchall was happy, was in¬ stantly taken up. " Much happiei than we aie," said Miss Blobber. " No doubt," said Mi. Lapstone. " He's wheie he'll be tossed about by no more storms," said the Lieutenant. The statmnei tned to lepeat this fine
sentimeut, but not ìeeollecting the whole of it, he stopped short as α man al ι public festival sometimes does, when he cannot m unge thc words of a long toasl that he is icquired to drink. Instead ol bawling " the aforesaid," Mi Wafei got out of the sci ipe, with " loıı've tiken the vvoids out ol mj mouth " Mi Cadav cious " had no doubt but that Mi Snatchall was to bc envied." Mi Waddle continued, " And weij much, too, m my opinion." And the nephew, Mı. Rattlei, who, by the bye, came in foi a legacy of α thousand pounds, piously lemaiked. " Hts loss is oui gun — Pooli ' I mean oui loss is his etei nal gam " Having thus mide an ippioaeh to¬ waids tlic honest expiession ol then ıeal sentiments, bj uninimously agieeing thai the late Mı Sıuıtelıdl vvas bettei out oí the w oild than in it, the conveisation became moie umestiained, Mi. Shovelem still taking the lead. ρ 2
" Ah ' Mı . Snatchall, poor man * w as none of youi fly-away, flash-in-the-pan gentry. Always paid his bills when they came due. He'd stand out foi discount, but I don't blame hım foi that." " Bettei do that than put people oft," Mi Lapstone remaiked. " As Mi. Flouush did, and at last fail.' " Aye, who would have thought of thatl" said Mi.Cadaveious "But I al¬ ways expected his pnde vvould come to something " " That was what Mr. Snatchall always said," observed the widow, who ap¬ peared a little relieved by this lelish of small talk. " Whj, it is but t'other day," the at¬ torney went on, " that he called in Ini onehoisc chaise, to duve me to Hainp stead, and when I pioposed to take Miss Blobber with us, he objected, and said his charactei would suffei, if three were seen in his chaise." " He was always a biute," said the
Mis Cadaveious elect " And then see how he went on at home. His wife and daughteis diessed hke the first ladies in the land, with then biacelets and rings." " And always having new clothes," Mrs. Snatch ill added. " О alwa) s ' Why, they had tlnee new sarsnet diesses each, within foui months, which cost the Loid knows how much, if they weie paid foi " " And then, when they went to the play, they must always go to the boxes." " O, bless you · to be sure. The two- slnlling gallery and the pit, were not good enough for people of then quahty," " Well, we shall see where they'll go now Perhaps they'll be glad to stay at home moie frequently " " If they have a home to stay .it," Miss Blobber sneeungly continued, with a satiucal leer, that produced a smile even from the afflicted Mrs. Snatchall." " And," said the lattei, " what a deal of company they used to keep," p 3
"And how extiavagant ir. ihen piepar- itions' The table was always coveied with plate and cut glass, and they made nothing of having tin bot and tin lie-soup. Mr. Flourish once said, he could not do without them. His constitution lequned high living." " I'm thinking, wheie will he find his high living now ?" Mr. Cadaveious sig- nificmtly remaiked. " Why in a ganet to be suie," ıeplıed Miss Blobber, and a geneial laugh among the friends of Mi. Flourish who weie present, followed. " But," said Mr. Waddle, " tbey tell me that he has some hopes of assistance from his cousin Sobersides." " О no," Mr. Cadaverous answered, " I beheve that is not the case." Miss Blobbei »idded, " he is too close- fisted to do any thing of the kmd. 1 dmed there once, and what do you think he gave us for dinnei ? A suloin of beef roasted, with potatoes and hoıse-ıadısh '"
" lhere wis meanness '" said Mr. Ca¬ daverous "And he gav eus nothing aflei dinner but home-made wme." " I could not hav e done such a thing," said the widow of the dealer m foreign wines and spirituous liquors. " But, I thmk," Mr. Shovelem here íemarked, "if we were to have some¬ thing to dunk, it would not be amiss. I'm suie if the late Mi. Snatchall could know wbat we are doing, he would not feel it any disrespect to him to take some refreshment. " The reasonableness of this pioposilion stiuck every one, and wine and negus weie soon pioduced Just as it came in¬ to the room, the Lieutenant returning fiom a stump round the table, to oflèr a pinch of his lappee to Miss Blobber, was about to resume his seat, when he had the misfortune to plant most firmly his timber-toe on the soft corn of Mr. Wad. die, while politely presenting his box to г 1
Mr. Lapstone, who possessed but the moiety of a nose. The indignation with which he was repulsed on the one side, andthe hornble roar that burst forth on the other, appalled the naval hero, so that he could neither stir nor speak, and his embairassment was but very little diminished, when he found that the start of the tortured sugar broker had emp¬ tied a bowl of negus (whicli was being handed over by Mr. Shovelem) into the lap of the widow, to tbe great discomfit- uie of her person, and to the serious injury of her new mourning. Apologies were of couise tendered, and, at the in¬ stance of Mr Shovelem, accepted, after a few admonitory giowls from Mr. Wad¬ dle. The assistance of the landlady, and of Miss Blobbei, removed, as far as might be, the annoyance, to which the unfortu¬ nate Mrs. Snatchall had been subjected, and harmony was restored. Another dish of reviving scandal was then served up, and the extravagance and economy of
their mutual friends, weie criticised with equal candoui. Suppei came next on the table , and with the exception of a complaint from Mi Wafer, that some of the gtavy intended foi one of the ducks had been impiopeily administered to his Sunday co it, evciy thing was pei¬ fectly satisf ictory. The cloth removed, the praises of the decease»lwereiesumed, and the nephew considenng excessive grief for those who were happy to be ridiculous, if not wicked, thought it no disiespect to the memoiy of his " deir uncle" to attempt to raise the spiuts ot the afflicted widow with a song He ac¬ cordingly ïoaiecl out a ditty, the buiden of whicli was " He's gone like a hearty good fellow" Most of the mourneis joined in the chorus. Seveial othei displays of vocal 1 aient, each having the solace of the widow for its object, followed in rapid succession, and happily at the close of г 5
an evening of more than common jollity, those by whom these benevolent efforts were made had the satisfaction of see- ing Mrs. Snatchall retire, to use the phrase always current on such occasions, " Quite as well as could be expected."
CHAP. XII. Heaven gives the needful, but neglected call, Whtt dnj, what hour, but knocks at human hearts To wake thc soul to sense of future scenes ? Deaths stand like Mercuries, inevry way, Anil kindly point us to our journey's end Dr Yoi m The " downy sleep, death's counterfeit," which had fallen on the mourners and others engaged in peiforming the obse¬ quies of the late Mi. Snatchall, in conse¬ quence of their " looking upon death itself," in his person, had not yet been disturbed when news from the Admiralty called Mr Hailey to town. Of all the sable tioop, " the chief alone, pre-emi¬ nent in caie," had ventured out to inhale the morning breeze. Mr. Shovelem, who Was accustomed to such meriy-makings, was more on his guard than some who as.
sisted at them, and never failed to leave his bed early on the succeeding moining for the benefit of his health On tini· occasion a snug plot of waste land hid caught hu- attention, and he had taken the opporli nity of paying it a visit for the sake of indulging himself with a cal¬ culation as to what would be the probable value of that said plot of land, if it were possible to move it into the heart of Lon¬ don, get it consecrated, and turn it into a burying ground. He returned to the inn in time to witness Hurley's departure. With great kindness he invited his new acquaintance to the treat which he had himself just enjoyel. He assured him that he would think exactly on the subject as he did Harley was so convinced of this, that he thought it unnecessary for two surveys to be made to produce but one opinion But the undertaker insisted that it was well worth seeing, for (piovided that it could be conveyed to town) it would be more
valuable than Biinlnll luelds, as it was half as big agam Hailey still refused compliance, and loudly calling foi Mr. Bung's best boises, and desiring that they might be uiged to then greatest speed, he gave Mi Shovelem to under¬ stand that he was disposed, foi that time at least, to pay moie attention to the i/utcli than the dead finis foiled, the master of yestei day's fttc, was obliged to console himsell foi the brief adieus now exchanged, by slipping his caul into the hand of Chartes, with the expiession of а hope that he might be remembered both by lnm and his friends, when any thing was wanting in his small way. Ilailey's business at the Admiralty was soon transacted, he ıeceıved lus commission, and found himself appointed Lieutenant of the Zebra fugate, which was immediately to sad foi the Gambia. He was well pleased with his destination, as it promised him the pleasure of again seeing an esteemed fnend, Major Hough-
ton, with whom, duung his pievious sei- vice, he had foimed α more than common intimacy. He lefl town agam on the following morning, and at night found lumself on boaid the Zebia, which then lay in the Downs. Heie he had the pleasure of meeting with an old brothei ofhcer, Lieutenant Jefleues, who had fonnerlj served in the Portland. Both were rejoiced at thus coming togethei, but Mr. Jeffenes com¬ piameli that " he had been rather unfoi¬ tunate, since they last met, and had ex¬ perienced repeated disappointments." " Why so have I," said Harley, " and one, seveier than all the rest, and seveiei, I dare sweai, thin all you have known put together. But, hang it, sailors must not biood on troubles. We must think of the bounty of Fortune, iather than of her unkindness. Though harsh to me in the mam, in one instance she has been unexpectedly kmd." " I am glad to hear it. In what way?"
" She w ıs pleased to bestow on me an eighth of the ticket No 2588, which was drawn α prize of five thousand pounds, in the last State lottery " " What nuinbei did you say ?" " 2588 " " Impossible ' — Nonsense ' — Come, come, Hailey, you are at youi old pi anks Somebody has told you tint I was fool enough to purchase a share of that num bei, and you aie hoaxing me, for wasting my money on ι blank " " Is it possible thai y ou have a share of that ticket ?" " I have it m my pocket book Heie it is " " My deai Jeffenes, I give you joy — But suiely you must know that this en titles you to the eighth part of five thou sand pounds " " Give over jesting — I have it on the authority of а letter from the office, that it was drawn ά blank " " I was told the same, but one of then
clerks followed me to Chatham, told me that there had been a mistake, and paid ine the money." " Are you serious ?" " Upon my honour, I was never more so." " 1 should like to make some enquiñes about it before I leave England: but J sail in the Thunderer, on the morning of the day after to-morrow, and there is no time." " A chaise and four will soon take you to London and hack." " But these are not to be had without expence." " Nay, on such an occasion, a few pounds can be no object." " But, my dear fellow, a man can't spend what he has not." " О ! is that it. I'll advance you whatever you please. What will you have, fifty or a hundred ?" While speaking, Charles produced two
notes, of the value he had mentioned, and tendei ed them to his friend " If it is the same to you," leplied the Lieutenant, " I will take the larger one. It will make perhaps no diflerence, if I take both You shall have them igain the instant I retuin. The hundied I can send to my wife, the fifty will covei iny tiavelhng expences, and enable me to pay for a few things which I should like to have sent on boaid while I am gone." " Very good. Take both " Lieutenant Jefleues, with many ex- piessions ot giatitude, took the money and his leave in the same instant, and, with elated spuits, commenced the most joyous journey he had ever mide m Ins hfe. The next day Hailey passed in making anangements for his own convenience during the voyage, m examining the stite of the ship, and in inspecting the cievv. Captain Tiancis came on board in the aftei noon, and Charles was much giati-
ficdwith the fnenillygieeting he ıeceıved fiom lus commande! Having duietl togethei, they weie cheeifully conveising on the service they weie sent upon, when a lettei was biought to Chulés. It had been dnected to Woobuin; thence it had been for¬ vi aided to Chatham, and fiom this last place it had been sent on to the Zebra. He immediately peiceived that it came from India : the hand was unknown, and it was sealed with black wax. He changed coloui as it was put into his hands, and, forgetful of all ceremony, it once opened it, and lead as follows. " Su, Bombai/, April 151/«, 1780 " I am sony to mfoim you that joui father and mothei, Captain and Mrs. Hailey, died, on the 2ith and 27th of last month, withm tlnee days of each othei, umveisally ìegietted by all then icquamtances. lhe Captam had long
been m a bid waj*, and the death of his wne is supposed to have been has¬ tened by hei attentions to lnm dining his sickness Befoie be departed he named mjself and Mi. Barnes, of this place, his executois We shall wind up the ac¬ count with the least possible dehj', and tiansmit the lesült by the fust oppoi- tumtj. I am, Su, Youi most obedient humble Sei vant, Stephen Smith." Though Hailey had known less of his patents than most j'oting men know ot those fiom whom thej denve existence, he felt most deeply the mournful intelli¬ gence that they weie no moie It threw mio his mind all that desolation ot spiut which those awful visitations, that sepa- ìate men, as they advance tluougli life, fiom their tleaiest connections, aie cal¬ culated to inspire, m α heart true to seli- sibity and nature He made Ciptam
Tiancis acquainted with lus disti ess, who »idmuustei ed that soit oí consolation which those who heai of sonow aie gene¬ ially ìeacìj to bestow on those wlio feel it, aud going on shot e soon aflei, Charles was left to indulge his guef alone. '1 he evening had just set in, when he wasintenuptedby the sudden mtiusion of Lieutenant Jefleues. Itwas easj for Har- lej to pei ceive that he was in no very gootl humoui, but had he been moie himself than he wasjust then, it would have been α difficult lask foı hım to divine the cause of that displeasure, which marked the deportment of his fnend. " I come rathei abiuptly on you, Sir," he remaiked, " but j ou must feel that I have little apology to make on that ac¬ count." " I was not thinking of an apology." " No, I sliould wonder if you were, but, let me tell you Sir, I am not at all pleased with the trick you have played me." "What trick'"
" Why, this lottery tuck." " 11 eally do not understand you " " I like a joke, Sir, as well as any man ; but this I ilon't call a joke It may he amusement for you, but it's most unplea¬ sant loi anothei, as your own common sense must tell you, to be sent from this place, anil at the most mcomenient time, to London, upon — on а fool's enand." " You have been to London, I sup¬ lióse, on business of youi own 3 " " When you fiist spoke, I suspected that you w eı e not in eai nest, but, when jou gave me joui honoui th it you were, I was satisfied, and join conduct in acting such a pait bj anj gentleman in mj situation, I must say, was — was most — " " Stay, Sir. Befoi e j ou use epithets, which maypreclude explanation, have the kindness to let me know of what it is you complain." " Suiely that must be unnecessarj I complain of the prsnk, that you will call
it, I suppose, which sent me to London, to make mjself ndiculous, by claiming a share of a five-thousand pound pi ize, on a ticket winch had been diawn a blank." " Su, what I did, I did with а view ol solving jou. I told you nothing but what I knew to be ti ue. I have the stiongest pioof that the ticket in question, w ts diawn (js I yesteiday told jou) a pnze ol 5000/." " And I have the most positive piool that it came up a blank." " Sn, I have actually ıeceıved, is I told you befoie, one eighth of the five thousand pounds, as my shaie of the pi i/o " "Fiom whom did you lective the money '" " Fiom one of Hazaul's cleiks " "Why, then, Sn, Ihave then autho¬ rity foi stating that no cleik of then s lus been sent on any such enand, and they deny having paid any shaie ot the ticket m question. Tins, theıefoıe, let
me tell you, was an unfuendly hoax, and an ill-timed joke. I am not a man who would take oflenee at а trifle ; but, — " " Believe me, Jefleues, I was nevei less disposed to joke oi to tı ille m my life, and Inow assuie you, upon my honoui, that I was m earnest m what I said yestei day, and I luve told you nothing but the tiuth. A man came to me at Chatham : hcdcscnbed himsell to be а cleik in the employ of Hazaid, Buine, and Co., and he paid mc the money, which I told you that I had ıeceıved." " But, do you know lum to be what he ıepıeseııtcd himself to be '" " I ncvei saw the peison befoie, to the best of my knowledge, but it is not likely that an impostoi would deceive mc, to get ndor six bundled pounds." " Why that is ti ue. And yet —" A thought now, foi the fiist time, oc¬ cuned to Chartes, that seemed to account foi all that had pieviously baffled conjec¬ ture. He lecalled certam parts of Su
George Hendeison's conduct When he was taking his leave, he saw him about to press a piesent on lnm. His servant had afterwards followed lnm to Chat¬ ham, to »iffoid him pecuniaiy assistance. Shortly aftei this had been ι ejected, the supposed lottery clei к had arnved, and he now lemembeied having seen that person in the course of the same day walking with a man, who reminded lnm of Thomas, the servant of his old friend. At the time he had supposed Thomas to be at home, and of course taken it foi granted that it could not be him, but it now seemed piobable that the stoiy of this lotteiy prize was nothing more than an expedient hit upon by Sn George, to piovide him with a supply of cash. The instant this idea crossed his mind, he le- feired to one of the notes which still remained in his possession for fur¬ thei evidence, and he soon found what convinced him that he did the Baionet uo wrong, in assuming that it was to him he
owed the six hundred pounds. The name of his benef .ictoi's banker was written on the note, ami he considered this a suflicient evidence that, Su George having found his old shaie ol α ticket, had converted a blank into а pi ize, to disguise his bounty. To Lieutenant Jefleues he stated wlnt hatl occui ied to lum, and soon satisfied lnm that he had had no in¬ tention to deceive. Of this he had before given what some would think a very con¬ vincing pioof, m the money lie had ad¬ vanced to be lepaid out of the lottery pnze, which Ins fnend was to ïeceive. Jeffei ies now, for the first tune, thought of this. " Buttile money you have lent me. ·1 have disposed of it, and at this moment can neither recall it noi îepaj." " It cannot be helped," said Hallej. " I deeply regiet the moitification to which jou have been exposed. Forget that, and I shall never lemindyou of the other." voi,. 1. <t
This business settled, Cliaileb mime diately wiote to Sn Geoige He thanked hnn foi his hbciihty, but 1 unciited that he should hive uncoiisc-iousi) added to the buiden of obhgition undei which he had pioviou-dy libouied, and histened to ictuin 111 it poition of the money which rciinined tn ¡us possession, lie also communicated the mournful intelligence which he had that day ıeceıved from India, and having expiessed a detei- mınatıon to dıscluıge the new debt put upon lum the moment it was in Ins powei to do so, he bade his f ι lend and patron, and one whom he feaied to name, — a long adieu. In the midst of his affliction foi thc loss of his pai ents, he could not but view, with feelings of astonishment, the incon¬ sistent conduct of bir Geoige Alter tlie ciuci ι épuise he had met with, that his active and ingenious geneiosity should puisue him fiist openly, and then
m disguise, appeal ed to hım so unaccount¬ able, that he almost doubted whethei he had come to α iiglil decision on this occasion But the 1 iet ol his having been imposed upon m so exti iiiidinaiy away, could not be eonliovcited , and lie could suspect no man living of such an artifice, but Sir Geni n e. lie had little tune to muse on this subject. Befoie the ι e\t two divs had expued, the Zebia put to bei , aml altei aıemaık.ıbly slioit passige, distinguished by no incident of suilieicnt importance to be lecouled liete, .11 med at the mouth of the Gambia. Ihe ofhceis went on shoie at the island ol Goiee, to pa} then compliments to the Lieiitenant-goveinoi, the celebi ated Josiph Wall, wlio had just commenced Ins ıeıgn. Hailey had heie the satislaction to meet with his friend, the 110 less celebi ated, the biave Majoi Houghton, immediately on Jus
landing; and that veiy day, he, with the officeis of the Zebia, hid the ho¬ noui of being invited to dme at the Government House.
END OF 1HF Filial VOLUME.
ťrmted by Strohan und SpottiswwKÏe, i'nr teri>Strect, London
