Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The mystery: or, Forty years ago: a novel
THE MYSTERY.
CHAPTER I — t will not shrink it «İcattı, ( ome in ««hat shape it maj, if God ao will Bt peril to confirm anil prove my faith Mrs H Moat 1 hf obstinate resolution of the Mission¬ ary gave Harley some uneasiness. The barbarians, now masters of their fate, who were as bigotted as ferocious, if once they attended to the language of his com¬ panion sufficiently to compi ehend the obloquy with which Smithers was anxious to load the name of Mahomet, he was confident would not fail to sacrifice the VOL. III. в
insultei of then faith, and make him t xpiate with his blood that scorn for the Koran which it was his pride, as he con¬ sidered that it wa» his duty, to avow. Resuming their march, the Moors ad¬ vanced with their prisoners, allowing thtmselves but little rest foi the next two days Having crossed the Senegal, thty at length ainvtd at the Mooriih settlement since known by the name of lam It was here t! at the Missionarj had been persecuted and plundered pre- vious to his meeting with Harley, and he trembled at approaching the well- known scene of suffering, lest his last source ol consolation—hisBible—should be taken from him. They, however, were so far satisfied tbat he had in the first in¬ stance been completely despoiled, that they never thought of searching him on this occasion. The naturalised appeai- ince of Harley announced to them that his complexion was all that remained of what he had brought from Europe ; and
the ceremony of seaiclnng him was but negligently and imperfectly performed. It was now made known to the captives that Smitheis had been biought back to Jarra by 01 der of thc King, into whose presence both the prisoners were forth¬ with conducted His palace was a shape¬ less hovel of clay, and he was seated on what, with tbe same good breeding, we may call his throne, namely, the skin ol «i tiger. A swoid which he had piocured liom a Slatee or slave merchant who had been accustomed to trade with the Eu¬ ropeans on the coast, his Majesty had broken by some accident, and he had sent out the party by whom Clmles and Smitheis had been made prisoners, to bring back the European preachei whom he had befoie permitted to dep irl, that be might mend it When Smithers and Charles made theu ippearance, the two pieces of the sword were exhibited by the King's command, and presented tothe Missionary, who was в 2
il tht s iiiit moment pei tu ptorily ordered to inuit thtm, as thej 1 id ouginally been joined Suipnse almost took his breath aw ıı whtn this extraordmarj mvnditi icichcd tlie on of Smithers He, how evei, pi omptly ieplied, that he undei tood nothing of the sword maker's call ing mil tint it was impossible foi hnn io tlo tht thing icquired of lum I hi Baib nun fiercely demanded that the ( hnstian dog should do it dnecth in his pitsence lie ieplied, ' I ' study lo sIioïl myself appi οι id unti Ood a tori-man that need cth not ti be ashamed ' but of the art of making or mending swords, I am utterlv ignorant " That α man who came from Lui ope sliould not understand mechanics suffi cientlj to pei form, on the spot, so simple an operation as that of joining two pieces of a sword, was that whicli King Sadi could not for a moment believe to be possible The command was m conse
pienti, iihcniiiitlj ι ptittil, tutl w bui ılıt Mission irj ìtplitd as beline sii/in r tht huidle ol Iht biniteli suoni, bis Mijestj spuing up, uni scenicii detti mund to ascertnn by ti j ing il on the nttk of the luiloiluuite Snuthus, it tint put of tht bhck winch lilheietlti it, wasnot still tiptblt ol somt t χ tu tion Smitheis, ıısıgııul to bis litt ılteı tht fiist slul ol ılımı, nule η ıtToıt to ıettdt 11 iisiiij, hi tjes ıs ııı the iti ol pııj ci, ht secuiul 1 ι ıppt il to a higheı povvei, while he uti itd, m i confident tout, ılıt wouls ol Divil ' Iıı Ihľe do I pul mı/ li и I sn с ι /ют all tliem that pet ct uk m , uil d Inu mc " lhtst tipitssioiis h ι pelted ııı a but nul m ninei nul then paused, ıs if ıvvııtııı,, tht I il il sunki which vvastottimin itt histti'hlv cucci And that which he expected would in ill probability luvt oeetı ltd, hid not the Mooi's ejt iestul on ınotheı object, which, for the moment, ot t lipitti til 'us
attention, llut object was the physi¬ ognomy of an European, who had, m the first instance, escaped Ins notice, antl vvho had been unexpectedly brought be¬ fore him by Ins marauders, in the person of Cliarles. His thoughts on beholding Harley, at once took a new direction. " If he cannot do it, you shall," was the substance of what he said, as his speech was explained by his looks and gestures, and such assistance as Smitheis could afford m the character of an in¬ tei prêter Charles had seen that the modest and becoming deportment of the Missionary had availed hnn nothing, and instantly deteimmed on tiy mg if an air of confi¬ dent self-importance would not be of sei vice to him liei e, as he knew it had often been elsewheie, to persons as ig- noiant on all subjects, as he was of the swoid-makei's trade. He calmly ad¬ vanced, and lus hands being unbound, took the parts of the fractured weapon,
fitted them to each other, and seemed to examine them with a careful eye. After thus wasting several minutes, he gravely assuied the King that what he wished could not be done, from the particulai way in which the sword had been bi oken , but he added, though this weapon could not be repaired, if his Majesty would permit any of his principal men, in whom he could confide, to accompany him to Jdlifree, he could there, or at some place in its vicinity, procure lnm α new one, much better than that which was now in his possession had evei been. This answer was in the course of being conveyed to his Majesty by Smithers, when it was announced that а Mooi was ш attendance, w ho could speak the lan¬ guage of the white men. Harley was rejoiced to leain this, as he hoped to be able to make himself un¬ derstood without difficulty. He tuined to the person who was supposed to be qualified to interpret his woids, and was в 4
saluted in English with one ol the coai ,- est phiases m the volgai vocabulary.— He enquiied of IhcMooi il lie uitild spe ik I'nglish, llld leeu.ed loi answei, the woids, " Go to-----," which he uttered veiy distinctly,but which, tl must be seen, hatlno beauug at all on the question put to lum. This, he soon found, that ho did ..ot uudei stand, and that in point of fact, the Iellow had no knowledge of the language he pretended he could speak. He had .accompanied some of the cofies of slaves from Bambaua towaids the ι o.'st, and had occasionally met with an I'.nglish saıloı υι two engaged in that eommeiee, iu human beings, which was then cained on lo α gieat extent. These had amustd themselves by teaching the pietcnded mteipietei to lepeat a few in¬ decent and blasphemous phiases, which he ostentatiously utteied before Ins fel¬ lows, who, astonished at acquit ements -.0 extiaordinaiy, applauded him to the ^kies as а prodigy of leal mug. He con-
sideied the present ι ht occasion tor the display of his knowledge, and without sciuple, undertook the office of inter puter By using the mo t common nul 11 nuli \r expiessions, Ch irles tmie nome 1 ίο mikt hun cmdcıstiiitî «lut ne utihni to sty to the kınjr Uis clients wci n unless lhis w ıs ι nuttet ol little m ment to the ııılı ipiett ι, who dul int liisit ite to invent speeches lol Ilıılej, «luth «eie inj U11114 but wlnt hi lini 111 conti ınpl ıtıoıı to nttci Vt ti nes tlı Mission uj w ıs t ıı ıbltd lo tieteet hun 111 I lsehooılst ' mostniisthitv oua tint'tiiej ind this he itttinpte 1 ti ι pl un ııı th ıluorı ılı tongue , butthe tli'htuliy which he futilul ш tollet tui r ι sulht tent mı uhu ot woids to mikt limitli undu sitio , his so iveai loimu to ¡n utdıtoıj thtt the Kin¿ jııugıd it exp dient to ihleti he intorpidii to speik loi Smithers s well as loi his tuend lhis lit impost n did with tht utmost t ou 1 itss, to the git ι
distomfituie of the Missionary, vvho, foiled in all his attempts to expose the cheat, was obliged to console himself by in appc il to that Being, who searches ill beuta, md whom no ingenuity can deceive Tlie f icihty with which the mteinietei tianslated the speeches of the Chnstian dogs into the language of the countiy was the subject of umveisal admiration among bis countiymen , and the nulig nani exclamation, ' lliou shalt not Urn false xtitiiess against thy neighl oui ," whicli fiequently buist from the lips of tlit pieachu, with an expression o/ angti, wholly unusual with him, was held to ifloid the strongest possible proof of tlie fitness of the mterpietei foi his office Such lesentment they supposed to be moi td by the othei 's ability, and the ma lignint laugh, and gloomy scowl whieh alternately succeeded each othei in the eountenince of tlie King, plunly inch cated that the tale which t! e Mooi
thought propei to tell, was m no way favourable to them. Γιοιη the rage at some moments called forth, Hailey thought it policy to be silent, as he coniti hardly doubt that his attempts to ex¬ plain were turned into insults by the modest and conscientious mteipietei Smitheis succeeded in telhng the King the cause of Hailey's detei null¬ ing to speak no more. But to have ıe¬ duced the Christian to silente, was tht ton-ummation of the Moor's triumph, and, for ıef using tomend the swoid, t oth were ordered trom the royal piesence. That Harley h id nothing to say foi bim¬ self, proved to then entu e satisfaction th it he was a detected nnpostoi. from the King's hut, they weie led to mothei. On then way they were spat upon and kicked, and, in fine, eveiy insult that Moonsh ingenuity could de vise, was bestowed on the unhappy strangers. These outrages were endured with veiy different feelings by the cap- _« 6
lives loaming with ıage, tlie bonds tliat ıestıaıtıcd lus limbs alone pievented Huley from steking, ontlie instant, to levenge Inmself on Ins toimentois ind die Smitheis, on llie tontiaiy, const de ι ig tht houi of Ins inutyidoiii it li md, w is so f u sust uned hv /e il in the cuise ol bis iilit,ion, tini he elicimeli ili vutlt unshiinl in 0 tonst uity uni vntli an isptct of st tnuy ıııd benevolence, that ι mau ol m ich hunei neues wou d 1ια«Ό found it no e tsy ttsk to mutiti undei cucıııııslıııtes of equal pain, even suppostila hım to bt ι sti uyeı lo th it huy indign ıtıoıı «hich foimcd ι pait of the thu ietti of II ulti While the 1 ititi bieathed wnth uul defunct on ill uound, uul while his lowt пц eye seemed occupied in selecting objects foi futuic veugtmtt, the Missioiutj, with ι tranquil in, continued to iepe il pious exhortations to hi peisecutois, " to it pent ere it «c«s /uo lalt," ancl " fiy fiam the tiiath to comt ' and lh it they might
nol thmk tlie attempt hopeless, he added, when he peıceıved then violence to in ciease, th it the mei cy of Heaven tr ins eendtd then iniquity , and gre it as then tiansgicssions neie, nothing tould bc nioi t tint thin th^ sentiment expiessed bv the l'sihmsl, and thus lendeied by ihe sweet smgei of the Bntish Isı iti W I L tU Ι ι I ol Is 1 1 to b r ι Ile le t м cr iy ra r Ilten obsei ung the violent agit ıtıoıı ol lus iel ow sufici ti, bc entieated hım to be calm, leinindmg lnm it the sunt time, that "Ut man/ if the Loid nuts/ nil simi bul be b cııt/c lottai els allmen, ι« »ut /ncss, insti iiLtm n llto&e Hull oppost Iht insci с " It was ilso to be bonít m n intl, tint if it utie bettti loi thtm to lue than to die, " lie ho had sated them be] ι eji omillepa oof llu. hon, und Iht pa i/ lhe beai, could delna them also out tij Hie hnnds of those Philistines " Moieovei, they wert enjoined by the Scnptuu,
" to lote those teho perscc'ikd them," and it was then duty, as Chnstians, to lift their voices to Heaven, even at that moment, and say, " ľaliu. , Jolánt them, thcy l.noto nottthat tliey do." But the voice of lehgion, most sooth¬ ing as it is commonly found to the t u of those who moiun the piessme of calamity, was lost on Hailey in that hour. His bosom could know no emo¬ tion but ıage, no wish but foi ven¬ geance. Ci uelty at length became «eary, ami aftei exhibiting the two sufleieis, almost naked, as if to compai e them v\ ith cicli other, they weie left to themselve n the hut to which tliey bad been last ce n- ducted. Hailey's hands lud been loos¬ ened while he sat on the ground «ilmost m a state of lnsensibil'ty, and he sud¬ denly found himself .appai ently at libel ty. He began to think that the Moois, having inflicted what they judged m adequate punishment on then captives,
intended to allow them to depart. But since the pieceding day they had tasted no lefreshment, and devout ing thirst pi eyed on bun, and at length became uisuppoi table. 1 he Missionaiy, on his knees in the hut, was ictuining thanks foi past meicies, and implonng the future protection of Ins Maker, when Hailey ventuied forth. At a distance he saw α Moonsh woman. She did not appear to ìegaid lum, but theie was an expiession of sonow m hei face, which he felt as¬ suied could only pioceed from α heart of sensibility, alive to the feehngc of com¬ passion He lesolved to solicit hei, to bestow the important boon of а diaught of watei As Challes advanced she began to íetue, without observing Inm. He lud aheady neaily approached the place wheie he had hist seen her, when а small gieen shiub attracted his notice ; he plucked it, and piessed its leaves against Ins binning tongue. At that in¬ stant the retning female h ippened to
urn round , a piercing siniek oí agony and honoi burst from hei lips, md Hailey immediately lound himself sm ìounekd by his lonncr toinienlois, wlio now att icked lum with tenfold fui j, md so suddenly, tint unible to Uten pl flight oı icsistance, he sunk uiulei tin weight of ι epe ited blows, devoid il sense anil lecollection It w ıs twilight wh u lit ie\nu! Ιυ ι peıftct coiiscioiľiics, ol his situinoli He heaid α lootsttp ı tu, ıııd ι \|iecteıl new toi lui t, when the mild \oiee ol "■Miiithcis btıı bt on his en Hit lutei had just been supplied with sonic boilid coin ind silt, togethei with ι «aioli ου ııl watei, and hul h istened to shut tlıuu with his corniti j nun ovei \\1«sl muu mate tonn lit hid vv itelie 1 it niten il tlnough stvcı il houis belo e " Awake, mj bıotheı ' lie t χι lai md, " Behold I bung ltfitslimtnl I ι j nu «noitil pul Ile who supplied m um ι to his chosen people in tht w ikicini s , ΟΙ
Ins given us food at the hands of these bai banans." " Aie they afiaid that without such supplì, wt shall die too soon to allow them to displ iy all the tiuelty they know bow to piactist ?" " 'Ihen motive I piofess not to know. But let us take the good tlut is sent us— ' ¡el иь cal an ' di nil, lo elai), « ' For lo топ ото «с die,' I apprehend might be added with httle risk of offerding tiuth." " It may be so, but ' sufficient foi the day is the ex il Ihei cof.' " " I am astonished that the ferocity which attacked me without the slightest provocation, should have peımıtted me to live even till this moment." " You know not the customs which the powei of Satan hath caused to prevail imong the heathens in tlus land of daik¬ ness." " I can imagine no customagainstwhich I have offended even m thought. Leaving
tlie hut I sought but to ask a female for a draught of water, and even that design I had not accomplished when I was at tacked by the barbarians, and all but murdered " " But the woman you appioached was weeping over the grave ot her child You plucked the shrub whicli had been planted over its remains, and which it is considered sacrilegious for a stianger to touch " " Indeed ' Then that accounts fot the shriek which burst from her, when her eyes first rested on me " " Even so, and « the Christian dog,' such is the language of these benighted sinners, was held to have committed one of the most foul crimes tint depra vity could offei against humanity and religion Hence the cruelty with which you have been treated They look upon you as one accursed " " Then fly me You cannot be safe if seen to hold converse with me "
" What ' ShaU I fly my brother in distress ?" ' That am I forbidden to do by htm τι/ιο sent me ' " " You will be exposed to the same tortuie that has been inflicted on me." " It may be so." " Nay, the barbai ïans may even put you to death for attempting to mitigate the sorrows of the wretched being, who has thus unw ittmgly become an object of such peculiar abhonence." " God's will be done." " But why expose youiself to peril which may be avoided. All the atten- tion youi benevolence could bestow on me, would but httle alleviate the ugour of my destiny. Why do you thus risk prov oking them on iny account '" " Because I am a Christian " " But, by staying, your life may be sa¬ cuficed. Reflect— death or torturo will be the ceitam consequence." " But to stay is my duty. That will 1 endeavoui to perfoi m, and leave the rest to Providence,"
And having stated it to be lus duty to expose himself to tht cuielty ot those .uound lum, he felt tint he had uigcd that which could ι ol be ansvvtietl, mil would listen to no furthei lenionstiantc, while he ìequested Challes to sh.ut tht scanty ıcpast whicli had been put il his disposal. It was then that Hailey ftlt lemoisi for the sharp language that he bail used, «md the haish thoughts that he lnd in¬ dulged when his companion shiunk from the fight in which he thought that he ought to have been as f orvval tl is him¬ self to engage. With equal wondei and admuation, he saw n Smitheis a feeble and natuudly timid nun, who, anun iteti by the hope of leading Ins fellow eiei- tuies fiom the ways of sm into the paths of truth and eternal happiness, h id not feaied to venture alone among s iv age antl unknown nations, to pieach the Gospel The sacı ed cause which had tluis led bim on, Charles found with astonish-
ment, supplied a dignified and generous enthusiasm, winch lifted his mild spirit fu, fai above thc diead of all that man eoultl do, and taught him serenely to scorn dangei 01 death, when to avoid cithei seemed opposed to duty. A little refieshed by the food, and still moie by thc water which the kind caie of Smithers had supplied, Charles, with the assistance of the Mıssıonarj, returned to the hut, wliere he soon had the good fortune to forget, foi a time, the haidslups which awaited, and tin penis which surrounded hun, in sleep
CHAP. II. We fly, no resting for the foot wc find, Λ11 dork before, nil ilcsolatc bellini RoaERl T. he entrance of the hut was baiiicadoed during the night, and in the morning it was impossible foi Challes and the Missionary to doubt that they were still icgarded аь piisoneis. In the course of the day, they wcie compelled to assisi in drawing up w atei foi the flocks and heids of their peisecutois The vigoiu of Harley's constitution was such that all the hardships he had endured had but in a small degree diminished his stiength, and the labour now imposed caused lnm but little pain, though to his weaker companion it seemed to be intolerably seveie. He, however, bore
it without repining, though „ometimes the anguish caused by the exertion required of hnn, was betrayed by an involuntary groan They slept again in the hut in which they had passed the preceding night On the return o f day, Smithers calLd upon Harley to jom w ith lum in prayei and celebnte the return of " the gieat sab batic day " " It was" said lie, "oi the lastSundaj tnat Providence was pleased to permit two brothers to meet in a land far remote from that of then forefathers A week of sad ti lbulation we have passed togethei, but tlnough meicy we still uve, and HE vvho led the Children of Israel out ofthe land of Egypt, may yet be pleased to lestore us to our homes Let us then join to bless his holy name " I should be rejoiced if we could unite m devotion, but at this time we aie denied the consolation that would flow from our doing so Ourpetsecutors
approach, doubtless foi the purpose of making us ıetum to the toil of yestei day." " But that we may not do " " We cannot escape it " " But we must refuse. This ' is the Sabbath of the Loid, and we must do no manner qfxvoiK.' " " And what can such refusal avail ? It will but expose us to additional insult Why should we thus accumulate misery for ourselves, and provoke the unen lightened barbarians who surround us to commit outrages which otherwise they would not think of perpetiatmg. If it is impossible to awaken them to virtue and religion, let not our seeming obstmacj betray them into sins for which, but foi such conduct on oui part, they would not have to answer." " We," Smithers solemnly ieplied, " must not shrink from the perfoimance of our duty, because the sinful, in the wickedness of their hearts, are likely to
be offended thereat Though the king of these savages regard not our holy re¬ ligion , though, like Phaioah when he refused to let the children of Israel offer sacrifice to the Lord, he will not permit us to worship our maker without molest¬ ation, we must not forget that which he has enjoined, for all that these worse than Egyptian task masters can do " " But he who sees all, who knows our hearts, will recognise m that silent devotion, between which and the Creator no persecutor can interpose, the offering of humble and contrite spirits, and over¬ look that involuntary sin against his word, to which, under the pressure ot circumstances, we reluctantly submit, by labouring for the Moors " " O, my brother, deceive not yourself by sinful submission to the children of Satan ' The words of the commandment cannot be mistaken They are positive, and must be implicitly obeyed On the voi m с
Sabbath we are directly forbidden fo labour. It is said, « in it thou sluilt not elo any tuork ; tliou, nor thy son, nor lliy rlaughter; thy man servant, nor thy maid ¿criant ; nor thy cattle ; nor the stranger lhat is within thy gates.' " " But we shall not sin against the commandment, seeing we but labour in obedience to them whom we have no power to resist." " We cannot thus excuse ourselves fbr neglecting to observe a sacred command¬ ment." " I differ from you m toto. At all events allow yourself one day for re¬ flection." " And pro&ne the Sabbath while I reflect ?" " I do not think that in any case you will do so. The day on wbjch we met, though you were satisfied that it was Sunday, I thought, and still think, was Saturday. If I am right, to-morrow is the Sabbath of the Christian world, and
to daj we may — we ought — to laboui for our daily biead " '· Believe ше, I kept too careful an ac count of the lapse of time to have fallen into such an error " " The Moors aie here," said Hariey, " Be piueent, reflect on the consequences of provoking then ıage " " I do , but shudder still moie at the consequences of provoking the wrath ol him who reigns above the sky These heathens, urged on by Satan, may inflict unwonted pains on my vile body, they may slay me, but the Lord will delivei my soul, and my eternal part shall be safe " burther argument would have been vain, had there been time for it, but now the hut was entered by their Moorish masters, who came to order them to re¬ sume their labour Charles seemed to acquiesce, and called upon Smithers to reconsider what he had before urged, and accompanyhim. The Missionary calmly, but positively, с 2
i etused obedience to those who summoned hnn to toil on the Lord's day. Го the ferocious Moors his conduct was wholly inexplicable. That a timid, weak, and friendless prisoner should scoin their impenous mandate, and de¬ liberately set their powci at defiance, was that of which they could have no idea Such conduct, it was not easy to convince them, was within the lange of things possible. Harley perceived their astonishment andendeavoured to avail himself of it, to mitigate the ι igorous treatment which the temerity, tnd as he considered it, the in t itu ittonof his unfortunate friend, was but too well calculated to provoke. By signs, ind by means ot the very few Moorish woids, with thc signification of which he had become acquainted, he strove to make thtm understand that his companion w as too ill to work that day, but that he Inm self would perform the labour of both Smithers understood what he was doing,
and ¿ealoiislv txtrted himself to tountti ict evei effort m his f moui Sick," lit txcluined, " I un not moie than I have been foi minj dijs past, but tlus day is the Sabbath of the Loul ind I will mncmbei it lo l сер it h li/ O, my brother," he added, looking compassionately upon Hailey, ' О that you could but see the insignificance ol the ev inescent pleasures of this impei feet state of being, and how greatly the gloiy of suffering and dying in the good cause compensates for the loss of all this ν am world can bestow ' Then should we go forward strong in the spu it, conquering and to conquer Mucy miy yet open your eyes Tl en a· tho moments pass away Wc II love and wonder and adore Antl hasten on ti at glorious day When wc si all meet no more Carried away by thc enthusiasm ot his piety, Smithers foigot the presence of his peisecutors, and shed tears, not for the hardships which awaited hun, but fiom с 3
the teai th it his companion, as he shared not this pliasurable glow, was under the dominion of the powers of daikness Rudtly oideied to go foith as on tht pieceding diy,his attention was called to thost fiom whom the command pio ttedttl, and he flatly refused to obey The unwonted firmness of Ins deportment sti иск all present with amazement His refusal could no longei be misunderstood, yet the Moors, who had tortured and confined lnm befoie, but never requned him to laboui dunng his fiist captivity, ilmost doubted the evidence of theu senses, when they heaid the mild, un repining being, whom they had pillaged, and scouiged, and insulted with impunity, oppose then will, and fearlessly set then power at defiance Hailey agam attempted to interpose " Man of the vvoild '" exclaimed the undaunted and detti mined Missionaiy, " be silent, and let me speak It is written that ' thou shall keep the sabbath
holy, and do яо manner of work ;' and I, adhering to the religion of my forefathers, which is the only true religion, will not iorth at the bidding of the heathen this day." The Barbarians looked at each other and at him. They appeared to think that he had lost his senses. Tbis idea Charles anxiously sought to strengthen ; and by pointing to his own head and then to that of his companion, he endeavoured to signify that 'the man was mad. " I am not mad, most sinful country¬ man," Smithers warmly remarked. " In the language of Paul I may say, · J speak the language of truth and sober¬ ness.' " And that such was the fact he suc¬ ceeded in convincing his auditory. They proved that'they understood him by a torrent of abuse which they bestowed, while they furiously ordered 'hitn tô fol¬ low Harley, who was now dragged to the accustomed toil. с 4
Never had the period between sun-nse and sun-set appeared longer to Chailes than it did on this melancholy day. He laboured to display uncommon alacrity, and to do tbe work of Smithers as well as his own. At intervals he interceded lor the Missionary, and endeavoured to con¬ vince them that he was really insane. This he strongly urged to those whose aspect he thought less ferocious than that of theu- fellows, but the result of these appeals did not flatter him as a physiog¬ nomist. Through every hour the image of his pale emaciated companion in misfortune, presented itself to his mental view. He tiembled lest the exasperated bigots around him, should sacnfice tlie Christian to their zeal for Mahomet. The im¬ prudence of Smithers knew no bounds, and he had unfortunately acquired a suf¬ ficient knowledge ot the language of the country to convey to them his scorn for Mahomet and the Koran, with sufficient
distinctness tomake them understand th it he held then faith in utter abhorrence Harley was impatient to return to the hut in whicli he had left the virtuous enthusiast, yet shuddered with unwonted dread as the moment drew near in which he was to ascertain his f ite , and when he was again conducted to his miseiable resting-place, he expected to be shocked with the sight of his murdeied or muti¬ lated friend. On entenng the shed he looked aiound for Smithers, but perceived him not. This was even moi e appalling than the ghastly spectacle which he was in some degree prepaied to contemplate. His worst fears seemed to be realised " They have de¬ stroyed him," he exclaimed. " He sleeps in the grave. Alas ' I shall see the face of my countryman no more '" A groan, accompanied by an attempt to articulate the name of Harley, an¬ nounced that the conclusion he had come to was erroneous. с 5
In the most retired corner of the hovel, prostrate on his face, the Missionary lay in that position to which he had been driven to shelter Inmself as far as might be, from the cruelties which his incensed tyrants had combined to inflict These, when he had sufficiently revived to be in а state to recount them, he desci ibed to have been most severe After reviling him with the most offensive epithets tint I uigu igt could supply, lit had been spit upon, kicked, beaten and lacerated vv ith thoins and pointed sticks While tliey were thus employed, he had raised hie thoughts to the I atlici of all, and Invine, implored mercy foi himself, hi prayed lot the comei sion of his enemies loi their depravity, as well os foi Ins own sufferings, teais had poured down Ins cheeks, and when these weie obsened bummg sand had been thrown into In eyes, as they told him with bmtal moel« ery, to dry them He endeavoured t hide his countenance but had been re
peatedly compelled to turn his face to hn tormentors; and it wa3 not till naturt, sinking beneath repeated efforts ot bar¬ barity, suggested that further persever¬ ance at that tune would occasion the loss of that recreation he might afford on some futuie occasion, by enduhng the same tonnents again, that tlıey peımıtted hım to remam as Charles had found him, with the parting assurance that their cruelties should be speedily renewed. To reason with him then on the folly which had subjected him to this unneces¬ sary misery, would be useless, and, is Hailey thought, eiuel, for he was not npable of experiencing· the felidty which some íespectable people derive from the triumph of that moment, which proves to a broken hearted friend that the dismal prediction they 1 ad hazarded turns out to be fatally correct. Instead of reminding lura or what he had ad¬ vised, and reproving poor Smithers for the course thnt he had thought proper to г f)
take, Charles endeavoured to soothe the suflerer by mild condolence, and by ex¬ pressing a hope that before the return of that day in the enauing week, they would bc no longer in the power of the relent¬ less wretches that surrounded them. " The abominations of these people grieve my soul," observed tlie benevolent Smithers. " I have cried to the Lord in their behalf; but, ibr my sins, he hath not yet hearkened to my prayer : ' He hath blinded their eyes and hardened their heart, that thej/ should not see with their eyes, nor understand With their heart, and be converted I' " " We must endeavour to escape." " Of that there is little hope. This day a palaver or consultation has been held concerning us, and our fate is de¬ cided." " And what is that rate ?" " That I know not with certainty. In aid of the punishments inflicted on my wretched frame to-day, the Moors have
taken саге to call in the future hardship! to which we are destined. Some have told me that we shall have our hands thopped off, and then bc sent as a present to the King of Bambaria, otheis tell that it is intended to put us to death, and a third class of persecutors say tliat we are to be taken to the salt-pits at Tisshect, and there doomed to some new slavery in the great desart." " Then," said Harley, " we must seek speedily tlie means of emancipating our¬ selves." He was silent, but his mind ran anxi¬ ously over the possibilities of escape. He was still ruminating and tasking his in¬ genuity to discover the means of flight, when an irresistible drowsiness came over lum, and foi the moment slumber dis¬ missed all sorrow. Buef was the rest of that night. He was soon awoke by the rude invasion ot the hut ; and those who had usually con¬ ducted him to toil, now busily employed
tiiemselvcs in binding lus hands and feet liom their frowning looks, impatient gestures, and loud reproaches, he could not but suspect the termination of Ins sufferings to be at hand, and he entlCa ν ourcd to summon up all his fortitude to meet the blow. In less than half an hour he found Inmself again thrown over the back of ι horse The Missionary, swooning from excessive weakness, 4vas disposed ot m the same way. Secured as they had been when first made prisoners, and accom¬ panied by seven horsemen, the captiv cs were soon removed from Jana. Had both the Englishmen retained thc peifect use of their senses, it would have been impossible for them, borne through the intricacies of a boundless wilderness, to tell m what direction they weie travel¬ ling On the second day, they rested foi many hours while the sun was high They resumed their journey when even¬ ing approached, but soon stopped in
consequence of' one of the horses being disabled. Thc Moors made a fire, and I ud themselves down to repose for the night To reiresh themselves seemed then only care, and they forgot to bind their hands as thcy had been accustomed ι о do ; or they thought them too much exh tusted, md too much bewildered in the pathless wilds which surrounded them, to make such piecaution neces- -ary The hre binned bri&ht, and flashing on the fieice swarthy countenances of then guards, composed as tliey weie in iliath-hke i epose, made what could only bc viewed with abhorrence by day, ob¬ jects ol ghastly horror by night. The Moots were all isleep, and snored m conceit so loud, that Harley almost ex¬ pected them to awaken each othei. When they hist halted, a circle was formed close round the cheerful blaze, ti om which Hariey and his fellow -captive weie excluded. As the waimth mcieased,
the Moors removed furthei fiom the fire, till the prisoners weie left within the cir- cumfeience of tbe ring formed by then prostrate bodies, and in a situation which exposed them to no suffering from want of heat. His legs were still bound, but he half raised himself to recede from the scorching flame. Hitherto, his every movement had served but to prove tne vigilance of the Moors, but lit now per¬ ceived, or thought ht perceived, that his actions were no longer observed. As he turned to look υ ι his rniards, he saw his own shadow , and while begazed on the imperfect image, he started at the ex¬ aggerated representation of his drooping head and descending beard, and almost doubted that that was indeed the shadow of the being he had once known. A death-like stillness prevailed, and it struck him, while he regarded his helpless mas¬ ters, tbat one bold effort might make their temporary rest eternal. But his heart revolted at shedding the blood of
sleeping men. By his side, the Missionaiy slumbered as calmly as if he had been in the best bed-chamber his own country could afford. .Suddenly it occurred to Charles that this was a favourable oppor¬ tunity foi attempting to escape. 'Ihe horses weie at a considerable distance, he and Smitheis could mount two oi these, and befoie their oppressole opened their eyes, might be at a considerable distance from the spot on which they then rested. Full of the thought, he waked the Missionary, who on the instant began to pray aloud. « Be silent," said Harley. " Never wi.l I be silent. I will sing the piaise of the Lord while my voice remains ; and yini, I hope, will not even now refuse to jc in with me." He then began to give ou , with an audible voice, one of Dr. Watts's psalms : Ye that delight to serve tlie Lord, Tlie honours or his name record "
" Suspend your deletions ior ι time I will join with you in singing or piaying when we are in safety, but th«si mo ments, unless you think llu wilful sien fice of our lives would be an accept iblt offering to the Tather of all mercie (who may yet have occasion for you to convert tht heathen) we must devote 1 1 effecting our с scape " " Our escape " " Lven so " " Now?" " Now or nevei An opportunity — a favourable one now ofteis If we lost this, we shall in all probability never hai e such another Our hands aie unbound, our guards asleep, the horses so distant that the sound of their feet will not irouse their masters, two of these we can seue, kill or disable the iest, and thus fly almost secure from pursuit " " The plan is a bold one, but whithei can we go, my brother ?"
" 1 know not, care not indeed. So we get out ol the reach of these wretches, out situition tan hardly change for the worse." " Veiilj', venly, that is α truth But kill not the horses , I like not to shed in wantonness the blood of a beast " " It will not be shed in wantonness il we sacrifice them to preserve human life. But, perhaps, this may not be necessary. The attempt must be made immediately, 01 the opportunity will be lost never to return." They need themselves in silence fiom the coids which bound then legs. A daggei, belonging to one ot the slcepeis, Harley chew fiom its master's bosom. A faint peiception of something moving near lum, caused the Moor to stretch his limbs. Charles raised his arm, suspecting tliat he was watched. He paused, re¬ luctant to inflict in unnecessary wound, but îesolute to stuke if the wretch un¬ closed his eyes. But the Mahometan
slept, and Harley dismissed suspicion Still attentively surveying hnn, the hand that held the dagger was suddenly giasped He turned, and perceived that it was tlie Missionary, whose implonng looks besought him to spare the blow that he meditated. Hailey oftei eel to give up the dagger, and snatched α musket for himself, but the Missionary refused to take the profteied weapon. He then fixed it in his own dress, which was the same that he had woi η at Sam- baira, and had now become not a little the worse for wear. The musket he felt would be an incumbiance, and laid it down again at some distance fiora tlie Moors, but with great caie, lest the jar of its fall should reach the ear of its proprietor, or that of one of his com¬ panions. On approaching the horses, Harley selected the two which he thought most serviceable. Several skins of water and provisions he deposited on these, and then mounting with the least
possible delay, felt already assured of safety Smithers having renewed hi» intercession for the lives of tlie horses, and undertaken to lead off two, Harley did the same by two more, and thus all were taken care of, with the exception of the disabled animal, on whose account they had halted, and they thought they ran no great risk in leaving him behind At first they proceeded but slowly, on account of their awkwardness in leading the useless horses They were beginning to advance with more celerity, when a loud outcry in their rear alarmed them, ind listening for an instant to the sound, thej distinctly recognised the vo ces of their late tyrants, and could no longei doubt that their flight had already been discoveied, and that their enemies weie then in active pursuit Bitterly did Harley lament, at that instant, that he h id yielded to the weak benevolence of SmiiWs, and spared the lives of the
horses, as, through leading them, they could not flatter themselves tint they went faster than a man might run, and if they relieved themselves from this in¬ cumbrance, they at once supplied the txaspeiated Moors with the means ot overtaking them. Dark as it was, they thought that they could discovei through the appalling gloom which surrounded them, the forms of their pursuers, re- heved by the famt ïeflection of the fire from which they fled. All doubt on this head was quickly removed, and they dis¬ tinctly saw their swift footed enemies. and perceivtd that they were rapidly gaining ground on them. The trepid¬ ation this inspired, so opeiated on Smithers, that unconscious of what he was doing, he let slip one of the horses which he had engaged to lead. He pressed forward, not daring to attempt to regain his hold, but they had the felicity of seeing, that left to himself, the animal took caie to keep up with his fellows.
This was a source of great joy to both. The othei horses were immediately ïc- leased, and all followed those on which Chailes andtheMissionary were mounted, and they now pressed forward with a rapidity that soon cained them beyond the view of then foes, whose shouts of ıage, excel ation and despair, growing iamtei and fainter, were at length wholly lost, ancl the most awful silence again prevailed, save when the distant howl of some roaming prowler of the woods, leminded them tint «dl dangei was not 1 emote, that blood-thusty monsters might still cross their path, though foi the pre¬ sent they weie apparently safe from the supeiioi ferocity ot then fellow-men.
CHAP. Ill ------ Yet ere the sun «techn'd. Recai the ihadei of night, the pamperM rogue ShaU rue his fate revert'd, and at his heel. Behold the just avenger, swift to seize Ни forfeit tiend SosiEavatr Methinks," (said the Misnonaiy, when, after prosecutng their journey foi several hours he at last became suffi¬ ciently himself to give utterance to some of the thoughts that agitated his mind,) " methinks we now indeed lesemble Christian and Hopeful, inasmuch as we have made our escape from the dungeon of Giirør Despair The Giant awaking to pursue the two pilgrims, I cannot but liken о the awaking of oui cruel task¬ masters to attempt to retake us, and the disappointment they experienced from witnessing our supeiioi speed, I compare
to the Giant's fit, when he would fain have risen to follow Christian and his friend." " There may be some resemblance. I apprehend the use John Bünyan in¬ tended should' be made of' that part of' his ingenious work was this, to im¬ press on the inind of those who endure hardship, that they ought especially to guard against despondency, «ind to re¬ mind them that one courageous effort, may in many cases, serve to rescue them from the most frightful abyss of' despair. The timid indolence, which inclines men to throw away their lives from a dread of exertion, ought not to be called resignation or fortitude. But have you any knowledge of the wilds we are now traversing?" " I know them not. Never was I here before. Uncertain as we are, iet us get off our horses, and pray to be directed in the right way." " For such a purpose we have no oc- VOL. III. D
саыоп to alight. On hoiseback we can nnploie the blessing of Heaven, and I doubt not thc piayci ol an cqucstinin, while fljmg liom his enemies, will .ľ- itadily obtain the eai oí the Al might«, Being to whom it is iddi essed, .is th it ivluih is utteied with «ill the tonn and incimistauce oí bended knees, closed eyes, and uplifted hands, tliougli the de lay caused by the obsei ( ance of thest, would cicate peni, which, uninvited, we might not have to encoimtei." " It is tiue that wc can pi ay at all times, uid m all places, and I do not know that any thing could be mole to the puipose, in oui piesent situation, than the piajei contained in one of John ( enick's liMims. Part of it luns thus, BiliolJtht «vîmes« s, m I sho« Tlit children «vhithcr tin.« should go 'lilt cutis the v.orIil,!liun ılıtır leave, Or till thou llu.ni to Ilı iven leeent Smithers ielt hunstlf much ıefıeshed in spint, as he expiessed himself, by tlie
devout îepetition of these pious lines, and now «appealed a, anxious as his com¬ panion could be to add to the spact which aheady lnttivcned between them and their late nusteis. The night was young when they com¬ menced their flight. Aftei an advance of five houis, without stopping for an instant, they peıceıved that thty weie near а well, and determined to halt for а short time to give then hoises watei, and to secuie a further supply foi them¬ selves. Here tbey made the fiist com¬ fortable meal thej had known since they weie surprised by the Moois. They soon lencwed then journey with re^ cıuıted strength and lenovated couiage. Two 01 tin ее noms moie had elapsed when the daj broke upon them. Smith¬ eis was а little in advance ot Hailey, and the latter was exulting in the unex¬ pected vigour disphyed by his fuend, when he saw him, on a sudden, turn his horse with gieat precipitation, and heard d 2
htm exclaim, in a voice, tremulous from alarm — " It is all in vain. It is the will of the Lord to deliver us into the hands of our enemies : behold we are lost." It was not without emotion that Har¬ ley heaid these dismaii, and at that time, unexpected tidings. He wasrappirehertsive that while seeming to advance in a strait line, they had in fact only described a circle, and were iiow about to overtake those whom they had supposed to be fár behind them. This fear strongly op¬ pressed his mind ; but, determined to look at the dangei, whatever it might be, he advanced to the spot at whicb the taieer or Smithers had been checked, at the same time enquiring the cause of his alarm ?" He was answered that they were Hi- deed coming on a 'Party of' Moors. A little hut appeared at a short distance, and three horses, caparisoned in a man¬ ner that unequivocally announced to
what nation their riders belonged, strayed near the little edifice, in which it vyas, to be concluded, that those whom they had carried thither were then at rest. " You see," added Smithers, '* escape is impossible. But « let not our- Inserts be troubled ;' doubtless it is for. some wise purpose that we are again tlitowii into the liands of these barbarians,." " It ia npt quite «attain ţha.t we shall, fall into their hands. There are but three borsé«, and if but three men aie with them, could you for once, lay aside your pacific principles, I should not despair of seeing them bite the dust." " Remember, tny brother, \ye да totø that ' whosoever slteddeth man's bfood, by man shall his blood he sfied.' Rather than deprive another of Ufe, I, would «yillingly bvy down my own." «' Self-defence iş the firsj law of na; ture. I abhor murder; but am sure religion does not enjoin us to submit to d 3
be murdered Did not the childien of Israel iesist their tnemies, and destroy them by thotis mds and by tens of thou sands ? And foi D witl the man after God s own heirt, did he not hght igunst the I'hihsti ies mil put to tie ith tht pride of then host, undei the smction of appi ov ing Heaven?" " But, bec uise by such means great judgments have been biought about on important occasions, I am by no means satisfied that he will m these days bt held guiltless, who lifts bis hmd agunsl his fellow man " " We seek the life of no man, but we have an undoubted right to endeavoui to save ouiselves liom destruction Agiee then to stand by me, and I doubt not we shall conqici " 1 I am a weal feeble man, wholly un iccustomecl to the use of aims Ono, such is not my mission, and I too plainly see that we ai e not permitted to escape, to feel at all disposed to engage n such a conflict I cannot do wh it you desire "
11 ^oıı arc vielding again to Giant De pair. It is by no means certam that to light will be nt ccssary. 'lhc hoises we set, m all ptob ibility, belong to a Mooi ish banditti, vvho having plundeied som« liavelleis belonging loa passing cai nan, have betn feasting through the night on ι p n tol then bootu At this moment they m ty be in a statt of helpless in¬ toxication." " That is possible ; for many ol the most ugni lolloweis of that aich im¬ posto! Mahomet, though professing ab- houenccof wme, when occasion selves, delight to dunk till they aie ni the state jou mention, and wallow about worse lh m the beasts of the held." " It may be then, that these hoises which have caused this alaun, have been conducted heie as α most convenienl re¬ lay foi us by oui good fortune." " Gootl fortune ' adopt not, I beseech you, the language of the heathen , say ι athei by Providence." u -1
·' Well, well ' Providence then to fa¬ voui our escape, appears to me to have thrown them in our way. Let us leave our jaded animals here, seize two ot these fresher horses, and pursue oui journey. Though they are close to the hovel, if we at hrst lead them gently, the noise of their feet will create no alarm, and we may get off unperceived. Do you carry these skins, taking especial care of the contents, to yondei tall tree, and 1 will bring the horses to you. Pass ш the real of the house, and if you pray on the way, do it with your spirit, but not with your tongue " With palpitating heart and faltenng step, Smithers undertook the duty as signed to lnm, but not till he lud re marked, that their peril would, in any ease, be little increased, by · ciytng aloud to tlie Lord for aid m tribulation.' He, however, relaxed so far on this oc¬ casion as to promise silence. Giasping his dagger, Hariey cautiously
oppioached thc horse thilt had strayed farthest from the hovel· The arjimid started when he »ttcnipţed to seize him, and patting him, Charles unconsciously used the common manège exclamation, " so ho !" Alarmed at the sound of' bis own voice, he looked anxiously round, and expected to see the tenants of the hut advancing in battle array, fro one ap¬ peared, and he led pffthe horse, reflect¬ ing as he passed, how well his own prudence justified him in schooling the Missionary fw his want of ţfiat estimable quality. On reaching the spot which be had in¬ dicated to Smithers, he found that thc companion pf his wanderings had care¬ fully performed bis part. « Now,'' said Charles, " put such ar¬ ticles as you can conveniently dispose pf, on the back of this horse, leave the rest to my care, and go forward, so that if I should be discovered by tbe ruffians in the hut, close tp wbich I must now рчвз, оде »t d В
least may be sale. Thej shall not know Irom me that I have h id а companion " " I Mill neiei hate thit noi Joi sake thee," Smithers cilmly replied " If j ou cannot come to me, I will not go loivvaid alone." " Surclj it is bettei that one should suffei, than that both should fall into then powei It is, m fact, a duty to save them if we can, from the double sin they may othci »tse commit, by murdenng oi toi tui mg both We must also beai in mind, that if one could find his way to in European settlement, it is possible he might soon discovei the means of ìc- htving the othei ' " I will not leave thee alone in the wilderness, noi in the bands of cruel men. If they take jou, I will lender up myself." " This obstinacy may cause one life to be uselessly sacnfíced. But we haie no time to debate, be advised, go foi¬ ward , and if possible, I will immedi¬ ately îejoin you "
" I may not tike stub lounscl, u tinned the Mission u y Wlnt, slnll I seek my own silttj, negligent ot thnn ' \o, I will not Vssisted by me, joi may be icailj to depait one minutt oonu thin jou toniti fly, il ltft .. ->nt uid tlut minutt may sut jon from tlu 111CI11J ' II /ili e Ilıtın O oest I all ,< indiiliLic tiniu Iodais/ J itlllnl a i Ilı/ peuple snail bc mı/ people und llıı/ <> d mı/ God ' " Txpostul ıtıoıı was vain Hırlej it tiaccd his steps, antl, m а fevv moments, wis seen bj Smitheis lettnning with tin bolse Lvery thing was soon tdutsltd, md having taken ι draught of w itti each, thcy again went foiwaid with in cieised speed lhe exulting giatitutU of the Missionary could no longei be 11 sti amed, and he loudly expiessed thejoy lul ovtiflowings of his heart, repeatedly quoting appiopnate passages from tht Psalms, and othei parts oí the liispned wntings, and singing, η 6
The wonder«, Lord, tltj love h» wrought, Exceed our {«mise, surmount our thought, Should I attempt thc Jong detail, Ml speech would funn, my numbers ciuf It was now broad day, and they conti¬ nued to journey strait forward, as they supposed, from the place wheie their late tyrants had designed to rest thiough the night. But the dreary wilds which encompassed them , tlie opposing thick¬ ets, which frequently exacted a slight deviation fiom the imaginary line it was tlieir object to pursue; and other circumstances, made them extremely doubtful what diiection they were ι eally taking ¡ when, emerging from the shades, in winch they had long been involved, they found themselves at the extremity of an extensive foiest, spreading on either hand almost as far as sight could tiavel. A " wide, unbounded prospect" now opened to their view ; and tliey saw before them, with an awfully thrilling sensation of mingled satisfaction and
dread, the vast, the interminable desert, the Sahhara They consulted what course they should take. Hariey was of opinion, that by plunging into the desoí t, Ihey would be most likely to elude their infu¬ riated pursueis in the fiist Instance, then directing their steps west by south, they might hope toarme at some European settlement, or it least to reach some negro countrv, where they would experi. enee, in all probability, less ferocity than it had been lately their fate to deplore. If they avoided the desert they could not accomplish then object, but by a long journey through the teiritoryof the King of Ludamar, in whose kingdom they un¬ derstood Jarra to he situated, and the treatment which they had experienced there, as well as the ι etui n they had at last made foi it, inspiied in thein a veiy sin¬ cere desue to avoid trespassing on that monarch's dominions The barbanan they had been examined before when
tlıey vveıe fiist tiken to Jura, thej uu- dei stood to bt the Iving, but it all events, thtj knew hnn to be a person ol importance, mil, wheicvu his influente jiicvailtd, thty vieic thoioughlj satisfied tnat they could ixpct no ıııcı iy. What distinte they had to tiavel, and wlnt time would bt nectssuy to iccom- pbsh the jouiney contempi ited bj llai- lev, wert nutttis, in ltgartl to which, both wiiepiolotmcllyignoiaiit. All w.is uncert.unty, and it cither, foi ι moment, gave his thoughts the foi in of а conjec¬ turo, he was constiamtd to acknowledge that what had so been utteied, was only a hope, or a f cai, in disguise This only did they know, that they had suf¬ leied muth, and that whatever calimity might await them, it was impossible foi then situation to become mateually woise than it litui been. Had theiebeen no alternative but topeush in the desert, 01 to ι etui η to Jaira, both would have been disposed to pielei the former des-
tmy, as liss seveie than the punishment, which, m the lattei eise, then exaspei- atccl enemies would not ful to inflict It was necessaiy to come to same de¬ tei inination, with the ltast possible del iy \t all events, it was clear that flight was tlıtıı only hope, that to lult was to le¬ tuin to captivity , and fe'ling tlus, thcy ingtd on then hoises tovvaids the barren sands, which Chailes had proposed tint thty should tiavcise. While still musing on the difficulties with which they had to contend, they saw befoie them an object, to which thcy weie at a loss to give a name. At first they could fincy it α hoise, but iinmeth- itely their il i//led ey es gave it a difleient shape. Smitheis thought it was а с imel, ind improving on the suggestion which Challes had thiown out when they weie about to seize on then piesent hoises, concluded that this camel might hive belonged to the very travelleis his com¬ panion had supposed to have been
îobbed by the banditti in the hut. What¬ evei it was, they weie soon sensible that it came rapidly nearer, and, in а vci y short time, all doubt was at an end, and they distinctly perceived a man on horseback. The next mute enabled them to discover that . ., costume coi- rcspouded vvıtlı that of the Mopis at Jorra; and they now lecogmsed one of then persecutors, m the person of the fellow who had pietended to interpret for them, when they were taken before the barbai ian chief. « We must return into the land ot bondage," sighed Smithers. " Оцг flight is intercepted. This Phdistine will not not suffer us to go on our way." " But, peihaps, he may not be able tp pievent it, and unless he has the povvei to compel us to ıetum, his command, il he be fool enough to throw it away on us, will be of no avail ; at least ap far as I am concerned." " Will you resist tbee?"
" Assuiedly, I will." " With what '" " lhis daggei." " How ' would you stab him ?" " To tho heart, if in no othet way 1 can overpowei oi escape lum." " О my biother, reflect on the sm." " On iny head be tlie sin, if there be sin in defending that life and liberty which God bestowed on all our lace, against any man who would take them away." " Bathei let us pray." " Pray yourself, and —-" The untraceable piety of the Mission. aiy again irutated Harley. A reproach was about to burst from his lips, but he with difficulty lepressed the angry ex¬ pression which struggled for utterance, and merely added —- " Tins is no tune foi piayer oi foi re¬ flection." And the loud voice of the Mooi who, calculating on the meekness and timidity
ol Smithers such ıs ht hul known them, being с orninoli to both the fugitiv ts seinictl u thout itively to onlu thtm ti top, now dun indcd ill II u lev s itttn lion His lout wis tvidtntlj tint ol minti, nul on tht insinuile bol ind ^c tint of l h ules bec uni tho of stun tlch met Iht inttipietei had howevci no thought of in iking them u turn lie hid not loi an uist mt supposed Ihıl the weik nul ippncnlly submissive ben а ь tintile hilseen tl 11 11, would due ti ventuie on so despci itt in attempt ι the y hid not sci tipicii to unke in the с uist ol fieedom Seeing them mounted and l'ont the ide ι that occuned to him was tint thej had been nnsomtdbj somt of then country men, and conceiving that thej must now be in possession ol something of valut, ht niciclj pioposid to dtt un ihan in oidti to nule vvhatevti they had been supplied with, his booty 1 he resolution of Harley, and the ip
parent fe.u of Smitheis equally tended to confimi and strengthen thc conclusion to vvhicli he had come. Ile doubted not that the Missionaiy tiembled to lose, and (hat Ins companion Wus anxious to defend tlul ol which it uould be well worth his while to despoil them. 1 niding the ex¬ ecution ol his plan opposed, he without teicmotiy lei cued his musket at Ins advancing antagonist. It missed file — he cocked it igam but before be eould pull the ti iggei, Hai ley had seized it by the b.itiel, .шс! commenced a stiuggle for its ovvncislup. Iu the contest the piece vvtnt off, and the left aim ot Smithers, then kneeling and engaged in pıay ei, was li.ictincd by tiie bullet. Tlie Mooi soon found tint ho had to deal with his supenot in stiength, and the musket vvi ested from hun, by tlie impulse of the cflort that toi e it from his giasp acting on the extiemity of the tube, caused the butt end of it to descend on his collai- bone with t violence tliat laid hun pros¬ ti ate undci the belly of his hoise.
Charles dismounted and approached the defeated ìuflìan. He clenched his dagger and rushed on hnn while he struggled to nee, but Smitheis hastening to him lnteiposed his broken, bleeding aim, and pleaded for his enemy. " Shed not his blood, my bıotheı. Spare his life foi my sake, for his sake who has told us that ' the merciful shall find mercy.' " A tear trickled down the cheek of Harley while he beheld his suffenng friend, forgetful of his own pain, thus earnestly interceding for the life of one who had so cruelly injured him. If before, a glance of scorn had descended on the good man for the nervous alarm m which he shrunk from the combat, Charles was now brought to repentance when he saw how well he knew " to forgive those that trespassed agamst lnm," and, penetrated with admiration for the simple dignity of religion, which could thus lift a frail mortal above the
sense of agony, and yet more atave all the resentments which m othei men, suf¬ fering under the same en cumstanees, would have raged almost to the annihi¬ lation of reason. The vanquished robber, renewed the attempt to use, but his conqueror placing his foot on his stomach would not permit him to moi e till he had satis¬ fied himselt that he had no concealed arms m his possession. It now Occurred to him that permitting the tnan to depart immediately might prove the means of giving infoi mation of the direction m which he and Smithers were travelling, which otherwise then pursuers would be unable to obtain. He determined, on this account, to make lnm accompany them for a time. Ilis first object was to find watei that they might provide them¬ selves with a more plentiful supply than they now possessed, and he therefore requested Smithers to tiy to make the Moor understand that he mušt conduct
тш misu ат thtm to thc neuest pl tet it which tin- could bt accomplished, md it tht same time to let htm know tint the sicufict of Ins htc would instantly requite de tectetl It cache ι j Smithers expostulated on this object and ıem uketl to llatlej tint to tccnti this tine it woul 1 be sinful Ilıt lattei ıephcd, " 1 ell lum so at ill events lhc di eul of death may lestiam hım fiom it tempting to beliay us lhe meie thre it may pi ove sufhcient 1 But if you do not pi opone so to de d vvıtlı hım, if I uttei the tin cat then shall I say that which is untine ' ' Then mike youiself pci fectly tsy about that, for if any thin«, of Hit kind should occui I'll cut tilt ı ist il s thro it that moment " " But ìeflect how teinblt thc crime of murder " " Mmdci is out of the question, but I will not give up the right of self
delence, lins Iellow ileseives death liom oni hands now, and he shall have his deserts il he dale lefuse to make limiseli useful, and the houi of his ex¬ ecution is an iv eel already, if you long« hesitate to nuke huu know iny will." Smitheis complied with the icquest made to him. By H nicy's diiection he loi bade thc urflian to use till they vvete both mounted. His own wound, though most senous, the Missionai j felt not while thus occupied with what he consideied the duties of humanity 'lhe Mooi sullenly piomised obedi¬ ence. Hailey looked at his fi lentl's .11111, and satisfied lumsell that the bone was bioken, hound it up .is well as he could, and assisted him to mount the hoise o( their pnsonci, who was then peımıtted to get on the back of the animal that seemed the most exhausted of'the tluee, ancl they again went foiwaid. Smitheis soon discovered that this was а good opportunity loi address-
ing the Moor on the wickedness of his former conduct. He seemed not a little elated by the opportunity thus afforded lum of exhorting a sinner tb repent. To Charles he remarked that the incidentavas most providential as ' a чмгв in due season was like apples of gold in pictures of silver.' He accordingly pro¬ ceeded to lecture the guide He told him thnt though he was already as it were t lead ir trespasses and sins, it was not too late to tüın from his wicked¬ ness and live, as abounding grace could yet snatch him like a burning brand fiom the fire, and give him a heart of flesh for a heart of stone He touched on the crime of which he had been gnilty in undertaking to interpret for men whose language he could m no wise understand, as doing so he had borne testimony to that whith was not tiue, in defiance of that sacred commandment which expressly says ' Though ihait not beai false witness agamst thy neighbour.'
The text, he observed, seemed naturally to divide itself into two parts. In the first place it was ferbidden to bear false witness. By the words, " Thou shalt not beai false witness," it might be under¬ stood that untrue evidence was pro¬ hibited whether for or against an in¬ dividual, and this prohibition was strengthened by the sequel of the com¬ mand, as against a neighbour. If, however this division in the text were not made, the result would be the same, as a man could hardly bear false wit¬ ness Jor one man, without at the same time beanng filse witness against the person opposed to him To explain this more distinctly, he would arrange what he had to say under three heads. In the hrst place, he would show the evil effects ot giving false witness, — m the next he would explain more at large the import of the word " against," and thirdly, and lastly, he would proceed to VOL·. III. >
point out what was to be undeistood by " neighbour." With great assiduity he laboured to give his thoughts utteranto m the lan¬ guage of the man he addressed, but was frequently obliged to eke out his dis- coui se with English phrases, to his own no small mortification, though the guide did not appear much concerned at it, as he neither understood, nor wished to understand, that which the Christian flattered himself would most essentially contitbttte to his eveilastmg welfare Smitheis had got over thc two first divi¬ sions of lus exhortation, and was in the midst of his third, anxiously labouring to make his hearei compiehcnd, that, as this globe was in space but as one giani of sand in that desert, the whole of the human beings that inhabited the surface of so small an orb ought to view one another as neighbours, and the ac¬ cidents of their having first seen the light on different spots of earth, divided
from each other by little spaces of water or tiny hills, called oceans and moun¬ tains, could not do away the neighbourly claim to justice He had got thus far when the object of his pious caie sud- denlj stopped and pointed to a pit, which Hailey had the sitisfaction to peieeive offered α plentiful supply of water Ihey dismounted, and the Moor was given to undeistind that he must fill the skins which wanted replenishing He obej ed the mandate with some degree of alacnty, and having filled the first, was proceeding to do the same foi the se¬ cond, when Hai ley ordered him to let one of the horses drink ofthe water just oDtamed from the pit The Moor ap¬ pealed not to undeistand lum, and this seemed to Challes lathet extraordinaiy, as he was well acquainted with the Moorish sounds, which named the ob¬ jects of which he had occasion to speak. He repeated his directions with no better e 2
success, and the Missionary attempted to assist with his superior knowledge of the language, but was not more for- tunate. But one way lemamed to make his meaning clear, and that was to show what he desired should be done He iccorchngly offered the watei to the horse himself The jaded animal eageily pressed foiwaid, «md manifested impa¬ tience to drink, but immediately lefused the proffered draught. Astonished at this, Charles tasted the water when all surprise was at an end, foi it was as briny as that of the sea. He turned with indignation to reproach his per¬ fidious guide, when he saw the cheat had seized that moment to spring on his horse, and was then in the act of urging him foiward. Harley had loaded the •.nusket, and when he undertoo) to water the horse, had laid it down so immediately m his own view, that the Moor did not dare to attempt recovering it. He now seized it, and presenting it at tlie fellow,
ordered hım, in a peremptory, tone, instantly to ıetum. The Moor heard the piece cocked, and trembling in every joint, expected death the next instant. Throwing Inmself on the giound, he, with supplicating an, agam approached Ilaihy, vvho pointing to the well, up braided bun with his malice in bunging them wheie he knew that they could find only sdlt water. He diiected him to dnnk of whtt he had provided to) them From this the barbarian shrunk, with symptoms of loathing and strong disgust Blow s compelled obedience to the hard mandile, and he was next foiced to take the skm which he had filled on his horse, with the comfortable assuiance, that, till he conducted them to a fiesh water spring, he should tastt of no liquid but that, to quench the burning thust, which what he had just been compelled to swallow was expected to create The Mooi thought proper to vary his E 3
coi rse Instead of advancing as before due north, he judged it advisable to turn his horse's head to tht west Гог thiee or four hours they procetded in this direction, without arnving at that which they sought to discover Seveial times they refreshed themselves with a diaught of water, but Hariey lent a deaf ear to all the piayers of the Missionary in behalf of their guide, to whom Smithers would fain have conceded the same indulgence He invariably rephed " On his necessities we must depend for a new supply I have solemnly de clared that he shall have no ìehef from oui store, till he conducts us to a fiesh watei spring The woid is gone forth, and it cannot be recalled " Many times did the pretended inter prêter seem anxious to get from them, but Harley kept him so constantly in his view, that he eould not ventuie on an effort to escape Harley had expected
to see him much distressed from thirst, but he heard no complaint, and the man did not appear to suffer more than them¬ selves who had drunk so frequently. How to account for this he knew not. He supposed that he had been more inured to such privation than himself; and could, in consequence, bear it with more fortitude. " Strange !" thought he, " that habit should thus enable man to triumph over the first wants of nature ; —. that hardship and exercise in abstinence should thus prevail over his infirmities, and in a manner seem to exempt him from the observance of one of the great conditions on which I have ever thought existence must universally depend,"
CHAP. IV. The angele rail, tliey call n e from above, And bid me hasten to tbe realms oflore My wul with transport hears the happy doom, J come ye gentle messengers I come, Earth flies with all the chums it has in store, Its snares and gay temptations are no more Mrs Rowu Hour after hour passed on, and still no cooling spring appeared to cheer the travellers, and relieve their panting horses. Night was fast approaching, and Harley and the Missionary knew not that they were nearer the object of their enquiry than when they com¬ menced their search. Humanity began to whisper to Harley, that the sufferings of the wretch he had compelled to be the companion of their journey must be so severe, that relief was absolutely ne¬ cessary to sustain him on the way.
Though he had peremptorily declared that he should taste no fresh watei till he conducted them tr some place wheie thej could obtain a new supply, perhaps it w ould be better that he sliould fad to keep his woul inviolate, than suftei an unfortunate fellow creature to pensh because he did not perfoi m that which it might be impossible to accomplish Thus lelenting, he diew neaı the Moor half lesolved on oflenng lum some relief, when he obseıved his hand raised to his face He had lepeatedlj noticed the same action before, and he now plainly saw lum put something into his mouth, and withdraw his hand with unwonted ıapıdıty, and with an air of alarm, apparently springing from the consciousness that his motions weie ob served It at once stiuck Chailes that he might possess means of refreshing himself, of which he had befoie had n > idea He forthwith deteimmed to make him undergo а new exammttion, and E О
the scrutiny was rewarded by thc dis¬ covery of a small tanned skin, made into a bag, in which was deposited a quantity of gum, of a peculiar appearance On putting some of this into his mouth, he found it soon allayed his thirst, and this he had no doubt it was that had caused the Mooi to sustain so little incon¬ venience from the want of watei The prize was valuable, and he did not scruple from that moment to consider it the lawful property of the captor It was not long before he perceived that its late proprietor was not quite so much at his ease as he had been What Ins pre vious intention or ability had been, it is not easy to say, but it is certain that more than an hour and an half had not elapsed from the time of his being de¬ prived of his gum, before the guide con ducted his Christian acquaintances to a well where there was an abundance of water of a disagreeable smell, but delight¬ fully cool, and perfectly fresh Harley
could not but suspect that the Moor had determined to delay them on their way as long as he could, in the hope that the fugitives, whose late adventures he had now become pretty well acquainted with through Smithers, might be over¬ taken through such delay, by his friends, and himself redeemed from the long captivity to which he supposed that he was destined. But to detain lnm unnecessarily was no part of the plan of Harley. Having gained an opportunity of supplying them¬ selves and their horses with water, to carry further as a guide a man who, in the event of their meeting with any of the Moors of the desert would be likely to say all that inventive malice fruitful m falsehood, could suggest, to raise them up new enemies, and to îeplace them in that miserable situation, the very recollection of which made them shudder, would hai e been almost an act of madness. If they foi bad him to leave them, it would be e 6
necessary for one of them to watch over him the whole of the night, and the danger which must naturally spring from such α sacnfice of iest, seemed greatly to outweigh any that they could have to fear from the information then prisonet, il they now leleased him, could afford to their pursuers on his return. These con¬ siderations deteimmed Hailey^ to set him immediately at hbei ty It was ac cordingly intimated to him, by way ot attempting for the last time to make bun useful, that if he had any knowledge of the art of setting a broken limb, antl could do any thing to ι elieve the Mission¬ ary from the effects of the mjuiy lit had received from the discharge of the musket, he should forthwith be free to go where he pleased. He professed to acquiesce in this, and without delay commenced his operations, which afforded poor Smithers anothei occasion for the display of his fortitude, but it was soon manifest to Charles that
he could expect no benefit liom his assist¬ ance , and he ordered lum to desist, as he plainly saw tlut what he was doing only in¬ flicted useless pain, thc Mooi's knowledge of suigery being «ibout on а pai with lus proficiency m Lnglish. Anxious to get ud of hnu, notwithstanding this failuie, the impostoi was piesently in¬ foi med that he might depart. On re¬ ceiving this notification, he was about to take his horse, but was told that he must do without such accommodation, and depend solely on his pedestuan eiieigies to extucatc himself from the desert. 1 his intelligence was а soie disappoint¬ ment, as besides that the deciee just pronounced against bun, sentenced lnm to а severe exertion, he could not but re¬ menibei with infinite legret that fewer than thirteen slaves had not paid the pnce oí the animal, which he was oideied to leave behind. " I think," said Smithers, as the ex- interpretei commenced his retieat, "we
aie not nght m witholding the horse We ue told that 'tie should not coict our neighbour's ox, nor Ins ass, nor any thing that is /ns ' Moreover, in another com- mandmert it is said, ' Thou shalt not steal,' and to take fiom others what belongs not to us, is to steal " . The calm gravity with which Smithers spoke, and the benevolent simplicity ot his manner, provoked a smile fiom his companion, and he could not help n om¬ ca] ly answei ing, " Perhaps it is to be regretted that you did not think of this sooner, as we offended equally when we first deter mined on making our escape from the banditti, into whose power we had fallen by seizing the horses which enabled us to baffle then pursuit " " It rejoices my heart," Smithers re¬ joined (not m the least suspecting Harley to be othei than senous), " that you see this m α pioper light, as at present it will be easy to correct, in some measure, 3
the eiror into which we have been bt tnjed " " By îetracing our steps to restore thein to then pioper owners, I suppose'" The Missionaiy now perceived the drift of Hariey, and proceeded to ıeply " lake not I beseech you, the Ian guage of scorn I propose not to return into the land of Lgypt, as I may call that place ot bondage, where we have both moistened the bread of slavery ivith the tear of bitterness But behold a fit opportunity offers for doing that whicli is nght, without thus putting ouiselves in jeopardy To the man now returning let us 1 cucici his own, and, moreovei, charge him with the care of the two animals that remain, which belong not to us, so sliall we stand in some degipe acquitted at the last great day, of having taken that from our neighbour to which we have no just claim " " Never will I admit," said Harley, " that the act of self-defence is a crime
He who sees all hearts knows tha- we have not dispossessed the late owners of these hoises of their property from ava¬ ricious motives, oi with α view to our own selfish enjoyment What we have done was no moie than what Heaven sanctions, η iy enjoins, as it had no object but oui own piesei vation Not to have seized them, as vve did, and having seized, not to ι et un thein at this moment, wert in iny opinion, little less than acts of stlf-inui (1er, and you have not now to leain that ' »10 self murderer has eternal life ' " Smithei s was а little staggered by these obsei vations, and as he plainly saw that his fellow-wanderer was inflexible on this point, he gratified lhe peaceful disposi¬ tion of lus lient by abstaining from farther altercation, and invited Hariey to join him in a piayer of thankfulness and praise Theu devotions concluded, they re¬ freshed themselves with a little millet
and watei, and having administered to the wants ol their horses, in the best man¬ ner they were able, both addressed them- seli es to sleep. The stock of the musket was the pillow ol Chai les, aud he took саге to place it so that it could not be moved without disturbing bun Calm simulici blessed the Missionary. The senses ol Charles wtie also soon steeped in forgetfulness, but while he seemed to repose, his active mind, bound¬ ing foi waul, emancipated hım fiom his actual situation, and with exulting heart he gazed on the well known chalky cliffs which piotect England from all assailing storms. On the shoie, Sir George Heu¬ deison and Amelia, happy and smiling, welcomed his return, when, suddenly, the faithless winds carried his bai к to sea again. He perceived that slie was sinking, and in that moment, he dis¬ coveied with honor that those who had so recently appeared in peifect safety were involved in the same calamity, and
descending by lus side into the fathomless gulf that opened to receive him. Ihe awful spectacle failed him with agony, and starting from his dream, thougli only to expeiience Λ bitter cl ange, — leverer to se« ci e, he blessed his fate that that was not, which had seemed to be, and was thankful that he was only a fainting, naked, desti¬ tute wanderet, m the great desert. Befoie day-break they resumed then march. Though he complained not, it was soon evident to Hailey, that the Missionaiy endured the most excruciating pain from his broken arm. To alleviate it was not in Ins power. All he could do, was to recommend it to his compa¬ nion to advance resolutely, in the hope of reaching the tent of some of the wan¬ deung bands that usually exist m the Sahhara, who might prove less ferocious than the baibarians fiom whom they fled, and whose experience might suggest
a mode of tieatment lor the wound, that might mitigate the seventy of his suftei- mg To look foi ïelief m any shape Iiom the Moois, was a loi lorn hope, but, alas ' it was the only one that they could cherish In baleful splendour, the sun now ap¬ proached his mei ldian. His potent rays, falling on the sands of the dtseit, weie thence reflected upwards with a destioy¬ ing heat, which, nor man noi beast could brave with impunity. Far as the eye could leach the appalling waste spiead its am¬ ple bosom, and seemed an ocean, whose waters, suddenly arrested by the fiat ot the Almighty, had become a cheerless, and expanse, which the beholdei in¬ stinctively trembled to survey. While the ndges of the lifeless waves decorated by millions of shining pai ticles, presented the vaiying hues of gold and silver, and of all the dazzling gems which shine in the superb collections of the scientific admirers of nature, the wanton winds
swept lightly over the magnificent dis¬ play, and seemed to aggravate ι athei tlian to tempei the scorching fiics that oppi essed the wanderers with then insuf - fer.ible bi ightness. To a mmd at ease, — to one secine fıom the pestilentul influ¬ ence of the climate,—the scene had pre¬ sented objects to be viewed with equal wondei and admuation. Thc piospect wore an .111 of indcsciibable giandeur, which was heightened by the piofound and eternal silence which prevailed. The radunce which suriounded them, and the slight ağıt ıtıoıı of the air would have betn delightful, but that intense suffic¬ ing failed not to lemind them, that the glaie though beauteous was fatal, and that death was 111 the bieeze. Ihe animals on which they were mounted bad seemed exhausted 111 the early p u t of the day, ind by noon no exei- tion could make them pioceed faster than α man might walk The stock of watei that they weie able to cany with them
was so scanty that it w as not possible for them to afloid then hoises the refiesh- ment they needed, and they were obliged to attempt to go forward, howevei slowly, ш se uch of a fresh supply, till they lound w Inch, it was useless to stop, with α view of leheving the pool jaded beasts that still tottered undei then weight. II irley had hcattl that the Moors wcie accustomed to plate various marks on the ndges of the sands, to militate the diiection m which wells wcic to be found l'or these, he looktd along the edges of seveial of the motionless waves, but all his effoi ts to dis¬ covei any object deposited theie foi such а puipose weie fiuitless, and he at length abandoned the effort in despau. On the following d.ıy, they continued slowly to jouiney towards the west, till the horse on which Smitheis iode sunk beneath Ins load, and the Missionaiy was thrown headlong on the plain. The ex¬ quisite torture which he endured, «is he rolled ovei his fractured arm, extorted a
groan, and he could not immediately re gam his wonted serenili , though while writhing with the pain, he expiessed in ι filtering tone his resignation to the Divine will, and his conviction that all things " woik togethei fn good" It was 111 vain that they 1 iboured to raise the fallen hoise The stiength ot the animal was gone, and that which Hailey iode had become almost equally unmanageable The third hoise they had tioubled themselves to bnng but a short distance from the watering place, when Hailey had releised him, expect nig to seebun follow,but the cieature had turned in another direction, and they had not judged it prudent to puisue, m the hope of ι ctaking hnn Under these en cumstanees, aftei taking some little lefieshinent themselves, they wore obliged to Jene the hoises to then late, and cndeai our to make their way on loot, lhis was found a most painful eicition, but tbey peiseveied in it foi several houis
Smithers had appeared much indis¬ posed through the morning, but now he grew rapidly worse. A raging fevei consumed lnm, and though he fiequently drank, ho continued to rave for water, even the moment aftei he had taken a laige draught, which could but ill be spared from the slendei stock which le- lnauietl to them. On а sudden, be told Harley that be discoveied a fine broad river Then he called to bun hastily to ascend Mount Pisgali, and gaze with him upon Ihe piomised land, which he could cleaily descrj , and he also perceived, that accouhng to the word, it was indeed flowing with milk and honey. Upon this ıefıeshıng vision, he sung a hymn oí thanksgiving for »hen dehveiance, and shai ply rebuked his companion for not joining with hım m this pleasing woik ol deletion At fiist, Chailes leasoned with lum on the delusions which floated before him, and endeavoured to awaken him to the îealities of their situation, but
he soon found that it was wholly useless, and that misery had at length triumphed over reason A vin iet) of circumstances had con¬ spired to produce this mournful spec¬ tacle. The mind of the gentle Smithers, accustomed to suffer and submit, was unusually agitated by the execution ot Harley's project ior escaping from the Moors. He was ill at the time from the treatment he had recently experienced on account of his refusing to work on the Sabbath. He had never been much m the habit of nding, and was soon dreadfully galled by the unaccustomed exercise which а desire to escape forced on lum, though he continued to advance without a murmur, feeling that not only his own safety, but that of his companion depended on his resolutely enduring the torture, and getting lapidly forward. Ihe intolerable heat to which he was exposed m the desert, the unfortunate f racime of his arm, and the ceasele»
anxiety he felt on account of the man who had wounded him, from an appre¬ hension tint the impetuosity of Harlej might lcquite his perfidy with death, completed the ovei tluow of α constitu tion befoie much unpaued, by his unre¬ mitting exertions m thc cause which had brought him to Ad ica, and the ungrate¬ ful retuin made b} many of those whom he «ought to benefit Chai les offered hım some of the gum, which he had obtained from the pre¬ tended interpreter, in the hope that it would allay in some measure the raging thirst of his delu ions friend, but he dis¬ dainfully rejected it, and asked " why he should make use o' that pooi substi¬ tute for water, when the mei Joi dan rolled its watery stoics at his ftet, and invited him to dunk his fill ?" Still speaking, he knelt down, and imitated the act of dunking, by taking sqmo of the sands they were traversing, into his mouth His offended palate m- VOL m p
stanti} rejected the supposed cooling beverage, exclaiming, "He hath filled me uith bitterness, lie /talli made me di ¡atleti a ilk teornwood He hath also broken my teeth with gravel stones, lie hath coieied my tongue a n'A ashes ' But he added, in an assumed tone, " He mil dehvei mc yet. Though I have gone astray like a lost sheep, he teilt seek lus servant yet, jb> I have not forgotten his commandments." While uttering the last sentence, he seemed more himself than he had previ¬ ously been. Harley remarking this, agam attempted to recall him to a consciousness of his ieai situation, and to encourage ium to proceed, but instead of attending to hun, Smithers had thrown himself down, and was now rolling ovei and over m the sand. After a while, exhausted by pain and fatigue, he remained motion¬ less, and seemed likely to obtain a little repose. The excessive heat would have made it almost impossible for thein to go
on, had Smithers retained his senses, and Hailey thereloie easily leconeiled his mind to indulge in a little iest ľxposed to the sun's peistcutmg fiits, Smitheis 1 iy extended at full length, with his face upwards. Chailes feaied to move him, lest, by trying to change his position, he should bring on another paroxysm, and depnve lnm of that tianquil insensibility which seemed to affoid limi a tempoiaiy lettige from pam. His hat had fillen oft, and this his companion propped up, so as to interpose a little between the ghastly countenance of the Mission¬ ary, and the great luminary of the sky which still poured its unrelenting bright¬ ness on the plain Falling on his face, he throw an empty watei skin ovei his own head, and waited the effect of this respite from fatigue on his companion, in painful suspence. At the end of two hours, he heaid the delirious Smithers call out aloud, " awake thou that sleepest." Hailey had slept r 2
not, but now summoned to proceed, he consıdeı ed that policy and humanity con curitd m lequiring bun to obey thc call lbe sun was fast declining, and the anguish attendant on an ittempt to walk was less insupportable than it had been Smithers advanced with ι lapid ity that frequently ltft Charles, wlio was charged with the conveyance of the little means of lefreshment that lemamed to them, considerably in thc icar The Missionary was cvidentlybereft of reason, but the most blissful illusions gladdened his delirious moments Tiequently would he exhort his pitying friend "to press lorward with joy and thankfulness, since then painful iv mdei mgs were so nearly at an end, that he could now not only see the rivei which bounded their thorny path, but he could also perceive the shin¬ ing Ones waiting to welcome and receive them on the f arthei shore, as they had done Christian and Hopeful befoi e, and the thrones on which the faithful weie to be
exalted, to smg glory to the Lamb, anıl all the joys of the New Jerusalem, lay open to his ravished view." It was the last effort of the kind, that religious enthusiasm could gam liom ex¬ hausted nature. The stiong impulse that had lifted the feeble Missionai y above tlit consciousness of pain and fatigue was no moie, .and he suddenly sunk to tht ground. He attempted to speak, but articulation failed. The purpoit of what he wished to say it was impossible foi Chai les to compiehcnd. Smitheis point¬ ed to his heart, and seemed anxious to ex¬ press what he had now no powei to uttei. Hariey was peisuaded that in the instant his speech failed Inni, he had an mteival of icason, but it expired with the stuig gle to give it language His inanimate form lay extended on the sands, and α flush of unusual colour in the face, and short interrupted bieathings, alone indi¬ cated that the sufferei still lingered within the precincts of life. F 3
It was m iain that Harley attempted to administer the slightest relief to the prostrate and penshiiig Missionary. Incıpıble of leceivmg nourishment, 01 of listening to the soothing language of fnendship, he knew nothing of vv hut passed .11 ouiid. Inspiration became moi e difficult, it was plain thathe was dying, but many hours might elapse before he would bre ithe his last Challes lcfleetcd that those from whom they had escaped, by this tune infoi mcd of the route then late captives had taken, antl guessing the di¬ iection in whicli they would subsequent travel, might be lapidly approaching lhe place w liei e he vv .itched ovei the uncon¬ scious foim of one, whom all probability would nevei again wake to sense and re¬ collection , and vvho, if he should do so ioi л moment, touldpi oht nothing fi om cares, which 111 all probability would endangci his own life. Would it then be well be¬ cause one could not escape, to devote both to destruction? Acting thus, he
was suic that he should do that against which the poor Missionaiy would not have failed to remonstrate, had he ïe- titmed the power of thinking, and use¬ lessly to sacrifice his own existence, was to do that which could Inidly be pis tified. Ought he not then to take the course whicli policy would lecommend , exert the little stiength that remuneri to lnm, to extucatc himself if possible, from the desert, and leave his unhappy friend whom no human povver could snatch from the jaws of death, to perish alone ' Such weie the suggestions which thc feeling designated by the multitude, pi udence, stiove to piess upon H uley foi the regulation of his futuie conduct In the busy world, bow many men ire theie who are called "good," even in thc city ol London, vvho would icjoice if they had so fair an opportunity of bieaking from calamity, so plausible an excuse foi abandoning the unhappy ' Memoiy and
sensibility, faithful to virtue, forbad Chailes to avail himself of such ldtas, the foi mei ìeminded hnn ol tbe devoted gtneiosity with whitli the benevolent bung now about to tscape from pain foi tvei, lud naked bis lilt by affoiding bun such ichef ind consol ition as he h id the powei ot imparting, in tbe presence ot the ferocious Mooi s , uid the latter whispeied, tli it α gleam of leason flitting «cross the mmd of tht expinng Smithers, might aggi αϊ ate the bitltiness of the hnal struggle, by the ïeflection tint his countrj m m had deserted lnm m the 1 in stage ot his disti ess Ivo, ht eoultl not ict such α part Ihough the pro liability was, that Sinitheisivould never leuie to thank hmi loi, or even to re cognise this last lesolve of fnendship , though lar ι emoved írom tho h lunts ot men, no admning speet itoib could wit ncss the virtuous let, and sustam the ef fort by then applause, though none eould reproach if he did it not, still did
Charles feel, tlut one All-seeing eye watched his pith through thc desert, and he consideied that it would have been the height of piesimiptiou to pro¬ voke the wiath of tlut powei which had thus far supported lum, by neglecting the poor, unconscious, dying Missionaiy. " I will, " he exclaimed, " I will remam till the vital spai к has fled to its eternal home. Peihaps it may yet be mme to allay his pain by a cooling cliaught 1 — by sug¬ gesting some topic ol consolation in the hist sad hour, or by leceivmg some woid of comfort, which he may be anxious to bestow. Thus, I would not leave hnn, thougli inevitable death were the conse¬ quence of my stay. Under cucum¬ stances of gieater immediate peril, he would not desist from aiding mo, because it was his duty. Let me now prove that I have lcaint one lesson of virtue from hun ' Alas ' if I quit lnm, escape seems almost impossible. Exposing my, self to attend him, I make but a mean, τ 5
α woithless offering at the slunte of hu¬ manity '" Smitheis still reposed m tianquil un¬ consciousness. His lespuation was not pei loi med without laboui, but Chailes could see nothing to awaken a diead of his instant dissolution, and at length, jieldmg to fatigue, he laid himself down by his side. Doing this, he sought merely to ι est his limbs, but his eyes lefused to be excluded from a share of the boon to be conceded to his exhausted fíame, and were almost instantly sealed in sleep It was past midnight when he awoke. Self reproach was the first feeling that giew on his waking thoughts. His conduct in having thus abstiacted his mind from the caie of his fnend, struck him as hai dly less culpable, than if he had ìeinoved his body at the same tune He had, however, no reason to suppose that it was of the slightest moment, as Smitheis leclmed in precisely the same attitude in which he had previously
seen him He was still gazing on his form, but impei fectly seen through the darkness that prevailed, when he started at feeling his hand suddenly grasped with intelligent eagerness by the pi osti ate sufferei. " Is it my dear biother — is it my coun¬ tryman, whose hand I giasp m mine?" Surprise and emotion almost depriv ed Hailey of the power of making a ıeply. He, at length, answeied in the affirm¬ ative, and enquired if he could do any thing to relieve lum » " To ıelıeve me '" exclaimed the dying inan " О no. The Lord has already relieved me I feel no ρ un, and I am about to enter mto his Paradise. My heait is full of joy that I see the termination of my pilgrimage, but teais fill my eyes foi jou whom I leave behind." " But do you not feel yourself reviv ed as it were by a miracle ?" " For a moment infinite meicy has pei- r 6
mitted me to speak the words of reason and of truth to the kind but too impetu¬ ous companion of my latler jouineyings. O my bıotheı' be faithful to the end. Ihen shall we one day rejoice together, that ' Our soul ts escaped as a bn d out o/ thesnaie of the fowler. Let not suffer¬ ing and persecution dismay.' Remember the words of St. Peter . "Bdoıed, İlimle it not strange concerning Ihe j eiy li ml, which is to try you, at Ihough some sit tinge thing had happened unto you,' and beai in mind also that we lead in the Reve¬ lations, that ' as many as he lox ts, he rebukes and chastens.' Pı esen e «ıs л treasure these precious words of conso¬ lation, and they will support you in the hour of tual." " But you exert youiself too much. Aheady I peieeive your voice to falter. Take a little water." " Not a drop : it cannot re-invigorate my mortal frame; you have none to spaie, and Done do J want. Why should
we feed with oil the lamp that can no longer give light? I feel that I grow weakei ; and I icjoice at it. That I have awakened to leison, «ind that I have found you by my «ipparently lifeless clay, aie meiciful dispensations foi which 1 know not how to be sufficiently thankful. I can only rewai d your kindness and bro¬ therly love by giving j ou thi», and my sincere wish and feivent prayei, that it may piove as fruitful of consohition and joy to jou, as it has been to me in my wandeiings." With these woids Smitheis handed to Charles the little Bible, whicli tlnough all his dein ium and insensibility he luti not ccised to clasp. The present was received with teais. "Check these soi rows," said Smitheis, " they aie smini, and tend to sadden the hour of my depaiture. Take chaige too of this little pocket book. It contains the letters of brother Bowman giving an account of the progiess of grace in those
parts which he had visited before vve parted. Lveiy thing of woildlj value that I had about me when I hist sought these inhospitable regions, was taken from me by the baibanans lhat .ue dwellers theiuu, but tbey left to me wh it was abov с all price, the Bible, and the pipets wluth I now confide to yon. Of the one alas ' they knew not the sur¬ passing worth, the other, all then dili¬ gence m the work of depredation failed to discovei " Heie he paused. For а few moments he w аз un ible to pi oceed fi om weakness. Chulés agun piessed on hım the ıelıef whieh a diaught of watei might afford, but this he steadfastly refused. "No—No — My earthly wants are at an end The cold dew of death hangs on my hi ow. Yet a few moments and Ishall be at iest. The caí es of life are ovei, and I icjoice that the hour is come which is to ıelıeve me from its infirmities. In the pocket book which I have given
you, the address of the sccietaiy to the Society ol Fiiendly Chnstians, whose unworthy lcprcsentative I have been, will be found. To bun, if you reach England in safety, conicy its contents, and communicate such p u ticiilars con¬ cerning me as they may be desirous to leirn. Above all, fail not to tell, how wondei fully I havcbeen sustained in iny trials, and how providentially I met with а countryman m the wilderness who cheered and assisted me while I lived, and left me not till he had tlosed my eyes, m natiue's last mid most ıefıeshıng sleep." Harley assuied lum that whateiei his future fate might be, he would remem¬ ber the chaige thus laid upon lnm, and fail not to execute it without loss ot time on his airival m Kngland, if ever it bhould be his fate to get theie. " And now, О fathei, ıeceıve my weary spmt," piajed the expinng Mis¬ sionary. " Faiewell, my pool, deatfnend
I go — I go — O that you were equally happy. — I go to lum ' in tihose presence Ihei e ıs jiilliicsb of joy, and attı hose ι ight handt hci с are plcasiu es joi clamóte'" " ILive you «my iclation — any fuend to whom, in the event of my ι caching England, you would desne me to bear any mess ige oı token." " Always looking foiwaid to such an end, — before my paper was exhausted, I wrote all that was necessaiy. Now 1 have no taro —no tliouglit connected with this vvoild." His voice giew weaker. For а few moments he was quite silent. Charlts doubted whethei he bad not ceased to breathe , » hen, to his infinite surpnse, his departing fnend seemed to have gained a sudden accession of strength, and he began to sing the following hymn, which he had composed himself. Almighty {lower «tlio hong tini ball in «pice, and bung brcıttlıcd on all. Now wult thy servant to that tliorc Where sin anj «orrow arc no more. 0
Му spint, long in сыю liere, Citii« il ί óiul lo íliy tticatiaf sphere, vStnill hke the 1 rk ut morn inibe With soties of rapture to tlit ьюсэ In mercy Ire wlio loves ti e jtbt Consij,ib my ho ly to the tiust ; Anı) eu U u uılııl ly B cirixi Of bolhi, ho[ e, unti ulle к ir Не e ills hit ρ uuii. 0 soul awij, Willi joj lib lì Khi. Itlie/ Dulli ' close the dream of jujle» strife. Aud wake iun to substautial lile
His voice failed hnn at thc close ot the second verse, and instead of singing, he but faintly repeated the concluding stanzas. He then strove to utter α prayer ol winch but few wouls could be heard by Chailes. 'Ihe sounds were now so faint .as to be wholly unintelligible' — they ceased — He was no moie. Bending With unaffected guet ovei the cold romains of his countiy man, Hariey saw the hrst ыу ot ι eturning light lall on the ghastly countenance of the lifeless Smitheis. No bird, no 111-
sect fluttered neaı to announce the open¬ ing of a new day. All cieated beings seemed to shnnk from the solitude and silence tint pievailed No life but th.it which yet Iingeied in his own emaciated fume appcııcd to have withstood the baléiul influence of the climate, and the blast which lun led in showers the ambient sands ovei the living and the dead, alone distuibed " the awful repose of the desert." The specticle was sad, but the me¬ lancholy suivivor did not fail to reflect that the scene he had beheld, was less appalling than that which is often wit¬ nessed m the splendid chambers of the great, beneath the superbly decorated canopy ehi mounted by the daz/ling coro¬ net. Tiue, he had watched the last stiugglcs of а human being, but the «igomsing tin obs of a guilty conscience pondenng with hoi ror over scenes of re¬ collected cume, — shrinking from the ten ible change which must snatch away
Ιοί ever all the dearlj pined objects ol eaithlj giandeiu, — and shuddering at the contemplation of eternal punishment — these he bad not seen On the cou¬ traiy, thc cheeiful lesignation with which he had obseıved piety j teld its peace¬ ful spmt, to him from whom я emanated, elicei ed the folloni moiirnci m the midst of his regrets, bnghtencd the dre.irj scene in which he was now the sole ıe- inaining actoi, and disposed him to ex¬ claim in the spirit of scriptural quotation which lie had in some degree imbibed liom his intei course with the Missionaiy, — " Let me die the death of the iighleotis, and may my latter end be hie lit»."
CHAP. V. Ο ι that to fU! ĺ kıllın., p m s no more. On Scıllıınıı lulls I lay a sulliks« stone, W as fix'tl a roık unut t tilt, «viittrc to ir, Viul ııı the «ast Att liitit stood alone Нлммочс J пе daikness of night which hung over the last moments of the djing Smithers, now hastily leceded befoie the coming day. Chailes considered the claim ot fuend hip to be satisfied and rose to pursue his journej. He tuined to be¬ stow one I ist look on the cold ι emams of his dtceascd fuend. " Faiewell, farewell, my departed comforter. You are at iest among the spirits of the just made peifect, and the benevolence which lately glowed on earth, now lives in its native Heaven, only reminded of past misery, by piesent
tiijojment, oı by pity lor hnn who leaves thy bones to whiten in thc blast that agi Utes thc sands ot the desert And must 1 leave thc moital part of thee thus the object ol inficici exultation, and sacrile gıous mirth ' No , these feeble hands sh ill still devote а portion ol their wast ing vigour, to give thee а glave " He on the instant, applied himself to tarry into effect the resolution so affection itely vam, which esteem for the departed Missionary, had inspired Ihe musket of the interpreter which he had borne thus f ir, and the dagger with which he had armed himself, were the only assist ants of his hands, while employed in the performance of this last sul duty It was ι ith difficulty that he prepaied а hole sufficiently large to receive the bodj Iwice he thought that he had at com phshed the object of his toil, and twice, on removing the cold and stiffening corse, (which, to him, weak as he then was, proved an effort ot great labour,)
to the opening intended for it, he found tlut fresh excitions were demanded to pıov ide its kist resting place. He at last succeeded m making one sufficientlj ca¬ pacious, .and a covenng of sand veiled the face of the gentle Smithers lor tvei. He passed sadly on, pensively ι efiect- uig on tbc \ aucties of soi row that he had known, antl on the seveial distiessing circumstances which had deprived hnn of tbe thiee kindest beings that it had been his happiness to meet with in Alrica ľhe musket he left behind lnm as use¬ less, foi diminished as his ouginallj scanty stock of piovisious had been, he lound his stiength lall off so fast, that he could hardly bear the load of the little that lcmatned. Dunng the heat ol the daj', he rested on the plain, as on formei dajs In the evening he stt foith again, but pioceeded so slowly, and with such pain, that hope almost abandoned lnm, and death seemed inevitable At night be was too ill, antl too wietehed to
sleep, antl he rose unreiieshed, in the moining '1 hough he had most frugally husband¬ ed his stock of water, the last drop was imperiously demanded by raging thirst eaily m the foi enoon of the day which succeeded that on which Smithers lud bı lathed his last. He had in vain sought to discover а spring, from which he might gam that supply, without which he could baldly hope to behold anothei sun use. The gum, which had at hist proved so seiviceable, by frequent use seemed to lose its virtue, and even of this, but a veiy small quantity remained. He shaped his course to the south waul, icsolvcd to leave the and waste on which he had foi some days languished, at the risk of tiespassing agam within the inhospitable limits of Ludamai. But without а compass — without any othei distinct indication of the diiection in which he travelled than wassupphed by the rising and the setting sun, he was much
perplexed and contused ııı lus motions \s tv ciung drew neu, Ins distress be came tei ι ible. Ile feai td that bewas becoming delinous, as the Mıssıonarj had been, toi he felt linnstll the sport of optical (Illusions, such as h id never cheated Ins senses beloie. The water melon, which piesents ichef tothe faint mg trav elici in Egypt, and the datc- trcc.-wlnch assui es the exploi er of w estcrn Asia, that a refreshing spi ing cools its root, seemed alternately to flouush on a spot, which blasted by natuie in wrath, is destined to peipetual steuhty. Night appioached. llailcj gazed on the last gleam of daj, with unusual taincstness, for something whispeied to lum that he should nevci see another lbe gum was now consumed, and the bl idt ot the daggei w lnth lit still carried with him, and which pussed on his parched tongue, bestow ed a momentary coolness, was all that he possessed which could lor one instant mitigate the excru-
enting torture, that merciless heat in fheted This seived, in fact, bul to aggi ivate his distress, from its total inefficiency to lepiess the thirst whicli consumed him He continued to labour to advance, but the dm ing blast, and the rising sands opposed him He turned his back to the wind, and covered his face to avoid inhaling the clouds of dust which encompassed lnm It wis in vain A faintness came over him, that he could not subdue , his trembling limbs refused to sustain lnm, and he fell befoie the fury of tlie storm Sinking to tlie earth, he looked towards the Missionary's grave, and regi etted that he had not made it large enough for both, and remained by it till the hour of his own einanci pation from tlie trammels of mortality arrived, that his clay might have ie posed by the side of his brother in cala mity He attempted to commend his soul to mercy, and to breathe а prayer for the happiness ofher whom he e ould vol ш G
hope to behold no moi e , but a wandering of intellect sci/ed lum, which was suc¬ ceeded by α profound and deathless stupoi. How long he remained m this situa¬ tion, could never be exactly ascertained, but he found it was mid-day when he was revived, by the caie of some un known being. His fiist idea was, that the Moois, he supposed to be in pui¬ suit of lum, had overtaken lnm. He started at the thought, but soon per¬ ceived that such was not his fate. It was a Mandingo incichant, who, ictuin¬ ing to his home, had discoveied the inanimate European, antl seeing that he was not dead, had been prodigal of his cal es to ìevive him. Harley thought he discovered an expiession of benevo¬ lence m the countenance of his new acquaintance, which assuied lum that he was safe, and he giatefiilly recepted the refieshments offeied lnm. With this man he was obliged to travel as he
had done while α captive to the Moors, with tins exception, tint those severe bonds whith weie then imposed, weie spared m the present instance md such only supplied is were necessary to save lum from falling He had no leason to suspect that hew ould have been car ned in this way it all, bad be been able to sit on hoi seback The Manthngo knew wheie to seek re Ireshment, and wliere to ìepair to rest, and under his conduct, Challes soon found himself extricated from the desert without endunng anything, which after what he h td befoie experienced,appeared to merit the character of hardship or pn vation His health began to return, and by the tune they gained the village to which his pieseiver belonged, Harley was once more in tolerably good health Giateful foi his debvtrante, he panted fm an opportunity of pioving his thank fulness to his benefactoi The latter, if the Mandingo may be so denominated, с 2
lost little tune in affording the opportu¬ nity desued, for he requned lum to peiforni eveiy menial and labonous office, and for all, but spauugly ι equited him with the toaisest fire At hrst, Charles sought to anticipate his wishes, and to obey his bidding, not only with¬ out leluctance, but with cheeiful ala¬ crity He, however, soon saw that his most ¿ealous effoi ts to please his tyran¬ nical mastei, for that was the chai acter now assumed by the Mandingo, pro¬ cuicd lnm no favoui, no tsteem The Afucan had, in fact, considered, when he discovered Harley in the deseit, that lit had stumbled on a prize — that he had found a slave. This was the souice of his appaient kindness For no other puipose luci he pieseived his life, and having done this, he cared not how irksome it might become to its unfortu- vate possessor. To one who like Harley, had been accustomed from infancy to prefer death
to skiveiy, it will easily be conceived, that it but too soon appeared that he had small ι eason to congi atulatc himself on having fer the piesent escaped the fate ot pool Smitheis Again to fly at all hazaids, he held to be his onlj lesouree , but events occurred, which made such a step unnecessary. It was a part of the duty assigned to lnm, to make butter. He had been taught to put the cream m the skm of a goat, and having hung it up it the entiance of the hut in which he slept, to agitate it by beating the skm with a stick till it gained the elesned consist¬ ency, and then lemove it with Ins hand« into a vessel appropi lated to its íeeep¬ tion. He had one day pei loi med tins part of his work, and was ι eturnmg with the stick that he had just been using, to the hut of his mastei, when the shrieks of a female which seemed tlience to proceed, caused lnm to quicken his steps, and drawing near, he peıceıved с 3
the Mandingo beating his daughter with α heivy stick, sımılaı to that which Hailey had been using in tlie way just descnbed, lhe scene was not quite new to hnn. His disgust and indig¬ nation had been moved on a iouner oc¬ casion m the same way. lhc gul had ι eluseci to eli voui that enormous quan¬ tity of food, winch is considered neces¬ saiy to produce corpulency. In Africa, as to be fat, is to be beautiful, this seveie discipline is ìesorted to by affec¬ tionate parents, anxious foi the future welfaie of then Iemale offspring, to make them complete then unnatural meal, and lay the foundation of а lovely rotundity of person, which might in time, make its possessor " а load for л camel." To the Lnghshman who had not learned to admire the result of this tieatment, much moie than the treatment itself, the practice appealed eiuel in the extieme, and he did not scruple to ìe- monstiate igainst it by wouls as well as
he was able, and by gcstines moie ex¬ pressive than his wouls. The father, befoie nutated by the undutiful absti¬ nence of the daihng daughter, whose charms he was endeavouring to thump to peifection, could not brook inter¬ ference with the peiformance of his parental duty, and he loaded the white man with a toi 1 ent of outrageous abuse, from which that personage judged it piudent to retire. He was, however, 1 ecalled, and he subdued his resentment so far as to obey the mandate with an appearance of eeremty. On doing this, as the Mandingo felt the exercise he was taking, become lathei fatiguing, Hailey had the mortification to hear himselt re¬ quired to be the instrument of that punishment, the infliction of which he had felt himself called upon to lepiobate and oppose. He was oideied to con¬ tinue the beating Го comply with this mandate was not 111 his power, and he hnnly lefused, while nge flashed from о 1
his eyes on the tyrant from whom it emanated. He expected new reproaches, but when he felt the stick which had been used to punish the weeping gnl, violently applied to his own shoulders, he forgot all the pei il of lus situation, as well as the humility of his condition, and returned the blows he had ι eceived with interest so usurious, that the master was presently seen prostrate at the feet of the slave. His first determination was to fly on the instant. But to escape by day was impossible, as befoie he could be well out of the village, the pursuit would be commenced and his route must be known lie determined, at all events, to r-.nam till night, and watch the effects produced on the Mandingo, by the experiment which he had ventured somewhat unceremoniously to make on his person. When his mastei lecovered from the beating that he had ι eceived, no angi y
word issued from his lips, but his lower mg brow told Harley, that wrath had full possession of his heart, and though he uttered no threat, he evidently medi tated a deadly revenge Charles saw and deteimmed, if peımıtted to remain unmolested till the return ofthe hours of darkness, to fly from the gathering storm Hamode Sano, (so the Mandingo was called,) was in the habit of supplying the slave cofies from Ludamar and Bam barra with provisions and other articles of which they stood in need, on their way to the coast He had a considerable herd of goats, several cows and some sheep, and these had been taken care of by two Pholies till the time at which Harley fell into the hands of the Man dingo The place of one of these menials who had died, our hero was in tended to supply, and his anxiety to ι equi te the supposed kindness of Hamode on his first arrival at the village, had proved lum fully equal to the duty At e 5
this penod a war with α neighbouring nation was anticipated, and his master h id m consequence judged it prudent to remove his stock to an enclosuie at some distance fiom the village 1 hithei Hariey now repaired m the hope of being enabled to collect from the Afri¬ can's herdsman who lemamed, more dis¬ tinct infoi mation ot the geographical position of the place in which he then found himself, and of the countnes which he must pass through in older to get to an Turopem settlement, than he had yet been able to acquue On his way, he saw Hamode in deep convers¬ ation with two of his neighbours They did not observe lnm, though he passed pretty close to them, and could distinct ly beai enough of their conveisition to know that he was the subject of it, but from the ıapıdıty with which they spoke, and the very slender knowledge that he had of tlieir language, he could not un derstand moie of what thcy were saytng
than sufficed to convince him that they were debating on Ins future fate He saw them sepaiate with the expression " at night," which they several times repeated to each other, and this led him to the conclusion that the resolution which they had come to was then to be earned into effect That they contem plated lus mur dei, seemed more than probable , and this idea confirmed lum in the ıesolutıon that he had previously taken, to fly the instant he saw a chance of stealing oft unperceived Hamode followed lnm to the enclo sure He affected to speak in lus ordi naiy tone, but to an mdiffeient obsei vei it would have been cleai that his mind was occupied with somethingelse, andClnrles, who remembeied the provocation that he had ι eceived, was at no loss to divine what that something might be He was not quite certain that he did not meditate instant vengeance, as he observed that о 0
he wore the dagger which had belonged to Harley, and which the latter, in the fulness of his heart on being rescued from the deseit, had offered to him as the only acknowledgement that his gra titude could make to his deliverer It was not Hamode's common practice to carry this about with him, and this, added to the circumstance of his being at what may be called his farın, contrary to his custom, which had hitherto uniformly carried him at that period of the day to the Bentang, or general plate of meet mg in the village, to pass a few hours, in the enjoyment of the luxuries of indolence, and tobacco smoke, might well justify suspicion He however made no attack His other servant had left the enclosure, and Hamode walked forth to look if he could perceive him on his return Absorbed m thought, Charles was em ploying himself mechanically in some of
tlie labours which had heretofore claimed his care , when his attention was aroused by the cries of his master, w ho loudly called foi help, and now appeared closely pursued by three Jaloffs, franticly con¬ juring Harley to assist lnm or they should both be taken and sold for slaves to a foreign country Harley heard this with profound in¬ difference, and responded to it, but with a contemptuous smile, " It matters little to me," he thought " if I must be a slave, who is my master, and he care¬ lessly turned to gaze on the conflict now about to commence, without experienc¬ ing the least anxiety about tbe result." The Mandingo, animated by the unfore¬ seen peril, made a brave ι esistance. With his daggei he wounded one of the as¬ sailants so deeply that he fell on the instant, but this exasperating his fellows, caused them to press on with greater fury, and Hamode in vain sti uggled to continue the unequal combat To see
hım thus about to be sacı ıficed after the cillant efforts he had made, waked the donnant geneiosity ot Hailey, and he no longei saw the cıuel mısteı in the vanquished Hamode, but α warrtoi sinking beneath supenor force , and it flashed like lightning on his mind, that whatever his leeent conduct had been, to that wai noi he owed the life he still possessed, and more was not necessary to engage him to devote it to his defence These feelings gained then birth and matuntj', and saw their offspring—bold decisive action, in the same instant The dart of one of the conquering Jaloffs was descending to annihilate Hamode, when a weapon, snatched fiom bis prostrate countryman, intercepted it, and, urged by the poweiful aim ot Hailey, pierced the right bieast of the supposed victoi. His still activ e companion made a blow at the new combatant, but it was so sue cessfully wauled oft, that his lance flew
fi oin his hand, and the cbscomfitted sav ige perceiving vvıtlı hoi roi the complexion of bis antagonist, was at once convinced that he had not encounteied " hv mg man oí earthly mould," but that α potent spn it of super-human powei glaied wrath- tolly upon lnm, and with agonising tre¬ pidation he attempted to fly. He was about to lehew his attack on the man he had wounded ; but Hamode, profiting by the timely inteiposition of his European ally, and the severe wound inflicted on the Jaloff, had not faded to spring from the ground to become the assailant in his turn, and Harley looked round but in time to see the wretch he had wounded, expire beneath the dagger of the Man¬ dingo. It had been no difficult matter to over¬ take the savage who had commenced his retreat ţ but the dangei which had threat¬ ened Hamode averted, he held his duty to be perfoimed, and wisbed not to visit with vengeance the trembling fugitive he
had filled with such indescribable dismay Forwhat he had done 1 e expecttd neithei thanks noi rewaid, and bethought he had iccomphshed enough for one whom he was well assured had only prolonged his life to ìeduce bun to the condition of α slave With these feelings he sullenly leturned to his former cares, without deigning to bestow a single glance on the man whom he had just saved from desti uction Great was his surprise when he saw the harsh, unfeeling Hamode draw near with every external demonstiation of hu mility and giatitude He was not in sensible to the obligation which Hariey had conferred upon him, and it made the deeper impression on his mind, as he had profited by his courage at a time when brooding over plans of vengeance himself, he doubted not that sımılaı feel mgs of animosity filled the bosom of Charles Had the latter been selected by the Jaloffs as their victim, he could have witnessed his murder with pleasure,
if assured of his own safety, and that generosity which had tnumphed over re¬ sentment, appeared to him in coloui s pecuhaily brighi from its having deve¬ loped itself in heroic exertion to save an enemy, when the chances of victory and escape were equally remote, and hope was no more ľoi the second time the master ap¬ peared prostrate befoie the slave Harley raised him with tenderness, foi contri¬ tion and shame were too strongly ex¬ pressed ш bis countenance to permit him to doubt of his sincerity. Hamode then presented lum with his dagger, at thesame time telling lum that he had meant to re¬ stoie it to him m a different way, as with that weapon hehad resolved to deprive him of life, and thus requite the blows which he had received Thenceforth he would consider Charles as his equal — the won «ded Jaloff should be his slave, and it thc white man desired to ıetum to his countrymen, he most solemnly protested
that he should never bc opposed by Hamode Joy, which hud been long a stranger to his Ιιυ.ιι t, now took full possession of the exulting Hailey. The prisoner he assisted Ilamode to convey to the village, in oidti to staunch the wound that he had uccuul Ou the way, the Man- dmgo never ccised to iciterate the ex picsston ot his giatitude, and as he ap¬ proached bis own hut, it became louder and moie feivent than evei, when it was suddenly mteirupted by the strams of hve or six Jilhl.cas, or singing-men, who announced the approach of a coffe ot slaves bound to the coast — iccounted the adventuies they had known on then march, and claimed the hospitality of the people of the village. Harley faded not to seize on this op¬ portunity while the giatitude of the Man- dingo was at its height, foi lecallmg to Ins lecollection the piomise that he had made — thai his dehvei ei should at all
times be fi ec to lttuin to the land ol his fatheis. 'Ihe boon wis instantly con- ceiled, and that s une houi Chailes heaid himself ltcoinmtnded to the cue of the singing men and the conducto] s of the slaves It was settled that he should pioceed with tnem to the coast, and he was told that he must piepare to com¬ mence his jouiney by daj bitak on the lollowing morning. Ills Hamper t at having gamed а point so impoitant, no langUiige cm describe. Iiom the moat deploiable condition in which a human being can exist, he found himself lifted in one shoit houi to fieedom, and the bi ightest prospects of permanent happi¬ ness opened to his view. With what joyful alacnty did he shaie with Hamode the caies and labours of the ι emainder of the day At night he letired rejoicing, though fatigued, to that but from which he had icsolvcd to fly while d.ukness piomised to favoui his escape, again to plunge into unknown
wilds, as helpless and as ignorant of the way he ought to take, as when he fiist attempted to ascend the Gambia — «as when he subsequently ventuied to ex¬ plore the dieary and inteiminable Sa- harra. He wooed repose, to en tble him to beai without slin liking the fatigue ofthe next diy's mai ch, but the piospect of soon reaching an Гиюреап settlement, of again seeing England, and, yet more, the image of Amelia, denied him the sleep he craved but, nevertheless, he was the person least sensible of weanness when the earliest peep of moining, gave the signal for the coffe to march The gratitude of Hamode had suivived the night, and he rejoiced as much as his emancipated slave could, that he had an opportunity of acknowledging the benefit he had received, though he could not but remaik, that "it was extiaoidinary that Hailey should be so eager to leave a place wheie he had good earth to tread
upon, and trees to look at, to go and live on the great watei, where no such luxu- nes could be enjojed " That othei kind, and othei trees might be found beyond the ocean, was that which he had nevei heard, and which, when it was told to lum, appealed so incredible, that the extravagance of the tale produced an immoderate fit of Uughtei. It now for the first tune occuned to Charles that he had the means of making some retuin for the present kindness of Hamode. The gold which he had found m the village wheie he had so long re¬ sided m comfoi t, it has been stated that he had concealed m that part of his dress whicli formed a covenng for Ins shoul¬ ders, and its picssure was so familiar to him, and he had been m so many situ¬ ations in which it was useless, that he had quite forgotten any thing of the kind was in his possession. Now tlut he re¬ collected it, he lost no time m presenting Hamode with some samples of Sambarra ζ
gold, which weie most gi iciously re ceived, and lit was in ι etui n piesented with as much piovision as he chose to take undei his cue lhe Mandingo ag un commended lus white presei vei to the cart of those with whom he was about to tiavel, and afftctionilely cm blated bun it puting The idv nice of the coffe was inegulai but tolei ibly expeditious upon the whole They crossed the Senegal and the I ela mèe, and traversed several countries of which Chailes had nevei heaid before In some of these he saw himself ap proached with admiring awe, as a supe noi being, in othei», he was viewed with pity 01 abhorrence, is one degraded below the level of the rest ot his species The very slaves with whom be journeyed seemed at first to pity linn as one whost fate—denied by soubd Nature the grate fully flat nose, the majestic thick hp and the fascinating hue on which they valued themselves — was even more de
ploiable than then», though the iioriihlt diead which they had of the evils still ш ıeservc foi them, atitied to those which they actually enduied, littjutntly ек hansted all then pattenet , tnd the fi mtic si!appin 0 of then fin 0 ei announced that suttu uig had it length vv rought atigtush to despei ıtıoıı But in calmei moments, as by degiees they became famíliu with the view of their Luropean companion, then scorn diminished, and the anxietv he displaj ed on every occasion to soothe those who suffered thc most, won then tsteem He endeavoured, and with some success, to console them undci then ically gieat calamity, by making them undeistand tlut their futuie fite was not that which they anticipated, that they would be employed in cultiv ating the tai th, instead of being sacnfíced to idols, 01 devoured by the human beings to whom thej weit to be consigned, and whom thty supposed to have no habitation but the large houses
(as thcy called the ships), that floated on the bosom of the deep ľhey soon saw the Gambn, and, though much fatigued, and occasionally subjected to sev ere pnv ations, Charles re tamed his health, and at length perceived with delight that thej approached the point he had so long sought to arrive at — tin mouth of the rivei, and the san gume hopes whicli had animated him on the journey, iipened into certainty when ne found himself safe in Pisania, a place much resorted to by those engaged in the slave-trade, and in which he expected to find some of his countiymen.
CHAP VI V tiger ' wjr.c, for ıı« liLvûiıd disputi, N v o fiei d ' ,o cruci Ί·. a learning Imiti PouiBir He did not deceive himself. As the cofle advanced, seveial Europeans ap¬ proached, and among them he peıceıved one face that was not unknown to huu — it was that of Major Houghton. He sprang foiwaid to embrace him, but the Majoi receded with prodigious agility, and demanded a pai ley. When it is borne m mmd that Charles still appeared m а wietehed lemnant of his Sambarra dress, eked out with the Moonsh gar¬ ment, and the slouch of the Missionary, which he had pieseived as a hade; and when it is remenibei ed that besides other changes made in hnn by Hunger, lon¿ travel, waDt, au 1 woe, VOL. III. H
he had a beard ι caching to his middle, which graceful appendage he had ac¬ quired since they parted, it will peihaps not be veiy difficult to account foi his not being recognised on the instant by an old friend. Explanation soon followed, and the Major learnt with equal wondei and delight, that the person he had long moui ned as dead stood before him. Great was their joy at thus meeting ; gieat the anxiety of each to heai what the other liad to tell Chailes obtained from his friend the latest news from Europe, and was informed that but foi his anxiety to avoid falling into the hands of tbe enemy, whicli induced him to go ashore, he would long since have been again on board the Zebra, as the fugate and bug which taptuied the tianspoils weie tiken in their tut η by the veiy rugate to which he had belonged, within a few daj s of the time when lie lashlj ventuied on the continent. Houghton soon accommodated his
triend with an English dress, and having bridled in Ins impatience till Charles had leheved his clun fiom its incumbrance, he eagerly demanded to heai his adven¬ tures 111 the inteuoi, and a description of what he had seen. The leqiusition was piomptly complied with, and the Major listened with the utmost attention to thc narrative of Harley. " By my soul '" he exclaimed " what you tell me creates in my inind an anxious wish to explore the paits you have travelled. If government would encourage such an undertaking, I think I could engage to find my way to Tom. buctoo. Did you heai any thing ofthat place, 01 its trade, during your wander¬ ings v ' " Not even its name, and I should therefore suspect that the tales we have heard of it aie fabulous, or at all events gross exaggerations of facts. To be sure my mind was too much occupied to h S
think of making enquiñes on the subject, and perhaps to attend to what might be said in mj piesence, but certainly I have no recollection ot having heaid it mentioned " " lhat is strange too. All accounts concur m ι eprcsentmg it to be a place ol gieat magnitude It seem, almost certain that masted v essels sail on the Niger 01 Jobba, winch passes neaı it, and perhaps terminates in some unknown Medıteı- lanean. I could wish tj follow the course ol the Jobba till I arnved at Tom- buctoo " " What diiection would you then take ?" "Ofcourse my dtteuninalion would be tn some me is ι e regulated by the in¬ formation I might gnu thue, but at present I think I should be disposed to puisue the tuck of the Niger, tilllruichul its souice or termination This done, perhaps the best plan would be to push on for tbe Jibbel Kınını, and having crossed the mountains of the Moon, which by-
»he bye many say are but α continu ıtıoıı of the mountains of Kong, get into Abyssinia, and return fiom Lgjpt bj sea." " You propose lo make a toleiably ex tensivejournej So vast an undertaking seems too much tor any man to accom¬ plish." " I should wish much to make the ex¬ periment. If it be not too much loi humin stiength — if theie be α mm living equal to the task, I am vain enough to think that I am that man. My stiength surpasses that of most men , I am mined to fatigue and puvation, and (bead not the influence of the climate " " I feai you would meet with insu- peiable obstacles to the successful com¬ pletion of your task." " You folget that 1 am pietty well acquainted with the language, manners, and habits of the Moors, from my re¬ sidence at Morocco, and with those of n 3
the Negroes, from the situation I have held at Goree, antl I could manage pi etly well with the natives of the seveial counti ies tlnough which I should ρ tss Ascending the Gambia lo this place, 1 would make my way to Woolli, ind I have some leasons foi thinking his Man- dingo Majesty would use mt well on my ıı t ii at at Medina, Tlience I should easily find my way to Bambouk, and penetiating into Ludamar, I think that I should meet with better tieatment from the Moois tban j ou did." " Perhaps you would, but I thmk you would not do well to ι elinquish the si¬ tuation you hold to engage in so des peíate an att mpt." " To me it does not appear so cles- peiate, and foi my situation, I hive no occasion to trouble myseit about that, as I am по longer town Major." " Indeed ! how is that ?" " Such has been the good pleasure of the worthy governor His leasons I do
not know that I can state with safety , but I suppose he perceived that I watched his conduct more closely than he could have wished, and rightly guessing that I should heieafter have charges to piefer against him, determined to get the start of me Accordingly on the 15th of last March, he thought proper to suspend me I wrote a letter to him, in which I endeavoured to offer such submission as would have satisfied a man of any libe rabty or feeling In this I told him — but the shortest way will be to read it, as all my correspondence with him is pre «erved in a small book which I have with me Here it is, I will read my letter, and then you shall hear his answer " SiR, Gorcc Marci 1Ä 1781 " Your orders of tlus date have been just shown «че by Ensign Poplett, of the African r orps, whereby I am su perseded of all my employments in the King's service, without accusation, crime, η 4
oı even without my having the least ided why, oi lor what cause I .ıııı thus ih«. niissed. I should have done mjsell tli·; honoui of waiting on jou m peison to have ìequested joui ι casons loi so sud¬ den aud unexpected .ill oidi ı, had 1 nol been pievented bj an indisposition undt* which 1 Invi sulleicd toi neaı fotu months, obtained bj my assidua) and attention to niv dut} by going into the Gambia bj youi ouleis at the most u' health} season of the ven, wheie most of the while people undei mj' command fell victims to the climate, and I, with much cue mil attention, have not jet escaped its m dignity, besides the loss ol all inj piopeilj whuh Iell into the handi ol the eucnn. "V nil cheulultiesslha\e tver obeyed all oideis that have been given mt bj the difleient offıceıs who have com manded this island, noi can I accuse myself ol evei neglecting anj one pomi ol duty, since I had the honoui ot
tei ving Ins Majesty in Af ι ica, when my health peımıtted me to peiform it, I ıcfer to those officers on tlus head. And why I am dismissed is to ine the most extiaordinaiy and unpi ecedented thing that I evei heard of during the course ot thiee and twenty years that lhave had the honour of serving his Majesty, noi do I think, from what knowledge I have m the service, that it is in the powei of any officei to supeısede anothei without а trial, or by his Majesty's orders, foi which icason you will not take it amiss when I mfoim you that tliougli by your oı ders I shall tease to perform any of the duties iny employ¬ ments requned, yet I shall still tonsıdeı mjself vested with those commissions w Inch I have had the honour of being appointed to by his Majesty's authoi ity, till such tune as it shall please his Ma¬ jesty to signify his pleasure thereon. " Ifl have unknowingly committed any error, or if you can point out to ine, h 5
how or in what manner I have merited the seventy of your oiders this diy, no person will be more ready to acknow ledge it, or to make yon any submis sion that may be requned ·' I have the lionoui tobe, Sn, " Your most obedient and most " Humble seivant, "D HoueiiioN " Copta n Commandant Wul! " And what was the effect produced by this lettci on the govenioi = ' " You shall heai He did not keep me long in doubt That same day I re ceived this answer to my letter " *' SiR, "Goree !5thMnrch 1781 *· Your inattention to the duties ofthe seveial stations you have held, and your not having produced any an thority from hi» Majesty to me, for holding those commissions, have induced me to publish the orders communicated
to you by Ensign Poplett this morning · which ordeis shall continue in force till his Majesty 01 his ministers signify pleasure to the coutraiy. " I have the honour to be, Sir, " Your most obedient " Humble seivant, (Signed) "J. Wail." ■ Го Damil Houston, Eiq " From this you will see that I have no redress to expect ш Afiica The truth is, that the conduct of the com¬ mandant has been so illegal and tyran¬ nical that he is sensible theie can be no safety foi him unless bj blackening the conduct of his brothei officers, he can nullify the testimony which they may be expected to give against him." " Has he continued that caieer of extortion which yon formerly described f" " With the most unsnanng rapacity, and to the manifest injury of the service. nG
A Dililah ship tht I nth ι amt int« Gone ltst Oitobu Walls pnncipal leting min in ittin n loi ııı otiti wluth Ilıt Dıınsh с ipt ıııı Iııd loıulıoıısh madt to sııpplj tht guııs ni withielu h nitnts, took on boud isliu tic piojieit« ol thc comni nul int loi sık 1 liehuja и was stilici« — the slut lelt inbond ini the next daj the hip wis hhtllul Ι ι tuijtng on ι tonti ıhın 1 li ult , ind Stıjtant Aııııstıoıitr wis sentón bou 1 to m ikt tht sei.au t ol the ship, it th veij time hcı l iptun wis politely eu tertainiiig ι p u tj ol lnglish offıceıs lhe nui к of tht bio ul ai iow w ıs put on hei mam mist, ıııd tht t. ipt uu anilins stcietaıj detuned ill night but on its bung distoveitd tint tht siivi thus sold had belonged to W ill his 1 xcellency thought piopei to send Poplett with this message, If Çaptım Assumis, (I could not thmk of his namt beloie ) and his secietiU) will give me an indemnification ii om undei their bauds not to prasecute m t m any court of hw, by complaint
tn tuhti wise, they slnll goon boaid, nul lhe ship be puinilled to depatt ' " " Was lit obliged to submit to suth humiliation '" " He was 1'uplett took the message, ami the Dme consented to ttee|>l Ins liberty on the tenns pioposed, lathei than expose' hunsell fuithei to the ty- t.uin v of V, all Hete the business elided, but on my ictuin to the rock, foi 1 was absent when this took place, his piecious ι epi esentatile — his agent in this busi¬ ness, lamented, iu vei> pathetic tenns, my ' unfortunate absence,' as he called it, lot had 1 been on the rock, he was sine the st'iziuc might have been made good, and to satisfy me that such a proceeding would have been peifectly just md piopei, be added, 'bei value was supposed to be at least twenty thou¬ sand pounds.' " " Could it then be expected tlut you would eo-opeiate in this ncfauoiis attempt at plunder?"
" Assuredly it was, and even m my absence it vv is in contemplation to sell some of my slaves to Captain Assemus, m ordei to givt α bettei coloui to the seizure of his vessel. Ihe person vvho told me this, added, that he supposed 1 did not want to pait with them I re¬ plied, that I wanted them to bung the island I hid pui chased mio cultivation. What thmk you was the answer made to this i " Nay, it is impossible to guess " " Why, I was told that it would have made no diffeicnce to me in this respect, as I might have had my slaves again, duectly the ship had been sci/ed, and the pn?e, 01 booty propeily secuied to the bandit who planned, and his «iccom- phces who executed the íobbery " " Infamous ' And is he as unjust to otiier officers, as he has been towards you ?" " O, yes, hie malice is toleiably im¬ partial. My case is not the woist that
tould bc brought loi ward, foi he has consented to let me ι etuni to England. That he has given me such pei mission, I have much reason to think he now sees occasion to iegiet, and desires nothing moi e thnn a Ian opportunity loi detain¬ ing me lí'oi this puipose, I am almost cei t un he attempted to fasten a quai rel on mc." " What leason have you foi thinking so 3 " " You shall beai . Being at the quar¬ ters ot Lieut. Schalch, of thc Royal Artilleiy, one Fold, an ensign, came and said, ' Mr. Houghton, I desire to speak with you.' I was unaimed, the night was excessively daik, and Ford h ivmg Ins hangéi in his hand, I suspected some foul play, as he had beiore shown a disposition to bc insolent ; and I theie¬ fore told lnm that that was not а propei tune and place to hear what he had to say, as I wished to create no disturbance in the garrison, and from the tone in
wluth he spoke, it was easy to discover that the communication he had to make, was not of α vei} pacific eharaetei He then pioceedetl to use the most out lageous language, bestowing ou me, without the slightest pi evocation, the epithets ol cowaul, îascal, and so foith 1 had not tune to icph, befoie Poplett, the ofheei then on guaiti, interfered, ami told Foul that he could not permit such language to be used. This called toi tli α torrent of abuse, diiected against himself, and he was compelled to threaten to put lum in απ est. His an thority and himself were tieated with the utmost contempt, the giossest m- lults weie offered to him, personally, and he was at length obliged to diaw hi defence ot his own honour and the king's sei vice Ford got wounded in the swoid-aim, in the face, and m the shoulder. He immediately ran to the commandant, Poplett did the aame, and
begged of hun to put the mutinous I oid in airest." " He appears to have been quite justi¬ fied in doing so " " 'lhe Govenior was of a different opinion Instead ol attending to tlie ments of the case, lit instantly seized l'oplett by the collii, (so Poplett says,) and lcd hun out ol the house, loading bun with the foulest epithets. He then called а seijcant of his guaid, put the ensign, who Inul done no moie than his tlutj, in nons, and sent bun to the guard house, altei sweai mg most violently ind blasphemouslyth.it ht would lung lum till he was dead Suth was the tieat¬ ment pool l'oplett ıeceıvcd foi doing his duty " " Ibiv did it end '" " Ilıt ensign icmaincd m confine¬ ment, till the doclois, who weie under the influence of Will, thought piopei to declai e Γοι d out ol danger. This they wen ceıtaıııly in no huuy to tlo, tliougli
lt ıs shıevvdly suspected that they knew there was тю danger from the first. The matter, however, will not end here. Poplett has aheadj written to Lord Am¬ herst on the subject, and means to ex¬ hibit charges against the Commandant I shall do the same, and I bve in the hope that his pnde will one day be humbled, and ti ust tbat bis disgrace and punishment will be as signal, as his tyranny has been unexampled." " I perceive," said Harley, " though I have endured much, through rashly ven¬ turing on the continent, that sufferings, little less acute, might have awaited me, had my duty pei nutted me to remain at Goree." " Yes, suffenngs the more galling from the circumstance of their being ac¬ companied by insults, and these offei ed, not by a savage, from whom you had no kindness to expect, but by a country¬ man, and still more, by a pretended friend."
" lhat consideration dips the dait in blacker venom But, come, let us not give way to vain regrets We have known sonows, but these are past, and we тчу now ïationally anticipate a tuin of happiness, foi, as the light of day succeeds to the gloom of night, the smil¬ ing sunshine to the appalling storm , so I have often remarked,-that joy and gnef seem to chace each other in endless· succession " " I wish not to damp your hopes, or to repress the buoyancy of your spirits, by awaking idle apprehension, but truth compel« me to remaik, that danger is not yet at an end, foi me at least To Goiee I must ıetum, and I Know not what new machinations my enemy may have recourse to, in ordei to obstruct the execution of my design, which is to take my departure immediately for l· ngland " " Can we not go together?" " I do not know that it wouid be pro-
per for j ou to go back to the rock at .ill. It will be no difficult thing to se¬ cui e j ou a passage to England from Jilli- fiee The cutumstance of youi being my fnend, will cause the Lieut, Go· veinoi to look on you with an evil eye, and his talent foi making mischief, is such, that both may be exposed to in¬ conveniences, that, if we take a different couise, may be avoided This, however, is a mattei foi future consideration " On tlie following morning, Hai ley took his leave of the Jilhkeas and conductors of the cofie He divided among them what lemamed ofhis Sambana gold, antl he ι equited, vv ith such acknowledg¬ ments as it was in his power to make, those of the slaves, who, in the midst of then own elistiess, had sometimes looked with pitj on the companion of their jouiney. A new conveisation took place between him antl the majoi, on the ques¬ tion, whether Hailey should, or should not, accompany hnn to Goree, which
terminated in their resolving to defer coming to a final decision on it, till their arrival at Jdlifree For that place they set out m the couise of the day The friends soon passed the limits of the king dom of Yanı, and Hariey exulted in the confident hope, that the day was not remote, when he should again behold the shores of Old England
CHAI'. VII. t will so nrtuouslv solicit ior thee, And with such cunning wind into hb heart, Tbat I sustain no doubt 1 «hnl) dissolve His settled melancholy (be it ne'er so grounded,) To rjtiunal love nnd grive [ihilosopby I know mj sight will cheer htm ut the heart ( ял™*» Тнь dramatist, in the twinkling of an eye, can change his scene, and he who was latelj at Rome finds himself the spectatoi of what is going foiwaid at Athens. As the histonan can, with equal ease, beai lus readers ovei oceans and mountains, peihaps those who have condescended to pei use the foiegomg chapters, will he disposed to complain that this faculty, or licence, has been suffered to he dormant too long, when it would have cost so little to have carried them to England, to see what was pass-
ing ra the family of Sir George Hen¬ derson. For this seeming negligence a brief apology will suffice. The history of nights of melancholy rumination, and days of tianquil woe, undisturbed by adventuie, unieheved by hope, cannot be given 111 detail, but at the risk of fatiguing the readei with intolerable re¬ petition , and as such was the character of the disti ess, known for many months by Sn George and Amelia, it was safest to leave that and them, to the ameliorat¬ ing band of Time. This, eveiy one who has seen much of what is called — society, life, and the woild, that is, — of the fooleries of man¬ kind, must admit raiely fads to produce the happiest eflects 111 nine cases out of ten The broken-hearted son who follows the lemains of a beloved father to the grave, himself apparently but half alive, is found, m a few weeks, the mirthful pre¬ sident of a convivial party, assembled in
the veiy hall from which the eoipseof ¡us parent w is lemoved foi interment the husband, prematurely deprived of his consort, before three months are ex pirecl, manifests his devoted attachment to the buned fair one, by paying his ad diesses to some living beautv , and the fiantie widow, having disposed of hei hysterics, enjoys many a hearty laugh, and lively entertainment, before that cap is laid aside, which custom claiws for the decoi ation of her peison dunng the days of mourning, and which policy adopts to make tt known that she is at hberty to enter into new engagements Amelia and Sir George were not so fortunate as to find their woe of such transient date Month after month rolled away without restoring them to cheerfulness That desolation of spirit, which the news of Harley's loss first oc casioned, had indeed subsided, but it had terminated, not in comfort, but in profound melancholy Mrs Roberts,
who mourned with them at first, from attempting to console, proceeded to re¬ monstrate with them on the unfashion¬ able duration of then soirow. Hei vivacity could not brood so long on images of woe, and she pi onounced it to be foolish to chensh affliction with such peiseveung constancy She cer¬ tainly succeeded in proving, that all was of no avail, but doing tins did not enable them to discaid those feeling» of bitter regret winch she had shown tobe useless Both father and daughter ad¬ mitted the justice of bei ìemarks, and were ready to say, in the language ol Shakspeaie, Sorrow n ver coul I rivive the li. ul And if it could, [юре vont ' [ eve t lint «urrow to we must weep bec iu«l via weep in vj I ButSirGcoigi ieplied to hei argument on the inutility of Ins continued sadness, tlut when stabbed he might as well be told that to bleed would be useless, and vol. in. ι
tliat the wounded artenes might, there¬ fore, refrain fiom pounng forth their crimson stieam, as to betold, that when he had mentally received a shock so se¬ vere, an outward expression of pain might be spaied. 'Ihe affection he had borne foi Harley, the circumstances under which they had last parted, and the present situation of Amelia, preyed upon his spints, and leason, reflection, long acquaintance with calamity, all faded to restoie that seienity of mmd, of which he had once «ippeared the possessor The piomotion of Major Roberts, whicb took place «ibout this time, raised the spints of his lady to that pitch of ex- lulaiation, th il she could uo longer en¬ dure the solium aspect of hei father'» hoirc, aud she accordingly lefl the vo¬ tants to join the ------1 o' 1 11 tl „ I hat «u lie witli alt tl ut weeg wit! a rc
Sır George and Ameb ι saw her depart with little regret, as they felt them¬ selves more at liberty to indulge their pensive musings, left to themselves Thc coldness of reason, often offends that sensibility which it is impotent to con¬ sole " Why, my deaiest Amelia," said Sir George, one day, when he had sur¬ prised hei m tears, " why do you give yourself up to this consuming grief, which — which (here his voice faltered, and an involuntary sigh burst from him,) is really very — very wrong " Amelia looked at lum with some¬ thing of surprise, and might fairly have retoited the question, but she only re¬ phed — " I wish my kind father, by com¬ pletely regaining his he ilth, and peace of mind, would set me in example of comfort " " My ìace is nearly run. At the worst, my pain must be of short duration; ι 2
but you, if you make not an effort to lift youi mind above the despondency which now oppressts you, maj have be fore you a long career of misery " " No, no, а something whispers me that it will not be veiy long " " If jou desue to see me less unhappy, try to regam youi lost tianquilhty Could I see you suriounded by images of smiling comfort, I should not be thc wietehed being that I now am And why should you not be othei than you are? Why shnnk from the most import ant duties which Heiven imposes on your sex? Lveiy woman should consider, that the cai es of daughtu, wife, aid ino thei, form the tluee gieat divisions of the task she is icquued to pei foi in to acquit herself of the obligations of ex istenci ' " But when calamity disables the m dividual fiom sustaining well such im portant stations in society, it is sui tiy better to avoid being placed m somt of
them, than to ventuie, at all events, to undertake them at the risk of filling them unworthily " " Of this, in youi case, there can be no danger If foi mei ly, from a principle of constancy to him, whose death we so sin cei ely mourn, you could not hold your self at liberty to look on another, now that he can re turn no more, to immolate j ourself on his tomb, is rathei to uni tate the frantic superstition of the Hm doos, than to act the part of the meek Christian, resigned to all the dispensa tions of Providence Let my words be lemembered I we, ioi you may still live to happiness, and fix youi affections where you may, by the tear of love and anguish, which now trickles down my cheek, your hopes, joui wishes, youi affections shall never be opposed bj the αν nice, the pnde, or the ambition of j our father " Stiong emotion shook lnm while he spoke, md m the promise, that avance, 1 3
pride, and ambition, should not oppose her felicity foi tht tune to come, she read a confession that these had once interposed between her and hei hopes Yet avance was a crime to which sht hatl never supposed Sir George was id dieted But he had seemed to own it, and his whole mannei pioved, that with af fection and gnef, unav tiling lemorsewa* mingled She w ıs ibout to soothe lnm, when the servant entered, to say, that ι cot tager wished to see Su George on parish business " Dobbs w mts to see me on parish business ' pooh ' tht fellow must make some mistike Tell him I have nothing to do with parish business " " So I told him Su George , but ht tried sadl}, and said, if }ou hatl not, nobody had ' " What ' is he m teais Tell lum I'll come to him " " No, thank ye, Sir, I don't desire
that not at all. I knows bettei than to expect a great gentleman like you, will cometo me, I'll walk in to j ou." And with these words Dobbs made bis appearance. Thomas, shocked at such ill-br ceding, was about to eject Dobbs, by a very summary process, but a motion from the Baronet caused him hrst to desist, and then to retne. " Well, John, what's the matter with you." " My mother, Sir — iny mother — she's all gone mad ; stark mad." '· I am soriy for that ; but what can I do?" " It you please, Sir, we aie afeard she'll do herself some mischief : so they told me I ought to get a strait waistcoat for her, from parish officers, to put on her." " The advice was good, but ï have nothing to do with tho parish officeis. To some of thein you had better apply." " If your Honour and Miss pleases, ι 4,
so I did, beloie I made so bold as to comt to jou " " W hom dul you go to '" " lust of ill, I wentto our bttdle, but he sud I must go to the const ible " " Wtll thin you should luvt goni to hım " " So I did , but ht said it w isn't Ins busillis·, uni 1 must go to tht woik house " " Did you go theie ?" " ics I did mtl 1 siw Mi Stuvem hunsell, ind he said he could not let me have what I wanted, without α ordei from the ov ci seer " " vv h it did j ou do then s " " I went to oveıseeı, but he was out, so I vvuted bj his tlooi, and when he coined home he gave nit the oidei " Well, and did anj new difficulty uise?' " No, Sn, not in getting tht jacket I went b it к to the woikhouse, and «,οι tint, butwben I got home again, with
the men who was to put it on, poor mothei liad locked herself m vvıtlı one of iarmei Wilson's eluldien, and was scieammg out quite loud, that she would kill the boy. So I was going to bilist open tlie door, but the men from the woikhouse wouldn't let me, as they said they lud no 1 ight to break into α house, without hist asking a lawyei , so I went lo Mr Paichment, but he's gone to London, and then vve went to Paison, but he's at dinner, and can't be spoke lo, and oo we come to ask y ou, if so be as vve may bieak in '" " What ' can there be a question about loicing а lock, when the life of a humail being is at stake » Break the door down instantly , I'll answer for it " " Yes, Sir , but j 011 would not be so kind, would you, as just to step out and tell 'em so, they won't take α pooi man's word , and Mr. Tibbot, the land¬ lord, says, he won't have his house ι ΰ
knocked about, so they were going to carry the strait waistcoat back again " " Ibey shall not do that, .lohn. I will speak to them and immediately, that the life of а fellow-creatuit may not bt sacrificed to the ignorant tei rors whith oppose an act ot humanity " He left the 100m, followed bj the rustic Amelia shuddered at the con templation of the frightful calamity which called for the - resence of bei father, while she lionoui ed the benevolence which so promptly obeyed the unceiemonious in¬ vitation that lie had leceived To walk in that garden, in which she had once been accustomed to enjoy tlie society of Harley, was the only solace that her melancholy could know Here, revelling in that grief whicli she could not — would not subdue, she frequently wandered, till forgetful of all around, her mind became absorbed in religious contemplation, and, soaring above the evils of this transitory state of being, en-
joyed a refreshing vision of the consola¬ tions reserved for the unhappy, in " an¬ othei and a better world. ' A splendid equipage caught her eye as she gained thc door of the apartment, and a moment after she heard the motion of its wheels stop, but this arrested not hei steps. She had long since ceased to take anj inteiest in the arrivals that were announced, and had constantly with¬ drawn herself fiom the company that Sir George still occasionally entertained, whenever it was not his particulai wish that she should remain. Such a request he now seldom made, as he saw compli¬ ance was painful, and the plea of indis¬ position might always be fairly urged to excuse her absence. The day was one of those which some¬ times give the close of October the brightness of summer, without the in¬ tensity of its heat. A thin floating vapour softened but concealed not the deep autumnal tints whicb the pencil of nature i b
had bestowed on the tini giove, tlat bounded tht guden, tiom wluth tin gentle bietľt taused α ftw ol the withti mg leives cvcıy moment to descend, aı d which, ïeltitt uit to sink liom tlıtıı tx alted situition fell not to tht giound till afttı ıtpeattd efioits to icgaui lie u lile elevation , lo »ııjoy the buef uuniani ol the parting seison 1 oiccd to the nth ihey now began rapidly to iccumul iti on the pleasmgH v u legated foit giound which the tiste of Amebi htd decked with the plants and floweis wl uh iet un then cli. n ins till thc neu appioach ol wintei, and which, fiom then lofty neigh bouts being half stnpped ol tlie loh ige which had idoined them, seemed to flouush m unwonted health, and to itvel in the glorv of the sun, fiom which, in thewaimei season, thej had been almost whollj excluded On one side α chci ι j tiee grew, I e neath which, while she was α child, thei t was a seat, to which Charles and tht sisters had fiequently repined of а moin
nig, to porose some woik oi amusement, befoie the tasks of the daj were entei ul .ipon. Heie the spughtly tale, oi pi tui¬ tivo poem, weie lead, listened to, .and .ululimi, antl the happy tuo enjoyed without ìcstiaiiit the luxury ot mourning ovei imagined woe, oı met the pietuie oí nurlii vvıtlı its ıcalıty . The seat had fallen to decay, but .it the icquest ol Amelia it had been leplaced. Ilei motive foi making the lequest was not avowed , but it oiiguuted in a wish lo iccal, as lai as might be, some of those delightlul houis so fondly tonseciated by memoiy as pregnant with joy, and un¬ stained by one thought. 01 action that could wake futuro iegiet, but foi the bail and evanescent chatacter of human happiness Hithei Amelia dnectcd hei steps, in silent, solemn meditation. From the disliess of the poor cottagei, lier thoughts iiivolutitauly turned to liei own, mil the muge of the youth, so devotedly loved, and so incessantly moni ned, failed
not to be present to her mind. The grief of Sir George, antl the apparent decay of his constitution, weie among the objects that occupied hei meditations, antl his sorrow acquired a deepei interest with her, from the regret which he manifested foi the course he had pursued with re¬ spect to Charles " Alas'" she sadly sighed, " that the feelings which generate rémoise cannot come sufficiently e.uly into action to pre¬ vent error' How v un the reproaches and the tears with whicli my kind but erring father loads himself, and sheds foi the fate ot Charles ' Had the same acute sensibi¬ lity lived m his bosom when the child of his bounty knelt before him, how im¬ portant, how blissful might have been the lesult ' He would not then have been animated to entci prise by desperation, nay, he might have been prevailed upon to give up thc dangerous profession to which he devoted lııınself But vain these tlioughts — these regiets cannot
alter nature's laws, and compel the grav e to give up its beloved inmate Be still, my heart ' Ihe termination of thy sor row approaches Peihaps, ere long, our emancipated spirits may meet in the regions of eternal day, and, as m matute ige we laugh at the recollected trouble? of infancy, so, in а more perfect state, we may smile at the little temporaiy woes that depressed us when we were only mortals " While her tongue unconsciously em bodied in words, the thoughts that cluicedeach other thiough her mmd, her eyes were raised to Heaven, glistening with a tear, for which anguish, piety, and love tontended, and which each had equal right to claim Suddenly she started, at perceiving tint slie was not alone A youth knelt at her feet, he gently seized her hand, shewould have repelled the daring intiudei, but a tin fi¬ lms sensition ran through her whole frame, and alike depnved her of speech
and motion He who lud caused this sudden emotion was uoi less affected. He tiembled, but was silent. Amelia felt hei hind piessed to his lips, and coveied vvıtlı burning kisses He raised lus liciti, and a countenance beaming with intelligente, and glowing with laptuie, met hti view — it was that of Hailey' " Amelia '" lit it length exclaimed —and the throb ot boundless tiinspoit denied htm the jiovvei of s lying more loi some moments. I le h id heard the w ords which fell f ioni bei when she little sus¬ pected that any one was ueai, but least ol dl himself He siw befoie lum the fan one, whose image he had so often en- ¡leavouied to tecili m the pathless wilds« ol Alma — among the abode of sav ıges, and on the binning sands of tlie cheei less Sahana Ht saw hei not, indeed, in all the bloom of beauty, such as when he had first bthtltl bei on Iııs ıetum from sea, at Loid Dashingtoii's, but still lovely, nav, to him moie lovely than ever, since
the paleness which liad invaded her cheek, he could not doubt, was the offspiuig of sensibility and love — ol thsintci esteti love foi huu His heart was too full to allow htm tlie use of speech, but all poweiful nature prompted hnn instinctively to satisfy tlie doubting, .and almost lifeless Amelia, of the leahty of his piesence, by clasping tlie tmiesist ing channel lo Ins agitated bosom Recollection began to succeed to emo¬ tion, and Amelia gently disengaged her¬ self. A dubious sensation of mingled appiehension antl delight still peivaded bei mind, while her gaze, at hist incre¬ dulous, became gi.ndu.illy moie assured, and, at length, compai.ltively tianquil. " That you have not ioigotten me, tleaiest Amelia," he at length said, " I have tht bliss to know. Bui why still seem at a loos to lecognise me g Have absence and miseiy, (to me the wouls are sy nommons), so changed iny featuies, tint you can for α moment doubt tlie
identity of your faithful, and, пои I may add, your happy Harley ?" " 'Tıs he 1 " she softly sighed, and again her thoughts seemed absorbed in devotion, as if mentally imploring Heaven to grant strength to sustain thc sudden transport that she proved at а meeting so joyful, and which α moment before she bad held to be impossible. " Yes," he continued, " I may call myself happy, since escaped fiom α thousand dangeis, 1 once moie see the beloved daughtei of my old friend and benefactor, and appear before her no longer as the youth whose swoid and lus commission were all he could call his own, but as the possessor of wealth so ample, that even his ambition can de¬ sue no more. But why do you not speak ?" " This surprise has almost deprived me of the power. To see you, whom we have so long mourned, thus muaculously revived — to see you Jiving—well and
happy—is too much for a weak-minded female to bear with fortitude " " I hope you do not think my return α calamity ?" " It would be ungenerous to ask me what I think now At this moment 1 can only feel, and ------ " Rejoice'—May I finish the sentence for you? 1 trust we meet to part no more Theie's Heaven m the thought'" And «1 all wc never — never part ? — Mv hf«. — ray all tl at s л ino ! " Sanguine as ever ' Ah, Charles, 1 see experience ıs lost on you All your disappointments have not taught jou to guaid against premature exult¬ ation ' " Premature '- and why pi etna t ure? Hive I not enjoyed thc happiness of clasping Amelia in my αϊ ms ' Have I not the bliss of beholding that counte¬ nance ' not, indeed, as when lighted up by mirth, it gamei' additional anıma
tion in the spi ightly dance ' Not with that tianquil gaiety which, while she presided at thc piano, spoke her ready to please, though unambitious of display« but loveliei, deaiei still, m the languor ol faithful love and unexpected joy, the immediate successor of hopeless gnef. Why call you then my exultation pre¬ mature r' 1 daie almost defy the malice of fortune to conjure up a new obstacle to my happiness." " You would not have scrupled to give a bumi u proof of youi temei ity fonneily. Remember how confident you then were that Sn Geoige desued nothing inore than to see us united. Remenibei how Ieai less you weie on this point, and tlo not folget what followed " " I do lemembei it, and must confess th it my picsumption was great in aspiring to youi hand in iny then situation. His conduct ought not to have surpnsed me, foi it was ceıtaıııly a singultii re¬ turn foi past kindness to demand a
boon ten thousand tunes moie valuable· than all." " But then, as now, you weie certain that no obstacle could aı ise to defeat your expectations, and now, as then, bittet disappointment may await you." " Impossible' I am now m wealth your fathei's equal, and though undei any circumstances to aspue to the pos¬ session ol a tieasure so immense as your¬ self, may bc counted piesuniption, yet, looking merely lo the common worltlly calculations indulged on such occasions, I am not open to that charge. At all events no soubd motive cm be imputed to me now, and α suspicion of this nature might have influenced Su Geoige beiore." " I know not that, but this I know that ever since youi ícported death was announced to hnn, he has been absoibed in melancholv the most piofound, and I have sometimes beai d e? pressions escape which reproved his conduct to waids you in the bitterest teims "
" Indeed' 1 am delighted to hear it But I knew his kind heart, though it swerved on that occasion from the till then uninterrupted course of bounty in which his life had passed, would soon repent its harshness I am certain that he will be pleased to set me, and learn with delight that I am no longer what I was Does he know of the fortune to which I have succeeded " " He does not In the first instance I kept the secret in compliance with your request, and when it was supposed that you were dead, I never mentioned it, as the knowledge ot that fact would but have aggravated the calamity which he deplored But Sir George is coming Retire а moment, and let me endeavour to prepare hini for the joy that await» him " The Baronet drew near, his spirits ap peared somewhat exhilarated " I have seen the poor woman taken care of,' he said " It is but a tempo.
ìary derangement under which she la¬ bours, and Dr. Memtk thinks she will recover in α day or two. It however required all my eloquence and resolution to satisfy the pai ıslı sages that they could be ught in breaking open a door to save a life. You see, Amelia, we can still be useful, and we must not therefore hold existence to be entirely destitute ot com¬ fort and enjoyment " " True, my dear Su, and Heaven will sometimes sweeten oui cup with bless¬ ings surpassing all expectation, and be¬ stow even that which for our blindness we cannot, or foi our unworthiness we dare not ask " " I am glad to find that you are sen¬ sible of this, and flatter myself youi re¬ viving spirits will shed a gleam of com¬ fort over my pai ting day, which I feared would gild it no more Why, you abso lutely look cheerful, and yet you seem to have been weeping " " Perhaps they were tears of ecstaey
or of gratitude for unlooktd for happi ness " " Happiness and ecsticy are words that I am little in the habit of hearing from those lips To what do they refet ? Who is that gentleman walking in the gaiden with his back towaids us ?" " An old fuend " " Who?" " Who of all we have evei esteemed would be most welcome ? Who if the wildest wish you could form might be icahsed would you desue to see? You aie surprised — prepare foi а greater surpnse ' —" " Hey ι — What's all this > — Why I should be glad to see Lord Uaslungton — or the Major or — or— but its worse than useless to mention his name —" " Peniaps you weie going to sav Charles Harley —Would you give lum a fnendly gieetmg " " A friendly greeting ' — О Amelia — That is reproachfully put — But see, 7
lie tums — ht appioithes— ht ııı is¬ tiny I bilut ι my tviı 1 — ЬЬ situou·· Ρ evidence —" VMule ict speiling, Hule ; ι ι lie I into Ins expanded un , ml t lit voie of the Biiinet was stíled in sobs of ι iptuic Su Ct ι »e beliti 1 v itu muie jilea ui e his 1 ıı nu j ι itt ţi с w ho η he hl ' I mj; "o ileti u dc ul io«, med to lus einbi tee m peilett health Ilt Ieai nt with salisi iction the istoiiishine ini) iove ment lint had tiken plie in llulcy'- fortunes suite thty list шс lhe chi wis devoted to ilacın Repe ledij dici Sn Cieorge grup atlctioiutclv the- hand oi Iııs gue t, ι ti d pus-, the uv best joy ι« seeing hun oure mit u sifclj on Luti ι „rot d i sı ver il t mts the lutei obscıvtı ıı the meri ¿ı/c of tht il non « whit he h ı r'ıt an t quii oul expi essai i vv ı tm-d „ disuniti to inilin ttt ıc ι , ^ ind he tould not hel,) u n i|, n ıha mı π к
this proceeded fıom emban assment gio» mg out of thc recollection of lhc scene which passed betwetn them when lit fonneily announced himself a candidate foi the hand of Amelia lhc contrast between his piestnt and bis fonner situ¬ ation was most flattenng to α j outhfid mmd. That a pool Lieutenant in the Navj, should within α period so limited, have returned in α gay equipage of his own, to conduct the mistress of his heart to α splendid establishment pic¬ paied for hei íeeeption, were cucum¬ stances so piegnant with felicity that theie are tew who would not, like Hailey, give themselves up wholly to exultation at such a period. He rose the n«?xt morning gaj and bappj Amelia mtt lum with cheerful uess, and he lemaikedwith delight, that alrcatlj the roses of health were begin ning to spring on the rums of sonow With what pleasure did she hear ıe- counted the tale oi his wandeiings, and
to hım lus past suffenngs wue cucinale < fıom the inteiest with which Ameh listened to them lhc bliss whicli lul been his day dieam at Simbau i, he en joy od in ie ihty at \\ ooburn Sir George tint moining ippened ui usually thoughtful The Inlaiity wine! hid lighted up bis counte nnct when he fust saw Charles, md lcaint the extent of his good fortune wis no moie He was frequently silent for many minute« together, and when an attempt was made to engage hun in conveisation, his answers seived but to prove the total abstraction of his mmd During а short wall« which they took this mental absence continued Every eftoit made to pievail on him to shako it off proved unsuccessful On their ie tuin \meha retued, and Charles accom pamed the Baronet to his chamber The dinner houi had neaily an ived, but Sir Geoige and Hariey weie not 'een A blush ovei spiead the cheek of к 2
Aiutili when thi probable subject ot then coiileiciiee tiossed liei ninid. She¬ was agitated bj a li cling ol exquisite ippicheiision, — whethei pun 01 plea¬ suie— hojic ot tei i oı pıt dominateli. Ameba would have been at a loss to decíate. Soine spinst« ıs at tht шопи nt thej btlicve then niai ıı.ıgt ıs nego citing, woultl pcihajb be les. einb.it- l used to decide wh it sensition take·, tht lead on so intei cling an oecxision It wis not till long afttı the usuil houi, that Sn Geoige m,ulu his appeai¬ anee it the (liunu tibie He «ippeai td ts at lueaklist , told, stitut, and thoughtful, and II ulti, bcloieall gaiety, had now taught tho liiiect.on. An an of s ttlness sımılaı to that which An. cha had su n hun vv t u on tht day when he last took his deputine clouded his blow, and he, like Su Gtoıgt, appealed to bc absotbed in the contemplation ol sonit calamity too ten ible to be communi cated.
ľhe Baionet closul his bnel ıcpast. His bosom swelled with unwonted agi¬ tation, and he h istilj'quilted the room, but not till he luti bittHy lciiunded Hailey 111 a mournful tune, that " il the houi of ten he should expect him." ' Hailey's ejes wue lived on the closing dooi. He listinní with uixittj to the liuontt's iltning iootsleps, and seimul on the point of lollowing lnm, when he siuliletilv checked himself. " Twill be all 111 1.1111," said he. " 'Iili the houi anives which he hi named I must 1 cinain on the lack ol suspense " , The anxious g\/c oi Ameln tested ou hnn Tendernes«· aud .btonishmentweit expiessed 111 hcı ınanneı Hu ıııındvvas attive, but liei tongue w ıs mute She elesned to know w h U thus agitated hei lovei, but tiembled to enqune. " You weie ught, my tleaiest lineha," Chailes proceeded, " you weie ught to caution mc against bung loo sanguine h 3
yesterd.iy. Alas' I painfully feel Iiow weak the man w ho presumes to say thai he ıs secuie of happiness. I had hoped that my suffenngs weie ovei, that loi- tune had exhausted hti malice, but such mj ilostinj, I know not what miseiy nuy be in ìeseive lui me, but (ein the w m it" " How 1 " " ľhe woist — the veiy woi'st that my malignant slats could devise to blast my peace and annihilate my icason-— а new sepaiation from Amelia " " Calm this violence. Suiely, sui elj, jou mistake whatevci you have heaid." " Ono' — The doom was dieadfully distinct' — 'Amelia nevci can be yum s.' Oen now it ungs ni mj cus like the knell of earthly happiness." " What menu join woids '" " Biiefly this. That I have again ingeit mj iuti, and miploied Su Georgi to bestou upon me this eiei-valued band. I have oftei eel to place my whole fortune
st lus disposal, to m ike such settlement-· mil such anangements ııı tveıy ıcspett, ıs he ııııghl be pleased to dictate , but mfltiible as evei, to all my supplie ıtıons lit his ıeplıtd by tlissi! uling mt from thinking of you moie, antl by a refusal the most peiemptoiy antl decisive, thtt tlie tongue of man could uttei " ' loi the piesent, he declines givi»), his consent " " Γοι evei. Yes — such was the ti t- mendous sentence ' ι ou ought ' you must ι enounce hei foi evei— Amelia ncici can be youi 's." " Stiange ' Youi supposed deatli vva» to hnn α soui «e ol the most violent and at the same time most cui eless guef Often luie I beai d hım exclaim m all tlie agony of llemoi se, О that the past could be lecalled ' As if no wish on earth were so neaı his heart as that of atonnie, foi foimer unkindness " " It must be ambition. Sotne most distinguished individual must have an¬ ıt 1
nounccd it to bt his wish to ti uni vom lund 1 J h t t umot bc Ambition mui «ıslı I ıılıt „ Htm olttn ,us ht ılı tlmil Ih f It would ı ıılıtı sec lib ıhıldı uh ι ¡>x thin ¿it t in oppositi t thn, lit 1 ι been iteustointd to stu nul Is ll ISC ıııd tun but V tatt ι d n v hen II hoj ι 1 1 ţ ııı ıetum w ıs lo t le i) t t il 1 s 1 ııı eı tU tl ıı ıtıoıı tlut ι 1 c< ııl 1 .,ı\c nıt laut lo ınotheı, bı lhc ü ilion 1 1 tic u ıhııılu ıl (ıl such ι nu u uld cxi t ; wu ti nuolit, inibitimi ni ι ι nei hi lil tu ι oppose n t wishe Mu ι this now tini vou ut tinne 1 «lim li so sn cciclţ esteem vit'i uiipltwi 111 lllllpilisptctsbll_,htll tli n \u sin l\ lliue must It sonu nist in cull in ' ııııpt s hit I w is not so negligent t-» to tlmil tliilht smione thing vv beu n u 'it\ he u 1 ınotheı But this w ıs not ill Vt leu tins nipht he Ins ip peniteli inc to n eet hnn dont ш hi
study, and then he decíales he will givt nie such explanation that I shall ilo justice to bis motives loi letusing his tonscnt, nij, he adds that I shall concili with huu in dcsiiing to avoid that union, to whieh, in all my wandel tugs, I have looked forwaul as the neb icvvaid ol patiently endin cd calamity." " In this thue is some fatal mjstcij " " His wouls, tlut when 1 had heaid what he h id to communicate, I should tiesne to avoid tht union on whith ill my happiness depends, might beai t constitution, buti will not wiong join unspotted virtue by biealhing tht inju- i ions inlt itntt, that iin«,ht be diawn from them Suictj, Anuin, Su Geoige ıs tou honoui ible to descend to tuckeiy ami falsehood, to dismiss an unwelcome in trudei." " Ilis honoui, his veıaeıtj aie not tu be questioned. I may be the victim to his fatal ıesolutıon, but ntvtı shall my heart suspect lum ot baseness 01 fraud. k5
He the obstacle what it m.iy, thit nieventi- his giving the sauttioii of Ins tpproving voice to tint шпон which j on and (heie hei looks weie cist down, hci voice lalteied, uid ι burnin,; blush invaded hti cheek,,) notion tlom , hoped he would no longei opptxe, I feel assuied tl« it his actions, undei some mystenous influence, aie it· gul iteti by due necessity, uid not by ι hoici " " It с umot be — who so tie« — so independent as Sn George Hender. son * l'ai ty nevei held him in its tıammeİB' Ile was ever too piudent to pi ice lus ioi tune in jeopardy ' Whence then can tint necessity anse which ion suppose maj compii limito act tu¬ be does 5 " " I know not lo me his piesent con¬ duct is peileetlj inexplicable Through life his deportment towaids me has been but one uniaijihg course ot tendei induitdfŕhce, and on evety occasion he hbs evinced the most sinceie anxiety foi joui welfaie. What then can I —
ought I to think, but that that winch he does is foiced upon him by en cum¬ stanees too potent to bc ι esistei! " " Well ' It should seem I hai a neaily got to the close of my eventful meei. A few hours will unravel the mjsterj', and then, what then? I may — I must be plunged in deeper desp m than evei, if Sir Geoige has spoken truth. He has piomised that I shall think as he does, that 1 shall cease to desne youi hand. It cannot be By iniiuoi tal Love it is impossible' Unless he has that to disclose, which can stuke thehstenei dead with its all-siupassing honoib." " Calm your agitated spu its. Youi wildness alauns ine. Bear up with foi- titude." " fortitude ' О Amelia, whei e eau I hnd it ? A naked, helpless wanderei, а despised and peisecuted captive, ι beaten slave, I still had foititude to bear my haid lot with patience and to κύ
look upon the ν tijing (ilunities lint tsstiltd mc is tempoi ui tmls which In milt ss md (innige might beir mı tinnii Jl , hut now, lhcse til stiiiuotmUi! icstoittl w 111) η itivi lind, tlu pos isot ol miníense wc dlh, now to hnd ;i\stll inou w ι etc hul Ihm tt im formu Idioti til inj lilt, ıs this to be boi ne vv uh I n titude ŕ W ts it fm this th it mv lde w is p u l 3 Hul mv Iittiin spuit ılıt ulv ( ıı Ihı wip vv ıs e died bitk to inimile ıtst ııthlv Inbit ıtıoıı' Whv whv w ıs ' nn Inund n the wilds ol Atiie ι Whv 'id lint stunt monstei ol tin woul ukt t nie Ilımı wot, 1>> lppcisin hi hini-, ι \ ith this ılı votul loi ııı J ' Stilimi sion to tlie will of the Most Hiji ist u (ust tlutv Kcpioieh not 'It iv foi mu uis p ist, Incinse wt now ill«. ι unlu ι puní il visitinoli Bt moie vollisti! Chulé, md w ut thi issue of this dicukil tontti enet beloit vou ibtntloii jotiisell to despiu" " I 1 now not what to do oi think
All uound mt is ι Chios duk nul hoinble Ro 11111114 o'ei the boundless S ι litui, im ithiii ö tjt 111 vain sought in ih|iit to u post upun, ill wis ι „lotiinj , ippilhn n unni tu stin 0 void Vnd suth, \ liciti ci I nuj 10 ıııı will bt the wholl ol im Indue lib, it ς ιι Gtoı 0 ı Ins not dt ι (ived mc 11 U be Hue th it Ameln nui cm be inuit, \ h ıl ıs the woiltl, ulti ill tint its mid milliinkin., vot tues pii/ttoniť' lint wluth, untiti olhei πι turnst шее w ould h n e | loved li uitlul it tomint, in 1 pichli ml with lelieitj will but 11101 tuj nul wound the liuti listii tutte' who, luulit ispiiecl to (ht siiiiinut ol lunn 111 hij J1IIK-.S Innis hım ell on ι suilden, Is by ılıt shock ol ııı с uth quilt plungıd 111 the tlttjitst, duktal, ¿uljih of misei j "Olli piosptcts ut indtcd unix [itcttdlj clouded, iluliescivc iput, otti km scieitlj tiossetl Ни* shill we mei it nt« iffliction bj 1 uinu, m oui duty 111 sign iţion ıs now ltqtiutdof us, let ue
not be lound η înting ι ou must leaın to appicci itt the ν umus blessings still within joui itacli, ind I, denied otlici subjects ol exull ıtıoıı, will icjoice that vou ıııt dut ' Btlovcd Monili tss ' Ah, why may jou not be tvti with me to tranquillise tht stoi my pissions which agit ite mj woe «otn spint? Must I ltnounce jou foi evei ? O no — though Su George should never consent to oui union, is in the course ol natine his mot tal existence nny close befoie ouis, let me believe that then you may be mine, that if jou in iv not be the joy, the hie of iny j outh tint j ш will at length tonsole my declining jeais With Sn Geoige, (tlist mt be the pinoti of his dissolution whattvti of happınc s it may bung to me,) eveij obst ielt to oui mainage must cxpnt lit will nol inteiihct oui union tioin the gì ne l'i omise nie then, Amelia, that jou will still keep joui hand at your own disposal llut if you may not be
mme, jou will not be thc wile of ι nvil lhat piomise hive I given jou ilitiilj If ) on h u e lorgotten it Ih«\c not 1 hınk me weik, tiifhng md vain is jou may, I will not give jou eause to compi un of my mconstanej " llianks deuest, ι tlioimnd tlmil s I Ins sweetness soothes while it ig,rn ι ates thei icking puns tint hll my bosom I will not despau I will not think my eotiduct his so moved the wiath ol Heaven is to cut oft my eveiy hope ' I willietue, tint jou in ij compose vourself, and bepiepaied toi the solemn mteiview to which jou ue b dden He ti inquil, be composed be comforted ' As she utteied these wouls she h istily left the loom to conceal the flood of soirow winch she eould no longei lepiess Challes saw that she wanted the fiunnesb she strove to nispue, md while he deploied her affliction, ho exulted in the. midst of his own, ovei the waimth and punty of hci love
( I! U' MII H I L ιι ll Ilı Ι ι I Vili ι ι I II I 1|| Cum Al tin houi n lined by the IJ nonet, tli uhs 1 ului not toitpui to the place at which he w s to ıeceıve the olution ol lint mvstiiv, lij whuh his undei -t indin., hil bun ptiplexcd, ind lus bosom i,it lied limosi betond unlu ι nice is lie ippioiclud the stndj he per ctivcil 'su (uot c w utm^to receive lum lh nmunlullv paused betoie lit prt sditeti linn ill tu hiu tint whitli lit hul but too ninth icison to feai would tondini wh it most lit ılıt tiled He puised as if tı„tı to snitch а bue! respite with ıs wild a tremor, and with 6
uni lion ıs tuubit, ıs tvti w ıs punul li ι tiving liliput, vvlıtıı the iwful nuni ut luti Uliveti lot giving tin Ι ι inuseil si_,n tl to inlun lie his it ulintss t ι bt I unitile 1 nitu ett milj \ I with t tic [iu ttt ıesolutıon, sinu III о ili it which uuni ties the suíleiei lo tlu list tllort icqiineil ol hnn, Huley tl ltii B th ltlv intttl to the dooi Is hi isc с mleti the stt ps he leineiiibeied I lie cestisy with which he ll id mounted them on the mejil when he so unexpectedly inv uled fie pnv ley ol the li nonet ilici his ictuin from Iuth ι , mil the conti ist tin illtil hım lo thi soul Ihen, he wis pc οι , hut lelt nol the wint ol fortune Dihjilcd to ictuin to tht sunt ol his vouthlul spoils, incl to hnd lus old buie I ıc toi still his must inxious lucuti, le hud but to hope, mil vv ts hippj How il (leient his situ ıtıoıı now Ile h id be come г nini ol ioi tune, but lhe elicci lulness which hul susl lined hnn in po v ilj w ь fled nul the inimi ν Ιιο,ι eje
then bt ııııt 1 with ι iptuic to bthold linn now sec nc I to tonsitlu his piesence α seven dilution 1 utiiilslup vvlueh coin monlj, — I le tic Wo It 1 Iv Ц * VV I tr I о 1 — dt sérted hım in the diy of his wealth, uitl that too without Ins bung able to distovti that his ovi n misconduct had at ill contnbuted to efttct such а change Wh ıteveı tlse he might have to ìeproach himstlf with, he was sine that even in thought lit had ι smctioned aught that could iát >a expected to give oftenct to S r Hendel son Why then should the end oí his pai ents — the kind, const int benefactoi of his youth, why should he now itiuse to do that which he hid icason to believe would contribute to the happiness of his own child while it gave hei lovei, the object oí the Baronet s kind incessant care, the gieatest felicity to which man could ispne? ' Wlnttvei loimeily the dis
pıııtj between us in point ot I ulum ' he mentally ι xel umed while expecting the dooi to open, ' th it is suiely ι emoved now It einnot be th it Su Gtorge feais to be ι ept cached with inconsistency ind nitanncss 1!, having ι elusiti his d nigh lei btfoie, ht shoultl givt hu to me now tint he finds I am his equ il in weilth No, no, if he icttd as he did from ι sordid motive, the same feeling would now optiate m my lai oui, ind hit hım above the scoi η of tlie world, when so fair an opportunity offeied for gritifymg his cupidity It must be that I hai e been tiaduced to hnn ' The idea never stiuck me befoie Nothing else could luv«. deteunined linn to stt his face so dt tiiledly igunst me, foi to avance, I have subst mtial leasons foi behevmt, that he has eiei bttn а stiangei " While these thoughts passed tlnough ins mind with iiidestiibable ι ipidity, tlie tlooi slowly leccdtd, and Su Geoide took hım by the hand as he enteied, but did
not bestow cm hım «ι look Instead ol the w um tnıbı ice which he had fonneily received, he felt his hand gently piessed with a liembhn« louth, while the torni¬ ti nanu il tht ľiuonil vv is averteli as il to uinu il the uuntion which he w inted lumiiť-s to icpicss He at length turned to the joung w unitiéi, and the lutei atonte peicened tlul thc fathei oi Ameln hul been in teus. lhe idea that he h ul been ti ulnecd, again oc¬ un iul to hım , nud the au of his old fuend stii'gcstctl the idea that they had flowed loi his supposed déglaciation, and tintici fus impiession he broke silence. " I see, mj den «Sii George, that you tie afflicted, ind 1 ieai that I am tht tause ot join sonow." " Voti ue in some incisine, Chailes," ieplied the 1)nonet, "though peihaps 1 wrong jou in sajing so — I — " ' Believe me, Su, 1 tuist that you tlo Ihough not liée iiom cuoi, yet I am boltl to saj tlut 1 have ncvei done any-
llung tliat could etil down upon mt thc henj penaltj ol tout displeasine, il mv conduct had been 1 ml«, discutici! Some enemy must hive found his w ij to voui ι ti, to bhst mj hopes bj the ills ol talnimi} " " Dismiss the injiu ions thought No encim to Chults Huky I ts c\ci ip pioithtd mt, ind if suth lnd ipptutd, hehtve me at let t po scs 1 cd of siilheitnt \ n tnc to hut icpclltil the wielth with scoili lie issinoti tint it i nit ol an чкпи/ tint ioti lnve to compi uu " " It is nut ai in < m mi/'' echoed ( hules " Ü Su iheie ıs something leailtilly signitiemt in yom wouls md in unici Nol in intui} ' I-, il then ι /ncnil that his suggested to jou tint I ought net el to become the hush uitl of Vinchi ?" " It is " ' Πι it li itntl, thtn, 1 pi inoiinct to bt niy bittciesttneinj ! etlhe vnttch meet me f ice to face Let bun m uifully id-
duce every thing with winch «"ilice can charge me, and if l ful to bring lnm to slume, denounce me foi ciei " " His shame mil humiliation aie al readj complete—" sobbed Su George, and tens thoaked his uttei nice " Surelj suiclv, Su Geoige' if suth lit Hit chai icter of mt icctisti, jou vul! not behevt what you have heaul to my prejudice ' ' " You have no accusei, and I luvt heaid nothing to your pitjudice ' " How ' Did j ou not say ' — hut mj head tin ns ι ound, and I must doubt tlic evidence of all inj senses Yet, if I am awake, I heard jou even now declare, tint it was on the lepresentations of a friend, th it you h id felt it youi duty to oppose my union with join daughter I promised to bnng hnn to shame, and jou ieplied that Ьь shame wis aheady complete Was it not so?" " Not exactly , but I did say that the shame and humiliation of youi fnend was complete "
" Then, confient ше with hım. I.el the monstei meet me if he daie." " He does dare to meet you Kveu íou his agonised ga«;e is lull upon } on I am that monstei, I am the wietch whom j out indignation demands, tlie liiend who decides that you ought nevu to become the husbind of Amelia I tm lie whom jou pionounce to be joui bitterest enemy " Though steinly uttei td the «ouls that closed the last sentence, though the) earned despau mto tlie heait ot Hailey, though he could have heard himself doomed to death with less emo¬ tion, yet was there that in the mannei or iiu George winch indicated calamity ι athei tlnn hostility, and called foith gnef, astonishment, pit), inything but icsentment. Alteia pause, he exclaimed " О ' Sır George, you know it was far from my heait to call ¡ ou my enemy, lie my fate what it ma\, to the last gisp I shall chensh feelings ot giatitude to tlie
luciul ıııd piotector ot mj vouth lint whj íou so kind, so geneious on evtl v othei occisión, shoultl thus pusevel nigh lefuse me tint on which ill my intuí Inppincs must depend, when no visible obsticle txiststo oppost the concession ol tht boon vvlueh 1 solicit, vit which, v ist as it is I sweu I would not c cpt if I tlul not think tint in consumiu Un tţ nj feliciti , ion would pi oc uie ıı addı lion to joui own, ι I ctmltss, tint foi which I know not how to iccount 1 cannot ıecoııcıfı voui piesent actions with jour pist benevolence ' " Charles 1 Urales 1 1 с umot hlinu vou It ıs pciŕcctlv n itili íl that jou should think ıs jou do But mj own happiness ıs not ıııoıt deai to me thin ıouı s Not mou de u to mt did ¡ sav, ' By Ileal en, not ball so dt u Theie is but one thing that I would not do to lestore youi p n a(t, but Hut unhnppili is pretisely the one on which it stuns wholly to depend 1 о any thing else th u
would be for youi good, I would fieely consent, though tht pute of it weie mv own repose, my foi tune 01 mj life But t Ins I expect you will set dow n ıs a ung ol common pl ite expiessions which mui of the woild use whtn deteunined to re luse a lavour solicited which thej might it so disposed, confu with perfect ease " " I have been httle m the habit ol classing Su Geoige Hendtison with men if the woild, a» the unfeeling, the de signing, and the soldul are usuallj called His sensibility, his honour, and his libei ihty I know, and must ever revere But the fatal piejuibce which exists in his mind on the subject of the marriage which I have piesumed to propose, is what I cannot comprehend You, I am mire, would not sacuhce Amelia to avarice or ambition " " No, Charles Through life I have evei pitied those fathers who thus mis. take the path to comfort, and have con hdently hoped that my dying head would, VOL ш i.
at the termination of my caieer, rest on its pillow, at least undisturbed by the i e flection that the happiness of а child of inme had been so unworthily immolated " " If I had asked j our daughtei s hand without being satisfied that bei affections would not be outi aged by youi consent¬ ing to our union, it would have been 1 our dutj to refuse me, but on this point I think you can entertain no doubt " " I wish I could ' ' If then she will not object, if my foitune, is not infenor to your own, it my family be such that in your estim ation it could justify me, as in happier moments you told tre it would, in aspir ing to the first heiresses in the land, if with all these propitious circumstances in my favour, you can still refuse me, what cause can imagination suggest foi the refusal but one ? — that my eharaetei is such that juu daie not confide the happiness of vour daughter to my keep mg"
" No, no, Chailes," said the Baronet, artéctiotiatelj embi icing the young man, " it ts not tli it W etc thetx. anothei man like you, and like jou beloved bj tny Ameln, I would consent to their union though hei lovei wtre mj own plough in in " " What teinblc riddle is this' Am I cl earning 2 Do I mistake my own situ ation ' Are not the advantages which I luvt tnumeiated really mine 3 ' ' Ihey ire, unquestionably , if those may be called advantages which at pre sent seem but to lggravate the rigour of join destiny " ' " Say not so Saj not so, my kind benetactoi If I Inv t cned, tellmem what, and jou lull mould me as yotf jilease, till I become all ion would hive me, ill jou would wish v otn own son, to he ' f í hat j on re already , und xVlJuld to 15·» ivc ι that it were possible foi »jetudo 1 " f
othei than adhere to the ι esolution I have already so repeatedlv announced — " " Never to consent to my union with Amelia ?' ' Even so " While he spoke, Sir George seized the hand of Huley with a look of the most teniler affection His kindness was lost Though Charles did not swoon or sink in Ins chair, all sense and recollée tion seemed to hav e been uunini ited by the last words of the Baronet Several minutes elapsed before his soothing cares could again restoie him ------ Γ ¡teil n aston sl nent L ke onej st blasted by n stroke fro n Hcnvei Who punt« for brcati a «I st İl ns jet ul v the desponding lover for some instant» was spared the consciousness of pam By sloV degree» he recovered sufficiently to know his situation " Unkind Sn George ' burst from his iips before he could feel that his hand was bathed m the fast falling tears of his
fnend, who, if he did not relieve, seemed at least to shaie his disti ess " Chailes," said the Baionet, letting go his hand to wipe those drops of sor¬ row which continued to inundate his countenance, " my object in desiring you to meet me here, was, to take tins opportunity of explaining to jou that conduct which must appeal unkind, but which, I am sure you will be most ι eady to acknowledge, when you know the melancholy fa<4s that I have to com¬ municate, is diet ited by duty, by neces¬ sity, by hte. My language is still ínvo- luntan'y mysterious. The tale I hive to recount can alone unravel that which has perplexed you, not moie than it has distressed me. I owe it to you, and I was going to say, to my own chaiacter, to make the fullest disclosure of those circumstances which forbid me to sanc¬ tion your union with Amelia , but, alas, my character wl! be little benefited by the disclosure, as, preparing to vindicate í S
one put of it, I iiiust give up the ıtst In proving to you that I luivt tvei lovtd vou, I shall tiitalltblj demonstrate tint you have littlt itisou to ι espect me It wis mj hope, tint foi tlus puiposc few wouls would suffice, ml tint bţ ibis otn ıııteıvıevv would Inve been at tn end , but I tiemble to commence the ieti il, wluth mu t consi n ii me to join scoin, if not to joui hatictl Still I t innot bt u that on should thmk ot me as jou must, il without ixplumtion 1 sutlu jou to dtp n t lint whicli 1 had resolved nevu to distio t to anj human bung sh ill now ht m ult know n to you 1 il ing this couise vou will 1 1 disgusti 1 it tht vvtikness incl vice wluth loi m the jniiiiijiil ftatiues ul mj Ion, but even tin 1 em beu bettei thm the idea tut jou consulti Su Oeoigc Henduson to be jour Interest enemy " Ihe eneigy with which he spoke, tailed not to command thc attention of
Chults Palt mutt and breathless, ht could ittempt no reply, but, a slight inclination ol the head signified his readiness to lieu what the Baionet might think propei to disclose lhe hitter pisstd to the dooi of the stulj sitisfiel himself that no hstenei had t il tn his station on the outsidt, ind hiving caie fully guai ded against intiusion is fai as this could be effected by means oí loe I s and bolts, he ıctuıııed to his seat Vs he crossed the apartment, Chailes ob seived his step to falter, and his eyes which were sunken in then oıbıts, were closed for a few moments, evidently with the intention of unpusonuig cei tain bimy drops, which sti uggled hard foi emancipation All his efforts to resti un them proved ineffectual He puisued the fugitives with his banciku chief ind having disposed of them, commenced the nauatue which Hailey was at once anxious to be nude ae quainted with, and afiaid to heai , as, L 4
after what Sır Geoige had already stated, he had but too much reason to expect, that tlie giatificatioii of Ins curiosity would be purchased at the expence ofthe last vestige of hope
CHAP. IX Sent I cannot conceive you Glotter Sır, this young IU!ow smother could where upon she grew round wonibcd and ll id, indeed, Sir a son for her trudle, tre she ha I a husband Гог her bed Do you smell n fullt r' Ьнлк,геан1 I ou know so well," said the Baronet, " who my ancestors were, and the inherit¬ ance to which 1 was born, that I have no occasion to give what I have to say, ex¬ actly the form of a biographical sketch of myself. I am, however, obliged to go pietty far back m my life to get to that which imposes on me the painful task I have now to pei form If I take up my history from the period of my loimng of age, it will bc sufficient to make you undeistand the situation in which I was placed. On that which followed, you must form your own judg- L 5
nient nom the cncumstinces, such .ıs they will appeal, fi oin whit I havt tu sij, boi ne out ıs tint nnj he by fiets, with which jou aie die uly icquainted " My lathei died when I was little moie thm loin-and twenty v eai s of age Iwo yens afttrwaids I became alius band. The connection between Ladj llentleison's family ancl your own, nuke it wholly unnecessaiy foi me to t fttr anj thing on that subject foi join ui formatton. It is enough to s«iy, that, though she was not without foi tune, i шип ied hei because I loved hei, Jiul happy in the possession oi wealth and beauty, many jeais of woildly felicity seemed to be betoie me. 1 had nothing to ask of Heaven, 01, if I had yet one gratification to covet, it wae that of see¬ ing an infant îepiesentative, «ind even tins was not withheld beyond the close of the fiist year aftei our union. " On the occasion of Lady Hendei- son'a accouchement, a female cousin, at
her request, came to pass α lew wicks at Woobiun. She was then in bei ugh« teenth j tar, and a face moie strongly indicative of that swtetntss of disposi¬ tion, by whith she was distinguished, nevei fell untici my obsei vation. Her light flaxen ban, as it adonidi hei ex¬ quisitely fan countenance, and hei soul- captıvatıng blue eyt«, even .it this dis¬ tant penod, aie not to be lemembued without emotion. A moie peiíect pit- Hue of innocence, never excited the guilty desires of man , but of this I have said enough. " Lady Henderson, while confined to her chambei, was anxious that her young fnend should sometimes enjoy the amusement of a short exclusion, as she feaied constant attendance on hei, might prove injuiious to one so delicate In consequence of this, bei ι elation w as frequently the companion of my moin¬ iug rides aud evening walks. Polite at¬ tention was all she expeiienced from me L 0
at first, but, by degiees we became more familiar, and I frequently pressed her hand, and sometimes even ventured to salute her On her side, unsuspecting virtue distinguished hei every action, and if she endured such fi ecdoms as I have spoken of, she nevei invited, or in any way sanctioned them. Hei charms made every day a greatei impression on me, and hei unresisting simplicity, en couragecl me to make advances, which I bad never thought of venturing upon at the commencement of our acquaintance In a word, she inspired me with a most violent passion. Iiendeavoured to ι eason myself out of it, but to no puipose If for a few moments I persuaded myself that I had subdued it, I was too soon convinced that I had deceived myself, and sought a new opportunity of seemg the fan object of my desires with more avidity than ever. " Full often did I reason with myself on the folly of my conduct. I con¬ sidered that to pursue her, independent
of the miserable discoid wluth it might be the means of mtioducing into my own house, would in its consequences be fatal to the happiness of the charming source of my uneasiness Besides, I en¬ deavoured to bear in mind, how insigni¬ ficant ind transient all illicit pleasures must uniformly piove, as well as the extended tiam of sonows and disgrace which usually follow The idea was dreadful I determined to break from the snaie, which accident had woven about my feet, for, indeed, I felt that, if I did not do so, I should become in the estimation of ill good men a iponster of iniquity My ıesolutıon was there. fore formed to wean mj thoughts fiom my beautiful cousin , and having adopted this resolution, I again saw hei, forgot all that prudence, conscience, and ho- nour had suggested, and puisued her with а frenzy of desne, that I know not how to describe, but whicli I have long »inte learnt to deplore
" Day after d ty did I continue to att this part I had not ittempted anv thing cununai, bat too well did I feel that what I did, had a duect tendency to euimnahty not to letne overwhelmed with shame amiseli lepioach Iheieal th u icter of mi ictions, I disguised not from my own he u t foi an instant, and I dtspistd myself foi that depravity which I knew not how to subtitle ' 1 ven yet," 1 thought * it is not too late I may now stopni my cueei, and u oid sicuficing the hippmess of the thoughtless bcuitj who, ieposin¿ in mj honoui tbeims not of dingei " Alis tiust liflittioiis vinishtd hie tht dew of tht liionuiig befoie the ascending sun, when the burliness of her charms came in my piesence Lven m the midst of my most senous thoughts, if she appeal ed, I proceeded, as I w ıs wont to do, dinost without being sensi ble that my conduct was directly at
variance with that, which on reflection I had mentally vowed to adopt ' One fine evening, in thc lo us f noi ite month ot Mai, vve took ıı walk ovtr my grounds and some of the ııeıghb ıııı ing estates lbe countiy all aiound was lud Out by its íèveial pıoprıttoıs, is it it hid been then objett tofuinish tht most enchanting 1 indsc ipe, th it the ey e ot nituie's admuei could desire tısın vey The vauetits ot soil uid culti vation, cotupie'iendtd iu the view, is seen illuminated by thc ρ ırtın e be uns of the declining sun, formed ι whole ol perfect haunony and beauty Oin iv ilk was m consequence unusiully piolon e ctl uid it was not till the last ny ol light was withdrawn, tint it occuned to us to leturn I had, indeed, designedly extended oui exclusion , ioi howevei delightful the scene, a still morf exqiu site chaim, than iny this could piesent, made me think the distince short, and when at 'ength we piepaied to ι etrace
our steps, I thought with pain on the few minutes which remained, in which I could enjoy, without ıeservc, the con- v ersation of my lovely companion. What the efttct of this feeling was, I will not minutely describe. Suffice it to say, that congenial gloom made passion bold, and mexpcnenced virtue vainly stiove to repel its audacious aspirings " The crime of which I made her the victim, I have ever considered to be wholly mine, and the base advantage 1 took of a tender, kind, unsuspecting icmale, who fell through her confidence in my honour, has been the source of unspeakable regret, and will, I doubt not, haunt me till the last hour of my life Reflection came to both too late, and О ' how happy had we been could fate have Kolied baclt tho flood of tune, to afford us the opportunity of becom-
mg again what we bad been Oui îe- moise was mutimi and sinceie, and the onlj solate wt scemici to know was de¬ nied from those sul moments, in which, without lcstraint, we could lament the fatal tiansgicssion into which we had been beti aj id by ungovei nable passion. "To conceal f ioni Ladj Henderson what had passed was no difficult task, as those vvho are above suspicion them¬ selves, are seldom loivv.ud to suspect others. Her peace vv is not distuibed by the slightest doubt of the propnety of my conduct The melancholy of hei cousin did not lad to attiact her atten¬ tion, but this with my unusual gravity, was only made the subject ot good hu¬ moui ed muth, and the cause was nei¬ ther sought tor, nor discovered without seeking " But the deluded beauty, whose every hope of happiness, Iliad destroyed, soon discoveied that she was in suth а state,
that hei tle /,ι illation must he specchii piotlaimed to tht vvoild " W eie it possible to convey to you the honoi which invadid my bosom when this news was fiist communicated to me, I should shiitldti to m tkt the atttmpt I felt my blood start upwaid» in my fate, as though it would have foiced ι passage through my eyes, lhc reflection that а wietehed being would owe Ins existence to me, whom I could not adopt without disgiaee, that л lovely woman, virtuous but foi me, must soon be pointed at by the finger of scoin, the subject of malicious comment and unftehng udi¬ cule, disti acted me. But the despau of my beloved victim, suggested that that which I dieaded was peihaps not the woist that might happen. I already beheld her in linty madly lushing to death, and ftlt my soul charged with the double guilt of the suicide and mm - dei. To soothe hei anguish, I exerted mj self as much as my own agony would
pennit. I endeavouied to pei suade liti, that some scheme of concealment might be devised and successful«} acted iijion , and at lengih, succeeded in extolling liom hei a solinin pıoınısc, that sin would in no w ij hj violent hinds upon heisell " Il was night w hen the moni ntiiluitei- vitvv took place to which I lnve just ad \ ei ted 1 hough we had staj etl out long, no gieat suipnse h.ul been t\tited, as it w.ts supposed that we hid cilled in at Sir Chailes Rawlinson's, and been pie¬ vailed upon to remain v httle longei than usual It was, peihaps, foitu- nate, that we retuined is we did, as tvisitoi had diopped in dunng oui ab- seuce and was just about pıoceedıng thithei, (for he was too impatient to wait while α seivant could be dispatched), to asceıtaın our safttj. Tht ptison who had thus unexpectedly an η oil, had been a suıtoı to the lady of whom I have ¡iad ocuision to saj' so much A year
before, he had in vain sought to obtain the consent of het lektions to their mar nage , but now, from some impiovement in his prospects, he had thtir lull appro bation, and happy tn being pu mitted to pay his addresses to the worn in he loved, and to whom he believed that he was not disagreeable, he had lost no time in seek¬ ing 1 -r present abode, to make known those tidings, which, he flatteied him¬ self, would afloid his mistiess unmixed delight. " On our entei ing the house, he accoi d- mgiy presented himself, and my fair com¬ panion no sooner recognised lnm than she fainted, lhis mark of tenderness for him, (such he conceived it to be,)hlled him with unspeakable pleasure. Propei assistance being promptly called, she was soon restored, but not before some in¬ coherent expressions had escaped her- which, though not undei stood by others, were sufficiently intelligible to me, but which I had veiy substantial ι casons tor not attempting to explain.
" The news which the visitoi had brought, she leceived with compla¬ cency, and the geneial dilhdence of her eharaetei sufficiently accounted to hnn ior her not expressing any very lively satis¬ faction. She could take no lcfieshment, and she letnctl at an eaily houi These en cumstanees, though the tuie explana¬ tion of them could only be supplied by the latly and myself, combined with her 1 linting at the sight of the new comer, weie all very silisiactoiily accounted for by bun, and he triumphantly remarked towaids the close ot the evening, that though his mistress had been sparing of her words, her manner sufficiently proved that his piesence had waked an emotion ol joy in her bosom, which she found it no easy task to conceal."
Неге util I we.! if grncioiis Heruen so ptciî To pu^s mv ugt. in 4*iiictit\ and enst , An 1 t) шк tl [xiwVr, I umy ¡lossit,* aku <- J he loi el\ prı/ı , -ind shan, the Ыь= with noi If von, шу friend , thia virgin t in procure Mvj « ilt'nll ,,.]ll| pu« «h «un·
"A variety ol thoughts pi essed upon my mind while I ga/ed on the elated coun¬ tenance of the young man , antl it ocun- red to mc, tlut the wrong I had done mj fan friend, to whom he was about to pay his addı esses, though it could not be re paired, might, by possibihtv through his means, be concealed forever Γ slifled is well as I could, the reproaches which tonscicnci did not ful lo bestow, .ıs well ι ıtlu ρα.Ι Ι hul alie ulv acted, .ıs on l'ut which Ini·, ibout to .itt Evei v thing tha«. could be tlone to assuie the
visitor tliat lie was welcome, w as resorted to by me, and 1 failed not to mingle with my hospitihly such piais-s of the beautj nul modesty of his mistiess, as I thought he would like to be ir I con¬ gratulated him on Ins piospect of liappi ness, and tletlaittl, tint if it hy in my powei in any way to further his stut, he might command me, my bouse and in short, any thing that my means tould enable me to supply " 1 hatl known this gentleman some yeais btfoie, but we had neiei been verv intimate, and he now kebngly lamented that lit had not bttn moie anxious to cultivate the futndship of a man of mj ingenuous md liberii disposition I reniembu feeling α little uncomfortable under these culogii to which, I knew, tbat I h id no claim , but was itjoited to find tlie part Ina u t ng, had completely answ tred my purpose tnd won hisfutnd ship md his confidcnct 1 he beauty of his intended bude I found he was de
lighted to beai celebi ated, and întins I was well disposed to gıatıfy lnm Befoie we retired to rest, he expressed himself most anxious to abudge the penod of " single blessedness," and I promised to intercede for lnm with the fm object of his choice, and to do dl m my powei to vanquish those sci uples, which her modesty might urge m opposition to an eaily day being named for the consummation of his fell city On this we parted , but not till he had assured me that the wai m interest I took m his happiness, would be remem bered with eteinal gratitude "Noslumbei sealed my ejes that night The agitation created in my bosom by the mournful intelligence I had hist re· ceived, the hope excited bj tht incident which had since occui red, ind above all, the shame, disgust, and rémoise, with which I contempi ited the despicable hypoensj to which I bad already de scended, and the duplicity, with which I must of necessity continue to act, allowed ine no repose
" I left my bed early, and hastened to walk m that part ofthe garden which lay nearest the apartment in which tbe in¬ tended wife of my new inmate slept, if indeed sleep, which fled f rom her seducei, had been meiciful enough to visit her A few moments sufficed to convince me that she was waking, as restless, and, if possible, more wretched than myself I saw her wildly pacing her room, and (unconscious that any eye observed her) wringing her hands in agony, which no description of mine can faithfully paint. Anxious to attract her attention, I endea¬ voured to make my voice reach her, by speaking to- the dog, takmg care, how¬ evei, to make so httle noise, that I thought rt next to impossible for any one to hear ine but the mom ner, whose dishevelled hair and pallid cheek reproached me for the ruin I had made Absorbed ra the most excruciating sorrow, she heard me not; and I found it necessary to make a bolder effort to gam hei ear, when to ray con- VOL, III nt
fusion, I was answeied not by liei, but by her admuei, who at tht s mic moment I beheld hastening to the spot where I stood, foi the purpose of viewing with a lovei's fondness, the place which he believed to contain lus mistiess sleep¬ ing m all the tranquillity of unsullied in¬ nocence, or waking only to chensh gay visions, of futuie days of happiness ind love " I attempted to smile, and to give the f ι antic eagerness with which 1 lushed foiwaid to meet m οι dei lo iesti un hım, the an of an agite ıble sıııpıısı, and impatience to take hım hy tlıt huid. liut the pang which Ins piestuee hid caused, seemed to destioy me, and so completely robbed me of self possession, that a man at all pione to suspicion would hav e sui mised that something was wiong. He foi tunately was no physiog nomist, and whatevei alteiation he might obseive in my countenance, ncvei con¬ sidered it of sufficient ¡mpoi tance to be
«inti «isted with tny woids, which falsely assuied lum that I w,is lejoiced to find hun stilling so eirly. " He lequested me to point out to hnn the apartment in which " the chaste keeper of Ins heart," 1 use his words, leposed. 1 could not affect ignoiance on thc subject, as he knew that she had been moie than six weeks α mcmbei of myfainilj, yet to satisfy him was tlut which 1 daied not to venturo upon, as I shuddci ed lest he should be, as 1 had been, the spectator of bei iniseij, and thence be led to foi in something like a coirect idea of its cause. " To gam time, and in the hope of alaiming the hidyand giving her a hint of the situation m which she stood, I affect¬ ed a loud laugh at heanng this lequest. I then desired hnn to guess from the comparative brightness of each window, which was that of the temple of his goddess. The loud tone in which I m 2
maintained iny share of the conversation answered the puipose for which it was adopted, and the drawing of the cui tam of her apartment, assured me that she was safe from observation, before 1 directed his attention to hei chamber ' The conversation which had closed the pieceding night, was again lesumed, and he spoke with increased eneigy of his impatience to have an early da\ named foi making him the husband ol Ins adored Iredenca "irom what I have said, you maj guess how I deported myself Concurring with him m the piopnety oi securing without loss of time, the tieasure to the possession of which he aspired, I pio mued to use my influence, such as it was, to accelerate the period at whicli he should lead his mistie s to the altar His suit I reminded him I could most effectually plead ш his absence, and I therefoie advised him to take some oy
portumty of leaving us alone, that friendship, thus did I profane thc name, might without restraint, advo- t ite the cause of love. " Led by me in eveiy thing, he believed my advice to be diet ited by the purest motives, and engaged to make it the rule of his conduct That same morn¬ ing he acted upon it, and I found myself alone with the fair one whom I had be.· tiayed Her dejection, her paleness, her fading charms overwhelmed me with reproaches which her tongue could never utter We were alone on a large, unfrequented plain, her lover having left us to return to my house as he said tor a letter which he had that morning received, but had forgot to read before he came out, though he had reason to believe that it required an immediate answer "I endeavoured to comfort her by con- giatulating her on the happy incident « hich had just occuned m 3
" Nothing on earth," said I, " eoultl be so fortunate Youi union with this gentleman will at once protect youi le- putation, and dissipate all those «ıppı с hensıons which you .ue too prone to entert un." " Indeed'" " Indeed' — Aye — Why do you re tarn that teaiful eye, and appen meie dulous ?" " Can you ask that question 3 " " Suiely I can. What could have happened better. Thc erroi which vve have both sufficiently mom ned, vvlueh, if repent.incc could atone foi it, uas been already expiated, may now be concealed for ever. He loves you to distiaction, and is mad with impatience, for the day to be named which shall entitle hıra to the felicity and the honom, of being called your husband. " The honoui '" she exclaimed, and hei face was m an instant overflowed with sorrow's in estrainable torrent "Do
not mock me If you have triumphed ovei my virtue, leave me to the derision of the woild, but do not you set the unfeeling many an example which they but too well know how to follow." " Rathei would I pensh than inflict, or suffei to be inflicted, one pang which any means that 1 can command might spaie you. To possess so much beauty, gentleness, aye, and I will still say it, vii tue, must be regarded as an honour. All that has passed between us will be buried in etei nal oblivion, and you shall be happy." " О never ' while sense and memory ι emani ' Why talk of happiness ? Where must I seek it ?" " In tlie arms of an honourable lovei, whom your smile can make the most enviable man upon earth." " What' shall I cany pollution to that honourable lover, and requite his generous passion with the basest and m i
most disgraceful fraud ? Can I do this and be happy? and do you thmk so meanly ot me as to believe it possible ' Wheie ' wheie ' will my degradation end ?" " You think too much of that devi¬ ation from prudence into whicli I (would to Heaven it could be recalled) have betrayed you. Things of this kind happen every day, and the parties, even though suspected, or more than sus¬ pected, hold up their heads as high as ever, and are received in thc best society. You will do your husband but an lmaginaiy wrong, and giving him your hand bestow on him a substantial blessing " " But, Sir George, you forget that m a few months a living evidence of iny baseness, a permanent record of my shame, must start into being, and all concealment will be impossible. О no ' I must not think of marriage. Let me and the wretched offspring of my crime
pensh, but let not the curses ot л wronged liusband be breathed over my grave." " Here despair seemed to take full pos session of her soul, and many inmutes elapsed before she could attempt to listen to what I endeavouied to press on her attention. Hei heart, the seat of gen¬ tleness and truth, shrunk within her, at the idea of acting a deceitful part, ancl of giving her hand to one man, while, conscious that her affections had been bestowed on anothei But 1 íepeat- edly piessed the union on her, as that which afforded the suiest means of saving her honour, in the estimation of the world. Aftei a long struggle, my argu¬ ments prevailed over her integrity, and I was permitted to communicate my suc¬ cess to her lover. His heart bounded with the truest rapture, at receiving thc welcome news, and he pronounced me to be the dearest friend that he had evei had on earth, while he vowed that his grati- M 5
tude should be as permanent as it was «meere I professed to have nothing but the«r mutual happiness in view, and at the end of a week I acted as fathei to nei, who knew me to be tlie father of her child, and gave her ti einbbng hand to the joyous giasp of a fond husband Involuntary teais burst from me during the performance of the solemn ceremony These flowed from anguish and remorse, and shame, for the despicable part that I found myself ι educed to act. They passed for the pure evidences of the sen sibihty of an exalted mmd, and tht faltenng voice with which I invoked that Heaven, my conduct had offended, al¬ most beyond forgiveness, to bless tht newly married pan, was supposed by all, but myself and one beside, to attest tht piety of the speaker, and to prov t his disinterested anxiety foi the happi¬ ness of others " Tlie happy pair," as each newly-married couple must ex pect to be called, soon took their dep.'r-
tuie from tins house, and two months lud not elapsed, befoie a letter liom the husband informed me, that his consort was in a state that promised fair to make his joy complete fortune proved unkind to lum A law suit, which be h id every prospect of gaining, terminated m fi vour of his adveisaiy, and he found himself undei the necessity of accepting an appointment in India Tluee months after then marnage, they sailed foi Bombay, wheie they had scarcely landed, when а ьоп was boi n, to the great satis fiction of his supposed fithei, who was easily persuaded, that the vicissitudes and tnals his fan partmi had experi enced, both on sea and on land, might ν uy wtll have accounted foi a still more tarly birth You, Chailes, weie tint infant You now know why I could not consent to your marnage with my diugh tei òhe, whom you would marry, is your sister You are my son, the off spring of my eliminai lust O' do not m 6
cùrse me, for imposing on you tbe heavy penalty of existence." The anguish, and the tenderness, which maiked tlie delivery of the last expres¬ sions of Sir George, abstracted Harley, for a moment, from his own affliction. He took the hand of his benefactor, anil knelt before him. "O' my father," he exclaimed, ·' think me not so depraved in calamity, as to curse, or to reproach you. Though your words consign me to despair, I will sooner die, than lift my voice against a parent. Let those who have never sinned, condemn you, but it is not for a son, himself too often the slave of passion, to sit in judgment on your errors. If your transgressions against morality have been great, your punishment has not been bght." " But you may, perhaps, doubt tlie truth of the statement I have made. I hold it to be mercy to annihilate your every hope ; and, at once, to afford you demon-
stratum, that that which I have now con¬ fided to you, is no fiction invented to cover my refusal." " Believe me, I have no suspicion " " But, satisfy yourself 1 lequest that you will do so. Look at these let¬ ters, they are in your mother's hand- wiiting. They give the history of youi birth, and of the successful imposture practised on your reputed fathei." Hailey looked at the papers He lecogmsed the well-known characters which distinguished the wnting of his mothei , and if a doubt had pieviously lingered in his mmd, it was impossible tor it to sui vive that moment. " The confirmation is but too com¬ plete," he remarked, as he returned the letters. " That conduct, which to you must have appeared inexplicable," resumed the Baronet, " you will now understand. I consideied it my duty, to look as anxi¬ ously to the welfare of my son, born in
India, as to that of any of my othei children. The hand of Providence de¬ pnved me of tbe male children, born to me by Lady Henderson, and you re¬ mained my only boy. Hence, my anxiety to have you sent to be educated, undti my own eye, in England. Be my othei faults what they may, I was not so heart less α wietch, as to think the bemg that I had been the means of bunging into the world, was not entitled to my pro¬ tection, because human laws could not compel me to provide foi him. I would not punish my offspring by my mean¬ ness, because I had been cununai , and such pooi ïeparalion as I could offei, by taking caie of him for life, I deteimmed to make. Hence, my anxiety to afford you pecuniary aids, from time to tune. Knowing you to be the bıotheı of my daughters, blind, thoughtless fool that I was ' it never occurred to ine, that you would be likely to thmk of making eithei your wife, or that one of them
would be likely, foi a moment, to look on you as bei futuie husband. Yom mother's seciet, foi obvious reasons, I had deteimmed never to disclose to any human being, and, till now, it has nevei passed my lips. It has at last, been extorted from me You will keep it in¬ violate , and how evei you may detest the vices, pity the soirows of joui wietehed, heart bioken fathei, vvho now, in his declining daj s, has the miseiy of seeing the happiness of two of his ehil¬ di eu at once sacuficed, and sacrificed hy his guilty passions You aie joung , let my fate be a w auung to you. Behold, Ш what I have disclosed, the long tiam of sms and of soirows, that follow one deviation from the ught path. Having become а seducei, the ehaiaetei of α liai .md a hypocrite soon belonged to me I he man I pretended to sei ve as a f ι ierni, I only used as a cloak to covei my on η miquitj'. To hide my shame from you, I acted with а degiee of harshness, once
foreign to my nature ; and youi peace of mind, and that of my pooi Amelia, I have destroyed, I fear, for ever." " Spare yourself these ìeproaches, my dear, unhappy father We ate all pil¬ grims to the shrine of ineicy, and he who m the midst of his errors, has still found the sweetest solace m administering to the comfort of his fellow-creatures as you have done, shall not seek it in vain. Vice, I know, never fails to generate vice, and to giaft on each succeeding crime some new shoot of depiavity, as our enoi mous banyans, in the east, drop new roots from then spreading branches, fiom which stiong columns ascend to sustain the un¬ wieldy limbs, and these, still extending their stretch, continue to drop fiesh roots, and gam additional supporters ad infinitum " " It is too true, and I am glad that you are awake to the melancholy truth. He who would really enjoy life, must not covet riotous pleasures, but rest sa-
tisfied vvıtlı the temperate feast which nature spreads for his giatification, whicli reason approves, and religion hanctifies."
CHAP XI I know not what I ask, nor what I seek I fed but w lint thou art, and what I am, And I would hear, vet once »clore I pensli, The «oice which was my ншыс ------Speak to n ' Lord Bviios Ihough Challes felt the justice of what had last fallen fiom Sn George, it was not in that houi of affliction, when life, beieft of all its charms, appeared to lnm to possess no temptation, that lit could hope to profit by insti uctions for the futuie ıegulatıon of his conduct Го devote his remaining days to soli tude and soirow, unless his profession should happily furnish an oppoituintj foi teimmating the period of suffenng in a blaze of glory, was his determination, and he did not believe it possible that any thing on earth could seduce him
again to engage in the pursuit of plea¬ suie. Anxious to leave a mansion, in which the spectie of murdered joy could not but incessantly stalk befoie hnn, he pioposed to quit it, foi the last time, on the following moining Though undei othei cucumstances, Sir Geoige would have coveted his stay, and en¬ deavouied, even by foi ce, to detain him, the Baronet knew too well the feelings by which he was actuated to oppose his depaituie. Challes solicited α parting mteiview with Amelia, the parent con¬ sented, and Hariey assuied him, that he should only avail himself of it, to strive to mitigate the severity of that fate, which at present ovei whelmed his fuend and fathei with insuppol table affliction. He retired to bed, but not to sleep He had nevei moie earnestly desued to be visited by ıefıeshıng iest, as he hoped it would give hnn stmngth and firmness to go through thc tiying scene
in which he had to sustain a part in the morning, but he appealed to the " poppy crowned god" in vain He closed his eyes, but he could not divest himself of that troublesome conscious ness which he wished to lay down He had lead, that to introduce the mind to tranquil images of nature, such as gentle breezes, and softly gliding stieams, were favourable to sleep, and these he m vited to lull his senses in forgetfulness , but they had not received the same flat¬ tering attention, while he was affluent of comfort, and they disdained now to obey the summons Occasionally the exhausted mind seemed sinking into the wished for calm, when the exulting be¬ lief, that he was about to sleep, insinu¬ iteli itself, and the satisfaction at having so nearly accomplished his object, soon taught him that imagination was still ìestless, and he found himself as wake¬ ful as ever And now his feverish thoughts ran
wildly over the recollections of the daj which had closed, and bounded forward to the duty which he had to pel form, in that which was about to open. While the faintest spark of hope remained, he had anxiously desued to chensh it, tiusting that some propitious change might one day wake it to a blaze ot joy He had therefore heard with delight the resolution of Amelia, never to plight hei faith with another. But ought he, now that God and Nature forbad then mainage, ought he to wish (or indeed to pet mit, if he could prevent it) that she should adhere to the vow she had made? Ought such loveliness to withei in solitude? If he might not pos sess the prize, ought he to desire that she should bless no fellow creature with hei charms ? No, the wish would degrade It was his duty as a brother to conjure hei to forget hun, to bestow her affections on some more fortunate mortal, and blessing and blessed, to spaie her fathei
the miseiy of seeing her lost to all the w orld. Tins lie tliouglit was his duly, but how to pci f 01 in it' What cause must he as¬ sign toi the sudden ι lunge which she could not but icni uk iu his feelings and views? Was it foi hun to proclaim his titbei's weakness and add to the Baro¬ net's piesent sonow, the pain of knowing himself lovveied m Amelia's estimation ? Was it for bun to nuke known the shame of Ins own mothei, and violate tlie confi¬ dence leposed in h ι in by Sn Geoige ? No, this he must not do. To Amelia thtn he must give his advice, while he care¬ fully concealed thc motives on which it was founded. The houi of bicikfast ai lived, the tiible was spiead, and tluee peisons sal down to it аз if to take food and refiosh- inent weie then object. But when the sei vants weie duceteci to cleai away, that would luve been an extiaoidinaiy effort of perception winch discovered that
tny thing had betn eaten, ľhe pi of ound gnef oí Sn Geoige and Chulés leheved them from the want of sustenance , ancl thc iwful suspense in which Amelia lan¬ guished, from obseiving the iffliction whicli in the face oí Challes had eluseti the boundless laptuit by which it had once, aud iccently, bttn illuminated, was suliimul lo prevent hei from being an exception at the fasl, which thej nomi¬ nally met to bieak, but tacitly agieed to prolong Few woids escaped from any of tbe paity, Ihough at inttivals, all Ielt thc silenti into which they had sunk, was equilly awkwaul and txti mulinai y, and attempted to mici ι upt it by α fevv com¬ mon place ltmaiks, yet each was too much absoibed in thought, to continue the effort at speech, oi to atland to the buef and unimportant ıeply, which а pievious question 01 observation had tailed forth. Su Geoige left the room, and Harley,
alone with Amelia, felt the time Wae come when despair must make its last sacrifice to duty, and the lover was called upon to give that advice to an adored mistress, fbr offering which on the pre¬ ceding morning, his indignation would have been tempted to strike another to the earth. He wished the scene to terminate with the least possible delay ; but fbr some minutes he wanted resolution to uttei one word to begin it. At length he rose, and spoke in a broken, faultering voice, With as much composure as he knew how to assume. " Dearest Amelia, the die is cast. Your father has confided to me the secret leasons which forbid him to sanction oui union. 1 feel their force. I acknow¬ ledge the propriety of his conduct. I submit to the fatal decision, and all my fetidly-cherished hopes of' felicity are no more." He paused. Amelia was motionless
and silent, her eyes were fixed, but their waters were not, and her cheek, in which a ghastly, death like paleness had taken place of the blooming health which loimerly flourished there, was suffused with them while he spoke She was not so far mistiess of her thoughts as to be able to airest them in their course, much less to repress them altogether Harley proceeded " What no varieties of situation, no change of scene no lapse of years could effect, the words of Sir George have accomplished in one short hour I may no longer hve foi you — I cease to wish vou mine " A deep sigh burst fiom Amelia at this sentence, but when he added — ' I mourn, and bitter is my grief that it was ever my fortune to behold you " Her emotion knew no bounds, and raising hei still streaming eyes to heaven «he exclaimed with terrific energy — vol m ¡s
"Good God' anıl —am I such a wietch?" " What mean thee words, Amelia ' Can τ, on so misundeistand mc an to sup¬ pose, that what I have uttered could be intended to convey rcpioacli ? О ever loveh, and still loudly, devotedly belox ed, wiong not lum on whom you once be¬ stowed join affections, hy so injiu юиъ a thought When I moiun that evei it was mine to see \ou, m\ lamentation spi ings but fiom the hopelessness of my pission, whuh jelentless destiny loi huis me to chensh longei, but whieh, supeiioi to eveiy othei consideration, will still con- bume my heait, till that welcome houi arnves which shall beai tlie sıılîeıeı fjom the tioubles of time, to the peaceful haven ot eternity. I come now to say" — ' bpare' spare the rest. Quel Kite pui sues us. I know all I desue to know You come to tell me th.it wc must part — tor ever."
" In this world, Ameba, you can nevei be nune. No human powci сап «ilter the doom — I bow to the decree. I now sec jou foi the last time." "O Chailesi" ·' I'oi the peace of both it must be so, foi the comfort of our — of the aflhctid Sii Geoige, it must he so. This sad nitei- v ievv is oui last." " Otu last 1 " icpeated Amelia, haidly conscious that any sound escaped her. "O' is theie no hope J " " None. While hope could be che¬ nshed, who so icacly to entertain it as I? I despaiied not of climbing the sleep of l'aine, of gaming the proudest elevations of 1 ank and fortune. These weie not to be expected by an humble 1ncl1v1tl11.il, but these weie possible and feeling that — that theie was а hope of gaining you, 1 scoi ned to yield to despondency. Now all is ovei. Thc cucumstances which command my approbation of, and ready, (would I could say cheeiful) submission
to your father's decision, must not be explained Let it suffice then to know, that thcy aie such as cannot be set aside, md Heaven foi bids oui union These woids fall sadly from my bleeding bosom Ihey aie extorted from me by ásense ol duty My prospects ai e for ever blasted " " And what are mine?" " I would imploro from the most High л happiei fate for you I seek you now to release you from those promises ol love and constancy, which yesterday foi worlds I would not have he ird you ìecall ' " I do not comprehend you " " I would have you forget — for youi own sake — foi your f ither's — nay, foi mine, that evei so unfoi tunate a being at Charles Hailey crossed your path, oi pi offered his unhappy love " "How' loigetyou " she exclaimed gasping for breath, and looking wildly iound, «as doubting the evidence of he startled senses.
"Torget me, ind bless some hippiéi being with yom love, that Heiven may not have bestowed so vast a tieasuie on the earth m vun Cheer with youi smile, one of those vvho knelt befoie you while you supposed that I was no more Become a h ippy w ife—a smiling mothei I daie not trust mjstlf to see youi hap pines.,, but to heai of it will be the only tidings that I sh ill thank the vvoild for forwarding to that solitude, which will soon surround the lost Hailey " " Am I awake ' Do I live to he u myself ulvised to give my lov e to ano thci, and by you? What must you thmk of me, if you can offer such coun sel' What must be the charictei of your own mind, if you suppose inme cm listen to it Chilles, Chirles, ıs this the language of faithful love ' ' "It is, and hither have I boi ne mv aching heart, to consummate tht last sacrifice, tint sinceie affection can offei at the shune of the object it adores, but n 3
never may possess. Yet no, believe mt not. It is not affection. Regard me as a cheat. Believe me fickle, false, and base. Hate me, Amelia. Think of me as you will, but be happy, and let the view of jour felicity cheer the evening of youi kind fathei's life " " I understand j ou not I have been long familni with sonow, but I did not think that I could have sustained а pang so dreadful, as that which this houi has biought." " О may it be the last you are destined to know, fiom the unhappy Charles, and ------" " Nay, hear me. As yet ι eason Ins not wholly desei ted ine, though I feel that she totteis on her throne , and m ulncss, like a hovering vultuie, lingers neaı, impatient for hei piey I have listened to you, ind thiough the feaiful mysteiy ol youi mannei, I collect but this distinctly, that you no longer wish foi mj love, and would have me bestow the despised
bauble on another, "i our motives I can- not peneti ate. I know not what can have suggested language so tembly at vanance, with alíthat I had tvei heaid from youi lips btfoie, but this I do know, that having once allowed my af¬ fections to iest on you, no mandate, no vicissitude, no torturing importunity shall evei pievail on me to pi etend to transfei them to α second loiei. No, if Heaven foibids our union, be the stein deciee obejt 1, but know befoie we sepai ate, as j on announce that we must presently, nevei to meet ag un, that my heart cannot play the w anton, and give my hand wheie it may not follow itself It spurns the coldly piudent counsel if has icceived, ancl bowing to necessity, îeconciles itselt to despau, but shall perish faithful to him who fiist called forth its latent fires, and taught fnendship to beguile it into love." Exhausted by the effort she had made, Amelia sunk back in hei chaıı. He n 4
hastened to support her, and hending over her, while she waved hei hand for him to retne, their blending tears, im¬ patient of those cucuinstances which doomed to a sepaiation those by whom they weie shed, solemnised a union which the disconsolate Chailes and the faint¬ ing Amelia were no longei permitted to contemplate for themselves, as the ultimate recompense of patient suffering, bold exertion, and unshaken faith He again spoke. " I have no more to say, Amelia. But do not mistake the motive of my anxiety for your father's comfort, and foi your's, that would foi bid you to lock up for life, in joyless celibacy, those chaims, which Heaven destined to complete the felicity of some favouied being. While giving the advice that I thought it my duty to offer, I trembled lest you should attend to it· and could now, while reproving its rejection, exult that you spuin it Yet again would I pıay you to forget me
But if ongenial feelings animate us now, I knov I lecommcnd that which is im¬ possible. Tbat fonn, that face, which cheered me in exile, and sustained me while fainting beneath the heat of the torrid zone, in the dreary deserts ot Afi ica, that beloved image which threw a radiance on my distant pi ospect, made me folget present gloom, and urged me on, till all the difficulties which once encompassed me were overcome, can nevei cease to live in my lecollection. I would now blot them from my me¬ moiy. But vain the thought, they will still mock disappointment, untate pas¬ sion, and mortify ambition. Though to see you in the arms of anothei, would tortine me beyond expiession, yet on any terms I could wish to know you happy , but I cannot dissennile that my love sur¬ vives thp annihilation of iny hopes, nay, I am bound to add, of my wishes. It has now become my duty to avoid y ou. I must re tire. Deaiest Amelia,adieu'adieu! Will ν 5
you not echo the sad sound' Will jou not respond to my soirow to my agony, when I bid you а long, а last faiewell? ' He gently piessed her hand to solicit her attention while he spoke Its touch made hnn tiemble anew A convulsii e throb from Amelia maiked an effort on hei part to pronounce the woid "faiewell ' but her feelmgs weit too icute, too ovti whelming, to find even a partial vent in language, and pievented all articulation Hariey pressed liei hand to his lips, tin tw one more burning gl nice it his ilmost lift less mistres», and in the hope lh it his ah sence might in some legi ее ıelıeve het tore himself away from the idolised ob lect of first, his onlv love, and slowly tlosed the door as he ıetıtıted, extlaim ing in a paroxysm ot gntf, Fate drop the curtan t can lose o ıı о
CHAP. XII. For me no more the path inviles Ambition lovci, to trend No more I climb those toilsome heights, By guileful Hope misled, Leaps шу fond fluttering he irt no more To Mirth's enlivening strum For piesent pleasure soon is о er, And ill the pist is ¡nun Beattik li was at Jilhfiee tint Hailey parted with his friend, Major Houghton. Ai- uving in England without accident, he soon round himself a stianger 111 the crowded streets of London. Not know¬ ing what step he ought to take fiist, he was in doubt wheie to apply for in¬ foi mation, when his uncomfortable revei ie was suddenly broken in upon with " Ha ' my dear Sir, is it you ' lam very glad to meet you ' Hope you have n 6
been well since I had the honour of seeing you last?" " I beg youi pardon, Sir, but you have, in some measure, the advantage of me. Though youi features ai e f ami lnr to my eje, I tlo not letollect wheie we met, nor your name." " Shovelem, Su. Do you recollect now?" " ' Excellent well ' О ' jes, I wondu I could forget you foi a moment." " A pleasant, jovial evening that w г spent togethei, hey, Sn ' Just whal such a thing ought to be. Crying you know does no good, and, when a nun has lived his day, its as foolish to take on about him, as to moiun when dinnei's over, that we ai e obliged to leave tin table " « Very philosophicallj' urged. But Mr Shovelem, I think you are m thf upholstery line." " Certainly "
" I want something in youi way, 01 shall very shortly, I believe " Hailey then began to explain the situ ition in which he stood At the men tion oí the wealth that had devolved to him, the hat of the undcrtikei moved instinctively fi om its place, and he per formed the remainder of his part 111 this ıııteıvıevv, baıeheaded Mr Shovelem was а peifect man of business, md, m everv respect exactly the person that H 11 ley had occasion foi at that juncture What had seemed to piesent the most appalling difficulties, un dei the upholsterer's judicious duections was made perfectly easy lhe neces sary steps being propeily taken, Harley was soon put in possession of his fortune, and now nothing lemained, but to hasten to lay it at the feet of Ameh? , save one thing He wished to be able to m vite Sır George to his own house , and had not yet formed an e tabhshment But this Mr Shovelem took upon hnn
self, he had it that veiy time an elegaui ' ouse splendidly fin nished in one of the sqn u es «it the w est end to dispose of, and would piovide suitable domestics, live¬ nes, and all other appendages necessaiy to a man of fashion and fortune He named, with the gleitest pieeision, the time in which he could accomplish all this Taking him at his wind, Hailey told him that he would ictuin with a pai tj of fuends fiom the countiy to dme ¡n his new house on the day mentioned by Mi Shovelem, as that on which his airangements would be complete. On this he was to calculate, unless he heaid to the contiaiy fiom Ins employer. The turn things had taken m the countrj, had precluded Charles fiom attempting to сшу his festive plan into effect, and also fiom wntmg to Mi. Shovelem. After his last mteiview with Amelia, he passed with little delay to his carriage, proper relays had been carefully piovided, so that he travelled
with gieat expedition, and without in tending, or thinking of it, on tht d iy and at thc very hour at which he h id in timated that he tn ^ht be ixpictt I , the well mstiucted coachman drew up m foim, at *hc door of Mi Hailtys tow ι Mansion On entt ring the h ill, he was mtt bj the vigilant Jii Shovelem, with a coun tc nance full of import mce, mil with ant in that bespoke bun bursting with imp t tiencc, to heai those exel unations of sin prise and atlını ation, at the ıapıdıty md taste with which he had fulhlled his em ployeı s wishes that he nevei doubted the uee ision might elicit from one moie cliffi cult to please th in Mi Ilulej Iwo ser vants in elegint livenes conducted their mastei to the dining room, which Sho velem plumed himself upon moie tlnn all tbe iest, is heie he expected all the poweis of his genius displayed m pre paring an entei tainment worthy a fashion
able company, would be most successfully dev eloped. Hai ley passed sullenly up the stairs, deaf to the compliments and observ.itions of Mr. Shovelem, and blind to all that the latter had expected would mspııe the mo t unbounded rapture. He thought not of the things about lum, save once, when the pei fume of the scented dress of one of the lacquies invaded his nos trıls, as the fellow obsequiously bowed on his entering the apartment. " 1 could do without such attendance foimeilj," he thought, " when in the foi ests of Africa, I found iny dimng-ioom at the loot of a tiee, and my bed chambei at its top." Fauly in the apai tment, Mi. Shovelem endeavoured to assume an ail of seremtj, that it might not be said he thought too highly of Ins own labouis Hemdeed thought that they might safely be lelt, as the phi ase runs, " to speak for them- sehes." His ejes alternately rested on
on Charles, and on those objects which he had calculated were most certain to strike, and, to his great astonishment, and infinite moi tiftcation, he discoveied th it all was lost on his unheeding em¬ ployer. He indeed, far from testitj ing pleasuie when intioduced to this intend¬ ed temple of ninth, shook his head from the bitter recollections whicli tlien cross¬ ed lus mind, and a deep sigh escaped from his agitated bosom Mr. Shovelem started Engaged in the undertaking part of his profession, he would have expected α sigh now and then But these »tieon sucli occasions, m his mind, so completely matters of couise, that they would hate occupied httle of his consıdeı ation, unless they had seemed to offer a favourable ορροί tunity for disposing of some of those appiopnate sei aps of Scriptuie and phi¬ losophy, with which, in the way of busi¬ ness, he had thought it pi udent to store his mind. The sound ot sorrow which
now burst on his ear as an upholsterer, confounded him As he could imagine no possible с uise for it, he was totally at a loss what to say on tlie subject, and the whole stock of consolation which he had collected in the course of twenty 01 thirty yeais, lay useless on his lunds. He however deteimmed, by pointing out the merits of some of the articles m tlie apartment, to endeavour to íaise Hailey's spints, and obtain the panegjuc to which he conceived him¬ self to be entitled, and had expected, in the fiist instance, without asking for. He accordingly began : — " Hope you appiove this carpet, Sn." " Its well enough " " Well enough ' — Beg youi pai don, Sn, but its considered α most elegint pattern. Then look at the textuie of it. I assure you I thought myself veiy lucky, to get one like it to a room of this size, in so short a time." " It matten not."
" Then those chandeliers, Sir —Don't you think thtj ie beaiitilullj cut r'" " 'lis all of no use ' ' exclaimed Наг lej half iside Mi Shovelem did not understand that his employ ei me mt that in the then situ ation of his mind, all the common matt rials of pltasui o h id no use foi bun He supposed tint what he heird pioceeded from ι feeling of economy tint shiunk from the expense whicli f illows tn the tram of eleg in e With this impiession he thought it n 0 ht to entei immedi itelj on his defence ' Whj to be sine, if they weie not quite so hanchon e, they cl inswei the purpose as wtll, but then peoplt ot for lune like to have evtiy thing suit ible, like And jou know, Sir, jou told mc to have all very eleműit, and said ex pense was no object " ' Well, Su, we'll talk ot this to mor row ' If jou had but told me it was youi
wish, I would have gone to work .a» economically as any man in the trade. I am suie it is not my wish to inn any gcntlemin to an unnctessaiy expense, and if you will look over the bills ol these -----" " Mi. Simulem, my mind ıs occupied with otlicr in ılteı s now. I cannot attend to these concerns at prtsent." " Pu hips, Su, you'll look at the paint¬ ings , some of 'em by veiy eminent mastei s." " Not to day " " Then will you look at the other apartments." " No, no, I dai e say you have managed eveiy thing veiy well. But I will give you no tin thei trouble at present. I will send foi you when I .un more cap ι ble of conveisation." Mi. Shovelem ι et и cd, and Hailev found himself alone in the splendid ami spacious apartment on which the industry and taste of the upholsterer lud been
exhausted, to fit it for the reception ot mirth and Icstivity. " Wh it а scene '" he exclaimed, ' what а lesson foi the vanity of nun ' Fins desei t of pi ide, I had thought to stt peopled .at tins hour with happy hugliler, wooing fiitnds, mil myself, " the giyest of the gay," exulting in having g uned the summit of human felicity Vain ılıcanı' All is changed, the animating spirit of mn th is fled, and in the gay objects which sunound me, I set but the appalling coisc of revelry, intl all tlut might have contributed tO iny enjoyment, seems but to demie and iggi ivate my sorrow Sitting pensivtly down, lit endea vouicd to form some futuro pl.m of life His first thought was to ìepair to а tott ige and live and die m solitude But his fortune which might be made the means of conferi ing immensi bene fits on his fellow cieatuies, would then bt useless Then he resolved to em
ploy some one to dıştı ıbııte it among thc iinfoitiiii ite, but itin Iıııtly occuned to bun that an honest ind imputi il dis trıbutoı he could hudly expect to find, and he fin illy concluded, t'nt, howevci labouoiis the tisk whieh he would wíl lingly confide to another, it w ıs his duty to m ike the leqnisitt cxtition to pcrfoim it himself Л\ hile this aigument was undti mtntal discussion, а stiv ι it had mnounced that sonit one wished to s e hin, luti he, without knowing whit lit did hid sig nified tint tht ptison might entu In а few seconds a set of f e itili cs weie presented to his view, that mule him start from his scat with ınvoluntaıy sin prise Stiange iccollections, and bevvil denng thoughts came ovei his mind, and without intending to speak, the exela malion — " Smitheis ' bin st from his lips And Smithers it certainly was not the unfortunate missionary foi whom he
had piepaied a grue in the desert, but the bıotheı of tint peison A stiong family likeness, added to ι stmbl luce of matnici, growing out of tht same habits of thinking, in ult this ıesemblance to his I lit ıtl ıtıoıı so stiong, that foi v moment Unity ilinost f incitei that lus distem peitei un igni ıtıoıı had coııjıucd up the apparition of his dittaste! futile!, to fill in put tint spate, whith his lecuit tits appointment had stud fiom betnir occu pitd by citttuits of flesh tnd blond Mi Smithers soon expi unid the ob ject ol his visit, which was to obtain а moi e pârlitul ıı account of tbt 1 ist bonis ol lus decciscd btothci, than he h id been able to obtun from the mouth of ι third person Chailes readily complicii with his wish, and accommodating itself to the pious anxictj of another, his own heart seemed leheved by what it tonunu nicatcd At the close of theu mteiview, which Mi Smithers from pievious en gagements was obliged to bung to α
speedy termination, he informed him that Su George Henderson, to whom he had applied for Harley's addiess, had re quested bun to say " that he might expect a visit from Inm, and not an un pleasant one — very soon." The enigma of the sphynx, was not more peiplexing to the wise-acres who had it propounded to them before it came to the turn of the sagacious Oedi pus, to try his hand at it, than was tins intimation from Su George to Chailes From the moment that Mr. Smithers re tired, he could thmk of nothing else For Sir George to send him, and by so pious and grave a man, a message that was of α cheeiful, if not of a joculai eharaetei, was that foi which he was but little prepared, at a period when the teriihle dream that he had ш th« desert, and in which he thought he saw Sir Geoige, Amelia, and himself, sink mg m the saine perishing baik, seemed to be so fatally realised 3
" Where is he ? Show me to hnn di¬ rect!)," a voice loudly vociferated with¬ out, which he instantly recognised to be that of the Baronet. The dooi flew open, and Sir George, advancing with open arms, clasped the amazed Hiuley in his embiace " I'm afraid, Challes, that I have come too suddenly on you. It was my intention that your Missionaiy fuend should pave the way for my coming, but I find my¬ self here as soon as lnm, though I had twenty places to go to. My warning is something like that of the lush labourer on the house top, who, when he pei ceives that his fallen brickbat has knocked a man down, serenely calls out, ' below,' to wain the prostiate passenger of his danger." " You seem m better spirits, Sir George, than when we last parted." " Why, so I am, Charles, and yet I've done nothing but cry, that is, try and laugh, laugh and cry, all day If I voi in о
would avoid the one, I am obliged tc/ take refuge in the other, for to be tian¬ quil is impossible." " Has any thing particular hap¬ pened ?" " There's α question, now ' Why do you think me such an old fool, as fo br thus agitated about nothing s It w ill hav e some effect on you too, but I am afraid to tell good news too abiuptly " " After what I h now of bad, I am so perfectly indifferent about what the ι est of the woild may call good, th it you need not bc afiaid of disordering my nei ves, by any piece of agree ible intelli¬ gence tlut you may hive icceived " " Th it is boldly s ud. So now you think you could beai announced an ex- tiaordmary piece of good fortune, with as muth sang paid as an ex-ininistei listens to the ι οαι of the Park and Towei guns." " Even so After what you told me and showed me y esteidaj, it is impossible
foi you to uttei anything to day, that I sliall not be able to listen to with the most pcrlett mdifterence." " Miracles, peihaps, Iui с not yet t cased , so do not be too positive. Look at tliesc papeis, Charles You luve seen the hand bcfoie , and the chai acters tiaced by it you can nevei pei use with liidifteiencc. 1'iejiaie to wondei. Come, icad them; lead thein out. I have been poring ovei them all day, but can listen lo them still." With silent astonishment, Hailey leceived the pa,,eis produced by Sir George. He looked on the writing and tiembled. It was indeed a hand that he knew well ; that he could not see with¬ out inteiest, noi lead without emotion. A teai diopped on the fiist page .is he glanced ovei it, for be already peıceıved tlut he was about to be made still moie intimately acquainted with the failings, tbe soirows, the humiliation, and ıemorse ol his unhappy mother. о 2
CHAP. ХШ. But «olt "Ль culm ielle« t on * niiiliiifeht hour, * I is the «oul « «olcinn nullit «t llroo ts it tlinught Ucu ntful ui Ih) u som? Dr Doiro Thf document so unexpectedly biought forwaid, was in the loun of a leltei II began in the following woids « Deai Su Geoige, " The awful houi is last approaching, when I must appeal beiore the Judge of all the с uth Pie this comes befoie youi eyes, Death will lnve closed mine for evei. I feel that which convinces me, that from the btd of sickness, on wluth 1 now ι celine, I shall use no more. But befoie the sepulclne has received my laded form, I w ould fain avail myself
ol the few moments of hie and ïeflection that 1 emani to mt, lo wutc to you toi the last tunc , and 1 know tint you are too bencvoltnt to ltpme at being thus tioubled bya dying wietch, whose bo¬ som had bten the abode of peace but foi jou, bec uist, but for jou, it had le¬ mamed the abotle of innocence. " boi some tunc I have desued to un¬ bosom myseit Providence now lavouis tha wish. A pious man, who, unsanc¬ tioned by the Government, has ventuied heie to attempi lhe mighty task of con- aciting the Hindoos and Mahomtnedans, fiom then supeistitious, to the Chnstian religion, has huppilj betn introduced to me, and lit olleis to take chaige of .my thing th it 1 may wish to send to Lui ope. I giattltilly avail niystlf ol the oppoitu- nitj, and jou will not leproath the upeiltani X itelenen loi hei lasi ıeso¬ lutıon. " Within these few diys, the lemains ol an esteemed husband have been ton- 0 S
signed to the grave. He was, indeed, sincerely esteemed, and would have been beloved, but that 1 knew I had de¬ ceived him. This ought not to liave made him less an object of affection ; but it did. I always trembled, lest some inconceivable chance should betray to him the baud, which had been com¬ mitted, and ınvoluntaıy shimkings came over me, even when his unsuspecting countenance was lighted up by its most indulgent smile. " Vain tremors ' Idle qualms ' You will peihaps exclaim, when yon have lead thus much of my letter. But pause, Sir George, ere you make them tlie sub¬ ject of udicule. lhis sad epistle may find you still m the vigoiu of life, and y ou may be but too ι eady to view with a lenient judgment, what the palliating language of fashion would call the mdis- cıetıon of α moment. Ah' tempt not the giddy tiembler on the verge of sm, to lay aside icsistance by my example.
Make not my histoiy the insti ument of another's ium. Say not of me, · Thus she did, yet she became the wife of an honouiable man, lived long lespected and happj', and died in peace.' Peace and happiness 1 have nevei known. Your¬ self sh«ill confess that my tei rors weie not groundless; for when in feverish blumbei, my guilty mind ι ecalled the scene of past wandeiings, and, when starting from iny dream, I awoke to a conscious¬ ness, that I had clasped my husband with unwonted tenderness, and accosted lum in the language of ardent love, by a name which had never belonged to hnn, О ' then, to you 1 appeal, if I might not well shnnk with hoiror, in the diead¬ ful expectation of being scorned as the wanton mistress of Sir Geoige Hen- dei son ?" Heie the Baronet gioaned, and, hiding his f«ice with his hands, he exclaimed, with emotion, " Good God ' ol what miseiy have I о 4·
been the cause ' How fatally extensive .ue the ìamifications of ute ' The inno¬ cent sometimes suftei from them In this instance, you and my poor Amelia have experienced severe affliction tlnough tiansgiissions not join own, but Eteinal Justice lus not permitted, that the punnij oftendeis should go unpu¬ nished. Then woe has been gieater than jours, for it has been aggia- vated by all the bitterness of feai and ıemorse I! the good aie sometimes ex¬ posed, as it seems to us, to unmented snffeiing, the bad, though not an ugned before any human tnbunal, escape not with impunity." " This," said Charles, " icason and expeiience will not fail to teach, but the being tossed bj the tempest of uiegular desue, foi gets the salutary truth, and the piecepts of molality and lehgion are alike lost on the man, whom God, in wrath, has given to lus passions " " Ihen, by a piudent tempei ance, we
bhould avert that wiath, in the first in¬ stance, if wewishtoenjoylife —Proceed." Chailes obeyed, and lesumed the lead¬ ing. " But," the letter continued, " I wish nut to wound your feelings, by detailing w at mme have been. It is foi а veiy diffeient purpose that I now take up my pen. But few houis have I to bieathe, and it is fit that these should be devoted to ti uth , and of the weight of one de¬ ception I wish, as fai as may be, to ıelıeve mj nnnd. "Shortly ifter my aiuval here, you leceived intelligence of the birth of an infant, which you weie told ought to nave home vour name. Befoie I left England, you had promised, that all that tould be clone bj you, m a case wheie uiepaiable injury had been sustained, should be done, to make the consequences less felt tban they might othei wise have been. You particulaily desired, that the child should be sent to you, to be brought о 5
up, and educ ittd at jour expence, as jou declared, that you sliould feel as anxious foi its advancement in life, as for that of any othei being that could call you fathei. " In pursuance of the wish so ex¬ piessed, Charles, at an eaily age, was con- fided to the care of a particular friend, then proceeding to Europe. He leached Lngland in safety, my letteis conjured you to be kind to out offspring, and you failed not to watch ovei his early years with parental solicitude. " Ihe accident which shatteied my husband's right hand, when he had îe- sided but little more than a month in Bombay, piecluded him from coires- ponding with you, md consequently you had no opportunity of ïeceiving intelli gence of what befel us, but through me. Possessing the powei of concealing what it was my wish that you should not know, I failed not to avail myself of it on one memoi able occasion.
" The miaut whicli I hist biought into the vvoild, was not born till thiee months allei tht lime at which I an¬ nounced his buth to have taken place. Conscious guilt had given me one vain alarm in England, and the child which passed foi my husband's, w as ti uly his, but anxious that my son should have a pation in Sir Geoige Heudeison, I deceived you with the tale of successful deceit, imposed upon Captaţn Hailey, and have falsely, till now, represented Chailes to be youi offspring." Hailey's voice lalteied, as he read the pieceding paiagiaph. He paused, fiom a feai that he had misunderstood it> he hastily ιαη ovei it agam, and at length lifting his eyes fiom the paper, sought to lead a confii mation of the intelligence in the countenance of the Baionet. But Sn Geoige had covered his face with his handkerchief, and deep fetched sobs attested his invvaid agitation. Harley's emotion was gieat, and he could not о 0
ich ain from -exclaiming aloud, " Gra¬ cious Heaven ' can this be possible ?" " Read," said Su George. He obeyed, ancl the letter went on, " It is not in this solemn hour that I can justify the fiaud piactised on you, and perseveied m foi so many years. This excuse I may uige, that as my husband had been pievailed upon by you to send his first child to Lngland, to be educated under youi eye, I could not have alteied his destination, without giving leasons foi ny conduct, that might have caused explanations to be requiied, whicli I had no inclination to supply. Peihaps, you will lecognise something like letribution m tins, that you who fiist taught me to wandei from honoui, should have been so long the dupe of my falsehood. But ftu be it fiom mt to defend those deviations from truth, which I now with shame and sorrow con¬ fess, when I declai e that Charles Harley is no son of youi 3.
" But though the penitent, piepanng for that tiemendous change which .all must one day undeigo, has proved that he whom she confided to your love, has no claim to those favours and that con¬ stant support whicli he might expect from a fathei's hand, Gieat Natine de¬ mands that the mothei should plead for her son. His growing virtues, jou have often commemorated. О ' let them not pass uniewaided, because he is not re¬ lated to jou ' If, when I am niouldeung m the giave, you should ever thmk of me with tenderness, embody the feeling in kindness to bun. I am exhausted farewell, ^ ι Geoige,—Farewell for evei. Forgiv e me he deception that I have prac¬ tised, I foi give you the sorrow you have caused me, and in the confident belief that we mutually paidon each other, I now, having unbuithened my bosom, hope to lay my head seienelj on my djing pillow, and bieathe my last in peace with «ill the woild.— Γαι evveli, foi evei " Fkcdlrica Harlm "
Il weit uo c isy task to dt tei mine whethei gnei oı joy piedominattd in the leehngs inspued by tue pei usai ol this İetteı , but wluchevoi took the lead he was most coidully aided by the othei in rolling down his watei у stoi ts from the eyes ol the itadei. 'Ihe Baionet was the hist to lecovti speech. I'iom his own feelings he could easily coinpiehtnd those of Chailes, and, anxious to sul lue Ins emotion, be endeaiouied to chaw lum into conveisation. " Well, Hailey, what think you oí all this. You weie little piepaied foi such а change." " О ' Su George, I am so hew ddei ed, that I know not what to think. 'Ihe hand I cannot he dtteivtd in. But when did you ìeteive this İetteı —" " I Ins morning." " lhe d ite, as íveli .ıs tlic tenoi of it, prove it to have been written dining my mother's last illness. By what accident has thc dehveiy been so long delayed ?"
" liiat, my deai Chai lis, you can probably explain better anj man living." " Do I not misundeistand you, Sir George ? Do you say that I can explain the delay." " I thmk you can." " Why this is as astonishing as all the rest. I know nothing of the letter, but its contents. "Till produced by jou, I had nevei seen it " " But it was brought to England by you. Mi, Smitheis, fiom whose liands I íeteived it this morning, told me that it bad been conveyed to t'ıe lehgious asso¬ ciation, ot which he is a membei, by а Mr Hai ley , and as he understood that you weie not unknown to me, be ìe¬ quested that I would furnish him with youi addiess" " Antl is it possible that I could be tlie bearei ol tins İetteı ! Suiely be ι ould not Siiy so." " Upon my honour he did. He blated
Ibis İetteı to h ive iccompanied the Coi ìespontleiiee of lus hi tl ei, the Mis¬ sionary ot whom I hid heaul you speak The story seemed incredible, foi as you had so many unicstiained conversations with the Smithers vvho died, I thought it almost impossible that he should have had such ι lettci in his pocket without com muriicatmg to jou its contents, as thej affected j ou so neaily " " Γοι tint I can easily account Ihe lettel wis not confided to Smithers by my mothei, but by α brother Missionaiy, who was proceeding to the inteuoi of Indu My unfortunate fuend was in Bombay so short α time, that he knew nothing of the situation of my pirents He 11 as а sti ingei even to the name When I found that he had recently visited the place of my birth, I failed not anxiously to intei rogate him ι espect mg them, but he could aSoid me no information I am sure pool Smitheis 17
knew nothing of tbe contents of the İetteı of which ho was the beaiei, and little did I sui mise, when I received from his hands the small packet winch he was desirous of having conveyed to England, of what vast impôt tance it was to me that his wish sliould be fulfilled." " Lveiy tiling respecting tlie İetteı ıs cleaied up by the statement you have just made. How important, how pro¬ vidential that it sliould anive «it this moment ' Your pool deal motliei com¬ mends you to my fnendship. You stand little in need of it, and I half ι egret that you have become a man of wealth, as it precludes me from showing how sincerely anxious 1 am to pay due attention to hei last lequest, foi trust me, Chailes, you would find me pıecısely the ıeverse of what I have seemed." " Such a change, Su Geoige, 1 should ι egret, and humanity woulddeploie." " No flatteiy. I mean th tl you would
find iny cond .ct, my sentiments, ai lo youi views respecting Amelia, veiy dil- feient fiom what thty have bten, ioi now that that obstacle is lemovtd which was fa' d to joui pı t tensions, though jou had not а shilling in the woild, on the honoui of ι man, I sweai, I would preiei you to the hi st peer in the realm for my son." Chailes was not insensible to the im¬ port of this speech, but he made no ıeply. His eyes weie iäiset! to heaven with an expression ot devotion and giateful wonder , while the lecollected incident of a formei day piessed strongly on his imagination, and absorbed his every thought. Su Geoige hid waited foi an answei, and knew not how to niteipiet Hailey's unexpected silence. Impatient of sus¬ pense, he again endeavouied to gain his attention. " Did you not beai me, Challes, oı ıs
nol ihe language which I have just used so gì atei ul to your eai s now, as it might once Iı ive been ' " ľoigue me Sn Geoige My thoughts wtre r used to tht Givei ot all good, and wholly occupied with adımı ation of his mystei mus dispens ıtıons , toi it just then occuned to nie, tint when bending ovei the unconscious, in animate Smitheis in the desert, had I ittci detl to the told suggestions of selfish ι eason, incl left lnm lo exput alone, that precious packet, whitli Ins itstoied me to life, joy, and Amelia, would never have been put nto my hand, the desp in m whu ι you plunged me yesterday, would 1 u e been peipttuated to the list houi of my hie, tht prospett ol tarthlv happiness had been closed at, unst me loi ever, ind the remaining cl lys of my existence, bhsted by sol did piudence, had proved but a cold, ehteiltss, unni teiesting void '
" lhe reflection becomes jou, Cini Ics and you will do wtll to lemembei it thiough all joui futuie hie, and to bc lieve, fıom what jou now feel, tint he only is tuie to his red interest who s faithful to his dutv '
CHAI'. XIV. Come mildly bright Pure orb of light' To thee such scenes belong Come every stir ' And Γιοιη niai, Begin the bridal song JOIIANIXB SeCUVBV« Mr Shovliem novV enteied to enquire when dinnei was to be brought up. The ingenious artisan vvho invents a complicated piece of macluneij, can neiei iest till he has seen it bring forth in peifection the article which it has been constiucted to produce. The anxious upholsteier having been ap¬ pointed to foim Mr. Harley's esta¬ blishment, extended his care to all the first operations of the domestics, and was as solicitous to have the dinnei served up
in good style, as ever he had been to see a funeral handsomely perfoi med. But the moody humoui of Harley at their last interuew was not forgotten. Though he could not tell why, he un¬ derstood that solemnity was to be the order of the day, and considering it to be his duty to accommodate a good cus- tomei with that soi t of depoi tinent that was most to his taste, his chuichyaid countenance and step were now put in requisition, and he enteied with an un¬ dertaking aspect of doleful sympathy, most Judiciously at variance with the cheei ing question he had to put ; to wit, " At what time would you like dinnei to be seived up ?" Hailey could not help feeling a dis¬ position to laugh at the odd combination of look and language with which he had tust been treated. He was at little loss to account for the change which he ob¬ served in his prune ministei, and took a moie agreeable way of teimmating his
anxiety tha is fashionable m some countnes, when gre«it men at the head of affinrs, luve the misfortune to see then superior with л giave countenance. Instead of accommodating him with a bow-stnng, or sentence of exile, foi the benefit of his health , Chailes took upon himself to dismiss his giavity. " Why, Mi. Shovelem, I thmk they may bring up dinnei in about half an houi But I hope no accident has hap¬ pened below, foi you look as senous thout it, as if instead of coming to an¬ nounce a feast, it was youi business to ι ί m us that the heaise was just about «o move, and the time come when vie, the moui neis, must be decorated with the flapping!, of woe, to fall into the procession " " О no, Sn t theie has been no acci¬ dent. I took cue of that, looked to eveiy thing myself, found 'em all ughtj if any of 'em hadn't known then bu¬ siness, I'd have giv'n 'em the sack, th.it
ıs, sent 'em paci mg, bag and baggage. No, Sn, theie's nothing the mattei be¬ low. I ho|ic all's well above, but I was afraid, an houi ago, that you had met with «ome mislortune." " What, I was insensible to the merit of your ai rangements ! Well, I have re¬ covered my taste now. The chandebei s are veiy elegant 1 " " I am very much obliged to you." " The carpet beautiful '" " Thank you, mj good Sir. Very happy to have given you satisfaction " " And the paintings divine !" " O, Sn, you are too good '" " Is there any thing else to which you would direct my attention ?" " Why Sn just at this time, peihaps, it would be as well to confine myself to telling what, m obedience to your orders, I have provided for dinnei. As you said you expected company, first of all there's —" , " Thank you, Mr. Shovelem, but I
will not trouble you to run over your bill of fare." " No tiouble at all." " But I do not wish to anticipate. I like to come as suddenly on mj dinner, as on the denouement of a novel. 1 have pei feet confidence in youi talents as а piuveyor. You gave me the most satis¬ factoiy pioots of your excellent taste, the first time 1 had the good loi tune to meet with you at old Snatchall's aflan." " You do me great honour, Sir. But do you expect so Luge a company as you fo.meily talked about." " Why no, I believe not." " Tell him you don't know, Charles," said the Baronet. " As you left the country in too great a hurry to invite those you intended to ask to your new residence, I have endeavoured to correct the error, so do not contract your pre¬ parations, Mr. Shovelem ; for we shall have a good muster yet, if I am not mis¬ taken." VOL. III. ρ
Mı Shovelem, Ins countenance light¬ ed up by the eomplnnents he had re¬ ceived, and the unexpected cheerfulness of Charles, was now, in а moment, trans- toimed from the dismal undertaker to the jolly upholsterer and auctioneer, from tlie sombre seivint of the dead and the melancholy, to the merry attendant on the living and the gay, and he letired as happy at heart as if he had just got the promise of а job, to bury the Lord Mayoi of London ' Alone with Su Geoige, Harley had a question of some inteiest to put He desìi td to know if Amelia had been in¬ formed of the change which had taken place m the views of her father ? «· W by, my deai Chailes ' can you have а doubt on that subject ? Do you think that I would wilfully prolong pain (or a moment, when it was in ray powei to terminate it?" " But what explanation did you give ?" " A brief one, but sufficient to satisfy α mind like heis, not idly inquisitive,
nor tiiesomely curious. I told her, that circumstances had matlc it appear, tlut a relationship connected you so neailj, that, actoi ding to mj ideas (wluth might he rathei petuhai), an union would be impropei. You, I added, bad been ol the same opinion, but proofs hail just arnved which satisfied me, tlut I had been in eu or, and all my objections were no moie." " And how did the charmer receive the unlooked-foi intelligence ?" " As ' the statue, which enchants the woiltl,' woultl have leceived it. Grief had petuhed her, «ind it was not, till many inmutes had elapsed, that a falling tear gave evidence that S/tc had not yet forgot heitel/ to stone " But a carriage etops. Some of out friends have come. Allow me to re¬ ceive them for you." He left the room, with an agility which surpnsed Hailey, who, before he could recover himselt, so far as to 11111- p Й
tate the politeness of the Baronet to the ainving guests, heard Sir Geoige ushei- mg some one up the stairs. " This way, this waj," said Sir George. " I im taking j ou at once to the dining- room j but I know you will be glad to see Mi. Hailey anv where, and form¬ ality, where you and he are concerned, would be a little out of its place " Hailej advanced to receiv e the friendly visitor, thus mnounced tobe in old ac- quaint mce, but with what emotions of wild transport md surprise did he start, at beholding his eier-mteiesting, eiei -lovely Aintha' She had not lecoveitd from the strange vicisitudes of happiness and misery, with which lhe last eight and-foitj houis had teemed. Though languidly reclining on the bosom of hei fathei, she failed not to manifest satisfaction and delight at again seemg him f i om w bom she had be¬ lieved heiself sepaiated foi evei, while her unresisting hand was pressed repeat- c dly to the burning lips of hei lover.
"O' Su Geoige," cned Challes, "tlie unlooked for happiness you have given by restoi mg me thus early to the prt sence ot Amelia, dem tuds the wannest ixpifssioti of overflowing gratitude In this I lecognise tht wish anticipating be lievoleiiee of my eai ly benefactor ' « Not so You only behold the selfish being avancious of comfort, who seeks impatiently his own hippmess m promot¬ ing yours " While he spoke he tlosed the dooi Then advancing to Hailey with tbe trembling Amelia, still leaning on his aim, he continued, " Tlus moment, young man, is one of the most blissful of my life, for now iu contributing to your felicity, I feel that I offer thebestexpiation of my former errors Take her from my hand Believe me, I lament that evei I should have refused you, and the diffeience between my present feelings and those which I expe¬ rienced «hen discouraging your suit, p 3
none but you, who have proved the like vanety, tan compi ehend, oı imiğine. Now I give hei to you, mil with iny blessing bieathe my earnest hope, that vour sor¬ rows, dunng the period of youi court¬ ship, will but make join union moie de¬ lightful from eontiast. All the storms that would dıştın b youi comfort, aic I tuist, gone with yesterdiv, nevei to ıetum." Challes received with ecstacy in his opening aims the piecious burden, which, till now, Su Geoige had boine Buef, incoheient exclamation» of joy weie all thathe could utter. A throbbing heart is tembly in the way of an eloquent tongue, and strong emotion Ins ever been found a formidable enemy to flow¬ ing langu igt. The leader is reinintkil ot these facts, to account for the absence of those fine speeches, which some might thmk would foi in appropi ι ite detoialiens to this paitof the piesent thaptei.
TUE MYSTERY 310 Amelia gently disengaged beiseli from the embrace of Hailey, but spoke not " V hat ' ' cued Su Geoige, " not one woid? Have you nothing to saj to him ' ■ii e you detei mined to ι eserve the w holt of youi eloquence to bless the m u nige state ? Well, well ' youi silence, if such be your ıesolutıon, will not be of long din ation I got into town too late to procure а licence to day, but to morrow, „nl, tomorrow, Harley theie will bt Do impediment in the way , and tht fes tiv il to whith we aie ibout to sit down I consider but the lehcaisal of the wed¬ ding dinnei tint slnll take phce befoie mothei day has closed What tlo you s iy to that, Chailes?" ' I have nothing to say that is ade quatc to tht expi ession of my feelings lhe Αι ib» I have lead, though f imdiu with tht txpiessions " slaves" and " sla veiy,' have no woid in their language that signifies "liblriy" Like them, though Ι α n not at a loss for the mean*
of descubing miseiy and sorrow, I luve no word that сап embody or depict the unimaginable rapture that now pervades my bosom." " And you, Amelia ?" " O, my dear father ' the strange, tint marvellous vicissitudes which 1 have known within the lost few days ai e such as to overpower thought itself. Let it not then excite surprise if they should be too mueh for speech." " Aye, aye, I see, that to get at youi meaning, I must ìefer to what Harley has just said. You ought to have been ingenu¬ ous enough to have told me so yourself, by tacking to his speech the words ot Young Marlow, in the play, ' My mean¬ ing, but infinitely better expressed.' " " Nay, it was suiely unnecessaiy to tell you, who cau read and interpret thoughts with such facility. To have done so might have seemed to evince an undutiful scepticism on tlie subject
of the talent on which you are so apt to pride yourself." *' What! you are beginning to rally me again. Hey ' How delightful to my eais are these sounds of ι eturning cheer¬ fulness. They have so long been stran¬ gers that they now glad my senses, as if thelatter, suddenly recognised old fi tends, supposed to be dead, unexpectedly re¬ stored. Have they the same effect on you, Charles?" " Precisely ; but a glow of satisfaction pervades my whole fiaine, which lan¬ guage could but ill desci ibe. I feel like a native of one of those northern coun- tues on which summei bursts unpre 1 · ceded, umntrodueed by spring. There, when the sun enteis the tropic of Cancer, the vegetable tubes and floweiy tiam on a sudden deck the grounds, which the iron hand oí wintei seemed but a few days before to doom to never ending sterility. Even thus my pi ospects, which were some moments since overclouded
apparently by the gloom of an eternal wintei, are now n'indiateti by the sum¬ mer-sun ot felicity, which presents to my view the uchest ft uits of joy on that spot, so lately the abode of desolation and despair." Minutely to describe the quality and eharaetei of the guests invited by Su George, who now arrived m rapid suc¬ cession, or to give α particular account of the good cheei which exhilarated theu spirits thiough the Utter part of the day, would be to risk exhausting the httle patience which remains to the Job-like reader, who has had the fortitude to pass (without resorting to that very sensible Mid convenient practice, technically called sfetpping), írom the title-page of this his¬ toiy, to that now befoie him. Piudence, therefoie, suggests, that it may bc as well to pass ovei these details for the present, and to reserve them, with the dresses of the ludios at the moie import¬ ant festival which soon followed, to be
added, if they should be called for by the curious, to some future, but dis¬ tant edition, in the foun of an appen¬ dix. The same feeling excludes from these pages the numerous giatifjmg re¬ cognitions with which Mr. Hariey was honoured by divers spi igs of nobility, whom he had formeily encountered^«. Lord Dashington's, and other places, whither he had accompanied the Baronet, but of whom he had no recollection, from thc laudable care with which many of them kept aloof from the pooi Lieut¬ enant — the dependant on Su George Henderson. It will suffice to say, that on the day succeeding that, the events of which have detained us so long, Charles had the happiness of leadmg Amelia to the altar. Sn George, exulting in their union, felt that by thus promoting the welfare of Harley, he did all that was in his power to satisfy the request of the dying Frederica The years of sorrow that
he had known thiough wandering from the straight path, pressed on the recollec¬ tion of his sm. in law at intei vals, fail¬ ed not to put Charles on his guard against temptation. He was in fact so unfashionable as to prefei no society to that of his wife, and Amelia bad taken up ideas so perfectly obsolete, and in¬ deed antideluvian, that she aspired to no glory beyond that of making ber husband happy. No jealousy their dawn of love o'ercast, Nor blasted were their wedded davs with strife. Šach season look'd delightful as it passed To the fond husband, and the faithful wife.
THE END.
Ftuted by Strahui wd Spatthwood·. Pentera-Sireei Landou.
