Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Fleetwood: or, The new man of feeling
FLEETWOOD.
CHAPTER I I was the only son of my father I was very young at the period of the death of „ mother, intl have retained scarcely my recollection of lier My fuller was so much iffectedby the loss of the amn ble atid affee lunate partner of his days, that lie resolve I to vvilhdiavv for ever fiom those scenes where every objeel he sav was isioci ited with the ideas of her kindness, her accomplishments, and her virtues and, being lub lually a lover ot ti e sublime ind romantic feiturcs orna¬ tine he fixed upon a spot in Menoneth- loi i e sbire,t
shire, near lhe foot of Cadei Idris, fo. Ihchibitadon of his declining life Here I B.ise-iucotcd And the s I- tlcd melancholy of my fnher's mind, intl the wild and magnificent scenery by which I wis «inrounded, had an eminent slnrc in deciding upon the fortunes of my future life My father loved me ex¬ tremely, his ıctıons (ovvaıd mc were tender md indulgent , he recognised in me all thit remained of the indivi dual he h id loved more than all tht odier jiersons m the wond But he «■"· en imourcd of solitude, he sjient whole days md nigl Is m study and contempla¬ tion Eve" when he went into compin), or received visitoro in his own house, he judged too duly of the temper and pro¬ pensities of boyish years, to put much ie Aıaınt upon me, or to require thit I fhouid either lender nyself sub c ci vient to the habits of my elders, or, by a ı ıdıcu- lolis exhibition of arlifir al tilents, en¬ deavour
deavoiir to cxfiact fiom their politeness nouiishment for his paternal vaňiíy or pride I had few companions The very s tuation which gave us a full enjovment ofth be mdes of nitore, inevitably nai rowed both Ihe ex(cn( nnd var ety of om intercourse with our own species My e и liest years weie spent among moun tuns mdpiecipees amidst the roaiing of Ihe ocean ind (he ihhhing of water- fills Vconstani famiimity wi(h these objects gave α wildness (o my ideas, and an uncommon seriousness (o my temper My eunosity was ardent, and my dispo sition persevering Often hive I climbed (lie misty mountain s top, to Ъ ııl the first beams of (he oib of dny, or (o wateh hi» refulgent glones as he c unk beneath the western ocein There wis no neigh bouiing summt( that I did not ascend, anxious to see what mountains, v allies, rivers and cities were plared beyond I в ι gized
gazed epon (he populous haunts of men as objects that pleasingly diversified my landscape, but wuhout the desire to be¬ hold (hem in nearer view I had a pre sentiment that lhe crowded streets and the noisy mart contained Ia ger malcríala for constitui, rg my pain than pleasure The jarring fissions of men, their loud contentions, their gross pursuits, their crafty delusions, their boisterous mirth, were objects which, even in idea, my mmd shrunk from wilh horror I was a spoiled child I had been little used to contradiction, and felt like a tender flower of the girrlen, which the blast ot the east wind nips, and impiesses wilh the (okens ofa sure dcciy With such a (ont of mint! (he great fcatuies of nature ire particularly in ac¬ cord In her chosen retreats every thing is busy and alive, nothing is in full re¬ pose All is diveisity and change The mysterious power of vegetation conti¬ nually
niially proceeds , the trees unfold their verdure, and the fields are clothed vvilh grass and flowers Life is every where around the solitary wanderer, all is health and bloom , (he sap circulates, and lhe leav-s expand The stalk of lhe flower, (he (runk of (he dee, and (he linos of animals tlihtc, and assume larget dimensions Hie ciitle breithe, antl the vegetable kingdom consumes the vital air, the herds resort to the flowing stream, and the griss drinks (he mois¬ ture of the earth and the dew of heiven Even the clouds, the winds and the streams present us with the îmatţe of life, and filk lo us of lhat venerable power, winch is opeiatitig eiei where, and never sleeps But then speech is dumb, their eloquence is unobtrusive, if they tear us from ourselves, it is with a gentle and a kindly violence, which, while we submit to we bless Here begins tLe contrist and disparity between
. between youth nnd age. My falher «as a lover of natuie ¡ but he «as not (lie companion of my studies in fhe srenes ol tinture. He viewed hei from his win¬ dow, or fiom the terrace of earth lie had raised ¡it the extremity of his gai den, he mounted his horse foi a tranquil exclu¬ sion, and kept along the road vv Inch was sedulously formed for the use ol havel¬ lers. His limbs were stiffened with age, antl he was held in awe by the penodicil inlrubiutis of an .inn cleome visitor, (he gout. My limbs on the contrary «ere full of the spiingmess which charat-leiitcs- ihe morning of hie I bounded along (he plains, and clurbctl lhe bigacst emi¬ nences ; I descended the most fnghlful declivities, and often peneliated into te¬ cesse» which had perhaps never before felt the presence of a human-creature. I nval'ed the goat, the native of the mountains, in agility and daring. My only companion was a dog, who by fa¬ miliarity
iiiilnr-ily hod acquired hubits sur lar to mmc, In oui solit ıry rumbles wc seeine 1 lo hive a celinin sympithy with each othei , antl, when I rested oc¬ casion illy fiom the weariness of my exertions, he с une antl hy tlown at my feot, and I often found relief in dallianrø with this humble companion amidst (he uninltnLited wilds winch leceivetl me Sometimes, when í foresa v in excursion of moie (han ustni danng, I confined hnn at home, but then he would gene¬ rally break loose in m/absence, se», к me among the mountuns, antl frequenily meet me in my return Sometimes í would tie him to ι tree ora shrub, and leave him for hours m these cases be seemed to become a party m the implied compact between us, and vvuted in mute resignaiioii (ill he saw me agun Every (hing however wis not exertion in the rambles I describe I loitered by the side of the rivei, and thank in at lei¬ sure
sure the beauties that surrounded me. I sat for hours on tbe edge of a preci¬ pice, and considered in quiet the grand and savage objects around me, which seemed never to have changed their cha¬ racter from tbe foundriion of the world. I listened in delightful idleness to the sound of the stones, which I gently let fall in the cavities of the rocks, or fol- lowed them with my eye as they bounded from protuberance to protuberance, till by distance they became invisible. I stretched myself at my length along the jutting precipice, while my head bung over the vast billows of tbe ocean, which seemed to gape and prepare themselves to receive me into their remorseless bo¬ som for ever. Often I reposed by the side of a cataract, and was insen¬ sibly lulled into slumber by the mono· tony of its dashings. While thus amused, I acquired a ha¬ bit of being absent in mind from the scene
scene which was before my senses. í de¬ voured at first with greedy appetite the objects which presented themselves, but by perseverance they faded on my eye and my enr, and I sunk into a s iveet in¬ sensibility to tbc impressions of external nature The state thus jiroduced, was sometimes that which wc perhaps most exactly mitici strtid by the term; reverie, when the mind has neither action nor distinct ideas, but is swallowed up in a living death, which, at the same time thit it is indolent and inert, is not desti- lule of a certain voluptuousness At othei scabons the abstraction of my mmd was of ι more busy and definite sort. I was engagtd in imaginary scenes, con¬ structed visionary plans, and found all naître subservient to my command I had a wife or childicn, was I he occupier of pahces, or the ruler of nilions ——Therp is lhis difference betiveen the visions of the night, and the di earns, the waking в 5 dreams
dream»! mean, of the day: the former are often painful, 'the latter are perhaps alwiiys grateful and soothing. With the visions of the night, there is ordina¬ rily milted a depressing sense of impo¬ tence î things withont us are too strong for us : in those of the day we are all- powerful ; obstacles По sooner present themse! fis than they are conquered ¡ or, if it te otherwise, we wilfully protract the struggle, that we may prolong our pleasure, and enhance-out· triumph. In the dream of the night our powers are blunted, and we aré but half ourselves : thé day-dream on the contrary is the iriurhph of than j our invention is full, our complacency is pure; and, if there is any mixture of imbecility orfolty in the fable, it ¡s a mixture td which the drearrler at the moment scarcely adverts. The tendency therefore of this species of dreaming, when frequently indulged, ie to' inspire A certain propensity to despot¬ ism,
ism, and to render him who admits it, impatient of opposition, and prepared'to fèelevery erose accident, as a usurpation upon his rights, and a blot upon his greatness. This effect of my early ha¬ bits I folly etperienced, and it deter¬ mined (he colour of my riper years. My youlh however was not wholly spent in the idle and frivolous task of constructing castles in the air. The re¬ gard and affection my father felt for me, rendered him anxious that my education should not be neglected. He hired me a private tutor. I -was perhaps suffi¬ ciently fortunate in the character'of the person who was thus establish ;d m our hdtise.' He was not a clergymar. He did not shackle my mind with complex and unintelligible creedsi nor did he exhibit that monastic coldness and squareness of character which is too fie» quently the result of clerical celibacy. He was however a man of morals and of
of religion. But religion was distin¬ guished in his mind more by sentiments 'than opinions. Whatever related to his conduct toward God or man was regu¬ lated jirincipally by a desire to saiisfy his own conscience and obtain his own ap¬ probation, not to maintain a certain cha¬ racter and name in the world. He had been designed by his parents, who were poor, for the profession of the law ; but he ultimately declined this pursuil, from an aversion, as ho said, (o disputes, and sophistry, and (he deriving a subsislence from (he misfortunes of others. He was one of those characters, so freqMently found in civilised Europe, who imagine in.tliemselves a vqciilion to the muses, and an interest in (he tempie of literary immortality, which all their efforts are unable to realise. He certainly was not я man of genius ; and, though he had acquiied a considerable facility in the art of rhyming, he was totally a sit anger to
to those more,essential qualities·which constitute the soul of poetry. But he was tbat wbicb is better than a mere poet; he was an honest man. His heart was guileless ; bii manners were simple ; and, though he could never be cured of a lying estimation, of bis own greatness, this did nöt prevent him from feeling and discharging what was due to others. He also possessed those accom¬ plishments, the reputation'of which bad principally recommended him to my U· iher's choice ¡ he had a very decent por¬ tion of learning, and understood the ele¬ ments of Latin, Gi eek, French and Ita¬ lian, as well as possessed a smattering of astronomy, natural philosophy, mathe¬ matics and history. But -his favounte study was mythology ;, kjs select reading was in Plato, at least in his tianslators and commentators, which he incessantly perused, I am afraid, without exactly un¬ derstanding them. He liad, made gieat , , progress
progress in what I may name a con¬ cordance of all religions This was the second basis upon which, together wiih his poetica' effusions, he propose) to erect the etil flee of his fame He alle¬ gorised i>nateveMs fabulons-or- historical in the sadŕeci books of all nations, and explained fHem all to signify a certain sublime metaphysios, the detail of which Л to be found for the most part to the writings of« Duns Scotas and Thomas Aquinas Tms was exacdy the sort of tutor adapted to my diepcèüions I read with him occasionally the classes, and the elehièiiràry books of science because I was tinwillirfg totbwaM ór giv* íny One pam, more especially tny lather, and be¬ cause I waS »trohgly impressed svilii a certi n love fot literature ahd science But I studied for the irfoSt 1 tlárt, when I pleased My father nils contented to discern in rne a certain: inclination to learning,
learning, and did not think of putting on me a task greater than I was willing to endure. In the mean time there was this pecu¬ liarity in my (uilion. Though I learned from my preceptor almost every (hing valuable tbat he was able to leach, I never looked up (o him. His foibles were obvious, and did not escape my observation. The understanding of my father was incomparably greater than that of this inmate óf our family s nor did my father always refrain from ridiculing in his absence, and even sometimes al¬ luding by a passing sarcasm in his pre¬ sence, to my tutor's weaknesses. I se¬ cretly despised (he good genileman's sonnels and odes, antl listened with an unamending ear (o his mythological mysteries. I never dreamed for a mo¬ ment that it could be less (hah sacrilege to measure his understanding with my own.
çwn. This systematical persuasion of «uperiority occasionally broke out into little petulancies, which did not fail grievously to wound my kind friend's self-esteem. I was positive, assuming and conceited. But the difference of our ages prevented (hese disputes from having any serious consequences. If I entertained little deference for my (uior's talents, I was nút insensible to that tie. gree of consideration which is due to su¬ perior age, particularly when united with virtue; and my father, m his general demeanour, set me too excellent an ex¬ ample in this respect, for it to be possible for me not to profit by it. I might per¬ haps in my own nature have been suffi¬ ciently inclined to the impetuous and turbulent ; if I had been one only of a class of pupilsj it is probable enough that I should have joined in the conduct of unlucky tiicks tp be put upon my in- , ,j etruclort
sfiuctor: but I was alone; and there¬ fore, however quick-sighted I might be fo his weaknesses, they did not so ex¬ pressly present themselves to my appre¬ hension in the shape of ridicule.
CHAP-
CHAPTER ΙΓ. ί he proper topic of the narrative I am writing is (he reçoit! of my errors. To write it, is the act of my penitence and humiliation. I can expect however few persons to intcres( themselves respecting my errors, unless they are first informed what manner of man I am, what were my spontaneous and nativ e dispositions, and whether I am such a one as that my errors are worthy of commiseration and pity. This must be my apology for the topic I am here to introduce, a tojiic on which all ingenuous minds are disposed to be silent, and which shall in thi» place be passed over as slightly as pos¬ sible, my beneficence and charities. I was fond of penetialing into (he collages of (he poor. I should be greatly 'ľ '.' unjust
unj ist tT m)self, if I stifteieil the rendu to suppose th it the wild elevation md mlelleclujl luxuries I indulged, had the effect fo render mc insensible to the mi¬ series of man Kothmg was sqtnltd, bithsome and disgusting in my t)es, whcie if was possible for me fo be use¬ ful I shrunk from the society ot man in general, nnd foiesivv in the inter¬ com se of my species, something fot ever prepared to thwart my sensibility, and to jar against the iimeil world in which I lived But I never sbtonk from the pı esence of calamity Гют lhc li- beial allowance with which my fatner supplied me I relieved its wants, I shcl- teted it fiom the menaces of α prison, and I even prevailed on myself to resort willingly lo such towns as our vicinity affortlcil, to plead its ciuse, ind parley with its о ipressoi No doubt my pride did not come awiy ungrttifietf fiom these enterprises Far
Farbe it from me to assert, with certain morose and cold blooded moralists, that our best ıctıons are only more subtle methods by which self love seeks ils gratification My own heait, in every act of benevolence I ever performed, gave the lie to this etecrable doctrine I felt that it was the love of another and not of myself lhat prompted my deed, I experienced a disinterested joy in hu¬ irían relief nnd human happiness, inde¬ pendently of the question whether I had been concerned in producing it, and, when the season of retrospect irmed, I exulted m my own benevolence, from the divine consciousness that, while I had been most busily engaged in the task, my own gratification was forgotten There is however, as I have intimated, a very subtle and complicated associa tran in human feelings The geneiotts sympathy which animated my charitable deeds was ptue, it flowed from a celci- 1 !
tia! source, and maintained its crystal curreni as immingled with (he vulgar siream of personal passions, as (he oil extracted from (he most aromatic fruits, flows sepirate antl unconfounded with (he mire of (he kennel on which it may have fallen 1 here is no doubt however that the honourable character I exhi¬ bited on these occasions, prompted me (he more joyfully to seek their repetition Humanity and self complacency were distraci causes of ıry beneficence, but the litter was not less powerful than the fonnrr in nourishing it into a habit In o'fier scenes of human intercourse I played an equal and a doubtful part, the st penor eloquence or information of my competitor might overwhelm me, he might hive more passion to pursue his puipose, or more want of feeling to harden him agunst the obstacles that opposed but in the cottage to winch my benevolence led me, I appealed lile a superior
A superior nature, I hid here no όρμο sition (о contend nidi, no instil to awaken my irritability, and no supercili¬ ousness to check the operations of my sentiment It was also toi (unite for me, that the eases of distress which came befoie me m this remote part of th6 island, wert not numeious enough to distract my choice, or to lender me callous by the too great frequency of their impressions One advenluie of this sort mteicsh-d meso much by the liveliness of its inci dents that I cannot refuse btietlj to de- Scribe it m this place 1 he eason 1 id for manj davs been uncom notify «et lhe waters «ere swelled with continual runs, and (he low lands were almost inundated It was July After a series of htavy showers, one afternoon the sky bı ightened, the su ι burs( foith with redoubled splendeur, and all nature smiled. This is a moment paiticulaily deai
dear (o tlie lover of rural scenery. Dry weather tarnishes the face of naturo, fades the lovely colours of hill and valley, and profanes antl destroys those sweet odours which, more than any thing else, give the last finish to the charms ornature. I hastened to enjóy fhe golden opportu¬ nity. By long practice 1 knew how to fìnti th'fe paths where itiire and swamps would not occur to interrupt my plea¬ sure. My way led me by а steep accli¬ vity of the mountain, which overhangs the bason that forms the source of the Desunny. I gained the eastern extre¬ mity of the ridge, that I might (he more amply enjoy (he beams of (he setting sun as he sunk beneath (he waves of (he Irish sea. It was the finest evening my eyes ever beheld. The resplendent co¬ lours of the clouds, the rich purple and burnished gold in various slreaks fantas¬ tically formed and repeated, were beyond any imagination to conceive. The ι woods
woods were vocal 'Ihe scents that surrounded me, the steaming earth, the fresh and invigorating air, the hay and the flowers, constituted, so to express myself, an olfactory concert, infinitely more ravishing than all the conco.ds of harmonious sound that human art ever produced This lovely moment com¬ bined in one impression the freshness of the finest morning, with all the rich and gorgeous effects peculiar to the close of a summer's day. I stood, as I have said, on the edge of the precipice I gazed fora long time upon the various charms, that what we ordinarily, but improperly, call inanimate nature unfolded. I saw the rustic, as he retired from endeavouring to repair the injury his hay had sustained, and the flocks, as they passed slowly along to their evening s repose Presently an individual object engrossed my atten¬ tion A young lamb bad wandered by some
sonic "ïccitlent to the middle of the pre¬ cipice, and a peasint was pursuing it, and endeavouring to call it to his arms. I shuddered at the sight The preci¬ pice wi» in some parts almost perpendi¬ cular The rams had rendered the sur¬ face exceedingly slippery The peasant ought at the shrubs -ind tufls of grass as he descended , and, with a skill pe¬ culi tr to the inhabitants of the mollil¬ tani«, «t cined to pıocecd securely in the most despeíate phces. The lamb, whethei from heedlessness or wanton¬ ness idv-inced fut ther jlong the moun¬ tain sidt, as tbe shepherd pursued, W hile I wis engaged in observing this little manœuue, I suddenly heard a su cam It came fiom a spot exceed¬ ingly neai to me Two bojs sit in a nook wheic 1 h-id not perceived them, ind cried out, Mj biothci ' my brother ' A venerable giey-headed man «as with them lie evclaimed, My son ' my v Pi, i c Willum ί
William I and prepared to plunge down the precipice The sereim I had heird was the effect of what at tint moment happened *e<bt e my eyes, yet such is the curious struclure ot (he human senses, that what I heird seemed to be prior m time to what I saw lhe pei- sant had almost overtaken his lamb The lamb was on the point of escaping by в sudden leap, the peasant sprung «pon hım, and both ν eie at the bottom of the precipice, nnd plunged in the ba¬ son, now swelled into a lake, with the rapidity of lightning I flew lo the groupe I have described, I laid hold of the old man at the moment of his pui- posed descent, I cried out, " Stay, poor man ' what can you do ' I will save your son ·' I knew a path, more secure, jet Bcarcely more circuitous than that which the peasant had followed I had the advantage over him, that I nas not di¬ verted from my course by any object whose
whose deviations I pursued Por some time I «ent on safely, I saw the pea¬ sant rise to the surface of the water, and sink igain, my impatience was too gi ĺ at to combine ıny longer with wan¬ ness , I lost my footing, and in an in¬ stant I also was in the lake My fall had been from a less terrible height tlnn his, and I recovered myself I swim toward the phce whcie he had last sunk, he rose, I threw my irai loıınd Ins neck, and supported h m Iht difficulty however which remained ippcired tnsupeiable, the shores on ilmost e\ciy side were shelving, and impossible to be scaled with the pea¬ sint in my aims, who was in ι stite of insensibility As I was endeavouring to find the mean of escaping from this dif¬ ficuliy, I saw a boat idvancing toward us, it was lowed by a young woman, it approached, she was William's mis¬ ti ess, and the owner of the lamb for с г which
»hich he had ventured his life , we got hım into the boat, he was more si tinned Mth the fall, than injured by the waier, he appeared (o be gradually recovering, even (he Iamb was saved By Ihe time ne had re iched the shore, the father and the two biothers were come round to our landing place All their attention was at first turned upon William , I was nothing to them, I re¬ tired to a little distance, and observed the groupe The eldest boy supported William, as he sat, the blooming maid rubbed his temples, the father sat be¬ fore him, and clasped his son's hands between his It was an mteresdng spec¬ tacle, a painter might have sketched them as they sat. The eyes of the boy glistened with eagerness, the girl hung over her lover, while her colour alter¬ nately changed from its natural iu khttess to a languid paleness, the hairs ol the told man were as white as snow. Pre¬ sently
scntly William uttered a profound sigh , it was a welcome sound to the whole issenibly lhe leist boy was at first Λν rapped in silent itfendon , but pie scntly began to |>hy wilh Molly, (he pet lamb, that fnsked about him In ι short time tie old man excliimcd, Where is our tlel ν crei ? It vv as now my turn , I wis it ι short distance, they were all tumultuous in then expressions of gratitude The peasant girl and my¬ self supported William to his cottage, I offered my other arm to the father, the biggest boy led their favourite lamb by a siring which hung from his neck, the youngest bore in triumph his father's stick, who, as he leaned on my arm, no longer needed lis support Such was the commencement of my acquaintance with an honest family. The habitation of the girl was at a small distance from theirs, she was one of a numerous assemblage of sisters who lived with
with their mother I found tint the young persons had been lovers for more than a year, but had deferred their mar¬ riage for prudentul reasons. The in¬ dustry of Willum was the suppoit of his own house, his fuhcr was pist his labour, they bad resolved not to marry till the next brothci should be able to take tbo place now filled by »he eldest. The accident that had just occuncd, in which the cottage-maid pteserved the life of her lover, increased their affec¬ tion, and doubled their impatience, an impatience however which thev were re¬ solute to subject to the most honourable considerations. I saw them often, I loved them much William was inge¬ nuous and aclive , the maid added to a tnascuhne intrepidity most of Ihe more ¡oyely graces pf her own sex The fa¬ ther often lamented, even with teaıs, that he was no longer capable of those exertions which might enable William freely
freely to obey the dictates of his heart, The attachment which I felt to them was that of a patron and a preserver ¡ when I observed (he tlegree of content which prevailed among them, when I vvilnessed the effusions of their honest esteem and affection, my heart whispered me, This would not have existed, but for me ! I prevailed on my father (o b'esiovv a farm upon Ihe lovers ; 1 engaged, out of my own litde stock, to hire a labourer fin¬ tile old man ; they married, and I had the satisfaction to convert ове virtuous establishment into tvVo. Such were the principal occupations of my juvenile years. I loved the coun¬ try, without feeling any partiality tp what are called the sports of the coun¬ try. My temper, as I have already said, was somewhat unsocial, and so far as lelated to the intercourse of my spe¬ cies, except when some strong stimulus of humanity called me into action, un¬ enterprising.
enterprising I was therefore no hunter. I was inaccessible to the pitiful ambidon of showing, before a gang of rural squires, that I had a fine horse, and could manage him gracefully I had not the motive, which ordinarily in¬ fluences the inhabitants of the country to the cultivation of these sporta, the want of occupation I was young (he world was new (o me I abounded with occupation In the scenery of Merio¬ nethshire I found a source of inex¬ haustible amusement Science, history, poetry, engaged me by turns, and info each of them by turns my soul plunged itself with an ardour difficult to de¬ scribe In the tram of these came my visions, my beloved and vanegaled in¬ dentions, the records, which to me ap¬ peared voluminous and momentous, of my past life, the plans of my future, (he republics I formed, (he seminaries of education for which I constructed laws, the
the figure I proposed hereafter to ex¬ hibit in the eyes of a wondering world. I had a still further and more direct rea¬ son for my rejection of the sports of the field. I could not with patience re¬ gard torture, anguish and death, as the sources of my amusement. My naf ural temper, or my reflective and unde- bauched habits as a solrtaire, prevenied mc fiom overlooking the brutality and cruelty of such pursuits. In very early youlh I had been seduced, first by a footman of my father, and afteiward by my tutor, who was a gieat .over of the art, to join in an excursion of angling But, after a short trial, I abjured (he amusement for ever, and it was one among the causes of the small respect I entertained foi my tutor, that he was devoted to so idle and unfeeling an avo¬ cation.
с 5 CHAP-
CHAPTER Iff. Ат the usual age I entered myself of the university of Oxford. I felt no sfrong propensity to this change ; but I Submitted to it, as lo a thing in Ihe re¬ gular order of proceeding, and to which it would be useless to object. I was so much accustomed to self-conversation as to have little inclination to mix in the world, and was to such a degree satis¬ fied with my abilities, and progress, and capacity of directing my own studies and conduct, as not to look with any eager craving for the advice and assist¬ ance of professors and doctors. In setting out for the university I was to part with my father and my preceptor. The first of these was a bitter pang to me ; I had scarcely from the earliest of my
my temembrance ever been a wedt rt>- moved from tbe sight of the author of my being. He was (he wisest and the best man I-knew. He had all those advantages from nature, and from the •external endowments of fortune, which were calculated to maintain my rerei- rence. We had gradually become more qualified for each other's society and confidence. Our characters had many points of resemblance! we were both' serious, both contemplative, both averse to the commerce of the world. My temper, as I have said, was to art un¬ common degree impatient of contradic¬ tion ; and a certain degree of heart¬ burning bad not failed occasionally to invade my breast on this score, even to¬ ward this excellent parent. But nay re¬ sentment and indignation in these irr- stances had been short-lived. As thte only representative of his piıson ih existence, my father was ardently at¬ tached
tached to me, and the occasions he ad- ministred to my impatience and displea* •ure were exceedingly few. On the other hand, whatever faults of character might justly be imputed to me, I had yet betrayed no tokens of an unma¬ nageable boisterousness ; my propensi¬ ties were innocent ; and my pursuits, most of them, suchas seemed to con¬ duce to the improvement of my under¬ standing and my heart. In a word, my father and I, allowing for those failings which in some form or other are inse¬ parable from the human character, were excellent friends ; and it was not with¬ out many tears sbed on both sides, that we parted when I mounted tbe chaise in which I set out tor Oxford. The separation between me and my tutor, which took place at the same time, was productive of a mixed sensa¬ tion. I had long nourished in my mind • supercilious disregard of bis mental discern-
discernment, and felt as ifit were a de¬ gradation to me to listen to his instruc¬ tions. The lessons he gave me ap¬ peared as a sort of shackles, the Sym¬ bols of infantine imbecility. I was con- fident of my virtue and my perseverance, and longed to shake off these tokens of my nonage. But, beside these intellec¬ tual sources of weariness and impatience, there was an animal sensation, which made me regard the day of my separa¬ tion from my tutor as the epoch of my liberty. His voice was sickly and un- pleasing to my car. He had cultivated the art of being amiable j and bis ca¬ dences were formed by habit (o a kind of tune of candour and gentleness and humanity. His gentleness was unfor¬ tunately twin-brother to the softness of his understanding, and expressed no¬ thing so plainly as his ignorance of all the avenues of persuasion, and all the secret springs of hope, and fear, and passion,
passion, and Will, Jn addition to this, the good gentleman loved to hear him¬ self talk, and lus s planstions and ex- ¿ortations were as long as the homihes of atchbishnp Creniner. At my age, the age of restlessness and activity arid enterprise, these discourses unhappily did not generate a propensity fo sleep, and therefore produced m me an msup- portable/listlesenessand emut. Yet I did not finally part witb my pld friend without pain. It was impossible a more innocent creature should live. If I did not highly respect him, I could not help approving and loving him. Had it boti otherwise, there is some¬ thing in the nature of habit, which will forever prevent ue from parting with that to which we have been long accus¬ tomed, with indifference. I had been need to see roy preceptor every morning. He was part of the furniture «four eat·· ing-room. M we had very unfrequent oppor-
opportunities of various society, I often found relief in entering into conversa* tion with him. If he could tell me no¬ thing that appeared to me highly worthy of attention, in the way of fancy or de¬ duction, he was at least well qualified tb inform me of what he had read in books, relatively either to chronology, geography or science. I am persuaded that, if, when my tuto* left me, I had remained among the same scenes, the crisis would have been a severe one. As it was, ray understanding approved ef the separation ; I recollected that it was an event for which I had often and anxbusly sighed; yet to part with a good man, a man to whose cares and patience I owed much, who had be¬ stowed on me a thousand benefits, and between whom and myself there had, from familiarity, grown up a consider-* able affection, was no desirable task. I kissed his hand ; I thanked him a hun¬ dred
dred times for his constant exertions; with bitter self-reproach I intreated him to forgive every act of rudeness, impetu- ousness and disrespect, I had been guilty of toward him -. at this moment these things struck upon my conscience like crimes. My father was anxious that a decent provision should be made for his de¬ clining years. There was an ecclesias¬ tical living of considerable value vacant in my father's gift, and he intrealed my tutor to enter into holy orders, and ac¬ cept of it. But this my old friend stre¬ nuously deelined. His creed did not exactly accord with the principles of or¬ thodoxy contained in the code of the church of England; and he disdained о compromise with his conscience. Be¬ sides, regarding himself, as he undoubt¬ edly did, as the first luminary of his age, he could not think with perfect temper of devoting the last maturity of his mind to
to the society of fox hunting squires, and the reading prayers and sermons to rus¬ tios and old women He retired, upon a small annuity which my father settled upon bim, to a narrow lodging in an ob scure street of the metropolis, and pub¬ lished from time to time pocket volumes of poetry, and sketches of a synopsis of his mythological discoveries, which some persons bought out of respect to tbe good qualities of their author, but which no person read A third separation vvhieh took place on this occasion, and which I hope the reader will not think ¡t beneath the dig¬ nity of history to record, was betiveen me and my dog He was ir-y old and affectionate friend, and the hours I had spent tete It tete in his society were scarcely less numerous than those I bad spent with my tutor He had often been the confident of my sorrows, ard I had not found it less natural to com¬ plain
plain (о him, than the hcıomes of fablo or romance to the woods and t ie «lid«, the rocks and Ihe ocean, oflhe cruelties they experienced, or the cal unities that weighed them down (o (he endi One instance in pellicular I remember in very early youth, when my father bad spoken to ще with unusual sharpness, about some fault that in my eyes hy no means mented great seventy of cen¬ sure. I retired to the terrace in the garden which has already been men¬ tioned, threw myself at my length upon the turf, and" indulged a short fi( of mu¬ tiny and raisanrtiropy. As I lay, pooi Chilo (that was the dog's name) disco¬ vered me, and leaped toward me with hi* usual demonstradons of joy. I was in too ill a humour to notice him, and he, who seemed to have at least as much- skill as my tutor in discerning what paused in my mind, crept along the turf ipw<vd the spot which supported my head,
head, vvjth pleidtng and most difhdcnt advances At length I suffered my eye to full on him lhis bought him close to me in a moment He licked my hands and my face, with every token of gratitude, affection and delight I threw my arms mun J hnn. Fond fool 1 said I, every one else treats me with un¬ kindness and injustice, but jou will love me still' It was judged proper that this animal, w ho had passed the meridian of his life, should not accompany me in my en¬ trance into the world, but should re¬ main at home I accordingly left him in Merionethshire What was my sur¬ prise then, one day as I came down the steps of the chapel from morning prayeis, after having been a week at Oxford, at meeting my dog 1 He fawned upon me, pla>ed a thousand ex¬ travagant antics, and was transported out of himself at the joj of finding me. I afler-
I afterward learned that he had been at my rooms, had been repulsed there, and finally found his way to the chape!. By what sort ol instinct an animal is thus enabled, for a distance of one hun¬ dred and seventy miles, to discover (he trace of his master, I am unable (о ьау. The thing itself I am told is not uncom¬ mon. But every ingenuous mind to whom such an incident has occuncd, feels, no doubt, as I did, a most power¬ ful impulse of affection toward the brute who has shown so distinguished an at¬ tachment. What is the nature of this attach¬ ment î A dog, I believe, is not lees at¬ tached to a fool than to a wise man, to a peasant than to a lord, to a beggar inha¬ biting the poorest hut, than to a prince swaying the sceptre of nations and dwelling in a palace. Ill usage scarcely makes a difference. At least the most sparingly dealt kindness of the surliest gi oom
groom affords a sufficient basis of at¬ tachment The case is considerably parallel to that of a nobleman I have somewhere read of, vv ho insisted (hat his mistress should not love him for hi» wealth nor his rank, (he graces of his pt rson nor the accomplishments of his mmd, but fer himself I am inclined to blame the man who should thus subtly letine, and wantonly endeivour at a se¬ paration between him and all that is most truly his but, where lhe course of nature produces (his separation, 1 here is a principle in (he bumin mind which compels us (o find gradfication in this unmerited and metaphysical love. At Oxford the whole (one of my mind became speedily changed The situa¬ tion was altogelhei no«, md the effects ¡iroduced were stukmgly opposed to those which I bad hitherto sustained. In Merionethshire I had been ι solitary savage I had no companions, and I 2 desired
desired none The commerce of my books and of my thoughts was enough for me I lived ι an ideal world of my own creat on The actual world be¬ neath me I lntuidvely shunned I felt that every man I should meet would be either too ignoiant, too coarse, or too supercilious, to afford me pleasure The strings of my mind, so (o express it, were tuned to too delicate and sensitive a pitch it was in Eolian haip upon w hich the winds of heaven might ■ d s course excellent music, but the touch of a human hand could draw from it no thing but discord and dissonance At the university all (hat I expe¬ rienced for some weeks wis pain Na ture spoils us for rehs^iing the beauties of nature Formed as my mmd had been, almost fiom infancy, (o delight Itself with the grand, the romantic, the pregnant, the surprising, and the stu pendous, as they display themselves in 3 North
North Wales, it ıs inconceivable with what contempt, what sensations of loathing, I looked upon lhe face of na¬ ture as it shows itself 11 Oxfordshire. All here was flat and tame and tedious Wales was nature in the vigour and ani¬ mation of youth she sported in a thou¬ sand wild and admirable freaks, she disphjed a masteı-hand ; every stroke of bei majestic pencil was clear, and bold, and free. But, in the country to which I had now removed, nature to my C)es seemed to be in hei dotage , if she attempted any thing, it was the attempt of a driveller, she appeared like a toothless and palsied beldame, who calls upon her visitors to attend, who mum¬ bles slow ly a set of inarticulate and un¬ intelligible sounds, and to whom it ex¬ ceeds the force of human resolution to keep up the forms of civility. Why does the woild we live in, thus teach us to despise the world ' My
My father s house had been built m a siyle of antique magnificence The apartments were spacious, the galleries long and wide, ind the hall in whicn I was iccustomcd to walk in unfavourable weither, w as of ample dimensions The rooms ipproprntcd to my u»e at Ox¬ ford appeared compirattvely narro«, squalid and unwholsome My very soul was cabined in them There weie spacious buildings in Oxford, there were ojien and cheerful walks but how contrasted with those to which I hid been accustomed ' There I cxpitialcd fiee, I possessed them alone Nituie was my friend, and my soul fumihaily discoursed with her, unbroken in upon by the intiusion of the vulgar ind tl e piotane Here I hid no fc ieen and heaven formtd letieat in which I could hide myself my path wis crossed by boys, 1 was elbowed by govvnmen, then vulgar gabble ind light I ughtti peijt
perpetually beset my ears, and waked up curses in my soul I could pursue no ti un of thought, the cherished visions of my former years were broken and scatteted in a thousand fragments I know that (here arc men who could puisne an undivided occupadon of thought amidst all the confusion of Babel, but my habits had not fitted me for this I Ind had no difficulties to sirtigglc wilh , and I «as prepared to surmount none The morning of life is pliable and do¬ cile I speedily adapted my-elf (o my s tuation As I could not escipe from lhc coxcombs of the university, I sur- leiitleicd mvself with the best grice I ould into (licu h mds It is the first step only tint costs a sdiiggle At the commencement tbc sav ige of Merıo- nclhsh ι e inule but an uncouth and hi dicious fiğine among the pert young- stei s of Oxfoi d Then speech and ges- voL ι n tures
tures were new to mc. I had hitherto spent more words, the repedtion of les¬ sons only excepted, in soliloquy thin in conversation. My phrases were those of enthusiasm and the heart. They had the full and pregnant form which was given them by a mind crowded with ideas and impelled to unload itself, not the sharp, short, pointed turn of a speaker whose habitual object is a jest. My muscles were not formed to a smile, or, if at any time they had assumed that expression, it was the smile of elevated sentiment, not that of supercilious con¬ tempt, of petty triumph, or convivial jollity. As soon however as I had chosen my part m the dilemma before me, I became instinct with a principle, from which the mind of ingenuo ıs you h ıs never to¬ tally free, the principle of curiosity. I was prompted to observe these animals, so different from any that had been be¬ fore
fore presented to my view, to study their motives, their propensities and their tempers, the passions of their souls, and the occupations of their intellect. To do this effectually, it was necessary that I should become familiar with manv, and intimate with a few. I entered myself an associate of their midnight orgies, and selected one young person foi a friend, who kindly undertook my in(roductton into the world I( happened in (-his, is in all cases of a similar nature, that familiarity annihi¬ lated wonder As the hero is no hero to his valet de chambre, so the monster is no monstei to his friend 1 hrough all the varieties of the human race, how¬ ever unlike m dien prominent Ieatures, there are sufficient chords of sympathy, ind evidences of a common natine, to enable us to undeisfind each othei, and find out the clue to eveiy Seeming ine gulanly I soon felt tint my new asso » 2 cules
ciates wero of the same species as my¬ self, and that the passions w hich stimti lated them, had seeds of a responsive class, however hitherto unadverted to and undeveloped, in my own bosom It is surprising how soon I became like to the persons I had so lately won- ■dcted at and despised Nothing could be mare opposite, in various leading re¬ spects, than the Fleetwood of Merioneth shire and the Fleetwood of the univer¬ sity The former had been silent and apparently sheepish, not perhaps more from awkwirdness than pride He was contemplative, absent, enthusiastical, a worshipper of nature His thoughts were full of rapture, elevation and poetry His eyes now held commerce with the phenomena oflheheivens, and now were bent to earth in silent con tcmplafion and musing ľheie was nothing m them of tbe level and hori¬ zontal His bosom beat with the flat- 5 tenng
(ering consciousness, tint he was of л class superior to the ordinary race ol man It «as impossible to be of j purei nature, or to have a soul more fice from every thing gro4, sordid and groveling The Heetwood of the university hid lost much of this, and had exchanged (he generous and unsullied pride of the « 111- dt-rer, for a pride of a humbler cast Once I feared not the eye of man, ex¬ cept as I was reluctant to give him pain ; now I wis afraid of ridicule This very fear made me impudent. I hid the qualms and apprehensiveness of my na¬ ture, under " a swashing and a martial outside ' My jest was always ready. I willingly engaged in every scheme of a ga) and an unlucky nature I learned to swillow my glass freely, and to de¬ spise the charicttr of a flincher. I care¬ fully stored my memory with convivial and licentious songs, anil learned to sing them in a manner that caused the «alls
walls of our supper-room to echo with thunders of applause. Here, as m Wales, I advanced toward the summit of tbe class of character to which I de¬ voted my ambition, and was acknow¬ ledged by all my riotous companions for an accomplished pickle In the contrast of the two personages I have described, I confess my memory has no hesitation on which side to determine her preference Oh, Cader Idris ' oh, genius of the mountains ' oh, divinity, that presidest over the constellations, the meteors, and tbe ocean ! how was your pupil fallen I how the awestruck and ardent worshipper of tbe God who shrowds himself in darkness, changed into the drinker and the debauchee, the manufacturer of " a fool-born jest," and the shameless roarer of a licentious catch 1 I did not however entirely depart from the dispositions which had charac¬ terised
tensed me in Wales My poetical and contemplative character was gone , all that refinement vvhieh distinguished mc fiom the gros er sons of earth My undersíandingwasbruíificd , I no longer gave free scope lo (he workings of my own mind, but became an artifici il per¬ sonage, foimed after a wretched nnd contemptible model But my benevo¬ lence and humanity «eie stil (he sime Among the various feats of a college- buck I attempted, there was none m which I came oft with so little brilliancy, as that of" quizzing a fresh man," and making a fellow-creature miserable by a sportive and intemperate brutality What scenes of this sort I have witnessed ' There is no feature of man, by which our common nature is placed in so odi¬ ous and despicable a light, as the pro¬ pensity we feel to laugh at and accumu¬ late the distresses of our fellow-creatures, when those distresses display themselves with
with tokens of the ungainly and un¬ couth. I engaged in a project of this «ort once or twice, and then abjured the ambition for ever. Thenceforward it was my practice lo interfere in behalf of (he sufferers by such hostilities; and my manner carried with it that air of decision, that, though the interference was unwelcome, it was successful ; and the dogs of the caustic hunt let go their hold of the bleeding game. Another motive actuated me in this plan of pro¬ ceeding. Though I had assumed an impudent and licentious character, I de¬ spised к ; end I made conscience of de¬ bauching new converts into the inglori¬ ous sehool, which was> usually the ob¬ ject and end of these brutal jests. I was contented to associate with thotc whose Characters I judged to be finished al¬ ready, and whom I ¡iersua<!edinjself rny encouragement would not nnke wor-e ; and thus with wretched sophistry I worked
worked my mind into the belief that, while I yielded toa vicious course, I was- doing no harm. In the midst of all Ihis, my heart entered with prompt liberality into the difficulties and distresses of others ; and, as in Wales I was assidu¬ ous to relieve the wants of the industri¬ ous and (be poor, so in Oxford the em¬ barrassments of those young men, whose funds, derived from their families, did not keep pace with the demands of their situaťion, exciíed in me particular sym¬ pathy, and received fiequenl and some¬ times secret relief from (be resources wiih which my father's bounty supplied. me.
-(...gir,.
u 5 CHAP-
CHAPTER IV. Ih this place I feet inclined to relate one of those stories of ingenious intellectual victory, as tbey considered them, of dull and unfeeling brutality, as tbey really were, in which too many of my college- contemporaries prided themselves. A young man, during my residence at the university, entered himself of our col¬ lege, who was judged by the gayer Oxo¬ nians singularly well-formed to be the butt of their ridicule. The dress in which he made his appearance among us was ungainly and ludicrous : tbe flaps of his waistcoat extended to his knees, and those of hk eeşi«hnost to his heels : his black, cotLM^bbipİDg hair, parted on tbe forehead, .waèieVéry 'where of equal length, and entirely buried his ears be¬ neath
neath its impervious canopy He had hitherto been brought up in solitude under tbc sole direction of bis father, a conntry clergyman, but he was an exv cellent classic scholar and a mathemati¬ cian, and his manners were (he most innocent and unsuspecting that it is pos¬ sible to imagine In addition to these qualities, he had an exalted opinion of his own intellectual accomplishments, and he had brought with bun among his other treasures, the offspring of his stripling meditations, a tragedy, found¬ ed on the story of the Fiflb Labour of Hercules In this performance Ihe contents of the Augean stable were set ou' in great pomp of description, the ordure which had accumulateti in thirty years from the digestion and dejection of three thou¬ sand oxen, was amplified and spread out to the fancy, and W ithcrs (this was the name of the poet) might be said, like VirgU,
Virgil, to " fling about his dung with an «ir of majesty." The tragedy opened with a pathetic lamentation between the groom and tbe herdsman of the king, respecting the melancholy condition of the stable, and the difficulty of keep¬ ing the cattle which were so unteyally lodged in-any creditable appearance. A herald then entered with a proclama¬ tion, declaring that three hundred of the king's oxen should be the prize of him who should restore the stable to a whol¬ some and becoming state. The chorus next sang an ode, in which they exposed the miseries of procrastination, and de¬ clared tbat none but a demigod could accomplish the task which had so long been postponed. In the second act Her¬ cules appeared, and offered to under¬ take the arduous operation. He has an audience of the king, who dwells upon the greatness of the effort, and exposes in » loftier style, what had already been described
desenbed by his servants in familiar verse, the filth the hero would have to encounter Hercules answers modestly, and enters into the history of the four labours he had already accomplish¬ ed The bardın is struck, and the chorus admire the form and port of the hero, and pray for his success The third act begins with expressing the ge¬ neral terror and aston shment Hercu¬ les removes the oxen from their stalls ¡ and then a mighty rushing sound a heird of the nvcr leaving its ancient bounds, ind pouring its tide through the noisome and infectious walls The rest of (he play consisted of the argu¬ ments on the part of the king and of the hero, as to whether Hercules lud fulfilled his engagement, and the punishment of the tyrant Here míny hints were boi- rowed from the contendon of Ajax and Ulysses in Ovid, respecdng the prefer¬ ence of wisdom and ingenuity ovei brute
brute force : king Augeas insisting that the nuisance should have been displaced with shovel and wheel-barrow; while Негсч!» with great eloquence main¬ tained that to remove the whole evil at once, by changing the course of a river, was a more wonderful and meritorious achievement. This tragedy soon became a source of inexhaustible amusement to the wits and satirists of our college. One of the drollest and demurest of the set bad first wormed himself into the confidence of Withers, and extorted from him his se¬ cret, and then, under the most solemn engagements not to name the matter to a living creature, obtained the loan of this choice morsel of scenic poetry. He had no sooner gained possession of it, than he gave notice to four or five of his associates ; and they assembled the same evening to enjoy over a bottle the treasure they bad purloined. It must be owned
owned that the subject of the drama was particularly calculated to expose the ef¬ fusions of its author to their ridicule. The solemn phrases and the lofty orna¬ ments with which every thing was ex¬ pressed, afforded a striking contrast to the filth and slime which constituted the foundation of the piece. A topic of this sort, however slightly mentioned, must appear low and absurd ; but, when the dung, accumulated in thirty years by three thousand oxen, together with the solemn engagement between a demi¬ god and a king for its removal, is set out in all the pomp of verse, the man must be more sad than Heraclitus, and more severe than Cato, who could resist the propensity to laughter at the hear¬ ing such a tale. In the present case, where every joyous companion was pre¬ determined to find malerials for merri¬ ment, the peals of laughter wtre obstre¬ perous and innumerable ; many passages í were
«ere encored Ъу the unanimous voice of the componyi and ifi conclusion the •coffer who had obtained for them their present amusement, was deputed to pro¬ cure them the higher and more exqui¬ site gratification of hearing the piece gravely declaimed to them by its au¬ thor. Accordingly in в few days he waited on Withers with a grave and melan¬ choly face, manuscript in hand, and confessed that by a very culpable neg¬ lect he had fallen into a breach of the engagement he had made to the author on receiving it. He then named a young man of ingenuity and fancy in lbs same college, who had obtained considerable notoriety, by several pieces of fugitive poetry, which were much admired at Oxford. Withers had heard of him, and felt that respect which might naturally be expected for a brother of his own vocation. Morrison, the jester,
jester, added, that this votary of the muses and himself were upon so inti¬ mate terms, that each bad a key to the other's chamber ; that he, not recollect¬ ing this at the moment, bad left the ma¬ nuscript, being called away by a parti¬ cular occasion, open upon his desk, had locked the door, and departed ; and that the poet, arriving soon after, had disco¬ vered, and seized with avidity the Fifth Labour of Hercules. Wilhers was greatly distressed at (his tale. He bad (hose feelings of modesty, which, under certain modifications, кге most incident to such persons ai are pervaded with an anticipation of Ibeir future eminence. He did not pretend however to blame his friend fur a fault, into which he seemed so innocently to have fallen, and which he so ingenu¬ ously confessed. On the other band Morrison soothed the dramatist by de¬ scribing to him tbe transports of admira¬ tion
tion with which the poet had been im¬ pressed in the perusal of this virgin tra¬ gedy. While they were yet in conversation, the poet knocked at the chamber-door. The verses of this young man, Frevven by name, were not deficient in merit, or even in delicacy ; bul his features were harsh, and his manners coarse. lie be¬ gan with saying, that hu could by no means deny himself the pleasure of soli¬ citing the acquaintance and friendship of a youth, to whose mind he had the va¬ nity to believe bis own was in so many respects congenial. He then launched out in rapturous praise of the Fifth La¬ bour of Hercules. Seeing the manu¬ script on the table, he requested permis¬ sion to open it, and point out to the au¬ thor one or two places which had struck him as particularly excellent. He then read part of a speech from king Au- geas's groom, and that with such em¬ phasis
phosis of delivery, and seeming enthu¬ siasm of intonation, as might have per¬ suaded the most sceptical by stander that he was really smitten with approbation of the \ erses he pronounced The eyes of W ithers glistened wilh joy His self love had never experienced so rich a treat Fiewen then proceeded to de¬ scant with great ingenuity upon certain metaphors and ornaments of style inter¬ spersed through the composition, show¬ ing how happily they were chosen, how skilfully adapted, bow vigorously .ex¬ pressed, and how original they were in the conception and, though some of the clauses he fixed upon were to such a degree ab ¡urti, that the poet himself, when he heard them thus insulated from their connection, began to suspect that all was not right, yet the remarks of his panegyrist were so subtle, and above all were delivered with an air of
of such perfect sincerity, that he finished witb being completely the dupe his false friends had purposed to make him. In conclusion, Mr. Frewen observed that he had a select party of friends, whom he was accustomed to make judges of his own productions, and be earnestly intreated Wilhers, that be would no longer conceal his talent, but would con¬ descend to recite the tragedy he had written, to tbe same circle. Withers unaffectedly shrunk back,. with the diffidence of a young man, wbo had never yet in so- striking a manner burst the bounds of modesty ; but, urged alternately by the solicitations and the encomiums of his tempters, he suffered them to " wring from him his slow con¬ sent." A day was then to be fixed. He refused to make it the same evening : he confessed to his visitors that it would be an unprecedented exertion to bim, and
and that he must string up his mind to the task it was ultimately fixed far the day following In the interval Withers had many qualms Betw-een the acting of a dreadful thing; And the fitst motion, all the interim is Like a Phantasma, or a hideous dream. He felt the sort of arrogance which was implied, m the seating himself in the chair of honour, fixing the eyes of dif. ferent persons, strangers, upon him, and calling their attention to the effusions of his brain, as to something worthy of their astonishment He recollected the faults of his poem, the places where he had himself doubted whether he had not embraced a Sycorax instead of an angel. He recollected his youth and inexpe¬ rience, and the tementy of which he had in reality been guilty, in undertak¬ ing
ingin his first essay to celebrate perhaps the most prodigious of the labours of the immortal Hercules He remembered what he had somewhere heard of the sa tincal and malicious turn of the elder Oxonians, and feared to become thetr butt On the other hand, he called to mind the beauties of his poem, and was encouraged Above all, he considered his character and fortitude as at stake in tbe engagement he had contracted, and was determined at every hazard to complete it The evening arrived, the company assembled, the unhappy poet, the vic¬ tim of their ridicule, was introduced Mr Frewen, at his entrance, took him by the hand, led him into the middle of the room, made a short oration in his praise, and m the name of the company thanked him for his condescension in ad¬ mitting ihem to such a pleasure as they were about to receive After a vartefy of
of grimaces on the part of the persons present, the manuscript was laid on the table The poe( (ook it up to read, but, in the first line, his voice failed bim, he turned pale, and was obliged to de¬ sist Morrison, his original seducer, and another, had so phced their chairs that their countenances and action could not be perceived by the reader, they be¬ ing parily behind him (hey winked (he eye, and pointed (he finger, (o each oiher, and by various gestures endei- vouied to heighten the entertainment of fhe party The table was covered with bodies and glasses Frewen, when he saw the unaffected marks of Wilhers s distress, began (o feel an impulse of compunction, but he knew that such an impulse would render him for ever contemptible to the jire^cnt socieiy, and he suppressed i! Ht filled Withers a bumpei, which he obliged him to take off, he snatched the play from his hand, and
taă read with much gravity and articu¬ lation tbe opening speech from th·· stable keeper to the herdsman, in which the former bewails the miserable state of the stalls, and, not knowing what to quarrel with, shows himself ready to quarrel with his fellow-ofhcer, laments tbat there are such animals as oxen, or that oxen cannot live but by food and digestion This speech was received with bursts of applause, and Frevven particularly commended the " long ma¬ jestic march and eneigy divine" of the concluding verse The poet was en¬ couraged , he had had time to reason with himself, and recover his fortitude, Frevven restored to htm his manuscript, filled him another bumper, and the scene commence 1 That my readers may more exactly un¬ derstand the spirit of the transaction, I will insert here a part of the chorus at the end of the third act, with which the
the auditors pretended to be especially struck. ι Illustrious hero, mighty Heiciües ' Much Inst thou done, and uonilrously nchie\'d ' Before th) strength, The Nemeæan lion fell subdued, Clos tl in a worse than Cornish hug ' Uie heitls of Hydn, one by one, were crush d Beneath thy club ot br-ns : \\ hile little Iolas, thy gentle squire, Stood by, With red hot salamander prompt, And sear d eich streaming wound ' 1 he st ig so swift of Œnoe tlie fur lhou didst o ertake, Or, if not overtake. Didst с -itch it in a trap ' I low glar d tlie eyes of Ery mantlius boar How fierce his tusks ' Hov. terrible his claws ' Ни fire ind fury calm thou didst survey. And cilm didst knock his brains out ' 2 Oh, mighty man' Or rather shall I name thee Go4 ' A different labour now demands thy care 1 · No fangs now menace, and no tongues now hiss, VOL ie No
No rage now loáis, nor awifiiiess flies thy grasp, Terror но longer waite thee, But strength is here ïequir d , btrengtb., patience, constaucy, aud endless reso- ìutioii 3 Behold these mountains, how they rise ' The slow collections of three Inmdred moons, Nay, almost four 1 Sleek were the oxen tint prcduc d them, And royally were fed ' Canst thou ab-ite the nuisance 5 What gulph so wide, that would receive its bulk ' Much likelier might st thou seek, With single strength, To level Ossa, or to cast momit Athos Down to the vasty deep ' 4 Here too thou must encountei odours vile. And standbogrnn d wilh muck Thy cheeks besmear d, Thy I neaments deform d, Beneath the loathsome load A guise how much unworthy such a hero ί Ab, по ' those godlike fingers ue er were made To ply the nightman s trade ' Ah, cruel fate ' Ah, step dame destiny T Inflicting
Inflicting such disgrace Upon the last bom son of mighty Jovp ' One apology may be mide for the coutriveis of tins scene, that they by no means foiesaw in the outset, how far they should be drawn in fo go, and the serious evils of which they might become nuthois The purpose of the auditors vv is, under extravagant and tumultuous e\prcssions of applause, to smother the in¬ dications of their ridicule and contemjil In this however they could not uniformly sttcccctl Λ ¡ihiasc of a ludicrous natuie in the piece, an abrupt fill fiom what was deviled to something meanly fami¬ li ir or absind, would sometimes unex¬ pectedly осеш, and pioduce a laughter tint could not bo restrained. Nor would the feelings illteti to laughter always oc¬ elli in the nght place Persons cigei m search of (lie ludicrous, will often find it in in linage, or a modeofexjues- E a sion,
sion, which by others, not debauched with this prepossession, would be found fnught with pleasing illustration and na turai sentiment The circle too, assem bled on this occasion, acted by sy mpalhy upon each other, and jointed many a joke, and gave s igour to man) a bur¬ lesque idea, which perhaps to any one of tbe associates in his retirement would bave appeared unworthy to move a ri¬ sible muscle For a short time the jesters w ho had made Withers their prey, observed a cer tain degree of decorum They bit then lips, affectedly raised their ej es, applied the finger to the mouth, the nose, or the forehead, and thus pacified and ap¬ peased their propensities to ridicule One and another incessantly showed themselves lavish m commendation of the beauties of the poem, and with every compliment the glass of Withers was filled, and he was excited to drink Presently
Piesently the Hugh, imperfectly sup¬ pressed, btoke out in one solitary con¬ vulsion, and wis then disguised in a cough, or in effort to sneeze The dumb gestmes of the auditors were in- perceived by the reader, who for the most pai t kept his eyes on the paper, and but larely ventured, when he came to some holdei flight, to look round lum for applause Then the countenances of the hearers suddenly fell, and their limbs were at once composed into serenity. lhis transidon produced an effect sin¬ gularly humorous, but which was wholly lost upon Witheis, who had the misfot- (une to be purblind. By and by an outrageous laugh burst forth at once from one of the audience. The poor nov ice, (heir v icdm, slarted, as if he had (iod on a serpent. Frewen, making a motion to him (o be tranquil, addressed the offender wilh much appa- reni giavity, and begged to know what he
he could find ludicrous in the passage winch bad just been read, at the s mc time repeating the two last lines with a full antl lofty voice 'lhe culţii it, as ьооп is be could îcsumchb sciitiuincs , Innubi) sued for pai don, antl deci u ctl Ilı it I с 1 inched at nothing m the poein, ot winch no one could be a sinceici ad¬ mirer, but that Ins fancy had been tickled at the sight of a cork-scicw (picking it up), which had just droppetl fiom Jack Jones's pocket. This apology was ad¬ mitted. In a few minutes tbe same per¬ son broke out into an equally loud and clamorous fit of merriment, in which be was now joined b) two or thice others. Greater anger, asthe tumult subsided, w as expressed lovvaid him , a moie bungling antl lmpetfect apology was tendeteti; and Fievvcn oľľeied, if Mr Witlitts ic- qiiuctl it, to turn the ctilpnt out of the loom. In one or two instances the poet was lcquestcd to reati agun some jas- sute
»i re winch the icij ics ci he le I pirti- t nl lit to atlının , md these 14 e mo ıs rilliini, -illetime s quilts ttl, nul o IlL- tltllta ungovernable. In oue oi luu t t th_ elıoııtbcs stvcıal ol t 'andı ot s re¬ pelled the concluding vci-es allei the rt idei, sometimes ıs ııeııîv ıs jtus^ıble keejiiiiiţ pate Willi hım, ond at othei times jjtiisttiii^ one mother after (he rrnnnci of a fit'e in music ; mil, when (he atllhoi expicsscd lus suifirr-e ı( this phcnomction, they dcfentletl it, fit»t from (he enthusiasdo admiiatiun they felt, an 1 next ftoin the nature of a cho¬ rus, winch wi, designed (o be sung, or ch ,t le 1, ind not spoken, antl from their de-ate to enhince their plei-auc, by biingine; the tragedy they weie heirmg toas ne ir a resemblance as they could, in this respect, to the state of actual cx- lubilion By this inne the mind of Witliers was ш
in ι pitiable situation That noviceslup and (odl inexperience on his pai t, which mide his torture, constituted the greit pleasure of his remorseless toimcntois He was unaccustomed to wine, aml they had mule him extremely uicbiiaicd He wis umccustomed to high commenda¬ tions antl vociferous ippl utse, intl (hey had raised his mind and pin er feelings info astile of mtosicilion, lilllc infcnor (o thai of (he moie pondcious md cor¬ poreal pardclcs of his neives aud brain. All «as confusion and tempest «itimi hım Upon lhis siile of (he man «ere superinduced the demonstrations of ridi¬ cule and laughter which by degrees broke out ııı t'ıe audience His brain was clouded , Ins understanding was in a maze, he apprehended nothing di¬ stinctly Grave apologies were made to lum, and he accepted them scnouslv , though, presently after, he was com pellet! to doubt whether they did not j «holly
wholly originate in the grossest hypo¬ crisy Had he possessed the smallest portion of knowledge of the world, he could not hive Inrbourcd a moment's uncertainty, but he was m a'l these lenpects a child They nursed him, so to speak, m mistake, and rocked hım in the entile of delusion By degieesthey persuitlcd him to mount upon llie tabic, tint he might učite some of the most brilli nit pissigcs with greiter effe t. Ihey crowned him with vvreiths ol par¬ sley, vvh'ch bippencd tobe the vegetable ■it hind, they anointed him with liba¬ tions of vine, and by this time his ap- piehension wis so completely subvcited, that he was unable to distinguish whethei these things weie dont in mockery or honour, and willingly le- signctl bini«elf to the moie agicoible. consti uction At length the leading was finished, and the notera (for all was now m a state of not) burst e $ open
Open the door, jiliced the jiocl, crowned with parsley, and (ncklmg with wine in a chair, and carried him triumphantly through the streets to his ipartment, with shou(s, and vociferation, and up roar, enough to aw ike the dead Thedeluded noteis, forthcyhbotiicd under a state of delusion no( less com¬ plete (han (heir victim, persuaded them¬ selves to look back wiih compi icency upon (nc diversion of the evening, rod even agreed thit they had not jet ex¬ tracted amusement enough from so rich a subjeel as (he unhappy Witheis 1 he ringleaders, in their msidate tla 11 st iftcr this species of gratification, p'ninetl a further scene to be grafted on whit h id passed in the evening of the reading * Morrison iccordingly waited on Wi¬ thers the next morning, and found him a prey to a misci ıble head ache lhe poet was also, now tint the fumes of wine were dissipated, full of mehncholy reflections
reflections on (he incidents of (he day, and extremely apprehensive that in all that hid passed he had been an object of mockeiy to (he assembly. Mornson put the best gloss upon the whole, as¬ sured Ins elupe that ill was donc in s ober sadness, apologised foi lho most exlra- vif int ¡nrticulais by observing thit (he wl olo pnly wis nearly chunk, and de¬ ci ned on his honour that the m inifcsta- tions, however uncouth, w eie those of gì nume idmiiatioii, irkiltip tint, for the s ko oí then sinieiilv antl nood incan¬ ii g, the poe( ought ceitnnly to excuse (he rudeness and uiigiacioustic^s of (he form they had issumed During the hai mgtic of (Ins buííòun, (he eyes of Witheis once ot linee flashed flic , they were (timed ujion the speikci with a scaiching jienetration as if they would look him through , ind (he poet swore a gi eat oath, that he believed he vv as de¬ ceived,.
cciicd, and lint, if it were so, he notili! die sooner (han endure it This subject having been discussed, Morrison informed Withers that he had a piece of bid news to communicate (o him The mastrr of (he college, he said, had got infoi m ition of the no( of the preceding nighf, and (he disoidei (hey had committed in (he slrccls, anil had hinted that he «as determined lo mike an example While Ihey «cie upon lhis painful topic, Fievvcn enteied, and added lo Morrison's intelligence, (ha( by some uniccountable accidcni the master had got hold of the name of Wi- thers, and that, as he had been carried in the chair, it was to be feared that ho would be selected as the object of pu¬ nishment Wilhers was a young man of great intrinsic modesty and sensibility, and he felt the utmost distress aí (his in¬ formation. While his hollow-hearted com-
companions were pretending to console bim, α young man, a stranger to Wi thers, entered, in the character of a mes- senget from the master, and summoned the poet to make his appearance before his academical superior, the same even. mg, soon ifter sunset Michinery, such as (he malicious antl riotous genius of (he young men con¬ cerned in the plot suggested to (heir thoughts, was piepared for the occasion In a chur neir the will, ai (he upper end of a spacious room the use of which (hey piocuied, «as seated a puppet, dressed up in a gown and wig similar to those of the master, which it was pro posed to pass on (be unfortunate Wi¬ thers for the identical person of the su penor «hose repioof he dreaded This image, by the ingenuity of some of the parties to the plot, was so contrived, as (o have lis heid ind hands capable of being moved by one of the confederates, who
who unseen held (he springs for (hat purpose Morrison, so much admired by his fellow-collegians for wit and hu¬ mour, had among other accomplish¬ ments (he art, commonly called venlnlo- quism, of uirering articúlale sounds with¬ out my visible motion of the lips, ind of causing his loice to appear to come from whitevei quartei he pleased, added to which, he was an excellent mimic, and could copy the peculiarities of speech in almost any one he pleased, to a supreme degree The fame of these qualities would no doubt in a short time have reached the ears of Wi- thers, but he vvas newly come to loe university, and hid as jet no suspicion that Morrison was even consideied as a wit In the evening, just after (he shui of the day, Witheis was introduced into the apartment which had previously been prepared He was accompanied by Mor¬ rison,
rison, Fienen and the other offenders , some having thrust themselves unau¬ thorised into the list of offenders, that they might have an opportunity to be witnesses of the expected sport The figure which stood for the master of the college, then appeared to call over the names of the culprits, antl a young per¬ son below him, who seemed to officiate as bis secretary, answeied to each of the names that the person called upon was present The master began his ha¬ rangue He addressed himself first to Frewen, and iftcr to Morrison, and each oi these attempted a sort of excuse for the outrigc, antl professed great con¬ ti mon The address to Mornson was paitieularly diverting to the spectators, every one of w hom, except Withers, well knew that it was Mornson m peison who thus pronounced a seveic and apparently angry censure upon himself The speech of the principal was then directed
directed toward Withers, whom he de¬ clared he felt himself obliged to treat as the ringleader, as he had been the person elevated in the chair , he added that cer¬ tain privileges were by long practice conceded to (he senior síudenís in (he university, buí (hat i( was intolerable foi a young man, not many weeks enferai in this seat of learning, (o be seen drunk in (he s(ree(s, and (o he complained ot foi a no(- Withers defended himself with moie spint than vvas expected. He protestul Ihat he was no diunkaid, and was ex¬ ceedingly chagrined that an unfortunate accident had exhibited him under tint character. He added that, so far from being (he ringleader in the not, he was made an unwilling tool in the hands of others. Name them I replied the mastei, in a strong and imperious voice. Name them ' rejoined Withers no, I will
I will not be an informer consider me as the ringleader ' He then proceeded to question the propnety of the rule just deliveied, of punishing strictly in the jiintoi , what was winked at, or slightly animadverted on, in those of longer standing Sir, interrupted the master, you were not sent for to criticise our rules, and to teach me how to conduct myself, and you have just shown yourself refractory to the first principles of academical dis¬ cipline by refusing to become what you с 11 tn informer W hit now remains is, that I shoultl v indicate the decorum of the college, by punishing jou for the not you have committed, and I ac¬ cordingly order you to strip off your gown in my presence, and direct that you be excluded from all academical privileges for one month, at the end of which tcim, upon your expressing a pro¬ per
per degree of sorrow and ninnili Кюп, you may possibly be restored Withers fell mdtçmní at (his cen¬ sure, and wis going (o remonstrate, but was prevailed on by (hose who stoud neat him to stibmil He how¬ ever ihrew his gown to (he floor vvilh Some lesendncnt and could not refmn expressing in thice or four wortls some contempt foi such tupping', and die privileges annexed to (hem At this moment, to his utter astonishment antl Confusion the figure lifted up ils h md, as if In the intention of striking him This indignity put Withers beyond ill patience, and «orket! hım info a mo¬ mentary in anily he fie« at the m ister¡ and positively begin to cuff (he image with violence the machine was unable (o lesisi tins stet ics of rudeness, and ac. tuilly fell in pieces about (he ears of ils assailant The candles were exim- guishetl,
guibbcd, and the room left in utter darkness, and at the same moment a long, obstreperous and deafening peil of laughter burst out from every person in fhe assembly Thus ended the scene plotted and conducted by these ingenious gentle¬ men , but not thus ended the conse¬ quences winch resulted from it Tbe impression it made upon the mind of Withers was indelible. Ho had given htm elf up passively from the beginning to the ideas which his deltiders wished to excite in him , the last incident there¬ foie of their coined) had tiken him at once, like ι tbtindcib t He slunk away m confusi m and silence His mmd bad been violently acted upon by tlie events before hnn, while the whole appeared to him as scnous He had been a stringer to any greater applause than that of having construed well .an ode in Horace, and he npw found himself
himself treated m one of our famous seats of learning as the foremost among the votaries of the muses. He had been a stranger to oointed îebuke under the indulgent discipline of his father, ind he now found himself called before the dignified master of a college, and treiled wilh injustice and contumely He hid been acting, as he imagined, a high and conspicuous part before his fellow-col¬ legians, acquiring laurels in the temple of Apollo, and asserting the cause of justice against insolent and ty tannic au¬ thority. On a sudden all this «as le- versed, instead of honour be encoun¬ tered disgrace, he found he had been made a laughing-stock (o all aionnd him The concluding moment of the business explained to him (he whole, he saw that the applauses he bid icceived were all ironical, that he had been in¬ vited to the reading his play, only ior contempt, that he had been tieafed as the
the weakest, the absurdest, and the most despicable of mankind The scene of the mastei the affected reprimand he had received, the stripping of his gown, the attempted blow, constituted a still deeper insult It must be acknowledged that this was no flattering induction of an innocent and artless rustic into a gieat university Withers lifted up his he id no more He could not bear fo face any of his fellow students, those, who had not been actors in the plot against him, were, he nothing doubted, well acquainted with all that had passed, he shut himself up, as much as possible, in his own apartment Afler a brief in¬ terval, it was sufficiently visible that his intellects were impaired, a keeper was planted over him He raved against poets and poetry, he seized with avi¬ dity every scrap of written paper he could meet witb, that he might commit it
it to the flames These excesses how ever were rare the greater part of his time was spent m dejection and silence One morning he escaped from the man who was appointed to watch him, and was soon after found drowned in (he Isis The cause of his unhappy ci(a strophe became public, the particulars were enquired inio, and Frewen and Morrison were expelled from (he uni- \ersi(y wuh a disgrace which pursued them for (be rest of their lives Ihis may serve as one sptcimen of the sort of grave fared (rick and delusion whicn the choice spirits among us de lighted (o put upon the more innocent and unsuepert ng members of the uni versify The example here given w ıs perhaps the most memorable, ind at tended with the most fatal effects, of my that occurred in my time jBut all the tricks which were pla^fd were of the 5 same
siine class, all turned upon considering the simplicity displayed, ind the anguish endured, by lhc sufferer, as a source of mcrument For myself, as I have said, I had no relish for this imusemcnt. Once ot twice, meonstdentcly and pre¬ cipitately, I yielded to the iinpoilumly of my compimons, md becimt en tangled in such adventures, but I pre senfly abjuied eycry thing of the sort, and, hiving set my fice aga ııst pica suies so criminal in their temper, wis repeatedly successful in delnering the bleeding prey from the jius of its dc vourers The adventure which I have bei e rc corded may seem foreign to my object, of painting mv own story I know not where honcver I could hive found a more apt illustration, to set befoie my reader the chiraeter of the peisons by whom I was now seduced, md with whom I at present associated They were
were such youths as Frewen, Morrison and the rest, whose applauses I sought, whose ridicule awed me, and whose judg¬ ment I looked to for the standard of my actions.
CHAP-
CHAPTER V. İr ıs not my purpose to convert these honest pages into a record of dissipa¬ tions , far less, of the rude and un¬ seemly dissipations of an overgrown boy. There are few characters more repulsive than that in which we find conjoined the fresh and ingenuous hneiments of ι young man, in whom the down has scircely ) et shıdt tl his pi asperous check, with the imputici cc of a pnctiscd liber¬ tine I look bick upon it with honor Youth, it once it has broken thiough the icstmnts of decoium, is the mini¬ ster of cruelty. Even in me, whose dis¬ position wis natuially kind and humane, there was too much of this It is suffer¬ ing on!), that can inspire us with true vol i t sjmpithj,
sympithy tint can render us tltvc to those (rifles which constitute so laigc a jioilion of eirthly misery or happiness, (hai с in give us a feeling of (h t in gtush, which, sometimes in human be ings, as mos( evidently in (he brute ere- idon, works mvvndly, consuming (he very principle of life, but h ts no tongue, not the smallest sound, to signify its excess, and demand our pity Over this, of which the soberest ind most dis¬ ciplined mind is scircely piepared to mike a true csdmite, youth, when flushed with convivial guety and high spirits, tramples without remorse, md unhesitatingly assures itself tint " All is well Among the manifold objects whirli shock our imperfect reison, and make us wish that the constitution of things was m certain respects other than it is, I confess there is none which b is at all times been more jmpicssive with mc
moflían this, (he vast variety of speech¬ less misery winch is every where (o be found. I passed (hrotigh the usual period of education at the unıveısıty, and then, by the liberality of my father, was sent to make a toui of other countries for my improvement. My faiher had particu¬ larly an old and much valued friend in Switzerland, whose kindness he wished me to cultivate, and whose affection¬ ate and benevolent wisdom he thought would contribute much to the perfect¬ ing my character. To him I was fur¬ nished wilh a most excmplaiy letter of parental introduction, os well as wilh letters of the usual desenptton to several distinguished and honouiable individu¬ als in lhc courts and principal cities of Europe. The diy on which I quitted the uni¬ versity «as an important era in my life, and might have been expected to redeem га me
me from the vices which I had there conti acted The necessities (such I was disposed to regird them) which had lendcred me dissolute, were now re¬ moved I had become vicious by the operation of α populous and crowded lesidence (fiom ι contict with the mem¬ bers of which I found it impossible to escipe) upon a )Oung man, unwarned by experience agunst the rocks that awaited him, and stimulated to confi¬ dence and enterprise by the feeling that he was bom to a consitlerible estate When I q lifted Oxford, I had once more the globe of eirth lo move in I had elbow room, and could expatiate as I pleased I was no longer cooped and cabined in a sort of rienagerie, m which I continu illy saw the same faces, knew the names and the little history of those I saw, and was conscious that I in my turn became the subject of their com¬ ment, of then contempt or their appro¬ bation
halion. I now saw once η,ι n tht fallest and most gioì unis tf 11 ν ч_'е , the face of lutine. If I ms etl to tlt continent, I should h ivctl e o, j n lunii of viewing herm new arietta, and, il 1 hastened, as my fathei wished ine lo ilo, to Switzerland, liííshould be Ld to ť eontcmplation №<>* moie adnurihle scenciy than my eyes had ever yet be¬ held. II I sojourned for a short time in cities, my sitinlion (heie would be very different from what it had been at Ox¬ ford 1 here would be no particular set of men appearing under such circum- stinces as in a manner extorted my confidence, but I mışht associate in- tiuren nlly with anv, or with what per¬ sons I plcised Another cause was favourıble to the nieiioialion of mv character. The great disadvantage to which young men in a populous jilace of с lııeıtıon are exjiosed, is
ıs the freedom thev enjo) trom tlie csti- bl shed rest runts of decorum and shame i hey constitute a İmle eiiip re of their own, and ate ^overned by the ltvvs ot ι moralilv of their own devising 1 hey arc sufficient to keep each other in cotin- ten mce, and, it Щецине of them cm presene the good дрКйвп and cücem ol the rest ofllicbod), it » all of which he feels Ihdt hc sf mils in need 1 he prin¬ ciples by which he is tesoihlcd arc voted by an asscmbl), tint is prompted by turbulence, high spirits, convivial good- humour, and a factitious sense ot gene¬ rosity and honour, md, pıovıded these principles arc obeved, be looks dovn with contempt on the sense of man¬ kind in general Ľven the soberer 1 1 v s which are promulgated by his icatlcmi ctl superiors, are canvassed in a muti nous tempei, md regarded as lhe tle- cices oftiowaula"-e obedience to tht m
ь st melimcs contempi ileti ıs ı due ne tes İv ind sou tlımeb аь ı y okt 1 which it ι ι .Hint md liberii to disti un Util, when lhe sime pci son cocs out into the uoild, he bceomes the rncnil cr ol 1 laigei rc|iublie He rcsjircts hnn 'ell pioj oidon ibi) moie ıs he feck th it l e is ictinglns put ujion ivv tlet the itrc He grt vvs ι graver ehaiactcr, nul ıs con¬ seil tıs that tumult ard frolic ire rot the business of human life He de- mand*, not a boisterous ipprob ition, but a sober deference intl lespeet, from those with whom he hai intcicourse I grieve (o say, (hat my chancter did not gun so much by this danspl million, is ι peison anxious foi my reputation and welfaie might have been willing (o hope К was at sixteen that I hid re¬ pined to the uuiveisity, ind I hid te¬ satici! there four years I hese foui y en s aie the period of the development of the pissions When I looked bick fiom the
the close of this penod, the years I had «pent in Merionethshire ïppe red to u с ıs α delightful (lic un, but only as а dieam It was а se son ol non ige, the ınfınry ofmin It was vision чу, antl itik, antl uiisubstantiil I had now ι se ι film I understood it) to the re¬ ality of life The scenes I had passed through m Oj»foid were sensible, we e palpable, those of mj caihei antihelter jeais weie the illusions as of a magic lanthoin I clung, at least on the thiesboltl, ind during the novelty of life, to the realities, and could not bear to exchange them for shadows I felt as if I could not so exchange then, if I would I I if leiied the gulph , I lntl passed the botiinc, from which, as it seemed to me ( а л different sense fiom that of Sh kespeir) "no travellei ic turns Hiving once plunged into tbc billows, and among the tumult of the passions, I must go on It «is thus 1 ica oi cd,
reasoned, w'-en the temptations, which presented themselves in the different stages of my travels, solicited my accept¬ ance I would not however be unde stood for w oı se than I vv as My life at Oxfo d vtis а life of dissipation , but it was not ill dissijation lhat eunosity, which had been one of my fiist seducers into vice, often assumed an ingenuous form. The various scient es winch invited my attention at the university, did not ll- vvays solicit in vain My natine was not }ct so biutified, as to tender me tndifteieiit to the venerable ach evc- mems of human intellect in succes sive igcs and in different countries My mitle of passing my days had toi much m it of the life of ι gamesome and inebri iteti savige, but ill my (lijs weie not su \ issed The same \imty tint led me among the licentious to aspire to ι licentious chancter, give ne the ım- F ¡j bıtıon
bidon to show that I could be some¬ thing more I aspued to resemble (he (rue Epicurean of ancient times, the moie illustiious philosophers «ho hid it orned that sect in Greece, or Hörnte, (li graceful and accomplished ornament of lhe court of Augustus I had (hcie- fore my fils oľsíudy and sevei e applica¬ tion, as «ell as ray seasons и 'neh neit exclusively devoted (о pleasure And, when I once secluded mysell fiom my notous companion«, I may without va¬ inly affirm that I eňcclctl mote, and untie a more full and pregnant impiovc¬ ment of knowledge in a « eck, tian tinny of the: mere bookworms of ılıt unıveısıty, and some too of no mein estimation among their fellows, did in months At Pans I met with sir Charles Gleed,. a young man who had been at Oxfoid it the smie time that I was and who h id occisionally nude one in the notons. and
and dissoluíe parties (hat I frequented Sır Chilles lntl appeared with no great brilliancy in Oxfoid. His mind was slow and indocile He h id a tutor, who look greit patns with htm, and who hid occasionally persuaded sir Challes (о (ake pains (oo But, (hough the labour, and still more the appualus and report had been greai, (he pioduce, had betti lidie There «as a bluntness and hebetude in poor sir Challes s piris, (hat seemtd to prove hım adapted (o an office like (bat of the horse m а null, iather (han of (he ince horse oi the hun- Ier When this operose md hird vvoik- ing student descended fiom his clo et, ind giined ι sort of Učit leave fjon lus tuloi to join in the ende of us gi) intl ln¿,h spirited fellows, the put lie plav cd «as no moie idvaní igcottb to linn, thui his lunner exhibition hid been amon¿ the lenned He wished foi thi. cha¬ rada of а n if, and had thought th it the ample
ample estate attached to his birth would be a sufficient indorsement to the repai - tees which he uttered But in this he was deceived. We were too thought¬ less and frolic, perhaps I might say, too liberal and independent of soul, to de¬ cide on the talent of our companions from the length of their purses. Sir Charles soon found that he was better qualified to be " *he cause of wit m others," than to be a wit himself, and the asperity and indigtiadon with which lie boi e this, and the awkward attempts by which he endeavoured to shake i( off, fluctuating between resentment and a suspicion that what he suffered was not a fitting giound of reseniment, only made ihe genera] effect upon bystanders the more mcsistibly ludicrous. I observed with surprise that sir Charles was received upon a very dif¬ ferent footing at Fans, from what he had been at ОлГоЫ. Here he performed the
the part of an elegant, and was generally admitted as« a man of breeding, amuse¬ ment and fashion. No one laughed at, and almost every one courted him. It has frequently occurred to me to see this metamoi phosis, and to remark persons, who in their boyish j ears had been (bought dull and poor fellows, af¬ terward making a grav e antl no disho¬ noured figure upon the theatre of life At school certainly the number of dunces is much beyond Us due pioportion (par- ticulai ly if we have regird to the higher classes of society) to those who ire ordi¬ narily put down for such in matuier life. Perh ips scarcely moie than one ooy in an hundred is clever, but, when ihesc boys grow up to be men, the dullard will fieqttently phy his put to the great satisfaction of the spcclatois, and not only outstrip his more ingenious com- pctitor in the load of fortune, but even be more highly esteemed, and more re¬ spectfully
speetfhUy spoken of, by the majority of those who know him. I have often been- desirous to ascertain in «ibat manner we are to account for so curious a pheno¬ menon j and I have found that there are two ways in which it may happen. First, Ihe man, who plays his part upon the theatre of life, almost always maintains what may be called an artificial character. Gravity has been styled by the satirist, " a mysterious carriage of the body to conceal the defects of tbe mind;" and young men educated toge¬ ther are scarcely ever grave. They ap¬ pear in simple and unvarnished colours ; theirs is not the age of disguise; and, if they were to aitcmpt it, the attempt, s» far as- related to their colleagues, would be fruitless. The mind ol a young man at college is tried in os many ways, and turned and essayed in- as various atti¬ tudes, as the body of an unfortunate capíive m the slave-market of Algiers. 4 The
The captive might, with as much pro¬ bability of success endeavour to conceal his crooked back or misshapen leg, as the Oxonian or Cantab to bide his dulness, his ill-temper or bis cowardice But, when the same persons are brought out into (he world, there are certam deco¬ rum», and restrictions from good man¬ ners, w hich operate most wonderfully to level the varying statures of mmd ι antl (to pursue the idea suggested by the slave maikét) the courtier, the profes¬ sional man, or (he fine lady, do not moie abound in advantages for conceal¬ ing then bodily deformities, than fon keeping out of sight those mental imbe¬ cilities, which the lynx-eyed sagacity and frolic malice of school boy against school boy ire sure to discover and ex¬ pose Beside which, secondly, the part which a man has to plav upon the theatre of life, is usually of much easier perform¬ ance,
ance,, than that of a stripling among his fellows. < The stripling is treated'with a want of ceremony, which * deters him. from properly displaying many of his powers. It has been remarked that the severity of criticism in uges of refinement suppresses those happier and more dar¬ ing fruits of genius, which the dawn of science and observation- warmed into life ; and in these- respects the entrance of the young man into the world operates in a way something similar to the trans¬ portation of the poet to a period of pri¬ meval simplicity. He is no longer rudely stared out of countenance. To change the similitude, a eollege-life may be compared with a polar climate ; fruits of a hardy vegetation only prosper in it, while thoseof a more delicate organisa¬ tion wither and die. The young man, having attained the age of manhood, no lohger suffers the liberties to which he was formerly subjected, and assumes con-
confidence in himself This confi¬ dence ıs in many ways favourable to his reputation and success It grows into a habit, and evciy day the proba¬ tioner is better enabled lo ict with pro. priety, to explain lus meining effectu¬ ally, md to display tint promptitude and firmness which miy command approbi- tion I should prefer however, I must confess, the school-boy bero to the plau¬ sible and well seeming manof the woild Mistakes may occur indeed respecting the former as well as the latter A false taste may lead his fellow-pupils to give the palm to a wild adventurous and boistful youth over his moie tranquil competitor, though the latter should be endowed with tl e most persjncacious in¬ tellect, the fine t imagination, or the most generous temper There is too a ıeatly f icnit), o'litťle depth, a rapid, mi¬ mede, stipeifioial memory, which will sometime» piss on inexpeuenced оЫ servers,
tervers, fiir a consummate genius. The judgment however which is formed on tbe phenomena of early youlh, has two advantages ; first, as this period of hu¬ man life is free from deception and false colours; and secondly, as qualities (her. discovered may be supposed more rooted and essential in (he character, than such as discover themselves only in α season of maturity. To return to sir Charles Gleed. —I found him, as I have said, established on •a unequivocal and honourable footing at Parie. He was received with distinc¬ tion by a minister of stale, who invited him to bis roost select parties. He was a favoured guest in the coteries of ladies of fashion, and often spent his mornings in the ruelle of a duchess. Sir Charlea was certainly a man of displeasing phy¬ siognomy. It was a picture so rudely sketched, that the spectator could scarcely guess what was designed to be repre-
represented by it The ey es « ere small and pinking, the nose colos al and gi¬ gantic, but ill defined The muscular parís «ere fiesln, substantial and protu¬ berant His stature however > as con¬ siderably above the middle size, and his form, at least to an ignorant observer, seemed expressne of animal force Sir duties «as perhaps sensible how hide he was indebted to the bounty of nature j and he was careful to compen¬ sate his personal defects, by the most mintile vigilance in conduct and de¬ meanour By some accident he had ac¬ quired, since he left the university, the happiest of all foundations for success in the « oriti, a tranquil confidence m him¬ self His speech, bis motions, were alt slow, but, as no part was lost in false efforts, in something done that was df- ter« ard to be done again, his slowness had to a certain degree the air and effect of haste He condnuaHy approached to the
the.hriilk of enterprise, and was never enterprising. He perpetually advanced to the verge of wit and observation, and ncver,said any tlimg lhat vvas absolutely the one or the other. The man how¬ ever must, I believe, be admitted to have had soine portion of judgment and good sense, who could so speciously imitate qualities, to the reality of which he was a stranger. , If he committed a hlundpr, (be bystander, migh( look in his face, and would discern Hiero such an unsuspecting composure, as might lead him almost to doubt his opinion, and be¬ beye tţiat there was no blunder. With tţie ladies be was attentive, officious and useful, but never bustling or ridi¬ culous ; by which means his service rţever lost thpıt jııçt value. Nothing of a natpre more -veighţy eyer thrust the details of a gallant dcineanour ont of his thoughts ; and the sex was űalteied ţp see a roan so ample шМь dimensions, and
V. and therefore, according 10 their reek¿ oning, во manly, devoted to their plea- Sure. For the rest, whatever they ob¬ served, which would haVe been less ac¬ ceptable in a Frenchman, was attributed to, and forgiven in consideration of, hie being я stranger to' their language, and having a äiS|iosÍtion'anďbent of mind, appropriate, as they «supposed, w the na¬ tion from which he came. Such was the man who generously performed for me the part of gentleman- usher, and introduced me to the society of the courtiers and belles of France. Our characters were strikingly contrast¬ ed. He was set, disciplined and regul¬ ier ι I was quick, sensitive and variable. He had speciousness ; I sensibility. He never did a foolish thing ; I was inces¬ santly active, andtherefoie, though fre¬ quently brilliant nnd earning applause 1 , yet not seldom falling into measu'res the most injurious to the purposes I had in 5 view.
view. Naturally I was too tremhlingly alive, to be well, adapted to the com¬ merce of the world ; I bad worn off a part of this at Oxford ¡ I had gained a Certain degree of self-possession and as¬ surance ; yet was my sensibility too great, not frequently' to lead me into false steps, though I had afterward the fortitude and presence of mind to repair them. Sir Charles and I, having every reason to be satisfied with our reception in this celebrated metropolis, engaged amicably in similar pursuits, and succeeded with persons of different predilections * and tastes, without in the smallest degree in¬ terfering with each other. The court of Louis the Fifteenth, the then reigning sovereign, was licentious and profligate, without decency, decorum and charac¬ ter, and the manners which prevailed within the walls of the palace, were greedily imitated by every one who laid claim to, or who aped, rank, refinement r, > or
or fashion. It were superfluous for mc here to describe, what the reader may find in so many volumes amply and am¬ bitiously detailed, the contempt for the marriage-bond, and the universal tolera¬ tion then extended to adultery and de· baucheiy, with fhe condition only tbat they should be covered with a thin and almost transparent veil, and not march entirely naked. Prepared, as I had been, by my adven¬ tures at Oxford, I fell but too easily into the maxims and manners then in vogue in the court of France. Could I have been abruptly introduced to a scene like this, immediately after my departure from Merionethshire, I should have con¬ templated it with inexpressible horror. But my experience at the university had killed ihe purity and delicacy of my mo¬ ral discrimination. In Wales the end I proposed to myself in my actions, was my
п\у om approbation ; at Oxford I had regulated my conduct by the sentiments of others, not those of my own heart. i had been a noisy and jovial compa¬ nion ; I had associated freely and cor¬ dially with characters of cither sex, that my judgment did not approve. Friend. ships like these had indeed been of short duration; but they were of sufficient power to contaminate the mind, and dis¬ tort the rectiiude of feeling and habit. From intimacies built on so slight and inadequate a basis, from a practical dis¬ regard of continence and modesty, the transition was easy to the toleration and abetting of the most shameless adul¬ tery. At the university I had been driven from a sort of necessity to live upon the applauses of others ; and, the habit be¬ ing once formed, I carried it along with me in my excursion to the continent. In
In the societies to Vhich I was intro¬ duced, no man was considered as any thing, uhless he were, what they styled, un bomme à bonnes fortunes, that ıs, an individual devoted to the fo'tnation of mingues, antl a favourite with those la¬ dies of honounble seeming, who held (heir virtue at a cheap rate The men who were regarded in Paris as mo¬ dels of politeness, stimulated me to pursuits of this sott by the tenour of their convcrsilion, while the women from time to time, who boasted of rank, beauty and elegant manners, invited me by their insinuations and carnage, and taught me to believe that I should not be unsuccessful in my enterprises I was young and unguaided, I had no Mentor to set my follies before me in their true light, I hid passed the Ru bicon of vice, and therefoie wis defi¬ cient in the salutary checks of reflec¬ tion My vanity wis flattered by the vol i. o ovei
overtures of (he ujtr¡> my ambidon was awakened by the example of (he pro¬ sperous and (he gay ; I soon made my choice, and determined that I also would be uu ¡omme à bonnes fortunes.
CHAP-
CHAPTER VI The first woman who in this career fixed my regard was a finished coquette, by which epithet I understand a woman vv hose ι tiling passion is her vanity, am) whose invention is hourly on the rack for means of gratifying ι* She was a lady of high -ank, and married to a person of great figure at court I first obtained 1 tr attention under favour of the epi 1het, by which (he Parisian belles thought proper (o distinguish me, of the hanăsoiit Ľvghthnian Sır Charles, my introducer, was certainly of more established vogue than myself, and in this respect might have seemed a conquest still more flat¬ tering (o a person ofher character. But 1he marchioness easily discerned that he would have afforded her less occupation β 2 and
and amusement Sır Charles would perhaps have equalled me in constancy and perseverance, but he hid a cilm ness of temper in affairs of this sort, which to her tastes would have been in tolerable Obedient, obsequious, pa¬ tient of injuries, he would undoubtedly have shown himself, he was of a charac¬ ter unalterably obliging toward the fair, to violence he would have opposed no -violence in return, but would have waited (ill (he siorm was dissipated, and then have soughi (o improve (he lucky moment, when the bird of peace brood ed over the subsiding billows, and lhe tumult of the bosom was ended My character was of an opposite sort Sir Charles appeared to the animated and restless spirit of the marchioness more like a convenient instrument, or a re¬ spectable piece of furniture, than a liv¬ ing being whose passions were to mix, and shock, and contend, and combine with
with her own She would have prefer¬ red a lap dog who, when she pinched or slapped htm, would ruffle his haus, and snarl and b irk in retili n to such я lover Го vex the temper and alarm the fears- of her admirer was her delight Shb would not have thought hnn worth hct с ire, if she did not ten times m the diy in ike him curse himself, his mistress antl all the world She des red no sympithy and love, that were not iľ-hcip 1 in bj ι prelude of something like hale in ι word, she aspired (o the character ascribed by Martial to one of his fi lends " There was no living with him, nor without him " lhe singularities of (his woman's temper particularly disphyed themselves, m the gradations she introduced into the fivours by which my attachment was ul¬ timately crowned I might describe the (i ansport of my soul, when I fiist bc- eatne assured that there was no mark of her
her good will which she was inclined to withhold from me I might delineate the ravishing sweetness of the weather on the day which first gave me possession ofher person, the delightful excursion we made on the water, the elegantly fur¬ nished cottage that leceived us, the very room, with all its furniture, which wit¬ nessed the consummation of my joys All these things live in my memory, and constitute a picture, which will never be obliterated while this heart continues to beat But I suppress these circum¬ stances, at the risk of rendering my nar¬ rative flat and repulsive by its generali¬ ties I wnte no book, that sh ill tend to nourish the pruriency of the debauch¬ ed, 01 that shall excite one painful emo¬ tion, one instant ofdebate, in the bosom of the vu tuous and the chaste The marcinone s tormented me with her flights and unceitaint), both before and aftei the completing ni) wishes In the
the first of (hese periods I thought my¬ self ten times at the summit of my de¬ sires, when again I was, in the most un- esjiected manner, baffled and thrown back by her caprices and frolics. Even after, as I have said, the first cere¬ monies were adjusted, and the treaty of offence was not only signed, but sealed, Mc of my yielded pleasure she begul I'd, And taught me oft forbearance; though I cannot say, in the sense in which Shakespear has imputed- it to his heioine, thai she did il, with A pudency so rosy, the sweet look on' t Might well have vvarm'd old Saturn ; that 1 thought her As cimate аз unbunn'd snow. It was in my' nature to attach myself strongly, where I attached myself at all, and by jgaj!Ìty ( of reason to be anxious con-
concerning propriety of conduct, ami the minutenesses of behaviour, in the per¬ son I loved. This was exceedingly un¬ fortunate for me in my affair wilh the marchioness. It was almost impossible to make her serious. At moments when all other human beings are grave, and even in allowing those freedoms which ought to be pledges of the soul, she could not put off an air of badinage and raillery. Her mind greatly resembled in its consfiiution (he sleek and slippery form of the eel ; it was never at rest, and, when I thought I possessed. it most securely, it escaped me with the rapidity of lightning. No strength could detain ii ¡ no s(ra(agem could bold it ; no sobrieiy and seriousness of expostulation could fix it (o any consistency of sy¬ stem. Had (his been the ojlljf· characteristic pf her mind, a Y&W.S/t> Щ<. 'empe» would soon havche^^^rjrø^tMhe a wex.
inexliaustibleness of her freaks and fol- 1 es But she had an ingenuousness of carriage b) which I was for a long time deceived She seemed, when I could gun her ear for a moment, to confess hei finits antl absuiditics with a simpli¬ city and unreserve th it was inexpressibly chirmmg and she had in hei self an equability of soul tint nothing could destroy Wheie other women wouldt hive btcn exisperated, she laughed, and, when by her flightmess she had driven her lover to theextremit) of hu man beai mg, she mollified bun in a mo ment by a gentleness an I tlcfenccless- ness of conce sion that there wis no re sisling Yet it ofl"n hippened, that she had no sooner by this expedient won my foigiveness, thin she flew offagun with her customary wildness and uiged me almost to madness One passion which eminently distin¬ guished the marchioness, was the per- 6 j petuali
pel uai desire of doing something that should excite notice and astonishment. Ifin the privacy of the téle å tett ehe was not seldom in a singular degree pro¬ voking, in public and in society she was, if possible, siili worse. The hu¬ man being, who is perpetually stimu¬ lated with the wish to do what is extra¬ ordinary, will almost infallibly be often l«d into what is absurd, indelicate and unbecoming. It is incredible what ex¬ cesses of this sort the marchioness com¬ mitted. Her passion seemed particu¬ larly to prompt her to the bold, the in¬ trepid and the masculine. An impu¬ dent and Amazonian stare, a smack of the whip, a slap on the back, a loud and unexpected accost lhat made the hearer start again, were expedients frequently employed by her to excite the admira¬ tion of those vvith whom she associated.. In the theatre she would talk louder than the f eiformere s in a, dance, by some ri¬ diculous
dieulous caprice she would put out those with whom she was engagetl, she was- never satisfied unless the observation o£ all e}cs were turned on her. It might seem at first sight that a de* mcaiioiu ot this sort would exoite gene* ral disajiprob ilion, and make every ono hei enemy. On the contiary the mar¬ chioness was an universal favountç, afe least with the male set. Her ctiunte. niiuce vvas exquisitely beautiful ; m her eye was combined a feminine softne 1 ^ wilh vivacity and die , her fume, which a little exceeded the middle si/e, seem¬ ed moulded by thcGiaces, and evciy thing she tlU was done with an ease and elegance that dazzled the beholders* What would have been absurd antl in¬ decorous in most women, became jileas-t mg antl 01 namen-tal in lira. Though the substance of the action was wiong; the maimer seemed (o change it» nature, and ι elidei if bulliani and beautiful. She
She did impudent things without as¬ sumption and arrogance, and what in another would have been beyond en¬ durance, seemed in her an emanation of the purest artlessness and mnocenct Besides, tbat such was the rapidity anil quickness ofher nature, she did not al¬ low to ordinary observers the time to disapprove. She never dwelt upon any thing; nothing was done witb slow¬ ness aad deliberation, and she pass¬ ed so incessantly from one object of at¬ tention and mode of action to another, that every thing seemed obliterated as soon as seen, and nothing was left m the common mmd but a gennai impression. of wonder and delight. This however was not the effect upon me. I often took upon myself to censuie tbe impropi leties of the marchioness. My murmurs, as I have said, never put her out of temper. Sometimes she would rally me upon roy sevsrit), and vow that, ìn- £ stead
stead of a young and agreeable lover, she bad by some chance fallen upon a morose philosopher, who wanted nothing but a long gown and a beard, to make him the worthy successor of Diogenes. Sometimes she would play off her usual arts, and, by some agreeable tale, or amusing sally of wit, force my attention to another subject At other times she would put the woman upon me, display her charms, assume (he attitudes, the gestures, and expression of features, al¬ lied to volupiuousnees, and make it im¬ possible for a young and suseepdble ad¬ mirer as I was, (ogive breath to another woi d of hai sh and ungende signification. On a few occasions, she would personate ι seriousness, responsive to my serious¬ ness, promise to be very good, and to conduct herself hei eafter in a manner (hat should command my approbation. Her most ordinary method however was to ridicule my advices, and exasperate mc
me by pertinacious and incorrigible folly; and it was never till she had exercised my patience to the utmost, that she con¬ descended (o soothe me wilh blandish¬ ments and promises of amendment. Inconsistency was the very element In which she moved ¡ and accordingly, whatever was the penitence she display¬ ed, and the amendment she promised, this one feature constantly attended her, that these little expiations never pro¬ duced any effect on her conduct, and that the fault she professed most so¬ lemnly to abjure, was sure to be the fault she would be the earliest to com¬ mit. The torment which-this species of cha. racter in a misdess inflicted on me is undesoribable. The pain I suffered from the excesses she fell into was vehement : when she frankly confessed how much she had been to blame, I became almost angry with myself, for the gravity of my. cen-
censure : and when again I saw her re¬ peat (he same unbecoming folly widiout reflection or hesitation, I was confound¬ ed at sounexpected an event, and cursed my own infatuation ; at the same lime that, in spite of myself, I could not help admiring the artless and simple grace, which even upon such occasions did not desert her. One thing that contributed, perhaps more than all the resi, to make this woman of so much importance to me, was the perpetual occupation she af- fbidcd to my thoughts Abroad or at home, in company 01 alone, she for ever engaged my attention, and kept my soul m a tumult, sometimes, though lately, of pleasure, fiequently of apprehension, alarm, jealousy, displeasure and con- demnadon One question continually haunted my thoughts. This woman, so ftivolous, so fickle, so uncertain, could she love î If sot, was it not beneath the cbaractei of a man.
a man, to be so perpetually occupied about a person, whom I felt to be of so little genuine worth, and by whom I was continually deluded í These doubts, this self-questioning and compunction inces¬ santly haunted me. Yet, in the midst of all my struggles, one inviting wave of her band, one encouraging glance of her eye, brought me in a moment to her feet. Never satisfied in this point, I how¬ ever gratuitously ascribed to ber a thou¬ sand virtues. Grace has something in it so nearly akin to moral reclilude and truth, that the unviliated observer can scarcely disjoin them even in imagina¬ tion, or persuade himself to believe that, where the former is, the latter is not. True, unaffected grace seems the very reflection ofr a candour and sincerity, which, knowingrliO'Wrong, has nothing to disguise.' 'It» iVfree from perplexity arid effort ¡ th« heart appears to be on the ■„u**» ■ lips,.
lips, the soul to beam from the counte¬ nance Was not so perfect an ingenu¬ ousness sufficient to atone for innu- inei tble eirors ? I know not whether the ι est of my species are framed to ι eceive so pure a delight as I ongmally did fiom the very sight ofa serene and composed human countenance A thousmd times, when my heart has burned with anger, the smile of him who had offended me, even though a common acquaintance, has disarmed me I bave said, " That calm expression, that unwrinkled phy¬ siognomy, that quiet, unruffled eye, can never be the cloke of a mind which de¬ serves m) hate , I feel m it, as it weie,. the precept of God speaking to my C)e, and commanding me to chensh, assist and love m) fellow man When ab¬ sent from hun who had awakened my re« sentment, I could feel aversion, and re¬ collect many severe and bitter remarks with which I was desirous to taunt him, when
when- present, his voice, his counte¬ nance changed the whole tenour of my thoughts, and tamed me in a moment. Ifthiswere the case in reference to one of my own sex, and an ordinary ac¬ quaintance, it may easily be sujiposed how I felt toward a mistress, who had excited in me, under some of its forms, the passion of love. Our correspondence for some weeks was such, as, while it furnished nn al¬ most incessant occupation for my own thoughts, left me, I believed, little rea¬ son tõ apprehend that the marchioness was less.engrossecl by me. Buf I was mistaken. I was at present wholly new to the world of gallantry. I had led a life of dissipation at Oxford. But, har¬ dened and brutalised, as to a certain dc gree I was, by the associates of my ex¬ cesses, and having never encountered in these pursuits a woman of distinction, of interesting story, or engaging man¬ ners,
ncrs, I had scarcely ever felt a single flutter of the heart in these idle and de¬ grading engagements. It was far dif¬ ferent now. My vanity wai stimulated by a success so flattering as tbat of my amour with the marchioness appeared in my eye. Often I trod in air ; often I felt the quick pants of my bosom, and walked with head erect, as if respiring a sublimer element, even when in solitude I reflected on the homage which this proud beauty paid to Ihe attractions of my person, and the persuasion of my tongue. Of all the üopliies which vain mortals boast, By wit, by valour, or by wwdom won, U he firet and fairest 'm a young man's eye, Is woman's captive heart. I was therefore in the wrong to mea¬ sure the modes of thinking or of sensa¬ tion in my mistress's bosom by my own. She had long been inured to those things which
which werenew and inteiesting to me, and she felt them not less coldly than she expressed them. I was willing to im¬ pute a eon(rast between her language and her sentiments; but ш this respect I did the marchioness wrong i she was no hypocrite here. At length sir Charles Glced removed the fűm which had grown over my cye=, and cured me of my infatuation.. Sir Charles was a man who in many points,. observations of detail, saw the world more truly I hart I did. I bave- often re¬ marked, though I will not affirm how far it is to be taken as a general rule, this difference between men-of imagina¬ tion, and those whom I will call men of simple perception. ' It is something like a poet andt a culdvator of (he soil, as¬ cending one of (he Welsh mountains, or tracing together the tracts of land, meadow by meadow, which might be discovered from th« top of it. The far- ' met
mer sees the nature of the fields, the character of their soil, and what species of vegetation is most adapted to grow in them. If he looks upwards he can tell the configuration of the clouds, the quarter from which the wind blows, and the prognostications of the weather. When he comes home, he can count up the plots of ground over which he has passed, the regions .0 the nght and left, and enumerate the wheat, the barley, the oats, the rye, the clover and the grass, which grew in each. The poet, during the progress we are supposing, , saw much less, (hough his mind was more aclive and a( work than that of the farmer. The farmer's were perceptions ; his were feelings. He saw things in masses, not in detail. He annexed α little romance to each. In the clouds he discerned a passage, through which he passed, and beyond which he plunged in imagination inte the world unknown. It
It. was not green and blue, ripe and im¬ mature, fertile and barren, that he saw ι it was be»uty and harmony and life, ac¬ companied' with a silent eloquence which spoke to his soul. The universe was to lum a Jiving scene, animated by a mys¬ terious power, whose operations he con. templatedwith admiration and reverence. To express the difference in one word ; .what the farmer saw wa* external and in the things themselves ; « hat the poet «aw was the grov. .ό and painting of his «wn mind, Theidifference between sir Charles Gieed and myself was parallel to (his, when we mingled in the scenes of hu¬ man society. While he saw only those things in clraracler and action which formed the substance of what was seen by every beholder, he was led astray by no prepossessions or partialities, and drew agreat number of just conclusions .from the ¡indications before him. I on j the
the contrary entered into every scene with certain expectations, and with a little system of my own forming ready digested in my mind If I repaired to Notre Dame at Pans to assist at the ce¬ lebration of the high mass solemnised on the evp of the Naiivily, my thoughts were full of the wonderful efficacy which religion exercises over my species, and my memory stored with the sublime emotions which altars and crucifixes and tapers had excited in the souls of saints nnd martyrs If I entered the walls of the British house of commons, and waited to hear an important debate, the scenes of past ages revolved before (he eyes of my fancy, and (hat parliament again filled (he benches in which Pym and Hambden, and Falkland and Selden, and Cromwel and Vane sat together, to decide, perhaps for ever, on the cıvıl and intellectual liberties of my country. These are only instances But in rea¬ lity
lily scarcely any character of (he smallest importance came before me, in whom, by retrospect or anticipation, by asso¬ ciations of pride, of instruction, or of honour, Idid not make to myself a lively interest, and whom I did not involunta¬ rily surround with an atmosphere of my own creating, which refracted lhe rays of light, and changed the appearances of fhe scene. These causes rendered me ■ less dispassionate, and therefore in many instances a less exact, though a much more earnest, observer than sir Chtrles Gleed. When sir Charles told me what he fiad remarked, I was struck wilh inex¬ pressible astonishment. I could not at first believe the report he made, and re¬ proached him in my thoughls for (hat vulganty of mind, which made him al¬ ways-see iti the actions of others some¬ thing allied 'a his own. I asked him a thousand questions; I demanded from him
hım a thousand proofs, and it was not till lie hid given me evidences amount¬ ing to demonstration, tint I consented to pírt wilh a delusion which hid been so delightful to my mind That the marehmnes«, whom I had so entirely loved, in whose partiality I had so much prided myself, whose smallest errors had afflicted me as spots upon the lustre of her qualities, should be а woman of abandoned character, disengiged from all resti aints of decency and shame, th- when I thought I possessed her whole, I really divided her favours «ith every comer,—a music master—an artisan—a valet,—it is impossible to express how stulden and terrible a revolut on this discovery produced within me '
vol t и CHAP-
CHAPTER VII. I WA« in Paris, and I did a» people or fashion in Paris were accustomed to do. I'consoled'myself for the infidelity of one mistress, by devoting my attentions to an¬ other. The qualities of Ihe countess de В', were exceedingly unlike those of the marchioness; perhaps, led by a senti¬ ment- to which I was unconscious, I se¬ lected her for that very reason. The marchioness I have compared to the sleek and glossy-coafed eel : for ever restless, never contented with the thing, or the circumstances under which, she was, you could never hold her to one certain mode of proceeding. The only way in which for her lover to become sa-' lisfied with her, was to persuade himself that her external demeanour was merely a guise
a guise put on, which belied beť hearf, and that, when she seemed most impa¬ tient, capricious and fantastica!, her soul confessed none of these follies, but as¬ sumed them to veil the too great sensibi¬ lity of her nature. The countess on the contrary appeared fo be wholly destitute! of art. Though passed the first season' of youthful inexperience, she appeared" to' have acquired none of the lessdn.' of pnidery and factitious decorum. Hef heart shone in her visage; the very tones of her voice were modulatedto the expression of tenderness. Ht-rs was " the sleepy eye, that spoke the melting soul." Her cheek was full; her skin transparent ; the least thought of pleasure or of paásion suffused her countenance vvith ablush. The coun¬ tess had no atom of the restlessness of her rival ; a sort of voluptuous indo¬ lence continually attended her ; ami tbe busy nothings of ordtnaiy life seemed to h г be
be an insupponablc burthen to her. She appeared born only to feel ; to reflect, to consider, to anticipate, to receive and concoct (he elemenis of instruciion, were offices in which she seemed incapable (o exist. It was her habit therefore to resign herself wholly (o her feelings, and to be in (hem undivided and eniirc. To judge from every exterior indication, it was impossible for a tenderer mistress 1o exist ; she gave herself up to her lover, and (reated hiin as if he were fa¬ ther, mother, fortune, reputation and life to her, in one. She placed no re¬ straint on herself, but appeared all anxiety, terror, apprehension, gratitude, enjoyment, as the occasions most obvi¬ ously led to one or another of these emotions. Yet this woman was capable of the more stormy impulses of rescnlmeni and jealousy, buí only in such a way as best accorded wilh the sensibility antl volup¬ tuousness
tuousness ofher character Her resent. ment was passit e intl desponding when wounded, it appeared incompitible with the purpose of wounding agun , in the person against whom it was directed tt excited not sentiments of hostility, but of pity , antl her tender bosom seemed to wait only the moment of passion 'c reconciliation When her lover return¬ ed to her, or persuaded her of the since- nty of hb affection gi ititude and de¬ light possessed her wholly, and re¬ proach cheti iway upon her Itp« The countess by her minners reminded her admirer, of the most delicate flower of the pai terre, winch the h st attack of a rude md chilling Ы tst mimedi itely wi¬ thers but which, by tie lustre of its tints, intl the softness of its lexture, seems to ι Iv mce an irres sl ble chim to genlle protection and western breezes 1 с irs ltom hei «paikl ng e) es broke forth almost at vvjll, by a teir she expressed her
her sufferings, and by a fear her joy. This might perhaps have been grievous to her lover, had she had the smallest bias towards a querulous temper. But her charnel er was s perpetual summer ; her storms were only like Ihe soft drop¬ pings .of a sultry evening, and easily gave place to a fair sky and a radiant heaven. The intellect of the countess de В. was rif narrow dimensions. Her mind had never been turmoiled with the infusions efficience ; she scarcely knew that there «ere antipodes, or that there hud bean ţncien(9. She lived like those insects which Ihe naturalists describe, gene¬ rated on the surface of certain lakes, ¡(hat are born only to hover along lhe superficies of the pellucid element, to enjoy, antl io-die. What pity thai the sentiments of such я person as Ihe counless dc B. were so little entitled to be depended ujion I Ac¬ cording
cording to the ideas many men entertain of the fair sex, it wis impossible for any one in (he particulars above desci ibcd to be more exactly qualified for a mistress or a wife than this fascinating woman There was no danger tha* she should be¬ come the rival ofher tover in any man¬ like pursuits, or that With troublesome turiosity she should intrude herself into his occupations of learning, of gam, ot of ambition She had af! the attributes ♦bat belong exclusively to the female sex, and as few as possible of those which are possessed by the whole species, mile and female, in common bhe was rather -in Asiatic suliana in her (urn of mmd, than a nadve of our western woild And her habits would have been equally accommrüated to the mm who, having serious pursuits for his gra er houis, w islied either not to impart, or not to re¬ member (hem in his hours of pleasure 5 and to the man who, being in the hey¬ day
day of his youth, and favoured by nature antl by fortune, desired to thrust the world aside, and take his swing of indul¬ gence uninterrupted and unchecked. I belonged to this latter description. Unfortunately however the countess, though she seemed to feel with her soul, had the spring of her sentiments and ac¬ tions in her eyes. Where she attached herself, it was with such a show of ar¬ dour, that the lover must have been cap¬ tious and difficult indeed, who was not satisfied with the sincerity of passion she displayed toward him. Yet the passion of the countess was radier an abstract propensity, than the preference of an individual. A given quantity of per¬ sonal mei it and accomplished man¬ ners was sure (o charm her. A fresh and ogietable complexion, a sparkling eye, a well turned leg, a grace in dancing or m pei forming the manœu¬ vres of gallantry, were claims ibat (ho
■the countess de В was never known to resist She appeared to administer her decisions upon these different pre¬ tensions wiih (he most rigid equity ; and (hey were somedmes very minute di¬ stinctions, scarcely discernible by the inked eve, thai decided her hair breadth pielercnce» Upon this rigid equity there was only one limitation , and this also was otifhciently in correspondence with the theory of the subject. Among the various sources of whai are called the pleasures of the imagination, one, as leai ned doc'ors tell us, is novelty. To this lhe countess de В paid the strictest attention, and, where there was any un¬ certainly in the compansonof jiersonal advantages or pohte accomplishments, the latest pretender was stue to carry (he day. A niable countess ' Like (he wanton bee, which flits from flower to flower, equally enamoured with each in turn, and retaining no painful recollec- H ¡ dons
tiens of lb«t which wa» last quilled, (о render lhe qualities of the next offerer lets agreeable and exquisite I remember lier even at this time with kindness She seemed to skim the surface of life, and to taste of a continual succession of plea sures It was perhaps unreasonable ever to be angry with her She had almost too little leflecdon and concatenation of ideas, (o make her a competen! subject of roofal jurisdiction It «as not how¬ ever always thus with her, her career was sboi t, and she expiated by long and severe calamities foi her br ef oenod of unchecked enjoyment Whatever may be thought of her dements, few persons ever drank nore deef ly of (he cup of re¬ tribution But this does not belong to my history It will eie ly be concluded from what I have stated, tha( Ihe termination of my amour with (he tountess de В was very similar (o that with the marchioness I ti usted ,
(rusted ; I was deceived ¡ my eyes were opened s 1 suffered all the torments of disappointment antl despair. A quick. and living sensitiveness was one of the most obvious characteristics of my mind ; and few men felt disappointment of al¬ most every kind more deeply. When fhe breach took place between mc and (he marchioness, I had' been for some days like a man dislracled. The coun- (ess de В. presented herself to my obser¬ vation jusi at tha( crlrical momenl ; (he- more (han feminine gentleness and soft¬ ness of hef nature were exacdy adapted to allure my attention in this- period of anguish; and it was, owing to this for¬ tuitous concurrence, that I lccovered my equilibrium,in a certain degree, much sootier than could reasonably have been éspet led. It has often been a marter of jest in (he world, when a widower, who seemed to be inconsolable fof the_ partner ef his hearf, suddenly marries again ; and
and the inference usually drawn is, that bis gnef was pure mummery and repré¬ sentation I grant that the man who thus conducts himself is guilty of a breach of decorum, and that his beha¬ viour is raiher calculated (o esule our disesleem I lian oui respect, but I tffirm that it is sufficiently natural, and (hat there i» no need of having recourse (o (he imputation of hypocrisy to account fot it lhere is a pnneiple in man, im¬ pelling him to seek Ins own preservation, and pulque his own happiness, and this pnneiple will frequen ly urge him, m proportion to the tlreiitllul vacuity pro¬ duceţi by the loss of that which no pos* »tb lily can íeslore to him, to seek to re- plate it by somewhat of the same species, and to endeivour to relieve his disconso¬ late state by a companion, who may m like in inner share his thoughts, and en¬ ga, e hi» tenderness. The Ьь» ot the countess was much more
more terrible to me Ihan that of her pre¬ decessor The marchioness had kept me in a state of perpetual agitation, a temper of mind not unalhcd to fortitude. The countess de В had softened and re¬ laxed my mind, and left in me a tempen ill suite I to the struggling with misfor¬ tune Thennrchioi esswasawommthat I loved ind hated by turns, she w s often too masculine and peremptory ( ι be in object of tenderness, her rlnritttr, adapted continually to produce wot 1er and astonishment, lost by just so much of the faculty to please But the coun¬ tess was all sweetness In the eyes of her lover -.he apj en ed like in angel She rose upon h n like the evening stir, mild radiant, tranquil nd soothing In periods of the mo t enure commur iea- tion an 1 accord, s с »eemed to leave h m n thing lo wish, but appearc 1 in his eves the ex iet model of pei fot tion trom the marchioness you eontinudlly expect¬ ed
ed something extraordinary ; her ambi¬ tion was to- »nme; and tbat which is extraordinary, must of course be some¬ times good, and- sometimes ill. But tbe countess de В. was so simple, so intelli¬ gible ; it seemed as if nothing could hap¬ pen with her that might not exactly be foreseen ι she was wholly engaged in the object of her selection, and appeared to, uve for that alone. The distress I suffered from- the in¬ constancy of the countess de В. was in¬ expressibly acute. It taught me to ab¬ hor and revile her sex. It inspired me witb a contempt of human, pleasures. I felt like the personage of a fairy-tale I have somewhere read, who, after being delighted with the magnificence of a seeming palace,, and the beauty of its fair inhabitants, suddenly sees the delusion, Wnish, tbe palaee is converted'into a, charnel- hoiisc,-and what he thought its beautiful tenants are seen to be the most ι withered'
withered and loathsome hags that ever shocked the eyes of a mortal. My soul w as in tumults. I loathed existence and the sight of day, and my self-love was inexpressibly shotked to think (hat I could have suffered so gross a delusion- I fled from Paris, and sought (he craggy and inhospitable Alps, (he mosi fright. ful scenes alone had power to please, and produced in me a kind of malicious and desperale sentiment of satisfaction Most earnestly do I intreat the reader to pardon me, for having thus mut h în- teispersed these pages, with a tale of de¬ baucheries It is not, I solemnly issure hun, that I have any pleasure in the re¬ collection, or that I glory in my sliame. Some men, I know, would palliate this narrative to themselves, bj saying that the dungs here related belong fo the country where my scene is placed, and that morals have no certain standard, but change then laws according to Ihe climate
climele in which they exist From my soul dc I abjure this apology. Without entering abstrusely mto the general me¬ nts of tbe question, I intimately feel in m)scir, that I carry about me, wherever Igo, the same criterion of appiobalion, which bends to no customs, tnd asks no support from the suffrage ot others to make it what it is At ihe time ot which I have been speaking, I »asyoung and wild, I had been muih injuietl by the sort of company I frequented for some vears before I lett England , antl I gave easily and without compunction into the dissipations of the meliopolib of France But I do not look back uj on then without ivcrsion I have vvruten the narrative of this period ui tier impres¬ sions of deep pain, and everv Ime li is cost me a twinge of the sharpest ie moisc There are some kinds ot writing in which the mind willingly cngigcs, in which, while wc hold the pen in our hand,
hand, wc seem to unburfhen the senti¬ ments of our soul, and our habitudi feelings cause us to pour out on the pa¬ per а prompt and unstudied eloquence. Here on the contrary, I have held my¬ self ίο my (ask wiih difficuliy, and often vvith my utmost effort I have scarcely wrote down a page a day on the un¬ grateful subject. Why have I introduced it then ? Be cause it was necessary, to make my sub¬ sequent history understood. I have a train of follies, less loathsome, but more tragic, to unfold, which could not bave been accounted for, unless it had been previously shown, by wha( causes I, the author, and in some respects (he princi¬ pal sufici er, vvas rendered what I was. I was a misanthrope. Not a misanthrope of the sterner and more rugged class, who, «hile they condemn and despise every thing aiound them, have a per¬ verted sort of pleasure in the office, whose
-whose brow for ever frowns, whose voice ¡has the t rue cynical snarl, and who never ■feel so triumphant a complacency, as when they detect the worthlcssness and -baseness of whoever comes into contact with them. This sort of man, even in tny unhappie6t state of desolation, I oould always look down upon with pity. My misanthropy was a conclusion, however erroneous, tbat ï unwillingly entertained. I felt what I was, and I pined for the so¬ ciety of my like. It was with inexpres·. »Ые sorrow that I believed I was alone in the world. My sensibility was not one atom diminished by my perpetual disappointments. I felt what man ought .to be, and 1 could not prevent the model of what he ought to be from being for¬ ever present to my mind.
CHAP-
CHAPTER VIII. I HASTENID, aS I have already tald, from Paris, and plunged amidst the wild and desolate scenery of mount Jura. The next intended siage of my travels was Switzerland, and I pursued the road which led to that country. The first anxiety I felt was to escape from France. Tbat kingdom had been the theatre of my suficrings and my disgrace. Ther« first I had felt my mind agitated wilh those emotions which are destined to have so mighty an influence on the fate of man. But howagitaled 'i I had loved. I had not loved innocence ; I had not loved the chaste simplicity oflhe female character : my affections had not gone forth toward any object, which might re¬ fine and elevate my soul, which might free
free me from the impurities 1 had con¬ tracted among fhe debauchees of ¡he university, restore me to peace wilh my¬ self, and prepare me to act an honourable part on the theatre of society. Unfor¬ tunately my initiation had been in the polluted tracts of adulterous commerce. My mind had been acted upon with ve¬ hemence, but not improved. What true s) mpatby and affection can arise be¬ tween pei sons of opposite sexes, when tbe basis upon which their intimacy is founded, is crimei when all decorum and character are trampled under foot, and nolhing is aimed at but licentious pleasure, at the expence of all our best duties, and all that is truly honourable in human life ? I had been interested in the mar¬ chioness. She lud originally been con* sideied by mc as the model ofa spirited, frjuk and ingenuous character. But the affections of my soul had been much morti
more strongly excited by the countess de В The marchioness wis, and had ulti¬ mately been set down by me for, a cha¬ racter merely artificial But the coun¬ tess was a woman who ap|iearcd to set up no defences, and employ no strata¬ gems, who surrendered herself fully, with all her fictilties ino ill her soul, to her lot er In her I persuaded nrjself that I had found that true simplicity which is most worthy to engige tht heirt of every beholder I did not per¬ ceive lhat she was in the worst sense of lhe word ι sensualist, anil (hat (his wis m a consumrmte de^iee ι depirture from the genuine female thuacttr, but unfortunately vvas induced to judge of lhe whole sex from the specimens which lntl thus been brought before me Amidst the mountains which sepirate Switzerlmd from Frince, Ihe idea oflhe countess was perpetually present to my thoughts In Troyes and the other towns winch lav in my roule, along the populous
papulous roads, and by the side of navi¬ gable 'rivers, my thoughts were inter¬ rupted-, if not amused'; but the instant I plunged into solitude and the retreats of uncultivated nature, my reveries became endless and inexhaustible. When 1 turned round a point of fhe rock, when I gazed intently, yet wiih an ausent mindy upon-the deep shadows of the mountain«, visto beyond visto, enve¬ loped in clouds, lost in obscurity, and where no human form was to be dis¬ cerned, there (he figure of the countess de В. flitted before me. I heard her voice between the pauses of the echoes, and amidst the dashing of the cascades. Why had J left her ? ----- Had I left her ? Why had she proved herself disho¬ nourable and unworthy f -----Was she indeed unworthy î ------ 1 believed every thing, and I believed nothing. Ten times Lwas inclined again to turn my face to¬ ward Parisi and throw myself at her feet. Shetcould.not be-guilty : (hat face was a pledge
pledge ofi her. rectitude : depravity and, inconstancy could, not lurk behind the, lovely expression ofthat angelic counlo- nan,ceİTWhat, turn back, and expose niyaelf to, the contempt; of every one in, Earls» ajid to her own,!· What, sue to her, that she would forgive to ma the, vices she had committedi? Be a sharer of her caresses vvith ----- î There was, no such woman I It was all a delusion 1 I might look for her through Paris, and, through the world, but should never findi her- The scales bad dropped from my eyes, and I might pray in vain, if Icould, bo worthless enough to pray, for the re¬ storation of my former blindness. I descended (he Alps, antl entered into Swilzerland. It may be, the very air of this country, the country of ftecdom, of independence, moderation and good sanse, hati a favourable effect on my temper. I began now to think of M. Ruffigny, to whose protection and coun¬ sels my father had so emphatically re¬ commended
cWrrifcridcd trie. Nevét did-1 liear the éUtogitínVòf 'oWe mart pronounced'by aWólhët-'iWt'hahat energy arid enthusiasm *ifo! which my falhei· spöke of this ve¬ nerable Swuå.'" He ■bad·told me once rin'd again* at cAir'parting,'and in the let. feťs he addressed to me in my (ravels, that, if ever I became the ornament of my house, and (he benefactor of my fel¬ lows, it was (o the friendship, (he instruc¬ tions and example of Ruffigny that he looked for (haf benefit. I had seen this friend of my father once only, when I was five years of age ; and (he vague and im¬ perfect recollection which remained in my mind, gave a sort of sacredness to his fi- gure.aiidmadehim appear in my thoughts like a visitant from the starry spheics. As I approached nearer to the re- s : dence of this man, I began to ex¬ amine whether I was prepared to ap¬ pear in his presence. J painted to my¬ self his habitation as the groito of an aerial spirit, whither I was repairing to do
do homage, and to receive the commu¬ nications of an all-penetrating wisdom While I had been engaged at Pans m the giddy round of licentious pursuits, I had forgotten this incomparible friend , nothing that related to him sobered and awed me, but, now fhat I had set my foot upon his native soil, I already seem¬ ed to feel the contact of his mind and the emanations of his virtues M Ruffigny lived in a neat house which he had built for himself m the valley of Urseren, near the foot of mount St. Gothard, the (illest and most stupendous of the hills of his country. It was a fine summer evening w hen I ap¬ proached his residence The beams of the setting sun illuminated the peaks of (he mountain, and gave a divine tran¬ quillity to the plains I felt my heart relieved from the rude tempests and the flagging and noisome atmosphere и hich had oppressed it. The sun was dc- voL. ι. ι clinng,
clining, and the heat of the day was over, when I entered a wood of tall and venerable trees, through which the road lay that led to his habitation Nothing could be more grateful than the fresh, cool an, which penetrated this wood After having for some time pursued a serpentine path, I came within sight of the house, and perceived the old man in his gaiden, examining the processes of vegetation, and stretching forth his hand to relieve and to raise such of its pro¬ ductions as stood in need of his aid I had no doubt it was M Ruffigny I leaped from my horse, and, delivering him to the care of my servant, hastened to join the friend of my father A little wicket at one extremity of the front of the house admitted me into the fotogene The owner was tall, and of a venerable presence, with a little stoop in his car¬ nage, his visage placid and his eye pe¬ netrating amidst the wrinkles of age, and
and his hair as white as snow He vvas somewhat turned from me as I approach¬ ed, but, hearing a quick step, he lifted up his head, and surveyed me I was too much cngtged in con¬ templating his interesting figure, in¬ st mtly to announce myself He hesi¬ tated for a moment, and then spoke Casimir Fleetwood 1 said he The same —He pressed rny hand with peculiar emotion The very irrage of Ambrose Fleet¬ wood, his grandfather ' I have expected your visit some time I have a thousand things to siy to you, and a thousand en¬ quiries to make You look like an ho¬ nest man, and an observing one It does my old heart good, to receive under my roof the last representative of the friends I have loved and honoured more than any others I ever had M Rufligny proceeded to question me respecting my travels How long I ι 2, had
had left England ί Where I had been ' What stay I had made in Pans î What «ociety I had frequented ? What con¬ nections I had formed ? What remarks and conclusions I bad drawn from what I saw ? He addressed to me no interro- gatories but such as a friendly anxiety for my welfare might naturally dictate, jet I could perceive that he endeavour¬ ed to draw from his enquiries materials for estimating my understanding and character I acquitted myself in this experiment as I could, though I felt em. barrassed with the recollection of aftan s and transactions in Pans, which I was not at present disposed to confide to M Ruffigny My venerable host listened with attention to what I said, and some¬ times mterposedhis commendation where he judged it deserved, but at no time did there drop from his lips a syllable of cen¬ sure He probably conceived that prema¬ ture criticisms on what I thought proper 3 to
(о unfold, would check (he spirit of communication, and lessen (he opportu¬ nity to discover my character which he was desirous lo obtain As we walked up and down in the garden, engaged in (his sort of conversa¬ tion, I turned my eye occasionally round, and examined the spot in which I was placed. It was a scene in which use seemed to take the piecedcnce of orna¬ ment Though roses, woodbines, lilacs and laburnums, with such other flower¬ ing shrubs as requne little aid from the hand of (he cultivator were interspersed, the plots into which the inclosure was divided were principally appropriated to pulse and other esculent vegetables, and were bordered with fruit-bearing plants and shrubs. On the lower side of the garden was seen the broad expanse of the Reuss, which, though a little further fiom its source it flashes over rude frag¬ ments of rock in a continual cataract, flows
flows along the valley in a smooth and silent stream. The opposite side of the garden was skirled by the acclivity of the mountain, the surface of which to a con¬ siderable height was cov ered with the most luxuriant vines my eyes ever beheld After having walked for a considerable time, we went toward the house Upon a smooth turf before the door was spread a table, with a few melons, gr ipes and wall-fruit, a loaf of bread, and a flagon of weak, but agreeably flavoured, wine. This is my supper, said M. Ruffigny. We sat down together. We talked of England, of France, and of the country in which we then were, and I vv as charm- ed and instructed with the acute re¬ marks delivered by my host upon the comparative manners of each. He spoke with enthusiasm of the scenery of his nain e country, oi (he enviable freedom enjoyed by its inhabitants, and the happy equality and competence in which they lived.
lived Here, said he, you behold m happy contrast the simplicity of man, and the exuberance of nature My countrymen appear in the plainness of what in England you would call a qua¬ ker like habit and manners, while the region that sustains them is clothed in all the dyes of heaven, and wantons her¬ self in more various forms of majesty and beauty than mere imagination could ever conceive Hence I learn to venerate and respect the intelligible rt ctitude of the species to which I belong, and to adore with sacred awe the mysterious power, which draws us into existence, and nurses our inexperience m its ge¬ nial bosom The adventures through which I had passed, and the misanthropy I had con¬ tracted, did not allow me perfectly to accord wi(h this sentiment of M Ruf¬ figny The next morning my henefieent friend
friend received me in his library. It was the only spacious apartment in his house, and was fitted up with peculiar neatness and convenience. I east my eyes around upon the shelves, and perceived that they were principally furnished wilh the. old poetical compositions of France, Ger¬ many, Italy and Switzerland, together with a very complete collection of bota¬ nical writers, particularly those which treated of the natural productions of Helvetia. One compartment of the li¬ brary was devoted to English authors, principally from the age of Elizabeth to the Restoration- I pass some hours of every day, said the old man, in this apartment ; but my life is principally in the open air ; I think more than I read ; and I am more at¬ tached to the great and living volu. ie of nature, than (o the cold, insensible, me¬ chanically constructed pages and sheets tbat have been produced by my fellow- creatures.
créatures. Let no man despise the ora¬ cles of books I A book is a dead man, a sort of mummy, embowelled and em¬ balmed, but that once had flesh, and motion, and a boundless variety of deter¬ minations and actions. I am glad that I can, even upon these terms, converse with the dead, with the wise and the good of revolving centuries. Without books I should not understand the vo¬ lume of naturo ; I should pass the scanty years of my existence a mere novice ; the life of a single man is too short to enable him to penetrate beyond the sur¬ face of things. The furniture of these shelves constitutes an elaborate and in¬ valuable commentary; but the objects beyond those windows, and the circles and coimTiunities of my contemporaries, are the text to which that commentary relates. After breakfast M. RufHgny and myself walked out, and ascended one i ¡ branch
branch of the St. Gothard I was sur¬ prised to observe with what agility and spirit the old man encountered this spe¬ cies of labour It is all use, said he. Temperance and the habit of daily exer¬ cise have preserved, and probably long will preserve to me these inexpensive and invaluable pleasures My host pointed out the various beau¬ ties of the successive landscapes which from the different points of the rock were presented to my view. It was a boundless magazine of the most ravish¬ ing objects. He directed my attention to the different towns, and villages like towns, which were discoverable from va¬ rious distances, descanted on the inge¬ nuity of manufactures, and the vigilance and expedients of agriculture Thi» whole territory, said he, is one continued monument of the triumph of tempe¬ rance, industry and independence.
CHAP-
CHAPTER IX. X he second day after my arrival M Ruffigny conducted me on- a little tour to the lake of Un My country, said he, makes but a petty figure in the mip of the globe , and perhaps it may be a fiivolous sort of pride in me, that makes me feel complacency in recollecting that I am a burgher of Un I do not merely exult that I am a Swiss, but I sometimes mdtilge myself in a fastidious compa¬ rison between mv native canton and the more spacious and opulent republics of Zurich and Beine The little state which I inhabit is nearly one cluster of r-ugged and inhospitable mountains, yet this is tho district in which the Swiss li¬ berty was engendered, and from hence as a eentre-it has spread on every side to. the
the furthest boundaiies of the union. I am my self descended from the patriots who secured independence to my native soil As William Tell married the younger of the daughters of Walter Furst, one of the three immortal leaders, who in 1308 conspired for llie deliver¬ ance of their country, so an ancestor of mine m the direct line married the elder. I know that the pretension oí an illustri¬ ous ancestry is too often a chimerical boast I know that, wherever a pedigree is preserved, ora distinguishing compi¬ lation is conferred, it is 111 the nature of things almost impossible that m a few generations a race shou'd not degenerate, and that fools or villains should not cor¬ rupt the blood of the profoundest sages and the most disinterested citizens. I know that, wherever this is the case, wherever licentiousness or imbecility has crossed the glorious breed, every time such a descendant hears the repetition of his
hls name, he hears a more deadly and outrageous satire, than the malice of his worst enemy could invent against him. Forgive me, my friend—1 feel that this censure does not fasten on me. If I have not the public merits of a Furst and a Tell, I have their innocence of manners, and my life has been usefully and honourably spent. Zurich, and Basle, and some of our more opulent cantons, are full of manu¬ factures and industry, they contain many citizens who are comparatively wealthy, and (he style of living of several of these would not shame (he capitals of Paris or London. My co-burghers are all feeders of flocks or cultivators of the eaith, there are among them none who are opulent, and none who suffer the evils of poverty, and their tables are such as bring before us the uncomipt- edplainnessof patriarchal times. I have visited many countries of the globe ; but this,
this, instead of distasting me toward the simplicity of my early years, has måde¬ rne relish it the more. Like a true Swiss of the earlier times, I have returned home, and bidden adieu without a sigh to the refinements and ostentation of other chmates. In the course of our excursion M. Rufligny pointed out to me the various spots still so dear to the genius of free¬ dom : Gruti, the village where the three heroes of Switzerland planned their un¬ dertaking, Brunnen, where the funda¬ mental league between their respective cantons was concluded ; Kussnacht, the ecene where an arrow from the bow of Tell reached the heart of Gesler, bis own oppressor, and the oppressor of his country ; and Morgarten and Sempach> the fields in which those celebrated com¬ bats were fought, that fixed the liber¬ ties of Switzerland on a basis which has endured the shock of ages, All these places
places were within such a distance, that we either actually visited them in the course of the day, or discerned them, almost in full detail, from the tops of the neighbouring eminences After having sated my curiosity m the examination of these venerable scenes, we returned in the afternoon by the lake of Un It was along (his lake tbat Tell is related to have been convej ed tn fetters by Gesler, that he might be removed from his countrymen, and shut up in, one of the dungeons reserved by the ty¬ rant for the mtiepid and the honest As they rowed along, a violent tempest arose The shores on both sides are ex¬ tremely craggy and dangerous and the tyrant began to fear that his boat would be dashed to pieces against these insu¬ perable precipices Tell, perfect m the accomplishments of a Swiss peasant, and endowed with a firm and adventurous temper, surpassed his contemporaries in the
the art of navigating his native lakes. Gesler knew this, and, trembling for his coward life, ordered the fetters to be struck off from bis prisoner, and the helm to be put into his hand. Tell used the opportunity whioh was given him. There are not above two or three points in thu whole ciicumference of this lake, where it is practicable to land. Tell steered his boat toward the most rugged ef these, leaped suddenly upon the rock, climbed witb inconceivable adroitness up the precipice, and returned once more to his longing countrymen and confederates. A chapel, erected by ad¬ miring posterity on tbe spot, consecrates tbe memory of this magnanimous and important achievement. One thing surprised me upon reflec¬ tion in the conduct of M. Rufligny. He had received me with particular kind¬ ness ; yet he did not so much as men¬ tion to me the name of my father. I knew
knew that the connection between them was of the most confidential mtuie, and including a vaneiy of importani obliga¬ tions, (hough I wis a siranger (o (he particulars My host did not enquire when I had heard from my father He might mdectl have received letiers as lately as I could have done But he did not ask me respecting his health, his vi- goui, his scndtnents, his habits, a (hou- sand minutiæ (о which ocular inspection alone can qinlifj. a man to speak. It is so natural foi a fnend to be anxious about these, and to think he can never talk or hear enough upon these interest¬ ing topics I Afler having busily employed our¬ selves in discovering and examining (he various memorable objet.(s which occur¬ red in our route, we now passed quietly and silently along the lake It «as a deep and narrow waier, about nine miles in length, and skirted on both sides wifh rocks.
rocks uncommonly wild and romande, some perpendicular, some »trelching over our heads, antl tnlerccpdng (he vrew of (he upper sky, and clothed foi the most part wilh forests of beech and pine, that extended themselves down (o the very edge of (he waier. The lake was as smooth as crystal, and the arch¬ ing precipices that inclosed it gave a pe¬ culiar solemnity to the gloom. As« e passed near the chapel of Tell, the bell happened to toll forth, as if for a funeral- The sound was full, the effect melan¬ choly ; each reverberation of the metal was prolonged among the echoes of the rocks. Ί lus continued for about fifteen minutes, and then ceased. We were attended by only two row¬ ers and a steersman, labourers in the corn fields and garden of M Ruffigny Shortly after we had passed the chajiel, the rowers suspended their labour, and we glided in silence over the water. We hid
luti been so busted in action and con¬ versation during the whole morning, that the stillness which now succeeded seemed peifeclly unforced antl natu¬ rii I sunk 111(0 a deep roveri«· I thought of Willnm Tell, and the glo¬ rious founders of the Swiss liberty, I thought of the simple marmeri) which still prevail in the primitive cantons, I felt is if I were in the wildest and most luxuriant of the uninhabited islands of the South Sea I was lost in visions of pândise, of habitations and hower-s among the celestial oibs, of things su¬ pernatural and remote of the unincum¬ bered spirits of the virtuous and the just, of the pure rewards antl enjoyments of a hippier stiíe I had forgotten Switzer lind, and M Ruffigny, and the woild, and my self Accidentally I lifted my eje, and saw fho countenance of my host fixed upon me with peculnr intentness, a tear moistened
moisien ed the fnrrows of his cheeks. This spectacle recalled me lo the re¬ ality of things about me , but my heart was softened by the images which had passed through my thoughts, antl I could not speak. I have not named your father to j ou, said M. Ruffigny. My dear father I—His name, uttered at that moment, awakened the best feel¬ ings of my soul. Casimir ! Casimir Fleetwood ' ex¬ claimed my host, where have you been ? In France : at Pans. How have you been employed ? Not well. My father sent me forth for improvement ; but I have been em¬ ployed m libertinism and dissipation. Fleetwood, I also am youi father. And I will not be less indulgent, scarcely less anxious, than your natural parent. You know in gross, though you do not know in detail, the peculiar attachment I feel
I feel for everj thing that bears the name of Fleetwood Am I not your father í This, sir, is the third day that I have ever seen 50u , I know little of you yet, the little I have observed has scarcely had time to strike its fibres deep in my bo¬ som But all that I do know makes me presume that, were I worthy of the ho¬ nour, you are the person of all mankind whom I should prefer for an adoptive parent Casimir ' my dear Casimu ' 'et not your ears for ever abhor the sound of my voice , let not my form and my vi¬ sage be for ever loathsome in your sight · —I cannot speak— I understand jou, sir Myfaiheris dead 1 Ruffigny held forward to me a letter I took if from him, I gazed mechanically on (he superset ıptıon, but could not make out a syllable My friend drew nearer to mc, he put his arm round me, as
as I sat, I rested my head on lus shoul¬ der, and burst into a flood of tears The communication of this melan¬ choly intelligence no doubt afftctcd me very differently from what it would other¬ wise have done, in consequence of the frame of mind, which this da)'s excur¬ sion, and the various objects I had be¬ held, produced in me My sensibility was increased by the preparation, and the impression I received was by so much the deeper- I do not pretend to di¬ vine Ruffigny's motives for so con¬ triving the scene Perhaps he knew eaough of human nature to believe that it rarely happened to a son m the bloom of life, to break his heart for the loss of an aged parent Perhaps hf understood and disapproved of the tram of life in which I had lately been engaged, and thought the thus softening my heart the most effectual way of recalling me to my betler seK $ Why,
Why, sır, cried I mournfully, did you suffer me to remain a moment in igno¬ rance of thisdreadful intelligence? Why all this pomp of preparation ? What are scenery, and patriotism, and heroes, and the achievements of past ages to me î What have I to do with all this world í __ My father t my only friend '—Where have I been î Losing myself, while you stood in need of my consolation I Bleat¬ ing ihrough every plan that was ar¬ ranged, loitering away my time among the frivolities and licentiousness of Pans, while you laid down an aching bead m solitude, while your pulses failed, and your eyes were closed in darkness' Would to God it were m my power to recai a few past months '—No mattci ' My prospects and my pleasures aie fi¬ nished , my life is tarnished, my peace is destroyed, I shall never again thmk of myself with approbation, or with pa¬ tience 1 I did
I did not say all this aloud, though a part of it I did The short time I had passed with Ruffigny was yet long enough to make me feel no sort of constraint in his presence On the pre¬ sent occasion he did not attempt to con¬ sole me he left my grief to ils natural course, «e finished our voyage in si¬ lence By degrees, as I recovered the vise of my reason, I felt myself grateful for his kindness, and respected his judg- nent in this forbearance The night of the day I have described did not pass in lepóse Amidst short and disturbed slumbers I saw my father, I heard his voice I roused myself, and returned to recollection Dead? satd I Impossible I—Let the reader remember what I have already said of him, " He was the wisest and best man I knew He had all those advantages from na¬ ture, and from the external endowments of fortune, which were calculated to maintiin
maintain my reverence We hael gra¬ dually become more qualified for each other's society and confidence. Our characters had míny points of resem¬ blance we were both serious, both contemplative, both averse to (he com¬ merce of (he world "—This dear friend, this sharer in ill my interests, should I never meet igain ' The well-known mansion in Metionelhshue, in which I had pissed all my bojish days, should I find it vacant of its resjiectcd inhabitant * 'l hit milt) and iflecdonate counicmnce } which for m ıny y en s I had beheld every thy, almost at every houi, should I never ig un behold it ' Sometimes he was my phy fellow, and even slnred m my childish amusements lhe little imple¬ ments mti mcchnucilcontrivinces upon which my be>\ibh thoughts were employ¬ ed, and which my tksttea jnntccl (o le- alisc, he would often lend his hand to assist me to foim Ills lessons iv ero so ■vol ι k paterini,
paternal, so indi Igent, so consulente, so well adapted to my opening povveis' The confidences he occisión illy reposed in me, were so coi tini 1 Ilts descriptio ıs and pictures of things to excite my cu¬ riosity and emulation weresoitlmirible ' I remejnbercd how his minner succes¬ sively adapted itself to mv gıov\ıng jeirs and demands, from prattling infancy to the full stature of mm All these things lose at first confusedly to my mind, ind jostled each other Sometimes I entlea vouted with melancholy indusiry to ar¬ range them, at other times I threw the reins on the neck of my imagination, and resigned mj self to the gtı dince of foi tuitous associations My life, sani I under the roof of my father was the rc- ility of life The penod I spent at Ox¬ ford and Paris was an interval of inco¬ herence and mebriPty And this is all now endet' ' The reality of existence is for ever gone ' Why
Wh) ıs it that, from the hour I heard of my fallici s decease to the present di¬ stant period,the icmembi ance ofthat me¬ hncholy event has always become asso¬ ciated in my mmd, with the rocks of Switzeiland, and the lake of Un' One of the most affecting oi the catastiophts tint beoct this mortal existence, with vvb it is most solemn and sublime in the ii| cet of the univcisc f Gnef in all hu¬ man minds soon assumes the character of α luxury to be indulged, asvvcllasofapam to be endured The mourner recollects with complacency the tenderness of Ins hcait ind tht purity of his feelings The conscious iccuncnce of the scene in winch my gi ici began, gave in m) case to flie gnef itselt а new merit at the tn bun tl oi sentiment and taste Ifononr- c I, beloved, evil to bt u^ictted author f f my life' IScvci wtre ť e ashes of an taitein tuonateli attended with so mag¬ ni к cut t funei il ' 1 he deep gkn of the к г dirk
duk and tianquil lake of Un was the eathedial m which the rites were so¬ lemnised ι The clnjjcl of the unmortil Tell tolled ott( its bell to pioclaim the ceremony ! Tnepitriots who, five cen¬ turies ago, established the independence of Switzerland, composed the pioces- sion that attended thee (o the grave' All these images are for ever worked up together, antl constitute in my memory one melancholy and indelible scene ' It was many days after the communi¬ cation of this intelligence before my mind could îecover any tolerable com¬ posure How vinous encttmstances combined to nnke (his a terrible blow to me ' I felt n iked and unsheltered from the blasts of the world I wis hke a vine that had long twined itself îotind the trunk of a stuidy oak, antl from which at length the support and alliance of the oak is taken away. The shoots of my emulation and enterprise lay pro¬ strate
strate on the ground, and the fibres ot my heart weie toııı and bleetln g If I hid been present on this melancholy oe casion, if I had heird fiom my father tl e iccents of а lisi fire vel, if it hid been permitted me to sollen the last | nigs of expinng lile (о si) to myself, I now see (he fnentl vv horn I shall see no moi e, lo 1 iss Ins clay-cold forehead, (о feel the lftecdomte pressure of his hand for the la=t time, my remorse would have been less Ι ι eiiiembered with insuj portible inguisli the minner in which my ab sence h id been employed Not m wholsome and salutary studies, not in useful intl improving meditation, not in iottiid obseivtdono upon the voiielieoof man and the distinguishing featuics of nations , but in vice, in dissipition, m what I was sute my filhei would leist of all have apjirovtd, in ι timid and igno¬ minious sacrifice to the licentious mix- ims
ims of a nation among whom I was a so¬ journer The diy after th it of the like of Un, I did not come out of ıny cli ι nbei I had no counge to lilt up my held, ind my pıssıon once intl igtin lelieveel it¬ self by a flood of teaıs I «aí for hours immoveable, engros e ed m dun and печ- plıcable reverie This blunting of the senses was grateful and life giving, the brief intervals in which I returned (o my¬ self were filled with infolerable anguish How happy was I yesterday I exclaimed I to myself how desolate to day ' Nevertheless, I wis yesterday as father less as I am (o chy , my deir parent for more than two months has been no more but I did not know my misfoi (une ' With wh it jileisuie did I receive the kindness, observ e the b ibiís, and spe culaie upon the propeiisiliee, of mv fa¬ ther's friend ' With what interest did I set
set out yesterday morning upon the little excursion we had jilanned ' How much did I enjoy the scenery, as it wis form¬ ed by the all-directing hand of mtuie, and as it was modified by the leeollco- tion of (he human acts which Intl theie been performed ι Ciuci Rufiiçrv, bow could you stiller me to live under this delusion ι How could you look on, en¬ joying in malicious sport my blindness, and sec me amuse myself with stnws, while the rock, upon which my habita¬ tion had rested, vv is dissolved away be¬ neath its foundations ι —Yet, why, ah, why has this delusion ever been taken away ι Yesterday, and the day prece¬ ding, and the days before, I did not know my misfortune, and I was happy' Oh, that this dieam could have lasted for ever '—I shall never again see my falher, —never, never '—yei why mighl I not h ive been led on with the pleasing hope, and have said, To-monow, and to-mor¬ row,—
row, —a short time yet,—and we shall meet I How happy, to have pursued an interminable route, and still have be heved (hat I was almost at my journey s end I to have (rusted for ever, and con tided as long as I continued to live ' My kind host sent mc my morning s repast, but it stood by me untouched Ever since I had received the news, I hid a sensation within ine, that rejected food, as peremptorily as the glands of a person labouring under a hydrophobia, (hrow back the water he might attempt to ab¬ sorb Dinner time came, and hunger at igth subdued the obstinacy of my grief Wrth biller seorn of my own frailty, I swallowed я few morsels of the food which was set before rne In the evening Ruffigny entered mv chamber He sat down, and for some minutes continued silent At length he spoke He did not ask me how I had rested, or how I felt myself He began with woids
words concerning my father ; he made a calculation of their respective ages. I could not stand this ; to myself I had repeated my father's name a hundred times ; but I could not bear to hear it formed by the voice of another. Ruf¬ figny desisted. A few minutes more, and he returned to the same topic with some variation. I now endured it better. He pronounced an eulogium of my fa¬ ther's virtues. This was not altogether without a soothing sensation ; though from time to time I covered my face with my hands, struck my forehead with my clenched fisl, and broke into other mechanical gestures of impatience. Ruf¬ figny spoke of the years he had spent in society with my father. He recollected a variety of little incidents and adven¬ tures, which had served to. display his judgment and humanity, the resources of his mind, and the generousness of his temper. If all this discourse had been к 5 artificial,
artificial, if it bad resembled the funeral encomium of a venal orator, it would only have irritated my impatience, and increased my sorrows. Bat Rufligny loved my fttber only less than I loved bim. Tbe chief differences were, tbat be bad not teen him for years, and this had served him for a weaning ; and that the instinct of blood, or tbat prejudice and sentiment which amply supply the place of instinct, was in full ascendancy in me, and was wanting in him. We mingled our tears. His discourse was the overflowing of his heart, a relief that was necessary to the anguish he felt, and to the restraint he had imposed upon himself in the two first days of my visit. 'His sorrow would have produced more injurious effects upon him, had it not been that he felt it as a duty incumbent upon him to console mine. Ruffigny went on. A most valuable life ha? been terminated, and you do well to
to weep. A great gap has been made in society j and, though you are the principal loser, ye* all who knew your father, particularly all who were within reach of his wisdom or beneficence, are losers too He has left a considerable estate, and there is need of some one to look into its condition and prosperity. He has left tenants, and they will miss his superintendence and indulgence Because they have lost him, I hope (hat will not be a reison thai (hey should lose you Your father has perished from- the face of the earth, but it is not your design th it his memory should perish vuth him ' Strangei s no doubt have al¬ ready giv en him a grave But shnll not his son entjuiie what they have done, and supply what they may have left de¬ ficient ί Shall no stone mark the place w here his ashes rest î Shall no filial cu¬ riosity demand, from those who were on. the spot, the history of his last moments, the
-.the paroxysms he suffered, the consola¬ tions that relieved them, the last words which were nreathed from his dying lips ? Shall no one endeavour to draw -out an image of his life, by enquiring into his injunctions, and perpetuating the execution of those plans upon which, it may be, his affections were bent ì , These are the duties of survivors ; it is in this way that our offspring prove their attachment to those, to whom they were bound in a thousand obligations. The discourse of Ruffigny produced in me the revolution he meditated. I will set out for England this moment ! cried I. Would it, answered Ruffigny, be any increase to your satisfaction that I should accompany you ? Good Heaven ! venerable old man, ■exclaimed I, you cannot entertain the thought ? The wish to perforin a pilgrimage to the
the tomb of my ancient friend is upper¬ most in my heart. Will you permit me to occupy a comer in the chaise that is to convey you to England î I threw myself into his arms, I burst into tears , I even sobbed upon his bo¬ som—My fafher is not wholly dead! What must be my obligation to the friend, who at such a moment is willing to supply his place I When my first surprise at this gene¬ rous proposal had subsided, I argued with Ruffigny I objected his age and infirmities, I intreated him to consider well the extent of so unexampled a sacri¬ fice My arguments were not urged with all the force of which they were capable, my heart betrayed me, my very soul thrilled with pleasure, and yearned over the old man who said, Shall I not accompany you to Eng· landi My host concealed from me one part of
of the motive that induced him to this extraordinary resolution. My father, as I have said, had furnished me with a most exemplary letter of introduction to Ые Swiss friend, and had trusted much to his affectionate and benevolent wis¬ dom for the perfecting my character. When I least suspected it, my deceased parent had obtained accurate accounts of my proceedings in Oxford and at Paris, and had transmitted a faithful abstract of these accounts to M. Ruffigny. He was exceedingly anxious for the future pu¬ rity of my character and honour of my transactions, and was of opinion that a violent interference and a rude check put upon my excesses, was by no means the most effectual method for my refor¬ mation. He therefore scarcely seemed to be aware of my errors, at the time that he was most exactly informed of, and most disapproved them. He be- lievet! that an unsuccessful attempt to place
piare them before me in their full light, would be infinitely moie injurious than if no attempt were made His great dependence was upon my visit to Switzerland He had the most exalted notion of the talents, the virtues and the zeal of his friend in this corner of the world He persuaded himself that the operation of novelty would be highly favourable to the accomplishment of his wishes, and that the unexpected meet ing with a man so qualified, and the yet untried expedients which Ruffigny would employ for my improvement, would produce the happiest effects My father was now dead, and my host felt the task which had devolved upon him as of double obligation I was a legacy which the friend most dear to him on earth had bequeathed to him, and a trust which with his last breath be had consigned to his care As a legacy, the
the long attachment he had felt to the name of Fleetwood made him regard me as the most valuable estate that could have been conveyed to him ; and as a trust, there was nothing for which he more desired to live, than the faithful discharge of what the person conferring that trust expected from him. When the choice of various means were in my lite father's power, he had fixed upon the vigilance and discrelion of Ruffigny, as that by which he desired to secure my improvement and happiness. Had fate not bereaved me thus untimely of a father's care, he would no doubt have employed various engines and instru¬ ments for the same end. While a pa¬ tent's eye was upon me, however much he trusted to ihe discretion of this friend, 'Ruffigny would still have been a de¬ puty, nòt a principal. * Now the task be¬ came entirely his, and every engage- • ment
ment that he felt to the virtues nnd (he memory of my fathei-, called upon him, as the last tribute ef friendship, to leave no effort unexerted for my wel¬ fare.
CHAP-
CHAPTER Χ. jUtiKiNG our journey, Ruffigny com¬ municated to me at 'arge the pulicul in of ¡ns connection with my family, ot which I had before heard in general teims, but knew nothing distinctly. While I was yet a child, said my fel¬ low-traveller, I had the misfortune to lose both my parents By this event I fell undei the care of an uncle, a brother of my father. Hypocrisy and fiaud are natives of every climate ¡ antl there are villains even in Switzerland. My uncle was copious in his professions of affec¬ tion and fidelity during the last illness of my father, and protested a thousand times that he «ould in all respeefs treat me as if I had been sprung of his own loins. It was at about seven years of age;
age that I was delivered to his guardian ship Unfortunately this uncle of mine had ι mimerons family, ant! had been unprospcrotis in several of his attempts foi llie impiovcment of his property He wis naturally of an impatient, d s contented and reserved disposition, yet with ι considetable mixture of vanity He had disbursed in several instances more money than he could well com¬ mand He had been restless, and eager to engage in various projeeis, ..rd nis piojects had failed. My father on the contrary, who was of an open and free disposition, cool in his temper, andsaga- r ous in his determinations, had con¬ stantly prospcicd Beside vvhieh, my father was gicatly and universally be¬ loved, every one consulted, every one distinguished him, he wis courted uy all his neighbours, made an umpire in eveiy controversy, and on all hands ad¬ mitted to be the most enlightened citi- гел
zen in the canton of which he was a na¬ tive. His brother, sullen in his disposi¬ tion, perplexed and obscure in his in¬ tellect, and rude and unconcihating in his manners, was as generally avoided. The common observation rcspccling him among the candid and good-humoured Swiss was, Our dislike is more than we cangile a reason for; wc agree to look upon him as a bad man, but where is the guilt he has committed ί Such was the guardian, into whose fa¬ mily I was at this time removed. He saw me ip the circle of his own children with a scowling eye. Why, said he to himself, should this little vagabond be entitled to more property, than all my children put together î He will come into possession of superfluity, while his .cousins, not less worthy (han he, will see (heir lives withered, by the scanti¬ ness of means which I have in vain exerted myself to increase. The
The obsci vidons my uncle had occa¬ sion (o nnke upon me tn the sequel, did not by any meins lend to tnnquilhse the storm already swelling in his bosom H s childien inhciiled the same slowness and perplexity of intellect which charac- tenscd their fitliei , I was remarked to have that facility of apprehension and quickness f parts which distinguish¬ ed my deceased pirent Whatever we Ieirned is pupils, we learned togethei, but I excelled them all Whenever, which was not often, any visitor honour¬ ed our toof, we put ourselves forvvaid «ith the eisy frankness of Swiss man- nets, but I constantly bore away the pr zc In the little exercises of the ad¬ joining hamlet, m the questions pro¬ posed, and the remali- delivered, by the aged peasantry of the vicinage, the picfetence still fell to mc This was too much foi my uncle s un¬ quiet tempet to endure Does the same fate,
fale, murmured he in his meditations, still pursue me? As I was consrandy eclipsed by (his urchin's father, so shall my children be for evei surpassed by (he son î Is (here a fatality entailed upon oui race ? Surely from the womb there has been an antipathy between us, and, as long as the descendants of cither exist, my progeny will for ever be made slaves to that of my brother I About twelve monfhs after the death of my father, my uncle had occasion to make a journey into France, and to my great surpri'e proposed to take me with him. My father had so disposed of his pioperly, as to vest in his brother, the full possession of the income during my minority, under (he notion of a compen¬ sation for his expence and (rouble in (he care of tny educadon Other parenis in other couniries would have been anxious that the gicater pírt of the income should accumulate, for the purpose of S supplying
supplying me with a more ample fortune when I came of age. But this idea is foicign to tbc simphciiy of the country in which I was born. The property of «hich my father died possessed was, without farihet improvement fully equal to any estate in the canton ; and it would have been more agreeable to his modes of thinking, that I should, when arrived at years of discretion, come into posses¬ sion of the very income thai lie had re¬ ceived, than of a l.uger One evil however originated m (his mode of settling his estate. My guar¬ dian found immediately afler the decease of my father a consideiable imptovement to his own resources. The expences which weie in any way necessaiy (o me at this tender age were extremely small, and my uncle had of consequence the whole present emolument of my pio- perty. This circumstance increased the strong dislike he entertained for me. His
His avaricious disposition caused him to look forward with honor to the time when it would be required of hun to dis- butse large sums in the progress of my education, and with still greatei horror to the period w hen it would be necessary to resign the whole. In our journey to France wc were also accompanied by my eldest cousin, a youth of about seventeen )ears of age This lad had always healed me with sin¬ gular unkindness, and at his age he was less under restraint fiom the laws of de¬ corum, and less capable of disguising his antipathies, than his fathei was. He never looked upon me but with a scowl of dislike, lie never spoke lo me but in a tone of seventy and hatsbness. Some of his brothers v ere as )oung as myself, and to these he w ıs a sotu and unnpencd tyrant Nevtitheless, when it was my misfortune to have any dıffeıence with them (and indeed we nevei agreed), he was
was alwajs, when appealed to, of the paitj, against mc, and his decisions were announced by cuffs and blows innu- meiable When we armed at L}ons, my uncle laid aside his proper name, and caused himself to be called M. Mouchard. Upon this occasion he called me in, and addressed me ma style of unusual sei.otisncss He had taken me louiid the town of Lyons, shown me the best buildings, and the handsomest of the suburbs, conducted me (o (he public gaidens and the theatres, and ended- \oured by evciy meins to make it ap¬ peal in m} e}es an agreeable residence It was indeed ι perfect conti ist to (he Mild and scierc ficcs exhibited by the cinion of Un, and to my foolish and mexiieueiiced heart the populous sireets, the thronged exchange, the crowded walks and lhe illuminated theatres ap¬ peared like finy-iand mt i L When
When I return home, said my uncle, it is my intention to leave you at Lyons My heart leaped within me at fhe irtel hgence, and I expressed my delight in unequivocal terms Unfortunate as I was, I had no prepossessions to attach me to my native land While my pa rents lived, I indeed loved it All my hours had been winged with joy, and I experienced those pleasing emotions which arise in the human heart, when we perceive that we are looked on with partiality and affection by all around us But the last of my parents had now been dead more than a year, and since that time the scene had been completely re versed It was ndeed an irksome and a melancholy year to me Till then I had been a spoiled child, but in my new situation I was neglected and dis¬ liked by all Wherever I was, I was one too much, whatever I did, my uncle and my cousins were sure to dis¬ approve
approve I did not feel this so much at fjist, perhaps the unkindness I expe¬ rienced vvas at first not so great as it afterward became I made those exer¬ tions which have already been men¬ tioned, and gamed the apjiUuse of the neighbourhood and the envy of my cousins But mine peilnps was not an age to struggle wiih discouragemeni, nor had Ihe tenderness and indulgence of my first education prepared me for it The volatility of youthful spirits in pait supported me, but I had fits of melan¬ choly and depression, greater than might have been expected at so early a period of life Gndually I came to hale the scenery about me, and to loath the rou¬ tine of the passing day " Your falhei, confmucd my uncle, " left you to my care, and many have been the anxioti» houis which this guar¬ dianship has cost me My brother was a very foolish min, and Ins bred you in L a such
such a manner that you will be a gi eat trouble to any one who has to do with you If you had been brought up so¬ berly and strictly like your eousms, you would have been a very different sort of a boy , but that, poor child, is not your fault I have tnec. to bring you into order, but I see it is necessaiy you should go out into the world My bro¬ ther, with all bis mistakes, was my bro ther sfili , and you must needs think that I will do every thing in my power for the service of his child " William, you must beavvue that, if I had not a good opinion of your capa¬ city, I shoultl not lalk thus fo ι child of your years You certainly do not want for capacity, though you are a veiy per¬ verse and wicked boy I musl own that 1 do not expec( any good of you, but, if you come to barm, it shall not be through my fault You will live, I hope, to (bank me fiom the bottom of your
your heart for what I am now doing foi you " There is one thing more I have to say to you, a part of which you cin un¬ derstand, and a part )Oti cannot The pírt you can untierstand, I will explain to jou , the pirt you cinnof, you must ti list for to my superior judgment, md to the paternal care I hive ever shown for you " Уои have obseived, that, since I came to this city, I have called m)se!t Mr Mouchatd lhat is to be vour name, you are to be called William Mouchard You aie a mtive of Bellm- zone, flint is the story I shill tell of jou, and that you ire to uphold There are miny things that a child of yotn jcais cannot compiehend , you do not know what is good for you, and must trust to the better discernment of your elders 1 his I have to tell you , you must nevet on any account mention my real name or
or your own, you must never mention the canton of Un, or any one of the mountains and valley s among which you have been brought up You must never write to me or to any creiture in Swit¬ zerland , you must never make any en¬ quiñes, or give the least sign thit you are alive. Ishall hive my eyes on you , I shall provide generously for your sup¬ port , and, when I please, shall vvntc to you, or come m¡ self to все how you are going on U| on this point, boy, I must deal plainly with you All n.y attention is directed to your welfare, and I have only this injunction to givejou Upon youi ouserv mce of it, depends every llimg th ıl ıs dear to you Ihe moment you bieak it m the minutest particle, the most terrible misfortunes will instantly overwhelm you I cannot tell you what they are, they are so great, (hat youi understanding would be wholly unable to comprehend them. But be sure of this,
thi«, all I do is for your advantage. When you least expect it, you will see that it is so Remember and tremble ' I put the happiness of your whole h r e into youi own disposal ' It is inconceivable with what stiange sensations J listened to llns harangue The phrases my uncle had employed, of the supei ior judgment of our ciders, the incapacity nnd blindness of children, and c\ cry thing tbat older people do being calculated for our good, was (he cant which I had incessantly heard during the last year, and, though these phrases certainly were never employed upon л more unworthy occasion, they exeiled in me a mysterious sensadon of leve- rence and awe, which I felt incapible to .shake off A doubtful opinion, Was (his genuine kindness? Was it a masked hostility î hung about me, and perplexed my resolutions I was not however long m doubt I was delighted with lhe city of
of Lyons , I could not endure the thought of leturning to my uncle and his family I looked upon my native home, now that my parents were removed fiom the stigc of life, with horror, but I w ıs m the morning of my days, antl w ıs inclined to legard every ihing new, with hope, with exultation, and a bounding heart One thing appeared to mo singular My uncle told me that L)ons w ıs to be the place of my abode , but he men¬ tionul nothing to me of the puticulir situation in which I was to be placed Was I to be put en pension it ι boarding- school, or how ? If I were, methought I should like to have seen beforehand the house in which I was to reside, the mis¬ ter who was to instruct me, the youths who were (o be my companions Bull was totally destitute of every sort of knowledge of the world, and was in the hands of my envious and bad hearted uncle to dispose of as he pleased This might,
might, for aught I knew, be the esta¬ blished mode of proceeding m all similar cases It was perhaps one of those points, which were reserved for the wisdom of our elders to dccitle upon, and which the capacity ofa child like me was held un¬ able to comprehend We had been now ten days at Lyons, and the next morning was fixed for my uncle and my cousin to set out upon their return In the evening a M Vau¬ blanc visited us in our hotel. This is the gentleman, said my uncle, who is so obliging as to provide an apai tment for you in his house Iliad never seen hnn before. He was a little man, with black, strnglit hair, his countenance clear and sensible, but with muscles that had not often been moulded into the expression of pity or tendei ness His diess was exceedingly plain, not without some ap¬ pearances of negligence and dirt. My uncle and he talked a great deal about i. $ the
the silk-manufactures of Lyons, my guardian seeming to be desirous of in¬ formation under this head, and the stranger well qualified to afford it Neither of them took much notice of me, and at an early hour I was directed to go to bed My little man, said the Lyonnese, taking me by the hand, but with no expression of kindness you will be very comfortable at my house, I have two little boys just about your age, and you will be nice playmates together Good night I I shall come for you in the morning I conceived no flattering augury in behalf of my new landlord What had pleased me in Lyons was the squares, the public gardens, and the theatres 1 hese were exactly calculated to soothe my youthful curiosity The plainness oflhe appearance of M Vaublanc, ana the dryness of his manners, were in per¬ fect contrast with these There was some-
something in them which tended to chill the imagination, and inspire a dieary presentiment of the future. Yet I was willing to launch on this untried sea I said, No, I will not go back with my uncle 1—The morning of our separation was heavy, and presently began to pour down torrents of rain. My uncle at pardng put a louis d'oi into my hand, I thought I never felt any thing so cold as his hand, when I touch¬ ed it for the last time My cousin pre¬ sented me with a three livres piece. You wonder perhaps at my recollect¬ ing so minutely a scene which passed at so early an age. But you will presently peiceive what reasons there were that compelled me to recollect it. Accus¬ toming myself to contain my recollec¬ tions and luminations in my own bosom, they took so much the deeper roor. M. Vaublanc was punctual in meeting and receiving me, at the very instant that
that my uncle was stepping into the car¬ riage which was to comey him to the foot of the mountains. I never sa« or heard of my guardian from this mo¬ ment. The wheels of the coach slowly rolled Bwoy, and my new landlord led me down another street. Our walk was not short, and we arrived at the meanest part of the city. M. Vaublanc led me up a narrow and silent alley. When we had passed through two-thirds of it, This, said he, is my house We entered, and were received by his wife, a woman plain and neat m her dress, and of a notable appearance Presently came in the two boy s he men¬ tioned to me Tbey were clothed in remarkably coarse attire, and the rude¬ ness of their countenances, and ungain- liness of their carriage, well correspon¬ ded to their dress. All together, the al¬ ley, the darkness of the apartments, the appear-
appearance of the family, exceedingly displeased me And this, thought I, is my residence in the magnificent city of Lyons! My youthful senses had been idly da.!zled with the gaudiness of arti¬ ficial hie is I had here first seen it But I could not help saying to myself, How preferable are (he mouniains, antl cas endes, and cheerful cottages, of the Swiss to this miserable alley ! In one respect however my situation was better than I began to expect it would be After two or three days I vvas conducted to one of the most re¬ spectable seminaries of education in the city of Lyons, such as young persons of the rank of the little Vaublincs never enteied, where, under masters of great knowledge and humanity, I began (o be initiated in every species of learning suit¬ able to my age What was my uncle s motive for taking this step, so little in consistency with those which afterward folio i-d,
followed, I could never exactly conjec¬ ture. Perhaps he was desirous of letting me down by degrees, and had not the courage to drive mo to despair at once, and risk the consequences which that state of mind might produce. Perhaps, wicked as be was, he could not himself form his resolutions immediately, and only by degrees worked up bis mind to the plan which was intended to termi¬ nate in my ruin. Be this as it will, the studies and ac¬ complishments in the pursuit of which I was now engaged, afforded me much gratification. Though I bad at first been dazzled with tbe splendours of Lyops, I knew tbat pleasure was not considered as tbe business of life ; and, regarding tbe acquisition of liberal know¬ ledge aş abadge of honour, I was willing to cultivate those improvements which might fit me to discharge with respec¬ tability the offices of a man. I recol¬ lected
lected that in my native province I had always appeared to advantage in the field of emulation, and this naturally inspired me with an appetite for similar experi¬ ments My parts were quick, mj ap¬ prehension was clear, and I almost con¬ stantly obtained the-praise and encou ragement of the regents The only mor tification I suffered, during this period, was in going home every evening to M Vaublanc s There was such a contrast between his manners, and those of my instructors ' His children were so sordid and groveling in their habits, compared with the generous minds and spirited tempers of my school fellows with whom I associated in the course of the day '
CHAP-
CHAPTER XI. I had for about three months frequent¬ ed the lessons of my instructors, when one morning the elder of Vaublanc's sons came to my bed-side at about six o'clock, and bade me rise immediately, for his father wanted to^peak to me. I obeyed. My little lad, said Vaublanc, you are not to go to school to-day. No, sir? What, is it a red-letter day? Your uncle has written to me to put you into a different birth. Ah, I am very sorry ! Ours is a sweet school, and I like the masters and eveiy body (bat belongs to it. William Mouchard, said my host, I know very little of you or your uncle either. But that is nothing to me. While
While he requires of me nothing that it is contrary to my notions, or out of my way, to do, I intend to be his fair and punctual con espondent All that he said to me while he was at Lyons, was like an honest man He said, he had a numerous family of his own, and that he cottiti not do much for you, an orphan cast upon his chirity. I stired I remembered the seveic injunctions of my guardian, and was si¬ lent. It ippeirs (hat he has had lepeated misfortunes in the woild, and that he can just make shift to bring up his chil¬ dren m a humble way It cannot there¬ fore be expected that he should do much foi you. I can make his case my own, md I am sure I should look to my own flesh and blood He has lesolved to keep you fiom staiving, and that is very ge¬ nerous of him. There is only one thing I cannot understand Why he sent you to
to this school at all I think he was out in his judgment there This was the first time m my life, tbat the ideas of subsistence and property had been plainly stated to me My no¬ tions, like a child s, weie very confused on the subject But, I suppose, pro¬ ceeding by a sort of implicit conclusion from the visible circumstances of my fa¬ ther, I had always considered myself as entitled to a full participation of those benefits and blessings which & child can enjoy What Vaublanc said however, convinced mc that my uncle was de¬ ceiving him. I understood little of the descent of property, and whether, upon my fathers death, it ought to devolve to his son or his brother, but I under¬ stood still less of the equity of just pre¬ serving from death by hunger the only son of aman, who had possessed evciy luxury and indulgence that were in use in his country In a word, the views now
now stated to me, enlightened my un¬ derstanding at once, and, when I found myself thus thrown upon the world, I apprehended, as it were by necessity, the laws and constitutions of human life What is to be done with me, siri said I You must do as I do, replied Vau¬ blanc People who have nobody else to maintain them, maintain themselves You have seen shoemakers, and smiths, and joiners at their work í Ihey get money by their woik, and with that money they buy meat and drink î Does my uncle wish me to learn to be a smith or a joiner ? No, no Any body that taught you to be these tndes would require to be paid for the trouble of teaching you, antl you would get nothing by it these seven years We have a trade in Lyons that we teach to younkers for nothing And
And shall I get money by my work immediately î No, not for a month. What shall I get then f Twelve sous a week*. Will that be enough to save every body else the trouble of paying any thing for my food, and my lodging, and my clothes ? That it will not. A sprig, like you, cannot do that ; he must do what he can. And my uncle will pay the rest î He cannot help himself,—You are willing tben to do what I have been tel¬ ling you î I must not say much about my willing¬ ness, M. Vaublanc. I never did any work in my life. The more is the pity ! In Lyons we find work for children from four years old : sometimes sooner
And
And in ----- In ------ the country I come fiom, the children never do any work, till they are almost as tall as their fathers. They do little offices indeed to be useful sometimes, but nothing like what you. call working for their living I do not know which way is right, but I know i\ hich is agreeable I should not so much matter a little hardship , hut you say, I must go no more to school —I cannot think why, M Vaublanc, you asked any thing about my willingness I Antl, sayrag (his, a flood of (eais buist from my eyes When a school-bov, continued I, is (o be punished, the master never asks him whether he chooses it — M Vaublanc, I cannot help myself. I am in а strange eountiy, and have neilher fafher, nor moihei, nor any body to care for me. Take me, and dispose of me, as jou please, and as you (cl! me my uncle di- recis I dare say, you are a just man, and will
will do me no harm. Wherever you put We, I will endeavour to be a good boy, and that nobody shall be angiy with me. I will be attentive, and learn as well as I can, and work as hard as I can. But, pray, pray, M. Vaublanc, do not ask me another time, whether I am willing ? That will do, boy, said he, nodding his bead. You will get better satisfied witb your situation, as you grow used toit. Saying this, be put on his hat, and bid me follow him. As we passed along : You know, I believe, what I am ? I have heard : a manufacturer of silk. One part of this business is to pre¬ pare tbe silk, as it comes from the woim, for the sempstress and the weaver. This is done by means of mills : I have two or three large ones, and employ a great number of work-people in them.—You 4 had
had rather work for me, than for a mas- ter you did not know ? That I had I The thing is frightful to mc, because it is a thing I never thought of But I should fear it more, if it placed me altogether among strangers You cannot think, pursued M Vau¬ blanc, what an advantage these mills aie to the city of Lyons In other places children are a burthen to their poor pa¬ rents , they have to support them, till they are twelve or fourteen years of age, before they can do the least thing for their own maintenance ι here the case is entirely otherwise In other places they run ragged and wild about tbe streets no such thing is to be seen at Lyons. In short, our town is a perfect paradise. We are able to take them at four years of age, and m some cases sooner. Their little fingers, as soon as they have well learned the use of them, are employed for the relief of their parents, who have brought
brought them up from the breast. They learn no bad habits ; but are quiet, aud orderly, and attentive, and industrious. What a prospect for their future lives ! God himself must approve and bless a race who are thus early prepared to be of use to themselves and others. Among us it is scarcely possible there should be such a thing as povei ty. We have no such thing as idleness, or lewdness, or riot, or drunkenness, or debauchery of any sort. Let the day of judgment come when it will, it will never surprise us in a situation in which we should be ashamed tobe found. I never heard M. Vaublanc so eloquent. Eloquence was not his characteristic·, but he was mow on his favouiite topic, a topic intimately connected with his fame, his country, and the patriotic services which he ren¬ dered her. He did not completely ïe- collect, while he talked on so infercsling a subject,
a subject, that be wat, iddres^ing himself to a child, scarcely more than eight y ears of age Some things that he said, were not exactly in accord with the viv aeily of my temjier, and th«" present siate of my feelings But on the whole I was fixed and penetrated by the warm colouring he bestowed on his picture , I checked the rebelliousness of my heart, and said, Piobably it is better for me that I should be admitted into so pine and exemplary ι soc ely I longed to set my foot upon the tinesholl of the teneşiri ıl pıradıse lie descnbcd My impatience wis speedily gratified We entered a very spacious building, which wis divided however no otherwise than into four looms, floor above floor Ihe lowei 01 under giound ipirtment was occujiicd by lhe horse tint givi mo don to lhe mill, ind (ha( wis iclicvcd every hour Two hoi«es weie the stock to each mill Above stins the walls vol ι m were
were lined on Ihree sides, with the reels, or, as the English manufacturers call them, swifts, which received the silk, as it was devolved from certain bobbins. Of these there were about eleven hun¬ dred in the first floor, as many in the se¬ cond, and as many m the third, in all between three and four thousand. It was curious (o recollect that all these, by means of wheels and other contrivances in the machine, were kept in perpeknl motion by a single quadruped In each apartment I saw several men, more wo¬ men, and a greatei number of children, busily employed. M. Vaublanc was so obliging as (o lake me over the whole, before he assigned me my task You will npt suppose there was any thing very cheeiful or exhilaiadng in the paradise we had entered. The idea of a mill is the antipathy of this One perpetual, dull, flagging sound pervaded the whole. The walls were bare, the inha-
XI. inhabitants were poor. The children in general earned little more than twelve sous in a week ; most of the wo¬ men, and even several of the men, but about one French crown *. We must correct our ideas, and imagine a very so¬ ber paradise, before we can think of ap¬ plying the name to this mansion. I was most attentive to the employ¬ ment of the children, who were a pretty equal number of both sexes. There were about twenty on each floor, sixty in all. Their chief business was to attend to the swifts ; the usual number being fifty-six which was assigned to the care of each child. The threads, while the operation of winding was going on, were of course liable to break ; and, the mo¬ ment a thread was broken, the benefit of the swift to which it belonged was at a stand. The affair of the child was, by
m a turning
turning round (lie swift, to find the end, and then to join it to the corresponding end attached to the bobbin The child was to supei intend the progiess of these fifty-six threads, to move backward and forward in his little tether of about feti feet, and, the moment any accident hap¬ pened, to repair it I need not tell you that I saw no great expressions of chcei- fulness in either the elder or the younger inhabitants of these walls their occupi- fions weie too anxious and monotonous —the poor should not he too much ele¬ vated, and incited to forget themselves There was a kind of stupid and hopeless vacancy in every face this pioceeded fiom the same causes. Not one of the persons before mc exhibited any signs of vigour and ro¬ bust health. They were all sallow, their muscles flaccid, and their foim emaciated. Several of the children ap¬ pealed to me, judging from their size, to
tobe undei four years of age—I never s ivv such children Some were not t tU enough with (hen little irais fo reich (he svvifi, (hese b vel stools, which they cai- l ed m their hinds, and mounted as oc¬ cisión offcietl \ few, I observed, hid ι soi t of lion buskins on vvhieh they wtie dentiti, md, is the iron wis vvoiked linn, ihey were not extremely unwieldy Childien, befoie they had leirncd that firm step with the sole of the nittini foot, without which it is im¬ possible ever fo bea mm, were thus dis¬ ciplined to (otter ujion stilts But this was ι new invention, ind not yet fully t stüblibhe I This, or neaily all this, I obscivcd upon my first stuvey of M Vatibl mc s m inufactory In addition to this I at- tcrvvird found, whit jou will easily con¬ ceive, lhaf it wis not without much seve¬ nty that tic childien were tinned to the regularity I saw Figuie to yourself л child
child of three or four years of age The mind of a child is essentially indepen dent, he does not, till he has been foim. ed to it by baid experience, fnme to himself the itlcis of authority and subjec¬ tion Wl en he is rated by his nurse, lie expiesses his mutinous spirit hyp ei- eingcrtes, when he is first struck by hei m anger, he is re idy to full into convt 1 sons of nge it almost never hajijicus otherwise It is n long while (unless he is unmcicifiilly treated indeed) lefnc a rebuke or a blow pioduccs in lum im- mednte svmjiloms of stibmi son Whi¬ ther Willi tie jlnlosojiher we chue lo i g id llns Ub in evidence of our high destination, or with the theologian ci e it os an liidicilion ofoui universal de¬ ju vil), nnd a biand we bear of Adam s tiansgression, (he faet ıs ind sputatile Almost all lhat any parent leqtures of ι child of three or four yens of ige con¬ sists in negatives stind still do not
go there do not touch thai He st irecly expects or desires to obtain from lum any mediameli attention Con- tnst this wilh the situation of the chil¬ dien I saw brought to the mill it six in tbc morning detuned till six at night, antl, vvith lhc exception of half- nn hour fir bieikfist, and in hour at dinner, kept incessantly watchful over the safety and regularity of fifty-six threads continually turning By my boni, I am ashamed to tell j ou by what expedients they are brought to this un- lntcinutted vigilance, this deid life, this inactive and torpid industry ' Consider the subject in mother light Liberty is the school of untici standing This ıs not enough adverted to Evety boy learns more in his hours of play, than in his houis of labour In school he hj s in the m ıterıals of thinking, but m his sports he actually thinks he whets his faculties, ond he opens his eyes The cinld
child from the mome it of Ins birth is an experimental philosopher he essays hie organs and his limbs, and learns the u«c of his muscles Evciy one who will at- tentively observe him, will find (hai (his is his perpetual employ men( But the whole process depends upon liberty Put him into a mill, and his understand¬ ing will improve no moie than that of the hor«e which (urns i( I know thit it is said ılı it (he lower orders of (he peo|ilc have nothing to do with the cul¬ tivation of the understanding , though formy put I cannot see how they would be the worse for thai growih of practi¬ cii intellect, which should enable Ihem to plin and provide, each one for him¬ self, the increase of his conveniences and competence But be it so ι I know thit the earth is the great Bridewel of the universe, where spirits, descended from heaven, are committed to dtudger and hird labour Yet I should be ghd that our
our children, up to a certain age, were exempt, sufficient is the hardsh ρ and subjection of their whole future life, methinks, even Egyptian taskmasters would consent that they should grow up in peace, till they had acquired the strength necessary for substantial ser¬ vice Liberty is the parent of strength Na- ture leaches the child, by the play of the muscles, and pushing out his limbs in every direction, to give them scope to develop themselves Hence it is that he is so fond of sports and tricks in the open air, antl that these sports and ti rks are so beneficial to him He runs, ho vaults, he climbs he piactises exactness of eye, and sureness of aim His limbs grow straight and taper and his joints well- knit and flexible The mind ofa child ь no less vagrant than his steps, it pur¬ sues the gossamer, and flies from ob¬ ject to object, lawless and unconfined m ¡ and
and it is equally necessary to (he deve¬ lopment of his frame, that his thoughts and his body should be free from fet¬ ters. But then he cannot earn twelve sous a week. These children were un¬ couth and ill-grown in every limb, and Avere stiff and deerepid m their carriage, so as to seem like old men. At four years of age they could earn salt to their bread, but at forty, if it were possible they should live so long, they could not earn bread to their salt. They were made sacrifices, while yet tender, and, like the kid, spoken of by Moses, were seethed and prepared for the destroyer in their mother's milk. This is the case in no state of society, but in manufac(unng towns. The children of gipsies and sa- \ages have ruddy cheeks and a sturdy form, can run like lapwings, and climb trees with the squirrel.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XII Y ou will readily imagine what a thun¬ der stroke it was to me, to be entered as one of the members in this vast machine Up to the period of eight y ears of ige I had been accustomed to walk upon (he level plain of human socieiy, I had sub- milled to my parents and instructors, but I had no idea that there was any chs» or cast of my fellow creatures, sú¬ permi to that in which I was destined to move This persuasion inspir , into the heirt, pardcul irly the heart of Ihe y oung, such guety of tempei, and graceful con¬ fidence in action I Now I was cast down at once, to be the associate of the lowest class of mechanics, paupers, biutified m intellect, and squalid in attne I had however the courage to make up my
my resolution at once to the calamities of my station. I saw what it was (o which it would be necessary for me to submit ¡ and I felt too proud, to allow myself to be driven by blows and hard usage to that from which I could not escape I discharged with diligence the task assigned me, and wasted in torpid and melancholy labour the hours of the day What may appear strange, this terrible reverse of fate by no means operated to stupefy my intellect. I was like those victims of Circe that we read of in Ho¬ mer, who, though (hey had lost the ex¬ ternal symbols of a supcuor nature, te- tnned the recollection of what they had been, and disgust at what they weie You will perhaps scarcely suppose thit my age was ripe enough for this If I had been removed lo a pleasing «cene, if I had continued a pupil in the ы. lic ols of liberal education, the impressions of my
my early years would probably have faded by degrees from my mind, But in the dreary situation in which.I was now plaqed, they were my favourite con¬ templation ι I thought of them for ever. It was by remembering, them only, that I felt the difference between myself and the squalid beings around me. When Adam and Eve were driven out of Para¬ dise, and turned loose upon the dreary and inhospitable plains, how fondly did they recollect the bowers and lawns they had quitted, the luxuriant flowers and blushing fruits, and the light and sooth¬ ing employments which had (here been (heir pursuit 1 It was naturally to have been ex¬ pected, (hat 1 should look back to my native country, and, finding myself thus cruelly and iniquitously (reated, should seek among (he scenes and lhe acquain(ances of my infani years the re¬ dress of my grievances. If I had re(urn- ed
ed tb the vale of Urseren and the foot óf the St. Gothard, nay, if I had whispered the particulars of my story in the ears of one man of eminence and respect within the circuit of Switzerland, it cannot be but tbat I should háve found a friend, a protector and Λ champion. But I dared not do this. The mysterious threaten- ings of my uncle still sounded in my ears. He had given me a new name ; he had left me among 'new faces ; he had entered me upon a new species of exist¬ ence. He had expressly prohibited all reference and connection between my former and my present state. What did this mean ? I had too little knowledge of the modes of human life to be able to appreciate his menaces. This was the second revolution in my fortune. By the death of my father I found myself placed in absolute dependence upon an uncle, who had before had no power over me, A child has no standard within himself
himself for these things, he is Sensible of his own weakness, he watches the carriage and demeanour of the persons about him, and from thence judges what be is, and what be can be The injustice practised toward me by my uncle rendered me from the period of my removal to Lyons a creature of soliloquy and reverie Children at the enly age at which I then was, are usu¬ ally all frankness and communication, they tell to their companions and play¬ mates every thing they know, and every thing they conjecture I had a secret that must never be uttered Once or twice in the few months in which I f-e- quentcd the school I have mentioned (for afterwird my temptations grew less), I was on the point of disclosing my his¬ tory to a youthful favourite But, when I had half resolved to unload my bosom, such apprehension suddenly seized me, that my tongue faltered, and my heart beat
beat with violence, as if it would choke me. At one time, walking vvith my youngster-friend on a narrow bank, just as I bad prepared myself to speak, my foot slipped, and I sprained my ancle, so as to occasion a considerable swelling. At another, by a strange coincidence, a terrible clap of thunder burst upon me, succeeded by uncommon lightning and rain, which of necessity foiccd the thoughts both of my companion and myself into a new channel. These ac¬ cidents took a superstitious hold of my fancy, and made mc more reluctant than before to break the injunctions which bad been laid upon me. Had I dared to attempt to deliver my¬ self from the cruel bondage into which I bad been kidnapped, it would have been a very arduous task for a child of little more than eight years of age. I might have chosen for my confident and preserver some cieature of my uncle, and
and have thus rendered my situation more desperate. No indifferent man would have undertaken my cause and my reseufe ; he would have looked on my dislress with a sense of momentary compassion, and (hen, like (he Levite in the parable, have passed by on the other side. It could be only a man of warm huTian.ty, animated with a strong love of justice and hatred of oppression, that, for the sake of me, a friendless outcast and an exile, would have sirung himself to the encounter of prosperous and suc¬ cessful vice. It would naturally have required on my part, (hat I should have digested a resolute plan, and have per¬ sisted in the execution in spite of every obstacle that might arise. But I had by no means the courage adequate to such an exploit. I felt like one of (hose unhappy beings we read of in books of supernatural adventures, who are placed in the hands of some powerful genius
genius invisible to mortal sight, who dare; not move lest tbey should meet wilh his hand, nor speak lest they should offend an unknown and never-absent auditor. It was thus, I feared the ascendancy of rny uncle. If men of powerful and vi¬ gorous minds, a Rousseau and others, have surrendered themselves up to the chimeras of a disturbed imagination, and havle believed that they were every where at the disposal of some formidable and secret Confederacy, wha' wonder that I, a boy of eight years old, should be sub¬ ject to it similar alarm ? Childhood is the •ge of superstition. The more I indul¬ ged this fear, the more my terror, grew ; and, in a short time, I believe I could sooner have died, than have brought my¬ self to divulge a secret, the publication of whioh so obviously led to my benefit. Thus* by tbe machinations of my cruel guardian, I was involved in a state of Slavery, body and soul, such as has seldom
seldom been the lot of a human crea¬ ture I remained for 1 consideriate time an inmate of my prison-house M Vau¬ blanc found (hat a person, so mean m his destination as I was, was not entitled (o the luxuries and refinements of his mansion intl board, ind placed me as a lodger with one of the labourers in his mill At (he same (ime he took from me (he clodies which I had hiiherto worn, and issigncd me a garb similar to Ibat of my fellow si ives Thus I became in all external respects like the companions with whom I was now associated and, whatever I might feel within, could in no point be distinguished by the com¬ mon observer from the miserable beings around me I be ame familiar with ob¬ jects of distress The sort of training and drilling, necessary at first to preserve an infant during twelve hours together from the guilt of a distiacted attention, was
was'continually before my sight. The supervisor of the machine conliactcd from necessity a pari of the rugged and ferocious chttracter, which belongs to a slave-driver in the West Indies. There 'wás one phenomenon among us lhat might have surprised and misled an or¬ dinary spectator. Our house of confine¬ ment often echoed wilh songs, and fic- quently an hundred voices from different parte of the machine joined in the бате tune. Was not this a clear indication of gaiety and tranquillity of heart f I re¬ member one day when I was in Englund, I had occasion to spend two hours in your prison of Newgate. The window of the apartment where I sat overlooked the press-yard, where a number of con¬ victs were assembled, waid'ng (he occa¬ sion of being transported (o (he other side of the globe. They w ere employed in the manner I have mentioned, singing out in chorus some of the popular songs of
of their country. But, alas ' there, as in the silk-mills of L)ons, it was a me¬ lancholy ditty. The tone was heavy, monotonous and flat. There was the key and the note of gaiety, but the heart was wanting It was like tho spectacle of a fresh and well-grown hu¬ man body placed erect against a wall, satisfaotory tn ot'ier respects,—but it was dead They sung, bold and auda¬ cious in the f ice of despaii, just as the fear struck peasant sings along the church-vard at midnight, expecting eveiy moment to c ee a ghost stai t up at his fret. On each returning Sunday the chains which confined my footsteps were sus¬ pended Tins day I regularly devoted to solitude antl revene It is not to be described what pleasuie I derived fiom this resottice It was a new being that descentlcd upon mc In the loom of dead, naked and discoloured wails, I be¬ held
held (he canopy of heaven. In the room of the ever-turning swifts, which in mul¬ titudes surrounded me on every side, I beheld the trees and the fields, the fruits of rural industry, and the grand feaiures of all-powr ful naf ure. Oh, Swi(zerland I I would have said, if I had dared trust my lips even in soliloquy with the en¬ chanting sound,—nurse of my cheerful infancy, in these beauteous retreats, me¬ thinks I бее thee still ! I scented the fra¬ grant air, and I exehangcd (he flagging songs of my brother-slaves, for (he joy¬ ous warbling of (he vocal woods. The poorest slave that lives, when withdrawn info a solitude like this, is upon a level with the greatest lord. If he does not tread upon floors of porjihyry, and is not canopied with roofs of granite, he how¬ ever possesses himself in the midst of a palace more glorious than human fingers ever formed. You may think perhaps tha( my Sun¬ day
day enjoyments, such as I describe, were of too grave and contemplative a cha¬ racter, to belong to such early years. I assure you however I do not describe them up to the height of what I then felt, and now remember them. In am swer to your objection I can only remark, that adversity, or rather the contrast be¬ tween present adversity and past good fortune, tends beyond all other things to sharpen the apprehension These scenes would have produced no such effect upon the other boys of the mill, because they had known no such contrast They would not have afforded me the delight I describe, had I not been so much re¬ strained from them, and lestrained in so hateful a confinement. My heart felt no less uncha ned and free at these pe¬ riods, than is the river, which had been locked up m frost, and at length by the influence of genial zephyrs is restored to 4
to her beloved murniurings and mean¬ ders. , , I firmly believe that,i if there had been no Sundays and holidays, I should have remained many years the prisoner of M. Vaublanc. My daye of labour were days of oblivion. It is impossible to de¬ scribe to you the state qf mind of a hu¬ man creature, whose incessant office it is from morning to night to watch tbe evo¬ lution of fifty-six threads. The senso¬ rin«! in man has in it something of ihe nature ofa mill, but it is moved by very different la« s from those of a mill con¬ trived for the manufacture of silk- threads. The wheels move in swifter rotation than those I was appointed to watch, and 'to keep this rotation con¬ stantly up lo a certain pace is one of tbe great desideiata of human happiness. When (he succession of idens flags, or is violently restrained in its ciicumvolu- tions,
dons, this produces by degrees weari¬ ness, ennui, imbecility and idiotism Con¬ ceive how this progress is impeded by the task of continually watching fifty-snt threads ' The quantity of thought re¬ quired in this office is nothing, and yet it shuts out, and embroils, and snaps in pieces all other thoughts Another law which governs the sen- sorium In man is the law of associa¬ tion In contemplation and ι evene, one thought introduces another perpetually, and it is by similai ity, or the hooking of one upon the other, that the process of thinking is cai ned on In 1 ooks and in hung discourse the case is the same there is a constant connection ind trans¬ ition, leading on Ihe chain of Ihe argu ment Try the experiment of leiding for halfan hi iraparcel of words thron η (ogcriıer aí randim «hieb icflcet no light on eich other and priduce no combined n ei nmg nidyou «ill have vol ι \ son e
some, though an inadequate, image of the sort of industry to which I was con¬ demned. Numbness and vacancy of mind are the fruits of such an em¬ ployment. It ultimately transforms the being who is subjected to it, into quite a different class or species of animal. My Sundays, as I have said, restored roe to the sort of creature I had been. At first, the feeling of this was enough for me ; I was too happy to be capable of much reflection. I leaped, and skip¬ ped, and ran, and played a thousand ri¬ diculous antics, that I might convince myself that I was not wholly an auto¬ maton. In a few weeks however, when the novelty of these periodical seasons of rest was somewhat worn off, I be¬ gan to feel my pleasure tarnished by the recollection that, when Sunday was gone, Monday, and after that five other mortal days, would inevitably follow. The day of rest was so short ! CHAP-
CHAPTER XIII. By degrees I became more serious and meditating. I said to myself, " What am I, and wherefore am I here ?" The years of nonage in the human creature are many, partly because he is sur¬ rounded with parents and kindred and acquaintances, whose habit it is to take care of him, and to direct his steps. Perhaps the majority of human beings never (hınk of standing by themselves, and chusing their own employments, till the sentence has been regularly promul¬ gated to them, It is time for you to take care of youiself. For my pari, I found myself cast upon a new world, without relations, acquaintances or friends, and (his urged me on prematurely to acts of discretion. I could scarcely persuade n a myself
myself that the life to which I was de¬ voted, deserved the name of taking rare of me, and therefore began to cast about in my own tbougns'vvhat ï should do. I need not tell you that I detested the condition in whîèh I' found tayself placed, and longed to escape from it, ånd beek ihy' fortune. But whither direct my steps î I dared not think of Svvitierlimd. There resided my uncle, that malignant demor/, the recollection of whom haunt¬ ed my thoughts, waking and sleeping. In all the rest of the world I kneW not ■even the private and proper name of a human creature. I had listened how- fever to the old-songs of Switzerland, and had some acquaintance with the ro¬ mances of the middle ages. Mine were the years of romance. Without knowt ledge enough of -what was actually passu ing in the scenes of the universe, yet 'with a restless imagination, and a power¬ ful motive urging me to consoli it, I patched
patched up aa 1 could, from narratives of humble life, and tales of chivalry, what it was that I should have to encounter. I knew I must have bread, and that bread did not grow in every hedge. I concluded that I must find or make a friend, by whose assistance to support life, and, if possible, attain to something beyond bare subsistence. At first I was somewhat terrified with t'..e project I had conceived. Again and again I sat down in despair, and said, I am too young ι I must wait yet some years, before I can launch upon so great an undertaking. But my tasks would not wait ţ they beset me from morning till night, and, when. J had once con¬ ceived the idea of flight, became conti¬ nually more insupportable. From the extreme of deipaţr I passed tp the ¡eţ-v. treme of sanguine expectation. \ brood-· ed over my plans, till all, difficulties seenaçd to vanish, bçfqre ще ; the spenes. I anť-
I anticipated at length became as fami¬ liar to me, as any thing which had abso¬ lutely passed in any former period of my life. You will smile when I fell you that my favourite scheme was to go to Versailles, a- ' hrow myself at the feet of the king of France. It was the project of ť child, and will show you how ripe and inripe at once was the state of my intellect. The Gallic sovereign is of all kings the fa¬ vourite of the people of Switzerland. I had listened to the songs and popular tales concerning Francis I and Hemy IV; and a king of France appeared in my eyes the most gallant and generous of mortals, I did not know exactly how much I pro. posed to tell tho king; I scrupled the secret my uncle had so severely enjoined me to preserve ; yet, if be should insist upon knowing the whole, surely he was able to protect me against the resent¬ ment of a burgher of Uri I However t his point
point might be disposed of, I felt in my¬ self a destination superior to that of a handicraft in the silk-mills of Lyons ; I believed that I was capable of extraor¬ dinary things ! what boy from the swifts but myself, would have had the boldness to think of applying for redress to the king of France î I was persuaded that I could interest his majesty in my case, that I could induce him to judge me de¬ serving of his protection. I would say to him, Sire, dispose of me as you please ; make me one of your pages ; you shall find me the most zealous and faithful of your servants ! Louis XIV was at this time in the height of his glory. Among the little topics, by my excellence in which I had distinguished myself in I!.- halcyon days of my childhood, was history. !t will easily be supposed (hat my knowledge amounted to scarcely more than a few names and dates. But I had heard cer¬ tain
tain familiar anecdotes of Henry IV, pleasing to my boyish imagination, and bad long since made him my hero ; I was told that Louis XIV was the worthy grandson of this free-hearted prince. In one of my Sundays-' excursions I fell in witb an old French soldier; the military private is usually of a loquacious and communicative temper. I was eager to be acquainted with the character of his master ; he was no less prompt to tell me all he knew. He spoke of tbe beauty of his figure, and tbe affability of his demeanour. He related the victories he had won, and described tbe palaces and public edifices which he had found¬ ed or adorned. He swore tbat he was the most generous, condescending and tender-hearted of mankind ; and be hap¬ pened to have two or three instances, Which he affirmed to'havq occurred un¬ dei bis own eye, not-unbappily illustra¬ tive of this character. Every thing, as I thought,
thought, leemetj to cóneur for the suc¬ cess of my design. The magnificence of Louis XIV fascinated my imagina¬ tion ; the examples of his gentleness and humanity were so many omens assuring my good fortune-. I bought a por¬ trait of this monarch ; it was almost the only extravagance of which I had been guilty, since my last degradation. I canted it in my pocket : on Sundays, when I had wandered into the most ob¬ scure retreat I could find, I held it in my hand, I set it before me, I talked to it, and endeavoured to win the good¬ will of the king. Sometimes I worked myself into such a degree of fervour and enthusiasm, that I could scarcely believe but that the portrait smiled upon me, and with a look of peculiar benignity seemed to say, Come to Versailles, and I will make your fortune 1 While I attended the lessons of the regents of (he free-school of Lyons, I n ¡ received
received tbe weekly stipend usually al- lotted to boys of my age. I had before, as Iihave mentioned, received a louts d'or jnd a three livres piece from my uno'ie and cousin at parting. Like a boy, I sometimes spent my money upon- toys and confitures ; but for the most part I reservedit, and Buffered it to grow into a Mttle stock. Young as I was, from tbe moment of parting with my uncle I could not conceal from myself that I was in, an extraordinary situation. The se¬ crecy that had been enjoined me weigh¬ ed upon my mind. Compelled to deny my family, my friends andı my countryt and suddenly dropped in a city where I was unacquainted with a single creature> I incessantly said, " What is next tu¬ befai me î lt is necessary for me to pro¬ vide myself, and not to be wholly unpre¬ pared for events which it is not in my power to foresee." Youth is- in some tespects the age of suspicion ; at least it was.
was so with me Whenever a child of the age al which I was arrived, feels that he is thwarted and rigorously used, ho half suspects some motive, obscure and unavowed, in the individual from whom his mortification is derived Tbe penod I ultimately fixed for my flight wis the week of Easier At this time we were allowed at Ihe mill two holidays in addition о that of Sunday I was perhaps partly influenced in chu¬ sing his season by the idea lhat when, I was not wanted at work, my presence or absence would be little taken nohce ef The people with whom I lived were too «retched, and too anxious about their own children, to feel much kind¬ ness for me, and I should not be re¬ ported to the overseer till Wednes¬ day But the pnncipal consideration that guided me was tbe cbeerfulness of the season, ltbei ly was to the whole lower class of the people the order of the
the day ¡ I had three days of freedom, why should I not make this the start¬ ing-post of my eternal liberty r I will not trouble you with a detail of my smaller adventure« on the road. Full of the anticipation of my grand under¬ taking, I had repeatedly turned my steps en my days of relaxation toward Paris, and made many enquiries respecting the way. I had learned the names of the principal towns. I set qut with a beat¬ ing heart, and, having 'Walked gravely till I was out of the city, I (hen began to -run. I did not however run far; шу thoughts were too full of agitation to admit any regularity of motion. Some¬ times I slackened my pace, because I feared u should be taken for a fugitive, and sometimes, because I said to myself, I must manage my strength, if I expect Й to carry me far. . Two hundred and fifty miles was a great undertaking for a boy under nine years
years of age. One advantage I possess¬ ed; I had money, more than I could prudently spenti on the passage. My mind was too intently fixed upon the end of ny journey, to be capable of much calculation respecting the obsta¬ cles I had to encounter. One resolu¬ tion however I fixed, firm as the basis df my native mountains, " No considera¬ tion on earth, no difficulties, no discou¬ ragements shall ever carry me back I" A mechanic becomes a sort of machine.) his limbs and articulations are converted, as it were, into wood and wires. Tamed, lowered, torpified into (his character, he may be said perhaps to be content. It is well ! it seems necessary that there should be such a class of animated na¬ tures in the world I It is probable, if I had continued much longer in the silk- mills of Lyons, Ì should have become! such a being myself. But, with ' th« conceptions and recollections which con¬ tinually
unually beset my imagination, it appear¬ ed thé tnost hornble of all destinies I, that dared af nine years of age, launch myself in the world, tbat dared to acer- tain-jdegree to revolve the various chances of human affairs, and defy the worst, tbat purposed to challenge the attention, the- equity and the compassion of the king of France, should I be thus neutra¬ lised I· —Why did I feel thus ? Because my early education had, not prepared me firn my present lot I understood why my companions of my own age Were put mto the silk-mill their pa¬ rents were engaged in, employments equally deadening, their parents were unable by their labour to obtain bread for themselves and their offspring but I did nót underítand whj I was there I felt such a loathing at this moment to tho occupation which had engrossed ma tor months, tbat, jf I could have been assured that such should be my occupa¬ tion
tion for as many months to come, I be¬ lieve, child as I was, I should sooner have taken a knife, and thrust it into my heart, than submit to it. In thinking over my situation as 1 passed along, I felt that the thing most immediately pressing upon mc was to avoid exciting the curiosity and suspi¬ cion of the persons ' whose assistance might be necessary to me on the road. The production of a louis d'or for ex¬ ample might be fatal to a boy of my childish appearance and coarseness of attire. In my journey from Urseren to Lyons I had learned something of the nature of inns, and I retained all these things as perfectly as if they had occur¬ red Only yesterday. I resolved ta go only to the meanest inns, and ask fop the plainest accommodations. On the second day í joined a waggoner who was conducting his commodities to Dijon, and this considerably facilitated the first part of
oí toy journey. I began with asking him of my road to Macon, tbe firet con¬ siderable-place through which I was to pass. He was going through Macon,. Hovy^iucfe ftirtherr To Dijon*· The meanness of, my at tire encouraged him toquettionme in his turn : What had I to do M Macon ? I was going to see the-world, I replied. , I peroeiva, say spark ( cried the wag¬ goner, what yqu are. You belong to tbe silk-mills ; you are a runaway, and I have a;gre«t:Uiind to take you up, and send you, hoefc to your master. ■ ■ I wasTjurprised at bis sd instantly fix¬ ing < on my -true character ; though, on reflection, 'it »as by no ¡means extraor¬ dinary tbatK a: pirson, just come from byons.-should, have.made the conjeb- ture ; lhc costume was sufficiently pe¬ culiar.. , ,1 , , nl will never stay at the silk-mill, said It-nobody bas aright to confine me there. j 4 Nobody
Nobody has a right, youngster? Not your parents î Your wildness, I dare say, will break their hearts. I have no parents.—I confessed to hint that I was determined to go to Paris. " And what will you do at Paris Ì You »ill be starved to death. Better be starved, than undergo such misery as I have suffered. But J will not starve 1 The, waggoner began to reflect, that« if I had no parents or kindred, nobody would be greatly injured by my elope* ment. He contented himself therefore with seriously expostulating with me on the tolly of my project, and advising; me to return. Finding his remonstrances of no avail, he agreed to take me under his protection, as far as he was going on my way. Thus I conquţied more than one-third of the road.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XIV. • ' ή Dijon was so capital a city, thit I thought I might venture here to charige my piece of gold, the parting present of my treacherous uncle. But I was mis¬ taken. I bated the clothes I wore, since they had led the waggoner to discover the lituation to which I belonged. I went into a clothier's shop with a determina¬ tion to change them. Unfortunately I plunged headlong into the house of a man of rugged temper and a hard-fa¬ voured countenance. The moment I looked at him, I trembled. But it was too late to draw back. What is your pleasure, my lad r said he. I want some clothes. Where do you live ? Who is to pay for them ? Where shall I send them ? i ; '- Iara,
I am a stranger ín Dijon. Why does not your iather or some¬ body come with you r How can such a child as you chute α suit of clothes ì I am all eione. Alone I And how are you to pay for clothes ? Perhaps you would allow me some¬ thing tor the clothes I have got on. And I have a loul« d'or,— -showing it. A louis d'or 1 said he, coming from the other side of tb» counter. Tell me, sirrah, where you got that loul· d'or î My uncle gave it me. Who is your uncle ? I shall tend for him immediately, and find out the truth of thit. I tell you, tir, he does not live here ; lam a stranger in Dijoo, never taw the city till last night. But yoe need not frighten me ; if you do not chute to sell me any clothes, I will go away without them.
them. I assureyou, J aman honest boy, and my money» my owrf. We? sball «ее tbat presently. Yob do not lik« to be frightened li But I »hall frighten you, and most confoundedly too, before· jl bave done with, you. You mutt go with me to the mayor, I will go with you, where you please, uid I; believing it was impossible tbat any body should be more frightful to me, than tbe honest slopman before me. But I bid rather go back to шу ¡nn. The trader conducted me to the m, - gistrate. I found myself right in my conjecture> that I should be better off in his hand», than in thoie of tbe Argus who had firet, jeiaed pie. Tbe mayor was a sober, creditable man, middle- aged, and inclined to corpulence, > who made * point of faithfully discharging his duty,-but who took no particular pleasure in frightening little baya. He was too much accustomed to office, to- Л- feel
feel any hfgh gratlfieation in it« swaggťíŕ and insolence. His passion« Wtre dead; he could scarcely be said to love or haté; to be gentle or furious ; he *as thè law 1 , ernt nothing but the law. As I and my conductor passed airing the streets to this' man's house, I fixed ♦he plan Of action that I would observe. I determined to take refuge in sileno* and reserve. I Said to myself, They can¬ not find out that I have stolen my money, because I have not stolen it ; and there¬ fore, after having examined and tried me as much as they please, they must dismiss me. I will not betray my family- story, and I will not furnish thefti wilh a clue by which they may send me back to Lyons. The slopman led me into the justice- room and told his story. The magi¬ strate liátened, and rfmde his observa¬ tions. My adversary endeavoured in vain to inspire his own passions into the mayor ¡
mayor t (Це clothier was earnest, abu- s'ţvesnd ãloqnent; the mayor was consi¬ derate,apd ¡inquisitive. He asked me who I was,,and I refused to tell. Did I know what it was tobe brought before a magistrate ì Not very well, I replied. It would be worse for me, if I did not give a proper account of myself. I answered that I could not satisfy his turiosity. I had been ill-used by cruel relations, but did not dare to complain. I hod bad a father, wbo was kind and riel); but my father was dead, and I was driven ОЦ1 from my country and friends. The magistrate employed every arti¬ fice to extort my story from me. He said, My secret should be safe with him, and my cruel relations should neve. know that I had disclosed it. He said, He would take mc under his protection, am) oblige them by fhe interposition of the law to do me justice. He then changed
changed his tone, put on an angry brow, and told me, that he perceived that all I had related was a fiction, but that be would send me to prison, and have me punished, till I told the truth. He put a variety of subtle and artfully contrived questions to wrest my secret from me. I stuck to the same point, made two or three answers which I hoped would move him to favour roe, and repeated them again and again in return to every inter¬ rogatory he uttered. He sent for the people of the inn, where I confessed to have slept the night before : luckily it was not fhe same inn the waggoner used, and Ihey could discover nothing. The magistrate was as good as his word, and sent me to prison. At enter- i n g, it struck me, tbat the scene was not new to me, but that it was very like a silk-mill ; the same meanness in the building, the same squalidness in the inh abitante, the same dejection in every conn-
countenance. Presently however I per¬ ceived a difference; the people there were employed, and here were idle; there were yacant and incurious, and here eagerly crowded about a new tenant of their wretched mansion. Thus I had twice in one day been in¬ troduced into situations calculated to im¬ press a youthful mind with inexpressible horror. To be taken before a fiiagi- strate, to be thrust into a jail, would to most children of my tender years have appeared no less terrible than death it¬ self. But I had entered upon an extra¬ ordinary undertaking, and had worked myself up to an uncommon pitch of te- solulion. I knew tbat for such an ur¬ chin as I was, to undertake his own esta¬ blishment in life was no holiday project. I knew that no small degree of courage and perseverance would bs necessary to introduce me to the presenqe and speech of Louis XIV. It is inconceivable, at least
least judging from my own instance, of what an extent of exaltation and enthu¬ siasm nine years of age are capable. En¬ thusiasm is often indebted for much of its fervour to a complete ignorance, and want of practice, in the ways of the world ; antl, as far as that constitutes a qualification, this immature period of life is of course admirably endowed. In this state of mind, I felt a contempt or difficulties, under which at any other time I should have sunk. I seemed to myself as if I were made of iron, and nothing hostile appeared to make any impression upon me. It was my business to proceed upon my high desti¬ nation and my choice of life, and to suf¬ fer none of these things to interrupt inc. The prisoners crowded about me, and were eager to learn for what crime such a child as I was, was brought into their society. It was presently rumouicd, that vol. i. о it
it was upon suspicion of having stolen same money, that I had obstinately re¬ fused to tell the mayor how I came by- it, and that I was committed for rc-cxa- mination. The moment the word money was mentioned, two or three came about me at once, and (old me that it was (he universal practice, for every new-comer to pay a certain sum by way of entrance- money, at the same time vociferously de¬ manding from me the established fee. It, fortunately happened that the magi¬ strate had taken from me my whole stó'ck, to be returned the next day, if no discoveries were made; otherwise it is high'ly; probable these obliging comrades of mine would have stripped me of all that I had. After the first bustle of my introduction was over, a very gravc- lboking man of the set drew mc Into a corner, and told me I was (he most promising boy of my age he ever saw. He said, he had conceived α particular 4 liking
liking to me, and greatly commended 111} fiimncss in refusing to tell the ma· g strate how I came by my money That showed i wis tute gime I Ile obscived (hit le would, if I jilci=ed, |nit -nc into ι vv y by which I might mike a inni of (n j «elf for evei, ind offeied to become n instiuctoi He swore, that it would be a thousand pities thit such talents as I had showed, should be lost foi want ot encoungement. I made little answer to these compli¬ ments, though the person fiom whom they flowed certainly succeeded in ex- ei'ing my curiosity, and I was desirous of hearing to what so extraordinary a preface would lead. Having intimated this, he entered trito a very animated and urnest dissertation upon the different modes of committing theft without din¬ ger of detection Obseiving however (hat I did not exictly enter into his feel¬ ings, he stopped short, and compi iined 0 2 of
of my timidity. He soothed me hi the gentlest, and, as he believed, the most flattering manner, and employed a hundred arts of rhetoric, worthy of a better cause. I told him, that he had mistaken my character, that I bad stolen no money, and that what I had is as ho¬ nestly my own. On this he assumed a smile, expressive of grave and gentle de¬ rision, and replied, that that was all very well, but tbat it was not worth while to persist in declarations of innocence among friends.—My mind was full of other projects, and therefore the repre¬ sentations of my sage Mentor had no effect upon me. This however was the sort of exloifation to which I was exposed ; and, if I had been the kind of person the magistrale conceived me to be, this night's lodging would too pro¬ bably have completed my character for ever. The next day I was brought again before.
before (he mayor, and persisted in my resolution (o discover nolhing. The interval which nad passed during the si¬ lence of the night, enabled me to col¬ lect more firmness, and (o cxjircss myself with greater coherence. I said, Sir, I am a friendless little boy, and you may ilo with me whatever you please. But I Vn not so much afraid of any body, as of my hard-hearted uncle. I am afraid, if I tell you who I am, yon would send me back to him, or write a leiter to hint about me. You tell me you would not ; but tich men think it a good action to 1 deceive little boys, I am sure I have rea>- son to know tha(. Oh, sir, db you think- it was a small thing that determined me¬ to nm away, and go among strangers ?' I would sooner die than return I You will easily imagine that what I said, did not in the smallest degree inove the man to whom it was addressed, to compassion ; (he magistrate, who could' consign
consign such a child as I was, for one flight to the horrors and dangers of a prison, could be little accessible to the relentings of nature. This reflection is obvious enough to me now ; but it was ţiot so then. The actions of their elders are always mysteries to children ; they do not see the springs of the machine ; they wait with a sort of superstitious an¬ ticipation, to observe how their seniois will act upon every new event, and are surprised at nothing. Buf, though the magistrate was guilty of no meltings of compassion toward me, be was not inflexible. He saw not what he could do further with mc; he had exhausted upon me every ex¬ pedient he could devise to render me frank and communicative. At length he calculated within himself, as I suppose, the fruitlessness of detaining me : per¬ haps he was inclined to think me inno¬ cent, and to believe the story I told. If he
he detained me longer, it might be a trouble to him, and ultimately produce a burthen to the corporation in which he presided He dismissed me with a moderate portion of good advice, re¬ commended to me not to become a va¬ grant, in consequence of which I should finally be made a scoundrel and a thief, if I was not so already, and, above all, warned me of the stubhornness of my tempei He had never seen so stiff- necked a little villain, and be augured и ntimcly and a shameful death from sueli beginnings I listened ίο his ad¬ vice wi(h passive attention , but, what I prized much bevond his advice, before he sent me from his presence he return¬ ed to me my money I left Dijon with a beating heart I was full of exultation at the thought of my liberty, once more restoi ed to me. I foresaw every thing that was fortunate from the issue of my first adventuies The
The discovery of my class of life by the waggoner had been productive of no mischievous effects to me. The adven' ture of the slopman and the louis d'or had seemed to threaten the greatest dangers ; but by my prudence and per¬ severance (for I was willing to take the whole praise to myself) I had been ex¬ tricated from them all. All difficulties would vanish before my courage antl ani¬ lities. I should infallibly become a pip e to the king of France.—From this goal my impetuous imagination took its flight The marshal's truncheon and tbe ducal eoronet danced befoi e my chai med sight I sighed for princesses, and llie blood- 10) al was mixed in my olbprmg Al- naschar in the Aiabian Nights was- but> a driveller to me
CHAP-
CHAPTER XV. jNothing further of matcnal impor¬ tance occuncd, till I armed at Fon¬ tainebleau I( is difficult to etpiess lhe laptuie I ftlt at entering (his celebrated scene Fonteincbleau h id been (o (he kings of France, what Versailles has be¬ come since. It bad been particularly honoured by the residence of Henry IV ; and Louis XIII, his successor, was born heie But, independently of this, here was a royal palace belonging to my in¬ tended patron, tbe first I had ever seen. Having refreshed myself, ard rested a short time, I found my way into the gar¬ dens, and vieived with enthusiasm the immenscness of the edifice Ihe foun¬ tains from which the place derives its name, the large and deep forests which on ev ar y side met my eye in the distance, all
all sli tick mc with an idea of unbour tleti magnificence I wish the king vis here ' exclaimed I Presently however I thought agun, Do I wish it î I must think i greit deil of what I have to do, ind whit I have to siy, before I meet him No, I im not sor'y I have a httlo further to go I , 1 he idea of a king at a distince, ι very different from what we feel when wo come near him. The imagination never fences him round with so míny obsta¬ cles, and enchanted circles, within which unhallowed feet may scarcely tread, as the reality presents, The very dinner which is set before him (to instance in я tnte circumstance) no untutored fancy ever paints. We shape to ourselves what we have not seen, after the fashion of what we ire accustomed to, and ex¬ perience does not fui lo sui prise us with the immeasurable distance which refine ment and art hav e placed between man and
and mm. It would be an amusing pic¬ ture, to set me on my wooden stool with my litile dinner in an earthen pan as I ate it at the silk-mill, beside even a petit songer of the king of Fiance. I own that I felt certain qualms about my heart, when I thought of my adventure, and looked round ujion Ihe sjilendonis of Fontainebleau As I wis vv indenng about, full of these reflections, a grave-looking man "ame up and accosted me He said, he saw I w is a stranger, and offered to point out to me the curiosities of the place. It is bingulai, but I was struck with a certain le^emblmce between hnn and the mm who had undei tiken to be my lutoi in (he jiicsi yaid of Dijon I wis howcvei now in iveiy difieicnt temper, from that vvlnJi inspued me then Then I was undei lhe pressuic. of ι very dan- getotis emban issment, ani had deter¬ mined to find my safety in the most in¬ flexible ìcserve. Now my heart v ıs open,
open, and my spirits light, beside which, I was anxious for eommumcaiion, and had an hundred enquiries which I wished to have resolved I therefore willingly entered into con- \ersatron with tins strangei I asked him whether the king of France ever now came to Fontainebleau , I enquired of him concerning the structure and site of the palace of Versailles, how the king was attended, and where and in what manner he spent the different hours of the day My communicative friend seemed fo be well informed m all these particulars, and his intelligence was co¬ pious and interesting In (he mean time he observed me clo«ely, and diew more sound and perfect conclusions respect¬ ing me and my fortunes, (han I wis aware At length be told me that lie vv as going to set out the next morning foi Ver sallies, and offered to become my guide J willingly accepted his kind proposal END 0» THE FIRST VOLUME B.Taij.011 V Cq f4iiimi,Slf4k-Hwu.Ciml
