Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Fleetwood: or, The new man of feeling
FLEETWOOD
CI ПРИ R I W went together to Pui , me! ui ivc d ibout the clost oi the evenmir Oi r convc sation h id been eiger md uu mated, md my compimon proposed oui tjking up our lodging at the su с inn I vvas a totil stnngei m lliisgi it me liopo! , md wilhngly accepted his sog gestion The streets by which vve er- tered the capital were by no means so sumptuous as the idei of so celcbnled α cily had given mc to expect, but I pic scntly obseived that my conductor led me away from the principal streets, md "VOL li в tint
that his route lay through many a dark passage and many an alley. The house of reception to which we rcpairetl, cor¬ responded to the road by which we reached it. My follow-tt aveller however appeared to me to be «ell known to its inhabitants, and I observed various sig¬ nificant winks and gestures that passed between him and the hostess. After n .brief supper, vve were shown to a room where there were two beds. The equivocal character of the inn iu which I took up my night's repose, did not disturb me. 1 sought for no present splendours, and my plan through my jouiney had been simplicity and eco¬ nomy. When the candle was put out, then the train of my splendours began. My heart bounded vvith joy, when I thought that I was thus far toward the end of my labours. I folded my arms about me vvith wanton triumph, as if I would bestow upon myself an embrace of
Oı congratulation lhe turrets and the spues of Pins, I regarded is the em T blems of my independence In the midst ofthis mighty scene, the conviction came home to me with pleasure, that I be¬ longed to no one, for, alis' said I to myself, since the deith of mv father, I have nol seen one human creature to whom I could wish to belong' I am set loose from all compulsory connections, but I will not long be ilone ' This short meditation was to me the precursor of sleep, and my slumbers were sweet and balmy. I was fatigued with my long peregrinations, and the sun was high before I roused myself from re¬ pose When I awoke, the first thing I observed was that my companion was gone I wonder, said I to myself, whe¬ thei Τ shall see bim again I thought that it would full as well content me 'hat I should not. I determined to ar- B г range
range the particulars of my plan in my own way, and the having such a companion аэ this would hut have in¬ terrupted and embarrassed mc I began to dress myself Through my whole journey, I had had the pre caution to take my breeches, contain mg my little stock of cash, into my bed, and to place them near, or rather under, some part of my body At first, I did not remark any difference from the morning before, and the usual appear¬ ance of things Presently however a suspicion flashed across my mind, I passed my hand along the pocket it went over smooth and without mterrup tion I felt within—there was nothing I I went to the other pocket, all was va¬ cancy I threw back the clothes of the bed, with a faint hope that my money was to be found there I turned ov er and shook every thing I felt in all my pockets a thousand times I examined in
in the same ininner the bed clothes of my fclliw traveller I searched impos sib'e phces 1'ily mc, my de ir Fleetvv ood, pity mc ι Distant as is the period I am dese ibing from the present, I cm nevei think ot this horrible event, without a twinge at the heirt which 1 cannot descube I was then a little, uninstructed boy, and now I am an old man, nnd my hairs are white, yet I cannot mention this adven¬ ture without feeling iny throit diy, anil my voice suffocated Common robberies aie committed upon a mm, who goes home, opens his escnton e, and puts into his puisc the exact sum of which he had been deprived I h id lost every thing I possessed in the world I had just tn veiled two hundred md fifty miles, md was distint four hundied 'ora the scat of my birth and my rehtions All my visions, my golden die uns, my cas¬ tles in the air, wert demolished m a moment.
moment Whit was I to do ' My vi¬ sions were not luxuries, vveie not chinges nfi worse stite f)ra belici lhey stoud letween inc and inriihilmoii I siw nothing that reimincd foi me, but to be ■-tu ved For God s sike, tuin to jour Æ op , open at ti e fable of the Dairj- nmd i id her Milking pul , blot it out, and put my adventure m its stead * But this was not the pn ïcipal iggra- v ition of my case M my men at míny times Invc, no doubt, lost all that they hid But perhaps such an event never happened before to a child, entering for the first ti ne a great metiopohs, without a single friend, ind four hundred miles ïcmoved from his home Men hivo arms to work, and a head to contrive, tliey have experience, enabling them to foresee and calculate the results of a thousand schemes, and a ton , to make good their storj, to pro, lings which it shall be for the in erest of the hearer
heuer to icccpt, to pailey, and to de¬ mand ihrough thit species of equility wlueh no refinement с in destroy, a fair hearing. 1 had noli.mg ' I ¡rat down, and found lelief in a gush of tears. I wcpl, till I could weep no more, ind fell myself sliiptficcl By and bj, a thought occuncd, w Inch ι uused mc If a man weie in my place, vvliat woulel he do ? He would not sit still, and do nothing. I am alone in Pans, I must be my own man ' I went down stairs, and saw my host¬ ess. Where is Ihe person, said I, who came with mc last night î Gone—he has been gone these two houis. Where is he gone ï I do not know. When will he come bick î I cinnot tell I never saw him in my life before. To
To ask these questions I was obliged to follow Ihe hndlady from side to side m the great kitchen of the inn. She seemed to be exceedingly busy, and .lever stood still for a moment Madam, saiil I, I have been robbed ¡ this» man has taken away all my money. These words stopped htr perpetual motion, and fixed her to the place where she stond. Robbed, said she ; this is a fine story I No such word was ever heard in my liouse. What business, you little ras¬ cal, had you to come with a robber to my house î Robbed ' He is a high¬ way-man, and jou are his jackal A pretty storj, quotha, that jou have been lobbed ι Such little villaine as you al¬ ways outwit themstives Betty, look up Ihe silver tea-spoons * Observe the brat ' See what fine linsey-wolsey clothes lie has got on ' And pray, my little ma». tei,
ter, of vvhat have you been robbed î Of a crooked copper, I warrant ' Yes, I see, there are two of my silver tea spoons gone Step for an officer this moment ' Search him I But thit is in vain Tho boy seizes the goods, and his compimon neatly carries them off You shall break fist, my lad, in the conciergerie, upon a salt eel ' Why ire not y ou gone, Betty î I on n I was now terrified, in a very different style from any thing I had felt in the presence of the miyor of Dijon. I believed that the house 1 was in, wis approprntcd to the consult ıtıons of rob¬ bers I hid obseived the signals of in¬ telligence which hid passed on tho pre¬ ceding evening between my fellow tra¬ veller and the hostess, ana now she- denied tint she had ever before seen him in her life I did not doubt that the story of the tei spoons was a eon' ceitetl fabncition, chosen is the most effectual means of quashing my com- B 5 plaint
plaint respecting the loss of my pro¬ perty But w hat chance had I, an un¬ protected child, without a friend, and without a name, of being able to make good my own cause, and defeat the ma¬ licious accusation which was threatened against me 1 This was ас intolerable ad dit on to the shock I had just felt m finding myself unexpectedly left without ι penny The whole recurred to my mmd at once, and though ilreidy ex¬ hausted with weeping, 1 burst afresh into a flood of tears Betty, a plump md fı esh coloured girl of nineteen, felt hei bowels yearn •wilh compassion for my case Pny, madam, said she, do not be too hard upon this little boy I daie say he knows nothing of the tea spoons I dare say no such thing ' replied the mistress fiercely Upon my soul, madam, if y on will send him to prison, jou may go foi an ι oflicer
officer yourself I will have nothing to do with it For mj part, I wonder vvhat jour heart is made of, to think of such a thing Go, you are a fool !—Well, let him get out of mj house ' Let lum tr imp, as last is his len toes can cany hnn ' If ever I catch him igun, I will have no moie mere/ upon him, thin I would upon the elm of ι lobsler '—Be gone, von gallows httle use il ' Oft with jou ' I took advice of therclcntings of the good woman, and denmped. 1 know not why however, I was by no mems eager to leave the sliect in vvhich she lived I felt is if in her house I hid left behind metl itfiopeitj, which hid been so cssent il to my [ tojects I began to suspect that, notwithstmdmg her loud¬ ness and ippnent fury, the mention of lhe concie; gette vvas ι tnek, ind that all her nm had been to get me out of her terntoncs This however, if true, would by
by no means mend tlie case : it was mi- possible that I should obtain redress. It was well for me that I lingered in my pace. I had not departed above two minutes, before I felt some one tap me upon the shoulder. It was my friend, Betty, the bar-maid. She held in her band a pretty substantial roll of bread ready buttered, vvhich she presented to me. She chucked me onder the chin, and, after a» expressive God b'ess you, my brave lad ' she tripped э vay by the path by vvhich she came. The offerings of gole', frankincense and myrrh, presented bj the wise men ofthe East, were not mo- ¿ acceptable to the mother of Jesus, nan this homely roll and butter were t< me at this mo¬ ment. Yet I was not hungry by sensa¬ tion ; my heart was too full of the crosses I had sustained but I was hun- giy by reflection. This is a distinction lhat vv ill be perfectly intelligible to every one,
one, however heart full, who sha'l sup¬ pose himself alone for the first time in an immense metropolis, without a mor¬ sel of bread, or the means of procuring it Poor Betty's roll and batter proved fo mc nectar and ambrosia in one I did not eat it immediately , but, in propor¬ tion as 1 did, I felt my spint revive within me To have been. Iclt without comfort and wilhout food at this criti¬ cii period, might have been fatal to me But the courage ofa child, the sunshine of his sou!, is easily called back , and, when the animal feeling of inanition was extinguished within me, something friendly seemed to whisper to me not to despair I had conquered tbe greatest pirt ofthe distmee , I was only twelve miles from Versi lies A walk of four houis would bnng me to that place, vvhich I had regarded is the assured goal of my listing prosperity CHAP-
CHAPTER II. ■No sooner did the thought occur to me, lhan I resolved to lose no lime to realise it I arrived at Versailles about the middle of a very hot day, broiling with the sun, and covered with dust I immediately enteied the paik, md, havirtg gained a favourable situation foi viewing the palace, protected by the shadow of overhanging trees, I throw mybelf upon the giass The first idea that struck me was, Versailles is infi¬ nitely grander and more magnificent than "fiOntauiebleau With my eye I measured the piles, surveyed the aıchı- tecture, nnd ι emu keel the moveable and immoveable objects around me Shortly however I forgot mjself, and fell asleep. Yes, arrived at my haven, and
ind wuh every thing for which ï hatt panted apparently within my ken, I fell asleep I Heat and fatigue contributed to this, but I appiehend I should not have been thus oveitiktn, if it had not been for the misfortunes which that morning had overtiken me Λ mitigated and fa¬ miliar sorrow blunts the faculties, and disposes to lelhaigy I hid not slept long before I was roused from my oblivion by the sound of a fife, and tht passing along of a file of sold ers This wis to me a most agreeable moment I shook myself, and gazed u 'cntly upon the men as they passed I recognised in ibf-m, as I stood still to view, the phjsiognomy of my native countrj While I lived at home in the canton of Un, I was unavvnc of the existente of this physiognamj , the particular which d stmgtiishecl the per¬ sons around me from eath other, were moie reinai ked by me, than those irt which
which lhey resembled But my resi¬ dence at Lyons had sharpened my per¬ ceptions in this respect Every man loves his native soil, and the Swiss are said to have more of this sentiment than any other people I had myself been in a state of banishment,, and, as I may phrase it, a state of solitary imprison ment Whenever I met a Swiss in the streets of Lyons, my little heart leaped within my bosom, and I could not help bailing him as a brother m the peculiar phraseology of my country My salu'i- tion never failed to call forth a cheei ful and affectionate response from the per¬ son to whom it was addressed This was usually all that occurred we mutu¬ ally bade each other Good-day, and passed on Yet this kind of encounter often furnished me with an intellectual feast for a whole day , it made the sun shine upon me through the opake win¬ dows of the silk mill, ind cheered my 3 soul
soul as I stood at the swifts An acci¬ dent of Ihis nature did not fail to hap¬ pen to me twenty tunes durine my abode at Ljons, and perhaps with as many different persons It had been one of the motive» that secretly stimulated me in my project upon the king of Frince, that I knew that the favourite guards of hiscourt were Swiss and lhat, when I came there, I should feu so much the less a stranger, is I should be able to speak, and address niy enquiries, to my own countrymen Io a poor, destitute and pennyless vaga¬ bond, it was at this moment like heaven, to gaze upon the countenances of a little cluster of n y countrymen, at the same time that I rccollecled thut I was four hundred miles distant from tny native home It was like Macbeth gazing upon the descendants of Banquo, ex¬ cept that, though the view in each instance was pregnant with emotion, my
my emotions were of a natme op pošite to his every countenance, as it passed in series and succession befoie mc, gave new slmg to my pleasure, and ele¬ vated my heart an inch the higher I said to mjself, These men will surely be my fiiends, lemovcd as we are from the spot where nature produced u», they will feel that here I belong to tbem, they will not leave a poor Swiss child to perish for hunger within their quarters. •*-It was a restoration from death to life. As they proceeded along in a sort of parade, I dared not on this occasion ad¬ dress them with my customary saluta¬ tion I resolved to wait, till I could meet with one of them not upon duty, and alone It was not necessary for me to wait long As I strayed about the park, I met with a respectable looking man, a private, with an infant m his arms. I saluted him, and we entered into
into conv trsition He see red surprised ut seeing me l' re uid aske 1 me whe- ihei I beh nged f о anj ofthe comp mica on dutj at Versiilles I told hım nearly the sime piiticiila'j oí my stoıj, as I Ind communicated to the mavor of Di¬ jon .1 sı d, I V/1S the son of a Swiss, ond thit I was born it home My pa¬ rents had brought me up in eise and opulence, but they were now dead, and, h iving left me, their only child, to the cate of an uncle, this treacherous guar- dnn hid turned me adrift upor the woild agreeably to my former resolu¬ tion, I did not mention Lyons, aı d I ab. stained from v lolating the secret which my uncle had so tremendously enjoined me I concluded however with my ad¬ venture of thit morning, and the loss of all that I hid The honest Swiss believed my story. He seited me by him on a bench, and put the child on his knee, anil, in token of
of his sympathy with my atlv enture», took uie affectionately by the hand, when I had concluded my little narrative He uttered several cxclamaticns, and mide several remarks, upon the pirticulars as I related them, but, as his remai ks were those of a common soldier, ond lue un¬ derstanding, os I piescntly perceived, was in no respect superior to his station, they are not worth mentioning He ob¬ served, that be was afraid 1 had not eaten that day. Not a morsel, except the roll and but¬ ter given me by Betty, the bir-maid. God bless you, my boy ' exrhimeo he with some emotion, come home along with me, and you shall at least partake ofthe fare, such as it is, that I have pro¬ vided for my wife and children I willingly accepted his invitation, and we went together As we entered the little apartment of his family, My love, said he, here is a poor Swiss boy, just come
come from his own country, and without a penny in his pocket you must give bim a little supper, and he shall stay with ui to-night. The wife was no less j. ompt in exercising this small hospita¬ lity than her husband. Th°y had three sons, beside the infant, and we sat round a cheerful board together I seized this opportunity of asking the soldier a variety of questions concerning the king, vvhich he regarded probably as the mere curiosity of a stianger He told me, that the king was not at present at Versailles, but had been for some days at Marh, which place he principally fre¬ quented for the diversion of hunting I enquired into the situation of this place, and was pleased to find that it was only four or five miles from Versailles. I set off for Marh early the next morning. When I arrived, I found the king had gone forth already to his hunt, and pro¬ bably would not return till the day was con-
considerably advanced, A Swiss soldier gave me my breakfast at Marli, as the private at Versailles had entertained me the evening before. This man was a being of more reflection than the for- merj and, when I had owned that I was without money, pressed me to in¬ form him what was my errand at Marli, and what prospects I had for the fu- •turs. This generous anxiety and fore¬ cast «aimed my heart : the deliberating benevolence of an ordinary soldier, hovy- evflr narrow may be his power, is not Jess interesting to the feelings, than that of a lord. I begged hiin however to excuse me ; I intreated him to give him¬ self no concern about me ; and assured him that, though I was destitute now, I Jaad means of speedily putting an end to my distress. I broke nway from this man as soon as í decently could, and wandered about lhe park and gardens. I saw bim two or
or three times in tho course of the day, and once passed so near a sentry-box where he was on duty, that be had an opportunity m a low voice to desire Ше to come again to his hut, when his busi¬ ness of the day should be over At length I heard the sound of clannets and horns, the signal of the return from hunting. I saw the hounds, and heard tbe trampling of horses, and presently the cai alcade appeared. The sound and the sight were cheerful, and my bosom was in tumults. Suddenly I recollected myself, and started away for the door, of which I had previously gained infor¬ mation, where the king was tü alight. Several attendints and lacqueys pressed to the same spot. I saw the persons on horseback alight, and, coming up to one of them, cried with eirnestness and en¬ thusiasm, Sire, hear what I have to say, and listen to my prayer * In the confu¬ sion of my mind, I had mistaken the in¬ dividual,
dividual, in spite of my precaution of the portrait : it was not the king. The no¬ bleman to whom I spoke, exclaimed, What, what is all this ? the lacqueys hurried me out of the circle ; the king alighted, and the scene was closed. I know not whether it will appear in¬ credible that a child as I was should have been capable of this daring. It was in reality perhaps because I was a child, that I was capable of it. I under¬ stood very imperfectly the distinctions of rank in artificial society. I was wholly ignorant of the forms and fences which are set up to separate one man from the rest of his brethren. A king to the ima¬ gination of a child js but a man ; and I was accnstomed, as perhaps all boys are accustomed, to meet him in fancy in the fields and the highways, and to conceive him a guest in my father's house. The first time I ever beheld a peacock's fea¬ ther, I fbund something royal in it ; and a man
ι man weaimg a peacock's fcilher upon bis bosom would to me have been a king Add to which, I had never dis¬ closed my plan to a human creature Timidity is the child of experience or of idmonition I was not wilhout timidity in the present instmce, I understood the degree of presumption there was in addressing a gentleman and a stranger·, and I undei sloo 1 no more If I set out in try projert with these notions, mj com ige vvas consdeiably lemforeed is Ι ρ occcded I had medi¬ tilo! my project perpetually, till enthu- s asm stpphedthe place of intiepidii) I had so oflcn icted tho scene over in my fancy th it the whole was become pcifectly familnr it wis like some si tuations which perhi| s eveiy mm has encounteied in life, new and extraordi raiy in themselves but which feel Ike lecollcctions, md he cxclums, This is my dicam' Recollect, in addition to voi π с these
these things, the tngency of my concli- tiuti, the desperatene s of my fortune, mj hatred to the silk-mills of Lyons, the long journey I had performed, the hard adventures I had encountered, the empti¬ ness of my purse, the immediate cravings ornature. All these things goided me forward, and made me look upon the ig¬ nominy of deliberation as tbe worst of evils. In the evening the kmg walked upon the terrace in Ihe gardens I informed myself exactly of his appearance and in¬ signia, that I might make no second mistake. There was a flight of about fitly steps that led up lo lhe terrace, and guards weie placed upon a landing- place in the middle, and at the bottom. These guards were not Swiss, but French. I had reflected, and found this spot the most favourable in the world for the execution of my project. The king, I «as told, usually walked here foi an hour,
hour, and conversed familiarly with a variety of persons. I approached to ascend, but w as stopped by the soldiers. My garb was mean, and they told me, a boy of my appeaiance could not go up there ' I was filled with impatience. 'U·" re was a similar flight of steps at the other end of the tenace ; I burst away from these persons, and hastened to the second flight Here I was stop¬ ped igam Repe itcd disappointments now made m desperate, ind I struggled with ihc soldier-, in the vain hope to pissin spite of ihcn efforts An attcn- d mt vvho passed by, recognised me for the child vvho hid endcivouicd lo speik. with Ihc king befoie dinnei. This cir¬ eumst nice induced them to conduct n e to the ¡run d house A child, as I was, tl ey took (or granted could not be a dan. gerous intimici , but it w ıs then busi¬ ness lo lcep ori impertinence, and pie¬ vent his mijesty from being distuibed с a The
The soldier who took me under his care «sked me, with some degree of kindness, What I wanted, and what purpose I had in view in speaking to the king ? But I was now grown sullen, and would only answer in gloomy monosyllables. After some time, I was conducted to the gate of the park, and thrust out into the high road. The soldiers left me, and I sat down upon a stone.
CHAP-
CHAPTER III. Heur my reflections were sufficiently melancholy. I would have returned, 'f I had been ible, to the hut ofthe centi¬ nél vvho had invited me, but that was un¬ fortunately within theinclosurc What was I to do ! I was by no means ciucci of my project of speaking to the king. How bitter were my rage and indigna¬ tion against the villam who had strip¬ ped roe ofthe trifling sum of money on vvhich I had depended ' I wanted, I thought, but alitile lime, but how was I to gain time, when I was without food î The objection I hid heird made against ne, vvas the memncss of my clothing : if my money had not been taken from me, I could hive removed this objection. Mj ruminations were ine/pressibly me» lancholy-
lancholy As I sat, several gentlemen passed me, who had probably made part ofthe company in the loj il | romcmde I must endeavour to obt nn from son e one the means of appeasing the demands of hunger. Should I applj to these ' There was nothing in their appearance that invited me Moved by my expe¬ rience ofthe past, I was inclined to wait till I could sec a soldier ind a fellow- countryman Yet of what avail wis the reliefi cou'd so obtain í I bad not come hither !o subsist upon the precarious chanty of daily bread ! Гаг different news had animated my steps m a course of three hundred miles 1 What wasl to do to morrow ' At Marli I should find myself marked, and watched, and thui it¬ ed m all my attempts When would le king return to Versailles ' Tho»e ofthe persons who pissed mo and were on foot, passed me by twos and threes Others vventincnirngesindon horse-
horsebick At length one ¿enllcman с ime alone Ile loukcel it u e, mei iel vaneed to the plice whe rc I sil My boy, s id he, nc not you the lilt с fellow that at einpted to spe ik to Ihc king! I looked up at the genii min He wis beyond the mid lie | euod ol humiiv life I thought I hid ne vei 'cen so be¬ nign ι counti nance Bts des, thei с vv is something in him tint stiuek me will ι lemarkable similanty to my own fa¬ ther I am, sir, answered I vvitu ι sigh And what cculd jou want to say to the king î I am friendless I have ncbidy to take care of me I vv intcd to tell him that Wis your fither a mihluy mm ' Did be wear the ctoixde St Louis? My father was no military mm he и as never in Fiance in h s life Good
Good God' —And vvho told you to apply to the king ' Nobody told mc The scheme is all my own I hive come thicc liundicJ mile» to esccute it The stt iiijrei became mlcteslcel in mv irllcss stciy AV ill yen coire 1 lo my lodgings lo morr uv moniini; 1 sh ill sleep it Muli —And he give mc his addi e ss I vv ι , ч replied I ßu' —but—■ i» ι wh il, mj hule mun î I un veiy hungry' Every new ciiciimstince I mentioned astonished him the more. He perceived, as he afterward told me, that I was bj no means without education, and ι certain lefinemcnt To hive foi med such a pro¬ ject, to have come three hundred miles to compirle it, and to be here without ι pennj,—' He was delei mined to be moie fully acquainted with so strange story ' —He took out his purse Do
Do you know, my boy, how to pro¬ cure yourself accommod ıtıons for the night i I have not travelled three hundred miles for nothing Well, take cue of j ourself to night, and come to me in the morning I looked at the addı ess. The nime on the card was Ambrose Fleetwood The generous man who accosted me in my desolate condition was jour grandfather. This was the first time I had ever seen· the η mie of Fleetwood, and, till this pulse ceases to throb, the occasion that brought us together will never be for¬ gotten ' This is the foundation of the ftiendly allı race of 1 leetwood and Ruf¬ figny ----- Upon what a picciptrc w s I then phced * Even it the distinct of so- many jears, I cinnot íeeollect it, with¬ out feeling my head turn giddv Γοι what did my destiny seem to ieşene me ' For beggary, for hunger,—to pc- c 5 nth
rish for want offood , or, if not, vvitl out guide or protector, and w ilh no means of present subsistence, toberome the associate of the worthless and the vile, the only persons, probablj speiking, who would court stitch an associate Oh, how infinitely worse would this have been, than the most unpitied death !— The king of Frince '—was ever pooı wretch misled by such an tgms faluus * did ever condemned criminal brave the fu'y of the ocean in such a cockle¬ shell ? I repaired at the ippomted hour to the residence of mj new protector He asked me a number of questions and I gave him the sime answers, but with more of detail than I had given on previous occasions He wis urgent in his enquuies, he spoke to me m the most friendly and soothing manner, I was on the brink of discovering my se cet , I intrealed hım however to spaie mc
me : I had been robbed by my uncle ; but I did not el ire to tell, where and who he was. The generous English¬ man perceived that I g isped and turned pale, as I touched on this tiemendou* subject. He became deeply interested in my behalf. Will jou go with me to my own coun¬ try ' said be. Oh, no, nol If jou aie so much my friend as to bc willing to take me thi¬ ther, then—pray, pray, sir 1—do for me the thing 1 want, cinblc me lo change these clothes Γοι others more suitable to my projects. I laved of the king of Fiance. The scheme of applying to lum hatl been my favourite contempi ilion for mouths I had had his picluie· so oflcn before me I The thought of him had soothed my weary steps, and comforted me undei all my disasters. I could not give up my plan. I cotdd not divest mjs'lf ofthe jvort
sort of ròbe of nobility with which my fancy had clothed me, and descend into the vale of ordinary life I intreated my henefactor with miraculous and un¬ padded importunity that he would di¬ rect all his assistance to this end. Enthusiasm is alwiys an inteiestmg spectacle When it expresses itself with an honest and artless eloquence, it is difficult to listen to it, and not in some degree to catch the flimc Particulaily at my age it was so extiaordinary in it¬ self, and so impetuous in its way of mi- nifestmg itself, thit it vvas impossible to contemplate it without sympathy Τ here arc so many ways in which the heait of man conceils lbelf from man 1 Beside the thousand motives which impel us to suppress one thing, antl to bc rcsened respecting another, it »s necessary that the human mind should be put into mo¬ tion in order to its being seen Speak, thin I may see thee ' sud the ancient philo-
philosophe! He might have added, Speik upon some subject, respecting which your feelings are spontaneous and strong The soul of man is one of those subtle and evanescent substances, that, as long as they remain still, the organ of sight does not rem irk, it must be agi¬ tated, to become visible All together, Mr Fleetwood grew exceedingly anxi¬ ous respecting my welfare On this iccount he condescended to a certain degree of artifice and tem¬ poi ising He observed to me that I had ruined my own proiect at Mirli, and that it would be ten dajs before the king removed to Versailles He invited me to spend this time with him at Paris, during which I should be clothed md equipped more smtibly to the great per¬ son I designed to ad diess He promised me that I should have the e ul сы intelli¬ gence of the removal ofthe court In how new a situation was I now un¬ expectedly
expectedly placed I I had not heard the accents of genuine kindness for almost two years, not since the calamitous moment, when my father uttered his expiring breath Mr Fleetwood, al¬ most from the first, conceived for me the affection of a father He did not treat me as a vagabond whom he had taken up out of charity, and keep me at a distincc from him I saw him, morn¬ ing, noon and night His accents were those of friendly solicitude, the looks I cast upon him were those of affection My spmt was softened within me my new situition took away from mc theheart of stone, and give me a heart of (¡esh It was this heart of stone, if y ou will allow me so to express myself, that led me to the king of France It wis tin sentiment of despair I had sent my en¬ quiring glances round tbe world, ind had not found a friend. Methodically aid slowly I had worked myself up to the
the resolution I had adopted, and I could not immediately abandon it. It was a sort of frenzy, a high pitch of tbe sou!, foreign to its natural temper Kind¬ ness, the perpetual attention and interest ofa ieai friend, in no long time brought me bick to myself. It is impossible to express what comfort, vvhat a delicious relaxation and iepo 3 e of spirit, was pro¬ duced by this revolution. Mr Fleet¬ wood gradually led me to consider the scheme I had formed, as wild, senseless and impracticalle. His expostulations were so gentle, benignant and humane, that, while they confuted, they had not the effect of mortif, ing me He took me with him to England I have been thus minute in the de¬ scription of my condition at Ljons, and of themanner of my desert in г il, thit I might the better demonstrate ю you the infinite value of the kindness youi grand¬ father bestowed on me. If I had not been
been the most unforturate, the nrst abused, and the most deserted of my species, the favours I received would not have had a tithe of the value they ac¬ tually possessed I cannot recollect the situation I deserted, or that upon which I threw myself, without a horror border¬ ing on despair The generous and ad¬ mirable mortal that then interposed for my relief, I must ever regard as my guar¬ dian genius, and my better angel How distinctly have I passed over m my mind ten thousand times the stone upon which I sat at the gite of the park of Marh, md the gesture md countenance with vv hich my preserver approached me ' The day was declining, the landscape hid as sumed the grave and uniform hues of evening, and there was that sadness in the atr which wakes up the tone of sensi¬ bility in the soul. The circumstances in which I was placed, sufficiently prepared me lo be deeply affected. The first word-
vvoi el (hat Ambrose Fleetwood uttered went lo my heart. I had orcasion- illy perhaps been ticated during my journey with gentleness md civility but it was the difference between the voce thit fells you wh eli t n you aie lo take in the roicl from Auxerre to Sens, and the voice tint tells you by implic itiou that the speaker is in¬ terested thit jou shill go right in the 10id of hippmess and life—With what consideiate wisdom did this noble Englishman soothe me in the midst of the exalted and enthusiastic fervour vvhich had brought me fo Versailles and M irli ! How pit cully did lie wem me fiom lhe wild p' in ıi| on vvhich my heart was bent ' And 1' lh s to an unknown and penny leo- vignbond ι Ihere is per¬ haps more merit in this temper, thit listened to ill my exti lviginetes without anger, ind did not suffer itself to bedis couiigcd
couraged by my tcnaciousness and stub¬ bornness, than in the gift of thousands In our journey lo England, I was <o fortunate as conlmuiily to advance in joui grandfither's good graces He thought me, as he afterward told me, a youth of very exlraordmaiy qinhfica- tions, and well deserving of his cırt He sent me to proper schools, and h id me taught every thing whith he believed it would be important for me to knovv He was an English merchant, and he determined to provide for me in some of those departments, in which com¬ merce opens the road to competence and wealth It was not till afler a very longtime, that I could prevail upon myself to unfold my heart to my benefactor, respecting my extraction, and the way m vvhich I had been driven to the deplorable situa¬ tion m which he found me Your grand¬ father
fither often enquired of mc vvhat were the condition in which I wis bom, and the prospects vvhich my birth had opened to me, but I manifested such a shnnk- ino· of the soul, such a convulsive kind of terror, whenever the suLjut was stilted, tint for some time he foibore all mention of it The alarm had been nnpiesscel on me early, and had taken; deep root in my breist While I was at Lyons, it formed the peculiarity of my situation, and I cherished it with a strange and mingled sentiment, some- Hung between horror and delight Eveiy human creature loies perhaps to thmk that there is something extraordinary about hım, ıı d dwe'ls with complacency upon thatwhichmakeshimdifterent from all lus race licit like an exiled sovereign, or a prince vvho loams ibout the world in disguise I firmly believe that it was partly to both these notions, of self-corn. placenoy, and of terror, that I was in¬ debted,
debted, for the habit of regaiding the names of my father and my uncle as the most inviolable of secrets At lengtii I became co ìvinccd by the unaltered kindnesses of my benefactor, that my seciet would be no less «afcly reposed in his keeping, than in the re¬ cesses of my own soul I told lum the whole He was astonished at the ter¬ ror with which I had looked forward to the disclosure, and proposed im¬ mediately to take such measures as should operate to compel my uncle to resign his ill gotten wealth I intreated him that he would engage m no pro¬ ceedings of that sort, I reminded him of his promise that my secret should nevei be communicated to a third per¬ son without my corsent My uncle, however deeply he hid injured me, was still the brother of my father, and in that quality I could not but feel îeluctance at the idea of exposing him to public igno-
ignominy. The menaces with vvhich he had so emphatically dismissed me, were still impressed on my heart, they gave me a horrible anticipation of the event which would attend my hostile re¬ turn to my native land, and I could not help apprehending that that event would be miserable to me, no less than to him. I implored your grandfather that he would suffer the question to lemam unopened, at least till I had arrived at a mature age He had often assured me that, having only one son, he did not re¬ gard the expences I brought on him as a burthen, but, if he did, I did not desire the situation he provided for mc, or the advantages he bestowed, the tilhe of his benefits would amply satisfy my ambi¬ tion and my wishes To occasion an entire revolution in the fortunes and si¬ tuation of my family, was a very serious consideration, it might be the most important transaction of my life, and I ear-
earnestly intreated that in such a trans¬ action I might be allowed to consult the ripest decisions of my own understand¬ ing. Your grandfather generously yield¬ ed to these representations. The principal friend I had in England, after my original benefactor, was your father. We were nearly of an age, and your grandfather brought us up together. I saw in him the image of the man vvho had rescued me from utter destruction, and loved him accordingly. Your fa¬ ther was acquainted vvith my situation, and knew that I had no claim either of blood or alliance upon my preserver : he saw me brought up vvith himself, and en¬ joying the same advantages ; yet he never repined at the favour in which I was held. Not only while vve were children toge¬ ther, he legarded mc as a brother; but this sentiment never altered in him as he advanced in judgment and years. He never looked upon me as an intruder; never
never considered the large sums jour grandfather laid out to procure me a re¬ spectable footing in life ; nor even en¬ quired whether, as I equally shared the bounties of my benefactor at present, he might not make a distribution of his property at death no less impartial. Could I help loving so disinterested: and noble minded a companion ? Having been perfectly initiated in the principles of commerce in tbe country where they are best understood, it hap¬ pened that, about the time when it was prO| er I should be launched in the world, ά proposition was made to the elder Fleetwood, respecting a banking-house vvhich it was in contemplation to set up at Lisbon. A countryman of my own was the principal in the project, but his capital was not sufiicient for the undertaking as it had been chalked ouf, and he designed taking in one or two «ther persons as partners with him in the con-
concern. Provided he could enter upon the affair in the way which had been de¬ lineated, he had the promise of being immediately installed as banker lo the court of Portugal. Your grandfather was an opulent London merchant, and had no inclination to extend his con¬ cerns. His son he destined for his suc¬ cessor in the business in which he was himself engaged. Under these circum¬ stances he thought of embracing the proposal in my behalf. I was never more surpnsed than when the idea was suggested to mc The money necessary to be advanced, was moie than three times the amount which my father's property would have pro¬ duced, if it had been all sold immedi¬ ately on the event of his death. I was suffocated with the thought of so incre¬ dible a generosity exeicised toward me. I told my benefactor that I was as far from the expectation as the wish of be- j coming
coming opulent, and that, independently of a secret feeling which led me to the hope of one day settling in my native fields, I could be contented to remain for ever the first clerk in my preserver's counting-house. Your grandfather answered me, that he much disapproved of a character defi¬ cient in enterprise, and asked, how the humility of the views I at present pro¬ fessed, accorded with the ardour which had formerly led me to throw myself at the feet ofthe sovereign rfPrancc î He said, I had with my own consent paseeel through all the stages of a commercial education, and that therefore it seemed but reasonable, that whatever enleipuse I possessed, should be directed into that channel. He expatiated upon the uses ofvvealth, and observed that, however limited might be my desire of indul¬ gences for myself, I ought by no mcins to forget the great public works winch m ■vol. п. d opulent
opulent man might forward for the be¬ nefit of his species, or hovv extensive was bis power of relieving distress, of ex¬ citing industry, of developing talents, of suppl) ing the means of improvement to those who panted for, but could not ob. tain tbem, and of removing the innu- mci'iblc difficulties which often sur¬ rounded the virtuous and the admirable, V» hich impeded their progress, and struck despair into their hearts. My benefactor recommended to me to make myself perfectly easj, as to the money necessary to be advanced, to launch me m the undertaking proposed He could spare it without the smillest inconvenience If my views in life were unsuccessful, it should never be repaid, and he should then have the satisfaction of having exerted himself liberally to establish m life a youth, who-i he loved no lees than his own son. But he had no doubt that the undertaking would be pro-
prosperous; and then he consented, if that would be any gratification to me, that I should repay lhe present loan, only upon one condition, that the first install- ment of the repayment should not com¬ mence till that day seven years, counting from the day of my landing in Lisbon : young men, who entered upon business with a borrowed capital, had often re¬ ceived a fatal check in the midst of the fairest prospects, by a premature repay¬ ment of the loan which had originally set them afloat on the ocean of life. Ruffigny, continued your grandfather, vvliat miserably narrow notions are these which you seem to have fostered in your bosom I Are all the kindnesses of th* human heart to be shut up within the paltry limits of consanguinity Ì My son will have enough ; and I am sure hé will not repine, that you should be made a partaker of the opulence with which providence has blessed me. If you will, D 2 wc
we will ask him, and I will do nothing for you that has not his entire and undis- s'embled approbation. Why should I not set up two persons in the world, in¬ stead of one ? Thirty-six princes, vve are told, erected each of them a pillar in the temple of Diana at Epbesus : why should I not erect two pillars in the edifice of human happiness, and prepare two per¬ sons, instead of one, lo be benefactors of their species i You are. my son, a son whom the concourse of sublunary events has given me, no less dear to me than the heir of my body. I found in you various estimable qualities, which won my 'attachment in the first hour I saw you; and I (rust, those qualities have lost nothing in the cultivation I have given them. You belonged lo me, be¬ cause you belonged to no one else. Tbis is the great distribution of human society ; every one who stands in need of assistance appertains to some one in¬ dividual,
dividual, upon vyhom he has a stronger claim than upon any other of his fellow- creatures. My son belongs to me, be¬ cause I was the occasion of his coming mto existence ¡ you belong to me, be¬ cause you were hungry and I fed you, because you wanted education and .. protector and have found them in me. You nre pow arrived at man's estate, and I regard you as the creature of my vigilance and of my cares. Will you not acknowledge ще for a father ? I was convinced by the arguments of my preserver ¡ I was moved by the feel¬ ings he expressed : my beloved compa¬ nion, the brother of my heart, declared ifiost warmly his consent to (he (irrange- ír.ent. I resided twenty-one yeais at Lisbon ; and in that time, by honourable. and just traffic, made a fortune infinitely beyond the most sanguine of my wishes. I faithfully repaid to my benefactor, at the time he had himself limited, the ca¬ pital
pital he advanced to me. During the period of my residence at Lisbon, I se¬ veral times came oier to England, anil visited the two persons whom I reason¬ ably regarded as Ihc most generous of mortals ; and in one of these visits, after I had been ten years engaged as a prin¬ cipal in my commercial undertaking, I witnessed the expiring breath of my ori¬ ginal benefactor. Never perhaps did I Jove a human creature, as I loved that man. My father, good and kind unci affectionate as he had been, was to my fflind a sort of air-drawn vision, the re¬ collection as it were of a preexistent state. My youthful companion and sworn confident, no less generous than my preserver, was inexpressibly dear to me ; but the sentiment I felt for him was altogether different. Nature has foi mcd ns to the love of the venerable. Filial affection is an instinct twined with tbe very fibie» of our heart. For the a grey
grey hairs of your grandfather I had a mystical and religious aivt, and age had softened his featuics into an expres¬ sion of ai ch calm benignity, that 4 if I were an adherent ofthe sect of the an- thropomorphites, I should take from his countenance my idea of the object of my worship.
CHAP-
CHAPTER IV 1 should hive told you that, about the time of my original depai ture for Lisbon, jour grandfather settled with my consent a correspondence with a citizen of Zu¬ rich, upon whose integrity and discretion he could perfectly rely he observed that, whatever forbearance I might think pro¬ per to exercise toward my uncle and his family, it was but reasonable that I should obtain from time to time information of his affairs, and learn vvhich of the family were living and dead I have already said that my uncle had been u n prospe¬ rous in all bis undertakings the estate of my father which he so wickedly seized, by no means introduced a better fortune into his affairs One by one his chil¬ dren died, he survived them, but sur. vived not long, and the estate fell in the twentieth
twentieth year of my residence at Lis¬ bon (for it was understood that I was dead, and my uncle procured vouchers to establish the fact) to a distant branch of my father's family. Circumstances were now sufliciently favourable to the project up.on which my wishes were bent, of fetuţnipij to my native country, and spending the remainder of my days in the valley whioh had given mc birth. I communi¬ cated my purpose to my correspondent at Zurich ; but I was somewhat divided in my ι id, whether I should purchase my paternal estate, and live uponjtas a stianger, or should openly claim, itvijs my rightful inheritance. WhaUncJined ГОР to the former »as, that by this expedient 1 should avoid casting any slur.tipon the memory of my false guardian. Oui' fa¬ mily had alway s ranked among the most patriotic families ofthe Union, And had n; ver sustained any dishonour, except in d 5 ' ' the
the person of my uncle On tho other hand, I could not bear the idea of ap¬ pearing as a foieigner in my vvn coun tiy this was but a half re ini on Why did I love my country ? Not "merely for that its scenes had been familiar to my infancy but that the human mind inesist Ыу wishes to con¬ nect itself with something I had an¬ cestors, tbe ornaments of the people among whom they were born These ancestors had married md given in mar riage, had received and conferred obit gations and benefits, and their memory was in odour a ι in favour through the neighbouring districts I wished to adorn my ancestors, and to be adorned by them This is the genuine idea of going to one's home I was averse however to the idea of ap¬ pearing in my ow n country in the charac terofa htiganl,an indiv dual unexpected¬ ly calling his neighbour into contest about a property
a property of which he believed himself to be lawfully possessed I therefore in¬ structed my correspondmt to bring this question to a full decision, »efore I should take my departure My resolution vv as formed, is »oon as I recen ed intelli¬ gence of the death of my uncle I im¬ mediately transmitted documents to Zu¬ rich, proving mypirentage and ldentitj, and duected my correspondent to serve the new claimant with a notice, that the true heir, who wis supposed to be dead, was still living He wis exceedingly surprised, md somewhat chagr ned with the intelligence, as he was a poor man, and burthened with л numerous family He consented howevei aftti the manner of the country, lo go before the chief court of the canton, for the decision of the question Afler a full and minute investigation ofthe evidences my claim was ultimately established This point being giined, I dispntchcJ to Zurich an u slni-
instrument, settling on the losing party in the contest, an annuity to one half of the value of the property of which he was dispossessed, accompanied with bills of exchange deätined to repurchase the lands which my uncle had sold, and to redeem them from the burthens he had laid upon them These objects were in most instances hippily accomplished. While my iffaus were going on thus auspiciously in Switzerland, I employed 'he time necessary for manning them, m adjusting and transferring in the most advantageous manner the commercial undertakings, in which more lh in twenty jears of my life hatl been consumed, in Portugal W hen evuy concern of this soit was now completed, and all things prepircd for my reception in my nitivc tanton, I bade farewel to Lisbon, and ptpaicd to return to Snitzeiland by way of London Jiy business in Englind was lo visit jour
jour father. I found hım the same io tastes, in moral dispositions, and m affec¬ tion, as his father's death had left him In many respects he was different Ten jears of added life had brought him to a nearer resemblance of my original pre¬ server, and, as I remarked in him the tokens of advancing age, I felt the agree¬ able sentiment of contemplating my ve nerible benefactor and my schoolboy as¬ sociate blending themselves, as it were, in one person Your father had also married since I was in England, and yourself was born I thmk I never saw so aftectionite a husbind and a father. In domestic life it was impossible lo be more fortunate thm I found my beloved friend He was not equally fortunate in every thing He hid experienced two or three severe miscarriages in his com¬ mercial concerns, and this, so far as I could understand, without the sm liest fault
fault on his part In one instance be had connected himself with, and given large credit to, a house, where all ippear- ances were fair, but where extravagance and secret gaming brought about a ruin, the most sudden and unforeseen In another instance a war had broken out at a time when he apprehended no such thing, his transactions were multiplied in the country vvhich was now declared in enemy, and nil Ins investments failed At a differ/ nt time bankruptcy upon an extensive scale took place in Holline), one great house drawing on the ruin of another, till half the most opulent mer¬ chants of the republic wtre destroyed your father suffered deeply ш (his cala¬ mity I soon discovered a cist of melancholy in the demeanour of my quondam play¬ mate, and ttiat there was something which hung piinfully on his mind In truth I had somewlnt sespectcd his real
real situation before I left Lisbon, and this contributed with other circumstances to hasten my conclusion of my affairs in that citj Wilh difficulty ind eflort I wrung fiom jour father a full confession of lus misfortune Ruifigny, sud he, I am a beggar You and I set out together in life, but under different nispices —He paused No matter, added he I hope I shall be able to discharge all my debts to the uttermost A trifle will remain to me liom the wreck I will venture no more upon the treicherous sea of commerce What is the value of riches ' I shall still have enough left, to jetiié with to some remote corner of the island, ind culti¬ vate a small farm in tranquilhtj My dear wife will be perfectly contented with the exchange She will give up her equipage and her hvenes without a mur¬ mur She will not sigh for the imus»- n cnts
ments of the court and the metropolis ¡ and she will look more beautiful jn my eyes clad in the plain attire of a rural housewife, than hung round as I have seen her, vvith diamonds and rubies. My son shall be a peasant swain, nqt igno¬ rant, not ambitious, viewing the storms of life from a distance, and feai less ot bankruptcies, shipwrecks and wm. Is not this happiness î Your father never dropped a sylluble which should sound lovv.u el the asking me to assist him in his adversity He knew my ability m this icspect, and the prosperous event which had crowned my efforts. Perhaps he would have been willing to have made anolhei ex¬ periment in the affaire of commeiqe, and not to have quitted the world a bank¬ rupt, had he known where to have raised | a sum adequate to his purpose, and upon terms sufficiently eligible. But all that I had
I had I derived from the bounty of your grandfather, and this consideration scal¬ ed up his lips toivard me. One morning I came to him eirly, and requested him to assist mc in cast¬ ing up the profits of my commerce, and the amount of my fortune. He» turned upon me a wistful eye, as I stated my proposal. At first sight it sccirted to imply an instilling comparison betwscn my success and lus. On the other hand he perhaps half suspected the true mean¬ ing of my visit. Come, my dear Fleetwood, said I ; my afEurs are in good order, and the task will not occasion you much trouble. Saying this, I opened again the door by which I had entered, and called to my servant to come in. He brought with him three or four pocket-books, and a hox. He put them down, and de« parted. Let us sit down ' I opened
I opened the pocket-books, md ex- plained their content« Some were bills of exchange, some were wirrants of ca¬ pital in the English and Dutch slocks, and some securities of vinous sorts I explained to my friend, the nature ofthe commerce in which I hid been cngiged, the profits trom jtar to ycir, mil the pirticulars of one or two tortun tc spe¬ culations I took pen anet ш';, and summed together tue amount of my bills, warrants and securities. I then pushed aside the pocket books, and drew toward roe the black box This, said I, I regard as peculiarly my own It contuned the evidences of my birth and identify, the sentence ofthe judge who had awarded to me my estate, the ejectment of the late possessor, and the titles of the landed property which my agent bad purchased for mc in Swit¬ zerland As I have now quitted trade, resumed I, and
I, and im going to ictirc from the world, I hive been trying to nnke my will Here it i», pulling a pietty laige parcel from my pocket I will leave it with jou, Fleetwood , peruse it at jour leisure One thing only I Inve to say, I do not show it jou to consult jou upon it, I am peremptory m its contents, md will not ilter a lettci , buf, between such old friends as we ire, I think it nght you should be acquainted with all my thoughts Is it your will î sud your father. Pooh, said I, emtling, -do not let из deal in quibbles and disputes about a woid ' If however I must come to defi¬ nitions, I will tell jou, thit by a will I understand a paper or parchment, con- tuning my final and irrevocable disposi¬ tion ofthat property over which the mu¬ nicipal laws of Europe give me an em¬ pire , and to tell you the truth, I hold a min's miking his will and the different pio-
provisos it contains, to be one of Ihe most sacred and mdispensible ilutic he cm perforin, md one of those ciicum- stances which miy best serve as ι crite¬ rion to distinguish the honest man mel tht knave, the man of narrow, md the man of capacious and liberal, views The parcel I tendered to your father contained n regular nnd formal transfer to him of all the property which I hail just put upon his table, with the excep¬ tion ofthe contents of the black box. It is not your will, said Fleetwood ! I will not touch a farthing of your pro¬ perty. You shall not. My property is con¬ tained in this black box. The rest is a debt I am come to you to pay, Why will you make many words, in a case which common sense decides in a mo¬ ment í It is yours. The small germ from which it sprung was the gift of iny fa¬ thei
thei The rest is the iccumulation of your industry, the fruits of twenty yens' occupation ind labour. I insst upon it, thatyou tike it iway Fleetwood, if I irus' speak on such a subject, hcu me ' Good God, it is the plainest question in the world ' I have been your fathers slevvud, and bring bick the fiuits of my stewardship to his son I have abstracted from it a consi¬ deiable sum, winch wis necessary to my e ligiblc settlement in my own country 1 had always deteimmed to settle exactly in the way I am now executing "ion have not distuibed my projects ι _,ot If I had letained the property which is now yours, I ncier would hue spent iu itom of it upon mjself or any of my lelations I should hive been a tiustee for others, ami a very 1 ibouous oflicc I should have hid As it is, the whole is jouis I hive calcuhted lhe maller wilh greit nieeiicss, and I find that you will llus ehy
day be placed exactly where your father left you We shall neither of us be the better or the worse for each other, ex cept as I hope vve shill be both giiners in the possession of eich other s friend¬ ship and affections Didlsij that vve shall neither of us be the betler oı the worse ? Alas ' hovv grievous an error did I commit ' I om siili indebted to yourfdthei andjou fir my life, mj edu cation, my estimition in the world the jeirs of respectability and peice I hue enjojed, 3nd the power I have it la t exerted to recover llie pro) ertv of my ancestors When I owe jou so vast ι debt that I can never repij, hovv can jou be so ungencious as to endcivour to prevent me from reimbursing this ir sguificint portion of the obhgition I owe you ? I was peremptory, and jour falber was obliged to submit We had ısuı our p' ice, assigned us by the destiny t n der
der vvhich vve were born , and the ar- ringcmcnt I now m ide vvas restoration to us both I wmted to end my life like my father, π citizen of Un , it wis proper that my fnend should live like his ancestois, a gieat English merchant, and, when he retned from ictive life, an opulent English countiy-gentleman. What hid Ι, ι republic™ of the old mo¬ del, to do with bonds, vvmants and se¬ cundes' To mc thej were in insup- portible incumbrance, to jour filhcr they were necessary You perceive with me, uy eleir Casimir, Ihat all tbe obliga¬ tion was on one side Your fither and grindfilhcr hid done every thing for me, I did nothing for them They had taken me in, an outcast, they had mide me one of their familj, cqinl with themselves, they had given me my edu¬ cation, and bj consequence eveiy qua¬ lity that made mc rcspectiblc m the tjts of my fellow beings, I hid lived upon them
them for twenty years in the style of ι German sovereign If the venerable Ambrose Fleetwood had been more ic tivcly my friend, I al wíj s considered Ibe part jour father acted as not a wlut less honourable Human beings are in all cases so fond of their creatures ' in the objects of their generosity lhey behold the mirror of their own virtues, and are sitisfied Your grandfather made me his child, and doted on me as such But jour father, without the smallest pictcnce to this ouginal merit, without any stimulus in the gratification of hts own comphcence, entered into the sen¬ timent of my picsorver, never uttered a murmur, never felt a compunction, but fullj approved ofthe lav ıslı bounty vvhich stripped him of so considenble a portion of his fortune It wis this feelmg ofhis heart which made us brothers, brothei s by a dearer bond than that of nature by a moie sıcıcd tic thin that of a com 4 mon
mon descent. My sou! has always panted for an occasion of showing my¬ self worthy of such a friend, of repaying somj small part of the obligation I owe to the name of Fleetwood ; but I shall go dow n to the grave ungratified in this first wish of myheart.
ÏOL. II.
CHAP-
CHAPTER V In such talk I and my fnend spent tbe chief p n t of our journey to England We reached Menonethshue, and found a desohtetl mansion and a tenanted grave In the one, ind over the other, we united our tears My friend ' my father I most generous of men ι were the epithets with which a thousand times we saluted the shade of the departed. And here I beg leave to protesi against the doctrine too commonly promulgated in the world, that we ought to call oft our thoughts, as speedily as possible, from the recollection of our deceased friends, and not waste our spuits in la mentation for irremediable losses Ihe persons from whom I have oftenest heard this lesson, bave been ofthe class of the hard-
hard-hearted, vvho bave sought in such " counsels of prudence" an apology for their own unfeeling seicnity He was a wiser man thin they, who said, "It is good to dwell in the house of mourning; for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better." Certainly I found a »alutary and pui ifymg effect, in talking to the spirit of my father when I was alone, and in discoursing of his good deeds and his virtues when I came into society. I cannot accuse these ha¬ bits of hiving geneiated in mc an incli¬ nation to indolence and inactivity, гд, if thej introduced a short intirvilofthat »■ort, it was a beaven-bom inactivity, by vvhich my whole character wis improved. Woe to tbe mm, who ь always busy, hun ied in a tuimoil of engagements from occupation to occupation, and with no seisons interposed, of ìeccllection, contempi ition and repose * Such a man must incut ibly be gross and vulgar and ε ι hard
hird and indelicate, the soit of unn with whom nogenerous spuit would de¬ sire to hold mtei coniai? Afler having spent about two month With mc »n Merionethshire, M Rufhgny consented to accompany me in an ex¬ kursion, rendered necessiry by puticu- 1 ir business, to London I wis not it first exictly avvine of the motive of my venerable monitor to this new compli¬ ance In the sequel it became suffi¬ ciently evident T lus vvas the first considerable visit I ever paid to the metropolis of Englind Bebide the change of scene, I had a new character to sustain I hatl tri- vellcd in Fiance a young hen, and in ι certain sense under a state of piipillige In London I was obliged to retr, 'd my solfas the bead ofa family, and in point of fortune one of the most eminent countiy gentlemen, of lhat pirt of the island where my estates lay Ί lus wis с ileti-
cileni t ed ııı its first ımpıcssıon to ıtı- 'pıte me with a eert un «ciìousness But, le ile this, I fek, by the deith of iny fithc , md the society of my t ither s fit ml, p lulled funn llıc d) sıpjliüiH vv h c h hid too io\\¿ engrossed mc I swo с in the vie ws which I medititeli Im my futuro lile, that I would ncvci ugnili у iele! to tht dcginding follies whicl) linei already cost mo so bitter a pang For some time I kept this resolution. Bv the persuasions of Ruffigny I fic- quentcd m a moderate degree the so¬ ciety of my equals, but tho very mourn¬ ing I wore for my deceased parent, served as a memento, keeping ilive m my heirt the ıecolltctıon of my du+ tics In one unfortunate moment I fpit tuy goo I resolutions thawing before the? dime of beiuty A fiictul who had made one with me in a rathei numerous p irlj it dinnti, persuaded me, when the com-
company broke up, to accompany him to a fetit soufer at the lodgings ofhis mistress. Wine is a most eloquent ad¬ vocate j the Burgundy and Champaigne had been pushed about somewhat briskly at our dinner ; nnd I suffereel myself to be persuaded in the gaiety of the mo¬ ment. I said, No ill consequence can result from this deviation ι I am fortified by a thousand arguments against a re¬ lapse into my former errors; why should I deny myself the sight of beauty î My inviter, sir George Bradshaw by name, had boasted of the charms of his mistress ; but (here happened to be pre¬ sent, as the friend ofthe lady of tbe house, a female whose p-etensions, at least in my eyes, outshone those vvhich I had heard so ν aunted, in an unspeak¬ able degree. I w ill not allow myself io dwell upon her features or her figuie: suffice it to say, that her motions were lighter and more graceful than those of a faw n,
a fiwn, that the plaj fulness ofher man¬ ner and the spoits of her f incy were ïn- cxhaus'iblc, that her voice was more rich md humonious than the lue of Apollo, and that she sung twenty frolic¬ some and humorous songs m the course of the evening with η inexpressible chirm The 1 idy vv is called mrs Comonn, she had lately cohabited with lord Mandeville, but she bad quarrelled with her admirer, ind her heart and her person were now vacant By what infatuation was it, that I in¬ stantly felt myself attracted toward her ? Surely, when nature kneaded my frame, she rast in a double portion of her most combustible materials ι Deep scars were left in my heart by my Parisian amours, and I believed it impossible that any of the sex could agam possess herself of my inmost affections I had argued myself into a contempt of their character, an opinion that to be a wo¬ man,
man, was the same thing as to beheart- less, artificial and perfidious. But what a delightful plaything, vvhat an inex¬ haustible amusement, should I find in the bewitching mrs. Cumorin [ ■ This was the most dangerous stage of my charac¬ ter. The heart cannot bc used for ever ; after a certain number of expeiimcnts it becomes obdurate and ■ insensible ¡ but. ifl fell, as I now seemed on the point to doj into the mire of sensuality, I should become a gross and impudent libertine for the term of my life, and remain α lioavy and despicable lecher lo lhe brink ofthè grave. I saw this alluring woman again and »gain ; and every time I' saw her I was more pleased than before. She was made up of pride of heart, ease of iman- ners, and an inexhaustible flow of spirits ; of sentiment and ieai attachment she was wholly incapable. I saw her for such as she was ; but, speli as she was, she
she won my pirhality, md peihaps, ow¬ ing to the dear bought experience vvhich I could not yet recollect without agony, I liked her the better, for her want of those qualities, which had so fitolly stung my trinquilhty I had strange qualms in my bosom, when the recollection of my inconsis¬ tency lecurred to my thoughts I, that had felt with such bitter rémoise my de- biuchenes it Paris, and the slnmeful way in which I had wasted my time when my father lay on his death-bed, to be so soon caught in the same toils 1 ------ Yet vvhat, alas, is the fiim- ncss of twenty one î Five years of licen¬ tiousness had hid the found ition in me, deep and broad, for a dissolute character In my adventures in Pans I had lost ilL that ingenuous and decent shame, which so often and so happily stops a young man on the brink of the precipice Even the ongiml sensitiveness and delicacy ľ 5 of
of my character, tendered me but the more tremblingly audacious in certiin si¬ tuations Iwas beyond ill things alarmed that the caprice which bad thus seized me, should remain unknown to M Ruffigny His thoughts on the other hand »ere conti¬ nually alive to watch 1 had been in the habil, w hile I had nothing to con eeal, of mentioning to this aged friend, the peisons I saw and the places I visit¬ ed, whenever we were separated Iroin each other A practice of this sort once begun, cannot, without awkwardness and exciting suspicion, be broken off, cir¬ cumstanced therefore as I now was, I Darned to my monitor sit George Brad¬ shaw and the other young men of fashion with whom I associated, but ob¬ served an inviolable silence as to the female members of our parties Ruf- fignƒ s suspicions were probably excited Sir Qeorge Bradshaw was by no means the
the ally he would have chosen for me. Once or twice he expostulated with me upon the new intimacies I seemed to be contracting I assured bim that they were matters of conv emence or accident merely, and that I felt no such partiality to the baionet, as a mere change of place would not immediately break off. One evening that I had left M Ruf- figny to his solitary avocations, the fancy took him to beguile a few hours at the opera. As he had no acquaintance among (he audience, he sat in the pit I was with sir George Bradshi», mrs» Como- rin and her friend, in the baronet's box Ruffigny perceived me, long before I had an idea that I was become a spec¬ tacle to him The publicity of the situa¬ tion, restrained my familiarities with this new mistress of my affections, within cer¬ tain bounds, but Ruffigny saw enough, to leave no doubt in his mind as to the true
true explanation of the scene. My fair friend was of too vivacious a tempera¬ ment, not to play a hundred whimsical tricks in the course of an hour ; I caught the tone from her, and made myself po less ridiculous. In thè heyday of youth¬ ful blood I was capable of little restraint; and my infant passion inspired me with unwonted eagerness and activity. In one of my idlest and most forward sallies 1 caughyhe eye of Ruffigny ; my face instantly became as red as scarlet. The next morning at breakfast we met. Ruffigny charged me seiiously with what he had discovered, with the disgrace I was bringing on my father's name, and the weakness and frailty of the resolutions I had solemnly made. The infatuation under which I labour¬ ed, stung me to a defence ofthe situa¬ tion in which I had been found. I more than half suspected that I was wrong ; and
and this rendered me tenfold the more peremptory and earnest in my vindica¬ tion Could I, asked Ruffigny, apologise for this recent misconduct, when I hid expressed such bittei compunction for the errors I had fillen into at Paris ' Veiy eisily, and veiy consistently, I ıephed Those eriors I should ever re¬ giet, and regirded now with as much ibhorrence as ever With whom were they commuted '' With women having husbands and children, ind occupying ι respectable situation in society I coukl conceive nothing, which would be pronounced more itiocious by in un- corrupted minti If the cumes, thus committed unelei a decent veil, and which, like the thefts of the Spartan youth, were commended, as long as they were cairied on with ι dextrous obscu- ntv, came to be detected, vvhat misery and confusion would they produce m families '
families ì But, detected or not detected, they poisoned every thing that was va¬ luable in social ties They depended for their perpetration upon one eternal scene of hypocrisy and dissimulation. The guilty female, instead of being that exemplary character which her situation called upon her to fill, was devoted to licentious thoughts, and must in her cooler moments be the object of her own contempt. The children she brought into the world she could not love, and the husband she received with personated caresses was the indi¬ vidual m the world she was conscious of most deeply injuiing Where such a state of society prevailed, every lover must regard his mistress with mon! disapprobation, and every husband sus¬ pect lhat by the partner of his bosom his confidence was betrajed. But in the acquaintance I contracted with this English ladj, I injmed no one No
No delusion was pnctised by any of the parties She would not be made worse by any thing into which she was induced by me, md neither I nor any one else understood her but for what she was Unfortunately my adventures in Paris had led me to form such an idea of the sex, that I could never be recon¬ ciled to the thoughts of marriage must I on that account remain as solitary and continent as a priest ' The conversation between me and Ruffigny gradually became warmer, but I was like Telemachus in the island of Calypso, so inflamed by the wiles of the God of Love, so enamoured with the gi aces and witchcraft of my Euchans, that all remonstrances were vain In vain were tht reasonings of honour and truth, in vain the voice of my venerable instructor, to which I had vowed ever¬ lasting attention I parted from him with peevishness and ill humour Is
Is it possible, said I, as I sallied mto the street, to conceive any thing so un¬ reasonable as Ruffigny > There are two pnncipal crimes vvhich, in the code of just morality, respect the relations ofthe sexes, adultery and seduction. I knovv that puritans and monks hive added ι third to the class, and have inveighed mdisci immately against all incontinence. I do uot decide whether their censure is wholly destitute of foundation. But wis ever any one so absurd, as lo place simple incontinence, upon a level with inconti¬ nence attended by one or the other of these aggravattons ' And yet this obsti¬ nate old Swiss will not bc beaten out of it' This aigument no doubt was exceed¬ ingly demonstrative and satisfactory ι but, as I passed and ropissee! it m my mmd, I did not altogether like it. 1 hastened to dine with sir George Biael- shaw, and to visit mrs. Comonn. I be¬ lieved
Iievcd I should dune betler 1 ¿ht on the subject from the bnlhancy ot 1er eyes, th in from Burgcrsdicuis or Con chilie Mysensationsoftlusdiy weie ni iluzii degiee punful and perturbe 1 I confers tint it moments mrs Cotuoi ineve np j c u с 1 to mc so beiutiful as now I ir l/cel on hci vvitli cxtacy but tint v c j cxtocy was tempestuous, and interi uplcd with visions of my fither and my fither a fnend Nothing wis clear mtl pctspi- cuotis in my mind I suspected thit my piesent pission was a vapour only, wis lighter thin vanity, my thoughts whispered me, lint ill I had seen most worthy and excellent on eirth, wa» iny deceised puent and Rufligny My soul was chaos A ceitun sentiment of remorse led me, sooner than usuil, to quit the com¬ pany and hasten home I tisked my thoughts as I went Sliall I be distant uid
and cold to Ruffigny ? Shall I endeaiour to soothe hım, and appease his anger ' or, Shall I sacrifice every thing at once to his invaluible friendship ' I cnquuecl of my servant as I entered, Wheie ь M Ruffigny ? Gone. Gone? Whither' Into the country He has been em¬ ployed all day in preparations, and set out in a post-chaise about half an hour ago Impossible · Gone into the country, and say nothing to me of tho matter ! He has left a letter for jou I was impatient to penise this letter Yet, even while I opened it, a thousand contending thoughts were embattled in my mind I felt lhat his going was inti¬ mately connected with our dissension of that morning I vehemently accused my¬ self for having so far offended the good old man. I was full of resentment against him
hım for having, at this first difference, conceived a mortal offence. It was not till after repeated efforts, that I found myself in a state sufficiently calm to read the letter CASIMIR FirCTVVOOD, The fact is at length ascertained. I have travelled from Switzei land to Bri¬ tain, and my dear friend, your late fa¬ ther, has died,—in vain. Is it possible? Shall this be so ? Casimir Fleetwood, you are called on to decide ! I cannot descend to altei cation. It is not seemly, that tued and hoary inte¬ grity should come into the li»ts, to chop logic with petulant and hot-blooded vice. Ii events, such is have lately been brought to strike upon your heart, will not waken you, m vain might a stionger impulse be sought in the deductions of Zeno, and the homilies of Epictetus. Remember vvhat I am, and hovv related 1 to
to joui fimily, remember vour lite í i- therj lemember the day ofthe 1 ikeof Un ! On that day you said, " Would to (jod it vveie in my povver to iccal a few cast months · My prospects md my plea¬ sures ue finished, my life ıs t iinishc I, my реке ıs desti oj ed I shall never ognn thmk of mjself wilh applanation, or with patience > ' And jou mc now returned to the course of life which jou then censured with so much bitterness. Was it jou that said it î One of the worst symptoms on the present occasion, is the sophistry with which you defend youi erroi A begin¬ ning sinner offends, md accuses himself while he offends, a veteian in wrong has still some flimsy, mi=ei ible disserta¬ tion, by vvhich he proves that wrong is not wrong Another symptom vvhirh ılmost bids me despair, is the recent date of your conversion and good resolutions The evening
evening betoic wc set out from Meno nethslure, vve wept together at jour fa¬ tile! s grave Ihc monitor whom vou consente I, it seventy years of age, to vvithdiavv from his mtive villey, and to bring along through vinous climes and stiles, has not jet quitted jou If jou rchpse, while all these thıııçs aie green and fiesh beiore you, what slnll be pre¬ dicted oft he ictions ind pui suits in which jou will bc cngiged a few jears hence ? bhimc, my dear í leetwood, shame is cvci thehandmiidof vice What is the hngu ige you hive held to mc for the last three vvceU' Whit slnll I name jou ? Mean pievancitoi ' You protended to ml irm mc who vveie the persons with whom you is oci ited You mentioned all the men of youi society, you did not hint al a single woman Yon said, you fe t no such paitnlity li su Geoigc Bulli¬ sh m , 1з a more chmge of place would not inmedi itcly break oft—Do jou tlunl·, that theie is no vice in the con- 4 duct,
duct, v. Inch led you thus pitifully to jug¬ gle with your fnend ? Do you think, that such a juggler, is worthy the mme of Fleetwood, or worthy the name of man ' You say thil in attaching yourself to the mistress of lord Mandeville, you nei¬ ther seduce innocence, nor mike your¬ self responsible for the violation of so¬ lemn vows Be it so A sound mind would prompt you, not to describe your conduct by negatives, but to enquire, what it is lhat you do ? You sacrifice the serenity of an honoui ible mind to Ihe tumult of the lowest passions in mm It is as tiue of the connection you now propose, as of any of the past, that you cannot eslecm the pet son with whom you form this wirm and entire intimacy Every creature lhat lives, derives some of the colour of his being, from the ob jeete which aie continually and fimih uly around him You hive hcaid it sud, tint no man can bc a great poet, or in elevated and generous
generous writer, who is not first a good man. Goodness is the corner¬ stone of all true excellence You can¬ not be blind enough to believe, that the course to which you are returning, is consistent with goodness Many of jour most familiar thoughts will be sen¬ sual and groveling, not of the class of impulses of sense, which are purified by the most sacred charities of our natuie, but of those which lead us to associate with the debauched, and to have our fa¬ vourite resort in the haunts of profligacy You will have ι succession of mistresses, there will not bc one vestige of the re¬ fined and the ideal, what is noblest in taste, and most exquisite in moral feel¬ ing, left within you By gross and vul gar souls j ou will be admitted for re¬ spectable , the men who do honour to the species to which they btlong, with one consent will pity and will shun you Fleetwood, jou must now decide- now, and for ever. Casimir,
Casimir, my heirt bleeds for jon Think vvhat my feelings arc, the feel¬ ings of Ruffigny, to whom th» nime of Fleetwood is ι name for every thing sa ered, vvho cannot be content that one spot should stun the lustre of its white, vvho lives only m hopfes to discharge a ¿.mill pirt of his obligations to your fa¬ ther md grandfather, and whose aged heart will burst, the moment he is con- v. meed the son is fixed to disgrace the virtues of his ancestors * ------ You will recollect tint I had 1 busi ne « which mide it desuablc for me to make an excursion into Devonshire, pre viously to my return to my mtive coun try I have seized this occisión for that purpose I slnll be ıbsent a fortnight Castrini, I cannot parley with you I leive you to your reflections When I return, I shall know, whether Ruffigny is to live or die Yours, moie than his own, JFK Befoie
Before I had half read this letter, I rung the bell, and orei ied myself ι post ch u e I felt that I could suffer a thousand deaths sooner than pass this fortnight n separation, or suffer my f lend to remun a moment m doubt of my gooil icsolutions, v hen I hi 1 firmed tlicm 1 travelled all night, and ovci- toe к Ruffigny at Basingstoke I rushed into his auns, I could not utter a woid, I sobbed on his bosom VV hen I could speik, I wis endlc s in my professions of giatitude, mil in piole ι ilions of a future innocent nd honoui ible life I spoke of the ret nt delusion mto which I hid fillen, with accents of lion oi, sclf- dctestation mil despau Rufhgnj was deeply affecleel This prompt md decisive return to reison md virtue lnspu es me with the most sanguine hope sud he vol ir C1IV1-
CH VPTĽR λ I JVl Ruffionv continued vvith me seve nl months, and during the reinamdci of his life, vvhich wis ibout six j eirs, I ge¬ nerally made a visit once a j eir to the canton of Uri Ihe relation which ex¬ isted between his fimily ind mme wis of the most nitcrcsling sort "Sever in any age or counliy were two parties bound together by tics so noble I look ed m his face, md suv the features of the venerable Ambrose Fleetwood, and of my beloved falhei VI hit I rem irk ed was not the thing we denominile la rmlj -likeness, Ihc sort of cast ol cauti tenance by vvhich descents and pedi¬ grees, whether wise men or fools, whe¬ ther knaves or honest, are, like the indi¬ viduals of different nations, identified all over
over the world Τ he rcsetnbl mcc I per¬ ceive 1, though less glai ing at first sight, extended its root infinitely deeper It wis thit their hearts had been cast in the sime mould He must hive been a \ciy slight ob снег ot men, vvho ıs not aware thit two human eieiturcs, equiUy gooil, lhat love each other, and hive during long periods associated together, un ivoi 1 ibly contract a similarity of sen¬ timents, of dcmcauoui, and of physio- gnomon с 1 e" cssion Hut, beside this re cmblanceof Ruftigny to my paicnls, which some will legarei as finlastical, the cc untenjtice of the vc icrable Swiss wis a uook wheie I could trace the his¬ tory of my ancestor» It wis like the book of the records of к ng Alnsueius in the Bible, in vvhich the good deeds ind deserts of the virtuous were writ¬ ten, thit they might not perish from tbe memories of those who were indebt¬ ed to tin m, unhoiiourcd and forgotten. r a Ihe
The benefits my father propose I for mc from the counsels and intercourse of Ruffigny I extensively obtained From this period I became m litered man Tne ebriety and extravigance of youth were at an end with me The sobriety, the delicacy, the sentimental fastidious ness of my childish eHjs, revived in my bosom, ind I looked back with asto¬ nishment at my adolescence, that I could ever have departed so widely from my genuine charac er The means e tiploj ed for mj conver sion were indeed amply commcnsunte to the end proposed There was some thing so venerable in the figure ind ap реагапсе of Ruffignj, and pn ι itive and patriarchal in his minners and modes of thinking, that it was perhaps impossible to converse intimitely with bim, and yet continue whelmed in tbe mire of been tiousness But, beside his genual quali (¡cations for the office, he саше reco n e mended
men led to mc by considerations so sa¬ cı eel, is to render his expostulations, his pci suaaives, and lus alarms to my virtue ind hono ir, n resistible What in un¬ esi n¡ lel fiicnelsliip wis that which bonn I tuirethcr the mines of I leetwood and Ri Ifigny ' Could I lisle n, otherwise thiu is to the idmoni ions of ι God, to tied scourses of ι mm who had gì ne rously, in hts life time, and in the full vigoui of his age, surrendered lo my fa¬ mily a forlune almost princely, and tran¬ quilly retired to the simplicity of his an¬ cestors ? In every word he spoke I felt this circumstance tnforemg his re nirks The misery of admonition in general, is that it is so difficult for the pe son whose benefit it professes, to be convinced of the disinterestedness of his monitor. Some suspicion of selfishness, of osten¬ tation, of vanity, of false colours, and the disingenuousness of a pleader, lurks within,
within, and poisons every clause Could I suspect anv thing oí that kind, in this living Cuntís, who had come from his Sabine farm, the voluntiry obscurity to vvhich he had withdrawn his ige, pur¬ posely to fulfil the last injunctions ot ray father, and to provide for the tranquillity md virtue of the son í While I listened to his voice, my conscience whispered me, It is the voice of him, but for vvho t absolute self denial and hero о fuend ship, my father would hive been bank- l upt of comforts and fortune, and my¬ self a beggar By degrees—let me venture to say— I became assimilated, however imper¬ fectly, lo my admirable monitor I whispered to my swelling heart, " Never, no, never, will I belong to such men as these, and not mike it the first object of my solicitude to become like them Let other men talk of their heroic blood, and
md svveir they will not blot a long line of princes trøtn w hom they míj be de¬ scended I Here is my pilent of nobility, than which I deiy all the monnchs of the eirth to show ι brighttr, not sealed by the rum of provinces md empires, but by fhe purest ind most godlike con tempt of ill selfish views thit evei was exhibited In mc the rice of the I leet- vvoods slnll sunne, I will become heir to the integrity and pei soml honour of the virtuous Ruffigny Why do I write down these elevated vows, wluch, alas, I hive never re¬ deemed I I but the tnore sinceiely sub¬ scnbe to my own con leinnation My history, as I early remai ked, ıs a register ofeiıors, thefiinl lecord of my penitence and humiliation From this period however, I ceased to practise the vices of a libertine The faults I have furthei to confess aie of ι diffeient niture My heart was hence- forvvird
forward pure, my moral tastes revived in their genuine'clearness, and the errors I committed were no longer those of a proflígale. Thus far I became unequi¬ vocally a gainer by this great event of my hie.
CHAP-
CHAPTER VII. M.Y education and travels had left me » confirmed misanthropist. This is easily accounted for I had seen nothing of the world but its most unfavourable spe¬ cimens What can be less amiable, than the broad, rude, unfeeling and inso¬ lent debaucheries of a circle of young men, who have just begun to assume the privileges of man, without hiving yet leai ned his engagements and his duties ? What can be more ignoble and depraved, than the manners ofa court and a me¬ tropolis, especially of such a court and metropolis as those of the last years of Louis XV î My constitutional temper was saturnine and sensitive This cha¬ racter of mind had been much heighten¬ ed in me in my earlji solitude in Wales. f j I came
I came into the world prepared to be α severe and an unsparing judge For a time I did violence to myself, and mm gled in the vices I witnessed But this had not the effect of making ine less, but more, intolerant When I came to myself, the spots I observed upon the vesture of my innocence, made me feel a still deeper loathing for the foul and miry roads through which I had jour neyed It has often been said that there is no sharper Argus or severer judge, than a superannuated debauchee I know not hovv generally this is the cise , but it may easily be supposed that there is much truth in the maxim, where the mind was onginallv virtuous, and was endowed with a taste vivid and tho roughly alive to the difference of beauty and deformity, whether intellectual or moral I loved and inexpiessibly ho¬ noured the characters of Ruffigny and my own immediate ancestors, but this 3 only
only whetted my disapprobation of the iest of my species. They were so totally unlike every other person with whom I had familiarly associated, that they struck me like luminaries sent into the world to expose the opacity and dis¬ graces of the rest of its inhabitants. Per¬ haps that is the most incorrigible species of misanthropy, which, as Sivul expresses it, love, John and Matthew and Alex¬ ander, but hates mankind. Here then begins the moral of my tale I " lepented," but I was not " made whole." My entire future life was devoted to the expiation of five years of youthful folly and foigetfulness. Ifl had retained the simplicity and guile- lessness of my Merionethshire character, it is impossible but I should have been happy. As it was, all tlie voyage of my life "Was bound ш shallows md m miseries.
I had
I had contracted a contamination, which could «ever be extirpated. Innocence is philanthropical and confiding, " be- lievòth all things, and hopeth all things." I looked upon every thing with an eye of jealousy end incredulity. The uni¬ verse had lost to me that sunshine, which It derives from the reflection of an unspotted mind. All was dark, and dreary, and sable around mc. 1 wan¬ dered in pathless wilds, unable to arrive but at regions of barren rock and im- meisurablè sands. Innocence is a sort of magnetism, by which one good heart understands another. It is peace¬ ful when alone; and, when it comes out· into lhe world, it meets with indivi¬ dual afler individual whom it confesses for brothers. I had lost this touchstone. In solitude I was discohsolate; and, ifl mixed in the haunts of men, I under¬ stood them not ; in no one did I find a com-
companion t and, in the most populous resorts and crowded assemblies, I was perfectly and consummately alone. I returned to my solitude in Wales with an arrow in my heart What did I want J I knew not. Yet I was not happy I regarded my own life with no complacency or approbation Oh, Cader Idris ' Oh, beloved banks of the Desunny ' Glorious men once trod your shades, my father, and my father's fnendi How ean I compare with these ? Their lives were generous, and marked with the most disinterested sacrifices, but what havel done ? If my days had been spent in innocence, that were much. I passed but a short penod in the tumult of society j but In thit penod how many blots did I contract I These blots make all my history. There are but two principal sources of happinese to the man vvhcl lives m soli¬ tude·
tude : memoiy, and imagination. The recollections which offered themselves to my memory gave me no pleasure. That period of my life which was most fi aught with impressions, and which therefore made the principal stock of my memory, was hateful to me. Imagina¬ tion in the days of my youth had been the mam fountain of my delight j.he materials of my imagination had been childish impressions, eked out with the books of chıldıen, with pastoral ideas, and fairies, and migic, and processions, and pilaces But, when vve have mixed in real scenes, the matcw ils furnished by books shrink into insignificance The actual affaus into which the passions of man have obtruded themselves, ambition and vanity and shame, and love and jea¬ lousy and despair, take so much faster bold of the mind, that even when we would expatiate in worlds of fancy, these affairs
affairs will push forward, and in spite of us make a part of the landscape we de¬ lineate. I know that most men would have been happy in my place, at least much happier than I was. The transactions of my early years have nothing singular in them, except as they were made so by my tuin of mind, and the strong aud subtle passions which weie ihus called forth m me. A dissipited and riotous life at the university, and a succession of misttesses at fiist introduction into the woild, compose the histoiy of »most joung men, born to the inheritance ofa considerable fortune, and whose educa¬ tion has been conducted in a style of li¬ beial expence. Such young men aie usually found to retire contented after the effervescence of youth is over, and unreluctantly to exchange the diawing- rooms of foreign courts, and the con¬ templation of foreign manners, for the country-
country-club and the bowling green. They lay aside their sattın suits, and take up their pipes, and become as com¬ plete rustics, as if they had never wan¬ dered beyond the smoke of their own chimneys Such was not the case in my instance At no time of my life did I ever delight in such " worshipful society ," and I le¬ tained too deep an impression of the scenes of courtly refinement I had wit¬ nessed, to be capable of dwindling into a mere justice of tbe peace I sought consolation in the exercise of my beneficence! and, though I never en¬ tered the halls of the wealthy, I often penetrated into the cottages ofthe puoi and I found what I expected But, though I found the consolation I looked for, I did not find it in the degree I looked for I had recourse to the amusements of literature I formed projects,------ sometimes of investigating the progress or
or decay of national gemas ind taste, Ană sometimes of following through ils minutest rimihc ıtıons a certiin memo rable period of history, ----- pi >|cctsvv Inch led me from author to author in vv lc suc¬ cession, and took away the oppressive feelings of passiveness which frequently pursue us, when we resign ourselves to the simple and direct reading of a single work But neither beneficence nor study af¬ forded me sufficient occupation. The relieving the wints of our neighbour, i* a pursuit which can only employ ns at interval«, and can never form the leading anel regulai bustress of our lives Read¬ ing has its periods of satiety I fell sometimes, for want of in object sufh- c ently lo exercise the passions, into long fils of lingnor and depression, which «ere inconceivably weinsome Exer¬ cise and the scenes of nature no longer relieved me T he inactivity which came over
over me made it very difficult for me to summon the resolution to go out of doors in search of variety But, when that difficulty vvas conquered, v inety it¬ self afforded me no pleasure The land¬ scape was as if it had lost the pnsmitic illusion, vvhich clothes it to the sense of sight in such beautiful colours The fields were no longer green, nor the skies were blue, or at least they afford¬ ed no more pleasure to my eyes, than they would have done if the grass had been withered, and the heavens shroud¬ ed in pestilence and death. The beau¬ tiful and the bold forms of valley and mountain, which had frequently delight¬ ed me, seemed to my eye loathsome and tame and monotonous The refreshing breeze which gives new hfe even to Jhe wearied patient perishing with a fivei, played in vain upon my countenance and among Ihc locks of ny hair.
CHAP-
CinPTER Mil Imrn of the countiy, I repnred te London To be presented at court, and occisonally to mike one in the rout,* the ball, oi the/«/«!» of a hdy of q n- lity, *ere rather necessities I submitted to, thin pleasures I sought One ad¬ vantage vvhich I knew I should und in the metropolis was an opportunity of frequenting the society of men of genius I hcaid of ι club of authors, several of whose works I had read with pleasure, nnd I obtuned the favour of being ad¬ mitted in honorary member. The so¬ ciety hid assumed to itself ι Greek nime, as if by way of hint to the igno- lant and the illiterate to keep their di¬ stance I did not however find in this society th
the pleasuie I had anticipated. Un¬ doubtedly 111 the convers liions they held I heard many profound remarks, m my original conceptions, many pointed re¬ partees, many admirable turns of hu¬ mour and wit I impute it to the fasti¬ diousness of iny own temper, bred in so- litude, and disgusted with the world, that I so soon grew weary of this classic circle. I saw better men than mjselt, men of elevated rank and refined breed¬ ing, as well ω of accomplished minds, who derived from the dinners and sup¬ pers of this club, and still more from the separate society and acquaintance of its members, an enjoyment upon which they set a high value. As far as my obser¬ vation of the world extended, it was al¬ ways the more valuable individuals in the class of men of quality and fortune, it was such as possessed the most gene¬ rous minds and the most comprehensive views, vv ho delighted most in the inter¬ course
course of men of literature Tbey were the fools, the envious and the self¬ ish, vvho shunned such intimates, be¬ ciuse they could not bear to be out¬ done by persons poorer than themselves, and beciuse they felt the terrifying ap¬ prehension of being reduced Ly them into ciphers I saw also contrary to the received opinion, that the men of real genius, and vvho were genuine orna¬ ments of the republic of letters, were al- wijs men of liberal tempers, of a certain nobility and disinterestedness of senti¬ ment, and anxious for the promotion of individual and genenl advantige, how. ever they might sometimes be involved in petty and degrading altercations and disputes On the other hand I must do mjself the justice to say, that I discovered many real blemishes ind erron in these con versations The literary men w hose ac¬ quaintance I could boast, vveie frequently as
as jealous of then fame and supenoi ity, as the opulent men, their neighbours, were of the preservation and improve¬ ment of their estates. This indeed is but natnral : every man, vvho is in any way distinguished from the herd of his species, will of course set no small value upon that thing, whatever it is, to which he is indebted for ins distinction. No one who has tasted of honoui, would wilhngly bc thrust out among the ig¬ noble vulgar The only thmg which can defend α mm u»ainst this pitiful jeilousy and diseased vigilance, i» a ge¬ nerous confidence in lus own worth, leaching lum tint it will find ils pi ice without any dishonest and clandestine exertion on his pirt The individual who is continually blowing the fiie of his own brilliancy, vvho asserts and de¬ nies, is direct or artificial, senous 01 jo¬ cose, not attending to the inspirations of truth and simplicity of heart, but as he thinks
thinks miy best conti ibute to idv ance lus reputition, if he can at all bc ac 1 nowledged foi ι pleasant companion ind associate, is so at least with ι very pow ei fui di iw-back Such men form to themselves in irt of conversilion I y which they miy best maintim the lank in uitelleet they hive icqinred They think little of tl с clicitin,r truth, or a conformity to tho just laws of equi! so¬ ciety, but hive tiained themselves to a tuck, either by an irtful nterruption, ι brutal ìclort, a pompous, full sounding md well pronounced censuro, or an in¬ geniously supported c\lubition of sarcis- tic mockciy, to crush in the outset the veiy ipp umceof uvilsl ip, md to turn the admintion of bystanders entnely uj on themselves This is iltogether a very pitiful po¬ licy True literary reputation does not depend upon a min s muntuning a shining figure, m the conversations m vvhich
which he mixes If au individual has no nobler ambition than to be the chairmin of lus own club why docs le commit his thoughts to paper, 01 send them through the medium of the pres info the world ' 1 lie moment he Ins done this, he ought to consider hunself as having pronounced his disdain ofthe fugitive character of a conversation wit or a conversation bully I am inclined to believe that no one ever uniformly maintained, in various companies, the first phce in subtlety and wit, vvho had not cultivated this chiracler with dis honest art, and admitted many unmanly and disingenuous subterfuges into tbe plan by wluch he pursued it If so, the shining man of a company is to be pı t down in the lowest class of persons of intellect If men entitled to a higher place have too often submitted to this, it is that they have inflicted on themselves a voluntary degndation -»— One excep tion
tion »nly can I devise to this disingenu¬ ousness, which is, wheie a man has the absolute cacoethes hqtiendt*, and where his thoughts are so brilliant and elevated, that all other men will be eager to listen to them. Ί he man of genius who has dehveied the fruit of Ins meditations and invention to the public, has nothing naturally to do with this inglorious struggle. He convcises lhat he miy mfoim and be in¬ formed He wishes to study the hu¬ morns, the manners, and Ihe opinions of mankind lie is not unwilling to take his shuc m convu sition, because he h is nothing to conceal, and because he would coiitnbutc, is fai ıs with modesty and propnety he с ip, lo the amusement and insti uction of others But his fa¬ vourite place is tint of a spectator. He is more eager to add to his own stock of vol. п. o obseıvı-
observation and knowledge, than to that of his neighbours This is natural and just since he knows better his own wants, lhan he can know the wants of any other man, and 6ince he is more sure ofthe uses that will be made, ofthe ac¬ quisitions he shall himself obtain Among the literary men I saw in this club, or with whom I in some way be¬ came acquainted in consequence of be¬ ing a member of it, I found one or two exceptions such as I have last described, but the rest were stimulated by the love of praise in society, as much as they had been in their writings, and the traps they laid for applause were no less gross and palpable, than those emploj ed by a favourite actor, or the author ofa modei n comedy Even such members of the club as did not sacrifice all truth and justice at the shrine of a sordid vanity, had the habit, as I heard it once expressed by a cap tious
tious visitor at his return from one of their meetings, of speaking as if they talked out of a book I admit that this is a fastidious objection He vvho spends his life among books, must be expected to contract something ofthe manner of his constant companions He who would disentangle a knotty point, 01 elucidate a grave question of taste, morals or poli¬ tics, must discourse to some degree in the way of dissertation, or he would dis¬ course in vain , and, if, like a disserta¬ tion for popular readers, he takes care to relieve his stj le with something pointed md epigrammatic, paints his thoughts as he goes on, to the imagination of his hearers, interrupts himself gracefully, and is on his guai d not to say a word too muth, he may be illowed to have played his part coinmendably If by talking as out of a book, is meant no more, than that a man speaks correctly, with well chosen words, in a perspicu- G 2 OUS
ous style, anel with phrases neatly turn. ed, the objection is eminently unrc ¡son¬ able Such ts the true and sound view of the subject, but it was in vam to aigue the point, so I was made, and so I found myself affected I was the spoiled child of the grcit parent, Nature I delighted only in the bold and the fiee. in what was at one End the sime time beautiful and lawless. What aspired to plcisc mc must be as wild as the artless wai blings of the clio- nstcis ofthe woods. Its giaccs must bo unexpected, and weie endeared so much themoietomeasthcy showed themselves m the midst of megül irity What spoke to my heart must bc α full, mellow and protrictcd note, or ι bewitching vibration of sound, vvhich seemed to come on pur¬ pose to reward me foi listening or a time, to what gave no express promise of so pure a delight. But, h id it been otherwise, an attcn- 3 chnco
d ince once a week, during the se ison, at ι club of authois, and Ihc occisional so¬ ciety of its members in the intcivals, woulel have afforded but slendci mate¬ uals for hipfimpss It might have an¬ sweied to the confections which amuse the palate at the end of a feast, but it could never appease the appetite of htm, vvho feels an uneasy and aching void withm, and is in hot chase for the boon of content.
CHAP-
CHAPTER IX Among the members of our club who were not themselves authors, there were a few who were among the most distin¬ guished ornaments of the English se¬ nate. The intercourse of these men was particularly delightful to me Their minners were more urbane, attentive, flattering and uniform, than those of the professional authors They were gentle¬ men bj birth and by education, md, as lhey hid not the same goad u-ging them along in the pursuit of praise as those who embraced liteiature as a pro¬ fession, then passions, at least is seen within these walls, were less restless, their views more enlarged, and their souls possessed of more calm and repose —— In this comp ınson, be it remembered, I speak.
speak only of the majority of the authors who were members of this club Among them I knew some illustrious excep¬ tions , and I should think myself highly censuriblc in deciding from those I saw, upon the merits of others whom I never knew The pleasure however I felt in the in¬ tercourse of such of our members as were senators, and tbe admiration with vvhich I was impressed of their manners and temper, inspired me with the desire of becoming myself a representative in the Engl sb pailiiment It will readily be perceived, how ill my temper «as suited to the ofhce of courting suffrages anti solicit) )g vote» In this one inst mee I conquered my te »| er I prom sed my¬ self that it should be but for once I binned mjselt for being so unbending lo tbe m muers of tlie woild I sivv that the J isk I was undei t kmg would afford me a copious opportuniiy ot studying the humours
humours and predilections of the mid¬ dling and lower classes of the commu¬ nity why should I quit the stage of human life without having obtained such an opportunity ? I made myself popular, md I ïesolved to do so I give entci- famments, and I delivered speeches I laughed at the rude jokes of hmdicrafts- men, and I cracked my jokes in return I smoked my pipe, and toasted Church and King, and the wooden walls of old England I saw that in complying with the plain, coarse manners of my consti¬ tuents, I ran no such risk, as I hid done in my former compliances with the man¬ ners of the Oxonians md the Parisians, antl, instead of despising myselffor whit I did, I esteemed myself the more, in proportion is I found that I possessed one faculty which I had not before sus¬ pected, andas I was able thus stoically to adapt myself lo a certain object, and pur¬ sue it to the end I was elected by a con-
considerable majority of votes, and those vvho had supported me with their suf¬ frages, or vvho had vociferated and huz¬ zaed in my behalf, were satisfied that lhey had guncd a more important cause, thin could have been secured by the de- livciancc of an oppressed countiy, or the emancipation of one quartet ofthe world. I entered with awe the walls of the Bulish pailiiment. I recollected the ll- lustuous men of past ages vvho Ind figured upon that scene I lecollected the glorious struggles of our ancestors wluch had Iheie been made, and by means of which gieater puvilcges and li¬ berties had been secured to the people of England, than any of the neighbouring countries could boast I looked round with complacence upon the accomplish¬ ed charactei s vvho now filled some of tlie most conspicuous seats on those benches. I eagerly courted the acquaintance of g 5 these.
these leaders. I was desirous to under¬ atand their view», and enter into their projects. There is always something more in¬ teresting, to a young and uncorrupted mind, in the cause of opposition, than in the cause of administration. The to- pics on which they have to expatiate, are of a more animated and liberal cast: rhetoric ever finds a more congenial and less thorny field, in the office of attack, than in that of defence. Liberty is the theme of their declamation ; and their bosoms beat with the thought, lhat they are pleading the cause of the great mass of their countrymen, vvho are denied the advantage of being able to plead for themselves. Beside which, modern go¬ vernments always must, or at least al¬ ways do, have recourse to various modes of proceeding, not exactly in accord with pure notions of integrity ¡ a statesman in placo cannot, but in a very limited sense
sense of the word, be an honest man. I therefore enlisted myself in the ranks of opposition. But, in proportion aa I became more familiarly acquainted with the maxims and views of opposition, I felt my satis¬ faction in them diminished. I saw that their aim was to thrust the ministers in possession out of office, that they might take their places I became aware that they objected to many things, not be¬ cause they were had, but because their defects, real or apparent, afforded plausible topics of declamation I per¬ ceived that the spirit of censuring the measures of government grew too mucb into a habit, and was directed too much by the intention of bringing the imme¬ diate conductois of public afiairs into discredit and contempt I acquitted the most considerable of the leaders- from the consciousness of pursuing so pitiful a plan, men of generous minds. will
will always dwell upon that view of the business in which they are engaged, which is most congenial to their natural tempers But, beside every other d s advantage attending them in this situa* tion, persons of merit, engaged in a party, must accommodate themselves to the views of the dullest and meinest of their adherents, to their impatience^ their perverseness, and their acrimony, they must employ a thousand arts to soothe their prejudices, and keep them in temper, and as, in every party that ever existed, the fools greatly outnumber lhe men of understanding, so in matters ot party it will infilhbly happen, that the honourable and the sage must, on a thou sand occasions, be made the tools and dupes of the vilest of the herd A par¬ liamentary leader scarcely appeared to mc the same man in a political consulta tion, that he had done in a literary club In his club he was free, ingenuous and gi}".
gay; in his political chaiaeter he was vigilant and uneasy, calculating witb restless anxiety upon appearances and re¬ sults, and still burning with ever new disappointments. I saw that the public character of England, as it exists in the best pages of our histoiy, was gone I perceived that we were grown a commercial and arith¬ metics nation ; and that, as we extend¬ ed the superficies of our empire, we lost its moral sinews antl its strength. The aeldeil numbers vvhich havebeen engrafted upon both houses of parliament have de- slrojed the health and independence of its legislature, the weallh of either In¬ dia has been poured upon us, to smo¬ ther that free spirit which can never be preserved but in a moderate fortune, contractors, directors and upstarts, men fattened on the vrtals of their fellow-ci- tizens, have taken the place which was once filled by the Wentvvorths, the Sei¬ dens,
dens, and the Hydes. By the mere pro¬ ject, the most detestable and fatal that ever was devised, of England borrowing of the individuals who constitute Eng¬ land, and accumulating what is called a national debt, she bas mortgaged ber sons to an interminable slavery. I did not however immediately see things in this point of view. I regarded my entrance into the station of an English senator, as a memorable epoch m my life. I said, I have been too long a mere spectator of the scene of exis¬ tence, it is owing to this, that I have felt such a constant corroding and dissa¬ tisfaction , I will now take au active part. In the measures which are adopted I will have a voice ; I will contribute by my advice to their improvement or their overthrow ; I will studv the principles of legislation, I will detect bad laws, and procure their abrogation , I will bung forward such regulations as the present state
etate of manners and policy demands. I will from time to time urge and un¬ fold m a greater or a smaller circle, aa occasion may offer, such maxims, as may insensibly tend to the correction and elevation of the character of my coun¬ try I know not whether it was owing to nny radical vice in my disposition, but I did not long persist in these gallant re. solutions The difficulties vveie much greater, than at a distance I had ima¬ gined The contrast which gradually obtruded upon me, between England as I found her in the volumes of hei history, md Tnglanil as she now wis, and had insensibly beco ne for moie than a hun¬ dred years, damped the ardour of m/ enthusiasm Once or twice indeed I felt that ani¬ mation w hich raised my soul to such a pitch, that I was conscious I had nothing left,
lefl, for lhe moment, to desire Some measures in which I had a part, were of immediate importance to the welfare of thousands Some struggles in which I joined were arduous j some victories, in which I was one among the conquerors, carried transport to my heai t I wit¬ nessed situations like that which Burke describes upon the repeil of the Ameri¬ can Stamp Act, " When at length, afler the suitors most interested respecting the issue, had wnted with a trembling and anxious expectation, ilnost toa winters return of light, the doors of the house were thrown opefi and shewed them Ihe figure of then deliverer in the moment of his well earned triumph, when they jumped upon bim like children on a long absent father, and clung about him as captives about their redeemer But these occasions were of rare occurrence, we soon fell back into the shop keeping and
and traffic-trained character I deplored t and even to these triumphs themselves, so beautiful to the eye, it was often found that tieaehery, calculation and cabal had contributed their polluted aid.
CHAP-
CHAPTER X. Displeased with the phenomena which I observed in the seat of em¬ pire, and satiated with the beauties of my paternal estate, I resolved once more to pass over to the continent, and to seek in tbe spectacle of different coun¬ tries, and the investigation of dissimilar manners, relief from the ennui which de¬ voured me This expedient seemed at first to an¬ swer my purpose Novelty and change have a sovereign povver over the human mmd. But the cfficicy of Ihis remedy did not last long Wheiever 1 v,ent, I car¬ ried a secret uneasiness along with me When I left Pans for Vienna, or Vienna for Madrid, 1 joui neyed a solitaiy indi¬ vidual
viduil along the tedious road, and, when I entered my inn, the same soli¬ tude and uncomfortable sensation en¬ tered along with me I turned aside to examine remarkable objects the fame of which had reached me, I visited some celebrated convent of monks, I took the freedom to intro¬ duce myself to some elaborate collector of curiosities, to some statesman or get neral retired from the busy scene, to some philosopher or poet whose lucubra» tions had delighted the world I waj generally fortunate enough to make my visit agreeable to the host I selected, I flattered his tastes , I expressed, in the honest Imauage of truth and feeling, the sense I entertained of his chiracter and merits This sort of avocation afforded me a temporary pleasure, but it often left me in a state of more punful sensa¬ tion than it found mc, and impressed upon me the melancholy conviction of the
the unsubstantial nature of all human enjoyments. Sometimes I joined company vvith a fellow-traveller, whom chance directed to the same point, or whom I was able, by some allurement of pleasure or ad¬ vantage, to prevail upon to pursue my route. In some cases I was disappoint¬ ed in my companion, found him totally different from what on a slight observa¬ tion I had conceived him to be, and either separated from him before half our journey was completed, or cursed a hundred times the obligation I had con¬ tracted, which, perhaps for twenty days successively, rendered me the slave of a frigid civility. At other times, it may be, the conversation of my fellow-traveller afforded me an unfeigned delight ; and Ihen I bitterly regretted the fugitive na¬ ture of our intercourse. The sensation I felt was such as has been experienced by passengers in a stage-coach, who have
have just had time to contract a liking for each other, who have whispered to themselves, hovv agreeable, hovv anima¬ ted, how well informed or hovv facetious is this stringer, vvho hive met m a domestic way at breakfast at dinner and at supper, who hive wished each other Good nigl t at the close of the day, and met with silutitions in the morning, when suddenly (he vehicle whirls tlicm into some vast city, the step of the car¬ riage is let dow n, one pisses one vv iy md another another, one calls for ι chaise to convey h m up the countiy, ind anothei hastens with his baggige to the port he ng engigcd in some distant vojage l' requcntly I soj mrned for two, three or fom months in some polite or learned residence and, when I had just had time to fundíanse myself with its most valuable inhabitants, was impelled to call to mind, that this was not my home, and that
that it was time to withdraw. Why should I stay í The language, the man¬ ners and the scene Were not native to me ; and it was nothing but the neces¬ sity of departing that made me regret a place, which, if I had been compelled to take up my abode in it, would speed¬ ily have lost its illusion.
CHAP-
CHIPTER XI. I saw that I was alone, and I desired to have a friend. Friends in the ordinary sense of the word, and that by no meatis я contemptible sense, I had many. friends who found pleasure in my con¬ versation, who were convinced of the in¬ tegrity of my principles of conduct, and who would have trusted me in the most importmt concerns But what sort of a friend is it, whose kindness shall produce a conviction in my mind, that I do not stand alone in the world i This must be a friend, who is to me as another self, who joys in all my joys, and grieves in all my sorrows, not with a joy or grief that looks like compliment, not with a sympathy that changes into smiles when I am no longer present, though my head con- i tinues
tinuesbentto the earth with anguish. ------ I do not condemn the man, upon whom a wound through my vitals acts but as a scratch j I know that his feelings are na¬ tural; I admit hiin for just, honest and humane, я valuable member of society. Bulheis not the brotherof my heart. I will not suffer myself to be beguiled, and to fall into so wretched an error, as to mistake tbe friendship of good-humour or even of esteem, for the friendship which can best console a man in cala¬ mity and wretchedness, whether of mind or external circumstances. I walk among lhese men as in an agreeable promenade ; I speak to one and another, and am cheered witb the sight of their honest countenances; but they are nothing to me ·, I knovv that, when death removes me from the scene for ever, their counte¬ nances will the next day be neither less honest nor less cheerful. Friendship, in the sense in which 1 felt the want of it,
ït, has been truly said to be a sentiment that can grasp but one individual m its' embrace. The person vvho entertains this sentiment must see in bis friend a creature of a species by himself, must respect and be attached to him above all the world, and be deeply convinced that the loss of him would be a calamity, which nothing earthly cöultl repair By long habit he must have made his friend a part of himself, must be mcapab'e of any pleisure in public, m leading, ui trivelling, of which he does not make his friend, at least in idea, a partaker, or of passing a day or an hour, in the conceptions of which Ihe thought of hi» fuend does not mingle itselt , Hovv many disappointments did I sustain in the search after ι friend * Hovv often this 11 ensure ippeared as it were within my grasp, md then glided away from my eager embrace ! 1 he desire to possess it, was one of the earliest passions VOL. II. Η of
of my tîfé, and, though eternally baf¬ fled, perpetually returned to the assault. I met with men, who seemed willing to bestow their friendship upon me ; but their temper, their manners and their liabits were so discordant from mine, lhat it was impossible the flame should be lighted in my breast. I met vvith men, to whom I could willingly have sworn «n eternal partnership of soul ; but they thought of me with no corresponding sentiment, they were engaged in other pursuits, they were occupied wilh other views, and had not leisure to distinguish and to love me. Some one perhaps will ask me, Why «re qualities of tbis nature necessary in a friend ? If I die, why should I wish my friend to bear about him a heart transfixed with anguish for my loss î Is not this wish miserably ungenerous and selfish î —God knows, in that sense I do not entertain the wish : I wish my friend 4 to
fo possess eveiy possible enjoyment, and to be exempted from every human suf¬ fering But let us consider the meaning of this I require that my friend should be poignantly affected by my death, as I require that he should be affected if I am calumniated, shipwrecked, imprison¬ ed, robbed of my competence or in/ peace Not that I have any pleasure in his distress, simply considered, but thiit I know (bat this is the very heart and essence of fin açdeııt friendship I can¬ not be silly eppugh to believe thjit the ipan wl\o Ipoks on, at my calamitj, or qiy death, wilhout anj stiikuiginterruption of his tranquillity, his a vehcinent affec¬ tion for me He njiy be considerate andkujd, )ie inay watch by qjy be¬ side vvith an enlightened md active be¬ nevolence, l¡e miy evcij be ¡>;e/i|oijs to procuie every jljcviatjpn f,f my pjaips, and every aid for restqung me to ejyqy- njept apd Ь.ед1ф but this is not love h 2 No,
No, if he can close my ejcs, ind then return with a free ind unembirrassed ininel to his ordinary business and avoca¬ tions, this is not love I knovv not hovv other men are consti¬ tuted , but something of this sort seem¬ ed essential to my hippmess. It is not wonderful perhaps, that I, who hal been so circumstanced from my infancy, as to accustom me to apprehend every discord to my feelings and tastes as mortal to the serenity of my mind, should have hid so impatient a thirst for friendship The principle of the sentiment miy be ex¬ plained mechanically, and is perhaps, to a considerable degree, mechanical in its operation. The circumstances, whether allied to pleasure or pain, in which I am placed, strike upon my mind, and pro¬ duce a given sensation. I do not wish to stand alone, but to consider myself as part only of a whole. If that which pro¬ duces sensation in me, produces sensa¬ tion
tion no where else, I am substantially alone If the lash inflicted on me, will, being inflicted on mother, be attended with ι similar effect, I then know that there is a being of the sime species or genus with myself Still wc are, each of us, substantive and independent But, if there is ι being who feels the blow un¬ der which I flinch, in whom my sensj- ! ons aie by a kind of necessity echoed antl repeited, that being is ι put of my¬ self Every reasoning and sensitive crei¬ ture seems intuitively to requ re, to his perfectly just and propei state, this sort of sympathy It is inconceivable how great an alleviation is in this wiy ifforded, how it mitigates the igony of every kind of distress It is inconceivable in how deep and insurmountible a solitude that creatine is involved, vvho looks every where around for sympathy, but looks in vain Society, an ictive and a crowded scene, is the furthest in the world from relieving
relieving the sensation of this solitude. The more moving and variegated is the assembly in vvhich I am present, the mote full is itiy cbnvidtibn that I am alone. I should find its much consola¬ tion and reat among what the satirist calls, the vitrified inhabitants of the planet Mercury, as here. The operation, as I have said, is in one view of it mechanical ; in another it is purely intellectual and moral. To tin happiness of «verj» htitìflm Cťeatuife, lit leVst lh á civilised state, It I» perhaps tie- cfeSrfy that be should esteem himself, that h« tfteuld regard himfelf ás ай ob¬ ject df eofnptticeflry intl honour. Btrt ifi ffiiï, tt *ert m emy eth» spedes of emi, 'h ito»!* sueıtı ulmast 'ш^&йЛ, ftr itn^iSiietote it feaf belieterj if there #e m etAer persone irt the wötTd of the a»*« mi tts MMsetf. Нададе? watthy ¡Ш vMtable ire «¡ay еяйеа«иг to coii- sMerhiitSBlf, his persuasion will beat- tended
tended with little conhdenoe and soh- ditj, if it does not find support m tho judgments of other men The martjr, or the champion of popular pretension», cheerfully cncounteis the terrors of a public eiccut on, provided the theatre on which he is to die is filled with his approvers And, in this respect, the strength of attachment and approbation in a few, or in one, will sometimes com¬ pensile the less conspicuous compla¬ cence of thousands I remember to huve heard a very v am man say, "I have a hundred friends, any one of whom ■Would wilhngly die, if it were required for my preservation oi welfare " no won¬ der that such a man should be conti¬ nuali) buoyed up with high spirits, and enjoy the most enviable sensations. Alavjvhat this man was able to per¬ suade himself he possessed in so wild an exubennce, I sought for through life, and found in no single instance! ■ Thus
Thus I spent more than twenty years of my life, continually in search of con¬ tentment, which as invariably eluded my pursti't My disposition was ilwiys sa¬ turnine I wanted something, 1 knew not whit I sought it in solitude and m crowds, m travel and at home, m ambi¬ tion and in independence My idets moved slow, I was prone to ennui I vv indereel among mountains and rivcis, through vcidant pluns, and ovei im¬ mense precipices, but naturo had no beauties I plunged into the society of the rich, the gıy, the witty and the elo¬ quent, but I sighed, disquisition did not rouse me toanimition, 1 ıtıghtcı wis dc ith to ny fl ıggıng spirits Ihis elise isc, winch fflictcd me at lir-t but in a modei ile dcetci, grew upon mc peipetually from ycir to yen As I idnnced in life, mv ρ ospects be¬ came less gilded w tth the sunshme of hoj с , and, as the illusion of the scenes of
of which I wis successively a spcctatoi wore out, I felt with deeper dejection that I was alone in the woild It will readily he supposed, thit in these twenty years of my life I met with míny idvcntures, and thit, if I were so inclined, I might, instead of con¬ fining myself as I hive done to gene- i ils, haie related a variety of minute cucumstmces, sometimes cilculated to uucise the fincy, met sometimes to agi¬ tate the sympithelic mtl generous feel¬ ings of eveiy rei 1er I might hive de¬ scribed mıny pleısıng mel minv pıthe- tic incidents in Mcnonclhsl tie Imtght hive enl i ge 1 upon m club of uithors, and thu , n place of mill c; my ίο - lumesi mn il tile Invc convened them into ι vehicle for pci son il sitne I in ^bl Invc expanded Ihe story of mv ¡ olitici! life ml presented lhe reader with imny anecdotes of cele¬ bi itcd dimeters, tint tie world his h 5 little
little dreamed of: I might have described the casualties of my travels, and the heart-breaking delusions and disap|k>lnt- (fients of a pretended friendship. It is by bo means for want of materials, that I have touched with so light a band upon this large portion of my life. But I wil¬ lingly sacrifice these topics. I hasten to the events, Which have pressed with so terrible a weight on my heart, and have formed my principal motive to become mj^ovvn historian.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XII I was now near forty five years of age Travelling on some factitious occasion ne ir the lakes of Westmorland and Cum- bcrlm I, and listening, is my custom was, after vv Inlever wis extraordinary and in¬ teresting (I listened, as lhe reader has by this time perceived with vain hope, vv hit was called exti lord nary had scirce¬ ly thepowcr to excite my attention, what fntciested others moved not me), ..... I was told of ι gcmlcmm, by nime Mac¬ neil that lnl icsided much m foreign countries, and was supposed particularly to have possessed the confidence of the celebrated Jean Jacques Rousseau, who had been some years an inhabitant of the banks of the Windermere He had a family of daughters, to the form¬ ing
ing whose minners and mind he and his wife had devoted themselves, so th it this man who had travelled so much, and whose understanding wis so highly cultivated ind refined, seemed to have no further business remaining in life, ex¬ cept to provide the children, the off spring of his mai mge, with the motives and means of a virtuous and happy ex is tence The history of his wife was somewlnt uncommon She had been born on English ground, but he met with her in the Ecclesiastical Territory in Italy. She had eloped to her present consort, not from her parents, but from aman calling himself her husband This man, in Italian by birth, had been her instructor in music, he was old, deformed, avari¬ cious and profligate The father of the lidy had considered his exterior is a suf¬ ficient security, against any injury to which his daughter might be exposed, .and,
and, pleased with his visitor's conversa¬ tion and professional talents, had vv ith¬ out sciuple invited him to spend month after month under his roof This repul¬ sive baboon however, soon conceived the plui of robbing his bencfactorof his only chila , and he succeeded in the attempt. He talked the language of love to a blooming and inexperienced girl, to whom that language had never before been addiessed, his voice was harmony, and his mannei s specious, gentle and in¬ sinuating. He won her regard, and, before she had completed hei sixteenth j car, prevailed on her to desert her pa¬ ternal roof. No sooner had he convejed her to his native countrj, than he threw oft" the mask toward her. Her fortune was entirely dependent on her father, except a small portion, which was dis¬ puted with the worthy bridegroom in the English courts, and which he soon found
found reason lo believe he should never obtain. He made her a prisoner in a dismantled and unvvholsomc castle which he had inherited from his father, and set over her his sister, as ugly as himself, but who, having obtained no advantages either from education or example, was in a singular degree vulgar, insolent and brutal. In this situation she lived when, about twelve months after the period in which «he left her father's house, mr. Macneil On bis travels heard something of her story, and, like a true knight-erranl, Was prompted to besiege her castle. He had seen her twice under her father's roof; he had lamented, like every other friend of the family, the vile artifices by which she had been trepanned ; and, being now informed that she was shut up as a prisoner, and kc^t from the sight of every 'human being, except her betrayer, and tbe hag, bis sister, be determined to offer
offer her deliverance. By means of a bribe to one of the servants, he con¬ trived to have a letter conveyed tb her hands. The young lady had had teisuľe to repent of ber rashness, ami to recol¬ lect with infinite remorse the endear¬ ments of her natal roof. To receive a line from her countryman, a gentleman whom she remembered to have seen at her father's table, afforded her inde- scribable pleasure. She knew that the character of mr. Macneil had always been spoken of as the model of in¬ tegrity and hono ir. In her perilous si¬ tuation which she regarded with infinite loathing, she judged that Some nek was mdispensible. She vvrole an answer, enquiring respecting her father, mother she had none in existence. Being in¬ formed that he still lived, but was incon¬ solable for her loss, she became not less earnest than her correspondent, that he should provide the means of her escape. She
She trembled to think whether her fathei would receive her, sometimes she repre. sented hım to herself as a stern judge, refusing her ıntre ıtıes, at others as the victim of offended love, reproaching her with eyes of deith and despair she de¬ sired however to cast heiself at his fee t, though thit moment were to bc her last Mr. Macneil concerted every thing with the utmost delicacy and honour He provided an itabın, ι womm of cha¬ racter and of some rink, to be the com¬ panion of his polegee in her journcv, he himself obfci ved the strictest cere¬ mony lovvärd them, and attended them no more than was necessiry for safety and mdispensible accommodition, md he had the sitisfaetion to dehvci this in¬ teresting female into the hinds of hei aged parent The leconcihation was easily mide, and was scarcely more affecting to the pii tics
parties themselves, than to the person who had been the happy means of then restoration to each olhcr. Mr. Mac¬ neil became (he declined lover of the lady he had rescued from slavci y Iler marrnge with her Italian seducer was speedily dissolved, and, fortunately, no child hid been the issue of this ill- omened connection. Still however there vvn-, a difnculfy. The beautiful peni¬ tent dwelt, with all the bitterness of ré¬ moise, upon her youthful offence, and a thousand times protested that, as she had rendeied herself unworthy, sho would never consent to become the wife of an honomable man. Beside which, she continual', lecollected with agony the cuci mannerin which she had fled from nn indulte it falhcr, and almost broken lus hent, and vowed that, so long is he lived, she would never again quit the paternal roof. These objec¬ tions, the impassioned dictates ofa vvell- cointitiited
constituted mme), dwelling with exqui- siteness upon an offence so early com¬ mitted, ahd so exemplanly atoned, were at length got over ; and, after eighteen months of stiuggle and sorrow, she gave her hand in second and happy marriage to the man of her father's choice, aa well as of her own, I know not whether this story will be found so striking in the repetition, аз it was to me when I first heard it. But I felt an uncommon desire to visit the fa¬ mily which I heard thus described. My desire was increased by a conversation respecting the character of mrs. Macneil, between Iwo ladies, within the walls of one of the most elegant mansionson lhe lakes, at which I happened to be pre¬ sent. One of ıem was her opponent, and the other her admirer. The latter spoke, in terms ofthe highest applause, of the qualifications and accomplishments of tbe young ladies, her daughters. This
This drew from the gentlewoman of severer temper a pathetic lamentation over their unfjrtuate situation. No woman, she said, who respected her own character, could afford them coalite- nance -, no man vvho was not dead to all the decencies of human life, could offer them his hand in marriage. They were devoted to misery and dishonour by the very circumstance of their birth ; and she held tho father no less culpable in ltiarryingawoman under mrs. Macneil'i unfortunate predicament, and making her the mother of his children, than if lie had married a person, on whom was entailed the most loathsome hereditary disarjse. What could bc thought, as a matron, of a girl who at sixteen had run away with an Italian fidler ? How many clandestine provocatives to depravity must she have listened to from him, be¬ fore she coUlcl have been prevailed Upon to take so outrageous a step ? When he bad
had conveyed hcı into Itiiy, he intro¬ duced her to his own friends, and no doubt her pnncipal issocnles foi Iwo oi tbtiejean had been shaıpeıs and prosti¬ tutes The consequence w is, thit she impudently elo[ eel with a stringer from the husbind of her choice, is she h id before eloped fium hci misguided filhei Pooı, vvietchcd inba Micneils, seiled to perdition * Л\ hat lesrons cot Id they lee nc fiom s ich i\ mother, bul lessons of debauchery ' So impuro a mind could not instil into them sentiments of virtue, if she would, and would not, if she could She ìemembeie 1, the gentlewo¬ man added, to have seen the young la¬ dies at Kendal Ihcare, they vveie fine guls , the more vv as the pity ' The putiaan of mrs Macneil put no Jess warmth into her ìeplj, th in her ad¬ vers iry haclyven to hci invective. She knew little of the lady herself, in conse¬ quence of the rules of society by vvhich she
She was excluded from the visiting circles of the neighbourhood Once however she had chanced tobe her fellow trivcller m a publie vehicle from York to Lon¬ don md she hid heird much more of hei than she had then had an oppor'u miy to observe Ггот every thing si e h id seen, ind every thing ehe could col¬ lect she wis persuaded it was impossible for my thing in the form of a woman, to exceed the piesent correctness of mrs Micneil s conversation and conduct Why should it be supposed th it in error committed before the age of sixteen, could never be atoned' How much wis ι young person, at so immaturo an ige, exposed to the stiatigems and wiles of an experienced seducer' A beltei judge of morals than si e could pretend to be, had pronounced that deep and exempl iry penitence for an unwary fault, was a fuller security for rectitude, thin inno-
innocence itself*. Mrs. Macneil, her advocate added, had been distinguished when a child, for the strength ofher judgment and the delicacy of her senti¬ ments ; once she had fallen ; but sh« had speedily recovered ; and malice it¬ self could not discover a blemish in her since that period. Might she not, if her present character was such as it was re¬ presented, be a more perfect monitor for the yopng, in proportion as sbe under¬ stood inore of the evils against vvhich she warned tlicm, and had felt the calamity ? The ludy vvho maintained this side of the argument said, that she did not pre¬ tend to dispute the propriety of the rule, by which mn. .Macneil was given up almost exclusively to the spciety of tbe other spx, but ¿ideied, that a humane judge would often drop a tear of pity, over the severity of the sentence he was com-
compelled to pronounce Why, though mrs Macneil could nover atone to Ihe rules of established decorum, should we refuse to believe, th it she had itoned to God, and to the principles of reclitude } Vt hy, though she was foibidden the so¬ ciety of hei sex, should the same prohi¬ bition be extended to her daughters > Indeed roost of the ladies in the neigh¬ bourhood of the lakes, had felt the pro¬ priety of the distinction, and had been eiger to afford them every countenance in their povver She understood from the most undoubted a thority, that they were brought up wilh a refinement and rigidness of sentiment, in every point wilh which modesty was concerned, be¬ yond whit was furnished by any other living example of female education Their father was the most faultless and unexceptionable in his habits, of any gentleman in ill the northern counties, and, if propriety of character m young women
women could bc secured by the diligence, discernment and rectitude of both their parents, there were no persons of then age who bid fairer to be an ornament to their sex than the miss Macneils. All that I heard of mi Macneil and lus familj, inspired in me the wish not to quit Wcstmoi linci, till I had seen them The fallici of the family was re¬ presented ns eHliemely attached to hia wife; ond, as liei unfoituintc historj rendered her liable to little slights and affiants, he shiunk írom all intcicotusc with his provincii! neighbours Πι would not accept any privilege from ihc males of a house, which might only c ervc to remind lum of the sevei e law dealt out to the pirtner of lus life lie felt too intimately for her honoui, hci 'pie 1- sures and her pauis, to bc capable of being peisuaded of the justice of lhe tieatment she received In truth, as I understood fiom the most exact mfor- % mation,
mation, lt wis no great sacrifice he made, in giving up the conversation of his rural neighbours He had resources enough in himself and the inmates of his own! roof They were far the most polished and elegint family, if politeness consists in intellectual refinement, in the circuit ofthe lakes He had accumulated from the living society of men of genius, the mitenals and the principles of thinking The joung ladies excelled in the arts of music md design The mother had 1 ud deir tor her progress in the formei of these but hei progress was tonspi cuous They frequently m ide little con¬ certs under their own roof They read together, an 1 compired the impressions they received from, and the judgments thty formed upon, whit they lead They spent solitaiy hours enough in the so¬ briety of the morning to inspire them with a zest for each othei s soc cty in thu latter part of tht diy Mr M icncil, as vol n ι I have
I bave sud, had no object which he had at piesent so earnestly at heart, as his chıldıen s improvement He snut up therefore no knowledge, no tasteful feel ing, no moral senliment, no speculation or deduction which his sagacity inspired, in his own bosom All his treasuies of this sort were brought into the common stock In this happy family there were no discordant opinions, no one ready to say, " This is rash, that is singular, this is contrary to the judgment of the world, you must learn to think like others, or jou must expect to be dis¬ liked," and thus to chill the opening blossoms of reflection «nd of mmd They needed not to be told, that he vvho is afraid to think unlike others, will soon learn, in every honourable sense of the word, not to think at all Mr Macneil, afler he hid withdrawn from the conveisation ofthe gentlemen of the neighbourhood, had found himself in¬ truded
traded upon by stragglers, whom the fashion of an excursion to the lakes had brought to his door. Some came with letters of recommendation, and some v. ithout. Some were induced by curio¬ sity to see the friend of Jean Jacques Rousseau, and some to see the lady vvho hid two husbands, both of them living. With the improper conduct and indeli¬ cacy of one 01 two of these vv anderere mr Macneil bad been highly displeased. He had desired his friends to yield no more letters of introduction to the mere impoi (unities of the idle He saw no leison why he should suffei his time to be intruded upon, and his sciemtj to be ι uttled, by the curiosity of indolent tra- vclleis who did not knovv how to dispose of themselves The lady, the advocate of mis Macneil, to whom I communi- rited my wish, did not ful therefore to assure me, tmt I should not gain entrance ovn tin threshold of then house This ι «nfivoui-
unfavourable prediction pei hips p q ned me the more, and I sat down, ind nd dressed the following letter to the gen¬ tleman whose acquaintance I wis de Birous to obtain sin, I have heard your character descrii cd in a way so peculiarly conform ible to my notions and predilections, that I im desirous to bc indulged with m hour if jour conversation You have been intruded upon, I im told, by the idle and the frivolous, jou are a lover of solitude, you ire happy ш the bosom of your family these aie the ι easons which have been alleged to me, why I ought not to expect to obtain the favour I solicit I shall at le ist weaken the objections vvhich hive been urged, if I can satisfy you that I am not ofthe class ot the persons who have occasioned your displeasure I im
í am no curious man vv hat Inve I to bc curious about i I am nearly forty-five years of age I have seen the world, thiough all ils gridalions, and in most of the counti ics of Liu ope In mv youth I was a wild roe among lhe inouti- I uns of Wiles as I grow up, I enteied upon the see ies of active life, foolishly, not cumin illy I conine ted an early distaste for the practices and the society of t lie world. I have lived much alone —I have not been happy. When I have gone into company, mere acquain¬ tance have not interested me , a friend (a friend, in the perhaps romantic sense of the word) I never found I am no doubt a very weak creature , I am not like Solomon's good man, " satisfied from myself" Such is my history, am I one of those persons whose intiusion y em would wish to forbid ' Why im I desirous to piy one visit to the roof of mr Macneil ? I knovv not whether
whether the answer I can give to this question, will be or ought to be satisfac¬ tory I am not idle enough to imagine that our interview will improve into oc- quiintmce, far less into friendship Wc dwell in different and remote pirts ol thtislmd, vve cannot be acquamlance My habits and temper (it is a million chances to one) will not suit jou, in those indescribable minuti», which tlo not affect the essentials of a charac. ter, but which make eich man an indi¬ vidual by himself, and vvhich divide you from the rest of jour species, you will probably not be approved by mc we tmnot be friends What then } You are, I believe, a good and a wise man (two qualities much moie insepi lable than the world is willing toallovv) I hav с found so few of these, as some times to be ılmost tempted to think th it the rice is growing extinct ind I would ııotvnllıııjj miss in opportunitv of
of seeing so cxtnordmary a cieitiue Your fimily is hippy-------(Oh, lııppı¬ ness ' thou perpetu il object of pursuit ' ilwiys show nig thyself in prospect ' al¬ ways cut ofl from our itlainment by 111- surmonntiblc precipices and imp ι ajle toirenlsl)—do not refuse me the sight of a happy family 1 I ask only lot ι tr in sicnt and momentiry pleaeure ' I ask only for something to stork my memory with, the recollection of vvhich I may call up from time to time, md with the image of vvhich I may gild my soli tude ' I im, sir, your very humble servant, imieoii lim, Casimir Flfetwood AmUmdt 0 f Me, jonethsbire
CHAP-
CHAPTER XII Г. JVl τ, applieitioii had the desti ed issue A polite answer vvas ictuined, cspicss- mg that mr Micneil would be hippy lei be favoured with my vist I w ıs ihr more fiatteı od wilh this, as Ihc laely to whom I had mentioned mj desne, a wo¬ man of no common sag ıcıtj, had pre¬ dicted a diffeient event. I hastened to make use of the privi¬ lege I hid obtained. I found the house of mr Macneil iincommonlj pi un in its style, jet replele with every Icmpciato convenience The fither of lhe family seemed lo be upwird of fiftj yeirs of age, and was tall, robust anıl m inly in his appearance His hur w ıs brown, short and unpow dered , his rudely cheek confessed lhat he vvas not negligent ot the
the cire of his fields, and tint he hatl rcicived in his constitution the icwarl of Ins care Mi Mnraieil was a Scotch¬ man The brogue of every country is ¡«rhaps pleasing to the eir of sensibi- litv, especially when it fills from the hps ot a m in ot cultivation , it seems to as sure us that simplicity antl the native feitnes of mind hive not been cradle ited With me the Scottish dia leet ıs somewhat a favourite , it aofims ind mellows the sound of our island tongic, and the griv ity which iccoiu- p unes it, gives in ur of sobnety and ie flection to the speaker, vvhich aie pır¬ tıeulırly in accord with my serious dis- ¡ osıtıon It reminds us of the fields, and not of cities I thank you for your visit, sud mr. Macneil, taking me by the hmd Your letter ısa masteily pictuie of jour cln¬ racter I knovv not what jou have heard of me that mide you desirous of seeing 15 ine ,
me, but I suspect that I, rather than you, shall be the gainer by the inter course I am no humourist, nor mis¬ anthrope, though circumstances have obliged me to be a little abrupt with some of lhe persons JMiave seen since I took up my residence here lima very plain man, and, if you expect any thing else, you will be disappointed I did not find mr Macneil vvhat I should hive called a very plain man, yet I do not blame him for his assertion It would be best of all, if every mm knew himself exactly for vvhat he was, and an nounced himself iccordinglj But this, alas' is impossible Every one vvho does not think too liumbly of his quali ties, sets too high a value upon them And how ridiculous a thing is self-im¬ portance, a fancied sovereign demand ing a tax from his imaginai y subjects, which they will never pay * False humi¬ lity is indeed, if not a more ridiculous, yet
yet a more degrading error than arro¬ gance. But every man who is aware of all the artifices of self-delusion, will ra¬ ther set his demands below, than above, the true rate Among other subjects wc talked oí the character of Rousseau. Mr. Mac¬ neil expressed himself with a veneration and α tenderness toward this extraordi¬ nary man, which I suppose wae univer- silly felt by all who approached lum, except those who, thinking less of his weaknesses and the indulgence thej de¬ manded, th in ot their own offended pnde, finished bj quai rolling with him. I siw much of Rousseau, said my host He ıeposed many confidences in mc. He often told me that he felt lesi, suspicious and embarrassed with me, than with almost any man he ever knew ¡ and he asseitcd that the reason was, that I thought more of the subject discussed and the scene befoie me, and less of how
how they would affect my own tranquil lity and importance I could see that «ne of his great misfortunes had been, that álmosít all his mtimates were chosen from among the French, that nation of egotists * Rousseau was a man of exqui- HSite sensibility, and that sensibility hid "been insulted and trifled with in innn merable instances, sometimes by the in¬ tolerance of pnestci aft and povver, some times by the winton and ungenerous sports of men of letters He lived how¬ ever, toward the close of his life, in a world of his own, imd sivv nothing is it really was, nor were lus mislikes less gross, than if he had is«erted that his little cottage was menaced by a besieg¬ ing army, and assailed with a battery of cannon Whether from the displeasing events that had befallen lum, or from any seeds of disease kneaded up in his original constitution, I wis com inccd, Irom a multitude of indications, that Rousseiu
Rousseau was not m his sober mind. How much are those persons mistaken, who imiğine that a madman is necessa¬ rily incapable ofcomposingorations is ai¬ dent as those of Demosthenes, and odes as sublime as those of Pindar < Hovv small ι portion ofthe persons who, upon some topic or other are unhinged in their in¬ tellectual compi chension, is it necessaiy to phce u-dcr coiporal lestramt '—Yet I wis often led to doubt whether Rous¬ se ııı, spite of the eliscasc under which he hbourcd, deserved upon the whole to be termed unfortunate When he wis induced to dwell for ι time upon the universal combination which he believed to be formed against him, he then un¬ doubtedly suffered But he had such resources in his own mmd ! He could so wholly abstract himself from this punful contemplation , his vein of en- thusnsm was so sublime, there was such a childlike simplicity often upper¬ most
most in his carriage; bis gaietj upon certain occasions was so good humoured, sportive and unbroken I It was difficult to persuade myself that the person I saw at such times, was the same as, at others, was beset with such horrible visions — Mr. Macneil related to me several cu¬ rious anecdotes in support of these ob¬ servations. The wife of my newacqu.ontance was one of the most accomplished antl pre¬ possessing women I ever beheld. I have often remarked that this mixture and result of the manners and habits of different countries, particularly in the female sex, presents something exqui¬ sitely fascinating and delightful. She vv as never embarrassed, and never ap¬ peared to meditate how a thing was to be done, but did it with an ease, a sim- phcity,an unpretendmgness, vvhich threw evtry studied grace into contempt in the comparison. She had been humbled by the
the miscarriage of her early youth. But for this, her person and her accomplish¬ ments, the acknowledged sweetness of her temper and clearness of her under¬ standing, might perhap have made her proud, and thus have tarnished the ge¬ nuine lustre of her excellencies. The modesty with which she presented hei¬ sclf was inexpressibly engaging. There was a cast of the Magdalene m all she did, not of the desponding, not of a temper deserting its duties, unconscious ot recovered worth, or that invited inso¬ lence or contempt. It was a manner th it had something in it of timidity, yet could scarcely bc said to amount to self- icpioach ; a manner indeed, tint, by the way in which it confessed hci frailty, m ule reproach, eithei by look or ges¬ ture, from any other, impossible. Her tailings had chastised in her the pride of birth, and the assurance that superior attainments are apt to inspire, and had generated
generated that temperance, moderation nnd gentle 'firmness, which, wheiever they are found, are the brightest orna¬ ments of human nature. The young ladies, whose merits I had heard so highly extolled, were three. Each of these had pimcipillv devotee! herself to some particuhr accomplish¬ ment, in which, though not unskilled in other pursuits, she had made extiaor¬ dinary progress. 1 he eldest applied la the art of design ; she drew, and even painted in oil ; and hei landscapes in particular had an excellence vvhich, to speak moderately of them, lemmded the beholder ofthe style of Claude Loi raine. The principal apartment of the house was hung round with a scries of the most striking scenes in the environs of the lakes, delineated by her pencil. The second daughter had chosen music for her favourite pursuit, and her execution, both on the piano forte and in singing, was
vv is not inferior to that which her eldest sister had attained on cam ıs T he joungest was a gardener and botanist She h id hid out her fither s grounds, md the stjle m which tliey were dis¬ poned did the highest credit to hci uiia- gunlion One side of the 1 umly sit- lint» puloiu wis skuted with a gicen- lionse, of the same length as the iuţim, md which seemed to make a put ol it i Ins. ipartment was furnished with nearly every variety which Flori has ever pro¬ duced in oui island, oi which curiosity his imported, and were entirely culti¬ vated by her hand In her prose¬ cution of the science of botany, she had also ι esorted to the use of colours, and, though the employment she made of the и was inferior m kind to the studies of the eldest, it ıs ılmost impos¬ sible lo conceive iny thm»; superior to vvlnt she hid iciched, cither in the faith-
faithfulness of delineation, or the bnl hancy of the tints The names of these young hd cs were Amelia, Bai bara and Muy The elde t had no pictensions to beauty, though theie was in uncommon appei ance ol quick conception md penetiatingjudg ment m the various tuins of her countc nance Barbara was a brunette Her features were regular, her mouth was al¬ luring, and her dark ey es flashed with meaning, and melted with tenderness Mary hnd a complexion which, in point of fairness and transparency, could not be excelled Her blood absolutely spoke in her cheeks, the soft white of her hands and ne к looked as if they would have melted away bene ilh youi touch, her eyes were so animated, and her whole physiognomy so sensitive, that it was scircely possible to believe that a thought could pass in her heart,
lieart, which might not bc read in her face I never saw a family that excited in mc so much approbation Individuals I hid encountered of gieit worth and extraordinary qualifications, but here was ι whole circle of peisons, such is a man would wish to spend his life with so much concord of affection, without any jarring passions, so much harmony of interests, yet each member of the fa¬ mily having a different pursuit To me, who was prone to regird the whole world with an eye of censonousness and dis¬ pleasure, and who, having conceived this propensity, but too easily found mateuals to foster and nourish it, this was a ravish¬ ing spectacle The father so well in¬ formed , the mother so interesting, the daughters so accomplished and solovely ι Mr Micneil seemed to feel a kindness for mc, proportioned to the gratification I cxpciienced in my visit, and, after hiving
having pressed me to partake of then family-fare, proposed a ride along the· shores of the Windermere the next morning. The day following wis oc¬ cupied in a party on the lake, ind thus by insensible degrees I became for ι time almost an inmate in the family I was so far advanced in lite, is to preclude any idea of indecorum ш mj visits, timi Iaddressod mjself to the different mem¬ bers of the little commonwealth, as ifl had been a brother to the master ofthe house, and an uncle to the daughtei s I sat sometimes for hours by Amelia as she painted, I listened with unwearied attention to the lessons executed by Bar¬ bara: but my chief pleasure was in at¬ tending tbe gentle end engaging Maiy, in her morning visits to her flowers, and in her walks among the avenues vvhich had been constructed, and the bowers which had been planted, undei her di- reetiun. CHAP-
CHAPTER XIV. JMft Macneil was a man of the wai mest philanthropy, and by degiecs I reposed in him a confidence, to wluch I Intl seldom felt excited toward any other nnn After a time, I hired apartments in the house of a substantial farmer in his neighbourhood, that I might the more freely enjoy his conveisation and ac¬ qu mitinee, without being an interrup¬ tion to the domestic economy of his fa¬ mily 11 ud before lum the secret grief thai pieyed upon my heart. I described the sickly sensibility of my temper, the cirly diagust I had taken at the world, and the miserable sense of desolation vvhich preyed upon my life, in my de¬ tached and unconnected situation. Come, ıephed my fnend, in lhat vein of
of playful good-humour which he tie- lighted to indulge,—whether jou con¬ sult mc, as a good Catholic docs his priest, for the salvation of his soul, or as on invalid does his physician for the re¬ storation of his health, let us try if we cannot make α conversion or a cure of it' Many were the debates that passed between me and my host respecting the tuie estimate of the human species. We differed, I suppose first, because we had «een them under unlike circumstances, and in unlike aspects. We diffcied se¬ condly, because vve compared them wilh different ideal standards. I thought, so to express mjself, too highly of the hu¬ man mmd in the abstract, to be able to consider with pitience man as he is. I dwelt upon the capacities of our natuie, the researches of a Newton, the elevi- tion of a Milton, and the virtue:, of an Alfied, and, having filled my mind with 5 these,
these, I contemplated even with horror, the ignorance, the brutality, the stupi¬ dity, the selfishness, and, as it appeared to me, the venality and profligacy, in which millions and millions of my fel¬ low-creatures are involved. I estimated mankind, with an eye to tbe goal vvhich it is ai dently to be desired they might reich , mı Macneil estimated them, .vith an eye to the starting-post from vvhich they commenced their caieer. " In every man that lives," he stoutly affirmed, " there is much to commend. bv try man has in him the seeds of a good husband, a good father, and a sin¬ cere friend You will siy perhaps, these are not sublime and magnificent virtues ; yet, if each man vveie enabled to dis¬ charge these, the world upon the vv hole vv ould afford a ravishing spectacle What a spirit of forbearance, of gentle atten¬ tions, of anxiety to maintain the cheer¬ fulness and peace of his female com¬ panion,
panion, inhabits every human breast ' Scarcely do we hear of the monster in whom this spirit is ever extinguished It accompanies almost all men, with' whatever unhappy interruptions, from mattmty to the grave Look upon the poorest clown in the midst of his chil¬ dren , vvhat a heavenly picture ! Hovv do his ejes glisten at their little plea¬ sures, their sallies of penetration and vi- л acity ! How disinterested a sentiment burns in his heart ' Yes, dismteref ted for I know vou will laugh at the silly sophism, which, when it regards the im- mense sacrifices that every father is reidy to make foi his child, calls the impulse from vvhich they spring a selfish one. I acknowledge, I am weak enough to be as much delighted with the spectacle of the lively and ardent affection of an Englishman to his son, as if it were di¬ rected toward the child of a Japonese It is equally affection, and equally bene¬ ficent
licent How much good neighbourhood there is in the woild ! vvlnt reidiness in every man to assist every stringer tint comes m lus wiy, if his carriage is broken down, if his hoise has rim from and left him, or almost vvhalevci is Ins el stiess I how cheei fullj docs he give lus d iy s labour oı the iroduoe of his diy s I ibout, to hv» fnend, till tint fnend by u justice hue proved himself unworthy of the kindness I tai my part, instcid ot |0imng in the pievailuig cıy ot the sc Ihsluicss, the wickedness, the ongmal sm or the subsequent riepi iv iK, of m m kmd, I feel iny hcait »well vvithm me, when I recollect that I belong to a spe с es, almost every individui! of vvhich is с dow ed with angelic virtues I am a pluhnthropist m the plim sense of the word Wherever I see a man, I sec something to love,—not with ι love of compission, but a love of ippiobation I need not put the question to him—I voi n t, know
knovv without isking, that he ıs fully prepared mcl eager to do ι thousind virtuous íets, the moment the oí cisión ıs afforded hım " I have sometimes had the thought, continued mr Macneil, " ot composing ι little novel or tale m llhistnlion of mj position I would take such ı m in, as my fnend Fleetwood for exunple, who looks with a disdimmi eye upon his species, and his scarcely the patience to entei into discouise ind mici couise vv ith any one he meets I would put him on board ι ship, he will of course be suf¬ ficiently disgusted with every one of his companions all of ι sudden I would raise a most furious tempest I wo Id cause him to be slupwiecked on a de¬ sert island, vvith no companion but one man, the most gross, perverse md stupid of the crew all the rest—the captain who, though sagacious, was posi ivc, the surgeon vvho, though skilful, was tire¬ some
some by his pedmtry—I would without mercy send to the bottom What do jou think I would represent as the na¬ tural result of this situation î My fisli- dious misanthrope would no longer have a world or a n ition, fioni which to chuse his compimon, and, after trj ing ill, to reject all he would he wholly deputed of the power of choice Here, sn, I would show hovv by degices be would tint! a thousand resources m this dt spiscd s ulor He would find hun ac¬ tive, spirited and alert Where befoie lie believed, without cximinition, that all wis stupefacţie и he would find by a u tet ν of tokens, good sense antl saga¬ cii) (low these two companions would ! jve one mother ' Hovvllicy would oc- ijsiomlly spend the live long night m 1 lightful chat * How thej would study ľich others virtues and ittaininents, even с ich othei s foibles ' With what " £>cr mxiotj, when in) necessary oc к г rision
Casion separated them, would they look for caoh other's icturn ' Wilh wh it diring and superhuman counge woulel they defend each othei from danger ' ------ And do not be pei t erse enough tobe lieve that all this anxiety woulil bc the fruit of selfishness ' They would have discovered m each other inestimable qualities, a large stock of sound judg¬ ment and excellent sense, and an inex¬ haustible fund of kind and benevolent propensities Aftci some jeirs I would bring back iny misanthrope to Lng¬ land. Sir, he would nevei be able lo part vvitli his companion in the desert island He would believe ihit there was not a creature in the worhl, take lum forali in all, so viluible \et ob¬ sei ve, he would only entertun this opi¬ nion of him, because he knew him more thoroughly thin any of the rest of his «pecie» I took my sailor merely is ι specimen of human nature, and of hu¬ mm
mm mime m one of its most unfavour- il le foi ms I hope my rcidei will be convmccel 1 ν ihcirgumcntsof mr Micneil Whit ι blessed stitc of mind wis thit, to w Inch he ippcars to h ive iti uned · Yet, tor myself, I acknowledge, either because tiuth was on my side, or, it miy be, merely from the excessive susceptible- ncss of my niture, or the accidents of my life, I remained unaltered by his dis¬ courses, and, though I wished to be ι philanthropist-, was »imiainthrope still
CHAP-
CHAPTER XV. " What I have been yet saying," conti¬ nued Macneil, " is speculation, let us now come to the most important pirt of my function, which 13 practice. Fleet¬ wood, you are too much alone I hear people talk of the raptures of solitude; and with what tenderness of affection they can love a tree, a rivulet, or a mountain. Believe me, they are pre¬ tenders, lhey deceive themselves, or they seek, with then eyes open, to im¬ pose upon others. In addition to their trees and their mountains, I will give them the whole brute creation; still it will not do There is a principle in the heart of mm, which demands the so¬ ciety of his like He thit has no such society, is in ι state but one degree re¬ mov cd
moved from insanity He pines for m cır into which he might pom the sio y of his thoughts for au eve tint shill flish upon lum with responsive uitellt gence, for i fue the hues of wli ch sh ill talk to hım m dumb, but cloq ic it elis course, for ι heirt that slnll be it in unison with his own If there is any thing in human form that does not feel these wants, ť it thing is not to be countei in the file for ι man , the form it bears is a deception, md the legend, Min, vvhich you reiel in its front, is alie Tdk to mc of rivers and mountains ι I venerate the giand and beautiful exhi¬ bitions ind slities of nature, no man more I delight in solitude, I could shut myself up in it for successive days But I knovv, that Chnst did not with more ilicnty come out of the wilder¬ ness ıfteı his forty diys sequestration, than every man, it the end of a course of this sort, will seek for the inter. change
chmge of sentiments and languite 1 he mignifictnce ot niture, after i lime, will pioduce much the sune eflect upon hım, as if I weie to set down г hunprj mm to ι sumptuous seiviee of phtf, where ill that presented itselt on every side wis massy silver and burnish¬ ed gold, but there was no food ŕ " Ие ıs a wise physician, that know» how to prescribe for his own malady. Were the eaee you have described to me, the ease of a bystander, you would ímniedníely see míe its merits, as eleu ly as I do You have no certain and re¬ gular pursuit, you have no equal alli¬ ances and connections The miracle vt ould be, if it were possible for you to be happy You are too rich, to be able to engage with sincere eagerness in any undertaking or employment The re¬ medy therefore m your case must bc de¬ rived from the other quai ter M irry ► beget yourself a family of children ' 'i on
You are somewhat advanced in life, time must elapse before your, children will be at an age to occupy much of your cai es, if you feel any vacuity in the interval, cıll about you your distant relations ' Sit down every day at tibie with a circle of five or six persons, con¬ stituting your own domestic groupe Enquire out the young men on th· threshold of hfe vvho, from the regula¬ tions of society, hive the best claim upon your assistance Cıll them round you, contribuie to their means, contribute to their improvement, consult with them as to the moat promising adventure m which they cm launch themselves on the ocean oflife Depend upon it, you will not Ihen feci a vacuity, your mind will no longer prey upon itself. ' I wis some time before I could believe thit my friend was in earnest —" I, to entangle myself with a numerous family, whose temper was so fastidious and sen¬ ii j sitivé
sitivé thit I could scarcely chuse a com panion for a day, that did not become in twenty ways disgusting and msupport able to me before the close of the day I " I, fo mairy * Hid I not now pissed the flower of my days in a state of celi¬ bacy > Whom was I to marry î I was »ear forty five years of age Wis I to make what is called a suit able match , that is, marry a w oman ot the same age as myself' Beside that there would then bc small chance of offspring, I could not siy I felt in myself much propensity lo fill in love with t lady of this staid and mitronly age " Add to all this, I am impiessed with no favourable prepossessions towaid the female sex I cannot be blind enough to credit what some have maintained, probably moie from the love of paradox than any other cause, that there is any parity between the sexes Till the softer sex
sex has produced a Bacon, a Newton, a Homer, or ι Shikespear, I never will believe it Who does not see that the quickness and vivaeitv ot then temper sels them it in immense disdnee fiom profound scnac, sublime feeling, ami tint giand species of adventure, vvhich cngro ses, from pubci ty to the gì ave, the whole enei gics of the h man soul ? But, beside this I think ill of then d spost¬ ile tıs llıc impiess ons of my deben¬ tures of gillmtiy in luncc I cannot overcome Peilnps, in lhe tnnquilhty ot se bei eliseti sion, juu mielit bring nie to confes ıhıl the с uripicssions ne un jusi but thtie thty aie, such ne the ■soci ıtıons of my muid, I neiet cui think criously of a womin, still less propose hci to mysclt as a companion, without с ilhng to mmd the muchionesb dc L , md the countess of B. " I have another disquihfication for mainage, woiac even than this I am grown
.grown old in the habits ofa bachelor I can bear no restrimt You, sir, happy as you are in your family, must be fully aware, that it is impossible for two per¬ sons to issociate for a d ι у , vv ithout some clash of their different inclinations It is like hounds in a leash , the chain is upon their necks, and not t»pon then wills But we bear this wonderfully v. ell for a time, beciuse w e see w here it will end, most men bear it better than I do But let the chiin be such the padlock of which cinnot be unloosed, but by the death of one party or ibe other, Gods, how gilhng docs it be¬ come ' In an ' agreeable compimon in a post-chaise,' m the guest that visits, or the host that receives, me for a day, though his desires are absurd, though his manner be abrupt, and his sentiments dissimilar to my own, I am too proud to suffer my temper lo be much ruffled by so fugitive an inconvenience But how 3 tufles
trifles swell into importance, when the individual whose temper jars with mine, is to live with me for ever ' Whatever offends me I feel as in the utmost degree grave, every accidental difference preys upon my heart, anel corrodes my vi¬ tals ' Mr Micneil laughed at the vehe¬ mence of my satire against mai mge. ' No,' said he, " I do not absolutely insist, that you shall fix upon a lady of forty-five years of age, or that you shall estim ite her illness to become your wife by the wrinkles in her brow. The man may love the wife at forty-five, whom, tw enty yeirs before, he received a blush¬ ing vngin to his bed , h mit may do much ior bim, a fnendship has gradu¬ ally sprung up between them, which death only is powei ful enough to dis¬ solve, but this is not exactly the penod at vvhich the familiarity should com¬ mence. No, if you marry, Fleetwood, chuse
chuse a girl, whom no disappointments have soured, and no misfortunes have bent to the earth ; let her be lively, gıy as the morning, and smiling as the day If your habits are somewhat rooted and obstinate, take care that there is no re¬ sponsive stiffness m her, to jar and shock with Let her be all pliancy, ac¬ commodation and good-humour Form her to your mind, educate her yourself By thus grafting a young shoot upon your venerable trunk, you will obtain, as it were, a new hold upon lite You will be another creature, new views, new desires, new thoughts, will rise within you While jou ire anxious to please and sjmpathise with jour beaute¬ ous bride, jou will feel as ilei t as a boj, and as free and ripid in joui conceptions as a stripling " You will tell me perhaps, that you could not make such a young creature happy I differ from you in that The women
women are not hke tıs in their tastes. A lady, as you say, past the meridian of life, will seldom be courted for a bride, unless with some sinister view ; but at least half the young guls you meet with, woulel be well contented with a husband considerably older than themselves. Man mai ι ies, because he desires a lovely and soothing companion for his vacant hours ; woman marries, because she feels the want ofa protector, a guardian, a guide and an oracle, some one to look up to with respect, and in whose judgment and direction she may securely confide. Besides, Fleetwood, jou mistike jour- sclt, it you tlunk jou aie old Your visage is not wrinkled, ind youi hair is not grej . The activity of j our temper, the many pluis of life jou have tried, jour perpetual change of place, have ef¬ fectually pieserved you from that run¬ ning down of the wheels of fancy, that decay of the principle of life, whirh should
should render you an unfit companion. for a blooming bride. " Yau allege, that your temper, which it so fastidious aneti sensitive that you qan seldom support the companion of a day, is a cause that would reduce you to make an ill figure, in a domestic cncle, with five or ых individuals who sat down With you every day to table Alas, Fleetwood, this is the very thing you want, the cause why y our temper is so blameably fastidious The horse, how¬ ever generous bis blood, and graceful his limbs, who has never learned certain: paces, and had bis temper subdued to the intimations of tbe bridle, will never be victor in the race Subject yourself tp the law of associating with your fel¬ low-men, place yourself in the situation to be the guardian and benefactor of your consort and kindred, and you will soon feel and bend to the necessity of nonsuiting their predilections as well as youi
joui own "iou will be a million times the belter ind Ihe happier for it. " But the mam eiror into vvhich jou lı ive fiilen, ıs to suppose that the wiy ot living between a man ind his wife, be ıra uıy resemblance to that with a chincc- companion in a post-chaise, or brfween m ordinary host and his guest. The first principle of society m this relation, if it is actuited with any spirit of kind¬ ness, is fbe desire each party feefe, to be the sacrifice of fhe ofher. Instead of to. giettmg the unavoidable differences ofl mclina'ion, they become, where thei topics to which they relate are not fon¬ damenta), an additional source of plea¬ sure. Each party is eager te anticipate· the desires of the other, to smooth the? way to then grahheition, to provide for then happiness. If, between a pair thus kind and thus wise, any little debates chance to arise, this too adds to their en. joyment.
joyment You knovv the proverb which says, Tbe falling out of lover» ıs llıc ıtî- nevval of love Between man and mm differences are gravely discussed and ir- gumentatively settled Lach revises tho imaginary bnefof his own cause, anil becomes confirmed in bis private view ofthe question at issue. But, between man and woman, the smile which unex¬ pectedly displaces the clouded brow, is the symbol of pence. Arguments are thrust away by hundreds, like beggars from the façade of a palace. The party most in the right, mourns over this de¬ grading advantage. The party most m tbe wrong, confesses the error incuncd with so jogenuous a grace, as to make error look as if it gave new improvement and finishing lo a character.—Marry, Fleetwood ι If you live, marry ' You know nothing of happiness, if you do not ' You are as ignorant of the true zest
rest of human life, as the oik which at tins moment overcanopics us with lis bunches ' Such were the advices of tl о intelli¬ gent and kind heirtcel fnen 1 I ha 1 thus accidentally acquired lhey mule a strong impiession upon me I know not whether the impression would have been so forcible, had the circumstances under vvhich the advice was given been different But the readermust recollect that it was addressed to mc in the midst of an amiable family, the children of which were daughters While Macneil was earnest in describing the sort of wife he would recommend to me, I thought of these accomplished young women when vve returned home from tbe wilk or nde which these discussions had occupied, I looked round upon the ci-cle, with different emotions from those which bad previously accompanied the spectacle could it be otherwise ' I have
have already said that the junior of the three particularly engaged my attention : I now caught myself repeatedly in my solitude uttering the involuntary excla¬ mation, " Mary, if ever I marry, it is thou that shalt be my bride !" The conversations between me and my hast* the sense of which I have thus compressed, occupied many successive excursions, Gne day when Macneil was roost' .ieeply engaged in the argument, I turned suddenly upon him, and cried out somewhat gaily, " Now, my friend, shall I try whcthec you are in earnest in all this declamation ì If such a marriage as you describa is desirable for me, it will be no less desirable for the woman I sbslt chuse ; one of the parties in wed¬ lock cannot be happy alone. You say, I should chuse a young person, a per¬ son of pleasing manners, and a culti¬ vated mind : where can I verify this de- scription so truly, as by your fire-side î Will
Will you give me one of your daugh¬ ters ' My friend paused '* A question like this compels one to be serious indeed — But jou hive no grave meaning in proposing the interrogitory ì " I cannot tell Your arguments have made me think I do not say thej have converted me Macneil, I do not wish totnflcvvithyou if my question touches you too nearly, I dispense you from a reply " No, the question has been asked, and it shall be answered Only, as I by no mems wish to restrun you, by treat¬ ing your question as ι proposal, so I must request you m return to consider my answer, as belonging merely to an abstnet lllustiation, as ι logical experi¬ ment to try the soundness of my recom¬ mendation I should be as much to blime in violating the modesty and maiden dignity of my children, as in im¬ posing
posing fetters of any sort on the freedom of ) our deliberations " Agreed ' Nothing can be more rei sonable ' * Well then , I have no objection to jour person, jour family, your fortune, jour understanding, your accomplish¬ ments, not even to your age But then as to ν our temper, ------ " Ay, there is the point '" " What a strange thing is advice ' How difficult is it to put one s self ex¬ actly m the plaee of anothei ' How hard (o be sure that the advice vve give, is ex actly that which we should think reason able, could vve change persons vvith the man upon whom vve are so ready to ob trudeit? Fleetwood, Isn ear that I im your friend I swear that the project I urged upon j ou, vvas urged in the since nty of my heart ------ " Io, tının jhe 1 I see, I «hall die д bachelor ' —Shall I confess my secret j weik
weakness? My Io, Itiiimfbe, was utter¬ ed with a heavy heart Ί he lovely Mary hid gained a station in my bosom, from vvhich I felt I could with difficulty dislodge her " I love my children jou, ill the world, would despise me if I did not It is so difficult to judge for a child, con¬ scious of unnpened discernment, and reiving on my superior penetration and expeiience, or by whom, if this reliance is not placed it clearly ought to be " I could cheerfully commit my own happi¬ ness to the lottery of human affairs, but thus to dispose of the little all of one s daughter, is a fearful responsibility l ——· " Yet, alter all, this lesponsibihty I must encounter If my daughter mar¬ ries ι wise man or a fool, a prodigal or in economist, an honest man or ι knave, and it is done with my ipproba- tion, it must alike happen lhat I may con-
.consider myself as the author of her hap- pmess or her misery " Well then, Fleetwood, I confess that the woman who marries joj, will engage in a considerable risk. But, God know», all marriage is a risk, is ihe deepest game that can be plijed m this "¡ublumry scene You say true, that jour nsk will not be les», than tint of the dame who accepts jour hand \ct I adhere to my advice, ' Marry 1 01, which is indeed merely dressing tint advice m another guise, * Fleetwood, take the child of my bosom ! win hu partiality and kindness, my approbation «aits on her profeience '' " By this question however, vvhich, as I said, I have answered meiely undei the notion of ι logical experiment, you hnve biought to my recollection a part of the subject, which, before, I ought not to have forgotten , and I thank you foi it If
If you should ever feel seriously disposed to adopt my recommendation, let it not be done lightly and unailvisedly. Con¬ sider it as the most important transaction of your life. Consider that not merely your own happiness, but that of the wo¬ man who has consented to embark hers under your protection, the virtue and respectability ofyour possible offspring, and lhe peace of the venerable parent» who hove resigned her to your discre¬ tion, are at stake upon the due regula¬ tion of your temper. Here indeed lies the gteat difference between your pre¬ sent condition, and that which I have been chalking out for you. Indepen¬ dent and sole as you now stand, you find yourself answerable to none: you can discard your servants when you please ; you can break off with your ac¬ quaintance ; and you need scarcely deign to ask yipurself, Was I in fault ï But you cannot so break off from the ties of vol. ii. L affinity
affinity and blood Believe me, too much independence is not good for man It conduces neither to his virtue, nor his happiness The discipline vvhich arises out of the domestic chanties, has an ad¬ mirable tendency to make man, indivi dually considered, what mm ought to bc I do not think you, V leetwood, worse than jour neighbours Ion are an honest and a just man, with sense enough to discern the right, and courage enough fo pursue it If j ou are now wayward and peevish and indolent and hypochondriacal, it is because jou weakly hover on. the outside of the pale of hu¬ man society, instead of gallantlj entering yourself in the ranks, ind becoming one in the great congregation of man ' It was in such conversation that Mat¬ neli andi passed our time in our excur¬ sions on the banks of the Windermere With what delight I íeeollect this happy interval of my life ' Ruffigny and Mac neil
neil were the only two men I ever knew, the clearness of whose thinking was an ever fresh source of delight, and the ge¬ nerosity of whose souls, tnhghtening their discourse, made their face occasi¬ onally look, as if it had been the face of an mgel But in the society of Mac¬ neil my happiness was even purer thin in that of my father s friend Ruffigny, gallant, noble-hearlcd mortal as he was, stood alone, my intercourse with lum vv as a perpetual Hie à tele, and had too much of monotony and uniformity for the unsatisfied ciavings of the human mmd , but to letuin home with Micneil, after ι morning s temperile and sober liscu sion, and to see him surrounded vv ith lib blimeless wife md accomplished daughters, what could the heart of man look foi more f Add to which, I was oc- cupird with the new sensitioiis which agitated my bosom for the chirming Man While I tilled wilh hu I foi χ - gut
got my prejudices against her sex ; the marchioness de L. and the countess of B. seemed daily more and more to be¬ come the shadow of a dream ; her con¬ versation was so inexpressibly ingenuous, and her sallies so artless, that, in spite of my preconceptions, she stole away my heart. Her delight was in flowers ; and she seemed like one of the beauties of her own parterre, soft and smooth and brilliant and fragrant and unsullied.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XVI Why did these dajs of yet tinexpc t eire d delight pass so quickly away I Mr Macneil, before I knew him, had determined to pass over with his family to Italy, with the intention of spending the remainder of his days there He liad ι fuend in the Milanese with whom he had Contracted the strictest bonds of intimacy, and who had often pressed him to take up his residence in his neighbour¬ hood , he was promised that circle of fe¬ male associates and acquaintance, which was denied to mrs Macneil in England, and this, though the admirable matron could have dispensed with it for herself without repining, he judged to be an ad¬ vantage of the first importance to his daugh-
("rnghlers Having foi mcd a proje t ot tt)is sort, he had proceeded so far asto h ivc settled to dispose ot ill his property in England, md to vest his foitunt in hnds lo be purchased on the spot ot his de stined abode The aflairs which rei iteti lo Ihı» intended trinsphnlit on had il- ready detuned tbe family m lngland longer than they wished, and I agreed to purchase the Westmorland estate, rathei to facilitate the projects of my friend, than with any intention to take up my residence in this part of the island The property was transmitted, and lodged m the hands of я banker at Genoa, nnd mr Macneil determined to take his passage by sea, from Falmouth for that city The adventurers in this voyage were mr Macneil, his wife, and his tw о eldest daughters, the youngest was to remain, at least till the next sea¬ son, upon a visit to a family, who in the winter
winter resided in London, ind during the summer upon then estate in Glouce» tei shire Every thmg being prepared foi the journey, the whole establishment re moved from the Wuidci mere and set out for lalmoulh, I myself, as well as the charming cadette, making part of Ihe escort I shall not d vell upon the particular of a tour, stietcliuig almost Irom one extiernity of the kingdom to another, wc reached the celebrated and commodious port from which my friends were to take then passage Here we spent a period of seven or eight days, winch was rendered so much the more interesting to me, as I knew not whether I should ever meet this amiable family again, and as it seemed to be at the mercy ofthe winds whether almost every bour of our intercourse should be the last The day after our arrival» Macneil and
and myself took an excursion on the sea coast and among the cliffs, to explore tho beauties of thiu delicious country. Previously to our quitting the borders of the hikes, I had come to a moie precise explanation with my friend, of the thoughts I entertained respecting his youngest diughter The removal, which was impending, had brought on some¬ what the more hastily tht communicn- tion of my views. I fairly confessed that the marned life was novV much in niy thoughts, and I owned that the eyes of Mary had perhaps contributed more to my conversion, than the argu¬ ments of her father. My friend asked me, if I had ever opened mjself to hrr он the subject, or was informed of lhe state Of her intimation toward me' I Owned, I hiid Hot The subject was in uself so interesting, and was so new to iny thoughts, that, whenever the im¬ pulse of confessing tny partiality had pre-
presented itself to me, it hid always brought with it such a palpitation of the heart, and tremulousness of voice, as had compelled me for the time lo desist from my purpose Nor could there ever, in my mmd, be sufiicient leason for an early declaration, except where the par¬ ties were so circumstanced, that lhey could not otherwise have the opportunity of a protracted intercourse, and a more minute acquaintance with each other's qualifications and temper Was it riot much more gritifyiug to a delicate mind, by silent attentions to ste »I away the soul, and to observe the griduil demon* strations of kindness in ι mistress, grow¬ ing up unconsciously to heiself, than by an abrupt question to compel her to check or to anticipile the progiess of sentiment ' Should I own the truth ? Whenever I meditated the proposing of the ques¬ tion, I was immediately beset in two ι 5 viiys
wavs with the passion of fear. I feared to be refused : else why did I put the question ) I also feared to be accepted : perhaps no ingenuous mind, not yet lost to s serious anticipation of the future, could be free from that fear. It was a question of so deep a stake, to both the parties to whom it related ι The man who was about to form it, could scarcely help recollecting on the verge, Now I sm free, I am master of my own ac¬ tions and of my plans oflife before the clock shall strike again, it may be I shall be bound by the sacred tics of honour, and the fate of my future life will be at the disposal of another I The 6eason of courtship is, at least to the man who has outlived Ihe fiist heyday of hts boiling blood, a season of probation, it is the business of either party to study the »ther, and m each interview distinctly to enquire, " Is this the person with whom I ought to embark in the voyage of
of lı'e ' Every species of promise, ex¬ press or implicit, ought to be kept back, that he may preserve, as long astpossible, the healthful and genuine character of the scene in which he is engaged " F irewel, ' said Macnűil in the close of the interesting conversation in which vve wereengiged " I leave my daugh ter behind me, and I may say, I leave her in your protection The family with which she is to spend the winter ire very good sort of people but tlicy are people affisinoli and without hearts Noman knows my thing muss of them, they ire correct in their methods of acting, and j mietei d in their payments, I feel •sitisfied that nothing ıınıss с in happen to my el mgliter, while she ıs m inmata of then house But it is to your senti¬ ments, as ι man ot worth and honour, that 1 contide her I believe, she ap¬ proves of you , I think she will accept of your tender, if you sitali judge proper to
make it In this, it is of course as muth your desire, as it is mine, that she should be free. Hoetwood, it is a very deep and solem ι confidence that I re»· pose in you If you marry my daugh¬ ter, you must be to ht , father, and mo¬ ther, and sisters, and all the world in one. If you are unjust to her, she will have no one to whom to appeil If jou are capricious, and rigorous, md umea¬ sonable, she will be jour prisoner " * This pathetic appeal from the father of her I loved, suddenly filled mj ey es with a gush of tears I eagerly pressed his hand " Macneil, ' said I, " I will never be unjust to your daugl 1er, she shall never find me capricious, or rigor¬ ous, or unreasonable I swear to you, that I will be such a husband, as the most tender of fathers would choose for his daughter !"·—It will be seen hoiy I tept my oath. After the interval of a few days we parted.
parted I Will not repeat here what mrs. Macneil said to me concerning her child, as that would be to go over again in substance what had been alreidy Såld bf the father This accomplished Vioman never appeared so amiable to me as du¬ ring our short residence at Falmouth. She had is much ι ight, perhaps more, th in her husbind, to urge upon me the justice I should owe to the lov ely Mary. Never h id any mothei more affection¬ ately or more diligently discharged the duties of a parent, never was mo¬ ther more amply qualified to discharge them I and Mirj, and one of the diughters of the familj with whom Mary was in¬ vited to visit, attended the rest of the party m a boit, to the side of the vessel in vvhich they embarked for Genoa We went with them on board the ship, and spent still two hours more in their com¬ pany Never was a familj so equally or so
so strongly inspired with love for each other, as the groupe before me. " Why am I not going with you ?" said Mary. " Do not talk ofthat," replied the mo¬ ther ¡ " we shall else never be able to ¡cave you behind."
CHAP-
CHAPTER XVn. 1 attendi D on horseback the chaise which conveyed Mary, and the young lady, her compimon, to London Hav¬ ing fixed her there, I was obliged to set out on an excursion of a few weeks into Wiles, to inspect some affairs which re¬ quired my presence It was on the twentieth of September that the Mac¬ neils sailed from England , and the wca¬ thei had proved sqinlly and uncertain almost fiom the hour vve putcl On tint day week from the tunc wc quitted 1 dmouth, I slept at Shrewsburj , and never in mj lite do I recollect a night so tiemendously stormy My thoughts were of course wholly on the Romney, the vessel on board which these dear friends
friends were embarked I could not re¬ frain from anticipating every thing dreadful Hovv curiously is the human mind affected by circumstances * I have often listened to ι storm, without al most recollecting that the globe of eirth contained the element of witer within its frame, I hav e felt entranced with the hollow sound, and the furious blists that sung round and shook the roof that shel tered me, I have got astride in imagina lion upon the horses of the element and plunged with fearful delight into the vast abyss Now every blast of wind went to my soul Every thought was Crowded with dismal images of ρ eicing shrieks, of cracking masts, of the last despair, of dy mg clasps, ind a watery grave It ism vain to endeavour lo give an idea of «hat this night I endured It was not fancy or loose conjecture, it Was firm persuasion ì I saw my fiiends pei ish,
perish, when the morning dawned, I rose with a perfect conviction that they were no more So deep was the sufFei ing I endured, thit I had not spirit the next morning to leave Shrewsbury, and proceed on my destined jourpey 1 could think of no¬ thing but the si I fate of Macneil, and affairs of business appeared wholly un¬ worthy of attention What ft long antl melmcholy diy did it seem ! A calm had succeeded ¡ the sun shone, and na¬ ture was cheerful, to what purpose? The mn nei longei shone on Macneil 1 " " By the evening however, the monotony of rest becime more intolerable to me than Inveli ng I ordered a chaise; I drove all night, mil in the morning ar¬ rived it my patern tl abode Τ he day after my irnval I received в letter from my idorcd Miry The sole topic of the letter was the storm of tbe a twenty-
twenty-seventh. She» wrote in broker» sentences, with grief, with terror, vv lb distraction " My ill, ooid site, " is embarked in one venlure! father, mo ther, sisters · What inf ltuation prevailed upon me to separate lnisclf from them? It is a crime, no less deep and turibte than parricide I What shall I do alone in the world î Ye wild and raging winds ! Ye merciless and all devouring waves ! Ye have made me tenfold a vagabond and a beggar upon the earth ' The re¬ membrance of last Saturday is distrac¬ tion to me ! Would that total distrac¬ tion would come, and drive all remem¬ brance from my brain for ever ' ' She continued in a style no less incoherent, and seemed to be as fully impressed as myself, with the conviction that the late storm had proved fatal to her wholefamily. I no sooner read the letter of Mary, than I lost no time in setting out for London,
London, that I might afford her every consolation in my power It wis pirti- culnly since this fatal prognostic had ti nek her, that she felt hovv loiloin wis I cr situition in the family vv ι re si e ìc- s tied She had met out of the daughters upon a visit in Staffordshire j they two had been the only individuals of the pirty, who had not reached a demure and sober age, md for a month thej had been sole companions to each othei. They had sung and danced to each other, they had strolled through the meadows and reclined in the shade to¬ gether, Mary hid instructed her friend in bot iny, and her friend had been eager to learn, because she was told that botinj wis a fashiomble accomplish¬ ment , she had in return been copious and animated m her description of the tow η amusements All this ended in the two young ladies, with that ardour and
and levity vvhich is perhaps rasepamble from youth, sw cai mg to each other an everlasting friendship Maiy was a total stranger to every member of the funily except this young lady, an 1 the aeniois complied in this point wilh their di igh- ter's wishes, in muling the joungeat miss Macueil to pass the winter with them. Mr. Macueil vvinhctl foi my sake to leave Mary in England, and easily turned the balance of her mind toward accepting the invitation. For the fiist two or three days Mary had been delighted with the metropolis; and no doubt w ould have continued to be delighted for as many months, had not anxiety for the safety of her family gradually driven all other thoughts out of her mind. At first she had conceived of a voyage at sea no otheiwise, than of a journey by land ; her father had been a great tra¬ veller , her mother had been in Italy ; yet
yet tempests and shipwrecks had made no pirt of the little histories she had heard them relate of their past idven- tures The ocean occupied no distinct region of her fincy, she had devoted no part of her thoughts to meditate the naturii history of the woild of watcis In the past years of her life she h id had no interest, giving to her ideas that par¬ ticular direction she had committed no rich freightage to the mercy of the imfuthful element Now the case was altered SI e had parted with her friends in а gentle and prosperous gilè , but the late squally weather had given being ind substance in her mmd to the phe¬ nomena of the sea What occupied her thoughts became the theme of her tongue, but she soon found that her feshtonable friend lent an idle ear to the monotonous topic Miss Matilda Ran- cliffe was what is well expressed by the phrase, a fair-weather friend, she loved no
no dismals ; her step wis a.ry , the (one of her voice was fi ohe and cheerful, and she owned that her sensibilities were so overpoweung, as to make 'ie impulse in her to fly from the presence of distress in esistible. The servant at mr. Ranclirre's showed me into the drawing-room, where the whole family, with one or two visitors, was assembled. Every one was cheer¬ ful and amused, the young lidies were busy talkmg ofa party of pleasuie, and anticipating the happiness they should reap from it I looked round the cncle, and could not at first discover tlie object of my search. The poor Mary had withdrawn into a coiner, neglecting all, and by all neglected. Her cheeks were pale, htr ejes nerr ι mk , her attitude was the attitude of с spair. As soon as she saw me, she hastened to me, and led me into another room. " Ob, sir," said she, " tel' me all that
that you knovv, and all that jou guess, respeclrag my poor father and mother. You, mr Fleetwood, are acquainted with these things, j ou no doubt have witnessed storms at sea, and knovv the different coasts near which they were tõ pass in their voyage. Are there any hopes ' Whereabout was the vessel 1 kcly to be when this storm came on ' Was there ever so drcidful a tempest ?" I endeavoured to encourage the unhappy orphan, I sought to inspiro courage, with as much skill as it could be com¬ municated by one who had not a spark of hope existing in his mind. " And how, Marj," said I, " do you find jourself situated in this worthy fa¬ milj > ' " Ah, mr, Fleetwood," replied she, wilh a desponding voice, " this is a sad place for me ' As long as I was gay, and could join in their amusements, vve went on well enough , I was a sort of favourite. But now that my heart sinks $ withm
within me, nobody cares for me ; they are glad to pass me by, and crowd toge¬ ther in a laughing knot at the most di¬ stant part of the room. This whole family, father, mother, brothers, sisters, seem to live only for amusements. What a situation for me, vvho have spent my whole life in a family of love i a family, where no individual could suffer, with¬ out exciting the liveliest anxieties, and the tenderest attentions, in all the rest ? ' A month longer elapsed, before we had any intelligence of the fate of the Romney. During Vhis period, my visits to the amiable forlorn were mnintermit- led, If Mary had before conceived a nascent partiality to me, it now became much stronger. The sight of me was tbe only pleasure the day afforded. The contrast between my sympathy and af¬ fection, and the indifference of the llan- cliffcs, was extreme. Into my bosom only could she pour her sorrows, in my eje
eye only did she meet the expression of liumimty. On my part, the situation wis no less favourable to the growth of attachment The sweet and affcction- ite disposition of Mary w as conspicuous. Htr desolite situation rendered her ten¬ fold more interesting I now felt, for tht first time in my life, how delightful a tisk it is to console distress, when the sufferer is ι womm, beiutiful and young. At tht proper hour I always flew lo the presence ot my churning wild with the most с igei ìmpatit ncc In general, when the mmd is engaje 1 tn the per- tot m ince of vu tiiou·» actions, one of the sentiments which most palpibly offeis itself is an honest pnde It wis not pnde tint I felt on the present occasion Mv uunclvvis too much sottencd to be ible to entertain so elect and prosperous a pission Thtrc was something ileh- cioiisly langu d in the lont of iny spirits, it us sidness, but a sadness not without voi и m it··
its gratificitions Sorrow brings two generous hearts nearer to each other, than joy I wis astonished, when I re fleeted on the ignorance in vvhich I h id lived of the most delicious emotions of the humm breist, and how near I ha 1 been to going to the grave without onci participiting whit is most precious aud excellent in the life of mm The melancholj news at length reach¬ ed us, which with so sure ifoicsight vve hid anticipated The vessel in wh ch the family of my beloved hid embarked, was tossed several dijs in the bay ot Biseaj, and at length Λ ishcd to pieces near cape Finisfenc, upon the uon-fiont ed coast of the proi шее of Galicia 1 he ciptain only, ind ι few of the offici is and sailors, were sived in the longboat They had proffered to receive two ot the passengers into the boit But this kin¬ dred of love refused to bc sepiritcd, they could not endure to cast lots upon ι their
their hves, md, rithcr tim submit to so cl rc in e\ticmitj, fither, mother ind d luchters preferred to perish together —How painfully are vve apt to icflect aftcrvvird upon ι project such as this of the vojagc toltalj, as pirtikmg of the natine of suicide ' Il the Micneils had been content to live in England, they might hive enjojed many years of plea sure, and hav с been long an ornament and advintage to their specie I never from this hour recollected the scene of ll eireinbai kat ion, without figuring them to myself as so many victims, robed m white, and ciovvned with chipiéis, marching along the beach, a:, to bc s ier heed When the melmcholy event wis as- certuncd, it vv is no longer possible for Miry to continue in the family ofthe Rinchfics She hired a lodging to wl ich she ictircd, with only one hum bic ten lie friend to iceoinj iny he M - lhe
The family vvho politely dismissed hei, condoled with her upon hci misfortune. It is impossible lei conceive any thing more hard and unfeeling, than the con¬ dolences which politeness extorts on so teirible an occasion. If a man could observe, fioin .1 place ot safety, the roir- ïngs ofa tiger, as he tore the palpitating limbs of his own brother, they woulel scaicely jai more painfully on the scn4. The adieux ofthe Rancliflcs sud but too plainly, As soon as we have shut the door on jou and jour woes, vve puipose lo toi get (hit theic is any such being 111 the «oil I.
Π I M'-
CIUPII R Will I vv vs now ¡mor Mirj s onlj visilor 1 sh ill not undei I ike lo dct ul the | rogre s of our imour mulct these trigieil cır oumstinccs For ι longtime, the ugh on couitslup substantially proceeded, no word of love, or hope, or of prepect to the future, fell from mj lips Ifl Ind attempted to utter such a word, I should have felt it like sacrilege, md 1 am sure the pure and affectionate htart of Mary would hive sustained such α shock, as must ultimately have proved abar to our union for ever No , she itgarded me merely asa zealous guaidian, and a failh- tul prolector. She s iw in me her fa- thtr s friend , and, as I setmed busy in pei forming the functions of tint friend to his sin viving repi csent itne, she ho¬ noured
noured me for my fitlelitj, she felt to¬ wird mt m mere ising rtv crtncc, and hid no thought iicircr her lient linn the gi itifjiii'my wishes, ind mtieipi tii^ mv riqiicsis lhe passem ofthe S!\cswill pcrlnps uifilliblv grow up be¬ tween milt nil female, vvlcicvcr thoy ue much togethei, md ted much mu¬ tili! approb ition, provided Ihcy ire nn- picsseel with no adverse prepossessions, and 'here is nothing in tht discipline anil decorums ofsocietj tint forbids and sets a biand on its completion The melan¬ choly too that hung over our interviews, soflencd our mmds, and prepared them for lender and passionate feelings One further misfortune impended over roy ward, for such by the most sacred obligations she was now become Her father, as I have said, had converted his whole praperty into meney, which he lodged, previously to his embarkation, in a banking house in Genoa He of course
couise received, in the duc forms pnc¬ tised on such occisions, two complete duplícales of tht titles or instruments by winch ht or his ltprescntative might climi the property at Genoi on pro- cluting the said titles or instruments. These duplicates were inclosed in two boxes of ebony, in figure and appearance perfectly similar. One of them mr Macneil designed to take with him on board the Romney, that he might em¬ ploy his foi tunc m tbe purchases he me¬ ditated, with the least possible delay, the other was to be left in my hands, with a view to my possible accident or miscarriage I was present with my fnend, when lie closed and sealed his different packages, the last diy but two before he left the Wmdermeie. We re id over on that occasion the papers received from tne Genoese banker The room in which vve sat was crowded with trunks and boxes, somt aheady locked, others-
otl eis waiting for their last compii ment In the middle of the room was в large tibie, covered with valuable tnnkets, bink notes, money, books of aceounts, and packets of pipéis of a ihüusiiid de nominations Suddenly Macneil was summoned out of the room, to speak to a land-bailift or tradesman of some soit, vvho had come for the second time upon some trifling and vexitious ques¬ tion Before he left the room, my friend hastened to put away his most im¬ portant papers He closed the two boxes of ebony, and carefully pi iced some other papers in a trunk vvhich was near bun His seal lay on the table, and, taking it in his hand, he requested me to affix it where it was wanting In all this he seemed to proceed so cautiouslj, as to leave my mmd entirely free from suspicion, while at the same tune his attention was really engaged by an¬ other subjeet This is the only account I ean
I can give of the affur Τ he trunks were opened no more One of the ebony boxes, together with the rest of the packages, was fin illy conveyed on board the Romney the other, as was previously determined, remained in my possession When, in consequence of the shipwreck in which Macneil perish¬ ed (fnrhe had placed a will he had lately mailt in my h mds, and hid appointed mc, in conjunction with in emment bar- ustcrat law, his exccutoi), 1 broke the seil, ind opened the box vvhich wis supposed to conlun lhe title ind instru¬ ments of his fortune, now become the fortune of his suiviving child, I found it tnlirely empty I was thundeistriick with this circum¬ stinee I ente cd into icoriespoíideiicc with tne banker at Geno ι, I i/tcnvirel commenced a law suit igunst lum His answers to my letters were ciuliously and artfully expressed, they ivoidcd M 5 '•i} mg
saying any thing d rectlj, respecting the sum of sixty thousand pounds stcilmg which I stated mr Macneil to have re mitted, the writer intrenched himself in the forms and language of business he said that he should be glad to see the titles and instruments on which I found ed so considcrible ι cluni but, till he saw them, he could deliver no opinion on the matter As this detestible cor¬ respondence proceeded, and m propor¬ tion as he felt himself more secure of h s ground, he assumed ι loftier and more insolent tone He was istonished thit I should trouble him with repeited apph cations m an afEur which he knew no¬ thing of, md required tint I should de sist from such extriordir y and discie ditable importunities This may well appe ir lo the reader somewhat wonder ful the banker who committed this enormous fraud had hitherto boi ne an unimpeachable character all I can say IS,
is, that the temptation was probably too large for his sentiments of integrity. I may be permitted, as ι misanthrope, to remai к, that the integrity of too many men has its limits, and that it ι to be feircd there have been bankers, even m ringlind, who would have sold them¬ selves to the devil for sixty thousand pounds—The faet ıs however, in a woid, tint the property of the Macneils was nevei recovered. I have often thought it was fortunate for me, that I antl my good friend, the Genoese banker, were not inhabitants of the same countn It was certainly in some meisui e m issue of character that was ti ied between us I do believe that, if the Genoese hid not entertained the hope of keeping his reputation is well as the money, he would have paid Mary her fortune. What applause would he have obtained, if he had disbursed out of bis coffers sixty thousand pounds, which, a»
as every one who repeated the story woulil have been forward to remark, he was not obliged to pay ' On the other hand, vvhat a villain was I, if, on false or uncertain grounds, I charged him with fraudulently detaining so enormous a sum' I must take care, as he obseived to me in some of his letters, hovv I ad¬ vanced an accusation against him, tend¬ ing to subvert the whole basis of his tr insactions, without having in mj pos¬ session documents by which it could be supported. The good Genoese; is I afterward learned, made out a plausible and even pathetic story, to his acquain¬ tance and friends, of the injury he sus tamed It might, he said, have been the intention of ihe unhappj gentlem m vvho was lost at sea, to have vested this pro¬ perty in his hands, the more was his misfortune that he never received it' Sixty thousand pounds however wúb л large sum, he had never in the whole 4 course
course of his business held cash to that amount, at one time, for any one indivi¬ dual , and he took upon hirn to doubt from every thing he had heard, whether the deceased had ever been worth half the sum. It was a hard thmg indeed, to be made accountable for money he never saw, and to be called a cheat and a villain unless he would give away halt his estate, and, though he trusted in the equity ofthe laws of Genoa to pro¬ tect hi» fortune, and in thecindour of hia countrymen to vindicate his charac¬ ter, yet the uneasiness vvhich the rash¬ ness of this Englishman, to say the least of it, had given his mind, was such asno vindication coultl ever compensate —I am not sure, it I had gone at this time to Genoa, whether I should not have been publicly hooted, as I passed along lliestieets. Yet, in reality, spite ofthe loss of these important insti uments, I had do¬ cuments
cunients left, sufficient to justify me in, the mind of every imputili obseiver. The amount of mr Macneil ч fortune was of course a matler that had been sufficiently obvious to many. Ί his for¬ tune could not suddenly be annihilated The Milinesc fnend of Macneil wis ready to attest that it had been his purpose to lodge his property in this house, aı d that he certunly believed, he had done so He produced ι letter m which the fact was strongly implied, though it was not affumed in words that admitted not of debale In bis will my friend de¬ senbed the receipt cf the sum as being acknowledged by the banker, uid enter¬ ed into some detail as to the number and titles ofthe instruments under w hich he claimed But all this was not sufficient to pro¬ cure a decree in my fav oui before the Ge¬ noese magistrates The Italian lawyers observed^tbat a description of property m aman s
a rnm's will, wis the most unlike thing in the world to a title to an estite, ind that, if such ι doctrine, is this cluirt turned on, were idmitted, which they well knew the equity ofthe bench befoie which Ihe/ pleided would reject with indignation, every mm vvho pleased, m ev ei y country ofEurope, might bequcith his daughter sixty thousind pounds, not only from their client, but from eveiy bulking, ind even coi sidenble mercan tile, house within the limus of the re¬ public They dwelt at great length upon the high charicter for integrity, which hid ever been pieserved by the co nmercial cl iss of the crtirens of Ge¬ noi, a class, vvhich wis well known to consist pi incip illy of the most ancient and honourable nobility in the woild, they expatiated pathetically upon the virtues, the charities, the devotion* and the unblemished life of their client, and the agonies his pure and uncorrupteel mind
mind had suffered from so foul an im¬ putation , and they earnestly called on the court by their pte ent decree to vin¬ dicate, not tbe defendant only whose charicter in this case had been griev¬ ously aspersed, but the whole stite, from the suspicion that such a cume could have been so much as conceived bv one of her cilizens—Their exertions and eloquence were crowned with the most entire success I hesitated long lo disclose to the un fortunate Mary the new calamitv which hung over her One constelei ttion it length decided me to make her of coun¬ cil in the controversy that wis g ung on I found her mind dwelling with inccss mt anguish on the image of her deputed kindred She refused all amusement and avocations The employments, which had lately been so clear, weie now loathsome to her The fields mel lhe garden hid no charms Her spuits and her
liei appetite ılescıtccl hcı I siw tint there was no ch mcc of ree ììhnj; her to life, but by giving her some object to vvhich she coultl not refuse to attend I believe the loss of hei fortune of sixty thousind pounds, wis the direct mems by which she was pieserved from the grive At first she dechrec! in the most pe remptory manner, tint she would listen to nothing tint related to the goods of life What were the me ins of life to her, when she was already bereaved of eveiy thing that mide life worth Invmg ' It was a pleasure to her to conceive, that, when she lost parents and sisters, she had nothing left ' There was some¬ thing soothing in the idea, that the same billows vvhich had devoured her dearest relimes, had swallowed upthcir wealth, and left her a helpless beggar in the world ' By degrees I recalled her to a sounder mmd.
mind. I represented to her the impor¬ tance of wealth, mil the duty which pre¬ sei ibed the preservation and light dispo¬ sition of it With the foitunc which had thus devolved to her, hovv ie»pect- able might she become ' She might maintain a houshold of temperate and happy individuals She might lehcve the wants of multitudes, might unfold talent, encourage industry, and mul¬ tiply around her the class of sober and honourable citizens in the state. Even the inherent qualities which she or any other individual possessed, weie lU lusfrated, when they appeared in con¬ junction with the goods of fortune. The meuts of the poor man were always clouded, undu valued, and baffled of their utility ; while those of the rich were illuminited with the be ims of applause, and enabled to appear with tenfold efiect upon the theafre of society 1 further reminded her of the guilt he would in¬ car,
cur, iľ, instead of cneleivoiiring to make ι propei use of thevveilth which hid de¬ volve 1 to hci, she suffered it, by any ncglycncc of hers, to become tne pri?e of piofiigicy ind friucl, ind to be ad¬ ni nistet ed in the depraved minner which such dispositions would dictitc I pi evaded on the sorrowing mud to suffer me to bring to her t ıe barrister, who was the joint executor of her fa¬ ther s will We read together, in her presence, the letters which had relation to the subject We canvassed the evi¬ dence, nuncupatory and sci ıptorj , vv h ell might be made useful in the cause We brought together in her ipartmcnts a consultation of English liwyeis, with whom we thought it necessiry to aduse as to the measures to be pursued Add to this, that the letters, vvhich from time to time reached us from the Genoese banket, ind from the lavvycis it wis ne¬ cessity fot us to rotun m llut cily, both wl ся
when they were expected, and when they aniveel, kept alive om interest, ind furnished topics for our conversition A law-suit is like an idvenluic in ι gıming transiction , the mind is conn niiilly upon the stretch, the iftiu from day to day assumes a new fice, hope and fear dance an alternate measine beloie the eyes, and we ire now smgumc vt lh expectation, and now speechless and de¬ jected with intolerable despnr How many waking and anxious nigh I s may he expect to pass, who, from choice or necessity, is obliged to commit his pro¬ perty to the discussions ofthe wnngluig bar I—Thedegrecof uneasiness,which is inseparable from an affair of this sort, was, as I have already said, salutary to Mary, and served by imperceptible de¬ grees to bring her back to the consideia- tions ofthe world. Here then was a strange series of vi¬ cissitudes in the pecunnry fortune of my destined
dest ned bride When I hid fust con¬ tem] I ted mam ge with her, she was one of tin ее coheiresses merely, of ч min of ι rţiven fortune, who might expect on the di) of her m irmgc to icct ive ι ccr¬ tiin r oltiin iud, ifter the deith of her puent todvidcin equil allotments the pi ipcrty which tliej possessed In the ttvv diys thit elipsed between the melan¬ choly intelligence of the loas ofher fi nuly md the pci iod vv hen it becime nc- ei asity to lool. into thcifTius ot mj dc ceiled tuend, she stiod iorth the un- douhtc 1 successor to his ample piopertj t ncvci In 1 been in iny occurrence ot nv life, ι linciceli uv, clnncter , indi doubt whethei in my moment ot these few d ıj·., the ulei of Muy s accession of j loperty oftcicd itself to my thoughts , cutainlj it wis very fir fiom bung imong lliecirly suggestions inspired by tij s mel incholy citistrophe But, aftci this, theic was a long tunc, ncirlj ivc , before
before the question was finally set at rert (ihc action indeed was not dismissed by the Ilalian courts under two years; but I had, before that, resolutely duven the expectation of any advantage to icsull, from my thoughts) ; and during this pe¬ rimi, amidst the various fluctuation» of our cause, and the sanguine hopes which vveie occasionally held out lo mc, the successive images of my mistic-s, as the possessor of an ample property, and я beggar, could not but loicifcly present themselves to my apprehension. What a stiange thing is the human mind ' Of vvlnt consequence was it to me, whether the amiable and accom¬ plished woman I man teil, were, or vveie not, amply endowed with (he goods ol' fortune ? I bad aire idy enough loi every honest and honourable purpose in life. boriimé could not make her more amiable and accomplished than shewas. aeheisity could take nollung from her. lean
lean safely declare tint I never repined for a moment, that she gave me her hind, without bringing me a shilling 'i ct I im formed 1 kc all othei corporeil essences, mil am iffected by the idvcn- titious ind munenti ıçf cireumst inces ot rink or riches villi which mj fellow bc ing ıs surrounded Hid Mirj entered into mj allnnce ι distinguished heiress, llns, in spite of my philosophy, would h ivc comm inded from me ι certain de¬ ference ind hom ige As she wis, pen- nvless, ι mere pensiomry on my bounty, —I sweai I di 1 not v due hci less,—I felt more tenderness, more humanity, ι more religious kind of forben ınee to¬ waid her But the senliment wis of a lillcicnt sort, her fust cium wis upon my pity I expciicnccd this ι hunditd tunes, when I hastened to piy hct my tustomny visit When I vvuled upon heras in heitess, I ipproached wuh a terlain submission, I looked it her as / an
an independent being, my thoughts moved slow, and my tongue was apt to falter, if I suggested to her any idea of a freer and more unreremomous sort. When I visited her portionless, mymind moved ficcr, I breathed a thninci and more elastic atmosphere, tny tongue as¬ sumed a tone of gieater confidence, and, at (he same time that I felt for her the deepest compission and the most entire sympathy, my speech became more éloquent, and I caught myself talking with the condescension of a su¬ penoi,.—aiipci oi in the possess on of tint solitici dirt, wlucli the svstem of human thing» much ottener bestows upon a elnvellei or a knave, than upon a being of genuine excellence and worth Another idea ofa subtlei nature ofler¬ ed itself to my thoughts, which I will state here, as calculated lo illustrate the whimsical composition of the human «und I felt that, m, consequente of the
the heavy cih nily which had overtaken tins beautitut oi|hin, it wis becom· doubly inciimhcnt on mc that I should mirry hei She was left, bv ι deplorable and istoinshing event, desolate upon the slige of the woild, and she was in all moril antl religious OJİıgılıon entitled to tht full benefit ot my fortune But this is not exactly the idea to which I refer An ample property of sixty thousand pounds h id unaccountably disappeared. What vv as become of it ' I charged the malvcisation on lhe Genoese bankéi he denied the charge The question vis it issue before the laws ind 1 ivvyers ofhis country it was probable thit the accused would ultimately be acqtultcj He would be icquittcd, because I hid no sufficient evidence to ел'иЬИ, to sub¬ stantiate the assertion Well then , here wis ι horrible ft iud which had been perpetritcd As I charged it cm the bmker, might not anothei chu^c VOL II \
ıt on mc î I hid been trusted In Mic ııcıl in ill h s affurs, theic » is no in pirent individu il to whom ihc guilt could belone:», but the Gctiuc с or mv- stlf líc h ι Ino more visible lempi lien thin I Uis opu'ertec wis not less, md, like me, lit vv is eh ldless „η Ι 1 11- cheloi , it was generally believed llint, when he died, he woild beque th his ]ni]eitj to lhe chuich But, it lhe fruid veieimic, how u ι ch ore com ihc ucci would be mj gu It ' 1 wis tie fi end e f the dccciseii, tic Gei o sc а sinnier ϊ Ind bten hveel on ly M e- ncil as li c select cicpositir\ of h s m leicsls 1 hen in gii e for i m mert how inexpressible must letle I eight 1 1 my profligace, if, conscious to mjself thit I alone vv is guilty of tht embcrz't ment, I cleliber itely clnrged it upon another, and solemnly prosecuted the charge ' Imagine what the guilt must be, of strppmga wcalthj oqhin, let
in my gnrehaiiship, of hci pioptrtv, it the same moment thil fitc had robbed her ofher uituni protetlois mtl ol thus hu rung liei forth penny less, to seek the me uis of ι wretched subsistence f lhese, it will be said, ue but wild ■ ucl airdriwn picture . I hid passed through the woild with an unimpeichfel к pulition tht ιι tegnty and hbenlily ot tny îrm ictions vvt cl nown to every ι nc tint hid hcud of щу name, no licitine would evct eheim ot suspecting me ul so il «ruions in ictie η Bc it so V nun is duel ely viewed by the ν in u Iv eliciuti lincei iiihibitiiits ot the Jole Milton is knrwn lo one n m neielj is the Liti ι li ni litui lo j se¬ net ırv of s| ite atul the 111114 of Li I ontune mici rupted h confessor, vvho u is setting befoie hi n on his clc ith-bc 1 lit tenors of moti ei vvctll, with the c\ 11 nition, ' boi Un t oiko, do not cíisluib the poc»r vvrcleh, bc is le^s s Inne
knave than fool ; God can never have the heart to damn him." Such was tny temper, that I could not sleep tranquilly upon my pillow, while I thought it pos¬ sible that a native of Genoa or Peru should regard me as a villain, pamper¬ ing my own follies and depraved pro¬ pensities with the purloined propeity of another.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XIX. JL/ET tic not be misunderstood. Let it not be supposed that the passion and de¬ termination of my mind in favour of this charming girl were less fervent than they ever had been. On the contrary she became eveiy hour more interesting to me. While she sat like Niobc, her whole soul dissolved in tears for I'.e un¬ timely destruction of her family, it was impossible not to feel in its utmost energy (he wish, Might I be youi comforter I In proportion as she gained lhe pow er of at¬ tending in some degiee lo thcobjccls befoie her, hei mtcrcoui-e gave me nan eless emotions Theie wasagentle sweetness in bei mainici, that 1 never saw in any other human crcaltiie, I re- membeted her gay and active and spint¬ eci ;
cd, ît wis now i famt and iindtfint I ııııaçc of the e qualities that presenti 1 licit, a sun thit yielded in uncen un beim, mildst the miss of clouds liat oicrht to overwhelm it Tint timspi icnt complexion, tint counten mce in which, like a book, the spect itoi might ie id cvci y ene tion and tempoi nj im¬ pulse of lht oul, rendered tverj 't It ot mind ot the angelic ereilure to whom it belonged intetesting When the fiist lamt smile, after the death of hei falber, illumined her features, it struck me like a resurrection from the dead mj sensi- tions weie such as Ihosc vvhich Admc- tus must lı ive felt, when Hcrciilea brought Ьзск to him his heroic consoi t fiom the regions of Pluto Theic ι t something tuo acri il, too subtle, too heavenly m hercountcii nice, to bc pro pcrlj the attribute of ι terminal being Thegloncs of Elysium seemed to hmi» round liei Pori Mary hid nothing on e it'«
cut h le-fi her to love, but mc ; and she felt toward me as toward (allier, mother, iisieio in one. Nothing could be so cle- lleale and tl litcring to me, as the whole of hei (lemcauoiu ι and eveiy demon¬ stration of this sort had a double pi ite, as it appealed a gentle »ни! voluntary and elicci ľul resliamt upon the state of her mint!, so much ttiken away fiom the rie. il lo give to the living. Thus vve passed the winter, The cheeiful blnze of our quiot hearth com¬ pensated for the driving hail and snow vvhich raged without. Gradually I cn- deavouicd to engage the attention of my charmer with indifferent objects. I adorned her «parimenti) with the most beautiful products of the gardener's care I was able to procure. I obtained some for her which she hatl never seen before. She instructed me in botany ; she brought forth her port-folios, and show¬ ed me her charming duwings. I railed her
imwittention to the beauties of lhe Eng¬ lish writers fioin Queen Elizabeth to the (ml War, writers vvho hatl always ap¬ peared to .me to surpass tho'e of any odier age or country. It was one of Ihe ¡tL.Benble ill tributes of this winter, that cut interviews were never broken in up¬ on by any accidental interloper. One peaceful hour of animated disquisition, or soothing remissien, passed away afler another, unmarked. When I s*avv my adorable ward, if not happy, at least peaceful and pleased, my heart beat with honest exultation, and I said, This is my work 1 she was willing to yield equal credit to my exertions. It was the work of nature I Time, youth and health inevitably did so much for my patient, that there was little left for me, her soul's physician, to eflèct. If the Intercourse and position I have described would bave been delightful to any one with the soul of a man, imagine what they were to
to ine, who, from the hour of my birth till now, had never experienced the sw eets of honourable love A brilliant and genial spring suc¬ ceeded the winter I hid never felt this- inteiestmg period of the awakening of the universe from its torpor, so deeply as now N iture became restored to life and the pulse» of life, and my charmer sympathised with Ihe general tone of crealed things Dm ing Ihe winter I had neicr ventured to propose lo hera visit to au j ofthe scenes of public amuse¬ ment which the metropolis affords, no one could have looked in her fice, and st tried the proposition, it would have been licason to the majesty ofher guef, it woul I have been sicnlegc, te bnng ten wu d lhe dejected mourner amidst the haidcncd gnctj and indifference of m assembly, oi the unlnllowed jests and ubsttcperoiib mirth of a theatre An ex¬ clusion mio the country is an amuse- N j ment
ment ofa different sort. Niturc in her gajcst scenes is never drunken ind tu¬ multuous A cheerful sobriety ıs their ch iiacteristio. When I escape from the multitude, and histen to her ıctıcıls, I am never incommoded with obtrusive and discoid int sounds, all around mc ia silent, oi, il any thing ia heard, it is lhe uistling of the wind, or the uncouth vv ubhngs of the feathered tribe, even the lowing of thoheidsisbwcct, mtl il I vveie phctd muckt ι foiest ol wild beasts, I should find, could Ι dne t η y- tlt ofthe tciroi lhey excite, tint tin nugl ty mastei hid Itiuptitd then loir- ing», till they iftoidcd a sublime mellow ness, not imple ising to the e ir Ihe solt lints of the moining hid ι stud liveliness in them vvhich led my poor Miry out of herselt, ere she vv is aware. The air had a sweet al ìcrity which she could not resist "Mi Ilctt- weed," sajd she, ' your attentions aie ι thou
я thousind times grcitci thm í de ..rve Hul thev ıclı ırıcterofoblıusıvcne s ind comm md, I should know whit pirt to til с But I cm discovtr nothing in then which betrivs tint jou thins, of gratili alinn to yoursell, vou ippear to be the s ul of liumimty md tenderness I should be the most ungnteful cieatuie in the vvotld, if 1 did not accept jour so¬ licitudes formy heilth and invitations to the iir or if 1 refused to smile, when nituit ind Flcttwood sum non me to We n ide a toni m succe Sion to al irioat ill the environs cf the metropolis If one is content to give up ihc dein md tit the vild, ttie nnjeslic ind ivvful in si cilery, I kno v of no cily the neigh¬ bour o lof which ifbrcls agrcitcr va¬ nity ol uch and beautiful and animated ^pots, th m London The Ί. hímes is the greit wealth of this vicinity Whit ean bc more striking than tht crowd of 4 mists
masts and vessels of various sizes, as dis¬ covered from Greenwich, or the frolic meandrings of, this rural stream, as it shows itself at Richmond ? What ob¬ jects can be more unlike than these two ? If you recede from the river, Syden¬ ham, and Epsom, and Esher, and Hainp¬ stead, and Hendon, and twenty olhcr delightful scenes, are ready to advance their several claims for Ilıe pı ize of beauty. Let not my readers w onder.. t this enumeration, which to some of * hem may perhaps appear tute. Lel them re¬ collect that with every cue of lhese places I associate some uitcicating scene of courtship, which renders the remem¬ brance dear tome. Let them bc thank¬ ful that I dismiss this part of my nar¬ rative so 1'ghlly. Ifl viete to enlarge upon the history of this beautiful spring, apel relate atlength the pleasing incidents which occurred, particulatly at Epsom and Richmond, instead, of consecrating a page
a page to this topic, I should fill vo¬ lumes. In the month of July I became a hus¬ bind When a sufhcient period had chpsed to make my poor Miry feel that she belonged in some measure to the world, she wis too ingenjonsnot todis- rhm the fot ms and semblmces of grief. As she h id s arcely anj visitor beside my •■elf, it became properthat vve should, is soon as might be, put an end to this cquuocil situiltoti, upon which the good n it u ι eel world is al way s eagei to inteipooc its consti ucdons " My be¬ loved Fleetwood," sud Miry, "I feel tint I lo с you to the full is much, 1 be¬ lieve moie, thin I could love a mm of my ovv n age The sentiment lhat I feel foi you h ю ι soit of îcligion in it, which ronders it a thousind times sweeter, and more soothing to my heart I levcienic, at the same time that 1 love you I shall bc infinitely moie icKictant to wound
wound yoif, and тогз solicitous foi your peace, thm I should be, if jou vveie л youth in the full levelry md cxuberinco of the morning of life. In all pirtncr- »lup engigements, there must b ι sub ordination It I had ι young husb nul, 1 might perhıps sometimes bc presump tuous enough to estimate his discernment at no higher a rate than my own , but the e ise ıs otherwise now. Mist ike me not, my eleu Fleetwood I am not idle ind thoughtless tnough,to promi e to sink my being and individu ihty m jouis I shall hive my distinct propensities nul preferences Nature has mortified my mmd in a particular wiy, ind I have ol course my tistes, my pleisurcs, and my vyishes, more or less different irom tho с of eveiy other human being I hope v ( u will not require me to disclaim them In me jou will have a wife, and not ap^ssne machine But, whenever a question oc¬ curs of reflection, of expérience, ofjudg- me it,
ment, or of prudenti il consider ition, I shall alwiys lisien lo joui wisdom with undissembled deference In eveiy thing nidifièrent, or th it em bc made so, I shall obey you wild pleisuie Anil in re¬ turn I im sure you will consider me ası being to be won with kindness, md not dictated to with the laconic phrase of uithouty " Yet I та sorry, u у dear lov e, that vou shoul I míny a woman who has snf- 'cieel so ciuelly as I hive clone My I itliei s advice toyou wis, 'Fleetwood, if you mairy, chuse ι girl, whom uo dis¬ appointments li ivc soiued, md no mis- lottuncs Invc bent to the eirth ' Fleet¬ wood, you must not bc angry wilh mc, il I sometimes íeeollect th it my father, molher, and sislcis, all pciished toge¬ thei by m untimely and tiagicil fitc. Iciccful and seiene as 1 miy ippcir to you, I beir a wound in iny bre ist, which miy bc skinned over, ind seem as if it were
werccuied, but which will occisionally break out afiesh, and pioduce sjm- ptoms of fev cr, »mpitience and elespur How exquisite arc the v irions chindes of humm life ' From the most venerable of these, those which are ent nicel upon us without asking our le ne, andare stamped with the highest «inctily, I am cut off for cvci I am like ι being vvho, by some severo ordiniti! u of pio vicleiice, ıs destined lo stand done, (о know no kindred, to hive no ill mce or connection, but vvlnt my own cleclion and voluntiry cngigemeut nuy eeeii tually supply If jou should ful mc, Fleetwood'——I hive f mils, you un questionibly have fuilts too. You me dif ficult to be pleised , I see it, mj f uher told me so, my poner, of pleasui·»·, pei¬ haps my inclination to plcisc, hive their [limits If vou should ful me, I hive no one to fly (ο , I shall íemín ι so litary möhumLrtt of despau ι Theîsfc thought*
tl oıı^I ts will sometimes intride and ni ikc mc sad Othci peisons looe their π î ıtıons one by one, tbey ire gndu ally broken in to then foilom sı' ntion I w ıs overwhelmed it once and never, so long is I shill continue to exist, shall 1 iccover this terrible stroke ' But why do I thus cheat my soi- rows, by dwelling in general proposi¬ tions ' If my lost rehtives had been other¬ wise lhan they were, I could have borne it, I ought to have borne it. Fleetwood, you knew them * No, never was theie such ι father, such a mother, such sis¬ ters. How we loved each other I Hovv happy we made each other, me! vvlnt poweis we hid of conti lbutmg to each other's hippmess '- Barbaıa I Amel a * my fatner * my uothci ' ¡t I dwell tip- on the hoirible theme I sh ill go disti act¬ ed ι —Fleetwood, hovv I wish that I too could commit myself to the mercy of the occm I When the thought of my own
own death rises to tnj mind it never comes in so soothing ι iorm is it 1 una gmc it to happen b\ diowiung Be¬ itele me, theie is nothing Ι Ό cutíes lj piaj for, as thit this may bc the me ιη-ι by which 1 muy cense to exist I should not feel it 04 death, it wouU be a it- union to all I love I I ife I» ılıı lUierl ι life Ills к t la le Ilı!» mingici me with ill uyunul hw Ι ι 1 'Tl» to bo bon» Юн «ir» unii to pimi!« "1U lorejoln lhe stolti írom wlikh 1 j runjj, Arni bc »¡,«11 m К Uure '
СПЛР
CIUPI LR XX Jľ ком the chinch of bt Gorges II i- novLiS|iiiP, »he с the miiutccccic liiuny w speli ι nc I, we set out f >i he bith 4 Mu lock m J1i.tljf.hin , vv'iuo wc sinul лп entire month I his wne tho happiest month of my 1 fc Mj dcir Muy betime plicul md cheei ľul , with¬ out foigetlmg the tcırıblo enl unity which the list mtuinp h id biought up¬ on her, she opened her heart to the gra- tilicititms vvhich wtit before hci , she felt thit, in the solemn contract bhe had formed, she hid undtitiken in some degiee for mj satisfaction and tran¬ quilli!), and she wis determined to witch over hei trust Nor will I be gu lly of the í ilse modesty to insinuate., tint si с di 1 this me ely is tlic disth uge ot
of a duty, on the contraiy, I wis so fortunate as to interest and please her This she manifestul by a thousand flat¬ te nng symptoms, attentions which can flow only from the heirt, antl vvhich the head can nevei supply Nor Jet it be iorgolfen that, though I was now some¬ what beyond tbe meridian oflife, I was not destitute of many advantages, cal¬ culated to recommend me to a delicate and refined female companion. My person was pleısıng, and my demeanour giaceful, circumstances which hid ac- quued me in Paris the appellation ofthe bandsome Engl· liman. Ί hat ν cry sen- sibilily which constituted the torment of my life, gave о feeling sweetness to the tones of my voice, and a gcntleiies* to my attentions, such as ai e found peculi¬ arly acceptable to the better order of fe¬ males. It Mary was cheerful and pleased, tbe happiness I felt is sucn as cannot be de¬ senbed.
scribed. Vv hat a conlrist did there exist between the tumultuous scenes of niy Partsnn amours, and my relative si¬ tuation with the accomplished femile whom I hid now madt my wift ' The women I hid Iovtd, furiouslv ml clis- trictcdly loved, in the t uly penod of my lite, I h id ικ ι er'* teemed II nv couldl? lhey h id eich a husbind, they had eich chıldıen Hoıv can a wo¬ man discharge the duties of these sacietl lehtions, at the same time that she is amusing herself with the wishes, 01 gra- tifjing the ippelitcs, ofa lovci ' The telci ıs too shocking to be dwelt upon ' bhe puts oft the mitron, to play the wild and loose-hcirted coquette She pre- «ntsto her husband the offspring ofher < nmtn.il amours, and calls it his. All her life is a cheat, one uninterrupted tissue of falshoods and hypocrisy. Can she tell 'ier thoughts? She, vvhohasnotismgle thought vvhich, though it may be tole¬ rated
rated in »i с нее, would n 't, if uttu ul ııı appropmlel incinge, make every one of her acquuiilince tum lei maiblc it Ihe· sound Esteem her ' She is not vvorlhv to live, 01, if to live, to he confined in some cloister of penitents, where rigid discipline and cent se ıltıı с, uıtlscmty fire, might it lengtii purge her of tint fcimcnt in hei blood, or thai giddy in¬ toxication ofthoughf, which at present render» her the blot ofher sc\, iud the disgriccof the man nge tic ' There arc ] cisons who «port Ihe opi¬ nion, thit tic plcısuıc which lsgimed by st i!th, is the genuine plessuie, and thit the ¡irohibilion which units upon Ihc intiulgcncc gives it its highest 7cst It is not so' This opinion is not moie pernicious in its tendency, thm it is ri¬ diculous in the grounds upon which it rests Whit, is it the consciousness of crime, lh it makes our pleasure ' the fear, which coYıtuıtııHy liiunts us with a presen
I r ent mout tint vv e sh ill bc delected ' tht co v inliet, tint luces our counte¬ rt mı t to fili in the jirtscncc of our fel¬ low men mtl mikes ι hundred iccielcn- tl ııııl lunule* ııınııksın convtisilion or in pul I с, с ci likt i sword into our vit ils' lhe fearful struggle for e vei re¬ peited vvithm us, which leids us to cb the thu g wc contlcinn, inel lepinc over mu vve uic s tint we dut' Ν , it ι innocence Ihıl ıs the sml of pleisuie vv lh wl ich lhe senit nent ot sh шве b и ce np Uibk i ht t uly h ippy un ι 1 t s up hia f tc with - rent у, md chilit 4 ts the tye- of ill tic world W it ioni fr tuk ıc s, vv thout ι conscience vod ol otte ее, with iut a feeling tint llu Ьетд I love is ot ι worthy mtnre, ι id thit no nnc can stind up md siy " In consulting your own lnclitntion you have d ше tne nnnnnly wrong theic cinnot bc the " sunshineof the soul Most tspccnlly in the connection of
of »cx with ses, it ıs necessiry to sub- stanti il cıi|ovınciit, tint virtue· shoul I spi eiei t! с couch, md that honoui ami pe ice of minti should close the cuit un The kiss of honest loie, how t ıpltıı «is ' But the tiuc iiigicdicnls in this upline ate, ι he ut-fclt esteem of cicli othci β chine ri, a pci cept ion tint, while the eye wc sec spatUe·., mcl the check glows, with affection, the glow is guilt¬ less of mv unhallowed and licentious propensity, in fine, the soothing st ite of illirici vvhich tells t s tint while wc freely indulge tht impulses of our heirt, vve ire not disgricing, but hcmouimg the mighty ] ower ly wh ch wc exist lo íeeollect tint ncıthcı my own charicter, nol th it of the pirtner ol tuj joy», ıs in¬ jured, but improved, by the scope of our nuluil pattıılılıcs, is the crown of social pleasuie To peisons thus at¬ tached, thus bourn! in honomable con¬ nection, c ich daj may be expected to 1 relt
add to their enjoyment, and increase the kindness and esteem with which they regard each other To me the situation was new, was such as I had not anticipated, and was so much the more enchanting to me I had lived long in the world, and I had lived alone. My soul panted for a friend, and I had never found such a friend as it demanded, a friend " who should be lo me as another self, vvho shptild joy m all my joys, and gnevc in all my sorrows, and whose sy mpathy sliould be inca- pible of being chmged by absence into smiles, while my heid continued bent to Jhe earth with anguish " I had not I ccn avv ore that nature Ins provided a substitute in the mainage tie, for this roma tic, il not impossible friendship I he love whit h Pythns is sud lo have lorne lor Dimoi!, or Theseus for Piu. hous, nvmy a mained pur have borne viii о for
for each other The diffeience of sex powerfully assists tbe intimacy, simili- rity ofcharacter can never unite tw о pu tics so closely, as the contrast of iiiascu İme enterprise m one, and a defenceless tendei ness uı the other Man and wife, if thty loie, must love each other vehe mently Their interestsore in almost all ■ cases united If they have children, these children form a new bond, either part} pursues the same end, and has us affections directed towards the same ob¬ ject Independently of this, whatever contributes to tbe welfare of the one is advantageous to the other, and the cala¬ mity or death of either is a kind of de¬ struction which overtakes tbe by slinder Habit assists the mutual dependence and very often it happens that, when a wedded pair has lived for a long series of years together, the death of the feebler ofthe two is only a signal calling on the 2 other
other to be gone, that he survives but ι ftvv clays, and they are cltposittd it tlie «ame moment in ι common grive Thus does the system ot things of winch vve ire a pirt supply oui inhcient deficiencies, md conscious is it vvcte, m hovv smiil a clcgicc vve ue ichptcd fir sublime vntues, issist, by a sort of mechmicil link, in the construction ot tint vivid md unremitting ittachment which the human heart demintls To me, who had been accustomed to live alone with dependents, with ac- qnaintmce, and with seivants, bow de¬ licious were the attentions of a beautiful and accomplished womm, whose inte¬ rests were for ever united with my own I A servant dares not, and an acquunt¬ ance but coldly performs the ordinaiy duty of enquiring after your health, and sending you forth to the occupations of the day crowned with their good wishes, Hovv pleasing to be an object of inteiest ο ι and
ind concern to the person whom I deeply esteem and fervently love ' How delicious the eye that glistens with plea¬ sure to hail my return, and the cheek that reddens with kindness' It is this which constitutes the unspeakable charm of home My home is not a fabric of walls и hieb shelters me, is not even the windows, the furniture, the elbow- chair, and the mute fire-side, which ha¬ bit has endeared and hung round with a thousand pleasing associations, it is that there I find the countenance that gladdens at my approach, and the heart that welcomes me. The affect on of Mary I felt as a charm reconciling me to hfe ; it gave me value ift my own eyes, to observe her beautiful and well- proportioned presence, her speaking «ye, her lucid complexion, and to say, To the soul that inhabits there I am ef importance ; she is cheerful, because I am happy and well, if I perished, she 4 would
would feci she had lost every thing' How flattering to the humin heirt, that there is ι being, and a noble one, whom with one accent of my voice I can de¬ light, vv ith one glance of my eye I cm fill with sweet content ' My tenants loved me, beciuse I hid power, my ic quamtance, because I could contribute to their entertainment; the poor who dwelt rear my mansion, for my we illh , but my wife would love me in sickness en m health, in poverty, in calamity, in total desolation I While we resided at Matlock, we vi¬ sited the beauties and romantic scenery of Derbyshire I w as familiarly acquaint¬ ed with the whole befoie, and I now per¬ formed the office of ucerone and inter¬ preter to Mary But how different were the sensations with which I now visited each charming, 01 each wonderful scene ' Even a bright and spirit stirring morn, did not now stir in mc ι contemplative and
and solitary spirit ; it turned my eye on my companion, it awakened us to the interchange of cheerful and affet lionate looks, it tipt cur tongues with míny a pleasant sal'j', and míny a tender and sjmpathetic expression. When we look- id down upon the rich and fcittle plains, when vve hung over the jutting and tie¬ mendous precipice, I perceived with in¬ expressible pleasuie, that mine was no longer a morose and unpaitictpatccl sen¬ sition, but thit another human creature, capable of feeling all my teehngs, re¬ joiced and trembled along wilh me. When I retired to my inn after the fa¬ tigues md dangers of the day, I did not retire to a peevish and fioward meal among drawers and venal attendants, I sit down with the companion of my heart, and shared the pleasures of idle¬ ness, as we had before shared the plea¬ sures of activity. Hovv many agreeable topics of conversation did the rivers and the
casions of mutual enden ment did tlıey aftoi tl I It seemed that the spu it of kind¬ ness still gained new strength, as the scene was perpetually shifted befoie our eyes, and as wc breathed an atmosphere for evtr new
E\D OF ГНЬ 4LCOM) VOLUME.
