Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The algerines: or, The twins of naples
THE ALGERINES.
CHAP. I. Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires, Know of your youth, examine well your blood, Whether, if you yield not to ^our faiher's choice, You can endure the livery of a itnn ; For aye to be in shady cloister mew'd, To live a barren sister all your life, Chanting faint hyrans to the cold fruitless moon. Shakespeare. ALPHONSINE saw the emotion of her parent, and preferring this placid display of feeling to the wild rage which had so re¬ cently shook his frame, wisely held her peace, until the storm in his bosom had partially subsided. She then, as soon as ceased the pealing summons to vespers (it was the first time she could remember VOL. II. B
ever disobeyed the now unheeded call), she turned again towards him, and fixing her dark expressive eyes on his still agitated countenance, seemed mutely to demand some explanation of his mysteri¬ ous words, Vicenza failed not to compre¬ hend the meaning of those inquiring looks, and casting another gloomy glance around the dimly-illumined apartment, and con¬ trasting it in his own mind with the scenes of the busy world, thus addressed her.— " My dear Alphonsine ! thou knowest it is thy father—the author of thy exist* ence, who now addresses thee, and whose voice thy religion, no less than the pre¬ cepts of thy holy instructress, alike con* jure thee to venerate. Oh! would that I were worthy of such veneration from thee, my Alphonsine!—would that I couid only deem myself so!—but, alas! I am a wretch so sunk in crime------" Here Alphonsine again grasped her cru¬ cifix, and resumed her look of terror, while a deadly paleness usurped her coun¬ tenance.
Vioenza observed the change, and re¬ solved to use his utmost efforts to retain his composure, continued, in a somewhat gentler strain—*' f see that my violence has already shocked you * he rusumed— 44 and well it may. But, gentle Alphon¬ sine, fear not my frantic sorrow, neither condemn me for a harshness it is not my wish to use—especially towards thee, my wronged, but still obedient child. Yet tell me, love/' he added, again surveying minulelv the confined duskv chamber where they sat—the most spacious, how¬ ever, and hest furnished, the monastery afforded, and appropriated solely to the use of the superior, *' art thou content to languish out thy life in an abode so wretch- ed, and so little suited to thy rank or years, as this ?—Answer me, Alphonsine. and sincerely, I entreat you, for the time is at hand at which (the veil once taken) no human power can release thee from these walls." Alphonsine answered him—" Of my B 2
rank nothing, nor am iiware of my boeaage to which it rrmy entitle me, being wholly ignorant yet of thir>e r mj not less honoured sii*e: but wi th respect W few®, I haw mm b^B taught to be¬ lieve, he weighs them kit lightly who gays— * Remember thy Creator in the days of Ay ytmtk;* and * in tlie iiiiddle of life we are in death/ Yet pardon me, toy fether—.and thou, great father of mercies! pardon me likewise—if I confess, that I am rather resigned to, than disposed to greet m a blessing, this bitter dispensation of Prcn^teiee Mistake me not—I mean not to repine at this long steadily-eoii- tempkted destiny; although some feeble and fleshly longings after a world which yet I never saw will clog the better wish, and, were I to afford them perhaps even their due share of consideration, would mar the better purpose: but since it appears Heaven's will, and my kind sire's-—• " Kind I kind ! w exclaimed Vicenza, in an agony of remorse. " Was it kind to
immure thy tender years in tim da* breaking sepufcbre ?— tim ^oomy recep¬ tacle of worn-out guilt and misery ? Oh! mo —it was monstrous T *« Forbear these wild expressimis, and calm thyself, I again eafiftire thee* my stiH reverenced sire r ad<kd AlfAonsine. ** I do not tieem it monstrous. It was surely kind to devote my eariy years to the service of that omnipotent Creator before whose footstool ali breathing crea¬ tures must one day render an account of their past lives." ** Ob! thou art excellent—supremely excellent !** said Vicenza, grasping with fervency her shrinking hand. ** Alas! unlike to thine as her conduct hath hither¬ to been, I pray that she who must now become thy substitute in the sacrifice, may be equally resigned!" " I understand thee not," said Alphon¬ sine, with some hesitation. ** You spoke of a sacrifice: if you allude to the ap¬ proaching solemn ceremony, although it be
siting Iii voice jmpreiwiively, M tbew mm gkm&m world, uf wteb—though, I grant, thoe hast yet seen but httle—it is almost m^msMt thou sbotildsl not lia ve heard, and &«a»^ much more. Books, it m pMkb may hive been thy iBOBitors; and wMb &ey watrod tbee from even th* remotest participation in its criaiinal de* %i^ coay have partially cutcksed to tlijr bngiiig fit«y ^ alitu^ n*te^e of tliote pleaiturefi they taught to shun. Perhaps, famm Ae pale Bps «rf thy virgin compa¬ nions—doomed victims lite thyself—tbou mayest have gathered, at least, some im* perfect knowledge of the gay scenes End soul-enlivening pastimes, the varied circle of acquaintance, and the daily round of so¬ cial enjoyment, it may soon be thy lot, in common with theirs, to renounce for ever. There* amid the glittering throng, it might be haply thy enviable destiny to shine conspicuous for virtue as for beauty—the
compeer of the wealtby, and fnend of the poor—"-the companion of tiie powerful, and protectr e s s of the weak—the envy of the proud, r nd the benefactress of the bumble These are al pleasures which may be en¬ joyed without a blush—without a pang. I speak not tn thee nf the worlds lighter and mG^e blameable recreations, because I feel assured that such eould never meet thy taste, or even for a moment attract thy at¬ tention. But the social voice of friendship —the heart-exbikrating exercise of charity —the freedom of the fxk green fields, and shady groves, with the pure freshness of the mountain air, to inhale, instead of dun¬ geon vapours, all these might have been thine—may yet be thine—4t is not even now too late. What thinks my Alphon¬ sine of the brighter prospect I have en¬ deavoured feebly to unfold, for ber accep¬ tation or refusal?** " I fear that I am wholly unfit to sup¬ port with credit even a retired station in the picture of society you have drawn, far less to become its brightest ornament, as
jtm nave flatteringly surmised," returned Alphonsine, timidly. m Besides, were it otherwise, I should feel no pleasure in find¬ ing myself the object of envy, even to those who are capable of fostering that bad * Ah! but the brightest portion nf the picture batb not yet appeared in view,** now exclaimed Vkenasa : •* its alluring tints, skilfully portrayed, might melt even the resolution of an anchorite—but I snail merely sketch its outline, and leave tfey own imagination to perform the re¬ mainder. It is tme^ my darling child— the sincere avowal of a parent who adores thee, and is pleased to acknowledge thy perfection—that thy rank and virtues wotiM entitle thee to a foremost place among the high-bred children of affluence —the proudest who bask in the sunshine of prosperity, and are acknowledged the flower and ornament of thy native land. There —on the world's wide stage, I mean —thou mightest shine, the glittering idol of those who themselves are idolized for
attractions inferior to thine, and triumph in beholding the loftiest yield to thy pre¬ tensions ; to say nothing of the baser crowd^—the mere fluttering votaries of fa¬ shion, who would swarm around thee. Mere —though I would not offend by un* merited scorn those who have hitherto kindly fostered thee^—thon c.:nst only crawl out thy monotonous existence, a wretched worm, doomed to eternal soli¬ tude. But what is the idle incense of the gaudy crowd, or their empty adulation, compared to those rapturous enjoyments I have not yet mentioned ? Alphonsine— among the many novel sensations thou must encounter, amid that yet untrodden, and oftentimes, I admit, destructive laby¬ rinth, it may haply be thy lot to taste of love-—pure, hallowed love, approved by thy fond parent, and sanctioned by the laws of Heaven and nature. From this delightful source how many joys arise— joys exalted and ecstatic—such as degrade not human nature, but rather tend to ele- B 3
vate the sentiments, and make man feel that he is only * a little lower than the an- gek/ The flowery, connubial chain—the fond, parental tie— the soft endearing mo¬ ments of domestic felicity! these the most virtuous have not scorned to participate, and many have acknowledged almost to emulate that immortality of bliss prepared for the blessed hereafter. How different to the barren, cloistered scene, which here awaits the lonely devotee, who having once renounced the vanities (as they are Md) of this S ubWy world. cLot afterwards reverse the fixed decree, how¬ ever loathed, or however heartily repented by its victim. What says my Alphon¬ sine now to the gay delights, and softer pleasures, of a splendid and captivating world, or the dull loneliness of a dismal cloister? The hour of that fatal ceremony is now at hand which must irrevocably fix thy earthly doom; say, then—and speak freely, for I would not have thee mince thy sentiments at a moment of such vital importance to thy welfare—how is my
duteous and beloved child prepared for Its arrival ?** Alphonsine now fixed her eyes earnestly upon his face, and, while the tears gushed into tliem, exclaimed—•* Aks! what can I answer?—and wherefore do you demand an answer from me at this hour, and not before ? w " Because till now I have slept or been bewildered^ hastily returned Vicenza; " and because the time is arrived, after which to demand it of thee would be cruelly to torture thee, without the power of af¬ fording thee redress/* " Oh! thou art kind," rejoined Alphon¬ sine, wavering: " but should I prove equally so, if, by my froward decision, I were to thwart what (I have ever been taught to believe) is the dearest wish of thy soul?" *' Dispel these scruples, my too consi¬ derate child!" replied Vicenza; " and let the solemn truth proceed unsophisticated from thy generous lips." For a little space, he again paused, lost in admiration of his
n€|rje€$ed daughter s magnanimity, bat m yet received no answer, unless her tears {wife*! now flowed &st> might teconstnied into m suffioent one. Vicenza, however, $M not appear exactiy to comprehend their n^anmg, and, accordingly, continued thus — m Speak! while those hallowed strains are pealing awfully around us—answer me, and semi thy bondage, or receive thy li¬ berty ! Life, in a smiling and glorious, though terrestrial world, or a premature interment in the wide tomb tbou seest, and which yet thou only hast inhabited ? w *iAs be finished, he again cast his wildly rolling eyes around the dim and desolate- looking apartment, with an expression of mingled aversion and contempt, which needed no interpretation " Life! life !* now sobbed Alphonsine, sinking on her knees before her once cruel but relenting sire—*' Life, in a world such as thou hast described, and not a lingering course of melancholy, augmented by soli¬ tude and penance, such as only I have hi¬ therto known !*
** Arise, my child P* said Vk?enia, al¬ most equally affected: *• the life thon hast chosen shall be thine—mayest thou long enjoy it, and the cheerfulness of thy later yet* render thee some atonement for the gloom of thy youth! The envy which may assail thee upon thy entrance into this novel course 7f existence, I feel as- sured, will vanish before the lustre of thy virtues, like noxious vapours before the bursting sun f* Vicenza now raised to his bosom his still weeping daughter (for Aphonsine still wept, though she scarcely knew whether for joy or grief—-joy for her unexpected deliverance from impending thraldom, or grief at her so sudden separation from her earliest friends), and again strained her fondly to his heart. Meantime, the last faint sound of midnight vespers gradually died away, and the melodious voices of the virgin choir had now subsided into si¬ lence. In a few moments, the sound of their retreating footsteps was heard echoing along the vacant galleries: the nuns, and
drowsy novices, were; agam seeking their cells. He then gently reseated himself beside fats lair companion, whose fluttering bosom, be rightly conjectured, was hardly yet sufficiently composed to enable her to listen to his further communications.
CHAP. Ii. Xity mother «m» & jtiece of tirtae, wid ^he a*M tbou wast my daughter; and thy fat Iht Was duke of Milan^ and tbou bis only heir, A princen, no worse issued, Sfivhtsnt .tHi:. It was the intention of the prince Vi¬ cenza, before Alphonsine quitted the convent, to make her acquainted with at least some portion of her own history; of which, it will be remembered, she as yet knew little, except that it was her father's pleasure she should be bred in perfect seclusion* But who that father was, and wherefore thus deliberately bent upon secluding his only child (as Alphon-.
sine yet believed herself), »be had never owe, that Vkenxa was aware oi ventu¬ red to inquire; or, if she had, her curio¬ sity would doubtless hive been prudently checked by the abbess, who was strictly forbidden to make any such disclosure, until the time arrived which might rea¬ der it necessary. No wonder, then, if Vicenza deemed the present hour the most apt that could be chosen for Uie pur¬ pose of initiating his trembling child in such deeply important particulars. The solemnity of the hour—the universal still¬ ness that reigned around—the very ** melt¬ ing mood" in which both the concerned parties found themselves, all combined to render his interesting communication doubly impressive. Vicenza knew this, and therefore no longer concealed from Alphonsine aught pertaining to the his¬ tory of her elevated birth—-her past seclu¬ sion, and approaching peculiarly marked ingress to that alluring world of whose pleasures, pursuits, and occupations, she had yet formed so imperfect an opinion.
It would be tedious to attempt describ- ii% the emotion of Alphonsine, on listen¬ ing to the narration of events with which the reader is, at least for the greater part, already acquainted. Her surprise on learn¬ ing her rank wm not so great, nor so ma¬ nifest, as her emotion at discovering that she had a sister ** bom of the same womb,*' with whose very name she had lived here¬ tofore unacquainted* Her joy at this cir¬ cumstance was, however, considerably di¬ minished, on hearing from the lips of Vi¬ cenza (who failed not to exhibit the por¬ trait in colours somewhat aggravated) the ** full and particular account** of Victo¬ ria's disobedience, and its threatened pu nishment. Much as Alphonsine lamented the delinquency of her newly-discovered sister, she now earnestly besought her la¬ ther not to meditate the infliction of so severe a doom upon her, for a fault only venial—he having announced his fixed resolution of immuring her for life in the convent of St. Rosalie, as the punishment of her disobedience: but when Vicenza once
more alluded to his recorded and unalter¬ able oath—in the words of Shylock^— *< An amlh] an mthI I k*«e an oath iu br*<re«* Shall t by $**rjery upon ray toirf ?• Alphonsine earnestly implored him (not¬ withstanding his recent decision) again to let her become the sacrifice. To this pro¬ posed consummation Vicenza now reso¬ lutely objected, urging that the most ami¬ able ought not to be incarcerated against her expressed inclination, even in a holy dungeon, to screen the disobedient and unworthy. ** I have,** he continued—** I have loved Victoria tenderly: she «eas the apple of mine eye—the delight, ay, the sole, supreme delight, of my existence. But the sweet chain forged by mutual af¬ fection which bound us together is shi¬ vered and dissolved—not by me—but it is broken, I would almost have sacrificed even my immortal weal to preserve it en¬ tire, by daring to violate the indissoluble oath taken over the pale corpse of her wronged mother, and thine: but any sa-
crifice short of consenting to aggrandize the son of my mortal enemy, by tamely witnessing their union, availed not to preserve that precious chain unbroken. Hence, the happy bands which once uni¬ ted us are shivered—they are gone: their links can now never be reunited." From converse of this kind, they were at length interrupted by the re-entrance of the abbess, who having, as usual, pre¬ sided at vespers, and since gone her wonted round, to ascertain that every member of her female flock was safely immured in her separate cell, returned wondering at the lengthened absence of her sole remaining charge. On entering the apartment, she advanced towards its agitated inmates, in a dignified manner, and crossing herself devoutly, exclaimed— " My daughter! this is the first time thou hast ever neglected thy spiritual duty, without a visible sufficient cause: may he who .is the searcher of all motives absolve theo for tho omission ! In the midnight orison, I have remembered thy name, nor
has thine, prince, been forgotten. We am ail erring mortals, and the practice of mu¬ tual charity toward each other is the sur¬ est pass to the obtainment of compassion¬ ate consideration for our weaknesses above" Vicenza gently bowed his noble fore¬ head, in acknowledgment for his share of the midnight intercession, yet somewhat haughtily, and as if he could well (at that particular moment) dispense with the per* sonal presence of the fair pleader for his frailties at the footstool of grace. There was a formal stiffness about the cold incli¬ nation with which he returned her com¬ pliment—if such I may venture to term her profession of anxiety for his everlasting weal—which showed that he did not much value her interference while engaged with his worldly affairs, at least, however he might deem of ber ghostly exertions in behalf of his spiritual welfare. For Alphonsine*"- she only *' drooped her head and sorrowed," in reply to the salutation of her dignified superior: her mind was just now too full
€v^n attempt an excuse, which, had she attempted to frame, her lips would vainly liave essayed to utter. After a mo¬ ment's pause, the abbess resumed— 0 But the hour is waxing late—it is already far into the morning, and prudence now de¬ mands that my daughter should retire to her pallet. The prince Vicenza knows too well the rules of this holy sanctuary, any longer to urge thy stay at this unseason¬ able hour, aware that it is meet our most salutary regulations should be strictly ob¬ served. I wait to conduct thee, holy daughter, to thy cell/' Alphonsine now arose, and again ten¬ derly embracing her father, prepared, as Vicenza seemed no longer to object to this proposal, to follow the superior to her own narrow apartment. The next moment, the distracted prince once more found him¬ self brooding alone in the apartment of the abbess. Not long, however, was he left to his meditations; she speedily returned unaccompanied by Alphonsine, and Vi¬ cenza, desiring her to be seated, now gra-
dually unfolded to her his future plans. The abbess started, on hearing bis deter¬ mination with respect to the weeping Al¬ phonsine, whose tears now received an an¬ swering tribute from the eyes of the griev. } ed superior. Vicenza strove to console her, by his repeated assurance that the convent should in no way lose by the con* templated exchange from Alphonsir.e to Victoria (who was now to enter upon her novitiate immediately), and which arose purely from other considerations than a too late repentance of his former liberality or promised munificence. Although evident¬ ly grieved deeply at the idea of an eternal separation from Alphonsine, for whom she entertained an unfeigned affection, having fostered her from her birth, the abbess for¬ bore to proffer either opposition or remon¬ strance to the will of the prince, perhaps wisely foreseeing that such a course would prove wholly useless. It was therefore agreed that in the course of the succeeding day Alphonsine should be fetched away by Vicenza, and Victoria sent to supply her
place at the convent shortly afterwards; it being the particular object of the prince to prevent any interview taking place at pre¬ sent between the two sisters, which could only have the effect of heightening the vain regrets of either, without the consum¬ mation more to be desired of altering his resolution. This matter being settled to the satisfaction of, at least, the most power¬ ful of the parties interested, the prince arose, and having repeated his professions of gratitude to the abbess of St. Rosalie, speedily took his leave. At a short distance from the humble edifice, he was met by his faithful Beltra- mo, now wholly in his confidence, who was in waiting with a vehicle to convey him back to Naples, from which the convent was situated only an agreeable ride- Not¬ withstanding, however, that the prince was driven with the speed of the " whirlwind through the forest," the break of day was visible long ere he gained the outskirts of the dty, so protracted, and so wholly ab¬ sorbent of all other considerations, had
been hk that night's conference. At length, just as the mounting sun with streaks of gold and crimson announced his approach toward the horizon, Vicenza sought his restless couch, to dream of the miserable past, or lay plans (delusive, be¬ cause too commonly tainted with crime) for his resolved obtainment of a more tran¬ quil future. Retrograding a little, we must now de¬ tail to the reader the cause of Vicenza's in¬ creased uneasiness with respect to the pas¬ sion of Victoria for don Csesario, and of his subsequent violent measures to secure their separation. Scarcely had the prince Vi¬ cenza time to congratulate himself upon the supposed downfal of Csesario, ere a fresh communication from the bravo Za¬ chelli, gave rise to fresh uneasiness in his bosom. The interview took place, and terminated as follows. In one of his lone¬ ly walks upon the terrace toward night¬ fall, the prince was again suddenly accost¬ ed by Zachelli, whom, on account of the important service so recently (as Vicenza
then believed) performed by his hand, he did not repulse in his usual indignant man* ner. Delighted with his cordial reception, the bandit had hardly collected himself sufficiently to speak ere Vicenza demand¬ ed—" But wherefore, Zachelli, art thou still here? Naples is now no place of safety for thee; thy work performed—and bravely thou hast performed it—I would rather Sicily contained thee now than Na¬ ples. Thou must return, and thy absence is so obviously necessary, that I cannot but marvel thou still lingerest here." " My work is only half completed," now stammered the bravo, not without some confusion. " What meanest thou ?" asked Vicenza. " Don Csesario is no more—what else hast thou to perform in Naples?" " His wounds have not proved mortal," answered Zachelli, with a bitter execration on his own failing arm. «' Don Csesario is yet in existence, and—but for the stroke I still meditate—is likely long to be so." " How, wretch! didst thou then deceive
me," cried Vicenza, ** when thou didst brandish aloft the naked dagger streaming with his blood ?—or hast thou only spilt a few superfluous drops of life's warm cur¬ rent, leaving still sufficient to animate the proud bosom of mine enemy? Answer me, which?" ** Somewhat of both," replied the ruf¬ fian, sullenly. " I deceived you not when I showed you the dagger, for I deemed it his heart's best blood that coloured the blade; and—but what signifies talking ? I mean to slav him still. He is not—cannot *r be invulnerable; though by what strange power he at present retains his existence, I confess I am wholly at a loss to con¬ ceive." " To the carelessness of an ungrateful ruffian," exclaimed Vicenza, reproachfully, " is don Csesario indebted for his present existence. But a truce to reproaches at ieps", for the present moment—how es¬ caped he your searching dagger, so often boasted infallible?—and where is he?" vol. il c
"Nay, for that matter, prince, he escaped it not," said Zachelli, w but received its whole length full in his pierced bosom; and hence the marvel that he hath—as re¬ port affirms—already recovered from the wound. With regard to thy second in¬ terrogatory, he is now at a house in the Strada di Toledo, under the especial care, and in close amity with, an African, named Abdallah, a worshipper of the false disci¬ ple, Mahomet—Saint Rosolia absolve me for mentioning his name (and he crossed himself as he spoke), whither he was borne by strangers upon the outcry of the dog who attended him. Abdallah, they say, is rich and humane, though an infidel; and hath, one way or other (except report be¬ lies him) contributed not a little to the wounded patient's recovery. But it is useless to speak further—you regard me not. Prince, what ails you ?" Vicenza was indeed sunk into a sudden reverie, and no longer yielded attention to the words of his companion. The name of Abdallah struck him as one almost for-
gotten, but which, perhaps, ought not to have been so, He recollected the flaming epistle discovered by Beltramo on the toilet of Victoria: could it have been placed there without the aid or connivance of Biondella? Of the circumstance itself he had thought too lightly—too contemptu¬ ously, even to mention it to Victoria, who, in her turn, had kept her sire in total igno¬ rance of the notice she had received from the persistive Algerine: but that there was treachery in his household, with re¬ spect to the matter, now appeared mani¬ fest, and he wondered that the suspicion had never crossed his mind before. The oddity, too, of don Csesario having formed a league of amity with his dusky rival! these thoughts combined to divert his at¬ tention, and threw him into a mood of ab¬ straction, which not a little perplexed the astonished assassin, and suddenly arrested his tale.
c 2
v/jrx/\Jr» jLIJL* Poor fellow f for some reason, sorely bad, They bad slain htm with five slugs j and left him there To perish on the pavement: so I had Him borne into the house and up the stair, And stnpp'd and look'd to. Byron. After scanning these things over for a few minutes in his own mind, during which Zachelli continued sulkily to re¬ gard his clouded countenance, prince Vi¬ cenza determined to conquer his rage, if possible, for the sake of gratifying his awakened curiosity. Accordingly, he commenced by demanding of his blood¬ stained, and (as he now began to suspect) somewhat treacherous companion—*' Who is this same Abdallah ?-—and whence comes he? I have heard his name before, but know not his nation, nor his business here." « Why, truly, his business in Naples, I
believe," responded Zachelli, half con¬ temptuously, " is merely to secure to him¬ self the pleasure of doing nothing; or, in other words, he is here only that he may avoid being overburthened with business elsewhere. He is an Algerine—men say of some distinction in his own slavish land, which, however, he has made no scruple of abandoning, on the threatened approach of an enraged enemy. There is warm work now upon the reeking territory where Abdallah, it is said, once possessed considerable authority; but he wisely pre¬ fers a life of ignoble tranquillity here, to the risk of taking an exalted part in the quarrels of his country. Report adds, that he has brought the whole of his wealth with him, no inconsiderable heap: on the contrary, his valuables are said to amount to a sum much greater than any dog of a Mussulman ought to be permit¬ ted to possess." " And therefore, I presume," said Vi¬ cenza, haughtily, " thou hast ventured to conceive the charitable design of speedily
disburdening him of, at least, some por¬ tion of theweighty incumbrance?" M Not if it is thy will that this dog of an Algerine should really gloat over bis heavy bags in safety," replied Zachelli, af¬ fecting a saucy kind of deference to the expected decision of Vicenza—" I will not strike a stroke to lighten them of theirpreci- ous treasures. Say, is it thy command that I relinquish aH sinister intentions toward this golden runagate—this cowardly bar¬ barian, who hath doubtless enriched him¬ self by his piracies, and yet possesses not sufficient courage to defend his store on the soil where it was accumulated—the land of his progenitors ? If so, his rubies, and amassed sequins, may rust in their strong chests, ere I molest them." " Pool! I care not," cried Vicenza, In. censed at being thus insultingly appealed to for his oaaainands in a mdre matter of robbery, as by a bandit to his,ehief. " What to me are his sequins, or his rubies? A misbelieving recreant! But is he, then —I mean, was he noble?" i
* His sire was governor of said Zachelli, coolly, « and of some note among the Ottomans, by whom, however, he was deposed and killed. His immense wealth, notwithstanding, is said rather to have accumulated than decreased in the hands of his son, who has recently trans¬ ferred it, in ready coin and jewels, to Na¬ ples ; whither fortune hath also transferred— indeed it appears most opportunely—your most humble servant. There is something amusingly grotesque in the plunderer's taking flight to preserve his pillage, and speeding hither only to lose it: but though I long to exult over a portion of the wily Mussulman's carefully-hoarded spoil, yet if you forbid ------ n " I again repeat that I care not for his plunder, nor for thine," returned the in¬ dignant prince Vicenza. " If it be only from his plundered wealth that his ego¬ tism is derived, I would that it was whelm¬ ed in the Red: Sea!" " Sayest th6u so?" exclaimed Zachelli, eagerly—" he shall not possess it long.
But the whole truth to speak, with respect to this Abdallah, it may be that his self- importance is derived from another source. Some say—nay, it is even confidently af¬ firmed by his own valet—that he possesses some miraculous power of presenting whomever he may choose with a prolong¬ ed existence, even at the moment when the gasping breath is about to abandon the body for ever; not by any visible or ostensible means, such as medicine, nor any of those causes commonly resorted to by good Christian practitioners, but by some secret sleight or charm, known only to himself. Such is the tale already rumour¬ ed far and wide, with respect to this semi- magician, so that all Naples rings with the mighty marvel, death being expected to become less frequent in a city the resi¬ dence of so famed an opponent, who looks, it is true, half demon, but whose practice, if report be correct, beareth certainly a much greater affinity to the supposed usage of a god."
Vicetiza smiled contemptuonsly^- a A^d thou believest the wondrous tale?" said he. " Whether true or false, I know not," answered Zachelli, shaking his head signi¬ ficantly—" how should I know? Can either thou or I, who find it difficult clear¬ ly to comprehend all that shines upon the surface%of the visible world, vouch for the existence or nonentity of aught which pertains to that which is invisible ? It may be that some spirit, either good or evil, hath gifted him with the power of acting as report describes; and he who says this must be impossible, is as daring in his as¬ sertion, as he who (without ample proof of his argument being well founded) shall venture to maintain the contrary. To me, I must allow, it appears most awful, and no less convincing, that no sooner did the mortally-wounded don C«esario (as, not without reason, I deemed him) gain admittance beneath the same roof with this dingy practiser of the resuscitating art, than he suddenly recovers, almost be- c 3
fore the steel hath lost its stain which went to his drained heart. Is not this a most disagreeable spedmen, at least, some¬ what resembling a proof, of this same Ma¬ hometan's potency, whom yet you would stigmatize as a liar and impostor ? But the verity or falsehood of report in the affair matters little, either to thee or my¬ self: when next I strike, Abdallah may haply be too distant to bestow a second time his required assistance; and I never yet heard of a charm that could restore the wealth once wrested from his keeping by a band of fellows so brave, and so determined, as those who in Sicily wili soon rejoice to hear of its arrival/' " Again upon the theme of his trea¬ sure !" said Vicenza: " thou art a greedy knave, Zachelli, who art ever on the look¬ out for booty; and yet not always, I per¬ ceive, performest the service required of thee, with a celerity which by any means equals thy avidity for gain. Return we now, for a single moment, to don Csesario, and then break off our conference. Abide
thou in Naples, until his recovery is com- pleto. Then watch him closely—hang like a shadow on his track, that he may not escape thee, until the opportunity thou seekest, and hast once possessed in vain, again present itself. When it doth, use it better. I still depend upon thy dagger's stroke—see me not again, until the purpose thou hast in charge be accom¬ plished. Away—we are observed—re¬ tire !" Thus spoke Vicenza to his wretched in¬ strument in the perpetration of the most villanous purpose that ever dawned upon the mind of man—the secret murder of a feliow-creature—but he meant not what he said. In reality, he resolved to depend no longer on the failing dagger of a hired ruffian for the security of his peace and honour. He determined without delay (finding that his scheme for effecting a bloody separation had totally failed) to find some other means of placing Victoria beyond the reach of Caesario, as his covet¬ ed bride; and none occurred to him so
likely to effect the desired object, as the firm resolution he now made of forcing her to consent to an immediate union with the gallant young marquis Lioni. Ac¬ cordingly, with the intention of directly putting this design into execution, he suddenly quitted Zachelli, who, turning on his heel, well pleased that the issue of his interview was no worse, resolved to follow his injunctions, which Vicenza, in truth (though he revoked them not), now eared very little whether he neglected or obeyed. Meantime, Vicenza repaired to the apartment of Victoria 5 whose grief for the loss of her Caesario's society, in which he had so lately taught her to believe she might still safely indulge, was equalled only by her wonder at his protracted ab¬ sence. In vain she wept—in vain the ex¬ ertions of Biondella were used to discover the cause—Isidore was far too busily en¬ gaged in the restoration of his cruelly mangled master, to bestow a moment's at¬ tention upon any other subject: besides,had
Victoria felt inclined even to condescend so far as to seek intelligence of her seemingly faithless lover, she knew not in what quar¬ ter of Naples his abode was situated; and Biondella was, of course, equally ignorant of the residence of Isidore. Hence was the daughter of Vicenza kept still in pro¬ found ignorance of the misfortune which had befallen don Caesario, although had she known the full extent of his suffer- ings, her grief could scarcely have been more vehement, or more destructive alike to her health and beauty, than the anxiety her present state of incertitude doomed her daily to experience. Thus situated, Victoria was not likely to afford a very cordial reception to the proposals of Vicenza for an immediate ac¬ ceptation of the proffered hand of the mar¬ quis Lioni: but the result was even worse than his worst fears had ventured to anti¬ cipate. Insteajd of (as he expected would have been the case) modestly stating her scruples, and at length suffering persua¬ sion to overcome themi he found the mind
of the already deeply^enamoured Victoria resolutely bent against hearkening to his arguments; and when at length, by pa¬ rental authority, constrained to listen, as steadily determined to oppose them. For a considerable time, no word of Cassario was mentioned, Victoria being yet wholly unaware that her sire knew aught of his second unwarrantable in vasion of her cham¬ ber : but when, after a protracted parley, the tide of opposition still ran high be¬ tween them, Vicenza, provoked beyond all patience at her insufferable obstinacy (as he termed it), could no longer refrain from reproaching her with the glaring breach of decorum thus daringly commit¬ ted. The effect of this communication .was only to increase the fury of the once- timid, once gentle Victoria, even almost to madness. She no longer doubted what had become of her iover—her faithful and beloved Caesario: she boldly reproached the pirince with having effected, or, at the least, sanctioned, his assassination, or se¬ cret imprisonment; and finally upbraided
him with equal cruelty to herself, alleging that she neither could nor would exist without Caesario. This last overboiling of her long-smothered passion, or, as Vicen¬ za deemed it, ungrateful burst of frantic disobedience, determined him to adopt at length the only course by which, it ap¬ peared, he could effectually prevent their union. This was the determination al¬ ready more than glanced at, of rooting her if possible entirely from his bosom, and planting there in her stead, the mild, du¬ teous Alphonsine, whose youth, he regret¬ ted, had already been undeservingly sacri¬ ficed to the cruel fulfilment of his hasty vow; while Victoria—no longer the same Victoria who had once enjoyed his affec¬ tion, and on whom his main hopes for fu¬ ture felicity had depended—must assume the conventual garb, and adopt the veil perforce in the room of her more amiable sister. No sooner had he finally adopted this resolution, than-his demeanour became proportionately calm—but Victoria little knew the meaning of this outward com-
posure: had she suspected its real cause, it is probable that her horror of such an existence as that to which she was thus suddenly condemned, would, by annihilat¬ ing her upon the spot, have rendered her incapable of enduring its bitterness. While these events were passing at the mansion of the prince Vicenza, the wound of don Caesario was tended by a skilful surgeon, and every attention shewn him in the Strada di Toledo, at the residence of the eccentric but humane Abdallah. Admitted as a, mere wounded stranger, at the earnest intercession of his servant, Isi¬ dore, into the hotel at which the kind- * hearted Moor had happened also to fix his abode, compassion alone at first induced the latter to visit the sick couch of the suffering Sicilian. This feeling, however, soon gave place to a growing interest in the bosom of Abdallah, which increasing day by day,* soon assumed the appearance • of a strong attachment, such as only " Souls made of fire, and children of the sun/ 1
are prone so hastily to conceive, as those who know them best will be found most ready to admit—the strongest proof which can possibly be afforded, that such an as¬ sertion is not built on a fallacious founda¬ tion. It might be also that his own some¬ what solitary and forlorn condition, inas¬ much as it bore some resemblance to «* The seeming friendlessness of him wlio strove To win no confidence, and wake no love," (for Caesario now appeared before him without a friend, broken-hearted and de¬ spairing) contributed not a little to excite in the breast of Abdallah a sort of sym¬ pathy for one who, although a Christian, seemed even more solitary in a Christian land than himself. However this might be, it is certain that the Moor behaved in a very praiseworthy and benevolent man¬ ner, on the present occasion. He not un¬ frequently sat for whole hours by the sick couch of the languishing youth, and often questioned him kindly concerning his pre¬ sent feelings, his probable convalescence, and, above all, his pecuniary circumstan-
ees: when these proved deficient (for Cae¬ sario was not overladen with money, and his father's largess was now nearly ex¬ hausted), the purse of Abdallah was rea¬ dily opened for his supply. Sometimes don Csesario would feebly attempt to ex¬ press his thanks for the kind solicitude ex¬ hibited by the generous foreigner for his preservation, on which occasions lie was gently desired to be silent, or return praise only to the beneficent power who had thus graciously provided for him a friend in his need; but the gratitude of Isidore knew nOfbounds, and he was not to be control¬ led thus easily in the expression of his sentiments. He was therefore incessant¬ ly loud in his praise of Abdallah's benevo¬ lence, often calling him, notwithstanding, by the very equivocal, although, in the present instance, complimentary denomi¬ nation of the " dark angel." In this train matters continued for some time, yet still the medical attendant adhered to his first expressed opinion, that from a wound of the nature of that inflicted by the well-
aimed dagger of Zachelli, don Caesario never could eventually recover.
CHAP. IV. Boy, bring more wine! the golden goblet crown, And wreaths of mjrtle ronnd my turban twine j In floods of nectar every care we'll drown, Oh! scatter flowers around, and bring me wine I From the Persian. It was the melancholy, affecting hour, of sunset. Abdallah, had already been for his accustomed stroll on the terrace, and per¬ ceiving, by the many merry faces he met there, that a jocund evening (at least to numbers of Uie sprightly inhabitants of Jfeples) was approaching, resolved, though alone in his hotel, that his own evening hours should not be passed less blithely. To effect this purpose, he begged pardon of Mahomet—it was not the first time he had ventured to infringe that prophet's or¬ dinances—for daring to contemplate a to¬ lerably copious indulgence in the wisely
forbidden liquor, scorned by.his more strict, but we cannot say worthier, votaries. Be¬ hold him, then, seated alone in his apart¬ ment, with a fresh bottle of the choicest flavour before him, resolved to be cheerful, in spite of the '* saddening hour," and his own almost equally saddening reflections. Ahmed, his only confidential attendant (being the only Mussulman in his service) was still almost constantly abroad, vainly awaiting an answer from Biondella to the billet he had entrusted to her care; which same answer, though earnestly solicited at each nocturnal interview, he now began to fear, he was likely never to obtain. All Ahmed could gain from his loquacious mistress—for as such he now considered the treacherous Biondella—was a profusion of ready excuses, varied, it is true, but in effect the same: in short, the poor Mus¬ sulman was grossly imposed upon—she never acknowledged having lost the letter, nor undeceived the hapless messenger with respect to his master's still vainly-hoped reply. Abdallah was therefore, for a con*
siderable length of time, bamboozled in the same manner: yet in spite of the anxi¬ ety arising from this circumstance, and the state of inquietude in which it kept his mind, he resolved, on the evening in ques¬ tion, in the arms of ruddy-faced Bacchus, to forget his repeated disappointments, and drown his consequent uneasiness in the *' brimming bowl." The sun had just disappeared behind the lofty mountain, and spread over the dis¬ tant perspective a deep purple shade, while above the broad moon brightened, and the lovely azure in which she rode seemed al¬ ready darkening, as Abdallah sat watch¬ ing his majestic departure through the clement; and, in defiance of his utmost efforts, felt his spirits droop in unison as the god of life and light descended. He had still, however, a powerful resource by his side, aud to that he once more most vigorously applied himself: in other words, he turned from the scene, and replenished his sparkling gkss again, and yet again. But Abdallah soon found, that, in spite of
bis almost Christian perseverance, it was all of no use. - Although he drank deeper than he ever remembered having 4one be¬ fore, be still lamented that the sometimes cheering cordial had not, on the present occasion, precisely the effect he wished: he ' grew giddy, and not light-hearted—mud¬ dled, not mirthful. The apartment now became gradually darker, and the objects it contained appeared indistinct: he either fancied, or really felt himself, more low spirited than ever; and even wished him¬ self again perfectly sober. Rousing once more, however, his sinking spirits, he has- tfly called for lights, sagaciously deter* mined—as one of our English poets has aptly phrased it— * f To light the tapers -wge the fire, And bid tha joyless day retire," And now, indeed, did Abdallah experi¬ ence the full efficacy of the cure for even¬ ing va|K)urs recommended in the above pithy distich; for no sooner were the lights brought in, and the silken curtains closed upon the scene without—with such a scene,
so calculated to inspire a tender melan¬ choly, it was impossible not to feel in uni¬ son—than, as if by magic, he felt his wont¬ ed hilarity revive, not a little heightened by the somewhat novel potations he had swallowed. Abdallah then, finding himself tolerably comfortable, according to his usual custom —a very dangerous custom at all times, and particularly fatal to Abdallah—began audibly to soliloquize.— " Suppose," said he, " it should be my lot to obtain at length a favourable answer from this high-bred damsel—this princess of the noble house of Vicenza, which, I am assured, is one of the first esteemed among the Christian aristocracy, the next step wili be to gain the consent of her, no doubt, haughty- minded sire; to obtain which, I fear, one of my charmed lives must inevitably be sacrificed: but no matter, since the sacri¬ fice will not only materially augment my happiness, but add also to my dignity in the eyes of men. Such combined advan¬ tages, the most covetous must admit, cm
hardly be ^purchased too dearly. I shall sti& have a charmed life to reserve for the prolongation of my own existence, and an¬ other to dispose of to the most liberal pur¬ chaser* The mighty and munificent must alone obtain, in return for a considerable portion of their relinquished wealth, the ftitureiassistance of Abdallah. I shall then become the richest man in Naples. This i§ no worthless distinction —-whatever threadbare cavillers may allege to the con- trary**-to arrive at in Europe; for I have discovered that wealth among these Chris¬ tians, though they affect to despise it, is the almost universal pass to esteem and friendship. The poor youth above stairs doth not seem to be overburtliened with this same needful commodity; and there¬ fore though mortally wounded, and pro¬ bably even at this moment on the point of expiring, he hath but few friends, and mtie to watch hi$ sick-bed. Yet'hold— I have spoken rashly—Abdallah will be his friend; and one true friend is worth a whole host of mere mouth sycophants:
nor shall he need any comfort either money or friendship can procure for him, or bis present helpless—I had almost said hopeless—situation may enable him to enjoy. But, alas! this fever that hath lately parched his form, the physician says, is even more likely than the wound to terminate his existence—and now I think of it------" Just at this moment, as the room began apparently to reel around him, and his brain evidently to stagger beneath the po¬ tent influence of the wine he had drunk, his privacy was interrupted by the en¬ trance of Ahmed, who rushed abruptly into the apartment. A single glance at Abdallah's countenance convinced Ahmed of the present condition of his master, who, however, though in accents which plainly enough indicated that he was under the influence of intoxication, immediately ad¬ dressed him with—" Well, Ahmed, what news do you bring me ? There is that in thy manner which speaks thee the bearer VOL. IL J}
of important intelligence. Hast thou re¬ ceived yet mine answer from the Christian princess—sole daughter of the most noble ? Why dost thou stare so wildly? Out with it, whether good or bad—I can never encounter disappointment better than now." Ahmed still stared, and cast his eyes mournfully upward, but as yet said no¬ thing. At length, he stammered out— w Thy princess, through her attendant, the lively Biondella, again greets thee kindly; but. regrets that she hath not yet leisure to return to thy flattering epistle a suitable reply/' " How long think you, Ahmed, do these European damsels expect a lover's patience to endure this trifling ?" exclaim¬ ed Abdallah, in a momentary fit of vexa¬ tion, rendered particularly ludicrous by his present style of speaking, " By Ma¬ homet—but I must not now profane my {ips with his name—I mean, his name with—troth, Ahmed, as thou hearest, I scarcely know my own meaning. But
I am merry, Ahmed—thou seest, I am merry still I am happy, in spite of mis¬ fortune—this is the Christian's happiness —behold it in this bottle—yes, Ahmed, I am now very happy/* Ahmed professed himself grieved to in¬ terrupt his happiness, and here he again paused, but looked as if he would fain have communicated more. ** Ahmed, thou hast not done so," ex¬ claimed his master, kindly. " I repeat, that neither thy entrance, norths aubigu- ous intelligence thou hast brought me— for such it is, Ahmed, to say the best of it —have sufficed to destroy the delightful sensations I feel. This Christian beve¬ rage, my faithful Ahmed, is truly a most delicious indulgence! I feel as if nothing could materially disturb me now." The alarmed slave still stood silent, and staring with a sort of stupid wonder upon his master, whom he had never beheld thus disgracefully overcome by the fumrs of wine before: though Abdallah, he D %
knew, even during his residence at Al¬ giers, was sometimes given to indulge in pretty copious libations of the forbidden juice. " There is a kind of mist before my eyes, and, it may be, a certain haziness of intellect likewise," continued Abdallah, " which prevents me, at this moment, from clearly appreciating the troubles that surround me. All owing to the supreme excellence of this unearthly liquor !—Wilt thou taste of it, Ahmed ?" Ahmed, who was astonished (as well indeed he might be) at his master's con¬ descension, now approached the table, and taking the glass which Abdallah filled for him to the brim, for the first time, raised the so vaunted " unearthly liquor" to his lips, while his expectant master sat anxi¬ ously watching his countenance. The faithful Moor, more stanch in his prin¬ ciples than the master who tendered it to him, was observed to shake his head grave¬ ly, as he returned the glass, with a deep sigh, to the table—but Abdallah saw with
a smile that it was empty. He then ven¬ tured to inquire of his attendant how he liked the intoxicating beverage, and seem¬ ed to await his reply with a sort of stupid satisfaction. " Thy slave will say to-morrow," pru¬ dently responded Ahmed. " For the pre¬ sent, a more serious matter somewhat presses, 1 confess, upon my mind, in spite of the seducing flavour of that unholy liquor, which (but for thy grave com¬ mand) 1 sorrow to have tasted. An event, it is apprehended, is about to take place, which------" "Ah! true—I had wcllnisrii forgot/' exclaimed Abdallah, again regarding more seriously the flurried aspect of the speaker. *' This Christian drink, enchanting as is its flavour, hath certainly some oblivious properties. But proceed—I remember now, that when thou earnest in, thy vi¬ sage and demeanour expressed thee char¬ ged with sometliing more important than thou hast yet greeted mine ear withal. What wouldst thou ?—speak 1"
- -" With grief thy slave acquaints thee with a circumstance, at this seemjng jo¬ vial time, which, he ventures to appre¬ hend, will damp thy joy," returned the afflicted Ahmed: " but I am commission¬ ed to inform thee, and must obey." « What meanest thou ?" once more de¬ manded Abdallah, on whom the serious air of his attendant now appeared to have the effect of rendering him for a minute sober. <c That the grim tyrant, Death, is at this moment busy within thy dwelling," replied Ahmed, with solemnity. " I am desired by the physician to inform thee that the young wounded stranger, whom they call don Caesario, is about to enter those purgatorial regions appointed by Alia, and our holy prophet, for the re¬ ception of ail zeal-blinded followers of the Nazarene. The fever which assailed him has reached its height—the crisis has pro¬ ved unfavourable, and his dissolution is confidently expected. I have seen him— he cannot many hours survive. It was
thy earnest wish that if any change, either fatal or favourable, took place in the pa¬ tient, it should forthwith be communica¬ ted unto thee: thy slave is here to ac¬ quaint thee with the probability of his ap¬ proaching doom." Thus spake Ahmed, while Abdallah listened to his words with the bewildered air of a man suddenly awakened from a pleasing trance, and condemned again to contemplate the less cheering objects of mortality. Deeply as, within the last few hours, he had ventured to indulge in " The bowl a Moslem must not drain," (perhaps, the poet would have done bet¬ ter if he had written should not), Abdal¬ lah had still sufficient of reason left to feel, with his wonted humanity, for the sufferings of his fellow-creatures; and above all, for those of his new protegee, whose agonies had long excited his sin¬ cere commiseration, and whose evidently- approaching end now filled him with hor¬ ror and dismay. As well as he was able,
h^ arose from his seat, and, bending anxiously forward, rivetted his searching gaze upon the sooty countenance of Ah¬ med, as if determined to ascertain, be¬ yond the possibility of deception, the truth or falsehood of his dismal intelligence.
CHAP. V. It is too late : the life of all his blood Is touched corruptibly ; and his pure brain (Which some suppose the soul's frail dwelling-house) noth, by the idle comments that it makes, Foretell the ending of mortality. SsfAnrsPFAnfi. There was nothing in the steady aspect of the devoted Ahmed that appeared to shrink from discovery, or proved unable to withstand the inquisitorial glance of his apparently-incredulous master; and Abdallah, indeed, derived not a " loop to hang a doubt upon," from his close scru¬ tiny (somewhat uncalled for—but that Abdallah's intellect, be it remembered,
was a shade the weaker for the wine he had taken) of the faithful creature's coun¬ tenance. Accordingly, the grieved Ab¬ dallah presently once moie sunk upon the sofa, seeming sensible of his weakness; for though it is prudent to be ever wary of the designing, it is always a sign of weak¬ ness to suspect the worthy. He felt him¬ self at last obliged to confess that there was no treason (at least on the part of his attendant) in this attempt to deprive him of his hour of sinful, it is true, but agreeable relaxation from the cares of so¬ ber Hfe: don Caesario was really dying, and Ahmed had really been deputed, by those best skilled in such affairs, to ac¬ quaint him with the heavy news. What, therefore, was now to be done ?—how was he to behave under such pressing circum¬ stances?—how conduct himself so as to veil his glaring disobedience to the pro¬ phet's law, and at the same time avoid the reproaches of his conscience for not award¬ ing a due share of attention to the dying d 3
invalid ?—one whom he had hitherto taken to bis bosom, as it were, more closely than pious Mussulmans, under any circum¬ stances, were allowed to strain a Christian, and promised to foster with peculiar care! In his present state, he was certainly most unfit to enter a sick chamber, even if able **-*which be almost doubted—without some disgraceful exhibition of drunkenness, ill beseeming a true believer, to arrive at the door. Short space, however, was left him for deliberation, even supposing him at present capable of holding a mental in¬ vestigation of the subject, which he felt that he was not. Ahmed still stood ijefore him, awaiting in silence the further com¬ mands of his grossly-inebriated master, and mentally petitioning Mahomet to preserve him from ever falling into the practice of a similar daring impiety; but toward .which, it is not improbable, the remem¬ bered flavour of the newly-tasted wine .already partially inclined him. Abdallah, with sudden determination, now arose and moved toward the door of the apartment,
desiring Ahmed to accompany him; and, concealing his obvious stagger under the guise of scarcely controllable emotion, with very little assistance from his attendant, contrived to ascend to the chamber of sick¬ ness, and anticipated death. On a low couch lay don Caesario, pale, feeble* and motionless, having just ex¬ hausted himself in one of those appalling paroxysms of delirium which the physi¬ cians rightly deemed indicated the crisis of his disorder, and might even possibly (by the breaking out anew of his yet scarcely-healed wound) put a sudden ter¬ mination to his life. Over him hung the distracted Isidore, grateful, in the middle of his sorrow, for even the short calm of exhaustion which forced the raging Caesa¬ rio for awhile to suspend his fury, and submit to the application of antidotes, hi¬ therto, alas! wholly inefficacious. He, too, appeared wan, the effect of repeated and unwholesome vigils, for Isidore watched almost incessantly by the sick-bed of Caesa¬ rio, as* indeed, in duty bound; and was
beside grown lean with almost perpetual Asting, for he could eat nothing; his grief for the impending loss of so good a master, *was exceeded only by his compassion for -the anguish of the unfortunate sufferer. Abdallah, as steadily as he could, approach¬ ed the couch, and looking on it truly with ** lack-lustre eye," in spite of the confusion in his brains, felt his heart moved almost -to bursting by the piteous sight. He could not speak—his senses were not per¬ fectly clear, nor his faculties (particularly that of speech) entirely at his own com¬ mand; but he wept—wept bitterly—and ftot even the tears of Isidore flowed faster, than those which fell from the eyes of the sympathetic Mussulman. A deep silence •prevailed, only now and then interrupted by the sobs of those around, or a low mur¬ mur from the quivering lips of the ex¬ hausted and delirious don Caesario. Sud¬ denly (or Abdallah thought so) he fixed his hollow eyes upon the dingy visage of the Mahometan, and their mournful ex* pression seemed to sink into his very soal.
Did the ears of the Moor deceive him* or were they indeed intelligible words that now again proceeded from his feeble and parched lips?—yet not addressed to the whole encircling group, but apparently only to Abdallah. " Oh! save me—save me!" h* 1 faintly articulated; " it is in your power—save me!" .Although, from the tenor of these ex¬ pressions, it was evident that the mentally debilitated Caesario now imagined himself addressing his physician, yet it i9 little marvel that the almost equally weak-brain¬ ed Abdallah (whose small portion of natu¬ ral discernment was now most effectually drowned in wine) should determine to put his own construction on the words thus distinctly and mysteriously whispered in his ear. He thought they could alone bear reference to his own boasted preroga¬ tive—he immediately decided that allusion was made to his own mysterious power of bestowing upon the victim of disease, or accident, a charmed or lengthened exist¬ ence; and he as directly resolved to answer
it accordingly. Just, however, as he was preparing himself to utter a suitable ha¬ rangue, the still-wandering youth con¬ tinued— * f Yes!" he exclaimed, again earnestly regarding the good Mahometan -*-** you are a man of skill—you are an an¬ gel, come to effect my deliverance from these torments—from these agonies. With¬ out thy aid I now must perish—inevita¬ bly perish—thy skill—thy benevolence can alone preserve me. But alas! what do I say ? Can human aid of any description avert the severe decrees of Providence, or allay this parching fever which consumes ray vitals? Ah, no!—even you can do nothing to relieve me now." " I could," thought Abdallah, but as yet he continued wisely silent. And now the raving don Caesario, still gazing stedfastly in the Moor's dingy countenance, appeared suddenly, for a brief interval, to recollect himself, and evidently to recognise the dark visage which peered feelingly over him. Then, changing his tone as suddenly, he repeated with the
most piteous earnestness—" My benefac¬ tor ! I am dying^—I am dying!" A rising sob choked the utterance of Abdallah, but he shook his head signifi¬ cantly. w Alas, yes! I am dying," said Caesario, in continuation, regardless of the mute dissent of his auditor—" yet a little space, and the wretched exhausted Ciesario shall trouble thee no more. It is vain to wish it otherwise, for my increasing feebleness convinces me that the hour—almost the very minute of dissolution is at hand. But had Heaven in its mercy permitted me to recover, my eternal gratitude, and that of my noble disconsolate parents, should have been yours, for the life you strove so zealously, though vainly, to preserve." " I will—I will preserve it!" sobbed Abdallah. " It is no longer possible—Heaven de¬ crees otherwise," returned don C«sario, mildly, and with something of reproval in his manner. " Had the good saints whom I have incessantly importuned—those kind
and powerful intercessors from whom alone in his last hour of extremity the good Christian can hope to receive effectual aid (Abdallah insensibly drew back a little) deigned to grant my prayer, my future life should have been devoted to thy ser¬ vice; and no sacrifice would haye been deemed too great, or even a sufficient re¬ quital for thy kindness. But I too surely feel it can never be. Yet a little while, and this pulse will cease to beat—this throbbing forehead to ache—my tongue to move, and my grateful heart to dictate the thanks which are thy due. Now—now my spirit is going—this excessive languor —my brain grows dizzy—blindness comes upon me------" 6 * Rest—rest, poor sufferer! noble and grateful as thou art, or seemest," now ex¬ claimed Abdallah, able at length to speak —" rest content with the assurance of Ab¬ dallah that the morning wili restore thy sight! repose quietly beneath the assurance pf the son of Aghar Hussein, that the coming morrow shall not fail to behold thy
fading energies recruited! Ah! it is well- he seems inclined to slumber. Indulge the wish—from that transient repose thou shalt awake as a man whose existence hath been renewed. Look not thus incredulous, ye who stand around," he continued, ob¬ serving tho expressive looks of Isidore, and the chief physician, who now stood near, " for such, I promise you all, shall be his waking. I promise you—I—the son of Aghar Hussein, and a true believer, who utters not falsehood. Follow me not, nei¬ ther marvel at mv absence during \his cri- tical juncture—I go to provide for the ful¬ filment of my words. Anon I will return/* Thus saying, he staggered hastily from the apartment, and down the stairs, accompa¬ nied only by his attendant Ahmed. As soon as he was gone, the physician looked sagaciously at Isidore, and, shaking his head, seemed almost to doubt whether the Moor was not at intervals labouring under the same delirium which affected his patient. Isidore, too, appeared greatly astonished; and as he had now very slight
hopes of his master's recovery, however ardently he might desire such an event, could not help treating the observations of the worthy Abdallah (for the first time) with the most profound contempt. Mean¬ time, the patient himself, don Caesario, had certainly fallen into a more placid slumber than it had been his lot to enjoy for a long time previous to that eventful evening; although so far from auguring a good re¬ sult to the patient from this circumstance, the physician sagely pronounced it a mat¬ ter of doubt whether don Caesario would ever again awake at ali from that apparent¬ ly gentle and refreshing slumber. In spite of this prediction, however, his breathing evidently grew more favourable —his restlessness seemed abated—a gentle perspiration covered his limbs and fore¬ head, and (if we except the solemnly-de¬ livered opinion of the doctor) every cir¬ cumstance appeared to indicate an ap¬ proaching favourable change, of which, notwithstanding, Isidore yet hardly ven¬ tured to credit the possibility.
CHAP. VI. This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch The lion, and the belly-phiched wolf, Keep their fur dry, unbonetted he runs, And bids what will take all. Shakespeake. Abdallah now, still followed by Ahmed, again for a few minutes found himself in his own comfortable apartment, where, it must be acknowledged, the enlivening blaze which flickered above the polished hearth—the vacant sofas inviting his reel¬ ing frame to repose, with now and then an occasional jingling of the cheerful glasses, caused by his own unsteady tread across the carpeted floor, combined to shake his resolution, but were insufficient to make him abandon his purpose. A glance, too, at the lofty casement convinced him that the night was one of the gloomiest and most discouraging description—not a star to be seen—not a ray of light visible, nor
a piece of azure of the magnitude even of his own muslin turban. Again Abdallah felt his determination waver, as again bis eye fell upon the cushioned sofa tempting to repose—the repose he so much needed —and he sighed heavily at the thought that circumstances should oblige him to deny himself the enjoyment even of so harmless a luxury. Presently, however, be* again became alive to the conviction that no time was to be lost, if it was ex¬ pected that don Caesario should benefit aught from his meditated appeal to the white spirit of the mountains—for to Him- malay it was that Abdallah resolved now to owe the restoration of the invalid to health and happiness. Accordingly, he addressed himself with renewed resolution to his task, preparing to issue forth into the open street, while Ahmed vainly en¬ deavoured to prevent him. Having reached the outer door of the hotel, he once more cast his eyes around Jhe blackening firmament, and saw plain- Jy, in the dense sable cloud which had al-
ready spread itself as far as the horizon, the most unerring indications of an ap¬ proaching tempest. This conviction was, nevertheless, insufficient to overthmw the invincible determination of the kind-heart¬ ed Moor to preserve, by such miraculous means as he foolishly imagined himself able to command, the life of his newly-ac¬ quired Christian acquaintance. Folding his mantle, therefore, closely around him, he exclaimed, half aside, but sufficiently loud to be overheard by Ahmed, who still stood at his elbow—" To-night, then, is Abdallah destined to receive his earliest favour from the potent Hirnmalay. I know not that my fortunes may be ma¬ terially amended by the boon, but Ab¬ dallah, I thank Mahomet! cannot learn to shut his heart against the dictates of humanity. I am resolved to assay my feeble voice in the youth's favour—" " The night is very dark," now observed Ahmed, interrupting him. " It is of little import," remarked Ab-
dallah, in reply to the interruption—" he with whom I seek to confer is invisible." " And may well be so on such a night as this;" said Ahmed. " Why, even the lofty and substantial fortress which crowns the topmost height of St. Elmo—whither I have strolled so often, just to admire the order of the Christian garrison—is invi¬ sible to-night. I can distinguish nothing of it." " St. Elmo—the very mountain I mean to climb!" muttered Abdallah, in an under tone: then added aloud to Ahmed—" I tell thee again, Ahmed, it is no matter." " But," said Ahmed, still resolved to remonstrate, although with little hope of ultimate success, *' danger may be abroad at this late hour—the city is already half sunk in sleep. Who knows what piece of mischief might be perpetrated by lazza- roni, or banditti, veiled by this pitchy darkness ? I mean, that peril is often to be apprehended,from thieves and assassins, on such nights as these, when chances are ten to one against their crimes or vagaries
being discovered, and themselves brought to justice." " I fear not robbers at such a time as this," said Abdallah, turning snappishly to his attendant, •* nor the lazzaroni at any time: they know me liberal, and they would not harm me." '* Aghar Hussein would not have trust¬ ed them though," said Ahmed, half re¬ proachfully. This was always the last, and often the strongest argument of Ahmed, when he found or fancied his master act> ing erroneously, to convince him that his more politic father (the very sound of whose name was always music to Abdal¬ lah—awakening as it did the recollection of his superior talent and dignity) would not have acted likewise. In this little sentence, therefore, Ahmed had made his latest effort: he knew that if it failed, there was little chance that any other ar¬ gument, however zealously urged, would prove successful. Abdallah answered him, after a momen¬ tary pause—.*« Says not the Koran, Ahmed
f f ^p,^otr#^e Koran***—by Mahomet! I f$*g0 }#& W^ w hat it says," and he clasp^ fd ,Mh bewildered forehead as bespoke, ^jbut|I« ? feel that my intentions are bene- ficent, and I trust our holy prophet wili protect me during the execution of a bene¬ volent purpo e/' ojfT Trulyi Httle has the blessed Mahomet to do with thy purpose at all, I believe," muttered Ahmed, as Abdallah {whom now hei strove to detain no longer) issued from |h& door, and almost immediately disap- peared in the darkness which shrouded ef?$p. the, busy Strada di Toledo in its im- p^netoble mantle. " It is the demon con- taped in the forbidden wine thou hast this night swallowed whose suggestions* I fear, thou hast been listening to* and whose intoxicating influence has prompted thy present,purpose. Preserve me, Mahomet! ffppx being :often exposed to the like temp- tatioo, #or, ,by the, beard of Omar! my hea^ feels giddy, and yet I tasted but of a single glass. Our prophet certainly did wisely when he expressly commanded all
true believers to abstain from the deceitful beverage. But, gracious Alia! here am Ii poor Ahmed, arraigning the sage decrees of the infallible Mahomet—the immortal servant of the thrice-glorious founder of heaven and earth, and the messenger of his will toward mankind! Forgive me r most holy prophet! I may well call the Christian's beverage deceptive — it hath beguiled me already of my reason. I will not enter that room again," said he, clo¬ sing vehemently the door of Abdallah's apartment, as he passed it, ** for there is witchery in the very sight of that same Nazarene liquor, which it best becomes a good Mahometan altogether to avoid. But my poor master! I know not how it may fare with him this dismal night, he hav¬ ing unhappily poured so much of that de¬ moniac juice down his hitherto orthodox throat* As little can I guess what sudden madness hath seized him, that he iriust seek alone, at this late hour, St. Elmo's mountain: but be the event what it may, VOL* II. E
ing demon—this
1 ! fbr att this same, m hide me hereabout; *v r ^HtSf looks I fear, and hi* intents I doubt , „ .,.,,- Shaeespeark- HAViNG wearied himself cf soliloquizing (a habit Ahmed had piobabiy imbibed from his meditative master), he first pro- ceeded cautiously again to the chamber of the invalid, to ascertain whether any change of importance had yet taken place. He found' don Caesario still sunk in what cer¬ tainly appeared a tranquil and refreshing ' slumber, with Isidore watching^ as visual, > quietty and patiently by his side. Ali the other* anxious feces which, a few minutes ^ttforeV liad surroiinded his couch, had dis¬ appeared; even the grave visage^of the physkJianwasno longer visible; and Ahmed, feeling that his jiiisence now could be
it all coraes of this
same
s
i
n
only an interruption, soon quitted the chamber likewise. He then descended, and strove to divert his thoughts by min¬ gling in giddy chat with the domestics of the establishment—but it was all in vain. Their coarse jokes failed to provoke the accustomed smile upon his good-natured features, and he forgot to reply to them; until presently (as apprehension for the fate of his attached master gathered strength in his mind) their voices fell wholly un¬ heeded upon his vacant ear. The thoughts of Ahmed were occupied solely by the strangeness and peril of Abdallah's head¬ strong purpose. He accordingly soon withdrew himself again from the society of the laughing menials, and retired to meditate in solitude upon a newly-con¬ ceived project that now suddenly '* peered upon his mind," and endeavour to resolve what course it would be most advisable to pursue, should his worthy and kind master fail speedily to return. As he proceeded gloomily, a vivid flash e $
et^lightning crossing his passage, rendered tl&eless, for % moment, the glimmering taper he carried in his hand; and as he passed the opened portal, he failed npt to remark the even-increased heaviness of the atmosphere, now truly resembling in aspect hfefewtt dusky countenance. A few mo* ments afterwards, the awakened growl of the thtinder saluted, with its unwelcome toneV his startled ears. Ahmed hesitated nd longer, but shrouding himself closely in hiscomfortable mantle, immediately issued forth amid the pelting rain, which now descended in torrents, in quest of the mis¬ guided Abdallah. It happened fortunate¬ ly 'that he had overheard his master's ex¬ clamation of—" St. Elmo—the very moun¬ tain I mean to climb!" and, therefore, tor ward the mountain of St. Elmo, lit on his way by the extremely-vivid flashes of lightning, which already grew frequent, Ahhled' wisely determined to direct his solitary course. Meantime, the credulous Abdallah had irreality urged* iris way impatiently to-
ward the steep and lofty summit? of §t» Elmo's mountain. As might have been expected, the extreme darkness rendered his path peculiarly perplexing, and even hazardous; but Abdallah blundered on most courageously, his thoughts still occu¬ pied by the moving scene he had just witnessed, or bent upon the glorious issue of his enterprise, and the anticipated mi¬ raculous restoration of the (at present) ut¬ terly hopeless don Csesario. Thus pro¬ ceeding, he at length, with much difficulty, reached an elevated part of the mountain; and judging himself now to be sufficiently exalted above the meaner inhabitants of the lower world, (mere commonplace mor* tals, who possessed no such truly enviable privilege—no such proud distinction as had been conferred, by an immortal spirit, upon the more fortunate Abdallah), he prepared to address, with becoming reve¬ rence, the all-potent Himmalay, to whose condescending ear, he still felt confident, the appeal would not be made in vain. The point to which Abdallah had scram-
bled was* in reality, far advanced up the mountain*—so far that even the city be¬ neath (owing to the extreme density of the cloud which now enveloped him) was rendered wholly invisible; nor, as the hour was waxing late, did even the hum of its busy inhabitants, ceaseless in Naples, reach the spot whereon he stood. The outer¬ most of the feeble lamps which adorned the streets of Naples, glimmered too far beneath him to emit the faintest ray of light which might otherwise have sufficed to render "darkness visible;" ali around was impenetrable chaos—obscurity unen¬ lightened by the remotest beam of radi¬ ance. The first flash of lightning had not yet burst forth from the scowling atmo¬ sphere, to illumine the prospect even for an instant, nor had the rain yet com¬ menced. Abdallah turned his face toward the blackened firmament, and thus com¬ menced his first meditated address to the mountain spirit: *- M Himmalay ! kind, snowy spirit, who art only to be invoked on the airy summits df nature's loftiest
eminences—I have obeyed thy injunctions in ascending this mountain. Moved to compassion by the sufferings of don Caesa¬ rio—sufferings wholly unmerited by that noble-spirited youth, to whom, although a Christian, I feel myself unaccountably at¬ tached—I am here to solicit thy promised intercession with the destinies, for the pro¬ longation of his otherwise forfeited exist¬ ence. Be not deaf, therefore, oh, Himma¬ lay ! to the feeble voice of thy supplicant, however unworthy to approach thy ex¬ alted footstool; but deign to grant—as thou wilt surely hear—his fond request. One of my charmed lives I freely bestow, to lengthen that of the expiring don Cae¬ sario. Thou hast heard me, Himmalay— thou hast heard the first earnest supplica¬ tion of thy favoured Abdallah, and I de¬ scend with confidence." Thus spake Abdallah, with tolerable distinctness, to the silent ear of night— but, alas! to descend proved no such easy matter as he seemed to anticipate. In vain (his conjuration finished) did the intoxi-
cated Moor strive to pursue his way stea¬ dily down that bewildering eminence, whose steepness seemed considerably to have increased since he ascended it. The fact was, that the fumes of the treacherous liquor he had too freely swallowed, conti¬ nued mounting in Abdallah's brain; and this was the principal cause of his finding the ascent less difficult than his return — admitting too, perhaps, that to descend a hill is seldom so easy to a drunken man as to climb one. However this might be, Abdallah, now suddenly overtaken by a giddy sickening sensation, felt conscious of his inability to reach the bottom of St. Elmo's mount again that night, from the first moment of his attempting to do so. He continued his attempt, notwithstand¬ ing, knowing there was no remedy, nor any other alternative than sleeping on the bare mountain : but just as the first bright burst of lightning (which surprised him most inopportunely, on an elevated bank, with a ditch at the bottom of it) glared around him, he fell headlong into a deep,
but dry, fissure, which gaped by the road side. If Abdallah uttered any exclama¬ tion of surprise, or for assistance, it was completely drowned by the loud hoarse voice of the thunder which immediately succeeded ; and for the present dryness of the channel which received him, it availed him little, for the rain now began to fall in large drops, and with an impetuosity that threatened speedily to drench him to the skin. The flashes now became more frequent, likewise, but their light was of little service to Abdallah, who lay utterly confounded where he had fallen, without attempting to move. The thunder, too, repeatedly raised its solemn voice, as if to terrify him; while, to complete his con¬ sternation, the neighbouring mountain— the far-famed Vesuvius distinctly sent forth a hollow and dismal sound, indica¬ tive of an approaching eruption. Yet amid all these appalling circumstances, the half stupified Abdallah still found leisure to revolve in his mind the projected resto- E 8
ration of don Caesario, and the joy of Isi¬ dore at his averted doom—averted (as he fondly believed) by his that night's inter¬ cession in his favour, before the imaginary shrine of the mountain spirit, Himmalay. Affairs were in this posture, when the faithful Ahmed, toiling up the eminence, regardless alike of rain and tumult, lit only by those vivid flashes of lightning which nearly deprived him of his eyesight, ima¬ gined he heard a sound that resembled neither the rolling of the thunder nor the still more terrible roaring of the adjacent mountain. It was the voice of his anx¬ iously-sought master, and seemed to pro¬ ceed from what Ahmed would have some¬ what coarsely termed a running gutter by the road side.—" He will certainly reco¬ ver !" were the words it uttered, and the pleased Ahmed instantly hurried to the spot whence the voice seemed to arise.
CHAP. VIII. Alas I sir, are you here* things that love night, Love not such nights as these ; the wrathiul skies Gallow the very wanderers of the dark, And make them koep their caves. Since L was man, Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder, Such groans of roaring wind and rain, I never Remember to have heard. SHAHtSPKARE. ** I am certain he will recover!" now re¬ peated the voice, in the same musing tone, while Ahmed, advancing, and bending over the brink of the channel, discerned, to his satisfaction, snugly deposited in the slimy bottom, the portly form of Abdal¬ lah, his limbs disposed for rest, in spite of the cool torrent which drenched them— his turban rolled far behind him—and his whole appearance exhibiting a perfect caricature of one defrauded of his senses, by the enemy men " put into their mouths to steal away their brains." " I trust he will recover," now remark-
ed Ahmed, with a significant shake of the head, " and moreover that thou, my poor deluded master, wilt recover likewise." " Ahmed! Ahmed!" exclaimed Ab¬ dallah, sullenly, whom the sound of his faithful attendant's well-known voice had recalled to a momentary sense of his situa¬ tion : then, as if guessing the design of the trusty creature was to seek him, he added—" I am here!" " Thy slave beholds," said Ahmed, in reply; and the next flash saw him busily engaged in endeavouring to extricate his degraded, but still honoured master. In a few moments, Abdallah, with the assistance of Ahmed, succeeded in gaining an erect posture; and presently, support¬ ed still by his indefatigable attendant, assayed once more to descend the comfort¬ less St. Elmo. Still, however, his brain reeled as he proceeded, and Ahmed had considerable difficulty to keep him on his feet. " I am sure he will recover!" he again reiterated, boldly, with the pride of
a drunken man in the feat he imagined himself to have just achieved. " I doubt it not," said Ahmed, yielding a ready assent, in the hope of urging him more speedily forward. " In the mean time, let us hasten ........ " " I will not hasten," exclaimed Abdal¬ lah, pettishly, aware perhaps of his pre¬ sent inability to quicken his pace—" it is below the dignity of the son of Aghar Hussein, governor of Constantia, to has¬ ten-—" then, as if recollecting his former speed, he muttered—" except to the com¬ pletion of some praiseworthy enterprise." " Agreed. Let us, then, move slowly," said the accommodating Ahmed, " pro¬ vided our course be only directed aright —guide me, I pray thee, Mahomet! this fearful night—we shall reach the hotel in time." " Ay, slowly, and with dignity," again muttered Abdallah, while proceeding truly at the pace his words described, but with¬ out any particle of the dignity which a simple hearer might infer from them gra-
eed his progress. " Good Mussulmans seldom move fast," he continued, drawl- ingly^—" it beseems not the dignity of a noble Moslem to move fast." " Nor to be found bare-headed in a ditch," retorted Ahmed, at length begin¬ ning to lose his patience. " Strange! that you could not leave to Christians the de¬ mon they are accustomed to cork up in bottles for their own vile use! Had it not been for the devilish wine thou hast drunk, thou mightest, at this moment, have been safely and comfortably bedded at Napies-^-whither, I pray thee, kind prophet! to guide us speedily from this pitiless night." Abdallah muttered something in reply, which Ahmed failed to hear,.or, if he heard it, failed to notice, and the twain proceeded for the remainder of the dis¬ tance without exchanging another syl¬ lable. In sooth, amid the hollow bellow¬ ing of the disturbed Vesuvius, the deafen¬ ing roar of the reverberating thunder, and the loud " pelting of the pitiless storm,"
it was no easy matter to distinguish each other's accents. The heart of the devoted Ahmed bounded gratefully on first dis¬ tinguishing through the gloom the feeble glimmer of a lamp, as he immediately fancied the faint and sickly streaming of a distant beam of radiance that seemed struggling to pierce the darkness—a dis¬ covery that certainly indicated their near approach to Naples. In a few minutes they were threading its usually crowded, but now forsaken streets, which the tem¬ pest, as well as the hour, had contributed to render solitary; and as Ahmed vvas pretty well acquainted with its multitude of intricate streets and passages, they con¬ trived soon to reach the Strada di Toledo. Here, on their arrival, the first care of Ahmed was to undress, and kindly put to bed, his now almost-insensible master: after which, having partly changed his own dripping raiment, he once more as¬ cended to Caesario's chamber, respecting whose condition the otherwise kind-heart-
ed Abdallah had gone to rest too far stu¬ pified even to inquire. Neither wind nor tempest—the rattling of the shaken casement, nor the loud bel- loW|pg of the heaving mountain—the driving rain without, nor the half-stifled exclamations of terror from the affrighted domestics within, had sufficed to awaken don Caesario from his profound slumber, nor to drive the affectionate afflicted Isi¬ dore from his gloomy bedside. Him, thert." re, Ahmed found, still seated sor¬ rowfully (though not without a faint glim¬ mering of hope elicited from the improved breathing of Caesario) in his chamber, gaz¬ ing with mournful earnestness upon the yet pale, but more tranquil features, of his unconscious master. Dismally passed that night to Ahmed—at least, the remainder of it, for the night was already far spent— and little less irksome proved the dreary interval of darkness to the expectant Isi¬ dore; but when at last the morning shone, the grief of both became converted into gladness, by the evident amendment even
their untutored eyes failed not to discerri in the state of the patient—an amendment so conspicuous, that it instantly animated their desponding bosoms with something even stronger than hope. To be brief, for the sake of more speedily laying this " sheet of sorrows on the shelf," the alteration in his malady—in his whole appearance, ap¬ peared perfectly miraculous. His fever seemed to have considerably abated, if not wholly to have abandoned him ; and his sudden (almost marvellous) progress to¬ ward recovery, so contrary to the express¬ ed opinion of the able physician who at¬ tended him, vvas such as to astonish even his most anxious and gratified friends. Those few brief hours of slumber seemed altogether to have changed the aspect of his case, and redeemed him from the grave, which before appeared gaping ready to re¬ ceive him. Ahmed and Isidore looked at each other perfectly astounded, while each felt utterly at a loss to account, by any na¬ tural means, for this sudden alteration; and of course, the rest of the household con-
fessed themselves equally amazed at this unexpected prospect of convalescence to the invalid, whom all pitied, but few dared venture to hope (until that unlooked for, but auspicious morning) would eventually recover. The morning was far advanced, before Abdallah was able to shake off the potent fumes of his unaccustomed draughts on the preceding evening. Thrice had Ahmed entered his chamber, eager to impart the joyful intelligence, and hoping to find him awakened from his unusually-protracted slumber, but as often had he been disap¬ pointed. These reiterated disappointments Ahmed failed not duly to impute to the continued influence of the swallowed " de¬ mon" over his master's spirit, and in this supposition he was, perhaps, not altoge¬ ther erroneous: but he dared not roughly to awaken him. Once or twice his fingers itched to do so—he strode over the cham¬ ber with a heavy sounding step—he even used his voice louder than prudence would have suggested as at all consonant with the
continuance of Abdallah's repose: but per¬ ceiving that, in spite of these repeated ef¬ forts, his master still slept soundly, Ahmed only shook his head, and again quitted the apartment. At length, Abdallah slowly opened his eyes, and with a heavy and so¬ norous yawn, endeavoured to rouse him¬ self to a clearer recollection of the past events, and his present situation. Ahmed was, in a moment, by his side; and by the anxious gaze of the self-deluded Moor upon his dingy but triumphantly-lighted countenance, he seemed presently to ap¬ prehend the nature and importance of his agreeable tidings.
CHAP. IX. Man, being reasonable, must get drunk; The best of life is but intoxication t Glory, the grape ; love, gold; in these are sunk The hopes of all men, and of every nation. Without their sap, how branchless were the trunk Of life's strance tree, so fruitful on occasion! But to reiurn. Get very drunk, and when You wake with headache, you shall see what then. Byron. " Well, Ahmed," exclaimed Abdallah, impatiently, perceiving that his attendant spoke not—" is he better? Will he re¬ cover ?" " The change is most miraculous," an¬ swered Ahmed, readily : " he appears to have received a renewal of existence." " He has received a renewed existence," observed Abdallah, pompously, and with evident self-satisfaction. " Indeed, it is true," remarked Ahmed, inadvertently. " Those few brief hours
of soft, refreshing slumber, have restored him wonderfully." " Pshaw!" said Abdallah, with a con¬ temptuous gesture: then recollecting him¬ self, he coldly at ded—" but I forgive thee, my faithful Ahmed, for thy weak¬ ness—it is true, at least, he is wonderfully recovered." Abdallah now resolved to rise immedi¬ ately, and proceed at orfce to the couch of don Caesario, to witness the effects (as he still dreamed foolishly) of his own un¬ doubted nostrum—his magical cure for all earthly, life-endangering, diseases, or calamities. But, as he strove to raise himself from his pillow, he still felt an un¬ usual sensation of pain and giddiness, for which he found himself wholly unable to account. Ahmed sighed, as he regarded with compassion his truant master, and iimmediately conjecturing the cause of his indisposition, again shook his head mourn¬ fully. Meantime, Abdallah, vvho, though accustomed even at Algiers to set at nought occasionally the mandate of the
prophet, had in reality never drank so deeply before of the forbidden beverage, began to feel all the qualms and heaviness w r hich commonly succeed an overcharge of that delightful liquor—the " Christian's enchantment" For a moment, he again reclined his aching head upon his pillow, and could not avoid exclaiming—" I feel unusually ill this morning—sick—sick, and spiritless. Ahmed, what can ail me ?" " If thy slave without offence may freely answer," said Ahmed, glad of another op¬ portunity to express his disapproval of Abdallah's recent disgraceful indulgence, " it is doubtless the wine thou last night drankest, that disguised enemy to all true Mussulmans ------" " I asked thee not the cause," said Ab¬ dallah, snappishly. " I but demanded of thee, if thou couldst comprehend the pre¬ sent painful effect of what 1 now acknow¬ ledge to have been an indiscretion—and, if thou knewest it, the most approved re¬ medy." " I am unpractised in the treatment of
diseases purely Christian," replied Ahmed, declining at the same time to interfere. His curiosity, however, by this modest re¬ ply, was left ungratified, and he therefore further demanded—" Unacustomed as hath been the ear of thy devoted slave to the symptoms which follow in the train of these foul excesses so frequent with the Nazarene, yet, if it now pleaseth the son of Aghar Hussein to describe them, 1 shall attend; and should aught strike me as likely to relieve------" " I told thee before, I felt sickness," re¬ sumed Abdallah, in a peevish tone—"ex¬ treme languor, too, and a dull, ceaseless headache. Oh! what a parching thirst! Some drink, Ahmed—some drink!" " A draught of the pure sherbet the prophet allows, and all good Mussulmans are content to take," said Ahmed, present¬ ing his master with the sober goblet. " Sickness and heartache," he continued, half aside, " are exhibitive of a surfeit in love—sickness and headache, it seems, of a similar indulgence in wine—verily, Ah-
med, thou wilt in time attain, in this Eu¬ ropean land, to the knowledge even of the dey's chief physician." " Physician! the very thing I want!" now cried Abdallah, somewhat alarmed at the qualmish state of his stomach. " Fetch me, Ahmed," he continued, as he returned the goblet, " the ablest physician this celebrated city of the Nazarenes can afford." " The best physician, in lands unsway¬ ed by the Moslem, is the Koran, for a true believer," said Ahmed, significantly. " Not so, I fear," said Abdallah, with a desponding sigh. " I venerate the Ko¬ ran, Ahmed, and commend thee for loving- it—but it cannot cure me." " Holy prophet!" exclaimed Ahmed, with a kind of horror in his aspect, " what is that the Koran cannot perform ? That thought is not thine own—thy slave may surely deem—but of the demon thou hast last night made familiar with thy bosom." " I dispute not its efficacy then," re¬ sumed Abdallah, who stood corrected by
the well-timed zeal of his servant—" but it suits me not now to inquire its remedy. I say fetch me a physician—a physician, Ahmed—mark me! the ablest in Naples." * € Alas! it is he who last eve predicted confidently that don Caesario would never recover," answered Ahmed, in a despond¬ ing tone. <£ Is it on such as these, that the son of the renowned and valiant Ag¬ har Hussein, governor of Constantia, is to depend for his restoration to the divine blessing of health, which, the Koran as¬ sures us, is a gift from the Most High ?" " Did he predict it confidently ?" in¬ quired Abdallah, with much eagerness, for Ahmed had now touched a theme which in turn awakened all his master's sympa¬ thy—" did the good doctor positively as¬ sert his recovery to be impossible ?" " He did," answered Ahmed, bluntly. Abdallah seemed much pleased with this reply, and presently Ahmed heard him muttering—" Things that are with man impossible, are possible to Himmalay. VOL. II. f
I thank thee, most mighty—most atten* tive Himmalay !" *' Who is Himmalay ?" demanded the wondering Ahmed. " I remember not his name in the list of Koran saints, nor among—" " Nor among any saints that thou hast ever heard of," replied Abdallah, rather gratified than vexed by the words of his gaping attendant. " But, for the present, Ahmed, rest assured that Himmalay is among thy master's most worshipped and most serviceable friends—hereafter thou shalt know more. Before the sun goes down, my faithful servant, I will unfold to thee the means—myself having happily proved the unworthy instrument—through which the forfeited life of don Csesario has in reality been preserved. This confidence, Ahmed, thou hast fully merited at fhy considerate master's hands: receive it then, not as a boon, but as an even inadequate recompence for thy last night's services. -Remember, I have promised thee, before
the sun goes down, thou shalt hear much of the immortal Himmalay." M I have heard much of hiin already," said Ahmed, ready to tremble, " but can-* not understand him. I have long since heard much of him—the domestics talk of him incessantly—the whole city talks of him—and of thee, too, as connected with him by some mysterious link, which enables ye both (I know not how) to ex¬ pand the natural term of man's existence. Some say that ye have power between you to treble his usual span of life—some that ye can lengthen it to ten times its wonted period, and others that ye can at once confer upon the object of your choice an interminable immortality. These are the rumours which, for some time past, have assailed me every where—in addi¬ tion to all which it hath pleased thee, at various periods, to impart to thy poor slave in profound secrecy ------" " And which, if thou hadst prudently kept secret," here interrupted Abdallah, f 21
** as I omitted not to enjoin thee, could never have given rise to the rumours thou hast mentioned. Attempt not to deny the charge—thy countenance confesses it: it is only to thy babbling tongue that re¬ ports such as these can possibly owe their origin. But repine not, Ahmed ; for how¬ ever it may be, I care not: thou hast only proved the unconscious herald of thy mas¬ ter's rising fame. In truth, when I re¬ quested thee to keep secret what I told thee, I but deceived thee, Ahmed. The miraculous power I certainly possess, and which I (only in part) have revealed to thy wondering ear, it suited me to wish published over the Nazarene city in which I now reside; and thou hast, half unwit¬ tingly, given it ample circulation. All this is only as I desired; my plan hath thus far succeeded—and, I promise thee, to-day thou shalt know more. Yes! ere night, my Ahmed, the sudden convalescence of don Csesario shall seem no marvel to thee. At least, it is my intention to bring the marvel more distinctly within thy com-
prehension, to the end that thou mayest aid me still further in the prosecution of my enterprise." Ahmed, whose confusion, indeed, was sufficiently evident, even through his dingy aspect, to have confirmed his indiscretion, had circumstances failed to render such confirmation wholly superfluous, for a few minutes bowed his head with shame be¬ neath the glance of his gently-reproving master. Then raising it, with renewed confidence, as Abdallah concluded, he de¬ manded—" And what enterprise is it, thy slave would learn, to the fair termination of which the propagation of this seeming wonder can possibly conduce?" " Alas ! Ahmed, knowest thou not," re¬ sumed Abdallah, " it is to the possession of the lovely princess Victoria, sole daugh¬ ter of the renowned, patriotic Vicenza, as thou hast informed me—and a worthy match for the son of Aghar Hussein— that I have ventured to aspire? But, alas! I fear she scorns my suit. Long time hath now elapsed, and I have yet
been able to obtetm no answer to my writ¬ ten protestations of regard*—no intimatidn, either written or verbal, that she even thinks of me. When I met her at the marquis Lioni's, too, so far from appearing pleased at the circumstance, or affording me an opportunity of more fully explain¬ ing my views and wishes, I thought there was not one amid the whok glittering as¬ sembly whom she seemed more anxious to avoid. I have many times meditated the obtainment of an introduction to her ho¬ noured sire, and procuring his countenance to my proposed addresses, as the surest pass to his daughter's favour: but——why dost thou turn aside, and shake thy head so mournfully? Becomes it the son of Aghar Hussein to despond ? Or hast thou indeed substantial reasons, Ahmed—as now, judging from thy looks, I fear—why the suit of Abdallah should eventually prove unsuccessful ?" " I have, indeed, many substantial rea¬ sons," muttered Ahmed. " What are they ?—and why keep them
from me?" demanded Abdallah, starting up impatiently. " Can he succeed in aught, asked Ah¬ med, significantly, " from whose purpose the blessing of our holy prophet is likely to be withheld ? Can he accomplish aught who passes his hours chiefly in the enjoy¬ ment of forbidden luxuries, and even de¬ nies the efficacy of the blessed Koran to remove the painful effects of his intem¬ perance ?" " Pshaw!" said Abdallah, resuming his recumbent posture, " are these your rea¬ sons ?" However, in spite of his pretended indifference, he really looked and felt ashamed of the reproof to which he found he had subjected himself, and therefore presently added—" It is true, Ahmed! it is true. I have forgotten the precepts of our holy religion, and how can I expect to prosper in any thing ? But I will amend my error, Ahmed, and then------ for now that 1 think of it more earnestly, perhaps had I purified myself by frequent devotion, instead of draining the filthy Christians
beverage, the result might have been dif¬ ferent. I might have received a favour¬ able answer." " 1 doubt it not," said Ahmed—" who shall dare to doubt it ? God is great, and Mahomet is his prophet—who shall pre¬ tend to doubt the vigilance of Mahomet over all good Mussulmans, or his ability to advance their cause ?" " I will drink no more wine," said Ab¬ dallah, sputtering vehemently, and fancy¬ ing in his enthusiasm that he was voiding the dregs of the forbidden liquor.—" Pah ! 1 shall never again get the filthy flavour of this Christian abomination out of my mouth: it is so thoroughly Nazarene, that if once a true believer suffer it to pollute his lips, he finds it extremely difficult to era¬ dicate the taste of it from his palate, and no less so to expunge it from his memory. Why, the very grape which produced it must have grown in a Christian vineyard— even the soil was Christian—the gatherei Christian—it is certainly altogether a Christian liquid—no wonder then it sticks
nauseously upon the lips, and disarranges the stomach, of a sound and faithful Mos¬ lem like myself. Ahmed, reach me the goblet again—I mean, filled with such liquor only as our worthy prophet himself might have deigned to taste, during the brilliant period of his sojournment here among the sons of men: then let us again talk of this stubborn damsel, and strive to devise—with the assistance of the thrice holy Mahomet, whose precepts hereafter I desire better to obey and reverence— some means of obtaining her still. I feel a new-born hope reign in my bosom— doubtless inspired by the blessed instructor of the faithful, as a foretaste of compensa¬ tion for the pious resolution I have made — never again to taste that pernicious be¬ verage. I feel assured, Ahmed, that we shall yet be more than conquerors, through the prophet, who hath newly undertaken our cause." Ahmed smiled at the sudden exhilaration of his master, but still shook his head f 3
doubtingly: he was pleased * notwithstand¬ ing, eveh at the avowed determination of Abdallah to abandon and despise that " bottled and corked-up pestilence," now so universally prized over christianized Europe.
CHAP. X. Oh! master, master, I have watched so long . That I'm dog weary. Shakespeare. Win her with gifts, if she respect not words; Dumb jewels often, in their silent kind, More than quick words do move a woman's mind Ibid. t " How long is it, Ahmed," said Abdallah in continuation, " since thy last lengthened interview with this Sicilian damsel whom thou wottest of—this favoured abigail whose influence thou hast either ^bought or won, or, it may be, something of both —this Brunella——" "Biondella," said Ahmed with vivacity,
evidentlyoverjoyed at receiving an oppor¬ tunity even of repeating her name. " Thy slave will cheerfully repeat to thee*—-" " Not so," interrupted Abdallah; " I need not the repetition of that which my memory well retains, but simply demand¬ ed of thee what space of time had elapsed since that last encouraging interview?" " Exactly three days," answered Ahmed. " No more!" exclaimed Abdallah. " Ah! but three days of absence—lovers* absence —three anxious, wearying days, in addi¬ tion to many weeks of tedious incertitude already passed! This is indeed still a dis¬ heartening reckoning. On that occasion, however, she informed thee, Ahmed—as thou since has twenty times assured me— that her mistress regretted not having yet had sufficient leisure to consider of my proposals, but that now an answer might be speedily expected. It is well—there is hope in this; and but for the frequency of disappointment-—but away with de¬ spondency ! the prophet himself is about to become our ally. I say that, notwith-
standing the recent vexatious and innu* merable delays we have been constrained to endure, there appears fair ground for encouraging hope in this. Ahmed, assist me to rise." " But the sickness—the headache you but now complained of," said Ahmed, hesitating. *' I feel it no longer," replied Abdallah, cheerfully. " Hope hath been my physi¬ cian, and her divine presence in my bosom hath already effected a cure." " I pray Mahomet that such hope may not be changed to despair," said Ahmed, with fervency. " Thou hast no cause to apprehend such an event, hast thou, Ahmed ?" asked Ab¬ dallah, half suspiciously. " None in the world," answered Ahmed. " The constant smiles of my beloved Bion¬ della, during our stolen interviews, pro¬ mise to each of us a perfect paradise." "Then whence that ill-timed ejacula¬ tion ?" said Abdallah. " But continue thy efforts, Ahmed. Ply her with costly pre-
sents, if she happeneth but indifferently to affect thy complexion. There is a class of women on whose affections such presents win more surely than even the smoother blandishments, and practised coxcomical airs, of a lighter-skinned lover. Spare not then, Ahmed, the treasures of thy master, but lavish them as thou wilt. To-night thou again shalt visit and im¬ portune this same Christian damsel-—this smiling houri of thy hoped-for paradise— for her mistress's promised answer. Thou must be earnest, zealous, and importunate —-saying the patience of thy master hath already been long tried, and will brook little further delay; but I would wish thee also liberal. To-night, Ahmed, thou shalt do this—to-night after sunset." The visage of Ahmed brightened at this intelligence, for he was always ready to hie to a meeting with his beautiful Biondella, nor did the frequency of his disappointment (with respect to the pro¬ gress of his master's suit) at all seem to abate the ardour of his own private attach-
ment. The fact was, that, of the two out¬ landish lovers, the attendant was certainly the better treated; or, at least, appeared to receive, from the treacherous Biondella, a greater share of favour than his master from the supposed haughty princess was ever likely to enjoy. Meantime, Abdallah continued—" But we forget the unfortunate youth above, don Caesario, who—in spite of the predic¬ tion of the chief physician, whose skill, notwithstanding, I reverence—will now certainly recover. I must first proceed to visit him; after which I will expounds© thee, my faithful Ahmed! the whole mys¬ tery of his preservation, effected solely through the interference of the immortal and (to thee) incomprehensible Himmalay. Anon, before evening advances, I will more fully instruct thee in thy bearing to-night. For the present—the bright¬ ness of the morning shames this tardy keeping of our chamber; let us go forth —a, day is before us full of fate—conduct me, Ahmed, first to don Caesario/'
Abdallah being by this time completely dressed, now accompanied Ahmed to the already thronged apartment of the conva¬ lescent Caesario, which he found crowded not only with physicians, but (in spite of the utmost efforts of Isidore) even with the domestics of the household, who, ex¬ cited by curiosity and the strange reports which had gained circulation upon the subject, literally besieged the chamber. As they passed an open casement, which afforded a distant view of the adjacent country, Abdallah perceived, with a kind of secret horror, the angry summit of the labouring Vesuvius, from which a long dark column of mingled flame and smoke was already ascending toward the darken¬ ing skies. The threatened eruption had evidently commenced, and promised, ere that terrific mountain again subsided into its wonted state of deceitful serenitude* to make all Naples tremble, From thence his eves wandered for a moment toward the nearer, but less elevated St. Elmo, and again he shuddered slightly at the bare
remembrance of the peril night escaped. This deliverance, however, he still obstinately imputed (in his own mind) to the care and vigilance over his protegee of the good mountain spirit, Himmalay; while, alas! it was to the efforts of the faithful Ahmed only that he owed his present safety. On entering the chamber, Abdallah was not a little gratified to find that don Csesario was again able perfectly to recognise, and even to thank his bene¬ factor : but in the latter effort the gener¬ ous and delighted Moor permitted him not to exhaust his strength. Then de¬ scending with a lighter heart, and a more cheerful countenance, than he had ever yet exhibited in Naples, the deluded Mus¬ sulman retired with Ahmed to his own apartments, glorying in the certain pub¬ licity now about to be given over every portion of the Christian's territory to his imaginary, superhuman privilege. And in this supposition, at least, the exulting Abdallah was far from being de¬ ceived. Before night, the miracle had in-
deed spread wonderfully within the walls of Naples, and even reached the suburbs. Here it failed not to divide the attention of the superstitious and ignorant popu¬ lace, with the dreaded eruption of Mourt Vesuvius, which, happening at the same time, some scrupled not to imagine only another and more fearful exhibition of the mighty sable magician's power over the component elements of nature. Never did man stand a better chance of being stared at—even worried by the gaze of admiration—than Abdallah, the next time he should venture to quit his hotel for the open pier, or the streets of Naples. All this was exactly as the Moor had wished; although, unhappily, he soon found the effects of this popular excite¬ ment by no means so perfectly agreeable as he had weakly anticipated. It is now high time to change the scene, for a short period, again to the more tran¬ quil coast of long-forsaken Sicily ; and re¬ veal how the weary, spirit-broken count Castelli, and his beautiful countess, endur-
ed protracted absence, and mysterious silence (for it was now long since be had written to them) of their pale wandering son*
GHAJP. XI. Mar. —And your son—how long will he live ? Doge. --------------------------- ——— I trust, for all that yet is past, as many years, Anil happier than his father. Byron. .■~v^;..-. : - '■■■:■■ ■■■:-■ For some time after the enamoured don Caesario had quitted Sicily, he continued to correspond regularly with his parents; carefully concealing from them, however, his cherished affection for the daughter of the prince Vicenza, his M house's foe," or even that he was at all aware of the prince being also at that time in Naples. Thus matters continued for several weeks, tlie count Castelli fully satisfied with his son's diligence, in obeying his parting injunc¬ tion, to " conceal none of hisadventures/'
and even the countess herself (so infinitely was she amused by the accounts of travel his letters afforded) scarcely repining at bis absence. But suddenly all this was to suffer a total change. The letters ceased to arrive as usual—the command of his father was neglected, or, indeed, appeared forgotten altogether. Week after week now continued to elapse, and no notice arrived, even sufficient to assure his un¬ happy parents that don Caesario was still in existence. Again and again did they peruse his last letter, but, alas! the peru¬ sal afforded them very little consolation ; it wholly failed to unravel the source or cause of his present inexplicable conduct. All was mystery at that period (so, at least, the letter assured them) with regard to his future destination: all was silence now respecting his probable fate. The grief and consternation occasioned by this strange circumstance at the palazzo di Castelli, became speedily demonstrated even in the altered demeanour of the vas¬ sals and dependants; but the sorrow of
the count Castelli himself, and still more especially of his amiable countess, was o%'erpowering in the extreme. At first, they strove to bear their repeated disap¬ pointments with resignation, and appeared determined, whatever might be the event, to act under their deprivation with be¬ coming fortitude. But the conviction even of the direst calamity, is easier to be borne than the intolerable anxiety—the insufferable torments of incertitude. The countess first felt her summoned fortitude sink under this insupportable weight of anguish ; and the count, who had hitherto striven to conceal or disguise his appre¬ hensions, at length cast off the veil, and gave vent to his disconsolate feelings in the bitterest language of unmerited afflic¬ tion.—" Alas !" he cried, " it is true, that the inveterate Vicenza, as report long since affirmed, hath betaken him suddenly to reside in Naples; and it is equally—ah ! fatally true, that he hath there practised some diabolical means, or, at the best, hath spread some wily snare, to lure to
perdition my unoffending son. Perhaps the festal draught destined to pass his lips may have been secretly drugged with the deadly potion—perhaps the hired bravo may have planted his murderous weapon deep in his innocent, unsuspecting bosom. Ha! yes—it must be so! else wherefore, too, the silence of Isidore ?—his favourite —his faithful Isidore ? It must be so— and Isidore, perhaps, expired also in his defence: but, trebly accursed Vicenza! thou too hast a daughter—sole prop and hope of thy house, as my beloved Caesario was of mine. Let me but prove it on thee—let me but feel assured this deed rests on thy head, and my vengeance yet shall overtake thee. The scion of the noble house of Castelli shall not be torn from its parent stem, to wither beneath thy malice unavenged, nor the once-dread¬ ed wrath of the old lion of his stock be yet aroused in vain." In useless threats, and surmises such as these, did the wretched count Castelli, and his still more restless and desponding
countess, pass perforce a considerable per riod, ere came the welcome apprisal from the hand of Isidore, which partially dis¬ closed to them the nature of the event they mourned. During the extreme ill¬ ness of don Ccesario, the attention of the devoted Isidore had been solely directed toward the means requisite for his reco¬ very : but when, as already narrated, he found his prudent efforts, and unceasing assiduity, likely to be crowned with suc¬ cess, he began to turn his thoughts toward the almost-forgotten palazzo di Castelli, and its doubtless distressed inhabitants. Accordingly, as well as he was able, he framed a brief epistle (for don Csesario was still incompetent to the task of writing, or even of conversing upon so affecting a theme), sufficient to explain, without too deeply alarming them, the nature of the calamity which had befallen his master, and occasioned the present lamentable breach in their affectionate correspondence. Already had the count Castelli talked of proceeding poste haste for the Neapolitan
territory, in order to the obtainment of such further intelligence, however unsa¬ tisfactory, as it might be in his power to glean—a course which the countess, in the height of her agony, urged him strenu¬ ously to adopt, forgetful of his present in¬ firmities, when that occurrence unexpect¬ edly took place which happily changed the scene. It was on a clear bright morning, but a sorrowful one to the Castelli family, that the humble messenger who usually brought the letters from Naples was observed with more than his usual speed approaching the palazzo. To describe the emotion of the countess would be impossible : that of the count, too, was more subdued, but equally intense. The superscription, each saw pre¬ sently, was not in the handwriting of don Caesario, but in that of Isidore. They seized it hastily, and devoured each sen¬ tence with all the eagerness of parental affection, fearful for the safety of its object; then, toward the conclusion, falling on their knees, eacli breathed a prayer of gra-
titude to that beneficent Providence who alone could have rendered weak the bravo's arm, and robbed it of its accustomed power to slay. The substance of this laconic, but well-timed epistle, thus hastily transmit¬ ted by Isidore, was as follows:— " REVERED SIGNOR, " I write not until fortune has enabled me to transmit to you some crumbs of consolation, as an antidote to the tidings of sorrow it is now my duty to communi¬ cate. Your son, don Caesario, my most honoured master, has long been lying almost within the very portals of the grave; but the dagger of the assassin has been cheated of its innocent victim, and, I rejoice to say, he is now likely to re¬ cover. Skilful attendance, and the strength of his constitution, have baffled the malice of the secret murderer—don Caesario will soon be able again to resume the pleasing task of writing to inform you of particu¬ lars, a degree of amendment not more ear-
nestly desired by any than by his attached, and ever diligent " Isidore" Such was literally the substance of the wary Isidore's epistle, the contents of which (without any imprudent betrayal of his sick master's most cherished secret) suf¬ ficed to alleviate the apprehensions, and re¬ kindle the hopes, of don Caesario's lately disheartened and desponding relatives. From this time forward, therefore, the count and countess Di Castelli continued to await anxiously, but patiently, the arri¬ val of the next communication from Na¬ ples, which Isidore had encouraged them to expect would soon reach them in his unfortunate master's own hand. In the interval, they were constrained of course- to confine themselves to mere cogitations respecting the origin of their son's un¬ happy accident, which the count failed not still to attribute solely to the evil machi- VOL. IL G
nations of the prince Vicenza; and which, while the countess repeatedly execrated his barbarity in thus transferring his im¬ mutable hatred from sire to son, Castelli often swore, in spite of his crippled limbs and increasing feebleness, should not long pass unavenged. Meantime, Ahmed was only obeying the injunctions of Abdallah in that night seeking another lengthened interview with the fair but deceitful object of his own affection—the captivating Biondella. This too engaging damsel had, by this time, so completely wound the scarcely-felt tram¬ mels of love around her dingy captive— so closely bound him in its flowery chains, ere yet he perceived their pressure, that the poor Moor (in spite of his usual dis¬ cernment) was easily blinded by her totally false, and even often contradictory, repre¬ sentations. At one time she would flatter him that his master's suit was not likely to prove disagreeable to the young prin¬ cess—an avowal which never failed to elicit from Ahmed some fresh present, or,
at the least, a promise of one, and his pro* mises were fulfilled. At another period, she would talk of the impossibility of a Christian damsel seeking her happiness in the " sooty bosom" of a misbeliever—a hint that as commonly filled the poor menial with despair. Then again she would lighten his despondency by a string of the grossest and most glaring falsehoods, ut¬ tered with a degree of volubility which the delighted Mahometan received as an incontestable evidence of their veracity; and finally conclude with a protestation of the most ardent attachment to his person, so bewitchingly spoken, that Ahmed would not for the world have disbelieved it. Thus had this artful coquette contrived effectually to rivet her pernicious and de¬ ceitful bonds upon the faithful, unsuspect¬ ing Ahmed. Imagine them now seated together, in an exceedingly small but comfortable apart¬ ment, which looked out upon the smooth promenade already so often mentioned, the G %
dusky visage of Ahmed gleaming with transport, at the seeming degree of favour (alas! that such a pleasing delusion should sometimes prove so transient) to which he had attained, while the countenance of the fair Biondella herself was certainly ex¬ pressive of any thing but dissatisfaction. She smiled complacently even upon the dusky aspect of the cheated Moor, at that moment her sole companion—in this Ah¬ med, assuredly, was not deceived: but had he known the true source of that gra¬ tification so visible in her speaking coun¬ tenance, he would as assuredly have con¬ ceived a wholly different estimate of its value. It was self-interest alone that prompted, and had always prompted, the treacherous Biondella in the slippery and perilous course she was pursuing; and as long as he continued to gratify her awa¬ kened cupidity with presents which to her appeared inestimable, so;long was her seeming friendship, but real treachery, Jikely to continue. The only light that shone upon their present intercourse was
a dim ruddy glare reflected from the sum¬ mit of the burning mountain, which, how¬ ever, was more than sufficient to reveal to Ahmed the beauty of his mistress; and which also sufficed to display to Biondella the artless, good-humoured countenance, of her enraptured swain.
CHAP. XII. -------------------1 have not seen So likely an ambassador of love: A day in April never came so sweet, To shew how costly summer was at hand, As this fore-spurrer comes before his lord. Shakespeare. > The large, dark, sparkling eyes of Ah¬ med were now fixed in the full glow of admiration upon the angelic aspect (as he somewhat prematurely deemed it) of his lovely companion: but the looks of Bi¬ ondella appeared chiefly bent upon a spark¬ ling kind of ornament—the very amulet which, it will be recollected, he had pre-
sented to her during their first interview, with a promise hereafter to explain more minutely its surprieing properties. It .was a species of collar, or necklace, com¬ posed of beautiful chain-work, studded all aver with precious stones, and which had long been worn, as a most potent preser¬ vative from evil, upon his own dusky bo¬ som; but which circumstances had thus transferred to the fairer neck of his skil¬ ful inamorato. Sometimes, therefore, as a signal favour conferred upon the liberal donor, he was permitted to see it adorn¬ ing, with its brilliancy, her ivory shoul¬ ders; but at present it glittered in her hand. Her fore finger rested gracefully upon a pendent piece of coral, which con¬ trasted beautifully with its whiteness, while her eye, sunk in reflection, bespoke her still meditating upon what she had heard-rAhmed had evidently just been extolling to her its peculiar attributes and virtues.—** And this," she 1 exclaimed, now pointing to the emerald— fi can this like¬ wise impart to the wearer a similar warn-
ing against approaching peril or afflic¬ tion ?" Ahmed readily answered her-—" The dark green stone on which thy finger pauses now, permit thy slave to assure thee, beautiful damsel! is an infallible preservative against all kinds of sorcery. While thou wearest it, even the most diabolical magic is powerless over thy abode, and witchcraft cannot assail thee; neither can the envenomed voice of slan* der effectually taint thy name, or inter¬ rupt thy repose. But beside these, and other equally valuable qualities, it is an approved talisman against a greater num¬ ber of diseases than thy slave can name/' " Indeed!" exclaimed Biondella, exult¬ ingly—" it deserves, then, to be worn by a Sicilian damsel in the service of the noble princess Victoria. And this red sparkling stone, kind Ahmed, that re¬ sembled in colour the wine, thou sayest, thou art forbidden to taste—what is it?" " It is a ruby," again answered Ahmed. " A ruby—gracious Virgin!" cried Bi-
ondella, somewhat unguardedly—-" that I should ever possess a real ruby! Tell me, sweet Ahmed, what can it achieve?" " Thy devoted slave will faithfully in¬ form thee*" now responded the duped African. * The gem thou there beholdest, and which, thou hast truly said, resem- bleth in its rosy aspect the wine I may not taste, is not the least valuable among its shining competitors—especially to an eastern wearer, whose abode is in those burning climes where it most abounds. It is a justly-renowned preservative against both pestilence and poison. It even cures the plague, or mitigates its virulence—it expels poisons, abates luxury, and banishes liabitual gloom from the mind. Such are a few of the inestimable qualities ascribed to the glorious and costly jewel thou seest sparkle but dimly by this shadowy light* and which, combined with its beauty* have obtained for it a well-won preemi¬ nence among the gems of earth. But there is another beside the rich-hued ruby yonder, scarcely inferior in value, it nlay
be, to a sensitive serving maiden, inas¬ much as its imputed properties are more likely to come within the especial pale of her observation. I mean the blue opaque stone on the left—it is called a turcois—" " Ah ! it is tinctured with the true ce¬ rulean dye," exclaimed the delighted Bi¬ ondella ; " it appears to have imbibed its shade from a clear soft morning sky, with¬ out a single star to spangle the pure bright azure." " The sympathetic turcois," continued Ahmed, " changes colour, or breaks, at the death, sickness, or even misfortune of the owner. In its very nature it is deli¬ cate, and variable—therefore fit for female wear. Smile not incredulously at thy slave's assertion ; it is thus held in Barba¬ ry, and our Algerine damsels have often found it true. I repeat, that the sensi¬ tive turcois marks all changes and acci¬ dents to the body of the wearer, by corres¬ pondent changes in its hue." " It is most incredible," observed Bion- g3
" but I smiled not al that—but that thou sfaouldst think it fit for female wear, because weakly false to its coIcit, and variaWk** Ahmed either did not, or would not, understand the allusion thus ironically coniieyedi but, regardless of her sarcastic manner, patiently resumed, "'fhereis/' said he, " a lightning-darting sapphire by itsside^w*" " Ay, this—it is very beautiful," said BioiKlella, " I noticed it yesterday for its ^xtroefee- beauty." " It, will never ios§ its beauty while worn upon that chaste bosom," returned Ahmed, significantly; "but placed for ? only & fe^w brief hours upon some unhal¬ lowed 'brtast accMstomed to throb with wiki intemperate wishes, the, beautiful sapphire would become as a mere pebble, reproaching obviously w^itb* its faded as¬ pect tbe foul bosom if; scorned any longer to adorn" Asf thkt definition of tlie modest sap¬ phire's imputed romantic quality contain-
ed a highly-flattering compliment to his auditor, it could not fail to be pleasing to the coquettish Biondella, however she might feel disposed to deem of its vera¬ city. She again, therefore, smilingly de¬ manded, pointing at the same time to another (not the least magnificent) of the shining circle— ** And this too, Ahmed, that seemeth of no fixed colour, but re¬ flects divers hues of no common brilliancy, oftentimes beautifully intermingled with firo—this—" " Is an opal," said Ahmed, interrupting her, " and is reputed partially to possess all the qualities comprised in many of its compeers, with some additional ones ex¬ clusively its own. For instance, the opal is accounted a conciliator of enemies, pro¬ moting love and good-will toward the wearer, and extorting feelings in his fa¬ vour even from among his bitterest adver¬ saries. A3 it moreover reflects the crim¬ son of the ruby—the purple of the ame¬ thyst—the green of the emerald, and, at other times, the azure of the turcois, so
doth it also combine their virtues. Hence* to possess so beautiful a specimen of earth's central productions, as even the smallest contained in this potent amulet, is, you perceive, a talisman against half the evils which afflict mankind on its sur¬ face." " It is indeed," muttered Biondella, " if mankind could only feel assured of the efficacy of a talisman thus obtained." " Thy slave speaks to thee," said Ah¬ med, fully comprehending her last ironical observation, " as men speak at Algiers; and the manner in which he has ventured to estimate these gems, is as in Barbary they are estimated. Of Europe, he con¬ fesses, he knows not much ; yet pardon •him, fair damsel, if he ventures to sur¬ mise, that, could an amulet be found to act upon this enlightened strand as a cor¬ rective to the beastly vice of intoxication, it might even here be serviceable." "But, oh \ what a beautiful rarity gleams yonder!'* Biondella now exclaimed, too deeply absorbed in contemplation of the
necklace to heed the last remark of A li¬ med. ** There, indeed, the stars seem to have found a faithful mirror—there gorge¬ ously reflected, from beneath a burning sky, they appear to dart their rays of love¬ liness in every direction upon the pleased beholder. Tell me, Ahmed, how call you this rarest where all seem valuable—this fairest among the lovely ?" Ahmed deliberately replied—'* It is the crimson agate, spotted with points of gold, if I mistake not, found in Candia. It is commonly prized greatly by the fortunate possessor, being held an invaluable preser¬ vative against the venom of spiders, and even of scorpions. Placed near it are se¬ veral others, accounted equa^y effective against the bites of insects, or of reptiles. Look, here is the precious sardonyx—the spotted purple jaspar -----" " In socth, it is a charming, and appears to be a valuable, trinket," here interrupted Biondella, seeming wearied with the appa¬ rently exhaustless theme; " and I am much indebted to thee, gentle Moslem,
for: the present, as well as for the defini¬ tion of its imputed virtues. Moreover, thrice worthy Ahmed, I again profess my¬ self ready to assist thee, and thy liberal master, chiefly actuated, I confess, by the personal regard I feel for thee, though partly in consideration of these noble gifts." " Ah! beautiful damsel, thou hast touch¬ ed the chord to awaken which I came hither," said Ahmed, with sudden fer¬ vency ; " but had weUnigit forgotten my errand, cowering, a poor timid—almost hopeless aspirant for thy favour, beneath the overpowering fascination of thy charms. Thou hast alluded to the subject of my kind master's suit,on which*—I swear, most lovely and condescending maiden! thy slave doth not exaggerate—his whole future happiness, nay, even his very life seems to depend. Hast thou, charming Biondella! whom, sooth to say, I heard him this morning call the portress of his paradise—hast thou yet succeeded in obtaining for him any
satisfactory information respecting the state of his divine mistress's affection ?" This was the approved eastern mode of addressing a scornful beauty, of whom it was found requisite to solicit a favour— and Biondella, failed not to answer him in the true style of an European; coquettish % abigail. After " pursing her brows toge¬ ther," with an air of much importance, she shook her head mysteriously, and with seeming sorrow, but real delight, articu¬ lated—" There is an affair—an affair, I think, X mentioned to you some time since,—between the princess, and a noble young cavalier of Sicily. He loved her tenderly—at least, he assured her so—and, it might be, that she loved him. But he is gone from Naples, I believe—I fear, he —he -----" " Has he abandoned her ?" asked Ah¬ med, almost breathless with attention. " She has neither seen nor beard of him for a long time," stammered Biondella. " There is hope in that, at least," said Ahmed, reviving.
" I fear he is no more," now added Biondella. " Better hope still, then," subjoined Ahmed, " for my noble master." " I am apprehensive that he has met with some fatal accident in Naples," con¬ tinued Biondella, " which prevents him from paying his devoirs as usual; or which —for such things occur here frequently, though but little talked of—may, it is probable, have deprived him of existence. Observe me—I do not say that it is posi¬ tively so, but only that he vanished strange¬ ly. I remember the eve when he last took his departure, little dreaming that so long a period would elapse ere his return : the princess herself stood weeping by the window—the rope-ladder was adjusted si¬ lently------" " The rope-ladder!" exclaimed Ahmed, with a vacant stare of astonislnnent. Biondella now seemed conscious that she had imprudently divulged too much; and, accordingly, she (to use a vulgar ex¬ pression) drew in her horns, stammering,
with an affectation of haughty indifference —«« Yes—the rope-ladder—I thought I told you that the princess placed in him the most perfect confidence. Would you have rope-ladders restricted to the wild and inhospitable shores of Barbary ?" " My master must know this," mutter¬ ed Ahmed, inwardly. " Gracious Ma¬ homet ! grant him patience—must Abdal¬ lah, the son of Aghar Hussein, learn to couple the idea of a rope-ladder with his Christian princess! Holy prophet! these are European customs—the admitted do¬ ings of the saint-worshipping dames of Sicily! How will Abdallah brook the intelligence of this strange discovery ? I tremble when I think upon his probable surprise and indignation" " You reflect too much upon this cir¬ cumstance, young Moslem," said Biondel¬ la, now becoming fearful that she had irre¬ vocably displeased the Moor, and injured the character of her mistress: " it is not an uncommon occurrence in Italy. To per¬ mit a favoured lover to ascend her cham-
ber window, is in no way derogatory to a noble lady's fame; and that he was a fa¬ voured admirer of this virtuous princess, my thrice noble mistress, thou hast heard me, Ahmed, from the first acknowledge." " I do confess the hearing of it," said Ahmed, significantly, " but, nevertheless, regret the fact." " Sweet Moslem! thou hast small cause," resumed Biondella, to whom the evident broodings of the startled Ahmed were not wholly unintelligible. " I again repeat, that he who seemeth thus to have awaken¬ ed thy jealous fears had ever little chance of supplanting thy noble—thy munificent master; and, to crown thy triumph, if he had, was slain—slain in some secret avenue on his way homeward, doubtless by the hands of hired assassins: or, if not so, has suddenly taken himself off to Sicily, leav¬ ing his lovely princess the fair prize of whoever shall think her worth contending for. He had but one attendant with him here in Naples, a brave, but ill-taught fel¬ low, named Isidore——"
" Isidore!" exclaimed Ahmed, on whose brow was now plainly written the painful suspense he was constrained to endure. " Ay, Isidore was his name," she conti¬ nued, " a hare-brained, but valiant Sici¬ lian, and who once dared aspire to the possession of your own unworthy Bion¬ della : but he was neither so liberal, nor so well-favoured, as ------" " And the name of his master?" in¬ quired Ahmed, scarcely able to subdue his agitation. " Was don Csesario di Castelli," replied Biondella, readily, " the only son of the count Castelli, a noble Sicilian, but the prince Vicenza's mortal enemy——" and here Biondella paused in astonishment, for the emotion of Ahmed was too visible any longer to escape her observation, " There is but one God, and Mahomet is his prop>het!" shouted Ahmed presently, somewhat louder than discretion would have warranted in his present situation. " Bow, weak-sighted mortals, and submit to his decrees, for God is great! Murmur
not at his dispensations, for they are in¬ scrutable; but reverence his edicts, and render homage to Mahomet, the servant of the Most High!" While poor Ahmed was thus hurried away by the strength of his feelings into exclamations scarcely comprehensible to the dwellers of christianized Europe, but perfectly characteristic of the rigid Mus¬ sulman, Biondella, who could comprehend nothing by this strange rhapsody, stared wildly in turn upon his suddenly-animated and expressive features. Thus curiously employed, she heeded not the approach toward the casement of two dark figures, who appeared promenading upon the pave¬ ment beneath, one of which seemed that of a richly-habited cavalier, young, and elegantly formed—the other she knew to be the prince Vicenza. The circumstance surprised her little, as she was aware that Vicenza was in the habit of walking in the cool air upon the terrace toward the close of day; but then it rendered some additional caution necessary. Making
Ahmed, therefore, understand her fears, as well as she was able, she silently closed the casement, and wisely determined to continue their conversation in a more sub¬ dued tone. But, alas! this resolution was needless, as Biondella soon discovered, to her extreme disappointment; for Ahmed seemed to have formed already a similar, perhaps even a still sager resolution, and appeared determined, under the present circumstances, to hold no further conver¬ sation at all, upon the subject which had affected his feelings, and excited her curio¬ sity. In vain now did the insidious Bion¬ della strive to draw him into a disclosure of the true source of his discovered emo¬ tion, and singular exclamations: he ap¬ peared to feel that in silence was now his only safety—that in sealing his lips lay the only chance of concealing what her words had taught him to consider his mas¬ ter's secret; and Ahmed acted accordingly.
CHAP. XIII. This will I tell my master. Tempest, Act 111, Sc, 2, During the rest of Ahmed's stay, on that eventful evening, at the residence of the prince Vicenza, his cogitations were cer¬ tainly of the most disagreeable kind : nor could even the presence of his adored Bi¬ ondella any longer suffice to enliven his countenance, or alter the melancholy train of his meditations. It was, then, a mourn¬ ful reality—an almost incredible fact, that Abdallah's benevolence had been unwit¬ tingly exerted only to rescue a detested rival from the already yawning grave: nay, it was also true—a fatal truth—that one of his charmed lives had been lavished upon the very being whom it was his in¬ terest to wish " food fot worms." It will be recollected, that upon that very day had Abdallah entrusted Ahmed with what he imagined to be the whole secret of his
preservation (don Caesario's) by means of the miraculous interference of Himmalay; and the deluded Moor had in reality so worked upon the credulity of his servant, as in the end thoroughly to impress him with the same conviction This newly- imbibed conviction, though it exalted Abdallah in the estimation of Ahmed almost to the dignity of a demigod, only served to render his present grief more poignant. What more could even the prophet himself perform, than restore the fainting frame that death's icy touch had stricken for decay, to its pristine healthful condition? But thus to be shorn of a third portion of tnis glorious boon of the white mountain spirit—for only three times could this enviable privilege be exerted— and that lamented third to have been ex¬ pended, as it too plainly had been, upon the one of all mankind most likely to prove a very serpent in the donor's path, was a bitter reflection indeed. Finally, how¬ ever, Ahmed felt it to be his first impera¬ tive duty to acquaint his master, Abdal-
laji^with^tlie, important information he had this night so singularly (and had it b^en twenty-four hours earlier, he could hayejadded luckily) obtained from the con¬ fessions of even the arch Biondella; to the end, chiefly, that he might possess the be¬ nefit of his instructions with regard to any future steps it might appear advisable to take in the affair, which now began to puz¬ zle Ahmed extremely. > ? Biondella sat long and watched his va¬ rying aspect, finding her utmost endea¬ vours insufficient to induce him to con¬ verse, with a strange mixture of surprise, curiosity, and suspicion, which (adept as sfce was in the art of dissimulation) she hardly knew how to suppress, or to en¬ dure. What had she said that could thus have disturbed his tranquillity—thrown him; at first entirely off his guard, and af¬ terwards set him so vigilantly upon it, that even her most endearing efforts were in vain to draw from him the cause, of his iqquietufie ? She tasked her recollection, but still in vain; she could call to mind
nothing in her conduct sufficiently blame- able to occasion such a total alteration in his demeanour, although she bitterly la¬ mented her indiscretion, in having been more than usually communicative respect¬ ing events which, she acknowledged, ought rather to have been consigned to oblivion. This scene, however, of mutual reserve and dissatisfaction was not likely to con¬ tinue long : already Ahmed could hardly conceal his impatience to be gone. His mission, he saw, for the present, was fairly ended, while his eagerness to impart to his master the discovery he had made ap¬ peared momentarily to increase. Accord¬ ingly, Ahmed soon took of the astounded Biondella a coldly respectful and hurried leave; and, laden with his heavy tidings, repaired instantly to the Strada di Toledo, there to consult with the expectant Ab¬ dallah, the gifted son of Aghar Hussein, upon the present perplexing aspect of this extraordinary adventure. As soon as he was gone, Biondella again VOL. II. H
cf epteautiously to the casement, and softly openfngit, endeavoured, by straining her keen vision, to ascertain whose was the graceful figure thus secretly communing With the prince Vicenza. That restless and tormenting curiosity, so commonly an inmate of the female breast, was doubtless Biondella's chief motive for this conduct, coupled, it might be, with the equally-fe¬ minine desire of having something new, or interesting, to communicate to her mis¬ tress. However this may appear to those little skilled in the inquisitorial propensi¬ ties of woman, it remains only to be re¬ corded, that the far-penetrating glance of Biondella was not, on the present occasion, stretched abroad in vain. In defiance of tiie dull red light which alone revealed their persons, she soon distinguished, in the companion of Vicenza, the young marquis Lioni, whom she likewise knew to be another suitor for the coveted band of the beautiful Victoria, her desponding mistress. They were slowly pacing the terrace, side by side, and, by the violence
of their gestures, appeared in close and earnest conversation, although the inces¬ sant rumbling of the distant Vesuvius rendered it totally impossible even for the practised ears of Biondella to catch more than the occasional indistinct rising of their angry voices. In vain she listened, long and patiently—although they passed se¬ veral times within a few paces of the win¬ dow, she could distinguish no syllable of their evidently much animated, if not ab¬ solutely threatening, conversation. It seemed a night of disappointment only to Biondella, and she was about in despair to close the window, when suddenly her eye caught a glimpse of a third figure, that appeared gliding softly toward them with " stealthy pace," and which instantly at¬ tracted her attention. This hitherto-unobserved intruder upon the lonely scene, like a silent spectre, was evidently watching the motions of Vicen¬ za and Lioni, although with what inten¬ tions, or for what purpose, Biondella was H 2
whojly unable to divine. It appeared, his object v^as not to listen to their conversa¬ tion,, since, from the space that was con- s|4htly betwixt them, it seemed possible that he should overhear even the nature of their intercourse. Yet was he evidently watching their retreating or advancing footsteps, at times, with all the feverish gesticulations of impatience and anxiety. ite bore the appearance of a stout-set muscular man, as far as Biondella could judge, belonging to the lower degrees of society, at least, if not (as she once half deemed) to the lazaroni: but the huge dark mantle that enveloped his arms and dress, prevented her from more closely scrutinizing his person. This was the robber Zachelli—but even had the cloak and light permitted her to exercise a more minute scrutiny, Biondella knew him not. After some time passed in patient ex¬ pectation of what might probably be the event, Biondella saw Lioni and prince Vi¬ cenza separate, with seemingly violent and unfriendly gestures on either side. Za-
chelli saw this likewise—and flinging aside his mantle, immediately advanced, with a bold and confident step, toward the now- solitary and motionless Vicenza. The prince seemed to start angrily on behold¬ ing him, and a second low controversy appeared suddenly to commence between them, during whicli both forms gradually receded toward the sea-shore, and soon disappeared in the surrounding obscurity. All this was also beheld by Biondella, but she execrated her hard fortune, and the ill-timed eruption of the groaning moun¬ tain, which enabled her not to hear, or comprehend, a single syllable. Long after their forms had vanished, notwithstanding, did she loiter at the window, endeavour¬ ing still to penetrate the encircling dark¬ ness, or rather in the hope that they again would issue thence upon the terrace]; but she saw them no more. Once indeed, she fancied that she distinctly heard a groan of agony—louder than the low moaning sound emitted by the distant volcano— proceed from the very spot toward which
they appeared to have directed their lonely course; but this could be only fancy, for a moment afterward all in that direction was silent as the grave. Vexed—disap¬ pointed—yet wondering at what she had seen, Biondella uttered an involuntary ex¬ clamation of terror, or astonishment, and softly closed the casement. It was now necessary that the long truant Biondella should hurry to the apart¬ ment of her too-indulgent mistress (too indulgent for permitting her thus idly to misspend her time), even if inclination had not led her thither; and she, accord¬ ingly, made the best of her way to Victo¬ ria's chamber. Lightly and airily vaulted her noiseless feet across the echoing gal¬ lery which divided them, so eager vvas she to communicate what she had just beheld; but, alas! useless was her speed, and all too late her zeal, for the chamber of Vic¬ toria was empty. In vain did Biondella call repeatedly upon her absent mistress— the kind voice of Victoria answered her not—the well-known step of the princess
approached not at her earnest solicitations. The apartment appeared to have been long deserted—tlie couch untouched—the toilet undisturbed—all seemed forsaken, comfortless, and solitary. On gazing round, it appeared stripped also of some trivial articles of its furniture—the wear¬ ing apparel of Victoria was gone, and it was evident from this, and other similar appearances, that Victoria herself vvas de¬ parted also. Stricken with sudden ter¬ ror, she shrieked aloud, but no one came to her assistance—no one appeared left to commiserate her situation. Indignant at this treatment, Biondella would have has¬ tily descended, but the door no longer yielded to her efforts : she would have burst it open, but found that it had been securely fastened on the outside, since her entrance. The reality now was plain, or, at least, seemed so to Biondella—donna Victoria had been suddenly transported to another residence, in consequence of some new discovery—and herself remained a prisoner!
CHAP. XIV. She is gone ! If aoght of ill betide her, better I Had lost my Hfe. Byron*. Having wearied herself with unavailing efforts to escape from what now appeared to her in no other light than a terrific dungeon, without approximating a single jot toward the attainment of the wished- for liberty, Biondella, exhausted, and per¬ fectly dispirited, flung her fair form upon a couch and wept. Never since the night of their equally-sudden departure from Sicily, had she witnessed such an " all un¬ looked for" desolation, or endured such feelings as those which now again assailed her fluttered bosom : even then—on the recent occasion alluded to—her lot was enviable, compared to her present destiny, for she was taken with them—with those she served and loved (or fancied she loved)
in their projected flight; but now, she found herself unhappily left behind. What unluckily discovered offence—what strange omission of duty, or tenderness, had occa¬ sioned this marked contempt for her ser¬ vices, and subsequent harsh treatment, she was utterly ignorant, and seemed not like¬ ly at present to be informed. Again she exerted her voice, but a chilling echo from the extremity of the vacant apartment, and far-stretching gallery, was the only reply. Even Beltramo seemed totally to have deserted her in her distressful hour— he who for one kind glance of her be¬ witching eyes, would that morning have leaped up to the skies—what could have become of him ? Could it be his hand that had thus unfeelingly made her a cap¬ tive? No—no—Beltramo could never have been so cruel, in spite of her coquet¬ tish rejection of his proffered regard. He was evidently absent from the mansion— but when departed ? — why ? — where ? All these were exceedingly difficult ques- H 3
tions, which Biondella—the hapless, for¬ saken Biondella, found it impossible, even in conjecture, to resolve. At length, resolved to make a final ef* fort for liberty, she once more sprang from her uneasy couch, and was approaching the door, with frantic determination in her aspect, when it suddenly opened, and a solitary form entered, whose severe aspect instantly awed her into submissive silence. It was the prince Vicenza, alone, pale, and disturbed, his countenance fearfully ex¬ pressive of the dark emotions of his mind. In his hand he bore a taper, whose flick¬ ering light shed a sickly hue over his pal¬ lid features, and served more effectually to discover to the affrighted gazer the tur¬ bulent workings of his soul. Biondella thought, too, while gazing alarmed upon his haggard features, that she could dis¬ tinguish a small spot of blood, which seem¬ ed to burn, like the mark of the fratricidal Cain, upon his frowning forehead. Vi¬ cenza regarded her sternly on his entrance, though his thoughts were evidently occu-
pied with deeper matters than her pre¬ sence : he f however, advanced slowly into the apartment, and, resting the taper on the table, appeared about to address her. At this moment, Biondella—the spright¬ ly, courageous Biondella, felt an involun¬ tary faintness gradually creeping over her —a sensation of awe, such as she had sel¬ dom before experienced, yet now strove vainly to get the better of: her courage forsook her, and her joints trembled. Pre¬ sently Vicenza spoke—".And thou," he exclaimed, furiously, " thou ! who shouldst have been my house's guard—the vigi¬ lant observer of my frail child's conduct, where wast thou when the young ruffian, Caesario, again polluted with his presence even my unhappy daughter's chamber? Away—I know, but must not think of it: the remembrance of it will drive rae to desperation, if it hath not already. Where wast thou, I say, when it hap¬ pened ?" The little remaining colour indicative of a " heart that felt, and pulse that flow-
,#d0filio^iw^<|)iy forsook the livid cheeks of tl>e drooping Biondella. , She stood conscienee-stricken before her distracted master, and seemed, like an expectant criminal whose conviction was already re¬ corded, only to await her doom in despair¬ ing silence. 'MAnswer me!" continued Vicenza, *f-»forrI,wjU be answered—thou shalt not escape my fury. I came hither to demand of thee whether thou also knewest of the paltry ruffian's artifice, and wherefore it was, not reported to me ?" ;- Biondella now sunk trembling on her knees, and with difficulty found strength to* anticipate—* Prince, I knew it not" r^sTbat is false!" resumed Vicenza, foam- IOV withifage-f-f* how else could lie have contrived unobserved to ascend, or even t^ know }^er casement, but through thy detestable agency ? Confess^ for this merepaltry, unsupported denial, can avail thee nothing. < Thou knewest of this arti- $m-*$fey ^0^fiision^ and the ghastly as- l#5t^§|A|by countenance, no less than the
visible motion of thy quivetinfg ^limb&, proclaim thy criminality-^-thy treacherous connivance in this guilty scheme. Per*. sist no longer, therefore, in a denial which can (procure thee no abatement of penal suffering, but only serve to accelerate thy destruction." " Alas! I am lost!" exclaimed Bion¬ della, piteously, gazing in an agony on every side for the succour which ap¬ proached her not. " Knewest thou not Abdallah, like¬ wise ?' vociferated the prince Vicenza, f as the letter of the wealthy Moor, discovered by Beltramo, now flashed across his recol¬ lection. Biondella was aware that the lek ter had been lost, but never until that fear¬ ful moment knew into whose hands it had eventually fallen: the information now,thus terribly thundered over her prostrate form, only augmented her despair, " Knewest thon not Abdallah ?" he continued-*-* 1 is tiiat nameunfamiliar to thee ?*^orj if thoii knowest it not, -whence came ther viM epistle found on, my daughter's toilet, by
a trustier servant of Vicenza than thou hast ever proved thyself? Thou answer¬ est not-**but thy increased confusion an¬ swers for thee: yet shall thy pale lips con¬ fers, erfe tfaoti departest hence, thy guilty privacy to the proud Mussulman's per¬ fidious aim. Dost thou attend ?" Biondella bowed ber head, half uncon¬ sciously, almost to the foot of her imperi¬ ous interrogator, in token that she heard him; but a convulsive sob effectually choked her utterance. " Perdition to the treacherous minion," said Vicenza, lowering his voice, however, as he continued, " whose culpable negli¬ gence, or worse, whose premeditated per¬ fidy, has (instead of vigilantly shielding from the bare semblance of dishonour) combined with various most untoward chances to rob me of my child! This traitorous servant hast thou been to Vicenza —this insidious enemy to the sacrificed Victoria: but beware*^4br in full confes¬ sion atone, m the prelude to reformation, exists thy solitary chance for safety, and
probable restoration to the smiles and ife* vour of a second noble mistress. Inform me who it was that quitted thee so re* cently—the flowing vestj and muslin tur* ban, array not often the inhabitant of Eu^ rope. His complexion, too, Was some* what darker than is imparted even by the sultry beam which flashes from our soft Sicilian skies. He hath of late been clo¬ seted with thee often—I must now know the purport of these private meetings^ with the slave of a designing foreigner at least, perhaps a renegade. Ha! what is here," he continued, seizing the already- described amulet, still suspended from her arm, " some profane, worthless toy, given doubtless as a bribe to the chosen confi¬ dant of Victoria, for the purpose of se¬ curing her assistance in some contempla¬ ted scheme of tender, amorous villainy. It must be soj" added Vicenza, endea¬ vouring to wrest the trinket ? &om her grasp, whichi however, Biondella stiff re- taiued—" alas! that a bauble like this should suffice to purchase the integrity of
a trusted dependant of the prince Vicenza!" Abashed — humiliated — astounded at this overwhelming succession of charges against her, the distressed Biondella still knelt despairingly at the feet of her stern companion, literally almost suffocated with excessive alarm and emotion. But now, in the extreme penitence and ap¬ prehension of wliich she appeared the piti¬ able object, and her abject submission to his authority, the purpose of Vicenza seemed answered; and his wrath (partly real, and partly affected) became instantly abated accordingly. He raised her gently from the ground, and (conscious that to effect his present project her assistance was necessary) even promised her his fu¬ ture protection, in spite of her past un¬ worthy conduct, provided only she would promise amendment, and implicit obe¬ dience to his future instructions. As he raised her, however, Biondella again shud¬ dered to perceive that it was blood which so terrifically marked his finely elevated, but still frowning forehead; and her hor-
ror increased when she reflected that it might even be the life-blood of his own child, her now deeply-lamented mistress, the gentle—the lost Victoria! Vicenza now condescended to support to a couch, with his own hand, the al¬ most-fainting Biondella; but told her that she must be content, for a few hours, to await in solitary confinement his further pleasure. In vain she demanded of him information respecting the future destiny of Victoria: on that subject he continued obstinately silent, but assured her that a few passing hours would fully satisfy her with regard to her own. He then sullenly retired, fastening the door again upon the outside, and Biondella was once more left to her meditations. Here, then, a captive, surrounded by all the terrors of darkness and solitude, we must also, for the present, abandon her, to narrate the substance of what pass¬ ed at that mysterious interview between prince Vicenza, and the gallant, deceived marquis Lioni; together with the subse-
quent gloomy transactions of that event¬ ful evening.
CHAP. XV. _—^-------------------My good lord Lioni, I have no lime to lose, nor thou—dismiss This menial hence; I would be private with you. By HON - . At the period when Vicenza and the young marquis Lioni were first discovered by Biondella, walking upon the terrace, the former was in reality communicating to the latter the fixed determination of Victoria (with which the reader is already acquainted) to reject altogether the pro¬ posed alliance, and to see him no more. Lioni received the unexpected informa¬ tion with something of astonishment, but with more of sorrow : he had never antici¬ pated a refusal of his addresses, and inde¬ pendent of his bosom's secret disappoint¬ ment (for Lioni really loved Victoria), he
felt it gall his haughty spirit, even more deeply than he chose to acknowledge. V'aenza had withdrawn him on that eve judiciously from the gaze and hearing of all human kind, in order that he might communicate the inauspicious result as privately as possible : but ven this delica¬ cy vvas insufficient to appease the wound¬ ed feelings of Lioni. He demanded to see and converse with Victoria himself, and from her own lips to receive his destiny: nay, he insisted on being allowed this pri¬ vilege, and absolutely refused to hearken to his doom by proxy. To this certainly not unreasonable request, the prince Vi¬ cenza, for some strange reason, as resolute¬ ly objected to accede. At first he demur- red ? upon the ground of its being inconve¬ nient at that hour to trespass on the pri¬ vacy of Victoria—then, upon the score of her feelings being probably too much agi¬ tated by such a parting scene—frivolous excuses all, as the penetrating Lioni failed not instantly to perceive. At length, words ran high betwixt them—Vicenza
was immoveable in his resolution, and Li¬ oni was equally obstinate. A quarrel seemed likely to ensue upon the spot—al¬ ready the rapier of Lioni trembled in its scabbard, and Vicenza's hand was on the hilt of his weapon, when the prudent for¬ bearance of Lioni averted, for the present, the apparently inevitable contest. While yet their altercation was at its height, Lioni said, with true martial daunt- lessness, for he too was a leader and a pa¬ triot—" Say no more, prince, and let us separate peaceably, at least, if not in ami¬ ty. By all the saints in Christendom! but another taunting word from thy proud lips, and Lioni's hand will never quit the hilt of this weapon, till its blade be crim¬ soned with thy gore—though his own heart may bleed in unison at sight of the gushing life-tide! But Lioni endures not the scorn of mortal being—not even thine, proud prince—albeit thou art the sire of my beloved Victoria. In a word—may Lioni expect to receive to-night the satis¬ faction from her own cruel lips, to which
his birth, his achievements, and his fideli¬ ty, alike entitle him ?" " It is impossible—it cannot be," re¬ sponded Vicenza ? in a milder tone. " It is, I think, already the hour of vespers with my child Victoria, vvho is indispo¬ sed, and needs the support of our patron saint—her devotions may not be distur¬ bed." " I will attend her leisure in the morn¬ ing," said the young marquis, calmly. " Thy attendance here can only be pro¬ ductive of additional vexation to thyself, and trouble to me," observed Vicenza, coldly. " I have already delivered to the marquis Lioni my daughter's final resolu¬ tion ; it is also mine—under the present peculiar circumstances. Becomes it thy high dignity thus vehemently to urge a suit that sire and daughter are equally in¬ disposed to hear or favour ?" Lioni, at these words, reddened with indignation, but again successfully sup¬ pressed his rising choler, and said—" How know I that Victoria favours not my suit,
except from her own lips I receive the un¬ welcome negative?" " Do you doubt my assertion then?" asked Vicenza. " I dispute not the veracity of the prince Vicenza," returned Lioni (who. to do him justice, throughout the whole argument had seemed to bear in mind that a i{ mild answer turneth away wrath/') " but I have loved Victoria—love her still, and, hear me, my patron saint! if now re¬ fused access to her presence, without a parting interview to convince me of her sudden hatred, I will not cease to pursue her, until the sought-for explanation is ob¬ tained. My inclination, as a lover, urges me to perseverance—my duty, as a soldier, commands me to preserve my honour: both duty and inclination require a perso¬ nal eclaircissement, before the adventurous spirit of Lioni can be set at rest. I warn thee, prince Vicenza, nor mean to pursue thee secretly—but, go where thou wilt, no clime so uncongenial to the tender passion that inhabits my bosom, but Lioni will
there be found, a troublesome and—alas ! that I should live to repeat it—an unwel¬ come visitant. With this declaration I leave you—but professedly in the hope, that with Victoria, at least, I soon shall meet again. For the present, prince, fare¬ well." So saying, the marquis Lioni departed, leaving Vicenza still standing upon the terrace, in evident consternation, pale and disturbed, but motionless. At this junc¬ ture it was that the sturdy ruffian Za¬ chelli, who had long been watching his ac¬ tions, as seen by Biondella, advanced, and awakened him from his troubled reverie. No -onder if Vicenza started angrily on beholding again bis tormentor by his side, tossed and bewildered as his mind was, at that moment, by various conjec¬ tures and apprehensions, in which the dis¬ carded bandit no longer had any share. It was true, indeed, what the priiice had told Lioni, that it was impossible any fu¬ ture interview, or explanation, could take place between him and Victoria—for even
at that moment was Victoria, escorted by Beltramo, far on her way to the convent of St. Rosalie. She had departed at sun¬ set, under the guard and guidance of that trusty servant, who was commissioned to deliver her into the safe custody of the abbess of St. liosalie, and to return before daybreak with Alphonsine in her stead. Thus did Vicenza actually put in force his long-formed resolution, goaded on to its fulfilment chiefly by the absolute refu¬ sal of Victoria to become the bride of the marquis Lioni. At the same time, he meant not that the good people of Naples should immediately make the whole of his strange proceeding in consequence the theme of public wonder, and the subject of daily conversation. Vicenza designed, on the arrival of Alphonsine, to quit Na¬ ples with her speedily and privately, giv¬ ing out that himself and Victoria had re¬ turned suddenly to Sicily ; and hence the origin of his strange condescension to Bi¬ ondella, who, he knew, must necessarily be aware of the deception practised; and
whose secrecy, therefore, for a transient period, it became necessary to secure. Not only, however, by his aspect and attitude, did the prince Vicenza evince his rage and indignation at the ill-timed intrusion of the unlucky bandit, Zachelli; he also poured upon him a torrent of in¬ vectives, more bitter than even Zachelli had been accustomed to receive from his lips. For some time, the robber, vvho knew his moody patron, endured this overwhelming cataract of abuse with the most stoical composure, as was his cus¬ tom ; but finding (such was the extraor¬ dinary volubility of Vicenza) that he was little likely to obtain an opportunity of reply, his patience soon became exhausted, and, with corresponding bitterness, he de¬ manded—" What have I done to merit these vile taunts, from one in whose ser¬ vice my life hath often—ay, a hundred times been ventured ? How have I pro¬ voked this enmity ? I—who am wholly unconscious of any designed offence? VOL. II. I
Ungrateful prince! Zachelli hath served thee long, and but too faithfully; so be¬ ware ! for I am already weary of this foul ingratitude. I have done nothing to dis¬ please thee—-haughty and querulous as thou hast been, and art—I have done no¬ thing to displeasq thee." " Nor to please rae," growled Vicenza, checked in his mid career by these expos¬ tulations. Then, resuming in a louder strain, he continued—" There is the evil because thou hast done nothing—nothing that can entitle thee either to esteem or gratitude of Vicenza. Were not my or¬ ders—thou detestable poltroon ! that don Caesario should be deprived of the vile existence he misuses to torment me?—- and is he not still alive ? Was it not my strict injunction that thou shouldst speedily find a passage—mark me! speedily—no matter by what means—-to his polluted heart ? —to the heart's core of the abomi¬ nable seducer who would deprive me of my innocent child ? How hast tbou per-
formed my bidding ? Even in thy very clutch thou hadst him—aided by darkv ness, and in solitude (according to thy own confession), saving the presence of a worthless menial—-yet doth Cassario tri¬ umph, and Vicenza mourn his disappoint¬ ment. Tell me—whose fault is this ?" " Troth ! not mine," answered Zachelli, in a tone that bespoke him not a little chagrined at the recollection. " I did my best to expel the spark of life from his impenetrable bosom—to reach his (I think) invulnerable heart; not only for thy re¬ membered injunction, and his base at¬ tempts to deprive thee of thy treasure, but for that he stole my favourite steed, Ro¬ solia—(whose fleetness, I remember, on that occasion, proved his safety)—and thus made himself master also of mine. Since the loss of Rosolia, I ride neither in com¬ fort nor security—I have not forgotten, nor will ever forgive him, for the theft. But to forego tliis trifling—I repeat, that I have done nothing by which I ought to I SI
have incurred thy displeasure, or excited thy resentment." " Repeat not to me, fool! any of your id le vindications," said Vicenza: " let your tongue be in future as nerveless as your arm, and utter as little as you have per¬ formed. Yet tell me—it is the last time I wish to hear his name from the lips of human being—inform me once more brief¬ ly of the present condition of your in¬ tended victim—my triumphant enemy— the accursed, but irresistibly fortunate son of him who, even before the birth of this second viper, strove to destroy the honour of my family ?" Thus spoke Vicenza, and slowly with¬ drew still further from the mansion toward the solitary strand, whither Zachelli in¬ stantly accompanied him. It was at this moment that Biondella, amid the encir¬ cling gloom, but chiefly, perhaps, owing to the increasing distance, lost sight of this quarrelsome and repulsive pair. Zachelli now seemed to have arrived at the subject the peculiarly intricate na-
ture of which had induced him to seek the present interview. He accordingly coolly adjusted his hanger ere he spoke, and then commenced as follows (it was evident, with an air of satisfaction) his de¬ liberate narrative.—" I told thee he had taken refuge at a house in the Strada di Toledo, where also resides a wealthy Moor named Abdallah, whose profound skill in some novel species of sorcery had effectu¬ ally restored him ------" " Idiot!" cried Vicenza, " confine thy¬ self to the simple, unsophisticated truth." " It is true," returned Zachelli, indig¬ nant at being interrupted, " that my sure aim was baffled, and my vigilance render¬ ed useless, by the occult skill of that mis¬ believing foreign slave. Hence, I am in reality blameless; since no blow struck by a mere mortal arm could ever have pre¬ vailed against his superhuman knowledge and authority. This is no idle fabrication —no falsely-imputed talismanic power, which perhaps exists only in the imagina¬ tions of the credulous and visionary: al-
ready the whole city rings with his mira¬ culous recovery—it is true, I repeat, that thfe Moor possesses some preternatural means of turning aside the ghastly hand of death, and averting his terrifically ma¬ lignant summons, even when prepared to deal the final blow. Men say that he holds frequent unhallowed intercourse with some mountain spirit; while many even go so far as to name the demon, saint, or deity, through whom, it is said, his miracles are performed. They call him Himmalay, and add that he is invisible to human vision, save to the eyes of one favoured mortal— that favoured one, the Moor Abdallah. In further proof of this assertion, his own ser¬ vant, Ahmed—-" " A truce* to this mummery, and tell me of Caesario!" here again exclaimed his impatient auditor, much to the chagrin of Zachelli, who found in this recital the double advantage of gratifying his love for the marvellous, and at the same time vin¬ dicating bis own forfeited reputation as an expert assassin, whom nothing but super-
natural facilities could cheat of his destined prey. " He is fast recovering," said the ruffian, therefore, sullenly, finding it useless to at¬ tempt a continuation of his tale. " Hateful sound !* muttered the prince Vicenza. " And is about to return to Sicily," add¬ ed Zachelli, who, vexed at being inter¬ rupted, now seemed to delight in the vi¬ sible torments of his former patron. " To Sicily !—wretch !" said Vicenza, darting towards him a glance of fury. " But I mean to intercept him," conti¬ nued the bandit, coolly; " and the more surely to effect my purpose, have sum¬ moned hither to my assistance two of my daring comrades. Dagolino and Spala¬ tro are by this time on their way to Na¬ ples ; nay, I even expect to meet them hourly at the appointed rendezvous. When they arrive, if Cassario again escape his impending doom " " Dog! I will trust to tbee and thy ruffian horde no longer," now exclaimed
Vicenza, incensed to the highest pitch at Zachelli's having dared to entrust his com¬ rades with the bloody consummation in view—or with any thing which might lead them to suspect his own secret con¬ nection with the leader of their band. It was now, indeed, that the fallen prince truly felt bis degradation; and most bit¬ terly repented having ever held any kind of communion with, or accepted the ser¬ vices of a character so altogether weak and despicable. Prince Vicenza looked around him—all was gloomy and solitary: he listened— but all was silent as the grave, save, in¬ deed, the hoarse rumbling of the distant mountain, and even that seemed partially to have subsided at that solemn moment. A long faint stream of crimson light, how¬ ever, still ascended from its crater, though scarcely emitting sufficient lustre to direct the blow. In the height of his rage and agony, he turned suddenly upon the un¬ suspecting Zachelli, and with an arm nerved to the strength of madness by his
present feelings, and past recollections, (for had he not failed before in his attempt up¬ on the life of the sturdy ruffian beside him?) struck his weapon deep into the luckless bandit's unguarded bosom. Vicenza felt that it was not necessary to repeat the blow: so far had his steel pene¬ trated into the body of the brawny ruffian, that it was with difficulty he could " win his blade again." Zachelli uttered but one loud hollow groan (heard even by Biondella, from the distant casement)— attempted vainly to grasp the hilt of his hanger, which now seemed too heavy for his enfeebled hand to draw, and pre¬ sently sunk motionless at the feet of his bloody and treacherous companion. With wild and hurried steps Vicenza now departed homeward, not doubting but he had made an end of his trouble¬ some coadjutor, and without deigning to bestow even a parting glance upon the supposed dead carrion that vvas once Za¬ chelli. He entered his dwelling privately, 13
and passed the portal of Victoria's deserted chamber, just as it had been entered by the alarmed and wondering Biondella. The prince, however, caught a glimpse of her form, ere she disappeared in the apartment, and judiciously fastened the door as he hurried on, rightly judging that in her close confinement lay his best security for the present silence of her tongue respect¬ ing the sudden departure of Victoria. Notwithstanding, after a little space, find¬ ing that Beltramo had not yet arrived with Alphonsine, he returned to upbraid,though subsequently he sought to comfort her, with the design of rendering her again serviceable. The scene already described will explain the spot of blood which the keen eye of Biondella failed not to discern upon the frowning and cadaverous fore¬ head of her irritated master; it was the blood of Zachelli that sprinkled his brow, and not Victoria's, as the terrified Bion¬ della (with all the aggravated circumstances of atrocity which the fertile mind of a wo¬ man, on such an occasion, could conjecture)
had falsely ventured to imagine the damn¬ ed spot that disfigured his writhing and distorted countenance.
CHAP. XVI. Bring me a father that so loved his child, Whose joy of her is overwhelm'd like mine, And bid him speak of patieucc. If such a one will smile and stroke his beard ; Cry—sorrow, away ! and hem, when he sliould groan ; Patch grief with proverbs; make misfortune drunk With candle-wasters; bring him yet to me, And I of him will gather patience. Shakespka iu-\ Having pacified, in some measure, the shrieking Biondella, and paved the way for opening to her his project of abandoning fair Naples without her mistress—the dis¬ graced Victoria—Vicenza retired to await in solitude the expected return of Beltra¬ mo with Alphonsine. Dreadful, indeed, was the dreary interval which preceded
their arrival, to the guilty, impatient, con¬ science-torn Vicenza. A thousand times did he curse, during those restless moments of strained expectation, the tardy pace of his faithful vassal; though a little reflec¬ tion would have convinced him that the utmost expedition could hardly have suf¬ ficed for his so speedy return. At length Beltramo came, bringing with him, in se¬ crecy and silence, the newly-adopted heir¬ ess of the noble houseof Vicenza, whom the mingled joy and sorrow of her unexpected and unsought-for liberation had affected almost to insensibility, and literally ren¬ dered "like Niobe, all tears." As Vicenza had anticipated, a little per¬ suasion, mingled with some well-timed threats of merited exposure and punish¬ ment, soon overcame the scruples of Bion¬ della, with regard to the projected scheme. A few (perhaps crocodile's) tears to the memory of Victoria, of whose fate she was kept in ignorance, and a sigh to the re¬ collection of Ahmed and Isidore, were all she deigned to bestow upon the soon for-
gotten objects of her former pretended af¬ fection and solicitude. Accordingly, hav¬ ing quitted Naples privately, and by night, the prince Vicenza, without seeking any further intelligence of the course adopted by Lioni, or the now disregarded Caesario, was speedily on his way again to Sicily. Meanwhile, don Caesario continued gra¬ dually recovering from his severe indispo¬ sition, to the great joy of Isidore, and the infinite gratification likewise even of his generous rival, the Moor Abdallah. The latter was startled, indeed, by the discovery of Ahmed, which the equally astonished menial was not long in communicating to his master, that in the person of the con¬ valescent invalid he beheld his most to be dreaded rival: but it is equally true that Abdallah—the kind-hearted Abdallah— still rejoiced in the boon of a renewed ex¬ istence which he (perhaps not altogether erroneously) supposed himself to have con¬ ferred upon the friendless stranger. As yet don Caesario had spoken but little, ow¬ ing to his extreme lassitude; while Isi-
dore, unwilling to urge him beyond strength, wisely refrained from any men* tion of Victoria, or even of his long-ne¬ glected parents; choosing rather to adopt the course already described (that of clan¬ destinely acquainting the count, on his own responsibility, with Caesario's present situation, and the cause of his long silence) than to disturb him too early with such "spirit-stirring" remembrances. One morn¬ ing, however, on Caesario's awakening from a profound, refreshing sleep, he no longer wore that resigned look of vacancy which had hitherto bespoke him unfit to bear the emotion likely to be excited by such com¬ munications as were in store for him. Isi¬ dore with joy soon discerned the pleasing change, and approached him smiling with a refreshing cordial, which, however, he for the present waved aside, and demand¬ ed suddenly—" Where is Victoria?" "Gone to Sicily," answered Isidore, trembling, who saw that the full recollec¬ tion of his unhappy situation had burst
at length, for the first time, on his bewil¬ dered master's mind. " To Sicily! ah!" continued don Caesa¬ rio, endeavouring as yet vainly to arrange his scattered thoughts — " Isidore —my brain swims round—alas! too, ray mother -p-my father —my parents—my already long-forgotten «- long-neglected parents. Isidore—I must be gone to Sicily/ 1 Isidore assured him, that as soon as he was able to travel, they would indeed again revisit Sicily; but smiled at the thought that returning to Sicily would never have entered his head, h?d he not just informed him that it was the present abiding-place of his beloved Victoria, " Alas! alas!" resumed Csesario, lan¬ guidly, " that our worldly expectations should thus, by an inscrutable Providence, be overthrown! Where am I, Isidore? —and, Isidore, whose is the gentle heart, and liberal hand, that hath thus, with true Christian benevolence, afforded mea sump¬ tuous shelter, and succoured me from an
untimely grave? Who hath been my good Samaritan, Isidore?" " Rememberest thou not," said Isidore, " the dusky-visaged gentleman whom ma¬ ny times thou hast thanked for the accom¬ modation thus kindly afforded thee?" " I remember a countenance such as thou describest," answered Caesario, striving in vain to recal the confused past clearly to his recollection. I even think I can re¬ member much of such a countenance—but nothing distinctly. Was not such a dingy aspect bent often—very often—over my couch ?—or did I dream it was so ? But then there were physicians—hungry phy¬ sicians—men who love gold, and adminis¬ ter not their aid without it. Isidore, what money have we left to requite their pains, and provide for our speedy return to Sicily?" " Alas! we have none," returned Isi¬ dore, exhibiting his master's empty purse, " but have long—very long, depended on this stranger's bounty/'
" Christ will reward him !" now exclaim¬ ed Caesario, fervently. " Alas! not so," again returned Isidore, placing his finger expressively on his lips: " except thy gratitude can devise some suitable means for his recompence, our ge¬ nerous host, I apprehend, is likely to go unrewarded." " What meanest thou ?" inquired Cae¬ sario. " That our friend is a Mahometan," an¬ swered Isidore, not without an involun¬ tary shudder. " Sawest thou not the huge symbolic turban that surmounted his dark brow, and where the crescent of the pro¬ phet sparkles so brightly ?—the false pro¬ phet, I mean—the accursed impostor, sub¬ tle Mahomet. Abdallah, our present hos¬ pitable host, I grieve to say, is one of his infatuated followers; though some—ru¬ mour adds, to be sure, and rumour is not always false—who have watched him by stealth over a flask of wine——" " I admire, then, and revere him for his hospitality, but sorrow for his soul,"
interrupted don Caesario. " Isidore, do thou likewise; nor let a word fall from thy lips calculated to sully the belief, or blacken the character, of our humane benefactor. And now, for the present, let us leave the theme. My parents, Isidore, and my ador¬ ed Victoria—I must hasten to relieve their anxiety for my safety, by assuring them of ray not ill-founded hope of a speedy re¬ union. Raise me, my faithful Isidore—a little raise me—and procure me, I charge thee, materials for writing immediately. I conjure thee, hasten." Isidore, however, delayed another in¬ stant to acquaint Caesario with the partial account himself had transmitted to count Castelli of their misfortune, and, if in aught offensive to his honoured master, to solicit pardon for the course he had deemed it his duty to pursue. Don Caesario, how¬ ever, highly applauded the line of conduct adopted by his faithful servant, and com¬ mended his prudence in brief, but flatter¬ ing terms. With respect to Victoria— Isidore advised his master to avoid at-
tempting any further communication with her, until his >wn arrival in Sicily, lest Vicenza (as was more than probable) should contrive to intercept their correspondence. With this advice, don Caesario at length reluctantly complied; and resolved to de¬ fer all further intercourse with the dear object of his affection, until a personal in¬ terview, on his own native strand, should fully explain his seeming negligence, and real suffering for his rashly undertaken es¬ calade of her chamber. *
chap. xvn. Love! all-defying love! who sees No charms in trophies won with ease; Whose proudest, dearest fruits of bliss Are pluck'd on danger's precipice I Moore. After this period, the health of don Cae¬ sario continued rapidly to improve, and he was soon pronounced (greatly to his own gratification, and the satisfaction of Isidore) able to proceed to Sicily. As Caesario was now capable of writing, and his affection¬ ate parents, therefore, no longer ignorant of the place of his abode, he had already re¬ ceived some considerable remittances from the count Castelli, which the grateful youth purposed applying chiefly to the reimbursement of his more than liberal host: but this Abdallah would by no means be persuaded to hear of He reso¬ lutely refused ali recompence, alleging that he had already wealth sufficient, and
to spare, but seemed pleased to receive the deferential expressions of gratitude with which the young Christian clothed his modest request; and with which, indeed, don Caesario almost incessantly saluted him during his stay in Naples; not for the purpose of inflating his vanity, but because the young Sicilian really felt deeply the obligation of which he thus strove to ex¬ press his proper appreciation. Isidore too, in spite of his own orthodox principles, and becoming abhorrence of all deluded Mahometans, became mighty familiar with the dusky Ahmed, ere he quitted with his master the Strada di Toledo. At length the hour arrived for their departure, and Abdallah took leave, with tears, of his new Christian friend and rival, after promising, at the earnest request of Caesario, if possi¬ ble, to afford him the pleasure of a future meeting in Sicily. The hospitable Moor then turned with swimming eyes back to his lonely dwelling, there to revolve in his - mind the increased intricacy of his situ¬ ation ; while Caesario pursued his way, re-
solved, in defiance of his repeated warn¬ ings, to obtain speedily another clandes¬ tine interview with his adored Victoria* even though now resident (as from the in¬ formation of Isidore he doubted not she was) in the paternal mansion of her venge¬ ful sire. Abdallah, in the mean time, as yet wholly ignorant of the departure of the prince Vicenza for Sicily, sat brooding at home in melancholy rumination, or passed the hours in dismal consultation with Ahmed, without being able to deter¬ mine upon any decisive course respecting the further prosecution or relinquishment of his suit to Victoria, whom he now be¬ lieved to be the rightful affianced bride of another—that other the very being whose existence himself had just contributed so essentially to preserve. In sooth, the dif¬ ficulties which now surrounded him, with respect to his first amatory enterprise so sanguinely undertaken, were, in the esti¬ mation of the strictly honourable and ex¬ quisitely sensitive Abdallah, not a few. It
was not that he did not possess sufficient courage or perseverance to pursue his ob¬ ject, in resolute defiance of every threaten¬ ing consequence, or anticipated peril, since " Bolder than he who dares not dive For pearls but when the sea'r at rest, Love, in the tempest most alive, Hath ever held that pearl the hest It finds beneath the stormiest water j" and this is peculiarly applicable, as Ahmed had before justly observed many times to Biondella, to the glowing natives of the fiery East, whence Abdallah had imbibed his earliest sentiments of the tender pas¬ sion. But then was it honourable—was it benevolent—was it even just, to endea¬ vour any further, by private and corrupt means (witness his unlimited bribery of Biondella), to supplant in the affections of his mistress, the gallant, but unfortunate youth, whom it had so long been his chief care to restore to health and happiness— upon whom he had even bestowed a charmed existence ?—thus sacrificing the whole expected benefit to be derived from one of his charmed lives, rather than see
him perish miserably. Did become bim now to endeavour to render miserable the life he had thus disinterestedly bestow¬ ed ? No—better would it have been to have let Caesario perish (thus argued the generous Abdallah) than thus to strive, by robbing him of his heart's sole idol (and who also, it appeared, vvas not at present averse to his proposals) to embitter his fu¬ ture felicity. Still ever and anon arose the pangs of something resembling jealousy in his bosom, together with the recollection of the costly presents already lavished on the deceitful Biondella, in the sole view of forwarding his pretensions now about to be abandoned : but when he reflected—if perchance it crossed nis mind—upon the probable happiness of don Caesario with Victoria—once his own chosen Victoria, he could no longer keep his seat, but paced disturbedly the apartment. In this state of irresolution did Abdallah pass several days, after the departure of don Caesario and Isidore for Sicily. It chanced, that one fine morning, Ab-
wearied with this constant alterca¬ tion between his better and worse feelings, having arisen somewhat earlier than usual, resolved to try the efficacy of the balmy sea-breeze to lighten or dissipate, for a transient interval, the perplexing thoughts which weighed upon his mind, and perpe¬ tually harassed his tranquillity. The gold¬ en beams of the refulgent orb of light and life had not attained any inconvenient de¬ gree of fervour, for it was yet early day; but, had it been otherwise, it will be recol¬ lected, Abdallah was accustomed to endure the radiance of much more fervid skies even than those of sultry Naples. At first, he chose to walk upon the pier, which over¬ looked the calm surface of the bay, and was already crowded with pedestrians, all eager to inhale the healthful morning breeze. But here he soon found himself too much subjected to the public gaze—too intense¬ ly the object of idle curiosity (for Abdal¬ lah, since the miraculous recovery of Caesa¬ rio, as already hinted, was become one of VOL- il K
the " lions" of Naples) to feel, pre¬ sent mood, perfectly comfortable. Ac¬ cordingly, soon wearied of exhibiting him¬ self the gaping stock of the wondering vul¬ gar, a situation which, however, under other circumstances, would only have served to inflate the pride of Abdallah— for had he not courted, by his own act and will, this invidious popularity ?—he retired to se.)k some spot where he might pursue his meditations more at leisure, relieved from the now every moment more oppres¬ sive stare of the surrounding rabble. By a kind of involuntary instinct, Abdallah now turned his steps toward the neigh¬ bouring acclivity known by the name of the mountain of St. Elmo, which he had not ascended since—but the reader will not have forgotten the absurd occasion of his last nocturnal ascent up that convenient eminence. A few lounging spectators followed him to the foot of the mountain, but as if the ascent were far too laborious for them to think of attempting, they there with one accord abandoned him, and
Abdallah, in a very few minutes, himself, as he wished to be, alone. How different now appeared the scene around him from that presented on the night of his last hurried ascent of that then-bewildering mountain path !—how totally changed! The eruption of the ad¬ jacent Vesuvius, then bellowing in all its fury, appeared to have subsided, and now issued only from its calm summit a pale thin wreath of smoke, to which the bright sunbeam, as it gleamed askance upon the ascending curls of this slender and vari- able column, even added a tint of beauty; while the surrounding landscape glowed in all the softened luxuriance of Italian loveliness. Abdallah gazed in silent rap¬ ture, as he proceeded, and felt his heart lightened, at least for the moment, of half its intolerable burthen. Beneath him shone the fair city of Naples, its innumer¬ able spires and palaces glittering gaily in the morning sunshine: just above him was the spot whence on that dark night K 2
he had delivered his first address to the supposed attentive Himmalay; and yon¬ der gaped the ditch into which he had subsequently fallen, and from which com¬ fortless situation he was fortunately res¬ cued by the prudence and heroism of Ah¬ med. Here, then, was food for medita¬ tion which certainly served for awhile to engross his thoughts, and give them a livelier turn; and Abdallah paused to meditate on these more pleasing objects accordingly. And now once more, while contemplat¬ ing this remembered scene, did the dark rolling eyes of Abdallah glisten with the proud consciousness of his own enviable and undoubted superiority over the meaner beings around him. Theirs were the mere common attributes of humanity—and was it not Abdallah's glorious privilege to re- lumine the vital spark, which, once ex¬ tinguished, all mortal wisdom united can¬ not rekindle? It was true, he acknow¬ ledged, that in ascending the dark moun¬ tain of St. Elmo on that dismal night, he
had seen, in fact, nothing of the white spirit Himmalay; but then he recollected that the demon was only visible toward the far more elevated summits of the Himmalay mountains. Such, by the snowy spirit's own frank assertion, being the case, Abdallah never seemed inclined for a mo¬ ment to doubt the possibility of his in¬ visible presence, but still felt perfect con¬ fidence in the effieacy of his talismanic preservative against the threatened ap¬ proach of the destructive tyrant. No wonder, then, if his heart beat proudly, and his bosom heaved with tumultuous exultation, while a conviction so animat¬ ing kept possession of his mind. Having sufficiently admired the magni¬ ficent prospect, which, to Abdallah, in his present frame of mind, appeared doubly gorgeous and captivating, he again turned to continue his toilsome and solitary way up the steepening eminence. As he pro¬ ceeded, still wrapt in silent meditation upon the probable utility or value of the two charmed lives yet left in his power £o
bestow, it chanced that suddenly he per¬ ceived by the way side a single rugged- looking being, prostrated as in the atti¬ tude df prayer, but whose looks were, in reality, fixed steadfastly upon his own ad¬ vancing figure and countenance. At first, Abdallah felt disposed to regard him merely as one of the lazaroni, who had retreated thus fer up the eminence to bask unmolested in the brightening sunshine: but this man, he observed, on a nearer ap¬ proach, though he seemed wan and feeble, was also heavily armed, and much too well apparelled to belong to the lazaroni. As the Wondering Moor drew still nearer, he was astonished to hear the figure ex¬ claim—-f' Thanks to thee, saint Rosolia! it is-—it is surely himself! It-is the re¬ nowned Abdallah, whose assistance alone of all the world can avail me now, and whom thou hast thus opportunely sent to my relief. Kind saint! I thank thee that thon liast heard the supplications of Za- ehetti—one of the charmed lives, indul¬ gent Rosolia! may yet, I trust, be mine/'
« Charmed lives," thought Abdallah, without pausing in his upward course, " are the gift alone of Abdallah, or Him¬ malay; and small chance hast thou, I ween, presumptuous Christian 1 of obtain¬ ing the boon from either." Zachelli (for it was indeed no other than the wounded, despairing bandit, who had crawled hither to importune his favourite saint for a speedy recovery, and to watch for Abdallah, should chance so far befriend him as to throw the Moor in his way) now flung himself directly across his path, ex¬ claiming—" Alas! thrice gentle and wor¬ thy Moslem, whom assuredly the good saints have directed hither, deign to be¬ stow one pitying glance upon a poor ex¬ piring wretch, whom nothing but thy aid can rescue from unmerited destruction." " Away, knave^—loose my garment!" cried Abdallah, endeavouring to rescue his apparel from the gripe of the writhing sup¬ plicant, who, he now perceived* was se¬ verely wounded, the clotted blood being still visible on his raiment
B&helli^howeVer, vigorously Kept*his hold, again exclaiming, iri a piteous tone -*- # *Behold me! I am the victim of an assassin—that assassin, too, thy worst enemy—for I know thee, Moslem, and am acquainted with thy secret purpose here in Naples. I also know thy wondrous potency in checking, by some Undivulged talisman, the giant strides—the chilling advance of death; and now, alas! am Con¬ strained to become a wretched supplicant for tiie boon of existence, which thou only canst dispense. Bestow but upon me one of those charmed lives which even thy enemies solicit not in vain—rescue me from the grave already yawning to receive me, and I can much communicate------ * " Nazarene t I need not thy informa¬ tion, nor-can now grant thy request," said Abdallah, sternly. " Loose your hold, * ruffians-let me pass, 1 say!" he continued, finding that Zachelli did not relax his grasp, and at length succeeded in pur¬ suing his way unmolested toward the summit of the eminence, whither the ban-
dit appeared tod far exhausted to follow him. . ' it ? ' Having proceeded to a considerable dis¬ tance, still pursued by the cries and sup¬ plications of the wounded Zachelli, who Abdallah, on turning round, now perceived with astonishment, was yet feebly endea¬ vouring to crawl after him,it chanced that a new and more important incident very unexpectedly demanded his attention. The path which led to the highest point of St. Elmo, whither Abdallah seemed resolved to direct his steps, proved to be, at this part of the ascent, bordered with low brushwood, which of course provided a suitable place of ambush for those whose purposes it might suit to remain conceal¬ ed from the " glaring front of day." This Abdallah soon found to his cost, for ere yet the scorned entreaties of the despair¬ ing Zachelli had entirely ceased to ring in his ears, he suddenly descried a couple of grim faces glaring upon him from each side of the narrow footway, with a mali- k 3
cious expression not to he mistaken. In a moment the whole truth darted upon his mind, that these were robbers—but it was too late now to retreat: the next in¬ stant a ruffian sprang from either side, and their naked daggers were gleaming at his breast. The usual—" Stand and deliver!" was next uttered in a loud hoarse voice, to which was added—- M Stab not yet, Dago¬ lino! let the worthy Mussulman have time to surrender—we have mercy, if he behaves like a gentleman."
CHAP. XVIII. That such a slave as this should wear a sword, Who wears not honesty. Such smiling rogues as these Like rats oft bite tive holy cords atwain Which are too intrinse t' unloose! smooth every passion That in the natures of their lords rebels; Bring oil to fire, snow to their colder moods, Renage, affirm, ant 1 tru their halcyon beaks With every gale and vary of their masters, As knowing nought* like dogs, but following. Shakespeaec, Dagolino, it is hardly needful to say, thought proper to obey this awful injunc¬ tion of his comrade, which, indeed, was only uttered for the purpose of terrifying the poor Moslem into silence, whose trem¬ bling already convinced them that he was not one from whom they were likely to experience any stout resistance. In reality, the confusion of Abdallah (of course not unmixed with terror) was so overpowering* that it scarcely permitted him to survey the speaker; hut when at - length he did
steal a glance at those he could as easily have flown to paradise as again have regarded, without a visible shudder of apprehension, that hideous countenance. In truth, all the blood of the fearless Aghar Hussein seemed at once to have abandoned his veins, and he found it impossible to support, in the presence of so frightful a desperado, even the out¬ ward pretence or appearance of valour. His companion was in aspect little better than himself—of a sallow brown complex¬ ion, fiercely whiskered, his belt loaded with pistols, and a huge sabre by his side. This worthy personage, by name Spalatro, now began eagerly to examine the Mussulman's gorgeous attire, exclaim¬ ing to his associate—" By all the saints in Christendom! a most splendid shawl! This will suffice to make my peace with Antoinette of Catania—she will hardly frown upon such a goodly piece of finery. , " This purse, too," remarked his com¬ rade Dagolino, seizing the gold net purse which depended carelessly from Abdallah's
girdle—" and, by the mass! it is bravely Hned—shall in future be worn by my pretty Pauline of Loretto, I promise thee; that is, when I have first disposed of its glittering contents. Look, Spalatro," he continued, exultingly chinking the coin in his rude hands, " here is enough to fur¬ nish a feast for our whole band. Ah ! by all my propitious saints, a pretty carved dagger also—the hilt doubtless valuable- set with rubies, I protest, by the whole gracious calendar ! It were a pity not to deprive him of this, be seems so little to understand the use of it: we know how to employ it better—eh ! Spalatro ?" " Take it, then," answered Spalatro, " but softly ! not so rough with him— learn to use peaceable travellers more gently, Dagolino. The worthy Moslem stands to be plucked as quietly as a lamb to be shorn of its fleecy burthen—neither threats nor attempts resistance—what need, then, of this violence? For my part, I always prefer a bloodless booty, and invariably treat with kindness those whose
prudence—I never call it pusillanimity, because all Sicily knows that resistance to us is useless—enables us thus to reap with little trouble the fruits of our profession." " As you please," muttered Dagolina " Meantime, I know where these Maho¬ metans love to hide their treasure occa¬ sionally, and no cranny must be left un- searched. Therefore, come off," said be, rudely divesting the shaven brow of the son of Aghar Hussein of its constantly worn magnificent turban, for the purpose of seeking among its intricate folds for concealed coin or jewels, a practice com¬ mon among the " true believers" in times of peril or adversity. Of this fact, Dago¬ lino seemed pretty well aware, since, trusting little to outward appearances, he began furiously to unwind the turban* apparently resolved that no valued bauble of the .wily Moslem, however artfully se- creted, should elude his observation, or es¬ cape his grasp. All this time, the terrified Abdallah stood staring alternately at his daring and
determined plunderers, who thus reckless¬ ly in open daylight, and in utter defiance of all consequences, had dared forcibly to strip him of his money and habiliments. Whethei his turban actually concealed the treasure these desperadoes were tear¬ ing it in pieces to discover, is here of little consequence; it is certain, however, that the loss of it from his head affected the feelings of Abdallah much more acutely than aught of which they had hitherto deprived him. Assailed, at the same mo¬ ment, by mingled rage, fear, and astonish¬ ment, he became actually motionless. At length, he ventured gently to remonstrate, observing, in a tremulous tone, almost in¬ audible—" You are wasting your labour on a few yards of muslin, while my bare head is exposed—good signors ------" "What! do you grumble, bald-pate?" fiercely demanded Dagolino, still ransack¬ ing the turban for its supposed hidden con¬ tents. " No! I only observed that the turban concealed nothing beyond what must rea-
dily meet your view,'* faltered Abdallah. " It is false!" cried Dagolino— " here is a diamond crescent. Dog of a misbeliever! you shall answer this." " I had forgot the crescent," said Ab¬ dallah, " which a fold, no doubt, conceal¬ ed. But take it, nevertheless, good sig- nors-s—you are ^welcome to it: restore me my turban, and I will depart hence, with many thanks for yo'u# eiviBty." - " If you depart hence with either head or turban>" remarked Dagolino, with a malignant grin, " I ant no t^ue Sicilian nor this weapon of fi&ine worth the labour I but yesterday* bestowed u|>on its eSge" w Does the worthy Moslem think," now observed Spalatro, casting likewise a mali¬ cious leer toward the devoted Mussul¬ man, ** that we are so little cautious of our own security—can he really imagine we are so madly destitute of common pru¬ dence, as to permit his safe departure, that he may presently hie to the authorities of Naples, and set the tibtrri after us ?" -" Why* what mean you to do with
me then?" inquired Abdallah, in evident alarm. " Stitch you up in a sack, it may be, made of the muslin of your own vile tur¬ ban," answered Dagolino, " and hurl you at night-fall into the bay yonder—a mode of navigation not altogether new among yoti gentlemen of the Moslem persua¬ sion." " But first let me pfant a few inches of cold steel into the gullet of this huge, cla¬ morous calf, to put an end to his bleat¬ ing," said Spalatro, coolly, and brandish¬ ing his naked dagger, as if actually pre¬ paring to strike. Abdallah was now, indeed, in a terrible fright — his situation appeared truly, at that moment, one of the raost hopeless and horrible that imagination could possi¬ bly conceive. Alas! for the sudden change in his circumstances!—that he, the life dispenser, at whose beck, only a short time since, the vital spirit had returned obediently to its half-forsaken tenement, should be thus forced to supplicate for his
own existence—perhaps, too, unsuccess¬ fully ! it was, in sooth, a bitter reverse of fortune. As such Abdallah felt it; and now prayed earnestly for some providen¬ tial means, but could devise none—no chance appeared to present itself, of extri¬ cation from this appalling danger. In another moment, while yet the threatening dagger was uplifted, and ere the agitation of Abdallah had permitted him even to intercede for his own precious existence, Spalatro, urged on by Dagolino, who by this time both heartily despised the trembling Moor for his unexampled cowardice, hoarsely resumed, saying loud¬ ly ^-" So prepare! for thy last moment, thou lying poltroon, is at hand." ** Stand off—thou fool! it is the famous Moor whose charmed bosom no weapon can penetrate," now exclaimed a remem¬ bered voice at Abdallah's elbow. " It is the renowned and wonder-working Ab¬ dallah, with whose miraculous skill and potency all Naples still resounds—and thou wouldst slay him! Sheathe thy dag-
ger, idiot, and instantly restore own. Behold, Spalatro, who it is com¬ mands thee." Abdallah's eyes now moved in unison with Spalatro's, and alit once more upon the feeble and ghastly form of the wound¬ ed Zachelli, who, it appeared, in spite of his wounds and lassitude, had succeeded in following him slowly up the mountain, and arrived just in time to avert the ter¬ rible impending catastrophe. With joy Abdallah now recognised the unoffending supplicant whom, a few minutes before, he had spurned out of his path, since to have any human being near him at such a mo¬ ment to whom he might appeal even for pity was some consolation; while the effect upon Spalatro of his captain's unex¬ pected and (just at that critical juncture) unwished-for presence, was equally per¬ ceptible and amusing. " Troth, captain, I meant the worthy gentleman no harm," said thealtered knave, " but was only frightening him a little, just because his chin is absurdly left ur>
trimmed, as you see, while his head is shaven, which declares him a misbeliever; though as for charmed bosoms, and mira¬ culous achievements, I profess myself ut¬ terly ignorant of your meaning. I be¬ lieve this dagger capable of entering any bosom, guided by the right arm of Spa¬ latro ; and then with respect to his vaunt¬ ed dexterity in any line of business, you must pardon me, captain, if I confess my¬ self dubious on that point; his courage, at least, seems of no miraculous order. But, holy saints! what ugly streak is that oft thy clotted raiment?—those ghastly looks, too—surely no daring hand hath ventured to assail, and thus bloodily to mangle, the invincible Zachelli ?" " As thou seest," said Zachelli, shaking his head mournfully. " And ,what is to be done then ?" de¬ manded Spalatro, evidently willing to aid, but completely posed by this so perfectly novel situation of his captain. "That only which I bid thee do," re¬ turned Zachelli, with emphasis; " though
the wound is deep, and beyond the skill of leech to cure, yet your leader is not without hope. Restore thou instantly to this mighty magian, the renowned Ab¬ dallah, on the successful exertion of whose skill now unhappily depends my sole ex* pectation of recovery, whatever in jewels, money, or apparel, thou mayest have ta¬ ken from his reverenced person. Dago¬ lino — Spalatro — am I no longer your chief, that thus ye dare to hesitate?—I pause to see it done." At these words, while Abdallah still stood wondering what might probably be the issue of this strange adventure, Spalatro, scarcely less astonish¬ ed, somewhat unwillingly replaced the shawl, turban, and other articles appropri¬ ated by the robbers for a different purpose, once more upon the person of the tremb¬ ling Abdallah ; while Dagolino reluctant¬ ly drew from his pouch the netted purse, which, though by the way lightened con¬ siderably, again became suspended from the girdle of its proper owner. The work of restitution thus completed, the two dis-
appointed bravoes (who seemed not at all to understand this disagreeable manoeuvre of thei* captain, which deprived them of what they' had deemed their lawful spoil) stood sulkily aloof to watch the event; while Zachelli, suddenly sinking on his knees before Abdallah, thus continued his solicitations to be favoured with the gift of one of those charmed lives, which the good people of Naples now universally awarded to the Moor the sole credit of bestowing. " Behold me," he added, " I am wounded deeply—I fear fatally; nor do I ask that of thee any longer as a favour, which circumstances well may have em¬ boldened me to require from thee as a matter of right. Weigh well thy present perfectly unrestrained condition with what it was but a moment ere my arrival on this spot. Biy voice is weak and feeble, as, alas! thou hearest—yet hath it restored thee to liberty, and given thee back thy rifled treasure: thine is strong and potent —a single sentence—even a tone—a wish, pronounced on this mountain, might pre-
serve my life; and shall it then refuse to utter the charitable sound? Oh, no!— forbid it humanity ! Even the false pro¬ phet whom thou dost serve and worship, whatever his tergiversation or his sophis¬ try, cannot advocate ingratitude: yet what but the foulest ingratitude would appear thy refusal of a boon (acknowledged in thy power to grant) to one who but now pre¬ sented thee with thy lost jewels, and thy liberty ? But yet more—not only on the score of the past do I claim thy grateful remembrance; it is also in my power to promise thee future protection and secu¬ rity for thy wealth and person." " Thou art, then, it seems, the leader of banditti?" asked the shrinking Abdallah. " I am the captain of as brave a set of fellows as ever relied on their sharp wits, and keener blades, for sustenance," replied Zachelli. " But, alas! look on me—I am wounded now, and feeble — while my gasping breath, and creeping pulse, too plainly assure me that I have not long to live. Then relent, I conjure thee—let
?^#fl!it top* owe his existence to the, i|ai|||ggi(iifl,^^ ta)l|^^lQ^ I §we$r*jl^ pr^er^fv ^pu ^r|Mt^f|jji|^".-,.^ ; :^- ; j. ^^ v:; ^^>.^i : ..;--,, : w-,;:-,,: I)uring this harangue, Abdallah confe nued feregard the prostrate miscreant who addressed ium^ with a visible sensation of loathing aud a^ strove yain^ to conceal. It is true that he was no longer undejr the curdling apprehension of ajfrjghtful death, nor the comparatively discarded loss of his diamonds, and few gpld pieces, but he felt that his condition was very little amended by the change. Here, then, surrounded by banditti, he was required to bestow tjie half of his re¬ maining invaluable treasure (a charmed life) uppn one of their disreputable fra¬ ternity ; the bare idea was too vexatious to be endured vvitb epmmpp patiepce. H<e^ determined^ at every risk^ to ayoid making the sacrifice, if possible, aud there? fere boldly resjjpnded—" Even if it were
my inclination to oblige you—and I con* fess I feel strongly prompted to requite your service with some suitable equiva¬ lent—yet could not the unfortunate Ab¬ dallah achieve the thing you name. My frame of mind, at this hour, being all unfit —the place ill-suited, too—it is impos¬ sible—I feel, I cannot ------" " Speed! for my breathing grows more difficult, and I am faint," exclaimed the impatient Zachelli. " Don Caesario would now have been mouldering in his bloody shroud, but that thy accents breathed on this very mountain — dost thou hear, Moor?—meanest thou, then, to refuse me?" " I have already said, I cannot achieve what thou desirest," answered Abdallah* firmly. " Nay, then, force must compel thee," returned Zachelli, with a look of frantic determination. " Help me, my gallant comrades!" he continued, addressing Da¬ golino and Spalatro, who advanced, seem- VOL. IL l
ingly nothing loth to obey his mandate. ** B^ar him to yonder beetling pinnacle- but gently, so that you hurt him not. Myself wili follow you, as swiftly as I may: he shall there pronounce the mys¬ tic words of intercession, known only to himself and Himmalay, or be surely hurl¬ ed a bruised and mangled carcase to its base. Heed not his supplications —the knave is obstinate. Away with him— away!" Thus did Abdallah find himself con¬ strained to ascend between two sturdy ruffians, who seized him vigorously by either arm, to a loftier crag of the now- execrated St. Elmo, there to sacrifice the Second of his charmed lives (which he still weakly imagined himself possessed of the power to bestow), in the manner dic¬ tated, or to expiate his folly with his own existence.
CHAP. XIX. Late, late to-night will Dian cheer The swain, and chase the boatman's fe/ir. The scitter'd lights that skirt the bay All, one by one, have died away ; The only lamp of this lone hour Is glimmering in Zuleika's tower. BynoN. Prince Vicenza, in the mean time, ac¬ companied by Alphonsine, had already arrived safely at his palazzo in Sicily, where, with little alteration, he resumed his former sedentary habits, and secluded life. But alas! that enviable tranquillity of mind which alone could have rendered such an existence endurable, for any lengthened period, was now more than ever a stranger to his dwelling, and an exile from his tortured bosom. As yet, however—so strict was the almost-misan¬ thropic seclusion in which the once-justly- L2
esteemed Vicenza now chose to reside- no rumour of his late domestic disturb¬ ance in Naples—no word of the adven¬ ture of the twins, and the subsequent transformation, as it were, of Victoria into Alphonsine, had reached the ears of any of the surrounding noble families. It was universally believed, that Vicenza had merely been absent on a brief excursion of pleasure with Victoria; and—though he took no pains to conceal it, well aware that it must in time become the subject of general conversation—none had hither¬ to suspected, or even dreamed of the me¬ tamorphosis, which had thus unexpected¬ ly taken place in the person of the solitary fair inhabitant of the palazzo di Vicenza. With respect to Alphonsine herself— gloomy perhaps as the majority of Sicilian ladies would have considered this seques¬ tered kind of life, it appeared to her as a perfect enchanting paradise of liberty and diversity. Accustomed long to the rigid adherence to religious rules prescribed for the observance of .all its inmates at the
convent of St. Rosalie, to her it appeared freedom even to direct the fashion of her own apparel—to command her hours/and to be able to devote the whole of her time to such amusements as best pleased her, without the fear of a reprimand from her superior—to pass the night undisturbed by the bell for midnight vespers, and the morning unmolested by the tedious prat¬ tle of the prosing sisterhood. These ad¬ vantages to Alphonsine—the long injured depressed Alphonsine — lightly as other damsels, differently circumstanced, might have estimated them, appeared the height of indulgence; and to have thus unex¬ pectedly arrived at their enjoyment, seem¬ ed, in her estimation, to have attained the highest possible summit of terrestrial felicity. Thus passed the time at the palazzo di Vicenza, chiefly in gloomy solitude, it is true, by the noble owner of the mansion, but by Alphonsine in some cheerful occu¬ pation, and not unfrequently in delightful rambles about the extensive pleasure*
grounds of the palazzo. In these rambles, however, she seldom strayed far from home, and often returned without having encountered, during her excursion, the sight of a single human being, except Beltramo, who, by his moody lord's com¬ mand, invariably attended her. Some- tiriies she would endeavour to cheer with music, or reading, the Evident gloom of her disconsolate parent; and, on such oc¬ casions, would sit with him in his own favourite apartment, regardless of the rapid flight of time, until tlie sun had long disappeared behind the Western hills in search of other regions, but surely to fied none more prodigal df beauty. Vi¬ cenza then rising, ere he rushed from the apartment, would clasp her in his arms, exclaiming—" Thus once would have sang Victoria!—thus once, to soothe her merciless sire, would my abandoned child have awakebed the chords of melody, or traced, ifi mellifluous accents well remem¬ bered, the glowiffg historic -page. But sbt was a traitrels^afterward to his happiness—
a very rebel to his^ blood—his peace—his honour—for that I cast her from me! Even with my house's most inveterate enemy to plot and contrive to her own de¬ famation, and ultimate destruction! No —no—the voice of Victoria never again shall soothe my pensive hour, or charm my disturbed, afflicted bosom to repose." Thus spoke Vicenza, and gnashed his teeth with seeming determination: but, in spite of these still-rankling recollections of her supposed misconduct, the absence of Vic¬ toria, it was evident, had left an aching void in his affections, of which even the gentle Alphonsine, with all her natural sweetness of disposition, found it extreme¬ ly difficult to render him unmindful. It was after an evening thus occupied, that Alphonsine retired later than usual to her sleeping chamber (the same formerly occupied by Victoria), her mind still ex¬ cited almost to enthusiasm by the glowing descriptions of " nature's imagery" con¬ tained in the fanciful volume she had just been perusing to the comparatively apa-
theic Vicenaa. She^ had already dismiss sed Biondella for the night, whose services indeed, though at present her only attend¬ ant; she w^s never extremely fond of re¬ quiring: the boldness or loquacity of this heartless creature, it might be, displeased her heW mistress; while her duplicity could not entirely veil itself from her ob¬ servation. Alphonsine, therefore, on the present occasion, retired to her chamber alone; and ere she closed for the night the long narrow casement, or rather smdl glass porta!* which, as already described, looked out upon the flowery lawn that surround¬ ed the palazzo, stepped lightly into the balcony to admire the silent beauties of the solitary scene. Silent, indeed* but enchantingly beau¬ tiful, did Alphonsine find the slumbering landscape that there attracted her atten¬ tion, and even though shrouded in partial obscurity, long rivetted her charmed gaze. It was a moonless night* but the soft gold- bespangled azure of the star-fretted firma¬ ment seemed to need no addition that the
silvery lustre of Cynthia could afford. The breeze, as it floated lightly and fitfully through the jessamine-shaded balcony, came laden with odours of the choicest kind, and departed with an equally deli¬ cious burthen of newly-imbibed fragrance. Often had Victoria, during the happier period of her life, gazed entranced from that lonely casement upon the lovely view beneath—the self-same scene and sky over which now wandered the straining eyes of the enraptured Alphonsine. It is true, that the shadowy light emitted from the " hundred orbs of fire" which adorned the ethereal concave was only sufficient to render the varied prospect dimly visible: but imagination well supplied the defici¬ ency ; and Alphonsine never felt a purer transport than while rapt in contemplation upon the sweetly rural, captivating land¬ scape, at that moment stretched before ber. While yet intently gazing, apparently lost in thought, upon the soothing and soul-elevating scene, Alphonsine suddenly l 3
fancied she could distinguish the distant clattering of horses' feet, which at in¬ tervals, she presently felt assured, came ^feifo&and failing" Upon the fitful night br^eae. Now, therefore^ with renewed earnestness did she for a momerit cast her straining eyes over the sombre and ex¬ pensive valley at her feet^ judging it to be somfe^bebighted traveller, who was thus urging !his, willing steed to gain the wel¬ come resting-place (probably one of the neighbouring palazzos), and wondering wh^t venturesome rider had chosen to pur¬ sue his solitary course at that lone silent hour^ itfc SPpart of the country so prover¬ bially infested with cruel hordes of ban- dtt$* whose: clutches the single belated passenger had little chance of escaping. At flrst her utmost efforts were in vain to distinguish aught save th£ dewy verdure of the fields* and the dark brown foliage of the surrounding groves, or coppices; but imanqther instant she plainly disbern- ed sornethiiig white in motion, which much resembled the plume of an advancing
horseman, though it appeared to skim the air with the velocity rather of the roving sea-bird. The louder echo of the approach* ing hoofs, however, soon convinced her that she was not deceived: a rider was in¬ deed advancing swiftly toward the palazzo di Vicenza, who, on reaching an adjacent cluster cf orange trees, flung himself light¬ ly from his saddle, and proceeded to fasten beneath that convenient canopy his pant¬ ing steed. And now, while the heart of Alphonsine beat with expectation, she per¬ ceived that solitary stranger cautiously qivt his ambush, and proceed silently, and on foot, toward the myrtle-shaded balcony. This (as the reader probably may have already surmised) was in fact no other than the impatient, anxious don Caesari©* who restored to convalescence, and arrived pnce more at the palazzo di Castelli, the residence of his overjoyed parents, found it impossible to rest until he had again beheld and conversed with his adored Vic¬ toria. Little aware of the change which had taken place since his last visit to that
remembered spot—little suspecting that that fatal chamber was now occupied by another inmate—though, perhaps, equally fair and gentle, yet another than his be¬ loved Victoria-^-he resolved once more at every risk to obtain an interview, at least to convince her of his safety, and unalter¬ able attachment. Alphonsine, however, shrunk alarmed from his presence, and was about to summon the domestics* feel¬ ing that the company even of Biondella would now (for the first time since her arrival at the palazzo di Vicenza) be most welcome; already her breath was drawn convulsively for the purpose — she was about to utter the shrill exclamation which usually accompanies female terror, when curiosity once more arrested the fearful summons upon her lips. Don Caesario had. perceived the light which glimmered faintly in her chainber> and, by its feeble rays, distinguished also her light raiment fluttering in the well-remembered balcony, toward which he immediately commenced making signs of courteous recognition, in-
terrupted only by dumb, but perfectly comprehended, signals to remain. Not¬ withstanding this seemingly-gallant and submissive demeanour, Alphonsine yet found it impossible to divest herself of the idea to which his evident caution in ap¬ proaching the palazzo had now given rise —that he might probably himself belong to that very banditti which, a few minutes before, had occupied her wandering thoughts. Impressed with this convic¬ tion, she was at length about to quit the balcony, when don Caesario, who by this time stood beneath it, eagerly addressed her, exclaiming—" Stay, adorable crea¬ ture ! and fear not—none are within hear¬ ing : all is dark, and lonely as the grave. 5 * " And therefore ought I to remain," thought Alphonsine, " in secret commu¬ nion with a suspected stranger?" But the words rose not to her lips, though her feet at the mild tone of his voice refused to recede further, and she remained station¬ ary, like a beautiful statue, leaning over the balcony.
4 * Fly me not thus unheard, my own adored one!" now resumed the entranced, but mistaken don Ccesario: " remain—re¬ main, I conjure thee. The peril which attended our past interviews exists no longer—or, at least, is little to be appre¬ hended to-night. A deathlike stillness pervades the whole surrounding scene- nought seems awake in nature, save those whom love has rendered sleepless: a si¬ lence equally deep and unbroken reigns throughout the mansion—its inmates are surely all retired to rest. Then abandon me not at this propitious hour, but suffer me to explain my seeming negligence, and the miseries I have borne since our last inauspicious meeting." *' I know not that we have ever met until this moment," now stammered the trembling Alphonsine, in a voice whose tender accents fell upon his ear so much like those of his lost Victoria, that still the anxious lover was not disabused of his mistake. "-You wili pardon me* stranger, it is meet that I retire."
" My beloved Victoria!" exbfeinied don C&sario itt amazemeftt—-** dost thou thus coldly entreat pardon of thy Caesario!— this strange denial of our intimacy, too!— what may mean this unaccountable mys¬ tery ? Torment me riot, I conjure thee, with suspense—sjsea.k! have I then irre¬ vocably offended ? Ah ! couldst thou but half divine ------" " Stranger! I know thee not," again feebly articulated Alphonsine, who scarce¬ ly indeed knew what to think of this fa¬ miliar, yet singularly earnest demeanour. " I repeat, I must retire." " Alas! retire, and leave me thus un¬ satisfied—thus disturbed—-distracted!" re¬ sumed the astonished Caesario. " Ad¬ dressed, too, as a stranger — heartless maiden! why am I doomed to hear this cold, cruel language ? What have I done to merit such treatment?—I, who would render up my life, a willing price, for a single smile of those adorable features. Is it that my lengthened absence hath irre¬ mediably displeased thee ? Alas! when
tbou shalt bear the lamentable cause, I trust thou wilt no longer deem the offence irreparable, I had hardly quitted thy chamber on the night of our last interview, ere, savagely attacked, I fell the victim of hired murderers—of pitiless assassins. It was very long—a dark and dreary inter¬ val, uncheered by any recollections even of past delight, or anticipations of fu¬ ture happiness-—ere I recovered sufficient strength to return to Sicily. Here I ar¬ rived but yesterday—and is this my re¬ ception ? Behold me, loveliest of women! at thy feet, and, if in aught I have dis¬ pleased thee, ready to makeatonement——" " I know nought of the events, or in¬ terview, thou hast mentioned, youth," returned Alphonsine, interrupting him. " I know but little of thy deceitful flat¬ tering sex—but of thee, in particular, I know nothing. What atonement can I possibly require from pne of whojse very name I am ignorant, and who, therefore, cannot have offended me ?—except I deem thy present conduct an offence, from
which, indeed, thy boldness is not far re¬ moved. With this, however, I take my leave—that as I believe you must be alto¬ gether mistaken, so also am I bound to believe the offence unintentional, and to award you the most perfect absolution ac¬ cordingly. Moreover, it may be as well to warn thee, gentle youth, in return for thy courtesy, that—whatever the object of this midnight visit—there is much danger in thy longer sojourn here. Stranger! good night—I conjure thee to retire." So saying, Alphonsine retreated a few steps toward the entrance of her chamber, but here could not avoid pausing to ob¬ serve whether the salutary admonition to retire while yet in safety was followed or despised. Meantime, the amazed don Csesario continued motionless, with his knee half bent to the earth, in a posture of mingled supplication and astonishment, without the least suspicion of his mistake, yet scarcely knowing what to deem of this extraordinary reception.
CHAP. XX. In flattering dreams I deem'd thee mine; Now hope, and he who hoped, decline : Like melting wax, or withering flower, I feel my passion, and thy power. Translation of Romaic Love Song. An interesting'pause, of some few mi¬ nutes duration, now succeeded — don Csesario quitted not his supplicatory pos¬ ture, and Alphonsine herself seemed un¬ willing to retire, without first eliciting some further explanation of this unexpected in¬ terview with so evidently handsome and courteous a cavalier. There was some¬ thing, too, in the gentle and unassuming demeanour of this nocturnal visiter, that failed not considerably to prepossess her in his favour; and, combined with his present imploring attitude, seemed to reproach with needless precipitance in thus abandon* ing bim likewise to the endurance of all
the vexatious torments of incertitude. Besides, might he not possibly incur the most imminent, even unavoidable peril, by simply neglecting her friendly caution to retire, ere his trespass was discovered by Beltramo, or some other over-zealous ad¬ herent of her querulous sire?—and was not to leave hini thus evidently embarrass¬ ed and disconcerted, the surest method of inducing him to remain? These reflec¬ tions assailed at once the gentle bosom of Alphonsine, ere her foot crossed the thres¬ hold ; and though she shrunk from the idea of resuming their lonely intercourse, thus abruptly broken off by her own act and desire, yet her limbs, with at least equal pertinacity, refused to resume the velocity with which her flight from that now doubly-alluring spot had been com¬ menced. At length, don Cassario, per¬ ceiving her visible irresolution, again broke the surrounding stillness by exclaiming— " Thou canst not—no—thou hast not the heart to abandon me thus a prey to this horrible incertitude! Pause, cruel maid !
r&ritateat thee yet once again, and let thy beauteous lips unfold to me the cause of this sudden change—this bitter reverse of fortune—this total subversion of all my long-cherished hopes of happiness." Alphonsine now, instead of pursuing her unceremonious retreat, again advanced a few paces (who could blame her under such pressing circumstances ?), and, stoop¬ ing over the balcony, mildly answered hini—" I know not, youth, nor therefore can plead guilty to any change of conduct calculated to affect thee thus grievously, or, indeed, that can at all concern thee— except my present irresolution to depart may be thus construed, to which I am prompted by a real compassion for thee, and a foolish wonder at thy impassioned gestures. I am the daughter of the noble prince Vicenza, unaccustomed to the use of falsehood, and here again protest, be¬ fore Heaven and thyself, I know not of aught that can, by the wildest—farthest stretch of a heated imagination, be con-
sidered as in any degree essential to, or destructive of, thy happiness." " Am I awake?" exclaimed Caesario, now rising franticly from his humble pos¬ ture. " Am I alive?—and do I breathe, and hear?—did mine ear catch rightly those incredible words?—did that false tongue utter them ? Oh, beauty! frailty is, indeed, thy universally well deserved attribute. Yes, thou art too surely the daughter of Vicenza—the treacherous, and perjured daughter, of a guilty sire—yes ! too surely from the lips of deceitful love¬ liness were launched just now those fatal words which have consigned me to despe¬ ration—to despair. Thoughtless, unhap¬ py girl! for it is impossible that thou shouldst be happy—thou who art, alas! the sole authoress of anguish keen as mine —hast thou reflected upon the pains re r served for perjured souls in that eternal realm of which the wrath of an offended Deity may in a moment render thee a scared, and, it may be, vainly penitent inhabitant? Speak! hast thou weighed
well the probable consequences of this unblushing denial of our intimacy, and pondered upon the terrible hereafter which assuredly awaits hypocri^ and falsehood such as thine ?" w Who art thou ?" demanded Alphon¬ sine, amazed, it is probable, and perhaps too, even somewhat alarmed, at the ear¬ nestness of this appeal. " I again declare solemnly that I know thee not—have never known thee. Who art thou ?" * f Patience! tbou pitying Heaven, that alone knowest my wrongs, and now be- hoWest my agonies," cried Caesario, " grant me patience to endure them. We have loved—we have embraced*—we have sworn fidelity. My country has been abandon¬ ed—-my blood has flowed for thy sake— ay, streamed beneath the assassin's secret stroke for the sake of Vicenza's cruel, faithless daughter. Thou dost not know me?" " Alas! he is crazed—he is distracted!" murmured Alphonsine, but the sound reached not the ears of the vehement Cae-
sario, and she prudertly forbore to betray by her manner the erroneous supposition which had (certainly not without suffi¬ cient cause) taken momentary possession of her mind. " My bosom has glowed with tender¬ ness in thy presence," resumed the dis*- tressed lover, after a transient pause, " and ached long and bitterly for thy lamented absence—and this our meeting ?—this the reward of fidelity? Summoned to his dark duty by thy remorseless sire—whose vengeance upon the devoted house of Cas¬ telli hath been too often fearfully wreak¬ ed—the hired bravo struck me down in Naples, and had nearly reached with his thirsty blade my foolishly-confiding heart. Ah! better had he drained it of its dearest life-blood, than that I should have lived to endure the bitter anguish of this pier¬ cing moment. But, alas! I rail, and am not heeded—-I supplicate, and am little regarded. Why need I loiter thus, like a condemned ghost, in presence of the pitiless judge whose fiat hath doomed me
to eternal misery ?—no! let me be gone. Fairest of all Sicilia's blooming damsels— but cruel as fair—suffer me only once again to hear from thy changed lips the stem decree which denounces as a stran¬ ger the once beloved of thy bosom, that I may be gone hence for ever, and trouble thee no more." " Yet this seems not the language of madness," again muttered Alphonsine to herself, " but rather resembles the over¬ flowing of a fiery spirit really grieved, or injured. I scarcely know what to deem, or how to act—should I alarm the man¬ sion ?—or were it not wiser to retire in silence, leaving chance, and his own im¬ prudent loudness, to unravel the sequel of this seeming mystery ?" " Ay, do alarm the myrmidons that too incessantly haunt this hateful dwelling!" exclaimed don Caesario, rightly guessing her thoughts. " Arouse them from their slumber—if guilt like theirs can slumber —and apprize them that their victim is again at hand, and defenceless! for I am
overwearied with speed to See thee, and feeble yet from former wounds taken in thy behalf, and could scarcely strive for existence, even were it worth a struggle. Let them fall on—I know their murder¬ ous strength~I have proved their hellish prowess*—have assayed, and baffled their skill in more than one nocturnal sally, as thou knowest-*-but, alas! can now resist no more. Let them, then, complete their work—its completion were now an easy task—thou who summonest, hast already rendered it easy to their hands. Let the fierce Vicenza come, thy own evil plotting sire, and the direst enemy of our declin¬ ing family, still drooping beneath the wi¬ thering effects of his awakened vengeance -—he loves blood ----- -" " Peace—peace, thou unhallowed slan¬ derer !" here interrupted Alphonsine, with sudden, and almost startling energy, " lest I Indeed be tempted to do that which might cause thee* bitterly to repent of thy temerity. Peace! and, whoever thou art, VOL. II. m
le#rn this from me" she continued, roused OM&ptot enthusiasm in defence of her af- feptjona^runhappy sire—" Prince Vicen- 2aiJov# ^otijblood, except the blood of his ^ctujuWy'sr enemies; and thou art nei* tk^i ^jise nor, courteous, thus, a stealthy intruder even to his very portal, and in pretawte of his darling child, to stigma- tizei with foul reproaches, such as the common bravo well might scorn to bear, hi$t noble and honoured name. 1 am ashamed," and the tears burst into her eyes^aa she concluded—" I am ashamed to haflre^even thus long listened to thee. Begope 1 and, indeed, for ever—thou ! who canst thus heartlessly, and in such unmeasured terms, traduce the parent, re¬ gardless of the presence and keen feelings of i his, child," i £ Pardon—noble lady! pardon* me," said the now abashed Caesario, sinking agaip upon hb bended knee, the spirited interruption of Alphonsine seeming ^ in some degree to jbave recalled him to his wonted sense of decorum due to the pre-
sence of an exalted female. f*v Jdoidollfesi my own bitter feelings to have^ransf**rfc ed me beyond the rules of courtesy, 6i the dictates of prudence—but pardon^mev gracious daughter of a once-nobfe stem! I will offend no more. I ought not to have permitted my wounded pride, and disap¬ pointed hopes, to have hurried me thus beyond the bounds of deference due to thy exalted sex, and stainless character. In the dust, I crave thy pardon—with¬ hold it not from one whose punishment hath already far exceeded his primary of¬ fence of having too fervently adored 1 , and too blindly trusted in the specious fidelity which seemed to actuate and adorn the sole surviving daughter of this noble— this distinguished line." " Be silent, youth, for—why am I thutf constrained many times to repeat it ?—I understand thee not," returned Alphon¬ sine, again retiring a few paces; " and now feel but little inclined to require, under present existing appearances, any further
elucidation of this seaming mystery, At least, it is plain thou art my fatt;£rVene- my—therefore canst hardly be sa^posed unconswvts mfr^ie: danger which attends tby present daring and ill-timed intrusion on his daughter's privacy. Undercover of the darkness hither hast thou come to traduce, if not to plunder him*^-beware of the consequences, should any of his house¬ hold chance to find thee here." " Yet pause," exclaimed the agonized Caesario, " and, ere thou departest, I con¬ jure thee, pardon me." " Thou hast my pardon, if it can aught avail thee," again returned Alphonsine, mildly; " look thou requirest not ere the morning shines, by thy rash sojourn here, the pardon of one whom thy presence will more bitterly have offended. Be warned, youth, and retire/' " Stay, cruel damsel," cried don Caesa¬ rio, stretching out his arms toward the balcony, " leave me not thus distracted— I implore thee-—" but his words were wasted upon the " desert air," for the
light form of Alphonsine Md already Va¬ nished into her chamber. She looked up¬ on him frowningly for a momerit, yet with something of pity, as she finished her admonition, and closed the door; and don Caasario found himself left in dark¬ ness and in solitude, to meditate upon the frailty of woman, and his own wretched destiny.
END OF VOL. II.
Priated by J. Darling, Leadenball Street, London.
