Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The algerines: or, The twins of naples
THE ALGERINES.
CHAP. L Tt*e cintf oi Lara \s retwra'd »gaw Btaos* IN the delightful Val di Demona, about a day's journey from the Faro di Messina, which divides Sicily from Naples, and si¬ tuated midway between Messina itself and the magnificent Palermo, arose a spacious castellated mansion, the venerable abode of the Vicenza family. Sprung from a lineage the noblest, wealthiest, and most ancient which had ever adorned the an¬ nals, or defended the rights, of his own fair, fruitful Sicily, the present prince Vi¬ cenza enjoyed, in a truly enviable degree, VOL. I. B
the esteem and admiration of Ms equally distinguished countrymen; and possessed —as a tribute not more to his exalted birth than to the benevolent qualitias of Ms na¬ ture-no mcons.derable share of sway mer ike grateful hearts, and cheerful homes, of the surrounding peasantry. During t!s£ recent commotions by which his country had been agitated, Vicenza bad invariably been found among the sa¬ fest of bar advocates in the council, and the bravest of her protectors in the field; but Sicily now found ber strongest secu¬ rity in the sheltering arms of peace. The koa haWiimeats of " giim-visaged war," and its unsocial customs, therefore, having been laid aside, the warrior betook him¬ self to the gentler office of rewarding the fidelity, and gradually softening the con¬ dition, of his valorous dependants, and impoverished tenantry. The situation of the retired castle at which prince Vicenza now chiefly resided, was peculiarly fitted for the exercise of benevolent exertions such as these. Erected near the main road
tb«t ^mdi^ed firom FatersK* to Me^?irja and from tbe view of wbidt an immense grove of orange trees, mixed with aloes, alone partially screened it, every peasant could speed with his ready tale to the ear of his lord, from whom he seldom depart¬ ed, without obtaining the redress, or assist¬ ance* which* it might be, his wrongs or necessities, had compelled him to seek. Thus wisely resident in the centre of the vast domain bequeathed him by his ances¬ tors, the sole representative of the noble house of Vicenza was enabled to receive with facility the complaints, or proposi¬ tions, of those from whom in reality his whole wealth and importance w r ere deri¬ ved; while its remoteness from the dis¬ tracting bustle of populous cities most commonly gave him leisure to examine their justice. If the lower apartments of this agreeable retreat might possibly be deemed too umbrageous, the upper stories commanded a magnificent open prospect; and if the solitude of one day chanced to B 2
weary its inmates, the next was generally relieved by a succession of splendid visiters; for the prince Vicenza affected not misan¬ thropy, nor desired to live like a recluse, Here s then, embosomed among enchant¬ ing shades, from which floated incessantly the odours of a thousand different plants and blossoms, and through whicli wound many a flowery avenue, overspread with myrtle, rosemary, and wild thyme, the retired patriot had passed for several re¬ volving seasons, with at least apparent sa¬ tisfaction, his uniformly tranquil hours. Nor were even his most solitary moments wholly unenlivened by the soft solace of domestic society : but tlie tale of his con¬ nubial infelicity is long, and as yet only partially revealed ; sufficient, however, Ic¬ ing already known to serve as a warning to the unwary and precipitate, in matters which require more serious deliberation. Let such peruse with attention the melan¬ choly recital of his errors and their punish¬ ment; and learn, by sad example, to avoid the fatal rock on which had long since
been shivered to pieces Vicenza's faded happiness. Early in life, the prince Vicenza had es¬ poused a noble and wealthy lady, who had Ion*; been esteemed the fairest ornament of her native, &unnv Sicilv. The beauty and accomplishments of the newly-wedded princess, far from suffering a diminution of splendour, received only added lustre and renown, frotu this proud* au>pic:ous union; and failed not tu attract, a^ usual i ven in more northern climes, an increased crowd of obsequious attendants and ad- miixr^. Among the rest, the young count Castelli, a Sicilian nobleman of inferior rank, but equal fortune, paid the homage he conceived dnv to her charms and spright¬ liness, with more than devotional scrupu¬ losity. It was true, count Castelli was also already married-—but he was extremely handsome, and professed himself a libertine. The beauty ot* his person, and the peculiar grace of his demeanour, joined to his suc¬ cess yet loudly talked of in many recent affairs of gallantry, afforded sufficient
grounds (at least, so deemed the jealous prince Vioenza) for significantly request¬ ing him to discontinue his unwelcome visits This half intimated desire, a& might have been expected, the gay count Castelli scornfully refused to notice; but continued his obnoxious attendance a* usual, at the forbidden repository which contained Vicenza's proudest treasure— his virtuous, bloommg bride. Thus cir¬ cumstanced, and driven almost to frenzy by some trivial occurrences, in hi* opinion almost amounting to proofs of the par¬ tiality of the young princess to Castelli, the impetuous Vicenza, in an evil hour, deterinined to take steps for the effectual prevention of their future intercourse. To this end, he carefully removed the princess (then near the time of her con¬ finement), accompanied only by a single female domestic, her favourite personal attendant, to Naples, whither he promised speedily to follow her. Count Castelli he intended also to prevent from offending him hereafter by a surer method-—-a re*
raoval even still more sudden from ** all we know—frcwn all we love:"* but, ^m the present* he cautiously cosc^ded hi?* scheme of vengeance. No Kroner had the unsus- }>ectmg princess departed &ir Naples^ vain¬ ly wondering at tliis seemingly stnmgf whim of ber despotic lord, yet not darmg to disobey his positi\e injunetiiHi. tktu Vicenza despatched a furious challenge to the really *in this particular instaiictn »n>- de^igniiig object ot* hi^ hatred, the fasci¬ nating rount Ca>telh w in whom fancy ilone had created him a rival. As Vicenza had anticipated, the rierv- spirited libertine flew, at the time ap¬ pointed, to answer the summons of Im incensed antagonist. Every advance to¬ ward a mutual explanation, which might and must have produced eventual amity, was scorned alike by either of the com¬ batants, each conceiving himself to be mortally aggrieved. At the first deadly onset, however, the fury of the enraged Vicenza was too much for his unpractised opponent, who proved himself better
skilled of than the Ion gentle mysteries of war. He sank 1j$spift||, and dangerously wounded, to the jmwti, which speedily became crimsoned with his gore. At this critical juncture, the nobleman who acted as second to count Castelli, condescended to clear up, even to the entire satisfaction of the jealous prince Vicenza, those particular points a too hasty interpretation of which had led to the present melancholy scene. The whole mystery of these appearances bein^ thus explained away, the upbraiding con¬ science of Vicenza smote him bitterly with regret for what he had done. He gazed again upon the bleeding form of Castelli, whose life with every convulsive gush seemed ebbing to its close, and, sheathing his weapon, which it was the first time he ever lamented having drawn, distractedly fled the spot. He resolved to depart that very hour for Naples, to which place the princess, and her faithful attendant, Bianca, had preceded him, un¬ der the charge of a most disagreeable con-
ductor, a menial formerly in his service, who. by his own stern order, closely watched their actions. He arrival at Messina, and immediately set sail for the Neapolitan shore, at once resolving to atone for his past erroneous suspicions— but, alas! he came too late. The tender frame of the neglected princess, unable at such a period to sus* tain the fatigue of the voyage, joined to the injurious treatment of her husband, became sensibly weakened by the united effects of her inward grief, and a more than commonly tempestuous passage. In vain were any longer the efforts of the assiduous and attached Bianca, to cheer the drooping spirits of her desponding mistress: she grew every hour more de* jected—every hour less able to support the approaching struggle of nature. The consequence was, that her extreme anxiety brought on a premature accouchement, and under such unfortunate circumstances, that, when Vicenza arrived, eager to make b 3
ametsds for his rash conduct, he found himself the father of two lovely female ehildre»"—tout m widower* It is almost needless to add that his affliction was ex¬ tremely poignant, and that be accused himself m the sole cause of to* untimely end* As some extenuation, however, of his fault—the last smd only atonement he could now make for having given foolish heed to surmises since acknowledged groundless and unjust, the fatal effects of which were thus terribly exemplified— Vicenza knelt over the breathless body, and vowed to devote one of the surviving infants to the cloister, as an offering to appease, if possible, the stings of his awak¬ ened conscience. The elder of the twins of Naples was selected by the prince Vi¬ cenza for this inhuman sacrifice, perhaps as barbarous as the crime of which it was falsely deemed an expiation; and the ruf¬ fian who had overheard the vow (the same to whom tlie princess had been confided in charge) was chosen, as the fittest instru¬ ment, to put it into immediate execution.
Accordingly, the eldest bom of the Bdbte prince Vkenzs was coir^^ pi- vatciy to a convent recently founded, by a worthy and benevolent lady, in the immediate vicinity of the proud dty of Naples. The hardened ruffian, Zaeiielli who carried the babe by night to the ap- pointed sanctuary, and Bianca, the weep¬ ing attendant ei the deceased priueess, were the only witnesses to the fulfilment of this gloomy vow. Meantime, it was given out abroad, merely that a daughter had been bom to the prince Vicenza, in giving birth to whom the mother hid died. The story of the twins thus re¬ mained altogether a mystery, of which Bianca and Zachelli alone knew the par¬ ticulars; and the secrecy of these was easily secured by Vicenza. Soon after the dismal, and unexpected termination, of this ill-advised affair, the penitent prince Vicenza returned broken¬ hearted to his paternal home in Sicily, bearing with him the younger of his babes, since named Victoria. This smiling in-
fant now became his only joy—-his only consolation amid the tormenting reflec¬ tions that pursued him. Firmly resolved never to marry again, he determined to adopt the fortunate Victoria sole heiress of his remaining possessions, having first awarded a considerable portion of their revenue to the enrichment of that holy institution, called the convent of St. Ro¬ salie, which had thereupon consented to receive his eldest child. Zachelli, and the inconsolable Bianca, returned also with him to Sicily: but the latter shortly after¬ wards quitted his service clandestinely, and, in spite of repeated inquiries, Vicenza never heard of her more, Zachelli him¬ self, report likewise affirmed, had since engaged in a desperate course of life, and became subsequently captain of the fierce banditti who commonly infest the road between Messina and Palermo. With regard to the unfortunate count Castelli— he was borne, severely wounded, to his palazzo in the neighbourhood; and though he still contrived to drag on a feeble and
solitary existence, never perfectly recover¬ ed front the efleets of that fatal rencounter. Seventeen years had passed away sinoe these events, and Cassario, the only son of the invalid, count Castelli. was sprung to manhood: while Victoria, the daughter of Vicenza, grew every hour more accom* plished, and more beautiful Meanwhile, the parents of these engaging young people had never met since that unfortu¬ nate misunderstanding which laid the foundation of their animosity : but each, as if conscious to whom was owing his own present degradation, continued to re¬ gard every thing belonging to the other with undisguised aversion and contempt. The moon was just peering into sight above the silvery tops of the surrounding orange trees, as the lovely Victoria, one clear summer's evening, stepped lightly into the balcony which fronted the win¬ dow of her apartment in the castle of Vi¬ cenza, to enjoy the silent tranquillity that seemed to reign over the whole face of nature. For Victoria, from earliest in-
faticy, had been accustomed to reside with her father in the home of his ancestors; nor ted she ever felt the slightest inclina¬ tion to exchange, for the gaudier corridors of a modem palazzo, the antique, but spa¬ cious cliambers and galleries of that ve- nerabie residence. Vicenza had, indeed, for a considerable period, bent his atten¬ tion almost solely to the achievement of * iron feats of war/ and efforts to uphold Mb sinking country: but now that the strife had ceased, Victoria again became his almost constant companion, and the only solace of Ms vacant hours. Here— with tim exception of now and then a short trip to Palermo, or Messina—her chief pleasure consisted in ministering to hm comfort, or cheerfulness: for donna Victoria had not yet entered fully upon the deceitful pleasures of a falsely-alluring worid. In person she was slender, but extremely prepossessing, with a delicate oval countenance, and her whole contour might vie with the most exquisitely form¬ ed Sicilian beauties. Her glossy ringlets,
adorned with a simple ribbon, or natural rose, were of the raven's hae, and te* eyes dark and expressive : but the uiteontainh> ated mind of Victoria was itiU her prin¬ cipal charm. Having ieated herself in the balcony, with what transport did ber eager sparkling eyes glance over the mag¬ nificently-illumined prospect that sur¬ rounded her!—but softly! gaze again. Why are they turned thus frequently towards that particular part of the sylvan landscape at which the cross roads meet yonder ? Was it an illusion of the fancy, or is there in reality a white plume flat* tering near yonder orange coppice, as if shaken by the motion of the wearer ? No! it is no deception: it passes now between the trees—the bright parted foliage par¬ tially reveals the snow-coloured feathers quivering lightly in the breeze — more delicately white than any other object presented by the moon-lit scene. Hark 1 too, the clattering of hoofs, distinct though distant, may be heard borne faintly upon the fitful wind. A horseman is approach-
ing the castle—what marvel, then, that a sight so unwonted, at that late hour of evening, should attract the straining eyes of the beautiful Victoria ? But, alas I the sight of the approaching visitant to the blushing daughter of Vicenza was neither unwonted, nor altogether unwelcome. With straining eyes, and a fluttering heart, did donna Victoria now view the approach of the impatient stranger (no stranger to her thoughts—no unsuccessful candidate for a place in her bosom) as if undecided whether to retire unobserved, or await his arrival. Nature, and the evi¬ dent good wishes she bore to the intruder, at length prevailed over maiden bashful¬ ness, and parental fear; and she determin¬ ed to await his coming in the balcony. Nearer and nearer drew the clamping sound, till presently a blooming young cavalier appeared in sight, who anon dis¬ mounting, after a graceful salutation to the only human being who witnessed his arrival, proceeded to fasten his faithful
steed beneath a friendly shade, and advan¬ ced cautiously on foot toward the castle. At this moment, the failing courage of Victoria again nearly forsook her, and she was about to retire precipitately, but the courteous mien, and imploring gestures, of the strange cavalier, once more induced hr w to remain. Almost fainting, however, she was obliged to lean for support against the parapet of the balcony; %vhile the beauteous hyacinth, the gay jonquil, and newly plucked anemone, fell from her drooping hand. Her emotion passed not wholly unobserved by the approaching youth, who endeavoured, as well as he was able, to dispel her apprehensions; and still advancing, stood presently at the foot pf the fairy steps, covered with twisted jessamine, which ascended to the balcony.
CHAP. II. Tiptoe siand* the anxious lover,, Wbbpermg forth a gentle *»gh : " AH» ketrp ihee, lowly lady ! Tell me, tm I doora'd to din ?'* Perct. "Fly ine not, charming Victoria!" said the youth, perceiving her shrink from his enamoured gaze-—" thou hast no cause for fear. Alas! if you but knew ------ ** u Hush! for I do know thee," inter- rupted Victoria, timidly, " and know too well the danger that awaits thee, if thou tarries! here. Thou art don Caesario, the son of count Castelli, my father's enemy, and——" ** I meant not that, Victoria," said the cavalier, " though it is, alas! too true. But, gentle Victoria, if you could only know the anguish——" *' The anguish my father would feel should he surprise us together !" exclaim-
ed the alarmed Victoria. * f Begone, for I kn>vr that likewise; and did I reflect upon it as I ought, that consideration were alone sufficient to put a period to these perilous interviews. Oh ! Caesario, ought not the united rage and anguish of thy parent and mine, should our inter¬ course be discovered, suffice to warn us from these clandestine meetings ? Think upon the rooted enmity of our sires to¬ ward each other, preserved through so many years of affliction and vicissitude; and, if utterly regardless of thy own peril, as I perceive thou art—** ** Peril is transport," now exclaimed the impatient Caesario," that is undergone for thee! What danger—nay, what certain desolation, shall deter Csesario from seek¬ ing this hostile edifice, while thou art its fair inmate ?—and with respect to the ancient enmity of our families, and its probable termination, I have got much to communicate. Descend, thou fit inhabi¬ tant of this terrestrial paradise, whose fairest productions equal thee not in love-
liness—the evening is inviting—the siroc ceased—descend, and listen to me P* ^ I may not," said Victoria, still shrink¬ ing timidly toward the door of her cham¬ ber—** I dare not Would Csesario tempt me to commit further evil ?" ** Perverse Victoria ! M said Csesario, re¬ proachfully. ** Is it evil to compassionate the miserable—made wretched by the re¬ sistless potency of thy charms ? Can pity be a crime ? Can the mutual exchange of our affectionate vows be criminal ? then have the noblest spirits, from the first, been guilty. Ah! forbear, beautiful so¬ phist, to advocate so cold a cause. No evil shall attend our intercourse." " It is evil to deceive a tender father," said Victoria; " and to disobey his most solemn—almost his only injunction.** w Away T exclaimed Csesario, resolved if possible to vanquish her scruples, how¬ ever ardently he admired their source. " He knows not the power of all-subdu¬ ing love—he cannot estimate the pleasure of a single blessed moment passed in thy
adorable presence. Descend—descend ; and, at least, listen to the vows of one who fears no peril—seeks no recompence— but the frown, or smiles, of his adored Victoria !'* ** Caesario! too long have I listened al¬ ready," said Victoria, sighing deeply, ** therefore suppress these transports. It becomes not Victoria, sole daughter and hope of the noble house of Vicenza, to hearken to such sentiments from the lips of one who—however favourably she might otherwise estimate his personal or mental endowments—is naturally Vicen¬ za's enemy. Believe me, since first I lis¬ tened to thy protestations, when you join¬ ed me some few moons past during my accustomed lonely ramble, my mind has not been tranquil. This nightly disobe¬ dience to my father's mandate weighs heavily upon my evil-boding soul. For a transient period^—the most blissful of our secret intercourse—you shunned to reveal your name and family: but now that the veil is withdrawn, I dare no Ion-
ger to continue these dangerous assigna¬ tions. That fatal disclosure puts a period to our hopes, and must terminate our hid¬ den communion likewise. Fate has di¬ vided us—we must meet no more. I dare no longer even thus tamely acquiesce in the repetition of thy stolen visits hither —hark ! what noise ? footsteps are surely approaching from yonder avenue—resolu¬ tion comes too late. Holy Virgin ! put up thy weapon—Csesario, I implore thee! Oh God! perhaps it is my wakeful sire— perhaps ------" Victoria had no time to utter more, for now the tread of more than one person was distinctly heard advancing towards the spot, and the lovers every moment ex¬ pected their forms to become visible. In an instant the drawn poniard of Caesario gleamed in the bright moonshine; but he sheathed it again, though reluctantly, at the earnest entreaty of Victoria. Thus utterly defenceless, and rendered so too by his prompt obedience to her express command, she could not do less than afford
him at least, a momentary refuge from his enemies. They were still advancing—her chamber door stood open—Caesario saw the significant wafture of that lovely hand which invited him to enter, and instantly springing up the steps, accepted the prof¬ fered concealment. In another moment, ere his manly bosom drew its succeeding breath, he found himself in the apartment of his mistress, and in security. He pres¬ sed the white hand which had beckoned him from danger fervently to his lips; and, sinking on his bended knee, by a si¬ lent eloquence more powerful than words, expressed his gratitude. Once more upsprung with the alacrity of the startled hind when surprised by the hunters, his next care was to ascertain whose intruding steps had caused this un¬ usual interruption to their hitherto unmo¬ lested intercourse. Placing himself, there¬ fore, near ^he open casement, partly con¬ cealed by jessamine, and a variety of other fragrant shrubs, he awaited with impa¬ tience the yet nearer approach and appear-
ance of the parties* whose voices already filintly saluted the ears of the two lovers. It was not long before they plainly dis¬ tinguished two dark figures, crossing the moonlit lawn to where the grove ap¬ peared the thickest, into which plunging together, they presently disappeared. One of these Victoria instantly knew to be no other than the prince Vicenza, her belov¬ ed and affectionate father: but the second appeared a total stranger at the castle. The gait of her father was measured and melancholy, and both seemed engaged in earnest conversation, but the words reach¬ ed not her ears. What could be the sub¬ ject of their discourse ? and who was his companion ? were questions that arose in her mind, but to which conjecture could make no reply. Caesario appeared satis¬ fied with their disappearance into the dark lime grove at the foot of the lawn, without troubling himself to divine their conversation ; little supposing his own in¬ discretion, as was in reality the case, to be the subject of that gloomy conference.
Having thus fortunately eluded the ob¬ servation of his enemies, don Ca?sario de¬ termined, true lover like, to avail himself of the present favourable opportunity again to plead his suit, which ne accord¬ ingly resumed with redoubled warmth and earnestness. Leaving him, therefore, to urge his cause with all that winning rhetoric which love is sometimes capable of calling to its aid, we change the scene, to pursue the footsteps of the prince Vi¬ cenza, and his yet more mysterious com¬ panion. On entering the grove, the bright moon¬ beams, which had before shone clearly up¬ on their ruffled features, became suddenly obscured by the overhanging foliage; and, as if the very darkness that here enveloped them, imparted to each a conviction of greater security, the degraded Vicenza, and his ruffianly associate, abandoned the low tone in which they had hitherto spoken. The garb of the prince was effectually con¬ cealed by a large loose mantle, which fell vol. i. c
m ai^ple &4di& dow» (9 hjk feet, and pro- t^ted it§ splendour from the d^wshed- #»g branches through which th^ey now forced their passage; but that of his com¬ panion was sufficiently conspicuous to pro¬ claim at once his coarse habits, and dread¬ ful profession. A drinking-horn, and a huge pair of pistols, with a short carbine alung carelessly behind him, and a sabre by his side, declared the mountain robber beyond all scruple, to every rational ol*. server. His loud harsh tones accorded perfectly with his rugged appearance; and combined to render his whole exterior that of a complete bandit of romance. Per¬ haps the wretch was proud of this appa¬ rently studied assimilation to the most notorious models of his class; if so, it can QUly be answered, in the words, pf Angio- lina~~" Twere a pride fit for him." Be- #des t^ aforesaid defensive, or rather of- Jgnsive* appendages to his attire, there ^as stuck m Hs gWle a ^mall poniard, which she we4 m&rku of a very recent ac¬ quaintance with blopd. It is nx> won-
der, then, if the haughty prince Vieenza appeared to regard thi9 being, with wimm, nevertheless, necessity obliged hira to commune, with unqualified abhorrence and contempt. As soon as they found tliemselves se¬ cure from eavesdroppers, Vicenza exclaim¬ ed—*' Tlie plague-spot blister thee, thou loathed remembrancer! for thus torment¬ ing me incessantly with thy hateful pre¬ sence. I tell thee, Zachelli, there is no alight danger in thus revisiting the spot thy crimes have rendered terrible to the misused traveller, who yet shudders aft thy name." Here the hardened miscreant, with a derisive shrug, marked his profound contempt for the observation. Vicenza, regardless of the action, continued.—" I had hoped, that, by this time, thou wert far from the scene of thy unparalleled de¬ linquency. Not that myself, Zachelli, as thou knowest, would, under any circum¬ stances, work thee injury*, or suffer even the fangs of outraged justice to lay hold c £
upon thee, if my power could screen theei but that thou shouldst abandon Sicily is alike necessary for thy safety and Vicen¬ za's peace. I admit, that thou hast once done me a somewhat important act of ser¬ vice ; and, amid all the buffetings of thy wretched destiny, hast faithfully preserved the secret entrusted to thee. I therefore feel bound to protect thee—unworthy as thou art of my protection: but I cannot conquer the antipathy which rises in my bosom when I reflect upon thy horrible career, nor bear thee near my person, nor in my sight. Speak, then, that we may separate as speedily as possible—wherefore art thou here? What boon hast thou to ask—what further service to require of Vicenza ? Have thy depredations of late been unsuccessful, and is money thy re¬ quest ? If so, receive it quickly, and be¬ gone—for ever!" " See now,'* said Zachelli, coolly, " the difference of opinion which prompts the actions of us distinguished individuals—- can we marvel that the world is always
wrangling about who best deserves a hal¬ ter, or a trophy ? Here is the noble de¬ fender of his country confesses that he hates the sight of a trusty old servant. Now I, who yet profess not to be the be¬ nefactor of Sicily, feel nevertheless a strong propensity to be grateful to my friends. I came to do thee service." *' I understand thee not," said Vicenza, haughtily. •* 1 am not aware of the exist¬ ence of aught in which thy presence can possibly advantage me." *' I came, therefore, to make thee aware of that in thy household," returned Za¬ chelli, doggedly, " which, it is probable, thou mayest yet require my aid to rec- tify." " Thy aid!" exclaimed Vicenza, in a tone of the most profound contempt. " Away ! thou hast served me faithfully, and thy fidelity, as thou well knowest, was not forgotten. But Vicenza^ he thanks Heaven ! has now no further need of such disreputable services. Oh God ! it was thou who didst convoy my injured
princess—my guiltless wife, to Naples, there to perish—to perish by the cruelty of her husband ! It was thou who didst rob me of my tender, new-born babe-—" " By your command," said Zachelli, sig¬ nificantly. " True—true," continued Vicenza, re¬ suming his self-control by a determined effort; " and if thou deemest the requital thou hast already received insufficient for thy past duty, or thy present exigencies, say it at once—I will increase the sum." " No, signor," said Zachelli, shaking his rugged, uncombed locks. "I did you a piece of service, and you rewarded me li¬ berally. I look upon you as the author of my present fortune." " A proud distinction, truly," said Vi¬ cenza, contemptuously, " to be regarded as the architect of a fortune such as thine P « Why, look you, signor," replied Za¬ chelli, surveying his accoutrements with an air of perfect self-satisfaction, " my for¬ tune is neither so desperate, nor so despi¬ cable, as you seem to imagine. I served
you with fidelity, and you paid me in tempting gold, which, by some means or other, I soon contrived to get rid of. To return to my humble labour was impos¬ sible: for I had tasted the sweets of idle¬ ness, and luxury. I therefore became what you see me, and throve in my pro¬ fession. I have now wealth, as my rejec¬ tion of your bounty must be admitted to prove, sufficient to enable me to despise your offer of assistance. I have also a faithful band at my command, ready to perform any thing to advance their leader's interest and welfare; or to promote yours, signor Vicenza—pardon me, I should say prince—because, in his early life, thou wert that leader's patron; and hast since proved thyself his principal friend, and most bounteous benefactor." " Patron and friend of a despised male¬ factor ! the benefactor of an execrable fe¬ lon !" now exclaimed the indignant prince Vicenza. " Peace, ruffian, or I shall strike thee to the dust, and trample on thee, for thy audacity!"
" Umph! let him meet this peril him¬ self, then," muttered Zachelli, now deli¬ berately tightening his belt, as if to pre¬ pare for his departure : " it will teach him better manners to his friends in future." Then, turning to Vicenza, he subjoined— " Farewell. My path lies yonder, lead¬ ing toward the mountains; thine conducts back to the castle—our business together is ended." " Why earnest thou hither then ?" de¬ manded the prince, in a somewhat softened tone. " I said, to do thee service," growled Zachelli, still retiring: " but it is not fit that the noble prince Vicenza should stoop to accept the aid of a despised felon. This is true. Yet doth the scorned Zachelli (who seldom prophesies lightly) venture to predict, that Vicenza's insolent rejec¬ tion of such ignoble aid hath rung the knell of his own tranquillity. Again fare¬ well." " Wretch! dost thou threaten me?" exclaimed the now-enraged Vicenza, and,
drawing his weapon, he made a sudden thrust at the desperado, who, however. dexterously contrived to avoid it; while Vicenza's blade, in the effort, was broken against the trunk of an adjacent tree This was a circumstance of which the robber might have taken advantage, had he observed it, and the rash prince must have fallen an easy prey to the incensed plunderer of the mountains. Zachelli, if he saw, took no heed, however, of the ac¬ cident: but still continued to make good his retreat among the thickening foliage, which he presently effected, Vicenzi, with a muttered execration upon his fail¬ ing weapon, and, it might be, a second upon the retreating bandit, then turned him sullenly, and began slowly to measure back his steps toward the castle. He had not proceeded far, bursting his way through the yielding foliage as he passed, when he suddenly found his passage intercepted by some fixed object, that was not so easily thrust aside. It was the muzzle of the
c 3
robber's carbine, firmly pointed against him, and close to his apparently-devoted bosom !
CHAP. III. Post.—Yield, or thou diest! lachimo,— Peasant, behold rny breast! Post. —No—take thy life, and mend it. Cymbeline. The prince Vicenza had been a soldier, and a brave one, and was not likely to be startled by the mere appearance of pro¬ bable danger : yet now, while gazing on the levelled carbine, presented by the known remorseless hand of Zachelli him¬ self, he felt the blood rush wildly to his heart, and his cheeks lose their accustomed shade for a paler and ghastly hue. It was not in human nature, disarmed and help¬ less as he was, to stand unaffected before such certain peril. Yet Vicenza would have scorned to beg his life of the ruffian who thus held it in his power, even if his existence had depended on the utterance
of a single word. The first sound which broke upon that awful silence, was a loud laugh of derision from the lips of Zachelli, succeeded by the following bitter taunts __« The felon—the ruffian thou wouldst trample on—at least let him live till the law lays its hold on him! Slay thy old servant, who has never injured thee!— Thanks to thy shivered steel, more ten¬ der than thy heart, he lives—but shall he shrink to spill the blood of one who thirsts for his own hunted existence ?—what had he done, save called thee benefactor? Demand thy life, or die !" " As thou wilt," said the enraged Vi¬ cenza, wildly gnashing his teeth in the impotence of his fury. ** It would ill be¬ come Vicenza to prize a life which thou hast power to destroy or to bestow. I will never ask it of thee." " Take it then unasked," said Zachelli, lowering the carbine : " yet deem not that thou owest the boon to my compassion— thou retainest thy existence simply be¬ cause it was never my intention to deprive
thee of it. Zachelli yields not to pitys although gratitude—honourable gratitude, he admits to sway his actions. I could not determine to take his life whose bene¬ volence once mended the condition of mine. I am still thy debtor, though thy pride and precipitance have deprived thee of a friend—perhaps, just now, a service¬ able one: but I never meant to dip my hand in the life-blood of Vicenza." •* Yet not on a bloodless errand earnest thou hither," remarked Vicenza, glancing significantly toward the naked poniard in his girdle, whose point was still discolour¬ ed (as it appeared to Vicenza) with fresh shed human gore. Zachelli now also glanced downward, with an unmeaning grin, upon the still dripping poniard, and exclaimed—" Ah ! my faithful Rosolia!—poor jaded beast! thy flanks have suffered for thy speed to¬ night. These crimson drops are only from the side of my sure-footed steed, now fas¬ tened yonder. Her fleetness was insuffi¬ cienttb keep pace with my wishes; and
pricking on, over stubble and through coppice, this poniard served the purposes of both lash and spur to Rosolia." " Brute !" exclaimed Vicenza, again be¬ coming indignant at the «« wild savagVy" of his companion. " He calls his misused beast, too, by the name of his tutelar saint —oh, gross impiety ! Begone, and let us part in friendship or in enmity, as thou wilt, for I can no longer endure to parley with thee." « Why, what signifies whether a man arms his hand or his heel?" grumbled Zachelli, surprised to find his conduct in this affair the subject of animadversion. '* Then, with respect to the other matter of offence, the beast is not misused; and for making so bold with her name, the worthy saint Rosolia (to the support and splendour of whose shrines I yearly con¬ tribute, as a good Christian ought) will, I doubt not, pardon me. But tliis comes of my unwonted speed to serve thee, and such is the gratitude of patriotic princes! yet there was once a time when the de-
spised Zachelli, if he brought tbee tidings of the count Castelli's schemes*—" ** Ha f what of him ?" now exclaimed Vicenza, with sudden earnestness. *' Hast thou then brought me tidings of the count Castelli ? 1 had forgot—indeed, I am to blame; but, Zachelli, the time is still, and cannot pass away, at which he who brings me news of aught pertaining to the count Castelli will ever be a welcome messenger. Heed not that rash demeanour—old and faithful servant, as thou hast proved thy- self—which, thou knowest, is natural to me j but let this weighty purse procure my pardon for having thus causelessly up¬ braided thee." Zachelli turned not towards him, but took the purse, which Vicenza dropped into his wallet: the chink of the metal, however, seemed somewhat to revive his good humour, and he appeared about to communicate something, when the impa¬ tience of Vicenza once more interrupted him. « I had hoped tlie disabled libertine
would long ere this have sunk quietly into his graved continued the prince, while a gleam of joy shot athwart his dark coun¬ tenance at the bare suggestion of his fan¬ cy, *' to the wliich this arm had smoothed, and, it might be, accelerated his passage. Yet he wronged not me—I was only the unconscious instrument selected, by an offended Deity, for his punishment— though the malignant enmity preserved towards mine, since the affair between us, now seventeen years ago, justifies my pre¬ sent hatred to his family. But, alas! Cas* telli is still living, while she for whom I fought—-but time should mellow afflic¬ tion, and teach us to forget calamity. Yet never shall expire my hatred, and enmity, to the accursed house of Castelli! Say- speak—hast thou aught to communicate to me which I may possibly wrest to the disadvantage, or destruction, of my mortal enemy ?—aught respecting the hated count Castelli?" " Respecting his son, don Caesario, I have," said Zachelli, sulkily. « But first
summon thy patience to the hearing of it, and promise to believe implicitly all I shall n&rrate." f * What surety have I that you will not deceive me?" asked Vicenza, surprised and hesitating. " My honour—my known gratitude," answered the roused bandit: " and the zeal with which I shali perform a service for which I have been already thus nobly paidi" Here he exhibited the purse, and added—** But above all, the assurance that thou mayest, even at this moment, receive a damning proof of my assertions." " I hesitate no longer," said Vicenza, hurriedly—*' I know thee faithful to my interest What is it thou hast to dis¬ close ?—keep me no longer in suspense, I charge thee." " Thou art impatient," now replied Za¬ chelli, " and, I grant, not more so than the occasion warrants. Attend, then, to the tale—I will not deviate even a single hair from truth. Thou knowest my mode of life, and that I am necessarily often on
the watch for straggling passengers, gene¬ rally selecting those for plunder whose loss would create least noise in the neigh¬ bourhood. Five nights successively, while holding my quiet watch, I saw the only son of Castelli, don Cassario, urge his tired steed, as if bent on some pleasing enter¬ prise, in the direction of Vicenza castle; and as often, ere the break of daylight, witnessed his return. The sixth night, I quitted my silent ambush, and followed him unobserved. The road was winding, and often intersected by patches of brush¬ wood, which rendered it difficult to pur¬ sue without attracting his notice: but his light habit, and the plume he wore, en¬ abled me to keep him in view. Enough— I chased him hither, saw him dismount, and, as I half suspected, approach the win¬ dow of Victoria's chamber ------" " Slave! villain !—would he rob me of my child!" exclaimed Vicenza, almost suf¬ focated by his excessive emotion. " Silence—and attend the sequel^" said the robber, calmly. ** I dismounted too,
and stealing cautiously beneath the shade of th« closely-twining branches, saw Vic- toria issue from her chamber, and greet with a smile of welcome the son of your great enemy. I, creeping nearer still, overheard their conversation—saw them embrace--*—— M ** Peace, wretch! for now thou liest," again exclaimed Vicenza, furiously: (i it is not possible that the daughter of Vi¬ cenza could thus salute the son of her fa¬ ther's foe—even were it probable, under any circumstances, that she should make clandestine assignations with a moonlight lover* Yet must I think of thee more charitably than to suppose that thou hast wittingly deceived me—thou wert, doubt- lessj deceived thyself. Thou hast dream¬ ed of this—and waking circumstance con¬ curring in some sort with the creations of fancy, hath stamped it on thy mind as a reality which is but a delusion. It can¬ not be but that thy fears are visionary." * I have spoken nought save what I
witnessed^ said Zachelli, still unruffled, w nor have uttered all yet that I know.** " Proceed then," said Vicenza* while yet his pale lips quivered in the vain ef¬ fort to suppress a smile of incredulity, so strongly now was he impressed with the belief that Zachelli was labouring under some delusion. " Thou hast permission to proceed." «• This night again," said Zachelli, with unabated firmness—" this very night, I again pursued him hither unobserved. I watched him dismount, and saw the lady of his love—Vicenza's supposed immacu¬ late and duteous daughter—waiting to receive him in the balcony of her cham¬ ber. I sped to acquaint you with the circumstance. On hearing my private signal given as wont beneath the window of your chamber, you, indeed, came forth* and joined me; and that you knew not sooner of my business is no fault of minei But it is not now too late—you may yet receive ample evidence of their stolen as¬ signations "
V^ficenza actually trembled w£th anxi- ety„as^ now seized the rude hand of the triumphant bravo, and grasped it eagerly in his own.-—** How?—by what means, goo# Zachelli?" he demanded.—"You shall direct me how to obtain this ample— this glorious satisfaction." *' Be patient," said the provoking ban- dit 3 still preserving his perfect composure of mien and countenance.—" As we pass¬ ed just now within sight cf the balcony, I observed—although thou sawest it not— this favoured lover enter for security the apartment of his condescending mistress, There* concealed from every obtrusive eye, even at this very moment—start not, prince—don Caesario exults at the soft stratagem of confiding beauty, and revels in the smiles of thy Victoria! This is no idle tale of a fawning menial resolved to obtain the favour of his lord. I beheld him enter her chamber—hs hath not yet issued thence—the proof therefore is easy-—" " And must be no less suddenly obtain¬ ed/ 9 said Vicenza; " in failure, Zachelli—in
failure whereof, not all the service thou hast heretofore done me shall suffice to screen thee from my awakened vengeance P* «• You forget, prince," returned Zachelli, again bridling indignantly, " that in an affair of that kind my arm is as skilful as yours—the mountain robber equal to the patriot prince. But let us leave this futile wrangling, or, at least* postpone it till a fitter period. I am your friend, as it were, by very instinct; and as instinctively the enemy of your house's foe, the count Cas¬¬ telli. Follow me, therefore, and the proof you desire shall soon be presented to your aching sight. Follow—but mark! let prudence guide your actions: on him let your wrath fall, if it requires a victim— but respect the safety and honour of your child." " Lead on P exclaimed Vicenza, already in anticipation viewing the writhings of the slaughtered stripling. " Proceed! I need not thy counsel to direct my actions." " I do not counsel thee not to slay," ob¬ served Zachelli, as he turned toward the
castle, ^ but rather to slay wisely. Cassa- tIo is worthy of thy blade, or min e i" ' « Nd \ I command thee, touch Mm not,** said Vicenza, haughtily: ** he shall fall only by Vicenza's vengeful arm, I seek no aid to sacrifice a mere baby antagonist, nor needed any to subdue even his abler sire. Remember, I command you." "I shall obey/' said Zachelli, without hesitation, yet seeming to wonder that an old^ practitioner like himself, so skilful in flie trade of murder, should be thus re¬ quired to hold himself unemployed. In another moment, the dark forms of the prince Vicenza, and the wily bandit, were seen proceeding cautiously, yet swift¬ ly, through the thick branches, toward the steps which conducted to Victoria's chamber. A stillness the most profound reigned over the whole surrounding scene, as they drew near, with silent and stealthy pace, to the jessamine-covered stairs which now Zachelli intimated (by gestures only) Caesario had ascended. Not a leaf stirred, save on some solitary branch unavoidably
| shaken in their passage; and even the ad- I jacent flowers seemed to droop their heads I despondingly, as if ashamed and sorrowful I at the guilty progress of these determined I violators of love's hallowed sanctuary. | The silver moon, now high in the deep : i blue vault of heaven, appeared even to ^ grow paler as the pair approached the bal- | cony: all things seemed to partake in the 1 solemn interest of that important momeut, I and anxiously to await the catastrophe. I It was, in truth, the deep midnight of all | animated creation—the very hush of na- I ture—how soon to be broken by the ila- I mour of discord, the wailings of beauty, -: and the screams of death!
CHAP. IV. —__ ----------- Grieved I, 1 had but one ? Chid I ibr that at frugal nature's frame ? Oh, one too much b}* thee! Why had I one? Why ever wast thou lovely in my eyes? SlIAKESPKARr. Having gained the window of his daugh¬ ter's apartment, the prince Vicenza, still pursued closely by Zachelli, paused ere he burst the door, to listen attentively, and obtain if possible a glimpse of the in¬ terior. The buzz of voices from within, however, alone saluted his ears, raised scarcely above a whisper, and of which he could gather no distinct syllable; although one of them, he thought, resembled in tone that of his beloved Victoria: but thrusting his head presently through the interwoven wreaths of honeysuckle which partially covered the casement, what a scene presented itself to his startled sight! There sat the son of his direst enemy, don
Csesario, whom Vicenza knew instantly from the likeness he bore to his detested parent, though he had never beheld him before that memorable moment, in com¬ pany with his own unduteous child—the daughter of his affection—the pride and joy of his existence! The arm of Cassa¬ rio reposed, with seeming tenderness, around her lovely waist, and their inter¬ course appeared perfectly confidential and unrestrained—so entirely had the zealous lover succeeded in calming the well- grounded apprehensions of his mistress. The story of Zachelli was then, indeed, no fiction, whom yet Vieenza could have felled lifeless to the ground, for even be¬ coming thus the witness of his degrada¬ tion through the base conduct of his dar¬ ling child. Contenting himself, however, with simply darting a fierce glance of in¬ telligence toward the exulting bravo, the prince rushed wildly past him, and burst into the chamber. A loud and sudden shriek from the vol. i. v
alarmed Victoria, succeeded by a heavy fall on the floor of the apartment, announ¬ ced that to her, at least, the terrors of this dreaded scene were already closed-—she was no longer conscious of the full horror of her situation. Insensibility had shroud¬ ed her, for a too transient period, with its friendly veil: the first glimpse of her frown¬ ing parent had deprived her of sensation, and stretched her at his feet unconscious as the ground she lay upon. Meantime, not without considerable confusion, which, however, he strove most determinedly to suppress, or to conceal, did don Cassario stand before the enraged father of his Vic¬ toria, and his own sire's once successful antagonist. It might be that the convic¬ tion of having, in some degree, justly of¬ fended the prince Vicenza by his own dis¬ ingenuous conduct, in thus seducing his daughter into a clandestine intercourse, tended chiefly to produce this visible con¬ fusion : but, whatever its origin, it is cer¬ tain, fear had no share in the present sen¬ sations of don Caesario. The momentary
pause that succeeded the shudden shriek and fall of Victoria, was speedily broken by Vicenza, who exclaimed—" Draw, pre¬ sumptuous boy ! draw, and defend thyself —prepare to receive, from an injured fa¬ ther's arm, the chastisement thou hast dared thus rashly to provoke." " My father shrunk not from the con¬ test," said the stripling, boldly, " though even the prince Vicenza was his oppo¬ nent; nor will his son be backward to pro¬ tect his life, his mistress, and his honour." " Boy !" reiterated Vicenza, in a con¬ temptuous tone, " thy honour is already forfeited. Have I not found thee, like a dangerous robber, hidden in my house ?" " With my sword I will redeem it, then," replied the youth, courageously, now seeming equally impatient for the threatened combat. The weapon of Caesario already gleam¬ ed drawn in his hand, while Zachelli stood a silent spectator of the scene, as if pleased with the expectation of speedily witness- d 2
ing the approaching conflict. It was not until now that the prince Vicenza, clap¬ ping his hand to his side and grasping the empty scabbard, recollected the loss of his faithless weapon. Disappointed in the expectations of the fiery soldier, at that critical moment, still the policy of the wily statesman forsook not prince Vicenza. Without a single word of comment on the absence of his shivered /eapon, which Caesario indeed had failed to notice, he waved his hand haughtily, and resumed, in a softened tone—" But no—too much of the blood of thy kindred is on my hand already," he exclaimed: " no drop of thine shall be added to augment the stain. I will not dip my steel again in native gore, however great may have been my provo¬ cation, or however merited may appear thy chastisement. To him above, who will one day humiliate the accursed be¬ trayer of innocence, and to thy own up¬ braiding conscience. I commit thy punish¬ ment. Begone, perfidious as thou art! depart in safety: but at thy peril, youth,
be again within the precincts of Vicenza's habitation. My rage might not permit thee a second time to escape with impunity." " I scorn thy lenity," replied Caesario, indignantly, " and thy pretended forbear¬ ance, and defy thee to the combat!" " My pity for thy youth hath overcome my resentment," said Vicenza, with dig¬ nity, " and turned my reluctant weapon from thy breast. But provoke me not to further colloquy, lest my just indignation overleap the bounds I have prescribed to it, and demand thee a sacrifice to my wounded honour. Thy path is open— choose it speedily, and begone! she whom thy presence here hath, indeed, rendered desolate, now requires assistance." " It is true," sighed Caesario, casting a rueful glance toward the still insensible Victoria; " and to thy care, perhaps, it is meet that I now resign her: but remem¬ ber, prince! that we shall meet again.—My adored Victoria!" he continued, kneeling for a moment over the unconscious form
of Ms mistress, « not long shall be our separation. Soon—soon shall yonder shin¬ ing moon, the faithful lover's lamp and idol, witness our reunion Over thy be¬ loved form, nature's purest model of per¬ fection, here I swear *■ " '* Profane not, serpent! with thy un¬ hallowed touch, even the inanimate body of Vicenza*s erring daughter," exclaimed the prince, highly exasperated, perceiving that Caesario was about to raise the unre¬ sisting Victoria, " lest I repent of my re¬ lenting mood, and kill thee for thy auda¬ city ! A word of mine and thou art but worthless dust, more lifeless than the form thou gazest on! Oh, begone! avoid me —while yet compassion pleads within my bosom, that I may spare thee to the world and to thy parents!" Don Caesario made no answer: but cast¬ ing another lengthened glance of affection upon the hapless Victoria, and hurling his glove in defiance to Vicenza, strode out of the apartment, and down the steps of the balcony. A faint neigh seemed to direct
him to where his favourite steed was se¬ curely fastened, and a few minutes served him to gain the grove, where every thing appeared precisely as he had left it scarcely an hour before. He mounted in silence, with a heavy sigh, and after gazing for some minutes upon the castle he had quit¬ ted, perhaps for ever (for Caesario doubted not that the prince would immediately re¬ move Victoria to some distant, and still more secluded, habitation), struck pen¬ sively into the wild road that conducted toward the palazzo of the count Castelli. As soon as he was gone, and ere yet he had disappeared among the orange trees, whence he loosened his steed, Zachelli ad¬ vanced to the prince Vicenza, and de¬ manded—" Shall I pursue him? You commanded me to remain neuter, during your conference—but he is yet in sight One stroke of this (showing his poniard), and your eyes shall behold the last strug¬ gle of the young snake that has wounded you." " Curse on my worthless blade!" mut-
tered Vicenza. " But within my castle's precincts, Zachelli, now it may not be. I have given, as it were, a sort of pledge for his security, and besides^—but see, my child needs assistance. Base, degenerate girl! yet still she is my daughter—my own beloved Victoria! She revives— away, Zachelli! for thou must not be seen here, and her attendants would not fail to recognise thee. Yet to-morrow night, be¬ neath the window of my sleeping-cham¬ ber, as was formerly thy wont, neglect not again to meet me—true hast thou spoken, old and faithful friend! I may yet have further occasion for thy services." " Speak but the word," said Zachell> fervently, " and my keen dagger— »—" " I thank thee," said Vicenza, interrupt¬ ing him* " but my mind is bewildered now. For the present begone." Donna Victoria now indeed opened her eyes, and Zachelli hastily retreated, while Vicenza, in sullen silence, strode across the room to summon the necessary attendants. .This done, he returned to gaze once more
on his disobedient child—it was only to gaze, for his lips refused to utter a syllable. The trembling Victoria failed not to read in his stern countenance the immutable resolve of his mind—a resolve which doom¬ ed her to eternal wretchedness—never to forego one particle of his deadly hatred to Castelli, or sanction any future intercourse with the object of her choice. There was more expressed in the dark writhing of his troubled brow even than this, had cir¬ cumstances permitted her to scrutinize it more particularly. What too was become of her lover?—for don Caesario, or any trace of what had probably befel him, she looked around the now lighted apartment in vain. It is no marvel that the spirits of Victoria were again unable to sustain the shock of these combined sources of ter¬ ror—her father's awful frown—her lover's probable destiny, and her own certain mi¬ sery. Her brain grew bewildered by the evil suggestions of her own fearful fancy : she burst from her attendants, and striving d 3
to clasp the knees of her frowning sire, ere he quitted the apartment again fell heavily and motionless at his feet.
CHAP. V. He parted frowning from rae, as if ruin Leap'd from bis eyes: ao looks the chafed tion Upon the daring huntsman that has galled him ; Then makes him nothing. Shakespeare. On the recovery of donna Victoria a second time from lier swoon, she found herself surrounded by her attendants only, prince Vicenza having quitted the apartment. Various had been the conjectures of her women, during her transient insensibility, as to the cause of this unexpected scene; and as numerous were the questions put to her, on the appearance of the first flut¬ tering symptoms of reanimation exhibited in her altered countenance. To these how¬ ever she prudently declined to reply, even had her yet insufficient strength enabled
her to do so; and presently intimating her wish that all except Biondella, the most favoured assistant of her toilet, should re¬ tire, the chamber was speedily cleared of these chattering abigails. As soon as they were gone, the distressed daughter of Vi¬ cenza gave vent to her sorrow in a flood of tears: then, suddenly endeavouring to suppress her emction, she began to inter¬ rogate her sole remaining attendant re¬ specting the demeanour of her angry sire, when he quitted the apartment.—** Ah ? wherefore was he thus anxious to be gone?" she exclaimed; " alas! I know I have deeply offended him—there was a time my noble father would not have shunned his guilty, penitent child. How looked he? —what said he?—Speak, Biondella, for I am on the rack to hear ?" " Why, bless me! signora," said the talkative Biondella, not a whit behind her disappointed companions in loquacity, " what can have put the good prince into such a dismal mood ? He rolled his eyes so despondingly methought on each of us,
as we entered, and then turned them up to the ceiling—then east them down again so sorrowfully, that I am sure something terrible must have happened. Then when you sunk down lifeless at his feet, he groan¬ ed so heavily, and looked so sad, that my heart ached for him—but he still spoke nothing." " Not a word even of compassion for his poor Victoria!" exclaimed her broken¬ hearted mistress. " Oh! Biondella, I have displeased him grievously—but did he, indeed, say nothing ?—no prayer for the recovery of his lost unfortunate child ?— no parting blessing on his beloved Vic¬ toria ?" " Not a syllable of that kind that I heard, signora," returned the surprised Biondella. " It is true, he muttered some¬ thing, in a sort of whisper, as he closed the door, but the words appeared of a far different import, and not meant for me to hear." " Ah! perhaps, then, on that whisper de¬ pends my whole future destiny," exclaim-
ed Victoria. " Good Biondella! keep not from me an instant—let me know my doom!" " Troth, signora, as far as my simple knowledge can assist you to discover it, you are welcome," said Biondella, cheer¬ fully : " but I fear you will find my in¬ formation very insufficient for your pur¬ pose. After gazing vacantly for a little while upon the means we adopted for your restoration, the prince, your father, turned suddenly on his heel, and quitted the chamber. Just ere he closed the door furiously, however, I distinctly heard him murmur—' Accursed necessity! but my mind's resolved—it shall be so!' This is all I have to communicate, and I would, for your satisfaction, it were more. Mean¬ time, when it shall please you not to deem me impertinent, I mean to entreat some further elucidation of the cause of his wrath, and your own present condition." " My faithful Biondella," said Victoria, fervently—" for I know thou wilt prove faithful, and that is my only consolation
now—thou shalt not ask in vain. Had I trusted thee sooner, thy assistance, it is probable, might have availed me much— thy counsel more—-nay, perhaps, would even have averted my destruction. But, alas! Victoria is a wretch who has deceiv¬ ed even thee." " What mean you, signora?" asked Biondella, increased astonishment visible in her countenance. " Undone! undone—lost, ruined, and urdone!" exclaimed the unhappy Victo- > «, now beating her hopeless bosom, as the whole tide of her misery seemed anew to rush on her remembrance. " Doomed to wither beneath the weighty burthen of blighted love, and drag its cruel chain, without sharing its enjoyments—my sire's affection estranged from me for ever—. my reputation forfeited — perhaps, too, Caesario murdered! Oh! is it possible Victoria can survive ?—or should she, in¬ deed, continue to exist in this proud world pleased with her published shame, were it not better to fill a quiet tomb, than en-
dure such dreadful humiliation she will not survive! He whose society alone could have imparted a charm to her now desolate existence—he, perhaps, is slain— slain by her angry sire, and Victoria her¬ self the fatal lure which inveigled him to destruction! Caesario! ah, Csesario!" " Caesario! the son of the count Cas¬ telli !" exclaimed Biondella, with a look of horror. " Can it be possible?—did not my ears deceive me ?" " It is I who have deceived thee hither¬ to, Biondella," replied her weeping mis¬ tress, " nor thee alone—I have deceived the hopes of all. But listen. Now that we are unheard by any, save those good angels who assist the stratagems of de¬ spairing lovers, for thou knowest, Bion¬ della, the last new volume my father brought me from Messina assures us there are many such, to make some atonement for my past neglect of thee, I will narrate the whole story of my hapless love, and this night's sorrowful catastrophe. It is
possible some gentle spirit may kindle a thought to inspire me yet with hope." " True, signora," returned her now- complaisant auditor: " for, I believe, that sometimes even in the last extremity ------" " And, Biondella, relieve me first from the weight of this massy necklace," added Victoria—" these bracelets, too—they are so heavy, their weight is cumbersome to me. But the gold is pure, and the work¬ manship exquisite—wear them thyself in future, Biondella, for thy mistress's sake." After this prefatory arrangement, ex¬ tremely welcome to Biondella, donna Vic¬ toria with somewhat more composure pro¬ ceeded, after the fashion of heroines of ro¬ mance " from time immemorial," to make a confidant of her attendant. Leaving them, therefore, to the free discussion of Victoria's schemes and wishes, in no way differing from those which generally en¬ gage the attention of young ladies on si¬ milar occasions, we shali return to accom¬ pany the rude bandit 3 Zachelli, on his road toward the mountains.
Having mounted (as he conceived) his favourite steed, Rosolia, Zachelli soon pricked his way through the surrounding orange trees, and presently cleared the do¬ main immediately pertaining to the castle of Vicenza. From some cause or other, however, his courser seemed less willing than usual to pursue the wonted route, a circumstance which occasioned him much astonishment, and some trouble. After a little space, notwithstanding, he found himself quietly jogging in the deep hoi- low, washed by the winter torrents, which conducted to the wild retreat at present occupied by his band; though still he thought the pace of his favourite, Rosolia, somewhat less steady than usual. Here, then, the rugged Zachelli found leisure for rumination on the events just descri¬ bed, and accordingly began to exercise his cogitative faculties without restraint. The* bent and issue of his meditations may be sufficiently gathered from the following characteristic soliloquy.—" Well, my jaunt to-night has proved a bloodless excursion,"
thus began tbe rough moralizer^-" yet wherefore need I repine ? The reward has beeri the more easily earned. It is not for men of my trade to sicken at the sight of blood, but saint Rosolia knows, I would rather at any time that my hands were free from it. The younker though had not been suffered to escape So easily, but that the bladeless scabbard would have thrown ri¬ dicule upon its wearer—the blade, too, bro¬ ken in a furious thrust aimed at the bosom xrf Zachelli! That is a hard recollection to stifle so soon, but gold—steady! Ro¬ solia—gold can cover all. The remem¬ brance, too—steady! jade—:>f his former kindness—steady!—Eh! what! how!" cried the bandit, now suddenly discovering his mistake. " I am tolerably mounted, it is true, but surely not upon Rosolia. Aha ! don Caesario di Castelli—wouldst thou fain trick the old fox out of his favourite steed ? —and hadst nearly effected it too! But time enough yet to prevent thee. Softly! wheel to the right-—yonder lies the track Caesario must pursue. Now forward, Za-
chelli! forward. It can be no hard matter to overtake him, for Rosolia goes not well under the weight of a stranger; and, no doubt, the fire of his affection hath so blinded his eyesight, that the youth be¬ strode the wrong steed unwittingly. The course of this blear-eyed lover must be in¬ tercepted—speed! speed!" Thus saying, the enraged Zachelli al¬ tered his course, and increasing the speed of his charger (no despicable breast—for don Csesario took care to be well mounted) expected speedily to obtain a glimpse of the retreating lover, resolving at least to rate him soundly for giving him so much trouble. The conjecture of Zachelli was, indeed, true. Don Caesario, bewildered by passing circumstances, aided by the gloom of the spot whence he loosed his steed, had really mounted that of the freebooter in mistake, and had not even yet discover¬ ed his error. After riding hard for a some¬ what longer space than he had reckoned on, Zachelli, however, caught a glimpse of the light habit worn by the thoughtless lover
(I would advise all lovers bent on mid¬ night perambulations never to wear a pale- coloured dress), and accordingly proceeded with redoubled caution towards an angle of the road, every turn of which was well known to the freebooter, whence he might dart on the unsuspecting Caesario sudden¬ ly and at advantage.
CHAP. VI. Ha! I am beset, and live but to revenge me! Southern. Don Caesario was proceeding at a tole¬ rably swift pace, but apparently lost in meditation on the present untoward as¬ pect of his destiny, as far as regarded his passion for the lovely daughter of Vicen¬ za, when his career was suddenly arrested by a dark figure on horseback, whom he yet failed to recognise, seizing his bridle. Ere the startled youth had time to draw his weapon, a pistol was presented by the
ruffianly intruder to his breast, and the words " Stand or die !" were uttered in a hoarse stentorian voice. In a few seconds, a perfect recollection of the form before him flashed upon his mind, and he ima¬ gined himself indeed doomed to embrace the latter alternative—it was the same who had accompanied Vicenza across the lawn to the grove of limes, and afterwards to the chamber of Victoria. Resolving, however, to sell his life as dearly as pos¬ sible, he deliberately drew his rapier, and exclaimed—" What wouldst thou, stran¬ ger ? If thou hast any errand it behoves me to hear, deliver it:—if not, as thou valuest thy own safety, stand aside, and intercept not my path, for I will neither stand at thy bidding, nor, so easily as thou expectest, fall." " Oh brave ! that's my trusty Rosolia!" said Zachelli calmly, clapping the sides of his pleased courser, regardless of the fiery speech of don Caesario: " trusty and fleet in peril, and matchless for docility—thou art mine again!"
. ** Thou dost profane the name of the worthy saint," observed Caesario, crossing himself devoutly, " by suffering it thus irreverently to pass thy unholy lips." " Thou liest—most thieving hypocrite!" was the uncourteous answer of Zachelli to this well-meant admonition. " Sayest thou so ?—lie thou there then, wretch ! till thy tone be as humble as thy posture," exclaimed Caesario, wrenching a huge pistol from the unwary bandit, and striking him with a violence which felled him to the ground. Zachelli discharged another, as he fell, at the bosom of the spirited youth; but the ball only perfo¬ rated a part of his dress, and sped whist¬ ling through the thick foliage which over¬ spread the scene of contest. Zachelli, who never before missed his aim, too long inured to these desperate rencounters to be flurried by such an accident, saw with the rapidity of lightning the full extent of his danger, and gave himself over for lost, resolving to die courageously, when Caesario continued—" Demand thy life!"
he cried, in a threatening tone, " or ex¬ pect never to rise again." " I do beg thee to spare my life," now grumbled the prostrate ruffian, " since it is in thy power; and a time may come, perhaps, at which Zachelli may amply compensate thee for the boon. Should my life be spared, look to receive my gra¬ titude. Yet not my will, but—as thou art the victor—thine be done upon me." " Art thou Zachelli ?" demanded Ca> sario, with astonishment. " I am," said the robber, coolly. " And in secret communion with the prince Vicenza, scarcely an hour ago!" murmured the alarmed Caesario, in a tone wholly inaudible to the wretch at his feet " Dost thou shudder at my name, youth?" asked Zachelli, hoarsely—" trem* ble not. I came not hither to slay, though I confess that I this night have done thee evil. But you rode away on my favourite steed, Rosolia—I followed you only to procure an exchange—here is thine. Am
I at liberty to rise, and pursue my jour¬ ney ?" ** The brute is valueless to me," remarked Caesario," but thy brutish demeanour hath occasioned our difference. Darest thou disclose to me the whole substance of thy conference, and history of thy connection, with the prince Vicenza, as the price of thy otherwise forfeited existence?" " Betray my trust .'—divulge the secrets of my patron! Never!" said Zachelli, firmly. " There is no pardon, then, for such as thee, who never hast shewn mercy ! 5? cried Caesario, and fired instantly. Zachelli, however, aware of his intention from his words, had suddenly twisted himself from his former position, and now lay totally concealed from view by the lank grass which grew by the road side. All, there¬ fore, was vacancy where a moment before had lain the suppliant robber—even the bright flash failed to afford the least glimpse of his person, and the ball spent its fury harmlessly, burying itself deep in
the yielding earth. Caesario saw that his fire had not taken effect, and instantly clapped spurs to his steed, hoping to be far on his course before the robber could remount, from whom, he now knew, he could expect no mercy. Rosolia (from whose back the youth bad never dis¬ mounted) obeyed with alacrity the painful signal, and sprung forward with the speed of lightning toward the palazzo of the count Castelli. Notwithstanding the velocity of his fleet-limbed courser, he had not proceeded far, ere a report behind him announced that Zachelli had discharged his carbine; and presently some horrible execrations, distant, it is true, but distinctly heard, convinced him that he was still pursued. These, however, grew fainter as he pro¬ ceeded, and soon ceased entirely—an issue which may be fairly ascribed to the supe¬ riority of Rosolia over the steed of his pursuer, or her better acquaintance with the difficult, uneven ground. At length, VOL. L E
don Caesario, though fatigued and rited, just as the rosy-hued streaks of day¬ light began to enliven the east, arrived at his dwelling in safety. A different scene was, on the succeed¬ ing night, exhibited at the castle of Vi¬ cenza. In a small square room, rather de¬ serving the appellation of a closet, were seated three mysterious-looking person¬ ages, appareiitly engaged in close consul¬ tation on some affair of correspondent im¬ portance, The curtains were closely drawn, and a single lamp stood on the table, whose feeble flame was scarcely sufficient to dis¬ sipate the darkness. It was not yet the " noon of night," although the universal stillness which prevailed throughout the mansion, and seemed to extend over the whole surrounding country, proclaimed the mid hour of nature's rest to be not far distant. In the countenance of one of the persons thus gloomily assembled, were distinctly to be traced the commanding lineaments, and supercilious expression, of the haughty Sicilian noble. This was the
prince Vicenza, though every distinction and ornament pertaining to his rank, ex¬ cept his dignified mien, and majestic but sorrowful countenance, appeared to have been carefully laid aside. But both his companions seemed (and truly seemed) of a far different cast. One of these was, in¬ deed, no other than Zachelli himself: the other was a domestic of the prince's house¬ hold, named Beltramo, whom Vicenza had newly admitted to his confidence. This worthy triad appeared to have been already long debating on some secret, settled pro¬ ject ; and were in reality only waiting un¬ til the castle bell announced the appointed hour of twelve, to proceed in the execu¬ tion of their deliberately-concerted, cruel purpose. Few minutes elapsed, ere the prince Vicenza started suddenly from his reverie, for the deep bell smote his ear, with its " iron tongue and brazen mouth," tolling the dull hour of midnight. His compa¬ nions arose also, and Vicenza strode has- E 2
lifta,,;,,.- i- „ ,^_ ,
tily to the window of the apartment. Be¬ neath it, appeared an attendant advancing, with two led palfreys, each evidently ca¬ parisoned for the reception of a female ri¬ der; while at a little distance were also stationed two ready-saddled horses, of a statelier breed, one destined for Beltramo, the other for the prince himself. The steed of Zachelli (not Rosolia) appeared also fastened in the vicinity. These pre¬ parations spoke but too truly the nature of the expedient prince Vicenza had de¬ cided on adopting, as the surest means of putting an end to the intercourse of Cae¬ sario and Victoria. In brief—Victoria, and her chosen attendant, Biondella, were to be conveyed privately to Messina that very night; and thence to embark, with¬ out delay, for Naples. The infamous no¬ toriety acquired recently by Zachelli, ren¬ dered his employment at this period, in such a service, at once imprudent, and even perilous ; and it thence became ab¬ solutely necessary to entrust at least one of the domestics with this secret determi-
nation, who might supply the place of the too-depraved bandit in assisting its execu¬ tion. Beltramo had been selected for this delicate office, who, accordingly, after pro¬ fessing his willingness and gratitude for the preference conferred on him, under¬ took to provide for their secret and safe conveyance to Naples; and Vicenza him¬ self, unable to endure the thought of a separation from her whom he now looked upon as his only child, even thoughtless and disobedient as she had proved, resolv¬ ed to accompany them thither. And now, after casting a significant look toward Beltramo, did the proud Vicenza prepare to enter his daughter's sleeping chamber, who as yet knew nothing of the sudden change designed for her. At part¬ ing, he wrung cordially the hand of Za¬ chelli, who now likewise prepared to be gone, and even condescended to compli¬ ment him on the manner in which he had anciently acquitted himself in his service. Zachelli replied by an awkward avowal of pleasure at having thus far given satisfac-
tion to his munificent employer, and a pretty broad hint of his determination speedily to execute the new task assigned him. Vicenza frowned, then bit his lip severely, and, as he left the apartment to arouse Victoria, said—" I would not that my soul be stained with other blood than that of my country's enemies—but hath he not sought the dishonour of mine house?—doth he not still seek to disgrace it, by an alliance at once degrading and repulsive to me? Then let him sleep in peace, that Vicenza may preserve his own tranquillity—that I may still boast the unsullied possession of my dignity, and my child. Away, Zachelli! look thou suffer him not again to escape. I am un¬ willing thus to charge even thee with the commission of dark and solitary murder for my sake; but doth not necessity com¬ pel me to it? since the death-knell of Cae¬ sario can alone be the signal for the return of Vicenza and his child to Sicily." At the conclusion of this speech, Za¬ chelli grinned significantly—pointed to his
poniard, and by signs promised his patron speedy intelligence of his success: while Vicenza, followed by Beltramo, departed to seek the chamber of Victoria.
CHAP. VII. One midnight Fated to th' purpose, did Antonio open The gates of Milan ; and i' th* dead of darkness The ministers for the purpose hurried thence Me, and thy crying self. Skukespfarr, It was really not without considerable re¬ luctance, that Vicenza agreed with the ready perpetrator, Zachelli, for the pro¬ jected assassination of don Caesario. One of his principal reasons for this proceeding was, that the thought of taking the bandit again with him to Naples vvas insupport¬ able to Vicenza: yet this he scarcely knew how to avoid, without exciting the jealousy, and consequent resentment, of the despe¬ rado, except by giving him other work to
perform during his absence. Thus far the scheme bid fair to succeed admirably, but the plea was too slight to be urged (even by the prince to his own conscience) as a sufficient motive for the sacrifice of a fel¬ low-creature's existence; and Vicenza felt that it was so. Yet what other means were now left him of removing the ob¬ noxious enamoured youth ? The first idea which had presented itself to his mind, that of a summary chastisement from his own hand, a string of unfortunate circum¬ stances ending in the Joss of his weapon (forgotten until the moment it was needed) had compelled him abruptly to abandon. To acquaint the count Castelli of the ex¬ istence of such an attachment on the part of his son, would probably have been a more advisable method of checking its fer¬ vour; for the count's aversion to the match, Vicenza, doubted not, would at least have equalled his own: but with the hated count Castelli, in any vein, or under any circumstances, the prince scorned to com¬ municate. Yet was it requisite that don
Csesario should be restrained from making any future professions of his affection for Victoria—an affection which (Vicenza saw good grounds for concluding) was not likely to be wholly unreturned. Influ¬ enced by these united considerations, the prince had reluctantly consented to the means of removal proposed by Zachelli, whose hatred to the young cavalier was any thing but diminished by the adven¬ ture of the preceding night: but his con¬ science failed not to prick him severely for this unjustifiable decision, in spite of his stoical determination to disregard its sting. Meantime, the trembling Victoria, who, as her stern father had already anticipated, had not retired to rest, atter ;pted not to disobey, or even to murmur at the harsh command she received, to accompany him instantly, by a private passage, to the pos¬ tern gate of the castle. Her faithful at¬ tendant, Biondella, who slept commonly in the chamber of her mistress, would fain have given a less quiet reception to the e 3
mandate; but the threats and promises of Vicenza, together with an assurance that they should not be separated, at length pacified her into submission. A close ob¬ server, too, might have discovered a con¬ siderable change in the conduct of the re¬ fractory Biondella, as soon as she found that Beltramo was also to be their compa¬ nion. A few minutes was ali they were allowed to collect such necessaries or orna¬ ments, as they could conveniently take; and even this time was grudged them by the impatient Vicenza. They were then hurried forward to their palfreys; and Vic¬ toria, weeping, bade a long adieu, as she passed, to the endeared abode of her in¬ fancy—endeared by the recollection of many hours of tranquil enjoyment, unim- bittered by a thought of sorrow such as, at the present moment, clouded her felicity. As soon as Victoria and Biondella were adjusted in their saddles, Vicenza and Bel¬ tramo mounted likewise; and, proceeding cautiously until they cleared the vicinity of the castle, every inmate of which seem-
ed buried in sleep, the whole party were speedily far on their road to Messina. We must now return, for a short pe¬ riod, to don Csesario, at the palazzo di Castelli, ere proceeding with Vicenza to the commencement of a series of adven¬ tures in the ** most romantic city in the world *." The reader must not suppose this faithful lover to have been idle during the whole of the preceding day: he was not so, though his exertions could avail nothing to prevent the departure of his mistress. However, it must be acknow¬ ledged something to have achieved, if, in that short space of time, he obtained not only information of her intended removal, but also of the route which it was resolved she should pursue, the more effectually to elude his search; and all this was dexter¬ ously accomplished by don Csesario. He had a servant of an ingenious turn of mind, named Isidore, who had long been more familiar than he often chose to
acknowledge with a domestic of the noble house of Vicenza, and high in the favour of his master—in short, no other than the trusted Beltramo himself. The clever Isidore was, accordingly, deputed by Cae¬ sario, who made him his confidant for the purpose, to ascertain what changes were likely to take place, in consequence of what had happened on the preceding night in the family of Vicenza. Beltramo, elated by his unexpected good fortune, and sud¬ den advancement to extraordinary favour, for " new honours are as heady as new wine," scrupled not to reveal to his bo¬ som friend the whole of Vicenza's hasty arrangements, as far as he knew them: for Beltramo and Isidore, as if in contra¬ distinction to their masters, had in reality long considered themselves as what the world calls bosom friends. The true rea¬ son, however, of Beltramo*s willingness thus to fall into the wishes of his wily companion, was his having been only half trusted by Vicenza. He knew there was a lover, who was at the bottom of all this
unusual bustle and mystery; but he knew not that lover was don Caesario, and hence was unaware of the full extent of the mischief he was doing. Meanwhile, the successful Isidore made the best of his way back to the overjoyed Caesario, who imme¬ diately commenced arrangements for se¬ cretly pursuing his beloved Victoria to Naples, resolving that Isidore should ac¬ company him on this adventurous expe¬ dition. The evening was delightfully fine, and the count and countess Castelli, happening to be alone, were enjoying the fresh sea* breeze from the windows of an open apart¬ ment in their palazzo, and occasionally making some mere commonplace obser¬ vation on the beauty of the scene beneath. Even this drowsy kind of conversation ap¬ peared at length to flag, for want of a sub¬ ject of sufficient interest; and several mi¬ nutes had elapsed, during which scarcely a syllable was exchanged between them. —" What is become of Caesario?" said the count at length, changing his position
with difficulty, for he was still an invalid —" and why doth he thus of late immure himself in his chamber ? Doth my boy, like his crippled sire, already shun society ? ■—but it cannot be that concealed sorrow hath induced him thus cautiously to seek seclusion, for the hand of misery, whose cold touch long since withered his father's heart, hath not yet fallen upon him. I have not seen him to-day." " He looks but palely of late," observed the countess, " and no longer visits the brook with net and line, nor threads the copse for game, as he was wont to do. It was only yesterday I heard him sigh so deeply as if wretchedness had been his birthright: but, when I questioned him, he shunned to shew the cause of his un¬ easiness. To-day he hath kept his cham¬ ber ; and when I asked Isidore of his mas¬ ter's health, his only answer- ----- but hark ! surely I hear him now ascending the stairs toward this apartment! Yes! a mother's ear is seldom mistaken—it is the footstep of Caesprio."
In another moment Caesario entered the apartment, pale, and apparently exhausted with watching, it is true, though hope and pleasure seemed once more to predo¬ minate in his countenance. He approach¬ ed the window, and, with a faint smile of recognition, seated himself silently be¬ tween his parents. The count surveyed his graceful figure, and animated counte¬ nance, with a momentary feeling of pride and admiration; they reminded him of what himself had been, during his happier days of youth, health, and sprightliness. After a brief pause, count Castelli thus ad¬ dressed his now again pensive son—" I have observed with surprise, Caesario, that you feel not the pleasure which, at your age, warmed my bosom, in pursuing such sports and recreations as the country af¬ fords, and witnessing the countless beauties of nature. Whence arises this apparent indifference to the charms every where spread around you?—and why doth Caesa¬ rio so often appear sad in the middle of
smiling luxuriance, with every wish of his heart fastidiously provided for?" " I despise not the beauties of nature," answered Caesario, this being the very op¬ portunity for forwarding his purpose the youth so fervently desired, "nor am in¬ sensible to the peculiar advantages, and enjoyments, attainable in my present si¬ tuation. I know that nature no where flourishes so gaily and luxuriantly as here. But the same scene, however superior to those we might elsewhere hope to view— I guess I but meet your wishes in speak¬ ing thus unreservedly—cannot always be pleasing. There exists naturally in the human breast a craving for variety; and after satiety we are no longer pleased with perfection itself." " Caesario would like to travel," ob¬ served the count, again changing feis po¬ sition on the sofa, and surveying the youtU anew, but without any symptoms of dis¬ pleasure at the discovery. This was the point at which Caesario had longed to arrive. He accordingly
confessed, without disguise, his disposition to travel; still carefully, however, conceal¬ ing the circumstances which had thus powerfully awakened such a truant wish in his bosom. The count still heard him without exhibiting any signs of anger; but, on the contrary, seemed rather pleased than irritated by this frank avowal of his inclinations.—" Go then, my son," he ex¬ claimed, after having patiently listened to Caesario's arguments in favour of a tem¬ porary visit to Naples; " and thy father's blessing, so long as thou continuest to merit it, shall go with thee. Myself also would accompany thee—but see!" he add¬ ed, exposing his infirmities by attempting to rise, " that adroit fiend, Vicenza, hath long ago prevented me. Oh! my son! ban to thy latest hour—ban and abhor the doubly accursed lineage, ay, even the very descendants, of Vicenza!" Don Caesario now turned paler than be¬ fore, and would have spoken something of Christian charity and forgiveness, had not the countess, his mother, interrupted and
prevented him; she knew that all endea¬ vours to soothe or divert the raging cur¬ rent of the count's resentment, would only tend to exasperate him more. He ap¬ peared to consider it his peculiar and per¬ petual privilege—-the right to heap unex¬ ampled maledictions on the whole family of Vicenza. Accordingly, Caesario, find¬ ing all resistance to his fury at present wholly useless, gladly seized the first op¬ portunity of quitting the apartment, in order to forward the preparations for his journey; resolving, at least, having thus fortunately obtained permission, to take his departure as soon as possible.
CHAP. VIII. And mounting on bis steed, he went his way, And ne'er repass'd that hoary threshold more. Byron. On retiring to his chamber, don Caesario immediately imparted the glad tidings of his speedy departure to Isidore, who, in his turn, was overjoyed at the thought of accompanying his young master. In truth, however, if seriously looked at, despite these mutual demonstrations of joy, there was little real cause for exultation in the present prospects of either: Caesario, in the first place, being wholly dependant on the will of his father for fortune, and even for daily subsistence—that father whom he vvas about, by his conduct, for ever to displease; and Isidore equally dependant on the perhaps soon to be penny less Caesario. But love is paramount to every other feol- ing, in the bosom at once dignified and
blinded by his presence; and Caesario de¬ termined, whatever might be the event, to obtain, if possible, speedy possession of his beloved Victoria. Having disposed all things in readiness for his departure, even so early as the en¬ suing morrow, if the count should permit him to leave so soon, Caesario seated him¬ self at an open lattice, and strove to be¬ guile the time (for he could not sleep) by admiring the extensive prospect his eyes now ranged over, from which his mind rambled often to compare its paler radi¬ ance with the more glowing charms of his Victoria. Again and again did he men¬ tally inquire, with true lover-like solici¬ tude—did Victoria, at that moment, gaze over the splendid scene? The broad round moon was rising majestically, and bright¬ ening every instant as it arose toward the mid heaven, gradually revealing, as its lustre became augmented, some new beau¬ ty of the surrounding landscape. There was no sound save the faint dashing of a distant waterfall, to interrupt the solemn
stillness which prevailed around; if, in¬ deed, vve except at intervals— " The tinklinga of some vigilant guitars Of sleepiess lovers to a wakeful mistress, And cautious opening of the casement, showing That he is not unheard: while her young hand, Fair as the moonlight of which it seems part, So delicately white, it trembles in The act of opening the forbidden lattice, To let in love through music, makes his heart Thrill like his lyre-strings at the sight" It was only, however, at distant inter¬ vals, from among the dwellings of the neighbouring peasantry, that even these strains occurred to break the silence. The melody, as might be expected, was often¬ times rude and dissonant in the extreme: yet distance, and the association of gentle ideas which it awakened, combined to ren¬ der it extremely delightful. Caesario heard and recognised a well-known plaintive air, awakened by some happier lover than him¬ self, and again his thoughts dwelt tenderly upon his absent mistress. Once more his eyes reverted to the sylvan scene beneath him, and wandered listlessly over its spark-
ling beauties, for mountain stream and cottage rill still glistened alluringly in the clearing moonshine, but it no longer en¬ gaged his attention as heretofore. He could no longer fix his eyes with pleasure even upon that lovely view—his heart was fixed on another, and far lovelier object. His soul was melted even to a misbecom¬ ing degree of softness by those subduing strains, rude as they were; and he could with difficulty restrain the rising tears from filling his downcast eyes. Don Cae¬ sario felt that he could bear it no longer— neither could he attempt to sleep.—" Isi¬ dore," said he, therefore, for his attendant had not yet quitted the chamber, " saddle my horse—I think I will ride to-night. The fresh air and motion, perhaps, will re¬ vive my sinking spirits." Isidore looked as if he would fain have remonstrated, knowing, as he did, how matters stood at the grand point of attrac¬ tion, to which his master, regardless of con¬ sequences, he also feared, was most likely to direct his course. After a little consi-
deration, however, he contented himself with saying—" You forget, signor, your horse is in the confounded stable of------" " I mean that which I rode home yes¬ ternight," said Caesario, pettishly. " The beast is sure-footed, and gets over the rough broken ground even more skilfully than the one I lost. I allude to the rugged passes betwixt this place, and------but no matter. Hasten, Isidore! I would mount directly." " Surely, signor," now said the cautious Isidore, " you would not think of proceed¬ ing thither to-night ? I mean to the castle of-^ -----" " Peace, Isidore! it is the anguish of thought which drives me thither," ex¬ claimed his master, motioning peevishly for him to remain silent; " and with the speed of thought I would gain the spot. But fear not thou that thy master's im¬ prudence will interfere with our future anticipated success: my vicinity to the scene of their meditated proceedings to-
night shall not be discovered. Peace, therefore, and obey." Isidore now saw that it would be use¬ less to argue the point further, and accord¬ ingly descended quietly to the stable, as commanded, and began to prepare the steed. In a few minutes, don Caesario fol¬ lowed him j having first taken the precau¬ tion to examine his pistols, which, in ad¬ dition to the slight rapier he usually wore, he now fastened securely in his belt; not having forgotten his rencounter with Za¬ chelli, the leader of the so much dreaded banditti, on the preceding night, and with reason anticipating the probability of ano¬ ther similar affair. Thus equipped, he descended with a noiseless step, as had been his custom on many a preceding oc¬ casion, to a small private portal of the pa¬ lazzo. Here he found Isidore, as usual, in attendance with his steed; and mounting in perfect silence, lest his voice should be overheard and recognised by any of the other domestics whom slumber might not yet have bound in its leaden bonds, de-
parted with caution, increasing his speed as the distance became augmented, and was soon out of sight What pen shall now describe the min¬ gled sensations, solemn, yet unaccountably pleasing, which filled the bosom of Caesa¬ rio, as he warily threaded each moonlight avenue, toward the scene so recently graced with the presence of his early—his first love ? Perhaps, even yet she might adorn it with the lustre of her beauty ; and this supposition again seemed to render it a perfect paradise in his estimation; but when the thought crossed his mind that she had most probably ceased to enliven its shades with her presence, his imagina¬ tion transformed it into a wilderness more desolate than the sand-tracts of Arabia. Meantime, the still mounting moon adorn¬ ed with her " silvery sheen" the gay flow¬ ers and foliage through which his roman¬ tic road most delightfully wound; and failed not to shed a correspondent influ¬ ence over the mind of the deeplyvenamour- VOL. i. F
ed youth. Who shall deny that there is a secret influence in that soft, tender light, which peculiarly disposes the mind to reflection ? Caesario gazed upward, until he could with Lorenzo have exclaimed— " There's not the smallest orb which thou behold'at Rut in its motion Hke an angel sings, Still quiring to the young-eyed cherubim; Such harmony is in immortal souls." This sublime consciousness, or something very much resembling it, most truly did Caesario feel, as he approached the spot of his former assignations with the then sprightly and beautiful, but now sudden¬ ly captive and forlorn Victoria. The hour of midnight was already past, ere he gain¬ ed the neighbourhood of the castle, and consequently all was silent, the travellers having taken their departure for Messina only a few short minutes before. He ad¬ vanced near enough to distinguish that the chamber formerly tenanted by Victo¬ ria was dark, and appeared deserted—a conviction which, though it could not be said to have surprised him unprepared,
made colour fade, and his heart sink heavily. He then turned his steed, and ascended to the summit of a neighbouring eminence. From the brow of this hill, looking long and earnestly in the direction of Messina, don Caesario thought he could discern four mounted figures at a consider¬ able distance, and even fancied he saw fe¬ male raiment fluttering in the breeze. While yet he gazed, the space betwixt himself and these nocturnal equestrians appeared sensibly to increase, and pre¬ sently fhe whole group entirely disappear¬ ed. Even after three of the receding party had seemed to mingle with the dusky landscape, Caesario still imagined (was it only imagination ?) that he could descry something resembling a light-co¬ loured female garb, such as he had seen worn by Victoria : but, in another instant, all was vacancy where the riders had pass¬ ed, and he found himself eventually doom¬ ed to experience all the agonies of incerti¬ tude. Long did Caesario gaze on the va- ¥ 2
cant 'space they had so recently occupied, with straining eyes, and an anxious bo¬ som : but he now gazed in vain—no fur¬ ther trace of the travellers became visible. At length, the solemn sound of the castle bell, announcing the hour of one, aroused him from his reverie: then slowly turning his horse's head, with a sigh that seemed to issue from the very bottom of his heart, he began pensively to retrace his solitary way toward the distant palazzo of' * sire. On the succeeding morning, all was bustle and confusion at the palazzo di Castelli, on account of the sudden depar¬ ture of don Caesario, who had obtained leave to set off for Naples on that very day. His own private arrangements were few, and easily made: but the grief of the domestics at losing, even for a short pe¬ riod, so kind and condescending a master, was^ perfectly uncontrollable. Each wish¬ ed personally to evince his sorrow, and Caesario was constrained to listen to a thousand circumlocutory speeches of re¬ gret for his departure, all of which he
could readily have spared. At length, the important moment came, and the young voyager entered the presence of his parents, in order to take his leave. The count now grasped him fervently by the hand, and after presenting him with a weighty purse of money, that indispens¬ able requisite for a traveller, desired him to conceal none of his adventures. Caesa¬ rio falteringly replied, that he would not (it was a falsehood, and deserved the chas^ tisement it afterwards received), and knelt to receive the farewell blessing of his father. His mother next approached him, and her tender counsel, at least, appeared to make a sensible impression on his heart. With fervency he pressed her hand to his lips, and faithfully promised to abide by her directions. In conclusion, she sub¬ joined—" Meantime, remember, my thrice duteous son! for such I know thou wilt prove—that every hour thou art tempted to prolong thy absence, thy father lan¬ guishes in solitude; and every morn thou awakenest in a foreign land, thy mother
wishes for thy presence. Forget not this, my son—but I know thou wilt not forget it!—and then, no lengthened period will be suffered to elapse ere we shall embrace again. For the present, farewell. ,, Don Caesario having thus taken leave of his affectionate parents, and received also the more troublesome adieus of the domestics, descended with a light heart to the portal, and flinging himself upon his spirited steed, once fhe property of the dreaded chief, Zachelli, departed, followed by Isidore. The day was remarkably clear and fine, and they took the beaten road to Messina, at which place they expected to arrive by sunset. And now, as they proceeded onward, Caesario involuntarily began to muse upon his present awkward situation, and future prospects. The strain of his soliloquy ran as follows.—" At length, Caesario," said he to himself, " thou art fairly cast abroad on the wide world to carve out thine own fortune—fortune ? did I say ? Alas! the first step thou must now take will go far to ruin thy fortune,
perhaps for ever. Well, then, to obtain thy mistress—ay, there lies the true mag¬ net which guides thee to-day to Messina, and wili thence attract to Naples, and afterwards Heaven alone knows whither beside. Like some worthy knight-errant of the olden time, thou hast sallied forth in quest of thy true love, but not like such with a prospect of unmingled fe¬ licity, shouldst thou happen to succeed in obtaining her: on the contrary, suppose thy mistress won, and happy in thy arms —why, the most potent obstacles to thy . worldly prosperity remain yet to be en¬ countered and overcome. The prince's scorn of thy present untitled estate, who hast nothing save thy own good sword, and the world's need of thy services, to depend on for advancement—and these, in peaceable times, are but sorry depen¬ dencies—thy own sire's inveterate hatred of his family, too, all must be vanquished, or nothing is achieved. But can Caesario any longer endure the burthen of a soli¬ tary existence, unblest with his Victoria ?
No! Then forward, Caesario, obtain the beauteous prize; and leave to chance, or rather to the, perhaps, favourable contin- gericies of some more auspicious hour, the issue of thy successful daring. Isidore," he continued, addressing his attendant aloud, " thou knowest, I think thou saidst, the quarter of the city in which my ador¬ ed Victoria is doomed, by her stern father, to reside ?" " I liave a clue may suffice to discover it, signora," answered the provident Isi¬ dore. ** It is well," observed Caesario, " and may happen to save us much trouble. Thou art a sagacious fellow, Isidore!"— and so saying he pricked forward his steed, as if already impatient to arrive at the termination of his journey. The sun was just about to sink gorge¬ ously into the magnificently-lighted straits of the Faro, as don Caesario entered the beautiful city of Messina, equally worthy (in the opinion of our young lover, who beheld it illumined by the parting radi-
ance of a gorgeous summer's sun) with its illustrious 6ister port, Palermo, of being styled the Golden Shell*. Here, much to the regret and disappointment of Cae¬ sario, they were detained some time by adverse winds. In spite of the charms of the place—the soft tints of the Faro, and the picturesque beauties of the opposite coast of Calabria, our travellers could not avoid regarding this circumstance as a heavy misfortune. Scarcely, however, had they leisure to bewail the untoward dis¬ position of the elements, when the wished- for breeze sprang up, and Caesario and Isi¬ dore embarked joyously for the place of their destination. It is now time to turn our attention al¬ together from the sombre retreat of the Castelli family, in order to pursue the course of the prince Vicenza, resolved, if possible, to secure from what he would have deemed pollution his sole remaining
f3
child; and, in a word, to transport the reader to the livelier coast of Naples. The manner in which Vicenza early de¬ voted the elder of his twin-born infants, since named Alphonsine, to the gloomy cloister, has heen already narrated. Since that period, the prince had only once be¬ held his child so rashly sacrificed to the fulfilment of a hasty and blameable vow; and it might be that some secret wish again to behold Alphonsine had assisted in prompting his sudden removal to the spot where she was now about to be for ever immured in her living tomb. For Alphonsine had not yet taken the abhor¬ red veil, to which her father's cruel oath condemned her: but the hour of her irre¬ vocable seclusion was at hand. Now for Naples.
CHAP. IX. _________________------—If in Naples 1 should report this now, would they believe me ? SHAKESrEARBi Naples! delectable, romantic Naples! How do the bosoms of all who have ever visited thee, feel warmed and elated at the magic of thy name! How do the hearts of all, whose hearts were not rendered, by sorrow or prejudice, impenetrable to thy soft attractions, exult in the cherished hope of beholding thee again! Fruitful vineyards, interspersed with lofty palaces! A genial clime productive of almost every species of delicacy! A lovely harbour- mountains and vallies covered with luxu¬ riant verdure—a cheerful, animated popu¬ lace, with a courteous and splendid nobi¬ lity ! These are among the most promi¬ nent of the countless allurements of Na¬ ples. It is true, there is a reverse to the
picture, in the overwhelming number of its lazzaroni, and other comparatively tri¬ vial inconveniences: but these defects are far outweighed by the numberless beauties of this Eden of Europe—this charming terrestrial paradise. There is no city in the world appears more beautiful, as view¬ ed from the level bosom of its deep, spa¬ cious harbour — there is no city in the world so little likely to disappoint the en¬ amoured gazer's expectations. Don Csesario and his servant arrived in this beautiful bay, after a pleasant passage, one delightful morning, just as the golden suri was about to mount the eastern hori¬ zon, which already glowed like fire, while the western side of the lovely atmosphere assumed gradually a rich purple shade. The city lay before him, like a truly mag¬ nificent amphitheatre, composed of an im¬ mense variety of churches, convents, pa¬ laces, and streets, open to the full view of the harbour: the whole most enchantingly surrounded with villages and villas, vines, olive, mulberry, and orange trees; inter-
mixed with flowers, statues and fountains, gravel-walks and arbours, terraces, and al¬ most every object that could tend to please the eye, or gratify the senses. At a distance, the view was bounded by lofty wooded mountains, on the north side; and on the south, ranged over the calm bay, spotted with beautiful islands. On the west, extends the celebrated grotto of Pausilippo; while toward the golden east, stretch those fertile plains which con¬ duct the eye to Portici, and Mount Vesu¬ vius. The most refined voluptuary might have viewed that morning scene, and ima¬ gined nothing wanting, further than it ex¬ hibited, to complete his happiness. No wonder if Caesario admired this cap¬ tivating display of loveliness, and forgot his anxiety for a transient period, in the magnificence that surrounded him. But what was his added wonder and delight, when, on looking upwards, a still more beautiful reflection of these enchanting objects flashed upon his sight, apparently floating in the glowing azure, each tinged
with additional of and splen¬ dour ! This appearance, he knew, was the effect of a mere natural phenomenon, often witnessed also in the straits of his own loved Sicily; but no where beheld to ex¬ hibit so close a resemblance of substantial nature, or at other times, as it were, almost supernaturally adorned with such a fan¬ tastic brilliancy as at Naples. The objects thus represented, as if reflected in a mighty mirror, consisted of hanging gardens, cas¬ tles, palaces, and groves, peopled with their feathery inhabitants, the lustre of whose always beautiful plumage was proportion¬ ately increased by their apparent transition from earth to the deep blue heaven they now seemed to inhabit. Don Caesario si¬ lently enjoyed this charming sight, imput¬ ed by the common people of Naples to the fairy skill of the renowned enchantress Morgana, as the vessel slowly glided into the tranquil bay. At length, the sun bursting forth in all its splendour above the elevated summit of Vesuvius, from which a slender column of smoke even
how ascended, put an end to the aerial ex¬ hibition, which gradually disappeared. As the bark approached the quay, a new source of amusement presented itself, in the opportunity thus afforded of sur¬ veying the numberless busy groups which already animated the city; for the streets of Naples, more especially the Strada di Toledo, and others near to the beach, are never at any hour deserted. Of this kind of entertainment, however, Caesario soon grew weary; and getting ashore as fast as possible/commanded Isidore to follow him to a more retired part of the city, where unobserved he might again give vent to his smothered feelings. In Naples our tra¬ vellers soon provided themselves with a suitable lodging, whence Caesario deter¬ mined to direct his future operations for the discovery of his beloved mistress: here then, leaving them for the present, let us at length turn to survey the equally-novel and more pitiable situation of Victoria. In a handsome but undistinguished street of the suburbs, which yet fronted a
beautiful terrace that skirted the bay, Vicenza provided most delightful apart¬ ments for Victoria and Biondella, himself and Beltramo also residing in the same house. Here had the hapless Victoria now for some time been doomed, though sur¬ rounded with joyousness and festivity, to " sigh the hours away," and lament vainly over the memory of her absent Caesario. For the daughter of Vicenza, indeed, had truly loved, even while she entreated the rash, thoughtless Caesario, never to see her more. She would, it is true, at that pe¬ riod, have sacrificed her own felicity to the unreasonable resentment of her sire; but now that the smothered spark of affection in her bosom had been blown into a flame by that sire's harsh conduct, she almost felt that such a sacrifice was im possible. Hence, in spite of all Vicenza's gentle expos¬ tulations, and even threatening remon¬ strances, which, on the present almost des¬ perate occasion, were not unsparingly heap¬ ed upon the hapless Victoria, she conti¬ nued still to pine incessantly for the pre-
sence of her first—her only love: nor could all the amusement and variety Na¬ ples proffered to her acceptance (but with which, indeed, she refused altogether to divert herself) induce her, for a single moment, to forget the sole object of her thoughts. In this strain of mind Victoria would certainly, had she possessed the means, have found some method of acquainting Caesario with the place of her retreat, that she at least might have listened once again to the tender tones of that beloved voice, chanting beneath her lattice some plaintive serenade, such as served to beguile the hours and ease the hearts of happier lovers: hut the bare possibility of such a commu¬ nication was carefully guarded against by the vigilant Vicenza. Pens—paper, were interdicted articles; and they were not al¬ lowed even to quit their apartments, with¬ out the attendance of the prince, or of Beltramo. Thus " cabin'd, cribb'd, con- fin'd," she had no alternative but to re¬ main silent, and endure the constraint put
Upon her with resignation, though her heart was secretly breaking under its bonds. One day, as Victoria and Biondella were sitting sadly at the window of their apartment, and contemplating the motley crowd that kept continually passing, some of whom, at any other period, by their grotesque appearance, would have excited the mirth of the young heiress of Vicenza, while others, such as the lazzaroni, inva¬ riably moved her to the tenderest com- passion* her affectionate servant suddenly exclaimed*—" Holy Virgin, signora, how melancholy you look! For myself, too, I am certainly not in the best spirits: yet I hold it wise to drive away dulness as far as is practicable. Why do you look so sadly on the lively group promenading yonder ?—I would I could find something to excite you to cheerfulness." " Alas! Biondella," replied her mistress, mournfully, " too well thou knowest the reason of my sadness—I fear I shall never be cheerful more. I was just thinking, that of all yonder bustling, smiling multi-
tude, not one has Victoria's cause for me¬ lancholy." " You deceive yourself, my dearest mis¬ tress," returned Biondella, evasively, " if you suppose yourself single in your pre¬ sent misfortunes. Your sorrows are not unexampled, nor your present situation worse than others, perhaps at this very moment, may endure. Only look, for ex¬ ample, at your faithful Biondella, whose disappointment is, as it were, a mere con¬ sequence of your own. This don Caesario whom you honour with your affections, has a favourite groom, named Isidore, who is handsomer, ay, and cleverer too, than Beltramo; and who not unfrequently found his way to the castle of Vicenza, whither, it was said by some, Biondella was the magnet which attracted him. Yet here am I constrained now to abandon the handsome, and talented Isidore, for the ugly and surly Beltramo, who, to say truth though, appears certainly less dis¬ agreeable since Isidore has been wholly away. But bless me, signora, only look
what a figure is stalking so majestically on the cool terrace yonder! Is he a Turk ? —an Egyptian ?—or an Algerine?—I am sure he is a Mahometan; for see! the cres¬ cent sparkles in front of his turban, be¬ sides being so richly embroidered on other parts of his dress. At least, he is a wor¬ shipper of the false prophet, whose cruel creed is death to the unbeliever: but this apart, he in truth makes a strange ap¬ pearance among so many more soberly- habited Christians. Pray, signora, ob¬ serve him." As she spoke, indeed, a stately, impor¬ tant-looking personage, appeared prome¬ nading on the lofty terrace which over¬ looked the bay, and apparently meditating on some affair of vital importance, for he paid no attention to the moving scene around him—a living panorama in which himself formed one of the most striking objects, owing to his dignified deportment, and magnificent attire. His flowing garb, and the singular majesty of his demeanour, combined with the extreme dinginess of
his complexion, seemed to declare him of Moorish origin; though his aspect was de¬ ficient in those traits of fierceness which equally characterize that warlike race. The expression of his features was unaffectedly gentle, but without that nobleness, indica¬ tive of superior intellect, which sometimes flashes even from the dusky visage of a Moor: for this, the most minute observer might have searched his good-natured countenance in vain. His habit, however, made after the Turkish fashion, was costly and magnificent in the highest degree; and this, together with his solemn gait, rather than any dignity of countenance, bespoke his wealth and consequence. In truth, he was an Algerine of considerable fortune, and, as Biondella rightly guessed, a most profound worshipper of Mahomet, whom circumstances had recently induced to settle at Naples. Here it appeared his favourite, almost his only recreation, to traverse, with deliberate step and pensive air, the terrace in front of Vicenza's resi¬ dence, which, indeed, for beauty of pros-
pect and salubrity of situation, could hard¬ ly be excelled in Naples; and such was his occupation at the moment when Bion¬ della first descried him. And now, on observing this outlandish figure, pointed out to her notice by the wondering Biondella, Victoria, again sink¬ ing pensively into her seat, from which she had arisen in the eagerness of female curiosity, coolly remarked—" I have no¬ ticed him often. He paces the terrace daily at this hour, but always thus majes¬ tically, and alone. I believe he is a Moor." " Blessed Virgin protect us! a Moor!" now exelairfTed the half-terrified Biondella; " one of those terrible beings who, in our romantic tales of love and suffering, affright fair damsels, and bear them away to their castles, where they are doomed to languish in bitter imprisonment, till their true knight delivers them. Bless me! I won¬ der the gay ladies yonder are not afraid to pass so frightful a creature; though, to say truth, there is really more to be laughed at than feared in his gaudy appearance.
He looks like a peacock strutting amid a flock of pied daws—Saint Rosolia forgive me! for likening the holy fathers whom I see yonder to such unreverend birds. But see! he approaches the window—he seems talking to himself—I am certain his lips move. Let us listen, and perhaps we may gather from his expressions some hint of his disposition, or present meditated de¬ signs. I am sure he has plots in hand, by his meditative step and pensive brow—but softly! he is here." The unconscious figure who was the subject of this rambling colloquy, now in¬ deed approached the window carelessly, but without perceiving his vicinity to it, or that there were eavesdroppers planted to overhear the tenor of his solitary rumina¬ tions. Accordingly, as be passed the open casement, often pausing listlessly in his solemn pace, Biondella and her mistress distinctly overheard the following inex¬ plicable soliloquy.—" Well, I am here in Naples," thus,continued the incautious so¬ liloquist—(apropos, soliloquizing aloud is
a custom against which I would warn all who wish to keep their purposes to them¬ selves)—" my person safe—my wealth se¬ cure, and my dignity undiminished by the course I have chosen to adopt in coming hither. There is nothing can now be wanting to complete my happiness but the society of my good friend Haly, whom ne¬ cessity obliged me to leave behind in Algiers. Yes! one thing more is want¬ ing—man was not created to live alone— I want a wife. Thou must now, Ab¬ dallah, cast thine eyes round upon the many smiling beauties who every day en¬ viron thee, each graceful as the immortal houries who fill our prophet's paradise- blessed be his name! and select for thyself a suitable partner to partake thy pleasures and thy cares. This course is the more advisable, for that I find myself in this foreign land much in need of society, the Nazarenes seldom choosing to associate too closely with one who obeys the directions of the sole true creed. Wealth I need not, nor require a heavy portion with my
chosen bride, mine own store being suffi¬ cient : but exalted birth and beauty, Ab¬ dallah, must direct thy choice, for both these she must possess whom thou takest to thy bosom. Now comes the difficulty. Will they who shun me in their hearts even during our necessary occasional in¬ tercourse, deign to bestow one of their lovely daughters on a Mussulman ? Yes! for the glorious and irresistible promises with which I mean to back my suit must surely cause it to succeed. Besides, am I not the son of the once-famed Aghar Hussein, viceroy of Constantia? and pos¬ sessed of sufficient wealth, drawn from his massy coffers, to purchase, if it so pleased me, ay, even their proudest title of nobi¬ lity ? But what are these paltry advan¬ tages, compared to the all-glorious and unprecedented potency vested in my will, and as yet wholly undivulged to mortal ears? What power doth even the mighti¬ est of these possess over a single human life, save haply that of destroying it ? It VOL. I. G
is mine to bestow a lengthened term of existence—and mine only. I can cheat even the devouring and inexorable vigi¬ lance of world-annihilating Time, and snatch from the dark gulf of oblivion, in defiance of his overwhelming and relent¬ less course, a double—nay, even a treble, portion of eternity! The charmed lives in my gift shall be proffered to her accept¬ ance, or devoted to lengthen the days of her perhaps otherwise disapproving rela¬ tives; and thus afford the most powerful aid to my pretensions. Yes! it shall be so—and who shall resist the temptation ? —who despise or reject the proposals of Abdallah? My wealth, and consequent importance in the world—the three charm¬ ed lives at my disposal ------" Here his voice became indistinct, ow¬ ing to the increasing distance, but his still pensive gait, and the frequent motion of his lips, sufficiently evinced the much longer continuance of his strange solilo¬ quy. Biondella actually held her breath for some minutes, in the vain endeavour
to catch another syllable, but it was an unavailing effort, the speaker had pro¬ ceeded too far: she then burst into a loud and uncontrollable fit of laughter, in which Victoria herself could hardly forbear from joining her convulsed attendant, " The good Mussulman is certainly plot¬ ting for a wife!" exclaimed Biondella, as soon as she could articulate any thing: " so, Neapolitan dames, prepare for an at¬ tack from the knight of the dingy coun¬ tenance, for he purposes to assail some of you. What he means by charmed lives, which, nevertheless, are it seems to com¬ pose his chief recommendation to your fa¬ vour, I confess I do not myself exactly comprehend, and therefore cannot put you on your guard; except, indeed, the man be in reality mad, which is the only solu¬ tion of the difficulty Biondella at present can hit upon. But look—he again ap¬ proaches, though his countenance is chan¬ ged; he seems to regard our window__ blessed Virgin! we are certainly discover- G 2
ed. How the man stands staring upward as if he were moon-struck!—-Come, let us retire." Now it chanced that the loud laugh of Biondella had in reality attracted the at¬ tention of the passing Abdallah, even wholly absorbed as he was in arranging his future plans for the obtainment of a nobly-born and beauteous bride; and as he was well aware that accident sometimes does that for us which by design it is very difficult to accomplish, he no sooner be¬ held the engaging mistress of her who had thus rudely interrupted his reverie, than he imagined he had found the object.of his wishes. With a fixed and earnest gaze, therefore, did he continue to regard the lovely Victoria, as slowly advancing he once more gradually approached the open casement. All his faculties indeed appeared suspended during that steady gaze of admiration, and he seemed truly, as Biondella termed it, planet-struck; for¬ getting every thing beside in his eager¬ ness to drink his fill of that " sight of
loveliness." How long his eyes would have thus remained transfixed is not cer¬ tain ; for Victoria, on the well-timed sug¬ gestion of Biondella, had withdrawn from the window ere he withdrew his gaze. Abdallah, however, had seen her, and a glimpse was sufficient to convince him of her beauty, as well as of her being every way qualified to suit his purpose, provided only she was single; and he immediate¬ ly resolved that it should not be owing to his own want of vigilance, if he did not speedily obtain a second view of her an¬ gelic countenance. From this period, even more regularly than heretofore, did the already enamour¬ ed follower of the precepts of Mahomet traverse the elevated terrace, with his eyes fixed constantly in the direction of Victo¬ ria's chamber. Hence, as often as the lat¬ ter chanced to approach the casement, the worthy Algerine met her view; and, on such occasions, invariably rivetted his ar¬ dent gaze upon her features, until native modesty induced her again to retire. In
Vain donna Victoria severely reprimanded her thoughtless attendant for having first incautiously attracted his attention: in vain now did Biondella, too, lament her own imprudent behaviour, for the evil was accomplished, and seemed irremediable. To the prince, her father, Victoria dared not complain even of this unpleasant cir¬ cumstance, being apprehensive of some yet further restriction of her few remain¬ ing privileges: she was therefore constrain¬ ed to endure this daring and offensive con¬ duct, on the part of the dusky foreigner, in indignant silence. Meantime, Vicenza strove by every means in his power that prudence would allow, to divert the melancholy of Victo¬ ria, and cause her if possible altogether to forget the hateful image of her deserted lover. Much of his tirae, it is true, was spent abroad, Victoria knew not where; but the remainder was devoted solely to her company and recreation, and hence she had little reason to complain of his oc¬ casional absence. The reality was this.
Since the glaring disobedience of Victoria to his earliest—strongest precepts, had un*. happily manifested itself, the conscience of Vicenza had severely rebuked him for his uniformly unfeeling conduct towards his other half-forsaken child, who, had not his own rash deed condemned her to per¬ petual imprisonment, and a total abandon¬ ment of the pleasures of life, might have proved better worthy of his affection. Groaning beneath this sentiment, his vi¬ sits to the convent of St. Rosalie grew daily more frequent, and his restricted communion with his lost daughter more protracted and affectionate. From these visits he almost constantly returned with a faltering step, and sorrowful counte¬ nance; and on reaching his home, usually shut himself for some time in his chamber. Here he was often heard to traverse re¬ peatedly the sounding floor with wild and hurried tread, as if striving (long in vain) to recover his composure ere he greeted Victoria. At these times, too, his voice, when at length he did salute her, was tre-
mulous and weak ; and his air (or she fan¬ cied as much) wanted something of its ac¬ customed tenderness towards her. It was impossible that his agitation on returning from these private interviews with his hi¬ therto-neglected child, should long wholly escape the observation of Beltramo; and donna Victoria likewise, with that natu¬ ral keenness peculiar to her sex when trifles only are the objects of investigation, failed not repeatedly to notice the circum¬ stance i but either of these little knew, or even dreamed, the real cause of his emotion. It wijl anon be necessary to present the reader with the substance of one of Vicen¬ za's burning conferences with his too long heartlessly-abandoned child : let it suffice at present to record, that he already wa¬ vered between the obligation of his oath, and the idea of thus inhumanly sacrificing the reluctant, unoffending Alphonsine ; and that the idea even sometimes entered his mind of immuring the disobedient Victoria in her stead — but this latter
thought he yet suffered not to dwell long in his distracted bosom.
CHAP. -X. Oh, love! what is it in this world of ours Which makes it fatal to be loved ? Ah! why With cypress branches hast thou wreath'd thy bowers, And made thy btfst interpreter a sigh. Byron. One evening Vieenza, accompanied by the disconsolate Victoria, chanced to visit the magnificent theatre of St. Carlo, for the prince, as already observed, denied her no amusement which prudence permitted him to grant, nor any society compatible with her rank and prospects, and which himself might also share : on the contrary, his chief difficulty lay in prevailing upon her to engage in pleasures which to her seemed perfectly insipid, and void of at¬ traction. On the present occasion, how¬ ever, she at least found her wonder excit- G S
ed by the glarfc df niagnificence which blazed around her, though her desponding heart was far from in unison with the gaiety that prevailed also on every side. The performance commenced, during which all appeared enchantment to the bewildered Victoria, the theatre being ac¬ counted the most splendid in Italy: yet even amid this brilliant scene, the spirits of Vicenza's daughter remained clouded by the remembrance of don Caesario, and her Wart was still " darkened with his shadow.* Suddenly she thought she per¬ ceived reflected faithfully in an opposite mirror ffor the house appeared completely hung with mirrors, of the noblest descrip¬ tion), a countenance so strongly resembling that of her lamented lover, supposed to be still in Sicily, and in utter ignorance even of her own destination, that she could not long entertain any doubt of its identity. With the speed of lightning her eyes now reverted from the mirror to the object it¬ self, and at once beheld Caesario gazing upon her, with a visage full of transport
and tenderness. No sudden shriek at this discovery resounded through the vast area of the gilded theatre—no exclamation pf joy or recognition escaped her trembling lips, but a deadly paleness, and a total cessation of the vital functions in her drooping form, sufficiently proclaimed that Victoria had fainted. She saw not what became of Caesario—she saw, indeed, that his eyes were intently fixed upon her— that he had recognised her, and instantly sunk senseless at the feet of her wonder¬ ing parent, who little suspected the true cause of what he witnessed. In a moment, the astonished prince was on the alert to restore, by his assiduous care, her fleeting senses. He conveyed her presently into the open air, and then as speedily procured assistance in h^ anxi¬ ous endeavours to revive her: bi t still saw nothing, and even suspected as little, of the presence of don Caesario. Having at length, with considerable difficulty, re¬ stored her to animation, Vicenza some¬ what reluctantly resigned her to the>eare
of his intimate friend, the young marquis Lioni, who politely proffered his carriage to convey her home; while himself re¬ turned into the theatre, for the purpose of taking a more ceremonious leave of the noble party he had thus abruptly been forced to abandon ; designing, after a short period, to follow on foot to his dwelling, and directing Beltramo, who was also pre¬ sent, to proceed thither immediately. Ac¬ cordingly, Beltramo presently obeyed his orders, by departing toward their new suburban residence; while Victoria, hav¬ ing sufficiently recovered her strength, and *again looked anxiously round for don Caesario, whom her eyes now sought in vain, rode home, accompanied by the gay marquis Lioni, who treated her with even more than common civility and attention. Beltramo had proceeded to within about a hundred yards of home, when he sud¬ denly perceived that he was watched^by a man, not very tall in stature, but enve¬ loped in a huge dusky mantle, which so totally concealed his figure, as to prevent
all possibility of recognition. On disco¬ vering this circumstance, Beltramo, not without cause, finding himself thus se¬ cretly beset in a strange land, where, even to a proverb, " law secures not life," be¬ came greatly alarmed for his own personal safety ; and brandishing his naked weapon, which gleamed like lightning through the darkness, exclaimed—" Whoever, or what¬ soever thou art, that darest thus in dark¬ ness and solitude to pursue my footsteps, I warn thee not to approach my person, lest the sharp sword of Beltramo should happen unwillingly to sheathe itself—— w " Not in the body of his good friend Isidore !" responded a well-known voice; and, suddenly dropping the disguising mantle, Isidore indeed stood before hira. The overjoyed Beltramo failed not in¬ stantly to recognise the voice of his former companion, although the insufficient light still afforded him a very imperfect view of his person, and he instantly returned his bright blade to its scabbard, well pleas¬ ed thus to escape an affray he had before
considered as inevitable. But speedily the degree of pleasure with which he at first regarded the sudden salutation of Isi¬ dore, appeared considerably to abate; and he now seemed rather to regret, than re¬ joice, at his friend's unexpected presence in Naples. Instead of greeting his old as¬ sociate with rapture, therefore, Beltramo, after a little pause, somewhat sulkily sub¬ joined—" It might have been as well to let a body know you purposed underta¬ king this pleasant excursion, master Isi¬ dore—another time, I pray you, use so much courtesy with an old acquaintance. But I know the origin of all this mystery, and its object—you purposed to surprise Biondella in my absence, and to plead your own suit secretly, without making Beltramo aware of your opportunities; thus rendering nugatory the compact be¬ tween us, that each should acquaint the other with the progress of his passion, and so neither be deceived by.a jilting mistress." " Talk not of Biondella," rejoined Isi¬ dore, confusedly, yet glad to avoid a more
important subject, " for, as surely as I live, Beltramo, she hath jilted us both. I pass¬ ed just now beneath her window—for I mean not to disguise from thee that I know her residence—and saw her con¬ versing closely with a stranger, habited in some outlandish garb, but the night is so dark that I could not discern his features, nor even the shade of his complexion. I suspect him, however, to be some rascally foreigner, whose life-blood thy dagger or mine ought this night to drink. I over¬ heard their expressions—-they were not such as she who favours either thy suit, or Isidore's, ought to permit a stranger to use. Thou art amazed, Beltramo, and seemest incredulous: but step softly this way—it may not be yet too late to con¬ vince thee, even by ocular demonstration, of the unvarnished truth of what I utter." Beltramo did as he was requested, and followed Isidore with a noiseless step through the gloom, toward the mansion occupied by Vicenza, where he knew Biondella had been left that evening, for
the first time since her arrival in Naples, free from the unpleasant surveillance of himself or his master. His heart bounded, as he proceeded lightly over the pavement, towards her window : there was certainly something very strange in the whole af¬ fair, but Beltramo deemed it wisest at present to suspend his judgment. He justly reflected, that it was yet impossible to decide whether Isidore or Biondella ought to bear the blame: but, alas ! in the event, both proved equally perfidious. The real facts of the case were these. Isidore had been ordered by his master, don Caesario, who unseen had watched the whole proceedings of the prince Vicenza, to divert for a time the attention of Bel¬ tramo, and prevent him if possible from entering the house; while himself strove to obtain an interview with Victoria, being determined not to omit the opportunity afforded him by the absence of her vigilant sire. Accordingly, that very night, nay, even ere many minutes had flown, with a dexterity that defied prevention, don Caesa-
rio, assisted by Isidore, succeeded in gain¬ ing secret admittance to the chamber of Victoria; for (of course through the agen¬ cy of the same inventive genius, Isidore) he was already acquainted with her resi¬ dence, A small ladder of ropes, prepared for the occasion, and which Isidore always carried about him, facilitated his design; and he found himself speedily in the apart¬ ment of his lost love—the so sacredly- guarded chamber of Vicenza's daughter, without even Biondella being aware of his presence. Here then he resolved to await the expected arrival of that chamber's lovely inhabitant; having first instructed Isidore to meet and detain Beltramo on the outside, if possible, as before narrated. It was now, while anxiously awaiting the appearance of Beltramo, closely enveloped in the dark mantle Caesario had cast aside as useless, on entering the window, that Isidore caught a glimpse of his own faith¬ less Biondella, at whose absence and appa¬ rent negligence he had not failed to won¬ der secretly, holding close communion
with a stranger from an humbler lattice belonging to the mansion. The form of Biondella was bowed condescendingly from the opened casement—-the stranger stood upon the pavement beneath, Isidore, con¬ cealed by thedajkness,and the convenient colour of his disguise, drew near, and lis¬ tened to their conversation. What he overheard consisted chiefly of some awk¬ ward protestations of regard from the gal¬ lant, whom, he thought, Biondella did not repulse with quite so much scorn as she ought to have done; when suddenly the sound of Beltramp's approaching footstep assailed his ears, and Isidore was obliged, for the present, to abandon his occupation. He was, however, no longer at a loas for a subject to engage the attention of Beltra¬ mo, his meeting with whom, and subse¬ quent conversation, have been already de¬ scribed. Short time elapsed, ere Beltramo also be¬ came an eyewitness of the apparent per¬ fidy of the fickle Biondella. He had not proceeded far, conducted softly by the jea-
lous Isidore, when both distinctly beheld her *itill conversing, in an under key, with the supposed favoured foreigner. Beltra¬ mo would fain have rushed forward and discovered himself, thus putting a sudden period to their intercouse, but was with¬ held by Isidore, who feared for the dilem¬ ma into which such a fracas as would pro¬ bably ensue might happen to bring his master. He accordingly suggested the more prudent method of first listening to ascertain more fully the real nature of their intimacy, which Beltramo felt assured, at least could not have been of long duration. They therefore still cautiously approached the spot where the supposed lover, who seemed habited completely in the Asiatic style, appeared pressing his suit with more than common fervency, and hearkened at¬ tentively to their conversation. In a few moments, each heard Biondella faintly whisper—" But, I tell thee, my young mistress has already an admirer, young—noble—handsome, on whom she looks with an eye far too favourable for the
dusky visage of thy outlandish master ever to change her sentiments. And then, for myself—I have, as I may say, a pair of them, although one is ugly, it is true, and the other absent. Indeed, the loss of either were no great cause for grief; since Bel¬ tramo, to be sure, is monstrously ill-visaged, and then for Isidore——but, bless me! what is it that sparkles so brightly in front of your turban ?—is it a crucifix ?" " For your sake, for the first time, I wish it were," answered her evidently-ad¬ miring auditor, presenting her at the same time with the sparkling ornament she had condescended to admire in his turban. " It is a crescent—but take it, notwith¬ standing, since thou hast deigned to com¬ mend its lustre. Nor yet wholly without a significant allusion is the gift I proffer thee, fair damsel—the emblem of Diana may best represent thy purity." " I owe thee thanks, gentle Moslem," now returned Biondella, softly, " for such, I perceive, thou art, as well as thy grave master; of whom—notwithstanding his
dingy countenance — I certainly think more favourably than at the beginning of our conference. But I must yet tell thee, gentle stranger, that he who seeks to wed the fair lady you mention, sole daughter of the prince Vicenza------" " This amulet, too, most condescending maiden !" here interrupted the pleased stranger, " will better grace thy bosom than mine. Its gems are rich, are rare, though the giver be poor and simple. Its coral, resembling in hue thy own rosy lips, will assuredly protect thee against many evils. Its opal and its emerald, are each a redoubtable preservative against some separate calamity. But I cannot now tell thee all. At some future period Ahmed will explain to thee----- ~" " Ahmed! is that thy name ?" inquired Biondella. " Thy slave's name is Ahmed," respond¬ ed the evidently-gratified Moor. " And thy master's ?" asked Biondella, curiously. " Is Abdallah," instantly replied the
faithful servant, " and his father was------" ** Never mind his father," said Bion¬ della, interrupting him, " you have alrea¬ dy told me he is dead. Now, as I said before, were I even to consent to convey this letter from the signor Abdallah (cer¬ tainly a liberal gentleman) to my mistress, the young donna Victoria, as thou wouldst fain persuade me, and as, I confess, I feel half inclined to do, yet could no good possibly result from any such communica¬ tion. For instance, in the very first place, as soon as the prince shall happen to hear " Heed not consequences, lovely mai¬ den," said Ahmed, impatiently: " while discussing them, the desired opportunity may, perhaps, be lost." For this, and some other sapient remarks, made by the Moor during their conversation, Biondella, although balked in the free exercise of her tongue (that favourite privilege of the fe¬ male sex, and of waiting-women in parti¬ cular), could not avoid thinking her com¬ panion, in spite of his dingy aspect, a very
sensible fellow. Ahmed continued—" My master is in love—to say nothing of his unworthy servant being little better than in the same predicament. Considerations of difficulty or danger deter not even the cold European lover from his project; and, by the fiery African, are regarded only as incentives to proceed. A mis¬ chievous dart, shot from the bright eyes of thy beautiful mistress, hath pierced Ab¬ dallah's bosom; and kindled a flame in his heart, fiercer even than the solar beam that hath tinctured his countenance. He prays you, through me, only to drop this letter where it may meet the eye of his beloved; and hath sent this weighty purse------" " Oh, the Virgin ! I must not accept a bribe, though sent by an angel from para¬ dise !" exclaimed Biondella. " I meant not to bribe you, beautiful signora," returned Ahmed, in a conciliatory tone, as if fearful of having offended. " I agree to take charge of the letter though," subjoined Biondella, hastily, to whom the adventure already offered too
many temptations to be thus easily aban¬ doned. " Without a bribe, then," said the judi¬ cious Ahmed; " this same purse being only the unworthy recompence of thy cha¬ ritable service. Fair and obliging damsel! thy slave, Ahmed, thanks thee, and com¬ mits his master's communication with con¬ fidence to thy care. If thou deemest the reward still insufficient, the grateful Ab¬ dallah, son of Aghar Hussein, the most valiant of the faithful, will augment it to any sum thou mayest demand." " More! oh good Virgin! what should I do with it?" exclaimed Biondella, with a degree of ardency at which even the se¬ date Ahmed could scarcely suppress a smile. " My master, Abdallah," he muttered to himself, " would not grudge twenty such purses to get his letter safely deliver¬ ed." Then, in a louder tone, he added— " Dispose of it in any place where thy mistress may pick it up—she, I mean, whom Abdallah loves—sole daughter, I
think thou saidst, of the noble prince—-—" "Saints and devils! I can bear it no longer!" now exclaimed Beltramo, burst¬ ing from the grasp of his companion. " Death and fury ! Isidore, art thou made of stone ? Let me come at the knave !"«— and as he spoke, he rushed toward the casement. " Beltramo, stop! be advised!" cried Isidore, but in vain, for Beltramo either did not hear, or would not heed, his voice; but, again drawing his weapon, furiously approached the Moor. With the speed of lightning, at the first sound of Beltramo's rugged accents, did Ahmed slip aside in the darkness, and gliding swiftly through the surrounding gloom, adroitly escaped the threatened conflict. It was not that Ahmed dreaded the rencounter, had such been likely in any way to advance the cause of his mas¬ ter—it was no sensation of fear which im¬ pelled him thus nimbly to fly from a single er?emy: he fled simply because to VOL. l H
brawl, and, perhaps, to slay, at present no part of his instructions. Speed¬ ily," therefore, Ahmed was beyond both reach and hearing of his assailant, leaving the infuriated Beltramo to vent his disap¬ pointment in any mode he thought proper.
CHAP. XI. Oh beauty ! where's thy faith? Siiakespbaux. After some few muttered execrations heaped on the vanished Ahmed, whom Isidore, in spite of his own real vexation, was delighted to perceive had escaped, Beltramo turned his attention toward the casement where so recently had stood the frail and fickle Biondella—but she stood there no longer. The window was still open, but Biondella, as well as her dingy lover, as if by magic, had disappeared. Had the curiosity inherent in her sex per¬ mitted her, she might have remained for
the present concealed, as the window was too high for Beltramo to enter without assistance, and Isidore felt little disposed to lend him the aid of his hempen ladder, which alone could have availed him to surmount the difficulty. But her anxiety to observe what was going on outside, speedily induced Biondella again to make her appearance at the casement, whence a little reconnoitring soon demonstrated to conviction that matters were in even a worse train than she had suspected. First a peep, then a broad stare at the figures which met her view, convinced her that Isidore, as well as Beltramo, had, by some unlucky chance, witnessed her perfidy, and her willing acceptation of presents and compliments from the courteous Moor. Her confusion, however, quickly subsided, and she determined (it was the only course left her to pursue, short of giving up the letter she had promised to convey to Vic¬ toria) to face the matter out as impudent¬ ly as possible. H 2
The instant Beltramo caught a glimpse of her form before the casement, he ex¬ claimed—" Aha, perfidious! dost thou return to exult over the mischief thou hadst nearly caused ? Behold my blade! a moment sooner had sheathed it in his heart!" " An hour hence, and mine may be buried there yet!" cried Isidore. " The knave shall pay dearly enough for the pre¬ ference bestowed on him." " Nay, for that matter," rejoined Bel¬ tramo, sulkily, " albeit he hath escaped at the present, myself will yet wring the bright roses from his cheeks, I warrant thee ! His delicate aspect, be it ever so fair, may yet change paler wL.n he feels the keen point of my weapon." " Thank the Virgin ! they have not seen his complexion," muttered Biondella, who longed to say something in her own behalf, but (strange predicament for a fe¬ male caught tripping in her fidelity) could not stumble on a word to the purpose. " But a truce to these idle threats," at
resumed Isidore, " and let us hear what Biondella has to say in explanation of this unexpected scene." " Really, signors, I have so little to say, that it may be hardly worth your while to pause, or listen to it," now said Bion¬ della, with at least an appearance of the most perfect coolness and composure. " I have only to express my unqualified won¬ der at the strange disturbance you have created, for which I declare myself wholly unconscious of the existence of any suffi¬ cient cause; and to marvel that thou, Isi¬ dore, in particular—of whose very pre¬ sence in Naples I was, until this moment, utterly ignorant—shouldst thus appear to join in the cabal against me. To this, signors, I have nothing to add, except— good night!" and so saying, she again dis¬ appeared, and closed the casement. After this, every effort of the twain to bring Biondella again to the window prov¬ ed useless, and thrown away. They, how¬ ever, continued together for some time on the terrace, endeavouring to divine who
this new suitor (for such he evidently was) could be; and finally concluded by re¬ solving to watch his retreat more vigi¬ lantly at some future period. The two friends then parted, Isidore being unable, with all his ingenuity, any longer tc allay the impatience of his companion, who feared to incur the anger of the piince, for this already protracted neglect of bis fair charge. Beltramo accordingly en¬ tered the mansion which contained Vic¬ toria, while Isidore continued to patrol the pavement. Meantime, Biondella, having under¬ taken that the billet-doux given her by Ahmed should meet her mistress's eye, such merely being the full extent of her promise, contented herself with carelessly flinging it upon the toilet of Victoria, and retired to consider how she might best succeed in pacifying Beltramo and Isi¬ dore. The particulars of this singular af¬ fair, in which she had thus heedlessly en¬ gaged without bestowing a single thought upon its probable termination, were as
follow:—Abdallah, grown weary of watch¬ ing for an opportunity of addressing the beautiful Victoria, at length resolved to commit his admiration of her charms to paper, and to entrust his faithful Moorish servant, Ahmed, with the delivery of his written sentiments. To commit this sa¬ cred packet, however, into the hands of Victoria herself, without being observed by the busy eyes which surrounded her even when abroad, and accompanied every movement of her own, Ahmed soon found impracticable. He therefore adopted the only course left open to him by circum¬ stances, in seeking to corrupt her atten¬ dant to his interest, which object Abdal¬ lah had accordingly commissioned him to achieve at any price; and hence the origin of those costly presents made by him to Biondella, who, if she had no great liking for his person, soon found his manners at least more pleasing than his aspect; and, above all, felt that such gifts as those of which his smile seemed the constant pre¬ cursor, were far too acceptable to be slight-
refused. was true, the unexpected presence of Isidore and Beltramo had abruptly broken off their interview; yet still the fickle, trifling Biondella indulged a confident hope, and even looked forward with a pleasing anxiety, to the moment of meeting and conversing with Ahmed a- gain. While these transactions were going forward among the domestics, donna Vic¬ toria bad arrived at the mansion, accom¬ panied by the marquis Lioni, who soon afterwards, with many unmeaning protes¬ tations (as Victoria then judged them) of affectionate regard for the lady committed to his charge, took a respectful leave. The daughter of Vicenza then instantly sought her own private apartment, with the se¬ cret intention of recalling in her " mind's eye" the image of her absent Caesario, but in reality to behold the living object of her solicitude. Don Caesario, who had succeeded in perfectly concealing himself, on beholding whose was the light tread that now broke the surrounding silence,
burst at once from his self-imposed con¬ finement, and flung himself, transported with ecstacy, at her feet. At first, Victo¬ ria felt overcome with terror at this se¬ cond unexpected meeting, in a place where he was exposed to such imminent peril as must inevitably await him if dis¬ covered in her chamber: but she soon re¬ covered, to rejoice at the happy ingenuity of her lover, who had thus invented a mode of communication between them, the safest probably, under the circumstan¬ ces, that couid have been projected. Leav¬ ing them, therefore, for a transient period, to the full enjoyment of each other's so¬ ciety (if enjoyment it could be called, which was constantly interrupted by fears and lamentations over their unfortunate destiny), the loud arrival of the prince Vi¬ cenza from the theatre of St. Carlo, which, notwithstanding, the lovers- did not hear, requires imperatively that we without de¬ lay attend his presence. On the threshold he was met by Bel- H 3
tramo, who, by a signal perfectly under¬ stood by the prince, intimated that he had something to communicate in private. Vi¬ cenza immediately proceeded to his own apartment, followed by his trusty menial, the important meaning of whose signifi¬ cant looks, he found he had not entirely misconstrued. Beltramo almost instantly produced a letter, taken from the toilet of Victoria, where himself, as he said, had by chance discovered it lying, since his return from the theatre of St. Carlo; and which had not failed to excite his suspi¬ cions that every thing was not exactly as it ought to be. Such was the account Beltramo gave to his master, of the dis¬ covery of this secret communication : but the reality was, in some particulars, dif¬ ferent Having, in fact, overheard, with Isidore, great part of the conversation be¬ tween Biondella and Ahmed, the enraged Beltramo, on entering the mansion, deter¬ mined diligently to search for the pro¬ scribed epistle, which, he rightly divined, would be most likely deposited in the
chamber of her whose eye was to meet, where the thoughtless Biondella little dreamed he would venture, under any circumstances, to intrude. Here the first thing that encountered his sight, was the object he desired to find, which he ac¬ cordingly resolved directly to deliver up to the prince, without any previous com¬ munication of his intentions to Biondella, lest the entreaties and blandishments of the treacherous damsel, with whom he was seriously offended, should happen to over¬ turn his resolution. At first with anxious haste, and after¬ wards with a scowl of ineffable contempt, did the prince Vicenza peruse, and reper- use, this singular epistle; while Beltramo, with at least correspondent indignation, stood watching the changes of his counte¬ nance. The strain of this truly memo¬ rable declaration of attachment, couched, it is true, in tolerable Italian, but conceiv¬ ed perfectly in the florid eastern style, was as follows:—
" Oh most supreme and irresist¬ ible charmer, who reignest over all suscep¬ tible hearts—daughter of the graces, and queen of love! I have beheld thee, god¬ dess of perfection! and my repose is fled. Who can refrain from adoring the most perfect masterpiece of loveliness ever crea¬ ted ?—who be restrained from falling at her feet? Deign, thrice beautiful and accomplished damsel! to accept the hom¬ age of one who hath felt, and whose bo¬ som yearneth to acknowledge, the supreme power of thy attractions — the homage which is thy due from all mankind, but more especially from him in whose heart thou hast kindled a flame which neither time nor absence, nor aught save the co¬ veted possession of thy lovely person, can ever quench. He who presumes thus un¬ worthily to address thee, though not a worshipper of the Nazarene thou art taught to reverence, prays thee, fair dam¬ sel, to grant him at least one transient in¬ terview with the incomparable idol of his affection, in whose presence even the pale-
faced empress of the firmament might be ashamed to shine; when the nature of his proposals (he hopes not too presumptuous) and the whole sum of his merits (he trusts not altogether contemptible) shall be laid humbly at her feet. My faithful servant, Ahmed, will be found ready to bear to thy devoted slave whatever hour or place it may please thee, in the fulness of thy gracious condescension, to appoint. Till then, most angelic maiden ! may thy path of existence be through the flowery re¬ gion of pleasure—there disport thee, sylph-like, in its sunny atmosphere, and endeavour to think favourably of " Abdallah."
While yet Vicenza gazed on this (at least within the precincts swayed by Chris¬ tianity) perfectly unique epistle of tender¬ ness, a grim smile of scorn gradually dis¬ torted his fine features; and he laughed outright, ere he rent the fervid effusion of Mussulman adoration into a thousand
pieces,—«' paltry egotist! con¬ temptible fool!" h6 exclaimed. " The sum of his merits!—-a despicable unbe¬ liever !—a worthless Mahometan! But away with such silly trifling," he conti¬ nued, scattering the despised fragments from the open window, " and let us at¬ tend to matters which may better deserve our serious consideration. Where is my daughter, Beltramo?—I have news of im¬ portance for her ear to-night." "Already gone to her chamber," said Beltramo; " whither she retired just as I had luckily succeeded! m abstracting thence the billet I placed in your hand." " Perdition seize the billet!" said Vi¬ cenza, pettishly and contemptuously— " speak of it no more. It is of import that immediately I commune with Victo¬ ria, Beltramo, light me to her chamber.'' Accordingly Beltramo lit his lord along the narrow gallery, and up the stairs which conducted to Victoria's chamber, in obedi¬ ent silence. The noise occasioned by their approaching footsteps, however, failed not
now sufficiently to alarm the trembling Victoria, as well as don Caesario, who was still inside the apartment. To think of escape from the window thus suddenly was .. Jtile, there not being sufficient time to make the requisite signal to Isidore, by the aid of whose corded ladder the descent was alone to be effected. Thus circumstanced, don Caesario was obliged hastily to regain his former concealment in an obscure corner of the chamber, assisted by the friendly screen which had once already so effec¬ tually sheltered him from the observation of Beltramo, when seeking for the clan¬ destine epistle in that very apartment; which Caesario had not only witnessed Biondella deposit on the toilet of her mis¬ tress, but also saw Beltramo afterwards bear away in triumph, without being dis¬ covered. Here then he once more re¬ treated with rapidity, scarcely allowing himself to breathe, and wondering what would be the issue of the coming scene. Having reached the chamber door, the prince Vicenza, with a haughty motion
of his band, silently at¬ tendant, to await his further pleasure be¬ low. Beltramo, therefore, descended sul¬ lenly to search the lower apartments for Biondella, whom he designed to reproach severely for her double perfidy; while Vi¬ cenza hastily, and with an air which be¬ spoke his bosom charged with some com¬ munication of magnitude, entered the apartment of his daughter.
CHAP. XII. Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child; One who, to put thee from,thy heaviness, Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy, That thou expect'at not, nor I look'd not for. Shakespeahe. Donna Victoria had scarcely sufficient time to reseat herself, after assisting in the concealment of Caesario, ere the impatient footstep of her father was heard in her apartment, and by her side. Then raising
her eyes, for the first time, to his ap¬ proaching figure, she started involuntarily on observing the unusual lustre whic^ animated, at that moment, his eyes and countenance. After taking a turn or two in the apartment, during which they con¬ tinued to regard each other in silence, Vi¬ cenza drew a chair, and seated himself close beside the wondering Victoria, who was utterly at a loss to divin* the mean¬ ing of this singular demeanour. Then gently taking her hand, and clasping it tenderly in his own, he thus addressed her—" My dear Victoria! my own be¬ loved—my only child !" he exclaimed—but here conscience appeared to smite him, and his voice faltered considerably, while the tear in his eye bore testimony to his in¬ ward emotion, " I have something to communicate, which not a little concerns an anxious father's happiness, and may happen still more essentially to contribute to thy own. But thou art not yet, I now perceive, sufficiently recovered to attend to me—sure you tremble ?"
" I have not perfectly regained my com¬ posure," answered Victoria, timidly," since the trouble I gave you at the theatre, which I regret exceedingly, but strove vainly to avert. Yet I am well enough to attend my father, and reverently to ob¬ serve his injunctions." " Heed not the trouble thou hast given me," replied her father, rapturously, " my amiable, considerate Victoria! I find an ample excuse for the eccentricity of thy feelings in the seclusion in which thou hast hitherto been brought up." Here again, however, Vicenza's consci¬ ence whispered him that there was also another in existence, whose claim on his favour and protection was equal, not to say superior, to Victoria's, but whose mode of education was unhappily still more secluded. And his the error— Ms the crime, for which the then unborn inno¬ cent had been doomed to a life of loneli¬ ness and austerity! While reflecting on this cruel circumstance, the tears again crowded into the swimming eyes of the
repentant prince Vicenza, in spite of his efforts to restrain them. He dashed them away, and continued—" Our noble house, Victoria, of which I am now the only re¬ presentative, has flourished for many cen¬ turies, the chief pride, and no less acknow¬ ledged bulwark, of thy native Sicily. Such was the reputation bequeathed to me from my ancestors and thine, which I have strenuously endeavoured, in war or in peace—in sunshine or in adversity, to up¬ hold with credit to myself, that I might hand it down untarnished to my posterity. Victoria! of this noble stock, thou art, my child, the sole remaining scion—the soli¬ tary survivor, when I am in the tomb." " But why need my father disturb his mind with these recollections now?" in¬ quired Victoria, in a tone of anxious ten¬ derness. " It has long been my hope to see thee nobly matched, Victoria," said her father, without noticing the interruption; " as it has also been my care that thou shouldst avoid the possibility of all future inter-
course with any unworthy pretender to thy favour. But recent events have com¬ bined to strengthen this latent wish into an ardent desire impatient of delay, and, it may be, accelerated its consummation. I could no longer rest, until the happy hour arrived when it should become my pleasing duty to resign thee to the guar¬ dian arms of a vigilant and noble husband, Victoria! that hour is come." A slight rustling behind the screen here caused Vicenza to cast his dark searching eyes areand the spacious apartment, still partially enveloped in gloom; but he saw nothing extraordinary, and again fixed them earnestly on the features of Victoria. With downcast looks, while an involun¬ tary shudder of terror crept over her whole frame, sat the shrinking donna Victoria, as she fancied she felt his gaze penetrate even to her inmost soul. Too well she knew the cause of that sudden rustling, which fortunately, however, had but feebly attracted his attention ; and much too well she now already divined the drift of his
ancestorial allusions. At length, with a faltering voice, she again demanded— " What means my honoured father ?— and what hour is nigh, that is to be greet¬ ed with so much of joy ?" Vicenza compressed his lips together, ere he responded; he seemed yet unwill¬ ing too suddenly to dart the whole of his intelligence on the weak nerves of Victo¬ ria. After a pause, he said—" The hour that shall witness the joyous celebration of thy nuptials may not be far remote, if Victoria will cheerfully concede to the wishes of her parent, and reject not her own felicity." This was precisely what Victoria ex¬ pected to hear proceed from his lips, yet she found it a blow almost too heavy for her drooping spirits to bear, even prepared as she was for its reception. Don Caesario, too, within hearing at such a moment! Every thing appeared to have conspired against her, and she remained silent, shaking vio¬ lently from excessive emotion. " But you are ill, my beloved Victoria,"
resumed Vicenza, affectionately—" for again you tremble. Yet suspect not, my child, (if such fears have any share in the origin of this unusual agitation) that thy father would urge thee for a moment to bestow thy hand on a disagreeable suitor, or one stricken in years, or -any way un¬ worthy of the coveted and truly enviable prize. No—to sacrifice youth and inno¬ cence at the shrine of avarice or ambition, is at present, as it hath ever been, far from my intentions." Vicenza now again droop¬ ed his head involuntarily, and its accus¬ tomed gloom once more transiently sha¬ dowed his countenance, as the thought that he had formerly sacrificed youth and innocence notwithstanding at the shrine of bigotry, flashed across his mind. With an effort however he continued.—"Think not, Victoria, that the prince Vicenza is so poor either in fame or fortune, or so desir¬ ous of their increase, as to compromise in any degree, for such delusory considera¬ tions, the substantial happiness of his child." Donna Victoria seemed to regain her
confidence in some measure, at this well- timed avowal of her father's sentiments; and at length found courage to solicit, in broken accents, some further elucidation ox his ambiguous words. Vicenza appeared pleased with her in¬ quiries, and responded—" My trusted and faithful friend—the pride of his country, and ornament of his sex, hath deigned to admire thee, Victoria. In brief, the young marquis Lioni, acknowledged by all to de¬ serve the encomiums with which I have prefaced his name, professes himself not in¬ sensible of thy merits, and hath this night solicited thy hand in marriage." Victoria started, and the full horror of her situation now rushed at once upon her mind. The more than common, though half unnoticed, assiduity of the marquis Lioni recurred suddenly to her recollection —his extreme civility—his officious con¬ cern for her safety; the whole had now re¬ ceived what appeared to Victoria a dread¬ ful explanation. With a shudder of dread she contemplated it, for a few transient
moments; and, just as the declaration of her father was concluded, sunk, as if smit¬ ten by a thunder-bolt, prostrate at his feet. Vicenza instantly rang loudly for assist¬ ance, and repenting heartily of having gone so far, in the present weak state of Victo¬ ria's spirits, presently resigned her to the care of Biondella, who soon made her ap¬ pearance from the kitchen, where she had been wrangling with Beltramo about their mutual treachery. At first, she was fear¬ ful that some unlucky letter had caused the scene of confusion which in Victoria's chamber met her view ; but soon the mild manner of the prince reassured her, and convinced her, at least, that he knew no¬ thing of herself having had so conspicuous a share in the business. Accordingly she addressed herself with diligence, but with¬ out questions, to the restoration of Victo¬ ria ; while Vicenza, descending slowly the winding staircase, issued forth upon the adjacent terrrace, to calm his perturbed mind, and enjoy his meditations in the open air.
As he passed the threshold, he was again saluted by the wondering Beltramo, who respectfully inquired whether he should attend him in his nocturnal excursion.— "No," said the prince; "attend to thy duties within. I merely wish to meditate alone." The vassal accordingly refrained from accompanying him, but quietly re¬ sumed his station amid the fumes of the culinary apartment, to await the return of Biondella from her fair mistress's chamber; while Vicenza disappeared upon the ter¬ race. Here the deep gloom that surround¬ ed him, and the profound stillness that now prevailed on every side, combined with the utter impossibility of distinguishing any distant object which might otherwise have engaged the attention, forced the mind to adopt for refuge that solitary rumination in which it appeared his present object to indulge.
VOL. I.
I
CHAP. XIII. Wouktfi thou, presumptuous as thou art I O'er nature play the tyrant v s part, And with the hand compel the heart? Oh ! rather, rather hope to bind The ocean wave—the mountain wind ! Or fis.thy foot upon the ground, To stop the planet rolling round. Rogebs. " Hitherto, at least," said Vicenza to himself, while pacing the gloomy terrace with folded arms, and a pensive counten¬ ance, " my scheme for their separation has been eminently successful. She hears not now of don Caesario—dreams not of him ; and hence arises the hope I have clung to, and still entertain, that she will be pleased to hear of other and more flattering pro¬ posals. For myself, I must acknowledge, that in the offer of the marquis Lioni, the utmost ambition of my soul is gratified. Lioni! the heroic—the renowned—the ac¬ complished ! she cannot but feel transport-
ed on beholding him at her feet. Yet should the effect produced on her mind by this intelligence prove the reverse of what I anticipate — should opposition only serve to inflame her mad passion for Caesa¬ rio, and a rival serve but to increase her affection for him — how, then, must we proceed ? I know not the meaning of this sudden swoon, and the true signification of a woman's emotion is not always easily found. But shall a son of the hated count Castelli possess for his bride the sole daughter and heiress of Vicenza? No! resolution will then be necessary to pre¬ vent it. Even should she refuse to mar¬ ry Lioni on any terms, her refusal shall avail her nothing. A father's authority shall interpose—she must—she shall—" " Softly ! not so fast," said a voice close to his elbow : " it is true that man ap¬ points, but there is a power above which ^appoints—-at least, sometimes, our most determined purposes. Even while thou art brooding here, and exhausting thy vain 12
breath in mere idle calculations, the ser¬ pent which hath been the bane of thy fe¬ licity escapes thy grasp." " How! Zachelli here!" exclaimed Vi¬ cenza, starting angrily (for he knew the voice), and striving, as well as he was able, to penetrate the gloom, he indeed perceiv¬ ed the figure of the bandit standing close beside him. " Ay, prince, Zachelli is here," replied the ruffian ; " just in time too, he hopes, to warn thee against the building of air- castles, when, with a little trouble, thou mightest achieve a much surer foundation." " Insolent!" cried the prince, indignant¬ ly—« even here thus to pursue me! This slave is too presumptuous." " Rather say too faithful," retorted Za¬ chelli, somewhat angrily, in his turn— " too stanch in his fidelity to abandon, as he should, so thankless a master. But let us remember the almost fatal issue of our last midnight meeting—save one------ and forbear, prince, to use invectives I have not deserved at your hands, nor can any
longer tamely submit to. My visage may be, perhaps, unwelcome to thee—I may seem to pursue thee undesired—but that I have done so is always for thy service." " I committed to thy charge nothing to be achieved in Naples," said the prince, coldly ; " nor see I aught here thou canst perform to advantage me." " There is the evil—there the danger," said Zachelli, with increased earnestness, " because thou seest it not. Therefore it the more formidably threatens—therefore it will overwhelm thee—except the despis¬ ed Zachelli once more aids thee to avert it. Prince! thy imagined security is false: thou art in no common peril, even at this moment. Listen, and learn of Zachelli how to baffle the wiles of thy enemy, and convert them into a springe for his own destruction." Vicenza drew his mantle more closely around him, and with an appearance of greater kindness than he had yet deigned to exhibit toward his unwelcome visiter, prepared to hearken to the promised com-
munication; first, however, sullenly de¬ manding—" What enemy, Zachelli, dost thou speak of?—and yet, if thou art true, I have but one in existence. He whom late most I dreaded—the son, Caesario— for whose life thou hast taken order from my lips, ere this should be no more." " He has yet escaped my dagger," an¬ swered Zachelli; " but shall not long elude the doom to which thy decision hath destined him. After your removal with Victoria, he fled also from Sicily. He is now in Naples." " Ha! so near me," exclaimed Vicenza, again starting, and casting a look of keen reproach upon the speaker. " Nor am I yet to blame," continued Zachelli, perceiving the expression of the prince's countenance. " I knew not of his departure, until he had reached the vessel, therefore could not intercept him. I did what appeared most advisable, un¬ der such circumstances—I followed him hither. Since my arrival, I have watched him closely, but could obtain no opportu-
nity to strike. To-night I hope to be more fortunate. As soon as he emerges from his present place of concealment -----" " Where, then, is he concealed ?" de¬ manded Vicenza. " Blind prince! Don Caesario, as here¬ tofore, is concealed in thy daughter's chamber," replied Zachelli, triumphantly; for he prided himself not a little on being thus enabled to afford this second proof of his own superior vigilance. " He who has once invaded so inviting a sanctuary, and escaped unharmed, will npt be over nice in venturing a second trespass. I saw him enter the window, by means of a corded ladder brought hither for the purpose by his servant, an arch rogue, who is yet stalking hereabout in expecta¬ tion of his return, no doubt by the same convenience. But behold my ready po¬ niard," he continued, exhibiting the bright drawn blade beneath his cloak— " Caesario shall never reach his home again. He must descend unmolested: but the dark narrow passages which intervene be-
twixt this spot and his abode—for I know it well—will afford ample opportunity; and ere he threads them, my arm shall reach his heart." Prince Vicenza was indeed astonished at this unequivocal declaration of the ban¬ dit, who, whatever might be his mode of life, was still his faithful, long-proved ad¬ herent, and whom experience had taught him not wholly to disbelieve. Yet even now, as he reviewed the intelligence in his mind, he could not avoid exclaiming —" But no! it is impossible. Myself have, scarcely a minute since, quitted her chamber. I repeat, that it is impossible." " What should render it so, too fatally confiding prince?" asked Zachelli. " The chamber, no doubt, contains sufficient space to conceal a lover in peril: a chim¬ ney—a casement—^-a cranny would suffice. The window, as thou seest, is not hard to scale, and the night dark enough to screen such an enterprise. In addition to these favourable circumstances, thou hast the testimony of one whose adherence to thy
fortunes was never questioned. But away with doubt! See where a dark figure ad¬ vances through the gloom, enveloped in a most convenient mantle: it is his attendant, and beneath it he hides the ladder which must facilitate his master's descent from the chamber. of love. Observe! he ap¬ proaches the window—he hath doubtless been summoned. Hark! the signal is re¬ peated—he quickens his pace through the darkness. Now is the moment to con¬ vince thyself of Zachelli's vigilance, and thy daughter's duplicity. Approach, like¬ wise, but let not a breath too loudly drawn betray thy presence; and, as well as the gloom permits, observe what follows. Re¬ member! a word — ay, even a footstep heard, would ruin all." Zachelli, grasping his poniard firmly in one hand, while the other kept hold of his companion's mantle, as if yet fearful that some sudden burst of emotion from the lips of Vicenza might discover them, now cautiously preceded the prince to- 13
ward the window of Victoria's chamber. As they proceeded, the scene reminded him strongly of what had once before oc¬ curred in Sicily; and he could not forbear from whispering as much to Vicenza: but added, in conclusion, brandishing his wea¬ pon, that the present should not fail to boast a more bloody termination. And now, as they drew nearer, they distinctly heard the wary adjustment of the corded ladder spoken of by Zachelli; and pre¬ sently as plainly distinguished the figure of don Caesario, in the act of descending to the pavement.
CHAP. XIV. Ulysses.— You have not patience j come. T«».--I pray you stay: by hell, and all hell's torments, I will not speak a word. Troilus and Cressida. In spite of the confusion which had taken place in the chamber, during the insensi¬ bility of Victoria, don Caesario had suc¬ ceeded in preserving his concealment, by a determined effort regardless of his rising feelings, until the retiring footstep of the prince assured him that he had quitted the " all unlooked-for" scene. Then, bursting at once from his hiding-place, with a some¬ what too violent exclamation against all " flinty fathers" which he no longer thought it necessary to restrain, he flew to the assistance of his faithful, susceptible Victoria. A loud expression of alarm from Biondella, at first, declared her astonish¬ ment at his unexpected presence; but this was soon stifled, or rather exchanged for
a sentiment of pleasure, as the conviction flashed across her mind that it could be no other than don Caesario himself; though by what means he had obtained admission to that forbidden sanctuary still remained a mystery. Assiduously, however, and without any attempt at explanation, the excited lover applied himself to assist in the restoration of his swooning mistress, leaving Biondella to unravel the marvel of his sudden appearance, as well as she was able. In this task he succeeded so well, that, ere many minutes had elapsed, Vic¬ toria once more slowly reopened her " soul- beaming" eyes; and gazing fearfully a- round the apartment, soon became con¬ scious of her father's absence, and the more welcome presence (in perfect safety) of her devoted lover. Her first impulse, on perfectly compre¬ hending her situation, was to raise her eyes and hands expressively towards hea¬ ven in gratitude for his deliverance, and her own preservation from a second expo¬ sure, with ail its probable consequences:
then, urging her apprehension that her fa¬ ther would yet return, she earnestly en¬ treated him to be gone. Don Caesario en¬ deavoured to dissipate her fears on this point, and combat her objections to his remaining in the apartment, pleading the facility with which he could again conceal himself, should any thing occur to render it necessary, but found that he only exerted himself in vain. She sobbed—she wrung her hands vehemently—she again repre¬ sented the magnitude of the danger, and fervently implored hinpto descend. At length, finding his efforts to soothe her, and calm her apprehensions, wholly una¬ vailing, he seriously addressed himself to descend; and, accordingly, having given the appointed signal to Isidore (overheard also by Zachelli and the prince) he found his attendant presently at his post, and the ladder adjusted in readiness for his de¬ parture. On gaining the ground, don Caesario could npt forbear from renewing his pro¬ testations of unalterable affection, and re-
peating his maledictions upon those who opposed their union, unconscious that he was overheard, even at that moment, by Ms direst enemy—the very being on whose bead he was pouring execrations. Vicen¬ za listened, and vowed inwardly that he should not survive to repeat, on another eve, those pernicious sentiments; even if the dagger of bis accomplice failed, his own should find a passage to his heart. At length, the mild voice of Victoria in¬ terposed to restrain this exuberance of passion in her lover, and the prince actu¬ ally held his breath with attention.— " Cease-^-cease, Caesario," she exclaimed in a low, but reproving tone," to lament thus unavailingly our fate at a time so inop¬ portune, and above all, to revile thus bit¬ terly the revered author of my existence. Against bim, whatever my lot, I have nought to say, and must not listen to those who indulge in the utterance of aught to his disparagement. Yet of tbis be sure— I never ^vill wed Lioni. Thou hast my solemn pledge, at least, for this—may it
eonduce to thy tranquillity. Victoria will never, while Caesario lives, ibestow her hand upon his haughtier rival." u Thou shalt not needy" now muttered Vicenza through his grinding teeth, " bis term of life is short." Zachelli here firm¬ ly grasped his arm, and the prince was again silent. " The virgin mother reward thee for the boon !" exclaimed don Caesario: " but " Delay no longer," said Victoria, Hur¬ riedly : " at least, for to-night be gone. I fear even yet my father may discover us* " My fears are as tormenting as thine, sweet Victoria," replied Caesario, still irre¬ solute, " albeit their foundation is wholly different." " Yet he fears not what will presently happen," again murmured Vicenza, as if gloating in idea over the anticipated fall of his victim: but again Zachelli inter¬ posed, and the prince resumed his silence. " Fear not my faith, unkind Caesario!" said donna Victoria, now in a perfect ago-
ny of apprehension—" unkind to loiter thus in the jaws of peril, in defiance of my repeated bidding to be gone," "Adieu, then, beautiful Victoria!" said Caesario," since thou hast commanded me hence: but we shall meet again ----- " and the remainder of the sentence was breath¬ ed in so low a tone as to be perfectly in¬ audible to the two eavesdroppers. " Never-—never!" exclaimed Vicenza, softly. " Caesario and Victoria must meet no more." " Right—but abide thou here." whis¬ pered Zachelli. " Myself will dodge him to the dark avenue yonder, through which lie must proceed: no light, not even a starbeam, can pervade its gloomy pre¬ cincts. It is the fittest place." " Rather precede him thither then," said Vicenza, earnestly. " There conceal your¬ self until his approach; and, as he passes, strike him to the ground. Be sure, miss iot Ms heart." "Trust my aim, prince," answered Za¬ chelli, With confidence; * it never yet fail-
ed me in the hour of need; at save once, and then the knave escaped pie— mounted on Rosolia, too!—but the error is about to be atoned for. The doom of Caesario is sealed." Hereupon the bandit darted noiselessly away, screened by the darkness, while Vicenza, who remained stationary as di¬ rected, presently observed the devoted don Caesario follow in the same direction, at¬ tended by Isidore. The next instant, the prince perceived another figure at his elbow, and anon distinguished Beltramo, who, finding himself deserted by Bion¬ della, owing to her unwonted detention in Victoria's apartment, had again issued forth, in search of Isidore, just as Caesario and his faithful attendant had departed on their road home. Beltramo also saw, and as suddenly recognised, the prince his master, standing bareheaded, in a deeply-pensive attitude; and veiling his own private ob¬ ject, pretended merely to be concerned for the probable effect of the unwholesome night air upon his health; and, in conclu-
sion, conjured him to enter the house. Vicenza nodded a cold assent to this pro¬ posal, and (though it had been his inten¬ tion to await on the terrace the issue of the coming struggle, and strive to catch the unconscious victim's dying groan) slowly accompanied Beltramo to the door of the mansion; often pausing, however, as he proceeded, to listen if any sound dis¬ turbed the stillness of the surrounding at¬ mosphere. Just as he reached the portal, his ear caught something that resembled the noise of a distant scuffle. This was succeeded by a heavy fall, with the sound of footsteps evidently flying and in pur¬ suit, accompanied by something like a cry of vengeance, raised, he doubted not, by Isidore, Vicenza shuddered, and, with a quickened step, entered the mansion. Immediately he retired to his own apart¬ ment, and a stern wafture of his hand again commanded Beltramo to leave him. Here, wrapt in solitude, he once more re¬ volved in his mind the dreadful certainty of his bloody orders having been too faith-
fully fulfilled.—" Yes P he exclaimed," Caesario hath groaned his last, and my mortal enemy is childless!" At this mo¬ ment, the well-known signal of the robber (never more welcome than now) suddenly drew his attention to the casement. Prince Vicenza approached, and with a trembling hand, though he repented not of what bad been performed, gently withdrew the cur- tain that confined his gaze. He looked toward the terrace, and the sight which greeted him, though sufficient to curdle the unexcited mind with horror, filled the vengeful bosom of Vicenza with joy. There, indeed, stood the exulting bandit, Zachelli, just beneath the lattice, brandishing, in proud security, his bloody poniard, and triumphing in the dexterous perpetration of his crime. With an indis¬ tinct but hollow laugh, he raised the drip¬ ping blade as soon as his wolfish eyes dis¬ cerned the form of Vicenza at the case¬ ment, and shook it sternly in air, in token of his success. Vicenza, owing to the darkness, could not perfectly distinguish
the expression of the ruffian's features, the. words—'* The son of Castelli will trouble you no more!" fell faintly upon his ear, and he knew that they proceeded from Zachelli's lips. Then suddenly bound¬ ing away ere the prince could even express his recognition of the voice, had he felt inclined to do so, the figure diminished to his straining sight, and finally disappeared at the extremity of the terrace. Vicenza tasted not that night the balmy blessings of repose; his thoughts, as may be readily conjectured, were of such a na¬ ture as would not permit the drowsy deity to visit his wakeful senses with the leaden wand of forgetfulness. One object however arose often to his mind, arrayed in brighter hues than the rest, which rather preyed upon his spirits than employed his active cogitations. He fancied he already be¬ held his child Victoria, the envied bride of the marquis Lioni. Even amid the dis¬ turbed tossings of that restless night, his " strong imagination" saw the desired co¬ ronet " dropping upon her head." No ob-
stacle now, as during the lifetime of Caesa¬ rio, existed to prevent the union his soul wished should take place; and he fondly hoped speedily to salute her as the mar¬ chioness Lioni. Accordingly, he resolved to lose no time in forwarding the consum¬ mation of his most ardent desire. Lioni was to give, at his magnificent palazzo, a splendid fete on the ensuing morrow, and thither he determined to repair with Vic¬ toria ; hoping, at least, that its splendour would tend to divert from the memory of her former lover, if not even more effectual¬ ly to further his designs. Alas! the prince Vicenza, with all his experience, had yet to learn the simple maxim, that " there is no sure foundation set on blood."
CHAP. XV. There is a festival, where knights and dames, And aught that wealth or lofty lineage claims, Appear—a high-born and a welcome gue&t To Olhu's hall came Lora with the rest. Bvron. The marquis Lioni was a Venetian noble¬ man of some repute, having distinguished himself considerably in the service of his country, and acquired many enviable lau¬ rels as the reward of his valour and saga¬ city, though still in the bloom of his youth. Hence it is no Wonder that the high-mind¬ ed prince Vicenza revered nnd admired him for his patriotism, as much as those of an inferior turn of temper for his less shin¬ ing qualities. For Lioni, in reality, was esteemed to excel in every thing: he was the model of the court in peace, and the pride of the soldiery in time of war. He possessed a magnificent palazzo at Naples, where he usually spent much of his time,
since the loud war-drum had ceased, to summon to arms for tlie protection of his country. The cause of this seeming aver¬ sion to a residence in Venice was-simply as follows:—Lioni had recently been de¬ prived of both his parents by one fatal ac¬ cident—the oversetting of a gondola, when he had the misfortune to behold them pe¬ rish, without the means of assisting them; and though he still fought for Venice, he could not afterwards brook to sojourn, at a period when she needed not his services, near a scene replete with so many painful recollections. Now it chanced that the marquis Lioni had announced a magnificent entertain¬ ment to be given at his palazzo, on the sea shore, to which most of the nobility in Naples were invited; and of course, among the rest, the prince Vicenza and his beau¬ tiful daughter. It is true, Victoria had hitherto declined to be present at any of these costly festival 0 so frequent at Naples, but in which she took no delight, and felt no interest: but, on the present occasion,
Vicenza determined to assert his preroga¬ tive, and to enforce for once her compli¬ ance with his wishes. Accordingly, when Victoria perceived her father's resolution, she no longer attempted to resist his will, but wholly unconscious of the dire catas¬ trophe of the preceding night, submissive¬ ly prepared herself for the approaching festivity. For this night, moreover, Vicenza con¬ sidering his fair charge to be now in per¬ fect safety, the close attendance of Beltra¬ mo was dispensed with, who passed in consequence a most disagreeable tite-a4ete with Biondella, each suspecting the other to be guilty of false play, while neither had the courage or the candour to avow their machinations. Biondella, in the first place, strongly suspected Beltramo of pur¬ loining the billet-doux given her by Ah¬ med, which, she knew, had never reached Victoria's hands; while Beltramo, in his turn, justly deemed her guilty of coquetry, and connivance with the strange figure beneath the lattice for the attainment of
some secret object. As neither, however, seemed disposed to become communica¬ tive upon the subject of their mutual treachery, they passed the evening chiefly in angry recriminations, and parted finally with no better understanding of each other's motives than had subsisted be¬ tween them when they met. Meantime the prince Vicenza and don¬ na Victoria were sumptuously entertained at the delightful palazzo of the marquis Lioni, where no pains were spared by the noble owner to gratify his distinguished guests. To Victoria, indeed, who had yet mixed but little with the loftier classes of society, all that here she met with bore the stamp of amazing novelty, or rather the semblance of a wonder-striking dream. The very height and form of the apart¬ ments appeared to her perfectly astounding " Where the tall torches' glare, and silver lamps' More pallid gleam along the tapestried walls, Spread over the reluctant gloom which haunts Those vast and dimly-latticed galleries A dazzling mass of artificial light, Which show'd all things, but nothing as they were." VOL. I. K
Nor did the noble host himself deserve to be deemed the least attractive among the many brilliant objects that surrounded her, Lioni was habited on that auspicious night in a rich suit of velvet, which glittered with jewels, and not a little contributed to adorn his really-handsome figure: his hat was surmounted by a magnificent plume of feathers, and his demeanour was exceedingly courteous and graceful. Such, in appearance, was the young marquis Lioni, whose superiority, as may be well imagined, had not failed already to capti¬ vate many a female heart; but Victoria only beheld in him one who had lately enrolled himself among her persecutors, and accordingly treated him with corres¬ pondent coolness. Previous to the opening of the ball, one incident alone occurred worthy of obser¬ vation, and that only because the reader must hereafter become better acquainted with the persons thus presented to the no¬ tice of Victoria. The marquis Lioni, with a grace peculiarly his own, begged leave
to to the particular regard of prince Vicenza and his daughter, a fine- looking family, but natives of a distant land, with whose inhabitants hitherto Vic¬ toria had never dreamed of holding any intercourse. Colonel Malcolm, his lady, and Miss Ebba Malcolm, instantly ad¬ vanced, and were presented by the mar¬ quis to Victoria and her father. The dancing, however, almost immediately commenced, and amid its mazy circles, Victoria, for the present, soon lost sight of her new Scottish acquaintance. It was long past the midnight hour— the dancing had ceased for some time, and the company were seated to partake of the costly supper provided for their refresh¬ ment, ere Victoria remarked a strange figure standing opposite, vvho kept his glance steadily fixed upon her form. In a moment, she recollected the visage and habit of the wealthy Moor, whose eccen¬ tric appearance on the terrace had so strongly excited the curiosity of Biondella; K 2
and who, since that period, had incessantly haunted the pavement in front of her re¬ sidence, and annoyed her thereby extreme¬ ly. Of the contents of the amatory letter transmitted by Abdallah through her at¬ tendant, or even of its existence, Victoria still knew nothing. His strange soliloquy, however, part of which had been over¬ heard by herself and Biondella, she had not forgotten; and here, at a moment when least of ali she expected to encoun¬ ter him, surrounded by the great and the gay of Naples, his garb—his look—his very attitude the same, Abdallah again stood in her presence.
CHAP. XVI. He was a Turk, the colour of mahogany; And Laura saw hira, and at first was glad, Because the Turks so much admire philogyny, Although their usage of their wives is sad ; Tis said they use no better than a dog any Poor woman, whom they purchase like a pad: They have a number, though they ne'er exhibit 'era, Four wives by law, and concubines " ad libitum." Byron, Victoria beheld with considerable asto¬ nishment, and not without a slight degree of confusion, the unwelcome presence of this remarkable foreigner, and the una¬ bated, even painful attention, with which he continued to regard her. Who was he, and what, that her person should have thus suddenly become an object of such intense interest to him ?—her words—her looks — her gestures — almost even her very thoughts, appeared subjected to his piercing scrutiny. That he was wealthy,
if not noble, was sufficiently evidenced by the perfect nonchalance with which he mingled among the noblest and wealthiest who now surrounded him: yet seemed he neither to court nor avoid their courtesies —his whole attention appeared directed towards Victoria. More than once he seemed strongly inclined to address her, but as often checked himself, as if awed by the circling throng, and by their presence prevented from uttering the sentiments that appeared labouring to escape from his bosom. At the banquet, she observed that he drank no wine, ate little, and spoke less; still, however, returning courteous answers to those who addressed him, though evidently rather from his desire to avert the appearance of singularity, than from anv interest he felt in the conversation. Amid the glittering crowd, he appeared constantly watching for an opportunity of privately imparting something to Victoria; —-yet what could he have to communi¬ cate ? Certainly nothing which it behoved the daughter of Vicenza to feel equally
solicitous to hear; and Victoria resolved accordingly, by every means in her power, to avert the opportunity he sought. Once or twice during the meal (or was it only fancy ?) she thought she observed her father's eyes fixed earnestly upon the Moor, with something of an inquisitive, and rather stern expression. Perchance Vicenza had perceived the Mahometan stranger's marked notice of his child; yet, as Victoria never complained of the incon¬ venience to which she had been subjected, this appeared hardly probable. As soon as supper was concluded, however, Vicenza arose hastily, and (Victoria still thought) somewhat disturbed in manner; and wav¬ ing a mute adieu to his noble host, whose regret at their early departure was por¬ trayed but ineffectually, returned with his daughter home. Donna Victoria had some time quitted the splendid apartment, ere the grave Al¬ gerine roused himself from his reverie, or withdrew his gaze from the lofty gilded avenue last traced by her departing foot-
steps. Few charms did that magnificent entertainment possess for Abdallah, after Victoria had quitted it: he therefore soon left the marquis Lioni's likewise, and returned vexed and pensive to his own abode, an hotel in the renowned Strada di Toledo, the most beautiful street in .Naples. It is now time to make the reader some¬ thing better acquainted with the lineage, and boasted pretensions to superhuman authority, of Abdallah the Algerine; as also with the origin of the strange delu¬ sion which possessed him. In the year 1775, the Spaniards made a supposed irresistible descent upon Al¬ giers, with an army powerful and well appointed, and which boasted among its ranks a number of enthusiastic volunteers from most of the nations in Europe. Among the rest, a young French officer, named Eugene D'Aubigny, whose soul disdained the slothful repose of a pro¬ tracted peace, accompanied by his newly- wedded bride, joined the expedition in-
tended to extirpate the common enemies of the human race; resolved to risk his life and fortune in the service of the Spa¬ nish monarch, and of humanity. How¬ ever, contraiy to the expectations of the whole civilized world, the result of the attack meditated by these combined he¬ roes proved most bloody and disastrous. Eventually they were compelled to re¬ tire, while many thousands of their gal¬ lant number fell victims to the barbarity of the Turks and Moors, x^mong the latter was Eugene D'Aubigny, who, at the first furious onset, received the sci¬ mitar of one of the dey's chief officers in his heart. He fell without a groan; and his corpse was insulted by the exhilarated barbarians, who triumphed in the over¬ throw and defeat of that praiseworthy en¬ terprise. But the doom of his bride was still more horrible. Aghar Hussein, then go¬ vernor of Constantia, by whose practised hand the disarmed and helpless D'Au- K 3
bigny was slain, became thus possessed of the blooming partner of his victim, whom be seized and treated as his most valuable prize—the loveliest wreck that day of slaughter and devastation had prof¬ fered to his insatiable grasp. Rosalie D'Aubigny for a long time endured her loathed confinement in the harem of this misbelieving savage with fortitude and resignation; still repelling his advances with a scornful dignity, and resolutely refusing on any terms to surrender her purity. At length the offers of Aghar Hussein, contrasted with the horror and hopelessness of her present situation, pre¬ vailed over her firmness, and he made her his fourth wife, in which capacity she soon became his principal favourite. For though Aghar Hussein possessed three wives already, he had very unfortunately (as himself considered the matter) received issue by none; whereas Rosalie soon be¬ came pregnant, and presented him with a fine boy, the very image of his father in feature, and likely, as Aghar hoped, to
become also his imitator courage and cruelty. In this expectation, however, Aghar Hussein was bitterly disappointed. Abdallah, our ?>resent hero of Naples, was the offspring of this unhappy, forced, and fatal marriage. Rosalie D'Aibigny, though now the wife of Aghar Hussein, chief favourite of the dey, in whose stern bosom she had really kindlec 7 the bright flame of affec¬ tion, which, once given birth to, even in the heart of the depraved and savage Afri¬ can, never again expires, yet felt not her own happiness increased by this, as it were unnat ural elevation to a dignity she was not born either to estimate or enjoy. Neither could the infantile endearments of the playful Abdallah diminish her re¬ gret for the sacrifice she had made, or suf¬ fice to restoie her mind to even a tolerable degree of contentment and tranquillity. His dingy complexion served only to re¬ mind her of her misfortunes; his habits appeared repulsive—his mode of education so utterly different to that which would
have been adopted in the far-off country where she was born, and where she felt she must yet pass the residue of her days, if their end was to be passed in peace. Ac¬ cordingly, while the unconscious Abdal¬ lah was yet in his infancy, one clear morn¬ ing which succeeded a night of pitchy darkness, Rosalie was found missing: she had absconded to seek again her native land, and no glimpse of the vessel which had conveyed her over the dancing waves to liberty, was then visible. In vain Aghar Hussein stormed, and tore his beard: the bark was already far on its way toward the safer shore of her beloved France, and patience was now his only remedy. A. female slave, however, who was to have accompanied her, bearing the young Abdallah, but who missed her way in the darkness, returned, and confirmed by her tale the supposition of the fair Christian's flight. Such was the substance of the confession drawn from the affright¬ ed wretch by Aghar Hussein: but as the
full particulars never transpired, there is little doubt " The sack and sea had settled all in time," (after the long-approved custom of the in¬ habitants of Barbary) with respect to the only lips which could have published them. Aghar Hussein long lamented the loss of his faithless spouse, of whose person and society he had in reality grown deeply enamoured: nor did he, barbarian as he was, ever afterwards perfectly recover from the shock occasioned him by her unex¬ pected flight. Meantime Abdallah grew in appear¬ ance a promising youth, although by no means endowed with the courageous spirit and aspiring sentiments of his father. In defiance of this deficiency, however, he was carefully instructed in all those warlike ac¬ complishments peculiar to his race; and having attained an age of discretion, was made acquainted with his mother's story, for the loss of whom, it is said, he even sometimes wept. But before Abdallah
could hardly be said to have sprung to manhood, an event took place which to¬ tally changed not only his present condi¬ tion, but likewise the whole aspect of his future fortunes. Aghar Hussein, since the flight of Ro¬ salie, grown careless of his command, and even altogether reckless of his once-covet¬ ed ascendency over the horde to which he belonged, soon became totally absorbed and sunk in habits of effeminacy and sor¬ row; and falling shortly afterwards into disgrace, owing to the mutinous disposi¬ tion of the soldiery, whose fiery spirits he ought with corresponding vigour to have restrained, was decapitated by order of the dey. In favour of Abdallah, notwith¬ standing (in whom the dey yet hoped to find a promising officer) some special ex« ceptions to the general rule were made; and he was allowed to retain and enjoy the whole of his condemned sire's accu¬ mulated wealth and possessions. Thus, at an early age, he found himself the undis¬ puted master of riches almost unbounded,
for Aghar Hussein, betwixt his office and his piracies, had not omitted to replenish his coffers. But Abdallah, as already ob¬ served, was not of an ambitious turn of mind, neither possessed of sufficient cou¬ rage to rise in a state where so much de¬ pended upon personal bravery: or even had the young Algerine been gifted both with ability and inclination for such a course, the lesson of his father's fate would most probably have deterred him from the attempt. His time, therefore, instead of sharing in the warlike exercises practised by those of his years who wished to dis¬ tinguish themselves, was now passed prin¬ cipally at th e bagnios and coffee-houses, where, as usual in much more polished countries, he found no scarcity of suitable companions. Among the associates he here met with was one named Haly, a Moor of an ex¬ ceedingly volatile and facetious disposition -—in short, a man to whom a well con¬ trived and executed jest appeared the su¬ preme enjoyment of existence, and afford-
ed extreme delight. To this sprightly personage, Abdallah, who, in the midst of his leisure and magnificence, often found his time hang heavy upon his hands, soon warmly attached himself, as one in whose society he invariably found relief from the ennui that pursued him; while Haly, on his part, was glad to associate with one so much his own superior in wealth and im¬ portance as Abdallah was universally and not unjustly considered. Hence the friend¬ ship of Haly and Abdallah became pro¬ verbial, at all the places of public resort frequented by them: all thought Haly ex¬ tremely fortunate in the obtainment of such a companion, and not wholly unde¬ serving of the distinction he had gained, for his wit, though sometimes a little ex¬ uberant, was generally harmless; while few blamed Abdallah for the selection he had thus openly made. At one of those coffee-houses so fre¬ quently met with in Algiers, as well as at Constantinople, and all over the Levant, where idlers use commonly to lounge away
their time, Abdallah sat one morning smoking, and sipping his sober beverage, accompanied, as usual, by his constant as¬ sociate Haly, whose practical jokes, no less than his verbal sallies, were generally wel¬ come to revive his spirits. Around also sat cross-legged many Turks and Moors, enjoying the " chibouque's dissolving cloud" in profound silence, except when occasionally broken by some brief jocose or caustic observation, generally from the lips of Haly. At length, one of those iti¬ nerant story-tellers who abound in such places, overjoyed at the sight of so excel¬ lent an auditory, began to recite one of his very best tales for their amusement, and instantly drew the attention of all present to his narrative. The story, though alto¬ gether of the marvellous cast usually heard in Mahometan coffee-houses, possessed some peculiar incidents, whicli its swarthy and turbaned auditors (whose very breath suspended sometimes bespoke the earnest¬ ness of their attention) appeared to think more than commonly diverting. None
yielded more deep attention than Abdal- lah# and his friend Haly, to the narrative thus opportunely commenced to while away the lagging hours; and which, for the gratification of the European reader, and of course, therefore, with many consi¬ derable abbreviations, is here presented as the story of the Three Charmed Lives.
CHAP. XVII. I bear a charmed life, which must not yield To one of woman born Shakespeahk. " In the mountainous province of Khoras- san, in the kingdom of Candahar," said the animated narrator, " there lived one of the faithful, named Achmet, who had a fami¬ liar demon called by him Himmalay, from the circumstance of his being only visible toward the elevated summits of that vast chain of mountains. From this demon, Achmet was said to have received the
power of bestowing three charmed lives upon any such of his acquaintance as might happen to require the aid of his talismanic influence to prolong their exis¬ tence. His mode of proceeding, in these cases, was to be as follows:—Ere yet the fleeting breath had ceased to animate the heaving body, Achmet was required to ascend the nearest mountain, and there simply to demand the assistance of Him¬ malay in bestowing a lengthened term of existence (a charmed life) upon the indi¬ vidual then about to expire. This com¬ pact thus concluded between Achmet and Himmalay, however, differed from almost every other infernal league in the annex¬ ed particular—there was no retributive consequence denounced as an atonement for the supposed privilege enjoyed; the presumptuous exercise of this superhuman prerogative was to bring its own reward. These conditions premised, Achmet re¬ turned overjoyed to his native village in Khorassan, resolved to exert his unprece-
dented authority over the " pulse of life" for his own advancement and felicity. " In Khorassan he loved a maid, named Selima, but whose sire, Bulcherib, though only a mean herdsman, ignorant and po¬ verty-stricken, refused his assent to their marriage, on the ground of an ancient en- mitv that existed between the two fami- lies. His aged uncle too, Alhara, one of the mighty in Candahar, and on whose fa¬ vour the expectations of Achmet for fu¬ ture prosperity solely depended, resolute¬ ly objected to their union, under pain of being disinherited, and compelled to drag on a life of wretchedness and poverty. So determined was the opposition of these two worthies to the match, that even Achmet himself was compelled to despair, during their lifetime, of ever espousing his beloved Selima. Behold him now, therefore, amoiig the romantic mountains of Khorassan, communing secretly, and by night only, with the object of his sin¬ cere affection. He strove to console her for their present unavoidable separation—
he told her every thing; and the secret of his interview with the snow-clad* spirit was not concealed from Selima. ** Scarcely had the pleased maiden time to digest this strange intelligence, or him¬ self leisure to exult in the consciousness of the power he possessed, ere news was brought him that his uncle, Alhara, lay at the point of death, and requested his im¬ mediate attendance. Achmet flew to re¬ ceive his dying commands, and though the desert which lay between their abodes was arid, and, at that season, almost im¬ passable, was presently by his bed-side.— * Alas! Achmet,' said his uncle, feebly, • I am dying. No charm can restore my vigour to me again—there is not any power on earth can save me now!'—' There is,' thought Achmet—but he yet said no- thing. " Then ensued all the horrors of the gloomy death-bed; the gasping chest— the quivering lip—the grasping hand— the strained, unnatural voice—-the rattling
throat, and the vacant rolling eye. These Achmet witnessed, till he could look no more. His uncle, too, had left him his sole heir—could he then, or ought he, to behold him endure such agonies, and not strive to put an end to them by lengthen¬ ing his existence? No: he felt that it was impossible to act otherwise than be¬ stow the first of his charmed lives upon his gracious uncle, and rushed out of the mansion. " He ascended furiously the nearest emi¬ nence, as instructed, and implored Him¬ malay to intercede with the destinies for the life of the suffering Alhara, his ex¬ piring uncle. The demon did not appear, as before, to answer his request; but this was pardonable, he being only visible near the snow-crowned summits of the lofty Himmalay mountains. Achmet again de¬ scended, having completed the form pre¬ scribed, and Alhara soon perfectly re¬ covered. " On the return of Achmet to his anxious Selima, she could not forbear from blaming
him, in some degree, for thus foolishly be¬ stowing a lengthened life upon the man whose existence was, and long had been, the chief obstacle to their felicity. Ach¬ met, in reply to these insinuations, ac¬ knowledged his imprudence, but attempt¬ ed to excuse himself on the score of his feelings. Shortly afterwards, the father of Selima, Bulcherib, happened to be severely gored by some fierce brute of the forest, on which occasion, to the great grief of Seli¬ ma, his wounds were pronounced mortal. With the speed of thought, she flew to Achmet, and implored him to arrest the progress of the grim approaching tyrant. In vain he now represented to her the folly of thus proceeding, and awarding his inva¬ luable charm to those whose existence was already the primal cause of his discontent. In the end, Selima failed not to lay her commands upon him, for the restoration of her otherwise hopeless sire; and Ach¬ met, under the penalty of forfeiting by a refusal his claim to her affection, was obli¬ ged to obey her mandate.
" A second time, therefore, Achmet (though unwillingly) ascended a neigh¬ bouring mountain, and once more entreat¬ ed the assistance of Himmalay in prolong¬ ing the life of the wounded Bulcherib, or rather in presenting him with a new char¬ med existence. His prayer was heard, and the fierce old herdsman, recovering sud¬ denly from the effect of his wounds, look¬ ed as savage and morose as ever. The heart of Achmet ached, as he descended the rough mountain side, at the thought of having thus already lavished two of his charmed lives, without one jot advan¬ cing his own happiness—nay, even upon those whose lengthened existence served only to perpetuate his misery: but the seal was set, and he could not now, if he would, undo the fatal spell which hitherto had only augmented his wretchedness. " The obstacles to the anxiously wished- for union of Selima and Achmet, appeared now more formidable than ever. The rigid Alhara, restored to convalescence by the nostrum of the, alas! too susceptible
Achmet, still firmly adhered to his con¬ temptuous condemnation of the proposed match, as grossly derogatory to his ne¬ phew's dignity; while Bulcherib, regard¬ less of the boon conferred upon him, still sternly maintained the impossibility of forgetting or forgiving His former feud. In this situation of things, the spirits of Achmet sunk daily, as his hopes diminish¬ ed ; and by degrees, also, his health gave way, until his form became shrunk to the mere semblance of a skeleton, A thou¬ sand times did he secretly curse those de¬ testable 'juggling fiends—' ' That palter with us in a double sense; That keep the word of promise to our ear, And break it to our hope/ " But execrations were of little avail to extricate him from his present dilemma, or conduct him to the arms of his beloved Selima, who seemed, equally with himself, to feel the full weight of their undeserved misfortunes ; for, except pity be a crime, Achmet and Selima were certainly guilt- VOL. I. L
less. At length, constant musing upon this discouraging subject, aided by the little hope of change that seemed to pre¬ sent itself, united with the consciousness which possessed him, that his own weak¬ ness was the sole cause of his present de¬ spondency, brought hira nearly to the grave. " It was now quite time for Ach¬ met, as the reader may readily suppose? instead of bestowing charmed lives upon others, to turn his thoughts toward pre¬ serving his own. Medicines, he knew, were vain, while the sharp disease which had i worn him to the bones,' continued still to prey upon his drooping spirits. There was but one other resource left him in his desolation: he resolved once more to ascend the mountain, while yet he pos¬ sessed the power to do so, and demand of Himmalay the third charmed life promised him, to lengthen the term of his own wretched existence. " Again, therefore, to invoke the snowy fiend, the disappointed and enfeebled Ach-
met assayed to crawl up the steep moun¬ tain. With difficulty he proceeded, often pausing to rest upon the sloping side, which, a short time since, he had climbed with such comparative agility. At length he gained the summit—the clear, smooth brow whence, in ancient times, the mis¬ guided Persian worshipped his glorious idol, the all-animating sun. Here, fling¬ ing himself upon the flowery sward, in an agony of the bitterest grief, he exclaimed .—' Himmalay! hear me! and, if thou canst, behold me. I feel that I am going to die. I am wasted and feeble, and have hardly sufficient strength to climb this mountain. My voice has failed me, as thou hearest, and my limbs totter beneath me. Alas! faint and low is now the flut¬ tering breath which yet my bosom heaves while it painfully respires. The third charmed life thou hast promised should be at my disposal, oh Himmalay ! I solicit for myself/ No sooner had he spoken, than his form became sensibly invigorated l 2
-—he drew his breath more freely, and springing from the ground moist with his tears, for a moment blest the happy change in his condition. Then descending the mountain with a much lighter heart, and nimbler tread, than he had climbed rt, the deluded Mussulman hasted to convince Selima of the joyful alteration. " On gaining the valley, and long watch¬ ing in vain for an interview with the maid he loved, Achmet soon began to fear that he had little cause to rejoice at his reco¬ very. His fears were not ill grounded. Selima—his adored Selima—for whose sake he had dabbled in mystical delusions, forbidden by the prophet, and scorned by all good Mussulmen—Selima was grievous¬ ly indisposed, and never likely to meet his embrace again. He raged—he tore, but his transports now were unavailing. Se¬ lima sick—expiring—and Achmet no charmed life to bestow upon her! Hor¬ rible oversight!—yet such was the reality. How then could he endure a tedious lengthened life, if Selima was indeed
doomed to an early tomb ? He could not —would not, at least such were his ex¬ pressions; but Achmet was now obliged to submit to the destiny he had vainly sought to amend, by a control which it would have been better for him if he had never exercised. To complete his distrac¬ tion, Selima died; while her boorish fa¬ ther, Bulcherib, and his own relentless uncle, continued to exist in ail the arro¬ gance of triumphant pride and malignity. A deep depression now seized upon his mind, of which he ever afterwards strove to divest himself in vain. To add to his misfortunes, the story of the three charm¬ ed lives became public, and the rabble in consequence persecuted him for a wicked necromancer. In support of this heavy accusation, the chief witnesses were Al¬ hara and Bulcherib, the very beings who alone had received the benefit of his delin¬ quency. Long did he languish beneath the weight of their ingratitude, and a nu¬ merous train of insupportable afflictions, wishing in vain to die; and thus the pre-
ternatural renewal even of own ex¬ istence proved an intolerable curse to Achmet." Such was the tale to which Abdallah sat patiently listening, replenishing his pipe as often as the speaker paused in his recital; while in silence to the remainder of the equally-attentive circle, tobacco, and the juice of the sober berry— " The slaves bear round for rigid Moslems' use." The day was fast declining, and the shades of evening were beginning to de¬ scend over the city, ere the narrator con¬ cluded, so numerous and varied were the interpolations with which he had deemed it proper to adorn his tale. So far, how¬ ever, from this circumstance being consi¬ dered a fault by his auditors, each pro¬ fessed himself doubly grateful for the pro¬ longed amusement thus liberally afforded him. It is not uncommon for a group of idle Moors to sit the whole twelve hours through, hearkening to some story of the marvellous kind, and its length is seldom
likely to be productive of offence. Per¬ ceiving now, by the increasing darkness, that the hour was waxing late, but princi¬ pally because the tale was finished, Ab¬ dallah slowly arose, and having paid some¬ thing more than his usual compliment to the story-teller, as an acknowledgment of his superior ability, quitted the applaud¬ ing circle, and returned home.
CHAP. XVIII. A living drollery. Now I will believe That there are unicorusj that, in Arabia, There is one tree, the phoenix throne; one phosuis: At tbis hour reigning there. Shakespeare. Abdallah, as he slowly proceeded to his magnificent habitation (one of those beau¬ tiful villas which adorn the romantic en¬ virons of Algiers), could not avoid musing deeply upon the singular legend he had just been listening to. Indeed, so entirely had the subject absorbed his mind, that he
never once recollected having quitted the coffee-room without noticing his humble friend Haly, or even appearing conscious of his presence. Haly, however, in spite of this apparent neglect, stole softly after him ; but perceiving that he was still en¬ gaged in profound rumination, forbore, for the present, to interrupt his reverie. Ab¬ dallah, therefore, continued to proceed homeward with a solemn and meditative pace, evidently fancying himself alone and unobserved. The night (for night had now closed around the luxuriant lands¬ cape) was one of that soft balmy descrip¬ tion so favourable to meditation, whereon no breath of wind appears to stir among the surrounding objects, while " whatever walks is gliding like a spirit." The silver moon had already risen high, and shed a faint lustre upon the flat-roofed buildings, and alabaster-hued terraces, of the receding city, whose indistinct hum appeared fast subsiding into silence. Thus, deep sunk in a pensive though not melancholy mood, did Abdallah trace leisurely the course of
the silent stream, or rivulet, that flowed near his somewhat sequestered habitation, of which a better description cannot be given than in the words of lord Byron. " Its banks are fringed with many a goodly tree, And flowers the fairest that may feast the bee ; Such in her chaplet infant Dian wove, And innocence would offer to her love. These deck tlie shore ; the waves their clunnel make In windings bright and mazy like the snake,'* With regard to the mansion itself, it was used formerly by Aghar Hussein merely as a retreat during the hot summer season; but had been since selected, as almost his sole residence, by Abdallah, whose esta¬ blishment, notwithstanding his immense wealth, was not proportionately extensive. The beauty of its situation chiefly had in¬ duced its present occupant to fix upon it for his future abode; and even now he would fain have lingered to contemplate the many beauties by which it was sur¬ rounded; for Abdallah, though wholly void of those ambitious and enterprising L 3
qualities his deceased sire so earnestly strove to inculcate, still possessed a taste (considered somewhat novel among his countrymen) capable of appreciating and enjoying the calm magnificence of nature: but his mind was at present occupied with images of a different kind, and—perhaps for the first time during his existence—he passed the scene spread before him without deigning to admire or commend its sur¬ passing loveliness. On entering the portal, he was met by Ahmed, the most faithful and attached of his retinue, who ushered his master into a rich apartment, the sofas of which were covered with crimson velvet, and the walls painted in the best style of Ottoman taste, with a splendid view of Algiers, the whole adorned with pillars and cornices of porphyry, and rendered luxuriously com¬ modious by a number of cushions fringed with gold. Abdallah flung himself list¬ lessly upon a sumptuous sofa, near which an ever-springing fountain of the purest water diffused an agreeable murmur, and
delicious coolness. Ahmed now seemed much inclined to be talkative, but Abdal¬ lah, by a gesture perfectly comprehended, intimated his wish for silence. Still, how¬ ever, the faithful servant appeared unwil¬ ling to retire until he had communicated something, which, by his manner, seemed to be of importance; until Abdallah, re¬ solved not to be disturbed with household broils at that moment, and little dreaming that he was likely to be involved in any of more serious consequence, with a second haughty (almost menacing) wafture of his hand, drove him from the apartment. Finding himself again alone, or at least, believing himself to be so, Abdallah con- tinued to pursue the train of idle reflections awakened in his mind by the marvellous narrative he had that day heard—one which (though he knew not wherefore) had excited in him a more than usual de¬ gree of in terest, and even actually inclined his orthodox bosom to harbour forbidden thoughts. And now, with the privilege of a man " at home," and little suspecting
that any eavesdropper would here over¬ hear his ruminations, he no longer confined himself to mere thoughts, but vented his observations freely in the following man¬ ner.—" To possess the power of bestowing three charmed lives! What a happy mor¬ tal I should be, would the fates deign to endow the worthless Abdallah with a si¬ milar privilege! though, it is true, I would use it differently. It must indeed be a very enviable prerogative." Here he was interrupted by an indistinct sound, which Abdallah could compare to nothing but a smothered burst of laughter: yet feeling conscious of the impossibility of such an interruption in that place, he thought he could only have fancied it, and proceeded. —" In the first place, I would only con¬ descend to exert the power thus vested in my voice for the benefit of those who were able to reward me with a suitable return; and as the favour which it would then be mine to bestow even princes might not scorn, what recompence might I not de¬ mand and receive for the slight trouble of
working so signal a miracle! Two of my charmed lives should—upon my reception of some noble and coveted boon, in acknow¬ ledgment of the service—be at the com¬ mand of the great ones of the earth, always taking especial care to reserve the third, in case of any unforeseen accident, for the re¬ novation of my own existence. Oh that I possessed, or was aware of the means of obtaining so golden a prerogative!" " The means are in thy power," said a voice in a hollow tone, after a short pause. Abdallah started, and looked timidly around. Two tapers only lighted the apartment, and these were placed too far from his present situation to shed more than an indistinct gloom around the sofa where he lay. It is true, the moonbeams through the lofty casements struggled faintly into the room, and glittered on the bright spray of the fountain which played near him: but this mixture of ar¬ tificial and moonlight served rather to confuse all distant objects, than to render them more clearly distinguishable. Ab-
dallah, therefore, looked around him, but failed to distinguish any living object whence it was possible the mystic voice could proceed. Thus circumstan¬ ced, he had not the power to rise, or even to summon his attendants, and search, as he should have done, for the supposed in¬ truder, but retaining his position on the sofa, exclaimed aloud, yet in tremulous accents-—" Who is there dares thus open¬ ly to disrespect the privacy of Abdallah ? —-who was it answered? If any thing human hears me, let him speak." " And if aught that is not human, Ab¬ dallah," said the concealed querist, "should happen to overhear thee, art thou afraid to listen to its voice ?" " What meanest thou ?—and who art thou?" now demanded Abdallah, with increased alarm. " My nature, at this present interview, it is impossible that thou shouldst wholly comprehend," answered the voice, in the same deep tone: w but I am one who has
it in his power to bestow upon thee the boon thou so desirest." " Step forth—let me behold thee!" ex¬ claimed Abdallah. " I am but a shadow," said the voice, " except on the Himmalay mountains." " Ah! then thou art Himmalay!" cried Abdallah, and, springing from his seat, he fell prostrate upon the carpet, still gaz¬ ing with due reverence toward the spot whence seemed to proceed those more than earthly accents. After a somewhat lengthened pause of silent awe and won¬ der, he strove to resume, in a voice chok¬ ed with real or feigned emotion, and vented his feelings in the following strain, " Alas! great Himmalay—thy slave is overburthened with gratitude for this most gracious and unexpected visit. Why shouldst thou leave those lofty sum¬ mits clothed in eternal whiteness, to com¬ mune with so worthless a creature as my¬ self, but in the fulness of thy condescend¬ ing benevolence to do him good ? Most mighty Himmalay! the full glory of
whose immortal nature, indeed, surpasses my imagination to conceive or compre¬ hend—the humblest of thy worshippers entreats to know the cause of this flatter¬ ing preference, of which he feels himself altogether unworthy ?" " Deem not so lightly of thy own de¬ serts," again responded the spirit, solemn¬ ly, " nor think that Himmalay would deign to visit those whom merit had not already distinguished from the grosser mass of earth's inhabitants. Thy actions, and thy course of life, Abdallah, have al¬ ready won my especial favour, and final¬ ly procured for thee this indeed unusual visit. I approve thy way of life, because thou art a friend to frolic and mirth, and bearest no enmity to the utterer of the harmless jest, even though thy own frail¬ ties be sometimes made the subject of his satire; nor dost wholly scorn the flavour of the generous wine—though forbidden by thy prophet—which gives to all these their chief attraction and finish. In par¬ ticular, too, I admire and commend thy
disinterested friendship for a young and lively Moor, named Haly, whose wit is a treasure to himself—to say sooth, the only valuable he possesses—and whose companionship is a credit to thee. In an especial manner, 1 would recommend this young Moor to thy bounty; and the more strongly, for that he hath but small ex¬ pectations of bounteous treatment else¬ where. He is an inventive and amusing genius-—a boon companion, as thou know¬ est, and attached to thy society; and will not prove ungrateful for the future favours with which it may be thy intention to re¬ ward his fidelity." " I am glad that thou approvest of my friendship for Haly !" exclaimed Abdallah, in a sudden transport of more than usual affection for his lively acquaintance; " and I will not forget to recompense more libe¬ rally in future than I have hitherto done, the gratification his company has afforded me; nor will I cease my eare of his for¬ tunes, or abate my solicitude for his ad¬ vancement, until I have rendered his sta-
tion in society as comfortable and respect¬ ed as my own. And now I think of it— I recollect leaving him in the coffee-room, about an hour ago, without so much as saying —' Haly, good bye;' but it shall be my care anon to send for him hither, and so make amends. With half the contents of my father's coffers, which thou, spirit! who knowest every thing, knowest were well lined, would I purchase his forgive¬ ness, sooner than neglect or disobey thy least injunction. I cannot better expend some part of the immense possessions be¬ queathed to me, than on the favourite of Himmalay: my purse—my stud—almost my very palace, shall henceforth be open to Haly as to myself." " Thou needest not fear that his forgive¬ ness will be long withheld from thee," said the spirit, evidently gratified by this deter¬ mination, " In the mean tirae, then, Ab¬ dallah, thou dost accept the boon which it is my present purpose to confer upon thee?" " Most thankfully, great spirit!" return-
ed Abdallah, with profound reverence: " but repeat to me upon what conditions." " I simply require of thee," replied the voice, distinctly, " that when the vital flame thou wouldst revive is about to be¬ come extinguished, thou shalt ascend to the summit of some neighbouring emi¬ nence, and there in solemn accents remind thv benefactor of the covenant that exists between us. This achieved in due form, Himmalay will not be found deaf to thy intercession, nor backward to grant thy prayer, hitherto conceded only to mortals who have sought his august presence amid the frozen pinnacles of earth's loftiest mountains. Such is the only sacrifice re¬ quired by the potent being whose voice now speaks to thee from his worshippers- few indeed in number—in return for the exercise of this inestimable privilege." " The very same that Achmet was en¬ joined to perform," now murmured Ab¬ dallah, while a deeper feeling of reverence insensibly pervaded his bosom, on receiv¬ ing this additional conviction that he was
indeed in the presence of the immortal Himmalay himself. After a transient pause, apparently de¬ signed to impress the matter more indeli¬ bly on his remembrance, the voice of the spirit resumed in conclusion—" Add to this, that I require the fulfilment of thy promise in behalf of Haly, and feel assured in future of Himmalay's constant attention to thy wishes. With this assurance, I depart, as at present there is no human being in existence of whose life it might behove thee to request the renewal. In pure plain honesty, I tell thee this—thou hast not a friend on the earth, save Haly, worth thy care; and his planet never beam¬ ed more propitiously, nor did his fate ever wear a more promising aspect, without any immediate application of thy charm, than at the present moment." " I have been thinking," said Abdallah, " whether, as a good and loyal Mussulman and subject, I ought not to proffer to the dey one of those valuable charmed lives (always upon condition of a suitable recom-
pence) as my most gracious sovereign, and chief of the faithful in Algiers. Besides too, for that he spared my property and effects, though my sire, Aghar Hussein, died deposed and disgraced ------" " Hold there!" said the spirit, interrupt¬ ing him—" be sure first that the dey still intends thee good." Even while the voice yet sounded in his ears, there arose a confused din in the outer court-yard, mingled with the ringing of harness, and the clattering of horsemen, which failed not (in spite of the august presence of the demon) forcibly to attract his attention. Never but once before did he recollect having heard a similar tumult, and then those appalling sounds, he too well remembered, were the fatal prelude of his betrayed father's downfall. Abdal¬ lah sprung suddenly from his posture of adulation before the supposed spirit; but ere he could recover from the stupor into which he appeared thrown by this terrible uproar, his faithful Ahmed again rushed into the apartment.
We pass briefly over the subsequent events, as not materially affecting the main thread of our narrative. The reader will not have forgotten the anxiety of the vigi¬ lant Ahmed, on the entrance of his dissi¬ pated master, to communicate his own pri¬ vate suspicion that every thing was not exactly as it ought to be; but whom, not¬ withstanding, the doomed Abdallah drove angrily from his presence. The facts of the case were these: the dey, vexed and disturbed in mind by the threatened inva¬ sion of an incensed power which he had too long provoked with impunity, and al¬ together disappointed in the expectations he had formed of the rising Abdallah's bent and services, determined at once to revoke his former merciful decree, seize on the accumulated treasures of Aghar Hussein, and compel his dissolute effemi¬ nate son to carve out his own fortune, by signalizing himself at the expence of the approaching enemy. Of this treacherous resolution, his attached slave, Ahmed—al¬ ready well skilled in the service of the wily
Aghar Hussein to decipher the meaning of court movements, if such a term may be applied to the rude policy of barbarians —found means to obtain some secret inti¬ mation ; his fears adding thereto many aggravated circumstances, which the ima¬ gination of the terrified African, who knew the habitual cruelty of his country¬ men, failed not to supply. Now was the time at which Ahmed, who acted as chief steward in Abdallah's somewhat irregular establishment, might, by proving false, and currying the favour of the dey's officers, have effectually overturned his master's fortunes: but he happily proved faithful, and saved the whole. Having secretly transferred to a trusty vessel chief part of the heedless Abdallah's wealth (consisting principally of diamonds, rubies, and gold coin), contained in strong and weighty coffers, he suddenly—on the arrival of the dey's plundering detachment, and conse¬ quent confirmation of his worst apprehen¬ sions—informed his master of his perilous situation, Abdallah knew too well the
approach of those remorseless mercenaries, to doubt the information even for a single moment; and a few minutes convinced him how much he was indebted to the prudence and foresight of his trusty abused slave. Such of his household as had ven¬ tured to resist the rapacious ruffians, were already massacred; and such of his harem as were worth the keeping (for any of whom indeed he cared but little) would, be knew, be transferred to the palace of the dey. Thus bereft of all except the pro¬ perty saved by Ahmed, the pair instantly embarked in the same vessel, having by a private passage given the slip to their pur¬ suers, and speedily, by good fortune, ar¬ rived in safety at Naples. Since that time, Abdallah had neither seen nor heard aught of his poor friend Haly, towards whom his benevolent in¬ tentions had been thus unexpectedly frus¬ trated ; nor could he even despatch the willing Ahmed for him to Algiers, that city being now in a state of siege, and its harbour blockaded. Still, however, be
firmly believed in the reality of the which had appeared, or rather spoken to him, on the night of his sudden expulsion from his native home; and likewise re¬ lied, with equal tenacity, upon the ima¬ ginary power to renew man's fleeting ex¬ istence, with which it was his peculiar weakness to fancy himself endowed.
CHAP. XIX. Say, gentle maid, what prompts thee to forsake The paths thy birth and fortune strew with flowers, Through Nature's kind endearing ties to break, And waste in cloister'd walls thy pensive hours ? Jerningham. An impatient ringing at the gate of the convent of St. Rosalie, caused the aged porteress to increase her speed, as she ap¬ proached the humble wicket, wondering what guest, at that unusual time, thus clamorously demanded admittance. The hour was late, and the night being none VOL. i. M
of the clearest, rendered the usual peep of sister Agnes (the name of the porteress) through the small aperture made for that purpose, of littie avail to discover who was on the outside. Thus circumstanced, sister Agnes was obliged to exert her voice, for the purpose of ascertaining the name and business of the noisy intruder. " Who is there ?" she accordingly de¬ manded, in a shrill tone. " Who knocks so late, and so irreverently, at the dwelling of peace ?" " Suppose the prince Vicenza!" said a haughty voice on the outside, which Ag¬ nes indeed well knew to be no other than thrt of the prince himself. No further interrogatories were now deemed necessary by the aged porteress, who, with a trembling hand, and sudden¬ ly humbled demeanour, immediately pro¬ ceeded to unlock the wicket. For the prince Vicenza, as was well enough known to all the inmates of that holy sanctuary, and more especially to the porteress her¬ self, had long been accustomed to obtain
admittance at any hour to the abbess of St. Rosalie, who (it was given out) consi¬ dered his extensive largess, and known piety, as forming a sufficient passport to her presence, and safeguard for the charac¬ ter of her establishment. The door being therefore readily flung open, sister Agnes, after crossing herself demurely, with a low courtesy, welcomed him to enter. Vi¬ cenza bowed his plume as he passed the humble portal, though not (as bigotry might have supposed) solely in reverence to its holy inmates, and strode onward to¬ wards the private apartment of the abbess Rosalie, with whom it appeared his object to obtain an interview. And now, within that solitary apart¬ ment sat the prince Vicenza, while the porteress was gone to arouse the lady ab¬ bess, and leaned— •* Hi* bowed head on his hands, and shook as 'twere With a convulsion—then arose again,'' and, with a distracted air, traversed im- m 2
patiently the gloomy chamber.-*" It must —it must be so!" he mentally exclaimed. " There is no other course by which my honour—my consistency—my very exis¬ tence, can any longer be preserved." At length, the abbess made her appearance, but her presence seemed at first to have little visible effect upon his chagrin. She found him still pacing the room in the utmost disorder, and so wholly regardless of all passing occurrences, as to appear hardly conscious of her entrance. She was a majestic woman, somewhat above the middle stature, of French extraction, and possessed of an agreeable countenance, which had evidently once been beautiful. Her name, in the happier moments of her youth, it was believed, had been Rosalie D'Aubigny. There was likewise a ru¬ mour of her having formerly lived (and some said sinfully) among the misbeliev¬ ing inhabitants of Barbary; in atonement for which guilty portion of her existence, it was consequently averred, she had de¬ voted herself to her present mode of life.
This inference (which, in the main parti¬ culars, was indeed correct) appeared drawn principally from her having first founded a religious edifice with her own scanty means, in all the apparent bitterness of penitence for some unexpiated crime, and afterwards dedicated it to the saint whose name she bore. For some minutes Vi¬ cenza continued to pace the apartment, covering his visage with his hand, as if the very light—the faint and sickly light even of that shadowy chamber—was painful and oppressive to him: then, turning abruptly to the abbess Rosalie— " Where is my child?" he exclaimed. " Where is my beloved Alphonsine ? I would converse with her immediately— hasten, and fetch her hither." " Prince!" said the abbess, respectfully, yet with much of dignity in her manner — F ' you know the rules of our order— rules which, I am sure, the prince Vicen¬ za is little likely to contemn, nor, without some strong cause, to violate. Pardon
me, therefore, if I venture to suggest that, at this unseemly hour------" " Away—away with remonstrances!" exclaimed Vicenza, wildly. " What are rules to him whose very soul is orderless —a chaos of confused and horrible imagin¬ ings—almost a wilderness of despair ! Yet must I add, that it is not disrespect for thine order, or for thee (and here his voice softened with gratitude while he spoke) which induces me thus rudely to violate the necessary forms of this hallow¬ ed residence—hallowed by the presence of so many purer hearts than mine. But it is necessary that I should converse imme¬ diately with Alphonsine—I cannot rest, until I have obtained my injured child's forgiveness, and placed her, it may be, in a sphere more consonant to her deserts and happiness. I know thou wilt argue with me—but forbear: it is not I alone who desire this, but heaven itself seems to decree her release from this austere habita¬ tion. Hereafter, as the lady abbess, I may tell thee more, and much too that may
not displease thee; but at present, go— fetch my Alphonsine hither !" The abbess yet loitered irresolutely near the threshold: his looks—his gestures, and, more than all, his frantic words, alarmed her. At length she stammered—-" If the presence of Alphonsine only may serve to restore ------" " Bring me my child!" reiterated Vi¬ cenza, almost furiously; and the abbess in¬ stantly quitted the apartment, to return presently accompanied by Alphonsine. No sooner did Vicenza again find him¬ self alone, than he exclaimed—" No, no, this hateful union must never be, even though her very life should prove the for¬ feit of her disobedience. Her life!—ay, even my once-beloved Victoria's. Have I not done all I could to separate them, and yet done every thing in vain? Flight hath been essayed, but vainly—the ruffian and his dagger, too, have been employed in vain. Don Caesario is fast recovering from his wounds, alas ! no longer likely to prove mortal. Curse on Zachelli's failing
arm, that reached not victim's Curse on my own unhappy destiny, since I have lived to experience the bitterness of possessing a disobedient child! So re¬ solute, too—but the hour of thy punish¬ ment, if not of thy repentance, ungrateful Victoria! is at hand. Yes! Alphonsine shall not be sacrificed to the fulfilment of my dreadful vow: she alone who hath de¬ served to be banished for ever from the presence of Vicenza, shall suffer the pe¬ nalty of her disobedience, and redeem my oath. Alphonsine will I now take to my bosom—ay, even into the bosom, too, of my own beloved Sicily, where her future happiness shall be my perpetual care; while Victoria—oh ! name now trebly ac¬ cursed, and, next to that of Castelli, grown hateful to my ears—shall languish out the remainder of an irabittered existence, a miserable victim in her stead. Away, compassion !—begone, remorse! Not all her pleading looks, though fraught appa¬ rently with an angel's purity, and in reality with an angel's beaming loveliness, now
shall change my purpose. My resolution is unalterable." The door now opened softly, and the abbess again appeared, introducing a young and interesting female, evidently Alphon¬ sine, to the presence of him who was awaiting her arrival with perturbation and anxiety. Vicenza sprang forward to meet her, and with an energy which beseemed not altogether his present situation to¬ wards her (that of a rigid sire exacting from her obedience the terrible fulfil¬ ment of a gloomy vow) strained her to his fond, paternal bosom. The figure of Alphonsine appeared exquisitely graceful, and such as, in spite of her secluded edu¬ cation, bespoke almost to conviction the loftiness of her birth. Her face vvas not, indeed, so beautiful as Victoria's; but there was a degree of stateliness in her mien which Victoria's figure possessed not, or exhibited in a less degree. On the whole, however, there was a striking si¬ milarity between their persons and fea-
tures, so that, to a mere casual observer, it might possibly even have been difficult to distinguish them apart. As it vvas, their observant sire (who alone had yet seen them both) found it impossible to de¬ cide which possessed the advantage with respect to personal endowments. Mean¬ time, after wiping away a silent tear, as she witnessed their transports, the abbess, Rosalie, slowly retired, saying—" Adieu, my daughter! Be happy in the enjoy¬ ment awhile of those transports, which, be assured, there are others in this vale of misery who vainly sigh to enjoy. The hour of midnight vespers is not distant, and then we meet again." Vicenza looked at her expressively, ere she quitted the apartment, as if he would have spoken something of consolation, for he saw that the present scene strongly re¬ minded her of her wretchedness: but his lips yet appeared to cleave together, and he found it impossible to utter a word. After a violent effort to subdue his own emo-
tion, he turned again to regard the weep¬ ing superior, but she was gone. The prince then gently supported Al¬ phonsine to a seat, and gazing on her countenance, exclaimed—" My affection¬ ate, injured child—alas! that I should even thus far injure one whose conduct hitherto has been marked only by obedi¬ ence and affection !—but the blessed hour of change is come. The scales are fallen from off my blinded eyes—blinded by some strange prejudice against the virtues of my better child, and a great—a glori¬ ous change, Alphonsine, now awaits thee. But let me use more method in the wild disclosure I am now about to make, lest my extravagance of speech tend rather to bewilder thee, than cause thee more clear¬ ly to comprehend thy situation." " Blessed saint Rosalie!" said Alphon¬ sine, attempting to count the rosary at her girdle—" whatever the origin of this wild demeanour, I conjure thee, saint, to aid in the restoration of my honoured sire's tran¬ quillity. These passionate expressions do
indeed affright me, and I can only trem¬ ble, without comprehending their mean¬ ing." Again Vicenza gazed upon her arched and placid brow, turned upward with a meek devotional expression, over which the solitary taper that streamed through the apartment shed a feeble, " religious light," yet sufficient to reveal to the en¬ raptured parent its present expression—-its calmness and its beauty, and felt his breast grow more tranquil beneath the in¬ fluence of those holy sensations awakened by her words and attitude. At this mo¬ ment, the first stroke of the bell announ¬ cing the approach of midnight vespers smote his ear. A solemn silence ensued; again it sounded, and again was succeed¬ ed by the same unbroken silence: but on the third reverberation of that sullen peal along the gloomy dormitory, a faint scuf¬ fling arose, as of distant footsteps hurry¬ ing to the chapel. Vicenza listened, and a solemn awe stole softly over his senses: never before did he remember to have
been so deeply affected by the observance of monastic order and solemnity. How much inferior now seemed the mighty prince Vicenza, torn and disturbed by his own conflicting passions, even to the mean¬ est of these thrice-purified virgins hasten¬ ing at the silent hour of midnight to the appointed place of prayer! Such was the inference which presented itself to his mind, though his heart smote him sorely as he drew the comparison. Pierced with the reflection of his own unworthiness— for Vicenza was at all times open to devo¬ tional impressions, but more especially so at the present solemn moment—the proud warrior of Sicily, while the bursting organ pealed its hallowed cadences around him, sat and wept. END OF VOL. I.
Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-Street, London.
