Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Alibeg the tempter: a tale wild and wonderful
ALIBEG THE TEMPTER.
CHAP. I. I shut my eyes lo nil armind mc, und in fancy beheld him lying in the shade before me. Arabian M.S. THE last rich beams cf an Arabian sun now adorned the lofty promontories, and innumerable palm-trees, which, in a few scattered parts of Yemen, decorate the vast sandy plains of that spacious and de¬ solate continent; and irradiated each with a glowing tinge that really resembled the bright golden hues, and sapphire-coloured reflections, so often alluded to, by Eastern writers, in their fantastic descriptions of VOL. I. B
some scene. of those supremely favoured spots, called oases, which smile even in that land of drought and sterility, near the banks of the Euphrates, where nature seemed to have lavished all her store in a momentary mood of thoughtless extravagance, as if to make atonement for her former nig¬ gardly dispensation of the bounties of Pro¬ vidence. On every side were scattered thick blossoms of surpassing beauty, and exhaling various odours, occasionally in¬ termingled with fruits of divers kinds, among which, however, the dale and me¬ lon were the most conspicuous — afford¬ ing, doubtless, a delicious sight to the tired followers of the thirsty caravan, fresh from the torrid deserts which divide Mec¬ ca from the sumptuous capital of Egypt; and presenting, to the startled eye of an unaccustomed visitant, all the agreeable variety of objects and productions which diversify the opposite coast of Barbary. At a little distance, on one side, were situated
situated many small mounds, or eminen¬ ces, of various dimensions and appear¬ ance, most of them covered with trees, and a few of them with verdure. Far beyond these, but lying in the same di¬ rection, could "be discerned a loftier range of mountains, apparently fertile, whose elevated summits still blushed in the tints of the departing sunshine; while through the whole of this terrestrial paradise mean¬ dered the broad and beautiful Euphrates, visible here, to the enraptured gazer, for an incredible number of miles. At length, as this majestically-rolling torrent ap¬ proached the almost-forgotten site of that once-famous city, Babylon, its course was concealed by the massy heaps of ruins among which beasts of prey, and broods of dangerous reptiles, find a suitable abid¬ ing-place, secure from the unwelcome mo¬ lestation of man* But narrow was the b 2 space
space allotted upon sterile the existence of flowers and productions such as these—its boundaries were even now in view. For, on the other side, was stretched a vast expanse of dreary desert, which the eye ached to rest upon, and the mind to contemplate; as if sight shrunk from surveying utter cheerlessness, or imagination dreaded to traverse the immensity of a barren wilderness, with¬ out comforts, and almost without, inhabi¬ tants. On a delightful sandy eminence, conti¬ guous to this verdant little region, was extended the form of a young and grace¬ ful Arab, who lay musing under the light palm foliage, which, combined with the broad leaves of the sycamore, afforded him a cool and sumptuous canopy. He appeared tall, well-proportioned, and beau¬ tiful. there; neither shall the shepherds niuke their fold there. 1 '— Isaiah liii 20. " Her ciiics are a desolation, » dry land, and a wilderness, a Idwi wherein no man dwellctli, neither duth any sun of man pass thereby,"— Jeremiah, Ii. 43.
glossy plaits of raven-co¬ loured hair descended, and clustered in ringlets, upon his shapely shoulders; while flung carelessly on the sand beside him lay his fairy bonnet of palm-leaves, woven by the agile fingers of some Arabian dam¬ sel, and which served him instead of tur¬ ban. His complexion was much fairer than many of tlie " sun-spoiled" counte¬ nances of his parching clime, and his no¬ ble lineaments possessed an open expres¬ sion that seemed foreign, or superior, to the dull race with whom he was associated. His features were not of that flat cast which characterizes the Arabs generally, nor yet indicative of that innate fierceness peculiar to some of the wandering tribes: on the contrary, his nose was aquiline— his eyes soft and expressive, and the whole contour of his aspect strikingly handsome. " Wild as his land, in native deserts bred," he appeared clad in the coarse, and simple habit, usually worn by his confederates in B 3 that
cif predatory warfare: was supported by the smooth stem of an adjacent syeaioore—his pistols were in his girdle—his sabre sparkled at his feet, and im hyke (a loose garment, commonly seven feet, or upwards, in length), of which he seemed to liave lately divested himself, lay folded at the foot of a majestic palm. ISTotiar distant was discernible an Ara¬ bian hyma, or tent covered with goat¬ skins, which appeared to have been re¬ cently pitched on the desert side of the eminence; and the vicinity of this rugged habitation added to the singular and im¬ posing effect of the scene. While thus at ease reclined this sym¬ metrical ** son of the desert," whose name was Alhamet, inhaling the soft evening breeze which, impregnated with fragrance, fanned his uncovered forehead, his ears were agreeably surprised by a distant sound of melody, that seemed borne from among the intricate windings of the flow¬ ery maze beneath him. He would have deemed
deemed it the cry of the plover, which remembered having often heard in the vi¬ cinity of large sheets of water, biit its tone was wholly different: neither could he with certainty attribute it to any of the numerous tribes of reptiles which com¬ monly infest these fertile specks in the desert; even were it possible that aught so forbidding in its nature could have pro¬ duced such dulcet harmony. Still he lis¬ tened with rapture to the fitful chime that each succeeding current of wind bore faintly round his brow, and then sank im¬ perceptibly; as if endowed with just suf¬ ficient energy to waft it to his temples, and expire.—" it can be only the tinkling of some stray camel," said Alhamet, un¬ consciously uttering his thoughts, " that has wandered away from our hyma in quest of the delicious springs, and her¬ bage, of this prolific region. Mohara de¬ lights in decorating them with gay bells, and plumed trappings ; and Muley loves to praise, fc_* Mohara's sake, the feathery b 4 adornments
adornments of rents, too, are charmed to see them happy —■it is only I who am miserable. Avails it aught that I adore this vaunted, new- sprung prophet, whose birth-place was the glorious Mecca, and whose shrine is at Medina, where thousands daily worship him, if to me life presents but a vacuum of dreariness without variation or excite¬ ment * ? Razekah might still have given me sustenance, and Hafedah have sup¬ ported me amid these pathless deserts— Salemah might have preserved me in af¬ fliction, and Sakiah have yielded me suffi¬ cient of refreshing moisture, if such was to be my existence. I would plough the deep—I would traverse distant regions— I would do aught to vary the loathed mo¬ notony of the life to which I am doomed." As he ceased, his dark-searching eyes glanced rapidly over the fading beauties of
of the now-empurpled and rested longer on those yet golden spots produced by the growth of a small yellow flower, or rather weed, found sometimes in the desert, and which has at a distance a beautiful appearance: but so baneful to existence is the venom it contains, that even the hardy camel, if tempted by keen hunger to bite of it, inevitably dies. At length, just as the sun had totally disap¬ peared behind the most distant promon¬ tory, whicli the naked eye could hardly distinguish from a cloud in the horizon, young Alhamet slowly arose, and resum¬ ing his accoutrements, prepared to return to the desert habitation of his kindred. He had not proceeded far ere he distin¬ guished the well-known voice of Muley, who now appeared at a distance, driving the camels to their place of security foi the night. Alhamet, being in no mood to enjoy society, slunk aside for the pur¬ pose of remaining unperceived ; and soon saw the favoured lover of his sister, Mo- B 5
pass over a exposed eminence, preceded by a train of camels, whose di¬ mensions seemed augmented to a size so gigantic, that each appeared a moving py¬ ramid—a not uncommon delusion, the ef¬ fect of refraction amid the sultry vapours of Araby. Emerging then from his con¬ cealment, as the last lines of twilight dis¬ appeared, he pursued his solitary way across the desert, sometimes lingering to survey the mounting moon, as, brighten¬ ing every instant, she usurped her pale dominion over the tranquil and unpollu¬ ted scene. Here (at least since the rt days of eld") the pestilential refinements of po¬ lished society have never dared to in¬ trude— 41 Here Freedom dwells without a fear— Coy to the world, she loves the wild j Wlm ever brings a fetter here, To chain the desert's fiery child ?" But here, too, the venomous reptile haunts the deceitful shade, and the dreaded beast of prey has fixed his gloomy abode. Of¬ ten
ten did Alhamet start as proceeded, on beholding the huge footprint of the sa¬ vage prowler of the desert—the fierce, majestic lion—fresh in the sand before him *, or listen disturbedly to the distant roar of the relentless panther, just rousing himself to roam the desolate wilderness in search of his nocturnal meal. On such occasions he would cast aside his thought- fulness—grasp his spear suddenly—pause for a fearful moment, while an involun¬ tary shudder crept over his frame, and then proceed with increased alacrity. And now, as he drew nearer to the hyma, he could plainly distinguish the sound of the arabebbah (a favourite instrument of the Arabs, who are passionately affected by the rudest harmony), which he doubt¬ ed not it was the light hand of his sister touched so mellifluously; and, unable to resist the impulse, he paused awhile to listen. In a few minutes the instrument was accompanied by the soft voice of Mo¬ hara, \yhile Muley occasionally assisted B 6 the
effect, at with gasaph, or reed, pierced with a greater or less number of holes, according to the abi¬ lity of the performer. Alhamet sighed as he contemplated the happiness of others, and hearkened undesignedly to the feel¬ ing strain of the artless sonnetteer, which, rendered almost verbally, ran as follows : " Allah ! prince of sea nnd desert, Listen to the Bedouin damsel— Grant the wandering maiden's prayer! I have an affectionate lire, Majestic and straight ns the cedar of Lebanon : But who soon shall bend, Lite the reed beneath the whirlwind, When assailed by destroying lime. Let bis decline be gentle as the mild, Yet gorgeous, coming of a peaceful evening— Oh, prince of land and ocean! Thou! who canst guide the simoom, And mitignte the wrath of the pestilence, Let not Mohara vainly supplicate. " I have a lover, Who is comely, and tull as the full-grown tzinnar, And beauteous as the blooming tamarind That shadows our tent with its clustering hranches. More graceful is he than the antelope! More btattly than the elephant! He loves Mohara— the rest must not be told. May
never Way his journey be among palm-trees I Thou! whom the dire hurricane obeys, When it harmlessly passes our dwelling,. Scatter pleasant valliea, Spread constant springs, for him who loves Mohara. " I have a brother, 7"Whosc aspect is cheerless as the parched Saharra : Whose form reserablcth the shrub of the wilderness, Which is withered, and early pineth uway, Because it delights not in the soil of Araby. Whose eyes are like fountains, Oftentimes overflowing, But the waters are drops of bitterness. Thou ! who canst mould the desert with a breath into columns of destruction, Then with a sign allay them—Oh ! look downward, Like the benignant sunbeam, Which irradiates the cool tnist of the morning. Lighten his sadness—teach hini, too, to love Mohara, and to prize his hair-wrought home"," To this wild and irregular, but heartfelt effusion, Alhamet listened as if spell¬ bound to the spot on which he vvas stand¬ ing ; nor did even the cessation of the strain induce him for some tirae to forego his
attitude of pleased approval and atten¬ tion. He felt as if under the influence of a delightful dream; an awakened sensa¬ tion of benevolence and gratitude rushed upon his heart, and a full flood of tears, at the same moment, relieved his dusky bo¬ som from the weight of feelings which it had not lately been accustomed to endure.
CHAP.
CHAP. II. Is the flower of the desert less sweet because it blossoms afar from the gardens of luxury ? Lift up thine eyes and judge. Arabian M.S. Mohara's melody had been for some time silent, ere Alhamet ventured to enter his rude desert dwelling; and when he did, it was with a faltering step, and disturbed countenance. She was sitting in the middle of tlie tent, and her attitude, as she drooped unconsciously over her mute instrument, was beautifully expressive of the interest she herself felt in the words she had just repeated. Her attire and ornaments, which were in strict confor¬ mity to the fashion of her country, seem¬ ed disposed in the best manner to advan¬ tage her certainly exquisite form and fea¬ tures—for Mohara was a beauty of the finest mould. She was not so fair.as Al¬ hamet,
complexion rather of shadowy description to which the accus¬ tomed tinge of henna appears a real em¬ bellishment. Her hair and eyes were of the jettiest sable; and the profusion of light silver rings that encircled her arms and ankles, though grating and repulsive, even in description, to a taste more refined and modernized, contrasted admirably with the glossy darkness of her majestic limbs, and commanding lineaments. Such was Mohara—the loveliest inhabitant of the wilderness! Such appeared the gazelle of the desert, whose unenviable destiny it was to traverse, in company with her tribe, the terrible sand-tracts, and enor¬ mous plains, of her native, desolate Araby. By her side sat Muley, the youthful ad¬ mirer of her beauty, who seemed intent on devouring with his gaze her manifold attractions. His dress resembled the at¬ tire of Alhamet, except that he wore nei¬ ther bonnet nor turban :—his dark, lux¬ uriant hair, which some of the tribes of Yemen
Yemen permit to grow to an ent length, being tastefully confined with a fillet of small cord. At a little distance from the open entrance, reclined Aben Voorg, the father, and Zeid, the mother of this wandering family. The earnest looks of each were turned towards Alha¬ met on his entrance, who slowly advanced, and, with a bewildered air, divesting him¬ self of his accoutrements, adorned with them the central pillar of this warlike ha¬ bitation. No sooner vvas he seated, than Mohara strove to cast aside her reverie, and again touched feebly the chords of her instru¬ ment; but the ability seemed to have abandoned her, and her hands dropped listlessly by her side, without eliciting the harmonious cadence of which her gesture seemed prelusive. Muley raised the reed to his lips, but perceiving that she did not commence, withdrew it again in silence. An involuntary sensation of melancholy pervaded the whole group, which, though each
each wished " Once upon a time" (the favourite ex¬ pression used by the Arabs to denote the commencement of some marvellous tale, or narrative)—none offered to dissipate; when suddenly a tall figure was espied advancing along the narrow valley caused by two inconsiderable ridges of sand which formed,- to the uncouth portal, a perfectly characteristic avenue. All arose joyfully on beholding him, which indicated the approaching personage to be neither un¬ recognised nor unwelcome: but the eyes of Alhamet glistened with unusual trans¬ port, as if kindled by some sudden recol¬ lection, while, uttering the customary de¬ mand for hospitality, the stranger entered the hyma. * # * * * His countenance was majestic, and his deportment dignified in the extreme; while his lofty, well-fashioned turban, and the faded sumptuousness of his flowing robes, bespoke him a native of Turkey, or Persia,
Persia, rather than of was aged, for his descending beard was' of a silvery whiteness, but his features were still florid, and even beautiful; and there was a loftiness in his demeanour which elevated his stature to considerably above the common size. His dress appeared " travel-stained," rather than travel-worn, and in spite of his years, and presumed weariness— " It seem'd he needed not the staff he bore." ***** The skin had been spread in the middle of the tent, for the refreshment of the tra¬ veller : figs, melons, the date of the grove __the wine-making tamarind, and the clear produce of the crystal well, had been provided for his entertainment. All had long since been removed, and yet not one had drowsiness prevailed on to retire to rest. The noon of night still found them listening to the wondrous tales which glided alluringly from the lips of their ve¬ nerable
nerable and often elicited well- merited " rnasha allah * /" from the loud and combined voices of his approving au¬ ditors. The adventures narrated by Ali¬ beg (for such was the name of this singu¬ lar visitant) on the present occasion, were chiefly descriptive of the most fascinating wonders, and enchanting phenomena in nature, whose divers charms were even augmented by the soft witchery of his de¬ liverance. He spoke of exhaustless floods of azure element, bearing whole navies on their yielding bosoms—of boundless realms crisped by eternal frost—of groves illumined by millions of fire-flies—the civilization of Europe, and gilded domes of Asia, with all the new-discovered glo¬ ries of the Western world, a thousand times exaggerated. He even spoke of the probable existence of an imagined re¬ gion, vvhere the sun never sets—daylight being never extinguished; themes calcu¬ lated to awaken the curiosity, and excite the
the interest, of the most apathetic Nor was the gloomy Alhamet any longer silent: he arose, and flinging his arms round the neck of the narrator, burst at once into a description of his evening ramble, and the desires engendered in his bosom. ***** " My son," said Aben Voorg, as he rose at length to retire for the night, " let what thou hast witnessed deter thee from too highly valuing those possessions which, being placed in far perspective, become thus commensurately magnified in thy es¬ timation; as objects in the desert some¬ times seem larger in proportion to the dis¬ tance from which they are observed. How delightful vvas the melody which allured thy attention this eve at sunset! but it owed its charm only to its remote¬ ness. Annihilate the distance — and would Alhamet have been thus transport¬ ed by the mere jingling of pieces of metal strung, by a foolish girl, round the neck of
of a ting, as distant theories, which, as close realities, we regard indifferently. The flowers that from afar attracted thy char¬ med gaze, contained the deadliest essence ;• mingled with hatred, then, should be the admiration they excite, for he who tastes the poison perishes. Reflect on this, my son—and may the prophet whom we wor¬ ship continue to amend in thee whatever he may discern amiss!" " It is all in vain!" said Alhamet, with a desponding sigh; " I respect thy coun¬ sel, venerable monitor—for art thou not my father? thine I revere, too—for thou art my mother; and thine, Mohara—for it is the voice of my sister speaks to me. Thine, Muley, also do I reverence—for thou hast been the friend of my boyhood, and mayst become the brother of mine age. But—it is all in vain! Now," he continued, seizing the hand of Alibeg, as soon as his kindred had disappeared— " now that we are alone, I conjure thee, tell
tell me yet of those wondrous climes vvhere the great orb of heaven op¬ presses not with its sultriness—those spar¬ ry regions of enduring crystal, often crus¬ ted with rain of a beautiful whiteness, whose inhabitants to me seem lovelier than mortal! since, compared with their complexions, Alhamet's—though the fair¬ est of his tribe—would be sooty as dark¬ ness. It is late, and few hours are left us for repose; but time cannot be spent bet¬ ter than in rendering instruction to those who rejoice to be instructed. Commence —I shall attend." * * * * * " Surely thou hast described to me the country of Ginnistan*!" jf:- * * * * AH vvas silent, and solitary, now within the hyma: the stranger, Alibeg, and his entranced auditor, had at length retired to rest. Alhamet long lay buried in ru¬ mination on his pallet, but found it im¬ possible
possible compose when slumber did, for a brief interval, seal his heavy eyelids, it was only the signal for his excursive spirit to realize in imagination the substance of his wak¬ ing dreams. He believed himself trans¬ ported suddenly to the summit of an im¬ mense edifice of stones, nine of which only formed the square space that sup¬ ported him, although the heaping up of the whole fabrio, judging from the astoun¬ ding breadth of the base, appeared to have been the work of many ages. He cast his eyes to the east and to the north, and be¬ held nothing but a sea of beauty, covered with innumerable islands. Forests of palm- trees grew upon them, and many were also diversified with villages, or adorned with sumptuous buildings. On the south he perceived smaller masses of stone, simi¬ lar in aspect to that on which he was standing: while the wh >le intervening space appeared covered with majestic ruins, whicli indicated it to have been once a country
country of still greater magnificence and splendour. Beyond these, and more par¬ ticularly on the western side, he discovered extensive deserts, and elevated mountains, over which the sluggish clouds passing heavily, and casting their shadows on the yellow sand, caused floating spots to move as far as the sight could distinguish. Al¬ hamet gazed, struck with amazement and admiration: but his transport was min¬ gled with an unspeakable awe, of which he strove vainly to divest himself. He vvas told that his feet rested on the loftiest of the pyramids of Djiza—but the voice that addressed him was so like thunder threatening his demolition, that his senses fled with the unnatural sound, and he sunk to behold no more. Again he was borne away in fancy to the brink of a gentle, limpid streamlet, which meandered through a beautiful country, adorned and illumined by a bril¬ liant and everlasting flame which never expired, and which not any quantity of vol. i. c
water could extinguish. side of eminence from which the rivulet descend¬ ed was covered with roses, that blossomed there perpetually, even while the snow in its crevices remained undissolved*. Al¬ hamet approached the miraculous blaze, and was astonished on finding the earth glowed beneath his feet. Urged on by some irresistible impulse, he thrust his hand into the fiery aperture, whence issued this amazing wonder of nature. In a moment the clear flame, like embodied lightning, shot vengefully upon him, and palpable ignition succeeded. He strove to fly, but the hot soil clogged his foot¬ steps ; and the sweet mountain roses, now changed to bubbling mire, emitted a foul steam to suffocate him. Faintness again befriended him, by shrouding him for a while
while in her mantle, and, during his fancied insensibility, the whole was changed. He now dreamed himself climbing an immense mountainous precipice, expect¬ ing at the summit to be rewarded for his toil by a prospect equally extensive and sublime. With difficulty he gains the ut¬ most edge, similar, in his imagination, to that of the Table Mountain, in -South Af¬ rica, and prepares from its lofty brow to cast his longing eyes over the scene be¬ low. He looks into the abyss—but his senses serve him no longer. Interminable vacuity lies stretched before him, and vo¬ lition itself is overwhelmed: his faculties are astounded—his gaze is fixed—his brain grows dizzy, and he falls headlong over the stupendous precipice. With a half- uttered cry of horror he awoke, and re¬ solved on yielding no more that night to the state of stupefaction, or rather torment, into which he had fallen; when suddenly he perceived, as well as the surrounding c 2 gloom
gloom permitted jects, a tall dark form bent anxiously over him, as if silently observing whether slumber had in reality obtained dominion over his drowsy senses. It was Alibeg, who, it was evident, had again risen, and now cautiously beckoned the youthful Arab to follow him to the open plain. Alhamet arose, took his sabre, lance, and pistols, which precaution his grave con¬ ductor observed with a smile, and instantly accompanied him.
CHAP.
CHAP. III. It it sctm good unto thee to come with me into Bub)Ion, tome; and I w H look well unto thee hut if it seem ill unto thee to come with uie into Bab^ Ion, forbear. behold, all the land is helore thee. Jertmuih xt. 4. The moon was low in the firmament, and shone on the yellow, far-spread sands, like a dull brazen crescent, as they quitted the hyma, and entered on the vast expan¬ sive desert. Alibeg still strode forward with speed and dignity; and Alhamet followed in mute wonder, as far as a little eminence, on which stood a single tree of the mimosa kind, and towards which their course seemed directed. Having without difficulty gained the summit, the mimosa bowed its gigantic arms around them, drooping its branches to the very ground, as in solemn salutation of its nocturnal c 3 visitors.
visitors.^- although no stranger to these self-prostrating rarities, could not avoid feeling a slight degree of terror, when he heard the rustling of this living (almost breathing) canopy, which, interposing its dark leaves betwixt them arid the moon, rendered her feeble light still more unserviceable. He shook in¬ voluntarily, and fear, for a moment, sup¬ planted wonder in his bosom. This awe was not diminished, when, on turning to his companion, he thought he perceived him to have increased considerably in sta¬ ture since they quitted the valley; but this appearance he presently attributed to the high ground Alibeg had chosen for their conference, as well as to the shadowy and imperfect light, admitted through the branches. Alibeg now opened his lips, and Alhamet instantly became attentive. * * * * * While yet the sage was speaking, a " voice
" voice from the wilderness" saluted them, which Alhamet presently recog¬ nised to be that of Muley, who, he now doubted not, had missed, and issued forth at that lone hour in quest of them. In this conjecture he vvas not deceived. Mu¬ ley vvas in reality traversing the level space below in the hope of distinguishing their figures, and chanting, as he proceed¬ ed, his accustomed strain to the camels, to beguile the loneliness of the desert waste. Although Alhamet thought little of the measure at this moment, yet, for the reader's gratification, a portion of it is presented as a specimen of those composi¬ tions which, in desolate Arabia, often serve the purposes of lash and bridle; for, as long as the song continues, the camel proceeds. The burthen of Muley's was generally to the following effect:— " On, camel! on to the hair-tent if Vohnra! It is pitched near yon hillock 01 jand, And within gleam the anus of he tribe, And their trophies hang marshalled around. C4 It
It is close by a soft-flowing spring, Whose freshness rejoices the traveller, And whose gurgling invites to repose, But mine be the rapture far dearer than rest, Tor there—there dwells Mohara I She is beauteous as mom in the desert! Delightful as noon in the shade ol the sycamore ' The stars are of fire, but her lustre surp.iss.'s them . There is brightness in Heaven, But the sun is less bright than the eyes of Moliar.i, Haste, camel! haste to the hair-tent of Moliura J" Such was the carelessly-vociferated strain of Muley, to beguile the tedious- ness of solitude, while seeking Alhamet, and his aged companion. His voice soon dying away by degrees, however, demon¬ strated that he had taken a wrong direc¬ tion, and Alibeg continued. * * * * * Ere the startled Alhamet could possibly make any reply, a sound approached which his practised ear instantly knew for the trampling of horsemen, and soon pass¬ ed them rapidly (the mimosa tree shelter¬ ing them from observation) in the direc-
tion of his young- Arab trembled, as fears for the safety of his kindred, in that wild, dangerous re¬ gion, where the midnight attack was so frequent, naturally rushed upon his mind. He paused, and listened attentively: the sound of the receding horsemen died away in the distance, and ali was silent as the o-rave. Presently a smothered shriek broke faintly upon his ear—the hand of Alhamet was in an instant upon the hilt of his sabre.—" The dreadful work is doing!" he exclaimed, grasping it with useless vehemence—"- It was Mohara's voice!—my sister massacred T and a deep, but stifled groan, burst from his heaving bosom. The shriek vvas succeeded by a few low moaning sounds, uttered appa¬ rently by a female in the act of earnest supplication, and all was once more unin¬ terrupted silence.—" It is finished!" again groaned Alhamet, distractedly—" it is completed! and Alhamet has no kindred I" while, under the conviction that the last c 5 dire
stroke upon mily, he became rooted to the spot with horror and dismay. Thus transfixed, did he meditate long and gloomily, while Ali¬ beg stood sullenly regarding him; and long and gloomy vvas the period which elapsed before the wretched Alhamet was undeceived. ***** Many weeks had now succeeded each other since the flight of Alhamet from his devastated home. The moon which lit him on the night of his departure from the hyma of Aben Voorg had waned, and passed away—another came, and found him still unseparated from his hoary com¬ panion, whom yet he could not avoid oc¬ casionally surveying with an indescribable feeling of aversion and distrust. It was involuntary, for he strove to subdue it— but it was well founded, for his efforts were unavailing. He had shrunk from returning to' the abode of his slaughtered family, and probably adding another vic¬ tim
tim to swords of since that lamented period, therefore, ° Heaven and accident" had provided him sustenance —the spacious desert his only shelter— Alibeg his only guide. Even him he sometimes shuddered to look upon—but he knew not yet that " his abode was the desolate charnel-house, and his dwelling among dark tombs." ***** " Thus far have we journeyed," said Aihamet, somewhat timidly, " through thornless mazes only of unthreatening as¬ pect, where the depredator lurked not, nor the serpent crawled; and thus far have I trusted to thy guidance, it is true, without reluctance, and without inquiry. But here, amid this curdling wilderness— these frightful chasms—these chilling pre¬ cipices, I feel a degree of terror from thy presence to which I have hitherto been a stranger. In trutii there appeareth more of mystery in thee than the wisest of hu¬ man kind may solve or penetrate. Lo! c 6 I am
am and art un¬ wearied : yet thy travail has been greater than mine. How is it that thou journey- est far, and yieldest not to lassitude?— impart to me thy secret." " Hope sustains me," answered Alibeg, " Of what hope speakest thou ?" de¬ manded the young Arab. " Of that which animates all bosoms, Alhamet," replied Alibeg, with an elated smile—" the hope of rendering others like unto ourselves." " Age, which stamps deeper wrinkles on the brow, hath added none to thine," said Alhamet, earnestly: " assure me what thou art?" " Ask of the monitor that is within thee," said Alibeg, with a displeased look —" thy conscience will reply to thee." "It tells me thou art evil," said Alha¬ met. " It hath told thee true," replied the aged Alibeg. ■ " Nevertheless/' resumed the now- shrinking
shrinking my tofore assured me otherwise. I have been instructed to believe that crime, at the first sight, seems foul and odious; but that its hideousness decreases as we be¬ come accustomed to contemplate it." " The doctrine was not false," said Ali¬ beg. " And yet I at first regarded thee as of an order alike glorious and enviable," re¬ joined Alhamet, with energy; " and it is only now that I begin to fear thee, as something whicli I ought to have avoided and abhorred," To this Alibeg responded, while a grim srnile of exultation again illumined his swarthy visage, which threw into strong, and (as it seemed to Alhamet) somewhat ghastly relief, the white folds of his em¬ broidered turban—" Thus hath it ever been in the earlier, and shall be in the after ages of mankind ! yet hath tempta¬ tion triumphed—yet hath vice prevailed! Some at the first approach towards ini¬ quity
quity are conscience-stricken, and a while remain aloof, shrinking from its proffered allurements, in dread of its in¬ evitable recompence. A few, like Al¬ hamet, may happen to be deceived by the untried course they have chosen; but none tread far the path of evil, ere start¬ led by the discovery of their error—al¬ beit, perchance, too late. The lively beams which adorned the entrance of that pleasing course will vanish—the broad un¬ varnished front of sin wili meet their un- dazzled vision, and its native hideousness be productive of conviction." " And why do men," said Alhamet, " persist fatally in that forbidden course, which, even at the beginning, is fraught with disappointment, and must end in re¬ tribution ?" " Why dost thou ?" demanded Alibeg. Alhamet heard, but remained silent. * * * * * It was on a " day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds and of thick darkness,"
and myste¬ rious associate, appeared to approach the place of their final destination. This was a dull and solitary valley, where even the most devastation-loving birds of prey would hardly have ventured to " set up their rest." No living thing was seen to stir amid the surrounding desolation, but all vvas silent, lifeless, and dreary. Yet the aspect of Alibeg still sometimes brightened into one of those significant smiles that so often perplexed his compa¬ nion—but the brows of Alhamet were no longer arched, and he frowned gloomily as he entered the valley.
CHAP.
CHAP. IV. A change came o'er the spirit of iny die.ini. Byhon. The daylight grew fainter, as they pro¬ ceeded onward, and the scene assumed, if possible, a still more terrible and forbid¬ ding aspect. At lengthy as the shades of evening closed finally over their darkened path, the lowering crags united their tall forms over a yawning gulph at the extre¬ mity of the rocky avenue, and which now appeared to present the only egress from this vale of horror. * * * * * " Thou hast demanded of ine," ex¬ claimed Alhamet, " during our journey to this dreadful region, why I adhere to my choice of becoming thine, in defiance of that internal monitor which warns me incessantly to abhor, and leave thee. Yet why
why require a .definition of motives thou canst not feel, or comprehend? for the attributes of humanity are not thy attri¬ butes, nor the welfare of mortals thy wel¬ fare. See where yon gloomy abyss must end our fearful path! Look how the forked lightning flares from its horrid at¬ mosphere ! Oh ! who art thou, that no longer resemblest Alibeg, and wherefore to this realm of terror hast thou guided me? Whence arises this strange splen¬ dour of thy shadowy visage, which no longer bears affinity to the meaner aspects of our middle vvorld? What enormous symbol decorates thy brow? Even while I gaze, tenfold in magnitude glare thy di¬ lated features—Ha ! I freeze with horror! my death-cold blood trickles heavily to my heart! my brain revolves—I a,m lost—". * * * * * " Mine art thou to destroy—mine to be destroyed! many serve me who know not their own servitude, and provide me vic¬ tims who are ignorant of their agency in the
sacrifice; shall exist an abhorred remembrancer of thy unhallowed fealty-^he whose dire attributes thou now rather feelest than darest to behold, when imagined most distant shall be near¬ est at hand. When thon slumberest in quietude shall sorrow come to awaken thee—when tliou revellest in gaiety shall thy pastimes be productive of calamity— when thou treadest on flowers, beware of the thorns they conceal. When thou turnest to flee on thy course, blood shall be on thy head—warm crimson shalt thou dash from thy foot-print; many whom thou lovest, shall perish in their gore— with it shall thy garments be stained, and thy track be overflown!" , ***** It was finished, and Alhamet had irre¬ vocably sealed the covenant of his future destiny; a mournful cry pierced the Sa¬ tanic gloom, and reverberated among the huge chaotic precipices, resembling so many masses of sable vapour, that com¬ pletely
pletely embayed gulph which he had followed his equally hellish conductor. Still, however, was distinctly visible the cowering form of the Arab, Alhamet, in company with a colossal figure, the immense shade of whose mighty wings, as they flickered heavily in the frequent blazes around, fell like the sha¬ dows of uplifted mountains; and the sound of whose voice resembled the burst? ing of a volcano. # . # » * * * ■* * •* a * ** * Tbe sombre hues of evening were now just beginning to spread themselves over the beautiful coast of Sicily, as the lovely Seraphina seated herself at an open lattice which overlooked the sea, to listen to the calm murmuring of the waves, and enjoy the sublimity of the tranquil scene. The sun had already sunk, but the glowing ocean, which reflected with fidelity the empurpled firmament, was still wrapt in a gorgeous
gorgeous of and magnificence; while on high was perceptible the " pale horned moon," whose hour for attaining her full share of lustre was not yet arrived. In addition to these, may be also mention¬ ed a partial view of one of the richest, and most delightful spots in the world—the country between Monte Pelegrino and Palermo, being universally so considered —the multitude and variety of its fruit trees, the softness of its climate, and above all, the number of fountains and rivulets, that meander through and adorn it in every direction, rendering it a delicious garden, which the environs of no other capital can equal or exceed. But Seraphi¬ na heeded in reality neither glowing sky, nor verdant landscape; nor even the beau¬ tiful expanse of unruffled water over which her anxious eyes seemed so intently, and almost continually to wander. Her thoughts were engaged by a far different. yet not less delightful theme; and here it might not be amiss to take advantage of her
her temporary abstraction, and proceed with a brief description of her person and family. The marquis Estherholme vvas of Ger¬ man extraction, but the land of his own birth vvas that in which he now preferred to reside—delectable, luxuriant Sicily. In his early life he had married an accom¬ plished lady at Vienna, of whose tender society deatli had long since deprived him. No longer able to endure the country of his ancestors, he had traversed successively many foreign lands in search of his lost happiness; and at last retired for tranquil¬ lity, with his only daughter, to a small palace he had long possessed near Monte Pelegrino, a short distance from Palermo. Here in a lovely, but sequestered situa¬ tion, surrounded with orange blossoms, and aloes, not far from the sea shore, he contrived to pass his existence agreeably. Seraphina, the only offspring of his un¬ fortunate union, formed, as may be con¬ jectured, in this enviable retreat, the sole object
object of pride and was about the age of seventeen—gay, beautiful, and accomplished. Her large blue eyes—for she was fairer than the ge¬ nerality of Sicilian damsels— " Shone sweetly lambent with celestial day," and seemed formed to disclose, by their mild engaging lustre, the becoming gen¬ tleness of her disposition. Her floating hair, adorned with a single rose, after the fashion of Sicilia's sunny beauties, was of that light golden hue so often met with among the northern divisions of Germany. She was exquisitely formed, and her at¬ tractions altogether were of that class which fix a lasting impression on the mind of the beholder. Such was Seraphina, the daughter of Estherholme, vvho, it was not likely, could remain long in such a coun¬ try as Sicily without attracting admirers. Accordingly, the young count Rosalba had lately striven ardently to obtain her exclusive favour: but unfortunately, on a recent
a recent excursion one of small islands in the Mediterranean, a sudden storm overwhelmed the galley, and Ros¬ alba was drowned. Seraphina, however, bestowed on this accident few tears, and little sorrow: she had never affected his person, but rather regarded him with aversion, though his extensive possessions had prevailed on her father to sanction, and even abet his addresses. Yet there was one not so wholly indifferent to her -—but more of him hereafter. She was sitting in a recumbent posture near the open casement, that commanded a view of the Mediterranean, a small inlet of which approached very near the gar¬ dens of the palace. In this position, Se¬ raphina did not perceive her lively and confidential attendant, Fiametta, who, half concealed by the gathering shades of evening, now glided silently into the apart¬ ment. The gorgeous effulgence which irradiated the west, had by this time par¬ tially disappeared: the sky was fast as¬ suming
suming a azure, and dually brightening, when Fiametta, who had hitherto remained unnoticed, watch¬ ing the pensive attitude of her mistress, came suddenly forward, and with a loud burst of laughter awakened her from her reverie.
CHAr.
CHAP. V. She loves, but knows not whom she loves— Nor what his race, nor whence he came; Like one who meets, in Indian groves, A beauteous bird without a name. Moo he, " Fie, Fiametta!" exclaimed Seraphina, starting, " why did you disturb my me¬ ditations?" " Were you fancying," asked Fiametta, archly, " that the drowned Rosalba could come from his ocean cave of shells and coral, and present himself to your gaze?" " If he could," replied Seraphina, with mere than usual coolness, " I fancy the meeting would be little gratifying on ei¬ ther side." " You fixed your eyes on the waves so stedfastly," said Fiametta, again laugh¬ ing ; w and looked as if you wished some pageant to arise out of, them, for the gra- vol. i. d tification
of your the phantom of a shipwrecked lover the most romantic that could spring from them." Seraphina made no reply. " Or were your thoughts more pleasing¬ ly occupied," subjoined Fiametta, in a softened tone, " and was Gialdini—the gallant, gay Gialdini—the subject of those broken meditations ?" - " Ah, Fiametta!" said her indulgent mistress, with a deep-drawn sigh—" thou knowest my secret fears ?" ** And wishes likewise," said Fiametta, promptly; " but.were my wishes heark¬ ened to in the matter, donna Seraphina should have nothing to fear." ' "What dost thou mean?" demanded Seraphina. " Zachelli says it is the wisest course," said Fiametta, with some hesitation. ««What says Zachelli ? what course does he advise?" inquired Seraphina, hastily. ** And, saint Rosolia condemn me! whose
whose exclaimed metta, flinging herself beside her mistress, " if I do not myself think it the better plan to pursue. It is to run away with him, to be sure—leaving all scruples of a fastidious, unfeeling father, to be settled afterwards." " No! Fiametta," said the determined maiden: " my father is not unfeeling, and if he were—never could my heart forget he is my faiher. But Gialdini is a wan¬ derer—unknown—unfriended. Perhaps unhonoured in his native country—it may be even ^honoured—but the lips of Se¬ raphina shall not suppose his shame. Yet if I, vvho love him much, thus acknow¬ ledge his possible inferiority to Rosalba, the selected of my parent, Estherholme— what will be his fury, when Gialdini openly declares himself my admirer, I tremble to imagine. But to leave—I can¬ not think of it at present. Gialdini shall declare himself—flight must be my last resource." d % Fiametta
said no more, probably a piqued at this unceremonious rejection of Zachelli's counsel. Zachelli was the most favoured servant of the marquis, and per¬ fectly in Fiametta's confidence, who thought him more spruce and obliging, and found him more affectionate and faith¬ ful, than any other of the household. Meanwhile, the earnest looks of Seraphina were still directed over the watery waste, till suddenly she started, and exclaimed— " See, Fiametta! I have not watched in vain. So came in days of yore the de¬ scending angels—the immortal sonsof Hea¬ ven, and blessed with their bright converse the adoring daughters of mortality! look at that noble air—those graceful features: it is Gialdini's form—Gialdini's aspect? I do not bid thee retire—betray me not, and listen; but the chaste orb of Dian is compleiing her lustre, and the hour of our assignation is at hand—^h, Seraphina! it is indeed thy hour of paradise!" Fiametta looked as desired. A light, but
but superbly gilded galley appeared view, towards which Seraphina continued anxiously to strain her " soul-swimming eyes, as it approached the shore. A single figure was seen on board, in the act of pointing toward the palace, as if directing its motion. He appeared tall in stature, with a handsome countenance—of swarthy complexion, but commanding features, A small guitar was suspended upon his outstretched arm—the other was enveloped in the folds of his mantle. His eyes, and ringlets, were of the raven's hue, and his attire seemed studiously becoming; still there was something foreign in his aspect which declared him a native of some other land than Sicily. This was don Gialdini. Seraphina still gazed with joyful emo¬ tion toward the approaching galley, and was not long unrecognised by Gialdini, who bowed with graceful humility, raised his plumed hat in salutation, and kissed his hand several times. The galley now appeared to slacken its D 3 speed,
speed, as nearer palace of Estherholme, and presently rested on the calm bosom of the water. The ruddy stream of departing daylight had now completely yielded to the shadowy lustre of the silver moon, by whose beams only was the scene distinguishable. A solitary star that glimmered by her side, rendered faint by her own overpowering brilliancy, seemed struggling with her to irradiate the still daikening firmament through which she sailed with majestic supremacy. Gialdini changed his attitude—looked up¬ ward toward the lattice with an affection- nate gesture—seized his guitar without withdrawing his gaze, and, after a flou¬ rishing prelude, sang the following apt recitative. " While nought save Beauty lists, I sing 1 And round her bower Love's vesper fling, With faltering hand, from silver string. Awake my lyre! thy chords I sweep, And music trembles o'er the deep- Awake my lyre! and aid to show The thenie that bids my numbers {low."
The
The strings seemed to he paused to alter them, and presently addressed himself gracefully to commence again.
D 4
CHAP.
CHAP. VI. See, lady, see, the gondolier, True to the vesper hour, is here. The Gondolier. In another moment the succeeding stan¬ zas were trilled skilfully by Gialdini, in a loud, melodious voice, and the wild shore echoed sweetly to the wilder serenade. *' Stem wc the waves 1 the sea-bird's cry The merroaid mocks—the dolphin hears: One twinkling star, a seraph's eye ! The lonely space with lustre cheers. And now, less bright, , But gathering light, Another through the dusk appears: And now there are many— Yet softer than any Looks au eye that beams love through its sheening tears. " The purple cloud that lightly sails. Without a wind, o'er ocean's wave: Whose hues the purest language fails To paint—so varied, rich, and brave.' Abash'd
With a storm-dark frown, On charms outvied by naught it gave To view: for itars peeping, Kor summer cloud sleeping, Mntch'd that eye whose soft glances so sweetly enslave." Gialdini's voice now ceased abruptly, and he began to traverse hastily the small space afforded him for motion in his nar¬ row vessel: he was evidently becoming impatient; when Seraphina, who had al¬ ready attired herself, placed her finger ex¬ pressively on her lips, in token of expec¬ ted silence and secresy, and, waving a mute signal from the lattice ere she quit¬ ted the apartment, descended hastily to the garden. The galley vvas now obser¬ ved to approach still nearer to the shore, and soon received on board its lovely bur¬ then; when it instantly turned its gilt prow toward Palermo, where the feast of saint Rosolia vvas celebrated. Fiametta watched it disappear with her beautiful mistress, vvho, she well knew, would not return until some hours after midnight, d 5 and
and aware of the sorrow and desolation the changes of that eventful night were des¬ tined to produce in the family of Esther¬ holme. ***** The blazing Marino was now glittering in the height of its splendour, and de¬ lighting the thousands of happy spirits that crowded to pass the midnight hours beneath its illuminated arches, and fiery pyramids, in habits scarce less gorgeous than the brilliant objects among wliich they were wandering, like the beatified inhabitants of some hnppier world. The splendid display of fireworks, with which it is usual to celebrate the festival of saint Rosolia, had not yet commenced; but the accustomed avenues of lamps, and mag¬ nificent trophies, were complete, and seemed to possess their accustomed charm for the smiling throngs that now paraded them. The noon of night was distant yet two hours, when a gaily-attired cava¬ lier
lier directed galley a small at a little distance from the Marino, and led from it a lady of superior loveliness, on whose celestial form his eyes were rivetted, and for whose ear only bis graceful lips dropped sounds of glowing admiration. " They were two lovers—Oh! how much is sa d In that brief phrase j how much of happiness, Of all that makes hfe precious, is smnra'd up In telling they were lovers '" They were Seraphina and Gialdini.— The tender moon, made paler by the glare of artificial light emitted from the rejoi¬ cing city, which appeared through the Porta Felice one line of flame even to the centre of the Ottangolo, showered over them beams of an unusual whiteness; as if in gratitude for their preference of her cold, wan lustre, to the gaudier streams of radiance that from a little distance saluted them, and invited their solitary footsteps. Hard by appeared stationed the small galley whicli conveyed them, in seeming readiness for a secret departure, when the d 6 stolen
stolen to mutual en¬ dearment should have passed away. * * * * # • " But did you never hear of the dead becoming visible?" asked Gialdini, with an involuntary shudder of recollection, while an unusual paleness crept over his features. " I have heard of such marvels," said Seraphina, carelessly, " but hold them as mere idle legends, invented to amuse the credulous, or affright the criminal from his iniquitous.career." " I have gazed—I have witnessed," said Gialdini with emotion, while his lividness increased to a degree that resembled the aspect of the grave itself—" Oh! Sera¬ phina—it is a dreadful tale!" " What tale ? what hast thou witness¬ ed ?" demanded Seraphina, with astonish¬ ment. " What I would fain forget," replied the awe-stricken youth, " but the ghastly remembrance will for ever haunt me! I cannot
cannot—cannot oblivion. have seen—I have beheld—" Gialdini paused again, and looking around him with an air of mystery, took her fair yielding hand, and placed it for a moment on his own cold clammy fore¬ head. Its touch was like marble—she started at the chill it communicated to her frame, and her countenance expressed the alarm she now felt for him. " " But the heart is warmer," he said, smiling faintly, as if conscious of her feelings— " the brow may be damp and chilly, and the lip falter—but the heart that ani¬ mates------" " Good Heavens! Gialdini, are you ill ?" she exclaimed. " Nought but sick of those idle legends, Seraphina," replied Gialdini, half sarcasti¬ cally, " wliich thou dost not regard. It is only a dizziness memory still casts over me—but thou canst not comprehend— beautiful Seraphina! heed not my tran¬ sient malady—it will soon pass away." He
ceased, and again shuddered. the curiosity of Seraphina being thorough¬ ly awakened by that wildness of tone and manner she had often before observed in Gialdini, but never to the extent now ex¬ hibited, was not to be so easily suppressed, or gratified. She entreated to be indulged with the particulars of an event which seemed so deeply to interest him—a fa¬ vour Gialdini had little desire to refuse. Accordingly, thus appealed to at the very hour in whicli the heart is always open, and by the lips of sympathizing beauty, he no longer refrained; but told with a throbbing breast, and changeful aspect, while his fiir auditor trembled as she listened, the following appalling tale.
CHAR
CHAP. VII. I pray thee, tell me of some shadowy thing Crossing the traveller in his path of fear. On such a night as this? Matpiun. It was in a part of the delectable king¬ dom of Siam, where the huge elephant mingles unmolested with his harmless kind, here often seen issuing in troops of thousands from some adjacent forest, or pasture, while the hushed crocodile, and beautiful river horse, gaze aghast at the magnificent assemblage, that the wander¬ ing Gialdini fixed the scene of his narra¬ tive. Here, it appeared, although by what strange accident was left wholly un¬ explained, Gialdini himself had formerly resided, since the boyhood of his' days, which had not yet reached their meridian. Here also had dwelt an Asian youth named Arion, betwixt whom and himself, a more
a more common seemed have subsisted. The captivating Zama was the object of their mutual adoration— but even this untoward circumstance was insufficient to make them enemies. In the company of Arion, Gialdini vvas accus¬ tomed to divert himself with hunting the wild animals which abound in that sunny but dangerous region. When engaged in this employment, the two friends were inseparable; and their application to the toilsome sport was frequent, as it contri¬ buted mainly to their subsistence.—" One fatal day," continued Gialdini, " which I ever shall remember, we were pursuing the enraged rhinoceros, when I launched the fatal shaft which effected his destruc¬ tion. It grazed the stem of an adjacent plane-tree, which caused my arrow to take a wrong direction—the first I ever sped that mistook its aim. Arion was near— I shouted to warn him of the erring mes¬ senger, but it was too late. He had re¬ ceived
ceived my arrow side—I gazed till he expired! " We were alone upon that fatal morn¬ ing, and I dreaded the attachment of some dark suspicion to myself: for—Arion was my rival. I therefore determined to dis¬ pose of the body secretly, and to affect to¬ tal ignorance of his fate. With my own hands I scooped a shallow grave under the spreading plane-tree, and deposited in it the body of Arion. I extracted the deadly herald from his side, and replaced it in my quiver; that should the body ever be dis¬ covered—which was next to impossible, for the spot was remote from the habita¬ tions of man—no traces of secret murder might accompany the discovery. I then embraced him, and covered him with earth, moistened by my tears; and with my knife marked the plane-tree that shadowed his rest. *' I told Zama, on returning from my first unsuccessful chase, that Arion had resolved to penetrate further into the country,
country, and not to return met with success. She commended his courage —but many moons passed, and he return¬ ed no more. I continued to hunt alone, or with other companions. On returning late one moonlight eve—such an eve as we now witness," said Gialdini, much affected, "laden with the produce of my skilful aim, Zama met me eagerly on the thres¬ hold.—' Our Arion is within !* she exclaim¬ ed, with innocent vivacity. I started with astonishment—but I disbelieved her —for I knew that he was buried under the shadowing plane. She saw my con¬ fusion, which she readily imputed to ex¬ cess of joy.—' But he is sick,' she conti¬ nued, * and looks ghastlier than wont. Come and see him.'—* Ghastly indeed, must appear the putrid dead!' thought I —but I told ber I would come.—' He complains of anguish in his side,' said she, ' but I understand him not—you may bet¬ ter comprehend his meaning.* Amazed, I rushed into the dwelling—Arion was not
not to be found. vain sought him every where—still her steady asserr tions that he had been present in her habi¬ tation shook me. I determined to visit his grave—but the very idea caused a faintness to steal over me, and I again sought the open air to revive my scattered senses. I had hardly gained the outside of the dwelling, ere I saw a dark figure standing by my side, who instantly saluted me. He com¬ plained, in a distressful tone; and I asked him his ailment, or how I could relieve him.—' I am afflicted with pain/ said he, mournfully, 'my side aches bitterly—it bleeds, too, for the shaft pierced it sorely,' —« Let me find the wound,' said I, en¬ deavouring to approach him.—* You can¬ not,' he exclaimed—* but the arrow is in your quiver!' As the form still shrunk from me, the clear moonshine, which the shade of the dwelling had hitherto inter¬ cepted, burst full on his unchanged visage —God of the invisible world ! I had been conversing with Arion." Gialdini
paused, and covered face n T ith' emotion. Seraphina ventured to suggest the possibility of his having been still deceived, bat he shook his head mournfully, and resumed, in a hurried manner—" No! it vvas no delusion—I was not deceived. It was Arion himself, whom the upheaving grave had loosened from its cold, eternal grasp, to overwhelm me with deserved confusion—for I vvas faulty, although not criminal. But he vanished—I knew not whithei:—yet he eluded me; and in my furious search for him, even Zama vvas forgotten. I enter¬ ed that dwelling no more—I sojourned not long in the vicinity of such horrible recollections: flight alone was left to me, and—I am here." As he ceased speaking, and ere yet Seraphina had recovered from her amaze¬ ment, they descried a form approaching them hastily, whicli they presently recog¬ nised to be that of Zachelli, the favourite, trusted attendant, of the marquis Esther¬ holme.
holme. Surprised at what could errand at such a time, Seraphina paused, and impatiently awaited his advance; for she doubted not it was through Fiametta's means he had discovered them so readily, and that his intelligence must be of im¬ portance. They had not long to await his arrival; in a few minutes Zachelli reached them, and, breathless with haste, requested per¬ mission to speak alone with donna Sera¬ phina.—" Speak freely, and aloud," said Seraphina: " none hear thee now, Za¬ chelli, who may not be fully acquainted with aught thou hast to say to me. Has thy master returned from his trip to r Mes- sina? Has my father arrived? vV„ell, why dost thou pause?" " He has—and count Rosalba," now stammered Zachelli, not without hesi¬ tation. " Count Rosalba!" exclaimed both his auditors. " Is arrived with him," said Zachelli, coolly
coolly, posed of the group. Seraphina stood wrapt in astonishment at this communication. Gialdini gazed steadily on the; aspect of Zachelli, as if mutely to elicit further information while a wild and peculiar expression marked his strangely-illumined countenance.
CHAP.
CHAP. VIII. Do the hollow grave, and Ihe whelming wave, Give up their drad again ? Doth the angry uaste waft o'er its breast The spirits of tho slain ? J. B.ullie, The floating strains from the distant Marino now passed them by unheard, and the gaudy crowd fluttered unheeded, while Zachelli continued with the rest of his marvellous communication. He told that the young count Rosalba, having escaped the wreck wherein it was report¬ ed he had perished, had encountered Estherholme on the road to Messina, being himself on his way to the palace of the marquis to convince them personally of his safety. That Estherholme had re¬ turned with him, accordingly; and find¬ ing Seraphina absent, had extorted from the fears of Fiametta (thrown off her guard,
guard, unexpected appearance of one whom she had long supposed at the bottom of the deep) a full confession of their secret intercourse. That upon this important information, thus obtained, the marquis and Rosalba had closely closeted themselves, and he feared some extraor¬ dinary mischief would ensue from their deliberations. He had stolen away to ac¬ quaint them with the danger of their si¬ tuation, and, by so doing, make all the atonement in his power for the evil occa¬ sioned by Fiametta's weakness.— w I will instantly front him myself!" exclaimed Gialdini, with a mixture of suspicion and dread, which, nevertheless, he seemed stri¬ ving to conceal; and Seraphina, though almost fainting with excess of terror and emotion, did not oppose his resolution. Zachelli, having executed his purpose, made all the speed he could homeward, to console Fiametta, and avoid being miss¬ ed; while Gialdini and Seraphina turned their steps also, but more slowly, toward the
the galley which was still waiting convey them back to the palace. What a change had the last few hours, it appear¬ ed, effected in their situation, and pro¬ spects ! the betrothed of Seraphina return¬ ed, and their intercourse discovered ! As they were proceeding in silent wonder, and brooding, it might be, over the prob¬ able consequences, they did not for some time perceive a strangely-attired female, who, though apparently of the lowest or¬ der of the people, stood regarding them with earnest attention. Her garb was not only foreign, but seemed of a nation with which even the travelled Gialdini was wholly unacquainted. There was a peculiar archness in the gaze with which she surveyed them so steadily, accompa¬ nied with a familiar impudence, which caused Gialdini to pause and question her.—" Who art thou? and whither bound ?" he demanded, hastily, supposing she had business with him, from the close¬ ness of her scrutiny. vol. i. E *' A Sa-
replied flippantly, " and my destination is the same as thine." " How, to the palace of Estherholme !" exclaimed Gialdini. " No !" said the femule, significantly: " I am further bound than the palace of Estherholme—and so to-night art thou." " Indeed!" said Gialdini, with an in¬ credulous smile. Then suddenly chang¬ ing her tone, she commenced in the man¬ ner of the scattered tribes she had named (the Samoyedes, who are fond of extem- poral poetry, which they produce with singular facility), a kind of chant, yet ra¬ ther spoken than sung, declarative of her power to foretel future events, much to the following purport:— " Celestial fair one, list, I pray i Ami, stranger, icoft' not—turn and slay. Thou! heedlws of thy daugeious laim, That urt~what ? who ?~1 cannot iuiui; 'Tis thine to-night 'ncnth foes to cpuil, Whose deeds might blanch ev'n heroes,pale. And, damsel, thou! too blest to dread Tlie hovering boit which threats thy head : Yet,
D.jrk hours of wail in store fur thee. Some gift bestow—who such bestows Learns olt to w.ud impending woej." Although neither of the personages ad¬ dressed could refrain from a contemptuous smile at this ill-timed interruption, yet Gialdini could not help fancying, from the marked manner in which she had sin¬ gled him out for this display of her idle palmistry, that she knew something of his peculiar situation ; and, therefore, present¬ ed her with some small pieces of money. Hereupon she took his hand, and after poring attentively over it for a minute, raised her eyes to his face, and thus con¬ tinued :— " Sli.mger! these lineaiutnts belevcd, I warn thee, bode, this 1 our achieved, Unholier dteds, by bloodier race Thau lips may name—than art should trace. There's much denotes tlij naturt kind : But inuoh—that thou wilt surely hud Friendship professed is only wind. Trust not lair speech—oi fraud take care — Craft hems thee round—beware—beware! Wone is at hand, I wist lull well, Tlian lips should solve—or miue may tell." e 2 Gialdini
withdrew her words implied ganger of immediate evil, and his suspicions that she knew something of his present circumstances became confirmed. Meantime, the fe¬ male solicited for a moment the hand of his lovely companion, Seraphina, and, re¬ garding it slightly, resumed :— " The lines that deck this sIlcIi, smooth Land, Dtnotc thon'It seek some foreign strand : Drctd secret iocs—a treacherous band ' For mtny a gathering pe rl of brine, Shall dun tho<e spuklin,; ejes of thine , Aud mimy a tear its furrowy streak, Sh ill tract adonn thj faded check. llude stoiins .ire ncir —at list a smile— But, oh ' what wiary bonis the while ■ Nor, maiden, scorn the sibyl's lore— Lcsi, to-s'd round some wdd distant shore, Who warns thee once should warn no more " < i , On ceasing, she vvas about to depart, though not without another significant glance bestowed on both her auditors, when Gialdini starting suddenly from his reverie, hastily inquired her name.—" Ge- ronime," she responded; •- and ere many hours
hours shall elapsed—I not mockery, but for thy consolation-—thou shalt hear it again. Farewell." So saying, she continued to retreat as fast as possible towards a vessel that seem¬ ed moored at a little distance from the beach where they stood. At her signal, Gialdini saw a boat, lowered from the ves¬ sel, which received, and immediately car¬ ried her on board. By this time the lo¬ vers had reached, and entered their galley, which instantly departed for the palace of Estherholme. No sooner were they fairly launched again on the smooth shining surface of the ocean, than the vessel, to which had just retreated the mysterious Geronime, began to spread sail, and make directly towards them. The apprehension that she might possibly be a pirate, immediately darted across the mind of Gialdini, and he trem¬ bled for the fate of Seraphina, should this supposition be realized. For he knew, E 3 that
that rover was not un¬ frequently encountered— '* Whose bark in sheltering cove below, Lurl's for the passing prrtcefu! prow, Till the grfy m irincr's guitar Is heard, and seen the evening s'ar; Tl 2n stealing, wilh the muffled oar, Far shaded by the rocky shore, Rush the nighf prow It ts on the prey, And turn to gruum his roundelay," Impressed with this conviction, he com¬ manded the rowers to make all possible speed—but speed was now too late; for the vessel lying between them and the palace of Estherholme, whither they were bound, easily intercepted their course— grappled with, and boarded the galley. The rowers sat appalled at their stations, and refused to oppose any other weapon than prayer to their pursuers, be the issue what it might. Gialdini, however, clasp¬ ed the:unconscious Seraphina in his arms, who ;had.already sunk into a state of in¬ sensibility,'arid, drawing his light poniard, prepared for a desperate, although hope¬ less
what was ment, when on board the vessel (evident¬ ly a pirate, from the uncouth and rugged appearance of her crew) he distinguished the marquis Estherholme, the father of his Seraphina, and by his side the dreaded count Rosalba, who appeared directing the movements of the seamen. Few mi¬ nutes, however, were afforded to the un¬ fortunate Gialdini, to collect his scattered thoughts, or form any rational conclusion. Half-a-dozen sturdy and vigorous rovers leaped instantly into the galley; and for¬ cing Seraphina' from his arms, by com¬ mand of Rosalba, pinioned him, aud bore him, powerless and half fainting, into the bark of the pirates. Gialdini cast a glance of agony around him, as he entered what, he now Tightly conjectured, was to be his prison. Seraphina was still lying in the galley, senseless, which Estherholme also had now entered ; and the fortunate, ab¬ horred Rosalba, was preparing to follow him. E 4 CHAP.
CHAP. IX. O'er tic glad waters of the dark blue sen, Our thoughts as boundless, ami our souls as frer, Far as the breeze can bear, the billows foam, Survey our empire, and behold our home! These are our realms, no limits to their sway— Onr flag the sceptre ail who meet obey. Bvnos. A huge, square-looking ruffian, with a long yellow beard, vvho appeared com¬ mander of the pirate vessel (for such in¬ deed was the cruiser into which Gialdini had been borne, although she still carried v.o ensign emblematic of her dreadful oc¬ cupation) stood leaning over her side, and following with his grey, ferocious eyes, the departure of Estherholme into the gal¬ ley. And now, ere yet Rosalba had de¬ scended—" Let the service be speedily completed, Ruganoff," said the marquis to him, softly, " and the rest of thy re¬ ward L sure." The
The ruffian, addressed name of Ruganoff, shrugged an assent, but mur¬ mured something also in an inarticulate, grumbling tone, which Gialdini could not understand, when the latter spoke.— " What service ? what reward ?" he ex¬ claimed indignantly. " Am I the victim of heartless assassins—of tame-blooded murderers? Thou, whom the graves dark trammels cannot bind," he continued, addressing count Rosalba—" who has! arisen from the tomb to blast my happi¬ ness, and destroy my hopes—tell me, what means this violence ?" " Thou hast the recompence of pre¬ sumption," said count Rosalba, with pro¬ voking; coolness. *' Wretch! receive thou that of vil¬ lainy," shouted Gialdini, suddenly, and plunged his still firmly-grasped poniard into his bosom. Rosalba, staggered back¬ ward from the blow, and sunk, with a yell that seemed to partake more of laugh¬ ter than of agony, again into the briny e 5 element
element which so rescued. Gialdini observed the body rise once to the surface, exhibiting still on its breast the hilt of the fatal poniard, and a grim smile (or was it only fancy?) of mockery en its features; when it again disappeared beneath the whelming waves, and was never found afterwards. Ruga¬ noff now gave a signal to his crew, and Gialdini vvas instantly secured. ***** " Why truly," said Fiametta, one af¬ ternoon in the palace gardens, while en¬ deavouring to appease her wretched mis¬ tress, " to lose two lovers on one unlucky night, was no slight misadventure. Praise saint Rosolia, notwithstanding—for that you escaped yourself from such a barba¬ rous horde must have been owing to the good saint's especial interference, and pro¬ tection. Saw you that huge knave with a yellow beard, and enormous pistols stuck in his girdle?" rt I saw none of them—nothing I" said donna
a mournful " But came they to the palace, Fiametta, in this guise?" , *' In this guise, madam," responded Fiametta. " Zachelli says they are pi¬ rates, who were just about to set sail. The marquis, while closeted with count Rosalba, sent for their leader, or captain, as it seems he is styled. This ugly Mus¬ covite soon appeared, accompanied by se¬ veral of his crew (who called him by some hard rough name), and added not a little to the fright I had already experienced. They remained not long, however, and the count and marquis left the palace, by a private portal, in tlieir company. I saw them embark in a small boat toge¬ ther—with the rest you are acquainted. But for what is become of the brave don Gialdini—Zachelli says, it is more than probable, we may never learn." Donna Seraphina clasped her hands with fervour—raised her blue eyes to hea¬ ven, and wept bitterly. e6 It
. It was now the hour of midnight. The vessel was scudding at an unusual rate, with a brisk, but not violent breeze, and the commander, Ruganoff, with the greater part of the crew, had retired to rest. The lieutenant, however, with two of the pirates, whose turn it was to watch, were still on deck, regaling themselves over a drowsy watchfire, and conversing in coarse language upon then past ex¬ ploits, or present expectations. Gialdini was alone in his cabin, but perfectly un- manacled, listening to the sound of their voices, and wondering how much longer he was likely to remain deprived of liber¬ ty. Many weeks had now passed since their departure from Sicily, and still the pirate kept his onward course, without coming to any explanation of his ultimate intentions. It was true, he was unfetter¬ ed, a favour not extended to him during the early part of the voyage; but he hardly knew to what, or whom, he was to
to impute his partial lieved Ruganoff instructed to murder him on the seas: still the sometimes re¬ lenting mood of the rugged buccaneer, and a friend he had on board in the per- son of Geronime, the Samoyed- female, gave him hopes of a better termination to his travels than it was intended by the marquis Estherholme should befal him. As he was musing gloomily on what might be the probable issue of this un¬ happy adventure, while the glowing charms of his lost Seraphina crowded ever and anon upon his anguished recollection, the door opened, and a light step entered his cabin. The visitor bore no light, and moon there was none—but a glimmering reflection from the lighted embers on deck was sufficient to reveal to him the figure of Geronime, and he knew that he had nothing to fear. Starting, however, in¬ voluntarily on his feet, he hastily de¬ manded the cause of her intrusion at that unusual hour; reminding her that he had already
already refused evening, could not now partake of it; for Gero¬ nime, he had discovered, was the pirate Ruganoff's loved and trusted companion; and one who made it her peculiar pro¬ vince to supply provisions to his unfortu¬ nate captives, even when forbidden to supply consolation. Gialdini well knew this—" My kind Geronime!" he therefore added, gratefully, " why will you torture with the offer of sustenance, one whom his wretchedness deprives of appetite?" " Hush!" she exclaimed, motioning him to silence. " I bring you to-night a bet¬ ter gift than food—I bring you liberty." " How? by what means?" inquired the startled Gialdini—*• the voices I hear— the fire—the watch' -----" " May be easily passed," interrupted the impatient Geronime, ** and this night you may be free—only agree to the con¬ ditions." " Name them!" said Gialdini, eagerly. " That you return not again to Sicily,'' said
said Geronime, with marked emphasis. « The world is spacious, and is all before thee: but to Sicily you must not again return." " Why do you impose an interdiction so cruel?" asked Gialdini, with amaze¬ ment, and in a supplicating tone. " Because thy return would injure thy benefactress," replied Geronime, impres¬ sively. ,( Because it would betray me* and because Ruganoff—whose welfare I prize beyond my own—would then be deprived of the reward for thy destruction. You must return no more." " Ha! it was so, then ?" said Gialdini, shuddering: " massacre was intended— was stipulated for?" " It vvas," responded Geronime, solemn¬ ly. " But Ruganoff loves not blood^I loVe not blood—nor even gold, which he has loved so dearly. Do you consent to the conditions ?" " Seraphina —my attachment!" now stammered Gialdini. " There
are means," Geronime; " letters were invented for the use of those who love. Employ them discreetly, and Seraphina joins you else¬ where." ^ , , ( " I consent!" said Gialdini, with ala¬ crity. , ."jAnfl'I confide!" said she, significant- ly:/,', that,is—I will confide—when you haye sworn -----" , % 1 swear never again to revisit Sicily I" exclaimed Gialdini, with firmness. '«/Enough!" said Geronime. " Now follow me cautiously." So saying, she conducted him warily towards the lighted deck, keeping as far aloof from the flame as possible, that their dark figures might not be so easily per¬ ceptible in the shadowy distance. On reaching the deck, a motley scene pre¬ sented itself to the eyes of Gialdini. The lieutenant of the cruiser, an Englishman, named Smyth, was occupied in the nar¬ ration of apparently a very interesting legend
legend for the entertainment of of associates—a Venetian named Spalatro, and Monctar, a Moor. They were alt hovering closely over the midnight blaze, which each was too deeply engaged in the interest of the narrative to preserve from almost expiring. It was a starlight sky, but no moon would illumine that night the vast watery expanse that lay stretched on every side of them; and yet over this dreary, unlit waste, might Gialdini take presently his undirected course. And now Geronime, closely followed by the object of her solicitude, had ad¬ vanced considerably nearer to the speaker, when, sheltered from view by a heap of cordage, they were constrained to await a more favourable opportunity for gaining the lee side of tho vessel, where lay the boat destined to convey Gialdini from bondage. In this perilous situation, while the lieutenant's face being turned in the exact direction of their hiding-place effec¬ tually barred the further progress of their design,
could not avoid overhearing every syllable of his narrative, in which Gialdini appeared to feel a singular degree of interest, not a little to the surprise of his observant companion. As the tale proceeded, he almost forgot to breathe, in the earnestness of his attention to that strange wandering legend ; which, for the reader's entertainment, shall here be di¬ vested of lieutenant Smyth's maritime phraseology* and presented as the story of the Caffre Slave.
CHAP.
CHAP. X. Thou most lying slave,, Whuni stripes may move, uot kindness ; I have used thee (Filth us thou art) with human caro, and lodg'd In mine oivn cell. ' ' Siiakesppaiih. ( t In the isle of Borneo, the largest in the Indian Ocean, near the sea-coast, lived a slave who was christened by the name of Oromanzel. He was a native of Caffraria; and, though the term of his servitude had been long and miserable, and he had never once permitted the hope of its ter* mination to animate his breast, yet had not forgotten the delightful groves, and almost overwhelming pastures, of the luxuriant country in which he was born. Oromanzel sighed incessantly for the sable associates of his youth, with whom he yet recollected to have partaken of his favour¬ ite pastimes; and for the simple enjoy¬ ments
ments which still thought the height of felicity, while in his native region. Hence he was gloomy, and wretched •, and ever on the watch for some opportunity of revenging himself on his purchaser, and present employer. This being his principal aim—almost the sole object of his ruminations, of course, it could not be long ere Oromanzel found the opportunity he so ardently desired. Aboukir, a Mahometan diamond-mer¬ chant, and the present owner of Oroman¬ zel, whom he employed in procuring gold and pearls from the interior of the island, and polishing them, one night later than ordinary, chanced to visit the hovel of his Caffre slave. They were alone, and with¬ out fear of interruption: the wily Oro¬ manzel, perceiving his advantage, threw him instantly to the ground, and flourish¬ ed a concealed poniard close to the throat of his unfortunate master. The luckless merchant, thus made aware of his devilish design, then addressed him, exclaiming— " Oromanzel!
" Oromanzel! thou wilt not murder me __« I will," said the vengeful Caffre.— " Alas, slave!" now groaned the hopeless Aboukir—" what right hast thon to take thy master's life?"—" A better right than thou hast to be my master," replied the determined Oromanzel. " I am stronger than thou: nature meant me for thy master, although circumstances have made thee mine. I was privileged, in the land of my birth, to slay the lion, because na¬ ture made me his superior in the combat, and in artifice—and shall I not slay thee? Strength, and cunning, imply natural su¬ periority. I know not what thou mayest urge—it is thus in Caffraria. Besides, thou art not of mine own religion—to slaughter thee is in me no crime: thine may be the true God—but we do not allow it to be so at the Great Fish River * " So saying, he drew the blade across the neck of his helpless victim- life ebbed fast in the stream which flowed from
wound, and no more. For some time did the merciless Oro¬ manzel gloat exultingly over the body of his murdered master, and rejoice that his own tiger strengtii had enabled him so easily to accomplish his destruction : but the hour of repentance was at hand. The malignant grin of triumph had hardly subsided from his sooty features, ere he began to feel alarmed for the probable consequences of the deed he he-id perpe¬ trated ; and to execrate his own stupidity, for not more deliberately weighing them beforehand, or selecting a place where the means of concealment could be found bet¬ ter than in his own hovel. Struck mo¬ tionless by these appalling suggestions of his conscience, which he wondered had never assailed him before, he stood like a statue of despair, unable to do any thing to prevent detection, and the guilty in¬ strument fell from his nerveless hand. The fall of the weapon, however, some¬ what
what revived : struck hollowly upon the floor of the cabin, and the idea smote him instantly that he might there deposit the body he had slain. Accordingly, by removing a few rude boards, he produced a sort of grave, into whicli he then lowered the stiffening body of the murdered merchant, and care¬ fully covered it with planks as before. Having completed this arrangement, he felt somewhat more at ease. Meanwhile, the lost Aboukir was sought every where —rewards of gold, and bees'-wax, every where were offered—but no tidings could be obtained of him. None knew, save Oromanzel, the dark resting-place of Aboukir—and he of course was silent. Some time rolled on. It has been said that Oromanzel was silent, but he was not tranquil: nor vvas his condition in the least amended by the crime he had com¬ mitted. Aboukir during his lifetime had a friend named Ali, who at his death suc¬ ceeded him, and took instant possession of all
all property. the slave of Ali, whom he found a harder task-master than Aboukir had been be¬ fore him; and who, moreover, now re¬ doubled his vigilant endeavours to dis¬ cover the fate of his predecessor, and the dread of his eventual success in this matter troubled the assassin exceedingly. It was on a dark evening, illumined now and then by the harmless flashes of lightning common in that sultry climate, as Oromanzel was returning from his daily labour, rather later than usual, that his lonely way was intercepted by a sha¬ dowy figure, wearing the very Moslem habit in which he knew he had buried the corpse of his late master, now festering underneath the floor of his own hovel. At first, he almost doubted the evidence of his senses; but when he saw the cold gleaming eyes of Aboukir fixed steadily upon him, even the stout nerves of Oro¬ manzel trembled, and the big drops of sweat coursed each other down his sable forehead.
forehead.—" Oromanzel," said the spirit, calmly, " I require of thee my bones— why hast thou treasured them up so care¬ fully beneath thy cabin floor? I have too long been separated from them—thou hast divided us — restore them to me again. They are mine, and I must have them—dost thou hear, Oromanzel?"— At these words, Oromanzel, who knew that his cabin had yet to be searched, and thought it an excellent opportunity to get rid of the bones, affected extreme peni¬ tence, and replied—" Poor injured spirit— talkest thou of treasure! of what value to me is a putrid skeleton? Alas! thy bones are already half decayed—they are mouldering into dust, and will hardly bear removal—the reptile hath eaten into them so far. Yet rather than withhold aught from thee to which thou hast a claim, I will forthwith fetch them hither, and should they adhere together------"— " Kind, worthy Oromanzel!" said the spirit, vanishing as he spoke—" thou wilt vol. i. f fi nt *
edly, than thou thinkest them." Away hurried Oromanzel to his hovel, elated fit the prospect of being speedily released from all further anxiety respecting the discovery of the bones. As he proceeded onward, the lightning flashed more vivid¬ ly around him, and the now-rolling thun¬ der, by its approaching growl, threatened a heavy tempest; but Oromanzel either heard not, or refused to heed, the impend¬ ing conflict of the elements, in his eager¬ ness to remove the bones. Immediately on his arrival, the Caffre having lighted a torch, commenced open¬ ing the grave, with combined caution and celerity. He started involuntarily, on be¬ holding the decayed and wormy state of those very vestments which had appeared so fresh and lively on the phantom, a few minutes before; but what was his asto¬ nishment and horror when, on attempting to descend, he heard the stiff joints rattle, and saw the lank bones shrink closer to¬ gether,
gether, while a grating voice angrily why he wanted to disturb them? To this interrogatory, so terribly ejacu¬ lated from the lifeless jaws of death itself, Oromanzel, as well as fear would permit him, returned a veritable answer, adding candidly enough—" Besides, I fear lest Ali should come hither, and discover my criminality by means of these unlucky bones." To this confession the voice sud¬ denly responded—" Let Ali come not hi¬ ther until after midnight, and he shall find in this grave other bones than mine." The skeleton now ceased to speak—the crack¬ ling of the crisp joints too subsided—the thunder paused for a brief interval, and the ears of the guilty Caffre were saluted by what to him was yet more terrible—an impatient knocking at his hovel door. Oromanzel stood aghast, and panic-smit¬ ten : the prediction still rang in his ears— himself might, ere the morning, fill that dismal grave, and his betrayer was doubt¬ less at the door!—What could he say, or F 2 do ?—
way : two fellow-laboursrs, attached to his late master, entered, and beheld the opened grave; then rushed, in spite of his entrea¬ ties, to obtain the promised recompence, by proclaiming that the murderer of Abou¬ kir was the Caffre slave. Oromanzel saw them depart, and hope fled with them: he however attempted to close the grave in his despair; but his strength vvas utter¬ ly exhausted, and, reeling beneath the weight of a massy plank, he fell headlong into the dreaded fissure. Why springs not the stout Caffre from that loathed re¬ ceptacle of festering mortality ?—what iron clasp withholds the brawny murderer? Hark! a voice—it reveals the dreadful se¬ cret!—" Midnight approaches—Ali will soon be here—1 warned thee thou wouldst find the remains of my mortal sinews tougher than thou thotightst them !" The skeleton had griped him in its suffocating hold! The whirlwind shook the hovel, and the thunder now lent its awful aid to solemnize
solemnize the uproar; while every crevice of that crazy edifice were seen ter¬ rific lightnings, as if the fiends were al¬ ready hovering in readiness to seize their desponding prey. Oromanzel glared fright¬ fully upwards amid the appalling tumult —struggled vainly for an instant, and ex¬ pired. What became of the corpse of the diamond-merchant could not be ascertain¬ ed : his body was never heard of more. It was even asserted by some that Abou¬ kir was actually again alive, and had been seen to converse with Ali, shortly after this adventure: but as Ali himself imme¬ diately quitted the island, this incredible circumstance failed to receive any positive confirmation. The two labourers, how¬ ever, still aver, that within that wretched hovel they saw the murdered remains of their late master, mouldering " in his ha¬ bit as he lived :" but that on returning to the grave with Ali, they found only the body of the Caffre slave. p 3 Toward
portion of tive, the features of Gialdini assumed so fixed, and vacant an expression, that his face less resembled the aspect of the living than the dead; so intensely was he ab¬ sorbed in the recollections which, it vvas evident, the names of Ali, and Aboukir, had awakened in his bosom. Geronime would have vented her wonder—but at that moment a change in the position of the lieutenant, Smyth, presented a possi¬ bility of their gaining, unobserved, the lee side of the cruiser, ;jf which they in¬ stantly availed themselves, just as the rough, unconscious seaman, finished his recital.
CHAP.
CHAP. XI. Whose voice is heard ' whoso carbine rang' Whose bullet through ihc night-air sang? Bvron. " The land lies yonder," now whispered Geronime, as Gialdini descended into the boat prepared for him—" yonder where the bright red star eclipses his twinkling brethren. Make speed—you will soon be safe." " Safe, and far from my deliverer!" said Gialdini, softly, grasping the oars as he spoke, " but should we ever chance to meet again—I shall remember------" A sign from Geronime to be silent, checked the rest upon his lips, and she now cautiously withdrew some paces to¬ wards her cabin. Meanwhile, the hardy lieutenant of the Invincible, as the cruiser vvas called, sat f 4 gazing
gazing on expiring and the cheated companions of his watch remained brooding over the tale they had been listening to so earnestly. Suddenly a light splash broke the surrounding still¬ ness, and fell faintly on the ears of the startled pirates. "Hark! what noise a-lee?" said Spa¬ latro, with awakened vigilance. " The dolphins sport merrily to-night in the darkness." " Or the gull must have taken a longer flight than ordinary," said Monctar, ri¬ sing, " that dips her wing so late on her return." " It is the plashing of oars alongside!" exclaimed the lieutenant, whose acute ears could not mistake the sounds they now plainly distinguished. " And see !" he continued, starting on his feet, and point¬ ing to a scarcely-descried object that was dimly seen to skim along in the darkness. All hurried in confusion to the lee side of the
the vessel, and rushed cabin. One—two—three pistols were fired by the rovers during the succeeding instant, and as many balls whizzed round the brow of the lonely ocean wanderer, and then, far beyond him, plashed for ever into the bounding wave. A tumult immediately arose on board—Ruganoff rushed on deck. Other shots were subsequently discharged, but the continued plashing of the oars, which grew louder and faster as the dis¬ tance from danger increased, sufficiently assured the crew of the Invincible that none had taken the desired effect. * * * * * « You have done wrong, Geronime," said Ruganoff to her, in a surly tone. " Beshrew me but my very heart rejoiced when he struck the younker, Rosalba, overboard for suggesting such an accursed business. Yet having undertaken it, as you knew, and touched half the reward, f 5 my
my and my required he should perish." " You know you shrank from his as¬ sassination," said Geronime, persuasively, " and can safely swear yourself not privy to his escape, if discovered. But I have his solemn oath that he will not return to Sicily, nor reveal his existence to Esther¬ holme. The reward will be bloodlessly obtained—this was better than butchery." " You have done wrong, I say again," replied Ruganoff, with sternness which she knew well was half assumed—" but at any rate I am glad my hands are rid of him. Fire away!" he continued, " as long as he is in sight. If the balls strike him— well; if not—let him find death elsewhere. The Invincible shall not alter her course to pursue him." ***** It was again the feast of saint Rosolia. The seasons had revolved—nature had changed he* 1 garb, and the skies their as¬ pect, but brought no change to the joyless bosom
of hope, long cherished, of Gialdini's return had abandoned her entirely, but no other cheering expectation, or new-sprung affec¬ tion, came to supply its place, and all before her was dreary vacancy and deso¬ late despair. Society she had avoided since that fatal night, which she felt had deprived her of the only intercourse her bosom seemed formed to enjoy; and all her former amusements within the palace became also tedious, insipid, and loath¬ some. Hers was no idle flame—no tran¬ sient semblance of affection : she had loved truly—tenderly; and the degree of mys¬ tery which enveloped Gialdini, had served only to heighten her attachment. It was in vain that she endeavoured to wring some particulars of his probable destiny from Estherholme: he lamented the fate of count Rosalba deeply, but of Gialdini sternly forbade her to speak at all. Thus situated, her only entertainment had been usually to " despond over her idol" with a f 6 bursting
which and impaired her beauty. Such was the once lovely, but now hopelessly impassion¬ ed Seraphina, at the return of the long anxiously expected, and joyfully greeted, festival of saint Rosolia. It vvas a gloomy evening, far different to that delightful eve (the last on which Seraphina had tasted felicity) when Gial¬ dini had accompanied her to the celebra¬ tion of that splendid festival. The hea¬ vens were overcast, and the wind swept dismally around the palace, as Seraphina now from her casement surveyed the tossing of the troubled waves—last festi¬ val she had looked from the same lattice on a different scene. She was alone— Fiametta, who had lately been united to her constant Zachelli, having accompanied him to Palermo, to witness the splendour, and partake in the festivities of this jocund season. Seraphina could no longer endure the recollections which crowded on her mind, and was about to leave the case¬ ment,
ment, when she thought she perceived a small boat labouring with the unusually rough waves, as often as their mighty un¬ dulations permitted it to be visible. She continued to gaze intently, and was not deceived : a boat of small dimensions, and containing apparently a single female figure, was evidently making for that part of the strand which approached nearest to the palace gardens. Alarmed at the tre¬ mendous risk it seemed to encounter, in surmounting each succeeding dangerous billow, Seraphina watched it nearer, and presently saw it arrive in safety. The adventurous female, who was indeed its only occupant, immediately leaped on shore, and after fastening her frail con¬ veyance to the dripping beach, disappear¬ ed for some minutes among the groves of orange trees that encompassed the gar¬ dens. After a little interval she again appear¬ ed, and it was not till now that (the dis¬ tance being considerably diminished) Se¬ raphina
raphina her person. In a moment she remember¬ ed the foreign-garbed sibyl, who had call¬ ed herself Geronime, and entered the ves¬ sel which afterwards chased their galley, on the night of her last interview with Gialdini. Her air—her aspect—her very dress appeared the same! she could not be mistaken. In another instant, the da¬ ring stranger was beneath the lattice, ma¬ king significant gestures to Seraphina, as if imploring her to descend. Whence could she come? and what could be her business?—were questions now that na¬ turally suggested themselves. Seraphina knew not; but remembered her con¬ nexion with the capture of Gialdini, and hastily descended, with a fluttering bo¬ som.
CHAP
CHAP. XII. Hull sorrow thy .joung ddys shaded, As clouds o'er the rooming fleet' loo fist have those young d iys 1 idid, Whicli even in sonow were sweet. Doth lime, with his cold wing, wither Bath fttlmg that once ivustlear' Conic, child of misfortune' come hither— I'll weep with thee tear for tcir Moont No sooner had Seraphina reached the garden, than she was joined by the mys¬ terious foreigner, vvho took her hand with a glance full of meaning, and gently hurried her to a little distance from the palace, as if anxious to escape the obser¬ vation of its inmates. Seraphina, al¬ though not without fear and trembling, submitted to be led by this strange con¬ ductor to a small imbowering grove, at the extremity of her father's territory, whence the sea was discernible. As they pro-
proceeded, from addressing her,demanding—"Whence comest, and who art thor, ? why venturest thou hither—for I now remember thee— and what hast thou to ask of me ?" To this Geronime replied, without slackening her speed, or loosening the hand of her companion, in the same rhym- in"- manner she had formerly adopted, as if still further to recal herself to Seraphi- na's recollection— '■ I ask neither gilt, nor golden fee ; As my boon d^erves, so remember mc : I am bound to tho East, but I come from the West, And I paused on my wiy, that thou niightest rc3t. Yet 1 usk of thee neither gold nor gear, Though I've coped with peril to meet thee ln.re." By this time they had gained a suffi¬ cient shelter, near the beach, where vvas fastened the boat which had conveyed the pirate's paramour over tho tossing waves. Here Geronime paused, and looking cau¬ tiously around her, seemed about to com¬ mence her communication; when Sera¬ phina,
phina, whose impatience accorded with her guide's prolixity, again inter¬ rupted her by saying—" If gold thou askest of me, I will give it thee freely; and through peril, I know, thou earnest to this place. But there are other horrible remembrances — other desperate adven¬ tures that arise with thy countenance, but about which I yet tremble to inquire of thee. Speak ! then—for to disguise my anxiety with thee is unnecessary: thou knowest, I am a wretch for whom there is no hope of joy—no prospect of tran¬ quillity !" She clasped her hands imploringly, as she concluded, and looked earnestly in the expressive face of her auditor. Ge¬ ronime having recovered her breath, and assured herself that no one was listening, gazed in turn on her with pity; and just¬ ly fearing the consequences of too sudden a disclosure, resumed the subject still am¬ biguously, in her accustomed rhyme—
" Seek
what survives Beyond the vast Atlantic lives. Seek thou the West! hope dawns for thee Afer beyond that billowy sea. When sinks the sun, in splendour drest r His wearied orb points out the West; And there, when all grows dark beside, Ilis lingering glories last abide. Hope for the marrow these portend— Hope tbou— for hope's the lover's friend. 'Tis hope must guide—mu* t prompt to flee Where I have been, and thou shouldst be." Geronime ceased, but continued point¬ ing to the West, and this attitude still spoke volumes to the agonized Seraphina, who hardly knew what meaning to elicit from her mysterious intimations, and sin¬ gular manner.—" Oh! tell me," she ex¬ claimed, " the drift of these strange allu¬ sions?—wild and incomprehensible, it is true, yet solemn, and of import to me, if I construe aright the meaning of thy words and gestures." " Aright thou hast divined them, maid of Sicily!" now responded Geronime, with fervour. " They are of import to thee, and my heart dictates them. The lonely bride
of relentless rover pities, and would serve thee. Relentless di^ I say ? pardon me, Ruganoff—thou art not re¬ lentless ! Sicilian damsel, I—even I have loved. Oh! how distractingly! Thou hast loved too, it may be, though not so steadily. Gialdini------* " Ah ! what of him ?" cried Seraphina, eagerly. " Tell me of him, and I will give thee jewels—load thee with fortune —cover thee with gratitude ! I will re¬ duce myself to penury—exhaust my trea¬ sure on thee—and after reproach Heaven that all I possessed was so inadequate to thy recompence!" " Hast thou not heard of him," inquired Geronime, " since ------" " Never!" said Seraphina, mournfully : " thine are the only lips—save Fiametta s s —I could ever prevail upon to breathe his beloved name." " H^t thou received no letters ?" de¬ manded Geronime, casting on her a scruti¬ nizing glance. " None,"
said " I thought it—I feared it—I knew it," now murmured Geronime, in an under tone—" they have been intercepted." She then added, in a louder voice-—" Ro¬ salba was a villain of the blackest dye, and Estherholme is------" " My father!" said Seraphina, hastily interrupting her. " True," said Geronime, seeming sud¬ denly to recollect herself—" true. But, the victim of both, Gialdini is-----" " Oh, where?" cried Seraphina—" tell me where ? thou answerest not—perhaps he is in his grave! thou sawest him be¬ trayed upon that fatal night—perhaps thou hast seen more! perhaps thou hast seen the thirsty daggers of thy abhorred associates plunge for his precious life— clashing each other in that gentle bosom that yearned only for peace, and throbbed for Seraphina!" " I saved his life," said Geronime, em¬ phatically, and as if not a little gratified with
with her own exploit. " gave berty—I saved his life." " Bless thee for that," cried Seraphina, gratefully—" an angel could no more! he lives then yet—still lives-------" " Gialdini lives!" said Geronime. Seraphina knelt in gratitude to Heaven and his deliverer, clasping fervently her uplifted hands.—" And thou wilt not tell me where?" she articulated, half reproach¬ fully- " This paper will inform you," replied Geronime, almost equally affected—" but read not it now. I know not whether I should find you here. I therefore wrote for you, designing to leave it with your attendant—it will tell you every thing. Abandon Estherholme—seek the Azores —there peace and felicity await you still— That is, if—if—but no—I will not doubt him. Report affirmed it positively—but I cannot doubt his Jaith." " Whose faith ?" asked Seraphina. " Gialdini's," was the reply. "1 do
not exclaimed fervently. " I yet hope thou hast no cause," re¬ turned Geronime. " There is but another word to say—farewell." " Not yet—not yet," said Seraphina, detaining her: " say, how can I reward you?" The Samoyede only smiled.—" You arc happier than you were?" said she, at length, to Seraphina. " Oh ! yes," exclaimed the already-al¬ tered damsel—" you have snatched me from the grave!" " Then I am rewarded," said Geronime, impressively. " And look," she resumed, pointing toward the ocean, " the fleet bird has opened her wings—the Invincible stays for me. See how she spreads her plumage to the breeze! The sun is set, and before he shines again, I shall be far from the coast of Sicily. Let not our in¬ terview be known to Estherholme—he will
will purpose. well." Seraphina looked as directed, and saw a vessel dancing proudly on the swelling billows, which some intervening trees had before screened from her observation. Her canvass was already fluttering in the wind, and she seemed preparing instantly to sail. Starting from the sight, she turned again to Geronime, now conscious that their interview could be but of short duration, as the vessel was evidently waiting for her.—" You, then, refuse all recompence ?" she repeated, in an earnest tone. " I covet not wealth," said Geronime, with seriousness: then suddenly changing her manner, while her features relaxed into their accustomed smile, she added— " I ,i<.K nuther gold, nor glittering gear, VLt I Ciiiiic through puil lo greet thee hero." " But—we shall meet again ?" said Se¬ raphina, anxiously, as the Samoyede giri departed toward the beach. Geronime turned suddenly, pointed to the floating cruiser
cruiser with evident pride, brief pause, responded— ** We meet no more—the anchor's wcigh'd— Our bark's pu pared—yet, nought dismaj'd The s'tdjI viens lis sails uufurPd To waft her tound the watery woild. Wine art my solace—none I ieai, And few 1 grk\e, and some I clicei A little space—a little while— And thou maj'bt bless Hjl voice, and smih, VV inch bade ihec seek that WLStun isle." Geronime now darted swiftly toward the beach, and was again for some few minutes lost to sight among the shrubs and aloes, through which her path lay. Presently, however, Seraphina again dis¬ tinguished her unfastening her boat, into which she then leaped, and after waving an adieu to her companion (who returned it graciously, though almost too much agitated to be sensible of what she did) was soon seen to approach the vessel. The breakers ran high, and often con¬ cealed the boat altogether, but its fearless conductress, accustomed to what might be not
not own element, surmounted every difficulty. Seraphina watched her received on board, when in¬ stantly the sound of a shrill whistle faintly reached her ears, and the cruiser took its departure.
VOL. L
G
CHAP.
CHAP. XIII. A change carae o'er the spirit of my dream. BvROf/. The daughter of Estherholme continued to gaze on the receding vessel of the rovers, often clasping to her lip.s the sealed packet given her by Geronime, full of anxiety—full of new-born hope. The night was likely to be a stormy one—but the fearless Invincible bounded in gallant trim over the foaming waves, each rolling billow a transparent mountain, as if re¬ gardless alike of the fury of the elements, and the wrath of man. In a little time, her shivering sails were alone to be dis¬ tinguished, which the wind seemed bent on converting into shreds of useless can¬ vass. Still she bore bravely on, and a small white speck in the middle of the dark horizon was alone discernible of the pirate
pirate cruiser, when wards her father's palace.—" Go!" she ex¬ claimed, ere she quitted that part of the garden which overlooked the beach—"and the blessings of at least one woful being, unto whom thou hast dispensed the balm of happiness, go and abide with thee. Hunted and execrated are ye by mankind, and most abhorrent must be your recol¬ lections—but may the remembrance of a single benign act of clemency prove a cor¬ dial to your bosoms! for one, at least, among ye, shall the prayer of the daugh¬ ter of Estherholme rise everlastingly. Now soon farewell, Sicilia!" she continued, has¬ tening onward as she spoke, " farewell— farewell!" Night fell heavily around her, and the gloom increased every instant, as Sera¬ phina, still clasping the packet close to her beating breast, retraced her path with agility toward the palace. As she reached the marble entrance, she again looked back for the vessel of the rovers—but it G % vvas
was gone. white speck was no visible—the gathering atmosphere rested alone in lowering masses on the foamy ocean, but the cruiser had entirely disap¬ peared, # * * # * * * * » In the Atlantic Ocean, lying off the coast of Portugal, not far to the north¬ west of Cape St. Vincent, and nearly opposite to Lisbon, are situated certain islands called the Azores—so named from the astonishing number of gosshawks re¬ ported to have been originally found there¬ on. They were formerly very little cele¬ brated, except by mariners, who, previous to the discovery of America, usually deemed them the westernmost extremity of the navigable globe. A little to the northward of this cluster, and separated from the rest by a larger extent of ocean, are Flores and Corvo; the former so de¬ nominated owing to the abundance of flowers
which spring spontane¬ ously, and the latter on account of the multitudinous flights of crows which, it is recorded, were disturbed by the first ad¬ venturers. The two are at an inconsider¬ able distance from each other, and the al¬ most constant intercourse maintained be¬ tween the inhabitants, serves to enliven the apparent solitude of their situation. On the beautiful island called Flores, the finest and healthiest, it may be, of the whole group, lived an aged Spanish gen¬ tleman, named don Alvarez, whose dwell¬ ing was situated on the top of a small flowery eminence, close to the sea shore. His habits of life were very secluded, al¬ most his whole society consisting, until, lately, of his two lovely daughters, Isabel and Maria: but recently the abode of don Alvarez had been enlivened by an addi¬ tional inmate. This engaging stranger, don Lorenzo, as he announced himself, had obtained admission to the domestic circle of Alvarez in a singular manner> g 3 which
which recital. vvas on a clear sun-bright morning, now nearly a twelve^ month since, that a handsomely attired foreigner had arrived in a small boat, en¬ tirely unaccompanied, reporting himself to be the sole survivor of a wreck which, he averred, had taken place near their island on the preceding night; and not* withstanding: that no remains of the wreck could be discovered, and the weather vvas exceedingly calm, his story obtained cre¬ dence. The inhabitants exerted them¬ selves to supply his most pressing neces¬ sities, and among the rest, in a conspicu¬ ous, manner, don Alvarez, to whose house he was taken, it being nearest to that part of the beach on which chance had landed him. From this hour the well-informed, captivating Lorenzo, became an inmate of the hospitable mansion of Alvarez, whence he vvas not soon likely to remove; as every passing month served only to make its noble owner more enraptured with his society. Here,
addition every comfort and enjoyment the warmest friendship could devise or bestow, don Lorenzo, it was affirmed, had obtained the affection of the beauteous Isabel, the eldest daughter of his host, Alvarez, and was likely soon to revel also in the enviable transports of successful love. This vvas by no means a surprising circumstance; but, on the con¬ trary, a consummation just such as might have been expected, whether to be " de¬ voutly wished" or otherwise, as the natu¬ ral consequence of his residence under the roof of Alvarez. Isabel was beautiful in person, and in disposition mild and ami¬ able, but somewhat romantic. Her ima¬ gination was kindled into enthusiasm by those marvellous legends of (sometimes lying) travellers she had occasionally, though but rarely met with; and those were heroes, in her estimation, who could barely enumerate or converse upon the wonders with which her memory was stored. But Lorenzo had in reality wit- g 4 nessed
nessed many of wondrous produc¬ tions of nature, the existence of which even Isabel—the romantic Isabel—deem¬ ed almost incredible. Born in the glow¬ ing East, and a stranger to none of its monstrous or beautiful rarities, he dis¬ coursed with her long and frequently on his own native region; and much of those burning climes he had to tell which roused her amazement, and startled her sensibi¬ lity, for*— " There the large olive rains its amber store In marble fonts; there grain, and flower, and fruit, Gush from the earth until the land runs o'er; But there, too, many a poison-tree has root, And midnight listens to the lion's roar, And long, long deserts, scorch the camel's foot''— all which in turn became the subject of their animated conversations. Thus cir¬ cumstanced, it was not at all astonishing that a mutual attachment should com¬ mence between Lorenzo and Isabel, but rather that their felicity should not have been much sooner consummated; to ac¬ count
count which, had some very material reasons, as will appear hereafter. Upwards of a twelvemonth had thus glided happily away, passed by Lorenzo almost wholly in the family of Alvarez, when an untoward occurrence happened, which failed not to produce a considerable change. On a stormy night, towards the com¬ mencement of winter, while the hollow wind raged furiously round the unshelter¬ ed dwelling of Alvarez, and the tempes¬ tuous ocean added its deafening roar to swell the tumult, a sound was distin¬ guished that could neither be mistaken for the roaring of the sea, nor the sweep¬ ing of the hurricane. It was a human voice, apparently exalted in an angry tone; and Yambo, the black menial of Alvarez, surprised at the unwonted circumstance in such a moment of terror, hastily as¬ cended to an upper lattice, for the purpose of ascertaining whence it could proceed. g 5 CHAP.
CHAP. XIV. One stormy wght, as I remember well, The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof. Red came the river down, and loud aud oft The angry spirit of the water shriek'd. At the dead hour of night was heard the cry Of one in jeopardy. Host £. The family of Alvarez had already retired to rest, with the exception of Lorenzo, who, as was not unusual with him, still remained in the library. Isabel and Ma¬ ria, although they found it impossible to sleep, heard not the voice which had alarmed Yambo, being deeply engaged in their devotions, amid the appalling hurri¬ cane which, accompanied by thunder and lightning, now raged fearfully around them, while— " Relic, and rosary, and crucifix, Did rock and quiver in the bickering glare,"
The
good old gentleman, regard¬ less of the elementary conflict, had fallen instantly into a sound repose; and Loren¬ zo was too seriously engaged with his own ruminations to regard any thing. Yambo opened the lattice, and now dis¬ tinctly discerned, as often as the fitful flashes of lightning illumined the dark¬ ness, a group of figures toilsomely ascend¬ ing the steep cragged rocks which alone intervened betwixt the isolated mansion and the sea shore. These seemed to con¬ sist of a whimsically-attired female, fol¬ lowed by a train of six or seven powerful ruffians, apparently habited in the costume of different countries, all cloaked and arm¬ ed for defence or concealment. While Yambo yet stood observing them with astonishment, by no means unmixed with sensations of fear, the rough voice which had at first aroused his attention again broke forth in a strain little better pleased, and sulkily demanded, while its hoarse tones reverberated even louder than the g 6 rumbling
rumbling thou leading us, Geronime?" « From yonder roaring breakers," now responded the female, pointing signifi¬ cantly downwards, " and to where you can hardly be used worse than they have used you. I promise provision, and safe shelter, to each of you that dares courage¬ ously to follow me." " He deserves not either that follows a woman's counsel, or guidance, too far," grumbled one of the most rearward of the party. *' Let bim who dares not follow a wo¬ man," returned the female sharply, " even were it to death, go find his fate from the fire of our pursuers, who have still some shots to spare for him—or from the foam- ers vve have just escaped—or from the hunger be so keenly feels—he deserves not to be of our band." " Well spoken, Geronime," said the gruff voice that first broke silence. '* Thou hast never yet deceived me—save in the escape
escape of that younker, not very island, about a twelvemonth since." " Wait till to-morrow before thou bla- mest me," said Geronime again, signifi¬ cantly, " and perhaps thou mayest re¬ joice at his liberation. Meanwhile, put on thy resolution, Ruganoff. We have been sorely beset, of late, with evils. Our band half killed in that last desperate en¬ counter—our cruiser all unfit, in conse¬ quence, to weather a gale like this—our¬ selves worn down by hunger we have no safe means of satisfying, what awaits us but destruction, except woman's inven¬ tion can avert it? I do not say our pre¬ sent course is without risk, or difficulty— but it is the best we can now pursue. Come nearer, and attend to me." She now lowered her voice consider¬ ably, and, Yambo thought, pointed often, with much earnest gesticulation, toward the lonely dwelling of his master. In this conjecture he was confirmed, when, on gaining the top of the small eminence where
where was situated, saw whole group approach it in silent anxiety, and, after a little hesitation, give the accusto¬ med signal for admittance. Now, al¬ though Yambo- was by no means free from some troublesome flutterings of per¬ turbation at this circumstance, he never Once thought of yielding to the sugges¬ tions of his fear, and keeping the stran¬ gers on the sure side (i. e. the outside) of the edifice; but, on the contrary, imme¬ diately descended, and, as his duty de¬ manded, proceeded to unbar the portal. It might be that his humanity had a little share in this promptitude, but what was more probable is, that the presence of a female among them had divested his mind of its worst terrors—a female rob¬ ber being, in the opinion of Yambo, a prodigy altogether beyond the production of nature* , Accordingly, he ventured to unbar the;door, expecting that the tra¬ vellers needed biit to inquire their road, or at most a little refreshment to support them
them on under such cir¬ cumstances ; although what could have been their errand to the beach, whence he watched them arise by a steep and pe¬ rilous track, he was still wholly at a loss to divine. How great then was Yambo's amazement, when, on his opening the hospitable door, the female of the party (still foremost) presented herself boldly, and requested to be admitted to don Lo¬ renzo! in vain Yambo stammered that the time for an audience was most inop¬ portune—the determined supplicant was not to be denied. She persisted in requi¬ ring to see him, and Yambo in endea¬ vouring to avoid disturbing him at that unseasonable hour, at the instance of one whose garb appeared little superior to what might have been worn by a beggar for his bounty; and the following dialogue ensued between them.—" He has just taken his supper," said Yambo. " He is fortunate," said the female, with apparent
apparent sangfroid; yet added, an un¬ der tone—" I have none to take." " He is now retired to rest," added Yambo. " Mine has been broken for him," she exclaimed—" for his service—for his safe¬ ty ! but he will not have forgotten it." " You cannot see him to-night," rejoined Yambo, pertinaciously. " Menial! I must," replied the reso¬ lute Geronime; "this hour—almost this instant. Trifle no longer, but say to don Lorenzo a female suitor requests and awaits an interview. Accept this gold— we are not destitute—and alarm none— arouse none but Lorenzo." Wholly unpractised as was Yambo in the trickeries of servitude, he could not avoid understanding this as a significant hint that her business with Lorenzo was meant to be entirely private; while so much had the sight of the gold raised his opinion of them, that he unhesitatingly admitted the whole group, and promised instantly
to acquaint with the arrival of such munificent visitors. He found him pacing the floor of the li¬ brary, wrapt in meditation, although wholly unconscious that he should have to listen that night to any thing but the continued beating of the storm. Accord¬ ingly, Yambo instantly disclosed to him that there were below, in company with a mysterious female, who had inquired alone for don Lorenzo— " Some six, or seven, that did hide their faces Even from darkness," Lorenzo looked amazed, but asked no questions; and snatching his poniard from the table before him, hastily descended to the hall of the mansion, whither Yambo curiously followed him.
CHAP.
CHAP. XV. These are not natural events; they strengthen From strange to stranger. Say, how came you hither? Shakespeare. The first object that met the sight of Lorenzo as he entered, was the figure of Geronime, a little advanced before the rest, who were huddled together in the most shadowy corner of the apartment. Lorenzo started, in still greater amaze¬ ment; and his consternation was not de¬ creased, when he perceived (although none presented them) a pistol in every hand, ready for use if their situation should hap¬ pen to require a resource so desperate. He, however, conquered his trepidation, and approaching Geronime with a bold, determined air, seemed tacitly to require of her an explanation of this singular scene and visit. She appeared perfectly to
comprehend meaning of ring glance, and, advancing still further to meet him, addressed him with confidence —" I deliver not to betray—be assured you are safe. Only dismiss your servant for our security—for yourself you hf.ve nothing to fear." Not without a considerable degree of apprehension, however, did Lorenzo or¬ der the reluctant Yambo to retire, but wait without where he could hear him call—an injunction wholly unnecessary to Yambo. As soon as the attendant had disappeared, Geronime stepped back- a little, and motioned to the foremost of the yet hardly distinguished group, who now strode forward, and stood before Lorenzo. In this personage, by the distinction of a yellow beard, and broad, square shoulders, the latter found no difficulty in recogni¬ sing their Russian commander, Ruganoff Smyth, the lieutenant, although severely wounded, was also among the group which remained behind; and the rest were evidently
evidently part of rover's crew, who all, to say truth, appeared in a sadly maimed, and distressed condition. « So—we have dropt again alongside!" said Ruganoff, addressing Lorenzo, at length, with some confusion. " We are, indeed, again confronted," re¬ plied Lorenzo, sternly—" but for what purpose ? wherefore come ye ? I cannot imagine chance so much mine enemy as to have conducted ye hither. No!" he continued, in a tone of agony, " thou hast again been hired, true ruffian like! to dodge me to my haven—to blight my hopes— to drive me from my solitude, and de¬ stroy the felicity you yet feared might smooth the meridian of a life hitherto de¬ voted to adversity." " Not so," returned the rugged chief with calmness, putting up his pistol as he spoke, " our errand is of a different complexion. We have been sorely handled in a recent conflict with a privateer of Biiperior metal—many of those who were some
some time your gaolers are not now of our number. The rest have escaped—but she has chased us hither; and our vessel is f.i damaged, she will no longer ride safely in such a tremendous surf and gale. Add to this, that myself, with the rem¬ nant of my crew, are famishing for food, and you will have pretty nearly the ex¬ tent of our miseries. She," pointing to Geronime, " knew your abode in this island, together with the name you have assumed; and while the Invincible lies in a snug bay concealed from her pursuer, we have roamed hitherward in the hope that you would aid us to avert starvation —a fate even the stout-hearted rover neither covets nor deserves. What I re¬ quest is food for my brave companions, and temporary refuge—to-morrow we sail again. Speak then, what cheer awaits us? Shall vve have jovial fare, and hospi¬ table harbourage; or bare shelter, and but a sorry welcome ? Which, or neither?" Lorenzo was so perfectly astonished at the
man who.a short since hired to deprive him of life now soliciting his assistance, that, for a while, he knew scarcely what,, or how to answer him : it might have been gratifying, under other circumstances, to behold his enemies thus humbled in the dust, but that they should apply to him for rescue in the hour of their necessity was .strange indeed. " Even grant that my life was saved by stratagem," said he to Ruganoff, after a lengthened pause, " what share hadst thou in its preservation ? and on what ground dost thou, expect from me any other re¬ quital than refusal, and abhorrence?" " I pardoned your liberator," said Ru¬ ganoff with firmness, while Geronime again stepped anxiously forward, as if to enforce the appeal. '* But your bullets whizzed merrily round me though, in the starlight," ob¬ served Lorenzo, sternly. " I had music —deep music to cheer my lonely passage." Ruganoff attempted to laugh—looked at
at pistols—muttered something about duty to his employer, and then added—? " But I withheld the pursuit, though I knew thee unharmed, and forbade the In¬ vincible to change her course." " It vvas so," said Lorenzo, clasping his forehead with his hand, while meditating how to dispose of his unwelcome visitors— " for that it may be that I owe thee some¬ thing. But chiefly for my pledge given here—to this fair sibyl, whose services I well remember—you must not arrive un- welcomed, nor depart uncheered. Such aid, and such refreshment, as Lorenzo can command, shall be offered to your accept¬ ance : in the morning go forth—fear no¬ thing—and let us part in peace." ■ Lorenzo now called Yambo, who has¬ tily entered, and, by his order, produced provisions for the hungry pirates, part of which they devoured greedily, and the remainder reserved for consumption on board, their vessel. For these Ruganoff proffered a compensation in gold, which Lorenzo
peremptorily rejected, permitting him, however, to reward the fortunate Yambo with several pieces for his trouble; which, added to those he had received before, composed a larger sum than the happy negro had ever till then possessed. During all this time Lorenzo remained present, although lit.tle conversation passed between him and the rovers; until suddenly Geronime, passing him closely, as if by ac¬ cident, dropped softly in his ear—" The elements are to me familiar—I regard not their strife. Follow me to the edge of the cliff which overhangs the beach— I have something to communicate." Lo¬ renzo replied not, but followed her with his eyes until he saw her glide, unperceiv¬ ed by her companions, through the portal which opened in the direction she had named; and then, after some little musing on the safety and propriety of such a step, prepared to follow her to the spot of assig¬ nation. This was not prudent, but the many painful recollections which the sight of
of awakened the of Lorenzo determined him to hear what¬ ever intelligence she had to impart with such apparent secresy: yet he resolved to use the utmost caution. A pair of pis¬ tols were consequently added to his poni¬ ard, and thus accoutred he ventured fear¬ lessly to his appointment, while the thun¬ der growled heavily over him, and the lightning flashed every instant across his solitary path.
VOL. i.
H
CHAP.
CHAP. XVI. He passes now the ivy bush, Thebwl.'juS seen hini, aud is hush ; lie passes now the dodderM oak, Ye heard the startled raven croak. • t) '' ' r o • The otter hears him tread the shore, * And dives, and is beheld no more ; And by the cliif of p.ile grey stone The midnight wanderer stands alone. Scott. The tempest vvas still unabated: the rain, indeed, had ceased to descend with such impetuosity as heretofore, but the light¬ ning seemed to have acquired increased brilliancy from ,the cessation of the pour¬ ing torrents. Lorenzo, however, still dauntlessly advanced with folded arms, and a dejected aspect, until he drew near the rock described by Geronime, which commanded a full survey of the now tempestuously-raging ocean. Here paused (impressed
(impressed with the sullen grandeur and solemnity of the prospect) the agitated, depressed Lorenzo, and pro^eded to take a more deliberate view of the troubled scene around him. The sombre frowning sliy—in comparison with which the ex¬ pansive foaming ocean exhibited an awful whiteness — opened only to send forth flashes of sulpliureous fire, which seemed at every startling emission to threaten the dazzled beholder with eternal blindness. It was now that he perceived, by the aid of these terrific exhalations, in a small bay beneath him, secured from the violence of the angry surge, the cruiser of Ruganoff safely riding at anchor, and sheltered by projecting crags from the view of his enemy, should she venture to approach so near the shore. While yet Lorenzo stood reflecting upon, and, it might be, half admiring, the hardihood of the rover, who had dared to run his bark into so perilous an inlet, he heard suddenly a voice which he knew to be that of Geronime, chanting H2 in
a and with even her usual wildness, the following mourn¬ ful lines; from the tenor of which, how¬ ever, it appeared plain that she had wholly misinterpreted his present mood, and feelings. " Thou ! iiho lament'st Love's thousand pains ! Gnzc' drown thy griefs— resign thy cliains, Whilst the wild wiah o\r conquer'd reason rei»ns! Dread not the detp, thy rippled home; There's calm below lhat heaving wave : There's rest beneath each billow's foam, Thy sulleiing breast that then shall lave. Qucnuh'd in its surge thine anguish dies- Shrined in its caves thy sorrows sLep : Ah I halcyon thought for thee to pii/e, Who liv'st to wake, and uak'st to weep! Doubt not the cells of ocean fair— Its chambers vast—its ireasures rure ! Then plunge—plunge deep—lorgetluhiess is there!" No syllable of this romantic strain es¬ caped the ear of Lorenzo, for whom it was evidently intended, although it was equally evident that the singer had mistaken the merely pensive attitude in which he stood regarding the tumultuous scene before him; for one of frantic sorrow, or darkly- brooding
casting eyes, however, a little to the left, he observed her apparently waiting for his approach, half-sheltered by a small cavity in the rock, which afforded a convenient refuge from the still-increasing tempest, and in¬ stantly advanced to undeceive her.—" I am neither hopeless nor covetous of change, fair sibyl/' he exclaimed, with a sickly smile, " and least of all do I desire that kind of refuge thou hast proposed so temptingly; and, as I guess, supposest me to meditate. Thou art deceived, in spite of thy prophetic capabilities, which, on seme occasions, nevertheless, I venture not to question. I live not always to be awa¬ kened by suffering; nor, even on this dreadful night, do I wake to weep, but to listen to thy communications." Geronime looked earnestly on him, and abandoning at once her sibylline attitude, seriously demanded—" Is there no com¬ munication these lips might make to thee, on learning which thou wouldst weep ?" h 3 Lorenzd
paused whole past rushed across his memory, and another faint smile usurped his livid fea¬ tures.—" It becomes not," he responded, half divining her meaning, " the favoured adorer of the beauteous Isabel, to weep at any thing. But waste not the few mo¬ ments we may pass together alone—I am here to yield attention to what thou hast to divulge." "And hastily to be gone to Isabel," said Geronime, reproachfully, " and glut her pleased ear with a rival's wretchedness. There was a time, that, when Seraphina was the theme, Gialdini would have at¬ tended much more patiently." Lorenzo started—the sound of names he was lately unaccustomed to the utter¬ ance of had struck upon his ear, and thrilled him like sudden lightning. He passed his hand hastily over his face, as if to conceal his emotion, but in reality to recal and collect his fleeting and scattered senses. Having rallied himself to such a degree
of as vvas able, pro¬ ceeded, with faltering accents, to make further inquiry. M What of my Seraphina?" he demand¬ ed—" I almost dreaded—yet I hoped ------" " Hoped ? dreaded ?" repeated Gero¬ nime, scornfully—" these are true lovers' accents, and beseem not thy false lips. But I forget," she continued, in a tone of sarcasm, " thou hast not lately seen her— not even heard of her—and a twelve¬ month's absence -----" " I have obeyed your injunctions," said Lorenzo, eagerly, " and kept my oath. I have written repeatedly, likewise, to her whom it were still impossible not to ido¬ lize, but that she designs me neither no¬ tice nor reply; and, it is evident, no longer cares for my existence." Geronime shook her head—cast her eyes expressively upwards, while (or did Lorenzo's own just then deceive him?) their lustre was dimmed by the tears which now filled them, and exclaimed, h 4 with
with a voice which sorrow and seemed mingled—" Away ! thou dost be¬ lie her!" ' * Another 5 instant, and Lorenzo would have implored further information—ano¬ ther instant, and the whole particulars of her interview with Seraphina would have been unravelled to his ear. But fate here put an awful termination to their inter¬ course, and the dark disclosure of Esther- holme's double treachery was never des¬ tined to escape from her lips. While yet she was gazing upward, a flash fiercer than any that had hitherto enveloped them, burst from the scowling atmo¬ sphere, and the unhappy Geronime sunk a lifeless weight toward that grosser ele¬ ment to which she was thus suddenly made akin. She vvas smitten by light¬ ning: a moment's attempt to shriek an exclamation—it vvas only a moment's— was her last effort ere the scorched spirit escaped from its blasted tenement. By the succeeding flash, Lorenzo beheld the appalling
appalling change which place in her aspect: he had caught her as she fell—and now, with a thrill of horror ut¬ terly indescribable, felt her stiffening in his arms!
h 5 CHAP.
CHAP. XVII. Hark I there be murmurs heard in Lara's hall— A sound—a voice—a shriek—a fearful call! A lung, loud shriek—and alienee—did they hear That frantic echo burst the sleeping car i They heard, and rose, aud tremulously brave, Rush where the sound invoked their aid to save. Byron. It was a low, faint scream, as of smother¬ ed agony, which alone burst from the blighted bosom of Geronime, and even that expired unfinished upon her blacken¬ ing lips. But what would not the vigi¬ lant ears of the rovers at that moment have distinguished, placed as they were amid perils of every description ? nor did the shrill cry uttered as she fell, although checked instantaneously, as by sudden suffocation, escape the startled Ruganoff, and his wary companions. The distance of
of the small rocky elevation which Geronime had appointed Lorenzo to fol¬ low her, was very inconsiderable f-om the residence of Alvarez; and a transitory pause in the storm happening to favour just then the progress of the sound, her exclamation easily reached the mansion. In a moraent the quick eye, of Ruganoff discerned her absence, hitherto unnoticed by the pirates ; and the next he had struck the unoffending Yambo to the ground, partly from a suspicion of treachery, and partly in his speed to discover the fugi¬ tive. The rest followed him quickly to the open beach, whence it was evident the voice proceeded, each bestowing as he passed a hearty kick upon the prostrate Yambo, who lay too much amazed and terrified to resist, even by words, this ex¬ ceedingly uncouth treatment. Accord¬ ingly, ere Lorenzo had recovered from the shock of horror occasioned by the un¬ happy fate of his companion, he found himself surrounded, and seized forcibly, h 6 by
a sturdy pirates, with ganoff at their head, who demanded with fierce oaths an explanation of the scene before them. ***** Ruganoff wept bitterly, but believed the tale delivered by Lorenzo; and knew too t well the appalling traces left by " heaven's own lightning," now easily dis¬ cernible in her discoloured countenance, to doubt for an instant his veracity. He knelt in unfeigned anguish over the black¬ ened body—kissed the scorched lips- clasped i^again and again, and would on no account be separated from the endeared remains „>pf her who had been from very ehildhpodfthe faithful partner of his ad¬ venturous existence. It was an affecting sight <to>dbehold those rugged counte¬ nances, .already oppressed by want and disaster,'again distorted by additional ca¬ lamity—as if the very heavens had re¬ solved'on their destruction. It vvas a sin¬ gular; scene—impressive, and not easily forgotten.
was overwhelmed with sorrow; while the rest of the pirates seemed so entirely absorbed by the grief of their leader, and struck by this seeming malediction of heaven made manifest in their hour of adversity, that they stood " like men who had forgot to speak," mutely observing his extravagant despair, and mutually lamenting, though in silence, this last irreparable deprivation to their band. * Q 9 ft * - . The morn which succeeded that* memo¬ rable night rose clear and lovely, and no traces of the tempest were perceptible, ex¬ cept an unusual agitation of the waves, which had not yet entirely subsided to rest. At his accustomed hour, Yambo entered the chamber of his master, don Alvarez, as if nothing of importance had happened, for the purpose of assisting him to rise as usual. There was, however, something in the manner of the faithful menial not exactly correspondent with his customary
customary vivacity, and were al¬ most constantly directed towards a parti¬ cular casement, which happened to over¬ look the sea, now sparkling gaily in the resplendent beams of the soft morning jsunshine. Presently— 6 ' What art thou looking at, Yambo?" demanded Alvarez, .with excited curiosity. Yambo seemed unwilling to answer; but still kept his eyes fixed steadily in the same direction. " Art thou thinking of thy trip to .Corvo?" said his master, kindly. " I re- ,member thou wert to have sailed thither to day ; but thou shalt not go except the waves be smooth, and the wind fair for ,thy passage, Yambo." , Here the grateful menial approached, and respectfully kissed the hand of his considerate master, but almost instantly resumed bis former station and employ¬ ment. " I see an unwieldy vessel, of apparently considerable strength," cried Yambo pre¬ sently,
sently, unable any to conceal interest he felt in the object he was really watching, " just heaving into sight, and yonder smaller vessel has altered her course in consequence. See! now she al¬ ters too—and, by yon rising smoke which obscures her bow, the pealing of her thunders has already commenced." (£ Ah! she holds her in chase," exclaim¬ ed Alvarez, who by this time was also stationed at the casement; " and, by the crowd of Sail she carries, the fugitive, al¬ though light, appeal's to have little chance of escape." And the fact was in reality as Yambo, and his more experienced companion, had very reasonably conjectured, from the miserably disabled trim in which the -In¬ vincible now seemed barely to float upon that element, which it had formerly been her pride to skim briskly, and defy. The sorrow and consternation occasioned by the death of Geronime, did not deter Ru¬ ganoff, and his abandoned associates, from proceeding
proceeding on voyage as soon as storm permitted, which was not until near daybreak. Of this Yambo was aware, as he had watched them through the lofty lattice whence he first observed them, and to which he had again ascended on reco¬ vering from the fright and blows they (in their first alarm) so plentifully bestowed on him. From this exalted situation, he beheld them some time afterwards descend cautiously to the beach, but without the female who had accompanied them on their ascent towards the dwelling of Al¬ varez, bearing with them, however, a bur¬ then of no small dimensions, and of which they seemed particularly careful. In a little time, moreover, Lorenzo returned alone, and commended his silence, at least, whatever he might think of his courage— purchased his future secresy at a still greater price than had been already paid for it—and told him, with assumed jo- cundness, that his nocturnal visitors had re-embarked, and would set sail instantly. This
was all of occurrences of that fearful night: he had formed, however, his own opinion of the characters and pursuits of his new ! rough acquaintances, and rightly conjectured them to resemble most—exactly what they were. The nature of don Lorenzo's singular connection with them remained to be cleared up—but this he was obliged to leave involved altogether in mystery. He had sufficient discernment to perceive instantly that the small vessel now chased was the one that contained themy and thence arose his extraordinary interest 3 in the circumstance.
CHAP.
CHAP. XVIII. Far on the horizon's -verge appears a speck, A spot—a mast—a sail—an armed deck! Their little bark her men of watch descry, And ampler canvass woos the wind from high; She bears her down majestically near, Speed on her prow, and terror in her tier. BynoN. The privateer continued still to pursue the half disabled Invincible, which its commander seemed determined should prove eventually his devoted prey. Mean¬ while, the vessel of Ruganoff, severely battered as it had been only the day be¬ fore by the same powerful opponent, and cramped in her number of hands by the destructive fire of her enemy, during a long and valorous resistance, was neither in a fit condition to combat or to fly. The heavy guns of the privateer were fre¬ quently observed to be discharged, while now
now and then only a return of was attempted to be made by the vessel of the pirates. Of these warlike saluta¬ tions the smoke alone was perceptible to Yambo and Alvarez, their distance from the vessels being great, and becoming in¬ creased with each succeeding minute; the plan adopted by the rover being, as it ap¬ peared, to run before the wind in a course direct from Flores, as if he had deter¬ mined that the final wrestle with his gi¬ gantic opponent should at least take place afar on the mighty ocean—for hope of escape he. must have deemed absurd. The chase still continued, and, although it was evident that the privateer gained considerably upon her victim, the obsti¬ nate resolution of the rover made it likely to continue for some time; until, as they mingled gradually with the blue horizon, the pirate first, and afterwards her fol¬ lower, totally disappeared. " Good night to the Invincible!" said a voice beneath the casement, as soon as neither
neither vessel was any visible; and a heavily-drawn sigh finished the ejacula¬ tion. Alvarez instantly flung open the case¬ ment, and as instantly perceived Lorenzo standing with folded arms, in a pensive attitude, and eyes still fixed on the spot where the receding vessels had vanished. The noise of the casement, however, dis¬ turbed his meditations, and looking up¬ ward he discovered the good old Spa¬ niard, his face still wearing its accus¬ tomed smile, as often as confronted with the visage of Lorenzo, to whom he was extremely partial, and in whose society he forgot his years. " A spectacle has been yonder," said Alvarez, carelessly nodding toward the ccean as he spoke. " I guess they were pirates, but the rogues doubtless will meet their recompence. The minor ves¬ sel—be she whatever she may—stands no chance with her pursuer." - " I believe both were armed," said Lo¬ renzo,
renzo, with much confusion, the necessity of making some observation. " Why are you stirring so early ?" ask¬ ed Alvarez, thus affording him an oppor¬ tune change of subject. " The tempest was most terrible," he replied; " I could not sleep." " It waked me at its height," observed Alvarez, instantly, " and I thought I heard the faint shriek of a female, during the succeeding pause—I could not get ic out of my ears. 1 even fancied I could dis¬ tinguish the hurrying of feet, and the sound of other voices, afterwards—but my rosary was my resource, and, thanks to Saint Miguel! I soon fell asleep again." " Thanks to the saint, indeed 1" thought Lorenzo, but finding this second subject equally disagreeable, he said nothing. At this moment he was happily reliev¬ ed from his embarrassment, by the ap¬ pearance of Isabel and Maria, the bloom¬ ing and incomparable daughters of Alva¬ rez, whom the tempest seemed also to have
usual and who now entered the garden to enjoy the freshness of the morning breeze. The enchanting Isabel, who was a tall dark beauty of the most exquisite proportions, held in her hand a beautiful bouquet of just-gathered flowers, with which she ad¬ vanced toward Lorenzo, who flew to meet her with a step sufficiently " earth-scorn¬ ing" to remind the spectator that— " A (over may bestride the cossamcr That idles in the wanton summer air, And yet not fall, so light is vanity." Her majestic, and finely-moulded form, was completely enveloped in a flowing- garb of orange-coloured silk, which, sur¬ mounted by her profusely clustering ring¬ lets of perfect sable, floated gracefully around her: Maria, her younger sister, was differently attired, but scarcely less beautiful. A close white habit shrouded her tender, and delicate figure, which, contrasted solely by her fine glossy locks, dark complexion, and animated features, became
became her exceedingly. as already observed, immediately joined them in their morning promenade; and Alva¬ rez, perceiving that he left him in better company, presently withdrew from the casement, and addressed himself again to the completion of his toilet. Yambo, however, still proceeded heavi¬ ly with the performance of his several duties. His thoughts dwelt continually on the secret events of the preceding night, which he had yet considerable doubt whether he ought not to divulge, although paid to do the contrary. Who could be those mysterious—even terrific-looking strangers ? and what could have been the nature of their former intimacy with his master's friend? These were questions that still constantly presented themselves to his imagination, but for which he strove vainly to elicit from his invention a satis¬ factory answer. He thought upon the romantic manner (to say no worse of it) in which Lorenzo first landed on the island,
now more than a twelvemonth since: the disjointed tale—the solitary- boat—all conspired to breed suspicions in the mind of Yambo, which, had he never known of this strange visit, would never have existed. And here it may not be objectionable to digress a little, and ex¬ plain in what manner Geronime became acquainted with the residence, and assum¬ ed name, of don Lorenzo; who, though he owed her his liberty, and perhaps his life, and was willing enough to pay the debt should payment be ever required of him, would much rather have never be¬ held her face again. It chanced that a short time after the escape, or liberation, of Lorenzo (then Gialdini) from the rover's cabin, where he had been confined, Ruganoff had been driven by a train of circumstances which it is not necessary to relate, again into the neighbourhood of the Azores; and actually took refuge in the very creek that so late¬ ly sheltered hira, whence he had departed on
on the without It was on this occasion that Geronime, at a little distance from where'the vessel'lay, discovered moored the very boat in which herself had set the captive adriftj after pointing out to him the direction in which was situated the island of Flores. Urged on by this circumstance, and, it might be, stimulated also by mere womanish curi¬ osity, or the supposition that such a piece of knowledge might one day be useful, she ventured to inquire of some stragglers respecting his destiny, and soon became mis¬ tress of the whole particulars she sought to obtain. These she afterwards commu¬ nicated to Seraphina, as the reader will re¬ member, in a sealed packet left for her perusal; but never to Ruganoff, until the very night, and even moment, in which they needed Lorenzo's assistance, lest he should blame her for her rashness. How this assistance availed them in their need has been already shown—but that it failed to stead them better was not the fault of vol. 1. 1 Lorenzo.
was sensible of strong claim Geronime possessed on his gratitude —he had promised, moreover, to liquidate the debt, should it ever fall into his pow¬ er, but was thwarted by circumstances over which nothing human could possibly have any control.
CHAP.
CHAP. XIX. I have a heart; but if it could be false To iny first vows, ever to love ayain, 'I hose honest bauds should tear it from my breast, And throw the traitor from me. Oh! Imoinda! Living or dead, 1 can be only thine. Southern. Meanwhile Lorenzo was now far from happy, although he strove to bury from Isabel, in particular, the cause of his new- sprung inquietude. The remembrance of his only half-forgotten Seraphina again tormented him, since his fatally-broken interview with Geronime; and, he felt inwardly assured, would now continue to do so, until he contrived to obtain some additional intelligence respecting his for¬ merly-beloved, and (in spite of all the so¬ phistry he could summon to his assist¬ ance) still tenderly-prized Seraphina. But how was he to obtain such intelligence, 1 2 since
since repeatedly vain? and what right had he—the be¬ trothed of Isabel—to seek tidings which, if obtained, might prove poisonous to their felicity ? She, too, who alone could have communicated them, struck mute for ever with the theme of his longing upon her lips ! It was true that her death, and the now almost certain destruction of the ro¬ vers, might be deemed to have partially released him from the scrupulous obser¬ vance of his oath—not to revisit Sicily : but could he abandon Isabel—the fond, confiding Isabel—to seek felicity else¬ where, on the strength of such broken syllables as alone had met his ear? and those, too, from the lips of at best a mere wandering vagabond ? he dared not even think of it at present. Yet she did say —^the words of Geronime—her dying words, did lead him to infer that his once- adored Seraphina had not forgotten him; and this conviction—aided as it vvas by his constant recollection of the tears which accom-
accompanied words—vvas alone quite sufficient to render him unhappy. In the midst of his inquietude, how¬ ever, Lorenzo forgot not to reward the secresy of the well-meaning Yambo, and determined accordingly to do so in the way of which he was most likely to ap¬ prove. There lived in the island of Cor¬ vo, a short distance removed from that of Flores, and to which \ ambo was frequent¬ ly dispatched on business for Alvarez, a certain damsel, between whom and this sooty Adonis it was affirmed that there existed a steady, and immutable attach¬ ment. There had also recently existed in the mansion of don Alvarez, an elderly matron, named Ursula, whose sole charge it had been to attend on the whims, and arrange the apparel, of her two young mistresses. This important personage was lately deceased, and it was intended to let the office also remain defunct for the pre¬ sent, in the family of Alvarez—for who could be found to fill it like Ursula? 1 3 Now
morning, to have conceived an idea that Jannette (the name given by her sponsors to Yambo's mistress) could fill it with equal precision and rectitude. To be brief, he had requested of Isabel the pre¬ sentation of this birth to the intended bride of Yambo, rightly guessing that he would be happier near her than, as was now the case, with an arm of the ocean betwixt them; and it is almost needless to add that he did not solicit in vain. This additional piece of service Lorenzo had yet to communicate to Yambo, and not many hours elapsed eve he found an opportunity of doing so without being observed. The day proved exceedingly fine, and even sultry for the season, which induced Lorenzo to indulge his meditations, though not of the most pleasing kind, by loitering alone in the garden longer than ordinary. Here he chanced to encounter Yambo, arrayed in his best holiday attire, being equipped
equipped for his voyage to where dwelt the rustic object of his affection, and whither he was now bound on some (most probably) charitable errand for his master, Alvarez. Now, therefore, as he hurried to the beach—" Yambo!" exclaimed Lo¬ renzo, conscious that the present moment was of all the most opportune for impart¬ ing his agreeable intelligence. The negro stopped somewhat reluctant¬ ly, for, sooth to say, Lorenzo had been no great favourite with him, since the mys¬ terious occurrences of the preceding night. " Whither art thou going, Yambo ?'* now demanded Lorenzo, vvho seemed per¬ fectly aware of that involuntary rising aversion which the black could so ill dis¬ guise. " To Corvo, senor," was the laconic an¬ swer. " And suppose I should have a message thither," said Lorenzo, smiling, " pertain¬ ing to the arrangement of a small matter of business, in which, it may be, an affair i 4 of
of gallantry concerned, wilt, trust, deliver it safely for me—wilt thou not, Yambo?" Yambo bowed coldly, evidently not much pleased with this addition to his dnty. " There lives on the coast of Corvo," resumed Lorenzo, " whither, good Yam¬ bo, thou sayest thou art bound, a damsel of French lineage, who, with her aged father, the industrious Du Moulin, hath long been in—I say not poverty—but cer¬ tainly necessitous circumstances. She is called, if I rightly remember, Annette— Nannette -----" "Jannette!" said Yambo, in amaze¬ ment, while a most unequivocal expres¬ sion which seemed to say—" Do, if you dare!" was strongly portrayed in his dusky lineaments. " Jannette, I mean," returned Lorenzo, coolly. " I must, to this young maiden, transmit a message of no mean import, as regards her future advancement and feli¬ city—
city—and thou shalt of Yambo." He now proceeded to state more expli¬ citly to the astonished Yambo, the true nature of his interference with the affairs of the lively French damsel; and to con¬ vince him that his only object was to ren¬ der his servitude less solitary, or, it might be, to facilitate their entrance into the hy¬ meneal bands. Yambo smiled, pleased at this suggestion, and began to think the circumstances under which he had found so firm a benefactor appeared already less suspicious than heretofore: in conclusion, he promised to acquaint Jannette with the preferment offered lier, and thanked Lo¬ renzo a thousand times for his potent in¬ tercession in her cause. Yambo now gaily departed on his ex¬ pedition to Corvo, unmindful of the blows, but not so oblivious of the remuneration he had received, since the preceding sun¬ set: while Lorenzo, less philosophically, again became lost in those dangerous ru- 15 minations
minations from which the accidental pass¬ ing of the menial had aroused him. Since his residence in the family of Alvarez, nevertheless, or at least during the latter portion of that residence, he had not been accustomed to meditate so gloomily; but recent occurrences had combined to dis¬ turb him—the remembrance of his woes had been awakened in his bosom— '■' And slight withal may be the thing3 which bring Back on the heart the weight which it would Cing Aside for ever: it may be a sound— A tone of music—summer's eve—or spring— A flower—the wind—the ocean—which shall wound, Sinking the electric chain wherewith we are darkly bound." ***** Monsieur Du Moulin was a native of France, which, however, the commotions almost constantly taking place in the grand nation, had compelled him to aban¬ don, and seek refuge in some more secure although, perhaps, less polished country. Accordingly, Du Moulin fixed on Ame¬ rica, but, somehow or other, got no fur¬ ther on his course than Corvo, which mid¬ way
way repentance many people liis excessive dread of a long sea voyage; and this conjecture, when it was after¬ wards observed that monsieur seldom ex¬ hibited any symptoms of superior courage, became consequently confirmed. How¬ ever this might be, it vvas certain enough that monsieur Du Moulin's situation at Corvo was not the most enviable. His poverty indeed had grown proverbial, even among those who were poor themselves; and his utmost skill in fishing could hardly procure for himself, and his daughter, a sufficient maintenance. Jannette did what she could to alleviate his wretchedness, but this was little. She was, however, his only companion—his only treasure— saved from the wreck of his scattered friends, and confiscated property; and Du Moulin knew well how to estimate the jewel which to him (shining like a single benign ray in the middle of his toils and adversities) was truly " beyond all price." Here then was the happy Yambo ar- 16 rived,
rived, and seated, with hovel (for it was little better) of Du Mou¬ lin, who had reserved the finest of his that day's sport for their evening repast, when all were suddenly startled by the sound of voices on the outside of the lowly portal, and presently a loud knocking an¬ nounced the arrival of wholly-unexpected visitors.
CHAP.
CHAP. XX. What will not woman when she loves— Yet lost, nlas! what can restore her? She lifts the latch—the wicket moves— And now the world is all before her! Rooers. It was a clear moonlight night, and the first movement of monsieur Du Moulin was to the casement of the cabin, stuffed not with " tattered remnants of a money¬ bag," but plentifully patched with pieces of sail-cloth, for the better expulsion of the weather. He here plainly distin¬ guished the figures of three persons, who appeared waiting for admittance at his humble door—two habited in the attire of seamen, and the third, a female, who appeared either sick, or fainting from ex¬ cess of terror. At a short distance from the beach, toward which he also turned his
wary eyes, floating bark, from which it was evident the female had been borne; but for what purpose, or with what design, was yet left to conjecture. Having thus recon¬ noitred, Du Moulin tremblingly imparted the result of his observations to Yambo, whose thoughts ran upon nothing but a second adventure with his ne»v piratical acquaintances: when told, however, that the female appeared sinking and distressed, he instantly counselled their admittance, in opposition even to Du Moulin him¬ self, who, although sufficiently hospi¬ table, was not over valorous in affairs where the issue, should a struggle happen to be necessary, was likely to prove even worse than dubious. Emboldened, how¬ ever, on this sudden occasion, by the pre¬ sence of Yambo, he consented to the ad¬ mittance of the strangers, who indeed seemed little inclined to abide much lon¬ ger on the outside of the crazy edifice, having with repeated strokes nearly bat¬ tered
and bestowed many hearty curses upon it for the resistance it still opposed to their, en¬ trance. " Hilliho! hilloj" exclaimed a rough voice, evidently that of a sailor—" have you no feeling here within ? who bars the door thus inhospitably against the en¬ trance of woman in misfortune ?" " Not the inhabitant of this mansion !" said Yambo, somewhat too pompously, forgetting at the moment that he was not in the hall of Alvarez; but as he accom¬ panied his words by charitably opening the door, the mistake vvas pardonable. In a moment entered two sailors, bear¬ ing in their arms a female of apparently exquisite loveliness, but worn by disease, it vvas evident, to the mere shadow of her former self. Her long fair hair drooped dishevelled over her graceful form, and her beautiful blue eyes glared wildly around her, unconscious of all they seem¬ ed to gaze upon. She vvas under the in¬ fluence
of she spoken, but her heedless demeanour, and -wandering look, revealed the vacant mind. Jannette clasped her hands feelingly at the sight, and instantly approached the un¬ happy sufferer, as if already anxious to render her every assistance her distressed situation so earnestly required. It was now that the foremost of the seamen narrated, in a hoarse voice, the nature of her unfortunate malady, toge¬ ther with the cause of their bringing her thither. He told that she came from Sicily, bringing with her, as had since appeared, a considerable quantity of money and jewels. That her passage was taken to the Azores, but long ere they reached them she fell sick of a fever, which had first deprived her of strength, and latterly of reason likewise. They had treated her on board in the best manner they were able, but their surgeon happening unfor¬ tunately to perish by an ill-timed accident, they could render her no further assist¬ ance
ance. They, therefore, at the nearest point, and urged the immediate procuration of a medical attendant; pro¬ mising, on the part of their commander, to be responsible for all expences incurred by those who were kind enough to afford her a refuge, and proffering ready gold for their present defrayment. Such was the lamentable tale told by the elder sea¬ man, who seemed of some command among his fellows, and concluded by say¬ ing, with characteristic drollery, carried even into the presence of affliction, which yet he scorned not to compassionate— " Flores is the port to which yon comely frigate is bound: but from Corvo thither is only a short scud, and, when she re¬ covers, you may put her over. At pre¬ sent her hulk is worn, and her upper tackle disordered—it is safer to remain in harbour awhile than proceed in such bad trim—better to recruit a little before she risks the passage." Jannette now proceeded to take charge of
of the unconscious stranger, and attempt¬ ed to lead her to an inner apartment, when she feebly raised herself, and, while some slight glimmerings of reason appeared al¬ ready to illumine the darkness of her in¬ tellect, exclaimed—" You are a gentler nurse than I have had of late. I see many around me here—but all are strange. Yet oh! if ye are compassionate, have pity on Seraphina! whoever ye are, re¬ store to me Gialdini! my peace—and rny Gialdini!" These accents, being uttered in some foreign language, were wholly unintel¬ ligible to her conductress, but not so to the seamen vvho interpreted them. It appeared by them that the utterer was the victim of some hopeless passion: but more than this, as those with whom she was now to be left in charge, notwithstanding the benevolence of their intentions, under¬ stood not her language, was not likely to be speedily ascertained. By this time the seamen had departed, after
after promising to touch again at island on their return, which they said would not be long, and the unfortunate patient was conducted by the daughter of Du Moulin to her humble apartment. Yambo offered his assistance to fetch the best medical practitioner the island afford¬ ed, which vvas instantly accepted; and Du Moulin occupied himself in ^delaying their repast, until the sick stranger should be properly looked to, and every thing adjusted for her comfort. In a short time Yambo returned with the physician, who, after much deliberation, pronounced his patient to be labouring under delirium (which was known before), and prognosti¬ cated that when the fever had attained its crisis (if it had not already passed it), she would cither die, or recover. With this certainly not to be contradicted definition of her case, Du Moulin was compelled to remain content; the sage practitioner pro¬ mising to send immediately such medi¬ cines
cines as would assuage restlessness, and sooth her to repose. After a little space, Jannette rejoined her father and Yambo,' reporting that Se¬ raphina (for it vvas indeed the pitiable Se¬ raphina whom strangers had that night entrusted to her care), after taking the draught prescribed for her, had fallen almost instantly asleep, and was not likely to awaken for some time. They accord¬ ingly partook of their frugal supper to¬ gether, Yambo rejoiced to have escaped a second encounter with the rovers, of whose ruffianly fierceness he discerned no traces in the demeanour of the peaceable seamen; and Jannette overjoyed at the prospect of advancement, and happiness, whicli Yam¬ bo had, a short time previous, unfolded to her view. Du Moulin was pleased that he had opened his portal, or rather permitted Yambo to do so, for the ad¬ mission of those who had so liberally re¬ warded him; and more particularly when he reflected that there was no other cot¬ tage
tage near, where the stranger could have obtained the shelter and rest so necessary for her recovery. All were delighted: the debilitated, and somewhat alarming plight, of their new inmate, was a check upon the joy which rose to their lips, but they still trusted that the skill of the renowned practitioner, and con¬ stant attendance of Jannette, would spee¬ dily restore her to convalescence and tran¬ quillity. One serene evening, the sun shining more brightly than usual for the advan¬ ced period of the season (as it was now upon the verge of winter) tempted donna Isabel, and Maria, to enjoy the fresh sea- breeze which saluted them through the opened lattice, in preference to their ac¬ customed amusements of books, or music. The time appointed for Yambo's absence at Corvo had now elapsed, but he had not arrived, though almost hourly expected, and Isabel, who was impatient to behold her
new attendant, delay; while donna Maria, and even the indulgent Alvarez, were constantly de¬ vising plausible excuses for his protracted absence. Lorenzo, too, was a deserter from their society on the evening speci¬ fied—the last donna Isabel was ever des¬ tined to witness from her lattice " sink o'er the earth so beautiful and soft," with feelings so tranquil as those she now en¬ joyed. Yet she was not now happy, al¬ though it vvas only at intervals, " few and far between," that the melancholy cast of her countenance evinced the disquiet of her mind. Even on the eve of her ex¬ pected union, she fancied her lover more cold than he was wont to be—more chil¬ ly, and distant, than even at the fi'*st kindling of their mutual flame: she strove vainly to discover his purposes—she even doubted his affection. He appeared late¬ ly to have grown so reserved—seemed so entirely to abandon her to solitude, that she feared he repented of his plighted vows—
vows—and she deed, was utterly changed: his purposes were shaken—his mind altered—his reso¬ lution gone. He had wandered that af¬ ternoon, as usual with him of late, soli¬ tarily toward die beach; and Alvarez had not yet arisen from his siesta, or after- dinner repose, common and necessary in a Spanish climate, to whicli he was inured —Isabel and Maria were alone.
CHAP.
CHAP. XXI. Brunhild is on her bride bench sitting, Pouring the gude red wine: Her maids the coiouet are fitting— Hut where is sir LocliTine ? Scotch BalUul. " Heighho !" exclaimed donna Isabel, after a gloomy, and protracted silence— " what a world of vicissitude is this!" " Why, truly, Isabel," said Maria, laughing, " you have spoken of it as I believe many to have proved. But you must allow that hitherto we have expe¬ rienced—you and I—a very small share of its vicissitudes." " I was just then thinking," rejoined Isabel, " of that auspicious morning on which, sitting together as vve now are seated, we first discovered the solitary boat dancing gaily over the blue waves hither,
which, you remember, us don Lorenzo." " Yes!" said Maria, cheerfully, " and have you forgotten our surprise when, some little time afterwards, the same boat, although securely chained to the beach, as Yambo has often affirmed, was loosed from its fastenings without the violence of wind or wave—broke away without rend¬ ing its chain, and was never heard of after- wards? For my part, I conceived its release to be perfectly magical—but a strange vessel being, about that time, ob¬ served very near the coast, one cannot be positive how the boat obtained its libera¬ tion." « True—true," remarked Isabel, with evident abstraction: " I wish I vvas sure, Maria, that the altered conductor of that little vessel would never desire to break his flowery bonds, and abandon us in like manner." " Who ? don Lorenzo ?" demanded Maria, with astonishment. vol. i. k " Ay,
my returned lorn maiden, " little as you may dream of such a chance —a sorrowful chance to Isabel—should it ever happen." " Impossible!" exclaimed Maria, her light heart evincing itself in her careless demeanour—" you but vex and torment yourself, my dear Isabel, by indulging in these groundless, and gloomy apprehen¬ sions. What occurrence could induce you even to think Lorenzo capable of such a causeless, and culpable, change in his sentiments?" " Alas!" rejoined Isabel, despondingly —" was I not happy when Lorenzo first arrived—still happier when he gave me his society—and do I not now grieve over the reverse ? is he not changed to me, as to himself—utterly, deeply changed? the smile that answered to my smile is fled, and in its stead an absent look of coldness keeps possession of his aspect, and will not be removed. These are symptoms, Ma¬ ria, of approaching indifference, that will not—
not—cannot mistaken; nor arise from imagination only—I feel but too keenly the consciousness of their more solid foundation. Was I not cheerful once, and am I not now melancholy— yet who, sav<? Maria, seems anxious to en¬ liven me ? had I not formerly a companion more than reverenced—almost as dearly worshipped by Isabel as her Deity—and am I not now alone ?" The sprightly countenance of donna Maria changed gradually as she listened to her sister's earnestness, and, for the first time, she began to think Lorenzo less assiduous of late than he was used to be: but far from still further depressing the spirits of Isabel, she immediately changed the subject, by exclaiming—" Look! Isa¬ bel—a vessel approaches that, by the di¬ rection of her course, must come from Corvo; it is strange that neither of us should have observed it sooner. Now that tall promontory veils her from our sight—presently she will emerge again. K2 I told
you so —and already proudly she rides over the bare beach yonder! what colour bears she at her masthead, Isabel? we shall have news from Yambo, at the least." Isabel looked in the direction pointed out to her, but made no observation. " See! now she slackens sail," resumed Maria, eagerly, " and a boat descends—a passenger enters it, beside the rowers, and now they near the shore. It is Yambo, but without his expected companion— Jannette does not accompany him—he is alone." It was not until now that Isabel, gazing more earnestly-from the lattice at this in¬ timation, caught a glimpse of a figure much more interesting to her than any thing pertaining either to Yambo, or his favourite. This was Lorenzo, who appear¬ ed watching anxiously the approaching boat from a retired part of the beach, to¬ ward the spot where he knew, in the course of a few minutes, it would set ashore
ashore somewhat had been recently in the act of writing, for an open paper was still in his hand; which, when Yambo pointed out to the boatmen a more convenient landing-place at a little distance along the coast, he waved impetuously, as if commanding his instant approach to the place where he stood. The boat approached, accordingly —but with it approached the darkness which was to veil its return from even the searching eyes of Isabel; for the sun had now sunk to the island of Flores— his short race until the morrow was con¬ cluded, and the duskier hues of twilight were fast usurping their dominion over every fading object. The last gesture of Lorenzo, that Isabel could distinguish, was a slight wafture of his hand across his eyes, as if they required clearing, ere com¬ mencing the lengthened gaze which he afterwards took in the direction of her dwelling. Expiring day withdrew its latest beams, while yet his eyes were (or K 3 seemed)
seemed) upon ing of Alvarez, and Isabel—the soft, en¬ amoured Isabel—could behold him no more. Finding now that every object in the landscape grew too dull to be any longer distinguishable, Isabel and Maria, calling for lights, retired to an inner apartment, there to await at least the arrival of Yambo, and wonder still at the protracted absence of Lorenzo. Here they found don Al¬ varez, who, with social and affectionate conversation, endeavoured to pass away the dreary interval. They had not long to await the coming of the negro, who entered in apparent alarm and haste, and having confusedly delivered an account of his mission to Alvarez, concerning indif¬ ferent matters merely, approached the ex¬ pectant Isabel. He now narrated, as hastily as possible, the strange adventure which had taken place at Corvo, and pro¬ cured for the poor abode of monsieur Du Moulin, his intended father-in-law, an additional
additional requesting Jannette might remain a little longer to attend, and assist in restoring, the health of the friendless female whom Providence seemed to have entrusted to her care. To this recital Isabel paid very little atten¬ tion, but, of course, accorded with his wishes; when Yambo suddenly approach¬ ed her nearer, and, with fast-increasing confusion, said—" But I liave other tidings, which must be now delivered to—to you —donna Isabel." "Tidings! of whom?" demanded Isabel. " Don Lorenzo," stammered Yambo, choking—" vvho has embarked, and------" " Embarked! how! whither!" inter¬ rupted Isabel, fearfully. "Just now for Sicily," responded Yambo, iu a breath, " after committing to my care this paper, which he desired I would give into your hands." Isabel snatched the paper with a deter¬ mined effort, as if resolved to know the worst, ere she gave way to overwhelming K 4 affliction.
affliction. vvas already open, never haying sealed it, and she read, with .terrible emotion, the following words:— " I am wretched—I leave you— perhaps I may return, but do not let that perhaps too far deceive you. What is spoken expires with the breath, and be¬ comes mere matter of remembrance—what is written endures, and produces convic¬ tion. I write the word—Adieu. For¬ give, and pity, for what he has written, and for what he feels. " Lorenzo." These lines appeared to have been scrawled hastily on the beach, upon the sudden appearance of the vessel which had brought Yambo back to Flores; and wherein, it seemed, Lorenzo in the bitter¬ ness of his regret, had determined at every hazard to pursue his wandering destiny. It was not that he felt he could not have adored
adored the only the thought of Seraphina was poison to his felicity, as often as chance might awaken her remembrance in his bosom: he believed his future course (had he re¬ mained in Flores) to be strewn with hap¬ piness, but that her constant image would have been the wormwood to fling its bubbling venom over the flowers in his path, and this he could not endure. The daughter of Alvarez perused his last epistle with feelings almost productive of suffocation : for a time she found it im¬ possible to articulate a sound, or syllable, but gazed wildly around her with a vacant aspect— " fhen burst her voice in onu long stuiek, Aud tu the earth she fell like stone, Or statue from its base o'erthrown." Alvarez rushed to her assistance, and presently perused, with sorrow indescrib¬ able, the open scroll which her hand still grasped with convulsive energy, as all she K 5 was
Was now ever possess pertaining to the lost Lorenzo. Yambo retreated astonished—the effect of his communica¬ tion had been even worse than he appre¬ hended ; and Maria assisted to raise, and recal to animation, her (as she at length too bitterly acknowledged) not vainly ap¬ prehensive, and now miserable sister. ***** The day was at length arrived on wliich Jannette Du Moulin was to depart for Flores, and enter upon her new, but agree¬ able vocation, of superior attendant on the ladie,s Isabel and Maria. It vvas true that the former, donna Isabel, appeared to have lost for ever the gay, admired gallant, who had interposed for the reception of Jan¬ nette into the household of Alvarez, and, if report said true, was shortly to have consummated her own felicity at the hy¬ meneal shrine: but this made no differ¬ ence to the duties of Jannette, nor caused any alteration in the arrangement. In¬ deed, Isabel, on the reverse, anticipated considerable
satisfaction advancing fortunes, and protecting the peace, of one for whose admission to favour her lament¬ ed Lorenzo had himself condescended to intercede; and she accordingly determined to watch over her innocence with cease¬ less vigilance, and unremitting kindness. It is to such trifling resources as these that the heart commonly flies, or clings for consolation, which, by greater events, has been bruised, or lacerated. Mean¬ while, the vessel floated in the harbour— the hour approached—the very minute was at hand, which was to witness the embarkation of Jannette, and waft her to the scene of her anticipated prosperity. And Seraphina—the gentle, wronged Seraphina—whose destination (according to the seaman's tale) was also Flores, was she sufficiently recovered to accompany her ? she was—nor had the benevolence of Alvarez been slumbering, nor omittted to invite the sick stranger to his hospitable dwelling, as soon as he heard fully the k 6 particulars
particulars of Slowly and gradually had the fever left the beautiful, fair-haired Seraphina, but the print of sorrow was still plainly enough perceptible upon her lovely, and expres¬ sive visage. She was, however, prepared to accompany Jannette to Flores, although she knew (for report had not been idle during her illness) that the only attraction it ever contained for her had quitted while she vvas delirious, and returned to Sicily, Seraphina knew this—yet gratitude for the kindness of Alvarez, and it might be some lurking particle of feminine curio¬ sity, induced her to visit that island: but she meant that .her stay there should be only transient—Lorenzo was gone.
CHAP.
CHAP. XXII. I am not mad, I would to Heaven I were, For then 'tis like I should forget myself. Oh. if I could, what grief should I forget'!' • 1 uin not mad ; loo well, too well I feel The different plague of each calamity. Shakespeare. Jannette Du Moulin was already stand¬ ing at the low portal of her father's cot¬ tage, her light airy form completely equip¬ ped for departure, in company with a statelier, more majestic figure, who ap¬ peared to lean on her supporting arm. > This was Seraphina, habited, for the first time since her recovery, in her travelling dress, for the purpose of accompanying Jannette to Flores, whom she had libe¬ rally rewarded for her services during her indisposition, by many valuable presents, in addition to having rendered her father's situation more comfortable than hereto¬ fore.
appeared still wan, and but there were symptoms of a returning lustre already in her eyes which augured a speedy renewal of health and spirits, while it indicated that hope was not yet entirely extinguished in her bosom. Her lofty, dignified figure—her beautiful ring¬ lets— " That o'er her forehead's white float gracefully, Like waves of gold chafing on ivory shore; Her lovely lids, fair as the Heecy clouds Whose dazzling whiteness gems the summer sky, And like them only chided at, because 'Tis Heaven's own blue they bide," formed altogether a striking exterior, which impressed with reverence, while it commanded admiration. Du Moulin had rushed into the small inner apartment of the cottage, and was pouring forth audible prayers, mingled with tears and sobs, for the safety and prosperity of his only child, now for the first time about to be sepa¬ rated from his paternal care. In this pious, and affecting employment, Seraphina was unwilling to disturb him until
moment, was now waiting, and Jannette and herself could stay no longer. She therefore ap¬ proached the door, and softly summoned him to take a last adieu ere they went on board. Presently he appeared, wiping hastily away the marks of his sorrow, for grief he knew to be contagious, and em¬ bracing Jannette tenderly, exclaimed— " Go, my child! go—and may the prayer of a solitary old man avail thee more than he, perhaps, deserves it should—but it cannot more than thou hast merited. Thou leavest Du Moulin alone—but he who is a friend to the fatherless, will prove likewise a comforter to the father whose offspring ........ Go—I can speak no more. Thou hast my blessing, and I have long had little but a blessing to bestow upon thee. Jannette —my Jannette — rise— take it again, and begone !" Jannette prepared to obey, but still wept bitterly. Again she knelt at his feet—she clasped his knees—she almost refused
refused who knew their time expired, drew her gently toward the door, and the aged Du Moulin once more vanished into the inner apartment. < He rushed again presently to the portal—but Jannette, and her compa¬ nion, were gone. ***** The bark of Lorenzo now rolled swiftly on toward the romantic shore of blooming Sicily; whither, urged by the remem¬ brance of recent occurrences, and the still unextinguished love he bore to Seraphina, he had indeed determined once more to direct his fatally-erring course. It had cost him many a pang to abandon Flores; but Lorenzo had pondered long and deeply upon the subject, and finally took that course wliich, in his imagination, appeared most likely to be productive of future tranquillity. And here— " Pass wc the long, unvarying course, the track Oft trod, that never leaves a trace behind ; Pass we the calm, the gale, the change, the tack, And each well known caprice of wave and wind; Pass
we the and sorrows Coop'd in thtir winged sea-girt citadel; The loul, the fair, the contrary, the kind, As biec^es rise and lull, und billows swell,' 1 and proceed to the first event of impor¬ tance which befel Lorenzo on his passage. The vessel had not yet cleared the vast Atlantic, that spacious " vvorld of wa¬ ters," ere one dismal night they were startled from tlieir slumbers by the cry of the watch, acquainting tliem that peril was at hand—peril unforeseen, and una¬ voidable. Almost at the same instant they were hailed by a strange approach¬ ing vessel, which appeared to have risen upon them suddenly in the darkness, and which, whatever might be her intentions, it was now too late either to think of wrestling with, or to avoid. Presently the summons was repeated— " A flash is seen—the ball beyond their bow Booms harmless, hissing lo the deep below," and they are hoarsely directed to lay to, and quietly await her approach and in¬ spection.
spection. a minutes enemy was alongside: the darkness was intense, and they could only distinguish of her that she was much superior in warlike appointment and preparations, although not in size, to their own vessel. From her masthead, moreover, vvas indistinctly perceptible the terrific flag, whose omi¬ nous woof seemed of unfigured sable, flap¬ ping heavily between them and the al¬ most equally dark canopy of heaven, the appalling signal which shut them out from hope. They were instantly boarded by the pirates, as they had too rightly conjectured their assailants to be, the vessel hastily ransacked, and the whole crew clapped into irons, for the next slave market at wliich it might suit their captors to dispose of them. Among these was Lorenzo, who in vain bewailed his unhappy destiny, now groaning under a second, and, if possible, still more hope¬ less sea captivity. In the morning the captives were per¬ mitted
mitted on and was afforded a clearer opportunity of sur r veying the hopelessness of his' truly- wretched situation. The vessel was a brig, well armed and manned: on the " white glassy deck" stalked in observant silence a slender, and somewhat diminu¬ tive figure, who yet appeared to be its commander, from his authoritative step and manner. This personage was attired in a blue sea habit, profusely covered with ornaments, in a style neither naval nor military, but apparently disposed as chance, or taste, seemed to dictate. In addition to this fanciful garb, he wore, as professional appendages, several pair of handsomely-mounted pistols, and a small, but elegant hanger. To him, as may be naturally conjectured, Lorenzo now di¬ rected his chief attention, as on his beck appeared to depend (if any at all existed) the sole chance of his deliverance. The haughty commander still paced majestically the ivory-coloured deck, with real
or around him: nor did his stern, though not masculine features, once relax from their apparently-accustomed rigidity. Yet Lorenzo could not help fancying—al¬ though their expression was changed since he last s.<w them—that there was some¬ thing in the curbed sparkling of those ex¬ pressive lineaments he well remembered to have seen before; but the chief met his eye wholly unmoved, and the fixed frigi¬ dity of his motionless features forbade any nearer attempt at conviction. Lorenzo, however, still found it im¬ possible to withdraw from those singular lineaments his steady gaze, as often as the snowy plume which drooped from his naval hat, and sometimes partially shaded his aspect, permitted them to be visible. At length, an occurrence favoured his ob¬ servation : the hat vvas removed—vvas it by chance or design ?—and the whole visage distinctly revealed to his strained, and wondering sight. The eyes once more
more encountered own—their mute eloquence was not to be mistaken. Yet how could it be possible? her fate still fresh in his memory—that demeanour— that garb! He laughed incredulously— but could reality long be deemed im¬ possible ?—he gazed on Geronime !
CHAP.
CHAP. XXIII. Art thou not risen by miracle from death ? Thy shroud is fall'n from off thee, and the grave Wns bid to give thee up, that thou mightst come The messenger of grace, and goodness, to me, ilowi, It was the aspect of Geronime that thus rivetted his ardent glance—it vvas Gero- nime's form that excited his amazement. With mingling joy and terror—joy for the hope with which it inspired him, but terror at the seemingly-unnatural circum¬ stance—did he trace every line, and per¬ use every feature. Then rushed again upon his recollection (or had he been hi¬ therto dreaming) her awful dissolution— her parched and blackening countenance— her stiffened, earth-struck form, and again his whole soul recoiled with unmixed hor¬ ror from the phcenix-sprung being who appeared to have arisen from those hea¬ ven-
ven-blighted ashes. ob¬ ject of his regard stood coolly adjusting his disordered plume, which he presently placed again upon his brow, without no¬ ticing, or even affecting to observe, his increasing consternation. Lorenzo could at length endure no longer this agony of suspense, but rushing toward the unconcerned subject of his cogitations, caught, with his fettered hands, the skirt of his garment, as if absolutely to assure himself it was a living substan¬ tial form he spoke to, and exclaimed— " Art thou really my deliverer—Gero¬ nime ?" " Call me De Rolfe here," answered the commander, with an expressive gesture, and in an under tone, but seeming by no means astonished or disconcerted at this sudden address, and interrogatory. Lorenzo started, manacled as he was, at the remembered tones of that well-known voice, which he had deemed never to hear again; but whose accents assuredly now once
once more saluted pleased, astound¬ ed ear. " Thou art—thou art!" he falteringly exclaimed, « in spite of this uncouth garb —this altered deportment. Yet say, in¬ explicable being, whom the wrath of angry clouds cannot annihilate, nor the turbulence of ocean deter from the re¬ newed committal of crimes upon its bo¬ som __thou ! whom I had falsely dreamed the joys and sorrows of humanity could n^ver more assail or enliven, yet whom here I have again encountered------" " J ost in time again to do thee service," said Geronime softly, interrupting him: " follow me below to my cabin—there we may converse less guardedly. Pietro!" she cried with authority, to a ruffian who approached—" strike off his chains," Lorenzo, after having submitted to this welcome operation, proceeded to follow her who, " whate'er her guilt," seemed born to be his benefactress. Ere he de¬ scended, he paused to cast another prying glance
glance over rough visages of crew around him—they were not the same as were led by Ruganoff, previous to the supposed death of Geronime by lightning on the isle of Flores. The latter failed not to observe his scrutiny, and Lorenzo thought he perceived her lip curl into a smile of scorn, as she entered the cabin. However this might be, he felt now a kind of abhorrence mixed with the grati¬ tude he owed her, that he was not con¬ scious of feeling formerly when the deeds o? Geronime occupied his remembrance. While musing upon this, his thoughts wandered involuntarily to the past of his existence—he compared the present event with other occurrences of his former life— and, although he considered his present course preferable to a continuance of op¬ probrium and bondage, yet shuddered when he reflected on the similarity. As soon as they were seated alone in the cabin of the rover, she vvho appeared to be its only occupant, cast upon him a vol. i. L piercing
piercing as able thoughts from him at a single glance; and then seemed to await Ins commence¬ ment oft-their interview. But Lorenzo spoke .not yet—his own appalling recol¬ lections, aided by that withering look, had deprived him of the power• of utterance. He felt' an insurmountable chill take pos¬ session of his faculties from the moment they were left alone—an insuperable aver¬ sion to the continuance of their solitude— on deck he had better subdued these emo¬ tions, but here his breast panted almost to bursting—loneliness with her appeared too horrible. His companion viewed his agitation with a contemptuous calmness, and awaited its passing over for some time patiently—but still Lorenzo spoke not. Then rising with a still scornful, but more softened aspect, she led him by the hand to the small cabin window, and, pointing to the waves, as if conscious that Lorenzo had too deeply felt the superiority of her presence, exclaimed—" There roll the dark
over which so roamed the once blithesome Geronime— there roll the greedy breakers which have now engulphed all that was dear to her! there wander the gorgeous waves thou didst not shrink to brave in the days gone by, when the hand of compassion restored thy captive form to liberty—and here is but the bosom that bestowed it on thee. The ocean is a worid of perilous strife— but the sea-hardy pirate is its monarch, and dares dauntlessly outride its fury. It is true, thou art at mercy of the one—and in presence of the other; but despiser, as thou hast been, of ocean's peril, and friend, as thou art, of ocean's sovereign—what canst thou have to fear ? I wait thy an¬ swer?" " I know not unto whom my answer is made," replied Lorenzo, falteringly— " what art thou ? who ?" " I was Geronime—I am De Rolfe," returned his companion, somewhat proud¬ ly still—" erewhile the riiler of,the ocean's L 2 bride,
and successor tery realm. Thus much to thee, as thou hast demanded of me what thy own me¬ mory should have better supplied thee with. My band know not that I am fe¬ male—as lam—but in form alone. Thou must preserve my secret." >! " T Faithfully!" said Lorenzo, with more energy' than he had yet spoken. " But, tell 'me—where is Ruganoff? where his J liold comrades?" Geronime pointed expressively down¬ ward. " The seal and the sea-snake will know," said she, evasively, " if they know not al¬ ready-" Then, having in some degree calmed his apprehensions, she proceeded to narrate the manner in which the In¬ vincible was chased on the succeeding day to that terrific night whereon she had sped " J for safety into the creek at Flores.—" But man," she continued, " man, as well as the elements^ is commonly the rover's foe; and better had it been for the Invincible to
withstood severest of storm and billow, than to have thus await¬ ed their cessation, for the sole effect of fa¬ cilitating the triumph of her foe." " I saw her held in chase," .observed Lorenzo, " on the morning of her depar¬ ture." " We ran her out to sea!" exclaimed his animated auditor, half triumphantly. " The privateer gained on us—a train was set to the powder-room—we took to the boat—she was blown into the air! not an atom of the Invincible fell into the hands of her destroyers. Ruganoff kept no ill- stored magazine—it was but a stout reso¬ lution—a hissing flame—a tremendous explosion—and the whole was accomplish¬ ed! her timbeis were scattered to the wa¬ ter's edge—a volume of smoke remained of the Invincible—would it had sufficed for tiie suffocation of her conquerors! but it was only smoke—they could not tow it into harbour after them, nor boast of trophies won from an empty cloud!" L 3 " And
" yourselves zo. i " We were taken up by the privateer," rejoined the narrator, " but afterwards all escaped, a few miles off the coast of Por¬ tugal. We* were, however, too numer¬ ous ; our boat swamped, and we were—• separated. I quickly provided for my own safety, by changing my attire, and -i-you behold me here! Ruganoff, and his brave associates, have, I apprehend, contrived to drop anchor elsewhere." Lorenzo next proceeded to question her respecting that whicli she had touched upon least, and, he fancied, seemed rather to wish to avoid—the point of her own recovery after quitting the Azores, whence he had seen her borne, in the arms of her companions, an apparent blackened corse. It was here lay the marvel, or, as Hamlet would have said, the " rub" of the matter, and for his bet¬ ter comprehension of this mysterious cir¬ cumstance,
cumstance, made solicit some further information. Geronime, whom for the future we must call De Rolfe, answered him to this point briefly, and whether satisfactorily, or otherwise, Lorenzo asked no further ques¬ tions. She said, that though, owing to the force and suddenness of the stroke, her form might have borne the appearance of death (which fact she did not attempt to dispute), she was only in reality severe¬ ly scorched by the electric fluid ; and that, on removal to the vessel, she soon began to revive, much to the satisfaction of Ru¬ ganoff, and the rest of her attendants. The remainder of the night, she affirmed, had been spent in efforts for her perfect restoration; and her rugged associates had so well succeeded in their unwonted task, that not a nerve of her frame any longer felt the remotest effect of the seemingly mortal shock she had in that storm sus¬ tained. Lorenzo heard this tale, and, at its con- l 4 elusion,
elusion, again tures of the narrator, whose wild expres¬ sion was even heightened by the fanciful and picturesque attire she had chosen. But once more arose the interrogatory in his mind—can this be possible ? and the only response his reason rendered him, made his heart to quake, and his cold frame to tremble.
CHAP.
CHAP. XXIV. And a mngic voice and verse Hath baptized thee with a curss : And a spirit of the air Hath begirt thee with a snare! Byhon. The following day passed—another and another succeeded, and Lorenzo observed no change in the demeanour of De Rolfe, who had indeed been recently elected commander of the small brig in which he had again so unhappily found himself a captive. His apprehensions of a length¬ ened bondage, however, had entirely va¬ nished with his discovery of a friend in the person of tlieir new-chosen leader, De Rolfe. His fetters it was never at¬ tempted to replace—he was treated, by the crew, with more than common reve¬ rence ; nor were even his intercessions for the better comfort of his unfortunate fel- l 5 low-
entirely while, he was himself a guest at the table, and partook almost constantly of the small neat cabin, appropriated solely for the commander's use; De Rolfe exacting in return only this easy compliance with his request, and interests — that he would carefully avoid discovering to any on board the secret of her sex. With these terms, as may. be supposed, Lorenzo found it no hard matter to comply: but he was still far from happy—far from tranquil. He could not yet endure the society of that singular female, nor conquer the inde¬ scribable antipathy he felt to being in her company, for ever so short a period, alone. Yet he strove to repress these feelings, particularly when he reflected how much he was indebted to her presence for even the partial liberty he now enjoyed; and remembered that it must be through her means alone he could hope to carve his way to ultimate freedom, which boon in- deed-she had already promised him. In consideration,
consideration, therefore, of alrea¬ dy received, and further expected advan¬ tages, Lorenzo managed to pretty-toler¬ ably conceal those sensations of dislike which yet he could never teach himself to subdue, or overcome. At least, he con¬ trived to cover them from open observa¬ tion—from De Rolfe's own kgen penetra¬ ting glance it was impossible to cover any thing. But the final destiny of his fellow- captives (although he had succeeded in alleviating their present miseries), Lorenzo was still unable to alter. He was told they would be taken to Tunis, there to be disposed of as slaves, and would most probably endure all the horrors of Ma- homeddan thraldom for the rest of their unhappy lives; but that for himself await¬ ed a different destiny, as circumstances, or his choice, might direct.—" To Tunis!" sighed Lorenzo—" shall I then breathe so near my Seraphina!" and much he wished to be set ashore on the opposite strand of Sicily, but durst not ask, on account of i. 6 his
oath contrary. eyed him askance, as if perfectly acquaint¬ ed with his thoughts, but made no verbal observation at that time. Don Alvarez lamented deeply the de¬ parture of Lorenzo, che mystery of which he strove vainly to fathom, and for which he found it impossible to assign in his own mind any sufficient cause." He had questioned Isabel, but she knew not of any recent occurrence likely to have occa¬ sioned such an event—the adieu left by him (that committed on the beach to the charge of Yambo) was not at all commu¬ nicative—yet it was the only adieu he had deigned to take even of his tenderly- adored Isabel. In this it was not surpri¬ sing that there should seem more of mystery than the aged, and unsuspecting Alvarez, could elucidate. Yambo alone, if he had chosen, could have thrown per¬ haps a partial glimmering of light on the affair;
affair; this refrained from doing, for several weighty reasons. In the first place, he could not do so with¬ out in some degree criminating himself; and, secondly, no possible benefit could arise from such a communication. Be¬ side, ought he, even now, to betray the confidence of those who had so liberally rewarded him for secrecy ? Lorenzo, too, was gone—the hour vvas past—" And perhaps as well," thought Yambo, not un¬ frequently, " that it has passed so harm¬ lessly—-that he is gone." For Yrmbo (al¬ though he forbore to communicate them, and still esteemed Lorenzo for his bounty) had his own ideas of the wrecked stran¬ ger's origin, since the transactions of that tempestuous night, and they were not the same as heretofore. He now deemed that—and not without, at least, fair cause for suspicion— " With desperate men, in desperate ways, he dealt," but his suspicions were the offspring of his
own and resolved them to himself. Seraphina had now for some time adorn¬ ed with her presence the mansion of Al¬ varez, in which she had met with suffi¬ cient to gratify lier curiosity, and where she heard daily more than sufficient of Lorenzo to awaken her interest, and re¬ quite her for the transient delay caused by this visit: but the period had now ar¬ rived at which she meant to be gone. She generously forbore to torture the despond¬ ing Isabel with the tale of her own affec¬ tion for Lorenzo, or her conviction that (to Flores) he never would return. But her own bosom (Seraphina's) still beat high with hope—the hope of a joyful, and speedy reunion, with the object of her unalterable attachment. For Isabel—her very form seemed to droop under the chilling breath of this first fell blast of ad¬ versity—this simoom to her future happi¬ ness—and her spirit to partake of its wi¬ thering
therins mind, once soro- man tic—her bosom, once the seat of all that vvas lofty and enviable— *' Proud thoughts, aspirings high, beyond Whate'er yet dwelt in soul so fond— Glimpses of glory, far away Into the bright vague future given, And fancies free and grand, whose play, Like that of eaglets, is near heaven!" divested at once of its superior longings— its exalted visions of felicity—became the throne of gloomy desolation, and despair. In vain Alvarez strove to comfort her— in vain her sister, Maria, remonstrated with her, and expatiated lovingly on the folly of excessive grief for the loss of one, who, whatever his inducement, had un¬ feelingly abandoned her—nay, who could not now even be aware of its existence. In vain she represented to her, in moving words, the unhappiness likely to accrue to their aged sire from witnessing her length¬ ened indulgence in such determined me¬ lancholy ; and that protracted sorrow could not
not recal past, future. Isabel, although she seldom failed duly to acknowledge her sister's kindness, yet turned with loathing from such hol¬ low consolation. What to her appeared now even the happiness of Alvarez? what the happiness of the whole world, now that her own was lost for ever ?—an ob¬ ject which (had it been in her power to have conferred) it seemed scarcely worth her trouble any longer to achieve. If there was any thing which awakened her interest, or excited her care, it vvas the fostering and instruction of Jannette, the favour heaped upon whom appeared to her mind rather like the performance of a duty she owed to Lorenzo, than any especial grace shown to her new attendant. The presence of Seraphina, too, might be deemed in some degree to enliven her; unconscious, as she was, that in the fair southern adventurer she harboured a dangerous rival, in reality the blameless cause of her wretchedness. Yet in
in spite of these trivial alleviations of misery, Isabel, as time wore away, be¬ came daily more disconsolate—her cheek waxed paler, and her form grew every hour more feeble.
CHAP.
CHAP. XXV. Oh ! make her a grave where tlic simhctms rest When they promise a glorious morrow : They'll shine o'er her sleep, like a smile from the nest— From her own loved island of sorrow. Moons. One clear eve, on which Isabel had been pointing out to Seraphina the spot where Lorenzo had first landed in Flores, after escaping the violence of wind and wave, and eluding also much greater peril which she knew not of, they lingered longer than ordinary on the wave-rippled beach, although the declining orb of departing day had already warned them to return. It vvas a subject to interest the feelings of both—a theme more than commonly over¬ powering to either; and a sight no less rare to witness two such beautiful excep¬ tions to the reproachful fickleness almost universally
universally ascribed softer sex. For such is the proverbial and acknow¬ ledged inconstancy of woman, still found ever ready to perpetuate, perhaps, the worst stigma that attaches to her fair fame; and, however frequently she may have already varied, always capable of an¬ other change. Not so with Seraphina and Isabel—both were alike still deeply affected at the bare mention of their heart's sole sovereign: each seemed to feel that still—in spite of his seeming abandonment of her rosy fetters— " He was her own, her ocean treasure, cast Like a rich wreck—her first love, and her last." Lorenzo, then, was the theme of their thoughts—the subject of their conversa¬ tion. The soft broad disk of the declin¬ ing sun appeared already to rest on the watery horizon, and, from the universal stillness that prevailed around, all nature seemed to sympathize in the departure of his
radiance. not ex¬ traordinary that, at such a moment, Isabel should have felt more deeply than usual those sensations of melancholy in which she had of late too frequently indulged. " There he landed," she exclaimed, point¬ ing to an insignificant inlet where Lorenzo had first stepped on shore, " and thence, too, I received his parting glance—Oh! never shall I forget it—but when will he return ?" " There is a softness in the hour of sunset," said Seraphina, thoughtfully, " that accords not well with sorrow—ex¬ cept it be with sorrow whose poignancy is past. Let us retire." »« No—no—let us remain," mournfully responded Isabel: " all hours are alike to me—it is sometimes a pleasure-to me even to weep. The sun of nature is about to set—but the brighter sun of Isabel hath long since sunk into darkness. He will arise again, to revive creation—but when will
will presence again cheer bosom of Isabel?" Seraphina gazed on her earnestly, but, although she had already denied her con¬ fidence to the unhappy Isabel from mo¬ tives of compassion, scorned to flatter tho hope it was her own consolation to believe would never prove substantial. " To-morrow thou wilt be gone to a happy clime," resumed Isabel, in the same gloomy strain—" to-morrow ! there for¬ tune will smile upon thee—friends will cheer thee—thy fond relatives will seem doubly endeared to thee, for thy heart hath room for affections such as these— the morning sun will arise to look upon thy gladness, and his evening beams gild only thy felicity—because thou hast ne¬ ver been destined to experience the blight of disappointed love! or, if thou hast- -----" " I have—I have !" exclaimed Seraphi¬ na, with sudden emotion—" but let us now change the theme. To-morrow, in¬ deed,
shall will be only to cherish the remembrance of the kind, gentle friends, whom a vast rolling ocean then will separate—and, if they were not happy, to regret anew that I could not make them so. Among tliose remembered friends, none will be dearer than Isabel—none more frequently dwelt upon. Come, let us now return—Maria must have been awaiting us long, and I have yet much to arrange for my depar¬ ture—to-morrow I bid adieu to the Azores. Come." Isabel now sighed, and reluctantly con¬ sented. Slowly and heavily did they re¬ trace their path to the dwelling of Alva¬ rez, though the night closed fast around them, and the chill wintry wind rudely saluted their tender, light-clad forms. On arriving at the mansion, they found Maria indeed anxiously expecting them, and Alvarez in no small alarm at their pro¬ tracted stay. Yambo had been dispatch¬ ed
ed to search for them, and was in tears. No explanation, notwithstand¬ ing, was required by any one of their lengthened absence—all seemed to recol¬ lect that " rapture heedeth not the fleet¬ ing moments, neither doth misery take note of time." On the following day Se¬ raphina set sail for Sicily. * *- * * * Meanwhile, the vessel of De Rolfe, on board of which vvas Lorenzo, pursued swiftly her billowy course over the broad Atlantic, intending without delay to pass the Straits toward Tunis, where, as speci¬ fied by her commander, the pirates pur¬ posed to dispose of their captives. They had not yet reached the vicinity of Cape St. Vincent, ere Lorenzo had taught him¬ self considerably to abate (if not entirely to overcome) the aversion with which he had heretofore regarded the strangely-al¬ tered Geronime, now called De Rolfe, who yet amid all her vicissitudes—it was wortliy
worthy the character of his preserver. He had done more—he had even admitted the pi¬ rate captain to his inmost contidence— concealing from him no part whatever of the former occurrences of his eventful life. This he at first would have deemed im¬ possible—but the rover had so won upon him by kindness, and convinced him by repeated proofs that De Rolfe was in¬ deed the being Jsome time known to him as Geronime—still always his deliverer and friend—that Lorenzo at length had yielded, and poured forth even his most secret thoughts to his scrutiny. In the fulness of his gratitude he had done this —or it might be, in the fulness of his desolation; for he looked around him now on every side, and nowhere distinguished a friend. Accordingly (and which, un¬ der the circumstances, is not surprising) he determined that the female leader of that fierce band, De Rolfe, should fill that vacancy
vacancy which painful to feel, but which he would not perhaps have bestowed on another confi¬ dant than one (like De Rolfe) well quali¬ fied not to tremble, if he could not be¬ lieve. And yet De Rolfe had not, in ex¬ press terms, sought this confidence, nei¬ ther did he appear greatly surprised at the astounding events communicated to him; which latter circumstance failed not to astonish Lorenzo even more than the re¬ cital appeared to amaze De Rolfe. One gloomy day, as Lorenzo was stand¬ ing on the deck of the vessel, and re¬ marking how ably the crew performed their different duties, he felt his bosom elated with a kind of pride, while bound¬ ing over the azure element, to which he had hitherto been a stranger. De Rolfe, who was by his side, appeared instantly to guess his thoughts, and taking him by the hand, as if secretly conscious of his every wish, led him to examine more mi- vol. i. m nutely
nutely objects wooden which seemed to have awakened his curi¬ osity, or excited his applause.
CHAP.
CHAP. XXVI. 'Tis true, they are a lawless brood, Hut rough in form, nor mild in mood ; And every creed, nnd every race, With them hath found—may find a place. « « * • • And some—and I have studied all Distinguished from the vulgar rank, But chiefly to my council cull The wisdom of the cautious Frank. Uvron. There was a brisk breeze, which seemed increasing as the day drew toward its de¬ cline, with a heavy gathering sky, over which the scud drove rapidly, and Lo¬ renzo felt sensibly that, on such a night as now appeared approaching, it was no small consolation to possess so tight and yare a vessel as that he now surveyed. Already the bellying canvass appeared swollen to an extraordinary degree—the strained cordage creaked — but not the M 2 slightes t
slightest symptom sensation in the crew than the utmost fearlessness, combined with the strictest order and discipline. Lorenzo looked around him with a swelling bosom, and found it impossible, at that moment, to avoid partaking slightly of their evident enthusiasm and confidence. He views how proudly she divides the curling waves —how skilfully the uproarious elements are made conducive to her speedier pro¬ gress, at once her scoff and servants— " How gloriously her gallant course she goes— Hee white wings flying—never from her foes 1 She walks the waters like a thing of life, And seems to dare the elements to strife. Who would not brave the battle Grj—the wreck- To move the monarch of her peopled deck ?" Such were the thoughts of Lorenzo, at ,that moment, created in his mind by the .captivating display of well-ordered skill, and magnanimous courage, accompanied by docile obedience, he was then behold¬ ing. De Rolfe, still his close companion, observed
observed the unconquerable expression of applause rise in his approving counte¬ nance, and failed not to continue the sub¬ ject. He now, therefore, conducted him again to the quarter-deck, or, at least, to the small space which in this mimic man of war was so called, whence they could discern all that was passing in the vessel; and here pointed out singly to his notice such of the crew as he had before observed to attract the eye of Lorenzo, making comments on their history. " Yon meagre-looking man," said De Rolfe, " has been branded for robbery— you see the mark of infamy stamped upon his shoulder—he takes no pains to conceal it. He is a native of France, and appro-. priated to himself some hardly-wrung tri¬ bute which ought to have gone into the king's exchequer. A rebel! to rob his country of her revenue—but no matter— the contributions our revenue may re¬ ceive are better taken care of.—He with the swarthy complexion, now standing. M 3 by
side, a maid of his own country, but his rival, it seems, outwitted him—he stilettoed him for it, and fled. He will never abandon us to return, for the Sbirri are on the look-out for him: besides, if he could, he has forgotten his mistress.—The next—so alert on the shrouds yonder—is a Briton. He had fought for his island long, but at length did something amiss, and was, it appears, to have been punished for it: but this he avoided by uniting with us. He is sometimes riotous, and always brutish in his manner, which he calls honesty— but will seldom flinch at hard fighting. __The negro there—who limps over the deck as if he trod on heated iron—is a runaway slave. He hailed our vessel from the Indian coast, and requested that he might be taken on board to live for our future service, or receive a leaden death from our powder engines—he said, he cared not which. I was struck with his earnest misery, and received him: al¬ though,
though, I believe, my principal ment was his having endured so severe a bastinading as renders him for the present incapable of fulfilling the conditions him¬ self proposed.—The gigantic figure at the helm is a Swede. He is the victim of an unfortunate predilection for the ancient order of affairs—in other words, it is to a political change that I owe the powerful co-operation of the worthy Swede. I find him the most honourable, and trustworthy, of any under my command.—You see yonder a Mahometan, whom his four wives formerly plagued nearly out of his senses. There are no women here, and he contrives to pass his existence quietly. His greatest delight lies in constantly in¬ fringing almost the only prohibition his prophet has imposed on him—there is no better friend to a well-flavoured flask of wine. It may sparkle in the glass, but shall not stale in the cask, is eternally his motto. Such are a few of my coadjutors —knaves, it is true, but regards De Rolfe as
as an circumstance viction of their knavery ? no! he rejoices that so many of his future associates are already initiated in their knavish trade. Are they robbers? let them plunder as they will—it is for the general hoard. Are they murderers? let them sluice their hands in gore—such work must the daunt¬ less rover have to do. Are they drunk¬ ards? then I can stupify ihem! or, are they avaricious? they will fight the bet¬ ter for it. Should I gain aught by the absence of such propensities as these? ought I not rather to encourage their growth ? that is, I mean, to a certain ex¬ tent, that, restrained by discipline, they may open a surer road to ----- w "To what? most unhappy being!" here interrupted Lorenzo, " who darest to build thy projected greatness on the worst failings that disgrace humanity. To what desirable pre-eminence can the ill deeds, and abhorred propensities, of wretches such as these uplift thee?" " Nay,
" now will not re¬ plied De Rolfe, half sportfully; half in earnest—" except thou wilt inform me faithfully what is the ultimate point of fe¬ licity at which thy wishes aim ?" Thus interrogated, Lorenzo hesitated only a moment, and replied—" Alas! De Rolfe (as it now pleaseth her who once would have assisted me to be called), thou knowest I have only one wish on the earth to gratify. I would find Seraphina —I would behold her again—and, I think, whatever the result, or under whatever circumstances, I should be hap¬ pier for that interview." "Thou shalt behold her, then!" cried De Rolfe, suddenly. " I meant, Loren¬ zo, to have conferred on thee a boon of another description. I meant to have opened unto thee a new and cheering prospect of lucre and happiness—for we live blithely, and our gain is sure—and I thought by the lightning in thine eye when first our speech commenced, that a proffered
proffered command under would not have been rejected—but I find I was deceived. Thou shalt have thy wish—thou shalt behold Seraphina. De Rolfe—on whom of late, thou know¬ est, thy destiny hath much depended, and who was never wont to deceive thee with falsehood—De Rolfe hath promised thee. Thou shalt have thy wish." " Generous De Rolfe! When ? Where ?" inquired Lorenzo, eagerly. " Here—on this night!" exclaimed De Rolfe, with a smile which might almost have been thought derisive, and stamp¬ ing fiercely on the deck as he spoke. Lorenzo, starting with astonishment at his words, would fain have demanded a further explanation, but De Rolfe, turn¬ ing hastily on his heel, darted into his cabin. The heavy, lowering sky, growing darker and darker, now gave fearful signal of the speedy approach of night, while the wild roar of the billows, which rose
rose higher at each succeeding became proportionately augmented, and the gale seemed still with every passing moment to increase. Her canvass was all taken in, save a single sheet at her bow, which appeared in constant danger of being rent to shivers, and the hollow whistling of the wind through her bare rigging cut across the ear, at intervals, with a shrill, heart-sinking sound. Woe to those who that night braved the stor¬ my Atlantic in a bark less sea-worthy, or less skilfully manned, than that which contained Lorenzo! so thought the latter, as standing alone on the wave-beaten deck of the rover, he surveyed for a time appalled the approaching darkness, and then followed De Rolfe into the cabin, to extort from him if possible some further elucidation of his ambiguous words. Scarcely, however, had he entered the cabin, where he found the mysterious De Rolfe lying calmly on a sofa, when the cry of " a boat! a boat!" was heard above,
above, and rushed again on deck, leaving the more supine commander below, who did not seem to think the incident worth his attention. On his arrival, he found a drenched, and solitary seaman, whom the crew, it seem¬ ed, had just picked up hy means of a rope from a watery grave, at the very in¬ stant the boat which contained him vvas overwhelmed, and sunk. The boat was entirely gone—indeed, had it been visible, it would have been worse than vain in such a sea to have attempted its recovery. The seaman still stood shivering in the pre¬ sence of Lorenzo, who now kindly ap¬ proached, and would have congratulated him on his safety, when each suddenly started—was Lorenzo sure of sight? he looked again, but it vvas no delusion— Ruganoff stood before him ! END OF VOL. I.
Printed by J. Darling, Leadcnhall Street, London.
