Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Alibeg the tempter: a tale wild and wonderful
ALIBEG THE TEMPTER.
CHAP. I.
I should have fatted all the region kites With this slave's offal. Blood;, bawdy villain ! Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villnin! SnAhrSPEAIlE,
Why this is well—why (his is blow for blow ! Younci. WHATEVER the project on which Agatha during those few brief moments decided, it appeared, at least, to have the effect of strengthening her resolution, and smoothing her brow. In that tran- vol. in. b sient
sient interval, she seemed effectually to have nerved her mind with fortitude, and now stood prepared to encounter the worst, in whatever shape her imagi¬ nation had ventured to depict it, which yet remained to be demonstrated. She, however, turned first to the now demon¬ like wretch by her side, and in a firm, though supplicating tone, entreated him to desist from his monstrous desires, and demand some more reasonable remune¬ ration for his services. But the fiend was constant to his devilish purpose, and not only refused all other recom¬ pence for removing the body, but threat¬ ened to acquaint the count and countess with the whole affair immediately, if his horrible terms were not complied with. Thus bewildered—threatened—intimi¬ dated, the wretched Agatha swore by the holy crucifix which (Jangled at her bosom,
bosom, that the body of Lovinski once disposed of, her own should atvait the pleasure of the monster Nicholas, in that very chamber, even though death should prove the result of her compli¬ ance. Having extorted from her lips this solemn vow, Nicholas appeared sa¬ tisfied, and lightly taking the body of Lovinski in his brawny arms, departed as if to perform his promised duty of in¬ terment in the snow; telling Agatha that ere many minutes had elapsed he would assuredly return, and bidding her still to tremble if she violated her oath*. As soon as he was gone, Agatha flung herself in agony at the feet of an enormous crucifix that stood in a corner of the apartment, as customary in Rus- b 2 sian
sian chambers; and again giving way 1 to the grief and horror which over¬ whelmed her, found it for a space im¬ possible to articulate any thing but sobs and groans. Meanwhile, the doubly deceitful Ni¬ cholas, who well knew the spark of ex¬ istence to be not yet extinct in the bo¬ som of Ziovinski, but only slumbering in his outvvearied form, conveyed the body to one of the lower apartments, yet warmed and illumined by a cheering fire; and hastily summoning the ancient Magdalen, commanded her as she valued his future* favour, to use the proper means for restoring his insensible bur¬ then to consciousness, and to misery. Magdalen started-on beholding the pale featuies of Lovinski, which she instantly recognised; but was far too desirous of obtaining the promised favour of Nicho¬ las,
las, not as instantly to obey. At first, however, she feared all her exertions would be exhausted in vain, so deep was the trance which appeared to have usurped his faculties, owing doubtless to excessive cold and fatigue, combined with his subsequent almost airless con¬ finement : but by degrees the wished-for symptoms of recovery became percepti¬ ble. Thus far had Magdalen proceeded with her task quietly enough; but when she saw him open his eyes she exclaimed —" God's mercy on us! it will be need¬ ed, if the countess discover what we are doing—for we shall receive little, I reckon, at the hands of her ladyship. How came Lovinski here?—Nicholas! knew you of this?—'tis a perilous piece of work, to say the best of it; had any other save thyself been engaged therein, I should have been most angry—but thou, b 3 Nicholas,
Nicholas, thou knowest, hast the way to soften the wrath of Magdalen— ah I thou hast." During this speech, and the whole of the preceding operations, Nicholas stood calmly over her, with folded arms, and an undisturbed countenance, watching the gradual effect of her endeavours to restore animation: but when he saw that their success was complete, ere yet Lovinski had sufficiently recovered to be sensible ofhis presence, he stole away with a sinister expression of triumph in his aspect, and silently re-ascended to Agatha's* chamber. Still prostrate before the massy, bless¬ ed cross, reclined the beautiful Agatha, her pale lips breathing, now supplica¬ tions for. the pardon of some only yet- contemplated crime, and now ejacula¬ tions for her eternal welfare. She had neglected
neglected.to fasten her door—it seemed even purposely left open for the admis¬ sion of the ravisher into her chamber: but so completely was she absorbed in her devotions, that she perceived not his entrance into that no-longer-inviol¬ able sanctuary. Thus bowed with hu¬ mility before the sacred symbol, even the callous heart of Nicholas—cruel and irreligious as it must have been—seem¬ ed moved with pity, or some other feeling, which kept him at a distance, since, for several minutes, he approach¬ ed not near her. At length, her wan¬ dering eyes discerned his tall gaunt form in her apartment, and, starting sudden¬ ly from her devotional attitude—" Ha! thou art here!" she exclaimed, with truly terrific energy; " thou art come to reap the damning recompence of an evil deed—the accursed meed of an un- B 4 holy
holy action—for it was not holy—was not Christian-like, to dispose of him thus brutishly—thus clandestinely. Oh! to lay him in the cold dark, without his rites—him—Lovinski—whom Agatha loved so dearly! yet it is done. Speak —tell me—is it not? but I already know thy answer. The last moment is arrived—no longer respite—no further reprieve—there is scarcely an instant between me and the----- God grant me fortitude to employ it as I ought—nay, as I must! I am guilty—and thou art come, abhorred instrument! to receive thy recompence for concealing my crime ?" Nicholas now advanced a few paces, and looking steadily at her, calmly re¬ sponded—" I am here to receive a more than golden recompence—a guerdon be¬ yond all price—for my fidelity." "Thy
« Thy fidelity!" said Agatha, sneer¬ ingly—" to whom hast thou been faith¬ ful? To my father for his honourable trust?—to Lovinski for his munificent bribe -----" " To thyself, 51 said Nicholas, inter¬ rupting her," who, I trust, art prepared to yield to ------" " Not ravishment, but death!" cried Agatha, with something of exultation in her manner. " Wretch ! that hellish guerdon thou shalt never enjoy! The body of my Lovinski once removed— and now it is removed—keep, for thine own vile sake, the secret of his destiny; or, if thou dost not keep it, dread the awakened vengeance of the count upon thy treacherous head! Lo! I am worth¬ less to thee now—thy reward is not worth reaping," she continued; and, as she spoke, she drew a concealed poniard, b 5 and
and plunged it snowy som. Nicholas beheld, but strove not to prevent the fatal stroke—he saw, but attempted not to save. The gasping Agatha would have tottered toward the couch, but pain and horror overcame her efforts, and she appeared about to fall to the ground. Nicholas now ad¬ vanced a few paces towards her, and she sank heavily on his sustaining arm. Just then Lovinski, who had by this time sufficiently recovered from his swoon to question Magdalen, from whom he soon learnt the particulars of his si¬ tuation, distinguished amid the sur¬ rounding stillness something like a scuf¬ fle, which, he thought, proceeded from the chamber of Agatha—that chamber from which, while insensible, he had been so lately borne. He listened more attentively,
attentively, and distinguished also Aga¬ tha's concluding words—" I am worth¬ less to thee now—thy reward is not worth reaping," and tliough scarcely able yet to comprehend fully his present condition and circumstances, wondered what could be the purport of such strange expressions.—" What means my Agatha ?" said Lovinski, starting from his hitherto-recumbent posture; and in spite of the entreaties, ancLeven efforts of Magdalen to detain him, he hastily ascended the stairs, and rushed again into the chamber. To describe his horror and astonish¬ ment at the sight which there awaited him is impossible. Agatha—his own dear Agatha—for whom he had suffered so much, and risked even more, met his view staggering on the arm of that sus¬ pected slave, whose cruel hand he at b 6 first
first little doubted, was stained with innocent blood. The crimson stream that issued from her swan-like bosom, had already descended down her milky raiment, and discoloured the floor at her feet; while, just as Lovinski entered, Nicholas, apparently by an involuntary movement, had drawn the poniard from its fatal resting-place, which then glit¬ tered stained with her life-blood in his hand. This appearance it was which at first convinced Lovinski that Nicholas was guilty—that, for some subtle pur¬ pose, the sjave had robbed her of exis¬ tence. Under this impression, he at length furiously exclaimed—" Villain ! why art thou here ? What means this scene of blood—this horrible phantasm? —for I can scarcely yet deem it a reality. Wherefore, wretch! dost thou hesitate to unfold the cause? Ha! dost thou grin
grin upon me! some fearful intelligence flashes througli that smile—a horrid con¬ viction strikes me! Fiend! thou hast slain her! Speak !" he continued, in a milder strain, addressing Agatha — " speak thou ! adored victim of some villainous artifice—tell me if it is not so? Speak, Agatha—my lost! my beautiful! answer, oh! answer me?" " Lovinski!" murmured Agatha, while her dimmed eyes, which his ap¬ pearance had enlivened for a moment, again grew fixed in the glassy stare of death. It was her last word—the flut¬ tering remains of life ebbed forth with the sound, and her beautiful lips were sealed for ever. Lovinski saw the change, and be¬ came stilt nore deeply, fatally trans¬ pierced, with horror and dismay. Ni¬ cholas alone now remained to answer him:
him: the distracted lover again turned toward the menial with a fierce and threatening gaze, but his tongue re¬ fused to sound the inquiry whicli ho¬ vered upon his lips. At length, the still smiling Nicholas coolly broke the silence.—" Thou hast accused me false¬ ly," he responded, gently disengaging himself from the beauteous corse. " Ap¬ pearances are often deceptive; and, how¬ ever thou mayest deem of the present, I struck not the fatal blow. But what hast thou further to do with this? Away! she for whom thou appearest thus deeply interested, had sworn this night to be mine." " Thine! monster! thine!" cried Lo¬ vinski, incredulously, at a loss for words to express his boundless indignation. "Mine!" shouted Nicholas, in a tri¬ umphant tone. " Let the lesson advan¬ tage,
tage, while it galls thee—thou! who eouldst not exist in affluence without venting thy spleen on an unoffending inferior. I was unoffending—for I only did my duty. I was defenceless, and you smote me fatally—I was a slave, and dared not strike again. My blood floated the pavement—all cried ' Cruel¬ ty !'—But Nicholas is avenged. Behold thy victim bride—gaze on her bleeding form, and own thou hast felt the resent¬ ment of a menial—even of the creeping, treacherous Nicholas. This night she swore to be mine—mine all—mine only! true, she is now another's, but equally to thy discomfiture; and Nicholas—the beaten, despised Nicholas, triumphs still!" The astounded Lovinski heard with mute wonder this insulting defiance; his mind was bewildered, and his body weak,
weak, yet he found strength to his peasant's blade. — *' Ungrateful wretch! a second time thou fallest be¬ neath my weapon," he exclaimed; but at that moment some of the aroused domestics, whom the stentorian voice of Nicholas had drawn thither, rushed into the apartment, and withheld him from further violence. It seemed to Lovinski but another instant, ere he saw himself surrounded by the count and countess Smolensko, vvith baron Wolveroff, and nearly the whole of the household. Although scarcely half at¬ tired, yet all were armed, and the point of every weapon was directed to Lo¬ vinski, who was known to be their enemy, and to whom each of course attributed the present tragical scene. It was truly a wild, and horrible group, which the midnight blaze now suddenly
suddenly presented, in the usually silent chamber of that solitary mansion. On the ground lay the body of Agatha, pale, bleeding, and vvith the fatal poniard by her side, over which was bowed the noble form of the countess in silent an¬ guish, and unavailing contrition; while the count, too, joined in heart-felt la¬ mentation over the lost object of their ambitious hopes, and tender love. Ni¬ cholas yet stood aloof, stern and un¬ moved ; while the baron busied himself in giving directions for the better se¬ curing of Lovinski, who, utterly ex¬ hausted both in body and mind, now quietly submitted to the degrading bonds which it pleased them to impose. Around were constantly gathering the alarmed, and ready menials, as, hurrying from their remote apartments to this scene of strife and tumult— " They
" Tbey como with balf-lit tapors in their hands, And snatch'tl in startled haste unbelted brands." It was some minutes ere amid the surrounding terror and confusion any one thought of securing the second per¬ sonage, who, by his presence also in this broken and rifled sanctuary, might be fairly judged a party concerned in plundering it of its most valuable jewel, the life of its inhabitant. At length Smolensko gave order, in an au¬ thoritative tone, for the capture of Ni¬ cholas, who, the domestics informed him, was also found by them under suspicious circumstances in his deceased daughter's chamber. All eyes were in¬ stantly directed to the spot where he had stood—but Nicholas occupied it no longer: in vain they searched the cham¬ ber diligently—he was not to be found. Through the door he could hardly have escaped,
escaped, as that passage was crowded with menials who would have opposed his egress. They drew aside the already- mentioned curtain, behind which Lo¬ vinski had concealed himself on his first entrance—the window was found open. Near the opened casement, moreover, was presently discovered the small po¬ niard which several had observed in *.he hand of Nicholas, only a few seconds before. Additional consternation now prevailed in the countenances of the whole group; and even the courageous baron Wolveroff cast a loving glance toward the friendly crucifix, and abso¬ lutely felt himself seized with a kind of shivering, which he never remembered, during the severest conflict, to have experienced before. The height of the window from the ground was great, yet count Smolensko ordered a party to search
search immediately the outside of mansion, as well as to examine the snow beneath, judging that haply some trace of his fall might be visible. This was dore, but nothing discovered that could lead to a rational conclusion with respect to his mysterious disapppear- ance; and the menials who performed this latter duty, even to the present enlightened era, declare it impossible that Nicholas should have ever reached the ground.
CHAP.
CHAP. II. A clwngc cnme o'er tbc spirit of ray dream. Byron.' Lovinski, now sunk in gloom and hea¬ vily fettered, was haughtily conducted to a chill and dismal dungeon, there to await the further question of count Smolensko, whose daughter he was supposed to have murdered, in conjunc¬ tion with a wretched dependant, a slave of the household. Ere quitting the chamber, he cast one parting look of agony on the blighted form of his Aga¬ tha, the only object it contained of suf¬ ficient interest to engage his attention now,
now, and with a heart swollen almost to bursting, but without uttering a syl¬ lable in vindication of his conduct, descended to his solitary prison. Meanwhile, in that now doubly de¬ solate retreat of the Smolensko family, the injunction of Capulet was well ful¬ filled— " All things ihat wc ordained festival, Turn from their office to bluck funeral;" and the earthly remains of Agatha were prepared to be honourably, but privately, transported, to the last abode of her ancestors. The count and coun¬ tess Smolensko appeared overwhelmed with sorrow, and the valiant baron Wolveroff seemed duly to partake of their affliction: little doubt, however, was entertained by many that the whole would speedily find in the pleasures of Moscow
Moscow an antidote for grief, suffici¬ ently powerful to dispel their melan¬ choly, and erase the remembrance of its unfortunate orgin altogether from their breasts. With respect to the more sincerely grieved Lovinski—on the morning that count Smolensko intended further to examine him, his dungeon was found empty. It was not known how he escaped, but he did contrive to elude the hoarded vengeance that awaited him—his fetters alone remained: nor did he ever afterwards appear in any part of Russia. 3K 7*t ^? Tt $ff * * * # * tf * # * On the rocky and dangerous coast of Cornwall,
Cornwall, near the harbour of little frequented except by fishermen, on account of its perilous situation, was now collected a dense and rugged group of spectators, whose attention appeared anxiously directed toward the boiling surge below. The night was exces¬ sively dark, but the frequent flashes of lightning that seemed bursting from a sky of ebony, sufficiently revealed to sight its roaring and tumultuous sur¬ face. Amid those angry waves, in dan¬ ger of being at each succeeding instant split to pieces, now rode a betossed and creaking vessel, which the boisterous winds had driven unawares into that perilous bay. And were the motley, principally sea-worn figures, which com¬ posed that assembled multitude, gathered on the beach for the purpose of render¬ ing all possible assistance to the suffer¬ ers?
ers? reader, no!—they were awaiting like wolves the expected fatal shock, whieh to them would be the signal of plunder and destruction. This on the coast of Britain—the renowned strand of beneficence and freedom ! Yes! and every stifled murmur which arose from that collected throng was a buzz of gratification at the proximity of the dreadful catastrophe which each knew it was impossible much longer to avoid. Who has not perused the impressive, and veritable lines of William Falconer, on this disgraceful theme? where he indignantly says— " I knoiv, among you, some full oft have viewed, With murdering weapons armed, a lawless brood, On .England's vile, inhuman shore, who stand— The foul repro jcIi, and scandal of our land ! To rob the wanderers wreck'd upon the strand. These, while their savage office tliey pursue, Oft wound to denth the helpless, plunder'd crew, VOL. III. C Who
Who, 'scaped from every horror of the .vain, Implored their mercj, but implored in vain." What pity that such public reprobation should have had so little effect in aba¬ ting the practice, or curbing the rapa¬ city of those unfeeling miscreants, who (until a very recent period) more than half subsisted upon the produce of their villany! In a little rude-built cottage, close to the sea-shore, lived Hugh Tregon- ning, an aged fisherman, but whose chief subsistence was in reality derived from the plunder of those drowning wretches who happened to be cast away near his convenient dwelling. Hence, his slender maintenance was indeed drawn from the deep—but Hugh Tre- gonning, when occasion presented itself, did not hesitate to become a " fisher of men." He was sitting in his humble apartment,
apartment, on the night here alluded to, in company with his daughter Amelia, his son, Frederic Tregonning, being ab¬ sent on a voyage, although now expect¬ ed daily to return. The wind blew— the rain beat heavily, and the thunder howled around his exposed dwelling, but the old fisherman little heeded this warfare of the elements, unconscious how rich a spoil they were about to of¬ fer to his grasp. He knew not yet of the approaching wreck, so soon unhap¬ pily to be cast upon his strand.
c 2 CHAP.
(CHAP. Ill, 0 I I have suffered, With' those tliat I saw sufTer:' a 'brave vessel' ; (That had no'doubt somemoble creature* in her) Daah'd aJlifo,piecc3. O f the cry did knock / Against mj very heart: poor souls, they perished ! SllAKESl'EAllE.' Amelia. Tregonning had laid aside her book,rto listen-to the .tumultuous storm which -raged ^without their lowly dwel- ling.vthat now ( seemediScarceiy sufficient to is shelter them ! from,-its fury. The windows shook ^terrifically—• the smoke refusqd J,o ascend,' but ii'eturned beaten downwardtcto the, L,blazing' hearth, and the,very; walls^seemed to totter beneath the
the violence of the assailing blast. The thunder rolled heavily from cloud to cloud, and the lightning flashed brighter every instant through the unshuttered casement, as Amelia shuddered, and ex¬ claimed—" Oh God ! how will my poor brother Frederic, betossed on yonder unsteady element, bear the rude buffet¬ ing of such a night as this! How I tremble at the thought of his rashness, and his danger!" " Put more wood on the fire," said Hugh Tregonning, in that kind of flur¬ ried accent which declares the speaker to be ill at ease. " Frederic is a cou¬ rageous youth—'tis a pity he is sickly: but my boy is not rash, and will elude the peril—rest you sure of it." " He is undaunted when peril is to be encountered* though not foolhardy in seeking it," said Amslia. Then lis- c 3 tening
tening again to the which now seemed actually laden with the cry of human agony, she resumed— "Hark to the bellowing of the water sprite! 'tis a night fit only for the con¬ demned Tregeagle to wail over his eter¬ nal task. Hark! he is about it—I hear his complaining accents on the gale— now, father, Tregeagle roars*!" , " Fetch me my hanger!" cried Tre¬ gonning, starting suddenly to his feet— ;" there is more in that guSt than the roar i ner
roaring of Tregeagle. Give me my hanger, girl!" Amelia reached the hanger —she knew it would have been useless to re¬ fuse, though her tender heart bled as she presented him with the instrument of terror—perhaps that night to be stain¬ ed with human blood. Tregonning re¬ ceived it fiercely—embraced her tenderly —bade her cheer up, and added, half baring the bright blade as he spoke—" I am sure there is sport abroad to-night— my ear is not easily deceived. But shake not, my own dearest Milly—no blood to-night! It is but to frighten the covetous knaves a little—to make them relax their hold, that I go armed —so fear not, sweet Milly, and we may be richer to-morrow. Thy father seek? not blood—it is not the quest of lives that draws me from my hovel—hark! heard you nothing then ?" c 4 "A distant
" A distant gun said lia faintly, ready to sink with apprehen¬ sion yet conscious that any effort on her part to detain him would be only thrown away. " It peals, perhaps, for our better for¬ tune," said Tregonning, coolly conceal¬ ing the hanger beneath his outer gar¬ ment, and preparing instantly to begone. Yet ere he passed his threshold, he darted to an upper apartment, and after gazing for a moment from the lattice, returned, exclaiming—" It is as I guess¬ ed. A vessel distressed is beating in the .bay—she has entered, and cannot escape. Yon signal-gun peals, perhaps, for,our advancement—ay, for our ag¬ grandizement, Milly. 'Tis an ill blast that brings benefit to nobody: should fairer fortuno,e.ver ,await the family of Tregonning, <'tis r a wind like this must blow
blow it to them. So weep not, Milly —-I will be back' anon—anon I will." Thus saying, he 1 'waved her ariother hasty adieu, and rushed out of the cot-' tage. As soon as Tregonning was gone, Amelia herself ascended to the lattice from which he had obtained'his tran¬ sient view of the distressed vessel, and found his definition of her situation too correct—she had entered that fatal bay, and could not return. Leaving Ame¬ lia then to gaze distantly on a scene which it curdled her blood to contem¬ plate, the reader shall proceed with Tre¬ gonning to take a nearer, and more, ac¬ curate survey of-this spectacle of hor¬ ror. The gallant vessel; 1 now 1 descried to be a foreign' ship^of considerable bur¬ then, which, on Plugh 1 Tregonning's c 5 first
first glance from the casement, was beating desperately around the rocky harbour, the hopeless crew firing signals of distress, while— " Inelos'd with all the demons of tlic main, Tbey view'd th' adjacent shore," had struck on a reef with terrifying violence, some few moments ere his ar¬ rival on the crowded beach. Even had the beholders possessed a wish to suc¬ cour the shrieking sufferers from a wa¬ tery grave, it would have been utterly impossible to have afforded them the least assistance, the surf ran so high, and the darkness was so intense; save, indeed, when illumined by occasional flashes of brilliant electric fire, which dazzled, almost as much as they assisted, the vision. The boisterous gale now came distinctly laden with the piteous cries of the seamen, which yet failed to move
move the obdurate hearts collected to¬ gether upon that inhuman strand. Al¬ most instantly ensued that crisis of uni¬ versal horror so powerfully delineated in the celebrated production of the nauti¬ cal poet already mentioned; and since also, with equal accuracy, and more poetical beauty, by a late noble and dis¬ tinguished author*. The vessel pre- c 6 sentiy
'sentiy split, and soon ofjier symmetrical buoyant form, little save a rough sea co¬ vered with scattered planks was discern¬ ible. It was now that Hugh Tregonning fixed his keen eyes upon a figure from the wreck, that seemed approaching on a floating fragment, which presently a huge wave hove providentially on shore, together with the clinging form whose destiny it seemed alone to survive that fatal separation. Of billows; but at intervals Ihere gush'd Accompanied with a convulsive splash, A solitary ihriek, the bubbling cry Of sarae'strong swimmer in his agony," This brief, but impressive description, can hardly be ex¬ ceeded in strength, and certainly is not equalled in smooth- ni'is and elegance, by any thing in the " Shipwreck" of Fal¬ coner.
CHAP.
CHAP. IV. Now on the mountain wave on high thoy ride, Then downward plunge beneath tli' involving tide ; Tilt one, who seems in agony to strive, Tlic whirling breakers heave on shore alive, FAixoNEn.
No hand did aid him, and he aided none— Alone he breasted tlic broad waves—alone That man was saved. MATtmiN'. The stranger was habited in what had once been a splendid suit, though the fashion of it was entirely novel to the eye of Tregonning. He was evidently, too, a foreigner, by the swarthy tinge of his complexion, even had his dress failed
failed smuciently to that circum¬ stance. Faint and exhausted from the violence, rather than the length of his exertions, he lay gasping upon the rug¬ ged beach, scarcely able to crawl out of the reach of the next wave, which threatened again to involve him in a watery grave. He, however, contrived to elude its fury: but what most at¬ tracted the attention, and awakened the desires of Hugh Tregonning, was a small chest, of which, even in the mid¬ dle of his appalling danger, the half- drowned personage before him had ne¬ ver quitted his hold. This circum¬ stance the glare of the lightning suffi¬ ciently revealed to Tregonning—and to possess himself of this so dearly trea¬ sured chest became immediately his de¬ termined aim. He had reason to believe that none had
had observed the casting on shore of either fragment, trunk, or passenger, but himself: the whole was, therefore, fairly his own, sole booty. Could he suffer such an opportunity to pass un¬ improved? Would reason sanction such an omission of his accustomed vigi¬ lance after gain—just at the moment, too, when it might so amply have availed him? Yet could he think of robbing a fellow-creature, who was yet alive to protect his property? Could he think of sending him unprepared to eternity, that himself might benefit by his worldly goods ?—of villanous theft, and murder? This was a stretch of baseness to which even the rough Tre¬ gonning dared hardly extend his thoughts. But his sally that night from his warm, comfortable dwelling, to encounter the fury of the raging ele¬ ments,
ments, must not made vain. what should he decide 9 The chest was evidently valuable—evidently pre¬ cious—almost equally so with life, by the owner's palpable tenacity in parting with it. Therefore, thought Tregon¬ ning, away with paltry scruples, and cowardly apprehensions. At any risk —at any price, short of absolute mur¬ der, the chest must be obtained.' Having formed this resolution, Hugh Tregonning rudely advanced, and seiz¬ ing the chest without uttering a syl¬ lable, en4eavoured to tear it from the supposed feeble grasp of its lawful pro¬ prietor. In the accomplishment of this dishonourable object; howevei*, the stur¬ dy fisherman had 1 to ^sustain more diffi¬ culty than he had premised. He was right'in 1 his'estimation'of the'value of the trunk, but not exactly so in his idea
idea of the remaining strength supposed left to the possessor. The lat¬ ter still struggled hard to keep his hard¬ ly-rescued treasure, and the plunderer found it impossible to loosen the coveted prize from his iron grasp. " It must be mine!" cried Hugh Tregonning, half frantic with fear and vexation at this unexpected resistance; and, as he spoke, he dealt the unfortunate foreigner a stroke with his bared hanger, which felled him bleeding to the ground. Just as the weapon descended, a mighty billow brought a second victim of that night's catastrophe nearly to the feet of Hugh Tregonning. His back being toward the surge, Tregonning himself observed not the circumstance, until, his own tones being recognised by the sufferer, he heard a well-known voice exclaim—" Help! save me—oh, my father!" "Ha!
"Ha! it is my now shouted Tregonning, turning has¬ tily toward the spot whence the cry for assistance proceeded. A powerful flash of lightning, at that moment, illumined the pitchy atmosphere. He beheld his exhausted form, yet clinging feebly to the slippery rock; but, the next instant, the succeeding wave washed him again into the briny bowels of the hungry deep. Tregonning now forgot his co¬ veted prize, and felt for his child—but in vain: he, however, continued long to pace that dismal strand, striking his heart and forehead, and exclaiming— «• Eternal Providence! thou art just— my son is lost!" *r * # * + At daybreak the sky was still hazy, and
and the waves somewhat turbulent, but the violence of the wind and storm had ceased. The scene was much changed: the peasantry had most of them re¬ tired— " The shouts that shook the midnight bay Are silent; but some signs of fray That strand of strife may bear." Sir Robert Langstone, a neighbouring gentleman of great influence, and much humanity, was still present on the beach, exhorting the few remaining fishermen to preserve for their right owners such valuables as the billows yet might cast ashore. During the early part of the night, tlie exertions of this benevolent ba¬ ronet (whose exertions were never want¬ ing at a time like this) had been of most essential service; especially to one poor wounded individual, whom he found lying
lying on the strand senseless the only survivor, as supposed, of the late lamentable wreck. He appeared to have received a severe sabre cut, which had nearly penetrated to the brain; but how received he was at present unable to tell. Sir Robert, with his accustomed benefi¬ cence, ordered him to be instantly borne to his own dwelling, together with a small, but extremely weighty chest, found by his side; expressing a hope that, as soon as the wounded stranger was sufficiently recovered, he should be able to discover the perpetrator of so foul a deed. * ■& * * * Many days had passed, since the pre¬ ceding occurrence, ere the shipwrecked wanderer was at all able to converse, even
even on the subject of his sufferings. Meantime, the kindness of sir Robert Langstone had been unremitting, and almost unprecedented. At length, the hour drew near when he hoped, by means of such information as the wounded gentleman himself might af¬ ford, to trace out the perpetrator of so heinous a crime, and bring him to con¬ dign punishment. In his appointed room of audience for such matters—for sir Robert was an active magistrate of the county, and seldom without some such business on his hands—he was awaiting the presence of his sick guest, when the door opened, and the interest¬ ing stranger entered the apartment. He appeared to be about the middle age —of extremely dark complexion, but're- markably handsome; and 1 a perfect tra¬ veller, whom no peculiarity of situation, or
or circumstance, seemed in any great degree to ruffle or confuse. His dress, which was both costly and becoming, resembled the attire at present worn by some of the northern nations; and his deportment was studiously graceful and pleasing. His name (as he had given it) was Edward Penrose. Beside the per¬ sonages already described, tliere was in company, on the present occasion, Julia, the only daughter of sir Bxibert Lang¬ stone, a most amiable and enlightened girl: but this young lady, and her pre¬ sent threatened misfortunes, surely well deserve a separate description.
CHAP.
CHAP. V. Stic never told her love, But lot concealment, like a worm i' the bud, Feed on her damask check : she pined in thought; And, vvitli it green mid yellow melancholy, She sat like patience on n monument, Smiling at grief, Shakespeare. Miss Julia Langstone was by no means particularly distinguished for personal attractions, but possessed a sweet dispo¬ sition, captivating manners, and was in¬ variably acknowledged to be highly accomplished. Hence, what some might think she required in beauty, was am¬ ply compensated for by her cultivated mind,
mind, and consummate skill in all those accomplishments which adorn female loveliness; but which are too often ne¬ glected by those whose superior grace of person renders them too vain to take the requisite pains for their acquirement. But, alas! not all the endowments of art, or nature, can preserve us from the visitations of calamity— " For time will como with all its blights— The ruined hope—the friend unkind ; And Love that leaves, where'er ho ligbts, A cbill'd or burning heart behind." And this last, fatal truth, it was the peculiar destiny of Julia Langstone to exemplify, and to feel. Greatly respected as was her honour¬ ed father, by the whole surrounding country, not less for his social than be¬ nevolent qualities, he of course enjoyed considerable
considerable intercourse with the noble and wealthy of the adjacent parts— " Horn of high lineage, linked iu high command, He mingled with tho magnates of iiis hind." Accordingly, as the daughter of sir Robert Langstone, Julia was obliged to mix occasionally with the great and gay, who admired her varied talent, and praised her for her diligence in the ac¬ quisition of every becoming ornament; but it was observable that of late her heart in these meetings of mere pomp and ceremony had no share. Her spirits were now sunken, and dejected—her mien grew absent, and melancholy. Julia Langstone was in love; and the object of her steadily concealed affection was one whom she dared not openly acknowledge, as the sole lord and sove¬ reign of her happiness, which yet, she VOL. III. d felt,
felt, depended entirely upon smiles. Frederic Tregonning, although in many respects even the very counter¬ part of Julia, was far—far beneath her in point of birth, present rank, and future expectations. Yet circumstances, a short time since, had thrown them together, in the exercise of that truly noble virtue which always covers a mul¬ titude of defects—charity; and Julia was surprised to find the commendable pursuits of Frederic Tregonning, though only the son of a poor neighbouring fisherman, so exactly similar to her own. She soon discovered that, although each moved in a totally different sphere, their minds and pleasures were perfectly congenial; and hence commenced an in¬ timacy which death alone was likely to terminate. But Frederic Tregonning had been delicate from his very child¬ hood,
hood, and his weakness appearing to increase of Me,, his father, Hugh Tre¬ gonning, had persuaded him to under¬ take a sea voyage, with a view to the perfect restoration of his health. This circumstance had caused a temporary separation of the lovers, but Julia Lang¬ stone continued anxiously to count the tedious hours till young Tregonning's return. Such was the present situation of the graceful female now seated beside the benevolent sir Robert, who, though he had not failed lately to observe some change in her spirits, was still utterly unconscious of the tumultuous feelings which had invaded her once peaceful bosom. When questioned by sir Robert Langstone respecting the nearly fatal blow he had received, Edward Penrose replied that he should know the lurking d 2! villain
villain again, should ever to encounter him; adding that the rob¬ ber was an elderly man, in a rude fisher¬ man's garb, whose features he well re¬ marked, but had never seen before. This portion of their interview being concluded, sir Robert made some further inquiries respecting the lost vessel, and theu continued—" I am happy and proud, Mr, Penrose, to congratulate you on your reeen* escape, and present con¬ valescence ; notwithstanding which, your situation at this moment may, perhaps, be one of extreme perplexity. You have doubtless lost in the wreck some portion of property—perhaps some mer¬ chandise, or valuables of any other de¬ scription, which, I am aware, you may exceedingly regret." uV No,".replied he who called himself Edward Penrose, carelessly; " my whole property
property was saved in the trunk you protected for me." " You are doubly fortunate," said sir Robert Langstone.—" You are the only individual by whom either life or for¬ tune can have been preserved." " It is little matter to me," remarked Penrose again, exhibiting in his manner a kind of gloomy unconcern. " I had nothing of value on board that vessel, if I omit to mention a friend with whom I became acquainted during the voyage. He appeared a promising young man, a native of this place, and, I confess, I found much pleasure in his society." " What was his name?" demanded sir Robert Langstone, " Frederic Tregonning," was the prompt reply of Penrose. " All are lost!" said sir Robert Lang¬ stone, mournfully shaking- his head. A d 3 loud
loud scream, at that moment, caused him to turn suddenly toward the hither¬ to silent, but attentive Julia. She had fallen from her seat—the dreadful intel¬ ligence that Frederic Tregonning was among the drowned had at once betray¬ ed her secret, deprived her of her senses, and stretohed her inanimate form along the floor. Sir Robert, alarmed, instantly rang for assistance: the attendants con¬ veyed her carefully to her chamber; but so great was the shock occasioned her by the thus suddenly imparted death of her lover (whose return she yet hardly expected) that it was long—very long, ere she recovered from her swoon. * » * * * It was some time before the ship¬ wrecked, and subsequently wounded Penrose,
Penrose, recovered sufficient strength to go abroad, except for very short walks or rides in *he immediate neigh¬ bourhood, during the whole of which period he continued to reside at sir Robert Langstone's. It was in one of these solitary excursions that, happening to be overtaken by a sudden shower, near a small lonely habitation by the sea shore, he without ceremony entered the cottage; little expecting from its rustic, unadorned exterior, the neatness and simple elegance that presided over every thing within. He had often re¬ marked before the rural and detached situation of that apparently humble dwelling; but never until now had he beheld its unconsciously captivating in¬ mate, or even dreamed that it contained such loveliness' within its wild vine- covered walls. A tall and beautiful fe- d 4 male
male saluted him at the entrance, kindly invited the sick Penrose to shelter in their best apartment, and officiously ad¬ ministered to his every need. Her as¬ pect was unknown to him—they had never met before—still bethought there was something' in the peculiar cast of those graceful features with which his memory was not wholly unfamiliar. He seated himself in this abode of artless innocence, with all the freedom of an old acquaintance, or rather of one accus¬ tomed to move in a superior sphere, while his fair juvenile hostess endeavour¬ ed, as well as she was able, to entertain him. She spoke of the weather—made remarks on the surrounding scenery, and such other common topics of con¬ versation; but, in spite of her assiduity to please him, he observed that her mind was frequently wandering, and her
her observations were often interrupted by a heart-drawn sigh. Penrose looked at her again—and in spite of the mild brilliancy of her large " heaven-tinctured" eye, he saw that it had recently been wet with tears. She was attired in simple mourning, and judging from this circumstance, he rightly divined the loss of kindred to have occasioned her sorrow; but hu¬ manely forbore, by any ill-timed curi- ord inquiry, to probe the wound which he felt he could not hea!. A mother's care, it appeared, she had never known: her father, she said, was a fisherman, and at present abroad pursuing his usual, and (on this part of the C'jast) dangerous vocation. The shower having now abated,,the stranger unwillingly arose to take his leave. When about to depart, he ad. d 5 dressed,
dressed, with a show of fervency, his lovely companion.—" May I crave your name?" said he; "chiefly that it may assist me in retaining—which I mean to c|o--the> memory of your kindness." " Amelia Tregonning," replied she, blushing deeply. " Tregonning!" exclaimed Penrose, with evident astonishment*— f< Good Heavens!" Then seating himself again, with much emotion, he once more de¬ liberately surveyed the figure and fea¬ tures of his fair acquaintance; and then muFmured; covering his visage with his hand-r-tf It is indeed the sister of Tre¬ gonning ! It is for him she wears these shadowy weeds-^-for him that her ten¬ der eyes are swollen with weeping—it isr-rit must be so. God! and this fa¬ mily is berefwafllicted—rwhile I, who have none to mourn for me, am alone preserved!
preserved ! Where slumbered thy wis¬ dom, governor of the universe! Oh! why did I not perish instead of him! I—the sole human being whelmed in that wreck who could not have been lamented!" A brief mutual explanation now took place between them, and the unhappy fate of Frederic Tregonning was grieved over, and admitted on both sides. After some fuither conversation, and many tears on the part of Amelia, Penrose departed, and charmed with her beauty and sensibility, proceeded with a lighter step toward the residence of sir Robert Langstone.
d 6' CHAP.
CHAP. VI. Good slieplierd, tell this youth what 'tis tn love. It is to be nil made of sighs nnd tears; It is to be all made of faith and service; It is to be all made of fantasy, All made of passion, and all made of wishes. Shakespeare. From this period the visits of Edv ard Penrose were frequent at the solitary, romantic cottage, of Hugh Tregonning. During these visits, however, he had never once encountered its rugged owner, who on such occasions was in¬ variably absent—a circumstance that surprised Penrose the more, as he had heard in the neighbourhood that Tre¬ gonning
gonning was considered most deservedly unprosperous, and looked upon as a man by no means diligent in his craft. What, then, could be the cause of the cturdy fisherman's constant absence, when a guest at sir Robert Langstone's —his son's friend—came to visit his dwelling? This was a question Pen¬ rose often asked himseif, but it was also one he found himself unable to answer. Notwithstanding this deprivation, the convalescent stranger contrived to pass some highly-agreeable hours at the cot¬ tage of Tregonning, in the society of his gentle daughter, the captivating Amelia, whom he continued to find every day more engaging, and more lovely. In short, she soon became the principal theme of his thoughts by night, and the magnet which attracted his footsteps by day: while Amelia, on her
her part, believed Edward to combine every qualification her most extravagant wishes could invent to adorn the being destined to render her completely happy. In this humble seclusion, therefore, Penrose not unfrequently passed whole hours with his already adored Amelia : for, sooth to say, in spite of the efforts of its worthy owner, his amusements were somewhat scanty at the mansion of sir Robert Langstone; Julia, owing to the recent violent shoek she had re¬ ceived, being still unable to leave her chambei:, and sir Robert being much engaged of late with his magisterial duties. Here sometimes the delighted pair would spend the long summer's evening in watching, from beneath the ivied porch of that rustic habitation, the gor¬ geous
geous tints assumed by the murmuring waves which broke under their feet; or the varying shape of some rich purple cloud that appeared to rest upon the fiery horizon. Sometimes they strolled arm in arm among the adjacent roman¬ tic scenery, and conversed of countries and situations still more strange and in¬ teresting; even such as Amelia found it difficult to believe could exist on the surface of the same globe herself inha¬ bited. For Edward Penrose, it appear¬ ed, had been indeed a wanderer. He could even unveil the secrets of— " The rainy caverns, blazing ou the day Of Abyssinia's cloud-compelling clilFs, And of the bending mountains of the moon ;" since, nurtured in the wonder-teeming east, he had dwelt, or travelled, in al¬ most every part of his native burning regions— " From
" From Memtni's orient stream, that nightly shines With insect lamps, to wliere Aurora sheds On Indus' smiling banks the rosy shower." He had also been an inhabitant of that vast and amazing continent, where— " Swelled by n thousand streams, impetuous liurl'd From all the vo.itiug Andes, huye descends The might} Orellunn;" and had heard, among the mazy laby¬ rinths of a hundred new-discovered realms— " The i oaring floods, and cataracts, th.it sweep From disembowd'd eauli the virgin gold." Nor was this all. He had moreover re¬ sided, at different periods, in the mag¬ nificent capitals of many northern coun¬ tries ; and thus watched the feelings of Nature warmly developed in her most untutored children, as well as marked the effects of perfect civilization on the minds
minds of polished men. No wonder, then, if the yet inexperienced Amelia felt charmed with his conversation—no wonder if she confessed that her hap¬ piest moments were passed in his so¬ ciety, and acknowledged that she dread¬ ed nothing so much as the bare idea of their separation. One balmy night, on which Hugh Tregonning was as usual absent, Pen¬ rose and Amelia sat somewhat later than ordinary at the delightful window which overlooked the flowery enclosure that surrounded the little residence. The full moon was sailing majestically through the cloudless heaven, and fringing the spangled tips of the adja¬ cent fruit-trees with a soft silvery lustre. The limpid brook that meandered be¬ neath their shade, while pursuing its quiet stealthy course toward the ocean, appeared— "So
" So calm the waters scarcoly seem to stray, AnJ yet tbey glide, like happiness, away." No breath—no murmur seemed to stir amid the surrounding foliage; all was silent, peaceful, and motionless. The expansive ocean, at a little distance, lay as tranquil as the unruffled leaves around; and the sweet-briar, which flourishes spontaneously here in wild luxuriance, forgot not to perfume the transparent air with its odorous exha¬ lation. Edward Penrose gazed steadily on his Amelia, and thought he had never beheld her look so beautiful—so irre¬ sistibly captivating, as by that tender light. In sooth, the lovely daughter of Hugh Tregonning was— " Fair as the bloom of May, and mildly sweet As the soft gales that, with their vernal wings, Fan the iirst opening Bowers j" and
and her present melancholy only added to the interest created by her appear¬ ance. Her moistened eyes, at that mo¬ ment, were raised to the heaven they most resembled, in silent ejaculation of a prayer for her lost brotlier; for Fre¬ deric had been the theme of tlieir con¬ versation, and her thoughts still dwelt upon him. —" Alas!" she exclaimed, pointing to the moon-lit shrubbery, " how delighted would he have paced his favourite walk, on such an eve as this! it winds among the lofty poplars yonder—Oh! he will never traverse it again. How charmed would he have chanted his favourite lay—it ran, as I remember—
Poor Frederic! he will chant it no more." Amelia Tregonning had hardly re¬ peated the words, ere a voice was dis¬ tinctly heard rising from amid the tall foliage she had pointed out, and singing in a clear tone what appeared to be a portion of the same ballad, as if in reply to her concluding observation. Pen¬ rose looked surprised, but Amelia seem¬ ed struck with something more than amazement, as she listened in fearful silence to the well-remembered strain. The lines which the singer had selected were these— " That hour is come—'tis now—'tis now! These flowers the dews have wet: This hour of calm instructs us how Grave fancies to forget." " Rather say tends to create them," exclaimed
exclaimed Amelia, in an alarmed man¬ ner, " if that be not the voice of Fre¬ deric Tregonning! —His voice! how should it be?—yet how should it be aught else? Those were his very ac¬ cents—hark! again!" As he ceased indeed, the same voice, now appearing nearer, commenced plain¬ tively a tender air, the burthen of which, Penrose presently distinguished, was the soft name of Amelia. She appeared to listen attentively for a minute, dur¬ ing which period every other faculty seemed suspended. Then rushing wild¬ ly to the almost-equally astonished Pen¬ rose, she flung herself on his bosom, exclaiming—" It is—it is my brother! it is Frederic himself!" and, over¬ joyed at the conviction, fainted in his arms.
CHAP.
CHAP. VII. You arc a spirit, I know. Whei. did you die ? SiiAKEsrrAnE, The last Penrose remembered to have seen of Frederic Tregonning was short¬ ly after the vessel split to pieces, when he recollected having beheld him cling¬ ing to the same floating fragment of the wreck on which himself was saved: but the youth could not retain his hold, and was presently swept away by the irresistible force of the boiling surge. After this he saw no more of him ; but so perfectly aware was he of the utter incompetency of Frederic Tegonning to
to contend with those overwhelming breakers, that he felt inwardly assured of his destruction. Even now, there¬ fore, though he acknowledged the voice to resemble that of Frederic, and in spite of the apparent conviction of Amelia, whose insensible form he still supported in his arms, he could not avoid adhering to his already fixed opinion ; for he was no stranger to the failing health, and even constitutional weakness of his former friend, and hence deemed it impossible that he should have escaped. Such were the reflec¬ tions of Penrose, while supporting Amelia at the opened casement, and striving to recal her fleeting senses— but they were soon to be changed. On looking up—it was the first time he had raised his pensive brow from poring over her alabaster features— by
by the moon's shadowy saw plainly a dark figure standing opposite, and attentively regarding him. It was Frederic Tregonning! now he felt also positive, and his startled eyes (perhaps unconsciously) sought for a moment the pale aspect of Amelia. He raised liis glance again immediately, but in that trifling interval,.almost too tran¬ sient for conception — even in tlie " twinkling of an eye," the figure was gone. Amelia now began slowly to revive, and withdrew by degrees from the sup¬ port of Penrose, who in sooth found hardly strength any longer to sustain her sinking weight, wholly overcome with awe and astonishment at what he had Witnessed. Penrose, however, was the first to break silence.—" Are we mocked by our own senses ?" he ex¬ claimed.
claimed, " Are we the sport of jug¬ glers?—or the victims of some more potent, and terrible illusion ? A few minutes since, and I held myself deceiv¬ ed—I deemed mine own ears unworthy to be trusted. I believed my vision, and became convinced; now again I am dubious, and cannot but think I too easily yielded to conviction. In spite of these appearances—strange, indeed, I I grant you—it cannot be but Frederic is no more." " He lives ! he lives!" said Amelia, joyfully. " It was his voice—I cannot be mistaken." " I have witnessed deceptions as strange," said Penrose, with an air of gravity, in which doubt and apprehen¬ sion were mingled. ** He has even been here, during your insensibility— but------" vol. in. e " Here!
" Here.' here!" exclaimed astonished ; " here—and I saw him not! but Frederic only sports with our perplexity, and hides himself to increase it. He will anon, I know, return to greet------" " His sister and his friend /" said a voice at tlie lowly portal; and Frederic Tregonning indeed, vvith a sportive air, again entered the apartment. Penrose, however, still kept anxiously aloof, re¬ garding the slender form before him, with a mixture of awe and suspicion ; but Amelia fell upon his neck and wept. % -* * * * The health and spirits of Julia Lang¬ stone had recovered apace, since the un¬ expected return of the shipwrecked (and long-
long-supposed lost) Frederic Tregon¬ ning to his father's humble residence. From this circumstance alone it was concluded by many, that they still found secret means of continuing their intercourse; although sir Robert Lang¬ stone, it was reported, on discovering the attachment of his daughter to the son of a simple fisherman (for ho had discovered it), had sternly commanded that all further communication should cease between them—and for ever. To this end, lie purposed tliat Amelia should almost immediately remove to some other part of the country—per¬ haps, to the distant metropolis—for sir Robert was perfectly aware of the miraculous power, and sometimes ex¬ traordinary effects, of absence in such cases. This decision, however, appear¬ ed to produce very little effect on e 2 either
either of f the 'parties concerned; and hence some Ventured to infer the fact, that these' faithful lovers meant not td submit' to such tyranny, and drew from' their'apparent indifference the existence still of a secret and close correspondence between them. But a fortnight had now nearly elapsed, since the undreamed-of—almost start¬ ling return of Frederic Tregonnning to the neighbourhood of his Julia, and the day was fast approaching, al¬ ready fixed for her departure from Corn¬ wall. Just about this important period, it hap¬ pened that, upon one occasion, Frederic Tregonning being absent (as they sup¬ posed) with Julia, Penrose staid much longer than usual with Amelia, regard¬ less of the " heaven-ordained" motion of time. He had been agreeably occu¬ pied
pied in imparting to her some of the remarkable incidents encountered, by himself, during his extraordinary and adventurous travels; a theme to which Amelia was always particularly atten¬ tive. With respect to the particular scene of those wild events to which by turns he called her attention, some¬ times— " Twas in a land that far nway Into the golden orient lies : Where Nature knows not Night's delay, But springs to meet her bridegroom, Day, Upon tho threshold of tiie skies." At another time, he would present to her vivid imagination, some abhorred and gloomy glade of frozen Lapland— •• Where the shivering huntsmen tear Bis fur coat from the grim white bear: Where the wolf, and arctic fox, Prowl lmung tlie lonely rocks; E 3 And
And tardy suns, to deserts drear, Give days and nights of half a year," Thus entertained, the moments sped fleetly by; nor, till Amelia spoke of her father's late return from the beach, did he perceive that the accustomed hour of his own departure was already long past. To Hugh Tregonning, Penrose was still a stranger, never yet having once en¬ countered him during his frequent visits to the cottage. It even seemed as if the aged fisherman wished to avoid an interview, as much as Penrose was anx¬ ious to procure one; but as the latter |iad no cause to suspect his motives, and in short could not think ill of the father of his Amelia, he was still willing to impute to chance alone this apparent lack of courtesy on the part of the elder Tregonning. However this might be, Penrose again
again took his leave, just as Frederic Tregonning (whoso friendship and con¬ fidence he again fully enjoyed) enter¬ ed, without awaiting the arrival of the tardy fisherman, who, it yet seemed strange, had never once made his ap¬ pearance. It wanted scarcely an hour of midnight, and there was no moon; but it being near the middle of the summer season, the dusk which pre¬ vailed was still far removed from in¬ tense darkness. His road to sir Robert Langstone's residence lay along a narrow avenue of beech trees, beyond which he had to cross an open plain. Just as he reached the plain, ,a figure darted past him, which, even by that dim light, Penrose knew to be the same as that revealed to him by the lightning on the night of his late disaster; and from whose weapon he received that fearful e 4 blow
blow which nearly put a termi¬ nation to his wanderings. j The form passed him hastily, and glided with -speed down the adjacent avenue, as if anxious to be freed from his pursuing* gaze. Penrose spoke no word, but marked the route taken by his enemy, and silently urged his own course toward the abode of sir Robert Langstone, On arriving thereat, he instantly im¬ parted his conviction to sir Robert him¬ self, together with a more accurate de¬ scription of the miscreant than he had before been able to give. The magis¬ trate instantly ordered pursuit to be made for him, without waiting even for the assistance of daylight, and appeared highly gratified at the prospect of cer¬ tain success now likely to attend his en¬ deavours. Meanwhile,
Meantime, the wretched Hugh Tre¬ gonning arrived terrified and breathless at his solitary home, soon to be desolated by the dreaded instruments of avenging justice. He knew by whom he had been met, and did not fail to remark the keen glance of recognition with which.the passing stranger had regarded him. On entering, he carefully refas- tened the door, and with symptoms of emotion which he could not hide, seated himself silently in a corner of the cot¬ tage.
e 5 CUAF.
CHAP. VIII. Doge! I arrest thee of high treason BrituN. " My father! you look agitated!" said Amelia, approaching him with tender¬ ness, apparently much alarmed at his visible trepidation and distress. '*" Not so, my child—I am only faint," said Tregonning in a low, and tremu¬ lous voice. "Faint, indeed!" echoed Amelia, taking his nerveless hand—" what sud¬ den alarm hath seized thee ?—nay, now you tremble as on that raging night, when,
when, whelmed in the rocky our Frederic was supposed lost. But thy fears proved happily false—and will again. What can have created in thee anew—as on that terrible night—this excessive emotion ?" " Our father had good cause on the night thou hast named," said Frederic now advancing, and with a maliciously scrutinizing eye regarding his shrinking parent, " to return smitten with horror and amazement at the sight he had just witnessed; for, just as the billows snatched me again to temporary dark¬ ness, by the lightning's glare I beheld him—a moment ere my cry reached his ear—bent closely over the unfortunate Penrose, now just departed, whose head seemed nearly severed by a sabre stroke. I, moreover, heard him exclaim—' It must be mine!' doubtless deeming the e 6 wounded
wounded victim to behis own beloved son. He was speedily undeceived, it is true, by my instant supplication for aid: but such sights leave sometimes an impression on the mind, not easily to be eradicated." " Too truly hast thou spoken!" ex¬ claimed the elder Tregonning, clasping his hands with startling energy—" but was it-even so? Ha! then thou bast seen, perhaps—thou didst behold -----" " Brother, it is wrong to increase thus our father's perturbation," here inter¬ rupted Amelia, alarmed greatly by the terrible emotion he displayed. " Rather talk of lighter matters. Remember, father, our Frederic was saved : he was cast ashore, and hospitably attended, until his recruited strength enabled him to return home. Think not, then, alone on such repulsive spectacles as doubtless the last fearful wreck displayed: thy son—
son—my brother—our Frederic, was preserved." " Yes! perhaps to bear witness of his father's criminality," muttered Hugh Tregonning, in a tone scarcely audible; ancl again his rough features gradually relaxed into thought so deep, that it ap¬ peared almost like the forgetfulness of insensibility. From this apparent stu¬ por he was awakened by what himself first distinguished to resemble the sound of approaching footsteps. This advan¬ cing tread did not exactly resemble the " tramp of feet in martial unison," fan¬ cied, or heard, by Marino Faliero, ere his fatal apprehension: but, though not quite so regular, the footsteps that now approached the cottage of Tregonning were evidently both fleet and numerous. The slight suspicion of peril which this circumstance might be supposed to create,
create, the conscious guilt of gonning, combined with recent events, now magnified into certainty; and he exclaimed, hurling a quantity of fagots against the lowly, and weather-weaken¬ ed portal—" Close up my shutters, Ame¬ lia—help me to barricade the door! Hark! they are coming—but I will never yield! I will fight—I will strug¬ gle—I will perish first!" Amelia, who had been invariably ac¬ customed to open, not close the door up, on the approach of strangers, little knew what to deem, or what deductions to draw from the wild demeanour of her distracted parent; but stood stupidly gazing, unable even to remonstrate on the folly and inefficacy of such inexplic¬ able behaviour. Frederic appeared more calm; but neither aided his father, nor seemed any way interested in the prob¬ able
able result. The persons now audibly surrounded the cottage, demanding im¬ mediate admittance; and, wo to the heavy-boding bosom of Hugh Tregon- nins! their voices were not unknown lo him. His suspicions were correct: the ill-treated Penrose, who by mere chance had at last encountered him, had also contrived to set—perhaps ignorant of his identity with the father of Frede¬ ric and Amelia— " The bloodhounds of thu law upun his track, and they were even now waiting hun¬ grily at the door, ready to pounce on their devoted prey. Hugh Tregonning, distressed, ran up and down the confined apartments, pausing at every crevice, and piteously repeating—" What! is there no escape ?—none, Milly, for thy fond old father? Must his limbs rot in a prison ?—
a prison ?—must his name be with infamy ?—and thine too ? Milly! my child! devise some means ------Ha! they break in upon us —so then, quickly!" As he ceased, indeed, they burst open the door, and the whole posse of con¬ stables rushed into the cottage. Amelia shrieked aloud with affright, but Frede¬ ric still appeared neither surprised nor alarmed. At first Hugh Tregonning himself was missing; but presently he was dragged, completely cowed and trembling, from beneath a heap of fagots, where in his last extremity he had sought concealment, just as the impa¬ tient assailants entered his weak dwell¬ ing. Whatever resistance the criminal might have purposed while danger was remote, every idea of the kind ap¬ peared
peared to have vanished from the mo¬ ment of his capture. The gentle lamb before his inhuman butchers stands not more meekly resigned to his fate, than Hugh Tregonning surrounded by these sturdy executioners of the law, as soon as he saw that the die was cast, and escape impossible. Amelia, before ap¬ parently submissive and resigned, now grew loud in her unavailing exclama¬ tions of sorrow and amazement; the officers, however, denied io her tears even an explanation of the sight she witnessed, and she was torn with rude violence from the silently-clinging arms of her guilty parent. The warrant for his father's apprehension was shown to Frederic, who, nevertheless, offered neither observation nor opposition to the authoritative mandate; and the hapless Hugh Tregonning was con¬ ducted,
ducted, manacled, like a common fe¬ lon, to the now-dreaded residence of sir Robert Langstone. And here it may be pardonable to digress, for a short period, for tlie pur¬ pose of remarking an extraordinary change that had taken place recently in the demeanour of the once-humane, but now cold and apathetic, Frederic Tregonning.
CHAP.
CHAP.. IX. lie was 11 lovely youth, I guess, The panther in the wilderness Was not so fair as he ; And, when ho chose to sport and play, No dolphin ever was so gay Upon the Tropic Sea. WonnswonTU. It was a fact worthy of observation, that those finer feelings which formerly prompted the actions, and distinguished the character, of Frederic Tregonning, had of late grown wholly imperceptible; and it might even be fairly doubted, by an indifferent observer, whether such at all retained their wonted station in his
his bosom. Weakly constitution from his birth, the unequalled tender¬ ness of his disposition seemed perfectly to coincide with the feebleness of his form, which, notwithstanding, was slender and graceful, if not beautiful. So placid was his temper—so mild his general conduct, that, even when gross¬ ly wronged, he seldom chose to retain the remembrance of the injuries inflic¬ ted, and more rarely still resented them. *' His spirit—not the eagle's but tlie dove's— Was gentle: raark'd out by the worldling file For scorn, he recks not, tliough his check it moves, And his breast heaves with hatred for a while. But ever softly—like the breaking smile Of sunshine through the tempest—o'er hitu came Something of pity ; and did liim beguile Of his brow's fury ; and his heart of flame As a shorn lamb's did beat—meek, docile, mild and tame.'' Too delicate in person to turn his mind with a prospect of success toward any of
of those arduous professions which alone appeared suited to his inclination, or ca¬ pacity, his amusements were principally to climb the " green hill side" what time the soft tints of evening rendered the landscape beautiful; or to sport buoyantly on the purple wave, when the rising sun irradiated its white spray with his glory. In pastimes like these he had passed, from earliest youth, the never wearisome hours; his chief joy lately being in the stolen society of his tenderly beloved, and equally affection¬ ate, Julia Langstone. Such was Frederic Tregonning ; but since the night of that fatal wreck al¬ ready described, his whole demeanour— nay, his very spirit, appeared to have undergone a total change. Now no more did he love to wander at that still hour—
" When
" mounts shadowy And poets love to be alune (Far from the minds of vulvar birth Whicli chain the spirit down to vntth) By lapsing brook, or wooded height," nor trace, with delighted eye, the mazy windings of the mellowed stream be¬ neath him. No longer he loved to sport amid the dimpling waves, or to watch the grey dawn advance gradually from behind the eastern hills. His ve¬ ry heart, as well as his habits, appeared to have changed: he was no longer that gentle, compassionate youth, beloved by every body—his feelings now seemed cold, obdurate, and sometimes immove¬ able. Not even to Julia herself did Frederic Tregonning appear unchanged: but she loved him far too sincerely for such change to weigh heavily in her es¬ timation, or abate one jot of the regard she entertained for him. Daybreak
Daybreak again brought the two principals of the party that had convey¬ ed away Tregonning, to his former ru¬ ral residence. They came not, they said, to search his yet unransacked dwelling, as nothing appeared to have been stolen ; but solely to collect some further needful evidence, to substantiate the charge of attempted theft and mur¬ der, which it was intended to adduce against him. First premising, there¬ fore, that Hugh Tregonning had alrea¬ dy confessed every thing, they addressed themselves to Frederic, inquiring mi¬ nutely what he knew respecting the distressful circumstance which it now became their duty to investigate. Frederic Tregonning freely imparted as much as he had witnessed of the whole affair; from which it appeared, beyond all question, that his own sire was
was the ruthless perpetrator of the in¬ human act. Amelia listened with hor¬ ror to the recital, while her looks re¬ proached her brother for having said so much. Too well she remembered the fatal night—too well she recollected the circumstance of the hanger, which she in vain wished him to leave behind! That hanger was next pointed out by Frederic, at the request of his interro¬ gators, as the only weapon the cottage contained capable of inflicting so severe a wound as had been received by his friend, Mr. Penrose. It was examined, and its huge blade too plainly exhibited the recent marks of blood—Hugh Tre¬ gonning had neglected to erase them. The rigid myrmidons of justice then desired him to be in readiness to repeat what he had acknowledged, at a given hour and place, carrying away with them
them the fatal hanger, and departing in the full conviction of having obtained sufficient proof to seal the prisoner's doom. As soon as they were gone, Amelia approached Frederic: dismay and asto¬ nishment had hitherto kept her silent, but now she gave full scope to her ex¬ pressions, and her thoughts.—" Thou wilt not," she exclaimed, in a voice of reproach and agony, " appear in evi¬ dence against our father, even though he were stigmatized as the blackest fiend in hell—oh! Frederic—thou wilt not?" " I must relate the truth," said Fre¬ deric, coolly. " It may be a task not altogether pleasing to me — it may wring thee even to thy very heart's core —but I must relate the truth. " O God!" resumed Amelia, raising vol, in. f her
her innocent eyes toward that she could almost have reproached with equal bitterness—" O God! where is thy clemency, if thou suffcrost my brother, and my earliest love, to be¬ come the legal destroyers of my pa¬ rent !" Edward Penrose was astounded, on discovering that the criminal he had de¬ nounced with sucii eagerness was the owner of that dwelling in which he had passed so many peaceful hours — was the father of his Amelia. The mystery of Tregonning's constant absence, du¬ ring his visits, at once was solved: but the means taken to prevent it, had been productive of the very catastrophe they were meant to avoid. He was smitten with
with deep sorrow at the thought of Hugh Tregonning's evident turpitude; but yet determined, at any price — at any sacrifice of money or labour, to avert so dreadful an event as his trial and subsequent conviction must prove, under the present existing and deplor¬ able circumstances.
e 2
CHAP.
CHAP. X. Think, oh! think What 'tis to give again n forfeit life, Ay, such a life as Faaio's. Miliian. To effect this purpose, Penrose resol¬ ved to apply to sir Robert Langstone immediately, and impart to him his de¬ sire that the present proceedings a- gainst Hugh Tregonning should cease. But to this abrupt conclusion of the business—high as his character stood for general benevolence—the worthy magistrate positively refused his assent. It might be that he remembered the offence committed by Tregonning's son, in
in daring to aspire to the affections of his own daughter; and hence rejoiced at having, perhaps, even the life of the father in his power, whose liberty was at present dependant on his word. But the only motives openly alleged by sir Robert Langstone were his ar¬ dent love of justice, and his duty as a magistrate, which alike forbade him to release a prisoner until his innocence was clearly manifested. Such was the substance of Edward Penrose's first communication to his beloved Amelia, on the subject of her guilty father's liberation. But there yet remained another scheme untried, and on this last desperate effort now depended their sole surviving hope of mutual happiness. Hugh Tregonning having passed his requisite examination, was fully com- f 3 mitted
mitted for trial—a trial sure to termi¬ nate in his destruction—and though yet at the residence of sir Robert Lang¬ stone, was about to be conveyed on the morrow to St. Ives, there to await the arrival of his judges. Tho coming nijrht, therefore, alone remained to effect his deliverance, and as this could not be done by entreaty, it was resolved to employ stratagem for the purpose. The influence of Julia Langstone over her father was great, but that influence was little likely to be successful on the present occasion; as it seemed to be the pride of sir Robert, in all magisterial matters, punctiliously to perform his duty. Yet had Julia the means of Tre¬ gonning's deliverance in her hands. His prison was locked—but the key was accessible to Julia: his limbs were fettered—but the hand of Julia could unbind
unbind his chains, and her voice bid him be at liberty. Their present plan, then, was to implore Julia Langstone to risk her father's temporary displea¬ sure, and set free the captive; and this, through the instrumentality of Fre¬ deric, who had in reality private access to the presence of Julia, they hoped they should be able to accomplish. Frederic undertook the task allotted him, with that sullen indifference wliich had lately distinguished his conduct, even in the most important affairs of life. He seemed perfectly conscious of the power of his persuasive eloquence over the gentle and affectionate mind of Julia. Hence, he appeared little doubtful of the ultimate success of the project thus des¬ perately determined on: but his evi¬ dent coldness respecting the issue (which involved nothing less than his sire's f 4 enfran-
enfranchisement, or final incarceration) failed not, in some degree, to puzzle and surprise bis more eager coadjutors in the hastily-concerted scheme. * * * # * The voice of persuasion rarely fails with woman, especially when exerted in the cause of humanity, or uttered by the lips she loves. Night had scarce¬ ly resumed her shadowy dominion, ere (aided secretly by the compassionate Julia) Frederic himself threw open the dungeon door, and unlocked the fetters of the unfortunate guilty Tregonning. His wretched sire seemed well aware of the purport of this visit, but yet received the intelligence of his freedom with a degree of gloomy despondency, which declared that the reverse would have
have been almost as welcome to him now. After releasing him from his bonds, Frederic proceeded to detail to him ine plan concerted for his flight. His own fishing-bark, he informed him, was ready at the beach; with this he was to escape to some distant part of the coast, and thence to obtain a passage to some foreign country, until circum¬ stances should render his return, safe. This said, Frederic drew from his vest a brace of loaded pistols, and presented them to him for his personal protection, significantly adding—" Should you be met—Hugh Tregonning is not a coward —'tis but a touch, and a clear road afterwards. He who can use the broad¬ sword so manfully, knows how to point these weapons; they will answer your need with a fidelity tbat shall cause your antagonist to* rue bitterly having intercepted your path." F 5 Hugh
Hugh Tregonning took the pistols with a grim smile of approbation, the first that had illumined his morose, de¬ jected aspect; and depositing them safe¬ ly about his person, roughly demanded —" So, old Langstone refused my re¬ lease to your intercessions ?" " He did," answered Frederic, " on the grounds of public expedience, and the regard due to the preservation of his own character." " Curse him !" muttered Tregonning, furiously : then added — " Where is Amelia ?" " On "the beach awaiting thy arrival," said Frederic. " And Penrose, then ?" inquired the released captive. " Is alone in the arbour which ter¬ minates the garden of our cottage," re¬ plied Frederic, " where my Julia, as thou
thou knowest, was so often wont to meet me. He lent his voice to ours for thy preservation." " Ay, but denounced" me first—dis¬ graced, and degraded me," growled Hugh Tregonning, gloomily—" I will not forgive him." Then, as if some gentler thought broke in upon his mind, he exclaimed—" Poor Milly! thy pa¬ tience will be exhausted ere I come. I have work first to perform—but thine, Frederic! is completed." So saying, the old fisherman warmly embraced his son, examined again the pistols, and depart¬ ed (for aught Frederic knew, or seemed to know, to the contrary) on his way to the sea shore.
f 6 CHAP.
CHAP. XI. 0, insupportable! 0, lieav« hour! Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse Of sun and moon ; and that the affrighted globe Should yawn at alteration. Siiakesveaki;. While tnese events were passing at the residence of sir Robert Langstone, Edward Penrose was anxiously await¬ ing the result, in a small favourite ar¬ bour which adorned the neat garden of Tregonning's cottage. It was hardly twilight when he entered the sequester¬ ed retreat—an hour had yet to elapse, ere the escape of Hugh Tregonning would be attempted. How to dispose of
of not: parting tints of daylight yet lingered golden on the surrounding hills, and co¬ vered the landscape with beauty; but when the mind is anxious and disturbed, is not the season for admiring the calm beauties of nature. This Penrose felt— and turned with indifference frora a scene which, at another period, would have created in him both wonder and delight. A folded paper, that lay half concealed by the creeping vine leaves, next attracted his regard. He found it contained some Anacreontic lines, writ¬ ten, he doubted not, by Frederic Tre¬ gonning, and then thrown carelessly by and forgotten. Having nothing better wherewith to amuse himself, Penrose sat down to peruse them: they occupied his time until the yet-remaining day¬ light faded into darkness, and were as follow:— " Alas!
" Alas ! « ben in tho grave r«t, The grovelling worm's, and reptile's guest •, When in the torab this heart kid low, No more shall ache, or feel, or know; When changed, and loiithcd, this iorni shall by, And the cold earth-worm feasts on me— Alas I who then one thought will spore For him who sleeps forgotten there? Ah ! when life's jocund hours are gone, And I shall lie in dust alone ? What voice shall bid the moments liy, Or viakc the closed, and joyless eye ? What pastime those dull years illume, And chase for aye the cheerless gloom ? This aspect what shall then beguile To wear the long neglected smile ? Close to roy mouldering lip—my breast, What cup shall tempt—what form be pressed ? Who all the weary day shnli weep? Who, drown'd in tears, sad vigil keep Through the dark night in silence ? None Will wake to mourn me—no! not one. Yet why lament? for aught ive leave 'Tis hardly wise to yearn, or grieve. Mused have 1 where tall cities rise, Like human hives, and heavenly eyes Shone round—they did but coldly shine: None kindled there when met by mine. Mused
Mused luvo I on the mountain lone, And view'd nbfoad Jovc'u lightning stromi; While thunder's voico, beneath did ring, And round mc whirr'd the eagle's wing. Mused by tlie soft, and peaceful stream, What time the glow-worm sheds its gleam : Vast ocean's watery limbs have cruised, And, bending o'er its billows, mused. Mused, too, among dull ruins gray— (Earth's sons to uw were cold as they) My bosuius vestment oi'.en'd there, That my heart'* throb the fresli'iiing air Miglit culm, and said *' Peace rules this spot I" 1 vainly woo'd—I found it not. Wave—mountain—waste, no charm could give- Might make the weary wish 10 I've. Then though no tears sliall slruini fur we— No pomp of wailing mine may be— No human clasp receive my form, To keep from worms, or sliield from storm : Yet welcomed be the joyous hour Shall luose the soul—bring change, and power : And set the minstrel's spirit free, To roam uncaged eternally." Night spread fast its raven shadows around the secluded arbour, as Penrose, with
with some difficulty, managed to pher the concluding lines; and, in a short period, every surrounding object was enveloped in total darkness. Ame¬ lia Tregonning was indeed gone to the beach, there to await the arrival of her father, subsequent to his liberation by Frederic, through the instrumentality of Julia Langstone: after which she had promised to repair to that fatal arbour, where Penrose was already anxiously expecting her arrival. The latter would have proceeded with her to the shore, and even aided in the escape of her guilty parent, but that his heart recoil¬ ed from again encountering the man whose arm had so nearly deprived him of existence. In this state of suspense, the agitated Penrose was constrained to pass a considerable time; when sudden¬ ly he faintly distinguished, at the en¬ trance
trance of the arbour, not the form of his expected Amelia, but that of Fre¬ deric Tregonning. No footstep, nor even the slightest rustling of the adjacent branches, hav¬ ing announced the approach of any one, Penrose at first felt rather startled at his presence. Presently, however, recovering himself, he became impa¬ tient to learn what tidings of the event his stealthy visitor had brought hira, who still stood (as far as the dimness permitted Penrose to discern his ges¬ tures) apparently regarding him closely, in a fixed attitude. Accordingly, he exclaimed—" Frederic! what am I to understand from this? Thy deport¬ ment savours little of joy, but thon art also silent of disappointment. Our plot, then, has succeeded ?" " Succeeded! ay—it has succeeded," answered
answered Frederic a tone of the most malignant irony. " Thy words import success," re¬ joined Penrose, surprised, " but thy manner appears to indicate the con¬ trary. However it may have chanced, 1 trust you blame not my zeal in pro¬ moting this scheme, which seemed tt) me the most feasible ingenuity could devise." " I neither blame, nor pity thee," said Frederic Tregonning, with extraor¬ dinary and provoking coolness. M Pity- me T exclaimed Penrose in still greater astonishment—" why shouldst thou pity me ?" " 1 said I pitied Hot, nor blamed," replied Tregonning, contemptuously, " because I am not accustomed to do either. Were it my nature to act other¬ wise than with perfect stoicism, I should do both." "And
" And wherefore ?" demanded Ed¬ ward Penrose. " Because thou hast been weak enough to imagine that aught devised by hu¬ man ingenuity can reverse tlie decrees of Providence, or amend its creatures' destinies," replied Tregonning, in a dic¬ tatorial tone, which seemed not a little to confound his already-perplexed audi¬ tor. " Am I then to believe thy father is not at liberty?" inquired the amazed Penrose. " Hugh Tregonning is at libeity," said Frederic. " I entered his prison as projected—myself took off his chains— he is free!" "Then all is well!" exclaimed Pen¬ rose, overjoyed—" " tlie rest cannot but be prosperous!" A loud burst of laughter was the only
only answer Frederic Tregonning deign¬ ed to this supposition, which presently was echoed by another on the outside of the arbour, accompanied by the re¬ port of a pistol, so near that it caused Penrose to start in alarm upon his feet. A low moaning exclamation followed, uttered evidently by a female voice: but ere he could make any observation, heavy footsteps approached the leafy entrance, and a second was discharged into the arbour. The flash occasioned by the latter pistol distinctly showed to Penrose the rough form of Hugh Tre¬ gonning, by whom the trigger was drawn, but who instantly decamped without waiting to witness its effect. For a moment all was silent, save the fast-retreating footsteps of the murder¬ ous fugitive: but, the next instant, Frederic Tregonning, as if mortally wounded,
wounded, fell into the arms of his af¬ frighted friend. Smitten with horror at the fate of his companion,although filled with gratitude for his own miraculous escape (since he doubted not at whom that deadly tube was levelled, though the darkness had prevented the assassin from rightly se¬ lecting his victim) Penrose stood aghast for some minutes, still supporting the feeble form of the dying Frederic. As soon as his confusion had somewhat abated, he exclaimed—" Alas ! brother of my Amelia—yon accursed fiend hath slain thee ! Though I comprehended not tby recent conduct, and misbecoming mirth, yet I grieve to see thee thus.. Thou ! so lately rescued from a watery- grave, from which thou wert only pre¬ served to*——" " To shield thee from the fate which otherwise
otherwise now were thine," said the ap¬ parently-expiring youth, " But a few words more—attend to my dying coun¬ sel. 1 have only breath sufficient left to enjoin thee to an act now necessary for thy tranquillity—nay, even requisite to thy very existence : mark, and obey the injunction now given thee. Pen¬ rose—abandon England." "And whither shall I flee?" demand¬ ed Penrose, as if hardly conscious of the words his pale lips uttered. " Wherever thou yet dceinest terres¬ trial happiness, without the alloy of grief, is to be found !" answered Frede¬ ric Tregonning, in a tone and manner whicli instantly again fixed the atten¬ tion, and awakened the suspicions of his auditor. " Wherever thou even fanciest in thy dreams that the golden fruit of felicity can be gathered, with¬ out
out the poisonous seeds of trouble and of sorrow—of peril, and of care—of crime—of terror—of affliction, and re¬ morse !" " Ah ! who art thou that thus cotin- sellest me?" now asked Penrose, with evident alarm and horror. " To know that at this hour would boot thec little," was the laconic an¬ swer. " It is euough that / know thee. But pursue thy changeful course—think life a revel, till thou feelest it to be a toil—find earthly bliss, if thou canst, and enjoy it." " Bliss is still to be found with Ame¬ lia !" exclaimed Penrose, somewhat ex¬ ultingly. M Listen !" said the voice of him hi¬ therto esteemed as the younger Tregon¬ ning, in whose dying aspect, had the darkness permitted, Penrose might have marked
marked the smile of triumph rise— " listen to me. Urged to the fulfilment of thy favourite scheme—the offspring of human ingenuity—I released Tre¬ gonning. Resolved further to ensure its success, I provided him with the means of self-defence, during his preci¬ pitate journey. That, he has misused them is no fault of mine. The baser passions seem predominant in his na¬ ture ; and such too often convert bene¬ fits bestowed on them into the means of wrong. Thou knowest that in this very arbour myself was wont to meet clandestinely the blooming Julia. Hugh Tregonning knew this likewise; and, instigated by a blind revenge, has this night given a death-blow to thy sole surviving hope of happiness. The fa¬ tal report reached thine ear—the burst of laughter that accompanied it: no ebullition
ebullition of harmless mirth rang in that startling sound—it was the yell of tri¬ umph—the shout of vengeance! He imagines he has destroyed the daughter of his foe, sir Robert Langstone, trip¬ ping down the dark avenue to an assig¬ nation with her lover, and thus reached the heart of his unrelenting judge— but it is thy Amelia who has received the death-shot in her bosom. Weary of awaiting his arrival at the beach, and apprehending the failure of our enter¬ prise, she flew to seek thee hither. Hugh Tregonning beheld her bound past him in the darkness—boiling with rage, he fired! He mistook her airy form for the figure of Julia—her body lies bleeding yonder—the sleep of death hath seized her—she will awake no more. The leaden messenger of disso¬ lution now lodged deep in my breast, vol. in. g was
was received in sheltering thine. thou livest—but beware, for thou art not safe. The liberation by treachery of the vindictive Tregonning—the mur¬ der of the innocent Amelia—nay, even her brother's inexplicable fate, will ap¬ pear in array against thee. Remain, and thou wilt be accused of confede¬ racy with a felon to elude the grasp of justice—even, perhaps, of murder: fly, and escape the ignominy—not to give it a more appalling name—which as¬ suredly awaits thee here. Hugh Tre¬ gonning is already recaptured, and again languishes in bitter thraldom, now ren¬ dered doubly hopeless and miserable: but it is futile to imagine that, on dis¬ covering his error, the murderer will acknowledge his crimes. The bark still floats in the bay that was to have borne him afar beyond the reach of his ene¬ mies.
mies. The wind is fair for thy depar¬ ture—the billows smooth—England, I repeat, is no longer a place of security, or happiness for thee. Let' not another mounting sun discover thee still a sus¬ pected sojourner on the shoves of Al¬ bion. Away—away—away !" * * * * * Some short time after these occur¬ rences, an execution took place, in the vicinity of St. Ives, of a murderer found guilty of effecting the destruction of two of his own children. It was not until after his condemnation that he confessed the crime; and his judges were long kept in suspense respecting their verdict, owing to the improba¬ bility (almost, as it appeared to some, the impossibility) of a parent becoming g % the
the perpetrator of such a barbarous sa¬ crifice.' It appeared eventually, by his own confession, that he had committed the cruel act under a mistake with re¬ spect to the parties who thus fell by his inhuman hand; which mistake, however, abated not the magnitude of the crime of which he had been con¬ victed. It is hardly necessary to add, that the criminal in this case was Hugh Tregonning, who thus expiated his of¬ fences with his life, which even the sa¬ vage multitude deemed scarcely a suffi¬ cient atonement for the committal of such enormities*. Sir Robert Langstone was not a Httle . astounded,
astounded, and somewhat mortified, at the sudden disappearance of his highly- favoured guest; for Edward Penrose had disappeared suddenly from Corn¬ wall, and-—-although the worthy ma¬ gistrate waited anxiously several weeks for his return—came not again. It was also discovered, that Hugh Tregon¬ ning's fish ing-vessel (himself having been retaken ere he gained the beach, and conveyed back to his dungeon) was loosed from its fastenings, and could not be found. At first a considerable shade of suspicion was attached to this mys¬ terious flight of Penrose, from a country in which he had been so hospitably treated. Soon, however, his benevo¬ lent and upright host imputed it rather to a merciful determination, at every sacrifice, to avoid prosecuting the de¬ linquent, Tregonning; and to what g 3 more
more probable, or commendable mo¬ tive, could sir Robert possibly have at¬ tributed this extraordinary circum¬ stance ? With respect to Julia—the bereft and almost broken-hearted Julia—it is impossible to paint the height of agony she endured, during the gradual deve¬ lopement of these fatal circumstances. It has been said, that Julia Langstone was a girl of the greatest susceptibility __ the most perfect refinement of feel¬ ing, and tenderness of heart. This excess of sensibility, given her as a bless¬ ing, proved now a heavy misfortune to the evil-fated Julia; she might well have exclaimed reproachfully, like Jaf- fier— " Why have I sense to know the curse that'a on nie' 1 ' The poignancy of her grief, on learning the
the lamentable fate of her beloved Fre¬ deric Tregonning, cannot be described. He was, indeed, of late, somewhat chan¬ ged in his demeanour towards her; since his return to Cornwall, she had looked in vain for that fervency—that ardour of affection, which, before his de¬ parture, had characterized his conduct. Yet still she loved him fondly—faith¬ fully ; and her utter devotion to his wishes was never more fully exempli¬ fied than in her recent connivance to effect the escape of his sire from merit¬ ed punition. The present lamented occurrence, however, having consider¬ ably increased sir Robert's magisterial business, and thereby set aside her own departure for the present, she hu¬ manely addressed herself to ordering, with all proper solemnity, the funeral rites of the deceased family; and in this g 4 sim-
simple office, contrived to no consolation. The bodies of Frederic Tregonning and his amiable sister were buried in the same grave. The cottage, which became an object of no little interest in the neighbourhood, was soon after pur¬ chased by Miss Julia Langstone, in whose desponding aspect were still easily to be traced— " Those furrows which the bumiiu share Of sorrow ploughs untimely there." Near this.sequestered spot, for a consi¬ derable period, it was almost the only pleasure of Julia to walk, and meditate on the melancholy past. At length, as time insensibly moved on, her all-sub¬ duing sorrow—or, at least, the outward traces of it—began gradually to abate. She once more attended those gay as¬ semblies,
semblies, and partook of those lively re¬ creations, in which she had formerly been accustomed to shine so conspi¬ cuously, and whence she again conti¬ nued to derive unqualified applause. Yet still vain were the pretensions of every polished suitor to the favour, or affections, of the frigid Julia Langstone. Her apparent gaiety was only outward, and assumed—her bosom still bled in¬ wardly over the memory of her early love, and would con tin ue so to bleed for ever! All may mask, but many cannot obliterate an early impression from the mind, to accomplish which even the powerful assistance of time is frequently ineffectual— " The deepest ice that ever froze Can only- o'er the surfuce close; The living stream lies quick below, And flows—and cannot cense to flow."
g 5 Penrose
Penrose never afterwards returned to England, and consequently the precise cause, or manner of his departure, was never known: but the fishing-bark of Hugh Tregonning having been disco¬ vered adrift, at a considerable distance from shore, it was conjectured that he had been picked up by some outward- bound vessel, and thence carried with her on her far, pathless course. Among the great and gay of that prosperous island he had made few friends, lest vexation or disappointment, as is some¬ times th,e case, should follow in the train of such connexions : but, unfortunately, his wariness in this respect had been productive of the very consequences which, by his conduct, it appeared, he was most anxious to avoid.
CHAP.
CHAP. XII. A change came o'er the spirit of my dream. UvnoN. The declining day had extended its lengthened shadows over the charming country of Circassia, and the sun appear¬ ed to rest on the gilded horizon before taking his final departure, as the beauti¬ ful Maimaina, caressed by her lovely offspring, sat watching his descent at the vine-covered entrance of her rural cottage. The dauntless Cassimir, her beloved husband, by his vigorous frame and enterprising mind, alike well fitted g 6' for
for the noble employment of had quitted his dwelling that morning for the chase, and the coming eve was to witness his return. Anxiously did the affectionate Maimaina strain her ex¬ pectant eyes already over the surround¬ ing glades, and eminences, eager to catch the first glimpse of his approach. The spot on which their rude abode was situated was more enchanting than even imagination, without the aid of the pencil, could probably be made to con¬ ceive. On looking westward, and more particularly toward the "north, the eye could not fail to be delighted with the extraordinary diversity of the landscape, comprising in one view— " Hills, glades and vallies, precipices, streams, Ilocbs, peaks and mountains, and the many shaped, And many shaded, variable lights, Furras, tints und hues, and shadows of the scene."
A chain
A chain of mountains loftier than the rest appeared stretched even to the northern horizon, where the wild brute of the forest ranged almost unmolested, or the equally remorseless Tartar roamed in savage freedom. Far—far toward the east, like a dim cloud rising in the misty perspective, the dark Caspian Sea spread its tideless expanse of waters; while, on the lovelier south, the gaze wandered enraptured over the flowery dales of Georgia—that land where some have even fixed the original site of the garden of Eden—whose wooded acclivi- ties, and transporting falls, were here distinctly visible. Over these objects often glanced the impatient Maimaina, in the evident hope of presently distin¬ guishing the. stately figure of her be¬ loved Cassimir. Kalib, a noble-looking boy, about six years of age, whose eyes frequently
own, amused her with his innocent prattle; and Ata- Ja, a fine girl about half the age of her brother, whose artless endearments might well contribute to a fond mother's trans¬ port, was playing at her feet. The suspense of Maimaina was not of long duration—with the shades of even¬ ing Cassimir returned. To a careless, or indifferent spectator a perhaps, his ap¬ pearance would have presented merely the aspect of a middle-aged man, and a Circassian ; but to the closely-observant eye, there were many points in his ex¬ terior which indicated the reckless hun¬ ter to be of a different extraction. His beauty—for he still was handsome—if not superior to that so generally exhi¬ bited by the natives of Circassia, was, at least, of a different description. His deportment was manlier than theirs: less
less lascivious, perhaps—but loftier, and more dignified. His noble figure was Arrayed in the commonest garb of the country; but there seemed, by his de¬ meanour, to have been a day on which he had assuredly worn a costlier habit. A tough bow, and quiver of fleet ar¬ rows, appeared at present to be his only weapons: he was, however, laden with the produce of his day's chase, which he flung triumphantly, though apparently somewhat wearied, at the feet of the fair partner of his affection—the joy of his life. Kalib ran to grasp first the hand of his indulgent sire, and (with a hopeful ardour which pleased the ad¬ miring parent) to greet him on his evi¬ dent success; while the game he pre¬ sented, with its varied hues, demanded from the infant Atala no small share of admiration. Maimaina received him with
with even excessive fondness, as, em¬ bracing him tenderly, she exclaimed— «Oh, Cassimir! the day hath seemed dreary in thy absence, love—but the evening will, at least, be joyful. Ah! thou art weary—lean on me, Cassi¬ mir—Maimaina hath strength enough to support thee still, and that she hath is thy boon. Thou hast waded the river, too—let me wring thy garment ,___Ah! no, it is the sweat from thy brow which hath moistened it thus. Yet thou look'st droopingly, ray Cassi¬ mir ! thou art even more languid than thou wert wont to be after the longest chase." " I struck out of my path to taste the cool mountain stream," said Cassi¬ mir, with some sprightliness—" but its waters were dried up. This was the bitterest-disappointment I have endu¬ red
red to-day. Maimaina—I am athirst." Maimaina ran eagerly to fill the accus¬ tomed bowl; and, after having drank heartily of its contents, Cassimir re¬ sumed—" How sweet is the draught labour renders delicious! how prefer¬ able to all the nectareous wines of luxu¬ ry, quaffed amid the refinements of ease!" " And thy course hath not been crost to-day by peril?" inquired the timid Maimaina. " No, my love," answered Cassimir, soothingly, " and if it had—I heed not woodland peril—Cassimir shrinks not from any peril that mortal strength or courage can overcome. He who hath slain the lion, dear Maimaina, need not fear to encounter the prowess of the weaker wolf. I mean the practised lion of the Caucasus—the human sa¬ vage
vage whose ferocity was proverbial, but whom 1 slew in his last fierce descent on our defenceless village. Since the death of the cruel Tartar, Hassaraic— the scourge and terror of our beautiful Circassia—I am little apprehensive of danger. The good bow that served me so faithfully when mine arrow was pointed at the heart of Hassaraic, will not fail me when it is levelled at the wild brute of the forest. I speak it not vauntingly, Maimaina, but for thy better assurance of my safety—I fear neither, prowling Tartar of the moun¬ tain, nor the less subtle savages of the plain, while my hand is on my falchion, and my quiver is at my back. Kalib, good child, my bow—come, dear Mai¬ maina!'' So saying, and receiving the unstrung weapon from Kalib, who had been play¬ fully
fully endeavouring to restring it, Cassi¬ mir and Maimaina entered an inner apartment of the cottage, for night be¬ gan to close drearily around, and a som¬ bre purple prevailed over the whole scene. Maimaina, and her blooming children, slept sweetly on that night of security, and no unwelcome, inauspi¬ cious dreams molested their repose. How fain would the elated Cassimir have done likewise! but just as he had composed himself to slumber, he heard (or fancied he heard) a voice exclaim— " Exult not, Cassimir! remember tbat all human joys are transient, and earthly expectations deceitful." Was he dream¬ ing when that strange voice saluted his startled ear with such displeasing truth ? He knew not: but the fatal verity con¬ tained in those simple words had disar¬ ranged the chords of his tranquillity, and
and (even admitting that slept already, he found he could sleep no more. Yet little cause had Cassimir at pre¬ sent to be apprehensive, or dispirited; for Fortune had favoured him of late in a peculiar manner, and seemed still fur¬ ther about to confer her welcome bene¬ fits upon him. Among many other events of an equally propitious kind, each of which tended in some way or other to his advancement, or felicity, not the least glorious was his having recently distinguished himself most sig¬ nally in defence of the romantic settle¬ ment where he now, with his happy family, resided. This achievement, per¬ formed in the presence of his own be¬ loved Maimaina, and witnessed also by many of those who had reluctantly en¬ rolled themselves his fellow-warriors on that
that perilous occasion, had excited the admiration, and secured to him the gratitude, of every joyous inhabitant throughout the peaceful village. The particulars of this fortunate oc¬ currence were these. There was a Tar¬ tar chief, named Hassaraic, the leader of a powerful and rapacious horde, who had long been the dread of the whole surrounding country. Coming down, like a sweeping pestilence, with his nu¬ merous train of half-starved followers from the barren North, he infested the more fruitful tops of the neighbour¬ ing mountains, whence he committed his ravages with impunity, carrying de¬ vastation and slaughter into the plains below. On a recent occasion, Hassa¬ raic had attempted a furious incursion on the small, but delightfully-situated village, in which Cassimir happened to have
have fixed his abode. approach from the heights was speedily discerned by the vigilant eyes of its too-deeply interested inhabitants: the females screamed, and clung closer to their hus¬ bands—the children shouted without scarce knowing wherefore—all but Cas¬ simir yielded to dismay. It was at his instigation solely that the men at length armed themselves to repel the audacious attack. Meanwhile, the barbarous horde commanded by Hassaraic, well mounted on their never-weary ing coursers, still approached with fatal speed, too evi¬ dently prepared for plunder and destruc¬ tion ; and foremost in the warlike van —distinguished chiefly by his superior height, and the beauty of his sable char¬ ger—rode the ferocious leader of the as¬ sault. A single bow was yet alone bent against the assailants; the arrow sped— a thick
a thick cloud of dust arose, and the charger was seen careering without his terrific rider. It was a moment of tri¬ umph and exultation for the affrighted Circassians; the dreaded Hassaraic lay convulsed, and writhing, on the ensan¬ guined plain—and Cassimir's was the shaft which had felled him to the ground!
CHAP.
CHAP. XIIL In vain Circassia boasts her spicy groves, For ever famed for pure and happy loves; In vain she boasts her fairest of the fair, Their eyes blue languish, and their golden hair ; Tliose eyes in tears their fruitless grief must send, Those hairs the Tartar's cruel hand shall rend. Collins. The . fall of their hitherto-successful leader, the supposed invincible Hassa¬ raic, while it served to exhilirate the drooping spirits of the Circassians, con¬ tributed in no slight degree to damp the ardour of the assault; and never was a fainter attack made by these .rude bar¬ barians, than on that memorable occa¬ sion.
sion. An universal panic spread itself suddenly throughout the whole savage tribe; every Tartar seemed appalled, and his fury considerably abated, by tho unexpected loss of one whom each knew to be his own superior in skill and daring. On the other hand, the less brutal Circassians looked up' to their new defender with confidence, and felt their courage revived, by barely wit¬ nessing his address and bravery. The event might be easily foreseen. The Tartars were speedily repulsed, and fled again to the mountains, bearing with them no other booty than the bleeding and lacerated body of tlieir chief; while the victorious Circassians returned into their homes, or betook themselves' to bury the slain, attributing to Cassimir the sole merit of their preservation. The report of this action soon spread vol. hi. h over
over the surrounding country; nay, it was even probable that the fame of Cas¬ simir would in consequence be wafted to the farthest confines of the Circassian territory. For it was averred, that the sovereign prince, Abbakuk, having heard an account of the whole transac¬ tion, had wisely determined to confer some signal honour on the deliverer of his nation from its direst scourge ; and, report loudly added, was already on his way to the village, for the pur¬ pose of effecting this sagacious resolu¬ tion. . ***** The sun was careering brightly in the heavens, and burnishing the whole beautiful surface of the earth, by caus¬ ing every object thereon to reflect back his
his powerful radiance. It wanted scarce two hours to the full attainment of his meridian glory, and the soft scene al¬ ready glowed around with all the fer¬ vour and effulgence of a sunny Circas¬ sian noon. Cassimir had on that day relinquished the pleasures and toils of the chase, for the society of his beloved Maimaina. They were sitting within their vine-encircled dwelling (small in¬ deed, but replete with every conveni¬ ence for domestic economy), and con¬ versing on the vanished enjoyments of the past, or descanting on the probable pleasures of the future. Kalib was amusing himself by gathering grapes, and wild berries, in the little enclosure which encompassed their residence; and the smiling Atala was receiving by turns the caresses of her parents, bestowed freely during every pause in their inte¬ resting conversation. h 2 The
The subject which at present occu¬ pied their attention, was the probable event of Abbakuk's expected visit, which, if report spoke true, was likely to occasion a considerable change in their condition and circumstances. In allu¬ sion to this theme, Maimaina said—" I own I am happy —most supremely happy! so happy that the longest day our summer yields—if blest with thy society, as I am now—is too, too tran¬ sient for Maimaina ! Cassimir! I vvould jiave this day endure for ever!" " Then why thus solicitous for a change, Maimaina?" demanded Cassi¬ mir. " Because, I also confess," replied the beautiful Circassian, " that to see thee honoured by the worthy—envied even by the-worthless, and reverenced by all as their superior, is a temptation my weak
weak nature cannot resist. I wish to behold it fulfilled." " Alas! my adored Maimaina," au¬ swered Cassimir, with a cold disappro¬ ving smile—" may the fulfilment, which is not improbable, answer thy expecta¬ tions ! But the mere wearing of addi¬ tional honours cannot confer additional happiness; and to live in constant envy is to dread the bursting of a smoulder¬ ing fire. Rank is not always produc¬ tive of felicity, and contentment is a blessing which princes cannot bestow. But it may be that Cassimir—for thy sake, Maimaina—will not wholly reject the favours designed for him by Abba¬ kuk. Rumour hath said, that with the approaching eve we may expect him here: be it so—I am prepared for his coming, and will accept his proffered dignities, should they not prove too cumbersome H3 for
for the wearer's perfect time, let us be jovial—it is scarcely in human power to disturb our felicity. Even Hassaraic can molest us no more. I watched the last gasp burst from his heaving frame, as the poisoned shaft spread its venom through his veins. Thou seest me, Maimaina, even /—joy¬ less wanderer as I have ever been, over the earth's wide face—even I can be joyous now!" As Cassimir concluded, Kalib ran into the apartment. Extreme conster¬ nation, was portrayed in the manner of the cherub-looking boy, and alarm had evidently stolen the roses from his cheeks. " Oh, father!" he exclaimed, running up to the wondering sire— (t I have seen him! I have seen him!" "Seen who, my Kalib?" inquired Cassimir, smilingly. "The
"The Tartar! the Tartar!" cried Kalib—" he is riding round our cot¬ tage!" "What Tartar, child?" -demanded Cassimir. " Hassaraic! it is Hassaraic!" replied the urchin, eagerly. " I knew him by his jetty courser that gallops under him so proudly—by his tall red cap, and silver-mounted pistols. He wore such, you said, when -----" Cassimir heard no more, but rushed, like a lion in his fury, to the outside of the dwelling. Maimaina stood asto¬ nished for some moments, looking mutely at Kalib, and then lightly fol¬ lowed her husband. She found him leaning against the outer portal, in a forlorn, dejected attitude, bis limbs trembling with excessive emotion, and the cold drops of sweat chasing each h 4 other
other down his altered face. No other object was, at that time, in view—she saw only the half-fainting Cassimir, en¬ deavouring to support himself with his palsied hand. His eye fell on hers, but with a vacant expression, as he mut¬ tered—'« Remember that all human joys are transient, and earthly expecta¬ tions deceitful!" Having articulated these words, with impassioned vehe¬ mence— " lie clench'd his hands, nnd rush'd away—away—" apparently in search of something, through sheltering groves, and ravines obscure at noonday, whither the strain¬ ed eyes of the distracted Maimaina (who had never seen him thus before) strove vainly to follow him. By this time Kalib had pursued her steps to the outside of the cottage; and, pointing to a distant
a promontory which Cassimir seemed about to climb, exclaimed— " Here he wheeled his dark steed, and ascended the tall steep yonder—now father follows hira—I see him mount the precipice!" But Maimaina still saw nothing: her head swam giddily—she grew sick, and reeling as if beneath a sudden stroke of lightning, slowly re¬ entered the cottage.
h5
CHAP.
CHAP. XIV. Thou Hear, thou liest, thou little foot-page, Loud dost thou lie to mc! For that knight is cold, nnd tow laid in the mould All under the eildon tree. Scutt. It was evening before Cassimir return¬ ed to his forsaken home, broken-spirited —wearied, and with an aspect wholly different from that which he wore in the morning. In his frantic pursuit he had met with no success. Once, in¬ deed, or twice, he had fancied he could distinctly hear the ringing of distant hoofs—the clattering tramp of a reced¬ ing
ing horseman, pursuing his way before him; and again had strained forward to catch a glimpse of the fleeting rider. But these endeavours were invariably productive only of increased exhaustion, and renewed disappointment. Still the wily Hassaraic—if, indeed, he whom the poisoned arrow had pierced could possibly be still in existence—eluded his searching vision, and seemed insult¬ ingly to deride his efforts. At length, the recollection of the wonder and dis¬ tress his own strange mood miist have occasioned to Maimaina, induced Cas¬ simir to reseek his now distant dwell¬ ing ; and abandon the chase of a fugitive who (whether moulded of any thing mortal, or otherwise) had, like the invi¬ sible Ariel, when labouring to his drun¬ ken followers, " done little better than play the Jack with him." H 6 Maimaina
Maimaina received her husband on his return, with mournful and affrighted looks, which plainly enough spoke the inquiries her lips yet refused to utter. During his absence she had more close- ly questioned Kalib respecting the ob¬ ject which had caused this consterna¬ tion ; and the result was her conviction that the boy had been alarmed by the appearance of some stray Tartar, who, having escaped the recent slaughter by lurking concealed in the vicinity of the village, had chosen the present oppor¬ tunity .of regaining his encampment. Another more fearful idea failed not, however, to present itself to her mind. This was that, in spite of the warning fate of their leader, the Tartars were still meditating a more effective attack, of which the present solitary spy was only an inauspicious harbinger. Imme¬ diately
diately on the entrance of Cassimir, Maimaina, perceiving by his wan looks that he was faint, presented him in si¬ lence with a bowl of refreshing .beve¬ rage, but which he refused to taste; while Kalib relieved him from the (on this occasion) needless encumbrance of his bow and quiver. Maimaina was, then, the first to speak. " Alas! my Cassimir!" she exclaimed—" What means that lowering, and averted brow ?—this sullen demeanour? Why hast thou wandered thus franticly away from ine? It was not really Hassaraic, whom Ka¬ lib beheld this morn—it could not— cannot be. Believe me, it was only some stray wretch—some straggling Tartar, starved, perhaps, into boldness- more glad to elude thy search than thou hadst been to discover him. Yet was I afraid lest peril should beset thee, be¬ cause
cause thou wert alone; thou art safe, and Maimaina is grateful. The Tartar I doubt not to be an enemy— ■but it tvas not Hassaraic. Can the venomed arrow I" saw enter his breast, prove deadly to the brave Circassian, and, to the inhuman Tartar robber, harmless?—or will the grim monster, Death, whose joy is the destruction of earth's creatures without distinction, disgorge his already devoured prey ?" Cassimir replied not, but an involun¬ tary shudder which crept over him at the bare supposition, evinced that the words were not lost upon his ear. " Then away with such weak fan¬ cies!" Maimaina continued—" Kalib shall be chastised if he repeats the tale. Come, Cassimir! cast aside this causeless gloom, and let us again be joyful. It was only this morning, thou knowest, that
that my heart leaped to hear thee con¬ fess thou wert happy. Can things have changed so soon? At least, all things cannot—toe not—and he is not wise who suffers a single adverse occurrence to embitter the remainder. Ah! re¬ member that ere to-morrow's mounting sun shall adorn the beautiful heaven— (to-day's, which now ceases to gild the western horizon, thou hast passed in fruitless anxiety, and unavailing search) —perhaps, Abbakuk will be here. He knows not of Hassaraic's present exist¬ ence, even if it were possible that he could still exist: but fear nothing—he sleeps quietly, and for ever. I saw the envenomed messenger of death pene¬ trate deep into his dusky bosom: the dead will not — cannot abandon the world of shadows to molest us here." Again Cassimir started suddenly- passed
passed his hand thrice across his feverish forehead, and, after a deep-drawn sigh, disturbedly paced the apartment. It seemed, by his impatient gesture, as if he could have contradicted this last as¬ severation of Maimaina — but he yet said nothing. ^ * * * * The full-orbed moon overhung the silent valley, where every thing pos¬ sessed of life seemed buried in profound repose, as the beautiful Zoa, with arms meekly folded on her lovely bosom, pursued slowly her meditative course, often pausing t;o contemplate the deli¬ cious softness of the surrounding scene. Zoa was the only daughter of Abbas, and Zulema, who themselves, from early childhood, had inhabited the vil¬ lage
lage where the infancy of their dearly- cherished offspring likewise had been passed—the same now dwelt in also by Cassimir and Maimaina. In her youth, Zoa was the pleasure, as she was still the pride of her tender-hearted parents; but, unhappily, ere her days had reach¬ ed their summer, she was doomed to experience a blight which nipped her opening prospects, and eventually chan¬ ged the whole tenor of her destiny. A wanderer came to their unfrequented village, where even the passing traveller seldom left his footprint—and the visit of the stranger was fatal to her peace. Zoa saw, and loved him—but Maimaina loved him also. Suffice it to say, that the charms of the daughter of Abbas were not triumphant, although hitherto accounted irresistible: the stranger soon became the husband of her rival, Mai¬ maina,
rnaina, whose transcendant sweetness and purity had won upon his heart. The disappointed Zoa, however, har¬ boured no resentment towards her more fortunate village associate, nor even to¬ wards him who had elected her his bride—but she felt that her own happi¬ ness was gone for ever. Her' charms were now neglected, and her air grew desponding and melancholy. In vain did young Ibrahim 1 prefer his suit of affection—he was unheard, or wholly disregarded.' Ibrahim was the son of valiant progenitors, although—owing to his village having long escaped those ravages so often committed elsewhere by the Tartars—he had yet met with few opportunities of obtaining personal distinction. From the first dawn of manhood he had tenderly attached him¬ self to the lovely, but insensible Zoa, in whose
whose eyes, however, he had failed even yet to obtain the most trivial degree of favour. This circumstance Ibrahim rightly attributed to the superior per¬ sonal attractions of Cassimir, for so was the all-accomplished foreign settler called by his new neighbours: but although some years had elapsed since the stran¬ ger's union with Maimaina, his assidui¬ ties had in consequence wrought no change in the feelings, or conduct of Zoa. Love for Cassimir, and aversion for Ibrahim, her heart had imbibed to¬ gether, and no alteration of circum¬ stances appeared able to change, or abate, the sentiments of her bosom. From that unfortunate period (now seven years since) it had been the chief joy of the disconsolate Zoa— " Ac that still hour when awful midnight rtujns, And none but wretches haunt the twilight plains; What
What time the moon hud hung her lump on And passed in radiance tlirough the cloudless sky," to steal unobserved from the quiet dwel¬ ling of her parents, for the purpose of indulging in her heart-breaking rumina¬ tions. For slumber too often flies the lids of the sorrowful; and truly sor¬ rowful are they whose hearts still bleed over the lacerating remembrance of dis¬ appointed love. Such were the present reflections of the solitary Zoa, when suddenly she, beheld, issuing from an adjacent avenue of richly-laden vines, the figure of a warrior, whose dark-coloured vest, and eagle countenance, she immediately re¬ cognised. This was Ibrahim. Zoa shrunk from the idea of encountering him on this solitary spot, and would have retired precipitately, but the young lover was not to be thus easily eluded. Perceiving
Terceiving that it was her purpose tc return without nctidng him, he resolved to frustrate it, that he might at least en¬ joy the gratification of reproaching her for her cruelty; and accordingly defeated her unkind intention, by flinging him¬ self directly in her path.
CHAP.
CHAP. XV. These nre the forycrica of jealousy: And never, since the middle summer's spring, Met we on hill, iu dale, forest, or mead, By paved fountain, or by rushy brook, Or on the beachy mnrgent of the sen, To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind, But with thy brawls thou ltas r , disturbed our sport. SltAKESrEARE, " Zoa ! dost thou avoid me?" now de¬ manded Ibrahim. " Believe not weakly that I came hither -to encounter thee, Ibrahim," an¬ swered Zoa, with dignity, " and I know not why I should avoid a friend." *' Oh ! but to wander abroad at this lone
lone hour," observed Ibrahim, archly, " is not usual with' maidens who have never hearkened to the accents of love." " Misconstrue not my motives, Ibra¬ him," said his fair companion, with in¬ creasing coldness. " Let not thy vani¬ ty induce thee to suppose that I came hither in the hope of meeting thee." " I have not dared to suppose it," an¬ swered Ibrahim. " It is well—then let me pass," re¬ joined Zoa, haughtily; " hold me not here in converse, Ibrahim, but suffer me to proceed." " Yet is there no other whom Zoa might wish to meet," continued Ibra¬ him, ironically, " in preference to the poor—despised—devoted Ibrahim ?" " No other!" echoed Zoa, with real or feigned surprise—" you dare not to in¬ sult me, Ibrahim. There lurks an un¬ usual
usual meaning in eye—again, per¬ mit me to proceed." " And whither goest thou ?" he de¬ manded, sullenly. « To—to my father's home," replied the damsel; " and, were it otherwise— what right hast thou to inquire, or con¬ trol my course ?" " Thy Steps were not directed home¬ ward when my presence first surprised thee," he rejoined. " I direct my steps whither I please," said Zoa, with all the bitterness of wounded pride, now visible in her stern and glowing countenance. " Away—away—guilt sits on thy crimsoned brow, and confession could hardly have convinced me more!" said Ibrahim, with wildness. " Zoa! Zoa! thou yet lovest this successful stranger —this alien to our race, and to our country—
country—this Cassimir—this despoiler of the happiness of Ibrahim! nor can even his known indifference to thy re¬ gard abate the foolish ardour of thy at¬ tachment to this foreign slave—the husband now of another. When at freedom, he rejected thee—married, he thinks not of thee. Hadst thou not extorted from me a solemn oath, sworn in our holiest sanctuary*, never to in¬ jure Cassimir—myself had chastised liim for the insult offered thee, and widowed thy triumphant rival. But this the stern vow exacted by thee forbade—yet the hour is at hand when Cassimir shall be humbled. It galls me to see the arrogant stranger flourish vnr. itt. I —to
—to behold the cause of my rejoicing in his happier destiny. He came, and was beloved—he fought, and he subdued. But the moment, I re¬ peat, is at hand—even Cassimir shall be humbled." , " Thou art not so regardless of thy fame—thy oath—as to seek his destruc¬ tion by treachery ?" Zoa demanded, trembling. " I said he should be humbled," re¬ peated Ibrahim, significantly. "Riddler! what meanest thou ?" again demanded Zoa. " Doth his name rouse thee ?" asked Ibrahim, in a reproachful tone—" at¬ tend, and thou shalt learn more. The deathblow of Cassimir—though I care not how soon he may receive the fatal stroke—must be dealt by some other weapon than mine; his destruction Ibrahim
Ibrahim.neveri may achieve. My hands are. manacled; by my past, vow—my sword 1 rivetted to its scabbard—>my arrow rendered pointless—my arm nerve¬ less. His existence—which thou art, it seems, still weak enough to value—is secured from the enmity of Ibrahim. I may not harm his life." " At what, then, aimest thou ?" in¬ quired the wondering Zoa. " I aim at nothing beyond the safety of our village in what I am now going to unfold," replied Ibrahim. " Listen, Thou knowest that soon—perhaps on this very night—will arrive prince Abbakuk. His purpose in coming here is—thou also knowest—to reward this Cassimir for the lucky aim which de¬ prived the remorseless Hassaraic of ex¬ istence. But thou knowest not how little Cassimir is entitled to the recom- 12! pence.
pence. He hath anxiously spread it abroad—and the report hath obtained universal credence—tliat the fell Tartar expired beneath the wound himself in¬ flicted during the recent conflict. Our warriors allow—but Cassimir chiefly hath avouched this The impudent im¬ postor ! Hassaraic is yet alive." "Alive! impossible!" exclaimed his incredulous auditor. " Hassaraic is yet alive !" repeated Ibrahim, triumphantly. " By what means Cassimir hath juggled the senses of oor warriors, passeth the art of the simple Ibrahim to know—but that our enemy still exists I am certain. This morning, while brooding in the solitude of these deep glens over my secret misery, the sound of an approaching gallop aroused me from my reverie. A horseman passed me at full speed—it was
was Hassaraic! his sable courser—his scowling front the same—deem not thou that Ibrahim was deceived. I had marked well the Tartar chief before, during his late hostile approach towards our village, ere yet he received the alleged fatal wound; and I instantly knew again his lowering aspect. He saw me not—or heeded not, if he saw— still hurrying with fleet pace to the blue distant mountains; but ere I could scarce recover from my amazement, I beheld on foot the furious Cassimir, foaming with haste, and pursuing him to—I know not what, nor whither—for my utmost speed, I. found, was no match for theirs. The rest is mystery-— I saw, no more: but is it nothing to know that Hassaraic still lives, and that Cassimir is aware ofhis existence?" " Why, what inference drawest thou 13 from
from this—'were it even possible ?" ask¬ ed Zoa, in some confusion. " That the stranger is in league with our enemies," replied Ibrahim, empha¬ tically ; " or, at the least, that he is capable of acting toward his friends with duplicity." " It is false !" cried Zoa, with consi¬ derable energy—" Cassimir is incapable of duplicity; and to suppose him in league with robbers is absurd." " But how if, to-morrow/' rejoined Ibrahim, " he accepts the recompence considered due to his vaunted achieve¬ ment, without confessing that he knows the Tartar lives ?—is this man incapable of duplicity ? How if he permits him¬ self to be dressed in the honours, and installed in the-new dignities, acquired only by Hassaraic's supposed destmc¬ tion, of whose present existence (how¬ ever
ever miraculous) I know him to be aware ? How then ?" Zoa appeared still more deeply con¬ fused ; at length, collecting her scatter¬ ed thoughts, she c naively responded— " Then a mightier arm than thine, or Cassimir's, protect us all! for if Hassa¬ raic, our nation's scourge, indeed be liv¬ ing still, some stronger protection than ye can afford will soon, I fear, be need¬ ful. Meantime, remember, Ibrahim— thy oath ! injure not Cassimir, howe'er he may deal with thee—not even to¬ morrow, though his conduct should dis¬ please thee. It is Zoa who enjoins thee thus—thou hast often professed thy wil¬ lingness to do much for her: refrain from this—it is all she requires of thee." " My adorable Zoa!" said Ibrahim, somewhat softened by her returning mildness—" I hear thee, and attend; 14 but
but every word thou speakest adds a fresh pang to my bosom. From what dost thou bid me refrain ? Alas ! from that which alone can give me hope—the destruction of him whose image holds mine from thy breast. And how dear must that cherished minion still be to thee, whose slightest peril thus awakes thy sympathy ! I am mad when I think of this—but I have sworn. Yet oaths are not stronger than reason—remem¬ ber that should the latter be destroyed, the former must be forgotten—and mine hath been shaken by thy cruelty. But I will not give pain, where I yet hope to bestow happiness; not for his sake, but for thine, Cassimir still lives and rejoices." " The rewarder of benevolence will assuredly recompense thee," said Zoa, bowing, with grateful emotion, her beautiful forehead. Ibrahim
Ibrahim ventured to raise her, and exclaimed—" Fairest of all nature's pro¬ ductions—loveliest where each is beau¬ tiful—sweetest ornament of our adored Circassia! who art to me as the sun is to the flower that closeth its weeping leaves at his departure—as the moon to the subject ocean ! Ah ! permit me to hope an earlier recompence !" Zoa started at this fervent appeal, and seemed fearful that her condescen¬ sion had gone too far: she withdrew her delicate form gently from his sup¬ port, and then paused, apparently fram¬ ing a response, while Ibrahim watched her countenance with a look of intense anxiety.
CHAP.
CHAP. XVI. Hear what Highland Nora said :— " Tha Carlie's son I would not wed Should all the race of nature die, And none be left but be and I; For alt the gold, for ull the gear, And all the lands, both, far and near, That ever valour lost o< won— I would not wed the Earlie's son." Scott. " What, Ibrahim, shall I say to thee?" Zoa at length articulated—" Alas! I have scarcely now sufficient strength to answer thee any thing, but compassion¬ ate my weakness, and let not what I am about to utter offend thee. Thou, Ibrahim, art thyself no stranger to the fatal
fatal power of love: ii hundred times thou hast sworn as much in mine ear, and, brave youth, I do believe thee. Thou knowest its terrible potency- hast suffered its million anxieties—and strained it, perhaps, so closely to thy heart, that, thou now well deemest, no human fortitude can expel it thence. Ibrahim—I likewise have admitted this ungrateful guest. As well as thy¬ self, I have endured its pangs—its falla¬ cious hopes—its humiliating disappoint¬ ments—its subsequent desperation and despair. All these I have sustained— and can sustain—because, though bitter, they are endurable: but to thrust the twined inmate of my bosom forth, after years- of fatal, but constant cherishing, is a task too herculean for Zoa to per¬ form. Thou hast pleaded thy own in¬ ability to effect it; yet requirest of me ! 6 — a weaker
—a weaker woman—to that thy manlier spirit hath laboured to achieve in vain. To wring from my bleeding breast the long-grafted image of its ear- lies'*, love—to tear from its blighted shvine my hourly-worshipped idol, and coldly elect another to fill its devastated throne. No! Ibrahim—thou art nei¬ ther wise, nor courteous, again to re¬ quest of me this sacrifice. Many years have elapsed, it is true, since thou wert answered; but, professing thyself a lo¬ ver, thou shouldst have known that time, in the hearts of trne lovers, makes no change. I loved (as thou knewest) the stranger, Cassimir; and—why should I shame to acknowledge it?—love him still, though lost to me for ever: but mine is a heavenly, not an unholy flame; besides, love is an involuntary feeling, and cannot at will be extirpated. We are
are used justly to scorn the fickle in their affections, shall we also contemn those whose attachment is immutable? —if love that is deeply rooted be a crime, what becomes of the reproach of incon¬ stancy ? The conviction of my own in¬ ability to subject these feelings to con¬ trol, hath taught me, Ibrahim—as it should teach thee—to regard with in¬ dulgence the seeming perverseness of others. Hence, I blame neither Cassi¬ mir for shunning to wed where he could not love, nor thee, for still vainly— weakly loving where thou canst never wed. I pity thee, Ibrahim! but can no more—destiny hath divided us. Enough hath been said—Zoa commiserates thy misfortune—be thou equally compas¬ sionate, and spare her the pain of a pro¬ longed intercourse at this forbidden hour. I will return home." " Zoa!
" Zoa! behold my emotion," said Ibrahim, distractedly—" view my scald¬ ing tears—gaze on my writhing linea¬ ments! Leave me not thus utterly hopeless, and forlorn—thou wilt not? Zoa!" " I have said, I compassionate thee, Ibrahim," Zoa repeated. " Am I so loathed as to excite but thy pity?" said Ibrahim, reproachfully. " Am I insulted with cold, unavailing compassion, even from the lips that have consigned me to despair ?" * l Pity, and counsel, are all Zoa hath to bestow," said the damsel, turning again towards Ibrahim. " The former, Ibrahim, is sincerely thine—hearken, if thou wilt, to the latter. Suppress these violent ebullitions of feeling, and betake thyself zealously to the service of thy country. There, valorous and emula-> tive
tive as thou art, amid the constant suc¬ cession of novelty, with glory for thy recompence, thou wilt soon partially recover thy serenitude. Then,at length, renowned in arms, as were thy noble ancestors, look around thee with pride superior to the state of the lowly maiden who rejected thee. Select for thyself a bride, gentle and loving, from among the exalted fair ones of thy nation— yea, from among the proudest of its matchless beauties, to whom thy alli¬ ance then will be accounted an honour. Protect her—cherish her—exult in her fair dowry; and mayest thou prove happier with her than thou ever eouldst have been with thy earlier elected fa¬ vourite—the lost, broken-hearted Zoa!" " Never—never!" exclaimed Ibra¬ him, but Zoa continued to retire pre¬ cipitately. " Hold ! Zoa," he resumed, " yet pause—for if thou dost not ------" " I must
" I must not—dare not now," she added, and, terrified by the impending threat that seemed about to issue from his lips, fled faster toward the village. " Then, spirits of my slumbering fa¬ thers ! hear me—it shall be so!" cried Ibrahim, grasping furiously his sheath¬ ed scimitar, and stamping on the ground with rage. The retreating Zoa heard not the remainder of his desperate de¬ termination. The palely shining moon —the smooth spread lake—the tranquil plains, and the overhanging skies, alone listened to the final resolution of Ib¬ rahim. For some time after her departure, Ibrahim lingered, like a pale gliding ghost, on the spot which had so re¬ cently been rendered a paradise to him by her presence. At first his vengeful ravings were alone heard ; but present-
ly, as his fierce mood subsided, he fell upon the earth, and embraced the spot where she had stood. Anon he arose, and ascending a small adjacent acclivity, which commanded a view of the dis¬ tant village, endeavoured to obtain at least another glimpse of her floating garment, ere she entered her habitation. A moving speck of white (the colour usually worn by the blooming daugh¬ ters of Circassia) was just visible, as if floating airily along the sober-coloured mead, and soon entirely vanished. Ib¬ rahim knew this to be the receding form of his still beloved Zoa: it was also, perhaps, the last time his straining eyes might ever rest upon it. He turn¬ ed aside, and wept. From this mood he was aroused by the faint sound of distant music, which appeared wafted from the farthest point of the open, and extensive
extensive prospect, that lay spread a map before him; and he instantly di¬ rected thitherward his penetrating glance, to ascertain whence it proceeded. It was not long ere the jealous brood¬ ing Ibrahim discovered whence arose this unwonted melody. His keen eye presently distinguished a lengthened train of horsemen, attended by others on foot, apparently proceeding, in a sort of irregular procession, towards the vil¬ lage. A few of the nocturnal travel" lers, who appeared handsomely moun¬ ted, were capering gaily in the van of the cavalcade; while many were endea¬ vouring to cheer its progress by the low mimicry of music which had first sa¬ luted his ear. These monotonous sounds, rendered pleasing only by the addition of distance, were chiefly the production of a long flute containing very
very few stops, and the well-beaten tambourine, much used among the Cir¬ cassians ; the tones of which grew louder, while the number of musicians also seemed augmented, as the cavalcade approached the place of its destination.
CHAP.
CHAP. XVII.
Slow breaks afar soft music's sound ; On moves the host—the chargers bound! Anon their aimour faintly crash'd— Abroad their beaming falchions fl.ish'd— While jostling, as in close urray They wound along the crnuded way, Rcinundi the «ur-stced's hon clang, As oft his jingling harness rang. Emir of the East. Ibrahim knew this unwonted parade could indicate nothing less than the ex¬ pected arrival of prince Abbakuk at the village. He even sometimes fancied, as the train drew nearer, that he could dis¬ tinguish the majestic figure of the prince
prince himself, riding slowly in the van of his array. With a displeased, though earnest gaze, however, he re¬ garded the unwelcome pageant, and cursed, in his heart, the moment of its arrival—for came it not thither to con¬ fer distinction on his enemy, Cassimir? —on that enemy already too prospe¬ rous, and too highly praised, for his en¬ vious eyes to witness, or his jealous spirit to endure? Yet was Ibrahim not without considerable hope of lowering these proud distinctions on the coming morrow, in spite of their present appa¬ rent increase; and this thought enabled him to endure, with outward compo¬ sure, at least, a sight which otherwise would have driven him to despair. By this time, the whole procession, length¬ ened by a considerable number of led horses intended for the use of Abbakuk, or
or as presents to his most deserving war¬ riors, had * entered the distant village, whose awakened inhabitants hailed its arrival with clamorous expressions of joy. The reflections of Ibrahim now again assumed their wonted melancholy cast, and he sank once more into the gloomy train of thought from which the passing event had aroused him He turned away his glance, and, in the bit¬ terness of his soul, exclaimed—" Yes, proud beauty! to obtain renown in arms shall now indeed, as thou hast advised, be the pursuit of Ibrahim—the injured Ibrahim! until a deed, greater than aught performed by his ancestors, avenge his injuries, and restore his peace. Yes! his scimitar shall be bathed in human gore, and his name be crowned with immortal eulogies. Thus far, relentless fair one! thou shalt be obeyed—but the blood
blood which soon shall dye his reeking scimitar must issue only from Circassian veins, and from the discomfiture of Cir¬ cassians shall his glory be reaped. I will seek the Tartar camp; and by disclosing. the amount of our hidden treasure—our herds, too, and possessions, induce them, to attempt another more successful in¬ cursion on our territory. I will offer them boldly my assistance in the con¬ flict, and disclose where the,whole wealth of our village is secreted.. Then will. the dreaded Hassaraic—for I know him. to be still in existence—clasp me to his breast, and award me a portion of the spoil as recompence: that portion my vainly wooed, unwilling bride. Yes! the warrior's true blade must win,, where entreaties have proved unavailing. So, shall Ibrahim triumph—so shall Cassir mir be confounded—and so shall Zoa be mine •'
mine! Yet will openly avow before prince Abbakuk—even in pre¬ sence of the assembled chiefs to-morrow —my conviction that Hassaraic is yet unslain. Ay, at the very moment which awards to the conqueror his unmerited recompence, will Ibrahim burst on the wondering assemblage, with tidings un¬ dreamed of, and no less unwelcome. Should Abbakuk incline to believe the astounding tale, then tremble, Cassimir __accursed Cassimir! thou shalt be humbled." * * * * * «■ * On the arrival of the terrified Zoa at her tranquil dwelling in the village, she began to ponder deeply on the scarcely- credible tale she had been listening to from the lips of Ibrahim; and to revolve in
in her own mind the propriety of ac¬ quainting Abbas, or her mother, Zu- lema, with the probability that existed of their yet having to sustain another at¬ tack led on by the cruel, and resistless Hassaraic. But when she reflected on the excited feelings of Ibrahim, and the combined motives which might have influenced his jealous mind, perhaps, even to the framing of a falsehood, she resolved to be silent. Accordingly, Zoa was seeking her restless couch, without mentioning her apprehensions to her slumbering parents, when the noise oc¬ casioned by the entrance of the cavalcade alarmed her. At first she started, and conceived the tumult could only have originated in a second assault of the Tartars; but the sounds of joy that arose on every side, mingled with cries of " Abbakuk!" soon convinced her to the vol. in. k contrary.
contrary. She knew that the prince was come, and long listened to the fer¬ vent exclamations of transport with which his affectionate vassals greeted his arrival; then turned to court repose, and dream of the approaching morrow, which was to behold the aggrandize¬ ment of Cassimir, and the probable effects of Ibrahim's jealousy. » * * * * The morning wliich succeeded the arrival of prince Abbakuk at the village was delightful. The mist exhaled early from the expansive meadows, beneath the glowing influence of an unclouded sun, which arose with even a more than wonted degree of splendour— ♦' And tinctured with a golden dye The azure of nn eastern sky." The
The birds were singing blithely in the heavens, or displaying their beautiful plumage amid the surrounding groves, and all nature seemed to partake of an unusual exhiliration. Now reposing at his ease in front of Cassimir's dwelling, appeared the revered Abbakuk, sur¬ rounded by his principal officers, and the chiefs of the village, who all seemed eager to press nearer to their prince. A few lofty trees shaded his resting- place from the intrusion of the solar beam, but intercepted not the extensive prospect that lay spread around him. Meanwhile, the encircling crowd of si¬ lent spectators continued to increase in numbers on every side: for the hour was fast approaching at which, it had been proclaimed, the admiring Abba¬ kuk would publicly applaud, and (as report added) compensate Cassimir for K 2 his
his recent dexterity in defence of the village. Already was expectation visi¬ ble in the anxious countenances of the attentive throng, each seeming eager for the commencement of the interesting spectacle: but Cassimir, the chief actor, (since the morning's repast, of which he had partaken with Abbakuk) had not yet made his appearance on the scene.
CHAP.
CHAP. XVIII. Thou ort so far before, That swiftest wing of recompence is slow To overtake thee. Would thon hadst less deserved, That the proportion, both of thanks and payment, Might have been mine. • « • * The service and the loyalty I owe, In doing it, pays itself. Shakespeare. After a somewhat lengthened interval of suspense, Cassimir was observed slow¬ ly advancing from the cottage, leading his young son Kalib by the hand, and followed by Maimaina, who carried in her arms the infant Atala. In appear- k 3 ance
ance Cassimir was even less anxious than the meanest of the motley group around him, respecting the issue of the coming interview. Being perfectly aware, how¬ ever, of the object which had attracted thither so many gazing eyes, he con¬ tinued to advance with dignity, nor paused until he found himself standing full in the presence of prince Abbakuk, Here, in the centre of his little family, he calmly remained, awaiting with con¬ tented indifference the expected address of the prince. Abbakuk surveyed him steadily^ with a penetrating look; and then glancing his eye carelessly over the bystanders, as if to command attention, thus commenced, addressing Cassimir. " Brave warrior! defender and preser¬ ver of the village of Ichohol! successful champion of our beloved Circassia! Worthy vassal—than whom many of our
our most favoured usdens* are less me¬ ritorious, as demonstrated in their hav¬ ing been hitherto unable to achieve what thy superior skill hath readily ac¬ complished—attend to the gracious communication of thy prince. In grati¬ tude for the present security of this for¬ tunate village, as well as with regard to the general weal of our lately harassed countrymen, and still more particularly in consideration of the happily-wrought destruction of our too-fatally renowned enemy, Hassaraic, it behoves me to con¬ fer upon thee some signal mark of es¬ teem or dignity. I therefore, Cassimir, proffer to thy acceptance the full piivi- leges and enviable rank of an usden, whose post shall be near the person of his prince, with the means of deriving K 4 such
such a revenue as will enable thee support thy state; or, should thy incli¬ nations lead thee to prefer a more pri¬ vate station, I here proffer thee such a sum of money as may meet thy wishes, and amply provide thee with all the ne¬ cessaries of a retired existence. These are no despicable offers, but such as may be worthy of his acceptance, who has delivered our country from its di¬ rest scourge. Pronounce, then, Cassi¬ mir, even in the presence of this fair as¬ semblage, that the many who witness thy exaltation, may thence be inspired to imitate thy conduct—the decision is left to thy choice." . Cassimir, whose firmness forsook him for a moment on hearing the now doubly-hated name of Hassaraic, here resumed his composure, and faintly re¬ plied—" The option is useless—I do re¬ ject them both." " How!"
" How!" exclaimed Abbakuk, asto¬ nished—" did I hear aright?" " Mighty prince!" said Cassimir, with humility—" noble and generous Abba¬ kuk! listen to the sentiments of a man, who having ranged the wide earth, from pole to pole, and gathered expe¬ rience, during his wanderings, from every clime, is prepared to affirm that he has found riches a burthen, honours valueless, and titles vain. Such, thou revered and gracious patriarch! is the settled opinion of him who now dares pour his unworthy accents into the ear of the most munificent of Circassia's princes. Such, Abbakuk, is the rooted conviction, gleaned from the countless misadventures of many disastrous years replete with torturing remembrances, which hath induced me thus to reject thy proffers—yet not with scorn and in- k 5 gratitude,
gratitude,but with and thanks. Nor even without some hours of hesi¬ tation have I decided on the absolute refusal of such advancement as might, perchance, be offered me : but hear my reasons; and, if thou canst not com¬ mend my resolution, at least, permit me to retain it without offence. Behold them in all that is dear to me in the world—in this heart-dissolving group— my smiling family! see how they throng- around me—I love them, and am happy. I enjoy most perfectly my Maimaina's love—will the rank of an usden in¬ crease her affection for me? I revel, oh! most tenderly in the caresses of my children—will the burthen of added cares (for care is inseparable from office, however exalted) enhance ray pleasure in thera? Can these things be even expected ?—are they possible ? No ! advancement
advancement cannot possibly swell, and might considerably diminish, the full measure of my felicity. I, therefore, reject all promotion which cannot in¬ crease, but may lessen, my present hap¬ piness." Abbakuk mused for some minutes in silence. " But the meed of mere rustic independence ?" said he. " I have already urged, my happiness is complete," rejoined Cassimir; "and I would admit no change that conse¬ quently cannot sweeten, but may em¬ bitter the stream. The independence you proffer me—what means it ? But that I should depend on your bounty, instead of my own resources for subsis¬ tence; and thereby should I lose the healthful advantage accruing to me daily from the exercise of mine own faculties in the procuration of the ne- k 6 cessaries
cessaries of life. My dependence therto hath been solely on my bow for the daily requisites of existence; such dependence naturally produced a cor¬ rectness of aim with the weapon almost constantly in my hand, and by that true aim was smitten the fell Tartar you would reward me for having slain. Shall the very meed awarded for its skilful use cause me to depend no lon¬ ger on the instrument by which the re¬ compence was won ? No ! my ardour in the noble exercise is increased—it shall still be my dependence. Let not my free speech chafe thee, noble Abba¬ kuk, nor the brave usdens in whose faces I read astonishment at my deter¬ mination. Lay it on me as a duty, and I shall cheerfully accept the exalta¬ tion, or even the more sordid recom¬ pence, you propose to confer on the most
most undeserving of your vassals ; but your true nobleness of intention hath left it to my choice. Therefore, I am bold to refuse aught that savours of innovation on my contented lot. I fought not to add to my felicity, but to preserve untainted that whicli I pos¬ sess ; if I can but achieve -----" and his lips faltered, as he uttered the conclu¬ sion—" if I am able to accomplish this, I shall still be, as I have lately ac¬ counted myself, most fortunate—most happy!" Abbakuk again looked round on the faces of his nobles, and saw surprise, correspondent to his own, depicted in every countenance. His glance then again strayed over the noble figure of Cassimir, and, after pausing some few moments, he responded. — " Gallant, and sage stranger! whatever may have been
been the bitterness of thy wanderings, thou at least hast gathered from them the true essence of wisdom—how to appreciate the blessing of contentment. It is, indeed, a jewel beyond all price : wealth cannot purchase, nor rank be¬ stow, the inestimable prize. However numerous may have been thy perils— however severe the misfortunes which may have assailed thee in those climes whence thou comest, to us but little known, learn to hold cheap thy suffer¬ ings in the attainment of that impor¬ tant requisite to thy future felicity. We no longer expect thee to accept the proffered dignity, or the pecuniary com¬ pensation— be still dependant on thy bow for sustenance, and still live happy. Yet must our good Circassians learn on this day that valour—at least within the broad domains of Abbakuk—passes not
not unrequited. Yet must each wit¬ ness—ay, even the meanest of our war¬ riors around—in this expected hour of gratulation, that his prince knows how to distinguish merit, and reward it.— Haroun!" he exclaimed, to one of the attendants, who immediately approach¬ ed him. Now, while the expectant looks of the whole surrounding assemblage indi¬ cated the degree of interest each took in the event, Abbakuk received from the attendant, Haroun, a splendid suit of mail, of the most costly Persian ma¬ nufacture, and superior beauty; and, holding it forth to Cassimir, thus ad¬ dressed hirru—" Cassimir, the earliest- latest conqueror of Hassaraic, and chief protector of this village, prince Abba¬ kuk requireth to attire himself in this, on all similar occasions. Thou! who hast
hast bruised even to death the mighty serpent, continue to live the terror of his surviving myrmidons: thy present conduct is above my praise. Forget not to wear it, Cassi¬ mir." " I shall wear with pride the recom¬ pence of valour," said Cassimir, bend¬ ing his knee to receive the sumptuous gift, always considered the most en¬ viable distinction a Circassian prince can confer on his inferiors. Abbakuk turned his eyes again towards Haroun, and the. attendant again drew near. He now produced a lance, a scimitar richly mounted, and some fire-arms, which Abbakuk receiving, presented also to Cassimir, saying—" It is not that I wish thee to forswear thy favour¬ ite weapon. But ours are perilous times, as thou hast proved: in such, it may
may not misbecome thee to practise these likewise." Just at this moment, a youth burst through the throng, and with frantic gestures, as if struggling with some in¬ ward emotion which he hardly could suppress, forced his way even to the spot where prince Abbakuk was seated, dispensing with rude dignity the ho¬ nours of the day. This was no other than Ibrahim. The love-lorn jealous youth had surveyed with anguish, frora a distant station in the crowd, the whole of the preceding occurrences, until he found it impossible to contain his agony any longer. He heard the praises so elaborately bestowed upon his hated ri¬ val—he saw the bright eyes of Zoa (who with Abbas, her father, and many young maidens of the village, was also present) glisten anew at the almost un¬ precedented
precedented eulogy with which the ho¬ nours proffered to his acceptance were accompanied. He could endure no more; but rushing forward, and fling¬ ing himself suddenly at the feet of Abbakuk, regardless of the passing ce¬ remony, exclaimed—" Oh, hear me! hear me!"
CHAP.
CHAP. XIX. 2 see a strange confession in thine eye : Thou shak'st thy head, and hold'st it fear, or sin, To speak a truth. If he be slain, say so. The tongue ofFeudi not that reports his death And ho doth sin that does belie the dead: Not ho which says the dead is not alive, SriAKESPEAnrj. Abbakuk, at first, looked not a little astonished at this sudden interruption; but presently resuming his majestic composure, with a somewhat indignant wafture of his hand, he gave a tacit signal for the removal of the offender. Already the attendants were about to obey
obey his implied wish somewhat rough¬ ly, when Ibrahim, perceiving their in¬ tention, eagerly continued—" Prince! pardon the rash intrusion of an undis¬ tinguished peasant, who has dared thus abruptly to seek thy presence; and for¬ give hia boldness for the motives which have prompted it," To this second appeal the offended Abbakuk still made no reply, but con¬ tinued to gaze on the speaker with a displeased look. Then, turning at length from his scrutiny, he demanded of the wondering Cassimir—" Know you this man ?" " I know him—he was once mine enemy," said Cassimir, somewhat fal- teringly, " my rival—but tliose days are fled—I know not his present pur¬ pose." " Whence
"Whence comes he?" inquired Ab¬ bakuk, still addressing Cassimir. " He has never left our settlement to my knowledge," answered Cassimir, coldly: but presently, after an evident struggle with his feelings, the compas¬ sionating victor subjoined—" Prince! he was not my friend, but yet I will do him justice. It is Ibrahim who ad¬ dresses you, the only surviving scion of a valiant race who -----" " Who have done Circassia service!" exclaimed Ibrahim, interrupting him, " but whose sole living offspring scorns to owe his present solicited indulgence to their deeds, as much as he would scorn to accept it if granted at thy in¬ tercession." " Ibrahim!" said Cassimir, reproach¬ fully. " Our feud is past—you know not what you utter." " Thou
" Thou knowest not what I am about to utter," retorted Ibrahim, contemp¬ tuously: "but its venom when utter¬ ed—like a mingled portion of gall, over¬ powering quite the honied draught of pleasure—shall penetrate even to thy inmost soul." " What mean you ?" demanded Cas¬ simir, still in a conciliatory tone. " I do protest, I never provoked thy en¬ mity, and at present had even forgotten its existence. What mean you ?" " Only that some of your new sprout¬ ing honours," said Ibrahim, derisively— " your premature adornments, may chance ere long to be plucked away from your brow." " Who shall displace them?" de¬ manded Cassimir, haughtily. " It may be that Hassaraic shall wrest
wrest them thence," retorted Ibrahim, with equal fierceness. " Thou ravest!" said Cassimir, smiling as he spoke, yet seeming affected with a sudden faintness. " Either I rave, or thou deceivest us," said the malignant Ibrahim. Then turning once more to the amazed Ab¬ bakuk, and again imploring an audi¬ ence, he narrated circumstantially the fact ofhis having encountered Hassaraic, on the preceding day, prowling around the village— " Escaped from shot, unharm'd by steel, Or scarcely grazed its force l o feel." This account, so highly improbable, was listened to by Abbakuk, and most of its hearers, with an incredulous smile; but from
from Cassimir, who had too much cause to dread its accuracy, it experienced a far different reception. He, however, strove earnestly to subdue, or, at least, to conceal his emotion, but in this he proved wholly unsuccessful. His visage fell—his composed demeanour abandon¬ ed him, and he stood the writhing por¬ traiture of fear and horror. This sud¬ den change in the appearance and de¬ portment of Cassimir, more than the tale itself, seemed to affect, and attract the attention of prince Abbakuk, who.evidently grew more thoughtful while gazing upon the altered aspect of the now-drooping conqueror. Of this Cassimir was aware, yet could not dis¬ semble, or veil his excessive emotion; he even trembled in his agony; while Maimaina, and her children, wept aloud at
at his distress. What a change had been produced, by a few short minutes, in him who was the hero of the scene! But this violent mood was only tran¬ sient; it passed quickly, and Cassimir stood again prepared to contest, vvith a still lowering, but determined front, the possibility of the alleged occurrence. Just at this important juncture, Abba¬ kuk, who during the commotion had been consulting with some of his chiefs on the probable chance that thus, it appeared, remained of their still having to rue the existence of Hassaraic, loudly commanded Cassimir to approach, and deliver his opinion. On receiving this imperative man¬ date, Cassimir, who had retreated a few paces, again slowly advanced toward where Abbakuk sat, but his lips seemed vol. III. L to
to cling together, and still as unable to utter a word. Ibrahim, too, stood there, the proud fire of exultation flashing from his triumphant eyes. Pre¬ sently Abbakuk again addressed the still silent Cassimir, mildly demanding— " What sayest thou, Cassimir, to this un¬ expected communication ? First know that at present we still believe—in spite of the unlooked-for intelligence which hath just reached our ears—that Has¬ saraic is, indeed, no longer in exist¬ ence. Yet might he not possibly'have recovered from the wound, having been borne lience by his retreating comrades? Is not such a conjecture, at the least, within the pale of reason?—might it not be accounted barely possible?" Cassimir now seized his bow, and drawing, at the same instant, an arrow from
from his girdle, cast his eyes full of eager confidence over the clear, far stretch- ing prospect, that lay spread on every side. His favourite—his only steed, rendered a conspicuous object in the view by that perfect milkiness of colour for which Cassimir had so often admired him, was quietly grazing in a meadow at some distance. PoorBolcscs! whose sleek sides even Maimaina herself had so frequently patted with her hand— thy span of life had reached its close [ With a determined effort to suppress his emotion,Cassimir launched the deadly shaft, and a moment after it entered the smooth side of his own gallant courser. The noble animal reared— snorted, and plunged, in vain; then, af¬ ter galloping furiously for an inconsider¬ able distance, fell slowly to the plain, l 2 and
and expired, writhing in the most ter¬ rible agony. As soon as the last quivering of his limbs had ceased, during which every eye was eagerly bent upon the dying horse, Cassimir essayed to speak.—" My brave Beleses!" he exclaimed, in a voice of exultation mingled with pity—" thou recoverest not from the wound ! Thou hast failed to avert the inevitable destiny conveyed into thy veins by the deadly poisoned shaft of Cassimir! My fleet— my generous steed! farewell!" Then, turning proudly to the assembled group, he thus continued—" Ye have beheld, sage chiefs, and thou, most worthy Ab¬ bakuk, that the arrow of Cassimir doth not speed in vain. My gallant courser lies stiffening on the plain yonder, but the sacrifice was necessary for your con¬ viction.
vietion. If you yet need further proof of its efficacy to achieve the destruction of an enemy, allow me in honourable combat, and in your sacred presence, to direot this second weapon even to the lieart of him who hath thus openly doubted of its venom." i " Grant his request, most noble Ab¬ bakuk !" now exclaimed Ibrahim, again throwing himself on his knees, with eagerness. " It is not that I dispute the fatal efficacy of thy poisoned arrows, but the venom which polluteth thy bo-- som is even deadlier than these." " Sayest- thou so!" said Cassimir, once more grasping his bow with vigour: " then, Beleses! not thy blood only shall be spilt, as the consequence of Ibrahim's most injurious' words." "As thou hast requested let it be," l 3 returned
returned the eager Ibrahim, preparing also for the expected contest. At this moment, ere the wondering prince Abbakuk had time to utter aught either in approval or condemna¬ tion of their conduct, a female broke through the crowd, and addressing Ibra¬ him, with an imploring gesture, exclaim¬ ed—" Remember thy oath!" ** Of what oath speakest thou, dam¬ sel ?" inquired Abbakuk, with even added surprise sparkling in his expres¬ sive countenance, " Pardon me, great prince!" said Zoa (for Zoa indeed it was) shrink¬ ing, in spite of her efforts, beneath his steady gaze; then presently, endea¬ vouring to retire, in palpable confusion, her lips murmured—" What have I done!" " Thou
" Thou lovest this youth?" asked the prince, pointing to Ibrahim. " No!" exclaimed Zoa, exalting her voice to a bold, decisive tone. " He loves thee, then ?" again de¬ manded the discerning Abbakuk. " Forgive me, prince!" reiterated the unwilling Zoa—" I cannot explain i t " It must be explained, fair damsel,'' said Abbakuk, mildly, "notwithstand¬ ing this seeming reluctance. The strange nature of the inquiry in which we are at present engaged demands that a matter so important as the alleged oath of one of the parties concerned should not escape investigation. Per¬ haps the maiden will deign to refer us to the person present best qualified to afford us the required elucidation ? She turns
turns aside, and tears of no common emotion stain her cheek—but tears yield us no sufficient answer. Speak, Cassi¬ mir! thou who hast nothing to fear from any disclosure affecting only thine enemies—canst thou unravel this seem¬ ing mystery ?" Cassimir, being thus pointedly re¬ quired to speak, professed briefly his utter ignorance of the nature of the oath alluded to, or even (until this mo¬ ment) of its existence; when Ibrahim, bursting suddenly from all control, broke forth into a vehement description of his long hopeless passion—his weary¬ ing hours of solitary sufferance, and his scorned proposals,, imputing as usual to Cassimir the sole merit of their having been rejected. On hearing this con¬ fession,, Abbakuk mused silently for some
some minutes, Uke one revolving de¬ liberately what he had heard, and de¬ ducing thence the most consolatory, or probable conclusion.
END OF VOL. III.
Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall Street, London.
