Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Alibeg the tempter: a tale wild and wonderful
ALIBEG THE TEMPTER.
CHAP. I. Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace, Profanes of this neighbour stained steel— Ou pain of torture, from those bloody hands Throw your mistcmper'd weapons to the ground, And hear the sentence of your moved prince. SlIAKESI-EAItE. HAVING apparently weighed the matter well in his mind, Abbakuk first communicated his conviction by an expressive glance to the surround¬ ing chiefs, and then said, addressing vol. iv. . b Ibrahim—
Ibrahim—" We have listened patient¬ ly to the story of thy supposed griev¬ ances, and no longer wonder at thy conduct, nor feel at any loss to com¬ prehend its motives. But mark, fond youth! although, in compassion for thy excited feelings, we may omit the merited punishment, we feel also that such conduct, and such motives, can¬ not be too strongly condemned. Thou fanciest thou hast been injured in thy suit by Cassimir, and thou hast dared a falsehood to requite the imagined evil done to thee, by lowering him in our estimation whom it hath this day been our pleasure to exalt and re¬ compense." " Pardon me, prince Abbakuk," said Ibrahim in remonstrance, " in spite of my galling wrongs hath a solemn promise been extorted from me — my
my vow is past never to injure Cassi¬ mir." " And thus you violate the holy bond!" said Abbakuk, sternly. " We can attach no credit to the represen¬ tations of one who, by his own confes¬ sion, hath broken his oath." " Not so," resumed Ibrahim, with forced calmness: " my only motives are the preservation of our village from sudden surprise." " These are hollow evasions," re¬ joined the clear-sighted Abbakuk, " and, even by thy own shewing, unwor¬ thy of our regard. Plainly, youth ! although we forbear to punish, we do discredit thee—remove him from our sight." " I again say—of Cassimir I think not!" exclaimed Ibrahim, stung to agony by this cutting intimation. B 2 " What
" What I have witnessed, that only have I spoken — what I have spo¬ ken, as I am a warrior, is true !" " Remove him hence," said Abba¬ kuk, with dignity. " For that he is a warrior—and for that only—doth the anger of Abbakuk slumber, and his voice forbear to avenge this insult offer¬ ed to our assembled council. Obey— remove him hence, but harm him not further. I will hearken no more to his remonstrances — from our presence — go!" Then turning to Cassimir, while Ibrahim was fiercely dragged from the circle into which he had intrud¬ ed, the ruffled prince continued— " Cassimir! feel assured, brave war¬ rior, thou art fully restored to thy place in our esteem, from which, in¬ deed, thou hast never for an instant been' expelled. Yet is it meet thou shouldst
shouldst distinctly learn that the tale which hath just been told weighs not aught in the estimation of thy fellow- warriors, or thy admiring prince. With respect to the benefits thou hast re¬ jected—let them reward some future warrior who may signalize himself in the cause of our still-bleeding Circas¬ sia; since, though Hassaraic may be accounted fallen, yet many of his tribe remain to glut the swords of brave Circassians. For such I reserve the wealth, and dignities, it hath plea¬ sed thee to refuse, whether wisely or weakly I pause not at present to de¬ termine. But for the life of rustic simplicity thou hast preferred to these —may it continue ever to proffer the sweets, and afford thee the gratifica¬ tion, it appears hitherto to have yield¬ ed to thy grasp. Live still in the bo- B 3 som
som of thy happy family, content to enjoy the respect of thine associates, and the favour of thy prince. Mean¬ time, for thy brave slaughtered steed, Cassimir, grieve not—two of the best in rny train shall be thine in his stead —this boon, at least, thou wilt not deem an invasion on thy truly-enviable, because contented state. Enough — now let the assembly separate; some beneficent power hath thwarted our intent, and rendered our purposed gifts unavailing; he who hath nothing left to 'desire, must indeed be hap- py-' J Cassimir bowed his head reverently at the concluding words, but his heart could not respond in the affirmative. A few brief hours ago he could have assented to the observation; but recent events, combined with the necessity that
that existed of still further dissimula¬ tion, had produced a weight in his bo¬ som which he could not remove. In a few minutes the assembled throng began slowly to disperse, with many silent manifestations of their surprise and joy at the issue of the scene they had just witnessed; and presently a few straggling chiefs, and attendants, alone remained with Abbakuk in front of Cassimir's dwelling. It now be¬ came the especial care of Cassimir to prevent all further evidence of Hassa- raic's existence from reaching the ears of the prince, during the remainder of his sojourn in the village. For had not the youthful Kalib also witnessed the prodigy?—and was not Maimaina likewise acquainted with it?" Oh ! what fears and difficulties follow the first B 4 erroneous
erroneous step from the path of recti¬ tude! Under whatever circumstances, or in whaf ever dilemma we may happen to be placed, be assured truth is always the best, and noblest policy. It is true, Cassimir had r»ji directly vouched a falsehood; but he had permitted the voice of Abakkuk to deprecate as illu¬ sory what himself believed to be sub¬ stantially true, and he became appie- hensive accordingly. ***** The morning that succeeded the day on which Cassimir, as already descri¬ bed, had received the distinctions due to his superior demeanour in the com¬ bat, was appointed by Abbakuk, and his eager train, for the noble enjoyment of
of the chase. At an early hour, there¬ fore, was heard the neighing of horses, and the cries of the zealous huntsman, as if alike impatient to be engaged in the destruction of those fierce animals which abound in that dangerous region. Soon among the collected group of gal¬ lant spirits that crowded around their prince, each panting to embrace the approaching opportunity of exhibiting their prowess in his presence, appeared Cassimir prancing on a high-mettled steed, the gift of the grateful Abbakuk to his most distinguished vassal. He was arrayed moreover, on that proud occasion, in the splendid attire—the costly Persian mail, presented to him likewise by the hand of his beneficent superior; and never did a nobler figure grace the field, than Cassimir presented B 5 when
when careering by the side of his noble patron. With respect to Abbakuk himself, his venerable figure needs little description. He rode a noble steed, but in his apparel was distinguished from the rest of that bold train by the massy chain of gold alone which en¬ circled his neck, and depended to his girdle. -But among that gallant throng which the mounting sun saw mustered ready to start upon the plain, the eye wandered for the youthful figure of Ibrahim in vain. He was not among the hunters on that glorious morning, neither had he been seen by any of the chiefs since his abrupt disappearance from the circle on the preceding day. Louder now grew the tumultuous im¬ patience of the crowd, but presently subsided, as the whole train, led by prince Abbakuk, issued gallantly forth to
to spread themselves over the face of the country in quest of their devoted prey.
b 6 CHAP.
CHAP. II.
Since firat Aurora wuked the morn, Ahroad was heard the huntsman's horn; And still along that pathless way, One lingering note was heard to stray; As slowly down the deep defile, Dejected—wearied—spent with toil— His hounds dispersed, unhorsed and lame, In piteous plight that huntsman came. Fays of Loch Lomond. A better day's diversion than the present was not in the memory of prince Abbakuk, or any of his excelling train. The eastern method of sur¬ rounding their savage game was resort¬ ed
ed to, then by gradually closing in the form of an immense circle, the wild and desperate animals werr driven into a fearfully bristling centre, and their consequent destruction was inevitable. Many were the bold feats performed by the various chiefs, or usdens, often singly upon the most terrible of the brute creation. During the early part of the hunt, Cassimir was seen riding almost constantly (at the prince's own request) by the side of Abbakuk, who bestowed on him no small shave of his enviable attention; but as the sport, or rather as the day drew towards a close, the repeated conflicts with their environed prey grew bloodier, and more frequent. At this time, Cassimir growing weary of the carnage, wandered insensibly away from his companions, for the pur¬ pose
pose of indulging a few minutes in his own private reflections. After riding apart for some dis¬ tance, Cassimir almost unconsciously dismounted from his horse, and fling¬ ing the bridle carelessly over his arm, pursued his musings ii? the following strain.—" Well, Cassimir!" said he, addressing himself by name, " thou art nobly occupied. Thine is, in sooth, a varied destiny. But yesterday, as it were, and thou wert hailed chief shi¬ ning star of many a polished realm— to-day thou art slaughtering brutes among the uncivilized habitants of a savage region; and who knows to¬ morrow, or can predict that it will bring no change? Alas! amid the pomp and favour that surrouifds me here, there is a hollow sinking at my heart,
heart, which bids me constantly to be¬ ware some great reverse. A. heavy weight seems lodged in my overchar¬ ged bosom—misery anew hath fixed its iron fangs upon my bleeding heart. It is true, that as yet my bodily strength seems unimpaired—nay, al¬ most superhuman: but even now while I dashed the panting lion with bloodless jaws to the ground, my soul was fainting beneath the weight of surmises equally horrible and improb¬ able. Should Hassaraic, indeed, be yet alive! let me not remember------ Oh! horrible, indeed, is my destiny! I am the sport of fiends—the puppet of a demon, who yet spoke truth when he told me I should never find earthly happiness! Open, earth! to receive me, and let me in thy bosom find
find rest! At least, let me find that repose in thy bowels, which dwells not upon thy surface! Oh, hear me, earth! ' thou of whose kindred clay. my form is made, and to whom only I have clung—must hereafter cling— for happiness! Oh, earth! gape wide, admit me to thy centre, and let me there find peace!" Thus murmuring, in a fit of despe¬ rate agony, he loosed the bridle— cast himself on the ground, and while the descending sun shone fee¬ bly over his prostrate figure, mois¬ tened the parched soil with his tears. ***** The moon was again shining sweet-
ly over the village, whose every in¬ habitant now seemed buried m pro¬ found repose. The hunters who quit¬ ted it that morning had not yet re¬ turned; a circumstance, however, which created no surprise, as upon these occasions it was not unusual for the parties composing such an expe¬ dition to keep the field for several days. The present hunting excur¬ sion had been most nobly, and nume¬ rously attended: hence few, with any pretensions to skill or bravery, were left in the village. One solitary form, however, was seen by the quiet moon¬ light pacing up and down the appa¬ rently deserted settlement. It was Ibrahim. Like " some unrighteous and unhallowed ghost," did the wretch¬ ed youth stalk round the silent habita¬ tion
tion of his mistress, cursing his evil lot, and wishing reversed the whole order of nature. At length, he approached her dwell¬ ing. Abbas, he knew, was absent, having watched him join the chase that morning: none, except females, were within that peaceful residence. .Aware of this, Ibrahim approached with less than his wonted caution, and softly whispered—" Zoa! Zoa! look out up¬ on me. All are now sleeping—the moon may view us, but cannot list our talk. I can scarce hope to hear thy voice, wretch as I am ! yet—yet look out upon me—deign one glance only to save me from destruction." In spite of the low tone in which these words were uttered, they were not unheard, as a beautiful head thrust presently
presently from the rude lattice suffi¬ ciently demonstrated. It was the vi¬ sage of Zoa. As soon as she observed the dark figure who had summoned her presence, in a tone of mingled sor¬ row and anger, she exclaimed—" Ha ! perjured Ibrahim ! begone—begone— falsehood and perjury how can I bear to gaze on without hatred and con¬ tempt ?" " Zoa! I am sunk—I am degraded," said Ibrahim, softly, " and I know—I feel my degradation. Yet do not ren¬ der me desperate—wholly desperate— at least, look with pity on the anguish of the fallen, disgraced Ibrahim." " I did pity thee, Ibrahim," said Zoa, with mildness—" Oh, how sin¬ cerely ! but it was before thy oath, and thy affection, were alike proved worth¬ less.
less. Thy state is now so low, that even compassion ought to be denied thee." "Am I, indeed, so lost ?—so utterly fallen?" exclaimed Ibrahim, distracted¬ ly. " Then wherefore am I still here ? Why do I yet shrink to perform a deed that, once performed, will restore me — - ?" Here he paused, and clasp¬ ed his forehead with convulsive vio¬ lence. " I understand thee not," said Zoa. " What meanest thou ?" " It would make thee shudder to hear," answered Ibrahim. « No—for I fear thee not," said Zoa, with calmness. " Thou hast done thy worst already—the utmost extent of thy malice hath been shown, and the execrations of all the good and just are heaped
heaped upon thee, Ibrahim, for the deed." * I came to thee in the solitary night," said Ibrahim, piteously, " for consolation in my misery, and, it might be, aid to combat the evil desirec that have stolen into my bosom. No sound save thy heavenly voice breaks the stillness of this solemn hour, and that breathes curses on me. Needst thou any further incitement, Ibrahim, to stir thee to revenge ?" " What mean thy dark, mysterious words ?" again demanded Zoa. " Abbakuk hath disgraced me—Cas¬ simir hath wronged me — thou hast execrated me!" exclaimed Ibrahim. " Think'st thou that I will live thus disappointed in ray dearest hope, and not strive to reverse the damnable de¬ cree?
cree? Can I exist thus shamed, and not seek to regain my honour?—Ha! how can I? No, it can never be. I must redeem my ruined happiness, and self-esteem, even at the dreadful price of-----" " Thy disappointment — if thou meanest, Ibrahim, in thy love—hath been the work of heaven," said Zoa, with at least outward indifference: " thy disgrace, perjured youth, thou hast brought upon thyself." " Beware! beware!" cried Ibrahim, furiously.- " Forbear, Zoa! to re¬ proach me—ere I at once resolve to take a wide revenge, and overwhelm even thee with sudden, unavoidable de¬ struction !" " I know that I am alone, and un¬ protected," answered Zoa; "but when our
our guards return, they are too nu¬ merous, and singly far too brave, to dread any effort of Ibrahim—even his treachery, to impair their safety." " Drive me not to madness !" now exclaimed the frantic Ibrahim. " I wish it not—I mean it not," said Zoa, significantly ; " nor to that which would be worse than madness, Ibra¬ him, the treacherous revenge you seem to meditate. But I will leave thee now to reflection, Ibrahim. I dread neither thy valour, nor thy treason, youth. He who can violate a secret vow—whatever may chance to be its purport—made to a confiding damsel, has seldom the courage to be a dan¬ gerous enemy. Of this, until yester¬ day, I had fondly believed thee in¬ capable, but ------Oh ! Ibrahim ! Ibra¬ him !" So
So saying, and with a look of re¬ proach, gently closing the rustic win¬ dow, she flung back her beautiful tresses scornfully, and disappeared.
CHAP.
ALIBEG THE TEMPTER.'
CHAP. III. I've yet enough of pride to break, The lingering relics of my chain ; I loved it madly for thy sake— But so I shall not love again. Ci.aiu. For same minutes Ibrahim stood lost in speechless agony, still gazing upon the vacant spot where he had so lately beheld her sternly-beautiful counten¬ ance. The blood rushed alternately to his heart and to his visage—he half drew his dmitar, and shook his clench¬ ed hand with a threatening gesture to- vol. iv. c ward
ward the village, looking upward, as if about to vow its utter extermination. " But what have I further to do with oaths ?" said he distractedly, sheathing his blade with violence. " No! let me act firmly, but temperately; si¬ lently—promptly—but let my deci¬ sion be the harbinger of devastation and wo!" Then again upturning his dark, swimming eyes, to the over¬ hanging moon, as he strode mourn¬ fully away, he added—" Thou sweet¬ ly-shining orb ! that hast witnessed my agony, and heard my determination, bear testimony also of my reluctance to become what nature abhors, and men shudder when they name. A traitor !—a heartless, ruthless traitor ! But, alas! what am I now ?—a dis¬ dained wretch, whom even the very reptile
reptile that crawls in happy freedom, had it sense and feeling of dishonour, would shun to meet. Fate has decided, and leaves me no alternative, save self- destruction — can I hesitate which to choose? An ignoble death, or perdition to my exulting enemies! I pause no longer. My soul is changed to a chafed and savage panther's—my spirit to the wild eagle's, whose swiftness 1 must imitate—I wruld outstrip the ivind in quest of vengeance. Farewell, Zoa— charming tyrant! for a little space, fare¬ well. Exulting Cassimir! thou hast hitherto soared beyond the storms of fortune, but Ibrahim's vengeance, like unexpected lightning, may yet arrest thy course—now not long shalt thou triumph!" That same night, Ibrahim mounted c 2 his
his fleet courser in secrecy, and departed from the village. * * » * * The sun had disappeared, ere Cassi¬ mir arose from his recumbent posture, and the pale moonbeam already glisten¬ ed over the shining plaits of his gor¬ geous attire. His fiist impulse, on re¬ covering his wonted presence of mind, was to look round for his steed, one of the noble animals presented to hitn on the preceding day by Abbakuk—but be looked in vain. He had insensibly dropped the bridle from his aim, during his ttempoiary abstraction from sur¬ rounding objects—the horse found him¬ self at liberty, and was not slow in ta¬ king > advantage of his rider's want of caution.
caution. In the dim light, moreover, afforded solely by the mounting moon, there was very little chance of recover¬ ing the rein, or even of discerning the animal's course. A thousand times did Cassimir execrate his own folly, and wonder at his own imprudence in not better securing his sole dependence for safety at the present juncture—his cou¬ rageous, fleet-limbed steed. A thou¬ sand times did he send his searching glance, as far as the wan light permitted, into the shadowy recesses of the wilder¬ ness, to discover if possible some trace of the spirited fugitive which might have awakened hope—but all in vain. He essayed his voice—-had it been his former favourite, Beleses, that trial might not have been made in vain— but, in the present instance, it was even c 3 absurd.
absurd. So Cassimir appeared to feel it, for presently he desisted, as if ashamed of the effort, and remained once more silent, motionless, and dis¬ tracted. How long he would have continued thus mentally bewildered must be left to conjecture, perhaps during the greater portion of the night, had not a slight rustling among the adjacent leaves now attracted his attention. Alarmed for his immediate safety, and dreading the sudden spring of some ferocious beast of prey, of which disagreeable species of companion too many, he knew, were prowling in his neighbourhood, Cassi¬ mir turned hastily round to ascertain the cause. Had the direst brute of the forest ap¬ peared suddenly to his view, with jaws opened to devour him, and himself been
been unable to resist the doom, the sight would have been less appalling to Cassimir than the spectacle that anon presented itself to his gaze. His eye had scarcely scanned what appeared the entrance of a deep and hollow dingle, when he distinctly saw the foliage tremble; and presently beheld rising betwixt the quivering branches the fore part of a majestic sable steed, that with one gallant bound cleared the vexatious shrub-wood which environ¬ ed him, and stood fully revealed upon the open plain. At first, Cassimir deemed (not without cause) the plun¬ ging animal to be his own strayed courser, and began to congratulate himself accordingly: but a moment undeceived him. The steed bore a rider — and that rider, having been once beheld, could never again be c 4 forgotten.
forgotten. It was Cassimir had beheld beneath the arrow bosom I
Hassaraic, such as him when he sunk which entered his
CHAP.
CHAP. IV. Prjthce, see there! hehold! look ! Io ! How any you ? Why, nhatearcl? If thon cnnst nod, speak too. Tf charnel-houses, and our graves, must send Those that no bury back, our monuments Shall be the maws of kites. SriAKESrEAllE. With a fixed and ghastly stare did Cassimir, for a few brief moments, gaze on his advancing enemy. The figure of Hassaraic sat proudly erect upon his mettlesome courser, as if per¬ fectly unapprehensive of peril from his presence, and in turn steadily regard- c 5 ed
ed him, but with a wholly different expression of countenance from that assumed by the shuddering Cassimir. With a slight, but haughty gesture, the Tartar now made towards him, in aspect and very accoutrements the same as Kalib had described him—the same, even in garb and attitude, as himself had beheld him on that day of strife when he received the poisoned arrow in his breast, whose deadly po¬ tency no human strength could have survived. With *a shuddering consciousness of this did Cassimir survey the martial form that now approached him close, but apparently rather for the purpose of-parleying, than with any immediate hostile intention. Once, indeed, Cas- simir poised his unerring spear, and with
with his left hand grasped his faithful bow; but mortal weapons, he seemed perfectly aware, would little avail him now; and he relinquished them on per¬ ceiving that in the aspect, and steady confidence of the seeming Tartar, there appeared no change. At length, he falteringly addressed the scowling form. —" Terrific phantom !" he exclaimed, " what art thou?—and what am I to apprehend, or gather from thy pre¬ sence ? I view thee, but I cannot de¬ termine— my brain swims round — a thousand recollections—again, what art thou ?" " One whom thou hast met ere now with somewhat less emotion," replied he of the sable charger, checking his steed. " Becomes it the renowned Cas¬ simir thus to tremble at sight of an enemy ?" c 6 "I shrink
" I shrink not from common foes," said Cassimir, with increasing agita¬ tion : " but an enemy lake to thee! art thou what thou seemest ?" " Ay," said the figure, haughtily— " even that which thy conscious spirit deems." " Stop, then, and answer me further!" cried Cassimir, as the Tartar again sud¬ denly wheeled his willing steed toward the plain. " The hour is not yet come," replied the sable horseman, continuing his rapid course; "\vhen it arrives, thou mayest be clearly answered." " Hold — pause," shouted Cassimir, now likewise exerting his speed—" fly not! for shouldst thou even to earth's farthest verge, I would pursue thee." " Thou dost forget—thou canst not," said
said Hassaraic, with a bitter laugh of derision, that made every adjacent hol¬ low echo back the sound. " Thou art shackled by the reward of dissimulation and perfidy." " Wretch! fiend!" cried Cassimir, furiously—but he could no more, for the words of the taunting fugitive were true. The clinging mail, indeed, effec¬ tually deprived him of his wonted fleetness—he felt it weigh like a heavy, useless burthen, upon his fainting limbs. In this dilemma, he wished he could shake off the cumbrous folds—but it could not be; and to pursue on foot beneath the oppressive weight of his present attire he found equally impos¬ sible. Enraged, he drew an arrow, and fixed his keen eye upon his fleeting enemy. Hassaraic was already far across the plain, and still pursuing his way, in a swift
a swift gallop, toward the distant moun¬ tains. He fitted the arrow to his bow- averted his glance for an instant to adjust his belt, ere he discharged the unerring messenger, then raised it again to seek his destined victim—but Has¬ saraic was now no longer visible. It was next to impossible he should have reached the heights, since any thing short of superhuman velocity could not have achieved the distance in so short a period; yet the moon had by this time risen high in the firmament, and emitted a brilliancy that almost rivalled the de¬ parted daylight, but Cassimir looked around for his enemy in vain. On receiving this added confirmation of his deadliest fears—for nothing mortal, he concludedj, could so swiftly have eluded his vision — he dropped his weapon, and remained transfixed in an ecstacy of
of overpowering terror and amaze¬ ment. As soon as he had, in some degree, recovered his self-possession, the ill- fated Cassimir exclaimed—" Yes! the assertions of Ibrahim, indeed, were true. Yes, Kalib, my darling child! thy sight deceived thee not, nor breathed thy young lips, on that remembered morn, a deceitful tale. My beloved Maimaina! our felicity is at an end. My infant, too—my happy, rural home —must all be abandoned? — must I again become a houseless wanderer? Never! I never will! Befal the worst that may, here will I abide, and thrive or perish with the beings that are dear to me!" * * * * *
Daylight
Daylight now seemed struggling to advance over the landscape from behind the eastern mountains, while the shades of night were gradually giving way before the rising beams. Short was the contest, and complete the triumph of powerful Phoebus over his gloomy ad¬ versary—darkness dispersed, the stars faded imperceptibly, and in a few mi¬ nutes the light was sufficient clearly to reveal surrounding objects. In the foreground of the picture appeared a Circassian youth vainly engaged in the act of end'eavouring to raise from the wild broken plain his exhausted, and apparently dying steed. It was Ibra¬ him, whose distraction of mind during his sudden flight from the village, so unwillingly adopted, and on an expedi¬ tion so abhorrent to all his better feel¬ ings, had caused him to neglect the due
due precaution necessary to the preser¬ vation of his courser's strength to the end, and to urge the willing animal at his utmost speed, even till he sunk un¬ able to rise again. With a grieved, and startled aspect, did Ibrahim now blame his own imprudence for having suffered his betossed feelings to induce him to omit those precautionary kindnesses so well known, and so universally prac¬ tised, by every traveller in those un¬ civilized regions. But his repentance —his regret was all in vain: the dis- tressed animal had scorned to sink till nature could sustain no more, and now struggled in vain to rise. Vainly did Ibrahim use the helping rein—the gen¬ tle, and encouraging accent: the pant¬ ing brute now flung at every gasp the thick foam from his heaving sides, and just
just ere the sun had scaled the ruddy horizon, stretched out his limbs, and expired.
CHAP.
CHAP. V. So—crossing yonder rugged dell, My gallant horso exhausted fell » o a Woe worth the chase! woe worth the day That coat thy life! my gallant grey! Scott. With a feeling of unfeigned sorrow, and no inconsiderable degree of ap¬ prehension, did Ibrahim, as already observed, gaze on the last quivering motion of his expiring steed. The consequences of this misadventure, caused by his own inconsiderate rash¬ ness, he too justly feared, might be fatal
fatal to his present purpose; and, per¬ haps, in the end, even cost him his existence. He had now proceeded, by the aid of his generous courser, whose exertions deserved to have, been more gratefully appreciated, to a considerable distance from the village; but he had yet many wearying leagues to traverse, ere he reached even the base of those enormous mountains whose summits it was his hope to gain. On these, it was conjectured (and none were better con¬ vinced than Ibrahim of the accuracy of this conjecture) that the Tartar camp was situated; and thitherward, accord¬ ingly, had the love-lorn youth hitherto directed his rebel course. But misfor¬ tune seemed every where, and in al¬ most every shape, to pursue the steps of Ibrahim, Undaunted, however, by the
the many cross circumstances that as¬ sailed him, although he could scarce¬ ly avoid accounting this last as the heaviest of them all, he determined still to stride boldly forward across the intervening desert, aud strive on foot, through perils of every kind, to reach the place v of his destina¬ tion. Just as Ibrahim had formed this fearful resolution, he espied a spirited horse, ready caparisoned, grazing at case on the luxuriant herbage, that still sprang in small fertile patches, placed at inconsiderable distances, a- round the solitary scene. It was, in reality, the steed o^ Cassimir, that having strayed thus far from its negli¬ gent rider, was calmly enjoying its recovered freedom. Ibrahim looked cautiously around—no human form was
was near; he listened, but all was tran¬ quil—not even a leaf stirred, to inter¬ rupt the dreary silence. Convinced that no enemy was lurk¬ ing nigh, Ibrahim rushed, in a tran¬ sport of gladness, new indeed to his bosom, to seize and convert to his ad¬ vantage, the self-proffered succour and assistance. " Heaven favours my de¬ sign !" he joyfully exclaimed, grasping with little difficulty the bridle of his unresisting prize. " Yes! fate smiles, at length, upon my daring purpose, and hath sent this undreamed-of aid, to facilitate its execution. But, softly! what is here?—the bridle embossed!— the saddle covered with ermine!—its trappings of pure gold! This is no common prize. Ha! it is the newly- bestowed charger of my rival—my deadliest enemy—the villanous—de¬ tested
tested Cassimir! Presented to him but yesterday—hath he so soon re¬ signed his claim ?—and to whom ?— to Ibrahim ! Well—the omen, at least, is a good one. Come, then, thou fair gift of fortune—in sooth, thou art the comeliest I ever bestrode. Thy fleet¬ ness yet untried, I will call thee Pro¬ sperity, since thou art the omen of its dawn to Ibrahim. Here's to assay thy mettle in his service—if it equal thy beauty, the goal of Ibrahim is won." So saying, he sprang upon the start¬ led courser, and giving the signal for speed, was soon far on his fleet course, toward the brightening moun¬ tains. £ 7$ at 'A :r
Sunset
Sunset brought with it the return of the hunting party to the village, laden with trophies of their united success, and the separate skill of each coura¬ geous individual that happened to have distinguished himself. Cassimir, how¬ ever, returned not with them, nor could any satisfactory account be gathered from them of his absence. All had missed him suddenly, about the pre¬ ceding sunset; but none had been able to glean the slightest trace or tidings of him since. Maimaina had watched the return of the wearied throng with anxious expectation, in the hope of at last beholding him; but when she saw him not, her grief became insupport¬ able. She raved—she tore her hair, she demanded of the hunters singly some intelligence of her beloved. All re¬ turned one common answer—they could afford
afford her none. With a breaking heart she heard that their number was complete, save one —Cassimir alone was lost. In her desperation, she rush¬ ed towards Abbakuk, and exclaimed— " Why! thou art here, who wert yes¬ terday his friend—where is he? All are returned save one—one only—and he, oh God! he is the only one whose return can save Maimaina from despair. Look on these little ones! Becomes it thee to return without their father ?— Thou, who but yesterday didst vaunt him to the skies ?" Prince Abbakuk, who was likewise really afflicted with sorrow at the seem¬ ing terrible fate of Cassimir, for he ven¬ tured not to doubt his having been over¬ mastered by some powerful brute of the forest, checked his courser, stooped to¬ wards her, and replied—" Myself will , vol. iv. d be
be their father—that is, should Cassi¬ mir not arrive before to-morrow's eve. But I hope he will return—I know not the cause of his detention. Our brave warriors will protect Maimaina, and shield her from despair." '" They cannot! they cannot! it is here—it is in my bosom!" cried Mai¬ maina, turning hopelessly away, 'and franticly reseeking her cottage. Here, in her so recently happy dwelling, with her weeping children, she passed the mournful hours, rejecting all con- solation/and even refusing admittance to those who would have been her com¬ forters.
CHAP.
CHAP. VI. He conies at last in sudden londinrss, And whence they know not, why they need not guess; They more might marvel, when the grceting's'o'er, Not that he came, but came not long before. Byron, " Why tremble you so, mother ?" said Kalib, gently seizing her hand—" and walk up and down thus wildly ? You make me weep to see you thus dis¬ tressed." " Alas! child," said Maimaina, sor¬ rowfully, " there is too much cause for weeping—we must all weep." d 2 " What
" What cause, mother?" asked Ka¬ lib, without loosening his clasp. " My father will soon return." " He will never return!" said Mai¬ maina, mournfully. " He will!" replied Kalib, with eager- ness—" he will! for the good prince to-night, you remember, mother, said he would." ** I have no hope!" said Maimaina, wringing her hands. " Hope is a blessing, mother! do not let it go," said Kalib, with acuteness beyond hi's years. " You remember, too, the good prince said he had hope —he knew not what detained him from our cottage." " He said, he had only hope," return¬ ed Maimaina, weeping. Then with a look horribly wild, she added—" If his hope should fail!" " Hope
" Hope is better than despair," re¬ joined Kalib, soothingly. " Beside, re¬ collect that he promised our warriors should protect you, mother; and that himself would be a parent to Kalib, and to Atala—but that cannot be, for I could never love him like my father!" Then, as if feeling he had done his ut¬ most towards her consolation, the urchin remained silent. During this pause, which lasted some considerable time, Maimaina continued to traverse the apartment, in a state bor¬ dering on utter distraction. Again and again, in the height of her agony, she clasped the unconscious Atala to her bosom, who now lay sleeping in the arras of her afflicted parent. All this while, Kalib stood watching her with tender solicitude, sometimes weeping, D 3 and
and sometimes endeavouring to chase away his tears. At length, the boy could contain himself no longer—-a thought seemed labouring in his breast that required utterance — he drew gently towards Maimaina, and articulated softly, as if fearful of exciting her displeasure— " Perhaps, dear mother, our sire has fallen a victim to the fury of many savage beasts, who probably attacked him at once. It may be so—for the night is already fast changing into morning,*and yet he comes not. But there is yet another cause more proba¬ ble—if you will hear me name it?" " Speak, my child," said Maimaina, scarcely heeding his words. " Do not be angry, mother," conti¬ nued Kalib, " but I cannot help think¬ ing
ing the cruel Tartar, Hassaraic, to be more instrumental iii my father's ab¬ sence, than the often-braved beasts of the dessert he went forth to slay for pastime. Frown not upon me thus— I know you forbade me ever to men¬ tion his name; but I cannot refrain from thinking him concerned in our misfortune—he looked so terrible." " My boy! thy father hath subdued him once," said Maimaina, with dignity, " even terrible as he looked ; and now wears the spoils—the trophies of his downfall. It was not Hassaraic who alarmed thee, Kalib, on that so fearful morning: he was already slain, and could not have been near to affright thee. Besides, were he living, he is only one—and Cassimir dreads no equal enemy." d 4 "I meant
" I meant not singly, mother," said the abashed Kalib, ashamed of having underrated his father's achievements: " but I still fear that Tartars, and not his wonted enemies, the wild herds of the forest, in this unfortunate excursion, have proved my loved father's bane. Recollect how the cold sweat stood upon his brow, and how wildly he rushed forth when I uttered the fell name of Hassaraic, which seemed to arouse all the furies in------but hark! surely I hear a tread approach the por¬ tal ----- slowly it advances, but the sound seems familiar to my ear. It is the footstep of my father! it is Cassimir! it is—it is!" " Ah! Cassimir!" and " My own Maimaina!" was uttered during the succeeding instant, by the voices of the parties
parties most deeply interested in these, and similar, expressions of tenderness. Long did they remain clasped in each other's arms, ere Maimaina thought of directing her attention toward the hag¬ gard looks, and altogether wretched ap¬ pearance, of her altered husband. When she did so, her emotion became violent in the extreme—she even started on beholding his changed aspect. When he left her he appeared cheerful, vi¬ gorous, and able to surmount even the most perilous hardships; now that he returned to her, he was spiritless —he even looked sickly—seemed lan¬ guid, and quite spent with weeping. This was a change she had not anti¬ cipated ; yet even thus to embrace him once again was joy compared to the horrid dread which had lately pos- n 5 sessed
sessed her, of perhaps gazing on that beloved form no more. She, there¬ fore, strove for the present to stifle her amazement, but her eyes gushed over plenteously, and grief was still mingled with the feelings of her bo¬ som. While yet they were engaged in the exchange of mutual congratula¬ tions and endearments, of which the overjoyed Kalib affectionately gave and received his share, other footsteps were distinguished approaching the cottage, which the ear of the tender stripling failed so easily to recognise. They listened, and distinctly heard the' voices of two persons, in one of whom Cassimir soon recognised the benevolent prince himself.—" But are you sure your information is correct?" asked
asked Abbakuk, addressing his un¬ known companion. " It is true," replied the strange voice, earnestly—" beyond doubt, it is true. I tell you he left the village secretly on the night of our absence, not many hours after sunset, and in quite sufficient time to gain the vici¬ nity of our hunting bivouac before the break of morning. I have spoken with those who saw him depart at his utmost speed, in the direction of our morning course, and he hath not yet returned." " And what inference draw' you from this circumstance?" demanded the voice of Abbakuk, with equal ear¬ nestness. " That whatever evil chance may have befallen Cassimir," said the other, D 6 softly,
softly, " hath been the production of the jealous fugitive—the work of Ibra¬ him ! Perhaps, having during the night discovered his situation, the vengeful hand of the disappointed lover may have drank the vital stream that so nobly animated his form. Perhaps, concealed among the scat¬ tered foliage till the burst of the morning beam, his arrow secretly "This is, indeed, most probable," said Abbakuk, seeming struck with tho conviction of its reality. " We should have taken better care of this hot-brained youth-—this Ibrahim —I dare warrant he escapes not our vigi¬ lance to perform such a feat again. Let his return be watched for, and his person secured immediately. Bomil- car,
car, the charge be thine—see it per¬ formed." " The prince shall be obeyed," re¬ plied the submissive Bomilcar. " From whom received you your in¬ telligence?" demanded Abbakuk, " From a damsel of the village," returned his companion, readily, " who saw him depart privately on his mur¬ derous expedition. She is the cruel beauty to whom he owes his present distraction—the same who, on a recent occasion, even in thy presence, con¬ fronted the false babbler to remind him of his oath." " I well remember her," said Abba¬ kuk, and, turning from the speaker, instantly threw open the half-closed door of the cottage. Meantime, Cassimir and Maimaina, who
who had remained anxiously listening to this strange conversation, arose sud¬ denly, in some confusion, to receive with due deference their distinguished visitor.
CHAP.
CHAP. VII. Nay I lien, farewell! I have touched the highest point ol all my greatness; And, from that full meridian of my glory, I haste now to my setting: I shall hill Like a briyht exhalation in the evening. And no man see me more. StlAltLSI't.Anc. The stream of light that now rushed in through the opened portal announ¬ ced that the day had already began to break, and distinctly revealed, to the group within the cottage, the stately figure of prince Abbakuk, accompa¬ nied by one of his principal officers. The prince appeared not a little asto¬ nished
nished to find Cassimir himself an in¬ mate of the dwelling; but checking his surprise, and exchanging a signi¬ ficant glance with the chief who ac¬ companied him, he advanced, with a cheerful countenance, and said—" For¬ tunate warrior! we are rejoiced to find our fears for thy safety were ground¬ less. Qur separation was somewhat sudden, and the o'erravaged wild, at that particular moment, replete with danger to a solitary horseman: but thou art brave, and the better power seem¬ eth ever -to war upon thy side. Yet, in sooth, now that I look again upon thee, thy aspect appeareth sadly chan¬ ged. I mistake, Cassimir, or thou hast striven with no common enemy for life and limb since we parted com¬ pany." " I have,
" I have, indeed," groaned Cassimir, faintly, but the words reached not the attentive ears of Abbakuk and his com¬ panion. Accordingly, the prince continued, evidently anxious to hear an account of his struggle with the suspected Ibrahim—" Thy apparel is soiled and rent, and thy form appears sinking be¬ neath the effects of no common ex¬ haustion. May we inquire, without offence to thy modesty—ever the com¬ panion of true valour, Cassimir — what desperate encounter hath left on thy dress, and person, these unwont¬ ed tokens of its length and fierce¬ ness ?" " I lost my steed in the forest," mut¬ tered Cassimir, in a tone scarcely au¬ dible from excessive fatigue and emo¬ tion. " He was unused to my voice— I could
I could not recover him. Tracing the rugged distance on foot to my dwelling, as fast as I was able, has wearied my form, and my attire was torn among the brambles." " You fought, likewise, at disad¬ vantage, then?" again demanded Ab¬ bakuk. " No such chivalrous encounter has been mine, as you seem to imagine," returned Cassimir, vexed at the re¬ petition of the question to which, nevertheless, he chose not to yield a more explicit answer. " I met, I repeat, no mortal enemy — nothing either human, or of the brute cre¬ ation, to dare my prowess, or endanger my p&th." " It is well!—you are more than fortunate," said Abbakuk, again ex¬ changing significant glances with the bold
bold chief, Bomilcar, who stood heark¬ ening to the conference, " But a subtle enemy hath notwithstanding, Cassimir, been on the watch for thee. Since the eve that succeeded our de¬ parture for the chase — although he chose not to accompany our train— hath Ibrahim been missing from the village. I profess not a thorough ac¬ quaintance with his purpose, for I know it not, but I strongly suspect his de¬ parture was evil meant towards thee. Thy secret murder, even in spite of his oath, I at first apprehended, might have been his project; for men choose not solitude, and the cover of darkness, for the execution of a fair design. As it is, I still fear, his protracted absence bodes the village no good. Cassimir, thou art a gallant, and a prudent war¬ rior, and holdest over the people's hearts that
that sway which thy superior know¬ ledge in the art of war hath given thee. Watch, therefore, as soon as thou hast recovered thy strength, lest the event should prove as I have ventured to predict. Be vigilant—be wary." " At the command of his prince ------" said Cassimir, feebly, commencing in a strain of much humility. " I need no protestations," inter¬ rupted Abbakuk—" I know thou wilt be cautious; and, should occasion ever again occur, no less valiant than thou wert heretofore. But, at present, thou art wearied — thy aching limbs lack rest. I leave thee to repose. Yet ere I depart from Ichohol, about the hour of sunset, we will meet again, and talk further on this subject. Till then, fare¬ well." As he ceased, the good prince mo¬ tioned
tioned to his companion, who instantly obeyed the signal, and they quitted the cottage together. " Repose! repose!" groaned Cassi¬ mir, as soon as he found himself alone with his devoted family—" Ah! shall I ever taste repose again? No—no —it is impossible. My dearest Mai¬ maina—my cherished little ones—must all be sacrificed ?—must all be torn away from me?—or must our blood be mingled in one wild bubbling tor¬ rent ?—for, alas! too surely the spoi¬ ler is at hand. Ibrahim, too, is on the scent for vengeance to atone his fancied wrongs, though I have seen him not: would that Abbakuk had permitted my trusty falchion to cleave him to the centre!—and yet, where¬ fore ? his incredible tale was true, and merited a less fatal recompence. Yet will
will not Ibrahim, when the, fate of Cassimir is in the balance—then will not Ibrahim shrink from smiting ter¬ ribly, even unto destruction. Then will his cruel blade, it may be, drink the dear blood of my defenceless babes, and, in conjunction with Hassaraic ----- Ha! can it be possible he hath fled to join him ?—deal the sharp death- stroke to Maimaina's bosom, while Cas¬ simir vainly strives to avert the blow!" Here he wept aloud and covered his face distractedly with his mantle, as if striving to exclude from his imagina¬ tion the picture he had drawn. At this moment, Maimaina approached him, clasped him tenderly round the neck, and strove to elicit fiom his al¬ most delirious agony some particulars of the recent event which had thus frightfully disturbed him; while Kalib clung
clung more closely to his garments, scarce knowing what to deem of the extraordinary emotion of his pa¬ rent.
CHAP.
CHAP. VIII. What dost thou mean by shaking of thy head? Why dost thou look to sadly on my son ? What means that hand upon that breast of thine ? Why holds thine eye that lamentable rheum, Like a proud riser, peering o'er its bounds ? Shakesfeahe. " My Cassimir!" thus commenced the timid supplicant, " what means this strange agitation ?—these scalding tears, and this pale trembling form ?—thy hidden aspect, and that labouring bo¬ som ? Answer me, Cassimir, hath aught of evil happened with which Maimaina
Maimaina is yet unacquainted ? If so, let me hear it quickly, that I may help thee to sustain the burthen—for grief, when shared, is proportionately lighten¬ ed. Speak, then, what hath chanced thus utterly to overwhelm thee with despair ?" Cassimir, however, still answered no¬ thing, but continued to heave convul¬ sive sobs at intervals, as she truly said, the very image of despair. Maimaina had never before seen him so deeply af¬ fected. " Thou art returned, I praise the beneficent power who hath protected thee!" she resumed, endeavouring to console him—" returned in safety—is this nothing to be grateful for? On foot, througii all the perils of the wil¬ derness, thou hast reached in security thy blissful home. Even the shaft of vol. iv. e Ibra-
'Ibrahim—if such hath, indeed, been levelled-for thy destruction—hath pass¬ ed thee harmless by. Is it nought, Cassimir, to elude unharmed the rou¬ sed brute of the forest, and the awa¬ kened malice of more dangerous man ? It cannot be that the loss of thy steed afflicts thee thus—nor yet is bodily ex¬ haustion the cause of thy present mental despondency, for thou wert wont full often to weary thyself for pastime. No! something hath chanced to thee, during the past excursion—something terrible, that Maimaina hath still to learn. Yet, Cassimir, suffer not the beloved of thy bosom to implore in vain ; think her but worthy to partake thy most secret counsel, and thou wilt find her so." By degrees, the emotion of Cassimir now seemetf to subside: he raised his eyes
eyes tenderly to her countenance, and exclaimed—" Alas! Maimaina—love¬ liest, and best adored! deem not that I have ever doubted thy fidelity. But to admit thee, my thrice gentle bride! to share the dark counsel of a wretch like Cassimir, would appal thy tender bosom—fill thee with horror, and excite in thy fond breast eternal hatred. No— no—it must not be !" " Thou hast amazed me, Cassimir," said Maimaina, with wonder indeed de¬ picted in her glowing visage. " Thy words alarm me, even more than thy strange bearing—what dost thou mean ?" " To hear it would strike thee with eternal palsies!" exclaimed Cassimir, franticly, yet in a low tone. " Forbear —forbear, then, to inquire." " I have forborne too long already," e 2 returned
returned Maimaina, endeavouring to subdue her own agitation, "and must how forbear no longer. Can Cassimir have a grief—a secret sorrow, however irremediable — however terrible, his Maimaina ought not to share, and strive to mitigate ?" " Yes—yes—away—away with the empty thought of mitigation—the idle dream of alleviating my misery!" said Cassimir, again shrouding his convulsed features from her earnest gaze. " Mine is grief no earthly consolation can miti¬ gate—mine is darkness no human aid can dispel—no mortal vision penetrate. All—all that the earth now bears on its varied surface, throughout the mani¬ fold regions I have traverser?., would become bitter against me—would rise up to destroy me, if they but knew that horrible—that appalling compact. And
And shalt thou, my adored Maimaina, be the first to whom this accursed tongue reveals the damning secret?™ that dreadful intercourse the very know¬ ledge of which will for ever blight thy peace, and, instead of hope, fill thy bosom with blackness and despair?— which will environ thee—as I am en¬ vironed—with horrors thick, dark, in¬ numerable. Nay, will cause thee—ay, even thee, my own beloved, chosen bride—to shrink, it may be, from my poisonous embrace, and shudder when thou but thinkest on my name." " Impossible I" said Maimaina, with energy, " though the dark thoughts of thy bosom eclipsed in hideousness that dire hereafter which evil doers find, on their dismissal from exist- tence." " Hereafter! did I hear the appalling E 3 sound ?—
sound?— hereafter!" echoed Cassimir, with increased distraction — " it is a word I dare not listen to, even from lips mild and beautiful as thine. Breathe it no more—or I may never brook to hear thy voice again. But at present a truce to this," he continued, endeavour¬ ing by a strong effort to subdue his emotion, " and let us hold ourselves prepared, my beloved Maimaina, for the worst that may arrive. I will now retire, to rest for a transient space, at least, my wearied limbs. Maimaina, watch thou near me; but utter not again that dreadful word, lest it should enter into my dreams. Deem me not harsh; dear partner of my darkening destiny! but a thousand torturing recol¬ lections haunt me, and I am harassed by as many fears. The day which hath already commenced is the last of Abbakuk's
Abbakuk's abode at our humble vil¬ lage. He came hither to bestow upon me reward, and happiness—behold;me! am I happy? I had devised an hum¬ bler road to felicity, and rejected his proffered endowments—what have I gained ? Bound now to my devoted home, even by command of Abbakuk, I cannot without dishonour forsake my post, and to abide is inevitable de¬ struction. Scoff, fiends, and chuckle, foes, at the projected happiness of Cas¬ simir !"
e 4 CHAP.
CHAP. IX. BIj lord, jou bade me wait on you at sunsets He sinks behind the mountain, Byuom. The moming was already far advan¬ ced, ere Cassimir flung his feverish form on the couch of skins prepared for his reception, *nd endeavoured to court the refrebhment of a short repose. Maimaina, as he had desired, watched over him while he slept; and became a terrified witness, accordingly, of his soul's writhings, during that transient slumber.
slumber. Long, however, before the golden Phcebus had attained his me¬ ridian of splendour, Cassimir awoke, but preserved a steady silence with respect to the cause of his preceding emotion. In vain were now the often- repeated solicitations of Maimaina, that he would make her acquainted with his secret cause of agony. Cassimir continued to maintain, with regard to this subject, the most obstinate reserve; and, as it was pretty plain that— " Not nnich he loved long question of the past," Maimaina soon forbore to interrogate one whom, she saw, her inquiries tor¬ mented. His demeanour, neverthe¬ less, as the day advanced, grew gra¬ dually more calm; and, towards even¬ ing, his composure, at least, if not his E 5 cheerfulness,
cheerfulness, seemed almost wholly re¬ stored. At the hour of sunset, as enjoined by Abbakuk, Cassimir repaired to the open square, or meidan of the village, situ¬ ated, as already described, nearly oppo¬ site his own residence. Assembled here he found all the principals of the village, together with the already mus¬ tering train of the prince Abbakuk, hold¬ ing solemn debate on the measures to be taken for the future welfare and security of that devoted settlement. Of Ibrahim, it appeared, no intelligence during the day had been obtained, and the consternation of several grave dis¬ putants seemed considerably increased in consequence; while there were not wanting others who maintained that Ibrahim, ashamed of his futile attempt to
to deceive the council, had indeed abandoned his native village in despair, and probably since that period sacrificed his own life in the desert, but argued also that no peril was to be appre¬ hended from his sudden disappearance. All, however, awaited with anxiety the arrival of the prince, who had not yet completed the private arrangements for his approaching departure, and to whose opinion each appeared inclined to allow considerable weight. After a short period of expectation, Abbakuk arrived, and his entrance into the assemblage \vas hailed with an instantaneous, and expressive greeting, followed by pro¬ found silence. The first act of the benevolent prince, on his arrival among them equipped for mounting his already caparisoned e 6^ charger,
charger, was again to congratulate Cas¬ simir (who had before received the con¬ gratulations of many) upon his safe re¬ turn ; and to extol once more his cou¬ rage and his wisdom, as well worthy of imitation. It then became his duty, according to the custom, while standing in the midst of the assemblage, to deliver to the breathless listeners his parting charge, with regard to the prosperity, or protection of the settlement, from which he was about to direct his course. By this speech, not a syllable of which was lost upon its attentive auditors, it ap¬ peared to be the opinion of the discern- iiig Abbakuk, that danger was to be apprehended from the abrupt and inex¬ plicable flight of Ibrahim. Having deliberately stated that opinion, and again enjoined the inhabitants (especially Cassimir,
Cassimir, in whose prudence he seemed mostly to confide) to redouble their vigilance, and be constantly upon their guard, he prepared for his immediate departure. In a few minutes, the whole of his retinue were mounted, and com¬ menced their journey, attended by the same harmonious (or, as many would certainly have termed them, inharmo¬ nious) strains which announced their arrival, until the last loiterer of the lengthened cavalcade was completely out of sight. Cassimir lingered for some time upon the green space still occupied by the assembled multitude, and then retired dejectedly, with his family, to his own once happy cottage; and in less than an hour after sunset, the good prince Ab¬ bakuk, with his protecting train, were many
many miles distant from that devoted village. ***** Long ere the sultry sun on that cloudless day had arrived at its meridian of glory, Ibrahim had reached the sum¬ mits of those lofty mountains, toward which we left him urging his panting steed. Nothing possessed of life had intercepted, or even made its appear¬ ance, during his pathless course. Judg¬ ing only from his knowledge of Tartar habits, his speed had been directed to¬ wards the loftiest pinnacle of the whole surrounding range, rightly divining that Hassaraic, or his surviving horde, would assuredly deem it the most inaccessible to their less active enemies; and, con¬ sequently,
sequently, that on that spot, it was most probable the Tartar encampment would be found formed. In this conjecture, however, he at first began to fear himself wholly deceived: for, on gaining the sum¬ mit, which at length he accomplished with great difficulty, Ibrahim looked round him in vain for any, even the slightest, trace of the once-dreaded Tar¬ tars' wished-for presence. All appeared lonely, desolate, and comfortless: not even a shelter from the scorching rays of the sun presented itself to his ardent and desiring gaze. Ibrahim, oppressed by the fervent and almost-insupport¬ able heat of the noontide beam, began already to repent his rash enterprise. He determined, however, to push his fatigued charger completely over the brow of the mountain, and thereby ob¬ tain
tain a clear survey of the opposite side; Just as he had passed the summit, and was beginning slightly to descend the rugged declivity, a new sight present¬ ed itself, and Ibrahim suddenly checked his willing, but almost-overwearied steed. A couple of horses of the true Tartar breed—their riders having ap¬ parently dismounted recently — were standing ready caparisoned, half screen¬ ed from view by a convenient jutting promontory. Ibrahim paused, and look¬ ed warily around him. He no longer doubted of the vicinity of the encamp¬ ment, or, at least, of some straggling Tartars, who, he rightly judged, had dismounted for the purpose of better observing his course and aim so near their seldom-invaded territory: or, it might be, from some secluded, and se¬ cret
cret position, of more securely marking him out as the devoted object of de¬ struction.
CHAP,
CHAP. X. Your name and purpose, Saxon! stand. Scott.
What would you 'fore our tent ? ' Shakes I'EAnE. Thus situated, the startled Circassian made«a sudden halt, but still rolled his keen eyes vainly round in search of an adversary. In vain he listened atten¬ tively: no breath—no murmur broke the surrounding stillness. For some time he hesitated, and " wist not what to do." His plight, he had sense enough to discern, was a critical one: but what¬ ever
ever the peril, or whatever the snare, into which he might thus incautiously have ventured, retreat was now impos¬ sible—the exhausted condition of his courser forbade the attempt. Beside* whither should he fly ?—and wherefore seek to avoid a peril, however immi¬ nent, which himself, but a few hours before, had thirsted to encounter?— and which, sooner or later, he knew, must be met and overcome? No, es¬ cape from the threatened danger must not be dreamed of; and yet how to proceed, with even a chance of safety, he knew not, for it was evident the Tartars were watching him; and prob¬ ably would not show themselves at all, until a leaden messenger had levelled him, their only—their too-courageous enemy, with the dust. In this dilemma, conscious that he was already the mark of
of many a hidden foe, Ibrahim involun¬ tarily cast his glance toward the route he had already traced; and, in an¬ other instant, his whole energy was summoned into action, every muscle of his form seeming newly braced, for he found that his wily enemies were no longer invisible. Behind him, at a little distance, be¬ twixt his present situation and the vil¬ lage he haa' quitted, he now discerned two Tartars prowling cautiously, and endeavouring to conceal themselves among the inconsiderable rocky pro¬ montories which alone diversified the rear of his course. They were on foot; and, Ibrahim doubted not, had dis¬ mounted for the purpose of secretly discovering his motives in approaching so near to their encampment, ere they dispatched him with the accustomed lack
lack of preparation and ceremony. A savage shout, or rather howl, from each, as soon as they saw their ambush was discovered, convinced him (if any fur¬ ther proofs were necessary) of their hostile intentions; and presently level¬ ling their carbines, at the same in¬ stant, at their devoted prey, it ap¬ peared probable, that another moment would have closed for ever the mor¬ tal career of Ibrahim. Thus apparently marked out for inevitable perdition, the desperate Cir¬ cassian drew his useless sabre, at the same time riding toward his ready assailants, and exclaimed in the lan¬ guage to which their rude ears were most accustomed—" Hold, brave sol¬ diers ! forbear — I am your friend. I ask but to be conducted to your chief." On
On this salute, the Tartars lowered their pieces, but continued stedfastly to regard the approaching youth; and, it is probable, his words would have been of little avail to save him from the threatened death, had he not se¬ conded his appeal just as they again raised their formidable weapons, by adding, earnestly—" Reserve your bul¬ lets for your enemies. Tartars ! I come your friend—I am no longer a Cir¬ cassian. I bring you treasure—bring you slaves, and concubines. Receive my sjcimitar, and, thus unarmed, con¬ duct me to your leader." Again the Tartars paused, and look¬ ed upon each other, as if now in re¬ ality dubious whether it were most advisable to desist, or give fire. At length, the fiercer of the two de¬ manded, hoarsely — " Why wander, thus
thus secretly and alone, so near our hostile camp? — and, if to surrender, why retainest thou thy weapon ?" Ibrahim, at the word vl flung his scimitar into the air, and it fell far distant from his now defenceless hand, almost within the reach of his in¬ terrogator. The Tartar sprang for¬ ward, and grasped the shining wea¬ pon, yet kept his eyes still fixed with steady wariness upon the fearless Cir¬ cassian. " Behold!" said the now again ad¬ vancing youth, " can you doubt my meaning, with the last proof of my sincerity in thy hand ? I have neither knife nor fire-arms—quiver nor lance. I am naked at thy mercy—yet I fear not." The Tartar whom Ibrahim now ap¬ proached (the same who had picked up the
the scimitar) had already desisted from presenting his piece; but his companion, to whom the youth had not yet spoken, he observed with something even of terror (for if there was any thing Ibra¬ him feared it was fire-arms, yet little used among his countrymen), still kept his carbine levelled with deadly aim at his advancing bosom. On perceiving this certainly suspicious circumstance, Ibrahim again checked his courser, and demanded why he did not lower his destructive weapon.—" Dismount first," said the ruffian, coolly—" we are not yet on an equality. Thy courser may possess speed, though he seemeth some¬ what wearied; but should the attempt be made to exert it now, my lead flies swifter than his limbs." " Mistrustful wretch!" muttered Ibra¬ him, in vexation; as, dropping the bridle,
bridle, after a transient pause, he leaped from his panting steed upon the ground. " There," he continued, somewhat con¬ temptuously—" we are now, at least, on an equality." The Tartar answered not, but spring¬ ing at once tovvard the steed, as his comrade had before vaulted toward the scimitar, he seized the relinquished bridle, and began minutely to examine the fashion of the splendid harness; nor failed to cast many an admiring glance at the sleek, well-shaped limbs, of the jaded animal. Perceiving him thus occupied, Ibrahim continued to advance toward his somewhat less close¬ ly-engaged companion; and having arrived almost within swing of his weapon (the Tartar still keeping him at distance with his own surrendered sword).thus addressed him. "I have vol. iv. F yielded
yielded all to your keeping," he said, calmly, " now conduct me to your chief. To his ear only may my purpose be revealed." " He will scarce lend an ear to the voice of a Circassian," was the sullen, and discouraging reply, of Sachem (the Tartar's name) to this reasonable de¬ mand. " Be that peril mine !" said Ibrahim, with fervour—" only bring me to his presence." " Not so fast," rejoined Sachem; " I know not the peril ourselves may incur by bringing a loathed Circassian alive before him. Thinkest thou, Taleb, the experiment would prove a safe one?" Taleb roughly responded —" If I bring aught alive before his eyes, ex¬ cept this horse, may I never again quit his presence alive myself! Thou know¬ est,
est, since his late wound, he hath spoken but little in council, or in private, but that little breathes only vengeance on the hated race ..... " " I bring him vengeance on the hand that nearly destroyed him!" exclaimed Ibrahim, eagerly. " I come to proffer him a glorious—an ample revenge, even upon that very being whose un¬ erring weapon felled hitn to the dust! to whose dwelling I will point him—to whose heart I will direct his blade! over whose present happiness he shall triumph—in the destruction of whose prized possessions he shall revel—on whose hoarded substance he shall feed! Be this my passport to your leader's presence, as I feel it a sufficient security for my safe dismissal thence; and let your own expected plunder be the f 2 talisman
talisman to secure a speedy compliance with my most earnest wish ! Behold! I am without arms, and entirely lack the means either of flight or resistance: slay me if you will—but deny me not first the interview I came hither to seek." The Tartars now drew more closely towards each other, and while their whispered accents reached not the ears of Ibrahim, seemed minutely examin¬ ing his personal equipments, and appa¬ rently estimating their value. Ibrahim gazed' on them with increased suspi¬ cion, and now began to repent of his temerity, in thus placing himself (wholly helpless and defenceless) in the rude hands of pitiless barbarians. Mean¬ time, the keen eyes of Sachem and Taleb continued their close scrutiny, and
and it appeared an enigma perfectly unsolvable which way the decision of the deliberating knaves would turn.
f 3 CHAP.
CHAP. XI. You will not see me murdered, wicked villains ? Philustcr. While yet the fate of Ibrahim hung suspended in the balance, and while the dark visages of those who had thus made' themselves the arbiters of his destiny grew every instant more gloomy and portentous, another horse tramp was distinctly heard approaching the wild scene of this threatening consul¬ tation. In very few seconds, a third Tartar joined the group, regarding, as he drew near, with evident joy and amazement,
amazement, the seemingly captured Circassian. " And wherefore," he ex¬ claimed, on reaching his brethren, " do you suffer the miscreant to be still alive ? It were best our leader hear not of your delay in despatching him. The slave stands trembling yonder, as if he were soliciting the death you have already too long refused, lo terminate his coward fears." " It is false—I tremble not!'' ex¬ claimed the degraded Ibrahim, indig¬ nantly ; " and had my nature been subject to the fears you name, I should not have stood here alone—even un¬ armed—yet, believe me, still undaunt¬ ed." " Sheeraz!" said Sachem, carelessly, " we have reasons for our course. Dis¬ mount, for thou shalt partake our coun¬ sel, and, it may be, render us thy ad¬ vice." E 4 The
The third Tartar, called by his com¬ panion Sheeraz, now flung himself from his steed, and began to listen attentively to the communication of his fellows. As he hearkened to their words, his own opinion of the case be¬ came evidently changed; and he seem¬ ed, more strongly even than his as¬ sociates, to "advocate the present pre¬ servation of their captive. As soon as their conference was concluded, he remarked, while remounting his spi¬ rited courser—" I will take the re¬ sponsibility of this act upon myself. I will conduct him to our leader, Hassaraic: if the slave disappoints us, by not fulfilling his promise, we know how yet to deal with bim. He shall perish miserably. Sachem, continue to keep careful watch—you, Taleb, ac¬ company me." Sheeraz,
Sheeraz, who appeared to possess considerable influence among his horde, now directed Taleb to mount his own courser, which, as before observed, was standing caparisoned at a little distance, and, leading the jaded steed of Ibrahim, to attend him to the camp. He then commanded the dis¬ armed Circassian to accompany them on foot, walking between his own charger and that of Taleb. Ibrahim would fain have objected to this de¬ grading arrangement, but he saw that it was no use: having already surren¬ dered, it only remained for him to submit to the conditions imposed, with a view of obtaining the desired in¬ terview. Accordingly, in this mode they proceeded, as fast as the strength of Ibrahim would allow the group to progress, toward the Tartar camp, f 5 which,
which, Ibrahim now discovered, was seated not far from his present situation. And now as they pursued their sul¬ try course, leaving Taleb to keep watch upon the shrubless summit, Sheeraz addressed the disgraced Ibrahim, ob¬ serving-—" By my faith in Mahomet! young Circassian, thine is in sooth a perilous enterprise. And then, with regard to thy expected recompence— what hoped reward can have induced thee to undertake a course so fraught with danger, and so apparently barren of advantage to thyself?" ** That disclosure is only for your leader's ear," said Ibrahim, coldly. " He will not refuse to his slave the recompence he has justly earned." " Nay, for justice—we sometimes are apt to think lightly of the word," responded Sheeraz, half derisively: " yet if
if thy desired reward be aught within the pale of reason—but thou art a niggard of thy speech, Circassian— thou shalt confess that I am less re¬ served with thee. Listen. After our leader, Hassaraic, had received his wound, during the recent attack upon your village, we left him for dead at the foot of an adjacent mountain. In a few days, however, he returned to our camp, restored to his former vigour, and reproached us for not more diligently ascertaining his true con¬ dition. Since that period, he has ut¬ tered nought save maledictions, and expressions of hatred, heaped indis¬ criminately on the heads of thy de¬ tested countrymen; and especially on the dwellers of that doomed settlement from which (if I err not in my conjec¬ ture) thou comest to demand an au- f 6 dience
dience of the pierced lion, ere his wrath at the pain of the wound has even subsided into the show of patience. Was this wisdom ?—but be it what it may, thou wert best not to retract thy protestations, nor to fail in their speedy fulfilment. Yet, answer me, was it wisdom ?" " Wisdom! Oh! no — it was de¬ spair!" exclaimed Ibrahim, distracted at the horrible picture of the Tartar's malignity his companion had presented to his imagination. " By our prophet, youth ! or Slieeraz is mistaken, thou hast reason to de¬ spair," said the Tartar, with cool indif¬ ference. " But see—our camp is in sight. Hassaraic will not be absent from his tent at this sultry hour—pre¬ pare, from his own lips, to learn thy destiny." The
The camp of the Tartars was now, indeed, in view. Situated in a small hollow on the top of the mountain, and screened from sight heretofore by the undulating surface of the ground, ap¬ peared a few scattered tents, covered with ragged cloth of a dingy hue. Near the centre arose one rather more ele¬ vated than the rest, which, Ibrahim doubted not, was the appointed dwell¬ ing of Hassaraic himself; and towards it his guards now silently conducted him.
CHAP.
CHAP. XII. 'Us he! 'tis lie! I know him now ! • • * I know him by his jet-black barb : Though now urray'd in Arnaut garb, Apostate from his own vile faith, It shall not save him from the death ; 'Tis he! well met in any hour. liv pas. The surrounding tents were scarcely raised from the ground, possessing most commonly a dirty, tattered exterior, and altogether of a most wretched ap¬ pearance. Yet even these, wholly un¬ inviting as was their outward aspect, afforded a shelter from the then scorch¬ ing
ing rays of the noontide sun; and they were crowded with human beings ac¬ cordingly, whose dusky visages were now thrust forward to ascertain whose steps intruded on the surrounding si¬ lence. Around, sometimes protected by a still ruder shelter, were seen many unharnessed steeds; and a dromedary (doubtless brought from afar, and re¬ garded as a valuable acquisition by this lawless horde) stood fastened to a stake near the principal habitation. As soon as the inmates of these wretched dwell¬ ings perceived that it was a stranger, and a Circassian, whom their comrades were conducting apparently in triumph to the tent of their chief, many rushed forth to torment him, and to witness his expected execution; while others still retained their crouching postures, contenting
contenting themselves with muttering indistinct curses on their fallen enemy. Men — women — children, in a crowd surrounded the distressed and shrink¬ ing Ibrahim. These, however, his con¬ ductors did their best to keep aloof, and even went so far in his favour as to intimate to them that the Circas¬ sian was likely to prove a friend. On arriving at the principal tent, Shee¬ raz desired Taleb to keep guard over his prisoner; and then entered to learn, as Ibrahim rightly conjectured, the de¬ cision of Hassaraic with respect to the requested interview. Immediately on the return of Shee¬ raz from the presence of Hassaraic, Ibrahim was conducted to a low black tent in the vicinity, already crowded with many groups of wandering Tar¬ tars, who appeared to regard the new comer
comer with a mixture of curiosity and hatred. Here he was briefly informed, that towards the close of day, most probably at the evening muster, which took place regularly about the hour of sunset, it was the intention of Has¬ saraic to grant him an interview. How the Circassian fugitive passed the re¬ mainder of that tedious—that dread¬ ful day, may be easily imagined; but his only remedy was patience beneath the galling indignities with which he was on every side assailed. At length the sun began swiftly to decline, and Ibrahim blessed the lengthening shadows of the tents, as they extended themselves gradually onward, even until they reached the brow of the mountain. It was now that the hitherto sluggish Tartars ap¬ peared at once to rouse themselves from
from their lethargy, and awake to the life of activity and danger it was their glory to pursue. A number of steeds were presently in motion, of a small hardy breed, well fitted to sustain the great fatigue, and occasional abstinence, it was so often their lot in these wild tracts to endure; while as many vigor¬ ous, and fearless riders, were engaged in feeding, or caparisoning their fa¬ vourites. Amid the subsequent bustle that ensued, as the air grew cooler, and the oppressive glare of the sun¬ shine-became diminished, Ibrahim was somewhat gratified to find himself al¬ most forsaken by his tormentors. Their attention was wholly absorbed by the approaching customary trial of agi¬ lity, and skill in horsemanship, about to take place, in presence of Hassa¬ raic himself, at sunset; and so eager was
was the interest each appeared to feel in the commonly hard - fought contest for superiority, that they seem¬ ed entirely to forget their unhappy prisoner. At length, the dejected Ibrahim, who, however, was still watched care¬ fully by Taleb, who had never once quitted his side, requested permission to breathe, for a few minutes, the pure refreshing air that now played over the mountain, in exchange for the unwholesome effluvia that still arose from the over-crowded tent. To this his guard sullenly consented, by rising to accompany him, probably weary himself of the protracted confinement; first carefully examining the state of his carbine, and adjusting his other weapons ready for instant use, should any attempt to escape be meditated. But
But who shall describe the state of Ibrahim's feelings, while wandering about that singular encampment? Even in that tumultuous hour, he felt that— " He atood alone—a renegade Against the country he betrayed ; Ke stood alone amidst the band, Without a trusted heart or hand;" and his own heart sunk responsive to the melancholy conviction. Still he wandered on, attended by his silent guide and guard; till, on turning sud¬ denly toward the space he had recently quitted, a new scene presented itself, totally different from any thing Ibra¬ him had ever witnessed. The Tartars were mounted, and al¬ ready their nimble coursers were skir- ring
ring fleetly the flat brow of the moun¬ tain, and even descending at full speed its steep craggy sides. Their various weapons, too, were in full play, and sparkling brightly in the expiring sun¬ beams; sometimes hurled high into the air, and caught by the expert wielders in their descent without check¬ ing their speed; and anon cast upon the ground, and thence regained with¬ out alighting from the saddle. And now, among this skilful, but ill-disci¬ plined troop, Ibrahim plainly beheld careering proudly the majestic figure of Hassaraic, mounted as usual upon his sable charger, apparently riding with as much outward courtesy as he could assume around the scattered camp, and encouraging his followers to feats of daring and agility, but without partaking
partaking their pastime. No other object now did the scene contain of sufficient interest to fix the gaze of Ibrahim for a single moment: no longer did he behold the wheeling- Tartar gracefully seated on his spirited charger— " Careering cleave the folded felt With sabre stroke right sharply dealt; !Nor niark'd the javelin-darting crowd, Nor heard their Ollahs wild and loud— iJ his glance was bent only on the ma¬ jestic bearing of the chief before him. Thus earnestly did his eyes pursue the course of Hassaraic, nor quitted their object even for an instant, till at length his own Circassian attire attracted (as he wished) the notice of the Tartar chief, who directly pushed his horse into
into a gallop, and made toward the spot whence Ibrahim was surveying this singular spectacle.
CHAP.
CHAP. XIII. He is not God—nor God's! Bvnoy. Anxious as Ibrahim had been to ob¬ tain a parley with the chief whose dreaded name had long made the bold¬ est of his countrymen to tremble, and although the present aspect of affairs was precisely that which he had so fervently desired, he yet could not be¬ hold the actual approach of Hassaraic without a degree of trepidation for which he strove vainly to account, and which he never remembered to have experienced before. It was not that the
the sternness of Hassaraic's countenance appalled him—for his aspect was per¬ fectly calm, and he appeared even gra¬ tified, rather than enraged, at the sight of Ibrahim, in spite of all the latter had been told of his reported thirst for vengeance. This expression, however, speedily passed away ; and long ere his sable steed had gained the spot where Ibrahim was stationed, with Taleb for his guard, the features of Hassaraic had resumed the settled composure that generally distinguished them—a com¬ posure whose meaning it was impos¬ sible to penetrate. Yet still did Ibra¬ him strive vainly to divest himself of dread—a kind of insuperable horror which he could not define, while gazing upon the iron lineaments, and (in appearance) scarcely mortal vol. iv. g stature
stature of Circassia's deadliest foe; but he struggled hard to prevent his sen¬ sations from becoming visible, and suc¬ ceeded. Hassaraic rode swiftly up, followed, or rather accompanied, by Sheeraz, and appeared, as before observed, neither surprised nor exasperated at the pre¬ sence of the Circassian fugitive. Not a single glance even of scrutiny did he deign to cast on the person of Ibrahim, ere, addressing his officer, he demanded haughtily—" Is this the man, Sheeraz, of whom you spoke ? — who seeks through, mountain perils of which his race wot well, and beneath the oppres¬ sive glare even of the noontide beam, an interview with the Tartar, Hassa¬ raic?" Sheeraz bowed to his proud steed's neck,
neck, and answered—" This is he!" " You have done well to spare him!" said Hassaraic, half aside, but in that steady tone which declares a delibe¬ rately settled purpose. " It may be, the slave shall aid me in effecting my meditated design—and if not ------" Here he broke off abruptly, and turn¬ ing toward the crest-fallen Ibrahim, added aloud—" Circassian ! speak your purpose." Ibrahim heard the words, but found, on being thus suddenly called upon, that to comply was not so easy as he had anticipated. There was something in the terrible calmness of the rude being before him, infinitely more ap¬ palling to his fancy than he had ex¬ pected to find even in the blustering wrath of the wounded and dishonoured g 2 Tartar
Tartar chief. He shrunk beneath the gaze of that steady, lifeless eye, yet knew scarcely wherefore; but still when he turned again, resolved, as he thought, to endure the shivering glance, he could not help thinking those fixed balls re¬ sembled no human eyes he had ever seen before. Thus bewildered (not to give the irresolution of Ibrahim a harsher name, for he was in reality but little subject to fear) the Circassian youth, at length, found courage to demand—" Art thou Hassaraic ? for to his ear only shall the thoughts of my bosom, and all its anx¬ ious yearnings, be divulged." " I am Hassaraic," replied the Tar¬ tar leader, proudly, " the dweller of the mountain—the desolator of the plain!" Ibrahim
Ibrahim felt hope rekindle in his bosom. " Then hear me," he exclaim¬ ed—" mighty Hassaraic! hear me. Scorner of death and danger, hear me speak—thou ! who hast too often wrapt our helpless villages iu flames, nor left them till consumed to ashes. By what¬ ever unaccountable chance thou hast recovered, and thus again eluded the long-threatened vengeance of my coun¬ trymen------" " Idiotic peasant!" exclaimed Has¬ saraic, interrupting hiin fiercely—" hast thon dreamed that the sunken and ef¬ feminate dwellers of thy peaceful ter¬ ritory, could have quelled for ever the invincible leader of those gallant hordes thou viewest yonder?—those uncon- quered legions which but now it awa¬ kened thy pusillanimity, and thy won- G 3 der,
der, to behold ? Fool!" and his aspect assumed an expression of scorn as he continued, " because I wisely fled be¬ fore the assailing torrent whicli over¬ whelmed me, and, like an impetuous cataract whose rage is soon exhausted, swept away all opposition for a time, thou hast presumed to think me finally overcome! I was unhorsed, and bleed¬ ing, it is true: but, young Circassian, learn—there is a price set on the least drop of blood which trickled that day from the veins of the fallen Tartar, Hassaraic, not all the lives of thy de¬ voted countrymen can pay." " My countrymen," retorted Ibrahim, with firmness, " are guiltless of the blood which, on that occasion, streamed (as then conjectured) from the heart of Hassaraic. It was the hand of the stranger
stranger that wounded the bosom of Hassaraic: it was the weapon of the stranger that became dabbled in his g 0re —the stranger's eye that directed its unerring aim. He—an alien to our race—a stranger even to our customs- came from a far distant country, and fixed his abode in our settlement. His first act in our land, was to rob me of the dearly-prized affection of my des¬ tined bride—his second, to deprive you of existence—at least, in the belief of our ruler Abbakuk, and in his own fond hope: for, even until this hour, among the inhabitants of yonder vil¬ lage, Hassaraic is believed to be no more. Myself beheld him proudly ar¬ rayed in the spoil—tbe recompence of thine overthrow; and when I ventured to contradict the tale, was shamefully G 4 thrust
thrust forth in public view as a wretch¬ ed slanderer, and denied the only res¬ titution an honourable foe can demand. But, Cassimir! the despised worm thou hast wronged, and trampled, yet shall be avenged—thou shalt yet writhe be¬ neath the bursting vengeance of the in¬ jured, disregarded Ibrahim." " Why did you not take his life," said Hassaraic, coolly, " and then strive to regain the affections of thy mis¬ tress?" " A solemn oath which I could not break," said Ibrahim, shuddering, " and which even now I dare not resolve to violate, prevented me. Else had I done it secretly, and alone—but I re¬ solved to preserve my vow unbroken, and commit the punishment of him whose life I have sworn to hold sacred to
to other hands. I come hither to so¬ licit your assistance, and that of your dauntless tribe, in the overthrow of mine enemy." " How! dost thou reckon upon my aid to destroy thy enemy ?" asked Has¬ saraic—" and. wherefore?" " Because he is also thine," re¬ sponded Ibrahim, with confidence— " and thine, too, in such a degree of virulence, that it becomes thee not to suffer him to live. Doth he not daily wear the trophies of thy down¬ fall?—hestowed upon him by Abba¬ kuk, in public council, for a conquest he never achieved? And because, moreover, it is in my power to prof¬ fer thee a recompence which, perhaps, may please thee better than even a summary and brave revenge." G 5 "No
" No passion is so potent as revenge!" said Hassaraic, with a grim smile of very dubious meaning. " Yes—Love!" said Ibrahim, stri¬ king his breast with vehemence— " Love! maddening, disappointed love, is stronger than revenge! It hath driven me almost to despair," he add¬ ed—" it hath brought me to your camp. But away with idle reflec¬ tions. Tartar! I proffer thee the hoarded wealth—the buried treasures, and the live possessions, of all who inhaHit yonder smiling village, toge¬ ther with the most ample retribu¬ tion thy soul can hope upon thy deadliest foe, provided only thou wilt grant me one poor recompence. I know the spot where all their valu¬ ables are secreted. I know where they
they have driven their flocks, and herds, as a security from the grasp of thy bold followers. Without my aid these might be sought in vain— for not a Circassian but would sooner die than disclose where such were hidden. I know the hour—the very point, at which a second attack is moit likely to succeed—nay, certain of success. Then will the surround¬ ing air be filled with human groans —then will the flowery earth be stain¬ ed with human life-blood! Then shall Cassimir be untaught the hitter false¬ hood, and perish suddenly—even Ab¬ bas shall strive in vain, and strug¬ gling yield his breath! Zoa then will shriek, and call, it may be, eve^n on Ibrahim for succour—the wretched Ibrahim—but call in vain!" 66 The
The deeply-affected Circassian now turned aside, and covered his visage to conceal his tears.
CHAP.
CHAP. XIV. And canst thou shed the blood that gave mc being 1 Nay, be u traitor, too, and sell thy country I Can thy great heart descend so vilely low, Mix with hired slavci, bmvoes, and common slabbers, Join such a crow, and take n, rulliun's wages To cut the throats of wretches as they sleep ? Orw^Y. Hassaraic regarded the afflicted youth steadily, for a few minutes, in silence. It was not the gaze of curiosity that triumphed in his flashing eyes—he seemed to rejoice at the devastation which appeared likely to ensue, and even
even to chuckle that the present speaker partook, in some degree, of its bitter¬ ness. At length, he demanded, half ironically—" And what may be the re¬ compence required for this honourable piece of service ?" Ibrahim raised his eyes indignantly for a moment—he felt the sharpness of the reproof conveyed by the words of his interrogator, but he also felt too severely his own degradation to attempt any other than a mild reply. Accord¬ ingly, he commenced—** There is a maidsn, most renowned Hassaraic! in yonder devoted village there is a maiden—" " True—there are many," said the chief, observing Ibrahim to pause, " who shall hereafter glad our gallant warriors, and teach them to scorn danger, at least, when
when beauty is the guerdon of intrepi¬ dity." " Be it so," said Ibrahim, in a falter¬ ing tone: " they will find sufficient of earth's fairest creatures to gratify even the daintiest appetite. Yet, bold chief, forgive thy slave if he ventures to sti¬ pulate; ----- " and here he paused again. " Quick, then," said Hassaraic, with seeming impatience; " the sun hath already sunk, and I have little leisure to hearken to the stipulations of a traitor." " Traitor!" groaned Ibrahim, but he smothered the sound, and if Hassaraic at all observed his indignation, he for¬ bore to notice it. He then strove to continue—" There is, in yonder village, a maiden whom I have loved ------" "And therefore seek to destroy!" said Hassaraic, with real, or feigned, amazement. "And
* ** And therefore would preserve- possess," cried Ibrahim, vexed at the Tartar's apparently wilful misapprehen¬ sion of his purpose. " I have loved her long—fervently, but vainly. This dam¬ sel, I require, shall be my portion of the expected booty : all other recompence I resign—refuse." " She must be peerless," observed Hassaraic, " to be worth so great a sacrifice. Doth she love thee, too, youth?" " Oh! no," said Ibrahim, in a voice of agony; " she hates—she despises me!" " Indeed!" said Hassaraic, half con¬ temptuously. " What proofs hath she given thee of her scorn—her abhor¬ rence?" " She hath been the cause of all my misery," exclaimed Ibrahim, distract¬ edly—
edly —" she hath made me what I am." " Youth! thou shalt have this mai¬ den," now rejoined Hassaraic, with a malignant smile. " I mean, pro¬ vided the conditions of our compact are fulfilled." " Shall I swear?" asked Ibrahim. " No!" said Hassaraic, hastily, with a contemptuous . gesture. ." Oaths can only be regarded by beings superior to thee—or, it may be, to him who now listetli thy words. Hearken attentively to my speech, Circassian; but as I mean not greatly to depend upon thy services, or confide in thy fidelity, it were useless to swear. Ere many rolling suns shall have follov/ed the course of the bright globe thou beheldest sinking yonder, I have already a purpose to lay the set¬ tlement whence thou hast escaped in smoulder-
smouldering ruins—mark me! a settled purpose, to burn, and to destroy. With this determination thy coming hither, though it may chance to avert the peril from thy single head, cannot otherwise interfere. But, Circassian, although without the superfluous aid of thy unexpected treason my meditated ven¬ geance was secure, yet is it possible thy assistance may increase our spoil, and thereby benefit, at least, my gal¬ lant comrades. Thou shalt accom¬ pany us —but not at liberty — start not aj; my words—I mean to with¬ hold thy freedom only until the ser¬ vices promised are performed. Thy beloved thou shalt possess — but I cannot add (if her feelings toward thee be as thou hast described) that thou shalt enjoy her. From amid the carnage of the sanguinary as¬ sault
sault the perverse object of thy fool¬ ish love shall be dragged weeping, and preserved for thee." " Heaven will reward thee!" ex¬ claimed Ibrahim, throwing himself upon his knees before the Tartar, with much emotion. " I seek not its recompence!" re¬ torted Hassaraic, coldly, and with an averted countenance. Then, turn¬ ing again tovvard the prostrate youth, he demanded—" Knowest thou Cassi¬ mir ?" " He is my deadliest foe, no less than thine," returned Ibrahim, with energy. " I know—I hate------ Oh ! that I dared destroy him ! But thou wilt not longer suffer him to live ?" " Rest satisfied—his days are number¬ ed," said Hassaraic, evasively. " Where¬ in
in hath he galled thy spirit thus se¬ verely ?" " He won the affection of my affi¬ anced bride," replied Ibrahim, readily, " although he wedded her not. He was the occasion, too, of my disho¬ nour, by causing me to be regarded as a vile slanderer, when I spoke only the truth these eyes had witnessed: but Abbakuk believed his tale, and commended him for the ignominious sophistry with which he refuted mine. He is triumphant—and I am miser¬ able;' " "Nevertheless, thou needest not envy him," said Hassaraic again, mys¬ teriously. " Hath Abbakuk yet de¬ parted from your village ?" " He will depart anon, if he hath not already," answered Ibrahim : " the chase alone, from which I saw not their
their return, prevented him from con¬ tinuing his progress to a distant pro¬ vince." " He is of the righteous over whom I have no power," murmured Has- sara i c _« and may not be sacrificed. Besides, his fate would but little grieve my victim." These words, breathed in a low sepulchral tone, scarcely reached the ears of Ibrahim, yet fail¬ ed not considerably to astonish him. It seemed strange that the Tartar, Hassaraic, whose remorselessness had grown proverbial, should be touched with compassion for a Circassian prince. Before Ibrahim, however, had time to express his amazement, the chief continued — " But it is more than probable, that Abbakuk hath already proceeded on his course. Circassian! it is £xed that to-morrow's sunset shall witness
witness our departure on this vengeful expedition." " Swiftly speed that sunset!" ex¬ claimed Ibrahim. « Till then," continued Hassaraic, " thou must perforce be satisfied to remain a prisoner. Sheeraz! let him have hospitable treatment and pro¬ tection from present violence, but look thyself to his security. Taleb ! follow me to my tent. Take heed that Zac¬ cho (alluding to his own sable charger) be tended carefully, that he may sustain bravely the fatigue to-morrow's sunset brings." " Hold, chief!" said Ibrahim, as Has¬ saraic wheeled his dark courser to de¬ part. " Hast thou aught else to demand ?" said Hassaraic, again turning—" then speak it quickly. What further is re¬ quired
quired of us as the full meed of thy treason ?" " That my steed also be restored to me," responded Ibrahim, his redden¬ ing visage once more flushed with indignation. " It is but a few brief hours since, royally caparisoned, he bore the weight of thy enemy, and mine. This was yesterday — to-day's better fortune made me his master. Some of thy tribe, to whom I sur¬ rendered, have withheld him from me __I would request his restora¬ tion." Hassaraic coolly directed his reply to Sheeraz —" Withhold the charger still," said he, "until to-morrow's eve: then let the Circassian receive his stolen courser, and ride unarmed in our rear. Mark me—unarmed!" So saying, the Tartar chief gave the
the signal to his obedient steed, and was presently seen galloping far on the way tovvard his own appointed dwell¬ ing.
CHAP.
CHAP. XV. Ho could nut rest, he could not stay Within his tent to wait for dny, But wulk'd him forth along the sand, Where thousand sleepers strew'd the strand. Wlint pillow'd them ? and why should he More wakeful than the humblest be ? Bvron. Sheeraz bowed submissively as his leader departed, and instantly resign¬ ing his horse to Taleb, remained, as directed, alone on foot with Ibrahim- The last lingering beams of daylight had now departed, but the paler moon, just peering above the horizon, vol. iv. H already
already supplied the deficiency. By her wan tender light several Tartars were still seen skirmishing with each other, apparently engaged in a sham combat, on the topmost pinnacle of the mountain. But, as it waxed later, even these began gradually to steal away to their tents, and nothing was either seen or heard, save the " Wide hum of that wild host," in adjusting themselves to slumber for the night. A strange reluctance to retire to the thraldom of his close, unwholesome lodging, still pervaded the bosom of Ibrahim; and induced him to persuade his vigilant, but silent guard, to al¬ low him yet to indulge beneath the more inviting canopy of heaven, for a transient
transient period, in his own gloomy and disheartening ruminations. The Tartar sullenly consented, or rather refrained from dissenting, to this piteously urged proposal, and stood for some time patiently beside his degraded captive. Yet, though he preferred their free indulgence in the ojen air, to the only alternative which presented itself (that of being " cabin'd, cribb'd, confin'd," among his insulting enemies), the meditations of Ibrahim, on that memorable eve, were by no means agreeable. He could not help feeling keenly, at that soft, and solemn hour, when con¬ science invariably whispers the truth, his own sunken and forlorn condi¬ tion—
H 2
« He
" He felt how fuint and feebly dim, The fame that could accrue to him, Who cheer'd the band, and wav'd the sword, A traitor in n ttirban'd horde," Indeed, his present situation, altoge¬ ther, he was fully aware, was far from safe or enviable ; since, what had he to depend upon, for even personal secu¬ rity ? The bare word of a pitiless enemy (and that ambiguously pledged), who had already sworn the utter ex¬ termination of his whole detested race. This was truly a frail, and un¬ substantial dependance; yet on it alone was the wretched Ibrahim constrained to lean for consolation, and for hope. Meantime, the moon rose higher in the azure firmament, and soon by her progress gave warning of the lateness of the hour. Sheeraz now turned abruptly
abruptly toward the tents, and slight¬ ly motioned to Ibrahim; who, after heaving a deep-drawn sigh, accom¬ panied him, in melancholy silence, to their place of repose for the night. ^ =r V -V -f When the next moon rose (on the succeeding eve), her mellow light, as she again ascended the brightening firmament, displayed a wholly differ¬ ent, and more active scene. The Tar¬ tars had abandoned their tents, and were already on their course toward that unfortunate Circassian settlement, their leader had determined should be given unrelentingly to the flames. A lengthened cavalcade, riding two by two, having already descended the h 3 steepest
steepest part of the mountain, was seen pursuing its wearisome route across the wilderness, in the direc¬ tion of the village of Ichohol. In the van rode the terrific Hassaraic, mount¬ ed, as usual, on the foaming Zaccho, his favourite jet-black steed. In the rear was observed a much more piti¬ able figure, the dejected Ibrahim, who, however ardently he had pant¬ ed for the treasonable contest, found his zeal to have abated, in no slight degree, on its near approach. The captive Circassian, indeed—for Ibra¬ him was still considered as a cap¬ tive— sometimes found it difficult to account for the dispiriting heavi¬ ness which seemed to possess him wholly. He was now well assured, that—
" 'lis but another anxious night, His pains the morrow may requite With all revenge, and love can pay, In guerdon for their long delay." Yet he felt not by any means ex- hilirated at the proximity of that ter¬ rible catastrophe, once so fervently wished for; on the contrary, his heart sunk within him at every bound his gallant courser gave, which hurried him onward to the scene of carnage. Close beside him capered the ever- watfhful Sheeraz, wliose orders were still not to lose sight of his evidently- suspected charge. To these may be added an extensive double line of well- mounted, and dexterous combatants, sometimes exhibiting as they rode all the graceful evolutions of Tartar horse¬ manship ; at other times curbing their steeds, in order to preserve their mettle H 4 for
for some more serious and desperate occasion. The pace at which they travelled was not remarkably swift, but such as these untiring trampers of the desert were accustomed to use; and the whole train was proceeding, by the nearest passable course, toward the de¬ voted village. * a *- * # The whole vicinity of the village was now wrapt in solemn silence, and most of its inhabitants seemed buried in profound repose. The moon had already risen high above the horizon, and, by her exaltation, combined with the surrounding universal stillness, pro¬ claimed the near approach of midnight. That day had been to Cassimir a day of bodily cessation from fatigue, and turmoil;
turmoil; but his mind was far—very far from tranquil. He had passed it chiefly within his own dwelling, in al¬ ternately conversing with his loved Maimaina, and directing the infantile pastimes of his blooming children. But slumber had long laid its heavy seal on the tender eyes of Kalib, and Atala; and even Cassimir himself had now some time since stretched himself on his uneasy pallet, in the vain endea¬ vour to obtain a transient interval of sweet forgetfulness. Maimaina lay sleeping beauteously by his side, her glowing cheek pillowed on her lovely arm; and yet— " In ^ain from side to side he tlnows His form, in courtship ofiepose; Or, If hi' do<:ed, a nouiid, a start Awoke htm, with a sunken heart,"
H 5
At
At length, however, for a brief period, he sunk into a profound slumber; but the terrific phantasms of his mind seem¬ ed only to have acquired superior force from the temporay suspension of reason. He now dreamed himself once more opposed to Hassaraic, who appeared approaching the village in hostile array, as on the previous occasion. But the weapon with which again in fancy he strove to pierce the breast of Circassia's direst enemy refused to assail its mark, or, if it struck, fell harmlessly from the unscarred bosom. Meantime, a thou¬ sand grinning visages seemed mocking him around, and malignantly watching the unequal contest, while in vain he still strove to injure his invulnerable foe. The horde came rushing on im¬ petuously, in spite of his efforts to repel the assault, and wound (as before he had
had fortunately been able) their impe¬ netrable leader. Presently they en¬ circled him—he appeared about to re¬ ceive a million wounds—flames burst suddenly around him—-the Tartars seemed already to have commenced the work of devastation—the home of his little ones, he fancied, was on fire! His heated imagination could endure no more. The bands of sleep were broken—he arose, forsook his unquiet couch in trembling silence, and flew to the casement, with hope that the fan¬ ning night-breeze might cool his fever¬ ish forehead. What dreadful sight meets he there? — do those horrible shadows still dance before his eyes? are their fell shouts yet ringing in his ears ? It is not the moon's pale light which greets his distracted gaze—the whole surrounding scene begins to H 6 brighten
brighten in the reddening glare. Cassi¬ mir clasped in speechless horror his own burning brow, and remained, for some moments, a senseless spectator of the approaching danger.
CHAP.
CHAP. XVI. 1 would not Dream; though I know it now to he a dren u, What 1 have dreamt. « • ■ • • And this look'd real, I tell you j after that these eyes were open, 1 saw them in their flight. Byron, The bewildered Cassimir, during this appalling period, could scarcely prevail upon his shuddering senses to believe but that he was still under the abhorred influence of his awful dream. In vain, however, he strove to clear his sight, or
or efface, for a single instant, from his startled and fixed gaze those fearful objects. On the reverse, while yet his brain reeled beneath the terrible con¬ viction that what he now beheld was no longer a delusion of the fancy, but a real substantial scene of desolation and carnage, the glare and tumult con¬ tinued most alarmingly to increase. He now distinctly saw the dark gliding figures of his Tartar enemies flitting, like shadowy spectres, from spot to spot with their flashing scimitars ready drawn; and at intervals, even discerned the flying forms of the affrighted Cir¬ cassians, issuing from the blazing dwell¬ ings, and with loud cries endeavouring to elude the swift pursuit of their brutal murderers. He heard the heart¬ rending shrieks of the females—their half-uttered
half-uttered supplications for mercy. He witnessed the struggling efforts of the males, until, borne down by over¬ whelming numbers, each in turn fell butchered at the feet of his yelling de¬ stroyers. While,yet his eyes roved wildly over this confused and hideous conflict, his attention was yet more fearfully rivetted by a string of mount¬ ed Tartars, who, led by their dreaded leader, Hassaraic, wheeled suddenly from their ambush, and appeared about to enclose for destruction his own se¬ questered dwelling. Struck with the immediate danger of his situation, Cassimir gave a sudden start, but directly afterwards relapsed into the state of motionless torpor from which this circumstance had momen¬ tarily aroused him. It w r as now that, while
while gazing in mute horror upon the approaching file, he first discovered the figure of Ibrahim riding among the foremost of his foes; and in a moment the whole reality rushed upon his mind. Presently, as the line drew nearer, and began to spread them¬ selves, forming a spacious circle round his devoted habitation, Cassimir saw his former rival distinctly point out its site to Hassaraic, and seemingly assist in arranging the plan of attack ; after which he rode back to some rearward station, and disappeared. Cassimir actually writhed in the con¬ sciousness of his own inability to reach the traitor with deserved punish¬ ment. Yes ! then it was true—the fugitive Circassian had leagued him¬ self with the enemy, and himself become
become marked out as an especial object of the Tartars vengeance, whoso deadly animosity, it was not impro¬ bable, had even been further inflamed by the representations of the malig¬ nant Ibrahim. Still, however, with the imminence of his peril, seemed also to increase his inability to con¬ tend with it; and he still remained, as if scarcely conscious of existence, silently watching the motions of his enemies. The first sound that recalled his fleeting senses, more powerful in its sweetness than the harsh yells with¬ out, in all their grating horror, was the soft voice of Maimaina, murmuring in her sleep—" We will be happy! Yes, Cassimir, nothing hereafter shall disturb our tranquillity!" " Oh!
" Oh! no—our quiet soon will be uninterrupted," thought Cassimir; " our slumber too sound to be broken ! Wake, Maimaina!" he exclaimed, seeming to burst, with a violent effort, the trammels which had hitherto con¬ fined his tongue—" Awake ! thou dear beloved one—for the commencement of an eternal tranquillity seemeth in¬ deed at hand!" " My Cassimir!" said Maimaina, awakening suddenly. " It was thy voice—what said'st thou ?" '« That, Maimaina, for thee at least," responded Cassimir, franticly, " an eter¬ nal haven of quiet is this hour prepared. Behold!" and he dragged the affrighted Maimaina to the casement, " Ha! what do I see !" she exclaim¬ ed, maddening in a moment at the ap¬ palling
palling sight—-" my Atala! my child¬ ren !" She rushed to their couch, and clasp¬ ed them in her arms, with all the agony of mate., al fondness about to be reft of each beloved object, but resolving never to be separated. For Maimaina well knew the inhumanity of those by whom, she doubted not, her dwelling had again been assailed. She was per¬ fectly aware that the Tartar's renown for barbarity to all those unhappy vic¬ tims who fell into his hands, was not undeservedly obtained, nor bestowed without sufficient cause. Her race had long been acquainted with the fa¬ tal truth, contained in the poet's feel¬ ing lines— " The villain Arab, as he prowls fur picy, Oft marks with blood and wasting flimr-s the uny ; Vet
Yet none So cruel as the Tartar foe, To death inured, and nursed in scenes of woe." While Maimaina was thus occu¬ pied, with vainly fondling (in the hor¬ rible consciousness that she could not save) her alarmed and shrieking offspring, Cassimir, excited almost to fury by the useless wailings of his in¬ nocent children, and the wild transports of their weeping mother, was hastily arming himself to encounter, as a war¬ rior ought, his numerous assailants. Having completed his defensive ar¬ rangements with a degree of speed that made some atonement for his former dilatoriness, he clasped for an instant the trembling Kalib to his bosom (to attempt hushing his fears would, he felt, have been useless and futile), and prepared to issue forth. " Farewell, awhile,
awhile, my dear Maimaina!" he ex¬ claimed, addressing the almost-fainting partner of his peril and affliction. " I go to encounter our enemies. Hark! I hear their feet approach the portal— already they trample our threshold! But the Tartar shall not satiate his foul appetite for human prey so easily. I know myself his victim—but the vic¬ tim is still at bay, and he shall find me resolute." " Hold! let us die together!" ex¬ claimed Maimaina, clinging to his arm¬ ed form, for Cassimir had now put on the mail presented to him by his ap¬ plauding prince. " Forsake me not, Cassimir—here let us die together!" " It must not be," faltered Cassimir, in confusion. " The charge bestowed upon me by Abbakuk—the fate, per¬ haps, ,
haps, of the whole settlement—it must not be. Besides, even were I to re¬ main ------" " Thus locked in each other's arms, at least, we shall perish!" cried the frantic Maimaina, desperately. " Leave me not lonely with my helpless babes— thy babes, my Cassimir. Look at our Kalib! doth not his tender aspect pre¬ sent to thee—even as reflected in a faithful stream—the image of thine own ? Oh! whatever course may be required of thee by the charge Abba¬ kuk bestowed—/ charge thee—I im¬ plore thee -----" The rest was unheard by Cassimir, for just then, with a furious yell, the Tartars attempted to force the fragile entrance. Already they had half suc¬ ceeded, ere Cassimir, gaining the rent aperture,
aperture, with his keen falchion fiercely drove them backward, .and stretched two of the foremost lifeless at his feet. Maimaina, however, with clasped hands, and agonized features, pursued him to the portal; and thence, as soon as his trusty and well-managed weapon had cleared a space sufficient for her passage, even into the open air to induce him to return. This incautious movement was fatal to Maimaina; since Cassimir had now advanced (marking his path with carnage as he proceeded) too far among his foes, for her lovely and feeble form to overtake his steps with safety. Accordingly, a rough and savage Tar¬ tar, springing from the darkness, pre¬ sently intercepted her course; while a second, the very prototype of the for¬ mer in appearance, at the same mo¬ ment
ment prevented her return to the cot¬ tage. Maimaina strove to shriek, but the ruffian who had first advanced grasped her so vigorously, that she could only utter low and broken sounds, such as were wholly insufficient to reach the ears of the still-warmly engaged Cas¬ simir. At that awful moment, how dreadful were the feelings of Maimaina! What horrible surmises rushed upon her mind! She thought (if thinking such a chaos of fleeting images can be called) of her own probable destiny— of Cassimir's—of her children's! Find¬ ing her situation desperate, she even assayed to move the compassion of her savage captor, addressing words of pity to ears that were pitiless. At length, she sunk, exhausted and fainting, in his unrelenting clasp; while the for¬ tunate
tunate Tartar, wreathing his rude hand in her beautiful tresses till his wonted stern features relaxed into a grisly smile, seemed to exult in the possession of so fair a prize.
vol. iv. i CHAP.
CHAP. XVII. I aslt not the pleasures that riches supply, My anbre shall win what the feehle must buy ; Shall win the young bride, with her long flowing hair, And many a maid from her mother shall tear. JJvnoN. While yet Sachem was regarding triumphantly his no longer resisting captive, the second ruffian, Taleb, who had so opportunely intercepted the re¬ turn of Maimaina, and who now seem¬ ed envious of his comrade's better for¬ tune, approached, and appeared inclin¬ ed (judging from the gathering gloom of his ferocious countenance) to dis¬ pute
pute vehemently his sole right of pos¬ session. " Now, by Allah !" exclaimed Sachem presently, disregarding the sour looks of his associate, " this is even braver fortune than I had ventured to hope. A most delectable creature —and won without a single stroke 5" " Hold there !" interrupted Taleb, snappishly, " reckon not so fast. With respect to her delicate figure I mean not to oppose thy opinion—but recol¬ lect the damsel is not yet wholly won." " I see no antagonist near to contest the prize," said Sachem, sternly ; " ex¬ cept thou meanest to oppose my just possession." " I do mean to dispute it," said Ta¬ leb, coolly brandishing his already reek¬ ing sabre, "Then, Taleb," replied the other, furiously, " be sure thou shalt find 12 the
the arm of Sachem strong, and his blade sharp enough, to protect his rights!" The ruffians now prepared fiercely to engage, Sachem having first depo¬ sited the form of the insensible Mai¬ maina on the ground, immediately be¬ hind his own station. Just at that instant, Sheeraz, happening to gallop past the scene of combat, saw by the red glare of the surrounding fires a beauteous female lying prostrate and unprotected on the cold, blood-sprink¬ led earth. The sight induced him suddenly to check his charger, and dismount.—" By my thrice holy beads, sacred to Mahomet!" he exclaimed (for Sheeraz accounted himself an ex¬ cellent Mussulman) " surely an inha¬ bitant of the promised paradise lies forsaken yonder. In sooth, beautiful as
as one of his own immortal houries!" he continued, bending earnestly over her lovely form. " Ha! yonder also are two of my tribe, contending, doubt¬ less, for the possession of this fair creature. What if I turn this ill- timed piece of folly into a fruitless contest ?—secure for myself the love¬ ly cause of their strife, and disap¬ point the victor? I will do so— since, during the struggle, all the spoi¬ ler's springe can grapple is fairly won; and Mahomet, no doubt, hath ordain¬ ed me this beauteous prize, in return for my ablutions duly performed at the desert fount this morning. Come, then, fair damsel—the prophet's own valued gift! let me bear thee to my courser. For the remainder of this perilous night, he shall carry us both." Thus did this consummate hypo- 13 crite
crite endeavour to reconcile his con¬ science to his crimes: then gently raising the still-senseless form of Mai- maina in his arms, he hurried her silently but swiftly towards his steed, left standing at a little distance. But here his short-lived triumph over his still regardless associates was doomed to cease. Ere yet he gained the saddle with his helpless burthen, his path was crossed by Cassimir himself, who, raging from the slaughter of his baf¬ fled enemies, but finding that most of Jiis friends were already sacrificed, and deeming probably the hour of his own destiny arrived, was now returning breathless to his cottage, resolved at least to perish (as Mai¬ maina so fondly requested, and him¬ self had before determined) surround¬ ed by those who were dear to him. In
In an instant he recognised the figure of his Maimaina, and ere the follow¬ ing moment had elapsed, with a single stroke of his trusty falchion, felled the ruffian who bore her to the ground! And now, stooping deliberately over the fallen Sheeraz, Cassimir wrested the inanimate Maimaina from his dying grasp; and flinging her unconscious form, with a sudden effort, across his own tired shoulders (for he was wearied almost to sinking by his previous exertions), proceeded with as much speed as his remaining strength permitted him to use toward the cottage. Though fainting — bleeding — gasp¬ ing, did the wounded Sheeraz scramble to his knee, as soon as he found his conqueror had left him, and, raising his fatal carbine, discharged thence after him a swift and vengeful mes, 14 senger.
senger. Cassimir heard the report— he even beheld the flash—but he felt not the wound, and only howled back his malediction in return for the in¬ tended unwelcome favour. The last effort of the struggling Tartar was made—he sunk backward to the ground, and expired. Cassimir entered the cottage, just as Sachem and Taleb, after vainly hacking each otner for several mi¬ nutes, discovered the supposed flight of their intended victim. He enter¬ ed - his dwelling in safety — but, al¬ though himself unvvounded, the lower part of his habiliments appeared soak¬ ed in blood. Alarmed, he gazed on the recovering Maimaina, since now, for the first time, he felt her quiver¬ ing limbs stir feebly—Alas! the Tar¬ tar's aim was too true, though Cas¬ simir
simir had little dreamed of its effect. The bullet of Sheeraz had pierced her lovely neck — a crimson torrent was streaming from the wound. Life was indeed restored, for a moment, to her bosom; but returned only to take an everlasting leave of its beauteous tene¬ ment. In that last struggle escaped her gentle spirit—Maimaina was no more. ***** After Ibrahim had deliberately point¬ ed out to the Tartar chief the residence of Cassimir, as already described, a piece of service Hassaraic received with evi¬ dent coldness, in spite of his professed enmity to its present owner (as if he had little needed such superfluous in¬ formation), the renegade Circassian gal- 15 loped
loped off, followed closely still by Sheeraz, to perform tlie remainder of his stipulated task. Having speedily disclosed to the avaricious Tartar, and such of his comrades as chose to accom¬ pany them, " according to the bond," the place where the whole treasure of the village was secreted, Sheeraz after¬ wards thought it necessary to care but little for the further security of his prisoner. It was on his return from this lucrative expedition, for the pur¬ pose of acquainting Hassaraic with the successful result, that Sheeraz met with the supposed fortunate adventure which terminated in his own downfall, and likewise in the destruction of the inno¬ cent Maimaina. Meanwhile, Ibrahim, finding tymself again at liberty, betook himself at full speed to the dwelling of 4-bbas and Zulema, where algq re¬ sided
sided the still dear object of his fatal affection—the unrelenting Zoa. The scene of slaughter and devasta¬ tion which presented itself, on his arrival at the well-known spot, beggars all description. The cottage was already wrapt in flames, and the green earth, in many places, visibly covered with human brains and gore. Of Zoa he could see nothing—but the venerable Abbas he saw still struggling singly against a host of assailants. Ibrahim felt for his scimitar, but in vain—it had never been returned to hirn; had he possessed it at that moment, he would certainly have directed its keen edge against his new allies. But he was wholly unarmed. He stooped, in the frenzy of his indignation, to pick up what he deemed a powerful clut)— by the dim smoky light whicli pre- 16 vailed
vailed it seemed so to him. It was a mangled limb—perhaps of Zulema— Ibrahim flung it from him with a shudder of disgust and horror. Zoa, however, he still deemed was safe; he knew the libidinous Tartars were not in the habit of sacrificing youth and beauty, except at the shrine of tlieir own inordinate lust. For such fate, indeed, he believed her at present re¬ served; but this, he also weakly ima¬ gined, the promise extorted by himself from Hassaraic would prevent. By this time, the aged Abbas, borne down by the superior number of his foes,' had yielded to exhaustion, and grew pal¬ pably feebler at every succeeding stroke. Presently he fell, covered with wounds; and half a score of weapons, " pinning him to the dust," made his dismissal from existence sure. The savage Tar¬ tars,
tars, nor content with his massacre, flung, with a howl of triumph, his mangled body into the crackling blaze. This sight, too, was the wretched trai¬ tor constrained to endure—and his the weapon which ought to have defended him! Ibrahim, in the height of his agony, cast himself on the ground, and begged some pitying hand to strew the dust upon his miserable head. ***** In the cottage of Cassimir was now presented a far different, though equal¬ ly mournful scene. The hideous din of that unequal strife had sunk to rest around its half-burned walls, for the Tartars believed that within them they had completed the work of death and devastation. During the absence of Cassimir,
Cassimir, in the vain hope of collecting his scared Circassians together, the cot¬ tage had been entered, searched, and af¬ terwards fired by these inhuman plun¬ derers, though the wish to destroy had taken only a partial effect; the flames, as it appeared, after a certain progress, be¬ coming almost miraculously extinguish¬ ed. In the outer apartment sat Cas¬ simir, still supporting on his knees the lifeless body of his beloved Maimaina, in utter unconsciousness of every thing but the overwhelming misery caused him- by her cruel doom. His eyes were fixed, and his teeth gnashed to¬ gether: had he possessed the power, he would have called upon the black¬ ened walls to fall and bury him be¬ neath their smouldering ruins. It was long ere he changed his despairing at¬ titude; but when at length, after a dreary
dreary pause, he started into motion, sense and memory too returned. He thought suddenly upon his children— it was the first time he had recollected their awfully-abandoned situation. In¬ stantly placing the body of Maimaina gently on the floor, he rushed into the inner apartment, and called distractedly upon his silent little ones. The chamber was scorched, and filled with smoke— the Tartars had been there—its suffo¬ cating atmosphere was alone a sufficient testimony of their destroying presence. The diminutive figure of a child appear¬ ed standing erect in a dull smoky corner of the apartment; his vision did not deceive him—it was Kalib. He caught the unconscious form in his arms—but it was cold, and stiff—life had evident¬ ly long forsaken it. The wretched father resigned with agony the value¬ less
|«K mould, and again rushed wildly toward the portal. In bis passage, his foot struck forcibly against some petty obstacle which rolled before it He stooped—it was the severed head of his blooming infant—his smiling Atala! Cassimir beheld no more, but quitting the dark and sanguinary scene, as if to court the death he had so lately struggled to avoid, entered with frantic daring upon the terrifically lighted country. # • * • • * Meantime, the open space in tbe centre of the village, conveniently illu¬ mined by the surrounding blazing dwellings* became now the general rendezvous of all the principal charac¬ ters concerned in our narrative. In the
the midst stood Ibrahim, who appealed strenuously urging his right to the possession of a female captive, whose trembling spirits seemed wholly unable to support tbe horrors that surrounded her. This, of course, was Zoa, who soon found, in total insensibility, a tem¬ porary refuge from her persecutors. Hassaraic was also there, mounted on sable Zaccho, his own proud favourite; while placed before him gently on the saddle, and evidently destined to be his own especial prize, appeared the Circas¬ sian maid already alluded to—the trem¬ bling, sinking Zoa. At length, having apparently assayed every argument to induce the faithless Tartar to relinquish his beautiful victim in vain, the incensed Ibrahim exclaimed—" Wretch! fit only to be reverenced by the barbarous tribes thou dost command—the re¬ morseless,
morseless, ruffian hordes, that alone acknowledge thy supremacy! Have I betrayed the last refuge of my country¬ men—disclosed their hidden treasure— borne agonies, and witnessed cruelties, which even a heart of stone might break __and shall I not receive, for such dis¬ tinguished service, my stipulated, and most just reward?" " Give him his due recompence," shouted Hassaraic, with a gesture his impatient followers failed not to com¬ prehend. " Let him see how the hordes <he affects to despise reward treachery and insolence." As he finished, he gave the signal to his mettlesome courser, who bounded with speed towards liis native moun¬ tains, bearing away with him the beau¬ teous prize; while suddenly a file of ferocious Tartars pointed their readv carbines
carbines at the frantic victim, and at once discharged their contents into his devoted bosom. Ibrahim fell—and in¬ stantly expired. The ruffians now ut¬ tering a savage shout of exultation, immediately followed the example of their leader by betaking themselves to flight, each laden with his own selected portion of the booty, leaving behind them only flames and desolation; and the tramp of their fleet horses speedily died away in the distance. Tlie momentary, but clear flash, which accompanied the firing of many a skilfully-levelled carbine, shone dis¬ tinctly on the blood-smeared vestments, and ghastly gleaming eyes, of the dis¬ tracted husband of Maimaina; and, the next instant, a cloud of sulphureous smoke enveloped the whole dcene of contest. Faintly now, from amid the dense
dense surrounding vapour, a piercing voice was heard, whose upbraiding ac¬ cents, uttered in a paroxysm of the deep¬ est agony, appeared to pursue the Tar¬ tar leader in his straining flight. The smoke soon cleared away—but Cassimir was gone. * * * * Yet a few passing years, and there remained but fewer scattered, and me¬ lancholy traces, whereby even to dis¬ tinguish the almost forgotten site of that once-flourishing village. Small, indeed, was the number of its inhabitants whose lot it had been to survive that fatal massacre; and these, on returning to their devastated homes, and finding only the red marks of slaughter and desola¬ tion,
tion, had abandoned them again in despair, and settled elsewhere. The unfortunate Zoa, whose miser¬ able destiny it was to be borne away captive by these fierce barbarians, never again became a peace-loving inhabi¬ tant of her native valleys. Once, and once only, many years afterwards, a withered - looking female, on whom a constant exposure to that scorch¬ ing clime appeared to have effected what age alone could otherwise have CD accomplished, was seen to descend the rough mountains on a ravaging excur¬ sion, in company with the tribe to which she belonged; and having reach¬ ed the spot where formerly took place the" brutal massacre before narrated, requested, for a short period, to be left alone. By the wan moonlight, she was then observed to wring her hands
hands with vehemence — loosen her long dark hair—and, sobbing violent¬ ly, to prostrate herself several times upon the ground, near the scene which was anciently the site of those happy habitations. For a short space, she indulged in the profoundest lamenta¬ tions, and appeared, by the wild ex¬ travagance of her gestures, to be ut¬ terly inconsolable : but finally retreat¬ ed toward the hills, on the return of her ruthless associates, whom, for the proffe/ of worlds, she would not have abandoned. This was the once-beau¬ tiful Circassian damsel — this was the lost, unhappy Zoa ! Forced to their camp by the cruel Tartar, Hassaraic (who immediately after her capture had most strangely disappeared, and, although his followers strove long to ascertain his destiny, was never heard of
of more), the wretched Zoa struggled vainly for a while to disguise the palpable feelings of horror with which she regarded her new associates. By degrees, however, this disgust became diminished; her terror Avore away, and she grew gradually reconciled to her (at first) apparently-hopeless situa¬ tion. She viewed them as affording her the only chance and means of fu¬ ture subsistence: in time their rude habits waxed familiar to her: and, at the period alluded to, she would not have exchanged her present for her former life, even had an opportu¬ nity of doing so presented itself to her choice. Meanwhile, the odoriferous produc¬ tions of their native land bloomed gaily over the neglected graves of the gentle Maimaiaa, and her murdered offspring; for
for compassion had afforded to each of the victims in that fatal fray a cover¬ ing from the'vultures, and wild beasts of the desert, near the place, where they had fallen;-although every rude token erected ■ by the* survivors i ere they abandoned' the desolated scene, to mark the precise spot of. their in¬ terment, had long since mouldered in¬ to obscurity. Yet still the wild rose blossomed there, and the far-shelter¬ ing myrtle spread its arms above them with a luxuriance known only in that flowery and aromatic region. The sun rose over them with his accus¬ tomed regal splendour, and the wan, clear moonshine, streamed often and lovely upon their silent resting-place; while odours of the choicest kind were incessantly diffused around. But Cas¬ simir was not there to inhale that de¬ lightful
lightful fragrance —he saw not the blossomed canopy which covered their remains—he heard not the soft mur¬ muring of the perfumed breeze which alone broke the surrounding stillness, seeming to wail over the innocent de¬ parted. Neither was his corpse among the mangled, fast-decomposing forms, which festered underneath that flowery turfj and smiling sky. Yet his eye never once rested upon their weed and blossom-encompassed tombs. Although living, he sought not again the place o" their repose—he knew not even that they had found a grave. He was re¬ ported (like the Tartar chief) to have disappeared strangely, vanishing none knew whither, by what means, nor wherefore (for the country was diffi¬ cult and dangerous to traverse, and to vol. iv. k attempt
attempt it alone would have been more perilous than to have sojourned) soon after the sanguinary adventures of that fatal night. But whatever his destiny, it was sufficiently palpable, he passed the remainder of his days afar, and never afterwards visited Circassia. ***** * * # * s * * * * In a hollow and desolate valley, .which" wourTd .among the low sandy -hills that intervene between the Red Sea and Mecca, a solitary figure was seen proceeding slowly along the shrub- less waste, with a dejected gait, and sorrowful countenance. His garb was foreign, yet his features were similar to those
those of the hard-faring, in habitants of that rigid soil; and, although .evident¬ ly just arrived jfronx some .far-distant country, he seemed not a total stranger to the ground he now traversed. On the contrary, he surveyed each desolate object with a degree of melancholy in¬ terest, which plainly bespoke some for¬ mer acquaintance with the rude and barren scene. The time was beyond the hour of sunset, and the brief twi¬ light was already abandoning every thing to the dull reign of obscurity, which enveloped the dingle with a sabler gloom at each succeeding in¬ stant. Measuring with hopeless eye the dreary expanse of sand before him, on which no living thing appeared to diversify the lifeless monotony of the view, and surrounded only by the K 2 blackening
blackening hills, and darkening sky, of that disconsolate traveller, indeed, it may be truly recorded— " He stood, amid the wilderness, alone."
CHAP.
CHAP. XVIII. I come to the place of my birlh, and cried, " The friends of my youth, where are they i" and nn echo answered, " Where are they ?" Arabic M.S. With heavy steps, and earthward-di¬ rected aspect, the apparently despond¬ ing stranger now pursued his solitary course. As he continued, in seeming recklessness of whither his weary feet conducted him, the shades of night closed silently over his bowed head, and the faint twinkling of a distant light surprised him from, his reverie. Suddenly he started — he knew that the hyma of some wandering family K 3 was
was near, which the darkness, and the confusion of his own bewildered thoughts, had hitherto prevented him from discerning. Yet he looked not alarmed at this unexpected intimation of the probable proximity of some un¬ friendly tribe—fear seemed to compose no' portion of his present feelings; he rather appeared to rejoice, in spite of his emotion, at the obvious nearness of,' at least, a human dwelling. He had not proceeded far in the direction of the small goat's-hair tent which he now clearly distinguished, ere he heard the sound of many infantile voices, and presently that of a musical instru¬ ment, as if awakened by some tender mother for the purpose of lulling them to repose. Words soon accompanied the Arabebbah, and floated melodiously over the noiseless waste to a consider¬ able
able distance. It was a female voice that sung, and the advancing stranger, pausing suddenly, seemed to listen to the mournful strain with breathless at¬ tention. The ditty, produced extempore, as was usual, by the feelings of the gentle musician, lamented the loss of parents dearly prized, and of a brother, who (said the reproachful strain) had forgot¬ ten the home—even the very exist¬ ence of his kindred. Still the stranger advanced not, neither did he attempt to recede; but by his attitude, and the eloquent expression of his countenance, it was e;isy to perceive, that neither the hand nor voice of that fair melodist appeared wholly unfamiliar to his as¬ tounded ears. The cries of the children had for some time ceased—even the maternal K 4 voice
voice which lulled them had long sub¬ sided into silence, ere the faltering limbs of the deeply-affected traveller sufficed to bear him to that desert ha¬ bitation. On its threshold he was met by the lovely form whose voice, and remembered skill in harmony, appeared aheady so to have startled his bewil¬ dered senses. He regarded her steadily for a moment, and then cast his eyes to the ground in extreme agitation. The Arabian female imagined him over wearied; and sooth it was his foreign garb, and apparent lassitude, sufficiently indicated his need of shelter and re¬ freshment at the hands of hospitality. Without hesitation, therefore, she ap¬ proached, and although his writhing lips refused even to pronounce the ac¬ customed salutation, or utter a syllable significative of his present wants, con¬ ducted
ducted the benighted traveller, cour¬ teously to the rude interior of the hyma. Within sat a middle-aged Arab, the husband of his charitable hostess, and the affectionate sire of a numerous and hopeful progeny, now placidly slum¬ bering around. This latter personage also arose, on perceiving his unex¬ pected guest, and welcomed ! him to partake of their slender fare. The stranger bowed his forehead gratefully toward the earth, in seeming acqui¬ escence, but said nothing. Food was then, placed before him, and . water which the juice of the tamarind had rendered delicious, but he could par¬ take of neither. His eyes seemed vainly, but perpetually wandering a- round the rugged habitation, in search of objects upon which, he yet felt as- K 5 sured.
sured, they would never alight again. " Daughter of the desert," said he at length, addressing the wondering fe¬ male, " the grateful remembrance of one who yet dares not even to offer a prayer for thy salvation, be the worth¬ less guerdon of thy hospitality—but I cannot taste them. I am a wan¬ derer, even in my native land, house¬ less and friendless—but thine is a hap¬ pier destiny. Thine is a blissful home —a brave protector, and a beauteous •family. Thou hast parents, too, and art happy!" " Alas! they are dead!" now ex¬ claimed the changed Mohara (for Mo¬ hara indeed it was, with Muley still, as heretofore, by her side, her kind and faithful husband)—" the sand has long covered, and hid them from my sight."
sight." Then as if he had touched a string which, while it vibrated, could emit only discord, she wildly resu¬ med—" Why did ye abandon your own beloved Mohara to pass her so¬ litary hours in wailing, and in mise¬ ry?— w hy sink, decayed and blighted, into the narrow tomb*? Why, Aben Voorg __and my kind mother, Zeid __-why did ye ponder ei your son's strange absence, even until the ma¬ lady grief occasioned wore ye to the grave?—and, oh Alhamet! my faulty, but yet lamented brother—ah! where¬ fore did thy cutting disobedience con¬ sign such parents to an early doom? K 6 Stranger!
Stranger! I had a brother—he was the delight of his father—the heart's core of his mother. He left us sud¬ denly—we knew not wherefore—he never returned. His departure threw a shade of darkness over their future lives, and gradually bowed them to the tomb. Ah! stranger, you are a wanderer—it may be, amid thy many journeyings, that thou hast heard tidings of my brother, Alhamet, wliose 'cruelty destroyed the mother that bore him—whose disobedience hath broken his father's heart ?" The stranger hid his face in his rough;, coarse garment, and again an¬ swered nothing. The half-descried motion of his writhing form, however, proved that his feelings were not .equally silent. His labouring bosom heaved
heaved beneath the weight of some¬ thing it panted to divulge—his whole frame appeared shaken by some ter¬ rible commotion, and he was evidently weeping bitterly.
CHAP.
CHAP. XIX. Wanderer! boiv'd with griefs and years, Wunricrer! wilh the cheek so pale. Oh t give language to thuse tears! Tell tlieir melancholy lalo. Montgomery. Muley and Mohara witnessed with astonishment the extreme perturba¬ tion of their strangely-sensitive guest. At length, perceiving that he answer¬ ed not, Mohara, with more mildness, resumed. " Let not my wild grief terrify thee, stranger. They whom I mourn have long slumbered in tran¬ quillity. Yet Alhamet—perhaps he lives——
lives -----Oh! pity a fond sister's feel¬ ings! What means this strange emo¬ tion ?—that averted countenance? Ah! assure me that these visible throes of thine portend not some dread tidings of my lost brother, Alhamet." " Look on me—I am Alhamet!" said the stranger, after a lengthened pause, during which sobs choked his utter¬ ance. " Mohara, tLy brotiier is restored to thee—I say not how wretched—but he is restored!" and, rising, he flung himself into her arms, who now (sud¬ denly recognising his changed features) rushed eagerly to meet him. " It is my brother—it is Alhamet!" she exclaimed, gazing earnestly upon his altered visage. " Look, Muley, it is Alhamet—but, alas! he comes too late. And, oh ! how changed — that wild, and haggard aspect—what must he
he not have suffered! But we will part no more." Alhamet now answered solemnly— " What I have borne can be appreci¬ ated only by myself: what I have yet to suffer, is known alone to him who will inflict, We must part again, and speedily." The latter portion of this speech was lost upon Mohara, who, in her anxiety to examine more minutely her bro¬ ther's wasted features, heard it not. A short time sufficed for the explanation that ensoed. Alhamet was startled to find that the horsemen who galloped past him in the direction of his father's hyma, during his conversation with Alibeg, on the night of his departure, were friends, not enemies. The shriek from Mohara which subsequently as¬ sailed his ears was but an exclamation of
of joy at this happy discovery; and the low murmuring that succeeded, and which his fears had interpreted into the last dying accents of his slaughtered parents, proved to have been only the expression of her thanksgiving for their preservation. A thousand times did the deluded wanderer execrate the guile of his perfidious tempter, in permitting him to imbibe, and harbour, that false, fatal supposition: but it was now too late—his sorrow, and his curses, were alike unavailing. After a lengthened pause, Alhamet arose, and embracing his sister Mohara tenderly, requested permission to retire to the couch she had already prepared for his reception. Mohara first pointed smilingly to her children—Alhamet bent for an instant over their sleeping forms, but his lips seemed to recoil from uttering the blessing
blessing his heart would have fain dic¬ tated. Then, having taken an affec¬ tionate leave of Muley, he again em¬ braced her with impassioned tenderness, and retired to rest. Often, during the succeeding minutes, did Mohara steal on tiptoe to the inner division of the hyma, for the purpose of ascertaining whether he yet slept. At first, sobs and sighs alone saluted her grieved, and sympathizing ear; but presently, his hard and regular breath¬ ing convincing her that he had fallen into a Sound repose, she reluctantly sought her own pallet, to pass the night in joyous anticipations of the coming day's felicity. The morning meal had been long prepared, and awaited only the pre¬ sence of the supposed overwearied tra¬ veller, ere the Arabian hostess again bowed
bowed her graceful form over his lowly pallet, to observe if he still slumbered, but it was vacated'—its occupant was gone! In vain did tho voice of Mo¬ hara summon him—in vain did Muley search diligently around the hyma— Alhamet was no where to be found. Loudly and deeply did the hospitable host lament his strange and sudden departure; and long and anxiously did Mohara await his still hoped for return. But Alhamet had paid a final visit to his sole surviving kindred, aud again departed, leaving his singular fate as much a mystery as it was before his arrival. His future career was (equally with the past) unknown : he came no more, nor did Mohara ever succeed in gleaning tidings of him afterwards. Various, however, were the conjectures respecting his probable destiny— " Somo
" Somo said that he did roam, a wretched man, In pilgrimage along tho Arabian sands ', Aud soma that he did dwell in tho far lands Of vast America, with savage men, The ctmso his pastime, and his borne a den." But the reality was never known by those whom it most behoved to feel interested in his doom; even vague tradition had hitherto omitted to re¬ cord what eventually became of the wanderer. ***** A short space only had elapsed since the preceding occurrence, when a single form was again observed traversing, in pensive loneliness, the barren and arid desert, on which the " hot sun poured its withering beams." This was the wretched, sunken Alhamet. He had quitted the hyma at first peep of dawn, scarcely
scarcely knowing or caring whither he went, till he found his despairing steps had conducted him hither. Behind him lay stretched an extensive plain of sand, which still seemed widening every instant; on the left, at some dis¬ tance, arose the dingy spires of Djedda, while the dark troubled waters of the Red Sea rolled heavily before him.
CHAP.
CHAP. XX. .Wonders and signs in tho land of Egypt, and in the Red.Sea. Acts, vii. 36. AiiiiAMET now paused, and turned, while a ray of admiration shone athwart his darkened countenance, to contem¬ plate at leisure the magnificent pano¬ rama in.-the midst of which he stood. The n surrounding scene was indeed one of desolate sublimity, well calculated to awaken the deepest responsive feel¬ ing in his equally desolate bosom. On the land side, the eye wandered to an incredible distance over those immense tracts of sand where the fatal mirage
so often deceives the thirsty traveller; but throughout which mighty space* at the present period, nothing possessed of life appeared to be in motion. Afar off, in one direction, almost on the " horizon's brink," Djedda, the seaport of Mecca, was faintly perceptible.; al¬ though the hum created by its busy inhabitants was, by the extreme dis¬ tance, softened into silence. The Red Sea alone, to the very verge of whose billows he had now advanced, like his own troubled mind, seemed more than usually ruffled for so calm a season. For the mind of Alhamet was indeed disturbed, and his feelings lacerated even to the last degree, by the convic¬ tion of his utter wretchedness, and the impossibility of procuring (as himself had too often dearly proved) perma¬ nent terrestrial felicity. His heart throbbed
throbbed tumultuously under the pres¬ sure of accumulated ills—his aspect was ploughed with the furrows of afHiction r and his bosom heaved like the waves beneath his eye. Alhamet could not refrain from acknowledging the simi¬ litude, while gasing upon the turbulent expanse of water he had thus inadver¬ tently approached; and, although in no mood for deducing poetical infer¬ ences, could have exclaimed, in the language of the prophet—" There is sorrow on the sea — it cannot be quiet." While yet the solitary wanderer of the sandy wilderness ,was occupied with his gloomy, and confused meditations, a palpable redness covered the fiery horizon, the air grew thick and oppres¬ sive, and even the clear sunbeam be¬ came tinged with a purple shade. Alhamet
Alhamet looked again, and knew the coming of the dreadful simoom—the hot blast of the desert, fatal to every living thing it overtook in its terrible course, and shuddered. Yet he well knew how to evade even this scorching- summoner to an awful eternity; in¬ stinct has taught the very camel how to do so, and Alhamet had learnt in his early youth, according to the custom of his countrymen, by instant prostra¬ tion on the burning sand, to elude this sweeping pestilence. But the suffo¬ cating atmosphere was already more than his overcharged bosom could en¬ dure, and he cast his eyes in anguish over the comparatively cool surface of the vast watery space before him. A small open boat, composed chiefly of the rushes that grew near the margin, appeared slightly fastened to the spark- vol. iv. l ling
ling strand. Alhamet sprang from the sandy beach with all the remembered agility of his roving boyhood; and, the next moment, was extended pros¬ trate and secure in the cool bottom of the crazy vessel. In this position he remained not long, ere a strange degree of motion in the shattered bark whose faithless moorings he had too far trusted, aroused him to the conviction of a new, and unexpected danger. Alhamet started to his feet, and gazed—but to gaze, and* lament his own imprudence, was all he could do in his present dilemma— to extricate himself appeared impossi¬ ble. He found that the rude, ill-shaped vessel, to which he had fled for refuge (doubtless loosened thence by the im¬ petuosity of his entrance) had drifted from its fragile fastenings, and already floated
floated at a considerable distance from the shore. Nothing that might have served the purpose of an oar could he discover in the vessel, and mast, sail, or rudder, there was none. Meantime, the waves incessantly rose higher, as he approached tho centre of the sea, toward which the frail conveyance that now alone stood betwixt him and a watery grave still seemed irresistibly impelled. With alarm, too, he soon perceived that the boat was considerably decayed, and rightly judged it wholly incapable of living on such a troubled surface for any length of time. Already the subtile element had entered its leaky sides, and the spray from each succeeding angry billow was dashed furiously over him. Scarcely had he time to mutter a curse on his own wayward destiny, ere his worst appre- l % hensions
hensions were verified; a mighty bil* low advancing overturned the boat, and Alhamet became plunged in a moment beneath the bounding waves. But who shall attempt to describe with adequate solemnity tlie horror of his feelings, while enduring all the agonies of suffocation, amid the vast caves and cells of the measureless deep ? A time had been, during his earlier and more buoyant years (which yet never were blithsome) when the ex¬ pert Alhamet could, by his skill in swimming, long have kept the sur¬ face. But now he sank, heavily and motionless, to the slimy bottom: in¬ deed, the land was at this time too re¬ mote for striving (even had he possess¬ ed his wonted power, and presence of mind) to effect his preservation. To define accurately his sensations, while seeming
seeming to seek iu the vast silent depths of that dim " world of waters" a re¬ fuge from its turbulent surface, were indeed impossible. Yet, as some brief description of his waking dream may probably be expected by the reader, .the succeeding broken sketch is here presented for liis gratification ; and may the " end of the guilty" be no more ab¬ sent from his mind. No sooner did Alhamet find him¬ self sinking iu the fathomless deep, than all the errors and frailties of ins past unhappy life successively arose to his remembrance — the gulf seemed " thick with phantoms," the unsub¬ stantial forms of the departed, with which his excited imagination failed not to people each dark abyss that now yawned to devour him. There the ferocious Hassaraic again appeared to L 3 triumph
triumph over the' still-beautiful form •of his Maimaina, and to revel in the blood of her murdered offspring. Ibra¬ him, too, was there, covered with wounds. She of the Western Isle, ocean's boasted and loveliest gem—his once-prized Amelia Tregonning—next stood palpably before him, with her pale brother drooping on her arm, and her fierce father vainly striving to clasp her shadowy form, both of whom she now seemed to avoid with horror in¬ describable. Alhamet struggled to elude 'the ghastly sight. Then arose fair Agatha with the dabbled breast— Agatha Smolensko—whom again that treacherous and hated, menial Nicholas, the blood still streaming from his shat¬ tered temples, seemed to hold in his foul gripe. Alhamet once more veil¬ ed his sight, and shuddered—but still, to
to his " mind's eye," were those terri¬ fic forms presented. Anon, he thought, he beheld the beauteous Ora, his chosen flower of the wilderness—his bloom¬ ing Indian bride, torn and bleeding, as on that fatal night when he viewed her hurried past him by the whirling ca¬ taract; and there stood, likewise, the frowning chief, Ogloo, whom he re¬ membered having assaulted in the hope to slay, now grinning at his own more surely-approaching doom. Again he turned from the hideous spectacle, writhing beneath the seemingly-peopled waves: but what shape now greets (and more than all seems to attract) his straining vision? The wasted fi¬ gure of his Seraphina fills his imagina¬ tion, and floats before his eyes, with, by her side, the broken-hearted Isabel, beating her hopeless bosom. They fled l 4 —and
— and now arose the fancy-created image of the perfidious, drowned Ro¬ salba, pointing to where still gleamed the fatal poniard, and mocking his rival in that very element which appeared to have twice swallowed him in vain. To him succeeded a group of dingy spectres, with Oromanzel standing in the midst of them, and Aboukir, the diamond-merchant, prostrate at his feet. Prom these, also, Alhamet turned, with a sickening expression of disgust and horror. A rude familiar form, how¬ ever, still hovered round incessantly, and would not be discarded: another, too, of more youthful aspect, appeared constantly bounding near, with an ar¬ row in its side; and a female voice seemed ringing uncouth melody in his ears. Alhamet thought upon Ru¬ ganoff—Arion—the wild songstress, Geronime!
Geronime! Above the whole, at in¬ tervals, appeared to tower the venerable Aben Voorg, with a " countenance more in sorrow than in anger" his lips yet seeming to move, as if still in the act of earnestly reiterating his remembered counsel. At length en¬ sued a loud chaotic tumult, resembling the united" roar of all creation's hugest monsters, augmented (as the fainting Alhamet deemed) by a shrill moan from the unearthly lips of his sur¬ rounding victims. The whole earth seemed slowly to dissolve, as if every thing mortal was about to ren¬ der up its spirit to the Giver of Existence, and Alhamet yielded his to ____ * * * ' * ***** " The camel drains not his hoarded L 5 draught
draught from the long parched-up cis¬ terns of Palmyra, neither seek thou compassion from the more surely mer¬ ciless than adamant —chief chronicled among apostate myriads—the tempter —the devourer*! whose food is sa¬ crifice—whose hope is flames—whose abode is the under world! How many disappointments had been spared thee, mortal—how many pangs might the wild Arab have avoided, by but sub¬ duing an erring thirst for terrestrial happiness (which exists not) when first, as the 'tired Alibeg, I approached thy dwelling! Since that hour, through what cold withering scenes of promised joy, but eventual lamentation, I have been thy close companion, is yet fresh in thy memory; amid the most deso¬ late wildernesses of earth, thou hast found
found me by thy side; and in its choicest vineyards I have not forsaken thee. Now, Alhamet! observe, for the lustre of thy dawn is changed to darkness—the brightness of hope in thy bosom hath waned even to the gloom of despair, and the end of thine earthly travail is at hand. Human life is a labyrinth of sorrow, and of crime; and he who enters deepest into the falsely-alluring, springe-spread maze, shall assuredly issue thence, polluted with the deadliest stain. He is hap^ piest who suffers its eventful current to pass him idly by, thus wisely in¬ curring the least possible risk of its numberless ill chances laying his fond¬ est visions in the dust This thou knowest, for thine hath been an es¬ pecial pilgrimage, replete with precept and example of the plainest kind. Nor
Nor yet hath thine enemy arisen in his own dread might, to mar or avert thy hoped felicity; but only assumed the appearance, and probable deport¬ ment, under the circumstances, of thy own departed friends or foes. Hence, nothing hath happened through¬ out thy marvellous destiny, but might have occurred to thee, in the common course of nature, had the advantages awarded thee by our covenant been less conspicuous, or thy death-strokes not so sure. What men call accident, or adverse fortune, hath been to thee an embodied reality. The principle of evil, ever busy in the transactions of the world, hath in thine cast aside its wonted invisibility, and appeared unveiled before thee. In this only doth the wretchedness of millions,, who mourn over their blighted aspi¬ rations,
rations, differ from thine. There is a curb which it is always requisite the desires of dust should feel, lest ruin irretrievable prove the fatal re¬ compence of their blind indulgence. The utmost wish of thy heart, once gratified, brought thee forth nought but evil, as naturally as the poison- root teems with pernicious clusters. Hast thou dreamed aught could pos¬ sibly have chanced otherwise? Then let the traveller quench his thirst with sand—let water ignite, and the stone yield to the pressure. A prickly bram¬ ble only hast thou many times nur¬ tured to torment thee, for on the body terrestrial * alone (which labour is idle) have thy pains ever been bestowed. Can the germ cast away upon an evil soil eventually produce goodly fruit? Can
Can the thorn of the desert bear cit¬ rons?—or the precious odours of thy native Araby exhale from offals of the loathsome grave?" ***** Not long afterwards, as a caravan on its way to Mecca was passing near the border of the Red Sea, a body was observed lying on the sandy beach, which the heaving billows ap¬ peared to have recently ejected from their " brinish bowels." The tattered remains of an eastern habit were in¬ sufficient to shade the blistered limbs, and the features seemed already fester¬ ing fast into decay: yet, though " Dark the dead skin -ipon the hairless skull," on his countenance still appeared im¬ pressed
pressed the horror of the conflict he had evidently endured while dying. The caravan consisted both of mer¬ chants and pilgrims; but the mer¬ cantile portion seemed far too deeply engaged with their own concerns, to bestow the slightest regard upon any other object. A Mahometan devotee, however, at length approached the body, and viewed it with, at least, the sem¬ blance of compassion. His example was speedily followed by several others of his creed; and various were the conjectures broached respecting the race, and country, of the unhappy object whose lonely fate had arrested their attention. But all soon turned away, and, in the fervour of their devotion, forgot to bestow on those changed remains a charitable burial; that the midday sun might blister them
them no more, but look in vain, on the succeeding morning, for that which his scorching radiance could only has¬ ten to corruption. A Christian re¬ ligious, also, now advanced toward the bloated, and disfigured corse; and, after gazing on it for awhile, fill¬ ed with disgust and horror, again withdrew trembling tovvard the cara¬ van. Yet"turning once more, ere he joined the motley throng, to take a final adieu of that " lost image of his Maker," whose fearful aspect was not likely to *be soon forgotten, the vener¬ able man could not avoid exclaiming, while he lifted his holy hands—" This could not have been a Christian!" Even the " pious elect" of their own separate faiths shrunk with dismay ,from the awful, expression of those discoloured features. Each gazed on the
the hideous spectacle for a moment— each passed away, telling his beads, and the caravan proceeded on its jour¬ ney. It was the body of the wanderer! Some humble dervises at length drew near, who chanced to be following in the rear of the caravan, but whose faces were of a sabler hue than any of their preceding brethren, and whose attire bore no resemblance to that of either the monk or Mussulman. Being firmly persuaded of the soul's trans¬ migration, a doctrine believed by many of the dusky tribes of Hindostan, they are disposed to regard alike every thing in nature with benevolence and hu¬ manity. These also paused to ponder over the piteous sight, and turned aside to contemplate the distorted features. Without any other sign than a shud¬ dering
dering glance upon each other, they began to scoop a hollow with their palms in the loose sand, a little farther from the waves than where he lay. This being speedily accomplished, by their united efforts, they deposited him softly in liis dreary resting-place, and " levelled over him the desert dust."
THE END.
Printed by J, Darling, Leadenhall Street, London.
