Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Horrid mysteries: a story: fom the German of the Marquis of Grosse; by P. Will
THE
HORRID MYSTERIES.
CHAPTER 1. Ex t r aã from Elmira* s P apers * I AWOKE, at length, from that long fwoon, and found myfelf ftretched out in a coffin. Some more of the receptacles of the wrecks of mortality ftood near me, and the odour of corruption was the firft thing that affected my fenfes. The fpaci- ous and lofty vault w T as fparingly lighted by the faint glimmer of a fingle lamp, that was fufpended to the ceiling. Its dying flame plainly told me where I was. What mortal can conceive a juft idea of the fenfations produced by the firft break¬ ing from fleep under fuch circurnftances; and who could be able to recai only a fin¬ gle fentiment of thofe that crowded on Vol, III. В my
my mind, if he ever was fo unfortunate to have experienced what I did? I did not know what I fhould do in that dreadful fituation ; whether I fhould call for afiif¬ tance, or patiently await the event. The lamp was a certain proof that I was in a place not entirely deferted by human beings ; and I felt no other painful fenfa¬ tion, but a great weaknefs, and relaxation of my bodily and mental faculties. Yet I was not fuffered to remain long in a ftate of confultation with myfelf; the found of different voices vibrating in my ears from a paflage whofe entrance the dying glim¬ mer of the lamp enabled me to defcry. I even could diftinguiih the expreffions and the fubječt of their difcourfe. Some de¬ claimed againft Carlos's inhuman barba¬ rity, and forne cenfured me for my im¬ prudence; but one perfon defended me, finding it very natural that a weak, love- fick, and inexperienced girl fhould have been taken in by an artful and experienced villain. The talkers, having carefully ftopt
ftopt a while at the entrance, came, at length, nearer, and appeared in the vault, exhibiting a large proceffion of compaf- fionate faces of either fex. Some carried torches, fome phials and glafies, and fome garments and linen. The light, that now illuminated my horrid refidence, en¬ abling me to look around, I beheld my¬ felf enfolded in a cloud, and different vcffels ftanding by my fide. " Loud rejoicings re-echoed through the vault when my vifitors faw me fitting in the coffin; and they ran towards me to complete my refufcitation, carrying me out of the damp cavern to a lofty apart¬ ment, where I was put into a well aired bed. Decency bade my deliverers to re¬ tire, and only two females ftaid with me, to affift me in changing my drefs, while I gradually was re-animated with a pîeafing warmth, and recovered the full power of recollection. " When they faw that I had entirely re¬ covered my faculties, they congratulated В 2 me
me on my prefervation, praifing God for having made them inftrumental in my reltoration to life. " Thank God, Countcfs/* one of them began, €i that you have been refcued from the cruel hands of that barbarian, and are now in the company of more humane beings!*' u From what cruel hands?" 1 replied, with aftoniihment. " From thofe of your pretended lover, the Marquis Carlos of G*****V "Be filent, vile reptile/* I exclaimed, " and dare not to afperfe the name of a man whom I adore !** " Don't put yourfelf intoa paffion, my Lady," ihe replied coolly: " You will be of our opinion before many days are elapfed. We are members of a fociety whofe fole bufinefs it is to make the fuf- ferer forget his forrows, and to reflore the unhappy to happinefs. Indeed, Countefs, we flattered ourfelves to defer ve, at leafl, your gratitude/* ff What
ct What could I have replied to the de¬ claration of that woman in my fituation? I was filent ; and having taken a firm re- folution to conceal all my ideas, I diflèm- bled to rely implicitly on the candour of my pretended deliverers. It was but too evident in whofepowerl was; and what I had heard of that fociety on my wedding- day forced itfelf with additional ftrength on my recollection. Though I could not unfold the real purport of that incident, yet it was furhcient to afcertain to me the truth of my fufpicions.- If, therefore, it was poffible to extricate myfelf from .their fnares, no other expedient was left than to pay them in their own coin, and to at¬ tempt to outwit them by a diffimtilation fuperior to theirs. I began, therefore, to pretend being more fufceptible of the ideas which they endeavoured to inftil into my mind, and returned gradually from my gloomy reveries. I was, indeed, par¬ tial to folitude; however, it appeared to them to be favourable to their fecret de- B 3 figns
%ns upof! me; and the more the refult of my contemplations feemed to make me micafy, the leu miftruft againft their fe¬ cret endeavours to encreafe thde diftref- fing doubts dkl I difplay. I fubmitted, with an imaffeârf relucbnce, more and mc^e, to their attempts at diverting my mind, and to their exertions to reftore me to happinefs, as they pretended, and to return me to my family with an eafier heart. A cheerful gaiety, which I kept in proper bounds, and ftrove to render as natural as poflible, by an impofing var¬ ni ib of truth, confirmed them in their be¬ lief of having gained upon my credulity; and I began to hope that I ihould find a favourable moment to give them the flip. I was not anxious to know the external circurnftances of the confederates, think¬ ing myfelf fufficiently happy if I could but efcape their baneful breath. ** Mean time a number of fine ladies and gentlemen gathered around me. I was invited to accompany them on a noc¬ turnal
turnai excurfion to a neighbouring caftle, where I learnt, the neirt morning, that ît was to be my future refidence. The fitua¬ tion was, indeed, beautiful; the garden extenfive and elegant; walking was, there* fore, my chief occupation and amufe¬ ment. Although I was never without company, or at leaft without fuch atten* dants as obferved me from a diftance, and the happy period of my elopement was probably not very near, yet I cheered my¬ felf up by numberlefs plans of accelera¬ ting it fecretly. " My keepers itudfed to amufe me by numberlefs little diverfions. Rural feafts, the charm of felected parties; beauti¬ ful, winning females^ and young, ami¬ able men, were to accompliih, with the fmiling afiiftance of the graces, during a conftant round of pleafures, what had been devifed and begun under circurn¬ ftances of the moil ferious and awful com¬ plexion. Every one breathed a general and delicate defire of plcafing me, and of В 4 anticipating
anrictpaiting mywiftSes before they had time to ripen to maturity; and ï cannot but confefs, that they fevera! times accom- plifhed their defigns as perfectly as they could wifh, I returned involuntarily their kindnefs, as if enchanted. They fuc¬ ceeded to паке me more unreferved ; and if not the tew hours, in which I was not in their company, had weakened the im- preffions of the reft, I fhould fcarcely have been able to avoid an intoxication which would have ruined me for ever. " Amongft the young men by whom I was furrounded, one diftinguiihed him¬ felf particularly. He was of a moft beautiful form, animated with a very dan¬ gerous fire, of polifhed manners, and an infinuating difpofition, which rendered him pliable to all my wiihes. He feemed to claim my favour in a more particular manner than the reft, depended entirely upon my looks, and was happy or unhap¬ py as my humour changed. Never have the wiles of the moil cunning fedudion been
been applied in a more artful manner; all circurnftances were in his favour; what¬ ever the reft of the company Cad, fup- ported zná advanced his fuperiority ; and being, in the fequel, convinced of the purity of his paflion, by his indefatigable exertions to pleafe me, I could not have avoided being caught in the fnare at laft, if not a trifling accident had rectified my opinion of him, and reftored me to my^ felf and to my plans. " He had a little French dog; and I grew fo foolifhJy fond of the animal, that 1 frequently hinted to him, it would give me the greatefl pleafure if he would make me a prefent of it ; yet he feemed not to be inclined to part with his little favourite. At length he promifed me, one afternoon, to let me have it in the evening. I was walking fometime before the affembly hour in thè bofcage, and pafling the en¬ trance of a bower, faw him in it, feated on a bench, and occupied with '-his -fa¬ vourite, and concealed myfelf behind a B S thick
tfekà haedUbirfh. He tiai a ribband round the веек oi to little darling, and havű^ feabed the Ык, be could mat rt- frrnn fioi® üfe^ him» and uttering the words, « Poiar Thooon! we muft part: bovener, thou wik always be dearer to me ihm what thou мг to piirchaië for rne»** ** Tbefe words wemnded my heart Itke a dagger* znà my whole fituation lav, at once, yndi%uifed be&re my eyes. I was ready to faint ; and could fcarcely refrain from ruftling forth, må letting him fee an Elmira entirely different from that he had known till then. Yet rage and pain fortunately ftified my tears and fighs, and I arrived at my apartment without being feen by him. " As loon as I had recovered my recol¬ lection, I few plainly how neceffary it w^s not to give up the part I had begun to act. I prevailed upon myfelf, after a hard ftruggle, to affume again the femblance of checrfulnefs, and an air of tranquil re- fignation· The dog was prefented to mc, and
жпа received with шп »poeng pkArc ; the ctaor expected, and demanded, at kngtk, a reward k*f the ikerifice be had mmk to me; hut being ашошЫ by ^ hat i had overheard, I foa^d к pretty eafy to evade his violent carefib and ten¬ der menaces. ** Thus fome weeks more elapáed, and I could flui not find out proper me^ns or effecting my efcape, Tbe danger of a longer flay grew every day more preffing. I knew, however, neither the diftricr. in which the caflie >&as fituated, nor the neighbourhood, and w*as carefully guarded. At length I attempted, with a very fmall probability of fuccefs, what I, perhaps, under more favourable circurnftances, never had dared to riík. At a feaft, which was given on my accounr, and on which all eyes were directed at me, I got fud¬ denly from my throne, on which I was to receive an approaching proceflion, upon a walnut-tree, and fortunately concealed В 6 myfelf
ту&Ш ^rwc^î the thick branches tiU ηΐφ£ ptmm&å to ûvour my flight! ** I d^erAd from my afylum as foon as it *as dark. A foc4:-path led mc to a ndghfaouring village; and the darknefsof тщЫ protected me on tny retreat- Being animated with a more than common cou¬ rage, I ventured to enter a cottage» ex¬ changed my garments for a ruraì éreù* dyed my face, and begged my wa^v through the provinces of Spain and France to this peaceful fpot. I loft, indeed, on my journey, a part of the jewels with which they had decorated me; yet 1 laved a fuf- ficient quantity to purchafe this little fo¬ litude, and to commence a little farm, which promifed to afford me a frugal fupport for the remainder of my life?* 5 CHAPTER II. " *Tf*HE above chapter, deareft Count, X is a faithful, but brief, extract from that .part of Elmira's hiftory of which
which I was ignorase till them. Yon fee how fingular the turn of her and of my fee was directed by a higher Power, If ever I had been capable to doubt that Provi¬ dence guides the fate of man, the reflec¬ tions which her account produced, would certa A nly have convinced me of the eter¬ nal truth, that a benevolent Being watches over our life and happinefs, and produces light out of darknefá. ** Give me now leave to inform you oí the remainder of my adventures, which I fliall be able to conclude in a few words* Clara was in love with the fon of a neigh¬ bouring farmer; but being poor, and the father of her lover a rich man, the latter w ould not confent to a union between his fon and her. Being averfe to fell or to abalieiute any thing my fainted Elmira had poflefted, I gave her the confiderable produce of my little eftate as a dowry, faw the young couple married, and went through Swiflèrland and Germany to
G***·**, where I hâd the happinefs to make your acquaintance. m Yon know my hiftory from that day : fuffice it, thercfi»«, to tell you briefly, that while you wai fighting the battles of ушг сошшу againft Great Britain, I went m B******, w commence a private, but, neverAeîeu, not inactive life, and to en~ 'joj thofe pleafures I wm$ accuftomed to. I ihall not tire your patience with an account of the little adventures, and the unimpor¬ tant €vmt$, of that period in which I was conftantly furrounded by members of fecret focieties, and enthufiafts of all forts, go* pofleffion of their fecrefs, and ob¬ ferved that they were for inferior to w hat I already knew, or that they were partly connected with the confederacy in Spain/* I (hall here, at laft, take up again the thread of thofe events I have mentioned in the middle of my adventures, which I have wrote down for the Count. The reader will recoiled that a man (James) fettled in our neighbourhood, who, as I apprehended,
^>prc*cnded, was nearly connected with me. His appearance threatened ше with new misfortunes ; and he feemed to intend opening a new way of influence on mc through the heart of the Count. How¬ ever, that ominous apparition paffed quickly over. He had, indeed, pur- chafed a country feat in the neighbour¬ hood ; but difappeared after a few days. I was told that he was going to B****** on matrimonial affairs, and my apprehen¬ fions vanifhed. That incident left, how¬ ever, feme impreflion on my mind ; and many plans, particularly that of returning to my native country, were thereby obli¬ terated from my foul. I comprehended many a myfterious phenomenon more clearly, and could, in fome degree, ac¬ count for Amanueľs apparitions, the frequent repetition of which now appeared to me to be a great imprudence of the unknown confederates. They probably intended to frighten me, by letting me fee that I was furrounded every where by their
their fecret agents: however, the myftic appearance of Amanueľs prefence, which had aflefted my fenfes fo powerfully, loft its awfulnefs entirely through that over- fight. I was no ftranger to the artifices wrought through natural magic ; and alfo not ignorant what a powerful influence a heated, overflow ing, and tranfported ima¬ gination produces on our feníês. The whole now appeared to me a mere fcare- crow for children. The myftic farce was continued too long, and afterwards betray¬ ed the whole confederacy. The myfteri¬ ous veil was removed from that memorable moment, and my imagination being recti¬ fied by cool reflection, the miferable artifices of the confederates rather filled me with contempt than with awe. James's apparition in my neighbourhood opened my eyes; and my mind, being now libe¬ rated from the thraldom of a deluded imagination, firmly begins a new, decided career. The
The Count was very much grieved at the fudden departure of the dear ftranger, as he ufed to call hîm # I was already, in the beginning, ftrongly tempted to predict k; but cannot conceive vihat prevented mc from doing fo; and my friend ^as, foon after that incident, a fécond time obliged, by his affairs, to leave me, before I could conclude my hiftory, and elucidate many myfterious events to him; for the various occupations in which I Mas engaged did not allow me, as I already have informed the reader, more leifure hours for the continuation of mý memoirs than I could fpare from the time of nocturnal reft. My friend remained a longtime abfent, being detained by the unaccountable intri¬ cacy of his aflairs. It really feemed as if they intended to exhauft his patience by juridical chicanes and petty artifices, to make him wafte his precious time in the molt ufelefs manner. I very feldorn re* ceived letters from him, and he always concluded
concluded them by informing me that he ihould not return fo foon. Being con¬ vinced that I was completely acquainted with his ideas, he did not trouble himfelf about the management of his eftates, which was an additional motive for me to be the more careful. There never was a period in my whole life, in which I knew fo well to fill up every moment with fuch exactnefsî every one of them, from morn¬ ing till night, being counted and defigned for fome employment. Thefe tedious occupations did not at firft pleafc me much on account of their tirefome fame- nefs; however, after a lew weeks reluc¬ tant exertion, they grew fo eafy, and at laft fo amufing to me, that I could not difuíè myfelf therefrom. I now excrcifed more authority over the Count's people than he ever did himfelf, becaufe he had not acquired that knowledge of the infe¬ rior clafles which I poífeíTed : I converfed with every one, liftened to every propofal of theirs, and frequently improved my own
own plans by corøpiring and uniting their ideas witli nine· I was all the dny long on horfeback, or running from one part of the eftate to the other, to give direc¬ tions to the workmen. I never indulged myfelf with reading before all the la¬ bourers had finifhed their daily taik, and my accounts were fettled; and after fup¬ per, which received an additional relifh fiom the fatigues of the day, I continued my memoirs till it was time to go to reft, \*hen I went to bed highly fatisfied with myfelf* The writipg down of my mc moirs was, from that time, continued with fo much afliduity, that the manufcript was finifhed in lefs than a month after the Count's departure. I afterwards corrected it in many places, and gave it him on his return. I was always very fond of gardening; and although my friend had an excellent tafle in arranging the whole, yet he had too little patience to dedicate much time to a proper furvey and regulation of the particulars.
particulars, I began, therefore, to revife his excellent pians, and to polifh them more carefully than he had taken the trou¬ ble to do, and altered fome parts of his garden accordingly. Some old buildings and pleafure houfes were facrificed ţo my impatient induftry. A pavilion, which was fituated in a corner of the park, and vifíted by no one who valued his life, was one of the chief objects that had excited my diflike* It was entirely concealed by buihes and trees, and feemed to have been defigned by nature for folitude, which de¬ termined ше to have it pulled down, and to build in its place a little hermitage, with a few fmall apartments; flattering myfelf with the fweet hope of being able to inhabit them the fubfequent fummer. I formed that idea and the plan for the new building in one night; went early in the morning into the garden, took fome workmen with me, who were cleaning a bafon, ordering them to provide them- felvés with the neceflary implements, and conducted
conducted them to the pavilion, with the inftručtion to pull the old neft inftantly down. My orders were put into execution with the greateft alacrity. A part of one of the fide-walls fell down of itfelf; and a large itone, which feemed to fupport the reft, being removed, we beheld the en¬ trance of a narrow fubterraneous paifage, We flawed at each other, feized with afto¬ nifliment; and I aiked one of the work¬ men whether he could flrike fire? He af¬ firmed it; and fome of his fellow labourers tore fome dry branches from a fir-tree, which, being lighted, the whole train fol¬ lowed me laughing into the cavern, ex¬ pecting to find a great treafure, and to have fome íha«-c of it. We defcended, therefore, cheerfully; and I cannot deny that I alfo hoped to find fomething of value, though of a different nature from what they imagined. The fcene which once took place between myfelf and the Count in that very garden* the fmall dif¬ tance of the famous turf-feat from the pavilion,
pavilion, the communication of thefetwo places thcough an almofl impenetrable bofcage, and the favourable concealment of the fpot, feemed to promife me fome important difcovery, which was the rea- fon of my being more apprehenfive than the reft of my fellow adventurers. How¬ ever, the confideration of my being at¬ tended by fcven flout Germans, armed with their working tools, and of a brave appearance, foon infpired me with cou¬ rage. I entered the avenue laughing, though with a beating heart, and called to the reft to keep clofe to my heels. I left one at the avenue, to guard us againft ail external attacks i and to alarm the fervants at the caftle, if we fhould not return within the courfe of an hour. Having defcended fome part of our way almoft perpendicularly, the pafiage grew fo fmall, that we found it very difficult to proceed. I conftantly held the torch before me, ex¬ amining the ground carefully, left we fhould be caught in a dangerous fnare. Yet,
Yet, the paflage foon grew wider, the way more even; and we had not proceeded a minute, when we came into a vaulted cave, which apparently formerly was a cellar* We difcovered, in the back part, a fécond receptacle, furnifhed with a table and chairs, that were pretty new. On ex* amining the table, I found that a piece had recently been cut out of it; and it ap¬ peared to me that forne perfon had at¬ tempted to obliterate a character which feemed to have been cut into the wood. After a more minute infpection, I difco¬ vered fome traces of an E. I coukl not guefs, at firft, w T hat that let¬ ter cc ild mean, but recollected, at laft, that the Count had the Angular cuflom to delineate frequently fuch an E in the fand, or to cut it into the bark of trees; and I ere now fufpected that letter to be the firft character of the name of a former mif¬ trefs. I difcovered nothing elfe befides this; neither a new avenue, nor a conti¬ nuation of the vault. I had ordered all 4 my
my attendants to fearch every corner: however, we found no farther trace of a human inhabitation; yet, when I left the vault, to afcend the paffage again, one of them exclaimed, that he had found fome papers. I ordered him to give them to me, and unfolded them. All of them rere blank, except the fourth, on which fomething was written, and I was ftruck with aftoniihment when I read, " Countefs Elmira is cautioned againfi the young Mar- quis Carlos of G****** who means to impo f e upon hen" I did not know whether I could truft my eyes; yet it was undoubt¬ edly the fame paper. Seeing, however, that my attendants were aflonifhed to fee me ftart back, I added coolly, after a few moments consideration, " The D ------1 may make that out without the other half." So faying, I threw the whole parcel into the fame corner in which it had been found. Thus terminated that fingular expedition, I left the paffage with an eafy heart -,
heart; but my conductors hung their heads, becaufe they liad not found the expected treafures. In order to confole them for their difappointment, I gave every one a dollar, under the condition to mention nothing of our adventure to the Count's fervants. I could eafily forefee that this would be the fureft means of having it circulated in the caftle, and de¬ termined to watch whether I could gather nothing from the behaviour of the fer¬ vants, all of whom I fufpected very much. However, the whole affair became a fub¬ ječt: of general merriment: every one was impatient to fee the fubtcrrancous vault; and the vifits of the curious to the cellar became foon fo numerous, that I ordered the paflage to be fliut up, becaufe it was now the general rendezvous of the fer¬ vants. Thus terminated that adventure. The new pavilion was finifhed in a ihort time, and furnifhed, and I had the plea» fure of breakfafting there before the Count returned. He arrived at length» fatigued Vol. HI. С by
by the incidents and the labours which had retarded his return fo long. His af¬ fairs were, indeed, fettled, and his law-fuk was gained: however, the expences amounted to more than he had faved; and he had, befides, reafon to regret the time he had wafted in that difagreeablc aitair. Yet he thought himfelf rewarded for his troubles, in fome degree, by feveral difcoveries he had accidentally made, and which he communicated to me without referve as foon as he had read my me¬ moirs. ci Let us act juft, dear Carlos/* he faid, " notwithftanding thofe villainous artifi¬ ces. We arc not bound to keep pro- mifes which have been forced from us by cruelties ; it would, however, be to no purpofe to inform you of the hiftory of thofe days when I fuddenly left you. You have difcovered the myfteries of the ca¬ vern: it feems to be forfaken already for fometime, and I have made a folemn pro¬ mife to be filent. What is, at prefent, of more
more importance to mc, is to find out the perfons that ftill are very active in our neighbourhood, that have confounded my law-fuit, and, as I have reafon to appre¬ hend, will ruin us fooner or later. Mar¬ quis, are you my friend?" Here he ftretched out his hand. I lhook it warmly, and replied, "Yes, I am your fincere, your faithful friend," u Will you ever prefcrve me your af¬ fection ?'* « By Heaven I for ever'/' " Then come to my heart, my brother, and receive from me the fame vow. 1 fwear to be inviolably your friend; and may I be left without comfort in my dying hour, if ever I forget this promife only for a fingle moment. May Heaven pre¬ ferve me your friendfiiip ; this is all that I wifli." * c Lewis, I follow you whitherfoever you go, in fpite of all difafters that may befall you.** " Well, then, let us boldly meet thofe daring villains that intrude upon our fate; С 2 let
let us fave the laft half of life; let us fa¬ crifice a few years more, and without mercy attack them in the centre of their my flic abode." " Here is my hand. I follow you." '* Let us go to Paris, affemble our friends around us, and then penetrate into Spain. How willingly would I facrifice the greater part of my fortune in that at¬ tempt, if I could purchafe peace and tranquillity." CHAPTER III. E now exerted ourfelves jointly to fettle the Count's affairs as well as it was poflible. Before fix months were elapfed, we accompliftied our purpofe, and foon after arrived at the capital of France. We were obliged to mix with the great world, in order to make difcovéries, and to obtain all kinds of affiftance in the exe¬ cution of our plans. The Count fpared nothing
W
nothing to do credit to his rank and title, and to introduce himfelf with eclat* His equipage was one of the moft fplendid at Paris; his fervants' liveries were in the higheft tafle; his drefs was feleited with elegance; and before many weeks were elapfed, we were introduced in the belt circles of the town, and İn fome received with cordiality. The amufements of that capital are too veil known to require a minute defcrip- tion. The play, dancing, parties of plea¬ fure, and particularly the charm of the fine arts, never mifs their aim. The Count was not much attracted by them. My character, on the contrary, impels me forcibly to feek that fort of amufement. We mixed, therefore, with the gay circles, and enjoyed the pleafures of Paris, but w ithout being much diverted. We made new connexions, and continued the old ones, without facrificing much to them; and fpared every day at leaft a few hours С 3 for
for more important converfations in our clofet. It was very favourable to our purpofe, that n ian y of my former acquaintances and friends gradually gathered around us. Don Bernhard and Count S******i were the firft, and more ftrongly captivated w i t h cur p 1 a η s t h a n I h ad le ft the m . T h су were furor ifed to the higheft degree at Count S******'s adventures, and impa¬ tient to have thofe myfterious incidents elucidated. The fufferings and experi¬ ences of fome years had ripened our cha¬ racters, and rendered them more harmo¬ nious,- and we found» in the mutual ex¬ change of our ideas, comforts, pleafures, and profpects which none of us had ex¬ pected. ' Our method of proceeding was alfo altered very much through the exifting circurnftances. Having di veiled ourfelves of our former timidity, we made no fecret of our plans, but fpoke of them wherever we met; and while we thus gained many friends
friends and fnarersin our enterprize, we alfo obtained gradually more refourccs, and perhaps, defeated thereby many fecret machinations of the confederates. Yet all thefe favourable circumftanccs did not, at bottom, bring us much nearer to the mark; for all our power confifled, as yet, in nothing clic than in firm nefs, and in a calculated oppofkion againft pro¬ bable future events. We had not fixed upon a plan of attack, but left the regu¬ lation of our proceedings to the direction of circurnftances; yet nothing happened that could have guided us. The Count was inclined to return to Spain; and I would have faithfully followed him, if ir had not been for Don Bernhard, and our aflbciated friends, without whofe affif¬ tance we could not expect to fucceed in our undertaking, which, to confefs the truth, promifed very little, as the centre of the confederacy could eafily be fhifted; and we had already been convinced that it could exift any where. Thus our prepa- C 4 rations
rations were rendered ineffective by the confederates, while they took care to give us no opportunity of applying vigorous meafures. We began, by degrees, to grow negligent, becaufe no occafion oc¬ curred that could have given energy to our defigns. Trifling amufements enervated our defire for great and important deeds; and the female world left us little time to meditate on ferious occupations. A con¬ fiant round of diverfions unbraced.our minds; and we foon looked upon our plans, which formerly had engaged our whole attention, as an object of exercifing our wit. At laft an incident happened which feemed lo make us forget them en¬ tirely. A fatal love affair occafioned a difference between myfelf and the Count; deprived me, for a long, time, of his af¬ fection and confidence, before I could prevail upon myfelf to make fomefacrifice to him; and, furprifing us unawares, al¬ moft terminated our inveftigations by an ill-fated jealoufy. Chance only re-united us,
us, and removed the veil of: myfteriouf- jiefs from our eyes. Caroline de В****** was of an ancient and noble family in Picardy. She was not rich ; however, her fortune was fuffi¬ cient to afford her a good education, and to render her no defpicable party. She was not handfome; but her complexion was frefh, her fhape elegant, and her de¬ portment natural and winning. She pof- fefTed an unaffected gaiety, which graced all her movements, and gave them diver- * fity and novity. She neither poffeffed a ftriking wit, nor an uncommon under- ftanding: however, her fallies were always pîeafing; and her modefty, good-nature, and evennefs of temper, fpoke highly in her favour. As for her character, I might well fay, ihe had none ; it was, at leaft, impoffible todifcernit; for flie accommo¬ dated herfelf with fo much eafe and fim¬ plicity to the individual difpofition of thofe with whom ihe converfed, and adapted herfelf in fo natural a manner to
the humours of thofe with whom ihe was connected, that every one imagined to fee in her his own picture. As for her heart, I may truly fay that it was pure and noble. It was, indeed, very unfortunate for us that we did not get fooner acquainted with that amiable being. If we had feen her on our introduction into our focial circle, the impreflion ihe would have made upon t us, would, perhaps, not have been fo ftrong, or foon have been obliterated by other" charming objects. But now we were tired by too much art; and our hearts being over-fatigued by the intricate mazes of the moft confummate female coquetry, were in want of a place of reft in the lap of Ample nature. Caroline charmed us at firft fight. We got acquainted with her at an evening af- fembly which we frequented almoft every day to play at cards. Caroline had already, fometime before our arrival, accompanied fome friends into the country; and being a conftant
a confiant member of the cheerful circle where we met her, her return occafioned fome confufion in the arrangement of the gaming-party. As foon as ihe perceived this, ihe declared that ihe would not play with us, but was determined to be received again into the party to which ihe belonged before ihe went into the country. This whim threw the whole company into a new confufion. Thofe with whom ihe defired to aflbciate again, were already ufed to their new companions, and did not ihew the ieaft inclination to quit them; and their ladies were not lefs difinclined to be abandoned by their partners on Caro¬ line's account. The general commotion to which this gave rife terminated at lait in a loud laughter, which covered the face of the poor girl with a high crimfon co¬ lour, and ihe declared that ihe would not play at all. Tranquillity and order were foon reftored, and I feated myfelf by her fide on the fofa; notili pleaied with the termination of that ridiculous affair. С 6 However,
However, the Count's mind was far from being eafy. It is almoft imponible to brook fuch an incident with indifference with an irritability like his, which was unimpaired by misfortunes. Anger boiled in his heart, and he only wanted an opportunity of giving vent to it. A fire, whofe nature I was no ftranger to, flufhed in his eye, and feemed to fearch an object. I ridiculed his agitation, and begged him to be eafy: however, he re¬ plied; " Fye upon you, Carlos; how can you be fo torpid ?" " He then fixed his eyes upon a German officer, who played at fome diftance from us, and continued to fmile at our difafter. " Don't you comprehend/* he refurned, " that all this is pre-concerted?" He was, perhaps, not much miftaken, if he fufpected the German officer, who called himfelf Baron de H******, to have acted in this affair with fome malicious heat, and with defign. Yet he was not a man that could fubmit to be fcoffed at without
! without chaftifing the offender. He knew the Baron already at Gibraltar, where he had fought with him againft the Britons, and, by a flrange accident, ivas his rival î in the love of a Spanifh lady· This had already incenfed him againft the Baron; and an affair of a later date, which I am going to relate, made him his implacable I enemy. The Count kept an acirefs of the royal opera, a charming girl, of uncommon wit, and a great knowledge of man; an excellent companion, but not very famous for her fidelity. Although he was not over fond of her, keeping her rather for fafhion's fake than from inclination, yet he looked upon her favours as goods which he had bought, and which no one could intrude upon without violating his pro¬ perty. His vanity contributed to render his ambition ftill more tender with regard to that point; and there was a period when his mind was entirely occupied with plans of fecuring the fidelity of his Amafia againft ШммЙиШШпйааийш!!,! ............ ..
againft all temptations which might be thrown into her way. But how was it poflible he could have interrupted all the connections of a vain, voluptuous, and covetous girl, who had made it the ftudy of her life to infnare men, and to jilt them, in her fetters? In ihort, he had fuf¬ ficient reafon for being jealous, and par¬ ticularly of his fworn rival, Baron de An odd incident ferved to blow up that dormant fire into a blazing flame. He went one evening over the Pont Neuf to pay her a vifit ; and intending to furprife her unexpectedly, to be certain of her in¬ fidelity, he had put on a blue coat, and taken only one fervant with him. On coming to the middle of the bridge, he was at once furrounded by a troop of in¬ toxicated citizens, who had drowned their forrows in large bumpers, and, by their inebrity, were led to commit a number of ridiculous frolicks. One of them having engaged to difcover the profeflion of every paffenger
paflenger by his external appearance, they had placed themfelves upon that fpot to obferve every one that went over the bridge, and the Count was unfortunately the firft that happened to come into their way. He that was to guefs at the profeflion of the paflengers, was extremely puzzled by the Count's appearance; a wager of fome louis d'ors having been laid. He eafily conceived, notwithftanding the difguife of my friend, by his gait and íhape, that he was of a fuperior rank. He hefitated, therefore, fome moments to pronounce his opinions i croffing his arms, and gap¬ ing at the Count. The latter being ftruck by the oddity of that fcene, could not help fmiling, which infpired the drunken inquirí tor with additional courage« He turned, therefore, to his comrades, who were diverted by his perplexity, exclaim¬ ing, « I will be d ------ d, if I don't guefs that gentleman's profeflion: I lay you one louis d'or more that he is a cuckold." The
The whole company broke out into a roaring laughter; and the decifion of the wager depending on the confeffion of the other party, they prefled the poor Count, in their merry humour, to confefs the fact. My friend being armed with no other weapon of defence, but a cane, was in danger of being torn to pieces. He de¬ fended himfelf as well as he could ; but, without the afiiftance of fome foldiers, who came to his relief, he would proba¬ bly have been forced to make the ridicu¬ lous confeffion. Thus he was feafonably extricated from the danger which had threatened him; but, far from taking the whole affair for what it really was, an accidental frolick, he imagined irto have been pre concerted, to give him a hint of the infidelity of his miftrefs ; he fancied, at leaft, the whole town was already informed of his cuck- oldom. His blood began violently to ferment, he quickened his fteps to the houfe of his miftrefs, and entered her apartment
apartment in the height of his paffion, abufing the poor, trembling girl with the bittereit reproaches. However, fhe foon collected herfclf; and having attempted in vain to foothe his rage, by tears and ten¬ der rcmonftranccs, afked him, at length, coolly, " whether ihe fhould ring for her people, or whether he preferred to quit her houfe without their affiftance?" He chofe the latter; and ihe appeared the next day in public as the declared miftrefs of Baron de H******, This affair re¬ curred, on the prefent occafion, to the recollection of my friend, and he ima¬ gined the Baron's malicious frhiles al¬ luded to it. He went, therefore, to him, whifpering in his ear, « Baron, you will give me leave to afk you, how far you are concerned in this affair ?" The Baron made a low bow, replying, fmiling, in German, « My Lord, I lhall give you every explanation on that head you can wiih for." The
The place where we were being not proper for pufhing the matter any farther, the Count pretended to be fatisfied with this anfwer, and retired; yet I could plainly fee what was going on in his mind. Caroline did every thing in her power to make us forget the confequences of her little caprice, difplaying her mental charms with a moft bewitching humour, nature, and elegance. She endeavoured to difpcl the gloom which frowned on the Count's brow, telling him, that fhe would try her fortune with him the next day: however, nothing was capable of reftoring the har¬ mony of his foul; and while I felt myfelf as happy as a god by Caroline's fide, and reviewed all my ideas to felečt for her the moil natural and intelligible fentiments, he was abforpť in a gloomy reverie, from which he fcarcely awoke now and then. Supper was, at length, ferved up, and we fat down to table in tolerable good humour and harmony. The converfation turning on the fiege of Gibraltar, the company
company were defirous to know the par¬ ticulars of it. The Count was requefted to favour us with a circumftantial relation of that remarkable fiege; but declined it with a great deal of politenefs and mo¬ defty, directing the company to beg that favour of Baron de H******, who had given many proofs of his courage and fu¬ perior talents on that occafion, The Baron, having not the leaft fufpicion that his conduit on that occafion was notorious* accepted the challenge, with a prefump- tuous fmile, as a juft tribute of his merits, and began his narrative. I was aflonifhed to hear with how much barefacednefs that fellow interlarded his relation with a num¬ ber of various adventures in which he pretended to have been engaged. There was no rencounter in which he had not aâed a principal part: he made the whole company fliudder at the dangers which he pretended to have experienced during the war i and it was merely owing to his mo¬ defty and delicacy that he forbore to fpeak alfo
alfo of thofe to which he was expofed by the fair fex. I am firmly convinced, that he flattered himfelf to have fold his rodo¬ montades for fterling truth, as he did not take the leaft notice of the fufpicious fmiles of the company, and would cer¬ tainly have carried his impudence itili further, if the Count had not interrupted him at the conclufion of a moil romantic adventure with the words, " And then you uwohf" An audible whifper, which ran through the company when the Count ut¬ tered thefe fareaftic words, roufed him completely from his infatuation, and he flopped halfa minute, glowing with fhame and rage. He then was going to vent his fury upon the Count, when the latter interrupted him with the greatefl: poUtenefs, turning to the company, and begging leave to re¬ late alfo an incident which happened at that time. The whole company fignified their approbation; but few only guefíèd what was to come. The Count began his ftory*
ílory, directing fome fignificant looks at the Baron, who wanted to continue his tale, and only could be filenced by the general clamour of the company. «« When we raifed the fiege of Gibral¬ tar," the Count refurned, « moft of thofe who had expeâed to gain honor and pre¬ ferment on that expedition as volunteers, abandoned every idea of making a new attempt; three of my comrades, and my¬ felf, refigned on the fpot, and went far¬ ther into the country, to recover from the fatigues of the campaign, and to vifit an intimate friend of mine, who had married a charming and rich Spanifh lady. Our journey was more pleafant than is ufual in Spain. Two of my companions, who refem¬ bled me in their temper and good humour, as well as myfelf, found every where fuffi¬ cient opportunities for diverfion; and when nothing occurred that could afford us amufement, the comical lies, and ro¬ domontades, of our fourth fellow-traveller, made
.made us forget the badnefs of the roads and the poverty of the inns. « Don Antonio (thus we will call him) was one of the ftrangeft human beings nature has produced. He had a pretty good ihare øf underflanding, and not little experience, but was of a moft Angu¬ lar difpofition. Although he knew that we had been eye witnefíès of, and con¬ cerned in, almoft all engagements, in which he difplayed very little of the hero, yet he invented a number of adventures, in which he pretended to have acted a principal part, and endeavoured to per- fuade us of his veracity by a femblance of the greatefl: candour, as well as by num¬ berlefs oaths. « Well invented ľ* we frequently ufed to exclaim, u though it is not truel' 5 However, he pledged his honour, and, what was itili more important, his tried courage, for the truth of his tale, We refolved, therefore, imanimoufly, to try, on
on the next opportunity, how far we could rely upon the latter. " Our common friend received us as well as we could expect, and did every thing in his power to prolong our ftay with him, and to give us pleafure. His country feat united all the charms of the Spaniih clime, and our rural diverfions were feafoned by the pleafant flows of humorous fallies. We played moil charming little tricks; and our fociable harmony prevented us from being offended when, now and then, our frolicks dege¬ nerated into fomething more than jeft* Our hoftefs and hoft foon knew Antonio's weak fide as well as we did; and we re¬ folved to repay him with a vengeance, on the firft opportunity, all the liberties he had taken with us, and foon were enabled to carry our purpofe into execution. " A fudden noife arofe in the caftle, one night, while we were at fupper in a gar- den-houfe* Some of the fervants came running, pale and with ghaftly looks, to inform
inform our hoft fecretly, that a ghoft hâd been feen in one of the apartments. The Marquis acquainted us inftantly with that intelligence. The ladies grew deadly pale, and ftarted up from their chairs. Some gentlemen, who happily had fuc¬ ceeded to fupprefs the firft emotions of fear, began to raife a loud laughter, and to ridicule the cowardice of the fervants. The Marquis, however, declared the af¬ fair ought to be treated more ferìòufly,- ordered the fervants to light fome torches; and begging the ladies to keep themfelves quiet and eafy till his return, took up his fword, and begged us to follow him. α Now a very tender fcene took place. The married ladies, as well as thofe of the unmarried, who had a lover amongft us, began folemnly to proteft againft that refolution, and conjured us not to leave them unprotected. The Marquis, how¬ ever, entreated them to give him leave not ' to fuffer himfelf to be robbed thus quietly ; and, after a number of remonftrances, admonitions.
admonitions, and obfecrations, had been exchanged, it was agreed to examine the affair in the company of the ladies. The latter took fearfully hold of the arms of their neighbours, the fervants led the way with a blaze of torches, and we covered the proceflion with drawn fwords. " I did not rightly know what to think of the matter, which appeared to me to be rather flrange, and quite unpre-con- certed. It was impoffible to draw any conclufion from the looks of our hofl. He really feemed to be rather agitated, and I knew that he was but a poor dif- fembler. I alfo could not imagine that he wantonly would alarm a whole com¬ pany, merely to punifh an individuals I concluded, therefore, that really fome¬ thing muft have happened; and giving, at that time, very little credit to the ap¬ parition of ghofts, fufpefted fome roguery, and refolved to behave with as much cou¬ rage as my unhappy education would al¬ low in that point. Vol. III. . D « I grew,
, U I grew, at length, fo tranquil and cool, that I w r as capable of making ob¬ fervations on the company. At firft, a general, profound, and anxious filence prevailed amongft us, and was only now and then interrupted by a folitary figh, which efcaped fome of our companions. Don Antonio uttered, at length, thegreateft oath he could find in the vifible agony of his mind. His fair neighbour (for he had carefully avoided to offer his arm to one of the ladies, in order to be at full liberty to take to his heels in cafe of neceflîty) conjured him to be quiet. However, he probably miftook this for a challenge to regale the company with fome more of his fine exclamations, and repeated every oath he knew, to proteft that he was im¬ patient to have the pleafure of engaging a ghoft. Yet, notwithftanding thefe ftrong proteftations, he could not help looking fearfully around now and then, and keep¬ ing carefully between the two fervants who clofed the train. He even made, at intervals,
intervals, a certain noife with his teeth, which is not accounted to be a token of heroifm, when the wind ruftied a little ftronger betwixt the leaves, and became more and more filent the nearer we ap¬ proached the caftle. The reft of the company Avere alfo not entirely free of tearful apprehenfions; and there was not one who did not exhibit ftronger or weaker f y mptoms of anxious apprehenfions. " A fudden gufi of wind, which extin- guifbed fome of the torches, ferved to encreafe the fear which prevailed in our heroic fociety : and fome of the ladies protefted they wou Id not advance a ftep farther, if they were not lighted again im¬ mediately. We were, therefore, obliged to halt, which happening frequently, our march was very much retarded ; and thofe that were more fearful than the reft, gainer 1 time to communicate their appre¬ henfions to their neighbours, and to infect even the fervants, who, at firft, had dif¬ played pretty much courage. D2 « We
** We arrived, at length, at the caftle- gate. The haunted apartment was on the firft floor ; but the anxiety of the company difplayed itfelf already at the ftaircafe which led to the great hall. Numberlefs fears and apprehenfions exhibited them- felvés on the countenances of my fellow- adventurers, which were rendered more vifible by their painful exertions to con¬ ceal them from the reft. We now counted the company, to fee whether none had flayed behind; and were ftruck with afto- nilhment, on finding that the Chevalier Antonio was miffing. We were already going to ridicule his cowardice feverely, and felt ourfelves ftrongly inclined to laugh at the defertion of his vaunted cou¬ rage, when he convinced us that we had wronged him ; for he came running out of breath, and wiping the fweat from his face, He even aiked, with a great clamour, why we did not proceed ; and the whole company being re-animated with new cou ra tre
courage by his noify exhortations, ad¬ vanced towards the great ftaircafe. " But now a new difficulty arofe; none of us being willing or able to afcend the fteps firft. The Marquis was retained by his lady, and the reft were ftopt by his example. At length, flie fuffered him to proceed, after he had afked her angrily, whether fhe took him for a child ; and Antonio, who was in the rear, had ex¬ claimed, Why we did not go on? He now afcended the ítairs¿ and myfelf, with a friend of mine, who had taken me by the arm, pufhed through the reft, and fol¬ lowed him clofely, while the greater part of the company w ? ere loitering partly at the bottom, and partly in the middle, of .the ftaircafe, according to their refpective filare of courage. We did not mind their backwardnefs, and proceeded towards the haunted apartment with a great ihow of courage, but I dare fay not without pal¬ pitating hearts· D 3 « The
* f The fervants, who carried the torches, being in the rear, I went back to provide myfelf with one. The whole troop, who followed us fiowly, watching every ftep of o-irs, were put in motion by my hally re¬ turn ; and fome, who were already at the landing-place, put themfelves in motion to turn back on the firft fignah I could not help fmiling at the fear of men who had fought like lions before Gibraltar, faced all the dangers and hardfhipsof that fatal fiegc with coolncfs and bravery, and now were overcome fo much by the pre¬ judices of their religion and education, as to pive wav to a moft extraordinary and chiidifh fear. Inftead of being infected by their example, I derived additional courage from their unmanly conduct, re¬ turned laughing to my friend, and opening tb.c door for the Marquis, went before him with a torch. « However, we ftarted a few fteps hack, feized with terror, as foon as we had encered the apartment } and the reft of
of the company, who лгеге awaiting the event, hurried inftantly down flairs. Be¬ fore two féconds were elapfed, we were forfaken by the whole train, except a fer¬ vant of the Marquis, who u as uncom¬ monly attached to his mailer, and would not leave him in the danger which feemed to threaten us. The fight which we be¬ held was, indeed, terrible enough. An enormous figure, with large, fiery еуеь*, advanced towards us; and I do not know whether an antecedent tranfitory fright does not iharpen the fenfes and the judg¬ ment; fori made, almoft immediately, an obfervation which confiderably dhniniihed my fear. " Firft of all, the figure was too gro- tefque. What a moderate deception would have eflettcd, is generally fruftra- tecl by an extravagant one. I could not help remarking that the figure refembled the giant who challenged Don Quixote, the celebrated knight of the woeful coun¬ tenance. This laughable idea, which D 4 forced
forced itfelf upon my mind, made me fufpect the whole; for as foon as I ad¬ vanced further with my torch, I perceived a fécond figure, fneaking into an adjoin¬ ing apartment, which communicated with thofe of the Marchionefs that bordered on the garden. The room in which we were was a ftate-chamber of the Marquis. This train of ideas came almoft in a mo¬ ment in my mind; and looking around, I miffed a filvcr clock which ufed to ftand on a table. Having feen it in its place before we went to fupper, I could eafily account for the apparition. " I took, therefore, our dubious hoft by the arm, exclaiming, " They are thieves, as true as I am alive ! Don't you fee that your clock is gone?" He ivas flruck by that remark, and we inflantly attacked the phantom with drawn fwords. However, the human fpečtre had a long ftafFin its hand, with which it parried our thrurts excellently. The fervant entering with a candle, along with my friend, I obferved
obferved that the torch which I flill held in my left hand was in my way, and threw it into my antagonifľs face. His head- drefs caught fire; and I threw my fword down, taking hold of his flick. The Marquis did the fame: we began to em¬ brace him in a moft violent manner, arjd before half a minute was elapfed, came with him down upon the floor. The fel¬ low being feized with defpair, difplayed a more than human ftrength, and could have killed every one of us if he had been armed. Being, however^ engaged by four men at once, he was foon exhaufted; and begged us, in a hollow accent, to fpare him. The Marquis promifed о pardon him; and he confeffed that he belonged to a band of five robbers, who had intended to avail themfelves of the bufile our feflival produced in the caflie, to plun¬ der it: in fhorr, he confirmed my fuf- picion. " His hands were tied, and he was com¬ mitted to the guard of the fervants. The D £ Marquis
Marquis and my friend examined every apartment, in order to apprehend the reft of the gang ; and I went down flairs to fend fome fervants to their affiftance. A death-like filence reigned every where, and not one human being was to be feen. They even had left fome candies upon the flairs, to effect their efcape with more eafc. At the bottom of the ftaircafe I found a lady who had been left there in a f woon j and a little farther I difcovered Don Antonio in a condition that was not much better. As foon as he heard a noife on the flairs, he covered his face with his handkerchief, and expected a happy de« liverance, feized with a moit painful agony." " Prepare thy fel f for eternity, Don An¬ tonio!*' I exclaimed, on coming nearer ; " for thou muft die !'* ■ "Spare me, O! fpare me only this time!" he ftammercd, in a hollow and broken accent, which fcarcely was intelli¬ gible. "No
u No mercy this time!*' I replied laughing, in my natural accent. He knew rne inftantly, took the handkerchief from his face, and gazing at me with af¬ tonifliment, faid, highly rejoiced, ťí Dear Count, is it you? are you ftill alive? You have played me a fine trick." u I now gave him a brief account of the whole affair, and recommended the faint¬ ing lady to his care. This animated him at once with new life, and he haftened to her with the alacrity of a buck to lend his affiftance. " I found the fervants difperfed in diffe¬ rent parts of the garden, and called to them to affift their mailer. The reft of the company were returned to the garden- houfe, and there awaited the event in great anxiety. When I entered the door, the ladies fat up a loud feream, becaufe they did not at firft know me, and miftook me for the ghoft. I never beheld a more fin¬ gular fcene than that. Every diilinction of rank and fex was fufpended for a while. D 6 The
The general panic having driven the whole company into a corner of the faloon, the coyeft ladies fat upon the lap of their lovers; the moil obftinate fhrew clung round the neck of her patient hufband, and the bittereit enemies and rivals held one another enfolded in their arms in the moil amicable manner. u At length, they perceived their mif¬ take, joyfully exclaiming, with one voice, ** It is the Count ! it is the Count!" '* It is impoffible to defcribe the aflo¬ nifhment and the rapture with which I was received ; not fo much on my account, than becaufe they faw themfelves relieved from their apprehenfions. I gave them a brief account of the affair; and when I had finifhed my report, the Chevalier joined us with the lady whom I had re¬ commended to his care. « Was the Chevalier alfo prefent ?" one of the company exclaimed. « Moil certainly ; he aäed a principal part," I replied. -< . . Γ. * « This
" This made Don Antonio fuppofc that I had not yet related the incidenti he therefore took my aflertion for a compli¬ ment paid to his courage, bowed, and be¬ gan, with the greatefl impudence, to re¬ late the affair, with fome additions and embellifhments of his own invention. We liftened patiently to his tale : however, the Marquis had mean time entered the faloon, and hearing his rodomontades, was ftruck with his barefaced impudence. He took his refolution on the fpot, and winking me to follow him into the garden, communicated a plan to me, which was to make Don Antonio fpend the night in a different manner than he feemed to expect. "Our meafures ivére foon taken; and we had only to give a hint to the Marchio¬ nefs, in which I fortunately fucceeded on my return into the faloon. She compre¬ hended me fo quickly, and fo completely, that I concluded we only anticipated her defign; thus much had Antonio exafpe- rated
rated the company by his barefaced fictions. " Our return reftored cheerfulnefs and merriment to our fociable circle. We fat gaily down to the defert, ridiculing one another for our fear, and the heroes of the drama earned the deferved applaufe. No¬ thing makes people more daring than a danger which has been happily overcome. There was not one amongft us who could not have defied all the infernal fpirits; and but very few who did not loudly declaim againft: the exiftence of apparitions, as we had been fortunate enough to have difco¬ vered the human nature of one. It may eafily be conceived who was the moft cla¬ morous amongft us. Don Antonio fworc that he had laughed immoderatelv at our childifh fear, that he had wanted to make game at me when I came down, and had been alarmed by nothing in the world than the fituation of the lady. " Our hoflefs now interrupted him, de¬ claring, that her education, as well as a certain
certain circumftance, did not allow her to coincide with the opinion moft of the company feemed to have adopted. Every one being curious to know that ciroum- ftance, flie was preffed to relate it ; upon which flie protefted that it was no fecret, that, every night, at twelve o'clock, fuch a terrible noife was heard in the chapel of the caftle, that one expected it would be turned upfide down. The Marquis raifed a loud laugh, in which he was joined by the whole company, but particularly by Don Antonio, who, probably recoL· lecting that midnight ivas already paft, propofed to the company to go with him into the chapel. Hoir ever, the Marchio¬ nefs dirľembled to pay no attention to what he faid, and feigned to be offended by the ridicule which her information had been received with; declaring, that fhe would lay any wager, that none of the gentlemen who were pleafed to laugh at her, would fetch a fan fhe had left in her pew in the afternoon. " A general
" A general filence of fome féconds was the confequence of this declaration. The Marquis, at length, thought proper to in¬ terrupt it, declaring, that he would cheer¬ fully accept the wager, and that he was firmly perfuaded any one of the gentle¬ men prefent would render her that fervice inftantly with the greatefl pleafure. We all confirmed his declaration, and begged the Marchionefs to choofe her hero. She now furvey ed the whole circle, and Don Antonio always turned pale when fhe feemed to be going to fix upon him. Her looks were, to his greatcft joy, feveral times fixed upon me ; yet poor Antonio had, at length, the misfortune to be ñn- gled out by her. Γ he С hevalier being bound by his word of honour, could not but accept the charge, and thank her for her good opinion of him. Having once more fiolen a clandeftine look at his watch, and convinced himfelf that it was near two o'clock, he took his fword, and left us with a very martial air. Yet his cou-
rage failed him already at the door. Having inadvertently unfaftened the red cockade of his hat, it fell into his face. He was violently frightened ; but when we began to laugh, and declared that it was a bad omen, he collected himfelf again, and looking at us with an indefcribablc contempt, on account of our fuppofed timidity, flung the cockade into a cor¬ ner. We took it up, refoîving to make a good ufe of it. He had no fooner quitted the faloon, than the Marquis communi¬ cated his plan and meafures to the com¬ pany, aflcing the gentlemen which of them would act a part in the farce he was going to play ? Don Joachim F******, a man like a giant, and Don Romero L******, who was rather of a dwarfifh ftature, of¬ fered inftantly to act the principal parts. Our plan now was briefly concerted, and the company rofe to follow the Chevalier at a diftance, and, if poffible, to get the ftart of him." " Never
"Never has a plan better fucceeded. The iky was indeed overclouded; how¬ ever, it was not fo dark that we could not have difcerned the objects at fome diftance; and we could clearly perceive that Don Antonio anxioufly liftened at every buih before he approached it, and that his fteps grew flower and flower, the nearer he came to the wall of the church-yard. He brandi {bed his fword to frighten away the fpirits, and at length arrived at the gate of the church-yard. He opened it with a great noife, and ihut it again in the fame violent manner. He, at the fame time, began to fing and to whiftle with all his might, ftruck againft all the crofles that came in his way ; but foon loft his way, and ftumbled over one tomb-ftone after the other, which enabled us to ileal into the chapel from the oppofite fide about ten minutes before his arrival. Having miffed the large gate, it was almoft impof- fible for him to come to the pew of the Marchionefs,.
Marchionefs, becaufe he would have been obliged to climb over all the other feats. ťC There ivas only one lady in our com¬ pany, who, however, had almoft fpoiled the whole fport. For when fhe faw the pool· Chevalier climbing over the pews, and heard him groan in a moft rueful ac¬ cent, flie broke out into an immoderate laughter, and endeavouring to ftifle it, rendered it only more hideous. I had placed myfelf near the organ; and being at a lofs how to remedy the fault fbe had committed, accompanied her with a flill more difharmonious paffage on the inftru- ment. This produced an effect which furpafled my moft fanguine expectation, as but little wind was in the bellows, and I never was an adept in mufic. i( The poor Chevalier was almoft petri¬ fied. He fat down in a pew, and awaited, in a kind of ftupefac'Uon, the things that were to come. I am fure he w ould have cared neither for the fan nor for his reputa¬ tion, if he had had the leaft hope of getting fafe
fafe out of the chapel. In this diftrefs he looked anxioufly about for an afylum, and feeing fomething of a white colour, which were the pillars of the pulpit, fhine through the duik, that prevailed around him, he climbed over the remaining pews to get at that fuppofed place of fafety. " We thought it our duty to light him on that expedition. A great electric ma¬ chine, which the Marquis had ordered to be placed near the pulpit, ferved our pur¬ pofe excellently, emitting from the con¬ ductor, at firft, large fparks, and then a whole electric ftream. We alfo lighted fome candles of the large chandelier, which was fufpended in the centre of the chapel, by means of a quantity of hemp, which was overfpread with fulphur and pitch. However, we foon extinguished the candles again. Two fervants, who were ftationed at the church-yard, broke fome panes of glafs, which came with a great noife into the chapel: the doors were opened and ihut again ¡ the howling of cats.
cats was imitated; fome of the company blew a ftrong current of air into his face by means of large bellows; the fhrill found of whiflles re-echoed from every corner; and as the effect of the electrical machine grew r ftronger, whole ftreams of fire illuminated the chapel at intervals. We alfo had contrived to tie cords round his arms and legs, which made the poor fellow believe that he was fpell-bound. In fhort, the effect of our contrivance was fo great, that the actors themfelves could not help fliuddering jiow and then. « Mean time, a thick fmoke arofe near the altar, and Don Joachim F****** and Don Romero L****** ftepped forth from its grifly w r omb, dreffed like devils. The latter being of a very diminutive fize, made the former appear a great deal more gigantic than he really was. The gar¬ ments of either were ftreaked with phof¬ phorus ; and Don Joachim F****** car¬ ried a large lanthorn on his head, on which was written, u Sinner, prepare thyfelf> for
thou muß die ľ' Don Romero had the cockade which Don Antonio had flung on the ground, and now was ftained with phofphorus, fixed to his head. Both of them extended two long fiery arms, the extremities of which were armed with claws, and howled fome hollow accents. Antonio fbut his eyes when he faw thefe two frightful figures, and did· not open them for fome minutes. " However, the fcene was foon changed to our mutual terror. The pulpit-door opened; a man, clad in a white robe, armed with a large crofs, and carrying a lanthorn, fiept forth. He was foon fol¬ lowed by one more, clad in black. "ît was the paftor of the place, and the fexton, who had heard the uproar in the chapel. The Marquis having neg¬ lected to inform them of our nocturnal undertaking, they were come to fee what was the matter. We foon knew them; however, the two difguifed devils, who never had feen them before, imagined that
that they were apparitions from another world, their late fear feized them again, and they ran with all poffible fpeed to¬ wards the door. They had, however, the misfortune to lofe their way between the pews; Don Joachim's lanthorn dropt from his head, and fell in Don Romero's face; ť. e one was frightened at the other; yet the latter had the prefence of mind to take it up, to faftcn it to one of his long artificial arms, which he took upon hks fhoulder, and thus happily gained the door. His giant-like affiliant was clofe at his heels. u But now a new misfortune happened; for when the prieft began his exorcifms, both of them were tempted to look once more back; the little one, who led the way, turning fuddenly round, knocked the lanthorn fo violently into the face of his tall companion, that the latter, ima¬ gining to have received a blow from a fpirit, dropped half dead upon the ground. Don Romero was terribly frightened at 4 that
that incident, but retained fufhaent re¬ collection to difencumber himfelf of every thing that could retard him on his flight, and to leap with the greatefl: agility over the graves. Yet the terror which per¬ vaded his agitated mind did not leave him fufficient power to proceed far, and he feated himfelf, at length, half fainting, upon a tombftone, patiently awaiting the event. " The Marquis now refolved to put an end to the whole fcene; and making a lignai to the fervants, the machinery was concealed as well as poffible; every one of the actors ftole filently out of the chapel, and the whole company met at the great gate. The firft thing we did was to re- flore Don Joachim to the ufe of his fenfes ; Don Romero foon joined usj and having lighted our torches, we repaired again to the chapel. " The prieft was ftiil preaching. He had taken the candle out of the lanthorn, and fixed it upon the pulpit, devoutly reading
reading the exorcifms from his book. The Marquis now ftepped before the pul¬ pit, aíking the prieft what his flrange be¬ haviour meant, if he was in his fenfes, or had loft his underflanding? Yet he re¬ mained fome time longer in his error; and recollecting, at length, the voice of his mailer, was feized with amazement, and gave us a brief account of his tran- faclions. The Marquis then begged him to fro home, and we haftened >to affift the poor Chevalier. <c We were ftruck with terror on per¬ ceiving not the leafl fi g n of life in him. Ills pulfe ceafed to beat, and the Marquis repented already the whole affair, thinking to have carried the jeft rather too far, when the poor fellow, at once, opened his eyes ίο our greatefl joy. Yet he flill fancied to be in the power of fpirits, and cried aloud forafliiiance. Wc fcarcely could convince him that we were human beings, and come in queft of him. He now was car« ried to the caflie, and put to bed; Im inj Vol. Ш, . E entirely
entirely loft the ufe of his fpeech. When we vifited him the next morning, we found him quite reftored, and he informed us that he had fallen afleep at chapel, and had a terrible dream." Here the Count concluded his tale, which we had liftened to with the greateft pleafure, though moft of us had heard it already, and knew very well who the per¬ fon was whom he had introduced under the name of Antonio. The Baron was co¬ vered with fhame, and had loft the power of utterance, yet was prudent enough to fupprefs his wrath. What rendered the whole tale moil en¬ tertaining, was the prefence of Don Ro¬ mero L******, a man of known courage, honefty, and of an excellent temper, who made no fecret of his defects; and, at the clofe of the hiftory, exclaimed, lf By holy Peter! I was terribly frightened." " Then you alfo was prefent on that oc¬ cafion?" one of the company afked, laughing. «Yes!
"Yes! yes!" he refurned; "and the Baron yonder, too, was not far off." The laughter encreafed. However, the Baron thought it proper to bridle his paf- fions, and not to reply a fyllable, but to wait for a more favourable opportunity to revenge himfelf upon the Count, which he very nearly had found that very night. We now converfed a little longer on different fubjeds, and then parted, as it feemed, entirely reconciled to one another* The Count faw Caroline to her carriage, and foon after went home with me, to all appearance completely happy. He v\as ufed to (it every night half an hour with me on my fofa, and to convcrfe on the occurrences of the day; but that time his mind was fo much occupied with the pail events, that he forgot it, and went directly to his apartment, which oc- cafioned one of the drolled feenes of my life. To make myfelf perfectly undcrftood, I muft premife a brief defcription of the 1Î 2 arrangement
arrangement of our houfe. The ground floor was occupied by our landlady, a mantua-maker; the firft floor was inha¬ bited by the Count and myfelf; and my fervants lodged in the fécond floor. Our landlady was a young, gay woman, who underftood her profeffion excellently, and made the utmoft of every little advantage. She not only let the remaining apartments of the ground floor to companionate la¬ dies, but her charitable difpofition was fo great, that flie alfo admitted fome young gentlemen by day and night to her own room. The Count and myfelf being very much difpleafed with her conduci, wc had taken a refolution to quit her houfe the fubfequent week. The Baron had vifited us fometimes, and taken a liking to our little gay land¬ lady. He was not ufed to flip an oppor¬ tunity of ingratiating himfelf with the la¬ dies; yet our hoflefs did not think proper to be kind to the Baron; and fome weeks elapfed before he could make any confi- derable
dcrable advances in her favour, notwith¬ ftanding the great pains he took to make her favourably difpofed to him. But learning, at length, that two floors in her houfe foon would be evacuated, he paid for that which the Count inhabited before¬ hand, and, in return, put himfelf in pof¬ feffion of the happinefs he had been hunt¬ ing after for fome time. He paid, that very night, a vifit to his future landlady; and was fafely houfed in her bed when the adventure occurred which I now am going to relate. CHAPTER IV. THE reader will recollect that the Count, on our return from the card- party, went immediately into his own apartment, inflead o** fitting half an hour with me as he was ufed to do. Havine: о undreffed himfelf, he obferved that it was too early -to go to bed: he, therefore, flung himfelf upon his fofa, to reflect on E 3 the
the occurrences of the day, and his affair with the Baron. His blood being in a violent fermentation, he tormented him¬ felf for fume time with ruminating on the bad confequences the latter might pro¬ duce. Yet the affociation of ideas at length brought him back again to Caro¬ line; he wandered from one fmiling reve¬ rie to the other, and at laft fell aflcep. His fituation being, however, not very eafy, he awoke after he had fiept about* half an hour. In his drowfinefs he ima¬ gined to have refted on my fofa as ufual, took up bis candle, and wifhed me a good night, fuppofing that I was gone to bed. He went foftly down flairs, and thus came to the apartment where the mantua-maker was fallen faftafleep in the arms of lier new paramour, and, notwith¬ ftanding his perceiving forne change in the furniture, yet he flill imagined to be in his own apartment, and was aflonifhed at his heavy drowfinefs, which, as he thought, reprefented every object in a different
d i fíe rent manner to his eyes. He now began to unci refs himfelf, opened the cur¬ tains, and placed the table with the can¬ dle near the bed, to extin^uifli it when he fa ould have gone to bed. But unfor¬ tunately one of the Baron's boots laying on the floor, he put one foot of the table upon it, the candle dropped down, and fell burning into the face of the former. The Baron awoke with ι terrible feream ; and it may eafily be conceived how much the Count was aftoniihed to fee his bed occupied by his mortal enemy. Being of a very irafcible temper, his aftoniihment was turned into the moil violent rage at that fuppofed impertinence. He uttered a dreadful oath, and ran to the corner in which he had placed his fword; but being not able to find it, he rung with fuch a ve¬ hemence for his fervants, that the firing of the bell broke; for being at a lofs to account for that incident, he was deter- mined to chaftife the Baron in an exem¬ plary manner. E 4 The
The latter had, mean time, haftened out of the bed, and found his fword. Thinking that the Count was his rival, he congratulated himfelf upon the favourable opportunity, he imagined to have, to get rid of him at once; and while his fair comoanion fcreamed with all her mierht, went in his fhirt to attack the poor Count, who held his breeches in one hand, and with the other, which was armed with the Baron's cane, parried his antagonist's thrufts with the mreateft difficulty. Yet being an excellent fencer, he foon attacked his adverfary inanoffenfive manner, with¬ out recollecting that his weapon was only a wooden one, beat the Baron's fword out of his hand, and gave him fuch a violent blow on his ftomach, that he began to roar in a moft rueful accent. The lady, who had not ceafed fcreaming all the time the combat laftcd, imagined that her Adonis could not but have ic¬ céi ved /ome material hurt by the Count's furious blows, аса mpanied the vocifera¬ tion
tion of her charmer with additional force, which roufed every inhabitant of the houfe that had not been awakened by the Count's violent ringing of the bell, A number of people appeared, by degrees, in the apart¬ ment, in their fhirts, and feemed to be very much inclined to affift the landlady. Some fpits and pokers began already to approach the Count, when my coachman entered the room with his horfe- w hip. Being of a giant-like ftature, which was not inferior to his bodily ftrength, he could look over the heads of the reft, and foon perceived the Count's diftrefsful fituatioiu He, therefore, began to lay about him with his whip, and handled the naked figures fo unmercifully, that the conteft was ter¬ minated in a moment. The aflailanţs dropt their arms, and faved themfelves as well as they could. The Count feeing himfelf delivered from his aggreflbrs, began to reflect a lit- tie, and perceived that he was not in his own apartment. The fcreaming lady in E 5 the
the bed now attracted his attention, and he m cm to take her out. No fooner did he behold her face, and fee who flie was, than he gucflcd at the real fiate of the whole aitair. Want of gallantry being not on the lift of his defects, he thought it was his duty to excufe his fatal miftake, and to foothe the wrath of the offended fair one. He, Lhcrcforc, told her a num¬ ber of fweet things, excufing himfelf as well as he could; and feeing many in¬ viting charms, clifencumbercd of every envious covering, before him, embraced her at laít. In that very moment I entered the apartment, armed with a fword, carrying a candle, and accompanied by all the fer¬ vants, who were armed İn the fame man¬ ner, the Count's valet having waked me as foon as he had mifled his mailer. A more ridiculous fcene never has been wit- neffed. On ftepping out of my apart¬ ment, I had met fomc fhopmen, who were half naked, and took to their heels as foon
foon as they faw me. When I came to the lady's apartment, I faw the coachman ftanding on the threlhold, gazing into the room, and holding his fides with laughing. The Baron ftood in the centre of the apartment in the fame pofturc, which, however, feemed to be owing to a different caufe; and the Count £.t by the bed, ca- reffing and, at laft, tenderly embracing, a lady that was almofl entirely naked. The latter glowed with a high crimfon hue, but the fire that burned in her face was not the elf eft of anger. Her longing eyes furveyed the beautiful form of the Count; ihe fuffered his kifles, and ap¬ peared to be difpleafed with nothing but the number of witneifes. Seeing me, at length, at the head of the fervants, fhe ejaculated a loud feream, and difengaging herfelf from the Count's embraces, hid herfclf in the bed. The firft thing I did, was to fly to the affiftance of the poor Baron. The Count, who laughed immoderately, aififtcd me li о faithfully;
faithfully; but our crefl fallen hero was in fuch agonizing pains, that he fcarcely could fpeak. He complained of violent pains, and a great quantity of congealed blood had gathered on the place where he was wounded, I fent inftantly for a fur- geon, and affifled my friend in putting on his deaths. The lady in the bed declar¬ ing that it v.as impoffible he could remain in her apartment, we carried him into a coach, and faw him to his lodgings, where we committed him to the care of his fervants. We took the greatefl' pains to keep the whole t ran faction private; however, this was. impoffible; for it was circulated through the whole town the next morning. We received every where congratulations, and were obliged to relate all the particu¬ lars of that flrange incident. The Baron was no fooner able to go abroad, than the Count received a challenge, in which the choice of arms was entirely left to his option; and he was generous enough to fix
fix upon piftols. Time and place were agreed upon. The Count feemed to pre- fage a fatal caraftrophc; having made his will, and committed it to my care, he bade a tender adieu to all his friends, under the pretext of a little journey. Caroline too was not forgotten. He imagined no one knew any thing of the real nature of his pretended journey; yeti could plainly perceive that his friends looked upon this journey as his lafl, at all events. Caroline almofl fainted, on rifing from the foia, to offer him her beautiful hand for a farewell к ifs. My rifing jealoufy perceived this plainly, and it did alfo not efcape her that the Count obferved it too with great emotion. We left town early in the morning on borieback, and found the Baron and his fécond already on the appointed fpot. Neither of the two anta^onifts bein^ a great markfman, each of them had brought two braces of piftols with him, which were charged by the féconds, and then exchanged**
exchanged. The fteps were meafured, and they took their proper diftance. Five íhots were-already fired without any effect. The Baron aimed fo miferably, that he almoft had wounded me, though I was more than fix paces diftant from the Count. I therefore called to him, when he was going to fire again, <c not to trem¬ ble fo much»" He was, however, but too fuccefsful ; for the Count dropt on'the ground, exclaiming that he was wounded in the üác, I haftened to affiíl him, and faw the blood guih violently from his wound. The Baron too offered to afli ft my friend; but the Count waved his hand, defiring him to flee as faft as poffible. The Baron feemed really to be very much affected; and having embraced the Count and myfelf, mounted his horfe, and rode away with his fécond. If the Count had been killed on the fpot, I fliould probably have made a better ufe of the remaining brace of piftols than my friend. But fee¬ ing a chance of faving his life, I was too much
much occupied with a defire of giving him relief, as to entertain any idea of vengeance. I flattered myfelf with the hope that the wound was not mortal, the ball not having penetrated deep enough as to injure his inteftines materially. I only apprehended the violent effufion of blood might prove fatal to him. Having drefled his wound as well as poflible w 7 ith the afliftance of my fervant, we carried him to a neigh¬ bouring village. The furgeon was of my opinion, and the event confirmed my hope j for a few weeks confinement and reft cured him completely. I could not prevent the duel, and the danger of the Count, from being known amongft our friends at Paris; and that incident gave us an opportunity of per¬ ceiving that we had a great many who really wifhed us well. AH of them dif¬ played the moft anxious defire of feeing him, and of contributing fomething to- Wiuds his recovery. The ladies, in par¬ ticular,
ticular, fcarcely left our houfe; and when he began to mend perceptibly, we began again to recommence our jocund aflem- blies with our ufual gaiety. Caroline alfo vifited at our houfe under the protection of an old uncle, and feemed to be par¬ ticularly rejoiced at the Count's amend¬ ment. One evening we were fitting at table, partaking of a cheerful fupper. The Count had declared that day that he in¬ tended to leave his apartment on the fub¬ fequent one, and we were talking of a little feaft which was to be given on that occafion. No one was more happy at it than Caroline. She fat oppolite to me, and I could plainly perceive the exprcf- fions of her fecret joy on her glowing countenance. I was abforpt in the con¬ templation of her charms, and felt my heart beat in unifon with hers. I was thrilled with a fecret pleafure, which, however, was mixed with fomething very bitter»
bitter. How nice is the perception of a lover's fenfes! At once fhe grew pale; her large blue eyes, which were fparkling with rapture, gazed joyfully amazed at the door which was behind me¿ her fork dropt upon the floor; inc hekl her napkin before her face, and leaned a little back againft the'chair. I was juft going to her affiftance, when every face was turned towards, the door. The chairs were fuddenly overturned; every one left the table,- a confufed cla¬ mour filled the apartment; and turning my head, feized with aftonifliment, I be¬ held the Count enfolded in the arms of friendfhip. What a feaft for us to fee him thus un¬ expectedly amongft us ! We all received him as a loft and fuddenly recovered trea- furc; the tcndereft carefles were lavifiied upon him, but the moft expreflive endear¬ ments were only weak emblems of our cella tic joy. He returned them faintly; but the languour which his words and motions
exprefied only ferved to animate them with additional ardor. We placed him in the middle; but no cuihion was deemed foft enough, no chair commodious enough, to feat the dear, recovered fugitive upon. A general fatisfaciion prevailed in our joyous circle; he was the monarch (o whom our hearts paid a willing, cheerful homage. Caroline feated herfelf, at length, with a charming fimplicity, by his fide, to nurfe the dear idol of our hearts. He was deeply affected by her angelic good¬ nefs, but could not find words to exprefs his feelings. Wit an humour now returned to our circle in an overflowing meafure, and with additional gaiety. The graces mingled with our fociety, and the god of cheerful hilarity prefided at our table. Our con¬ verfation overflowed with witty fallies; a general defire of giving pleafure to our darling pervaded every bofom. The Count's cheerfulnefs was of a more gentle complexion; he fmiled only when we laughed»
laughed. Caroline animated him with half concealed and half vifible careffes, and the warmth of friendfiiip foon blazed perceptibly up in the fíame of love. Every member of our happy fociety was charmed with the dear object of our love, and ap¬ plauded his enchanting ideas; I alone fat пшее, and, at the fight of his happinefs, fdt myfelf confumed by a fecret fire, for which I neither could nor would account. Here begins a period of my life, on which I cannot reflect without defpifing myfelf; in which I was mifled by a glow¬ ing paffion to forget every thing that was dear to me, and that I ever ihould have held facred. And, gracious Heaven 1 what a paflion? Not that of a firft love, in which the heated blood urges us to fac ri- fice all prejudices, and every idea that op- pofes our delires ; it was not that love which boldly breaks all the fetters of hu¬ man nature, and even tears all other fofter tics ; no, it was a paffion kindled by jea¬ loufy after the firfi bloom of life was paft, and
and numberlefs painful experiences ought to have put mc on my guard, after love even had iaviihed all her bleffings on me; a hopelefs, unhappy paffion, inflamed'by impoffibility, and combating the moil facred duties. What a misfortune is it to have been for fome time the favourite of fortune ! Nothing had been able ta refill me as yet, but here was the boundary of my power; and while I attempted to over¬ leap it, I was in danger to lofe a friend, •a real treafure, in the purfuit of an ima¬ ginary one. I was the only perfon in our cheerful circle that did not fincerely ihare the general flow of pleafure which pervaded the heart of every one prefent. The fmile of cheerfulnefs fat on my lips, but bane¬ ful poifon rankled in rny heart. My eyes, which fcarcely were able to retain the tear of painful difappointment, were over¬ clouded with a mift. Every innocent glance of Caroline's looks, meeting thofe of the enraptured Count, flung me to the hearts
heart; every tender geflure of hers threatened to choke me. 1 laughed immo¬ derately, to conceal the real caufe of the big tears that flatted from my heavy eyes, and to difguife the vifible agitation of my bofom. Yet my flrange alteration did not efcape the Count's keen fightednefs. He now took a too fmall fhare in the general flow of pleafure as not to be a good obferver, and repeatedly extended his hand to me over thé table to reconcile me to him. I ac¬ cepted, but could no.t have fqueezed it for the world. My cheerfulnefs was fo un¬ natural, f о extravagant, that I am aflo¬ nifhed it did not flrike the whole company. u Dear Marquis," faid he, as foon as we were left to ourfelves, iC dear Marquis, what ails you?" I had fqueezed myfelf into a corner of the fofa, abforpt in a profound reverie, avert¬ ing my weeping eyes from the Count, and turning them towards the window, through which the pale light of the moon trembled.
trembled. A melancholy train of gloomy feenes of former times, as it were, paffed vifibly the review before my overclouded eyes, and I compared the overflowing meafure of my fufferings with the fcanty portion of my joys. Only the prefent moment fways in our mind in fuch a dif¬ pofition, and reflects its hue on fufferings and pleafures paft, on our wiflies and fears, on our hopes and expectations. Feathers fink to the bottom when the torrent is too violent, and rocks ara unrooted. In that moment the whole courfe of my life ap¬ peared to me to have been deftitute of every joy, and futurity flared me grifly in the face. Without being rightly con¬ fcious of the original fource of that ago¬ nizing ftate of mind, every expectation was thereby infected, and every cheering hopfc deftroy ed at once. No fituation of mind is fo dreadful as the moment in which a violent, hopelefs paflion, whicli we have ftruggled with in vain, convulfes every faculty of the foul in its firft incon- 4. fcioUS
fcious rife. I fcarcely heard the Count's queftion, yet the dubious ftiake of his head did not efcape my notice. " You don't hear me, dear Carlos !" he refurned. u I fear you are not well?" " Indeed, I believe you are right," I replied mechanically; "for I feel fome¬ thing here," pointing to the left fide. The Count laughed at that gefture, af¬ fli m cd a cheerful air, and faid, ic So much the worfe, Carlos ; for hurts on that fide are generally incurable.' 1 ' He expected I fliould .fall in with his^ merry humour ; yet I was entirely mute, and he 'refurned again: " Tell me, for Heaven's fake, Marquis, what is the matter with you. You are en¬ tirely changed; or do you think that I have not f cen the tears which you at¬ tempted to difguife by laughing, nor that I have perceived that you did not fqueeze my hand when I offered it to you fo cor¬ dially?" "Don't
" Don't fpeak of it, deareft Count. I am, indeed, not well." " Indeed not? And that malady attacks you in the very moment in which I feel myfelf well again the firft time?" "Deareft, beft Count; for God's fake, don't be bitter. I cannot, I cannot bear it today." "Bitter!" he exclaimed, with a mien which was ten times more fo. " It is, indeed, the firft time to day that any per¬ fon taxes me with it. I was not bitter while I was unfortunate; it muft therefore originate in my happinefs. "But," added he, ina foothing accent, "do you really think that I am fuch a bad and inatten¬ tive obferver, that I fhould nor have fecn at whom your tcndereft and moit burning looks were directed ?" " Pray, tell me, at whom were they di¬ rected?*' " The former at my fair neighbour, and the latter at myfelf. The tears, that ftarted
ftarted from your eyes, could not extin- guifti their jealous fire/* < ť Jealous, did you fay? By heaven I do not comprehend you.'* " Alas ! how much is my Carlos al¬ tered í Can that be my Carlos, whom I doat upon, who was the tender partner of my joys and forrows, my guardian genius, the iharer of all my fecrets and my in- moft thoughts, whom I looked upon as my better half? I fcarcely can perluade myfelf that he is the fame perfon. By his kind afliftance I have recovered from a dangerous illnefs, ahd he docs not re¬ joice at his own work." " Lewis, your reproaches are unj u ft. By the eternal God ! I never have loved you with a greater ardour than in that fa¬ tal moment. But you are not miftaken; 1 am ill, very ill. I fcarcely know myfelf again/' Here a torrent of tears relieved me at once. My pulfe began to beat with un¬ common violence, my whole frame was Vol. III. F convulfed;
convulfed ; a feverifli tremor fhook all my limbs. I never have experienced fimilar fymptoms. All the agonizing feelings of my ftraitened heart convulfively commu¬ nicated themfelves, as it were, to every part of my agitated frame. The Count was almoft petrified at the fight of thefe emotions, which thrilled me by fits, and which I ftruggled in vain to overcome. I wanted to fpeak; however, my teeth chat¬ tered ib violently, that I could utter none but inarticulate accents. I wanted to fhake hands with him, but trembled fo exceffively, that I miffed his. I wanted to recline my head againft his bofom, and relapfed half-fainting upon the fofa. "What a myfterious incident!" he ex¬ claimed ever and anon. " I cannot per- fuade myfelf that you are really ill: or íhall I fend for a phyfician?" I begged him, in the greateft agony, for a little water and wine; my mouth being fo much parched that I fcarcely could open my lips. He gave it me, and I felt
felt myfelf refreffied. He now feated himfelf upon the fofa, to wipe the cold fweat from my face with his handkerchief, entreating me, again and again, to com¬ pofe myfelf. " All will be well,*' he added. " You know how little I value my life, if I can be ufeful to.you: fhould I, therefore, not willingly fliare my hap¬ pinefs with my dear Carlos ?" " Deareft Lewis 1" I groaned, " rather a thoufand reproaches, than that heavenly goodnefs. Alas! I do not deferve it." So faying, I ftruggled to difengage myfelf in a fit of wild defpair from his embraces; however, he would nót let me go. " If you don*t deferve that love, that tender kindnefs; who elfe can merit it? " Tell me, O! tell mc, my injured friend, do you really not hate a rival?*' <f A rival ! Is this the fatal fecret? Yes, Carlos, I confefs Caroline could make me happy, and obliterate the recollection of what I have fuffered. My paffion began as early as yours. It fways in my breaft F % equally
equally powerful as in your poor heart. We have the fame right; but I muft tell you, that I believe my hopes are better founded than yours." I ihuddered vio¬ lently. " However/* he continued Math а deep groan, <c you have nothing to fear$ I ceafe, from this moment, to be your rival. I rather will renounce happinefs for ever, than purchafc it at the expenfe of your tranquillity and peace of mind. Here is my hand; Caroline is yours. I renounce all my claims to her heart, and leave you at full liberty to gain it for yourfelf." So faying, he fqucczed my hand, and ftrained rne tenderly to his bo- fom. How was it poffible I could have expreíTed the grateful feelings of my heart? However, he was fatisfìed with himfelf and with my tears. Every noble, generous deed produces its own reward. Broken accents fpeak ftrongcr, and with greater energy, than words; and amongft all languages that of gratitude is the moft monofyllabled. He
He now left me to myfelf with his ufual gentlenefs. His eyes were, indeed, rather overcaft with a melancholy gloom, and his brow was not cloudlefs; yet he reflrained his <;rief at the facrifice he had made, and fpared my feelings. But, alas! what a dicadful nisht fucceeded that fatal evening! my fever encreafed after the Count's noble declaration, and the dawn of morning found me abforpt in gloomy reveries. " This is then the fruit of thy fu ft eri n g'?, thy travels, obfervations^ and refoiution?" I faid to myfelf:' " thy mofe folcmn vows, and thy vaunted friendfhip are ivrecked upon a miferable paffion ? How deeply muft he defpife me! And has he not the greatefl reifon for it? is he not greater than I? Did he not tell me that Caroline would render him happy for life, and -re¬ flore his long loft hilarity to him? He never has enjoyed the blifs of love in its fullcft extent, and I deprive him of it at his commencement of a new life: I, who F 3 am
am a voluptuary, a fpoiled fondling of love, and have but lately wept at the early % romb of an adored wife ! Carlos, thou art the meaneft wretch, and not deferving of thy cxiftence, if thou canft hefitatc to re¬ turn that facrifice." It is incredible how much pain it cofl. meto come to that refolution; a refolu- tion that was too natural and jufl than that it ought to have appeared to me a facri- fice. I began to meditate more feriou fly upon it, and was aflonifhed at the unna¬ tural ftate of my mind. The firft love heats a blood that rolls through a youth¬ ful, healthy frame; and the kindling fire of fenfations that have juft unfolded them- felvés, urges us beyond the limits of hu¬ manity j and yet my fenfes never have been in fuch a tumultuous agitation; even not when I firft met Elmira, animated with a full fenfe of my'pride, and con- fcious of fuccefs; nor when ihe ciropt into my trembling arms, encircling my neck as my happy and bleffing wife, and my fenfes
fenfes were, for the firft time, inebriated, on her bofom, with every rapture love is capable to afford; nor was my blood heated to a fimilar degree in Rofalia's arms, who had taught me to empty the cup of intoxicating fenfuality to the laft drop. Maturer age alfo had contributed to cool the heat of paffions ; and Elmira's modeft meeknefs, the dear cares of a tran¬ quil domcflicated life, unruffled by for¬ row, and flowing in a foft and gentle ftream, had blunted the edge of my de- fires. What could, therefore, have de¬ prived me of -my fenfes in that moment; what could have rendered me fo callous againft the admonitions of a juft and friendly heart; what could have been the reafon of the vehement tempeft that agi¬ tated my whole nature? While I was occupied with thefe and fimilar reflections, which fucceeded each other with an incomprehenfible impetuo- fity, the idea of my fingular fatalities in Spain forced itfelf upon my foul. Don F 4, Bernhardt
, Bernhard, who conftantly frequented our houfe, though his character did not fuffer him to affift inali our banquets, happened that night to be of our party. Count S******i alfo was. prefent; and both being in an uncommonly merry humour, they entertained the company with a relation of our little Bacchanals at Toledo. The re» collection of thofe merry feenes reminded me, by a natural affociation of ideas, of the feparation of our fociety, and of the fate of its individual members. I recol¬ lected that one was feduced by an Italian finger to abandon our cheerful circle; that a fécond was called away by family aftairs; that a third was intoxicated by fomething mixed with his wine. The latter idea made me flart up with a loud feream. " Heavenly powers ľ' thought I, ct fhould, perhaps, the unnatural ftate of' my mind and body be the'effect of a fimilar caufc?" I hurried out of my bed. The dining room* was feparated from my bed-chamber only by two apartments. I put
put a night-gown on, and went with the greateft precaution thither, to afcertain rny fuppofition, if poffible. The glaíTes were ftill upon the table; the fervants being ufed to remove every thing in the morning when the company flayed too long. The dawn of morning peeped al¬ ready through the windows, and enabled me to difeern every object ivi thou t diffi¬ culty. I began to examine the glafľes, but with very little hope of fuccefs, as it alfo was poffible that fomething might have been mixed in my plate; nay, it even* appeared to me to have been too hazardous to attempt mixing an inebriating drug' with my wine or water ; though I was fo' much abforpt in thought, that I perhaps' fliould not luve taken the leaft notice of whole clouds of impurity in my glafs. My apprehenlion foon was confirmed be¬ yond contradiction; for I difcovered in one of the glaíľes, ftanding near the place where I had fat, a whitiih matter on the bottom, which undoubtedly was the re- F s mainder
mainder of what I inadvertently had fwal- lowed. The conclurions I deduced from that difcovery were of a moft alarming nature. It-was evident that the agent of the au¬ thors of that atrocious deed muft be one of our fervants, and at the fame time have few accomplices, or none at all. My fer¬ vant« had, however, been employed very little attable; thofe of the Count having waited upon us from the moment he had joined our company. I had, befides, fufpected two of his people for fome time; for thefe fellows were of fuch an enormous and unnatural ftupidity, that I Could not conceive how the Count could keep thern in his fervice. Being, how¬ ever, unwilling to throw an odium upon m innocent perfon, I refolved to conceal that incident and my fuppofitions from my friend, and only to watch 'them with the greateft vigilance. My blood being ftiil in a violent fermentation, I mixed fome lemon juice with wine and water, a which
which refreíhed me more than I had ex¬ pected. I could, indeed, not fleep; but found myfelf a great deal better on the fubfequent morning. CHAPTER V. THE Count, who came very early to fee how ï did, found me pale and languid. I entreated him to forget the whole fcene of lait night, becaufe I had made the ohfcrvation that I really was very ill. He fcnt immediately for a phy- fician, who (hook his'head, declaring my illnefs to be a fever of a moft dangerous nature, and found it neceffary to bleed me. Yet I rofe at ten o'clock, in health. and pretty good fpirits, feeling no other inconvenience than an ebullition in the' blood, and an unfpeakable languour. I was feveral times ftrongly tempted, in the courte of the day, to inform the Count of my fufpicions with regard to the affair of laft night; and had the beft opportunity of F 6 doing
doing it at table, where I examined the wine, and every diih, with an unufual care, which occafioned him to afk me whether I was afraid to be poifoned by him? Yet that very queftion fealed my lips. His extraordinary agitation, and the ftruggle with his heart, which Was not yet entirely decided, imparted to every thing he laid a certain bitternefs which he could not conceal, notwithftanding his endeavours to appear open and kind to me. Thus frail is the human heart. I faw, with fecret forrow, the diftrefs which the facrifice he had made me inflicted upon his agonized mind. I might have foothed his agony, if I had explained to him that my fingular behaviour on the preceding night had been owing rather to a difordered body than to a weaknefs of heart; .however, his filent referve, and my being doubtful how he would re¬ ceive it, prevented me from coming to an explanation. The
The only thing I did was to make ob¬ fervations on myfelf; and the deeper I pe¬ netrated into the fecrets of my feelings, the more eoldnefs to Caroline did I dif- cover in my heart. I was highly rejoiced at it, and yet apprehended that it was im¬ poffible I loved her neverthelefs. I heated myfelf more violently in attempting to grow cooler, and fecretly afked myfelf, " Is it poffible you could love Caroline? It fcarcely can be ; and yet I apprehend it really is^fo. She has, indeed, not gentle¬ nefs and judgment enough, and alfo ap¬ pears to have . too miîch felf will, as to be capable to facrifice much for her lover; however, flie has a certain fpirit of con- verfation which charms me, and a natural infinuation that flatters felf-love, and muft render its object happy. But is all this worth facrificing a tried friend, whofe peace of mind appears to depend on her love ? No, Carlos ! be afbamed, and con¬ quer a fatal paflion, that owes its exiftence merely to an unnatural ftate of thy body, left
left thou becomeft the fport of others that have kindled it in thy heart, and ftrive to gain the applaufe of thy own underfland¬ ing, of the Count, thy friends.** This foliloquy terminated irrafolemn refolution to ftiun Caroline as much asdecency would permit, and I was determined to carry it that very day into execution. We were invited toan affembly, where wc were fure tomeet Caroline; my indifpofition afford¬ ing me a natural pretext for flaying at home, I refolved not to go. Not knowing how to amufe myfelf ali the evening, I went to my clofet, and fcarched for fome books. I carried at leaft half a dozen to my fofa, without being able to determine which I would read. I alfo had got fome mufic for my flute, and put a chair to the Piano forte. At length, I put a night¬ gown on, and ftretched myfelf upon the fofa, reading aloud, to filence the voice of my heart. Thus I was in an excellent way of fpending the evening in private, and to divert rny mind, when fuddenly a carriage
carriage flopped at our houfe. I was vio¬ lently frightened. " Good God!" faid I to myfelf, " I hope I iliali not be difturbed by vifitors!'* fbut my eyes, and pretended to be fait afteep. Not two minutes were elapfed, when my clofet-door was opened, and a perfon entered. He approached the fofa foftly, m hile I confulted with myfelf whether I fiiould not open my eyes a little to fee who was fo kind to difturb my fweet re¬ pofe? It was the Count, andin full drefs. "My Godi in full drefs ľ' I exclaimed, ftarting fuddenly up, and fur\ eying him with gazing looks. "You play fine tricks, Marquis," he faid coolly. < c I really thought you was fait afleep, and you ftart up at once as if you were going to fly in my face!" So faying, he put his fword on, which he car¬ ried in his hand, went to the looking glafs, and examined his head-drefs. Seeing that I ftill continued to lock at him without making the leaft attempt to ftir,
ftir, he put his hat on, turned round, and croffing his arms negligently, faid, « But tell me, Marquis, what means that come¬ dy you are acting there in your great night-cap?" c( A comedy ľ* I replied, with looks of aflonifhment. " I think you have had fuflficient time to take your nap; though you have dined to-day with an extraordinary appetite." " You are miftaken, Count," I began peevifhly: "I have had no appetite at all." I would have given any thing if I could have provoked him to enter into a conteft with me on that point; fori was deter¬ mined to prove clearly that I never had dined with lefs appetite. He went, how¬ ever, to the window, without returning a word, began to hum an air, looking into the ftreet, and diflembled to be occupied with fome ridiculous object. At length he refurned, flill looking out of the win- dowj
dow, u How long will you let your car¬ riage wait at the door?*' <c My carriage at the door ! I don't comprehend you. Havefrø ordered it?*' " Yes, I have; and it is your ftate- , carriage. Have you entirely forgot, that I am the kino* of the feaft which wc are to have, and that the Minifter of H****** and the ****fh Ambaffador will be of the party?" " Pray tell me, dear Count," I replied, "whether I am dreaming? for I aflure you, I know not a fyllable of it.'* (I really had almofl·entirely forgot it.) " Have I ever Icen the like?" he re¬ plied, turning round. <( AH the world has been folemnlv invited laft nisht. I cometo fetch you, and you arc not drefled. Thefe are fine doings, indeed! I am fure the card-tables will be occupied before you are ready, and you may eafily con¬ clude that I filali play to-night?" All my fine plans vanifhed in that mo¬ ment : I faw nothing but the gay company, dancing, playing and laughing. » Well,
u Well, then, I muft make hafte to drefs," I replied mechanically, taking my cap off, and ringing for my valet. He came, and ufed fuch expedition, that I was in my carriage a quarter of an hour aften We came, indeed, too late; all the card-tables were already occupied; and Caroline having defpaired to fee the Count that night, had left the company to pay feveral vifitfc before fupper. The Count was determined to play, and fucceeded at length to collect a party. Being not dif¬ pofed to play at cards, I ftole upon a balco- ny A which looked into a large yard covered with lofty trees, where I abandoned my¬ felf to pîeafing reveries. The delufive duik, the humming in the air, and the ominous ruftling of the cooling breezes betwixt the trembling leaves, created fweet fenfations in my mind ; and my imagination was agreeably occupied with forming pîeafing fancies, when the door behind me was opened at once. On turning
turning round I beheld Caroline, who, mean time, was returned, and had left the apartment for reafons fimilar to mine. She feemed not to have obferved me at firft, being rather ftartled when fhe faw me. Yet fhe foon collected herfelf, falu- ting me with her ufual good nature and fimplicity, and inquiring how I did. I began to tremble, and replied with vifible confufion, and in broken accents. She began to laugh, refuming gaily, *' I really think you have been fleeping, Marquis, for your phrafes are uncom¬ monly odd/* I confeffed that I had been dreaming, at leaft, and being afked of whom, I replied, < c of you, charming Caroline." Thus I opened a converfation on the very fubje¿t I had fo firmly determined to avoid. She declined every thing I faid with thegayeft humour, which impercep¬ tibly led me to add a great deal more of the fame nature. In ihort, our converfa¬ tion grew very warm. She was violently agitated
agitated, notwithftanding her cheerful hu¬ mour; and at length began repeatedly to fpeak of the Count, pitying him with a moft charming kindnefs for his palenefs and melancholy, and even afked me whether his heart was not the prey of fomc filent grief? She could havechofen neither a fubjcčl nor words that could have made my blood ferment with greater violence. When the air grew more chilling, fhe told me fhe would go and fetch her fhaw!, and foon join me again. I offered to do it for her; however, fhe infifled upon going herfclf. I counted every minute; but fhe did not return. Having waited İn vain above a quarter of an hour, I re¬ turned to the company. She fat by the Count, looking in hk cards, or rather contemplating his beautiful countenance, which exhibited flrikine marks of melan- choly, and received additional charms by the languid palenefs his illnefs had left upon it. He never had appeared hand- fomer to me than that night. The fpeaking language
language of his mien was indeed now and then interrupted by an indefcribablc per¬ plexity ; however, the goodnefs of his heart continued to prevail in every feature of his benevolent countenance. His dark eyes, flafhing with a faint fire, fpoke powerfully to the heart ; and the pale ena¬ mel of his lips refembled a rofe that firft begins to blufh. Caroline was entirely abforpt in the con¬ templation of his affecting features; her face was the mirror of his, and repeated every mien of her melancholy neighbour by its movements. As foon as the Count perceived me by his fide, he endeavoured to involve me in a convcrfation with Caro¬ line, whojuftwas ltarting up, exclaiming, ft Good Heaven! I have forgot the Mar¬ quis, who waits forme on the balcony ľ* She was rejoiced to fee that í had joined the company, and drew her chair clofer to the Count. The latter began, from that moment, to be entirely abfent, replying little, or nothing
nothing at all, to her obfervations and queftions. This offended Caroline at laft, and flie rofe fuddenly from the card-table, declaring that play did make people unac¬ countably infupportable. She then wifhed the Count, laughing, a good night; re¬ pairing to the oppofite fide of the apart¬ ment, where a forte piano flood, and be¬ gan to play. Yet flie could relifh nothing. I followed her like her iliade, taking up a violin to accompany her; felected fome of her fa¬ vourite airs; but every thing was intoler¬ able to her. She grew, at length, un¬ commonly fad and gloomy, reclining her¬ felf againft the back of her chair, fetched a deep figh, and ihut her eyes. I did every thing in my power to amufe her; but nothing would do: flie returned very ihort anfwers, and grew cooler every moment. She continued to keep up that humour till the gaming parties rofe ; and being placed, at fupper, between the Count
Count and myfelf, her cheerfulnefs foon returned with additional luftre. This charming change feemed, how¬ ever, not to have the leaft effect on the Count. He continued to be fad and gloomy, however attentive and obliging flie was to him. She was indefatigable in her exertions to roufe him from his melan¬ choly ftupor, difplaying her wit and good humour in the moft advantageous light; but nothing would fucceed. The com¬ pany was enchanted with her lively fallies and acute remarks ; the Count only was dejecled and abforpt in gloomy reveries. He had formed his plan, and nothing could tempt him to give up his refolution. His pertinacy was fo firm, that neither Heaven nor Hell would have been able to draw him only a hair's breadth from his courfe. At length flie grew tired of that frigi¬ dity, and addreffed herfelf to me, to pu¬ ni fii him for his füllen referve, thinking, perhaps, that jealoufy would effect what love
love was not equal to perform. But (lie was miftakcn;. for the Count grew more communicative, and I was as laconic as he had been. I was but too feniible of the real motive of the honour ilie did me ; my pride did not ftiffer rae to avail myfelf of her favourable ciifpofition, and my checrfulnefs was far from encreafing. Thus the evening ) for the pleafures of which fo many preparations had been made, was fpcnt in a very irkfome and tedious manner. From that time I faw Caroline almoft every day ¿ it was at leaft not my fault if I did not, The Count's melancholy en- creafed every day more vifibly ; he fre¬ quently {hut himfelfup in hisclofct, re¬ tired early from all companies, or flayed entirely at home. His friends afcribed that love of fblitudc to the effects of his illnefs; and I confirmed their fuppofition. Every fpark of generofity feemed to be dead in my heart during that fatal period ; 1 faw him ilruggle againft his paflion with an
an indifference that covers me with pun¬ gent fiiamé whenever I think of it; he •was a living picture of forrow, and I had not even fo much feeling left to comfort him. In fbort, I was fo completely, fo thoroughly altered, that it is impoffible my friends fliould not have noticed it. The female heart is never entirely void of vanity; and none that is notpre-occu- pied, will be able to refift a firm and inde¬ fatigable exertion to gain upon it. I now was frequently in private with Caroline, and none of my other rivals was very formidable. I really imagined to have made fome imprelfion upon her heart, and that flie had completely forgot the obfti¬ nate Count, I enjoyed that little, dubious happinefs with a rapturous pleafure, when an accident fuddenly overturned the airy edifice of my vanity at once. Wc met at the country feat of a friend to celebrate a rural feaft. The fine feafon was already on the verge j autumn had, however, fufficient charms left to make us Voi. III. G forget
forget the amufements of the town foi* a ihort time. The vintage was getting in, and that is the time when merriment and pleafure difplay themfelves in the moft natural and charming manner. The neceffary preparations w-ere made, at the country feat of my friend, folemnly to celebrate every day of that general re¬ joicing. The two moft virtuous girls of the village were publicly prefented in the church with a garland of white rofes, and received a very liberal dowry. Their beauty was, indeed, not equal to their virtue; yet they received that reward with fuch a grace, and fo much modeft inno¬ cence, that every one was convinced, be¬ yond contradiction, that they deferved having been feleâed from the reft of their lifters. This enchanting harmony between gracefulnefs and virtue is generally no where to be met with in that high degree as among the French peafantry. No one could deny that all his fcfter feelings were completely gratified among that
that troop of amiable country girls who, during the ihort time of our ftay with them, never loft fight of us. Thefe re¬ marks had a powerful influence on my fubfequent refolutions. All of us gentlemen were greater or lefler finners, and it afforded us the higheft pleafure to exchange the coquetry and art of our la¬ dies with the fenfible and open fimplicity of thofe innocent children of nature, Joy and cheerful mirth animated, therefore, every one of us; and we found many little innocent means of gratifying our glowing humour, and the ч demands of a heated blood, without injuring the virtue of thofe innocent ruftics. Dancing and fongs, little feafts and proceffions, fire-WOrks and comedies, followed each other in a pîea¬ fing fucceffion, were always different in their nature, and, neverthelefs, only parts of a well arranged whole. Even the Count began to cheer up a little, yet without being able to take his nfual ihare in thefe amufements. Caroline G 2 was
4vas flill a little angry with him, or at ieaft pretended to be fo; and being ufed to have always a declared lover, gave me the preference. I was obliged to fit al¬ ways by her fide, to carry her gloves and her fan, and to follow her every where as her efquire. Even when fomebody talked to me at a fmall diftance from her, fhe inquired, with the greatefl: fimplicity, <( where may the Marquis be?" This in¬ duced me to flatter myfelf to be fecretly beloved by her, though fhe never fuffered me to fpeak of my paffion. She neither acted the prude, nor was referved, but behaved like an offended wife that is going to lofe her huiband, and importuned al¬ ready with propofals of a fécond marri¬ age. The Count foon obferved that fhe feemed to be very partial to me, and fre¬ quently fqueezed my hand by flealth with averted looks. Yet my proud heart foon conceived a prefumption upon her favour, which unexpectedly made me fenfible of my miftake. One
One afternoon fhe roved with me thro* the garden, playing numberlefs little pranks. She was more immoderately merry than I ever had feen her before, and her amorous gambols fired me to a degree of which I never thought myfelf fufeepti¬ bie. She was, befides, drefled with un¬ common elegance and tafte. Her fine о íhape, the activity of her limbs, the pli¬ ancy of every part of her graceful form, the luxuriant growth of her curling hair, which wantonly overfhaded her forehead and bofom, and her eafy, cheerful gait, made her refemble the Goddefs of Mirth. I was intoxicated by the fight of her un-. prefuming charms, and enchanted by the jovial roguery of her iparkling eyes. Being, at length, exhaufted by her play fome gambols, we feated ourfelves upon the fwelling turf, where it was over¬ fhaded by a tuft of myrtles. She broke off fome of the depending twigs, and be¬ gan to throw them at me. I had juft picked up two, and was going to fling G 3 them
them a'; her in return, when ihe fuddenly averted her face from me towards a walk covered with lofty trees, I turned round, and beheld the Count coming flowly to¬ wards the place where we were fitting. He was alone, and fo profoundly abforpt in thought, that he did not fee us. His arms were crofted, his head depended upon his bofom, his eyes were half fliut, and he feemed to be entirely unconfcious of the objects around him. He made now and then motions, as if he converfed with fome perfon, dropt one of his hands, covering with the other a part of his face. Caroline fuddenly grew ferious ; I wanted to continue our frolicfome fport, but ihe paid no attention to me, replying to all my qucltions nothing but, <c The poor Count! how melancholy he is!" "The poor Count!" I repeated with great emotion; and one of her fweet looks thanked me for my concern. When
When he came nearer, without feeing us, I called to him. He awoke from his gloomy reverie a little frightened; yet he had too much power over his countenance as not to exhilarate it immediately; and he always grew extravagantly merry, whenever he changed from a melancholy mood to checrfulnefs; which now alfo was the cafe. Yet Caroline could not be de* ceived by his unnatural jocundity; her countenance aíľumed an uncommon fe¬ rious afpečt, which impelled him to ufe itili greater efforts to cheer her up. I fe- conded him faithfully; and when.-nothing would fucceed, wc grew, at laft, fo excef- fively merry, that ihe offered to rife, and to leave us. " I perceive, beautiful Caroline," he now began, <c that one of us is difagree- able to you, and I fear I am that one." Although he faid this in a laughing ac¬ cent, yet Caroline returned neither a word, nor even a look; remaining quietly on her feat, and playing with her fan. G 4 « No,
cc No, no!" faid I, " You are miftaken, dear Count; I am that perfon." I di¬ rected a fcrutiniztng look at her while I uttered thefe words; but lhe ftill conti¬ nued to be taciturn. ** You probably think fo/* the Count refurned, " becaufe fhe is fo ferious ever fince an unfortunate accident has made me interrupt your converfation?'* " I don't like to enter into a conteft with you; but let us make an experiment. That proud goddefs may decide herfelf. Kneel down, and take this myrtle fprig/* He kneeled, laughing, down, and took the myrtle in his hand. "Now, fair Caralme/* I began in a folemn accent, turning to her, " it is your turn to choofe. Here you fee two lovers kneeling before you, who adore you with equal tendernefs, who would facrifice their life with pleafure to fave yours, but ra¬ ther will devote it to your happinefs. Either offers you a myrtle fprig, accept that of him whom you prefer to the other.'* I could
I could not help thinking that it was cruel to treat the poor Count thus : how¬ ever, the prefent opportunity feemed to offer me that little triumph in fuch a na¬ tural manner, that 1 could not refift the temptation of enjoying it. My poor neighbour trembled, and was in a violent agitation, while I anticipated my victory with a fmiling countenance. Caroline, however, inftead of treating the matteras a frolic, as I had expected, rofe wdth dig¬ nity, and in a very folemn manner, which excited our aftonifhrnenti but no fooner had fhe furveyed us with a dubious look, than fhe loft all prefence of mind. Her face was alternately overfpread with a deep crimfon hue and a deadly palenefs ; her bofom heaved with greater violence, and fhe breathed louder, covering her counte¬ nance repeatedly with her hand, and dif¬ playing an uncommon emotion. After a few féconds, ftie recovered the dominion over herfelf, darting an unfpeakable ten¬ der look at the Count, who flared at her; G 5 like
like a ilatue, and another lefs fignificant one at myfelf, fnatched with "vehemence the myrtle fprig from my friend's hand, averting her face, and faid, in a trem¬ bling accent, " I thank you, dear Count." It is a kind of miracle that I did not lofe the ufe of my fenfes on the fpot. It rather feemed as if I had received a thou¬ fand eyes more, to fee more plainly what now enfued. The Count was almoft: frantic with rapture, forgetting every thing", the world and myfelf, and ftrain- ing the trembling girl to his bofom. At firft, ihe only fuffered his careffes and kuTes, but foon returned them with equal fervour. Tender looks, and voluptuous fighs, were mutually exchanged, and the glowing fire of love burned on their crim- foned lips. They were infolded in tender • embraces, while I continued to kneel before them in a kind of fenfelefs ftupor, The Count obferved, at length, my forlorn fituation, and raifed me with a grateful look. (i My Caroline," faid he to
to the fweet girl, " let my deareft friend have a fhare in your агГеЛют** So faying, he preffed me to Caroline's bofom» Heaven was in his looks ; he believed to have regained every thing while he could ftrain the dear object of his love and the friend of his heart to his heaving bofom. " Yes, Marquis," Caroline began* fc I ihould have preferred you to all the world, if I had not known the Count. Be my friend, as you have been that of my Lewis, and you always will find my heart open, kind, and affectionately difpofed to you." I was feized with ftunning ftupor¿ and incapable of returning an anfwer; I even could not evince my gratitude by a mute fign. I bent my weeping eyes upon the hand which fhe extended to me, and felt it burn more violently than my face. This was the only fenfation of which I was confcious. My heart ceafed almoft to beat, and a chilling tremour thrilled my framcj but was foon fucceeded by a con- G 6 vulfive
vulfive heat. My breaft heaved violently, and yet I had it not in my power to un* burthen it by a fingle figh. The Count embraced me, fqueezing my hand. "You know, my dear Carlos," he added, " that my rapture is not unal¬ loyed with pungent grief.'* Caroline now raifed me up, putting my hand between her arm, while the Count took hold of me on the other fide. They fpoke little; however, their tender looks conveyed comfort to my poor heart. I was fcarcely confcious of being led by them. " This then is the confequence of thy adventurous undertaking/' faid I to my¬ felf in the evening, when I was alone in my apartment: "fate has punifhed thee as thou didit deferve. Yet it is fortu¬ nate enough that that decifion, t that the certainty of thy fate, has cooled thy foolifh prefumption, and that thou haft a greater ihare of pride than of any other paffion." I cannot
I cannot but confefs that my pride only faved me, my paffion being not ftrong enough to refift it. I never had, till then, loved without hope? and even Caroline had opened a favourable profpečt to me by her innocent fportivenefs. The firft blow my humbled vanity received was dreadful enough, yet it foon recovered from that unexpected ihock, and rendered me eafy. I fhould have been blind, if I could have overlooked the Count's fuperior merits, his enchanting form, his gay and even temper, and his fenfible heart, which was ever ready to make the greatefl facri- fices to the objects of its love. Yet no one will expert that. I ihould have been able to witnefs the felicity of the two lovers with tranquillity. I refolved, there¬ fore, patiently to keep them company, while they ihould remain in the country, and then to repair to fome other part of the world ; a refolution, the firft part of which I performed more faithfully than I had reafon to expect. I took fuch a tran¬ quil,
^quil, tøt lefs cheerful, ihare in all their amufements, deceived myfelf fo much by my equanimity, and forced myfelf to fuch an impofing unconcern, that the ferenity of the Count, who firmly believed that I foon would be cured entirely, vifibly jencrea&d, and grew every day more na¬ tural. But how great was his aftoniihment when I entered his apartment, a few days after our return to Paris, and informed him that I was going to leave him for a Ihort time. He fcarcely could believe that I was ferious: I told him, however, that he was miftaken if he imagined my heart was as cheerful as my countenance. I alledged fuch ftrong and reafonable mo¬ tives for a tour through France, and a vifit to a little eftate I poflefled in Provence, that he approved my plan at laft, though it was very vifible that it gave him pain to part with me even for a ihort time. We found, however, fome comfort in the hope of a fpeedy cure of my mental difcafe*
difeafe, of my fubfequent return. I had, befides, found out the moft amiable travelling companion I could wiih for: this was Count S******i, who was in a fituation fimilar to mine, and fincerely re¬ joiced at my propofal. The Count and myfelf being now completely reconciled, we embraced each other with an affectio¬ nate heart and weeping eyes. He offered to fpend the night with me, and to ac¬ company me the fubfequent morning a few leagues. Wiihing, however, that my journey ihould be looked upon merely as a pleafure excurfion, I defired that the fareweli-fcene ihould be as ihort as poffi¬ ble. Having, therefore, fettled the man¬ ner in which our correfpondence was to be carried on/1 difengaged myfelf from his embraces, and fpent the night in pri¬ vate in my apartment, giving audience to my thoughts, and preparing for my departure. S******i anc j myfelf had agreed not to render our journey tirefome, by taking 4 too
too much care of our convenience on the road. We provided ourfelves with good horfes, and very little baggage; and were attended only by two fervants. Being thus accoutred, we began our excurfion, independent on the rudenefs of the poft- mafters, who are of one caft all over the world. As for my companion, I had not the leaft apprebenflon of falling out with him, forche was good-nature itfelf. I called at his apartments with the firft dawn of the morning; we mounted our horfes, and the Count wifhed us a pleafant journey from the balcony*. CHAPTER VI. S#*****i an( j j ] e f £ p ar j s M >i t h iigfâ , hearts, and cheerfully anticipated the pleafures which awaited us. Our hilarity encreafed with every mile that carried us farther from the refidence of every terref- trial happinefs. We did not regret it in the leaft; and were entirely occupied with the
the ferenity of the fky, with our plans, and the good-natured cheerfulnefs of the country people. ^IJcrry lay before us, and promifed to afford us ample fcope for ob¬ fervations and amufement. Autumn was on the verge, and the wind whiftled more chilly and bleak through the fading leaves: this is, however, the very feafon that agrees beft with a certain wearinefs of foul. My companion was, befides, a man that would have been capable of foothing the acuteft forrows,* for a moft infinuating gentlenefe animated every word of his, and he took the warmèft intereft in the leaft trifle that concerned the heart. The objects that prefented themfelves to his tyesy made him completely forget all his cares ; his exuberant imagination was fuf- ficiently purified by the trial of early dif- appointments and fufferings j and his hi¬ larity of mind reflected a cheerful lighten every object that prefented itfelf to his eyes. His heart w T as the amicable abode of tender fenfibility; and he was too good- natured
natured to confine his friendlhip to an in¬ dividual fellow-creature, cherifhing the whole human race with undivided af¬ fection. We travelled for fome time without meeting with any remarkable incident, accelerating our courfe whenever wc thought proper, and flopping at every place which promifed to afford us pleafure. Count S******i being difpofed by nature, and I by my fate, by philofophy and flern neceflîty, to find every where fcope for amufement, we met at all places-where we flopped a kind reception, and people with whom we could converfe. Nothing is more ridiculous than to travel for the fake of amufement and improvement, and at the fame time to pay a nice attention to one's rank. I have known very few ram¬ blers who travelled with that intention, that did not difplay more or lefs of that fooliih pomp. A traveller never ought to expect real pleafure and benefit from his rambles, if he is not initiated in the great art
art of being a peafant amongft country people, an artift amongft artifts, and a merchant amongft merchants. I have never known a man who poflefled the different qualities and perfections which compofe that art in a more extenfive compafs than S******i; his temper, which breathed nothing but cheerfulnefs and af¬ fability, appropinquating him to every open phyfiognomy. He fpoke the lan¬ guage of all ranks, knew all their preju¬ dices,'their favourite ideas, and peculiar expreflions. He could affume almoft any íhape; and no one could refift his manner, which fpoke a language that is generally underftood, the language of the heart. My rambling life, and the frequent changes of my fituation, had taught me alfo a little knowledge of man ; but whenever I was near him, I was but too fenfible that I was obliged to exert all my attention, if I would fpoil nothing. He ftole almoft irrefiftibly upon every heart ; and fcarcely a quarter of an hour elapfed before he was the
the idol of people who faw him the firft time. There was no reft in the houfe before our horfes were watered and baited, and our dinner or fupper got ready. All was in a bufile: fix feet were in motion as foon as one fignified a wifh; they af- fembled cheerfully around us¿ fpoke freely, and without difguife, of every thing. The prettieft girls were feleded to dance with us, or offered themfelves voluntarily with the moft amiable fimplicity and inno¬ cence. Wherever we fhewed ourfelves, we beheld joy and good will depicted on every countenance; and were happy even amid the fmoke of feveral dozens of to¬ bacco pipes. If we flayed more than one day at a village, fome little feaft was ge¬ nerally given on our account; the beft bottle of wine was fetched out of the cel¬ lar; the young girls of the place were af- fembled ; and thefe poor people, who only wanted a pretext for being merry, were rendered happy for feveral hours by the fhare we took in their amufements.
S******i, in return, flighted neither their difhes, nor their offers, nor their fociety ; he ate and drank with every one what was offered to him; danced as well with the ugly as with the handfome villagers with¬ out difcrimination ; fpoke and laughed with every one at whatever they chofe; and frequently played a ballad on the guittar, or related his travels. Such a fi¬ lence did then prevail around us, that one could have heard the falling of a feather. the company fat gaping on the benches, and hardly dared to fetch breath before the tale was concluded ; the confequence of which was, that thefe poor people parted with us with weeping eyes, or ran a quarter of a mile after us, on our de¬ parture. At Blois we happened to meet the Duke of B******, and gave occafion to that proud Briton, who thought to carry every thing by the weight of his purfe, to make a very mortifying experience. Having arrived early in the morning, we deter¬ mined
mined to take a ride after dinner, and to furvey the environs of the town· The Duke arrived, not long before our return, with two coaches, two valets, feven or eight giant-like fervants, and two led- horfês. The landlady, who was preparing our fupper, hefitated a while whether flie ihould admit the proud Peer with his nu¬ merous retinue, notwithftanding the dif· play of his guineas, as fhe could forefee that he would give her fo much trouble that ihe ihould not be able to enjoy our fociety. At length ihe gave the keys of the apartments to the waiter, and ordered him to fhew the Duke up* The purfe- proud Nobleman being ufed tobe received with the greatefl refped at the inns, was aftoniihed to fee himfelf ufhered in by the waiter, the landlady being juft occupied to prepare a rice cream, which Count S******i had ordered; and the landlord gone in queft of a bottle of Vin de la Cete, which my friend had wiöxed to have. The
The Duke took, however, pofTeflioft of his apartments, and fuddenly a dreadful noife arofein the yard. Our two fervants had been watering their horfes, while the Duke's people had quartered theirs in our ftable, which appeared to them to be more commodious, and better than the reft- Our trufty efquires were aflonifhed to find, on their return, the receptacle of their beafts occupied by new inhabitants ; and having not the leaft inclination to be diflodged, Antonio difmounted filently, with all poflìble Spanifh grandezza, led the intruders into the yard, and put his horfes in poifefïïon of their former ftation, in prefence of all the fervants^ who were ftruck with aftoniihment on feeing the beafts of an Englifh Peer treated thus difrefpeftfully, and diflodged by two mi¬ ferable hacks, as they were plcafed to call them. Their indignation foon broke out into dreadful curfes; and they aiked Alfonfo^ with kindling rage, how he dared to re¬ move
move the horfes of an Engliih Lord. A loud laugh was the only anfwer my fervant returned. He locked the ftable, and having put the key coolly into his pocket, was going to flep into the houfe. The Duke's fervants feeing Æemfelves treated with fo much difrefpeft, grew furious; and tbe conteft foon became fo clamorous and warm, that the Peer, hearing the voices of his people, opened the window of his bed-chamber, and defired to know the caufe of their quarrel. Being informed of Al fonfo*s temerity, he ordered him, in a domineering accent, to deliver up the key, and to put his horfes into another ftable. The fervants exulted already at their fuppofed victory; but Alfonfo pleaded, with the greatefl civility, his prior claims to the ftable, and declared that he rather would lofe his life than give υρ the key. The Peer being highly exaf- perated at his obftinacy, ordered his fer¬ vants to take it from hirn by force ; and his people having only waited for the lig¬ nai
nal of attack, fell furioufly upon poor Alfonfo. The honeft fellow being afiailed by feven ftrong and lufty men, faw no other expedient of faving the key, than to throw it into an open window, which went into the kitchen where the land¬ lady was bufily occupied with the Count's rice cream. She had been amufed already for fome time by the fcene which was acting under her window, and fecretly applauded Al- fonfo's fpirited conduct. He pofTeíľcd, like my friend S******i, a fecret charm to ingratiate himfelf with all the landladies we met with on our journey; and our hoftefs no fooner faw him fling the key into the kitchen, than flie took it fora fignal to come to his affiftance, and in* ftantly armed herfelf with her largeft ikimmer to terminate the conteft. She was firmly refolved to hit a found blow at the lufty fellow who had feized her dear Alfonfo by the collar, when the landlord appeared on the field of battle, carrying the bottle Vol. III. H with
the coftly wine, which he had got at laft, after numberlefs fruitlefs inquiries, tri¬ umphantly under his arm. He was in- ftantly informed of the caufe of the con¬ teft in a moft clamorous manner, and haftened with his yoke-mate to poor Al- fonfo's relief. The Duke's fervants being more de- firous to get the key into their poffeffion than to vent their vengeance againft my man, had already unhanded him, when they came up with them, without having done him any other harm than beating a hole into his head as large as a ihilling. It may eafily be conceived what a terrible clamour our landlady raifed when fhe be¬ held the broken head of her favourite. ** Good god ! what will the dear gentle¬ men fay on their return ľ' fhe exclaimed ever and anon. " Holy Peter! how they will be enraged!" Mean time 3 one of the Duke's fervants attempted to get into the houfe to fetch the key» which fhe no fooner perceived, ttan flie hit him fuch a л dreadful
dreadful blow with her culinary weapon in the face, that the poor fellow daggered back with a roaring yell. The Duke now ordered his people to defift from all further contention ; for al¬ though he was an Englifhman, yet he did not poffefs a large fhare of that undaunted courage for which his countrymen are re¬ nowned ; and having learnt, by the excla¬ mation of the landlady, that Alfonfo had a mafter, which till then had not come into his Lordfhip's mind, he thought it prudent to proceed with lefs violence. The hoftefs did, however, no fooner efpy him at the window, than fhe let loofe the reins of her tongue, thinking him to be. the chief caufe of that incident. She read fuch a lecture to the Englifhman on the impudence of his people, as he probably never had heard before. Her huiband too, who was not in the habit of agreeing with his loving fpoufe, was of the fame opinion with her, declaring that the ftable could be parted with for no price* На ТЫ
The Duke thinking the honour of his nation was at flake, looked upon this Phi¬ lippic as a challenge to throw fome guineas out of the window: however, that indeli¬ cate expedient only ferved to exafperate the hoft more violently; yet hecontented him¬ felf with kicking them indignantly afide, and proceeded to the Duke's apartment, to remonftrate with him on his conduct. The latter was, by our hoft's obftinacy, inflamed with fuch an eagernefs of getting pofleffion of the ftable, that he offered a confiderable fum of moneys and at laft threatened to quit the houfe immediately. But neither the one nor the other made the leaft impreflion upon the headftrong landlord; and the Peer was, at length, obliged todrop the conteft, becaufe he knew that he could not get poft-horfes before the next day, and apprehended that he fhould find no accommodation in another inn. The hoft was juft going to quit the apartment, when the Duke perceived the bottle
bottle he carried under his arm. He in¬ quired after the name of the wine, and it happened unfortunately to be his Lord- ihip's favourite liqour. He began, there¬ fore, to make new. offers; but the hoft was equally inexorable: nay, he was even fo malicious as to extol 1 the delicioufnefs of the wine to the fkics; adding, that he had found it extremely difficult to get a bottle of it, and that he would take no price for it. The Duke inquiring after the reafon of fuch flrange behaviour, the hoft, who was impatient to difplay his attach¬ ment to the Count, enumerated our merits in a moft hyperbolical manner, and laid a particular ftrcfs on the defcription he was pleafed to give of cur noble fpirit and bravery. u Thefe two gentlemen do, in¬ deed, travel in a fimple and unexpenfive manner/' he concluded : " however, I will be hanged if they are not two foreign princes who travel incognito/* Thefe words had the defired effect on the Duke: he now began ferioufly to think that his H 3 heat
heat had mifled him to commit a very fooliih action, and afked the landlord, with vifible perplexity, how he thought Alfonfo could be indemnified beft. The landlord fliook his head, declaring, that he was afraid it could not be done by money; and an attempt which the Duke made to that purpofe confirmed his fuppo- fition. We returned from our excurfion in the moment the landlord had finifhed his parley. The Duke was at the window, and feemed to be aftonifhed at the majef- tic appearance of the Count, whofe un¬ commonly beautiful horfe was prancing in the yard. The noble animal was of a high mettle, and gave his rider an oppor¬ tunity of difplay ing his fkill in horfeman- ftiip. Mean^whilc the landlady came running out of the houfe to feÍ7.e the reins of the horfe, thinking the Count was in danger; and Alfonfo, whole head was bound up, was clofe at her heels. We difmounted; and feeing a number of flrange
flrange fervants in the houfe, could partly guefs at the affair. Having patiently liftened to the minute account of our kind landlady, we found that it was of a complexion which made it necefiary we fhould wait upon his Lord- fhip immediately. He received us with an incredible perplexity, which he ftrove to conceal as much as poffible. My ad- drefs was very fhort; and, without men¬ tioning our names, or inquiring for his, I afked him what fort of fatisfaciion he meant to give to my fervant for the ill treatment of which he had been the prin¬ cipal caufe? He ftarted fome difficulties; but at length grew more reafonable, beg¬ ging my pardon; and we parted with mu¬ tual civility. We frequently met with fimilar inftancesj for the vanity of men is greater than their defire for gain. We had entirely diverted ourfelves of our rank and dignity; and without abandoning, only for a mo¬ ment, that elegance of deportment which H 4 always
always diftinguifhes a man of noble birth and a good education, flattered the paf¬ fions and prejudices of every one. Little friends ought not to be flighted, as well as petty enemies; and we frequently received the greateft fervices from people of whom we had not expected the fmalleft kindnefs. The innkeepers and their people rivalled every where to treat us as well as poffible: the lefs we required, and the more fa¬ tisfied we feemed to be with what they could give us, the more did they exert themfelves to render us every kind of fer¬ vice, and to anticipate our wiflies ; the confequence of which was, that we never had any reafon to complain of the info¬ lence and the impofition of the landlords ; and we were convinced, by repeated ex¬ perience, that travellers generally have to accufe no perfon but themfelves if they are not well treated by the innkeepers. One evening we had already left Chartres far behind us, and approached a village, whofe folitary, but romantic, fituation promifed
promifed us, if not a convenient, at leaft: an agreeable, accommodation for the night. We had made it a rule to decline as much as poffible from the high road, bending our courfe generally towards a vil¬ lage on the top of a rifing eminence, or fecluded from the reft of the world in a deep valley. There nature was purer, happinefs more artlefs; the inhabitants were handfomer and more cordial; and the reception was kinder than in the neigh¬ bourhood of more cultivated manners. And why did we travel? Was a ftatif- tic fpeculation, or the examination of the- different degrees of morality, or ofchurches and fteeples, or of bridges and edifices; were the fine arts, or any thing ofthat kind, the objects of our peregrination? Cer¬ tainly not. If one is defirous to travel for that purpofe, one muft not flop long at Paris, where fpeculation finds fuch an ample fcope, and where the fineft products of art, and the objects of the moft luxuriant phyfical and moral re¬ finement are fo numerous, that a refi- H 5 dence
denceof a twelvemonth at that gay capi¬ tal blunts the fenfes and the mind almoft entirely; takes away every relifh for fuch objects, at leaft for a confiderable time; and excites an irrefiftible defire to fly from that fatiguing bufile, and to reft the weary mind, and the fatiated fenfes, on the bo¬ fom of pure and artlefs nature. This was our aim, and coniti tuted our fole pleafure. The hamlet, which now hailed our eyes, feemed to conflit only of a few houfes; and reclined fo artfully againft the fteep declivity of a rock, that к was almoft perpendicularly fufpended over a preci¬ pice. The eminence terminated, on both fldes, in a plain, which was covered with a number of a fertile hillocks, and exhi¬ bited a variegated mixture of garden ground, meadows, and wood. Art feemed to have joined with nature to mix the co¬ lours in the moft pîeafing manner. The fenfations of the traveller chiefly depend upon trifles· Nothing, therefore, produces
produces a more picturefque effect than the rifing fmoke of a folitary chimney- concealed between a clufter of trees· Hunger, fatigue, and curiofity, lead us to form an idea conformable to the difpo¬ fition of our imagination, or to the wants of the moment of the fcene which is be¬ fore us: we anticipate the enjoyment of every thing we expect to find, mould tbe faces into the form in which we wiih to meet them, and reduce the circurnftances to the fhape that would be the moit convenient to us. Nothing is truer than that not the enjoyment makes us: happy^ but its approach. CHAPTER VII. IT was Sunday when we arrived at the hamlet. All the inhabitants were af- fembled beneath a large wallnut-tree, and their joy was rather clamorous. One muft have feen French peafants, to form an adequate idea of the fcene which pre^ H 6 fented
i^Ö* THE HORRID MYSTERIES. fented itfelf to our eyes. The opprefTed and the poor generally abandon themfelves to exceffes whenever they can catch a mo¬ ment of liberty, tranquillity, and fuper- fluity; and the human heart, which much fooner is urged from one extreme to the other than cooled to moderation, deflroys, without hefitation, a part of future plea¬ fure, while it abandons itfelf to the rapid torrent of prefent gratification. The young people danced, and the girls were adorned with autumnal flowers. Some branches compofed charming huts, where we received refrefhments fpread on benches. Their whole orcheflra confined of a Angle fiddle, a tambourine, a fife, and a clarinet : however, the female dancers moved with fo much agility and natural grace, that the eyes were indemni¬ fied for what the ears miffed. We paffed the dancers in a hard trot, being impatient to arrive at the inn which was on the other fide of the hamlet. The curiofity of fee¬ ing us ride by, put a momentary flop to the
the dance and the mufic, which began again, as foon as we were paft, with the fame unconftraint as if no obfervers were near. Our drefs was foon changed : the Count put on a flight white night-gown : I followed his example ; and thus accou¬ tred, we went in our flippers to the dan¬ cing place, attended by our landlady, who gazed with vifible delight at my friend's elegant form and graceful carriage. I alfo could not help making the fame re¬ marks I read on her countenance. He had the appearance of a king in difguife. His foft blue eye glittered with that tran¬ quil majefty, which peacefully raifed it¬ felf above the preflure of forrows ; his looks fpoke the fweet language of general benevolence; and his colour, which com¬ monly was rather pale, had been animated, by exercife and good humour, with a rofy hue, which was charmingly fet off by the diforder of his brown hair. The noble grace of his gait, and of his whole carri¬ age, eafily could tempt one to believe that he
he was an inhabitant of Heaven*s realms, who had left his celeftial abode to blefs the mortal race. When we approached the dancing place, we obferved fome motions among the merry company. They feemed to confult how we ihould be received : however, we joined them with as much eafe as if we had lived many years amongft them ; fa- luted every one, and fhook hands with thofe who were moil contiguous to us. The little confufion our arrival had caufed was thereby inftantly difpelled ; and when we told them that we wiihed to take a cor¬ dial ihare in their joy, they raifed a loud ihout of fatisfaciion. We were led to the beft feat: the oldeft of the happy circle offered us wine, figs, almonds, and grapes; and the mufic and dancing began anew. Having refreíhed ourfelves fufficiently* ve did not hcfitate to mix with the dan¬ cers. The Count chofe a partner; and I alfo had no difficulty to find one for my¬ felf.
felf. The vanity which our charmers felt at that preferment, foon raifed them above the referve which is natural to the female fex; and the blufhing, innocent damfels joined their hands cheerfully with ours. The Count's partner was a tall, jolly bru¬ nette; and I was coupled to a little, lan- guifhing girl. The former was by far too fiery for the character of her partner, and the latter too gentle for me; yet the beauty of their form, the fimple, animated and well conducted dance, Avhich unfolded their charms in the moft advantageous manner, foon made us forget the recipro¬ cal contraft of our difpofitions. Annet te, the partner of my friend, had the fineft fhape I ever beheld ; a fmall, pale face, full and rofy lips, and a round voluptuous chin. Her black eyes fpoke, or, at leaft, would not fpeak, much that evening; for I remarked afterwards that they could be pretty eloquent. She fported with the innocent careffes of the poor Count, who feemed to be enchanted with her^
her, though he was not wont to brook fe¬ male feverity. He was probably fo pliant at firft merely for the fake of amufe¬ ment, but at laft his fentiments took a more ferious turn, Lucy у my fair partner, was Annette's younger fifter, and quite the reverfe of her; a little, languifhing, puny being, of un¬ commonly fine limbs, and a moft pliant make. Her foft eye, overfhaded with long, brown eye-lafhes, feemed, indeed, not to be an entire ftranger to roguifh co¬ quetry; yet it difplayed more modeft good¬ nefs than wantonnefs. It burned with a wiih, with a fecret defire, for a certain fomething, which ihe, perhaps, had no clear notion of, or at leaft, feemed never to have found as yet. Her bofom fpoke the fame language, as well as the blufhes of her dimpled cheeks, when I preffed her little charming hand. Her feelings certainly were ftrong, and fhe only was at a lofs how to exprefs them. She had too little energy of body and of mind, and for
for that reafon, feemed not to be fufcepti¬ ble of a higher culture, as fhe indeed was fenfible of the impreflion of the prefent moment, but did not retain it long· We fpent the evening in congenial, art¬ lefs pleafure, frequently changed our part¬ ners, according to the eftablifhed cuilom, but always returned to thofe our good for¬ tune had beftowed upon us at firft. The Count's charming impartiality forfook him at once, and 1 did not hefitate to imitate his example, impelled, as it were, by an unaccountable fecret enchantment. If one has, or only imagines to have, re¬ ceived forre pîeafing fenfual gratification, the firft impreflion, the firft tafte, always predominates ftrongly among thofe that fucceed it. There were at leaft twenty lovely figures among thefe little fweet country girls, that were prettier and more charming than our partners; however, we were almoft entirely infenfible to their beauty. The fecret impulfe that urged us to return to our charmers, cannot be called love,
love, it rather was a ilrange fort of a namelefs dèfire. The íhape and the man¬ ners of the lovers infpired the reft with a jeaJoufy which rather feemed to be owing to offended vanity than to a particular in¬ clination towards us. The general good underflanding was foon interrupted; the favoured fair ones indulged themfelves with feveral little liberties,* the reft did not care to difguife their indignation; and, befides, we were not the fole lovers of our partners. It was owing merely to the fuppofed fiiperiority of our rank, which was confirmed by the noble carriage of the Count, that this general difatisfac- tion did not break out: however, the filence which began to prevail around us rapidly encreafed every moment; the ge¬ neral inebriation of pleafure gradually vanifhed as one little troop feparated it¬ felf by degrees from the reft¿ and thofe who were infpired with fimilar fentiments, retired at fome diftance in fmall groups, taking no farther ihare in our diverfion. Our
Our ladies, too, were fenfible of our mif- conducì, and grew gradually more re- ferved ; and we now were the only perfons that did not obferve it. I was at length reminded of it by Al¬ fonfo, who, ail the evening, had been a filent obferver of our behaviour, without taking the leaft ihare in our diverfions. I imparted his remarks fecredy to the Count, and our eyes were opened at once. We now beheld ourfelves and our part¬ ners entirely deferted by the company, and the reft difperfed in feveral groups. However, we negleâed to make a proper ufe of that difcovery, being di* verted by the jealoufy of the company; and, inftead of behaving with more cir- cumfpečtion, encreafed our carefTes and our attention to our partners, which vexed their lovers in fuch a degree, that they drew nearer with glowing faces, and with looks which plainly told us that it was high time to difcontinue our ungentle. man-like fport. Night
Night was, fortunately, fetting in. The families broke up, and went to their re- ipective homes, probably very little edi¬ fied by the conclufion of their rural bui and our conduct. Annette and Lucy alfo were impatient to go home: we offered them our arms, and attended them to their houfe, amid the pretty audible hiffes of thofe that had ftaid behind. There are fituations in human life in which we really feem to be controuled by fome magic chami, of which the events of that evening were a fpeaking inftance. All thefe humiliating confequences of our conduct, the cold civility of the old peo¬ ple, the fcornful looks of the girls, the wry faces of the young men, and even the referve and growing eoldnefs of our charmers, were not fufficient to make us fenfible of our foolifh imprudence. The landlord and his dame, who, fome hours before, had received us with fo much kindnefs, and attended us, had alfo changed their looks very much on our re¬ turn:
turn·, even our fervants convinced us, by their geftures, that they did not much ad¬ mire our prudence. Every thing was, befides, in a confufion to which we were not accuftomed, and which we had not yet experienced on our excurfion. The- horfes had bad ftabling, and not yet got their fodder: no fupper was to be feen; and having, at length, put the people of the houfe in motion, our meal turned out fo meagre and miferable, that we went to bed with empty ftomachs. We now be¬ gan, almoft at one time, to rail at the people of the houfe, inftead of looking for the caufe of our difappointment in our conduct; and were fo much infatuated as to curfe and to threaten our hoft, to quarrel with our fervants, to beat cats and dogs, and feveral times were very near falling out with each other before we went to our apartment. On coming to our bed-chamber, an additional caufe of diffatisfaction threw itfelf in our way; only one fpare bed being, unfortunately,
unfortunately, in the houfe. This incon« venience would, indeed, not have given us the leaft uneafinefs at any other time, either of us taking it rather as a favour to be fuffered to fleep on a chair if the bed happened to be too fmall to contain both. But now, neither would refign the bed to the other; and, after a long and warm contention, we fqueezed ourfelves at length into the narrow compafs of our uncom¬ fortable couch. Yet we were incapable of getting a wink of fleep, toiling our¬ felves from one fide to the other, and mur¬ muring alternately at our miferable fitua- tion. We had the additional misfortune to be almoft fuffocated by an intenfe heat, which, at length, drove me out of the bed. I began to walk up and down in the room, and the Count foon followed my example, ftepping to the window, and inhaling the freih night air. "What the D ------ 1 does that mean? M he exclaimed at once, ftarting fuddenly back. " Look, Carlos, what a numerous crowd
crowd gathers under our window.** I haftened to him, and actually beheld about twenty young people before our door, but could difeern nothing elfe, the night be¬ ing very dark. We now began to guefs and to conjecture w 7 hat could be the mean¬ ing of that aflemblage, and naturally con¬ cluded that it muft have fome connection with the incidents at the dancing place. I was violently enraged at the infolence of our nocturnal vifitors; but Count S******i, whofe good humour returned at once, began to laugh. This inflamed me ftill more vehemently; and, inftead of being pacified by his unconcern, I appre· hended fome danger* I fetched, there¬ fore, our piftols ; and having made every preparation for a vigorous defence, was going to awake our fervants. Count g******j was ^ henvever, more prudent than myfelf, and flopping me at the door, with a loud laugh, faid, " Don't put yourfelf into a paffion ; I will lay any thing that their whole drift is nothing but a miferable
a miferable frolic. Don't fpoil the plea¬ fure of thefe poor fellows, but rather let us divert ourfelves at their expenfe." The event proved that he was not mif¬ taken -, for we were, after a few minutes, regaled with an excellent ferenade, whofe harmony foon informed us of its meaning. The effect this charming concert had on my rifibility was fo powerful, that I could not have refifted an immoderate fit of * laughter if it had coil me my life. The muñe could certainly not be cal^d a fym- phony; however, fomuch is certain, that the moft horrid notes were borrowed from all inflruments to produce a kind of cho¬ rus. As much as I could diftinguiih, fome horns were the principal inflruments ; and it may eafily be conceived how charm¬ ingly they were blown : a fiddle, with only one firing, two or three rattles, a da¬ maged trumpet, fome little drums, and three or four kettles, accompanied the performers who played thofe agreeable inflruments; and fome fmall French whiflles,
whittles, which are ufed to call the flocks together, in the neighbourhood of which one is in danger to lofe one*s hearing for ever, completed, by their flirill notes, the harmony of the whole. Several other in- Uru ments I did not know; however, the whole concert was of fuch a nature, that it would have been able to rcfufcitate the dead, and to reduce nervous people to the brink of the grave. We were amufed for fome time: how¬ ever, the Count took, at length, a pocket piftol out, and having extracted the ball, fired it over their heads.. It "caufed a louder report than I had expected, and the mufic was filenced in an inftant. The voun^ gentlemen, who had not conceived the moft diftant idea of the ferious confe¬ quences which might attend their irolic, did not think proper to finifh their fere¬ nade, and left us fuddenly to our reflec¬ tions. The Count continued to laugh immode¬ rately, and í was infeci cd by his merry Voi, IJI t I humour.
humour. <c It would be excellent fport,'* he exclaimed, « if we could difpofiefs thefe fellows of their pretty little girls. I would give any thing." I was entirely of his opinion, protefting that nothing could be more pleafant. Our vexation at our difaftrous circumftanccs had divided us, and the refentment thefe very circum- ftances created united us again. We now confulted about the means of effecting our purpofe, and foon hit upon meafures which promifed us fuccefs. The execution of our plan was more fuccefsful at firft than we had expected, as the final ifllie of it was more unfortunate and mortifying than we ever could have imagined. The young people had again a dance the next evening; and we pre- pared the whole hamlet, during the day, for our behaviour on that occafion. We were as gentle as doves, and feemed to be good-nature and condefcenfion itfelf; wandered through the hamlet, paying very little attention to the girls; joked with the young
young men, and were ferious in the com¬ pany of the old ones ; flattered the mo¬ thers, and treated the daughters with cold civility. When we entered a houfe, we were received with frigid referve and four looks, but pleafure and good-will beamed in the eye of every inmate when we left it : our fal utes were returned with cord i a - lity; every one was charmed with our conduct; and every thing changed in our favour. Yet we were too much exafpe- rated as to drop our defign, and impa¬ tient to be revenged for the treatment we experienced laft night. Our behaviour in the evening was alfo entirely changed. We betrayed not the leaft defire to mix with the dancers, but aflbciated with the old peafants, difcourfed of the vintage, made our obfervations on the wind and the clouds, prefaged the weather, and pretended to know the mean¬ ing of the croaking of the frogs. The gaping peafants were aftonifiied at the ftriking change of our behaviour, and 12 liftened
liftened fo eagerly to our difcourfes, that here and there a pipe dropt on the ground. Every recollection of the events of the preceding night feemed to be obliterated, and the liftening circle, that ftood around us, encreafed with every minute. The Count fang and played on the guittar; and I relieved him at intervals by the relation of wonderful incidents, and of ludicrous anecdotes. The dance ceafed, and the girls too aflernbled around us; however, we took little notice of them. Annette and Lucy were flruck with af¬ toniihment at our behaviour with regard to themfelves. They weredreffed in their beft apparel, and their difappointment was legibly written on their countenance. Annette affected to be entirely indifferent to the Count's inattention to her perfon, and ftrove to be extravagantly merry: Lucy, on the contrary, fcarcely could re¬ tain her tears; and the more her fifter exerted herfelf to make the company burft with laughter, the more frequently did fbe take
take her pocket handkerchief out to wipe her eyes. Not the leaft of thefe circumftanccs ef- capcd our obfervation, and our looks fre¬ quently met thofe of our offended fair ones,» yet nothing was able to make the fmalleft imprcffion on our obdurate hearts: they were obliged to топоте unattended ; and we returned to the inn, accompanied by al¬ moft all the inhabitants of the hamlet, who feern-d to adore us. No fooner were wc left to ourfelves, than we broke out in a üt of laughter, congratulating ourfelves'mutually on our excellent talents for hypocrify, deceit, and courtly diiguife, as well as on the impref- fion we flattered ourfelves to have made on the hearts of our charmers. We really had appeared more to our advantage to day than the evening before in our night gowns and flippers. The Count was drefled in his uniform, which, indeed, did not become him half fo well as his white night gown: the buttons of his тъ- I 3 li ta ry
litary drefs were, however, fo bright, and the rich embroidery of his coat was fo re¬ fulgent, that every look was attracted by £--^ţhe fplendor of his external appearance, \vn1ch received additional charms by the bloonvof health blufhing on his cheeks, and the fparkling luftre of his eyes. Love, unblended with any kind of ambition, is, béfides, rather unnatural; and the latter is frequently the father of the former. The next morning we converfed, in the prefence of our landlord, on the happi¬ nefs a conftant refidence at fuch a charm¬ ing fpot, and with fuch good-natured people, muft afford. Our hoft now af- fumed a very fly look, afluring us that he was not fo ignorant of the ftate of our hearts as we perhaps imagined, and de¬ claring that he would do as much as lay in his power to put us in poffeffion of the twogirls whom we had found fo charming the firft evening, provided we were willing to marry them· He added, they were the
the richeft in the village, each of them pofleffing a large farm of her own ; and we might be fure of fuccefs, if we would avail ourfelves of his intcrpofition, as he was their uncle and godfather, and had a great influence on the family. I feigned to be aflonifhed at his faga- city, replying, in my and in the Count's name, thaf he had completely guefled the real ftate of our hearts, and that we fhould avail ourfelves of his kind offer as. foon as we perceived that the girls were favourably inclined to us; mean-while we wifhcd to hire a fmall farm for fome*time. We were fortunate enough to have the choice of two, and hired that which re¬ quired the leaft labour; becaufe neither the Count nor myfelf was over fond of too much exertion, but knew how to fet a proper value on eafe and convenience» It was, however, requifite we fliould aft the part of farmers in the higheft perfection poffible; and while we exerted ourfelves to the utmoft of our power to do honour 14 to
to our new ftation, we actually incurred the danger of being rufticated, I do not know what opinion S******i entertained of me with regard to that point; however, his behaviour gave me juft reafon for thinking thus of him. He could eafily accommodate himfelf to almoft any fitu¬ ation i and its character, which he appro¬ priated .to himfelf, foon became completely natural to him. He ptcfľed, as it were, the eíľence out of all feenes and circurn¬ ftances of human life, and always found fomething agreeable in the enjoyment thereof. Ere long, his borrowed character grew habitual with him; and he never left his aflumed manners before they re- linquifhcd him, or a new fituation re¬ quired it. . I, on the contrary, did not fo eafily and fo perfectly catch the fpirit of a character, My difpofition of mind, which always leads me back to the time paft, and ren¬ ders the gratification' the prefent moment affords agreeable to me only as. far as it harmonize?
harmonizes with the images of my fancy, embellifhed by the diftance of time, ren¬ ders every fituation very foon irkfome to me. Being averfe to yield to the alluring charms of novelty, it gains fome gratifia cation only by a long continued ftudy of an object, and therefore approaches it only flovviy. But not one moment of hu¬ man life is alike to the other; the events wc experience, and our notions, are eter¬ nally fluctuating and changing; and the moment in which I begin to grow fuffici- cntîy intimate with the exifting circum¬ ftanccs, is gcneraliy the period in which I commence a new cxiftence. I acted, therefore, my part a good deal worfe than the Count, who found it very- convenient to attend perfonally the pafture of his flock; to adorn his hat and bofom with ribbons and flou ers ; to dine beneath a fpreading lime-tree, to blow a melting air on the flute, or to compofe the moft heart-breaking paftorals. It was, how¬ ever, very unfortunate, that the fine feafon I 5 was
was already paft; a flower was a rarity; not one human being heard his plaintive ftrains; and his verfes, which favoured already of the winter, were generally obliged to be thawed before the kitchen fire along with their author, before they were palatable; and were loft to the world, and to immortality, becaufe no perfon heard them but myfelf. I took care of the internal economy of our houfe; and, with the two fervants, fed and milked the cows, and prepared our meals. We three feemed to prefer having a good joint of meat in the pot, and a proipect of a fubftantial dinner, to hunting for rhimes all the day long. When the Count returned, and had pro¬ perly arranged his ideas, he began to fpeak wiih enthufiafm of the graces of poetry, and of the celeftial, immortal fire oflove. His character had received fome fatal luna¬ tic fpots from the reading of fome German novels, and his fancies more frequently breathed an odour of the grave than of found fenfe.
fenfe. Heaven knows how it came that I never was more materially difpofed than at that period. I rather endured than co¬ incided with his fine fentiments. If the morning was ferene and pure, my feelings were neither more nor lefs elevated than thofe of the brute creation: when the moon fhone'bright, I could, indeed, re¬ joice for half an hour at her fil very orb; and a fweet melancholy, now and then, ftole upon me; but, inftead of fh ed d ing fentimental tears, I took my gun or a ner, to fhoot a good bird or to catch fifh, af¬ fined by her deceiving flight. Being occupied and diverted by labour, allured by no temptation, and fafe from the corruptive poifon of idlcnefs, my heart feemed, at that time, to be as healthy as my body. 1 can, indeed,, not deny that a certain lady of the capital of France attended me fometimes in my little occupations. She was* however, rather gay and cheerful than gloomy and fad ;, and, what was ftill more agreeable,, came 16 always-
always in the company of a third perfon. I thought very little of Lucy and her whole tribe, but neverthelefs lent always after our meals, a patient ear to the Count's amorous complaints, laughing in¬ wardly at my friend, that he was fuch a fool to fall thus violently in love. As for our fociable life, it was regulated in the following manner; In the week every one was hard at work; for our ham¬ let was poor, and the inhabitants lived upon thefcanty produce of their agricul¬ ture, pafturage, vintage, and the making of wooden fpoons. The time lying very heavy upon my hands for want of fociety, I employed my idle hours in the fabrica¬ tion of the latter article, and improved fo rapidly, that I foon ivas famed in the whole hamlet for making the fineft wooden fpoons. I had learned, in Germany, to make bafkets, and now exercifed that art alfo in great perfection. When I was fit¬ ting in the yard bending ofiers, then it grew frequently lighter in my foul than at any
my other time: I fmiled cheerfully at the time paft, and was highly fenfible that no> thing in the world fmooths the path through life fo much as conftant occupation and labour, which leaves no fcope for idle fpeculation. This predominant propenfity for acti¬ vity, which, being intimately connected with my nature, has frequently urged me, in the courfe of my life, to commit the moft adventurous follies, made me ftiffer, and lefs fociable, than the Count was ren¬ dered by his poetical idlcncfs. When he returned from his paftoral* world with his cows and his flieep, he üfually w as in fuch a good humour, and his imagination was fo bright and active, that every object pre¬ fented itfelf to him in a rofy-coloured light; and his rapture knew no bounds when he had fucceeded in being happily delivered of fome fine poem, or had feen his fhepherdcfs, and received a kind look from her. He almoft choaked me with his enthufiaftic extravagancies ; and when I fliewcd S
I Ihewed him a fine fpoon I had made, W a neat bafket which I had finiihed, he left me fuddenly, ran through the whole ham¬ let, knocked at every window where he law a light, difturbed our neighbours in their fleep, tired them with his unfeafon- able difcourfes, found every where wit, found fenfc, fimplicity, and honefty, ho¬ noured, at laft, his miftrefs with a ballad of the time of Henry IV- or of Lewis XI. and perfuaded her he had compofed it for her that very day» When I returned with my gun or net, I generally went for him to her houfe, or delivered him from the teeth of forne maftiffs, who could not conceive what bufinefs he could have in the ftreet at fo late an hour. He made, however, excellent progrefs in his courtihip. Annette had already confeffed to him that ihe loved and pre¬ ferred him to the reft of her lovers $ and nothing but the marriage ceremony de¬ barred him from the completion of his happinefs. This was, however, a point with
with refpeft to which the Count poffefTed as little of the fpirit of cofmopolitifm a$ myfelf; for he profeflèd the juft principle, that, as a man of the world could not be certain to be happy with his lady, one ought to take care to get fomething along with her, that at leaft would make fome atonement for difappointments which might happen, and fweeten the bitternefs which oftentimes is mixed in the cup of matrimonial blifs. I was not fo fuccefsful in my love, for which I probably had to thank nobody but myfelf; for while the fiery fair ones feem to make great pretenfions, thofe of a gentler difpofition ačiually demand a great deal. They do not eafily forget little neg¬ lects, refent every fault one commits, and reflect at home on what one imagines to have been forgot in a moment. A great propenfity for an eafy and quiet life has always been a predominant ftričture of my cha racier, notwithftanding its reftleflhefs* and my gallantry to the ladies was feldorn, carried
carried to a very high degree, if my heart did not, of its own accord, urge me to tender thofe fiattering afiiduities that com> monly are held to be the criterion of a fervent love. Lucy profited, therefore, very little by rny paffion. I did, indeed, occafionally play a little air on the flute under her win¬ dow at night, or danced twice with her ona Sunday, "when the other damfels had that honour only once; or if I could get a nofegay without much difficulty, I pre- fented it to her, entwined with a blue rib¬ bon, in a bafket of my own workmanfhip. I alfo told her fometimes, in the moft ele¬ gant manner, if flie was alone, and feemed to wiih for it, that fhe ivas as beautiful as an angel, that I adored her, and that it depended entirely upon her to be beloved by me for ever. If I was in an uncom¬ monly gcod humour, I even ventured to ileal a kifs, and to repeat the fweet theft if ihe was angry at my boldnefs. This was, however, all I did for her. My rufticated phlegm
phlegm did not fuffer me to venture far¬ ther. The fervour of the firft evening had been damped by the ferenade; and I ihould have been vexed to death at our foolifh frolic, if I had not been diverted by the cares attending my culinary and domeftic employment. It was, at bottom, nothing but kind¬ nefs for the Count that prompted me to await patiently the conclufion of our whimfical farce; for love appeared to mc, at that time, to be nothing elfe but an oc¬ cupation fit only for idle people. The work I had on my hand .quickened the circulation of my blood, enlivened my ideas, and rendered them more healthy, which enabled me to improve confider¬ ably, in that fituation, in the true philo¬ fophy of life. Unfortunately, our pleafure did not laft much longer. The hamlet was too far remote from the high-road than' that its inhabitants could have attained a great knowledge of the gallantry of the nation. It
It was, therefore, the cuftom with them to marry firft, and then to commence to make love. The fervants had, befides, not been over-careful to*conceal outrank} and we had rendered ourfelves very fuf¬ pected the firft night. The father of the two girls being heartily tired of the trou¬ ble of guarding their virgin treafure, and feeing their former lovers refinquiûi them, applied frankly to the Count, defiring him to declare whether we would marry his girls or not. S******i wanted to pa¬ cify him by an evafive anfwer and vague excufes; however, the farmer declared he perceived the drift of our courtihip, arad Jcnew very well that it was imponible a fe- xious alliance between ourfelves and hm daughters couki ever tafce place; defiring him, at the fame time, in the politeti: manner, never to enter his houfe again, nor to appear under the window, if ,he did not choofe to expofe himfelf to difagree- able accidents. My poor friend really was fciaed with defpair $ for although he had
had no mind to marry, yet he was violently in lové with his charmer. He now told the fields his forrows, and the echo re¬ peated his defponding complaints. The moon and the ilars were moft ruefully in¬ voked to witnefs his tears and his defpair. His amorous fury and grief were, however, only poetical. He did, indeed, rove the fields, abfcond himfelf in the moft foli¬ tary receffes of the wood, gaze wildly at the waterfalls, and conjure the chilling autumnal gales, which only the abfenceof all feeling could miftake for Zephyrs, to waft his fighs and amorous complaints to his cruel Phyllis. I was not difpleafed at that unfavourable turn of our affairs: and if the girls only had been a little more of our party, this would have afforded the fineft opportunity for adventures. My healthy blood fpoke of nothing but of murder and elopement. Oppofkion made me enterprifingj and I cou id have torn our faithlefs inamoratas from thebofom of their parents, and carried them
them to the moil diftant parts of the globe. But the misfortune was, that the girh were not at all difpofed to elope; and I laughed, at laft, at myfelf and the Count, and refolved to attempt his. converfion to found fenfe. I. never performed a good work with lefs difficulty; for he foon began to laugh at himfelf and me. He coincided with my humour, and w T e began publicly to act the furious lovers. Wc quarrelled every day with the father of the girls, and not a night paffed without a ferenade un¬ der their window. The whole hamlet was put into an inteftine. commotion, and divided in different parties. A deputa¬ tion appeared,, at length, at our farm, and requefted us refpečtfulíy to depart in peace. This was juft what we wanted: we yielded, therefore, generoufly to rherr humble requeft, fettled our affairs, fold our cows and iheep, paid our rent, and de¬ parted laughing, highly elated by the ri¬ diculous, termination of our frolic, CÍIAPT£R
CHAPTER VIII. I FORBEAR troubling my readers with an enumeration of the changes that little adventure, which, at bottom, was a mere nothing, produced in my character. They will be perceived, without my affif¬ tance, in the fequel of my hiftory. The chief effect it produced was a growing eoldnefs to Caroline. A fluctuation with regard to this point too, inwhich I had, till then, difplayed a firmnefs that re¬ flected honour on my character; a fudden breaking from a kind of mental fleep, a ftrong internal ebullition, fleeting fenfa¬ tions, hazarded prefenfions, a high degree of activity, and a fubfequent ftate of apa¬ thy, made me dream, then urged me again to hunt eagerly after peace and hap¬ pinefs, and, when I imagined to have found them, to throw them away fud¬ denly. The enthufiafm arifing from a quicker circulation of the blood was paft j and
and I now commence that period in which an unfatisfied internal fenfe, an ardent de- fire for activity, begins to ftir, and at length relapfes again into its former dor¬ mant ftate* The gay periods of my life are now on the verge, and my career grow« more fe¬ rions* The wanton fports of an exube¬ rant imagination are on the decline ; and the reader foon will behold the birth of a new love, great and facred v glowing and powerful, without any nouriihment for the fenfes, new-moulding my whole charac¬ ter, difpelling its fliades, railing, the luftre of its brighter parts, artlefs and omnipo¬ tent. The vicious fpirit of an abominable confederation purifies itfelf in its genial fire; and moments are dawning in which the veil of mortality drops before me» and my fpirit foars beyond the confines of humanity. I cannot conceive how it came that, after this incident, I found my difpofition not quite fo cloudlefs as before, every gra¬ st tification
tification being blended with a greater de¬ gree of care, and joy and gaiety lefs be¬ nevolently fmiling upon me. I relapfcd into ferious contemplations; and although I was neither diflatisfied nor melancholy,; yet I could, notwithftanding the circum- fpečlion with which I continually watched over myfelf, never recover that cheerful fìation from which that ludicrous adven¬ ture had expelled me. I was conftantly obliged to ipur myfelf to activity;, and I am almoft inclined to believe that my tafte, and my notions of tranquillity and happinefs, were entirely changed. I was, as it were,, gradually prepared for the impending period of my adven¬ tures: a ferious^ but inviting, fhade fpread itfelf over every objecî that came in my way $ and I felt as if I returned from the ferene luxury of an exuberant and gay landfcape, to the melancholy, f weet night of a fragrant grove carpeted over with aromatic flowers, and animated with the plaintive notes of the folitary nightingale.
nightingale. Former feenes of joy, and the heart-expanding retrofped of the paft events of my life, now reprefented them- felves to my mind, and abforpt me ¡n fweet reveries. I enjoyed neither the ef- fence nor the external of thofe events, but only the fentiments and notio is which they produced and nurtured in my foul. - The Count either was infected by me ; or a different caufe had, perhaps, produced the fame effect. He fpoke lefs, and was more frequently abforpt in ferious reflec¬ tions. Formerly he had now and then, and always with fuccefs, trufted to hazard; but now he confulted carefully with him¬ felf before he attempted any thing, and the confequence conftantly turned out un¬ favourable. It was very natural that he was not difpofed to afcribe the caute of this phenomenon vto himfelf, for he found it without difficulty in the capricious hu¬ mour of fickle Fortune. He was füllen and gloomy whenever he could find an ex- cufe for being f05 and my altered looks always
always afforded him a palpable plea for. relapfing in that cheerlefis. humour. Do the events of human life really fol¬ low a pre-delineated trait, or does chance fometimes prod" ce oddly united circum¬ ftanccs? Our minds were, indeed, now and then, cheered by lucid and pîeafing intervals. Our good humour frequently made ample amends, in an hour, for what we had negleded in the courfe of feveral days, when we were refreíhed by a found fleep, if the morning was clear, not too cold, and neither wind nor fnow troubled us on the road, which was lefs frequently the cafe the nearer we ap¬ proached the fouth of France. The moft important morning of my life was alfo the fineft I recollect: ever to have feen ; my mind too partook of the ferenity of the iky. January was already on the verge; and the winter having been as mild as fpring, fummer feemed to be drawing near. The almond trees were already high in blof- Voi. III. К fom,
fom, and the flirubs began to be invefted with a leafy verdure. The olive woods, with their unfading green, embofomed already every where germinating wheat- fields ; and the lark, the harmonious herald of the morn, ftrained its warbling throat to welcome the approach of the fine feafon. The returning fpring carries along with it a genial warmth, which dif- fufes itfelf through body and mind ; every gentlegale breathes an animating fpirit; the myftic humming in the air, and the almoft vifible growth of the budding plants, produces a fymbol of a cheerful refurrection. And when wc behold again, for the firft time, a flower, and the fun- beams gleam through the young leaves, our heart is thrilled with a heavenly rap¬ ture, and our language is too poor to do juftice to our feelings. A fecret puliation in my blood, a myftic unaccountable preflure againft my panting heart, a fudden nop of the gentle flream of my thoughts, frequently difturbed the peace
peace of my mind on that heavenly morn¬ ing. Every thing around me feemed to be animated with namelefs beings; the myftic founds which pervaded the foreft, the fluctuating of the fun-beams in the rifing vapours, the fparkling dew ; -drops gliding from one leaf upon the other, the current ftreams of vernal warmth, formed in my bufy imagination a fmiling picture, without colour, without a diftinft contour and centre. The whole was attended with a certain obfcure prefenfion, with an ominous, though unintelligible, meaning; and fome myftic certainty lurked in my foul, without my daring to confide in it the reality of its exiftence. The beauti¬ ful left landfcape hailed our enraptured looks : yet its beauty rather con li fled in a fecret charm which my foul, unknowing¬ ly and fecretly, imparted to it, than in the fweet variegated mixture of its parts. On our right a beautiful country feat ftretched extenfive gardens and pleafure grounds over the contiguous chain of hills; fmiling, К 2 picturefque
picturefque groups of trees, and little neat cottages, defcended from the declivity into the vale. A rofy-coloured morning va¬ pour was ftill fwectly blended with the bluifli colorit of the back ground, and, where it was lefs intenfe, exhibited to our view fome part of a village, the lower part of a rock, or trees whofe tops towered above the vaporous ocean. The cattle, i\hofe fcite ive alfo could defcry only par, tially, was not far diftant; and the morn¬ ing fun reflected with radiant fplendor from its flaming windows. It was, with its light-green trees, fairy-like fufpended in the mifty back-ground. We arrived at length at the park; and one of our fervants (I do not recollect whether it was Alfonfo, or that of the Count) began to repeat to us the informa¬ tion he had gathered from the landlord in whofe hcufe we had flept the preceding night, with regard to the Lord of the Manor. He was a mifanthropc, fecluded from the world by misfortunes, who edu¬ cated
cated here a daughter famous for her un¬ common beauty. Adelheid, Bnror.nefs of V******l, was the brighteft ornament and the admiration of the whole province. She lived, however, a folitary life, having no iiitercourfe with her neighbours; few had feen, and a ftill fmaller number ever fpoken to her. This information agitated me in a fin¬ gular manner. " y******l !" I exclaimed : 4i have you heard right? 3 ' " I cannot be miftaken, My Lord," he replied. "The name is very familiar to me: ihould he, perhaps, be the father of "Whofe life you faved at G******/' Antonio interrupted me. "The very perfon/' I refurned. "I now recollect that he frequently has con¬ verfed with me of his father and fifter; and 1 am certain he was a native of this province." K3 hi
In that moment I rejoiced at my good deed. When I rcfided at C******, that young man fell into the river. He could not fvvim, and was in danger of being drown¬ ed. I inftantly plunged into the water, and was fo fortunate to fave his life. This was, indeed, no heroic action, as I was a good fwimmer; and it had entirely flipt ray memory ; but now I recollected it with pleafure. I took, from that moment, a warmer intereft in every object 1 beheld. The wall was low, and I could furvey all the walks. if Perhaps (thought 1) thou wilt meet young V******l in the bofom of his family, happy and animated wich friend¬ lhip for thee." I was profoundly abforpt in the pîeafing fenfations this idea created in my heart, when Count S******i fuddenly exclaimed, " Stop! Marquis: for Heaven's fake flop! You will inftantly drop from your horfe. Don't you perceive that your horfe's girth has got bofe?" I flopped
I flopped to alight, the fervants not being within call. However, he di£ mounted, exclaiming, with his amiable kindnefs, "Keep your feat: my faddle, too, wants to be tied faiter." While he was employed to bind the girth faiter, I made fome motions to make it eafier to him, and in the fame moment my looks catch ed a white object in the park. My heart began violently to palpitate; a cold tremour pervaded my limbs; and I fcarcely was capable to keep myfelf in the faddle. A female being, of an heavenly form, walked in the park, within a fmall diftance from the wall. She carried a book in one hand, and with the other fcreened her face againft the dazzling rays of the fun, reflecting, as it feemed, upon what ihe had read. A little green ftraw-hat, fixed with a white ribbon beneath her chin, overfliaded her long auburn treffes, which depended in beautiful ringlets upon her gir¬ dle; the morn ing breezes fported with her К 4 white
white gown, which was tied round the waift with a green fail): her uplifted hand was whiter than the muflin from which it ftole fo/th, and the rofeate fmile of health was d i if u fed over her countenance. Her gown being unfortunately caught by a brier, fhe was obliged to remove her hand from her eyes to difcntangle it; and having extricated her garment, her black eyes met me by accident. She ftarted a little when fhe faw us fo contiguous to her; a deeper hue blufhed over her delicate face, and file caft her eyes fuddenly to the ground, as if in fearch for fomething. My horfe, whom I inadvertently had pricked with my fpurs, began fuddenly to bound ; the Count called to me to be on my guard. She looked once more at me, growing as pale as aflies, and quickened her paces. I pacified my horfe i and while fhe turned round a corner into ano¬ ther walk, flic directed her beautiful eyes again at mc; and in that moment the Count too obferved her, exclaiming, " Eternal
"Eternal God!" It is impoffible to fay- more to the praife of a beautiful object than thefe two words, the aftoniihment and the features of my friend expreffed; and yet it was by far too little. My heart was thrilled with unutterable fenfations, and an unknown fomething pervaded my whole frame. I could not conceal the ftate of my heart, which exprcffed itfelf legibly on my countenance. The Count obferved me awhile feized with fpeechlefs aftoniih¬ ment, and at laft broke out in the words,. "Poor G******!" He, perceived the growing paffion¿ and knowing that my temper was too irritable than that I ever could be fortunate in love, vviihed to be able to deftroy my paffion in the bud. " But how ihall I accompliih this?** he faid to himfelf. " It is impoffible her foul ihould entirely anfwer her external appearance. There is no poffibility to prevent my poor friend from getting ac¬ quainted with her; I will, therefore, affift К 5 him;
hirni and if he fees himfelf difappointed in his fanguine expectations, the cure of his paffion will foon be effected." He told me, therefore, laughing, " I perceive, Marquis, I ihall have an oppor¬ tunity to act here the fame part you un¬ dertook from friendfhip for me in our winter quarters,'* But apprehending his untimely joke would offend me, he added, in a foothing accent, " yet I hope, Carlos, you will repofe confidence in me!" He accompanied thefe words with a hearty fqueeze of his hand, which I returned cordially. Mean while we were arrived at the village, and difmounted at the inn. While I retired to a private apartment, to give audience to my thoughts, the Count mixed with the people of the houfe, and having made feveral inquiries concerning the Lord of the Manor, wrote tbe follow¬ ing note in my name, and fent it' to the caflie. « The Marquis of G****** has had the honour to be intimately acquainted with a Mr.
Mn de V******h Having gľeat reafon to believe that Baron de V******l is the happy parent of that excellent young man, he begs leave to pay his refpečls to the father of his friend." His ambaifador returned in the courfè of a few minutes with one of the Baron's fervants, and a formal invitation for my¬ felf and the Count. Our horfes were in¬ ftantly taken out of the ftable, and our fervants defired to bring them with our portmanteaus to the caftle, " You muft be very intimate with the Baron, or ftrongly recommended to him," the land¬ lord faid to the Count, fhaking his head. The latter now came to my apartment, and finding me on the bed, abforpt in a profound reverie, faid, " Will you not get up, Marquis? The Baron," he added coolly, " has juft fent us an invitation to come to the caftle." " Howl the Baron, did you fay?" I exclaimed. К 6 « Yes,
" Yes, yes, the Baron,** he replied, fmiling, and related his artifice to me. I prefled him to my bofom, tranfported with rapturous joy, and we went to the caftle, but Heaven knows with what an anxiety on my part. My knees trembled, and my heart palpitated violently. I was obliged to take hold of my friend's arm, left our conductor fhould perceive my emotion by my gait. Whenever I looked at the windows of the caftle, and faw the curtains move, I was violently agitated, my tongue trembled, and I could fcarcely fpeak intelligibly. The attention of fome fervants, who ftood at the gate, opening the folding doors on'our approach, made the blood rufh into my face; and I now began firft to make the obfervation that our drefs was very indifferent; for, to confefs the truth, I had nothing on but a Ample green hunting coat, and my hair was in the greatefl diforder. I could not help communicating thefe remarks, in a whifper, to the Count. However, he fmiled,
fmiled, replying, in German, " What a vanity! I aftlire you, you never have looked better!" We entered the caftle, at length. A man, who appeared to be the butler, welcomed us with refpectful politenefs, informing us that he had orders to fhew us to the drawing room, till his mafter was dreffed. We were conducted to a fpacious apartment, decorated with a number of portraits and other pictures. The fervant having withdrawn, we began to examine the pictures. They were, probably, family pieces. I did, indeed, gaze at every one of them, but without the leaft attention, my mind being diffe¬ rently occupied. I admired, at length, even the frames of fome, declaring the carving to be excellent, when the Count quickly replied, " Dear Marquis, if you are fuch an admirer of frames, then come, and look at this : I am fure you never faw a finer one." I went to the other fide of the apartment where he was, and he ex¬ claimed, again and again, " Is it poffible any
any thing could be more elegant than this frame?" " You are miftaken, dear Count; for the garland of yon picture is much more beautiful and elegant.*' " I am of a contrary opinion," he replied, laughing: « this is of a much better workmanfhip. Upon my honour the picture does not de- ferve fuch a beautiful frame." Thefe words naturally made me look at the painting. I ftarted back, feized with aftonifliment, when I beheld myfelf as if in a mirror, I inftantly recollected to have been perfuaded by young V******l, after his accident, to let him have that picture. Aftoniihment fettered my tongue ; and I fcarcely heard the Count fay, «* Faith, Marquis, you are grown much handfomer, or the painter has not done juftice to your face." No fooner had the Count pronounced thefe words, than a fide door opened, and an old man, of a ftriking beauty, and an elegant carriage, entered the apartment, I bowed refpečtfulíy, and was going to thank
thank him for his kind invitation, when he ran towards me, preffing me tenderly to his bofom. ** I know you, Don Carlos," he added; ft and the difcovery you have made juft now faves me a farther elucidation. You have prefer ved my fon' s life; receive the grateful effufions of a father's heart; but, at the fame time, lament w r ith me his un¬ timely death." With thefe words a tor¬ rent of tears gufhed down his cheeks. <f Gracious Heaven!" I exclaimed, kiflîng the tears from his cheeks, c< is it poffible ?" A violent emotion, which had been preparing all the morning, and only had waited for a pretext of growing loud, interrupted me here. A copious flream of tears relieved my heart; I preffed him to my bofom, and reclined my face on his fhoulder. " Yes, you are quite that fenfible, excel¬ lent man," he refurned, " whofe picture my fon has fo frequently drawn to us with enthufiaftic warmth. Alas! his fate en¬ vied
vied him the happinefs of feeing you once more. He went into the army fome years fince; a few months ago he was thrown offhis horfe, and died of the fall.'* Here he paufed a few moments, and then continued, "Yet you have loft nothing by his death; the fon's friendfhip for you has devolved to the father, I do not love mankind; yet I wiih you would accept of his place in my heart, and beftow, at leaft, a part of your affection for my un¬ happy boy upon his father." It was very natural that I replied I had loved him long fince, and that I would endeavour to de¬ fer ve his kind opinion. He now left me reluctantly, turning to the Count. I told him his name; and it fortunately hap¬ pened that he was an intimate friend of the Baron in his younger years. Our re¬ verend hoft was rejoiced to renew an old acquaintance, and we began foon to con¬ verfe fo cordially as if we had known one another for years, and were members of the fame family. Having
Having fpent about half an hour in the moft agreeable manner, the Baron faid to me, " I now will conduct you to my daughter, who has feen you already this morning, and inftantly recollected your features, You fee," iie added, fmiling, " how ftrongly your image is imprinted on our hearts." * c Our affairs are in an excellent train!'* the Count whifpered to me, while our kind hoft opened the door. <( Here, Adelheid, I bring you the friend of our Adolf!" the Baron faid, on our entering his daughter's apartment. cc He has promifed me to be my fon and your brother.'* The fweet girl fat upon the fofa, hold- ino· a book in her hand. She laid it down on our entrance, and rofe to meet us. She had exchanged her green hat with a ţ ribbon of the fame colour, and her bofom was adorned with a white rofe. The reft of her drefs was nearly the fame as in the morning; her hair was in the fame charm¬ ing
ing diforder, and a miniature picture de- pended from her fwelling bofom. It was a manly face; but fortunately I thought that it was the picture of her brother. An amiable confufion blufhed on her beautiful· countenance. My fecret agita¬ tion did, indeed, render me very unfit for clofe obfervation: yet I perceived in her timid looks, and on the faint blufhes of her dimpled cheeks, certain fymptoms - which gave nouriihment to my hopes. An innocent girl is chiefly fwayed by inílinčl, when fiie meets the man whom ~her artlefs heart has chofen without being confcious of it. The moil confummate art could not have invented a more charming reception than fimple nature effected here. The vifible tremour which glided through her frame was a filent confeffion that fomething more than the requeft of her father prompted her to do what fhe did afterwards. Her heart fpoke through her looks, though it was afraid of being un¬ dcrftood. The: image, and, if I do not flatter
flatter myfelf too much, the beautified image, of her fecret dreams was led into her arms by her own father, to cherifh it as a brother. But who can force the hu¬ man heart not to overftep the limits pre¬ ferred by parental authority? The father did not underftand his daughter completely. He imagined that fhe did not anfwer his wiihes, and his tendernefs for me, a* much as he had ex¬ pected. " How!" faid he, t( does Adel¬ heid thus coldly receive the friends of her father, and her fécond brother?" Her looks could, hovve\er, have made him fenfible of his miftake; they intreated for indulgence, and at the fame time made the fweeteft confeffion. He fmiled bene¬ volently at her confufion; and encircling his daughter with his arm, preffed her to my bofom, requefting me to embrace my fifter. Her cheeks burned, and my lips quivered. This was all that I was able to obferve. I now
I now led her to her fofa, prefenting the Count to her; and fhe returned his courtly civility in a manner which be¬ trayed the moil accompliftied education. I now was more at leifure to make obfer¬ vations, and my eager foul was abforpt in the contemplation of her exquifite charms. I had travelled much, and feen a great many beautiful women ; I even had pof- íeííed a wife adorned with heavenly charms; and my imagination added to her image, which was deeply engraven in my foul, perfections which the original, perhaps, never had ; but here my boldeft dreams were more than realized; I fre¬ quently doubted that I was awake. Her foul, which foon recovered its WOnted flight, to unfold all its per¬ fections, enchanted me irrefiftibly by its romantic turn. I never fiiould have thought it poffible that fuch pure and juft notions of human life could be treafured up in that beautiful mind, which evidently had received rather a fingular turn. Even the prejudices of education, the national notions
notions of her country, and the frailties of the human heart, had, either by acci¬ dent, or by an innate talent, given birth to adorable virtues. What an angelic heart was here to gain ! A walk in the garden being propofed, flie took hold of my arm with the^ inno¬ cent familiarity of a fifter; flopped at her favourite fpots, and informed me, with an inchanting fimplicity, where fhe fome¬ times had thought of me. iC Don't be angry, dear Marquis," ihe added, ζζ if I now and then,,, perhaps, have intruded upon your dreams by an obfcure omen; for I really believe that this is poffible; and Adolf repeated your name conftantly towards the end of his life." How fwiftly did the hours elapfe in the company of that angel! The Count, who was elated with joy at my happinefs, completely accommodated himfelf to the nature of her ideas, and in a ihort time fpoke in the fame enthufiaftic ftrain that was fo peculiar to her. Adelheid found him
him very amiable, and told it him without referve, I was feveral times in danger of giving way to jealoufy ; yet flie always re¬ conciled me again by the tendernefs flie evinced for me, and by numberlefs little endearments. The father took an artlefs and cordial ihare in the innocent flow of our fpirits. The firft rapture of joy was, however, of no long duration, CHAPTER IX. THE Baron had made us promife, the firft evening after our our arrival, to ftay fome weeks with him; and thefe weeks were gradually extended to months. Adelheid's natural ferioufnefs returned by degrees. The Baron was fond of hunting, notwithftanding his age and infirmity; it being likewife the favourite diverfion of the Count, they were almoft the whole day in the foreft ; and I was fond of no¬ thing. A fmall, well felected library did, indeed, agreeably fill up many of my hours ;
hours; yet ftill many dreadful chafms were left, and I was obliged to have re¬ courfe to walking to ihake off the heavi- nefs of time. Adelheid being fond of exercife, we fre¬ quently met in the garden, where we were leaft difturbed. She feemed to have dedi¬ cated the morning fo religioufly to ferious occupations, that I would have intruded upon her on no account. I was, befides, in a very anxious fituation. I was fenfible of her attachment to me; but could I venture to prefume that this w 7 as any thing elfe than a fitter's love? As for myfelf, I loved her with an un¬ fpeakable ardour, with an uncommoo patience, and an unexampled resignation. I was formerly too proud to receive laws from the female fex, but now faw myfelf at once reduced to the moft obedient fub- miflion. A young girl directed the courie of my thoughts at pleafure, and guided the current of my ideas. I had com¬ pletely loft the dominion over myfelf, was 4 unexpectedly
unexpectedly deprived of what formerly conftituted my greateft pride, and there were hours when I ihed tears at that lofs. The name of a fifter entitled her to many innocent familiarities which tranf¬ ported me beyond myfelf* The language of friendfhip flowed from her lips, and I was fure her heart did not give them the lie; yet fhe never ^difplayed one of thofe finer fymptoms of a ftrong, over-power¬ ing paffion; appeared to apprehend and to divine nothing; was always of the fame temper, without either referve or caprice. I did not know that there are female hearts of a nature different from that of the generality. What Adelheid had in common w 7 ith the reft of her fex, with refpect to love, I miftook for a pe¬ culiarity of all parlions, and tormented myfelf with my own feelings at a time when I could have been completely happy. We generally took a walk when the day began to decline. She took familiarly hold of my arm when we wei;e alone; we rambled
rambled through different parts of the garden, and a large feat of turf, in ths moft diftant corner, was commonly the fpot to which we reforted at laft. Adel¬ heid always grew more ferious, and at length even melancholy, when we ap¬ proached it, and I was taken with the fame mood. The compafs o" this world was too narrow for her foul ; fhe gathered matter for new images in other regions: night ftole upon us, and threw a deeper gloom over our dreams. A fweet melan¬ choly frequently made us weep, without our being able to.account for it. I was generally fo much agitated, that the power of utterance failed me. She then re¬ clined upon my fhoulder, and looked at me with eyes full of benign tendernefs. One evening, when we were in the fame melancholy difpofition, flie took hold of my hand, and preffing it with affection, faid, " Dear Carlos, the difpofition of your fifl er renders her very unhappy : it would be very well if ihe were not to fo- journ much longer in this world. But h Vol. III. L would
would you then continue to remember me; and do you think you will know me : again in another world?" This and fimilar feenes overwhelmed me with a fpeechlefs melancholy, which gradually began to prey on my vitals. She perceived it, and caught the conta¬ gion. The Baron, too, was grieved at niy alarming fituation. The Count afked me, with tender fyrhpathy, what ailed ж? But what could I reply? He ima¬ gined that I was happy. We met one evening in the garden, equally immerfed in that gloomy melan¬ choly. I had been in a violent agony of mind all the day long, and almoft diffrac¬ ted. Being impatient to get rid of that defponding mood, I took up my gun, tmd went into the park, where 1 wandered about till evening was already far acU vaneed. No one knew where I was; and when I was returning to the caftle, I met fome fervants, who had been fcnt in fearch of me. Having fent them back, I climbed over the wall of the park, to come té Pri »-"^
to the caftle by a fhorter way, and, to confefs the truth, to meet Adelheid, who generally took a walk at that time. I really met her, after a ihort ramble through the garden, abforpt in profound reverie, and walking with trembling fteps. She did not obferve me, although I was only a few paces diftant from her, being occupied with a rofe, which ihe alter¬ nately took from her bofom and replaced again. She was pale and dejected, carry¬ ing my cane in her hand, upon which ihe reclined, and frequently fixed her looks. I faw her itart feveral times, looking around with a ghaftly afpečt, and moving her hand as if fpeaking with fome perfon. At length ihe faw me ftanding clofe by her fide, began to ilägger, and I had fcarcely time enough to receive her in my arms. " Good God ! Marquis, where have you been?" ihe faid, collecting herfelf immediately î but that very moment a new misfortune happened. My gun being fulpended round my fhoulder by a ftrap, I pufhed it back to be better able to fup- L 2 port
port Adelheid; but it was unhappily cocked; the trigger came againft: the branch of a fmall tree, the fufil went off, and the ball wounded one of my fingers. It bled copioufly; and my hand being lifted up, the blood ftreamed into the face and on the bofom of the Baroncfs. This accident reftored her entirely to the full ufe of her fenfes, inftead of de¬ priving her of it. ** Eternal God ! what have you done?*' fhe exclaimed, terrified, and inftantly pulled me towards an adja¬ cent arbour, to examine my wound, poured the contents of her fmelling bottle upon her handkerchief, and tied it carefully up. Having dreffed my wound with anxious alacrity, ihe afked me tenderly, "Do you fuffer great pains, dear Marquis?" "Very little on my hand,'* I replied. " Good God! are you wounded in another place befides ?" " Alas I here, here I have violent pains ľ' pointing at my heart. «* What pains you there? Will you not tell it your fifter?" ihe refurned, taking hold of my hand. " Deareft Adelheid, how can
can I deferve that angelic goodnefs, how can I make amends for jour uncommon tcndcrncfs? J ' <( Is this all that pains you? Have you not deferved my love long fince? 'Ihe beit amends you can make for my tendernefs is to return my love." " O, then, I have deferved it, anJ made ample amends; and you, Adelheid, arc in ?ry debt. After this poor heart of mine has waited almoft all its vital powers ina namelefs grief, youafkwhy.it bleeds? Oh! It is dreadful to love without hope; and a. tranquil return of a violent paffion is more galling to a fpoiled, infatiable heart, than the moft rancorous hatred." A torrent of tears gufhed from her eyes, and ihe began, after a fliort paufe, " You are very unhappy, Cai los, if my tendernefs does not fuiice you. I have frequently aiked myfelf, in the hours of filent melan¬ choly, whether I am capable of amore ar¬ dent love than that whieh my heart feels for you? I do not think I am. Tell me, dear Carlos, what do you defire me to do?" « What I defire? Can words defcribe L3 that?
that? I wiih that Adelheid would live only for her Carlos, who knows no о her happinefs but that of thinking of his fv\eet fifter, and would ihed his laft drop of blood to purchafe her felicity." " Is that all my Carlos wiihes? Is not your image the fweeteft and the only ob¬ ject of my dreams and of my happi eft hours ? Docs not every bleffing of my life depend upon your affection? Does not my heart beat ftronger, and my counte¬ nance affume a deeper hue, when I fee you? Does not your image follow me every where like my fliadow? Are you noc the only object of my pride, and the iole. arbiter of my happinefs? Shall I quit, for your fake, father, family, and friends; or live with you in a dreary folitude upon roots? Speak only, Carlos, and your Adel¬ heid will cheerfully obey. The world, nay eternity itfelf, would be a lonely de* fert to me without you!" " Then you confent to become my wife; my faithful, ever adored wife?" « Wife,
"Wife, or fifter. Is there any difference? Or do you think I have a ftrongcr claim to your love as wife? Here is my hand; ï will be any thing you wiih me to be." On our return to the caftle, we met the Baron, and the Count, who alfo had gone in queft of me, and with rapture embraced the recovered fon and friend,. I was happier than words can defcribc» but found it impofiibíe tojóin in the lively fallies of their fportive humour, Adel¬ heid was in the fame predicament. The Baron perceived our mutual tranfport, and his cheerfulnefs encreafed. I went, on the fubfequent morning, to the Baron, as foon as he got up, and dif¬ covered the whole-to him. He conducted me filently to his daughter, who, as welf as myfelf, encircled his knees, and, lift¬ ing us up with tears of affection in his eyes, faid kindly, « God blefs you, my children: you have prevented me." S******i almoft was frantic with joy. Be¬ fore a month elapfed Adelheid was my wife, L 4 We
Wc refolved to fpend the fummer in the country, and to go to Paris the enfu- ing winter. We were unanimous in all our rcfolutions. The Count was looked upon as a member of our family, and had rendered himfelf as ncceflary to the Baron and Adelheid as he was to myfelf. How imfneakablv charming was the fummer to me! I never had enjoyed the One í e afon with fo much hilarity and unclouded con¬ tentment. We became every clay more fufceptible of the ble Mings of a domeni- cated life; and our fociable happinefs af¬ fli med a livelier complexion, and en¬ creafed with every hour. I generally fpcnt the morning in private with my wife; the dinner bell fummoncd us to more common pleafures. Every one of us regaled our fociable circle, afler dinner, with the new ideas and obfervations he had gathered in the courfe of his activity in the houfe and abroad. Adelheid \*as of a very ferious charac¬ ter, and my joviality was gradually mel¬ lowed by her turn of thinking. She foon defired
defired me to relate my hiftory, and loved to hear me fpeak of Elmira. She was pleafed with her melancholy difpofition, and lamented her misfortunes; but con¬ ceived more predilection for the fpirit of the confederation, in which they origi¬ nated, than I w i flied: flie found its prin¬ ciples good, and cenfurcd me now and then for havine; acted with too much impetuofi ty of paffion. We difcourfed on this fubječt every evening which found us alone. While fhe attempted to pene¬ trate deeper into the character of the dif¬ ferent circumftanccs, fhe did, indeed, not reconcile me to a fociety that had с au fed me fo many fufferings, but, neverthelefs, fubdued my averfion from its principles. The choice of our fociable pleafures depended on our humour and on circum¬ ftanccs. Adelheid hunted, fiihed, or walked, with us in the park. She fang uncommonly well, and played the piano¬ forte to perfection. I played the flute to¬ lerably well: the Count was an adept on feveral inflruments, and the old Baron was
was delighted with our little concerts. Reading, and the mutual relation of our adventures, filled up the hours which were not dedicated to thefe and to more ferious occupations. None of us had ever en¬ joyed fo much unclouded happinefs for fo long a period, and none of our fociable circle had ever been fo completely fenfi¬ ble of his felicity. Thus autumn ftole upon us unawares. We poftponed our departure from time to time, till we could delay it no longer, if we wifhed to go to the capitai. Having informed Count S****** of my marriage,. he wrote almoft every poft day, urging me to come as foon as poffible to Paris. We departed, at laft; and at the latter end of November arrived at the capital. The political fituation of France was, at that time, not yet arrived at that critical ftate, as to caufe a great alteration in the focia¬ ble circles. I found my old friends again, united by the bonds of intimacy, and was welcomed with cordial joy. The Count appeared to be cheerful; and» although not
not completely happy, yet fatisfied with his Caroline. It may be eafily conceived what a noife the appearance of my wife made at Paris, where every new face charms and attracts- the general notice of the fafhionable cir¬ cles. She eafily found out the proper fo¬ ciable tone which fuited every circle to which fhe was introduced i became foon the favourite of all aíľcmblies, and the idol of her acquaintances. She grew in a fhort time very intimate with Caroline, notwithftanding the difparity of their cha¬ racters. The Baron was animated with new vigour, joined in alť our diverfions, and forgot the imbecillities of his advanced age. S******i was his conftant attendant and companion; and Don Bernhard was an agreeable addition to our domeftic cir¬ cle. We all were happy, or at leaft, ap¬ peared to be fo, when a new accident feemed to be going to difturb our plea¬ fure. Count S****** became, foon after our arrival at Paris, a riddle to myfelf and all his acquaintances* He grew fad, dif* fatisfied,
fatisfied, abfenr, and irafcible. His whims were foon very troublefome to us, and he frequently treated his lady in a very harfli manner. I perceived that he pre¬ ferred Adelheides company to all other fociety; but without concluding there¬ from upon the real caufe of his extraordi¬ nary change, looked upon it as the effect of the fimilarity of their characters, and as an encouragement of his melancholy. I .cemented, therefore, that friendfiiip as much as poffible, inftead of throwing the leaft impediment into his way. Adelheid, confiding in me and my knowledge of the Count's character, made no difficulty to ad¬ mit his vifits without reftraint, and to receive from him an attention which fhe confidcr- ed as a matter of courfe in a friend of her hufband. I do not know what particular information S******i had received of the fecret caufe of his behaviour: in ihort, he, . as well as Don Bernhard, grew every day colder to him, and jointly endeavoured to interrupt his intimacy with my wife, by throwing many little impediments into his way.
way. This ferved, however, only to add fuel to the flame: he intruded himfelf every where upon her; and at length pro¬ voked the voice of flander to fuch a de¬ gree, by the violence of his paffion, that S******i and Don Bernhard thought it their duty to inform me of it in plain terms. I did, indeed, ridicule them for their fufpicion, but refolved to keep a watchful eye over him, and to take the firft opportunity to fpeak to Adelheid about it. This opportunity offered itfelf fooner than I imagined ; for fhe came one evening, after my return from company, to my apartment, holding a paper m her hand, and fliedding a torrent of tears. " Deareft Adelheid!" I exclaimed, Cf what is the matter?'* btaving fent my valet away, fhe fat down by my fide, and began, with a trembling voice, tc Carlos, I cannot conceal the infult I have received any longer from you. It would be crimi- - nai in me to fpare your friend on the pre¬ fent occafion. You certainly have ob¬ ferved how Count S****** has behaved to
me
me for fome time. Read this note, which I have found this moment on my dreffing table." She gave me the note and I read ; "Don't fear, beautiful Marchionefs, '* that I lhall betray the fecret your eyes *< have confeffed to me. Will you receive " to-morrow night, at eight o'clock, be- tf neath the large lime-tree, a vow which " my looks have made to you fome time ti fince? ------ Lewis, Count of s******." It was the Count's hand writing; I could not be miftaken. My indignation was, at firft, fo vehement, that I flung it rather violently upon the table, and knocked a glafs down. The fervant, whom I had fent out of the room, re* turned, aíking if I had rung for him? Having ordered him to retire, I embraced my wife, and promifed to remove that lit¬ tle interruption of her tranquillity, with¬ out having recourfe to violent meafures. I only begged her not to change her de* portment to the Count, and to leave every thing to me. She
She feemed, indeed, to leave me with ^reat tranquillity, but was actually far from being eafy, and could not help informing her father of it. The Baron could conceal nothing from S******i, and the latter communicated it to Don Bernhard. They all agreed that I ought to meet the Count in the room of roy wife, and the latter promifed to be prefent on that occafiom I was of the fame opinion, and refolved to adopt their advice. The Count was, during the day, rather eafier than ufuaL î repaired to tbe great lime-tree before it had ftruck eight o'clock, and was afto- nifhed to find S****** already there. He read a paper, and kiffed it repeatedly; but no fooner did he fee me, than he ex¬ claimed, with the greatefl: fury, " Ней and damnation! I am betrayed: but you» monfter in human íhape, ihall not efcape me a fécond time.'* With thefe words he xufhed upon røe fword in hand. I was not unarmed, and defended my* felf againft his furious attack * taking all poffible care that he fhould not run againft S the
фе point of my fword. I exclaimed un¬ interruptedly, " For God's fake, Lewis, defift, and hearken to me!" But all my entreaties were fruitlefs. He uttered dreadful curfes, foaming and grinding his teeth. I difarmed him, at length, and flung his fword into the adjacent thicket. He looked up to heaven, and ejaculated the moil ihocking execrations. Loud cries behind me now attracted my attention. I looked round, and dif¬ cerned Bernhard's red coat through the gloom of night. He was wreftling ith a white figure, and on the point of fink¬ ing to the ground. Now he actually dropt down. I haftened, half frantic, to aflift him : a dagger glittered over his head in one hand of his antagonift, while the other endeavoured to flop his mouth with a handkerchief. I pierced his opponent in the firft violence of my paffion, and in that moment perceived that he was JmanueL· Tearing the bandage from his head, I beheld Jlfonjo, my faithful fer¬ vant, at my feet.
END OK THE THIRD VOLVME.
