Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Horrid mysteries: a story: fom the German of the Marquis of Grosse; by P. Will
í - ί fC HORRID MYSTERIES.
СИЛПГЬЯ í- IN the ïp'ïng of mv life, and in the fi.II enjovrnenr of unimpaired vigour» and of deai h bought experience, do 1 flop, to look back on the path I vent, or, rather, w a- led. 1 behold, in all the ma/ v labyrinths of my career, a vifible hand, thar, perhaps, is aifo extended over many of my friends guides them in the dark, and hab wove the thread which they, in carelcfs fecurity, fancy to Spin themfclvcs. The invifiblc web, which encompafled my iate, is novv, perhaps, torn afunder; and, perhaps, not. While I fancy to be free, the fetters which I imagine to have fliaken oft; are, perhaps, forged ftronger, and may foon enthral me again. Be this Voi. I, В as
as it may, I will meet futurity vvith a cheer* fui confidence; and í expand my hands peacefully towards tou, ye fields of higher knowledge and experience! no matter whether you be ftrewed u,th the roic- of fweet tranquillity, or the thorn- of for¬ row. I fuffer myfelf, impelled by ftern neceffity, and too weak for réiiftance, to be hurried onward, without anxien, b\ a torrent which is limited and directed bv a Superior Power. The hiftory of my eventful life proves how little all human ftrength, and a well tried and circumfpect experience, can prevail over the fecret plan* of certain unknown perfons, who, behind the impe¬ netrable veil of myftic concealment, inv i- fibly watch over a great part of the world. Their plans and proceedings frequently have been clofely obferved: however, I feem to have been doomed exclufively to penetrate to the centre of their abode. Every action of my life feems to mc to have been computed and arranged in their dreadful
arcali dueaed, in л pre-conu erted wan¬ ner, towards the moft horrid ^¡л", ro the perpetración of whuh uk v«a"t..¡ :> fedine me; лпа their whole tra: n provji the ineontethbîe truth, tha; not the a;>pli- cation of individuali apa^.iic^, but onlv a pr,:Jen: improve mcr: 01 reaíon, can in¬ fure an :.::, ontroUcd fwav over the mind í of nicn. J muffs hou ever, obferve, that the courfe of mv biflor. r> too rapid, and reo com¬ plicated, to be plain in ihe beginning. I ihall, therefore, commence vvith that period which begitb to throw fomc light upon it. All the antecedent occurrences of my life do not only concentre, but arc alfo repeated therein. As for the reft, I am eafy about the fate of thefe ihects, vvhich the world will not fee before I am gone to my eternal home ; and vvill take no other revenge on my enemies, than to convince them that I deferved leaft to be envied in the moit en¬ vied period of my iife. В 2 CHAPTER
CHAPTER ГГ. COUNT S**^* # , arı uncommon hand¬ fome and amiable young man, fervevi as volunteer under Crillon ui the famous fiege of GihraUar-, and when the latter was forced by Elliot to abandon his plan of taking that impregnable fort refs, left the fervice, and took tlie refolution to travel through Tortuga!, and then to re¬ turn, by way of Spain and France, to his German eftates in his native country. He finiflied his travels in the latter end of fummer. I was enraptured to embrace him once more, and found him by far handfomer and more amiable than he had left me, frequently joking vvith him about the amorous adventures he had probably met with abroad, and, moil likely, would meet at home. He returned ihefc jokes; yet I frequently faw, during the fallies of a lively and good-natured wit, fomething fparkle in his eyes that refe m bied a tear. Having, however, great reafon to imagine that
Τ Π Ε ΐ » Л ? R Τ ч ·*" that a mar. of his amiable form, сЬапчгег, and rank, could not but have contrau« d temler connexion?, I afenbed this to the tffeeiofa fweet recollection which t;n.e cu.K wire^ofl'with a foothing hand, ar.d a;r*i4iK-iK.ed not in the ηκ·Ι1 <hfia:u !ran- h^r, thai h > forrows fprung tn*m n.*>r¿ í; i :; lib ibi.' ref ", Having taken ;!.e rcfbh;: ( i.n ro í] <-\ \ t;,_- ihmmer a: 1 - к \-.V:, he cr.ciev.oured í ? ¡ eìfeade n,e ro keep Ium company, and I ct.incided ehcvîSjh'.* wirb, his wiihes. The chafe, cc^ nemicai U'nce:n¿, and bil¬ liards, occrpied the greateft part of the day; and aitera frugal fupper, vve gene- tally feated ourfelves m fweet tranquillity by the fire fide, our mind being baled 1 y that cìr-eriaì phih-lbphv that bkíľc-; the fijul only after tlie performance of ufeful occupations, and fw ettens an active life beyond defeription. Whoever knows what real friendihip is, and what conge¬ nial fouls experience when exchanging harmonious ideas; whoever knows thofe В 3 charming
charming fancies, that arc fo apt to m« tbt late our min J by the fide of a dear friend, and the glow of innocent hilarity, will eafiïy believe that wc were happy in each others company, that we avoided nu¬ merous circle«, and very rarely had ano¬ ther talker with us befides the garrulous fite in the chimr.ev. We exchanged the ♦;J\ entures of ou r lite and travels when the Count w a.-, m а good h un »οι ι r, and fre- iViCrulv were fo much abfornt in liftcninf' aud reíatíníT, that neither efùrcJ to ftir before the dying liame in the chimney and tnc cold reminded us of Germany and zße comfort ofa warm bed. Againft the clofe of April, he looked frequently into the almanack, and laid it down açain with the fliake of his head, 1 obferved it, but did nor enquire the rea¬ fon of that ftrange beliaviour, leaving the developement of this myftery to time and the heart of my friend, He grew, however, every day, more and more abfent and diftracted, neglect¬ ing
iw the chafe, Avhich ahvays had been his favourite diverfion ; and at fupper I fre¬ quently miffed the jocund hilarity that ge- ncrallv had feafoned our frugal meals: he began to be immerfed in thought, and frequently betrayed uneafinefs of mind and filent anxiety. I İh a red his grief, but ftili refrained from intruding upon his fe¬ cret. At length, he ihut himielf up a whole day, and at í upper was fo melancholy and thoughtful, as not to reply a Syllable to my queftions. He placed two chairs by the fire fide, rang for a fervant, and or¬ dered him to fetch more wood. His peo¬ ple being gone to bed, we feated curfelves by the fire: he moved his chair clofer towards mine, while I obferved thefe pre¬ parations with anxious afloniihmenr, and then inclined his head to me. I fliall relate the tale he now communi¬ cated to mc with his own words; yet I have juft reafon to fear it will not be half fo interefting as he related it. No man did ever poflefs that enchanting Suavity of В 4 fpeech
fpeech vvhich rendered his narration fo un¬ fpeakably beautiful, and made the fweet, melodious ftream of his words appear to be only the echo of his feelings: nor diei î ever know a mortal that equalled him in the cxpreiiive language of his gcftures i (or every motion of his elegant form, every n:¡en oí' bis went in í u eet harmony with bis гесоПе /tiori, and his heavenly eye fie¬ quently recalled long forgotten tears, "My dear G vi " n '*V' be now began, " I fee my bchav iour fills you with anxious furprife; but be eafy, my friend. I am irointr, to relate to vou the moft dreadful feene of my whole life, which, perhaps, wiil unravel to you the myftery of my »íeportment. Are vou prepared for that u!e of horror?" " Vou know, my dear S******, that mv own hue has made me Sufficiently in¬ umate vvith feenes of that nature: who, therefore, could liften to you with more tranquillity than myfelf?" However, I gave the lie to that declaration in the very moment
moment I uttered it; a long, chilly tremour flowing down my back. " Well, Marquis, hearken to the tale I am going to depofc into the bofom of mv deareft friend ! Do you recollect how haftily I pafľed over my journey from Li ¡Ion to Madrid? I will fill up that ciumu with an adventure whi Ji l durit not com¬ municate to you one day iooner, and evc*t now dare relate only partially; an adven¬ ture that ftiil İs veiled in myftic darknefs ; fo much the more dreadful to mc, as I can fee no poftibility of clearing it up. You know that family afiairs obliged me to quit Madrid abruptly. I counted every moment. Some difagreeable incidents, but chiefly the impolitions of my poftil¬ lion, forced me to take a roundabout way, and í reiolved to ride all the night, in or¬ der to make up for that delay. Sevcial robberies and murders having been com¬ mitted on the road, I was cautioned, pre¬ viously to my fetting out, to be on my guard; yet I relied entirely on the protection of ß 5 Ш У
my two fervants, who, as well as myfelf, were vvell armed. But, when I came to the frontiers, and propofed to travel all the night iong, my hoit and hoftefs exerted themfclvcs in the tendereit manner to clii— fu ad e ι ne from my pu r po fe , с ο η η ι r i π g m e for God's Sike to ibi) till fun rife. They endeavoured to frighten mc by the rela¬ tion of fiery phantoms, of Wilh-with-thc- wifp, apparitions, and numberiefs talcs of noci urna! adventures and murders. Flow- ever, the fear of being thought úmorous % and the pertinacy vvhich, as you know, is a predominant ftructure of my character, impelled mc to infill on my departure. 1 perfuaded the poftillion, comforted my hoft and his famile, and proceeded on my journey. On that occafion I parted vvith the ring vvhich you lately miffed, giving ίς to the lovclieft little giri Ì ever have fecn, that clung around my knees, and would not fuffer me to go, I affare you, my dear G******, the ftate in which my mind way, at that time, is an evident prooi' againft
againft all forts of ominous prcfenfions; for I was fo cheerful and ferene, that I never have felt more ftrongly what a hap¬ pinefs it isto live, nor ever beheld the ob¬ jects around me in a gayer attire. Our road led rhrough a forcft that commenced at the Spani fli frontiers. The night was uncommonly fine; my driver guided his mules mechanically; and my two fervants were Lii afleep. I was, indeed, awake; however, I dreamed. The filence that Swayed around me, the melodious notes of the feathered fongfters, the moon, vvhich deceived my eyes vvith fhadovvy phantoms, the myftic rufiling and whifpering in the leaves, and every object around me, pro¬ created dreams in my imagination, in which my friends fweetly danced before my mind. I exchanged with you the moft enchanting reveries; collected, as it vvere, the moil myftic founds of nature, to im¬ part my fmiling fancies to you; and only ihc joftliiig of my carriage caufed now В 6 . and
and then a painful chafm in that airy reti¬ nue of uncorporeal fenfations, " Being, at length, tired of thefe un¬ welcome interruptions, I alighted to walk behind the carriage. Having proceeded about a quarter of a mile, I turned into a bye-path, which appeared to join again vvith the hiiihvvav at fome diftance. Beine: now freed from all interruptions, my ima¬ gination revelled in numberiefs extrava¬ gant reveries, my fteps quickened during that inebriation of my heart, and I com¬ pute to have proceeded tvvo miles in that manner, when I ftumbied againft the root of a tree. My fportive fancies difap¬ peared at once; and I found myfelf en¬ tangled in a thicket, and, foon after, in a mazy labyrinth of underwood, without being able to find the path again ν nay, even vvithout the leaft apparent poftibility of retracing it. Suppofing, however, that I could not have proceeded a great way» and of courfe, not be far diftant from my carriage, I called feveral times the name of
of my driver, I imagined to hear him re¬ turn an anfwer, (vvhich probably was no¬ thing but the effect of an echo,) followed the direction of the found, and relapfed into mv former careleflhefs. Having forced my way, for fome time, through bullies and underwood, 1 was furprifed at niy having not yet regained the high-way. I ftopt, and liftened. How great was my joy, when I very plainly heard my fervant converfe with the poftillion! I pufhed through a thick buih, and imagined to be near my carriage. 44 You may eafiiy conceive how great my terror was, w hen I found myfelf on the bank of a rivulet, the murmuring of whofe waves had deceived me. Tbe painful fen- fation I felt at this fight was raifed to a ftill higher degree by the idea of being in a ftrange country, in a dangerous forcft, and perhaps at a great diftance from honeft people. How much did I novv repent my heedleflnefs ! I curfed the poftillion, my¬ felf, and my fervants. While I Avas la¬ menting
menting my dangerous fituation, a little Italian greyhound rufh cd forth from the adjacent thicket, running along the bank cf the rivulet, and croffed a fmall bridge which I had not obferved before; but f looking conftantly back at me, it fell into the water. The current hurried it rapidly along: I went back, keeping clofe to the bank, till I could take hold of it, As foon as I fet my prifoner at liberty, on the other fide of the rivulet, he ran barking before me over a grafly turf, which feemed to be enclofed by a wood. My conductor led me, at laft, to a bovver, which was embofomed by lofty trees and fhrubberies. I entered it without hefitation; but had not advanced many fteps, when a foft arm encircled my neck, and pulled me down. A burning mouth touched my cheek, and kiffed it fervently. The hand that ρ re f fed my face to the lips of the unknown perfon, glided accidentally upon my fhoulder, touching the epaulet of my uniform ; upon which the being, in whofe arms I was, in¬ ftantly
ftantiy ftartcd up vvith a loud ihriek; but Soon fat down again. My fituation fur¬ paffed all power of defeription, I was no ftranger to dangers, and always had faced them with equanimity: the terrors of war never have terrified me, nor made my heart beat ftronger than ufual ; yet here, w here I faw no danger, where I could ufc my fword, and, to all appearance, was in the company ofa female, I began violently to tremble ; my knees fhook, and, inftead of fupporting my frightened antagoniil, I was fupported by her. My heart threat¬ ened to burft, and I dropt involuntarily upon my knees. Encircling the ftranger with my arm, I perceived that it was a lady. She trembled, but not fo violently as I did. My head fank upon one of her hands ; my fenfes vvere benumbed : I was in a dreadful agony, and imagined the icy hand of death was upon me. *' For God's fake, Sennor, who arc you?" afweet, trembling voice exclaimed at length. I recovered the ufc of my fenfes,
fenfes, and rofe. My right-hand, which was refting on her fhoulder, encircled, by a fecret impulfe, her taper form, and I preffed her violently to my panting bofom. A vehement paffion thrilled all the pulfes of my heart, which fcarcely had recovered from the higheft degree of a momentary terror; my tongue cleaved to the palate, and I ftammered, vvith great difficulty, " A man of honour, Sennora!" Fler me¬ lodious voice trembled fo fweetly, that I fancied to hear the plaintive ftrains of a nightingale: the darknefs of the bovver began to be difpelled by the filver rays of the moon, and I beheld the delicate form of a heavenly figure rcpofing on a feat of green turf. I beheld numberiefs bewitch¬ ing charms, yet without being able to dif¬ cern her features ; her heart beat violently under my daring hand, and I was irrefifti- bly impelled to prefs the fweet enchantrcfs to my enraptured bofom. " At once, it began to lighten; a fud¬ den brightnefs illuminated the bower; a dazzling
dazzling light flirted before my eyes, which, however, were fuddenly veiled again vvith midnight darknefs; an icy hand glided down my back, and I was fcarcely able to turn mv torpid neck : for horrid phantoms, with torches in their hands, ftood behind me. I ftarted up ; but when I was going to draw my fword, a fifth perfon ruihed upon me from behind, and feized my hands, vvhich were tied to¬ gether in the twinkling of an eye. T was forcibly dragged into a garden. The ra¬ pid tranfition from the higheft fummit of ecftaiy to the utmoft degree of terror, the fuddenneSs of the furprize, and the alarm¬ ing circumftances attending it, aimoit pe¬ trified me. I was fuddenly tranfported from a world of enchanting reality to the gloomy kingdom of horrid dreams; my fenfes fled by degrees, my pulfc began to beat flower, and, at laft, feemed entirely to flop. On recovering my recollection, í was feized with new horrors, feeing two of thofe phantoms walk by my fide. They
They vvere covered from head to foot with a white cloth; and I beheld, through a fmall aperture, fuch an unnatural, dis¬ torted countenance, that I cannot but think that they vvere mafked; though I cannot guefs the reafon of their having been difguifcd thus in that place. I never faw fuch a chalk-white prominent chin, and fuch a horrid, grinning mouth, which was over-íhaded by a crooked red nofe. I addreffed thefe monfters trembling, in the Spaniih language, but received no anfwer» " A little while after, I took the cou rage to look back after my female companion, whom I heard groan and fob a few pace-; behind me. She was clad in white; her aih-pale unveiled face was half covereei with her auburn treffes, and inclined to¬ wards her open bofom, which feemed to expand itfelf more than ufual, in order to receive it entirely. She was led by two guides, that were fpeaking to her; a chilly tremor, which vifibly íhook her frame, and
and a hollow groan, that raifed the difor- dered covering of her bofom, was the only anSwer ihe returned. My conductors now dragged me more rapidly along; I heard, only at a diftance, low whifpers, and could plainly diftinguifh the name, Francifca — But what is the matter w ith you, Marquis, are you not wel!?'* ťf Nothing, dear S******. Pray go on! Your tale is fo horrid. The name ftruck me. Goon, deareft Count!" The Count gazed a while at me with a doubtful unfatisfied mien, and then re* fumed : " The gradually increafing palenefs of the moon, and the dawn of the rifing day, enabled mc to obServc that our way led to¬ wards a ruinous buildinc, vvhich was half concealed by a cluftcr of lofty trees, and rofe, as if called forth by magic fpclls, out of a grey fog. It reclined againft the lower part of a hill, whofe barren top beetled over the bu flics. It was half de¬ cayed, had large apertures, and not one whole
whole window. It feemed to have for¬ merly ftood upon the top of the eminence, and gradually funk down into the dreary valley. The doors· were half covered vvith rubbilh; and fome decayed fteps rofe out of the black darkncfs, which evaporated a fmell of corruption that ftraitcned my breaft. I took leave of the living; a gap¬ ing, bafelcfs tomb extended its arms, vvhich feemed to be ready to receive me; ftern neceflity urged me to bury myfelf in its darkfome womb; I loft fight of the lady 3 with an excruciating agony, and the icy torpitude of my foul was gradually ex¬ pelled by a mournful horror. A door was, at length, forced open; my conductors pufhed me through the gravelike aper¬ ture, which was ihut upon me with a dreadful noife. A fécond door, not far from me, opened at the fame inftant, and was ihut again. Woeful groans re-echoed through the extenfive dreary vault. It was Francifca's voice. CC I thought
€f I thought it ftrange they had not taken my fword from me, which I novv recol¬ lected. The unknown lady was not Sir diftant, I hoped flic could untie my hands : 1 was flrong, and my keepers were un¬ armed. Advancing, for that purpofe, a few fteps nearer to the fpot w here ftie was, I found that we were feparated by an iron rafting, which feemed to extend through the whole vault, I accoftcd, and begged her to endeavour to thruft one of her hands through the rails; but all the apertures were too narrow. She difcovered, at length, a larger opiening, through vvhich flie could juft force her hand« I placed myfelf fide- ways, to afford her an opportunity of draw¬ ing mv fword, in order to cut the firings that fhac ktcd my hands, The fword flick¬ ing, however, too Sail, fhe pulled it So vio¬ lently that the broken blade wounded her hand. " In that very moment our keepers ap¬ peared at the door, They called to me, and I could not but obey their Summons, FranciSca
Francifca was led through the other door : our keepers took us into the middle, and Ave entered a long paffage, vvhich loft itfelf in the midnight darkncfs of the back ground. " I novv was at leifure to take a view of my fellow prifoner, aififted by the light of the torches. Alas! mv dear G** w '\ not one moment of my life has deftroyed a fingle ftroke of that picture, whofe ex¬ quifite beauty fiiled me with wonder and aftonifhment. I never beheld a woman like her. Her heavenly form engroffed my whole attention, and thrilled my foul vvith rapturous fenfations in fpite of ohe dangers that furrounded me. The fight of her woukl have imparadifed mc on the brink of the gaping grave. This greateft and moil perfect mafterpiece of plaftic nature feemed to have tranfported me into a new and better world. I forgot that I was a prifoner, and imagined to breathe in a bet¬ ter atmofphere. Her beauty furpaffed all power of defeription; innocence throned on
on her heavenly countenance; her coral lips were the refidence of numberiefs graces. No language is adequate to de¬ fcribe the heaven that fmiled in her looks. Her face refe mb led a lily that blu flies in the vicinity of an opening rofe. She was abforpt in profound thought; a faint-like refignation gleamed in her tearful eye; the convulfive motions of her quivering hps, and her gloomy, downcaft brow, be¬ fpoke the Secret workings oS her Souh Fler overclouded looks Seemed to be di¬ rected in Sond melancholy towards an ob¬ ject at an unknown diftance, and, when returning to me, with a tender glance of pity, appeared to defcend from a bieffing heaven, to comfort a finner before their final clofe, " I accoftcd her in French, and flic an¬ fwered me. The paffage grew fo narrow that only two could walk a-breaft. Our leaders vvere obliged to go before us vvith their torches ; and vvhile they were vio¬ lently quarrelling about Something, flie 4 gave
gave me fome horrid explanations of that dreadful adventure; but our converfation was foon obferved, and we were torn afun¬ der. One of our guides took my fword from my fide, and looked at the fword-knot with great attention. I refolved to take advantage of this circumftance for my prefervation. " Having proceeded about an hundred fteps, the end of the paffage extended it¬ felf into a fpacious cavern. The light of the torches reflected from the walls in num¬ beriefs, various colours, as if they were inlaid with chryftai ; a SoSt glimmer Spread through the vault; and FranciSca, who now joined me, reSembled a celeftial che¬ rub encircled with heavenly glory. How¬ ever, this luftre was only a preparation Sor a ftill more Splendid Scene. The cavern contracted itfelf again into a paffage to a fécond vaui, that glared at us with addi¬ tional radiance. Two large chandeliers depended from the lofty roof into an in¬ tenfe magic mift, which refted awfully up¬ on
on the objects around. As wc proceeded, I obferved all the walls around decorated vvith large mirrors fixed on a ground of black cloth. In our front we beheld an eleva¬ tion vvith feats on either fide, which Seem¬ ed to be occupied by a numerous aflembly. Two chairs vvere placed beneath the chan¬ deliers on the brink of a gaping gulph. My firft gefture was directed towards that ominous abyfs ; a cutting blaft of wind gufhed from between the aperture, and low whifpers feemed to afcend from the deep* After a long painful reflection on that alarming objeet, I directed my eyes at the company that were feated before me. The uppermoft place was occupied by an enor¬ mous plump figure, the right by four wo¬ men, and the left by five men. The near- eft perfon towards me was a girl of ftrik¬ ing beauty; tho' it appeared to be only the wreck of former charms, vvhich feemed to have been impaired by the moft violent affaults of grief and rage. A dying flame gleamed in her breaking eyes, and her bo- Vol. I. С fom
fom was perturbed by a vehement fermen¬ tation, that novv died her features vvitîı a crimfon colour, and novv veiled them with a corpfe-like hue. A fecret horror feemed to have grafped the whole aflembly; every¬ one ceafed to breathe when we entered, and the blood in every vein made a long and dreadful paufe. " The young lady knelt, at length, be¬ fore the monfter, whofe kindling rage now appeared to give him a thoufand arms and a thoufand tongues, and the tumultuous paflions that agitated his foul broke forth with undefcribable fury. The moniter accufed the girl and myfelf, charging me with being her lover, and infifted upon our death. Francifca, meantime, was as motionlefs as a marble ftatue; life feemed to have taken its flight from her for a vvhile, in order to return, at once, with redoubled warmth. She rofe as pale as a corpfe, but with marks of firm refolution, and re¬ figned toher impending doom, defending only me, and declaring to have ken me the firft
irit time an hour ago. Her courage, her noi e than terreftrial, more than human equanimity, the firmnefs of her (already membodied) foul, could have animated a lying man with new life, and kindled in my foul a flame that burft forth in execra¬ tions. I pleaded my fword-knot, difclofed my rank, and fwore my death would not remain unavenged, and call down their own deftruction. My returning boldnefs, the fire of my eloquence, and, alas! (what has deftroyed the happinefs of my whole life,) my not once mentioning the haplefs girl, and pleading only for myfelf and for my life, appeared to ftrike the aflembly, But when I had finiflied my harangue, and the midnight filence returned, I darted a look at my fellow prifoner, and flic glanced at me. It was well that I did not die in that moment, for that look would have met me again in another life, and haunted me through the endlefs realms of eternity. It was a look of angelic greatnefs, inter¬ mixed with a filent, painful contempt of С 2 mv
my cowardice. Her tender grief changed into the frigid flare of a marble bufi; a dy¬ ing fpark feemed, at laft, to tremble on its furface, and to demand back all the ten¬ der fentiments of vvhich I had cheated her fo fliamefully. This almoft made me fran¬ tic; but, inftead of rufhing into the abyfs before me, which opened its gaping jaws to receive me, I raged like a child, ftrug¬ gled to break my galling fetters, and relapfed fainting and weeping upon my chair. " The ftern arbiters of our fate now be¬ gan to confult with each other in an un¬ known language. Our accufer frequently interrupted their confultation by horrid howls, and was pacified vvith the greateft difficulty. A paufe of profound filence enfued: the monfter, who was ready to faint with inward rage, interrupted, at length, that dreadful interval of ftillnefs, afking me, with a trembling voice, Avhe- ther I chofe to die, or would take a folemn oath never to reveal what Francifca had difclofed
difclofed to mc, and not to mention a fvl- lable of the whole aflair during a twelve month? A bible was brought, and I, mi¬ ferable wretch ! fwore. I was cautioned not to break my promife, left I fhould pay with my life for my perfidy, though I fliould be concealed in the centre of tlic earth. «« As foon as I had feated myfelf, out of breath, and almoft bereft of the ufe of my fenfes, one of our conductors, who flood behind us, went away. The door was ihut vvith a hideous noife, the lights were ex- tinguiihed, the aflembly difappeared, and the awful filence of a church-yard fvvayed all around. Francifca only fighed to my left; but foon after was dragged from her chair, and plunged into the abyfs before me, I heard her diftinctly fall down from ftep ro ftep, and dreadful fcreams refound- ed from the abyfs. The hollow groans, extorted by a painful death, vvere inter¬ rupted now and then by woeful lamenta¬ tions, and the clattering of clanging irons, С 3 which
Avhich clafhed againft each other. My fenfes fled on pinions of horror." Thefe were the laft words I heard the Count utter, dropping fenfelefs from my chair. He called for afliftance, and I was reftorcd vvith great difficulty. When I re¬ covered the ufe of my fenfes, I found my¬ felf upon my bed. My fervants flood around me; and the Count fat in fpeech- lefs ftupefaction by my fide, leaning his head upon his hand. As foon as I uttered the firft found, he rofe, and knelt down before my bed: " What a dreadful myfte¬ ry i'* he exclaimed; and a little while after ftared at me, aiking, in a kind of agony, " For God's fake! who are you?" It now was my turn to collect myfelf. I took him kindly by the hand; but he tore himfelf from me, and ruihed out of the room. His fervants followed him, and I heard him haftily ride through the caftle gate. CHAPTER
CHAPTER III. MORNING was juft dawning, and I wiflied to fleep a little, being en¬ tirely exhauftcd. I difmiffed the fervants, and fliut my eyes, but could not fleep, Alas! Francifca! I heard your woeful la¬ mentations, and your groans kept me in a painful ftupefaction : a thoufand confufed ideas arofe 'm my foul, Succeeding each other with unSpeakable rapidity; but Fran¬ cifca's haplefs fate was uppermoft in my imagination. I was fuddenly feized with a chilly tremor, and fancied to fee her hui led down into her grave. " Yes P' I VJi exclaimed, ft Francifca, it is you!" and extended my arms, as if going to fave her. An ice cold hand touched my face, and a fecret horror convulfed my nerves. I had ordered the candles to be extinguifhed ; but, neverthelefs, perceived a radiant fplendor around me, A low rufiling an¬ nounced to me the approach of a fuperior being. It was AmanueL " What do you С 4 want
Avant with me?" I exclaimed: "Muft vou j haunt me every where." 44 Two years are now elapfed," he re¬ plied, kindly, 4i Since you have feen me, but I have never left you for one hour. Remember, Carlos, that I muft not ap¬ pear to you again. You are furrounded every w here with invifibîe fpies : I warn you, Carlos!" So frying, he difappeared. The luftre that illuminated my apartment died away, and midnight filence reigned again around me. No found was heard, and I relapfed breathlefs upon my pillow. The Count ftaid tvvo days away, and no one had feen him Since his Sudden depar¬ ture, líe returned, on the third day, in vifible perplexity, I was juft taking a walk in the garden to refrefli my exhaufted fpirits by the exhalation of the budding flowers, and turning round the corner of a bye path, he ftood before me, embraced me fpeechlefs, and fuddenly tore himfelf from my bofom, leading me to a feat of turf. There he took a fealed paper out of his
his pocket, and gave it me. Having em¬ braced me again and again, and bedewed my face with tears, he left me abruptly. I looked trembling at the direction of that myftcrious packet. It was directed to me, double-fealed, and tied with a firing. The knots being fo tight that it was impoffible to untwift them, I wanted to take my fciffars out of my pocket, but could not find them. Having exhaufted my patience by repeated fruitlefs attempts to open the letter without tearing it, I went to the caftle to open it. On the way I met one of my fervants, Avho came to tell me that feveral neighbouring noblemen were at the caftle, and wanted to pay a vifit to the Count; but the latter could be found no vvhere, and I was obliged to re¬ ceive them. We converfed, dined, and fat down to play, whereby I was conftantly prevented from reading my letter. The company began, at length, to dance; however, I was drawn into a long conver¬ fation, and obliged to flay my impatient C( defire
defire of knowing the contents of the myf¬ tcrious paper fome time longer. They went, at length, and I haftened impatiently to my clofet to gratify my curiofity. I put my hand into my pocket to take the letter out; but how was I terrified when I could find it no where! I fearched the whole houfe and the garden ; but all the pains I took to find it were fruitlefs ; and I went to reft, entirely occupied vvith ideas which painfully combined the whole train of thefe incidents, and led me to connect a gloomy futurity with paft fufferings. However, the vexation of Seeing the pro¬ fpect oS Suture peace again overclouded, the painSul notion oS being once more re¬ duced into the deteftable bondage of fpi¬ rits that had already repeatedly abuSed me in the moft cruel manner, the adventures of the Count, their probable connection with the incidents of my own life, the fi- milarity of the place and the perfons, Amanueľs words ; every, every thing com¬ bined to draw a horrid picture before my imagination,
imagination, which difpelled even the idea of fleep. Being entirely exhaufted, and almoft ftupefied by anxious bodings, I could remain no longer in my bed, and went to the window. The night was beau* tiful, and a profound, inanimate filence reigned all around ; all the pulfes of na¬ ture feemed to flop. The profpect from my window opened to the feat where I had received the Counťs letter. I looked at it, and faw fome perfon fitting on that fpot» The moon fhone bright and clear ; I could not deceive myfelf. The perfon was wrapt in a white cloak, and appeared too fmall for the Count, and much too tall for the gardener. It ftruck me that this incident, perhaps, would afford me an opportunity of clearing up the unaccountable lofs of the letter, and my friend*s fudden and myf¬ tcrious departure. I flipped my great coat on, opened the garden door foftly, took a fliort way round through the bofcage vvhich extended to the turf feat, and went boldly onward. At С 6 a fmall
a finali diftance from that Spot I recollected that I was quite unarmed, which was no fmall check upon my courage, particularly when I was ftruck Avith the idea that every thing bore So much reSemblance to the Count's adventure. The moon ihone with the fame brightnefs upon a fimilar ominous fcene fix months ago; the young leaves floated in a Similar manner in the dufky night air, and appeared to tremble with fecret horror; a SoSt, aromatic guft oSair ruihed againft me, and thrilled me with ftrange, undeScribable SenSations : every object around me Seemed to be animated with a SénSe of anxious expectation, and the fhades refembled fporting fairies, that appeared to reft on the flowery turf to await the event. Not only my courage was entirely gone, but I alfo began to tremble. I intended feveral times to re¬ turn to the cattle; but, at length, took the firm reSolution to await the event, and to obServe the white figure Srom a diftance. When
When I was but a few fteps diftant from the turf feat, I was ftruck vvith aftoniih¬ ment on feeing three white figures, inftead of one. The company increafed, from time to rime, in number, and 1 had alrea¬ dy counted eight perfons, when the Count joined them in his ufual drefs. My hair began to briftle up; Iwas feized with dreadful apprehenfions: my eyes were anxioufly directed at the myftic company, to fee what would be the confequence of that extraordinary nocturnal meeting. Not the leaft found interrupted the awful filence that reigned all around. One of the com¬ pany unfheathed the Count's fword, and made him take hold of the hilt, without uttering a word. I then clearly faw a tall man touch my friend with a long white finger, upon which he dropt fenfelefs on the ground. I ejaculated a loud feream ; the compa¬ ny difappeared, and I was left alone. Was it, perhaps, a deluding dream? The whole creation around me appeared to be fo
fo entirely inanimate that nothing could interrupt my ftupefačtion. Not a breath of air was ftirring; not a leaf trembled; even the moon was not obfcured by a fin¬ gle cloud. A diftant noife vibrated in my ears; I approached the fpot where the Count ftill was proftrated. He was not ftained with blood, but only cold and ftifF. Oh! how unfpeakably dear was he then to me ! I lifted him up, took him in my arms, and fpared no pains to recall him to life. All the breath that animated me was concentrated on my lips, to impart itfelf to him by numberiefs kifles. His face was dreadfully convulfed. Thofe beautifulj fweet features, which ufually were the feat of juvenile Suavity and friend¬ ly kindnefs, were contorted into horrid furrows, and numbed with an icy torpi- tude; terror had depreffed his lips, anda convulfive trepidation moved, now and then, his eyelids and forehead. His right hand had grafped the hilt of his fword fo firmly
firmly that it was impoffible to take it from him. He "began, at length, to move again, opened his gloomy eyes in a ghaftly man¬ ner, flaring at me as if he did not know mc, and then clofed them again with a loud feream. He feemed to collect him¬ felf with great difficulty; but where fliall I find words to defcribe his fudden tranfi¬ tion to the moft furious paflions, and the frightful change which they produced in his face? His corpfe-like palenefs red¬ dened rapidly; his lips began to quiver; his brows were contraded ; and a pair of furious, rolling eyes flafhed through the red glow of his countenance. I had re¬ covered my courage, and prefled him ten-* derly to my bofom, feizing with my left the hand in which he held his fword, and ftraining him clofer to my heart with the right. He attempted to tear himfelf from me, but his ftrength failed him, and he relapfed into my arms. His frowning brow now began to brighten up, difplay-» ing
ing fpeaking marks of tender melancholy; the rolling fire of his eyes was drowned in tears, and he groaned aloud. "Deareft, beft Count!" I began, "col¬ lect yourfelf!" He ftarted back, and tore himfelf from my embraces. 4t For God's fake, Carlos, be gone; leave me inftantly !—Be on your guard ! Don't you fee that I am ftained with blood?" " What dreadful phantoms do you be¬ hold, Count! Pray, collect yourfelf: am I not your friend ? is not your Carlos vvith you ?" His head dropt down upon his breaft ; his left hand made a convulfive motion, as if he wanted to drive a fly from his brow: " Rather fay, Carlos was my friend; for now I hate him mortally." So faying, he ftarted up, but foon dropt down again. " Go, dear Marquis!" he refumed: " do you hear? Make hafte to be gone. You are not fafe here. Beware oS my hand, particularly of my right. Call your fer¬ vants
vants together ; defend yonrfclf!" Thefe laft words he pronounced vvith a lingular violence. " Yes, dear Count, I will call your fer¬ vants; but not for my fake: it is you that wants afliftance." 1 vvaà going to rife, but he pulled medovvnagain. " Hearken, Marquis! I am going to intruft you vvith a horrid fecret! Alas! vvith a fecret that makes me frantic." " Whither could you rcpofc it more fafely than in this bofom, which beats ent i rely for you ? Collect your¬ felf, my dear fiiend, and every thing will be cleared up." « But will you think it poffible? Don't be angry vvith mc, dear Carlos, Alas! I cannot help it: I am urged by ftern ne¬ ceffity." With thefe words, his hair b ri ft led, a dreadful rage convulfed his fea¬ tures, and he grafped my arm vehemently. 4i Hearken! hearken to what I am going to tell you !" So faying, he drew nearer, and roared into mv ear, " I am to affatfi- nate you!"—"Count!"— 4l Yes, by the omnipotent
omnipotent God !" With thefe words he ruihed upon me like a madman; but I made a fudden turn, and the fword went into the back of the turf feat. We wref- tled, and the Count dropt down, unhand¬ ing the fword, and prefling me to his heart. "Alas! Carlos, will you believe me?— You that are my only friend ! Do you fee, I am quite delirious. A fpectre haunts mc every where. ЛУЬу will you not die vvith me?" So faying, he directed his large blue eyes mournfully at me. I was fo much benumbed with horror that I loft the power of utterance. * £ Why dont you anfwer me? Come, let me pierce your breaft: one ftroke will unite us for ever. Have pity опте, dear Carlos!" I in¬ clined my face towards him, preifing it to his forehead. " You never have been cruel to me: it will be the laft pleafure I fliall have on earth. You have defired mc to collect myfelf; do you only collect your¬ felf. By the eternal God! (ftarting up) we both muft die this inftant," He
He fearched for his fword, vvhich I had concealed behind the turf fear. " So! Can you ufe me thus, Marquis? ,Me> to whom you fo frequently have vowed eter¬ nal friendihip? Why have you taken my fword away ? Alas ! you have taken every thing from mc! Return it me, dear Car¬ los!" " Count* you ought to thank me for what I have done; your fenfes are be- Avildered; you would have repented it too late." " My fenfes difordercd, do you fay ? Gcd forgive you that lie. No ! I am very fenfible of what I am doing, where I am, and what I am about. A dreadful myftery tears us afunder. But are you not Carles? " Yes, your Carlos; your beft and molt faithful friend." " Well, do you fee novv that I am not mad ?—You are my friend ; you have Solemnly promifed, a thoufand times, to die with me ; and I know you would die with me now, if it could make me eafier. Would you not?" <c Willingly, dear Count, if it would make you eafier," « Well! then liften to me, Marquis*
Marquis. I have been compelled to fwear a dreadful oath; I have been fliut up in a dungeon tvvo days ; I have been forced to fwear—Alas! I am not delirious:"—and, after I had fworn, a white ghoft, whom I had already once feen, came, and"—Fle had, meantime, perceived his fword be¬ hind the turf feat, taken it up, and now aimed a ftroke at me : however, a Superior Being ruflied between us, and the Count drop: to the ground. CHAPTER IV. WHEN I came to my recollection, I found myfelf alone. It was broad day; the fun was rifen, and glared me in the face. All the trees around me were enlivened by the feathered fongfters, vvho chirped their matins. The events of the antecedent night hovered only like fhades before my fancy, diverted of their horrors. My exhaufted fenfations recovered their ufual energy, concentrating into a raptu¬ rous ftream of ferene ideas, and I fcarcely miffed
miffed my friend. I lore myfelf, flow and reluctant, out of the arms ofa volup¬ tuous languor; and my fenfes were, with difficulty, roufed from that fweet laffitude. All the inmates of the caftle w T ere ftill afleep when I returned; I went directly to the Counťs apartment; but it was as empty as before. I awakened his fervants ; no one had feen him. I paffed the day in the greateft anxiety; he did not come. Several weeks elapfed, and he had not yet re-appeared. The door of my apart¬ ment opened at length, after the lapfe of two months, and he entered with a cheer¬ ful countenance. The rofes of youthful hilarity throned again on his dimpled cheeks; his eyes had recovered their ufual luftre; a mild gaiety fported upon his beautiful lips : he looked cheerfully at me, and fmiled. " Have I furprifed you, dear G******? Well! it is a long time fince Fhave feen you P' He then embraced me with his wonted cordiality, took a chair, and brcakfafted with uncommon tranquillity.
tranquillity. I beheld ail this in a flate of petrifaction, and went into the garden to give way to my ideas. The Count joined mein a few minutes; we rambled all over the garden, fpeaking only on indifferent fubjects. He informed me of fomc im¬ provements he intended to make, and of the fum he meant to apply for that pur¬ pofe. He feemed not to know the feat of turf where that dreadful fcene was acted; not a fingle veilige of a returning idea of that ftiocking incident was to be per¬ ceived. The fummer paffed amid our ufual oc¬ cupations and amufements: my friend was as cheerful as ever; and I joined him with pleafure in his jocundity. We roved merrily from one of our neighbours to the other, frequently had vifitors; hunted, danced, played ·, and arranged our occu¬ pations and diverfions fo vvell, that the approaching winter did not threaten to make the leaft change in our plan. When autumn began todie the leaves with a paler hue.,
hue, the friendly fire fide cemented our mutual intimacy more ftrongly every day. We Spent again our evenings with conver¬ sation; a congenial propenfity Seemed to recai either of us from the bufile of com¬ pany to the cheerful fire fide. Wc were equally animated with a defire to hear the tale of each others adventures; ihewed the fame attention to, and the fame intereft in, our mutual narrations, and were equally ready to gratify our reciprocal curiofity, Thefe hours feemed to be the leafl impor¬ tant of my life; however, they were the moil happy, and I enjoyed them with un- aliayed tranquillity. The autumnal rufi¬ ling in the trees, the rattling of the win¬ dows, and the cracking - of the doors, ftruck us vvith fecret awe, and appeared to bring us into a cloSer contact. We returned once, on a Serene, Srofty autumnal day, from a Satiguing, but plcafiint, hunting party. Our Supper was Soon finifhed, and we reSortcd in excellent Spirits to the inviting fire fide. 4t Pray, Marquis,'*
Marquis," the Count faid, when we were feated, " don't you think it very ftrange that I am ftill ignorant who you are? You have given me only partial accounts of yourfelf; could you not intruft me with the particulars of your life?" " I will do it with pleafure, deareft Count; but then we fhall want more wood ; for I have a long tale to relate. "I will trouble you only for a part of your adventures to night; but I wifh to hear the beginning. Will you do me that kindnefs?' 1 He ordered the fervant to bring more wood, and I began : " You know, dear S******, that I am born of an old Spaniih family, that traces its anceftors back to the firft Chriftians, and has been graced by heroes in the ear- lieft times of the Monarchy. My father was a nobleman of the firft rank, and my mother was born of an ancient and wealthy family. Alcantara is the place of my nativity.' 1 ci Alcantara!"
« Alcantara!" the Count exclaimed, feized with aftonifhment: " Alcantara I But go on!" He was for fome time loft in profound reflection, from which he reco¬ vered only by degrees, and fo far as to attend to my tale. «« The amiable qualities of my mother, in particular, had a lingular influence on my external improvement, as well as on the mode I adopted to acquire ufeful knowledge, on my education, and ..on the combination of all my future hopes with the prefent time. I was early told that her beauty, which was a particular attri¬ bute of the whole family, vvas the ufual inheritance of all its members. Full cheeks, expreffive lips, fparkling eyes, and a pair of regular eye-brows, were really my firft patrimony. The viva¬ city of my actions, the firft blandish¬ ment of my fpeech, the liability of my difpofition, and a little pertinacy, which I knew very well how to apply, affiftcd Vol. I. D mc
me to gain attention, indulgence, and favour. " My educators, therefore, endeavoured to prolong to me the enjoyment of thofe happy times. This was, however, the very way of making me lofe it the fooner. The folitude which I was fuffered to enjoy, ferved to afford a wreftling place to the extravagancies of my juvenile feelings; it ferved to imprint my obfervations more ftrongly on my mind, to form more vo¬ luptuous dreams of them; and my whole fpirit feemed gradually to diflblve itfelf into that uncorporeal mift which bedews with fweet tears all fubfequent feelings. Alas! I did not then imagine what fuffer¬ ings thofe delicious hours were preparing for me,. and how much the marrow of my juvenile ftrength was confumed by the moments in which my foul floated on cheerful images of the prefent time into the moil diftant futurity. " When I, as a young man, was in¬ troduced to fociety, I was animated with a fenfibility
fenfibility and warmth vvhich never Saih to make a particular impreflion on the fe¬ male Sex. í was careffed by the ladies ; and they had an hundred defects to correct, and an hundred amiable qualities to un¬ fold; and thus I was feduced under the pretext of being polilhed. 44 1 was foon rendered receptive of the careffes of the other fex; but fuffering mySelf to be guided merely by humour and fafhion, I generally paid homage only at the fhrine of her who was moit ad¬ mired. I improved by degrees in aii the arts of gallantry, and very foon had rea¬ fon to complain more of being conftantly teazed by unfought conquefts, than of the cruelty of the objects of my adoration. However, the period arrived when I was punifhed for my amorous frolicks. " Elmira, Countefs of S******, had fpent the firft fifteen years of her life at the caftle of a relation, which was too re¬ mote, or too much concealed, to attract the gallantry or the notice of any man. She D 2 novv
now came to Alcantara, adorned not only with all the charms of novelty, but alfo with uncommon natural endowments, which Soon raiSed her above the Splendor p and even the jealouSy, of her competitors. Her fuperior beauty, her unaffected wit and jocularity, that charmed at firft fight, af- iifted her to conceal, beneath an ever- fmiling form, a glowing heart, a heart that demanded eternal love. Nature feemed to have been in her beft humour Avhen forming her, for every expreffion of her fentiments, and all her motions bore the ftamp of the fweeteft hilarity, of an indefatigable gaiety, and of innocent blandi fhment. She admitted my addref¬ fes with that jocund, pleafing opennefs that redoubles every ftep, but yet keeps one at a refpectful diftance. " One evening I Surprised her with her guttar in her hand. She was fitting on a Sofa, and the inftrument lay on her lap: her head refted on one hand, and the other held the guitar and a pocket-handkerchief. Having
Having entered the apartment unper¬ ceived by her, her back being turned to¬ wards, the door, I heard her heave deep fighs, and faw fome pearly tears drop up¬ on the mufick book that lay before her. I ftepped nearer, but Аде did not hear me; Tenelt down before her, feizing her hand, and kiffing it; but Elmira feemed to be petrified. She ftarted up, at laft, and feeing me by her fide, offered to run into her clofet: however, I retained her on her feat, yet without fpeaking a word." " Alas! Carlos!" ftie exclaimed, at length, " what have you fecn? But if vou had heard the fweet affecting air I Sung, it would have melted vou alSo to tears: if you wiih to hear it, I will play it to you." 44 She then Searched in her mufick book; but I Saw that the affecting air could be Sound no where. She endea¬ voured to regain her ufual cheerfulnefs, but her efforts were fruitlefs, D j " I now
" I novv took her once more by the hand, and faid ; " Deareft Countefs, one cannof always find what one wifhes to meet with; lamin the fame predicament w ith you. I was melancholy and fad, and expected to find you ferene and open, in¬ ftead of vvhich you are in tears and re¬ ferved." " Referved, Carlos! I never was guilty of refervednefs." " Then this is the firft time you are, Elmira: I am young in years, but I have ceafed long fincc to be a ftripling İn love; and if ado¬ ration be not fufficient to deferve your confidence, you vvill at leafl unbofom yourfelf to your friend! You are filent! )ou weep! Why vvill you not fpeak to me? am I not enrirely devoted to you? Yes, my fweet friend, every fentiment of mine is your property; all my thoughts and feelings are dedicated to you!" "Do you then imagine, Carlos," ihe began at length, rather offended, " that I have fecrets to difclofe to you ! I am, real¬ ly, not in the leaft prepared for it." « Flmira.
" Elmira, you miSunderftand me."— * l To be plain, Carlos, I miift tell you that I am in a humour vvhich does not pro- miSe to meet your approbation." 4< Dear¬ eft CounteSs, I did not mean to offend you." tf I do not doubt it; you only wanted fkill to fliape your curiofity pro¬ perly. ° u Indeed, Madonna, I am Senfible that I have been too i nq u i fit i ve. Forgive me, deareft Countefs, and let us fpeak of fome¬ thing clfe. Who made this guitar?" She ftared ac me, and began to weep violently: a long, long figh Swelled her beautiful bofom. " I am troublefome to you, dear Coun¬ tefs : I conjure you once more to excufe my intrufion. Good day to you, Elmira," «Oh! ftay, Carlos." « Your tears flow more violently fince I am vvith you.' 1 '* Don't let me be an object of your anger, if you don't think me deferving of your compaflion," D 4 « Having
" Having pronounced thefe words, fhe left me abruptly. I was extremely angry with her: however, my anger was nothing but the effect of love. That fcene af¬ fected mc fo much, that I was obliged to keep my room two days; on the third (•veiling I received the following note: u We have exchanged our parts, Carlos. I am on the point of becoming the object of your pity. You love all women ; alas 1 and I only one man. To-morrow morn¬ ing I fliall be at the monaflery of the Ca¬ puchins at St. Jago, and—confefs." ** St. Jago is twelve leagues diftant from Alcantara. It was neceffary that I fliould fet off that very evening; and, in fpite of the tcmpefluous night, and the remon- ftrances of my fervant, I got upon my horfe, and rode furioufly through the city- gate. Alfonfo's prediction was realized; the rain, which, intermixed vvith thunder and lightening, poured down in torrents, Avetted me to the ikin; the hurricane threw us off from our horfes, and we could
could not diftinguifh the road ; our poor beafts, who took not the leaft fhare in the heat of their riders, fank with every ftep deeper into the mire; and we knew, at length, neither the fituation ofthemomf- tery, nor that of the town, arriving at the ikirts of a foreft, with the greateft danger of our life, and amid the continual fear of being drowned or finking into the mire. Here a new Scene of horror awaited us. The dangers of my journey had ftill left me fo much good humour that I began to fing, to beguile the tedioufnefs of our road. It was a well known popular Song, and Alfonfo joined me heartily. But con¬ ceive our aftoniihment when the whole foreft refounded at once with numberiefs voices, who fang the fame fong. I fancied, at firft, that it was the effect of an echo, but was chilled with terror when the invifibîe Songfters commenced the Se¬ cond ftanza ere we had finiftied the firft. " What is that, AlSonSo!" I exclaimed. «Alas! my Lord/* returned the poor D 5 fellow
fellow trembling, " I really think they are devils who are going to break our necks." " I now perceived that w ? e were on a beaten path. Fear had feized my SenSes, and I gored my horSe f о violently vvith my Spurs, that he fet off in full fpeed ¿ while my poor fervant, who .was entangled in the underwood, and roared as if Old Nick and his infernal hofts already had feized him, was incapable of following, I was, in a few moments, fo far diftant from him, that I could hear his voice no more; and ftruggling to arreft my horfe, he left the road, and got into a clofe thicket. The fky had cleared up in the meantime; however, m'y fituation was not the better for it. I called my fervant repeatedly by his name, but no anfwer was returned. I alighted, took the horfe by the bridle, and went in fearch of an open fpot, where I hoped to difcover a road, and, if not, propofed to fpend the q¿ght. I perceived, now and then, Some lights
lights at a diftance, which, however, in¬ ftantly difappeared, when I called out to¬ wards the direction where I faw them. One light only remained unalterably in its place; and expecting to find people on that fpot, I proceeded towards , it half comforted, tf< The nearer I came the fmaller it ap¬ peared : and after I had gót, with great diffi¬ culty, through marfhes and bogs, within a iew hundred paces diftance from the place where it appeared to be, it concentrated itfelf, as it were, into a red hot point. " I difcovered, at length, a little hut* The diminutive window in which the light that had guidai my fteps was placed, was; almoft totally emboft in a thick bufh, and entirely covered with leaves; folitary rays only ftole through the leafy darknefs, and produced an enchanting effect. The iky was entirely cleared up, the tempeft had fpent its boifterous fury, and a gentler breeze of air only íhook the pearly drops &om the leaves, which tAvinkled like little û 6 åars
ilars through the awful duik. On ftep¬ ping nearer to the hut, the found of diffe¬ rent voices, which I had heard at Some diftance, hufhed fuddenly. I knocked at the door, but no anfwer was returned. Pufliing violently with my foot againft the wooden wall, fome perfon exclaimed with¬ in, " Make hafte, María, and open the door!" The door was opened by a little girl; and I beheld a blazing fire in the middle of the chamber: a female, who had her back turned towards me, was bu¬ fi ed in putting fome coals under a fauce- pan ; and a little well-made boy was üu ting on her left fide. As foon as he Saw me, he leaned againft lier boSom, and ex¬ claimed, " Mother! Mother! only look!" " James, you are very late!" the wo¬ man exclaimed, without discontinuing her occupation, or turning round. " Have you brought Sather with you? Look only, you wicked rogue, I have been obliged to burn, on your account, all the wood which you have gathered with So much trouble : H however,
however, I warrant you, James, you will relifh your Soup/* So faying, fhe took the cover from the Saucepan, looking into it with apparent delight. u Good woman !" I at length began, «* it has dreadfully lightened and ftormed; and the Spirit of the Wood has paffed by." " Poor fellow ! I dare fay you are wet to the ikin. Come to the fire, you wicked rogue!" So faying, ihe turned round, and feeing me with the horfe, who had followed me into the room, the cover, which ihe had in her hand, dropped down ; the iaucepan was overturned, and the foup ftreamed into the fire. She fcream¬ ed, and endeavoured to Save it; but the fright which the fight of a ftranger had produced, threw her into Such a flutter, that fhe extinguifhed the fire by her at¬ tempts of Saving the Supper of poor James ; and only the little lamp in the windoAv fpread a faint glimmer through the duik of the hut, 'f James
u James will make a fine piece of w r ork, (ihe now reSumedi laughing,) when he finds his delicious foup between the coals." She then got up, and came to¬ wards me. " I beg your pardon, good Avoman, Sor having cauSed that accident. The tem¬ peft—I have loft my way." 44 Walk in, Sir, (fhe Said, with much good nature;) but the horSe muft ftay out of doors." I went filently back, tied the horfe to a tree, and then re-entered her humble abode. u Well, Sir! I dare fay you are pretty wet, and hungry into the bargain. I would light the fire again with all my heart, but I have got no dry wood." í had not feen her face as yet: however, her amiable unconcern charmed me. <c I have cauSed your Soup to be overturned-, (faid I,) and ihall puniih myfelf for it, by going in fearch of dry wood.** " Pray do, (ihe replied ;) meantime I will rekin¬ dle the fire.^ I went out to fetch wood ¿ but
but not being able to find one dry piece near the hut, I was obliged to go farther into the foreft. Meantime I heard røy horfe neigh, which he was ufed to do when he kicked at the approach of a ftranger. A loud laugh of feveral perfons enfued, which made me conclude that James was returned, and, with his wife, was diverted by the kicking of my horfe«. f< I was, at length, fo fortunate as to collect a fmall bundle of dry wood. I returned with hafty ftrides to the hut, and entered the door; but found the merry fcene entirely changed. Neither fauce- pan nor fire was to be feen j and James, a tail and handfome man, was fitting on the floor, and had taken his wife upon his lap» The lamp, with which fhe probably had intended to light the fire, ftood by her fide, and reflected its light upon her beau¬ tiful face. She clung with the greateft tendernefs round her hufband's neck, and her angelic looks were directed at his eyes* James feemed to be enraptured with his. happinefsa
happinefs, and quite abforpt in his felicity. He lifted his eyes up to his heavenly wife, whofe cheeks refted upon his; ihe im¬ printed fervent kiffes on his majeftic brow, and feemed to intend to bury him in her bofom. A look of rapturous enthufiafin glowed on either face, the little boy hung around the neck of the mother, and the moft beautiful girl I ever faw careffed her parents by turns. What ajknt, and yet, what a fpeaking Scene ! low fighs only were exchanged; and every word was kiffed away from the opening lip ere ir could form an articulated found. I never have feen fuch a feaft of tenderneSs and love ; never have I beheld So much genuine matrimonial blifs.** "Ohi God!" James at length began: however, he was interrupted by the boy, who, on feeing me, exclaimed, w The ftranger I м James now raiSed his beautiful burden from the floor, came towards me, and íhook me by the hand : " Welcome, dear Sir! welcome to my humble habita- tion,' 3 ,
tion," faid he. " You will find very lit¬ tle convenience here; however, it will make us happy to entertain you to the beft of our abilities." His charming wife, mean time, was occupied with the fire A and novv ftepped towards me to bid me welcome, fhaking me by the hand vvith hers, the downy foftnefs of which toid me .that flie was not born to live in that forry fituation. The ferenityof her looks gave me, however, juft reafon to conclude that flie was happy in her lowly ftate. The children too approached me, and began to play with the plume of my hat. 44 My excufes fcarcely were attended to, and a bench in the back ground of their poor cottage received us. I forgot Elmira and my journey in the fociety of my ami¬ able hofts and their little cherubs. An¬ other foup was foon got ready, and the Same fire ferved to warm us and to prepare our repaft: Some fruits, bread, and honey, compleated our meal, and wc were Soon engaged
engaged in ferious conversation. James and his lovely wife difplayed a polifh which was far fuperior to their fituation; and yet their wants appeared to be fo few, their happinefs fo complete, and their vir¬ tue fo accompliflied, that I was frequently put to the blufh wdien I compared myfelf with that amiable couple. 44 1 at length took hold of the hand of my hoftefs: " Excufe my rudenefs, (I began,} deareft madam : why do you live in this hut; why did you leave a fituation where you would have been honoured, and a world that Avould adore you?" "Adore!" flic replied fmiling; f< I af¬ fure you, Sennor, that very adoration has driven me into this foreft. Our hiftory is very long, (James interrupted her,) *' and, alas ! very mournful. This forry cottage was our laft afyium: we have fa¬ crificed a part of our life; however, we have fa ved the refl for our happinefs." - chapter
CHAPTER V. HERE I Avas interrupted in the relation of my adventures in a moft fingular manner. The fire in the chimney began to die away by degrees, and, at length, was entirely extinguifhed : we were in- volved in a cloud of fmoke, and the lights threatened to go out. * The chimney muft be on fire!' the Count exclaimed, fright¬ ened. He rang for the fervant* to look into the chimney ; but no fire, not even a Single Spark, was discovered. We Spent almoft the whole night with SruitleSs exa¬ minations all over the houfe. The Count was tired, and the room continued to be filled with Smoke, notwithftanding our ex¬ ertions to purify it. We were obliged to leave it in that unaccountable ftate, and went to reft. W T e were prevented, as it feemed, de- fignedly, for Several Subsequent nights, to rcfume our dear converfations. One time wc had vifitors, who pieafed to ftay a whole week s
week; at other times we were conftantly interrupted by the Avorkmen, Avhom the Count had fent for in the middle of winter to make fome alteration in the caftle ; or we had accounts to fettle and to rcvife; and finally, he was obliged to go to a neigh¬ bouring town, on account of a law fuit, and to ftay there a confiderable time. When ftepping into the carriage, he took me by the hand, and whifpered into my car; * Pray, think fometimes of the chim¬ ney?' Being, however, entirely occupied with the management of his economical concerns, I could fpare very few hours at night for writing down my adventures, agreeable to the Counťs defire, (for thus I explained his laft words,) and I pro¬ ceeded but flowly. He had, indeed, meant fomething eife by them ; but returning, after an abfence of many weeks, he had met with an opportunity of making feve¬ ral difcoverics which were combined with my hiftory, and determined him to take that heroic refolution which had fo great a fluire
a fhare in the Surprising turn oS our Sub¬ sequent Sate. I fliall, therefore, only renew in thefe fheets, as far as the impreiiions which I then received, and at that time naturally were much ftronger, ihall enable me, the continuation of my hiftory, which already at that period bears ftrong marks of thofe fecret attempts which were intended to prepare me gradually Sor a horrid purpofe. Whe ι I wrote it down for the Count, I had, indeed, only an obfcure idea of the vile machinations which were directed at me, the myftic veil in which they were in¬ volved being difpelled firft at a more dif¬ tant period : however, I was frequently feized, during that occupation, with fecret ominous preSenfions, which I Scarcely could drive back by the idea that every Seru ous reflection upon them Avould only render my fteps more uncertain and dangerous. CHAPTER
CHAPTER VI. *' WT^^ 1 y° u ^ ve ше ' eave t0 com - » V municate a part of our hiftory to this gentleman?" faid James to his wife. She affented, by a filent inclination of her head ; then amufed hcrfeif vvith her children, went frequently out of the cottage, and appeared in general, to take fome intereft in her hufband's tale only in the fequel. i« We are born of noble and well known families," James refumed, " but you muft give me leave to conceal our names. My juvenile years paffed without any remark¬ able occurrence. Being the youngeft fon of my father, my little fortune was chiefly confined to the fmall legacy of an old fe¬ male relation, which being fpent very faff, my family foon got tired of me, and in¬ tended to devote me to a monaftical life. This, however, did not agree with my in¬ clinations. Having been ufed to live in a conftant buftie, and to lay much ftrefs on my noble birth, I preferred a military career to all other occupations, as it promifed to
gratify my propenfity to fplendor, and to afford me, one time, the beft and fureft opportunity of reaping fome benefit from my exalted parentage. Fortune affiftcd me iboner than I could have expected. A fermentation in New Spain obliged our monarch to fend fome troops to America, and a regiment that was garrifoned at Madrid was ordered to embark for that purpofe. I obtained a company in that regiment by the recommendation ofa near relation, and we proceeded to Cadiz, where we vvere to go on board of a tranf¬ port, Flo we ver, the fhips of advice, which vvere to order the preparations for the arrival of the galleons at Carthagena, had been retarded in the harbour by the rogueries of the victuallers, as vvell as by contrary winds. We could, of courfe, not hope to fet fail before the end of, at leaft, two months; and that period became the moft remarkable of my whole life. " The town afforded me neither fuffi- cieni amufement nor occupation. It be¬ ing chiefly inhabited by merchants, and ___ ___ onl y
only a few grandees, I was entirely con¬ fined to the fociety of the officers of my regiment; and the military being then held very much in contempt, wc had not the leaft hope of being admitted into a good family. My Sole diverfion confined, therefore, in walking; and the harbour was almoft the only place which I frequent¬ ed. Afterwards I difcovered a more plea¬ fant walk on the fouth-eaft fide oS the town, in the vicinity of the fort St. Sebaf- ţian. There I was ufed to feat myfelf op¬ pofite to the pharos, looking mournfully at the immenfe ocean, as the only gulph that feparated me from the goal of my fond and ianguine hopes; dreamed of wealth and happinefs; and was but feldom difturbed in my reveries by the devout pilgrims who vifited the neighbouring chapel of St. Sebaftian, and more fre¬ quently that of the holy Virgin, which is defigned for ftrangers. Excufe my pro¬ lixity, Sennor j the Sequel of my narrative will convince you that thefe infignificant circumftances are intimately connected with confequences of importance. " It
" It happened foon after, that a fliip of St. Malo's attempted to export filver with- outpaying the ufual duty, and the cuftom- houfc officers thought proper to feize it. Two galleons vvere ordered to execute this refolution, and began to cannonade the veffel. The captain of the French ihip was, however, determined to defend him¬ felf, and refufed to ftrike; and it being impoffible to clear the harbour, on account of the contrary wind, he attacked one of the galleons, with an intention to board it, if poffible. He could, indeed, not carry his aim; but having rendered the tvvo gal¬ leons entirely unfit for farther ufe, he fet fire to the powder-room, and bkvv his veffel up. " About twelve perfons were fiivcd, and got on fhore upon fome empty cafks and pieces of timber. However, inftead of affifting thefe unfortunate people, thecuf- tom-houfe officers endeavoured to ftrip them entirely. Being not far diftant from the fpot vvhere this inhuman fcene was Vol. I. E atei,
acted, I haftened to give them afliftance, and interfered with a number of thofe rob¬ bers, who had feized upon a vvell-drefled young man. I carried him to an adjacent public houfe, and recommended him to the care of the hoftefs, but do not know what became of the reft. if When I went the next morning to fee him, I found he had left the houfe. Being, however, ufed to meet with ingratitude among men, I was not aitoniihed at it; paid his bill, which was not very moderate, refumed quietly my former occupations, and continued my morning walks. The number of ftrangers whom the war, which was then on the eve of breaking out, and the failing of the galleons, had affembled at Cadiz, peopled the environs round my favourite fpot fo much, that I could amufe myfelf for whole days by making my ob¬ fervations on thofe who paffed by, A man, Avho diftinguifhed himSelf by his form and elegance from the multitude that paffed me every day, foon attracted my particular ι notice.
THE HORRID MYSTERIES,
notice. He was wrapt in a large cloak, which covered the greateft part of his face, walked always very faft, finiflied his devo¬ tions in the fame hurry, and then haftened back again. However, he never omitted ro ileal a few féconds from the time he feemed to have dedicated to that pious oc¬ cupation, to flop at the door of the cha¬ pel, and fix his eyes attentively at an in¬ scription which vvas engraven on the wall ; he then inclined his head mufing, wrapped his cloak cloSer round himfelf, and went away with accelerated fteps. His frequent vifits to the chapel, his conftant attention to that infcription, and the little notice he took of the thronging crowd, arrefted, by degrees, the obfervation of all thofc thar vifited that place of devotion. A nume¬ rous multitude crowded, at length, from the town to that fpot, to ilare and gape ar the infcription; and the ftranger generally found fuch a crowd of people at the cha¬ pel door, that he fcarcely could get thro*. He always was received vvith fuch a tmi- E 2 a er fa í
verfal whifpering, and the words forcerer and necromancer refounded fo loudly, that I apprehended he would come no more. 44 He feemed, however, not to pay the leaft regard to the general notice which his ftrange behaviour excited, and when¬ ever he could get near the infcription, he ftopt, at leaft, for a few moments, to pe - rufe it. As often as the humming of the people grew *oo loud, he opened his cloak a little, ana his dark eyes examined the whole aflembly with fcrutinizing looks. An involuntary awe feemed then to feize every intruding gaper; no one attemptcel to utter a word, nor to look at him, while he was reviewing thus the curious multi¬ tude; and the fpectators feemed to recover from their awe only after he was gone fome time. " I generally ftood in the midft of the .multitude, and for fome time had endea¬ voured in vain to decvpher the infcription, us half decayed fhort-hand characters bidding
bidding defiance to my exertions, when the ftranger arrefted my attention more ftrongly. His gloomy and awful looks were fixed at me twice vvhile he reviewed the aflembly, and always flruck mc vvith a kind of chilly ftupor, from vvhich I re¬ covered only to wonder at my ftupefaction. I never have experienced a fimilar hor¬ rid awe. " We happened, at length, one evening, to meet quite alone at that fpot; and on feeing me ftanding at the door, againft wiiich Ì was carelefsly leaning, he viewed me vvith aftoniihment; and I directed my eyes involuntarily at the infcription. Having call his eyes all around, as if he wanted to convince himfelf that we could not be overheard, he drew nearer, and ac¬ coftcd me with uncommon politenefs. «Sennor, (faid he, in a foreign dialed,) your appearance befpeaks a man of honour and courage; may I rely on your difcre¬ tion?' * Undoubtedly, Sennor, you may.' c Will you not give me a denial (he con« F 3 tinued)
tinued) when I beg you to meet me here to night at twelve o'clock?' 4 If you will explain to mc------' A. 4 You fliall know everything (he inter- j о \ rupted mc) you at prefent wifli to be in¬ formed of: I only wiih to converfe with \ ou witliout being interrupted. The moon is bright, and, Sennor, 1 am an honeft man!'—He then opened hi·; cloak, and his large eyes told mc the fame. * You may rely upon me, (Î replied ;) I ihall not fail to meet you : I am a ftranger to cowardice ; and, in cafe of an attack, I ihould not fea r you ! ' He bo w ed , vv rapt h i n i fe 1 f in his cloak, and left me. " I was at the fpot precifely at twelve o'clock. The night was rather windy, and the moon alternately concealed her orb behind the fleeting clouds, and awfully illuminated the objects around. The ftorm began to fhake the windows of the chapel, the weather-cocks made a difmal noife, and the waves of the fea broke with ftrange zeecnts againft the wails, I walked up and down,
cloak. Curiofity was at firft my chief fenfation; and my imagination formed a number of probabilities to remove the painfuj incertitude which had tormented mc feveral weeks. But when the ftranger kept me waiting longer than I had reafon to expect, being not arrived at one o'clock, I began to be apprehenfive; every crack¬ ing of the half-decayed croffes on the graves frightened mo, and everv rufiling О О * jir of the leaves lifted my hair up. My pa¬ tience being, at length, exhaufted, I was on tlie point of going home, whm ho met me on the fteps of the chapel, cwjhriminr. * I beg your pardon for having kept you waiting fo long.' He then took me by the hand, and led me to the chapel door. * Our time is fliort, (he refumed,) and 1 have to tell you only a few words. Sonic years back I happened to get acquainted in Germany vvith a very fingular man, wlio, however, foon after fuddenly difappeared at the inn vvhere vve lodged in a moft un- E 4 accountable
accountable manner, and vvithout our be¬ ing able to divine the motive of his clan- deftine departure. He had left a Iettcr- cafc behind him, which was brought me, Amongft a number of letters and annota- r.ons, which partly vvere entirely unintel¬ ligible, and partly very unimportant, the uivfiic fenfe of vvhicii I have, however, lately been fo fortunate to unfold, I aifo found the key to an unknown alphabet, to which the characters of yon infcription' belong. It has probablv been miftaken for an old epitaph, and for that reafon fixed into the wall of this chapel: how¬ ever, according to the key I poflefs, it contains the follow ing words : '' át ranger, and thou who art initiated; the friende -· Arc near. A foreft afid a cavern in the vicinity of *** Alcantara. The hrft day of the month.'' " I ftarted up at this paffage of James's narrative: but he did not fuffer himfelf to be interrupted, continuing vvith a fmile, which he ftrove to conceal; « The
44 The ftranger, having given me this explanation, meafured me vvith piercing looks. c What do you think of it, Sen¬ nor?" he added. * I don't know what to fav, (I replied;) the infcription appears as obfcure to me as if it never had been explained. What can vve do ?' " He turned round with kindling anger, exclaiming, 'Flow! can you aik that quef¬ tion ? I have been ftrangely miftaken in your appearance. I advife you to leave me inftantly, if you don't choofe to feel the ceige of my fword.' 4 Upon my honour! (I replied,) I am not afraid of it : but don't put yourfelf into a paffion vvithout reafon. It is im¬ poffible yoti could be more defirous than myfelf to know the fecret meaning of that infcription, and that exclamation of mine was merely intended to know your fenti¬ ments, but nota fign of cool hefitation.' 44 This declaration feemed to have re¬ conciled him. « Very true! (he novv ex¬ claimed groaning,) what can wc do? We X-* s atv*
are now in the middle of the month, and, of courfe, ihall be obliged quietly to await the firft day of the next. But do you think you will then be able to accompany me ?* " 1 replied, that I hoped to get leave of abfence, if the galleons fliould not be rea¬ dy by that time, as I ferved in a regiment Avhich was going to embark for Mexico." * Good God ! (he exclaimed,) if I had gueffed that circumftance, I would not have mentioned a fyllable to you ; yet I hope you vvill not betray the fecret if you fliould be detained. I do, indeed, wifli you well, vvithout being able to account for it; and offer you my friendffiip. Do not refufe it; for it may, one time, be of Service to you.' 4 I accept your kind offer with gratitude.' * Don't attempt to get leave of abfence ; it might excite curiofity. I vvill depart vvithout you ; and I fwear you fliall know every thing on my return, if you are ftill here; if not, I ihall prefcrve the fecret for you/ «So
" So faying he embraced me, and de¬ fcended the fteps foftly, without giving me time to return an anfwer. I followed him foon after, having firft made an at¬ tempt of reading the infcription by the light of the moon. о CHAPTER VII. ťí jNa few days we received orders to X prepare for our departure; the gal¬ leons were ready, and vve embarked. Dur¬ ing our whole tedious paffage, I was oc¬ cupied with drawing refults from my ex¬ perience, which afiorded me fo much pleafure, that I was forry when we difem- barked on the coaft of America. The fermentation was foon quelled ; and after we had been a twelvemonth in New Spain, í obtained leave to fee my family in Europe. Four days were elapfed after my arrival at Cadiz, and I had not yet quitted my apartments, being too much fatigued from my voyage, when I received the fol¬ lowing anonymous note: E 6 * δ You
" You fee I am a man oS honour. I have been waiting Sor your return awttole year, and rejoice that you are arrived at length. I have to unfold ftrange myfte¬ ries to you. I fhall be vvith you at nine o'clock." Here James was interrupted by his chil¬ dren, who fliouted, 4i Father comes ! Fa¬ ther comes!" and could add no more, but, " this is the very man, Don Carlos!" I ftared at him with aftoniihment, and was juft going to exclaim, " How! you know me?" when the man whom the children had announced ftepped Into the cottage. His figure was tall, and difplayed, in fpite of his advanced age, a moil regular fliape: a fparkling, majeftic eye was, however, the only beauty of his face, vvhich he had been able to fave from the deluge of paf¬ fions. His features bore fpeaking marks that they had fucceffively been the feat of every paffion which, after having been nurfed up, feemed to have partaken of the general torpitude of his lineaments, which appeared
appeared to have been produced by fome horrid incident. The wrecks of former violent paffions could ftill be perceived on his countenance; and as one of them re¬ appeared, all the reft feemed to revive along with it : one recollection of former ideas impelled the other, and all the dif¬ ferent propenfities of an agitated mind flaihed alternately over his face. I had fufficient leifure to make thefe obferva¬ tions; for, after having darted a Scrutiniz¬ ing look at me, he placed himSelf oppo¬ fite me by the fire to warm his hands. Without uttering a word, he directed his melancholy looks by turns at the blazing flame, at the children, who were gambol¬ ing by his fide, at James, his wiSe,and at mc. He Seemed to miSs fomething in the cottage, or to be puzzled by Some unuSual object, and at length took a Seat by my fide. " You comeSrom Saragoffa?" Said he to me ; and James affirmed it Sor me. " The night is very boifterous, (he added.) You have been very fortunate to meet Avith this
this afylum. This cottage is the only one in the whole foreft; and you would have fpent the night very uncomfortably, if you had not found it." « The Spirit of the Wood has made a dreadful noife this night," faid the young woman, interrupt¬ ing him. " The Spirit of the Wood ?" he replied, fmiling: " Who knows what you have heard, Almería?" " I now couid reSrain my impatience no longer. Having been perturbed and in¬ terefted to the higheft degree by James's tale, I was extremely vexed at this unSea- fonable interruption. I thereSore drew cloSer towards him, and taking him by the hand, while he viewed me with looks of aftoniihment, began: " Sennor, don't be furprifed at my familiarity ; I know you ; James has given me an account of you* Give me leave to crave your friendihip." " You don't know the extent of your requeft, (he replied.) I alfo know you, Don Carlos: you are of the houfe of
q*#***# # i naV e feen you lately, and was highly pieafed with you. I will do any thing you may reafonably defire. Tell me, what do you wiih?" " Your friend ftopped at his return from America, where you interrupted the train of his narrative. You promifed to vifit him, in order to acquaint him with a fecret concerning that ftrange infcrip¬ tion." Here he ftarted up, exclaiming angrily, " What ! James has done this?'* So fay¬ ing, he ftood for fome féconds by the fire, flaring at the flame : he then turned round, and pulling a watch out of his pocket, faid, " Don Carlos, it is fix o'clock; I advife you to go to Elmira. She waits for you at the left fide of the little chapel. You may return to this place after fix weeks; but take care to come without company." While I was almoft petrified with aftonifhment, and could find no Avords to exprefs my furprife, he difap¬ peared fuddenly, « Good God!" I ex- claimed*
claimed, at length, " how wonderSul! Am I awake, or is it a dream ?" " Do as he has defired you!" James Said, rifing from his feat. " One word more,** " Not a fyllable more, dear Carlos: your horfe is ready. Make hafte to be gone ; but I hope you vvill return?" " Without fail, James."—I embraced hiin, and per¬ ceived a big tear in his eye. My horfe ftood at the door, he directed me to the road ; and when the fun peeped over the tops of the diftant mountains, I was in the open plain. Why did James weep? faid I to myfelf. And the beautiful, dear wo¬ man, too, wiped her eyes when the old mancarne. Was it pity, or recollection? And if it was pity, am I perhaps in dan¬ gerous hands? Yet it is impoffible; that purity and opennefs of their fouls, that innocent blifs from which they fcarcely could difengage themfelves to welcome me, that Sweet domeftic harmony oSSouls, сап- дог harbour nor conceal a vice. And why did
did they not rob me if they be robbers? Shall I return richer than I am now} " I had been hunting in that wood numberiefs times without ever feeing the cottage, or meeting with any thing fufpi¬ cious. Strange traditions were, indeed, rumoured about of a ruinous caftle in the centre of the foreft, whither my way never had led me as yet; but I could not learn that ever a particular event had happened in that direction, vvhich could have at¬ tracted the notice of the neighbourhood to that fpot. " But if it be no band of robbers, (I rcafoned again,) as all circum¬ ftances forbid me to think, what elfe could be the purport of that affociation?" My imagination ranged reftlcfs through the whole empire of poflibilities ; but my reafon did not attempt to declare decidedly for one of them. " While I was thus giving audience to the wild fancies of my heated imagina¬ tion, my horfe ftarted Suddenly, and I beheld a perSon ftretched out on the ground dofy
clofe by me. tc Don't hurt me, dear Spirit!" he exclaimed in a rueful accent. It was Alfonfo, who lay proftrated on his face, almoft motionlefs with cold and fear. He*trembled violently; and, on my approach, endeavoured to conceal himfelf behind a buih, contorting his feet anxioufly, left they fliould betray his afylum. " For Heaven's fake, Alfonfo, what is the matter with you, and vvhere have you left your horfe ?" I exclaimed, laughing. *" Jefus! Maria! is it you, my Lord! Heaven be p raifed a thoufand times, tliat you are alive. A curfe on that foreft! How did you get out of that infernal abode of Spirits?" So faying, he crept out of the bufh. " But where is your horfe}'* " In¬ deed, I do not know, my Lord. Not long after you left me, poor fellow, in the lurch, it took fright at a Will-o'-the- vviSp, threw me down, and ran away. I have been wandering to and fro in the forcft all the night long, without being able to
to find a path. Have the kindnefs to help mc up; for I have fprained my ancle." I aififted the poor fellow to get upon his legs, one of which really appeared to have been hurt, for he could not ftand upon it. I made him get upon my horfe, and walked by his fide. Soon after this inci¬ dent vve perceived an unknown hamlet. We quickened our paces, and it was broad day when we came up with it. We were about four leagues diftant from St. Jago. I fent for a furgeon, recommend¬ ing Alfonfo to his care, and arrived at ten o'clock at the cloifter. 44 I went mechanically to the chapel. Mafs was juft finiflied when I approached the door: a numerous multitude ftreamed out of it; but the crowd foon difperfed: and when I entered the chapel, all around me was deferted and filent. My fteps re¬ founded through the vaulted edifice, and a chilling ftream of air ftruck againft me within the expanded walls, I perceived a little chapel at my right hand, and a fe¬ male
male kneeling before an image of ? he holy virgin. It was Elmira. " She prayed audibly, but paufed every now and then. Her low fobs told me that flie was weeping; her face was covered with a veil, vvhich flie frequently removed to dry her tears. Heavens ! what a change did I behold on her face whenever fhe un¬ veiled it for awhile! all thofe enchanting features, vvhich ufed to be animated vvith a fmiling fpirit of cheerfulnefs, and fo eafiiy conquered every heart, appeared to be numbed by a conflict with a tender Se- male anxiety, which Seemed to be in ex¬ pectation of fomething. Her eyes had quitted the image of the holy virgin, Avhich was ftanding before her, and wan¬ dered with inquietude around the altar, where Some more perSons prayed, or walked about. I proftrated my Self on my knees at the door of the chapel ; for I would not have difturbed her on any ac¬ count. Every moment of which I fliould have deprived her, would have appeared to
to me a facrilege committed againft the altaron which my idol ftood. Her foul beheld me, at that moment, in a glory before her; and her devotion was raifed by the jeaioufy with which flie watched the looks of her guardian-angel. Even at her feet, or regenerated in her arms to a гг>] } í ftıould have miffed that part of a ,: '** 'vf^anced me with unfpeak- , , - ' - ''-■< ' I did then not yet love her νΛΐιη < t . . ·λ--ι a' -h h v 4 r«.-g!y faerificcs its own interdi' to th·- ::.iMp¿uefs of its object ! " She began, at length, to ftir, and rofe up, d i refting her fteps towards the door. I got behind it ; and when fhe was going to ftcp over the threihold, flie recollected to have forgot fomething, and went back to fetch her praver-book from her feat. Her opening, and looking with vifible anxiety in it, prevented her from taking notice of me. A note dropped, at length, out of the book, upon the floor, without her perceiving it· I followed her foftly, and
and having picked it up, exclaimed, El¬ mira, you have dropt a paper!" cc She turned round, and her knees be¬ gan to fliake : but when I ran to fupport her, flie recovered fuddenly from her ter¬ ror and aftoniihment, tearing the paper out of my hand, and concealing it in her bofom. She took no notice of my fur¬ prife, but viewed me with flaring looks, and afked, " Don Carlos ! have you read that note?" No, Elmira!" " I ihould not have wiihed you had. It was a letter from my aunt." She added, with more compofure, * c You are well, I hope, Don Carlos : the weather was dreadful to night; you look a little paler than ufual; you have had no accident?" <c (I examined her looks, to learn whe¬ ther fhe knew any thing of my nocturnal adventure. Her anxiety to evade my in¬ quiries made me SuSpect the note. You will See by the Sequel, dear Count, how Singular the fate of that paper was, and that it unfolded to me, though at a later period,
period, the whole connection of all my adventures. However, Elmira's tranquil¬ lity convinced me that nothing but ten¬ dernefs and anxiety for my peace had prompted her to afk that queftion.) "Trifles! dear Countefs !" I replied. "Trifles? your looks, and trembling ac¬ cent, tell me the contrary. But leave mc novv, Don Carlos, left vve fhould be ob¬ ferved. Go behind the garden of the cloifter: my woman ihall meet you in a quarter of an hour, to conduct you to my apartment." " So faying, flic difappeared in the ailles of the chapel. I went out of the back¬ door, and directed my fteps to the garden. Ere long, Elmira's woman joined me, to conduct me to her apartment. I followed her vvith a beating heart, and m a few moments knelt at Elmira's feet. " Charming!" flie exclaimed: " you are in a great hurry, Don Carlos." Her woman left us, and fhe refumed, " How imprudent! Will you never act with more circumfpection ?
circumfpection? Rife; I cannot bear to fee a man kneeling before me in a cloif¬ ter. '' " But why will you not fuffer it? why not allow your confeffor to receive the confeffionof your fins on his knees?" cc You dream, Don Carlos," flie replied fmiling: (t how can you talk of confcffors and fins? You don't fuppofe that I have any thing to confefs to you?" 44 What a mifimderftanding, Elmira! ves, I confefs that I imagined it. Then you wanted to fport vvith me! Why diel you give me that invitation; and what elfe can this niyfterious vifit mean?" <c My good Marquis, don't be fo warm. Can you not have a little patience? It is your duty to protect afflicted damfels; and can you not guefs what I am going to defire of you?" tc So? Will you be fo kind as to tell me how I c?n,be ferviceable to you?" With thefe words I rofe coolly, and feated myfelf carelefsly upon the fofa. " Good
<ç Good Heaven!" flie refumed, "what would I give if I could tame this head- ftrong man ! yet I fear I never fhall fuc¬ ceed. Well then, Don Carlos, liften to my fecret; but firft tell me whether your heart is ftill free?" " Whether my heart is free?" I re¬ peated, with great emotion: " can Elmi¬ ra aik that queftion? Have you never read in my looks that I am entirely devoted to you? Don't be cruel to me. Return me another treafure for that vvhich I have loft." u No! no! you mifconceivc me again. I do not defire you to love me ; I only wiih you would fympathize with me, and pity me a little. I ihould be fo happy if I could intereit you for me; for you are an open, noble young man; a man who is too much my friend to refufe me his af¬ fi flanee." 44 You may rely upon mc. But you fpeak in riddles; be more explicit, dear Countefs, more explicit!" Vot, I. F 4 < Weft
, " W r ell! let me then teli you the great fecret: I am in love, Don Carlos." So faying, flie caft down her eyes vvith a comical modeli y , and hid her face in her handkerchief, as if flic could not help blufhing. " And who is the happy ob¬ ject of your affections?" "A young man." I do not doubt it, Flmira/* I faid, with an involuntary laugh: "you are in¬ deed very unfortunate." " He is hand- Some." " That is itili more unfortunate," " Don't rally me, Marquis, for he does not return my love." " This is the wor ft ofall: but do not defpair, Elmira · I fliall ufe all my influence on him in your behalf. But you have not yet told mc his name. Who is he? I took hold of her hand, and imprinted a burning kifs upon n. I expected joyfully to hear my own name, and was already prepared to kifs the fweet reluctant confeffion of her love írom her lips; but how was I flruck vvith aftoniihment when ihe moved clofer to¬ wards mc, whifpering, with an anxious ferioufnefs,
ferioufnefs, " It is Don Antonio, your friend. Oh! Carlos, if you have any power over him, plead in my behalf; but fpare my honor." " I novv felt emotions in my brcaft which were entirely novel to me, and was overpowered by feelings vvhich I never had experienced before. I felt as if I were i. fuddenly roufed from a dream, and, on awaking, did behold myfelf enthralled in irrefiftibie bands. I loved Elmira be¬ fore flie communicated that unexpected fecret to me, but my love was only a tranquil tendernefs, which, in a conftant ftruggle with caprice and pcrtinacy, was nou ri flied only by vanity. Thus I hael been in love with all women. They al¬ ways had met me halfway, and mv heart had found too little réfiftance, as ever to have required all k^ feelings for givi no- vent to its paifion, I novv did meet not only with a ftronger and more refolute réfiftance, but alfo an indifference, and a contempt of rny addreffes, vvhich I never F г had
had experienced before. My heart, w hich alwavs had been half fliut againft all ten- J Ci der feelings, and never inflamed vvith a burning defirc by unfought conqueft, was unequal to that contempt, and violently agitated by the apprehenfion of being obliged to give up an expected and anti¬ cipated victory. " I dropt down upon my knees, over¬ come by the violence of my feelings, and exclaimed, agitated with an unknown pain, " By Heaven, Elmira, this is too much ! ' ' c< Having viewed me for fome moments vvith fcrutinizing looks, fhe refumed, "Dear Marquis, ftand my friend: I ef¬ teem and promife you to have as much affection for you as my fituation will allow. What more can you expect?" " Death! Elmira; have compaffion with me : I cannot live, and fee you in the arms of another perfon." Flere my feelings overpowered me, and I reclined my head fenfelefs on her lap, " Compofe
' ( Compofe yourfelf, dear Carlos: you have a noble heart. Should friendihip be of lefs value to you than love? I promife to be your fa ith full eft, your infeparablc friend. I fliall not conceal one fentiment of my heart from you; vve will teach the world how difintereftcdly and ftrongly two congenial hearts can be united." " No, I fcjrn your offer: I deSpiSe you: I don't want the miferable refufe which another perfon will let me have out of pity." Here I rofe. <* One word more, Elmira: was the note which you dropt to day from Antonio?" <£ No, Carlos; I fwcar it was not. But be a man. Is a prefent, which I offer voluntarily, of lefs value to you than an involuntary affection? I feel myfelf i rrefif- tibly 'lAtìfeìled to love Antonio; and to you 1 am allied by thofe fofc bonds which owe their exiilence to the moit tender regard. Come,-Don Carlos, and be my friend." " Yes, wy doom is fix'd. A life which is bereft of every rav- of hope is worfe than F 3 death.
death. Farewell, and live happy. I am not generous enough to perfuade another perfon to accept a heart, the pofteflion of which promifed me an eternity of blifs. Farewell, Elmira!" I killed her hand, Avithout being able to look at her. Her heart palpitated audibly; her hand trem¬ bled violently; I laid it foftly on her lap, and went to the doer. " How much have I miftaken you, Don Carlos! yet, if you are determined to leave me, ftay only a few moments longer." I lurned round. <c Krccl down, Don Carlos!" I lay proftrated at her feet ι ftie encircled my neck vvith her hand, and in¬ clined her crimfoning face to mc. Fier Cl eves floated in a liquid fire. " One word more, Don Carlos! Forgive me! Antonio is no other perfon but yourfejf." My Senfes fled on wings of rapture; I felt no¬ thing but a beating bofom convulfively preft againft my heart; two burning lips in clofe contact with mine", and my cruek* were inundated whh tears of unfpeakable bhfs. chut-V'
CHAPTER VIII. " Τ Ж THEN I recovered from that V V trance of happinefs vvhich the confeffion of Elmira had thrown me into, I found her large blue eyes vvere lovingly livetted to me; and I fancied to be tran¬ fported to an unknown world. " How delightfully do you, fweet enchant refs ! atone for the agonizing torments you have inflicted!" I exclaimed. " Let us be quit, Don Carlos: I have to forgive you as much as you have to forgive me." " I have nothing to forgive. Elmira could, perhaps, have offended me in a former period, but flie cannot offend mc novv. Don't view me vvith thofe looks of jeaioufy. Do I not novv firft begin to live? Ail is changed; my whoie nature is transformed." 4i May you never forget, Don Caric, what vou have faid in this happv moment. 1 have purchafed the poilcifion of yoar h 4· hear"
heart vvith pungent forrows, but, I hope, not at too great a price." 44 Oh ! ht mira, my whole exiftence de¬ pends on you. Every íenti ment of mine is ftamped with your image: you may, therefore, boldly claim all the feehngs oi my heart as your property. But excufe my apprehenfion ! Are you not at liberty to inform me of'the contents ofthat note, which you fo anxioufly have concealed from me?" 44 1 am; but it would only alarm you, without affording you the leaft benefit. Don't urge me any farther." ci Yourudfhcs are laws to me; yeti cannot but confefs, I ihould like to fee it." " Juft as you pleafe, Don Carlos; but don't be alarmed: I put more confidence in my own experience, and in your words, than in that miferable *f paper.' 3 " She then gave me the note, which was written with red ink, or with blood, and contained the following words: " Coun¬ tefs Elmira is cautioned againft the young Marquis
Marquis Carlos of G******, for he in¬ tends to impofe on her." It was figned vvith three croffes, if Where have you found that paper?" I exclaimed, frightened. " In my prayer- book." <( Do you know the hand wri¬ ting?" "No; but I can guefs vvho has written the note. Let me intruft you with a fecret, Don Carlos. Unknown hands, that direct all affairs, have for fome time been difperfed all over Spain. No perfon knows who thcy are. Thcy force their way through bolted doors, and to the moft retired apartments. You have, probably, heard of the hiftory of Count О * * *" '* - : * w h o c a r r i cd oft' a gi rl agai n ft the 1 vvill of her parents and of thofe unknown confederates. They vvere found dead in their bed on the morning after their mar¬ riage. Don Pedro D****** quarrelled vvith his father, and difappeared, after he had murdered his parent by their corn« mand. They write only vvith blood, and fign their letters vvith three croffes." F 5 -· Thi*
u This account ftruck me vvith aft afto¬ niihment vvhich furprifed Elmira. " Why- are you thus aftoniftied at this intelligence, Don Carlos?" u Tell mc firft, Elmira, how you have obtained that knowledge." fť I have myfelf ejXperienced their influ¬ ence -, but I dare not mention the particu¬ lars; yet you may rely on the truth of what I have told you." [I fliall acquaint the reader, in the fequel, vvith that hif¬ tory which I learnt by accident. It is fhocking.] 4< 1 now 7 acquainted her with the adven¬ ture I had encountered the preceding night, when it was her turn to be feized with anxious aftoniihment. "How!" ftie exclaimed, at length, " Shouid both incidents be connected with each other? Nothing is more probable. They in¬ tended to part us, but did not forcfec that our meeting would end in fuch a manner. They have counted more on my fear than on my love. Giverne your hand, Carlos ! We
We will never part: death itfelf fliall not feparate us !—Do you hear?" (f Oh! Elmira, never has a vow been offered with more fincerity. Flere is my hand, Wc vvill live and die together.'* She embraced me vvith an enrhufiaflic, frantic fervour. We were tranfported be¬ yond ourfelves, and I could have fworn, in that folemn moment, to kill her, if flie had defired it, " I will propofe fomething to you, Don Carlos," ihe now refumed, in a lower ac¬ cent: " Let us unite thefe hands for ever. í am provided vvith a great many valuable ¡evu-1% and ready to follow you whithcr- foever you choofe. I ftiall deem no coun¬ try too far, no cottage too fmall. Thefe foft hands fhall ufe themfelves to the hardeft labour, I fliall have no other wiih, but to make you happy; no other care, bur to clothe you, and to fwectcn vour life. What do you fay to it, dear i'ai los ľ'* 1 ï ; (> u í preffed
" I preffed the heavenly girl convul¬ fively to my bofom. Her looks attefted the declaration of her lips, " Alas ! I do not deferve you, Elmira," I ftammercd at iength. " Why ihould you not deferve me? Love for love. Follow me. I have pre- faged every thing, and taken proper mea¬ fures. A prieft is waiting for us, and in half an hour we fhall be united for ever. Or do you hefitate?" 4{ Elmira!" * г Well, then follow me !" So faying, flie led me down a fecret flight of iteps. We went through a long paffage; and, at laft, ftopt at a door, againft which flie knocked, exclaiming, " Reverend Father, I am ready for you." The door opened ; a prieft joined us, and walked filently by our fide. We were foon kneeling at the altar; the pneft united our hands, and gave us his benediction. 44 I cannot omit remarking a circum¬ ftance which, during the marriage cere¬ mony, threw me into the greateft confter¬ nation,
nation. A fhrill noife, like the whizzing of a large bat, refounded twice through the church. Elmira grew every time deadly pale; and when it re-echoed a third time, much louderand more piercing than before, flie fainted aw*ay. Yet flie reco¬ vered foon, encircling my neck, and faid, 44 Leave me novv, Don Carlos. Againft evening I expect to fee you in my apart¬ ment." 44 It was already paft one o'clock; the fun flionc very hot, and I went into the garden. The refreihing coolnefs of a fha¬ dovvy walk, and fome fruits, which in¬ vited mv appetite, re -а nim ated me vvith new life and vigour. The leafy d u ík re¬ ftorcd me to mvfelf; and the anxiety which had ftraitcned my breaft, wasdifpelîed hy the expanded profpect before mc. The cryftal rivulet appeared to me an image of futurity ; I only faw the rofes which its flowery banks were embroidered with, but did not obferve the rugged ftoncs through which it wound itfelf vvith difficulty. I( Evening
" P-A'ening itole, at length, upon mc, and I found Elmira on her fofa. Fler anxiety had left her, and her cheeks beam¬ ed with the frefh enamel of health and young defires. She encircled me with her bridal arms, and drew me down upon the fofa. The hours fled rapidly on pinions of inebriating blifs. We counted every minute, left it fliould pafs too fleetly, and yet the minutes and hours fucceeded each other vvith unfpeakable fvvifrnefs. Night furprized us unawares; and when the can¬ dles were lighted, vve began to think more ferioufly of our fpeedy departure. Elmi ra formed numberiefs fchemes : one urged the other; but not one of them met with our mutual approbation. 1 fat oppofite to her, abforpt in meditating on my happi¬ nefs, and enraptured vvith her charms, vvith the fuavity of her youth, vvith her IivclincSs, and the frefli rofes of her health. She appeared to be more blooming than ever. Her eyes beamed with a heavenly fire,
fire, and her mouth opened like a budding, luxuriant rofe. t( While I was thus entranced by rhe contemplation of her charms, I obferved that flie grew paler, her eyes appeared to be more languid ; her mouth lefs blooming. I flared vvith aftonifhment at her; yet afcribed it to rhe faint light of the can» dies. However, I faw her foon grow vi¬ fibly paler; her eyes began to dim, and her upper lip was contorted by a convulfive motion; her whole face grew longer and fmaller, and fhe began to flammer. " For God's fake! Elmira, what is the matter with you?" " Nothing; nothing at all, dear Carlos/' flie rephed vvith difticulty. But in that very moment her eyes broke, flic gnaflicd her teeth, and inclined her¬ felf, vvith a contorted mouth and flaring looks, towards me: the icy face of a corpfe touched my lips: her hands violently grafped my arms. I ftarted up, feized with horror, and fcarcely could difengage myfelf from her long fingers. I placed her
her lengthways on the fofa, and flie died under my hands, grinding her teeth. I had not the power to call for afliftance, and ihould have dropt fenfelefs at her feet, if her woman had not come into the room by accident. " She no fooner faw me lying in defpair, and half fainting, by the fide of her mif¬ trefs, and the latter ftretched out fliíľand lifelefs, when flie ruflicd to the place of woe vvhere vve lay extended. What a new fcene of horror ! In fuch a moment, all diftinction of rank and birth ceafes. She appeared to have loft a mother, and to have been bereft of her oniy remaining parent. She threw herfelf upon the corpfe, kiffed the livid mouth, and refted her face upon the clay-cokl countenance of her mif¬ trefs. She then preffed the icy hand c ť the deceafed to her lips, and, without utter¬ ing a word or a queftion, her foul feemed to fink under the certainty of Mmira's death; inarticulate founds only forced themfelves through her convulfed lips. * ; She
" She recovered the ufe of her fenfes at length, and went to fetch afliftance. A furgeon came to aflift her in her tender en¬ deavours to re-animate the lifelefs body of Ftrnira; but all the application of medi¬ cal ikill ferved only, as it vvere, to make it riper for the grave. The air was foon infected with a fmell of putrefaction. We were obliged to perform her obfequies rhe fubfequent day. " Who can form an idea of, and vvho has experienced, my fituation? Being hurled down from the fummit of the greateft: blifs into the mbft abject ftate of mifery, which bordered on annihilation, it was a happinefs for me to have loft the ufe of my fenfes fo far, that I could not diftinguifh the fenfation of a dream from the heavy preffure of indubitable truth. I flood entirely ifolated on one point of the univerfe; nothing was left near me, nothing that could have reminded me even of the horrors of the time pail. The fe¬ ver of my foul feemed, however, con¬ ftantly
ftantiy to fliake even that folepoim,- and I was agonized by the apprehenfions oían approaching annihilation, without being capable of eitimating the value of my ex¬ iftence. " Alfonfowasat that period my greateft benefactor. Mv danger accelerated his recovery. He never loft fight of me. Iiis warm and truly tender attachment to me, fharpencd all his fenfes to anticipate my wants, and raifed the faculties of his foul high enough above the fetters of his pre¬ judices and his rank to gratify them with delicacy. His tender care for me was a continual conflict between the moit fervent zeal of being ufeful to me and the effects of his education, and the latter blinded the former but very rarely; nay, his kind¬ nefs for me frequently gained additional ftrength, by his exertions to break the chains of his prejudices. <c The firft thing he did forme, was to remove me from all objects which could have reminded me of my lofs on the re¬ turn
turn of my recollection. Submitting pa¬ tiently to any thing, vvithout being fenfible of what he was doing, I was condii eted by him to a neighbouring feat of my fa¬ ther's. He informed my parent of rny misfortune; and mv w hole familv came to comfort and to divert me. One amule* mcnt fucceeded the other ; all my favourite occupations were oppofed to the torpor of my foul ; and the ladies of my acquaint¬ ance forgot their referve, to convince me, by fweet blandifliments, that I had not loft every thing. Grief was by degrees expelled by the beautiful retinue of the graces; my fenfes opened themfelves again, with additional warmm, to long neglected charms; and I began to mifs Ft mira lefs, becaufe I accuftomed myfelf to find her every where. Uninterrupted amufements diverted one thought after the other from that object: the images that Sported before my fancy affumed a gayer attire, and their gloom brightened up more and more every day. " In
" In order to complete my recovery, I was periodically left alone. My imagi* nation, which had been occupied by fo¬ ciety, fuffered, in thofe folitary hours, the arguments of cool reafon to fpeak; and I did, indeed, feel my lofs ; but foon began to think how I could repair it. " Thus the fme feafon paffed ; and my difpofition was So much altered at the con¬ clufion oS it, that I Scarcely knew mySelf again. The fweet happy gaiety which formeriy had pofleffed my foul was vanifh¬ ed; and the ferioufnefs which now occu¬ pied my whole mind fcarcely had left the recollection of it. The objects around me appeared in a more decent attire; the im- provement of my underftanding began to employ me more than ever; and I owe the the greater accom pi i ih ment of my mind entirely to the fubfequent period of my life. " Yet all thefe changes of my difpofi¬ tion could not make me forget the adven¬ ture in the foreft. I was grown more cir¬ cumfpect^
cumfpect, and even more timid. Not having one friend to whom I could have unbofomed myfelf, I wandered from one conclufion to the other, and neverthclefs advanced not a ftep farther. Don Antonio, the friend of my juvenile years, had, in¬ deed, fufficient tendernefs for me, but too much levity. I wanted a more expe¬ rienced and prudent guide. This want was foon gratified by accident. A young nobleman of the upper part of Spain, Pedro G******, purchafed a feat in my neighbourhood. Misfortune had vifited him earlier than myfelf, though itili in the prime of his life. He had, according to report, killed, in the heat of paffion, an adored wife and her feducer, whom he had furprized in the act of adultery; and novv fuffered for this heedlefs action in retirement and a cloiftered folitude. " The gardens of his eftate bordered clofe to mine. Both of us being fond of walking, prompted by the fituation of our mind, which wanted amufement, I foon 2 had
had an opportunity of feeing him frequent¬ ly at a little diftance. He was conftantly occupied with improving his new refi¬ dence; and the fpirit of building and gar¬ dening appeared to have made him fre¬ quently forget his mifery, " His form was one of the moit inte¬ refting I ever beheld, I never have fecn fo much goodnefs refiding in fuch a me¬ lancholy eye ; never fuch a tranquillity at the miferies of iife, blended by fuch recent impreffions of over-powering forrow s. Grief had purified his feelings in a fupe¬ rior degree; and the emanation of his goodnefs flowed moil heavenly and unal¬ loyed upon every thing around him. The whole vicinity foon fpoke loudly of his generofity and humanity ; and I could not help being involuntarily interefted to the higheft degree in all his occupations. " A fmall rivulet feparated our gardens. My fide was clofely overgrown with fhrub¬ beries; and I had ordered a bovver to be conftructcd in a fecret corner, where I fre¬ quently
quently feated myfelf on the mofiy bench vvith a book, obferving, with fweet tran¬ quillity, the bufile that animated all nature around me, and indulging the variegated reveries of my imagination, while my eyes purfued the fleeting waves of the tinkling rivulet. From that fpot I could obferve all his occupations through the apertures of the adjacent flirubbery. I foon per¬ ceived that he had a fort of tomb erected in the vicinity of the rivulet, vvhere he fpent the greateft part of the day as foon as it was finifhed. He was, for hours fix¬ ed motionlcfs to his feat, gazing at the urn which was placed at the top of the tomb. Ite then lifted his eyes up to heaven, rail¬ ed, as it were, beyond the limits of mor¬ tality, as if in fearch of fome object, and declining his looks again to the monument as foon as he feemed to have found it. I watched every motion of his; and the in¬ tereft I took in them foon became my Sole occupation during the day. " One
44 One time he came nearer to the fpot Avhere I fitt, and ftarted at the fight of me, but fainted me friendly. Sufferers know each other at firft fight. Our intercourse was, however, not carried any Sarther on that day : he difappeared in the flirubbery ; but a few days after he ftopt long enough to give me an opportunity of addreflmg him. " I have fo frequently the pleafure, Sen- nor, (faid I,) of feeing you, that I cannot refift the defire of getting more intimately acquainted with you." He bowed polite¬ ly, and fmiled. t4 You meet me half way, Don Carlos, (he replied;) yet that kindnefs of yours would not have been required, if I were not fo vvell informed of your hiftory, which made me appre¬ hend that I only fliould add to the weight of your fufferings by the preffure of my own." " Let us wave that fubject for the prefent, (faid I:) futurity and friendffiip will ferve to affuage our mutual forrows. Let us expect every comfort from thefe friendly
friendly falaces. " I know and efteem you, Don Carlos, (faid he.) If that vviil fatibfy you, your friendihip vviil indeed make me infinitely happy.'* With thefe words he went to a fliallow fpot of the ri¬ vulet, and ioineei me. u We continued this intercourfe every day. He was extremely civil, but con¬ ceived only w ith difficulty fome attachaient to me. Our intercourfe was gradually prolonged onlv with regard to time, but decreaied in point of enjoyment; yet wc became at length infeparablc. Fle was rather weak and Irritable, which was very falutary to my pertinacy. The ideas of one Served to obliterate thofe of theother; and Iriendllnp began to confole me fbr the difappoimment of love. * f Nui a Single complaint had, as yet, efcaped our lips ; and vve carefully avoided, at the commencement of our intimac*, every thing that could hav. re-produced the gloomy images of former days. By
degrees vve began to converfe of individual indifferent incidents of our life, and touch¬ ed only reluctantly upon the more fcrious and painful part of it. " One fine morning, when an eafy night had expanded our hearts for the influx of pleafure, and leflened the weight of time paft, he began to fpeak of the incidents of his former life as of a dream. Fle touched only lightly upon the moft impor¬ tant of them, mentioning merely as much as was neceffary to preferve the connection. His hiftory was affecting, but not extra¬ ordinary. He had been married to Donna Francifca L******, who, in the buffle of the great world, became unfaithful to him, and eloped with her feducer. No one could tell what was become of her: the report of her having been killed by her injured Lord was, therefore, erroneous. He itili adored her; and would have for- tri ven her all injuries, if fhe had returned repenting to his arms. « I then
" ï then gave him a faithful account of all the particulars of my hiftory, which ftruck him vvith aftoniihment and pity. " What is your opinion in point of that myftery?" he aíked, at length. "None, but what I have already told you. All that I have been able to conclude from Elmira's information, and from the inci¬ dents of my life, prompts me to believe that a great affociation is difperfed all over Spain, and watches the actions of every in¬ dividual." " Have you never been able to guefs the purport of that fecret confe¬ deration?" "Never, Sennor! 4 " Pleafe only to recollect all the inci* dents at the cottage: did not one action of its inhabitants betray a veft ige of in¬ tereft ? Did you difcover no aftcctatioii in their miens? Was the unconcern whicli you mentioned not foreign to the connec¬ tion of the w hok ?" " No, certainly not ! I furprized them : the woman appeared to have not the leafl apprehenfion ; and fuch a tendernefs as James and his wife dif- G г played
plav ed cannot be aıtİhcİal. The children, too, took a fliare in it, which ť:cy feemed io have been Unvj accuftomed to. u And did the woman really weep, when j'ou left them? 5 ' " So it appeared to me : but I am certain that James's countenance changed when 1 went. It was too vifible." u 1 cannot comprehend it. Yet it appears io me that they have been tools of theolei man, under w hofe command thcy certainly are. They have probably, at firit, been πι inured in the fame manner in which thcy intended to allure you." if But what reafons can you a (fign for tlie patience with which they Submit to the yoke which is impofed upon them, according to your ideas? What can they fear to loie in that ftate of extreme poverty *t .md al ject flavery, if they flee from their tvrants? Both of-them are certainly not born for their melancholy fituation ; and their refignation and tranquillity is a moit palpable proof of their voluntary fubmif- iion toit," « This
" This eioes not at all confound me; hur only ferves to make mc more curious to know the ι nyíl cries of the cavern. It both are iniriatcd, and if their happineis flows írom thaï fource, w hat an incftimahJe- nxafure for the whole life would it aiforci, ¿f one eould obtain ord v a few eìroj.,.; υί kV' u I do not think that fuch an unconfined activity, which remains unalloyed amid all the changes of life, can be derived from principles." ** Principles are not rriways the only :neans of rendering man capable to i;u:e every norm of life vvith tranquillity. The confcioufnefs of being united to a iocietv vvho are allied bv the ftrono'cft ties, vvho never fiiiìlr a member of their bodv to link undei*; the weight of mifery, is cer¬ tainly a great alleviation in every fuffering. The more numerous the ports are where we can take flicker in the ftorms of life, liie lefs are we a fleeted bv the dangers and diflicult ies or our voyage. Every lofi; G з points
points out a new compenfation, and every finifter accident is attended with a compe¬ tent afliftance. " ' f This is very true, Sennor." " This aíľociation, of which we can conceive only an obfcure idea, has, be¬ fides, another cftimabic prerogative. Other alliances, whatever view thev mav have, preclude always from the enjoyment of domeftic happinefs, if their aim be only in the leaft important; the ties vvhich unite the father with a faithful wife, and with his whole family, muft be difľolved, in order to quality him fbr the intimate union which has a more extended purpofe in view. The means of gratifying ambi- tion, and of executing lofty plans, can only be met vvith beyond the deprefling limirsof a domefticatcd life; and one con¬ ceives a iìronc and fufficient attachment to that aim only beyond thofc confines." <c Very true," ,r But how different is the nature of that confederation ! All appearances point at
at a deep-la) ed, powerful, and extenfive plan of thofe men. James, w ho certainly has a great fliare in all the views and pro¬ ceedings of the fociety, is, notwithfiand- ing this, not in the leaft alienated funn his domeftic fituation, his wife and hi^ children. lie even is no ftranger t^ hnf_ p: tal ity, and to the loiter fencin, ents ot ieìiow-ieeì ;vV íť But have you forgot, Sennor, the horrid feenes of which Elmira has inform¬ ed me?" " We muft not judge* precipitately of that matter, my friend. We ought to make fome allowance as to the extent of their views, and to put a great deal to the account of report, vvhich, if prejudiced, al vva) s favours one paity, let it take what¬ ever couife it may. And, befides, Don Caries, ycu w ili confider that vve are never more ¿rt to be unj uft, than when vve arc too fiiort-fighred to diScover the views of fuch a fociety. Who can expect ίο bc ca¬ pable of unfolding them at firft: fight? G 4 Let
Let us fuppofe that they are great and iK>ble t that they aim at the improvement of ail mankind; what is then the life of an individual, if compared to thai view ? Wben two men have taken refuse on one board, which can carrv only a fitude per- fon with fafety on the hi il ou ing ocean, either is to be excufed if he itrumdes to цеп rid of his rival," <c But, dear Pedro, do you not think it too prefumptuous and unfafe to decide arbitrarily on fuch an occafion? Who warrants me that even my beit plans, which I either muft abandon or proiecute at the expence of the life of one of my fellow-creatures, are worth that facrifice? Who, finally, can be anfwerable for their furvcis? and is it not madness to lac ri fu e an hundred existences to one dream? ťí Providence is not fo axions as vou are. Every thing in nature prciies and urges the other; and a new life erigi nates from every death. Being entirely taken up by the great plan of promoting the greater per feci ion
perfection of man, it docs not care for the changes vvhich fake place in the creation. Providence knows how to direct every thing to one great end, anel unfolds the laft dying point of life for new plans and defigns." <4 Very true, Sennor. I fnould entirely coincide with your opinion, if vve couid direct the courfe of our actions and their final iffu e w İth the fame wifdom." ** Shall we never make an attempt, be¬ cauie vve do not always fucceed ? Shail we wafle our faculties in a dream of hu¬ manity, left vve fliould rou fe the objects around us from a fimilar dream? Who can prove lhat the enjoyment of the mo* nient alfo is the purpofe of the eújlence of that moment? Jf a whole eternity of rimes forms a life beyond the limits of mortality, and if the laft point of that ¡Vie implies the higheft and muft perfect enjoyment, if no other end of our fuffer¬ ing can be found than our gradual .quali¬ fication for that Supreme blifs ; arc w e then G 5 not
not fools, if vve confine ourfelves merely to corporeal wants, and thus place that point longer out of our reach ?" " I do not entirely comprehend you ; but be fo good to go on." " Let us novv fuppofe, that a whole nu-* merous fociety of men, who would keep firm to that idea, were to unite, and tø profecute it indcfatigably, aififted by a long-tried f upe r ior ity over the reft of the people ; kt us farther fuppofe, that that fociety fliould watch the fecret procefs of nature, trace the means Providence em¬ ploys to educate the human race, and pur¬ fue the difcoverics which their united ex¬ ertions fhould ftore up; let us finally fup¬ pofe, that thefe men fhould faithfully act as vicegerents of Providence, and ftrive not to improve, but to accelerate, the ac¬ tions of the Supreme Ruler of the world ; Avould thefe men wander from their great mark on account of the kffer troubles of this life?" " I muft confefs, this point of view—" 44 L·
" Is very different from what you have had? However, another point of view is not lcfs obvious. Every life has its na¬ tural burden: is it, therefore, not areal bieffing for mortals, if they can lay all the weight of future days on the beginning of their career, in order to exempt thereby the evening of their journey from the pref¬ fure of forrow? We have long forgot the tempeft of the night, and morn, and the heat of the noontide hours, when the fct¬ ting fun hales us with a pure and ferene light, and finds us in the enjoyment of reft and happinefs. The terrors of dangers pafl, ferve then to enhance the value of the blcflings we enjoy after a long laborious ftrife; every object around us wears a gayer attire, and our heart is expanded with raptures which vve ihould be utter ftrangcrs to, if former flruggles had not purified and exalted our fenfes." 41 I am charmed with that enchanting dream." G o "Pciťr.
" Don't call it a dream, Don Carlos, I reafon from experience. You do not к no vît that fociety vvho have offered to receive you into their hallowed circle. Think of James and his happinefs." 44 Flere we dropped the fubject, and our converfation turned on different mat-- ters. However, they did not intereft me; the ideas which had been imparted to me being Sufficient to ingrofs the reflection of years. I tormented myfelf to unfold and to arrange them that day; but could not difpel the obfeurity in vvhich they were concealed. No other expedient was left mc, but to take a firm refolution of pro- fecuting the veiliges which I already had difcovered. " Ori meeting vvith my neighbour the fubfequent day, he refumed the thread of his converfation. *' Don Carlos, (he faid,) ihould Ave not make an attempt to afcer¬ tain the probabilities vve have ftartcd yef¬ terday?*' This was gueffmg at the moft ardent wiih of my heart, I confented cheerfullv, v ·*
cheerfully, and we vvere juft thinking cf the proper means, when our confuí tation 5 were fuddenly interrupted by a new in¬ cident* CHAPTER IX. 1*4 /JY friend Pedro had invited me one LVX night to fup vvith him. He was a little indifpofed; and, to avoid the chil¬ ling night air, we had retired to a pica- fure-houfe, where vve enjoyed the charms of a beautiful night, and the aromatic ex¬ halation of the young orange trees. After fupper I began to read to him. He re¬ ii flied the author fo much, and I wai fo pieafed at it, that all other ideas and ob¬ jects loft their influence upon us for Some time. Fle was feated with his back to¬ wards the door, his right-hand refted on my fhoulder, and his melancholy counte¬ nance reclined on my cheek. The book which I was reading had ingroffed my at¬ tention to fuch a degree, that 1 could not turn
turn my eye from ir. A piercing feream fuddenly vibrated in my ear. I ftarted up, feized with terror; and Pedro dropped fainting from his chair. I had fcarcely time to take hold of and to fupport him, when I beheld a pale, emaciated face re¬ clining on his hand. It was Francifca. After fhe had knelt a confiderable time, and Pedro, at length, opened his eyes, fhe rofe, and kiffed his pallid lips. a Col¬ lect yourfelf, my dear huiband, (flie ex¬ claimed, with a convulfive firmnefs ·) collect yourfelf, to grant your forgivcnefs to a wife vvho comes to bid you an eternal adieu." 44 He had not yet recovered the power of utterance, but ftretched out his hand towards her. if No, my deareft huiband, f flie re- fumed, after having kiffed his hand,; I thank you. I will not deceive you a fé¬ cond time. A repenting, tormented whe, who efcaped her feducer in the very mo¬ ment vvhich was to ruin her for ever, con- 5 jures
jures you to give her your benediction." So faying, flie proftrated herfelf again at his feet. " No, Francifca, (he replied,) I receive the repenting wife, who returns to me with tender affection, to my bofom. I have forgiven every, every thing, a long time fince; and it is certainly my dear Francifca's wifli that I fliould forget it too." '* You are miftaken, Pedro, if you think me capable of abu fing your goodnefs. No, take your heart back again." " Why fliould I do it, dear Francifca?" " You never can love a criminal; nor íhall 1 ever be capable of making you happy again. No, Pedro, I will not cheat you of every future felicity. Give me your benedic¬ tion, my dear, injured hufband." 44 My poor friend was almoft diftracted, This afflict ing coolnefs of his wife, and thefe heart-cutting words, pronounced in the eafy tone of converfation, excited in his heart a conflict between his tertdernefis ** and pride, which I apprehended would prove
prove fatal to his exhaufted nature. I thought it my duty to interfere. " You fee, Madonna, (faid I,} to what a dreadful ftate your huiband is reduced. If you are come to kill him by your cruel¬ ty, your bufineSi will Soon be done. But, you vvill give me leave to take care of a life which I have learnt to efteem." I then was going to take her by the iiand, and to lead her out of the apartment, b·.:r flie had grafped his knees ίο faft that I 'found it impoffible to raife her up. <c Don't let me depart, dear Pedro, without vour foro/i venéis!" ftie exclaim- ed. " This man is going to tear me ϊιαααλ you. Give me your benediction, antl í will part willingly with you." <c The dreadful words, <ζ Give me yc.;;; b 1 c fil ng, Ped ro İ " ft i 11 v i b ra te i n m y t :u ^ She rather ejaculated than uttered them with a trembling voice: it was the laft dying accent of a perfon who i m piores heaven to grant her a gracious reception, Defpair had lifted up her hair, wluch pap i y
partly covered her tace, and partly flowed i\)\\n her neck, in a frightful diforder. Λ frî"idirv, fuch as I never beheld on a marble ftatue, kept all lier features in in¬ frangible fetters; an unconcun t f mien, fueh a^ tleath fcarcciy ca:i :ui: ar', 'aa iiih.lv ι ontradieted herword.·; and llie ν iew eel ľne weeping eyes of her huiband with a dreadful indifference. My poor friend fat trembliner on his chair, bereft of cou- rage und of every ftrength; directed his uncertain and inquifiüve looks at me, and then at his wife, who kept him fixed to hii feat vvith her hands. " WiU you not give me your benedic¬ tion, not forgive me, deareft huiband?" ihe refumed. " Ü! grant me, ac leaft, Oi.e Ai'A}crß' " 1 ( annot give you my benediction/* /he replied trembling:. lt to a criminal only, whom one receives, and repudiates again, one gUc* а benediction as a curfe. Conic into ihde loving arms, my dear, my ever adored wife* í was, periiaps,
the primary caufe of your errors; let mc atone for ¡ton your bofom." 44 No, Pedro! will vou let me Suffer the torments of hell in your arms? No, my huiband is not fo cruel," 44 I wdl not only appeafe your agony; I will change your defluir into love. Do not commit a greater crime in order to retrieve a lefler one. I was unhappy, but never have abandoned alı hopes of ceafing one time to be fo: will vou deprive me alfo of this confolation; will vou rob me of every thing?" " Be eafy, Don Pedro; I muft deprive you of it, in order to prepare a peaceful futurity for you. The bofom of your wife has no comfort, no joy to give you. How could uninterrupted, eternal tor¬ ments render you happy ? If you fliould companionate me, I fliould rage againft your happinefs, and reward the raptures of your love with the agony of defpair. No! no! give me your benediction, Don Pedro; or, at leaft, grant me one prayer ?" "And
" And what is it you defire, dear Francifca?" iC She rofe, and went out of the door. My aftoniihment and expectation weie ι ailed to fuch a degree, that I fcarcely couid make ufc of the ihort interval to fpeak a few words of comfort to my dif¬ confolate friend. She returned, after a iew minutes, with a little boy in her arms, vvho reclined tenderly againft her bofom, carefting her vvith amiable fweetnefs. Fle feemed to be two or three years old. Her looks refted painfully on bim, and her eyes told me that flic was revolving a great defign. <( Come, Pedro," flie faid, kneeling down, " You finali fee your father. Look, there he is. Go, and kifs his hand/' i( is this my papa?" the child lifped. " Why docs he not fpeak to те?' 1 44 What docs this mean, Francifca? faid my friend, interrupting the child. " Give me leave to fay only a few words more, my huiband; then I will go, and blefs
blefs you." Her bofom worked violently; her livid countenance reddened fuddenly, and was, all the time, covered with a high crimfon hue. The words flie was eoiwjf to utter, threatened to burft her bofom before (he could form them into audible accents. Sbe fiiivered as if feized with a feveriih paroxifm, and vve awaited her ad¬ drefs with an expectation as awful and agonizing as that vvhich the finner muft feel at the tribunal of his Judge when his eternal doom is to be pronounced. t( You know, Pedro/* ihe continued, u that I carried a fruit of your love under my heart along with me when I left you. h would grieve you to fee it in the hands of a reprobate. I will returnit to you." "Alas! Francifca, then you would leave me a living witnefs of your cruelty?" " Don't interrupt me, my huiband. It is the laft will, it is the laft figh of a dying perfon, what I am now going to confide to you. Do you recollect that day of my bridal blifs, when I fank enrap¬ tured
tured into your arms; an immaculate, guiklefs virgin?" " Francifca!" " When I imparted to you all the happinefs I cou lei beftow, and was grieved that I could not give more, and your quivering lips in¬ fpired me with frantic rapture; when every nerve of mine was convulfively be¬ numbed to awake again for new ecftatic ScnSations of blifs ; when my languifhing, r breıthîefs lips could utter only inarticulate accents ; and the voluptuous flame that penetrated my whole frame, fcarcely couîd be extinsruifhed by a ftream of delicious tears ? Do you recollect that fcene of ec¬ ftafy? My imagination has cruelly de¬ frauded me of all ether joys of former times, to blow up, from that recollection, a burning fire to confume my remembrance flowly upon it. In that hour of unutter¬ able rapture, I received this pleelge of your love from you as a fecurity of our mutual happinefs, and its everlafting du¬ ration: that time is paft, our happinefs is
k ruined for ever; I return you your fe¬ curity." " Merciful God!' 1 my friend exclaimed, " Why did I not die ; why muft I live to fee this fcene of unfpeakable woe?" Ap¬ prehenfion and fufpenfe had rendered me motionlefs. " You have, however, told me, (Said Francifca,) that you vvill have no witnefs of my cruelty ; and I muft tell you, in return, that I too will have no witnefs of my iliame. I have hit on an expedient (continued ihe, mufing, and fuddenly put¬ ting her right hand into her bofom) which will relieve both of us. It is, indeed, an horrid expedient ; it will, however, be falutary for you and for myfelf." With thefe words flie pulled out a dagger, aim¬ ing a blow at the boy. My fufpicion having, however, been excited by thofe ominous words, I had watched her mo¬ tions, and arrefted her daring hand. I tore the fatal inftrument from her, upon which flie exclaimed, " Gracious heaven! I am
I am undone!" and ruflicd out of the apartment. Neither of us could ftop her; and when I ran after her, flie was van i fil¬ ed, and every fearch was fruitlefs, which made me think ihe had plunged into the adjacent refervoir. " On my return, I found my friend oc¬ cupied with his little boy. A truly great and affecting fcene ! Thcy feemed to be old acquaintances, and to celebrate, the feftival of meeting again after, a long fe- paration. The boy, who was feared on the lap of his father, did not mifs his mother for fome time, and only after a long interval began to enquire anxioufly about her. I endeavoured to pacify him ; and his difconfolate fatherwas infpired by the fight of his child with new hopes and expectations. " Her maternal heart (he faid) is attached to the boy; flie vvill cer¬ tainly return to fliarc this treafure with me."
CHAPTER X. α TT now became the chief object of my A care to amufe and divert Don Pedro's thoughts ; and I began to unbend bis mind from its glcom by the fame ideas which he, perhaps, involuntarily had ex¬ cited in wy foul. The compafs of our experience and knowledge foon grew too narrow for us; we feparated poffibilitiqs and probabilities from the regions of dreams, and produced from thefe mate¬ rials one fanciful creation after the other. We turned from hefitation to refolution, from refolution to danger, and at lart agreed to encounter them boldly. " We made every preparation to execute our defign with fafety. Our death would certainly have been attended with dread¬ ful confequences to our murderers; and what iiad we to apprehend from them if our life was not at flake? We flu out one morning, on horfeback, and arrived at the
, } the cottage againft noon, but it was emp¬ ty. No veft ige of human footfteps could be traced all around. What could that mean? Pedro, vvho already, on the road, had repented our raftı undertaking, made this circumftance a pretext to abandon it entirely; and when I infifted upon the exe¬ cution of my defign, mounted his horfe, and left mc vvith vifible fatisfaction. ťí A dreadful wind arofe vvith the fct¬ ting in of night; the trees were violently fliaken, und every new guil threatened to overturn the old, decayed cottage vvhere 1 had taken flieltcr againft fhe torrents of rain which poured down from the flood* gates of heaven. Having been near an liou r in that uncomfortable fituation, the intenie darknefs that involved me feemed to di fpe r fe g rad uai! y ; but the fa i n t g} im¬ mer, vvhich now and then trembled through the window, was fw allowed up .«gain by black obfeurity. My fear made me fee every object double; and my ima¬ gination was, in thefe moments of anxiety, Vol, L II dreadfully
dreadfully affiiled by the recollection of ihe adventurous rumours which I had heard related ofthat foreft. My apprehen¬ fions were increafed by the reftkfihefs of my horfe, whom I had tied to a pofi in the inner part of the cottage; and I may tu.ly fay that í never have feen a moie dreadful night. " The awful filence which, for fomc time, had fwaved around the cottage, be- gan by degrees to be enlivened; my hften¬ ing ear, in w hich the roaring of the ftorm, and the cracking of the trees, began to «efound again, could plainly diftinguifh whifpers, vvhich feemed to proceed from different people. The whifpers grew louder and louder; and I could, at length, plain¬ ly diftinguifh a word. I now began to tremble, inftead of rejoicing, at being re¬ lieved from my horrid folitude by the fo¬ ciety of men. The whifperers came, mean¬ time, nearer and nearer; a pale glimmer flafhed through the little window; fome¬ body puihed agaiıîft the unlocked door; it opened,
opened, and, to my greateft terror, I fav/ the old man enter. He had a lighted torch in his hand. As to the reft, he was ftili the fame as when I faw him lirft; the lame awfui ftcrnnefs prevailing in his looks. " Is it you, Don Carlos?" he exclaim· cd, as foon as he obferved mc, 4C I heard a horfe kick and neigh!" "My horfe has not neighed." " Perhaps you did not regard it. Are you come to redeem your word?" c * Yes; I am come for that pur¬ pofe," I renlied, rifing from mv feat. ťt You will not have waited for me; as your occupations—" " I am ufed to be kept waiting; but òon' t be uneafy about it; 1 forgive nothhig in the world пюге readily. Will you follow mc now?" I confented. The horfe was tied tafter: he lighrcd a fécond torch, which he had un¬ der hk arm, and gave it me in mv hand. The doer was then carefully bolrcd, and vve began to pufli through the overgrown underwood. But no path being to be met with, every fiep wc proceeded was ar¬ il J tended
tended with laborious difficulties. í ran againft every protending branch that ob¬ it reel ed our paffage*, loft my hat, and could not get to an open fpot that was be¬ fore us without leaving part of my tattered garments behind. The old man feemed to be ufed to that diflicult way ; he im¬ proved every advantage, and followed me vvithout receiving the leaft hurt. We reñed a few minutes on that open fpot. í v.as as tired as if I had walked many miles: the fleeplefs night, the anxiety of expectation, and the difficulties of our way, had exhaufted me entirely: I could fcarcely breathe. My conductor looked fmiling at me, and lhook his head, yet without betraying the leaft mark of dif¬ pleafurc. " Let us not tarry long here, Don Carlos," he faid; and this was the fignal for breaking up. We began to proceed: the great extent of the open fpot where vve were began to grow narrower by de¬ grees; and we were, at length, confined in
in a rocky paffage, which led through wild fhrubberies, almoft horizontally, into the deep. "I could not help being chilled with a fecret horror. The way feemed to lead us into a lonely abyfs. All objects around us bore evident marks of a chaotic difor¬ der and of violent devaftation; yet vve beheld every where the wrecks of former grandeur. The deftructive hand of na¬ ture feemed to have exhaufted here all her devaftatmg powers. Enormous rocks, which were already half decayed, oppofed a roaring cataract, which * concealed its unbridled fury beneath the gloomy dark¬ ncfs of bottomlefs aby lies. Every thing bore the ftamp of antiquity, A gray mofs mournfully covered the mountains, and the ilender ili rubs trembled ruiilinp* о in the flaring light of our torches; the rays of which, reflecting a pallid* glimmer upon the darknefs of the moit elillant bu ih es, along with the trembling ihadcs, alternately railed the mind to the moit H 7 elevated.
elevated fentiments, and lulled it again into filent meditation. The change of the iight, which fported between the leaves and the deep leafy darknefs, every object around appeared to me to be a fymbol of my life, in order to conduct me towards a happier futurity. I felt myfelf, as it vvere, new created, and dropped the cum- berfome covering of time pail with enthu¬ fiaftic boldnefs. (< Whither do you lead me, Sennor?" I exclaimed, at length, involuntarily, " Whither a man of boldnefs and feel¬ ing needs notbe afraid to go." " Am I then afraid? Cei tainly, Sennor, I am a ftranger to fear: I only fink under the weight of reflections which never came into niy mind; and my foul is fufpended betu een the affliction of a painful expe¬ rience and the joys of hope. Relieve me only of my fufpenfe.'* 44 Can I do it? Your own feelings ought to tell you what ycu can expect vvith cer¬ tainty. You know James's hiftory. A confederation
confederation of men awaits you. You wiih, perhaps, to takea part in the great views which they profecute; will you be able to fubmit to a voluntary yoke?" 44 Yes, I fliall ; but what recompenfe may I expect?" " You will be enabled to throw off an involuntary one," " Is that all?" 44 Carlos, you afk this queftion too pre¬ maturely. You fhall one time feel-your¬ felf happy. But how can you expect to receive your reward before you have earned it? Purified from your prej cid ices, united bv indiffoluble bonds with men of exalted u' virtue, and of an all-conquering fpirit, you will learn to forgez the little troubles of life, and be enabled, by the fmiling light of truth, cheerfullv to bear the bur- dens of your exiftence. But, are you un- biafled by opinion? к your mind unfet¬ tered by prejudice? do you think you arc •already deferving of fuch a union?'* * c No, Sennor, and this it is that makes me uneafy, Can vou fav nothing tha" H 4 couhi
could difpel my uneafinefs?" "Have I not done it already?" " Can you not point out to me a mean which would enable me to conceal my weakneflcs and my defects from the feruti- nizing eye of thofe men whofc difcerning looks will confound me?" i( To give you a maik by which you could deceive us? No, Don Carlos, truth is the foul of our fo- " It is, however, dreadful to appear unprepared before men whom one has learnt to fear. Fear fhackles the mind, and fuffers the foul to unfold hcrfeif but flowly," Ч " Don't be afraid, Don Carlos; your merits will not be mifconceived. They will e>;pect rather too much than too little <*f vou. Wliy fliould you then be afraid? If you ihould feci yourfelf undervalued, or deceived in vour hopes, no one will ione ties upon you which rcquiie the grearcft liberty of will iť vou ftiall be ule¬ iul r:; rhe iocietv ?" " But
ct But how can freedom of will and tics of that nature be coniiflent with each other?" if Nothing can be demonftratcd eafier than that. The connection of the whole body docs not confine the different parts of vvhich it is compofed in the motions of which thcy сан he capable. The freedom of vvill, which every member enjoys, fuf¬ fers no abatement if impelled by its own voluntaiy clioice. The charming garlands which bind a irce, but pu ri fed, will, are kept together by a union which forms it¬ felf voluntarily, animated by a fpirit of tho higheit cultivation, The more you pro« ice ute it, the nicer and the more penetra¬ ting your looks grow in the examination e f ti-.e nature of worlds; the more vom* t pr'copnhUhy enei cafes, and the mort: icnii ole you aro, that hi the inane compafs of r. re:;red life ihc nobleft fprings of our •fpirit arc iamwd, Шс пюге powerfully νου wi:, ìv attracted by a point of unionin I ì " v -V 1 -*
which all the faculties revive as if rouied from a lethargy." " What profpects! what hopes! Scnnorl " Profpects! hopes!" he then refumed, with a gentle, but iarcaftic, fmile ; what profpects and hopes have been held out to you? Don't fpeak of it. You are fcarcely efcaped from a miferable coafr, and you prefume already to fee the fnorc of the opixifitc continent ! You miftake clouds for the fiiore, Don Carlos : you fee nothing but the coverings of rifing tempefts 5 a chaos big vvith terror. The rofy morn opens tlic gates of day vvith additional brightness after gloomy and boifterous nights." " But can I omínate nothing at all? hope nothing? " How can you form*an idea of the en¬ joyment of a refreihing draught if you never have been dry? how conceive a no¬ tion of a height which never has been Seen nor meafured? Nature conchas in her fecret bofom the beautifulleft charms of
THE HORRID of her creation; the enchanting centre of the wonderful web which attracts aii her children us concealed in a cave moit diffi¬ cult of accefs." " You cannot conceive, deareft Count, how much that dreadful man began to confound my ideas. He excited hopes and feelings in my foul, of which I could conceive no diftinct notion: a certain me¬ lancholic gloom, an obfeuration of all images, deprived me imperceptibly of the confcioufnefs of my ideas; and i found mvfelf, at laft, entirely difencraped even from thofe profpects wiiich had en¬ ticed mc to vifit the myftic foreft. Fiis mien fpoke, however, more forcibly than liis words; he feemed с are full v to denrefs ' . j. the latter, while the former unfolded itfelf freely with an awful greatnefs. I lis words couid not difengage themfclvcs from a certain mvftic ir.caninp*, vvhich awed me the more anxioufty, the more natural ix feemed to be to them* The ferioufnefs of his countenance was flowly difiolvcd m II 6 that
that affecting Self-contemplation, from vvhich the foul, when brooding over a great object, unfolds herfelf only in fingle rays. Every thing confpired to imprint the im¬ preffion of the circumftances indelibly on my mind ; and while I am writing down this account for your perufal, my deareft Count, thofe ideas renew themfelves vvith additional force in my memory. " We had, mean while, proceeded a great way through the rocky paffage ; and the mountains began, at length, to decrcafe gradually on the left and on the right. A valley opened to our view : the rifing morn fiiled the apertures between the bufhes with a fweet rofy dawn ; anel the objects we beheld affumed gradually a more ro¬ mantic contour. As our torches began to become more ufelefs and paler, we found ourfelves and the whole valley involved in a thin vapour, out of vvhich a uniform greenifh-red back ground emerged. The objects around us began to lengthen, and every thing feemed to have diflobed itfelf to
to receive the rifing day, and to be im¬ pregnated with its cheering light. Unut¬ terable feelings crowded upon my fenfes ; a rofy dream had lighted upon my inebri¬ ated foul, and all my ideas were floating in a dubious trance. I had frequently vifited this foreft on my hunting excur¬ fions·, but never deScried that Spot, which Seemed to be the production of my enrap¬ tured fancy. We entered, at length, a little wood of orange trees. Aromatic odours, and the fweet choirifters of the air, vvho warbled their matins, feemed to have awaited our arrival ro receive us in fweet unifon. A fpirit of peaceful tran¬ quillity, and a pleafing life, inclined the bows of the fragrant trees cheerfully to each other. I fancied to tread on í airy ground. The fhrubberies became agaiu very intricate; however, the whole ro¬ mantic fcene ftill exhibited vifible vettiges of a former not quite decayed cultivation. A regular ferpentine path emerged in dif¬ i'erent places through the luxuriant grafs ; wrecks
wrecks of bowers peeped here and there through the thicket; the regular arrange¬ ment of feveral dufters of trees, wild fo¬ reign flowers, vvhich were difperfed every where, and fhrubberies, betrayed tbe re¬ tracted hand of art. An antiquated fabric difplayed itfelf at length to our view; a long avenue led towards it. Bending un¬ der the preffiirc of hoary time, its totter¬ ing ruins reclined againft a hill, vvhich pro¬ tended over it in romantic beauty. Moft of the windows were decayed ; but thofe that had efcaped the voracious tooth ofall deftroying time, I beheld, to my greateft aftonifhment, grated with new iron bars* An involuntary horror vibrated through my nerves at that ominous fight. ϊ looked at my conductor, vvho walked by my fide, abforpt in profound meditation, Fle feemed to have forgot that I was vvith him; his foul had unfolded herfelf on his countenance to a great expectation, and feemed to labour under the prefenfion. of an anticipated horror. I iollowed the old maa
man through the gate, and we defcended feveral fteps. « Don't fall, Don Carlos," he faid, lighting me vvith his torch. But this don't fall almoft had thrown me head¬ long down the fteps ; I fupported myfelf with difficulty hy an iron bar, which was fixed into the wall; and it was high time that we reached the bottom, elfe I fliouîd certainly have dropt down fainting. But I now could fupport myfelf no longer. " Give me leave to reír a little," I fuel to my coneiuctor, and feated myfelf on the undcrmoft ftep :" I am quite ex¬ hauftcd." <f The old man turned round vvith marks of furprife, and viewed me by the light of his torch. (Mine I had flung away at the entrance.) " So foon, Don Carlos?" he exclaimed. " Floly Virgin! how pale you arc! Be a man." " He did every thing Ín his power to make me eafy: however, the apprehenfion of being doomed to meet itili greater hor¬ rors, becaufe he otherwife would not have 5 facrificed
Sacrificed the preSent awSul impreflion, which promiSed to affift him in the com¬ pletion oS his purpoSe, rendered my heart inacceffible to every kind of comfort» My not being capable to divine what ob¬ jects would crowd upon me, my defence¬ lefs ftate, and the vifible anxiety of my conductor, gradually obfcured my fenfes. A long paffage led us deeper into the fa¬ bric ; fteps vvhich alternately led us up and down narrow-ways; fpacious caves vari¬ egated the fcenc every minute, We en¬ tered at length a regularly vaulted and very fpacious apartment. " Stay here, Don Carlos!** my conductor faid, cxtin- guifhing his torch, and vanifhed fuddenly. Not the leafl found, not the moft fecret motion of air enabled me to ñnd out whi¬ ther he had turned. Whitherfoever I ex¬ tended my hands, í could find nothing but а dreary vacuity: I was in a fpacious grave, the walls of vvhich I could not dif¬ cover. I flood at firft motionlefs on one {got ; feut being too much exhaufted üo remain
long ¡n that fituation, I refolved to feat myfelf on the ground, and thus to await patiently the things vvhich were to come. CHAPTER XI. Д FTER my conductor had left mf, JĹ jl one quarter of an hour paft after the other without my being relieved from my dreary folitude. My refolution to make myfelf eafy was of fliort duration; every beating of my pulfe*, which dis¬ tanced the time of my arrival, farther en- crcafed my anxiety ; and my rifing heat turned at length into a violent feveriih paroxifm, that raifed my agony to the higheit degree. The fpace around me be¬ gan at length to grow vifibly lighter, which probably was owing to the rifing day, whofe rays penetrated through a fmall aperture in the wall; and I could already difccrn myfelf again when a door was opened. Two maiked men, with lighted torches,
torches, entered, and aíüfted me to get up. You will be furprifed, dear Count, when I tell you that my anxiety was in¬ ftantly difpclled, and I Sanded mySelS to be amongft brethren. I imagined to meet the expanded arms of an amiable family, who would welcome and make me happy, and whofe peaceful fociety promiSed me a perfect and unutterable felicity. " A numerous aflembly of men, co¬ vered with white maiks, offered themfelves to my view on our entrance into a hall, which was fplendidly illuminated by tvvo large luftres, the light of which was re¬ flected by a number of mirrors. They were feated on low arm chairs, which joined in the centre on an elevated fpot, where, as it appeared, the chief of the fociety was fitting. He had a table be¬ fore him, on which I beheld fome books, a crofs, a dagger, a goblet, and fome un¬ known inftruments. An empty chair, which feemed to be defigned for me, was ftanding
ftanding beneath the luftres, A profound folemn filence fwayed for a few moments in that awful aflembly, till my two con¬ ductors had taken their fears, when the chief, who fat oppofite mc, rofe from his elevated feat. He ftepped to the table, and uncovered his face. A noble and un¬ fpeakably enchanring countenance, where hcaveniv p-ocdnefs, mixed with the vefliges of the b;tterefl experience, was enthroned, flruck mc with reverential awe. A clear look, vvhich raifed itfelf vvith peaceful fe- renity above the confines of this terreftrial life, and a brow, vvhich braved the tem¬ pefts of forrow, captivated my foul. The filent plan of a new creation feemed to reft in the former, and the latter was a complete picture of the molt perfect hu¬ manity. I couid have proftrated myfelf before and adored that great man. " Thou art come, Carlos, to get ac¬ quainted with us?" he now began, in a foit accent. I affirmed it filently. " Un- mail;, my brethren! 11 At thefe words ths whole
whole aflembly uncovered their faces. What an unfpeakably grand fcene! A groupe of faces, replete with apoftolic humanity. The old man, and my good James, vvere amongft them. I fancied to have found again a number of old ac¬ quaintances. A melancholy ferioufnefs had, however, taken poffeffion of their countenances. I'heir eyes »were mourn¬ fully fixed at the face of the old man who had addreffed me. " What is your defire, Don Carlos?" he now refumed. fi To get acquainted with this fociety, reverend fiither." €t And then to become a member of it?" " I have duties incumbent on me as a man ; duties which I have been taught to hold facred : I am ready to become one of you, if you will not violate them." " And what du¬ ties are they?" "To love mankind; to be charitable to every one that meets me ; to forgive my enemy; to love everyone who wifhes me well." " Everyone, Car¬ los?'* " Every one, my father." " Is this
} this a duty vvhich no circumftances will prompt thee to renounce, againft vvhich the arguments of reafon, and the perfua- fion of your heart, never vvill prevail?" 44 Neither my reafon nor my heart will ever make me renounce it." 4t Then you are unfit for our fociety !—Lead him hence, my brethren." iC Do not reject me too raflily, my fa¬ ther, (1 replied;) do not condemn me without trial. Tell me what you defire, and what the bond of your brethren re¬ quires: I fwear to be fincere in return, and to be entirely yours, if I can." 44 We require nothing of you, Carlos, except the very thing you have declared yourfelf not to be able todo. If you will become a deferving member of our community, vou muft diflblve all bonds wherebv men bind themfelves to men. Our property is only to be found in the world at large. Murder your father, poniard a beloved filler, and wc fliall receive you with open arms, When human Society expels you, when
when the laws profecute you, when the ftate execrates you, then you ihall be wel¬ come to us. However, our focicty rejects the tea?* of humanity." * c Dreadful!" I exclaimed. " And why then dreadful? (replied he.) Do wc offer no compenfation? Whatever you facrifice for our fake will be com- penfateda thoufand-fold in our fociety. A finçle eräin vou fow bears fcven-fold. Or do you account it no gain to call the whole great world your property? Is к a mife¬ rable, cheating bargain, to exchange one fifter for a thoufand brothers? Would vou not deem the prefervation of millions w orth one poor drop of blood from your own breaft." c * I underftand vour words, reverend father, but cannot comprehend their myftic fenfe. « Mifcreant! remain then for ever a property of your father's duft : may you never be haled by tbe heart-expanding Ihiht
light of truth; but your breaft tortured forever by the miferies of life!" 44 Why do vou repel me? I do not re- ject what you fay; only teach me to com¬ prehend it. How can I, being taken by furprife, renounce truths vvhich, as yet, have directed the courfe of m v days, in order to refign myfelf to principles the confequences of which I cannot divine? Conduct me into the fanctuary of the prin¬ ciples by which your focicty is guided, and try me vvhether I am docile enough to be vour pupil." 44 You came in fearch of us: it was y¿?;/ % Don Carlos, vvho challenged us to appear to vou vvithout difguife. But Iiave vou confidered what vviil be the confequence of your having only fetn us without be¬ coming a member of our bodv.? The light of knowìedgc is fometimes fo powerful that it will kill the beholder. Are you not fenfible that a fingle word will fufiice to remove you for ever from the natural order cf things, or at leaft from the memory of
of thofe men to whofe welfare you prefume to have dedicated your exiftence?" Thefe laft words he pronounced with an agita¬ tion which tinged his face with a higher hue. " I am fenfible of it, reverend fa¬ ther, (I refumed boldly:) I even have counted upon it. When the fmilcs of fortune were withdrawn from me, when not a glimmer of hope was kft me, I re¬ figned all my claims to a life which ceafed to be my property. I look with indif¬ ference upon a good which is not entirely in my power, and refign it willingly to him Avho demands it lawfully from me. But unlawfully?—I have friends, have a father ! ------ " The whole affernbly grew pale at thefe words, viewing each other with confter¬ nation. "Flow, villain!" my conductor exclaimed, after a nauftľ of univerfal alarm. '* have vou betrayed us?" * V * 44 1 have not betrayed you, becaufe you have not difclofed y í ли fel ves to mc: I only liave exchanged m v notions of your fociety for
For thofe of a friend whom chance threw into my way, and vvho had more favour¬ able ideas of you than myfelf. Who could have prevented me from uttering fuppo- fitions? And was it a crime to folve the obfeurity you forced upon me? Have I intruded on your fociety? Have you not allured me by your influence? When I took leave of thofe who were around me, in order to follow the fecret charm where¬ by you attracted me, could I refift the ap¬ prehenfion that it might be poffible I ftiould See them nomore? My family will mifs me: you know my father. Compare your danger vvith the value of my death. I have been promifed to be at liberty to ac¬ cept or to decline the union with you : woe unto you if you dare to break this firft oromife!" JL 44 As foon as I had hinted to whom I had confided my fecret, the aflembly grew calmer; and their tranquillity increafed with every minute. They beheld, with an indignant calmnefs, the emotions of Vol. L I the
the acuteft forrow and vexation at not having fooner difľolved Snares of fuch a coarfe texture. My life was fafe; Iwas fenfible of it : however, it grieved me to find menaces where I had been led to ex¬ pect love. It was only with difficulty I could conceal a difguft which was too na¬ tural not to wifli for an opportunity of fliewing itfelf. 4f Fear nothing, Carlos," the préfident refumed, at length. " How could vve defign to force you, as wc love you fin¬ cerely? In an hour you ihall be at liberty ; but attend to what I am going to fay." " I am not indocile, my father." u You know the lamentable ftate of our country. The grievances of the whole nation cannot but affect you alio. All ranks are confounded, or rather, are re¬ duced to one, by defpotiSm's galling fcourge. The people are miferable flaves. Neceffity has formed this fociety, and op- preffion has ftrengthened cur mutual ties. Lurking dangers have forced us to be on л our
, our guard, and to court retirement and folitude. A century has made us wife. Experience taught us to proceed with mo¬ deration. The fociety chofe their mem¬ bers from the ableft gcniufes of the na¬ tion, vvho are intrufted with all our fe¬ crets, are wholly devoted to us, and feel themfelves happy." t( Have the views of the affociation al¬ ways been entirely general?" " They have never been otherwife. All countries of importance arc ours through the members of our fociety. » Here oniy is the centre of our united ftrength." Ci Do you aim at the dominion of the world ?" " To promote the happineis of the world is univerfal dominion." " And the means?" <c You fee their Symbols on this table. Faith, dagger and poifon." — I trembled with horror, « Whv does our new brother tremble?" « Did I trem¬ ble?—Alas! I was only chilled with a woeful recollection. A horrid, ominous darknefs lies before me. I have had a J "2 wife,
Avife, a tender wife! You write Avith blood! A crofs is your fign! Curfed, eternally curfed be your bond ! You have robbed me of the greateft treafure!" "Carlos, you are mad!"— <c You are miftaken: my fury is cool, and my intel¬ lects are unimpaired. Have you the cou¬ rage to confefs that you have murdered Elmira? " Carlos, I fwxar by the eter¬ nal God ! by the horrors of this myftic cave ! by this crofs and dagger ! we have not murdered her." ** Then forgive me, reverend father ! My defpair be on the head of the villain who has perpetrated that atrocious deed." " We fhall enable you to find him out." 44 Do you promife that ? " We do!" 4ζ Well! then receive me into your fociety! I devote myfelf en¬ tirely to you. Tell me, what am I to do? " Nothing but to renounce every doubt; to confide in our decrees; to obey our or¬ ders, and to act your part well. Dagger and poifon are the greateft friends of hu¬ mankind. Thoufands of new lives ger¬ minate
minate from the urn of one man, whofc doom is fixed, if the welfare of the hu¬ man race requires it: his death is unavoid¬ able in that cafe, though he be a mo¬ narch ! " ■· ■' ■ · ....... " You will obferve, dear Count, how artfully they endeavoured to prompt me to refign myfelf entirely to their wiih All my paffions had been traced out, and excited with unerring art; notliing had been neglected to train me in time to the part vvhich 1 was defigned to act. It was nothing bur artful cunning that induced O e j them to touch upon tlie larier idea, in or¬ der to divert me from it vvith greater eafe, becaufe they imagined meto be fufficient¬ ly entranced to overlook its real meaning. However, they were miftaken. My ima¬ gination had not been able, as yet, to difengage itfelf fo foon from the na¬ tional ideas I had early imbibed. Thus one word overturned all their fine-fouii Schemes, obviated their moii Secret plans at the greateft diftance, and entangled 13 them
them unexpectedly in their own artful Siares, which they had fpread for me. Yet, although I imagined myfelf to be cunning enough to conceal the impreffion it had left on my mind, they perceived very foon what hael hurt them moft. Both parties wifhed to deceive each other, and either were deceived; 1 by them, and thcy by circumftances which could not be forc^ "Fla ving Su ppreffed my agitation, I ex¬ claimed, with horror, " Shocking! very Shocking! The life of a king, did you S:;v?" " Yes, the life of a thoufand kinp-s. The libertv of man is an unalien- able family-property. Who fteals it is a с r i m i n ai ; w ho a r t fu ì 1 y pu rc hafes i t fro m. the poffeflbr for a falfe appearance of inane happinefs is an impoftor. Whoever feels himfelf ftrong enough to punifh crimes, is his natural judge. Our forefathers gave us monarchs; vve re-demand our rights, and fummon them before a higher tribu¬ nal." " But do you judge with more cqu i ty
equity than monarchs?" " Our union has пюге members, and all of them arc free: our decrees are never infpired by caprice. 5> " The monarch owes his exiftence, as vou faid, to the voluntary Sub m i S- fion of our anceftors: they transferred their inborn rights to him for their benefit and liis ufe: but who has authorifcd ycu to re-demand theie rights? vvho warrants vou the truth of vour fentiments; vvho ^ «■ ·· O JL rated againft government, you confound your feelings with thofc of a general op- preffion; and, fcorning to obey any other law than the fuggeftions of your irritated will, you plunge mankind, vvho arc not capable to rule themfelves, into the tor¬ menting agony, of being governed by an unknown, foreign, arbitrary power " " Alas! Carlos, how little do you know us! Wc retired voluntarily from the lap of fortune, to whom men devote them¬ felves. We refigned the nobleft wiih of ex, alted minds, the immortal renown of beinsr О 14 ufeful
ufeful to a nation who vvere ienfible of our merits, and loudly and publicly courted our friendihip; vve retired from the fplen¬ dor which attended us, in order to direct a groaning nation to happinefs at a dif¬ tance ; and in folitary feclufion from the ** pleafures of the world. A long feries of years entirely devoted to that occupation, numberiefs errors vvhich vve retrieved vvith the greateit difficulty, the unity of our aim, the zeal and the number of our co¬ adjutors, every, every thing has contri¬ buted to fliarpen our eye; and, without any claim to the pleafures of the world, it fees clear when your looks are over¬ clouded. Believe me, dear Carlos," he continued, taking me by the hand, and looking at me with an eye fparkling vvith a heavenly fire, 44 you alfo will, one time, confidently adopt our creed. The hal¬ lowed bofom of folitude infpires the foul with elevated, heavenly fentiments; the fublimeft plans are generated in the pro- foundeft darknefs of night and obfeurity : what
what an endlefs blifs to extend one's arms over the whole globe, to be entirely inde¬ pendent, to be no more expoSed to the painSul SenSation oS the wants of life, nor to the caprice of circumftances and the blafts of accidents?" 4i Being furprifed and conquered, I fank into the arms of the venerable fpeaker» <4 Approach, my brethren," he refumed, 44 and receive the oath of eternal love from his lips." 44 I was in the twinkling of an eye en¬ circled by every arm ; and the horrid vow efcaped my lips at the altar, amid the kiffes of my new brethren. Being inebri¬ ated by a beverage out of the goblet, I dropped down at the foot of the altar, laying my hand upon the crofs : my arm was uncovered, a vein opened with the point of a dagger, and the ftreaming blood circulated in a goblet among all my brethren. The old man embraced me once more. " Go novv, my fon" faid he to me, « go, and receive the reward which you deferve,"---------■— « Give 1 *
u Give me leave, dear Count, to refpire a moment. If I fell, my fall is excufe- able. My fenfes were inebriated; and our paflions, when diflol ved, always melt into a wearinefs and a wavering of fenfa¬ tions vvhich leave no room for anv kind of recollection. The commotion which was excited in my mind by the idea of an atrocious aim of the blackeft die, can have been only momentary; and many crimes grow more imperceptible the greater they are. " I novv felt mvfelf not only reftorcd to a new life, full of activity, but all the ob¬ jects which lighted on my mind were at the fame time coloured with the die of that enjoyment, vvhich was, till then, the only one I had learnt to taftc. Confider only how I have been educated, and you vvill excufe me. Although I was early con¬ nected with women, I had neverthelefs, in their embraces, learnt to love but at a very late period. CHAPTER
CHAPTER ХИ. I NOW was led out of the hall, and the aflembly feparated. James afcended Avith me a flight of fteps, and ihewed me a door, vvhich opened into the garden. Day was not yet Sir advanced, and the balfamic vapours of the night were ftill in a conflict with the rifing heat of the rofy morn. An ocean of vapours vifibly floated in thin mifty clouds from one flirub to the other; a univerfal life and activity oc* cupied my fenfes, and I imagined to have been tranfported to another world. I roved by myfelf through the garden, fweet bodements lighted upon my foul, and I indulged my imagination to range without reftraint through a new worid, not ciirinp*· what novv would become of me. What a happy difpofition for the charms of love ! The garden had, indeed, a wild ap-» pearance; however, it had really gained by the changes which nature had effected 16 in.
in its cultivation. It being fheltered from the parching rays of the fun by its fitua¬ tion, the lemon groves vvhich covered it had been enabled to form a clofe thicket ; little rivulets animated the ever verdant verdure of its foil; c< and fruits and fra¬ grant bloffoms bluftied in focial fweetnefs on the fel f- fame bough:" tottering ruins of former grandeur beetled indifferent places over the encircling vines, and the creep¬ ing evergreen appeared to be the only re¬ maining ligament whereby the half-de¬ cayed ftructures were held together. An cver-ferene iky feemed to be fufpended over the luxuriancy oS this romantic val¬ lev, which was cooled by never-dying gentle breezes. A warm breath of fra- tyrant odours floated betwixt the trees, on which the golden load of ripe and ripen¬ ing fruits, painted vvith the moft beautiful hue of health, beamed through the trem¬ bling growth of covering leaves. Every object around wore the gay livery of pleafure, and awakened the defire of en- joyment
joyment in every fenfe. The whole ap¬ peared to belong to the peaceful lap of a paradife where even a God could have forgot himfelf. 44 How was it poflibie I fhould be able to recai at prefent to my memory the airy dance of thofe enchanting images, which were refufcitated, as it were, from all the periods of my whole paft life? I floated in a ftraitening reverie, and neverthclefs was unfpeakably happy. The whole time paft vvas involved in a rofeate cloud, from which the prefent time unfolded itfelf gra¬ dually like the firft rays of the morning fun from the purple clouds of the eaftern horizon. I feated myfelf on the velvet grafs in a retired fpot, and a low hum¬ ming in the air, the murmuring of a neighbouring rivulet, the plaintive ftrains of a folitary nightingale over my head, and the rufiling of the leaves, had a more powerful influence on my réfolutions than the eloquence of a reverend hoary man. How wonderful is my fate, deareft S****** ! Iiow
How deceitful, how contradictory is it in the fentiments and feelings to which its •lingular turns gave rife, and from vvhich always new incidents originated! Thiii heavenly, peaceful difpofition, which breathed nothing but the pureft inno¬ cence, and guiklefs .tranquillity, procre¬ ated a voluptuous inebriation; the effect of which ftill obfcurcs my whole mind, u I had not long indulged the fwect dreams of my imagination beneath a fra¬ grant tree, and obferved the gentle mo¬ tions of its boughs, when a diftant mufick vibrated in my liftening ear. The mufi- cians came nearer and nearer, and at length itopped, juft when I could difcern the different harmonious ftrains. The fweet accords feemed to be gentle fighs expreffed by the foft notes of a flute : the amorous ftrains of a plaintive voice, vvhich fpokc the captive language of voluptuous de¬ fires, and the Swelling melody of the flute, made my pulfes beat with uncommon violence, and changed my blood into, a liquid
liquid fire. My breaft expanded itfelf in a painful agitation; all my fenfes vvere enraptured, and I fancied to be tranfport¬ ed to better regions. 44 Looking back into the Shadowy walk from vvhich the harmonious ftrains pro¬ ceeded, I beheld a white female form, of a taper fliape, and uncommon beauty. The harmony of her enchanting notes feemed to have imparted itfelf to all her motions, and lifted the liçht covering of her bofom vifibly higher. Her face was veiled with a thin gauze, and flie flopped repeatedly to look timidly back. What a fweetnefs of features did I behold in her angelic countenance î Her gait was, in¬ deed, rather uncertain and timid: how¬ ever, the tout enfemble of her lovely form was a mafler-piece of elegance. She drew baflifully nearer towards the fpot where J was feated, entranced with unfpeakable fenfations, and uncovered her heavenly face. Words are inadequate to exprefs what I felt when the unclouded fplendor of
of her unparalleled beauty dazzled my giddy eyes. Wbat a number of beauties had I already beheld in the courfe of my amorous career ! but never have I feen a face like her's. I am of a voluptuous difpofition ; and I had felected from nu¬ merous beauties thofe charms which flat¬ tered that propenfity moft. An image which I believed could never have its ori¬ ginal, had gradually formed itfelf in my imagination; but here was more than an image of fancy. My enraptured looks beheld female beauty in the higheft perfec¬ tion. Her eyes were animated with a fire which would have kindled the flame of love even in the heart of a ftoic: the bright enamel of her face; the bluih of morning on her dimpled cheeks ; the tre¬ mulous motion of a languifliing mouth breathed a fpirit of Avanton defires, Avhich promifed more to give than it was capable to receive, and imparted itfelf to me with irrefiftibie power. Senfations and wiihes, which long had lain dormant in my heart, ι awoke
;iwoke at once, and pervaded every nerve of mine with a foft tremor; a voluptuous fire glided through all my veins; and my arms expanded themfelves involuntarily to receive the unknown being. She feated herfelf filently by my fide: the luftre of her beautv unfolded itfelf more and more iß to my gazing looks; the rofeate colour of her face affumed a higher tinge; her eyes grew more and more languifliing, and Seemed to invite the wanton fports of love. A growth of filken hair floated in natural ringlets upon her bewitching bofom, anel encircled her lily neck. The charms of her incomparable form difengaged thern^ feives gradually from the invidious con* cealment of her garments ; her little foot grew vifible; an alabafter knee, whofe lilies vvere intermixed with the blufhes of the vernal rofe, unfolded itfelf from the ■- cloud of her veftments, beautifuller, rounder, and more perfect, than ever a painter could have delineated, or the moft luxuriant imagination conceived. She exten dedi
extended at length her downy arms ; 1 fek myfelf clofely encircled; my eyes were dazzled bv the overpowering fire of her looks; a quivering, balfamic lip burned on my languifliing mouth ; my breaft heaved againft a panting bofom ; all my fenfes vvere intranced; my blood fermented; my face fank on her knee ; but ihe raifed me vio¬ lently up to her bofom ; her garments gave way, and—I fell. " Unhappy me! In the extacy of thefe embraces, in a furious trance of the hiVheft fenfual gratification, which drowns the enchanted being in an ocean witliout" a ihore, I Avas fettered with bonds from which I could not difengage myfelf for many years; my reafon and my firmcfl principles were totally overturned in the rapture of my fenfes. It required, after¬ wards, only the leafl recollection of thofe moments of unutterable pleafure to tran¬ fport me beyond myfelf, and the nobleft réfolutions of my, certainly, incorrupted heart could never ftand the hope of refting once
once more on the bofom of that con fu ni¬ mate enchantrcfs. Caufes and effects had been computed with unparalleled art, and Li'* the re-action could, therefore, not mifs its aim. With a virgin fulnefs which en. chanted my fenfes, and with an innocent refignation which charmed, did flie com¬ bine the art of igrati Гу1пц· me with either. Every feducing art was at her command; flic could have thawed the ice of hoary age, and rekindled the flame of youthful fire in the р/с liei bofom of a Ncftor. More than human ft re n çt h would liave been re- quired to withftand the conquering powers which nature and art had imparted to her JL charms. " Our mutual trance of fenfual gratin- cation was of a pretty long duration, and I recovered firft the ufe of my enraptured fenfes. She was ilill extended on the claf¬ tic grafs in a voluptuous fwoon, bereft of the power of recollection. The ecftatic trance in vvhich her fenfes vvere drowned diffolvcd at length; her half dimmed looks
looks feemed to be afraid to meet my languifliing eyes; and the blufhing fpirit of virgin pudency overfpread at once the lilies of her languid countenance vvith a crimfon hue. She ftruggled againft my bold blandiihments, and, before I was avvare of it, had regained a dominion over herfelf vvhicii awed my temerity into profound refpect. Her lips began to open the firft time; and flie faid, in a tremulous accent, " Alas ! Carlos, what have I done! Will you return my fond¬ nefs for you with gratitude?" " Angelic girl ! how can I ever be grateful enough for the unfpeakable blifs you have beftovv¬ ed on me? My whole exiftence fhall be devoted to you·" " Carlos, your love will be the only re¬ turn I ever fliall claim: but do you really love me, you beautiful rogue?" ' ς I loved you, idol of my foul, when you fat down by my fide, adorned with every charm of virgin beauty; when your looks refteel wkh f ich an unSpeakable kindnefs on me. But
But now—now—fince I have tailed the luxury of your charms, I have ceafed to love—I adore you." " How happy is your Rofalia ! how unut¬ terably happy ! But who warrants me that AOu will be faithful to me? " Your *¥ charms, Rofalia, and your kindnefs to your devoted Carlos." " How many girls have already had charms for you, Carlos! and was one of thofe whom you loved lefs kind to you than myfelf? However, I per¬ ceived pretty clearly what would fetter you moil, when I faw you the firft time. How fervently did I love you at firft fight! how boldly did you face the furrounding dangers of death, like a God vvho fears nothing but the judge in his own heart! How did your Rofalia tremble for you when you refufed to become a member of our fociety ! and how ecftatic w-as my joy when you acceded toit! Dear Carlos, will you ever be faithful to the folemn oath you took voluntarily ?'* " Undoubtedly?" " Svyear to your Rofalia that you will ftand firm
firm to your facrcd obligations." " I fwear by your love; by your blooming charms; by your kindnefs. I lay my hand upon your bofom as on my moil facred altar, and call down upon my heaei the moft horrid punifhment, if ever I break this oath. Will this fatisfy you? " Not quite, Carlos. You have fworn in the folemn aflembly of your brethren, and novv in the lap of love, to keep faith¬ ful to that union, never to quit it, nor ever to waver. Swear to me that you will be active for it vvith the facrifice of vour faculties and-fentiments?" 44 Can I prefume to engage myfelf for futurity? Is it not fufficient to beat leaft a paffive member, when reafon and fenfibi¬ lity prevent me from taking an active part? Shall I, in the lap of love, renounce the fentiments of humanity, for which you have been animating me juft now ? 44 That you fliall not, Carlos. I only defire you to regard me as a compenfation for every thing you fliall be obliged to facrifice.
Sacrifice. A thoufand women will love you, but not one fo fervently as I do; not one with that anxious defire to be every, ** -* every thing to you ; not one vvith my for¬ bearance; not one with the care I have for your happinefs; not one with a parti¬ cipation in your enjoyment that will be equal to mine. Dear Carlos, be at leaft grateful, if you vvill not love mc. Sacri¬ fice to me what you have." "Willingly, deareft Rofalia; but what have I that vvill fatisfy your demands ? " Nothing at pre¬ fent; but, ere long, perhaps, very much. I have an obScure preSenfton of futurity. Are you devoted to none of my fex more *· J ardently than to myfelf?" " To none, dear- eft Rofalia." "Nowife?" "No!" "Did you never love a woman with that ardor which you profefs for me?" " Yes, Ro¬ falia, there was a time when I loved with the fame, if not with a greater ardor. It was Elmira, Countefs of------ " I know her!" exclaimed Roialia, witlvkindling anger. « How! You know her?"
her?" She grew vifibly pale at theíc words, and her anxioufnefs encreafed the more ihe ftrove to hide her confufion. fC Yes, I know her," fhe refumed, after a fliort paufe ; " I have feen her at Madrid." íc Elmira never was at Madrid." " Or at Alcantara. Who can recollect every thing? ,> " She recovered, at length, her en¬ chanting fmile. " Do you not think/* fhe acjded, when fhe, probably, recollected that fhe had interrupted me too prema¬ turely, f< that we know your adventures better then yourfelf? A conqueft like Car¬ los is worth while to engage the whole attention of our fociety." With thefe words ihe encircled my neck with her beautiful arm, prefling me to her bofom, and imprinted a burning kifs on my lips, which had the intended effect. All ob¬ jections and doubts which her words could have produced Avere drowned in the rap¬ ture which her carefles infpired rne with. « Do
.V.VSTER .e-* 44 Do you then promife me, Carlos, to facrifice every thing for me; even your Elmira, if flic fliould be alive?" fC Everv thing, except Elmira." 4t And you would abandon me, you traitor, if your Elmira fliould return from the realms of death?*" 44 No, I fliould divide mv heart between you ; I fliould love either of you vvith fer¬ vent, fincere fondnefs." <f With fincere fondnefs?" flie exclaimed, viewing me vvith aftoniihment: 4< No, Carlos can never defire that his Rofalia ihould be Satisfied with half his heart. . Choofe novv between myfelf and Elmira," So faying, flie offered me her hand. " Elmira is dead; I choofe you." (< I thank you, Carlos! a feaft fliall crown our love." <f She clapped her hands, and twelve females, clad in white garments, appeared commencing a myftic dance, Their vo¬ luptuous attitudes expreíľed rheir defires, and excited mine again. The individual enchanting charms of the beautiful dancers compofed a whole vvhich inebriated my Voi,, 1, K. fenies
fenfes vvith pleafure. The whiteft bofoms and necks, knees and taper legs, which wantonly were difplayed by their flying garments; the voluptuous play of their arms and fingers, the languifliing lan¬ guage of their miens, the action and re¬ action of their limbs, the vifible motions and heaving of their fwclling bofoms; every, every thing my greedy eyes beheld re-kindied the half dormant fire in my veins; I preffed Rofalia clofer to my heart, our eyes Swam in voluptuous tears, anel our pulSes beat with redoubled quickneSs· 44 It is impoffible, deareft S******, to give an adequate description of the plea¬ fures that crowded on my fenfes, vvhich vvere alternately exhaufted and animated again with new energy. The fweeteft fruits refrefhed my languid tongue; the pureft and moil delicious wines invigorated the flopping pulfes of my heart. Every object: around feemed to be the effect of fairy art; invifibîe hands fupplied us vvith the moit exquifite dainties; vve were left to
to ourfelves, and yet feemed to be ani¬ mated by fecret voices to fpend the day in fairy revels. The tepid air around us, the moit fecret bower in the garden, the blue enamel of the iky, the joyful ruffling and humming; betwixt the leaves, a foft ftrain of amorous flutes, which floated through the fragrant air at a diftance, invigorated the fenfes which that bewitching woman hael opened to the raptures of the moft exquifite enjoyment. We roved through the garden arm in arm, melted, as it were, into one being, * and frequently dropped half fainting on the fwclling grafs ro exchange our fouls in burning kifles. <f Evening came at lenoth on the dufky wings of twilight; the clear blue of the ether was gradually tinged with a darker hue; and vve beheld already here and there a little ftar twinkling through the leaves, which were moved by cooler breezes. The contours of the objects loft their edges, and gradually difľolved in tlieir К 2 OWn
own iliade; the dying nočturns of the ** Ό feathered choirifters grew fainter and fainter, and the nightingale retired to a more fecret and gloomy fpot to fing her plaintive ftrains in undifturbed folitude. Wc feated ourfelves on a bench of elaftic turf, and Roialia difengaged herfelf at once from my embraces, lifting up her eyes to the ftarry heaven. Her looks grew gradually more folemn, and I viewed her with aftonifhment. tc What is the matter with you, my deareft love?" I whifpered, with endearing careffes, and taking hold of her hand. She drew it fuddenly back, took a poniard out of her bofom, and lifted it up to heaven. Imagine, dear S ****** > how great my terror and afto- ifiihmcnt was, when I had reafon to fear to be fuddenly doomed to deftruction in the lap of pleafure. " Eternal povvers!" ftie exclaimed, vvith , the higheft degree of enthufiafm, 4i to you I am going to devote this victim." (She was no more the fond girl fhe had been, but
ТПЕ HORRID MYSTfRlES. Iţ//' but quite a different perfon. I fcarcely could think that nie vvas the fame Rofalia. She feemed to ruih between the Godhead 1 and humanity to facrifice the latter to the former. Like an inexorable judge, flie 1: a d raifed the dagger to deftroy the de- voted victim with one blow. What a íľreatnefs of look, what a fublime maiefly in every feature, did ftie difplay !) " Rife, Carlos, and kneel down before me!" .1 obeved her ftern command. tc Hear niy imprecation !" 4i í hear, Roialia." u Sw ear as I do." " Here is my hand." 4t Swear that no other being ftiall intrude between с ) us; that no living; being, not even a thought, ihall tear our bond afunder; that vve w ill be united forever, and keep firm to the fociety vvho gave us leave to love each other: that neither of us fliall attempt to alienate the oilier from it." <c I i\ve:\i\" i4 That each of usihali proffente the faith¬ lefs party with namelcfs tortures, and vent the moit unrelenting revenue even on the half withered bones of the perfidious К 3 wretch;
w retch ; that the burning refentment of the avenger fhali not be appea fed till every thing that renews the memory of the traitor be extirpated along with every "veflige of his love and of his pofterity/' " I fwear." 44 And if the reprobate fhould efcape the refentment of the avenger, mav then the marrow in his bones dry up, may cankered poifon corrode his heart, burn¬ ing thirft parch his tongue in the midft of water, and an infatiable hunger torment him in the lap of plenty ! Even in love's paradife, may infernal agony excruciate his heart and blaft his hopes; may he be miferable amid the fmiles of pleafure, and become a picture of woe unutterable to humankind. Swear Carlos?" " ï fwear." 44 So do I then confecrate thec to be my faithful huiband. May heaven be propitious to our union. Ye invifibîe povvers be witnefs to our mutual oath ! So faying, ihe ftrained me to her heart, and imprinted the bridal kifs on my trembling lips.
lips. The voice of my defires was filent in that Solemn moment; the ftillnefs of the grave fwaved all around us, and even the waving leaves of the trees ceafed to ruftîe. 1 preffed my heavenly wife fpeech¬ lefs to my bofom, anei her large blue eye, animated with a foft fire, repeated tho oath her lips had uttered. 44 Her hand was ftill armed vvith the dagger. She bared my arm, and opened a vein, fucking the biood which flowed from the orifice in. large drops; and then wounded her arm in return, bidding rue to imbibe the rofeate ftream, and ex¬ clahned, u thus our fouls ftiall be mixed together!" However, ilie dropped fud¬ denly fainting into m ν arms, exhaufted bv the lofs of blood. 1 ftarted wo* Seized with terror, bound up her wound with my handkerchief; and vvith difficulty re- ftored her to the ufc of her fenfes. But I was alfo feized vvith a fudden fainting fit, having neglected mv wound; mv eves grew dim, and my fenfes fled.. Roialia К 4 called
called out for ailiftance. Some females appeared, and led mc to the caftle, where i laid down, and inftantly fell afleep. " James fat b ν my bed when I awoke the following poornino* irom a balfamic fleep. tr You have flept verv iong, Саг- 1 ι * О У Ioo! 1 ' he faiei : <ζ can vou foare mea few 7 •t j-.İLVı.tes for a fhort converfation ?" " Why p. or, niy friend, rny pi r с ft r ver? " Not fo enthufiaftic, dear Carlos: Do vou hear? Let us now talk in a cool and r ea:o nable manner. You have made me our fincere friend, and it refts entirely with vou whether I ftiall continue to be fo or not." " What can I do, James?" " Firft of all, I wifli you would liften patiently to me. Ύοχχ was inebriated yefterday: to day you muft be fober. Rofalia was, at firit, defigned only to charm your fenfes; the girl has, however, conceived a fincere love for you, and this alters the matter." " Dear
" Dear James, you fpeak fo candid w ith me." " Muft 1 not, if 1 ihall be your real friend? I only witli you alio would be candid and unreferved. í believe you are in love vvith Rofalia?" " I adere her." *' Will vou ever be faithful to her?" tť Have 1 not fworn a folemn oath tobe fo? í was, indeed, in a ftate of inebriation when I pronounced that vow ; A. but I call vou to witnefs that 1 now re¬ peat my oath vvith the fulleft approbation of mv underftanding." 44 1 do not doubt vour Sincerity; flie de- ferves being adored by v ou. Learn to de¬ ferve the heart ftie has ofiered you. lt was not in our plan tliat you ftiould anticipate what is onlv the privilege of a wedded huiband. You have tied the bonds of wedlock fooner than you deferved it; you have taitcd the fweets of matrimony be- fore vou vvere legally united. Your mu- tuai ties will 'be more firmly contracted when vou firft have learnt to be deferving of each other." Ír f -. < it ( ¡-χ
<c Can I render myfelf deferving of her by the moit implicit fubmiflion?" " Yes, this is the only way. I can converfe with you only a few minutes longer; and yet have to tell you very much. Let me recom¬ mend a few words to your confideration. You will not always comprehend us, Car¬ los; but let this not tempt you to doubts, and obev without hefitation. After you fhall be tried fufficiently, and have given us unexceptionable proofs of your firm¬ nefs, the veil vvill be removed from your eyes, which, as yet, cannot bear the ftrong light of many truths. And befides, vve do not know you fufficiently, nor on what: trait of your character we can have more or lefs reliance. Yet, truft in futurity, and you will become an honour to our fociety. ■" Be always obedient. The degree of your obiequioufnefs will be put to the teff; vou will be involved in fituations in whicii it vvill appear to you to promote the intereft of our union vvith your own advantage if you
you fliould tranfgrefs your orders ; but do not fuffer yourfelf to be feduced thereby from your duty; for obedience is the fail ftep that leads to dominion. * c Be ahvays unreferved to us; for it Avould avail you nothing to be reel ufc. Being furrounded by an hundred hands, watched by a thoufand eyes, you will not be able to conceal the moit fecret receîTes of your heart from us; your eyes vvill al¬ ready betray half-born thoughts. Our bond does not condemn bold ideas ; vve only defire to know them, in order to cor¬ rect your errors. The opener you are, the more we ihall reveal ourfelves to you. " Finally, Γ muft tell you, that I have been fent to make you fwear an oath of fecrefy. We fliall intruft you vvith im¬ portant papers, by which you will be en¬ abled to get acquainted with the fpirit of our focicty. You muft fwear to me to preferve them carefully. Who knows the fates of men? There muft be places which К 6 are
arc out of the fphere of our activity. You may be feduced; but as to this point, you muft iland all temptations, and keep faith¬ ful to us." " I promife it." 44 Swear by God and your life." " I fwear by God and by my life!" " Here is the parcel. You will find in¬ it a complete direction how you are to act. Farewei, my dear friend. In a twelve¬ month I ftiall fee you again. A Genius will attend you every vvhere, and you vvill be fafe if you follow him." " So fining, he embraced me, and left the apartment vvith tears of affection. His· confidential tone had entirely conquered my poor deluded heart, and my ideas floated in a mixture of noble réfolutions. .uid voluptuous fancies. I had juft done d re f ung myfelf, when a ftranger appeared, ii.r.bying to me, that he had orders n> conduct me out of the caftle. I followed him mechanically through feveral paffages ci the ruinous fabric, from one vault into the
the other, and through the garden into the foreft. When we came to the cottage, be left me fuddenly/ and difappeared. My horfe was ftill on the fpot where I had left him, and neighed joyfully when he faw me. I took him affectionately round the neck, and his tears feemed to mingle vvith mine. A great change had, meanwhile, taken place in my mind ; I fcarcely knew myfelf again. All my wiihes and prefen- fions had been gratified, although but ob- fcureiy, yet completely ; and novv I loft myfelf again in a labyrinth of new ones> which ieemed to be endlefs. Was it delu- fion, or a dream ? What was to become of rue? And, to leave you now, Rofalia, now, a bride after the firft bridal night ; a. wife, after the firft embrace; vvithout taking leave, without any other token of remembrance than the picture of your charms, which is deeply engraven in my heart ! How unfpeakably cruel is the firft proof of your friendihip, ye dreadful un¬ known! Dunner
During this Soliloquy, I had thrown rriy- felf down upon the couch where I had refted formerly. My mental and bodily ilrength was exhaufted, and I was half dreaming and half awake. However, the violent kicking of my horfe roufed me from that ftate of apathy; I untied him, and went in fearch of the road to my caftle. " Dear Marquis!" a voice exclaimed, when I approached my garden, "you look very pale. How do you do?" Thefe words were accompanied with a loud laugh, and I perceived Don Pedro at the diftance of a few paces. " Indifferently vvell, as you fee," I an¬ fwered. " On coming nearer, he perceived that I was not difpofed to liften to his jefts, and refumed, in a more ferious accent, ,f So gloomy, Marquis : what has happened to you ? If you had come a little later, I fhould have gone in fearch of you vvith an armed force." " I doubt it very much, Don
Don Pedro." " Perhaps, becaufe I was not inclined to creep with you into the hut. I would lay any thing that you have heard and feen nothing. Is it not true?" cf You are perfectly right, (I replied.) I fell afleep, and had a dream; a long dream, which, as you fee, has lafted till now. But, to be ferious, Pedro, have you received any intelligence of your lady?" 44 This unexpected queftion difconccrted my poor friend at once; he hung down his head in a mournful manner, dropt big tears, fobbed, and anfwered not a fyllable till we came to his houfe, when he left me abruptly. I went into my caftle, where I was received with univerfal joy by my fervants, who had been under the greateft apprehenfion on account of my long ab¬ fence. Different reports about the fup¬ pofed reafon of my abfence had, mean¬ time, been rumoured about, and received additional credit, becaufe Don Pedro too had returned but a few hours before me. ıh ts
This latter circumftance, of whichhe had made not the leaft mention, did not ftrike me much at that time: however, his ab¬ fence was clofely connected with mv ad- ventures; and you will foon fee, deareft Count, what confequences I could have drawn from that circumftance, İf I had not been ftupefied to fuch a degree as ren¬ dered me entirely unfit for reflection. " 1 fpent the firft weeks vvith ft udy i n í*· the papers I had received from James. They vvere written in fuch an obfcure ftile, that I could only vvith difficulty gather а few ideas: however, thofe new notions ap- peared fo fublime to me, that I was quite enraptured with them. What grand pic¬ tures did they exhibit, and how great а judgment of compoiition ! í vvas loit, as it were, in а foreign country, whicii was ihewn to me at a fmall diftance vvith un¬ common eharms, and a í forded me Sufi¬ cient opportunities for exerting all my mental faculties to underftand the whole, and to enjoy it in unmixed purity. The more
more 1 purfued thefe ideas, the more per¬ ceptible did their connection grow; my foul ex oa n d ed itfelf. and i ihon expected to penetrate ro the fource of the whok. 'She remam!;:'*·· part of m v time elapfed amid the iirnn'le amufements of a rural liie. The clr.no-c of obie-cls amufed my "î 3>' 1 " ' " '' í j л * i i ι : u 2 il ¡í V í 'liv. i c t. í t İL 1 ¿ í j J i l lite llill^avjd "ϊ 4 #*" i · ϊ * î , 0?Ί İ ■* Γί ϊ ŕ ' i ' ì · A i *" Г' ν V ΟΓ.Μ' !'' ''Γ'^,μ Ws f --p fyilT ¿i 1\Ux{-í1 ı.,b , ν У : li* y aí'jniviU Aàí evi L . * L UvU t «■ r 1 ì I vvhich 1 was to ačt alwavs recalled to mv memorv the heave::» v charms of her beau- tiful form. 'Fhe latter only was the object of my ideas, becaufe 1 had experienced too little of the accompliihments of lier mind, or was too exhaufted to have had a proper' fenfe of her mental excellencies. That fmiling, voluptuous image followed me everywhere, mixing with my amufements, haunting me in mv fecret bowers, at the tinkling rivulet, and purfuing me to the ft.lent grove 1 , wliere, on the bloomy fpray, the birds wich joyous mufic waked the dawning dav. î beheld her every where clad in virein beautv ; and the artlcf* Sounds
founds of nature, which formeriy hael enraptured my foul, had no charms for me, if they did not refemble Rofalia's voice. I cannot conceive, at prefent, how it was poffible that a lively fpirit like mine was capable of being fenfualized fo much. <c Don Pedro appeared again the day after my arrival, and feemed to be very much comforted and tranquil. Fie was occupied with building, and amufôd him¬ felf with gardening. He was merry and ferene, and relapfed but rarely into that melancholy which, in the beginning of our acquaintance, had rendered him fo dear to my heart. We generally fpent the evenings together, and repeated, in our confidential converfations, the occupations in which vve had been engaged during the day. It appeared fometimes to me that his underftanding was more penetrating, and his character more fludied, than he chofe to let me fee. His mind frequently developed itfelf in wonderful greatnefs and brilliancy. Yet I took thofe brighter moments -
moments for ecftatic tranfports of an over- burthened Soul, ftriving to nun itfelf by merriment. The deeper I penetrated into the plan of my aflbciated brethren, the plainer I prefaged their manner of pro¬ ceeding and their operations, the more did I fufpect every word that was dropt in my prefence, and I found in every thing a relation to the notions that occu- pied my foul. Sometime was granted me for reft, and for the ftudy of their fyftem, and two months were already elapfed vvithout any indication from their part, I imagined, at laft, that thcy had forgot me entirely, and prepared to return to Alcantara, where my whole family awaited me vvith anxiety, when an event hap¬ pened, which at once gave a different turn to my whole future fate. " I had carefully avoided to mention Francifca a fécond time to Don Pedro. He feemed not to have received any farther intelligence of her, and the child appear¬ ed to have made him forget the mother. At
At once he came in full fpeed to my houfe, 44 I come to tell you news that vviil furprife you, Don Carlos, (he exclaimed, on fee¬ ing me:) my wife is returned P' " Your wife?—You joke, Pedro!" 4i Wouid to God, I did, dear Carlos. But, between ourfelves, I novv care very little for it. Alas! fiie is again fo melancholy, weeps fo much ; and when I told her, Don Car¬ los would rejoice to fee her again, her tears flowed more copioufly. Can't you guefs, dear Carlos, what may be the meaning of it?" " This unconcern appeared to me very SuSpicious. His innocent air was not quite natural, and his looks betrayed fome anxiety to hear my reply. 4t So!" I ex¬ claimed, laughing, <c I am glad of it. Perhaps flie is in love vvith mc!" 44 This indifference of mine furprifed him as much as his unconcern had ftruck me. He feemed to be violently agitated, when he faw that he was caught in his own
own fnarc, but foon collected himfelf again. u What do you mean by that, my dear Marquis? You are very abfurd to day, my dear Marquis." 4f You fee, dear Pedro, that I am very bufy, at prefent. Pardon my franknefs. I fhall be glad to fee you and Francifca this afternoon. Till then, farewei, dear Pedro." So faying, I offered him my hand. Fle appeared to be confounded, and left me with downcaft looks. " What docs that mean?, faid I to my¬ felf, when he was gone. Francifca is re¬ turned ; and yet the farewei fcene between her and Don Pedro was as folemn and fo affecting, as if flie had intended to fee him no more this fide of the grave ! Did flie not fwear that flie would fee him no more ? Did flie not offer to deftroy herfelf? And, what ihall I think of the unconcern with which Don Pedro informs me of her re¬ turn? Fle either is a fool or an impoftor. And who is to be impofed upon? Carlos! Carlos !
Carlos! If you ihould fuffer yourfelf to be deceived by a friend! In that moment I flept to the window, and with terror faw the name of Elmira written on one of the panes. Gracious heaven! (I exclaimed,) who has done this? In that moment the recollection of times pafl ruihed upon my memory; all thofe charming feenes when I ftrained Elmira, that noble, heavenly being, to my heart, were regenerated in my mind. However, the recollection of that blifsful moment alfo re-produced that fcene of horror when ihe clofed her eyes for ever in thofe arms that had expanded themfelves to make her happy. A dreadful fufpicion ruflied like mountains on my heart. She died fo fud- denly, and in a manner fo unnatural ! Who fpoke fo myfterioufly of that affair on my reception in the fociety? And— all-gracious Heaven !—has not Rofalia made me fwear to love her no more? Of what ufe was that oath, if flie is really dead? And Rofalia betrayed fo much anxietv
anxiety and uneafinefs. Should ihe per¬ haps be ftill alive? Should ihe be only withheld from me?—And for what pur¬ pofe ?—To tie me fafter by Rofalia's charms ? My agitation almoft overpow¬ ered me; a torrent of tears gufhed from my eyes. How different, Elmira, were your charms from thofe of Rofalia! How innocent your looks! How chafte was the warmth of your embraces ! Never, never fliall I forget your noble mind, the fweet harmony and tranquillity of your pure unfpotted foul. O! that you never had left me ! how happy fliould I then be ! CHAPTER XIII. THE tranfition from fentiment to Sen¬ timent is a wonderSul trait oS the human heart. The firft part oS my Soli¬ loquy was entirely occupied by anxious SuSpicion and lurking jealouSy; the Second breathed nothing but grief at Elmira's lofs, which totally difpelled the former α fenfations.
fenfations. I was afraid to examine into the probability of Elmira's ftill being alive; the faint glimmer of hope, that cheered the defpondency of my foul, was fuch a precious treafure to me, that I ima¬ gined to owe fome gratitude to the con¬ federates for not having precluded me en¬ tirely from it. My former fanciful dreams re-occupied my foul, ingroffing my whole confcioufnefs, and I imagined to com¬ mence a new life fince I renewed the in¬ terrupted connection with her. Flow hap¬ py was I ! I overlooked from my vvindovv, with anxious pleafure, all the bovvers and trees vvith vvhich I had held an intimate communion after the lofs of my dear de¬ parted wife. I fufpended her picture to my neck, kiffing it more than an hundred times, and it began to fupply to me, by degrees, the original. " Againft evening I faw Don Pedro and his lady coming to my caftle. He looked flaring at me; talked anxioufly to her; and flie feemed to take great pains to com¬ prehend
pre hend the' part in which he inftruct ccl her. I went down to receive them. Pedro was as friendly, innocent, open, and com¬ municative, as he formerly had been; anci his wife did not betra v the leaft neroicxitv. I received them with common civilirv, vvithout mentioning a Syllable of her re- turn, telling them that í reioiced at the incrcafe of our fociety, anel we foon com¬ me need an indifferent converfation. Fran¬ cifca frequently was abforpt in meditation, as if fludyino- the r-srt ¡he was to act ; and 1 furprifed lier feveral times in a fecre: an x i et ν, which ihc ftrove to conceal. if She was grown much handfomer than when 1 faw her the firit time. A fAcret grief, that feemed to rankle in her bofom, liad fpread a languid palenefs over her 1 í Α* Τ * LOunlLütliiL^, liuti \viti\LS t\ UlpclľíiCLlC СП10· tions in every feeling heart, and faíeinates the mind; a iivrniiicant mouth, that Spoke the energetic language of internal fufter- илц$, rendered her tace an affect i n p* picture Vol. Г. E or
of love. I could not help fixing my looks on her interefting countenance. " Pedro obferved the emotions of my heart, vvhich was not ufual vvith him. He made merry at it, and encouraged us to be more communicative to each other. " Have I not a beautiful wife, Don Carlos?" he exclaimed, incircling her taper waift. " Who denies it, Don Pedro?" " A wife that loves the friends of her hufband?" , " She flok a glance at me, bluihing, and catting her looks down again. This is onepartof the charačterin vvhich he has tutored her! faid I to myfelf, and yet could not help being captivated by the lovely mourner. It is true, Don Pedro acted his part in a mafterly manner; and he would have attained his aim, if his wife had been poffeffed only of one half of his felf-confcioufnefs. Fle involved us in the moil innocent, and vet in the moft artful, manner, too, in a thoufand little fituations which gave us an opportunity 2 oS
of crowing more intimate with each other. He made me, with confummate art, take notice of the brighteft parts of his lady, difplaying them in the moit advantageous manner, and unfolded all her captivating charms. We grew warmer every mo¬ ment: however, flie biufhed more fre¬ quently than he probably had inftructed her to do. It appeared to me, that flie was tutored to perplex me only, without being thrown off her guard; but flie watched not carefully enough over her heart, and conceived an inclination to mc before flie was aware of it. She afforded me lefs opportunities of making thefe ob¬ fervations than Don Pedro himfelf. With¬ out lofing fight of me, he gave her num¬ beriefs little h'mt^ not. to forget herfelf; but fae gave way to the fecret impulfe of her heart. At length ihe acted her part more natural than her huiband wiflied; he rofe, and lamented that he could not ftay longer vvith me. When my vifitors took leave, Francifca's weeping eyes, and her L α trembling
trembling hand, told me that my fufpicion was not unfounded. But how was all this connected? I was implicated in a maze, from which í could not extricate myfelf. Pedro had fomc defign upon me. This was but too viii ble. But if it had been connected with that of my aflbciated bre¬ thren, it would have been folly to weaken, by the coquetry of his wife, the ftrong impreflion Roialia had made on my heart, which would have been rendered more lafting and e ili cacio u s b v m v iliaden fena- ration from that captivating woman. But if he wanted to implicate me in a defign of his own (which then was moit probable to me) what plan could it have been, if it ihould compenfate hirn fufficiently for the riík he ran of lofing the affection of fuch an accompliflied being? All thefe reflections produced no other refult, than the refolution of being on my guard at all events. " Several days elapfed before I heard any thing from my neighbours. I was too
too much occupied to take much notice of it, and omitted purpofely to pay them a vifit, or to gather any intelligence con¬ cerning them from my people. I enjoyed in folitudc, and in Silent rapture, occupied vvith the remembrance of my Elmira, all the charms of ray refidence, indulging rny fweet, though melancholv, fancies in the dying breezes of autumn. Ьлегу ob- * **.j «> ject around me wore the livery of my fancies: I was fo hapoy, fo much abforpt in my reveries, as to h.e afraid of the intrufion of every foreign fenfatîon ; 1 converfed vvith the tinkling rivulet, and it anfwered as I wiflied. Fací ν fufferer loves his grief. ζ< At the clofe of the fifth day, I walked flowly down the borders of the rivulet which feparteci Pedro's elbue from mine. I was ίο ir.iich inebriated with pleaflní»" filiations, that I took but lirde netice of u hat was doing around me, when SkU deniy loud fobs vibrated in mv ears. Tliey a roce c d e d fro m Fra n c i fc а . H e r <j r i e f vv a s L· 3 natural,
natural, for it was impoifible fhe could have feen me. She Sat on the oppofite bank of the rivulet, reclining her head on her hand, and mixing her tears with the filver waves of the purling rivulet. Her hair covered part of her pale woe-worn countenance, and her bofom heaved vio¬ lently under a burden which it fcerned en¬ deavouring to throw oif. Her attitude was fo painful, and the expreffion of her features fo affecting, that involuntary tears ftarted from rny eves. " At length fne ftarted uv, and looked wildly around. A rofe-huih in full blof¬ fom was at her right. She tore the bud¬ ding flowers off, and fcattered the leaves on the ground. At length flie feemed to forget that ihe had intended to 'tear the fragrant bloffoms, collected fome of the fcattered leaves, kiffed them, moiffened them with her tears, and kiffed them again. " She is in love ! faid I within myfelf: and thou, unhappy wretch, art perhaps, the
the object of her paffion. I ftepped nearer towards her, exclaiming, " Francifca* why do you weep?" She raifed her head placcntly, as if the object of her reveries had called to her; her melancholy looks met me; but no fooner did ihe defcry rne, than íhe ejaculated a loud feream, and ruflied into the thicker! fhrubberv. w " Do you fee, Carlos, (faid I to myfelf) rhe haplefs woman loves you; and whar do you feel for her? nothing but pity ! Ac bottom, I did not know rightly what I felt for the love-Sick mourner; but thus much is certain, that I poftponed my in¬ tended journey on her account. 1 did, indeed, not love her; inv heart being ftill warmly and faithfully devoted to Elmira; yet Pedro was a villain, and it was worth while to difpoffefs him of a treafure whole value he could not eftimate. This fine ratiocination, whofe true fource I would not fee, prompted me to flay. " Soon after this incident, Don Pedro vifited me. He wanted to appear open
and confidential, but I could eafiiy fee that fomething ailed him. I returned his vifit the following day, and met Francifca. But ihe was filent, conftantly blufhing, referved, agitated, and Dale. (i Are vou not well, my clear friend?" faid I, vvith a gentle fquceze of my hand, which ftie re. turned crimfoning. " She is always fick¬ ly," Don Pedro replied for her. A tor¬ rent of tears gufhed from her eyes, and her hufband gave her a hint to vvith- <t ■ í: ^ .· fi I do not know what ails the fooüfti woman." her huiband replied. t{ You treat her perhaps wkh too much fe verity»" í anfwered. ** Vou have not informed me >et of li^e firit reception vou gave liei*; ir ■*·-<· ï о 7 ч .- ■ t - v о »-s о * ~> f v Г / ^ ' i í t * -* 1 ì 1 ' ч ; ì **ì ^ lili* Г * ŕ Ì : î ! í í wiih; not ťo warm asan unhappy, rc- * , ;-y Τ* 1 Tl f" penting w ite may expect. i eli menn« eereìw lune vou ncthinir to accufe your- iei ť of, in that refpeci?" He knit his brew, íť No, indeed not!" — < f Doive
u Don't reftram her too much. Per-- haps flic is fond of fociety; let us invite the neighbouring nobility. She is per¬ haps inclined to amufement anei noify di-· verrions. Let us give concerts, balls, and mafquerades. Take care you don't lofc her a fécond time.'* This fimolicirv onen- ed his lips, and he imagined that he could advance a few Steps farther in his plan without ninnino· anv rifk. "No. Carlos! You miftake the caufe of her ¿nef,'* (i Well, what is it then?" <c She is in love ľ' ťí în love? (I laughed aloud.) This к r.othinp* new* to me," Ci You know ^A it? Well, then, I need not to inform vou of it. ,? (i No, certainiv not; if only the' happy objeci of her flames knows it." i( Dear ivïarquis, I conjure you to <?;ivo- her no enco\;rag;Tnent !" i{ Do vou dream, 'Don Pedro? or Iiave vou loft xavac fenfes?' —Of whom do you i peak?" u Of vou - Marquis. —' f v\ un nie Uie ıs in love.·"* ťí Moft certainiv ; v, ich vou!" " ímnoí- •ŕ p- t íible! That certainiv would Ье fi u ne: n uh·
с > ГАГА/
new to me.—But, Pedro, you are a mife¬ rable jefter! b "No! by heaven! I am ferious!" " Do you fee, that I am right? Your unhappy jeaioufy renders her miferable. She fees herfelf excluded from your affec¬ tion! Is any thing farther wanting to make her unhappy.—-Fie ! be afliamed, Don Pedro!" 44 I know very well what I fay. But let us drop that fubject at prefent." ci Here our converfation terminated; cither of us being eager to impofe upon the other. I went home foon after. W r e met feveral times, on the fubfequent days ; but Francifca did not appear, and I muft confefs that I was afraid of inquiring after her. vc Pedro was fhortly after obliged to makea journey: heaven knows whither. Fíe feemed to be rather perplexed when he informed me of it, and took leave vvith the following words,: " If you love me, Don Carlos, you vvill remember my re¬ queft ?"
queft?" He then ftrained me tenderly to his bofom, and departed. I was not dif¬ pofed to enter in a long converfation,· it appeared to me as if Francifca's name were lurking in all my ideas, anei as if I did not rejoice at that difcovery. My danger increafed. I was but too fenfible of it. How diftrefsful was my fituation, if this was a fnare for me! 44 Yet I refolved firmly not to fee her during Don Pedro's abfence ; but it was plain that the haplefs woman really loved me. She had no fhare in Don Pedro's art, and her tranquillity and happinefs en¬ tirely depended on me. Should I render her fituation more forlorn than it already was? How eafiiy could flie conclude, from my behaviour, that I defpifed her ! that I did not decline her affection from duty, but fcorned it. And what bad con¬ fequences can one vifit produce? I re¬ folved, therefore, to pay her a vifit, but to be as civil and referved as poffible. Familiar gambols, and innocent liberties, L 6 only
only threatened to nourifli the flame that was concealed in her heart. " I found her again in a very melancholy fituation; her eyes were red and Swoln; her pale lips emitted plaintive fighs ; yet flie endeavoured to conceal the mournful flate of her mind, receiving me kindly, and with a blu fli ing placency. I feated myfelf by her fide, beneath a fpreading Jimc-tree, vvhich overfhaded a beautiful i ишак -fii rubbery. The day was one of the fin с ft I had ever feen in autumn. The departing feafon feemed to bid a finiling farewei to her d ving children, and to erive her iaft cheerful benediction to the fading bowers, and the decaying verdure of the autumnal fields. Francifca difplayed a mien of compofiue which 1 never hael ob¬ ferved in her countenance. She was occu¬ pied with female work, and now and then ftole a glance at me. Her woe-worn, рак countenance, overfpread with rhe charm of an agitated fenfibility, rendered it
4
it i m poilible for me to preferve the referve vvhich I had brought with me. (t Having, for fome time, converfed on indifferent fubjects, I inquired after her lord. (ζ Will he foon return, Sennora?" faid 1. <4 í dont believe he will: for he has ordered mc to fliut myfelf up, and to avoid feeing ftrangcrs, as much as pro¬ priety will permit."—" Probably he has been avocated by family affairs?"— (i It mav be. He has communicated nothino· to me." " You don't feem to be fatisfied vvith his behaviour, Madonna? I am Don Pedro's friend, vvill you honour me with vcur confidence?" <ζ Woe unto you. if you are! but I have no fecrets to confide to you/' "Alas! Francifca, I do not deferve that treatment. No one can love you more cordially and fincerely than my¬ felf. But, why thefe tears, why thefe in¬ voluntary Sighs?" You See, my friend how* I kept my refolution. She pre w paler and paler, and began to weep more violently; replying, after a mournful paufe,
paufe, " Carlos, if you love me, fpare me Avith your tender goodnefs; I do not de¬ ferve it." « Who would be more deferving of my tendernefs than Francifca ? Have confi¬ dence in me, my dear friend; let me fliare your forrows!" "Carlos, lam a faithlefs, abandoned woman!" " Has Don Pedro told you fo?" " No; Pedro has forgiven me: however, I am agitated by a new conflict with my heart; and this time, alas! Carlos! I ihall not conquer." " You are in love?" No anfwer. " You are in love, Francifca?" "She dropt half defpairing in my arms, and hid her face in my bofom; feizing my hand with convulfive fighs, and preifing it to her lips and to her heart. Heaven and earth difappeared in that moment from my dizzy eyes; all my réfolutions were forgotten; and I beheld nothing more in Don Pedro than a villainous friend and huiband, from whofe hands one ought to delivera dear object. I encircled Fran- cifca's
cifca's waift, and imprinted a burning kifs on her lips. " Carlos?" ihe groaned, 4C I can bear it no longer." So faying, ftie difengaged herfelf from my embraces, and rofe up. " Why do I conceal thefe fentiments? No, I will be proud of them. Yes, Carlos, I adore you. You are the only being upon earth whofe affection can fet this poor heart of mine at eafe." 44 With thefe words fhe was going to leave me abruptly; but I Avas tranfported beyond myfelf, and took hold of her arm* " And wfith that confeffion you will leave me to myfelf, Francifca?" "Can I help it, Carlos?" "No, you muft not leave me. Unbofom yourfelf to your friend. Will you unite your fate for ever w 7 ith mine? Will you flee with your devoted Carlos?" " Yes, I will: but we muft not ftay in this' country, nor in a neighbouring one : they would find you, and tear you from* my arms. Do you know fome foli¬ tary unknown fpot beyond the ocean? Forgive me, Carlos: excufe a lovefick woman,
woman,' that would willingly purchafe your happinefs at the expenfe of her own. But take me vvith you, left I fliould be forced to act agai nfi you !" ft Againft me ! Then my apprehenfions are not unfounded ?*' 4€ Dark and dread· ful things are hid in the human heart, Do not truft your beft friend, Carlos. But, I have fworn an horrid oath." She looked around with a fearful countenance. " We novv agreed to elope. The foL lowing nicht vvas fixed for our flight. I took every precaution to execute our plan vvith fafety, and unpurfued. Night fet in. A window was the place where I was to meet Francifca. Ά noife was to be made, as if robbers were breaking into the houfe, í intended to conduct her to a place of fafety; then to run into the houfe, under the pretext of tendering my afliftance, and to purfuc her wiih Pedro's fervants in a falfe direction. A ladder was placed atrai nft the houfe ; the window was left <*~A oocn. I entered it mafked: but how great
great was my terror when I found Fran¬ cifca's bed empty! The whole houfe was fearched. Ail her waiting women vvere faft afleep, and ihe could be found no where. " Ì perceived, however, fonie traces in her room, that convinced me ihc hael been carried off by force. She had, pro- bably, ftruggled very much; her bed be¬ ing in the greateit diforder, and a great part of the furniture broken and fcattered on the floor, near the bed. It was aito¬ ni (hing that her attendants, who flept in the adjoining chambers, ihould not have been difturbed b v the noife. The fervants whom vve had awakened, and who vvere furprifed to find that we had got into the bed-room of their lady through the win¬ dow, protefted to have heard nothing but hollow moans, vvhich they had miftaken for the diftant howling of a dop*. The waiting women were ftiil afleep, and wc haftened to awake them, upon vvhich the myftery was unfolded at once. All our endeavours
endeavours of roufing them were fruitlefs; and having applied even painful means (to which I thought myfelf authorifcd, imagining their lethargy to be fictitious) \ve were obliged to defift from all farther attempts, it being plain that fome perfon in the houfe, that had an opportunity of mixing fomniferous drugs with their drink, was concerned in the affair. Every moment added to my fury and rage. I was almoft frantic, and threatened Don Pedro's people to maffacre every one ot them. But they protefted unanimoufly, with evident fincerity, to be entirely ig¬ norant of that myftcrious tranfaction ; and* it appeared afterwards, that they all had lived too long in Don Pedro's fervice for being reafonably fuppofed to have allifted a ftranger to carry off their lady. Whom could I now more naturally fufpect than Don Pedro himfelf? I had plain proofs of his low cunning; it was evident that he had a defign upon me, whatever it might have been; and had felected his wiSe to be
be inftrumental in the execution of it. She had returned to his houfe at the moft feafonable period : ihe was thrown off her guard : it could be forefeen, that, at length, a defign would be formed againft himfelf; his wife was, therefore, danger¬ ous to hirn; he could not remove her vvithout exciting my fufpicion, and, of courfe, carried her off by force. 44 tliis train of arguments appeared to be very clear; though it rendered my fitu- iííion more intricate and dubious. I was actually on the brink of defpair; not fo much on account of the lofs of Fran¬ cifca, as of her fate and fufferings. My diftrefs was fo much the more galling to me, as I faw myfelf a fccond time im¬ pofed upon under the mafic of friendfhip. My pride being hurt, the agitation of my mind, originally caufed by an unfortunate love, was renewed, 44 Several weeks elapfed vvithout any in¬ telligence of either Don Pedro or the con· federates having reached me. The coun¬ try Teat
try-feat of the former was a real folitude. The fervants, that had been left behind, having received neither intelligence nor anv inftruct ion from their mailer, bco-an to quarrel, and part of them ran awav : h i s ga rd e n vv a s i n t h e g rea t e ft c o n fu fi o n , h e - caufe every one wanted to be the gardener ; and I thought myfelf bound, аз a neigh¬ bour, to put a ftop to thefe d i forde rs. Extending thus the comnafs of my occu- pations, my reflexions on tiie injury I had received vvere diverted, my refentment wore off by degrees, and I began to excul¬ pate my former friend with encreafing good-nature, the more I had occafion to intereft myfelf in his external concerns. This mutability of character, which ori¬ ginated Iefs in weaknefs than in an un- bounded goodnefs of heart, promifed be¬ fore-hantl the greateft fuccefs to the fu hfe- quent wiles vvith which he deceived my un fufpect ing heart. " The ftudy of the papers James had given me occupied the greateft part of my time. I combined not only my former, bui
but even my innate notions and rooted prejudices vvith thefe new enthufiaftic doc¬ trines ; and the more they became inti¬ mate to my open, fufceptible foul, the eafier I deduced applicable refults therefrom, the more did my mind ex¬ pand itfelf, and futurity appeared to me in a clearer and roller dawn. Thev com- *f pri fed nothing but ideals, and yet the images pourtrayed therein were fo human rhat my underftandiníí vvas warmlv inte- 1 ч. iteti » ----------- <( How forry am I, dearcfr Count, that 1 am forced to withhold from you the no- hie fenfations which the communication of the great and exalted plans thefe papers contained would produce in your mind and that 1 can give you only thofe few hints my vows do not entirely prohibit me to impart ! Though I ihould be bold enough to imagine myfelf difcnsniffed —■ -' "C_r* irom them, yet that Genius that has haunted every ftep of mine ever fince my initiation, itill hovers around me, 1 fliould wantonly provoke the vengeance of thofe
dreadful unknown, whofe controul over me may perhaps have decreafed; but for their own fafety can terminate only with my death. Time, perhaps, will un¬ fold more than I am at liberty to do. The influence under which you and I evi¬ dently are, muft ceafe fooner or later. Suffice it to tell you, that I gradually have derived from that fyftem, which has in¬ trufted me vvith the nobleft ideas, that tranquil ferioufnefs with vvhich I look for¬ wards into futurity, expecting nothing from it, and taking hold of every thing ufeful and improving it offers to me. I relapfe again Avith gloomy melancholy into my age, from which I ardently wiflied to emerge, and fubmit vvithout either grief or joy to my fate. Deareft Count, let your noble human mind dwell a few mo¬ ments on this emanation of fenfation, the refult of the moil extraordinary fate; a refult which will be able to guide your courfe when I, as I have reafon to appre¬ hend, ihall have taken leave of you in fome manner or other. chapter
# CHAPTER XIV. •\ SOON after this incident I vifited my j * family at Alcantara-, but all their re¬ joicing, all the pains they took to prolong my ftay with them, were fruitlefs. I was entirely dead to thofe fweet pleafures which the peace of a ferene domeftic life always affords to uncorrupted minds, that do not groan under the heavy preffure of forrow. New gratifications had rendered mv heart infenfible to the former ones: and vvith the knowledge of the fituation of my family, I alfo had loft all the inte¬ reft I was wont to take in it. " It is one of the moft lamentable flates of mind to be addicted to any good or expectation to fuch a degree as to be in¬ different to all other pleafures. I was mifconceived every where. Being from the fociety of the higher claffes, occupied with the ideas of fuch a noble fociety, en¬ gaged with a conftant conflict vvith my¬ felf
felf and my prejudices, I could not but be a ftranger to the method of circulating my ideas vvith eafe in the company of that Set of people. One ftared at me, becaufe he did not comprehend me; another treated me vvith eoldnefs, becaufe I was ufed to grow warm on fome occafions; and a third ibunned me, becaufe I was a difagreeable companion. The natural confequence of it was, that I grew more obftinate and referved. Taking all thofc I was connected with for blockheads, I ufed myfelf to a tone of condefcenfion that offended. All the offences I gave unknowingly vvere returned vvith a venge¬ ance, which prompted me, at length, to leave Alcantara. Having explained to rny family the motives that obliged me to leave them, ï departed vvith great fatisfaction. " The vernal feafon had, mean while, re¬ turned; and my heart longing foran undif¬ turbed communication vvith itfelf, I threw myfelf again into the arms of a country life. My grief foon was reconciled again to
to the world; and the more I fecluded myfelf from men, the more did the gloomy light in which they had appeared to me of late clear up. I foon began to live again for them, yet without being able to love them : vvhile I refined on my enjoy¬ ments, I ftrayed farther and farther from the fweeteft and moil natural pleafures, and thus appropinquated that point where the whole life is waited in reafoning, and loft to the community. Finding Don Pedro's houfe as empty as I had left it, and being unable to difcover the leafl traces of the fate ofthat couple, I refumed, vvith additional eagernefs, the ftudy of the pa¬ pers intrufted to me by the confederates, from whom I alfo had heard nothing fince my return from the myftic cavern. The whole fyftem was already become pretty familiar to me; but the more I perufed it, the more new ideas did I difcover. My mind was occupied all the day long with no other ideas but fuch as immediately related to the fublime principles contained Vol. L M in
in thofe papers, and I even fpent whole nights with the moil diligent ftudy ofthat treafure of elevated fentiments. " In that occupation I was one night engaged. Midnight was already paft. Every perfon in the houfe was afleep, and I had opened the windows of my bed¬ chamber to inhale the balfamic fragrancy of the young lemon bloffoms, and to liften to the plaintive ftrains of a nightin¬ gale that had perched on a large lime- tree before my window, when I fuddenly heard a violent knocking againft the great gate of the caftle. I ftarted up, feized with aitoni fliment, and could not guefs the meaning of that unfeafonable noife. " All my fervants were afleep. tlie knocking grew more violent. The gate was at length opened, and a loud noife re-echoed through the caftle, vvhich feemed to be in an uproar. A it range murmuring refounded through the gallery, and the whole edifice was in confufion. Hafty fteps were heard on the ftaircafe; the
the doòr of my anti chamber was opened. Some perfon approached my bed room, and at length a figure in white entered, ruihïng into my arms. 44 Being half dead with apprehenfion, and an uncertain fear which I could not fliake off, I had ihut my eyes, when my nocturnal vifitor came towards me. I was fo m' ich ftunned, that I hardly could open them. The candies did not burn very clear; and the ftranger was fo much difguifcd, that I could not difcern her fea¬ tures. I imagined her to be Francifca, and was enraptured to ftrain her again to my bofom. I prefled my lips upon hers, when I firft obferved it was not Francifca. I pufhed her from me, and exclaimed, " Go woman! thou art not Francifca! But who are you?" <4 How, Carlos? don't you recollect your wife, your Elmi¬ ra?" Eternal God! it was Elmira. I was aftonifhed at this difcovery; it was my fweet, my faithful wife. I knew her by her tender kiffes, by the fire of her M 2 embraces,
embraces, by the fweetnefs and the milei- nefs of her words. Yet fhe was not the fame Elmira that formerly enraptured me; not that heavenly fmiling and cheerful being. A death-like palenefs covered her torpid features, and feemed only reluc¬ tantly to give way to the rapture of my fenfations. A mifty gloom had overcaft the large blue eye, flaring at me vvith figns of anxious apprehenfion; and a painful, but placid, fmile aíked me foli- citoufly who that Francifca was for whom I had miftaken her with fo much warmth. I felt the whole force of that reproving fmile, ft rained her to my boSom to pac i fy her Avith blandifliments, but found it im¬ poffible to utter a Avord in my excufe. 44 Do you ilill love your Elmira with tendernefs?" fhe at length began. 4i Yes, my fweet, heavenly wife, I do; but can¬ not yet collect myfelf. Are you really rifen from the grave, or are you only the ghoft of my wife, and returned for fomc moments to fpeak comfort to my foul?" ι « Let
44 Let this embrace tell you, my dear huiband, what I am. Departed fpirits cannot kifs vvith that fervour. But have you been as faithful to me as I was to you ? Be fincere, my deareft huiband." " I was terrified, the joy of meeting again being fo fliort lived, and fo fudden¬ ly overclouded by anxious jeaioufy. If that dreadful confederation had taken her from me, flie muft have been informed of my faithleffnefs, of my infernal inebriation. This thought, vvhich obtruded itfelf irre- fiffibly on my mind, bereft me of the power of utterance. At length, I ex¬ claimed, in an agony, " Curfed confedera¬ tion! thou haft robbed me ofe very bieffing!" "What does my Carlos fay?" Elmira refumed, preffing her pallid face to my cheek. " Be candid to your wife." " Alas! Elmira, you know my tender heart. You died in my arms, and I was pre¬ fent when you was entombed. How could I imagine that all this was nothing but foul deceit to ileal my moil valuable trea- M 3 furc
fure from me? I have bemoaned you a long time, and looked for your image in every objeet which my eyes beheld. You did not defire me not to lovea fécond time." " No, I did not; I even couid not wiih that your heart ihould never give way to a fécond love. But now, my deareft huf¬ band, now you vvill love me again? Is not Elmira reftorcd to the poffeffion of your heart? She has deferved it by her fidelity, and dearly bought it by her fu fieri ngs. Is it not true, my dear Carlos, that you will refign to your faithful Elmira all other women, that you will be wholly mine, and that the reftoration of your fond wife gratifies all the wiihes of your heart?" " Certainly, my dear, my ever adored wife/' " Though my tender huiband fliould have loved another, yet it was but Elmira whom he fancied to have found in her. If you forgot me for whole days, it was only becaufe you did not omínate the pofti¬ bility of my return. I forgive you, dear culprit; I forgive you every, every thing. Your
Your heart is capable of rendering thou¬ fands happy: but, is it not true, dear Car¬ los! it can be made happy only by one?'* 44 The fweet enchantrcfs! I was itili fufpended between dreaming and waking, while I was enraptured with the probabi¬ lity of having her reftorcd to my heart. I was in the ftate of a wayward wanderer, -r vvho, on the morn fucceeding a tempcftu- ous night, is afraid to meet the firft rays of the fun, apprehending to miftake it for a fla ih of lightning. I ftill fufpected that fweet enchanting fcene ro be only a delud¬ ing apparition, and conftantly cailed my fenfes to an account. It was too romance¬ like and ftrange to prefs the terreftrial form of a departed fpirit again to the heart. I had not been furprifed when fiic was torn from me; but could not help won. dering to fee her reflored to me by our enemies. Or had flie, perhaps, effected her efcape from the den of thofe tygers? And how was this poflibie? NofoonerdidI begin topiace again fome confidence in my M 4 fenile;,
fenfes, than I entreated Elmira to unfold that myftery. " The palenefs of her countenance en¬ creafed, flie looked iearfui around, and encircled me vvith growing anxiety. " Don't let us talk of it now, dear Car¬ les!" fhe repiied, in a trembling accent: " vve are not a moment fafe: let us flee, as far as you can, as foon as it is poftible! As quickly as you can, if you love your wife. Alas ! they will tear me again from your tender bofom!" " I meditated a few moments. Amongft all my obligations to the confederates I could find none relating to that point: I firft wanted a hint to that purpofe, and refolved to await it, it being not impro¬ bable to me that Elmira had made her efcape vvith their confent; and they could forefee that flie would flee with me. Yet, I loved her fo ardently, and with fuch an unfpeakable tendernefs, that I fcarcely would have heii tated to run fome rifk for her. I, therefore, promifed to make every
every preparation for a fpeed y flight ; I endeavoured to fpeak comfort and peace to her boding mind; carried her to another bed-chamber, where I begged her to lay down, and to compofe herfelf; and having fecured the door and the windows, flung myfelf upon my couch greatly fatigued.— 44 You have feen, dear Count, that my hiftory, as yet, has been an aimoit unin¬ terrupted train of misfortunes; but the period which I am now beginning opens new feenes of ftili greater horror, that vvill fliock your feeling heart, and ren¬ dered me almoft frantic; feenes in which I loft every thing dear to me, the fole ob¬ ject of all my hopes and wifhes ; in vvhich my feelings vvere agonized in the higheft degree; and vvhich deprived me again, in- the moil horrid manner, of the only re¬ maining confolation for my former miíery. You will behold me the lamentable fport of the moit enormous plans, and a vičii m to black defpair. 44 Having refted a few moments on my couch, my half open eyes beheld at once a M 5 lucidity
lucidity refembling the faffron glimmer of the dawning morn. I took it, at firft, for the blufh of the rifing fun, and ihut my eyes again; but ere long, it grew fo dazzling, that it made my eyes fmart. I raifed myfelf up, and faw the whole apart¬ ment illuminated. I could not difcern whence the light came ; the whole atmo- Sphere oS my chamber being inflamed. Little clouds of light floated in the air, moving to and fro' ; and I beheld, vvith horror, ftreams of fparkling fire dart through the apartment. All objeâs around me were clad in variegated light. Low accents, like thofe produced by a ftream of air touching the firings of a harp, vi¬ brated in my ear; a whifpering-like ruff¬ ling of the wind between the young leaves mixed periodically with thofe myftic founds. I alSo heard, at intervals, half fuppreffed groans, and yet could not fee whence they proceeded. I pulled the bell to awaken my fervants, but the firing broke. I wanted to ruih out of the bed, but
but was held down by an invifibîe power» I expected that a beneficial fwoon would relieve me from thofe horrors; but my fenfes being already ufed to fuch appari¬ tions, I was denied that melancholy comfort. While I ffruggled in vain to difengage myfelf from the invifibîe bands that helel me down, a thin vapour arofe in the apart¬ ment, vvhich having artained fo much confiftency as to overdarken all the objects around, began to form itfelf into a more diftinct fliape, and a white being emerged at iength from its cloudy womb, darting with fparkling eyes towards my couch. 44 Who art thou?" 1 exclaimed, with an accent of defpair. 4( I am thy Genius, AmanuelV that dreadful being replied, in a hollow, but melodious, ftrain. 44 I have been Sent to warn thee not to elope with Elmira. Take my advice, Sor I love thee." 4( Who has Sent you?" " The great confederation has confided thee to my care." <f I had many more queftions to afk, and numberiefs more objections to ftart ; but M 6 fcarcely
fcarcely had I extended my arm to feize the phantom, when midnight darknefs furrounded me at once. The filence of the grave reigned around me, no found vibrated in my ear, and I beheld the ob¬ jects around me in their natural form. " I had not been reclining long on my couch, and was but too certain that I had not yet fallen afleep, and that, of courfe, that fcene could not have been theillufion of a dream. I hael been promifed a ge¬ nius, and his apparition was too convin¬ cing for me to have miftaken my myftic vifitor for an imaginary phantom. He appeared to be a tranfparent airy being, and amicably inclined to me; my whole belief in the non-exiftence of fpirits was, of courfe, violently fliaken ; and I cannot deny that I felt myfelf happy in my con¬ nexion vvith fuch a being. On getting up, I found my chamber door faftened on the infide ; the windows vvere ftrongly barred, as I had left them in the evening ; and the whole fituation of the chamber rendered a fecret
fecret communication impoffible. Impo- fition was impracticable, and my reafon urged me to believe in Amanueľs exiftence. " My mind turned, at length, to the purport of his million, and I repeated his dreadful words vvith an unfpeakable agony. Then I fliall refign Elmira to your power? ye incomprehenfible unknown! She has already fuffered too much on my account; and I could be unfpeakably, and completely happy with her; I even could, on her bofom, revolve all the notions which you, as requifite for my happinefs, excited in my mind. And fliould I not be happier, and more content, if I never had known you, or were to forget you for ever? I wafte the bloom of my years, anel the golden age of my life, in myftic prefen- fions and arts, in order to underftand and to aflift you in directing the happinefs of mankind after the lapfe of many years. I anticipate, in the prime of life, the gra¬ vity and ferioufnefs of hoary age, merely to fcek after a felicity which perhaps never will
will blefs me; fiicrifice the enjoyment of the prefent moment to uncertain futurity ; fow vvithout knowing whether I ever fliall be fuffered to reap. How unfortunate, how lamentable is my lot ! And do you offer me a compenfation equivalent to the facrifice you demand? How cruel, how incompaffionate are you to me ! " I fpent the whole night with conflicts ofthat nature, and was entirely exhaufted, when the rofy blufh of morn dawned in the eaft. I went eariy to Flmira : fhe aifo had been debarred from fleep by reftlcfs inquietude. We took a walk in the gar- den, equally rcftlefs. A fecret vifibly de¬ preffed the fpirit of either; vve felt mu¬ tually each other's referve and anxiety, and were afraid to open our lips. I walked mute and gloomy by her fide, fighing at every beautiful and fecret fpot where my fancy formerly had feafted my foul vvith her image; and when her fupplicating eye begged me to difclofc my forrows, I felt myfelf incapable of realizing thofe feenes of imaginary pleafure. " Wc
cc We returned to my apartment without having exchanged a word ; but no fooner were we feated, than either haftened to interrogate. We preluded our convcrfa¬ tion with fond endearments, and fealed the opening lips with kifles ere they could emit the hal S formed words, " Elmira," 1 began at length, " I am very unfortu¬ nate ! I cannot flee vvith vou,"—" Mer- ciful God ! Carlos," ihc inquired with terror, " why not?" I related the events of the night. She was almoft petrified, but infifted upon our flight. " Rather kill me, my huiband, than leave me here. Why would you undo a wife that you have feduccd to love you? that was fo happy in the lap of her family before ihe knew you ; that from love for you has riiked every thing, and patiently fuffered unutterable mifery. Be compani¬ onate, dear Carlos, and kill me !"— " No, you fliall die with me, Elmira. But firft let us try whether we can be hap¬ py· Tell me, what can I do?" u Let
" Let us fly ! This is the only means of infuring happinefs. No rofes can bloffom for us here. Every other part of the globe will afford us more happinefs; the farther we fly, the greater wfill our happinefs be." " But how can I efcape thofe invifiblc hands that infilare me every where? hoAV can I fave my love from their powerful grafp? Put me in a way of doing it. You feem to harbour a fecret, let me know it, to fave you and your Carlos." " No; let us fave ourfelves firft: they Avould murder me in your arms. О ! you will learn how cruelly they fport with your good, your noble heart; how enormous and unheard-of the deceit is which is practifed upon you; how they endeavour to feduce you, under the malk of frienel- fliip, to the moft heinous villanies, to the blackeft crimes. All the fublime ideas which have been held out to your noble, generous mind, concentrate in one point of the moft atrocious wickednefs. I have accidently difcovered the whole myftery ; I was
I was doomed to die, but I eluded their cunning; and now throw myfelf in your arms. Have pity on a haplefs being!" 44 I am aitoniihed ! Elmira. Should it be true what I ominated? Should they heedlefsly have dropt that hint vvhich I happened to catch in their fociety ?" 44 You are certainly not miftaken, Car¬ los. I know how they abufed your heart, and how cruelly they have feduced you. I was forced to witnefs vour faithleffnefs in Rofalia's arms; I was to be an accom¬ plice in the confpiracy againft you. But what nifties yonder, Carlos: did vou hear nothing?"— 44 It is nothing, Elmira. Your imagination deceives you." <c Indeed, 1 heard fomething, dear Carlos. Take me in your arms ; let me die on your bofom." 44 There certainly milled fomething be¬ hind the mirror; however, I pretended not to have heard it, took her bv the hand, proftrated myfelf before her, and did every thing I could to make her eafy. But no¬ thing could difpel her terror. I laviihed numberiefs
numberiefs careffes, intreated her to fear nothing, anel even flied tears to prevail upon her to ftay at my caftle: but I grew weaker every moment; and as foon as flie perceived that my firmnefs gave way, fiie redoubled her anxious and tender efforts to perfuade me to flight; and at length extorted the promife to elope with her to a diftant country. In order to protect her at kail againft open attacks during the ihort time that was required for the pre¬ paration for our departure, I defired tvvo of my moil faithful fervants to ftay with her while I arranged every thing for a fpeedy flight. Nothing feemed to impede my journey; no obftacle, no hindrance came in my way ; every thing was favour¬ able to me. I fcorned already the impo¬ tence of the Spirit, who, as I imagined, would apply every means of oppofing the preparations for my departure. But I was miftaken ; the Spirit fuffered me to get every thing ready. The night which was fixed for our flight approached very faft. We
We intended to fly to France, where I hoped to find with Elmira the happinefs tvvo congenial fouls may expect, I flat¬ tered myfelf to be able to forget in that country the tender objects that made Spain dear to me, and to find a new home. El¬ mira took a lively fhare in the hopes that animated me, and vve anticipated already fo much of our expeeted happinefs, that little would have been left for futurity to add. The mules were already harneffed, the coach was ready, the fervants were waiting for my commands, and I went with a loving heart ţo fetch Elmira. It was already dark ; ihe had two candles burning in her apartment, and fat on the fofa to adjuft her travelling drefs. She was fo cheerful, that we began to joke, and to exchange a thoufand little Sallies. She had juft clone d refting, and was on the point to follow me down ftairs, when ftie fuddenly ftarted up, overfpread with death¬ like palenefs, and Slid, " Dear Carlos! I hear certainly fome noife yonder," point¬ ing
ing at a chandelier that was fufpended to the ceiling. " Yes, I hear the mules kick. Come, let us be gone." " No, no; I heard fomething very clearly, juft over our head." " Well, let us quit this inchanted room." <f I took her round the waift, to make her go out of the room, when a pane in the window was ihattered to pieces, and fell into the room. The fame happeneel Avith feveral more. A loud hiifino; guiheei О О through the apertures like the whiftiing of a ftrong wind. The tvvo candles were cx- tinguiihed with a loud report» A fire ball flew down to light them again; the doors burft fuddenly open, and vvere ihut again. An invifibîe being ambled through the apartment, and an ice-cold blaft of air blew in our face, being fucceeded by a burning hot ftream, that almoft Suffocated us. Elmira lay fainting in my arms; however, I had fufficient ftrength left to carry her to the door« Defpair made me
furious, and I awaited anxioufly Amanueľs arrival to vvreftle with him. I could not open the door, and called for help through the window, when it fuddenly burft open. I haftened with my precious burden out of the apartment; an uninterrupted hif- iing and whiftiing purSued us ; the whole apartment was in an uproar, the chande¬ lier Sell upon the floor; all the furniture was fcattered about vvith a hideous noife; the whole houfe feemed to be in 'a blaze. A tremendous noife arofe behind us, pur¬ fuing us through all the apartments to the door of the carriage. But I fliut my ears and eyes, and held my wife fail in my arms. 44 No fooner were we feated in the car¬ riage, than the whole caftle feemed to be turned upfide down. All the windows were illuminated at once, the doors opened and ihut again with a tremendous noife, and large Stones vvere rolled down from the roof of the houfe. My fervants looked at each other pale and feized vvith terror. They mounted their horfes with anxious hafte,
hafte, and even the mules were impatient to leave that inchanted place. " We foon reached a little wood, and our beafts relaxed from their furious race. At once the carriage ftopped, the window was ihattered to pieces, and a mafked perfon íhot Elmira in my arms.·----------- " Thus far I had wrote when the Count returned from town, diffatisfied with his affairs, and angry vvith me, becaufe he had not received a line from me for a long time. I affured him that I had wrote to him feveral times, and fcolded him in my turn. Our letters had been intercepted. " We re-commenced our former courfe of life, and were mutually happy in each others fociety. He did not mention the latter part of his adventures, and 1 told him that I was writing for him. This made him cheerful ; and he frequently re¬ peated, " this will make us underftand one another." " The diverfions in which our neigh¬ bours involved us, did, however, not al-
low me to write much; and the fubfequent part of my hiftory, to the period when I came toa mutually dangerous explanation vvith the Count, is the fruit of thofe hours in vvhich I could fteal from his company, the produce of many a night, and of many folitary meditations. 44 One day I had been confined to my apartment by a flight indifpofition, when the Count returned cheerful from a ball in the neighbourhood. 4t I have got ac¬ quainted with a man," he exclaimed, on entering my bed-chamber to wifh me a good night, 44 vvith a man whom very few refemble, you and myfelf excepted."— " The Count was not ufed to praife too precipitately; my curiofity was therefore excited to a high degree. 44 W r hence does he come? How does he look?—What did he fay?"—1 inquired, with impatient eagerneis. 44 Dear Marquis, what an inquirer you are ! He has fettled in the neighbourhood, and feems to wifli being more intimately connected
connected with me. This is the moft im¬ portant point I know of him." " That is certainly fufficient for you ; but vvill you not make me alfo a little more acquainted with him? How did he look." " His face is rather oval ; he has a beautiful pair of black eyes, full lips——" " Dear S****** this defeription is very unfatisfactory. Did you not perceive fome¬ thing characteriiticafi no linking defects? He muft certainly have fome, and I am very jealous of your partiality, dear Count." " Indeed, I believe he has. A lit tie red fear over his left eye-brow T ; a little red wart upon his left cheek; and, if I am not mif¬ taken, one of his eyes is black, and the other rather blue. Don't you think, Mar¬ quis, that this is a moft charming picture? But you don't laugh?—Gracious Heaven! you grow paler and paler!" " Need I not to grow pale ? Your defeription completely fuits James's countenance." END OF 1 HE FIRST VOLUME.
