Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Horrid mysteries: a story: fom the German of the Marquis of Grosse; by P. Will
ч&шт*ш1&шм *млыя Ё1шшт»шштм1*ьш*ши0Щ1¥врат1шят10щшшш&жшя&шъш*чш1гшгшшшлгш**
THĽ HORRID MYSTERIES.
CHAPTER I. N r O one can conceive what fenfation; agitated me in that moment of nor- о ror, when Elmira, my dear, adored wife, lay b leed i np; in niy arms. I faw her an¬ gelic foul take its flight amid dreadful convulfions; her heart palpitated fainter and fainter beneath my hand, and, at length, ceafed to beat at' ail. Her Hps clofed for ever without being able to utter a lafl* farewell. However, I clearly per¬ ceived what legacy flie wanted to leave * me. 1 ftill flattered myfelf that the whole v,as nothing but a deluding, horrid dream, 1 had recovered my Elmira in fuch a ro¬ mantic nnnnei, and loft her again under fach fhucking circumft.inct*, that I Voi U К fancied
fancied it was impoffible the whole could be any thing more than an illufion of my imagination. I ftruggled violently to ihake off that fenfation, but always re- lapfed again into a ftate of agonizing in¬ certi tude. ff Thus late I was made dreadfully cer« tain that Elmira really was dead. Her blood ftreamed down my hands; and, on removing her veil, her countenance was entirely disfigured; her features were to¬ tally undifcernible; not one trace of her former beauty was left; the lovelicfl eye was ihut by the icy hand of death; not one fiVh heaved her bofom; and flie rather refcmbled a marble ftatue than a corpfe. How can I unfold the fenfations that thrilled my heart in that moment of agony? I felt no pain, but a burning preffure in my breathlefs bofom; my tongue began, as it were, to thirft for blood; and her departed fpirit appeared to me not to demand tears, but vengeance. " A mift
" A mift was, in that moment, removed from my eyes. The whole myftcry began to clear up, and all the clouds that liad obfcurcd my looks were difpelled. Never had ï felt myfelf fo much the fport of thofe unknown, fo much their cruelly abufed flave. How could they ufuip the authority of dictating to my fentiments ; and was I to implore, with, abject fervility, their permiffion before I conici enjoy cne happy moment? Life now became indif¬ ferent to me. I had vowed to my wife, in the firft delicious moments of our connec¬ tion, not to let her quit the world without me. When flic was torn from me the iirfl time, rny weaknefs had abfolvcd me from the performance of that promife. I now was doubly bound to go to my eter¬ nal reft; but I vowed to her departed fpirit not to die alone, fi This train of ideas was the work ofa few moments«, A finie of vengeance now A\as interwoven with my whole exiflencc: the lail idea of my bleeding brain, the \J M. i «I ' V
îaft drop of blood, ft rea n ung from the itiffening heart, would have been animated by that powerful fenfation: and in the prefent hour, in which I am unfolding to you, deareft Count, thofe dreadful m\ Ae¬ ries, I can bcldlv fay, that I have faith- fully obferved that vow, that I never loft iiiiht of it, that I revolved it in m ν mind under every preffure oí circumftances, and even İn the moil dangerous fituations of my life ic I mu fed a moment. My fervants leaped from the coach-box: thofe that had preceded us on horfe-back were re¬ called; the affaffin was purfued; my valet fired his piftol at him, and he fell. We haftened to the fpot where he lay extended ; but he died in the moment of our coming up with him. We tore the maflv from his face; I did not know it; however, the maik was dreadfully contorted, like thofe of your leaders in the garden of which you have given me a defcription. " I now
T »t í Hw . « · к " i now remo\ed Elmira'* сом. í- te f con;er (;i r'..c c^'.cii, and lei L it, í« exánime ť.e body of lhe aíuffin. \>- fc r v a ! í : s h л \ i ng vxpe^i ed t o fee n i e ag ; L u U . i bv tlie ПдоЧ violent eruptions oí arjen ■ and fiïry, were an:azed at fr.e соо!.л** with which ï met then». Ve kad t .* c harvad perfine. They buifi ti.e ct^u iı door open, being in .patient to fee tht.' belo\cd miftrefs once more, to kil\ h«r clay cold hand«, and to moi iten it w::!i their tear«·;. Happy was he that c uld catch a few drops of her blood, tb.^v were circulated like relics: tears and loaJ groans were the iole tokens of their affec¬ tion, and the) could not think that it was poffible they ihould have been feparated from her fo foon. This was the higheft triumph of innate goodnefs and of mag¬ nanimity. Elmira had conquered their hearts by her charms ; but her immacu¬ late virtue, her gentlenefs of mind, had iniu red her con qu efts. В 3 <( I flared
jr.g fcenc; and, zĹcr a pauli <tr iiicnc agony, avocated them írem the; г aJ<¿ra¬ tion, ordering them to fcarch the mur- derer. Yet nothing was found ιπκη ths г ilia in. The plan ofthe \cn r :an:r i vu determined to take u as аЬсаЛ fb.tV and 1 only wanted the kaft ггь с to К 1 me nearer the mark. \ et aii t :n ù ii. !:, . v.tre fruitkfsi and the progrefs of rime cniv made me acüuaintcJ with the fole v*ay which could kad mc to the wiíbed- ínr feope, and juft when I w «as incapable of purfuingit. We returned to the caftle, and Elrnira's corpfe was carried to her apartment. Having bolted the door, I undrelied her myfelf, and examined her wounds, to convince myfelf that ihe was really dead. Nothing was more certain. Two balls had ihattered her breaft; a third had lace¬ rated her neck: the blood was congealed, and all her limbs were ft iff. I nov. called her woman, ordering her to undrefs her _______________ entirely,
erű wíy, .;.. :· mu* tuv ;«. t urtr ien:, :.'> e\anu«ie :,·«... more Lareiuilv, On turning one oi* her pockíľí, a little pocket bot'k dríjpt t : tin Hour. It vai tied with α p.nk-< ;- loured r.tuvn«, and feen itd to í ^ q,.. new. 1 tore ir open; bı: t ;: contain. ιί no:h!ng, ex/ert that nore vh^h Einiir,: had lof: a: ihurch m n r. pre [I nee, ur.d - packet of papers, th.it promifed to be κ τ ine createli importan^ e to me. Beii; χ not at lcHure to read them, 1 put thim into a ftcvei drawer of my bureau, which I had made myfelf, tied the pceket-beor; again, and replaced it into the pocket from which it had dront. «' Mean-time repeated attempts had been made to recai Elmira to life; but w ithout eflect. The beaut i hi licit form bade defiance to all chinugical fkiil. I ordered her to be drefled, and kept above ground three days. I had already once experienced the artifices of the confede¬ ration in that refpect, and was determined В 4 not
" ' : ' «u «ч « .■ s rr s ï: ч rj,'t ro negler che leali trifle that could prevent their itrpofing on me a fécond txWA. I made a fecret mark on the corpfe, and looked evei·;» hour at it, kíl it fhould be exebr.^cd. She w a-, fj much disfi - gered, even in her ùce, b\ the íhot and the powder, that her f.aiure^ bore not the letit refemblance to her countenance when alive, nnd that it confequently would have bjuieaiy to fuhftkute another body. Yet a fear, which I never had obferved, ap¬ peared on her forehead, and it was impof¬ lible that mark could be imitated. " I ordered, for the fake of greater fe¬ curity, feveral people from my eftate, on whofe fidelity I could depend, to watch the corpfe day and night. After three days, the higheft marks of corruption appeared; her coffin was fcrewed up in my prcfence, fealed with my family feal, which I always carry about me: no pains w T ere fpared to prevent all deception, and I was prefent when (lie was intombed in my family vault, " As
. t ■Γι ϊ^. '· ΐί'ίΐ *^ г - "Г"'*·,^' Π+- Tlľ'^rTIll Н/ГДЧ. ,\ \ i U t. ä . ülÜ ч «Ч_ n,t'nl t « bt., w. k. í А ...«.I -V-] il *.ч. .λ. ţ and wir^d (»tf a numi n j: rJiciant t wir, I ΠαίίίΓ;ι. ίί tO m '- »..1Яа«.. jì 4 .' utu t i,^ v rapir-, t.) iiieak the k.ıî, and tu и/.:*ч· г-. erv thing on the floor, in ù^ ï ::r.} : - impatience, v,a^ :I;e work oí one nxvwr. llUÍJií VL \t± liu^<V. ií.i*>4» «..iii,-« *'.i > ·- floor. Thi» ^еге ne: mımbi-rc-İ, nn; с required а кос tİmj to ar: n r c ïhtn л little. Thcy vl;v, V.hJrs, ν-τ;" пг^ ~ L^en'ly wr.izcn, and ι oiiiiiir.jd m*. .v:';;, b«.*: family accounts. İ-b\iny ri.:: :. -**. i .^, 1 ried t'ne m cureiuilv u¡>, a:\i ;·■.:: :'..«.·: ι affai η into mv bureau. ** Night iìolc upen mc Ci:i\r. ч ; *.!««. : j с--*- cupations, and í expected to rc:».:w :i vilit from m\ genius. I ordered Jir r i-r- ;o be carried to a remote plcafurc-houfe in my garden, to allure l.im thitîiu*. ;.nd armed myfelf with a brace of nİlto!>, with two poníanla, and a f word whoic goodnefs I had had feveral opp«, π initie:; to try. All preparations were made to Β ς o-iv-
.Vi pjve him a warm reception. My iorv ai¬ moit had bereft me of the ufe oi mv ílníes, and ye: I waited co^liy and pat.er/- Iv for him all the nit^ht long; bu: Ama- nucí did not appear, tJ I vi aite J three n^hrs n>ore for 1-лп ¡г. my bed-room, leaving the bed emp?., and concealing myfelf in a clofct. "fhı 4 fury that rankled in my breaft kit me noi a moment's reft; 1 watched c\ er , morien ; the Ieaft breeze of air* the leail ега\.к:пц in the wood, made me grafp my poniarj, Ol I would have g:\cn ten years of ъ\у İne for every moment in which I could have met A manuel face to face. %{ Yet all my diligent care net to mift the propitious moment of bloody revenge was fruidefs; and, after having tried every means human prudence could devile to find ou: a fingie trace of thofe unknown friends, I took the uefperate réfolution to explore alone the inmoft centre of that horrid web of infernal villainy, to cut the nerves of their motions aftinder, ant 1 . either
timber a ^vi: rum, or r u í., r. iL с m; hie :n t :e «.;. i. e* i 1 1-· t * lí Sigerai v aL- elapfed anu d the гк·^:- Г.;г т pie 'a;a:u)i^, and the experta;t ι ì * , perhaps mor. d,ít.r:..£ ehvuL·: ^π- M rc Л Littori ма 1 . î^o '.гю1, t r »o :ч^ч for an ľ d.t::cu t;e; m К„и e Плкег. ^o ! tho^rh-, at !c.ïft, at с Г. Л t*me, í ^í»n 'dered rn - íl,:* «..- а d г-; т.„л 1 i.:; f m- <U«:r ;; _:. .^ ■' \ . rbw, .\.íí* ьа^ z L.aùn Γ·> л ν схл:с.*г.ч + ,'П, ;1а^еЛ niv Lj.î \**ΐ. r:to :ht:r culi '«L, and, while I prcpurcd my- Klf to :.:d tin. -л orld an tierna! aÛKj, п.;. he«ir; bcLa'.r.c calìe r, and í :ir?.cr^pe.· :o К .idvarscv-d r'v.ırcr to the П -irL vi u v di- fiiľíb. İ ciímniitteu the г.мп.испгепг ; : my eíL,:e^ ro Don Antonie, imcLr :·.- pretence о! a :ournc\ : everv th.n -д v. л .:: İ «v .t readint.l % , and 1 had Jre.ujy concea!*.d » good quantity of poifon in the lining ot my coat, in order to deprive the confede¬ rates, iť.thcy ihould get me iu their power ah ve, ofthe pleafure of letting me fuñu* В 6 a ! biçer: n-r о
t "e îıt^ur iur mv departure, w la n İ w« j i forni ы : ] ar Dun f J ıj lud ; í : «r n v d w '; hou: hiá lady«, 4t î was tuki that he had dildra til *>*- r vl , in г'ч· iirlf h«Hir aí ĺ, r hi·» arr , ««\ ' . . ле ri.^.l cruci trcatmtrït cu еча r: ! \-\antN, ihat hb whole conduct 'чь L f- f .ri!\ changed; and e\trv \<fl .„ г е (Ί ťrrC bcpfvolencr' whuh tormerK Lad v ua iud Ь.лп the love of all his pcrpK\ for w. hap*p*n«.A or l> r row he now difplawd 'M the kaft í aie, bad totally difapptai. d. 1 round this repoti confirmed on tht i.iii % f: he paid m«-*. He treated rue's," ч * мгеп^г coi d neb; however, Ì ren .r p.l J r v:*hintc'aft. Neirhe- ol us w :ь ire i i ned ■ ) viTKÏerftand tl к* ether; and he lat ire-* ♦ ;uenv* tor whole hours bv mv fide, filent a "d in a fate of apathy, fuppcrt n^ h;¿ he «al w ; t ! ì one hand, and тог imp tiu t . r t on vu p ive ly. I had great reafon a» le a:vMV wali him; but that cjoornvj :ae- ¡ancholv air, i:al«cr gave lum a:i ap¬ pea i.t Т асе
p. arance of mfiiücíTnefs, mâ I would noi í, ™ condemn hmi unheard; yet I duru noz zrııfi him in the leaf! ; and a per fonal heat amiinit hi mieli would onlv have ferved u> Ixrr-iv my plan againft the coniede- ràtâV>«- " NT fufpicion w a; encreafed bv hi¿ rh ( m;;'ng, unfettled deportment, md the jr-càìhiLÌ- he berra) ed m our comerfu- r ! η ·λ >. Η e g rc w ι η ft an t : y ii I c n t and m u te, wlì'-i Ι a.ludci.1 twen m the mt>ft diflan: галг.лс: to FrancHeaS probable fate; a ih rug oí his fhoulder, and fome fignifi- t mì look>, be ¡ívj: the onlv anfwer he re- tarm-d. But he behaved in a diPeren: in«mner when he fueecedcű to turn our converfation upon the unknown confedt- га:ез. Il.s whole соипч-плпес ufed then ť) lu:g v ten up; he feemed inly to rejoice at his к umilivi, wanted to be informe. 1 oí L\,r/ thing, diffembled to be intereftcd i с ver\ word, and ufed numberlefs artful turning and crooked windings to explore my fenriments and deiigns. However, I oppolld
oppofcd to all his inquines an unlliaken «quanmury, a icmblance of the moft placid retìgnation to the plans of the con¬ federation, and the oath I had taken to be Ieaft communicative and open to rm moft inumate friends, I frequenti) contra¬ dicted my own opinions; and he wa* every day more at a lofia concerning my real fentíments, '* Yoa are not confident w ¡ch уош feli, dear Carlos," he faid one day ; Ci let us fpeak mor -е plainly of ir. 'i here is no¬ thing m the world foobkure that a friend who is acquainted with the líate oí our n;ind could not clear upl*' <* Are you really ib intimate with the ftate of my mmd? If {o t then >ou will certainly know that I am more confinen t with myfelf than it feems?'* " How do \ou mean that?" he ex¬ claimed, with evident marks of impatient curiofity. " I think that there cannot exift a greater felf-confiftency than to fubmit quietly
quietly to one's fate, to fuffcr every thing with patience, and even not to murmur, \ ou behold me in that very predicament, Don Pedro, A wife that I adore is re¬ ft >red to mc, and I lofe her for ever, while í imagine to infiire the eternal pof¬ feflion of her. Bui what can I do? I am eafiv and chearful ncverthclefs." ie There vou have hit me, Don Carlos; vet \ou are miftaken, if you think me to bein the fame predicament with you. I muft confefs the confederacy has reafon to congratulate itfelf. Who fhould ha\c dreamed that the Marquis of G****** would bc fo content with his flavery i" « c Not flavery, dear Pedro; all is volun¬ tary. Shall 1 recai to your memory your oun words, which you have related tome on an oecafion, that has imprinted them deeply on my mind ? c All appearances ( point at a deep-lay ed, powerful, and ex- * tenfive plan of thofe men: who can ex- < peel to unfold the views of that confe- * dcracy nxfirflfivbtr I have been made fenfible
fenfible of this truth, and purchafcd that fenfation with many precious moments ; I have boldly exchanged many cheerful profpects of my life for it." <* But Fornira ------------- *' ** Her lofs was, indeed, a dreadful blow. My foul loft, as in a high fever, ali re¬ collection of the time paft. But do you fee, dear Pedro, I have confolcd and cheered myfelf with your own words? * Every thing in nature (you told me on * that very oecafion) preñes and \irg\$ the * other; anew life originates from every * death. Providence being entirely taken i up by the great plan of promoting the * greater perfection of man, docs notare * ibr the changes that take place in the c creation. It knows how to direct c\eiy * thing to one great end, and unfolds the * laft dying point of life for new plans and *'dcfignsľ And who can have learnt this more palpably than myfelf? « Very true, Don Carlos. But who ean prcfume to comprehend you? Yot: loved
loved Elmira fo ardently, aii }0.ir pio- fpeŕrs feemed to be concentrated fo ims. n in the pofllflion of her, tua: one wou: ì * have fworn the fécond ¡où of your idi*l would dJhact >ou, and render life bur- then fom e to \oii; and now you are fo com; Ltd y a pîulcfophcrî"- ----------- €i Neccfitv has made me fo ; and, dear Pedro, }ou cannot but confefs that this policy, abftracted from experience, of whatever nature it be, is alv. ays better than that one nwchanicallv has got bv heart, and repeats after rule and meafure, like a parrot. Dont you think fo y deareft friend?" So faying, I took hold of his hand, ÍI.aLing it, and looking fmiling in his fate. This was indeed very impru¬ dent. He was quite confounded, and at¬ tempted feveral times to return that look, but in vain; his eye remained anxiouily fixed to the ground. More than half an hour was required to roufe him from a fenfelefs muling, in which he inftantly rc« lapfed. I could eafily obferve that he apprehended
apprehended I had penetrated deeper into the receflës of his foul than he could wiih; however, he was too much occupied with the elucidation of that idea, than to light upon the notion which on my part was ne- ceffarily connected v, ith it. CHAPTER ÎÎ, SOME days elapfed, and feveral little in¬ cidents led me to obferve that the fecret agents of the confpiracy began again to render my abode rather unfafe. It ap¬ peared to me to be high time to depart. Don Antonio was already arrived ac the caftle; he was ftill the fame faithful and cordial friend he ever had proved to me; continued to take the warmeft intereft in my happinefs, and to be fincerely con¬ cerned for the peace of my mind. The next night was to be the lail which per¬ haps I ever fhould fpend at my caftle. Heavens! with what fenfations did I fee the iky affame a deeper hue ; every breeze from
from my cheerful heavenly gardens was impregnated with fecret horrors; and the mild radiance with which the twinkling ftars emerged on the dark blue canopy of heaven, ftraitencd vry heart in as melan¬ choly a manner, as if the fate of a whole world had depended on my miicrabie exiftence. 1 vifited every fecret recefs of my park олее more, took a tender tare-» wei! of every how er, and mixed my tears with the tinklinrr rivulet, Everv obiect mf * ** feemed to oppofc my departure : however, my réfolution was too firm :o fuffcr me to yield to my fentiments. rt Very fortunately for myfclf, and my fit -nation of mind, the whole fcene changed againft night. A portending tcmpeft over-darkened the horizon ; the ftars dif- appeared one after another; the feathered fongftcrs concealed themfelves anxioufiy in the moil fecret rcceffes of the park; a fultry, awful ftillnefs fwayed over the whole creation ; not the Ieaft found inter¬ rupted the folemn filence ; the pulfes of nature
nature feemed to have ceafied to palpitate. The folitary chirping ofthe cricket was the fole found that by intervals interrupted the univerfal grave-like ftillnefs, which at length was rendered more awful by the di flant rolling of thunder, <c This was a propitious moment for me. Midnight was arrived, and every eye in the caftle wa? clofed by the leaden wand of fleep. I fetched the key of the garden^gate, and itole foftly down flairs, climbed over a wall into the fiablc-vard, and began to faddle my flccteft horfe. While I was occupied thus, I felt fome¬ thing between my feet. It was Kttßo> my favourite dog. He had lain in the liable; and having been attracted by the fcent, came to carefs me ; he rejoiced to fee his mafter, bounded againft my breaft, and howled for joy. Alas ! poor Kufko feemed to feel that he fliould foon be parted from his mafter, I could not take him with me without betraying myfelf. An hundred times did I clafp the faithful creature
creature in my arms, and let him lick rny tears. I had borne every thing elfc with coolnefs, even when I embraced my dear Antonio the laft time; but this farewell fcene affected my heart with melancholy fenfations. He certainly was fenfible of my grief, hanging his head, and whining in low and mournful accents. Alas ! he was perhaps the only friend I left behind. However, his affectionate lamentations roufed the other dogs in the court-yard, and it was high time for me to be gone. I ftrained him once more to my bofom, exclaiming, "Good Kufko, thou wilt not forget thy hap!cfs mafter!" 1 then locked him up, and íhu t my ears againft his anxious icratching at the door, opening a little back-gate, mounted my horfe, and purfucd a well known path that led through a chefnut grove. " The tempeft had, mean-time, grown more violent: the night was dark, the lightening flafhed in vivid colours, and •the thunder rolled in awful majefty, I fet
fet fpurs to my horfe, braving the fury of the hurricane, and the pouring torrents of rain which threatened to drown us ; but our ftrength was foon exhaufted ; my poor beaft began to groan and to puff; I fcarcely could refill the violence of the wind any longer, and unfortunately had loft my way. I rode flower, but my horfe ilumbled every moment over the protend¬ ing roots of trees, or fell in holes : I found myfelf every minute entangled in the un¬ derwood, or impeded by a branch. If the flaflies of lightning had not made mc perceive the neighbouring river, I fliould, without doubt, have periflied in the Tago; as I certainly ihould have been prevented by the inceffant rolling of thunder from hearing the wild bellowing of the waves. I was, at length, obliged to alight, being unable to proceed farther. I beheld a large cavity in the earth, within a fmall diftance, which promifing to afford me fome íhelter, I refolved to creep into it· My horfe, being equally unable to ftand α the
the inclemency of the weather any longer, followed mc by inftinct, and we fliared amicably our forry afylum. He always trembled violently when the lightning flafhed through the trees, and preffed clofer towards mc. No one can conceive what I felt; all nature feemed to be con¬ vulfed, and quickly ripening for diffo- lution. " The tcmpeft was now over my head ; the horizon refcmbled a billowing ocean of liquid fire, and flaming clouds'poured down amid the howling of the hurricane and the cracking of ihattered trees. No human ear has ever heard a noife like that which the roaring thunder produced be¬ twixt the neighbouring mountains. Every object around me was violently agitated; and no other choice feemed to be left me, than either to be ftruck dead by the light¬ ning, or buried beneath the ruins of the fliaking cave. The cold of the water be¬ numbed my limbs, and ere long I was unable to hold the bridle, " What
u What perfon in my fituation would not have repented my mad réfolution? However, the commotions and all the horrors of warring nature were nothing, if compared with the torments inflicted by thofe dreadful unknown, who, being acquainted with the moft fecret receffes of the human heart, knew how r to agonize its tendereit fibres, and how to lacerate its moil fenfible parts. This reflection fired my enthufiafm to the higheft degree. Every réfiftance - ferved only to animate me with redoubled ardour, and a con¬ quered obftacle was my fwecteft reward, I looked with rapture at the flaming iky, as if going to collect all the lightnings of heaven to hurl them into that infernal den; I itole the moil horrid founds from nature to appal with them the affaffms of my wife; I could have gathered all the torrents of the clouds to deluge thofe in¬ fernal fiends. Thus my fancy was at work even in the moil agonizing moments of my life; following only one ftrong current in
ina great ocean of images, and counting even minutely the drops which fate and chance mix with them. <€ The war of the agitated elements ceafed at length. When the blufh of the dawning morn fmiled in the eail, not а trace was left of the devastations of the night, except the ihattered fragments of forne trees turned up by the hurricane, or fhivcrcd by the lightning, and the fwell¬ ing of the water. The air was as pure as if the young creation had juft emerged from its maker's hand: .the ferenity, the fweet fmile of appealed nature invited to ardent love; the reconciled creation now appeared in the higheft virgin charms, after having been deprived for a fliort time oi' its inchanting beauty. The azure mir- rour of the fmooth waves reflected the verdant verdure of the trees, and only ths nuddie of the river exhibited a curling milky trait. The breath of the rofy mom was embalmed with the fweet invigorating exhalations of millions of little flowers Vol, II, С embroidered
£Ó* THE HORRID MYSTERIES.
embroidered with pearly drops ; the myf¬ tic milling of the leaves feemed to hale the rifingking of day, and fhowered with every breeze fparkling pearls on the fvvell- ing turf. The winged chorifters began to chirp their fweet, melodious matins, re- joicing that the horrors of the night were paft. All nature was clad in the gayeft livery of mirth, and animated with new life. No fooner had I emerged from the wood over a ridge of hills which bounded it, than I was haled by a new charming picture. The heavenly valley of Placentia, infolded by the flowery banks of the Tago, fmiled at me; on the other fide of the river, Talavera attracted my delighted looks; and at the left Oropefa emerged, furrounded by numberlefs detached houfes and luxuriant villages; a fmiling, unfpeak- ablycharminglandfcape,refembling Eden's happy plains. " The fertility of the exuberant foil was not only cultivated, but alfo improved and beautified; a phenomenon which one but rarely
rarely meets with in Spain, A picturefque- mixture of vineyards and nodding corn¬ fields leaned in gentle dcclenfions down¬ ward to the banks ofthe Tago; little cottages peeped gaily through the rich clufters of fruit-trees, and the bluiih mir- rour of the river reflected the bluflies of the riling fun through the high grafs and the luxuriant meadows. * f Nothing interrupted the pleafing ex- ftafy of my enraptured fenfes. The firft village which I arrived at was already in a lively buftle. The inhabitants looked out of their windows, and returned my falutations fo cheerful and gay, as if they had already expected me fome time. As I approached nearer towards Talavera· the road grew more and more populous ; whole troops of neatly drefled peafantry joined me by degrees, and, in a fliort time, com¬ pofed a large proceffion, in the middle of which I proceeded on horfeback, ridiculed by the merry fwains for my woe-worn countenance. At firft they were rather С 2 referved,
referved, not knowing how to addrefs me properly; but as foon as I had accofted them, a general joy pervaded the whole cavalcade. They informed mc, amid the laughter of merriment, that an excellent fair was held at Oropefa. and that they intended to celebrate it in cheerfulncfs and jocundity, becaufe they loved to do honour to that feftive oecafion. Wc grew at length fo fociable, that they began to difpute whofe gueft I ihould be at the next alehoufe. " We flopped at feveral places on the road, and met every where with profperity, innocence, and hofpitality. That happy valley feemed to be entirely cut off from the reft of the country, and to be pof- feffed of innate treafures. The innocent hilarity of its inhabitants, the neat and fimple elegance, and the play fome gaiety of the tawney girls, their lively loquacity, their little carefles and endearments, made my heart heavier with every ftep. " How happy, (I exclaimed repeatedly,) how
happy ihould I be if I could live amongft vou!" " Pray, dear Sir, do fettle in our vil¬ lage," a young, robuft peafant, who walk¬ ed hand in hand with his cheerful confort, replied: " follow my example, and choofe a wife amongft cur girls ; no one will re¬ fufe your hand." " But you don't con¬ fider, my friend, that I fliould not be able ro WOrk as hard as you : who would affift me?"— " We all, dear Sir, if you will ftay with us. We have not been long ac¬ quainted with you, yet I-am fure you are a good man, and we love you already. We compofe but one family, and would gladly receive you too in its lap. Is it not fo, my dear friends?"—The whole troop replied, with the moil amiable good-na¬ ture and opennefs, " Certainly!" " And ihcu, little enchant refs yonder," he continued, " that looks fo flily at us, would you hefitate to take this gentleman for a huiband?" С 3 Her
Her countenance was overfpread with the virgin crimfon of modefly. " Don't bea child, Clara," he refumed: "come, give me your hand. She is my wife's filter, dear Sir: you fee flie is a pretty little rogue; and, notwithftanding her le» vity and humourfome pranks, a very good-natured, honeft and endearing girl. What ! you call your looks down? Have I perhaps faid coo much in your praife?" Clara, cafting a moil bewitching leer at him, faid to me; " Don't believe him, Sir : I am good for nothing. Yet—if you will run the riik with me—I don't diilike you." "Sweet creature!" I replied, "how forry am I not to be able to accept ofthat happinefs at prefent! I have a father and a mother, a proud family, and, alas! am of noble birth. 5 * " So am I, Sir," faid the peafant; "and it is a queftion which of our families is the moft noble. Have you ever heard of Count Q******?" ,he whifpered in my ear. " Gracious
íf Gracious Heaven! are you Count O******, who eloped with a young lady, and afterwards------------" « How! Sir, you know my hiftory?— Pray, who are you?" I whifpered my name in his ear. He looked at me with aftonifliment, checked his pace, and view¬ ed me with fcrutinizing looks from head to foot. Having gazed at me a while, he turned to his company, and faid, " Chil¬ dren, I recollect juft now to have left fomething at the lafl public houfe ; proceed on your way, I ihall foon be with you again/' His companions aiked him what it was, and every one begged to be fu ffe red to fetch it : however, he whifpered in my ear, α Don Carlos, you are an honeft man ; but I muft fee vou no more;" and left us abruptly, "Every one was aftoniihed to fee the peafant turn back; the whole fociety was vexed at it; yet I was furprifed to fee that they were more and more reconciled to his fudden departure, the longer he ftaid С 4 away;
away ; and while they agreed that he would not return, the former cheerfulncfs be^an again to enliven the whole troop. u He has fometimes ftrange whims," one of the company laid; " it is a pity that fuch a good man is fo melancholy." No one could conceive what was the reafon of his glooininefs, as he had fertile fields, a houfe, a good wife, and children. <( Yet his confort, who could not con¬ ceal her noble extraction, and her genteel education, was far from being pleafed with the arguments of her companions. Being, probably, confcious that her huf- band did not indulge fuch fingular humours without reafon, fhe was extremely terri¬ fied by his fudden departure. She gazed at me with melancholy looks, as if appre¬ hending that I fliould difturb her prefent happinefs. Clara too took a very lively iharc in that incident, I was utterly con¬ founded, and did not know how to behave in that dilemma. " Perceiving
(í Perceiving that the lady feemed to be inclined to fpeak in private with me, I feparated imperceptibly from the com¬ pany to give her an opportunity of doing it. She gueffed the motive of my loiter¬ ing behind, and ftopping under fome pre¬ text, approached me. It is impoflible to defcribe the affecting perplexity in which flie w r as. She feemed to caft, with weep¬ ing, mournful eyes, a look into futurity, on which her whole prefent happinefs fud¬ denly threatened to be wrecked. Before flie could difclofe her mind to me, I en- deavoured to difplay, in my looks and air, that fympathifing intereft which my heart really took in her deplorable fate, and let her read in rny eyes all the confolation that could afford her comfort in her afflic¬ tion. " Alas! dear Sir!" flie began, wich a deep figh, " we are very unfortunate." « Indeed, charming Countefs," I re¬ plied, aftonifhed at that preamble, " I am fenfibly intereftcd in your misfortunes. C j « I fee,
u I fee, Sennor, my confort has been fo imprudent as to difclofe our rank to you,* ytt I am not uneafy about it; as I do not doubt for a moment that you are a man of honour. But why did he leave us fo abruptly?—Why does he not return? - —I know him¿ he was violently affected. ,, t€ You need, indeed, not to fufpečt me of want of generofity, and may count on my fincere friendfhip for you. I confider the knowledge of your rank as a fecret which I ought to hold facred. I ihall bury it in my heart, Sennora." " I am fatisfied with your promife." *< As for the fudden departure of your lord, I am in a greater incertitude than you can be. I only can faintly guefs at < the reafon of it. You know, probably, the rumour that was circulated about your marriage. Count O****** married againft the will of a confederacy of certain un¬ known perfohs." <f I am aftoniihed, Sennor!*'·------■ ι <« Don't
« Don't be aftonifhed, Madonna— I alfo am connected with thofe Unknown." <f Merciful God! woe unto us!" " What are you afraid of, my lady? did you not hear that I faid, I alfo am connected with them. That relation was perhaps far more painful to me than yours* I have been more dreadfully abufed than you. I even am deprived of thofe means of faving myfelf from mifery that were left to you. Do you comprehend me now? « Perfectly."— " I received very plain hints concern¬ ing that point; they acquainted me with your hiftory, perhaps with exaggerated circumftances; which, however, is per¬ haps dreadful enough without thefe addi¬ tions. Who has a greater right of being interefted in it than myfelf, whom it fo nearly concerns? " I faid juft now, Sennor, woe unto us that we have met you. I now recall my words, and fay, how fortunate are we!" С 6 "Ifoon
cť I foon perceived that I had hurt my¬ fclf very much. She grew vifibly more referved, and I could not prevail upon het¬ ro unfold to me the myftcry of her hiflory. If, on the contrary, I had availed myfelf of the dubious moment of her terror, I might probably have learned her ftory ; whereas fne now appeared to have fud¬ denly forgot every part of her fate that could have interefled me. She evaded, with an admirable dexterity, every captious and tempting queftion I put to her, and turned my own arms upon me. Her eyes only fpoke, perhaps, more than tiiey ought to have done, u in this ftate of mind we arrived at length, at Oropefa. The fair was large, and crowded with people. All the neigh¬ bouring villages feemed to have depopu¬ lated themfelves to render it fplendid. A merry, variegated mixture of characters and dreffes afforded me fufficient room for obfervation. This-motly crowd amufed me for fome time; the buftle of the mul¬ titude
titude hurried me from one diverfion to the other : now I ftcod before a booth of jugglers, in the midit of wondering gapers, and now involuntarily was entangled in a bachantic dance. An inexhauftible di ver- fity of new objects, the clamour and- the noife of the joyous populace, quarrels and blows, fcolding and burits of laughter; all this compofed a mcdly that would have amufed a novice in fuch feenes a confidé¬ rable time, " Having diverted myfelf for fome hours, I ftopt at a ring which a number of pea* fants had formed round a dancing åog y w hen fuddenly fomc perfon tapt me on the fhoulder, exclaiming, " How do you do, Marquis?" Turning round, I beheld a ftranger, whofe face I could not recollect ever to have feen. (< You are certainly miftaken in the perfon, my friend," faid I, ftartled at that unwelcome addrefs, (i I beg your pardon, my Lord," refumed the ftranger; '* I know you too well; you are Don Carlos, Marquis of G******. All eyes
eyes feemed, in that moment, fixed on me. I was almoft petrified, and a chilly tremor feized me, when I fancied to have feen that face, and the countenance ofthe two companions of the ftranger who mean time had joined him, at the myftic caftle in the foreft. I rufhed almoft fenfelefs through the gaping multitude, mounted my horfe, and gallopped away at a furious rate, " Haplefs Carlos," groaned I within myfelf, " there is not one fpot on earth where thou canil find an afylum ; no place where thou art not furrounded by the myr¬ midons of thofe fiend-like Unknown\ Their fnares are fpread every where. Alas ! what will be thy fate, if they get thee in their power. What new torments will they invent to puniih thy difobedience ! What new wiles will they devife to entrap thee in thy own perfidy, and to delude thee by thy own madnefs! Thou wilt catch a phantom of thy own fancy, when think¬ ing to be near the butt of thy purfuit, and the
the Iabourfome ftructure of thy prefump¬ tuous wit will miferably fink down into its own pit. " And what will it avail to have re¬ courfe to force? Two weak arms, of an unnerved body, againft a thoufand vigo¬ rous men ; one poniard againft a thoufand fwords ; and one folitary brain againft the artful ihiftings and turnings ofa numerous fet of cunning deceivers ? It is true, thou art provided with poifon, and couldil ihorten thy torments; but what remedy haft thou againft their pity, againft their filent contempt, if they ihould catch thee in thy own fnares, and generoufly releafe thee again to convince thee of thy pitiful impotence? This would be more tor¬ menting than the agonies of a lingering death ! It certainly would be wifer to con¬ trive means of efcaping their powerful grafp, than to wander from place to place in fearch of them, guided by nothing but an obfcure prefenfion·" CHAPTER»
CHAPTER III. AMID a melancholy and irrefolute fo- liloquy I reached a foreft at the bor¬ ders of the valley of Placentia. Being ufed to meet in every dark wood vvith a fcene of ftrange adventures and incidents, I prepared myfelf with tranquillity for the worft. My imagination was at fuch a romantic and turbulent ftretch, that it always anticipated dreadful events with anxious rapture. Every veftige of an¬ cient times filled it with ominous images; I miftook every cavity in the ground for an entrance of a horrid cavern ; and every uncommon mark cut in the trunk of a tree was fufpected by my harrowed fancy of fome myftic meaning, I met a tra¬ veller in the gloom of the foreft. He was a man of common appearance, and his addrefs was equally infignificant. Merely the want of fociety feemed to prompt him to accoft me¿ and a fecret impulfe to court
court the affiftance of men againft defign and chance, that haunted me every where, made me willing to receive his add refles with kindnefs. The caufe of our keep¬ ing company was alfo the theme of our converfation. The fore ft, danger, appre- henfions, adventures, and conjectures, were the chief fu bj ečts of our difcourfc. Our converfation turned, at length, on the proprietor of the tract of country to which the foreft belonged, and a fpirit of communicativenefs feemed to have feized him on a fudden: he introduced, in a fimple, natural manner, a number of ftrange events, and feemed to become more inexhauftible the longer he enlarged on thofe topics. The proprietor was a widow; her huiband had fuddenly difap- peared ; and ihe feemed to be ignorant of what was become of him ; having, at Ieaft, fpared neither time nor pains to find him out. All her fearches having at length proved abortive, fhe had retired from the world, to fpend the reft of her days in folitude.
folitude. It appeared, by the narrative of the ftranger, that ihe was an enthufiaft ; yet the extravagancies of her imagination were fo amiable and gentle, that Heaven feemed to have fent thern to make her for¬ get the forrows of her afflicted heart, and to reconcile her to her lamentable fate. " Evening had fct in; no inn was to be found within feveral leagues, and the lady received every traveller with kindnefs and hofpitality. The ftranger affured me that * her hofpitable difpofition extended to all ranks, and I had juft reafon to hope that I ihould remain unknown beneath her roof. Her voluntary feclufion from the world, her melancholy, which feemed to guide almoil all her actions, the myfteri- oufnefs of her hiftory, and particularly the fudden and unaccountable difappear- ance of her lord, had pre-occupied me in her favour. In the painful incertitude in which I was, the fociety of every human being would have been agreeable to me, how much more the meeting with a being that,
that, expelled from the world by events fimilar to mine, perhaps by the fame fiends that had ruined me, had already executed the réfolution to which my ftate of mind, and the dangers of my fituation, were juft going to impel me ! " We now came to a bye road, which led to the village where my companion * refided, and that, as he informed me, was feveral leagues diftant. My horfe was almoft knocked up; I myfelf was tired, and impelled by curiofity; which determined me to proceed to the caftle. My fellow traveller aifured me I could not mils it: twilightwas yet faintly ftrug- gling with the fetting fun ; why ihould I, therefore, hefitate to direct my courfe to the hofpitable abode of the unknown re- clufe? " I had not long feparated from my companion, when I beheld the turrets of a large building emerging from the mifty vapours that began to rife. I had ex¬ pected only a fimple, unadorned edifice, and
and was ftruck with an agreeable aftoniih¬ ment, to fee a majeftic fabric hailing my gazing looks through the duik of eve. It feemed not to be a refidence of tranquil¬ lity and rufticated retirement, but the abode ofa man of the world, who feemed to revigorate his relaxed fenfes by the change of the luxuries of a rural life. u The avenue to this elegant fabric led through a garden, which embroidered it with a variegated verdure. It feemed not to be laid out after a regular plan, the moft perfect art being concealed behind the charming veil of fimplicity; yet an internal fenfe impelled me to admire the elegant tafte which had guided the form¬ ing hand of nature. The foft, pellucid verdure of the vine, blended with purple clufters, blufliing through the leaves, mixed itfelf fo artfully with the darker green of the luxuriant turf; the variegated leaves of the trees exhibited fuch a pleafing contrail; the colours of the objects were fo ftrikingly, and in fuch an enchanting manner
manner combined or feparated, that it was impoflible to overlook the fpirit of elegance and tafte that had regulated the whole, and prevailed in every part of the tout en/emble, I was animated with a fecret pleafure at the internal fenfe that told me I fliould not be able to withhold my re¬ gard and admiration from the amiable difpofer of that fairy fcene. <c As the avenue approached nearer to the caftle, the alleys grew ftraitcr, the clufters of trees more regular; the en¬ chanting wildnefs of the walks, where the relaxed fenfes were left entirely to the in¬ vigorating hand of artlefs nature, now diffolved imperceptibly in more artificial regularity, and terminated, at length, in a beautiful flower garden. The ftatues, that only wanted breath to be completely alive, feemed to refreih themfelves in the cool dufk of twilight, and in a fragrant atmofphere of fweet fcenting lemon and orange bloffoms. Some temples, and a number of pavilions, that with a fump- 'iMi.irA ....... A í
tuous fplendor enraptured the eye through the darkening duik, offered themfelves to my looks on approaching the caftle, which was fituated in the centre of that fairy fpot. Every object I beheld difplayed the wealth of the poileffbr, and her elegant tafte. A benevolent fay feemed to have exhaufted here all her fupernatural power, to prove that a paradife could be produced on earth. " In the back ground the whole of this fweet flower garden was terminated by the caftle, an edifice which was noble in its ftructure, without parading with groteike ornaments and fuperfluous embelliih- ments. An extenfive turf was in the front ; two alleys, in a half circular form, led to the portal ; and a marble ftaircafe wound itfelf up to the entrance of the edifice. « This paradife was, however, lifeleft, and appeared to be uninhabited. The birds retired gradually to their roofts; a folitary finch chirped in the ihrubbcry, a little
little fnake ruftled in the leaf; the evening breeze whifpered in the odorous foliage; but no other motion, no found, no human footfteps vibrated in my ear. I alighted; my horfe pranced in the court-yard, and hailed the fiable Ъу his neighing; no perfon feemed to take notice of it. I afcended the fteps, opened the door; no found met me in the anti-chamber; and only the echo of my footfteps was heard İn the empty apartment. I mounted boldly an alabafter ftaircafe; paffed feve¬ ral lofty rooms, and obferved every where marks of fplendor and luxury, but no trace of an inhabitant. At length a door opened; a fervant, in mourning, came out of it, but kept his eyes fixed to the floor. I accofted him; yet he took no notice of me; and before my aftoniihment fuffered mc to come up with him, he dif¬ appeared. <f By Heaven, Carlos !" I exclaimed at length, « thou hail met with many fingu¬ lar events, but never with one fimilar to the
the adventure of this night." So faying, I opened the door which the fervant came out of, and entered a dark apartment, lighted only by two torches, which were Handing near a filver crucifix. A lady, in black, knelt before it ; looked at me, on my entering the apartment, and gave me a fignai not to difturb her. I flood near half an hour at the door, agitated with ftrange fenfations. To be fo unex¬ pectedly received in fuch an unaccount¬ able manner; to bç treated with fo much indifference, blended with cordiality; to behold the enchanting effufion of the noĹ bleft fentiments, without knowing «Kow far they might be relied upon; щ this would have confounded a man gf greater equanimity than myfelf. Witjťwhat eyes was I to behold the w'oman/that lay pro- ftrated before me in fuch a heavenly ecftafy, occupied with the idea of God, of her heaven, or of her lover, betray¬ ing fo much forrow and tendernefs, foar- ing above this world, and yet animated With
with benevolence, without aflecting not to perceive what was doing near her, and fhow'ing fi/much goodnefs to the difturber of her devotion ? In what light was I to view^rnyfelf? More intimately related to hec/foul than fhe could omínate in that inoment, or infnared again in a new im¬ pofition, in a pre-concerted delufion? Ratiocinations and prefenfions alternately fucceeded one another in my foul; I did not know what to think of that fingular event. " The ornaments of the apartment were not iplcndid, but" fimple and neat : a ill-grey hangings, embroidered with gar¬ lands of rofes, and two pictures, were the only embellifhmcnts of the room. Ir. was no exhibition room of grief and mourning, but onlyharmonizing with the difpofition of its owner. The table with the crucifix, before which flie lay pro- ftrated, flood near the fofa; and a harp was Handing in a corner. In fliort, every Vol. IL D thing
thing was in the tafte of a family apart*. nient in which one loves to be at home. u At length ihe rofe, wiping a tear from her eye, and ftepping towards me with a candle in her hand. The eíFer- vefcence of her devotion was ft ill vifible in the crimfon hue of her f weet counte¬ nance ; but the traces of great forrows, and of many years of affliction, glittered in her large blue eye, A dewy languor of her looks pointed treacherouily at the place where fhe had depofited her willies and her hopes^ and whence ihe juft had returned. She had prayed at the throne of her Father for ftrength to perform every duty of iifterly piety and of benevolent charity. All this my harrowed mind read in her eye and in her fpeaking looks. I was furprifed to find her fo young and fo charming. My fenfes fpoke at fir ft fight louder in her praife than they ought to have done. How could that angelic being have been an impoftor! My felf- confrioufnefs being aíľailed by fuch re- .-,-.■ peated
peated and fenfible blows, began gradu¬ ally to lofe its energy : I could fcarcely think it poffible that ail this fhould have been pre-concerted. So many men, fo much labour, fuch exquifite charms, fo much underftanding and fkill fliould have been combined fo fludioufly, and, fre¬ quently, reluctantly compreffed; for whac purpofe ? for the miférable end of fettering and fixing the whole exiftence of a being that already, for a long time, had been tired of that exiftence; it was impoflible means and end could here be propor¬ tionated to each other with that wifdom and exactnefs one could expect of fuch a confederation as my unknown tormentors already had proved to be. The meeting of thefe incidents was, indeed, wonderful enough; and I fre¬ quently found the confederation svoft un¬ accountably implicated in thofe very ob¬ jects where I had the leaft reafon to fufpect their agency: there was even a long period of my life when I could not proceed a D 2 lin gle
Angle ftep without meeting with fome veftigcs of their omni-prefence, as Ijuftly may call it ; yet at the fame time I was not far diftant from them : the humor of chance, too, contributed, perhaps, now and then, to combine the incidents in fuch a ftriking manner, and they found it lefs difficult to enfnare me than at prefent when I was farther diftant, and rendered morecircumfpect by many a fad experience. €< Who are you, Sennor? and how can I ferve you?" the lady aiked me with a winning grace. " A ftrayed traveller, Sennora, who flatters himfelf you will not deny him an afylum for this night," I replied. " I filali not apologize for my intrufion," I added, <c as this would be doubting the veracity of the general report of your hofpitality and humanity." She feemed to find my reply rather inconfiflent with my appearance, and viewed me with fcru- tinizing looks. 2 u Sennor,"
«Sennor/ 1 ihe refumed, at length, ** I beg your pardon: you do me much honour: but may I crave your name?" I made ufe of the name ofa friend of mine, whofe family, relations, and fituation, I was completely acquainted with ; adding, that if fhe knew my name, flie alfo would not be ignorant how little my ilender fortune correfponded with my rank, and pre¬ tended to have been impelled to travel by a. defire of feeing the world. During this elucidation I had kept a ftrift watch over her features, but not one mien feemed to betray or to conceal any thing from røe. She recollected my name, my family, and fituation, with artlefs civility, protefting that ihe would detain me fome days at her caftle, ordered her fervant to fiie w me to fome beautiful apartments, and begged me to return as foon as poffible to fupper. Her addrefs and replies were delivered in fuch a fimple tone of converfation, that I had no probable reafon to fufpect a pre¬ concerted plan, D 3 « It
" h was, at length, time to go to fup¬ per: the changing of my drefs, the con- tcmplaticn of the beautiful fituation of the caflle, and the examination of my decent apartments, retained me fo long, that flie was obliged to fend the fervant twice for nie. I was aftoniihed to Find a young man in her company: he was one of the hand fomc ft and moil interefting figures I ever have feen : the energie vigour fwelling his fincas, tîıe confcioııf- ncfi; of innate nobility, throning on his цгаесги! countenance, and the traces of fecret forrow, which were legibly written in his looks, made him appear a melan¬ choly Apollo. I took him for her brother, and treated him accordingly; but foon perceived, by the interchange of eloquent dances, that a more tender relation united them. They concealed their mutual fen- timents fo little, and fo entirely difre- garded my préfence, that they foon obli¬ terated the diffatisfaction their behaviour ar firft had excited in mv foul. 1 confi¬ de red
dered them, in a fliort time, as dcflinated for each other; viewing him with reve¬ rence and envy, as the inftrument of Heaven to reconcile the heart of that ex¬ cellent woman with the world and her fate, and feconded with pleafure the mu¬ tual eflufion and interchange of their tendernefs. " He fpoke hut very little, but what he faid was excellent. His words feemed to emanale from the profundity of a no¬ ble heart, and befpoke a fertile imagina¬ tion and a high-foaring understanding, Notwithftanding my.being conftantly on the watch to catch fomething on which I could have grounded the fufpicions which haunted me every where, yet he always eluded my fnarcs with fo much dexterity and arrieíľncfá, that I couid difcovcr no¬ thing that could have juftificd my appre- henfions. I either was not fubtle and dexterous enough to over-reach fuch a genius, or he was innocent. At laft I found that it would be moil prudent in D 4 me
me to difplay my little accomplilhments in the moft advantageous manner, and to try whether I ihou Id be more fuccefs fu I in that method of attack. " We had, mean time, fi milled our fupper amid indifferent converfations. î w ; as extremely fatigued, and retired in good time to my apartment. Soon after, I heard the young man pafs my door, and rttire to an adjacent apartment, accom¬ panied by a fervant. General filence be¬ gan gradually-to prevail in the caftle; the gates were (hut, and a profound, awfi.l ftillnefs reigned all around. I could not fleep in fpite of my wearinefs, the night being extremely hot, and my blood in an unnatural fermentation. I alfo imagined to hear the found of a muficai inftrument ; and getting up, opened the window with all poffible precaution to liften whence the melodious ftrains proceeded. I was not miftaken, diftinguiihing the fweet notes of a lute, accompanied with a harmonious voice. The general filence that
that prevailed in the environs of the caftle, foon enabled me to difcern the words of a popular fong and the voice of my hoftefs. The tune may, indeed, have been printed literally in the book as flie fang it; how¬ ever, no perfon, that did not feel the meaning of the poet in the ftrongeft man¬ ner, could have fung it like her. The notes feemed to emerge from the deepeft receffes of an afflicted heart, and were fo plaintive and affecting, that their power¬ ful charm glided irrefiftibly through every nerve of mine, and touched the inmoft fibres of my feníès. , " My heart fympathized, in that mo~ ment, feelingly with hers. Elmira, my fainted Elmira, itole upon my fancy, ar¬ rayed with all the beauties of her lovely form, and with the charms of heavenly glory, recalling the events part to my me¬ mory. Every plaintive found that'touched my ravifhed ears feemed to appertain to her; I imagined to be tranfported to a better world, and there to hear the fainted D S dari ino·
darling of my heart vent her grief at our untimely feparation. Alas! how oft had flie fung that tune to me! All my ideas were drowned in the great, over-powering ocean of the wonderful events of my life pail, and I had no fenfe for the time pre¬ fent. The view from my window com¬ manded a great part of the garden. A long, over-grown path Jed, by feveral windings, to fpme edifices which I beheld through the gloom of night. The plain¬ tive ftrains feemed to proceed from one of thofe buildings, which emitted a faint gleam of light. My whole attention was now directed to that fpot; and, ere long, I beheld a white figure, refembling my hoftefs in her form and gait, carrying a lamp in one hand. The air blowing ra¬ ther ftrong, fhe fcreened the light with lier hand, which prevented me from dif- cernino* her face. On corning nearer to the caflle, ûıe turned into a fide path, and chancing to caft a look at my window, faw me leaning out of it; the lamp dropped
dropped on the ground, ihe fcreamcd aloud, and concealed herfelf in the next ihrubbcry. " I did not know what to think of that ftrange incident. Was it furprife or ter¬ ror that frightened her fo ftrangely from my afpedt ? Did flic, perhaps, imagine to have been taken unawares in a fentiment or an expreflion which flie had reafon to conceal from me? Nothing is more un¬ certain and deceitful than the grimaces of women. How frequently had I already been miftaken in my judgment of their actions; nay, I had juft reafon to aver that I had not once hit the truth, and acted accordingly. Though I was the fport of women from my early youth, and had conftantly been allured and repelled by them, yet that treacherous fex had not exhaufted its wiles to miflead mc anew. I was become rnillruftful; but this only afforded them additional means of mif- guiding me, Ό 6 « Was
" Was that unaccountableincident (faid I to myfelf) perhaps a new defign upon thee? Was the fcene I had witnefled premeditated to miflead thee again to fome finifter ftep, or only to excite thy curiofity? Sympathy is, with good, or only enthuiiaftic minds, the fon of curio¬ fity ; love is the After of fympathy. They are more akin in thy foul than in that ofa thoufand other perfons; the fecret mo¬ tives of thy plans, the combination and the inftruments of thy actions, either are known, or they endeavour, at Ieaft, ilily to lift them. Thus I reafoned within myfelf; but it ferved only to increafe my perplexity. I fpent the night in an unfpeakable ^Ttiritarion. I awoke again from a com- fortable flumber of fly obfervations ; my ideas began gradually to interchange their nature ; what feemed to be trifling and infignificant, now appeared to me to con¬ ceal feme danger; but noify incidents did not alarm me. Appearance, which already
already naturally is deceitful enough, was now nurfed up to a ftate of the completei! delufion. All the circumftances were fo vifibly connected, and every thing contri¬ buted involuntarily to cement that con¬ nection, which rendered it fo much the more dangerous. " However, who can unfold-the won¬ derful mazes of the heart ! All thefe ideas were active in my mind only while the re¬ femblance with Elmira ftruck me, and my foul was occupied to find out a probability of her having appeared» to me here; for my agitated imagination furmounted every obftacle, and was capable of effecting any kind of delufion. Yet as foon as thefe dreams, that w T ere intimately connected with my whole ex¬ iftence, difappeared, or their connection with the moil diftant probability began to grow more invifible and dubious, the light in which my hoftefs appeared to me af¬ fumed gradually more chcerfulnefs. The intereft flie could have had in alluring mc by
by her charms, her vifible attachment to fome object of her grief, rendered it very improbable that ihe could have any defign upon me ; and if any thing in the world could gain upon her affection, and claim her attention, it was certainly the hand¬ fome young man whom I had feen with her, and whofe excellent qualities far out- fhone my poor accompliihments. Her eyes confirmed this conjecture in a moil ftriking manner. What a great diftinction did they make between him and myfelf! and why ihould I not believe their lan¬ guage? CHAPTER IV. IN the morning a fervant called me to breakfaft. The lady was alone, and informed me that the other gentleman had gone on a journey. She met me with a pale and languid countenance, but with¬ out any fign of perplexity. She enquired fo tenderly after the ftate of my health, that
that I was thrown into an anxious confu¬ fion. We foon were engaged in deep con¬ verfation. She feemed to be defirous only to unfold her ideas and experiences of certain philofophical principles, and there¬ by betrayed me into an explanation of my opinions. All her notions were the off- fprings of overftrained enthufiafm. f< It was vifible that ihe had totally, and already, fora long time, retired from this fublunary world, to be happy in an¬ other, which flie decorated with her ro¬ mantic dreams, I behaved, as much as poffible, merely in a paffive manner, be¬ ino· fenfible that it was not yet proper to fubmit my ideas to her inveftigation. " In this mutual relation feveral days elapfed, and the young man was not re¬ turned from his journey. She feemed to be furprifed, but not much vexed at it. Two fouls, that communicate with each other for fome time, and can converfe without being interrupted, are more inti¬ mately allied every minute, if only the harmony l ŤfttľTinflTni-íiiiiliiMB.ii»ii ..... Ill ....... »imiMÉÉJÉ— ^^^M^MM II II I I
harmony of their difpofitions renders them more congenial. Ennuy and civility kept us, in the beginning, tolerably together, but we foon grew infeparable, our com¬ munication being cemented by more ten¬ der ties. " I intended every any to leave that enchanting houfe : however, the charms that retained me grew every day more at¬ tractive. The hours were connected by a certain unaccountable tie of defire and fatisfačtion; our converfations grew more interefting the more w ; e difclofed the fecret receffes of our hearts to each other, and interchanged our ideas and fentiments. Roving the garden from morn till night, we left our fenfes no time for enjoyment: we fluttered from pleafure to pleafure, and foared, on rofy wings of fancy, beyond the limits of reality, without having a clear perception of our imaginary tran¬ fport. « The garden terminated in a little lake, on whofe flowery banks a graffy knoll formed
formed our favourite fpot. Here we fat for whole hours, indulging our imagina¬ tion in its airy flights. The undulation of the curling waves; the ferene iky, re¬ flecting from the filver lake; the amorous gambols of the playfome f wallows, fport¬ ing on its furface; the peaceful tranquil¬ lity that reigned all around, gave wings to our fancy, and procreated fweet fenfations in our hearts. We wandered beyond the limits of mortality, and our imagination tranfported us to the golden age of a futu¬ rity beyond the grave. We vifited the kingdom of fpirits, peopled it with the offsprings of our rofeate dreams, and roved through the boundlefs realms of eternity on pinions of fmiling hope. <f Thus we fpent eight days by our¬ fclves. The moon foon faw us walk arm in arm through the mazes of the garden; and at length, infolded in rapturous em¬ braces, attracted to one another by the fe¬ cret ecftafy of our ideas. It was no fen- fual love that united us fo tenderly, but ад
an internal fenfe of the congenial harmony of our fouls. " What a boundlefs realm of fweet ideas does fancy comprife," flie exclaimed, one time, when we juft were returned from one of our boldeil flights into the realm of fpirits, if fo fweet, and yet fo melancholy." " How happy arn I, Sennora, to know only the fweets of it! Being almoft dead¬ ened for the buftle of human forms and circumftances, I have fettled in thofe body- lefs realms as a cheerful and peaceable ci¬ tizen. My new country is fubječt to me, and receives my laws ; it is a foft and pliant mould in my forming hand, and is ren¬ dered happy by me. I am the great om¬ nipotent fpirit in this creation of mine; and fpreading my blifs-abounding hand over its realms, every thing ripens to maturity, affords me the pureft enjoyment, and contributes to the happinefs of the whole. u A beautiful fiction, my friend ! But is your creative fancy never difap¬ pointed ? is the creator never difplcafed w ith
with his creatures; never wearied by his work?" <( I cannot but confefs, Sennora, that difappointment, d ¡flat is faction, and fa¬ tigue, now and then fteal s upon him; but not in fuch a dej/ce as to deftroy the en¬ joyment of the blifsful hour. Even weari¬ nefs is fiwTCt in a certain point ; and one is yet happy, though the ftrcnght decreafes, when one has done every thing duty and ncccflity require." " But, Carlos," faid flie, taking hold of my hand, <f ifa realm of fpirits like that which our imagination has created ihould really exift?" tf So much the better, Sennora." " No, Carlos, you miftakc me, I am ferious, my friend. If you were more in¬ timately acquainted with the events of my life, you would be convinced that I have a melancholy, dearly-bought right to fpeak that language," " How wildly you talk, Sennora! If you fpeak that language with me, I muft anfwer
anfwer you as your friend. I refpect the offsprings of your imagination ; they are emanations of an accompiifhed mind ; your dreams are dearly-bought creations of an amiable heart. I follow you with pleafure to the realms of friendfhip, love, and peace. I alfo hold a communion with a life be¬ yond the grave dear and facred, becaufe the events of my former days have rendered me unfufccptible of earthly blifs. But, deareft friend, do not mingle the leail flia- dow of reality with thofe charming chil¬ dren of glowing fancy, nothing that might deftroy the happinefs which every journey to that enchanting country affords." " How happy are you, Sennor, that your fenfes have not convinced you of the truth of my affcrtion ! Other people are lefs fortunate. And pray, dear friend, what can reafon object againft the exiftence of fuch an intermediate realm, whofe fpi- ritual inhabitants can communicate with men?'* " I can,
ч( I can, indeed, not abfolutely deny it; yet it affords ftrong arguments againft a belief in the exiftence of fuch a realm of fpirits, whofe citizens communicate with the human race. Why ihould they be en¬ dowed with that capacity ? To render us or themfelves happier? Us f Can any mortal maintain ever to have had a clear perception of their exiftence or influence on earth-born men ?" " You arc too rafli, Don Carlos." « Why, Sennora, too raftı ? Neither you nor I can fpeak of it from experience. To improve their own happinefs thereby ? How could that be poflible? Through the recollection of their former life? How few of them would be able to derive happi¬ nefs from that fource 1 To continue the improvement of their capacities, inter¬ rupted by death ? Would this world af¬ ford them more proper opportunities for doing it than yon blifsful realms beyond the grave? To watch over the happinefs of mankind ? Is the omnipotent all-wife Ruler
Ruler ofthe World not powerful enough to promote our happinefs without the in¬ terpolation of fuch а miraculous agency, that would overturn all the wife rules of nature? " You may fay whatever you choofe, dear Carlos; you will never be able to prove that it is impoffible fuch an agency of intermediate beings can exift. I could oppofe an argument to your reafoning that would confound you at once." " And what argument could that be, Sennora?" " Reality." « Reality !" " And my own experience." " Your experience ? You aftonifli me." " Yes, yes, my experience. Are you my friend? my real fincere friend ?" " How can you doubt it, deareft woman ? ' ' "I don*t, indeed, Carlos; but I am fo anxious, fo anxious. I don^ know what it is that lays fo heavy upon my mind. I am afraid I ihall fuffer, fliall painfully fuf- fer,
fer, for my communicativenefs ; but let the world be diffolved, and the fun be ex- tinguifhed, if I but purchafe a friend for all eternity." Here fhe paufed, and having looked anxiouily around, refumed: "Look at me, Carlos, and behold the palenefs of my cheeks, the melancholy wreck of an extinguifliing fire in my eyes, and the vifi¬ ble decay of my conftitution. Sleeplefs and tormenting nights prey upon my health. My ftrength declines gradually, and I be¬ hold myfclf at the brink of the yawning grave. A Spirit does not 'permit me to enjoy a moment's reft.* 5 " A Spirit! a Spirit! did you fay, Sennora?*' " The departed Spirit of my Lord." " Eternal God ! this is Amanuel ľ* €< What found did I hear? Have you faid any thing, Don Carlos?" " I only faid, What a ftrange illufion of fancy!" " No : that was not the found I heard : it was fome пате.** « The
«' The wind ruffles in the leaf, Sennora. Pray go on." iS I have been frightened fo much, Sen¬ nor. The moft fecret, myftic found of nature terrifies me violently. I tremble at the Ieaft ruftling near me. Every thing torments me : I can enjoy no pleafure un¬ mixed and pure. Let me give you a brief account of my hiftory. You know my fa¬ mily,, Five years fince, I was married to a man whom my heart had chofen. He was the moil amiable, the beft of men, and an enthufiaft like myfelf. Being cap* tivated with a country life, and retirement from the bufile ofthe world, heperfuaded me to live with him on his eftate. Want of regular occupations, and of cheering amufements, the total feclufion of this caftle from the world, and our own fufecp- tibility, infected us already in the firft years of our union with a kind of penii ve melancholy, which heightened the charms of our imaginary dreams. In a fatal hour of ecftatic enthufiafm, we vowed mutually to
to extend our reciprocal love beyond the confines ofthe grave, and to continue our communication after death. I loft him foon after we had exchanged that vow, and now he vifits me regularly every night.," " I am aftonifhed, Sennora, at your wonderful tale. But was no perfon pre¬ íent when you interchanged that vow?" <c Who could have been prefent? We were quite folitary: no perfon vifited us ; and my Lord kept only that young man whom you faw with mc on the firft night after your arrival to take care of the ma¬ nagement of our domeftic aflairs, and of the prefervation of the eftate. Befides him, we fuffered no perfon to be admitted to our converfation, and he was at that time abfenton fomc bufinefs." " Wonderful!—Every night, did you fay?" " Every night: he omits but very feU dom to appear." " And what does he iav to you on thefe vifits?** Vor., IL E «He
" He has never uttered a word ; but on¬ ly feats himfelf at the bottom of my bed.*' " Have you never attempted to touch him? M ťf Never!" " Have you tried every means to dis¬ cover whether you are not impofcd upon ?** " Every thing, Sennor. My bed-cham¬ ber is bolted on the infide, and it has no fecret door." " This renders it certainly more incom¬ préhenfible than I imagined. I am a man of courage, Sennora, and of no fmall bodily ftrength ; you have confided your fecret tome; give me leave to examine it !" " No, Carlos j I have too much affec¬ tion for you as to fuffcr you to endanger your life fo much." " I fear nothing for my life, Sennora, but much for yours. I have courage, and a more than common bodily ftrength. I fhall arm myfelfagainft any attempt againft my life ; only let us proceed with caution." if No, you muft defili from your de- fign«,
fign. You are dear to my heart, are the only friend I have in this world. It would render me unfpeakably miférable, if you fhould thus wantonly rob me of the only good that has fome value for roe. The few moments of my life are counted ; let me linger them away, at leaft with fome fhadow of peace, and do not fhorten them." " Thus we fought for fome time the conflict of love and friend fli i p, and only after much perfuafion I could prevail on her to fuffcr me to engage in the adven¬ ture. Having mutually agreed to pre¬ ferve the profoundeft fecrecy, and that ihc ihould admit me to her bed-chamber be¬ fore niidn.ght, I prepared myfelf in a manner which promifed to infurc mc fuc¬ cefs. A good cuirafs, which í generally ufed to wear, a well-tried poniard, a ftrong agile body, courage, and prcfencc of mind, which I had acquired through a variety of furprifing adventures, were no defpicable armour for fuch a hazardous attempt. 1 was confident not to lofe my firmnefs en- ^ E 3 tiivly,
tirely, however terrified the apparition fliould bc. I awaited the fetting in of night with impatience. The wiihed-for time arrived at length. We endeavoured, indeed, to exhibit a femblancc of tran¬ quillity at fupper; but who can conceal emotions like thofe tnat prevailed in our foul ? We exerted every fenfe for w ; it and gaiety to fupprefs thofe for fear and anxious expectation, or, at Ieaft, to conceal our emotions in an unaffected manner, and fuccecdcd in our attempts tolerably well. " We feparated at the ufual time, laugh¬ ing and joking, I bolted my door carefully, extinguiihed the candle, and laid myfelf down. Having laughed pretty loud in . my bed for fome time, I drew the curtain, and began to fnore. The night was not dark ; however, the wind was fortunately fo high, and the dark clouds were driven with fuch an impetuofity through the air, that I could not be obferved in my apartment. « The
"The caftle clock ftruck half an hour after eleven, when I crept foftly out of my bed, this being the time the Countefs had ñxed. I armed, and wrapt myfelf in counterpane, unbolted my door asfilently as poflible, and began my pilgrimage. « On the long corridor, which I was obliged to pafs on my way to the chamber of my hoilefs, I almoft was betrayed by a large dog, that was fleeping in the mid¬ dle of the way. It was fodark that I did noc obferve him 'till I trod upon him ; and I could not prevent him, by all my ca¬ refles, from barking violently. But as the tempeft fortunately'fhook the windows of the caftle in a violent manner, and the dogs in the court-yard alfo began to be very noify, I flattered myfelf to have efca¬ ped obfervation. My hoftefs opened her chamber door as foon as I had made the fignai we had agreed upon. She was in great agitation when I entered her chamber, and almoil fwooned in my arms ; and although I ex. E 3 erted
erted all my eloquence to make her eafy, yet flie continued to be in а dreadful ftate of fear and anxiety. She exhibited the moil fingular conflict between dread and curiofity, between womanhood and enthu¬ fiafm, fhame and expectation. She feem¬ ed net to fear fo much for as of me ; and I fucceeded only after numberlefs attempts of availing myfelf of her paffions to in¬ fpire her with fome hope, " I cannot deny that her fituation was dangerous enough. If flie had fore-known it in its whole extent, I fhould probably not haveperfuaded her to fuch an attempt. The tempeftuous night, which ufually makes two congenial fouls more familiar ; her fituation, which precluded her from all affiftance ; the diforder and negligence of her drefs, and the agitation caufed by her fear, would have endangered the virtue of two firmer charadters. I cannot but confefs that, on my part, fcarcely one half of thcfc incitements would have been wanted to ftir up my fenfes if they had not been
Ыеп occupied too much with my own danger. Every thing that had wounded my heart in the former periods of my life, or awakened any dormant paffion or fenfa¬ tion within me, appeared to me to point at that moment. Much of my owm hif¬ tory could be elucidated here, and all my réfolutions would receive an impulfe to a different direction for the future. Although the hiftory of the Lady was not immedi¬ ately connected with a part of my own, yet its developement ferved to make it ufeful to me in the fequel. if The momentous hour of midnight drew nearer and nearer. We made fome preparations, chilled with mutual horror. She concealed herfelf in a corner of the apartment, and I occupied her place in the bed, wrapt in my counterpane, and lift en¬ ing with the greateft attention to с veiy motion around me. The ieaft vibration of the air, nay, I almoft might fay, the refpiration of a fly, alarmed my imagina¬ tion. Nothing appeared to me fo trifling E 4 or
or infignificant as not to be capable of be¬ getting fome horrid apparition. The barking of the dogs, and even the crow¬ ing of the cocks, was fufpicious to me, " At length it ftruck twelve o'clock. A gentle, almoft imperceptible, ruflling vibrated in the air. The rain beat a little ftronger againft the windows; the wood work of the bed and of the whole apart¬ ment began to crack; the objects grew more vifible and diftindt, and the moon¬ light clearer; every thing around me trembled in an undulating glimmer. At once the curtains were drawn; and the whole bed having been moved a little from its place, a human form, encircled with a milk white light, feated itfelf at the bottom of my couch. The firft terror ftunnedme fo much in the beginning, that I could difcern nothing but the outlines of the phantom, and I diftinguiihed only gradually the face ofa man already advan¬ ced in years, disfigured with blood, and fixing a itaring look at me. He moved
his hand flightly, as if going to fpeak ; yet without utterring a fyllable. Having look¬ ed at him a few féconds, I ftarted fuddenly up. " The apparition flagge red back at that fudden motion, which infpired me with additional courage; and when I had en- tirely di fengaged myfelf from my difguife, he rofe terrified from his feat to retire. I even imagined to hear him utter a found which was not unknown to me, and could not appertain to a fpirit. This detenni* ned me to attack him. I darted upon him, and in that moment was completely con¬ vinced that he was no airy phantom. He wounded me in the arm with a poniard, and only my cuirafs protected me againft a fecond (tab, which otherwife woukl have put an end to my life. I feized him fo powerfully that he could not ft ir, oppofi ng to a more than human ftrength, which perhaps was heightened by fury and de- fpair, firmnefs and agility, parrying his repeated, violent thrufts with my arm, or E 5 rendering
rendering them harmlefs by my cuirafs. We wreftled without uttering a word, or making a great noife, like two furious lions, and came fuddenly to the ground* Being almoft exhaufted, I was obliged to fave my life by the laft dreadful expedient : J uniheathed my dagger, and terminated our conflict hy two violent thrufts. He died without uttering a word, heaving a long and heavy groan. His ftiftning arms grained me powerfully in the laft agon)' of death, and enfolded me fo furioufly that I could not difengage myfelf. * c The lady came to my afliftance, light¬ ing a candle in the anti-chamber. We di- \efted the corpfe of its difguife, and were feized with dreadful aftonifliment when we beheld his face, It was the young hand- fome man whom I had feen the firft even¬ ing after my arrival. if My firft look was now directed at my hoftefs. Numberlefs paffions, which I had not expected to behold at one time, changed on her countenance; aftonifli¬ ment,
ment, curioflty, gricf, and, at laft, indig¬ nation, convulfed her features. The latter prevailed over the reft. I now expected that ihe would thank me for having ha· zardcd my life in her fervice; buti was difappointcd. Having contemplated the corpfe for fome time in dumb horror, flie put the candle on the floor, dropt on one knee, applying her handkerchief to the bleeding wound, and killing the pallid lips oí the youth. I gazed at that ftrange fecne, feized with aftonifliment. Her convulfive features convinced me that her agony was of fuch a violent nature as to deprive her of the ufe of her fpeech. <c Having remained for fome time in that pofture, ihe rofe at length, and ftar- ing at me with that gloomy, melancholy frigidity which diftinguiihed the com¬ mencement of our acquaintance, exclaim¬ ed, u again a murderer ľ J So faying, flie left the room abruptly, turning round once more to look at me. I was alnioft petri- E 6 fied
fied with aflionifliment, and had not ftrength enough to follow her. " I returned to my apartment without being able to conclude how all this would end. Was it love for the dead young man that repelled her from me in that deciiive moment which flie had anticipated with effufions of the moft grateful enthufiafm ? Was it horror at the bloody termination of the conflict? Wasit the conféquence of terror; or what was it? I never fpent a night in more painful perplexity, and awaited with impatience the dawn of day ; yet İt afforded me no more light. u 1 went to the apartment of the lady at the ufual hour of breakfaft. It was locked. A waiting woman of my hoftefs came to tell me that I could not fee her. My breakfaft was carried into the garden, where 1 fpent the whole forenoon. I went again to her door, at noon; but was a fe- cond time denied admittance. I found my dinner in my own apartment, and the following fealed letter upon a plate : i( You
Cf You have again perplexed me in my " opinion of your fex. Don't inquire for " the reafon of this aftertion. You have cc undefignedly robbed me of the greateft <c felicity that could have alleviated my dif- ff t refs. I can fee you no more. Don't <e deny me the favour of delivering me of <c the fight of you, which has become to íť me the fource of unfpeakable mifery. iC Forgive a poor, difconfolate woman,that " deferves your compaffion, and forget me/' <s I was feized with deep indignation at reading the note, and wrote the following reply an the other lide of the paper: if You know the motives that have " prompted me to riik my life to reftore " peace to your heart. You know the love c< with which my foul met your's ¿ but you " alio muft know the ambition that guides " my actions. If chance does not throw tf me again in your way, you will have tť feen me the laft time in that bloody " moment. I wiih you may forget an un- u happy man, whom you cruelly wrong." " Having
" Having wrote this letter, I rofe, and left the apartment. After I had waited a painful quarter of an hour in the anti- chamber, one of the waiting women'ap¬ peared. I gave her fome pieces of gold, and the letter, defiring her to deliver it to her lady, ordered my horfe to be faddled, and rode away with the coldeft tranquillity, without once looking back at the caftle, and returned the fame road I came. CHAPTER V. ISHOULD find it difficult to give you, deareft Count, an idea of the fentí¬ ments of that moment ; for, to be fincere, I thought nothing at all, I was in a ftate as if I had been fuddenly roufed from a dream, and could not recollect myfelf. The world appeared torneas if new crea¬ ted, as an extenfive fpace, and I myfelf only a folitary point in it» « Being
" Being arrived at the fpot where I had parted with my travelling companion, I turned mechanically into the road which he had taken when he left me. I was iheltered by lofty and thick trees againft ihe fcorching rays of the fun. The de¬ pending branches breathed a profound peace, which gradually communicated it¬ felf to my foul. I rejoiced in that mo¬ ment with inward rapture at having efca¬ ped the danger which had threatened me; my whole life appeared to me like a dream, and it foon began to give me pleafure. I let it pafs the review before my imagina¬ tion in the rofy hue it had affumed ; and was totally abforpt in meditations on events pail. The path grew wider and wider, and at length extended itfelf into a fpacious turfy plain, on which I beheld, at fome dif¬ tance, feveral tents, in the front of which a number of ladies and gentlemen appeared on horfeback. I foon obferved that they were preparing for a chafe. The number of
of fplendidly arrayed hunters and beauti¬ ful huntreffes encreafed every moment; the hounds fwept the plain in large packs ; the winding of horns, mixed with the yell of dogs, and the neighing of horfes, filled the air. The chafe drew near, and I turned from the high road to let it pafs, and to admire the drefs of the beautiful huntreffes at leifure. The whole train ex¬ hibited a fplèndid fcene ; jewels, gold and filver, and the moft admirable embroidery, variegating with the moft exquifite tafte and elegance, " The troop pail the fpot were I flood in flow folemnity, and no one deigned to look at me, my appearance and drefs be¬ ing too humble to attract their attention, when fuddenly one ofthe hindmoft horfe- men, who attended forne ladies, came up to me, ftaringat me, and exclaiming with a roaring laughter, « Upon my life and honour! this is the Marquis 0 fG******— How are you, Don Carlos? How the de¬ vil came you here in that fplendid attire?" " 1 faw
" I faw myfelf difcovered to my utter confufion. The youngDukeof S******, one of the molt intimate friends of my earlier years, flood before me; the whole chafe was thrown into confufion; and in a few moments I was furrounded by a number of gay ladies and gentlemen, who did not know what to think of the adventure. At length I made the beft of this unex¬ pected incident, laughing aloud, and em¬ bracing the Duke. He introduced me to the company, adding, that I was an ad- \cnturcr who ought not to bc fuffered to proceed; and I coniented at laft, after much perfusion, to flay fome days at his caftle. I \vas provided w ith a hunter, and defired to attend Donna Augufta, one of the moil beautiful ladies in the whole com¬ pany. The chafe began, and after we had ihot fomc game, we returned to the caftle amid loud peals of merriment, <c It is impoflible to find a more charm¬ ing fociety than my companions compo¬ fed, and to behold a more pleafing mix¬ ture
ture of forms and geniufes than that which they exhibited. There was no form that did not ftrike the eve ; no character which did not contrail with fome other. The richnefs and variety of the beautiful group did not invalidate the internal value of the whole picture, which rather had more in- trinfic worth than it promifed at firft fight. Wit and humour animated the whole com¬ pany; one pleafing fenfation urged the other; and the moil perfect elegance was united TT ith natural fimplicity. Every one feemed to ftudy only how to contri¬ bute the largeft ihare to the diverfion of the whole. Don Edwardo, Count of V******, was the paragon of the whole fociety. It İs my dutyto avail myfelf of this opportunity to erect, in the heart of my friend, a lit¬ tle monument to that excellent young man. I have felt, with the warmeft rapture, what a happinefs it is to be his friend : I have purfued my thorny and painful courfe with more fuccefs and courage while he guided
guided and comforted me, and the recol¬ lection of his converfation frequently fteals upon my mind amid tears of affection. Count V****** was defcended from an an¬ cient Greek family, that had fettled in Italy«, Having left his native country at an early age, and being gifted by nature and edu¬ cation, with all thofe endowments that render man fufeeptible of every object, he foon became naturalized to a country where the foreigner in general is eafily difcerned from the native. His long and almoft continual travels had enabled him to ga¬ ther and combine in himfelf the peculiar accompliihments of different nations; he fpoke feveral modern languages with faci¬ lity, and in great perfection, and had no superficial knowledge of the fciences and arts. Being a complete man of letters, a perfect obferver and courtier, he could conceal and exhibit as much of his ac¬ compli fli ments as he chofe. <c His amiable wit, his great judgment, and the tendereit pliability of his thoughts and
and notions, convinced me, at firft fighr, that he was born only for fociety. His form, indeed, was not perfectly handfome; his hands and legs could have been better ihaped ; however, his deportment was eafy and engaging, and his countenance was the moft winning I ever beheld. His large blue eyes fpoke to the heart : he was mailer ofall his movements, and thorough¬ ly ikillcd in the great art of accommoda¬ ting himfelf to every fituation, and imita¬ ting what is peculiar and natural to every rank. In the elegant circles of the great world, he was the moft confummatc cour¬ tier: in the middle clanes, an agreeable and well bred citizen ; and amongft coun¬ try people, aa inquifitive and artlefs fvvain; but in each fituation equally amiable. « But how iliall 1 bc able to give you an adequate account of his heart, w hich was adorned with every fentiment that enno¬ bles man? The Count was in every rcfpedl fit for his age, but his heart was too good and too feeling for the prefent time. Im- mcrfed
nierfed in the profundities of former ages, he lived only for the rernotcil futurity: without prcfuming to confound a world in which he found fo many objects that could attract him, he was animated with an en¬ thuiiaftic defire to form it for the enjoy¬ ment of a heaven. Nothing in this world could give him grief or pleafure, except the forrows or the happinefs of his friends. He loved, and his whole foul was occu¬ pied with the objects of his affection : however, his fancies generally ftrayed be¬ yond the limits of this world, and he only was happy when he could tranfplant his fentiments into the moil diftant ages, amid rofes, and beneath the ever-fmiling fkyof a peaceful, paftoral life. (< He had been frequently deceived by men ; his friends had repeatedly betrayed him-; his kindred had renounced, and his miftrefs jilted him: he had experienced all the hiuernefs of life which an open heart muft expect in an artful world. He had no where met with a congenial foul, that
that knew to eftimate and to repay his worth. His mind now unfolded itfelf only in the narrow circle of his moil intimate friends. " Donna Augufta F****** was the ob¬ ject of his affection, and could not but be happy. Her fufceptibility for manly great¬ nefs, and her fond attachment to her Edw T ardo, could not but render his love the greateft bleffing to her. I muft con¬ fefs I never beheld a greater harmony of fouls than that which united thefe two hap¬ py lovers. (C Augufta's form was uncommonly charming. It is poffible to be handfomer than her, but not to be more enchanting. The ever juvenile fuavity of her looks, the eafy play of her mien, the winning fmile that graced her rofy lips, the beautiful fymmetry of her features, and the freih¬ nefs of her tint, will fcarcely be found united in fuch perfect harmony in any other female form. A taper fhape put the fin i fil¬ ing ftroke to the whole charming picture. w Her
<( Her cheerful humour, and even her whims, imparted an uninterrupted flow of jocundity to the whole company. She fpread laughter and merriment around, by the inexhauftible fal lies of her lively wit, without hurting the feelings of any one, or trefpaffing the limits of virgin modefty, and w T as afliduous to make every onehappy,without neglecting herEdwardo. " The fociety was befides graced by fome other members, who contributed in a dif¬ ferent manner to complete the happinefs of the whole. Our hoft, the Duke of S******, was a character of the firft rank with re¬ fpect to general amufement. I had known him already many years as a very amiable man, who knew how to attach mc to his perfon by his fondnefs for me ; and although his fubfequent connection with the court and the great world, and the flatteries he received, had changed fome beautiful fea* tures of his character, yet he had not ceafed to love his fellow-creatures with fincere ardour, and to defcrvc their reci- 2 procal
procal affection. He was the moil fubtle courtier among the w^hole fociety, a kind of chameleon, without poffeffing any colour of his own, changing all forms with un¬ common eafe, and gifted with a moft pli¬ ant tongue, a high degree of judgment, and a fertile imagination ; a flattering mir¬ ror for every one that had a mind to make ufe of it. His refined epic u ri fm, which always confined itfelf within the bounds the tone of the company in which he was and circumftances did prefcribe, contri¬ buted a great deal to the pleafure of the whole fociety. He was the moft refined voluptuary I ever knew, fporting with pleafure, which affumed a thoufand dif¬ ferent ihapes under his forming hands, He made all circumftances fubfervient to his joviality, was proof againft all attacks of forrow, indifferent to all the incidents of life, and unruffled by paifions, except that of enjoyment. Even fad nefs fer v ed him to procreate mirth, and he transformed, as it were, every tear into a rofe-bud. " This
« This difpofition made him the fa¬ vourite of the ladies. Without behy; gifted with a great Mock of natural wie, he had acquired an artificial one through ftudy and reading, and was endowed with the great art of adorning and difplaying a limited number of ideas in а manner which made every one beiieve that he pof» fefferì an immenfe flore. Daneing, mufic, the play and the chafe, in fliorr, every thing that contributes to fmoorh the ft ream of life, feemed to be his favourite amufement, and he knew the impofinpr furface of all fciences. The make of hn body agreed perfectly with the difpofition of his mind and hearr, it being neither athletic nor manly handfome, but rather luxuriant and pliant. Flis fhape difplayed the greateft fymmetry, without approach¬ ing to effeminacy; his mien and m úfeles were in confiant morion without heir"· о antic; numberlefs painons changed con¬ tinually on his pretty countenance, witli¬ out precipitation; the moft beautiful, Voh. IL F ihu licit,
fhmlieít, and whiteft hands, a little foot, and a handfome calf, which he knew how to difplay to advantage, compofed an en¬ chanting Alcibíades. His brother, Don Pablo S******, on the contrary, acted the philofopher. Count V****** feemed to have divided himfelf in two parts to produce this couple. The Duke had received his charms, and Don Pablo his ferioufnefs : either of them only had it improved in his own w ay, and exaggerated. Don Pablo was dry nefs itfelf, endowed with а kind of humour which excited general laughter, w ithout his changing a feature. His ima¬ gination was poor; but he poffeffed α great flore of fubitantial knowledge, which he had gathered fiom all the philofophers of ancient times, His mind and body were robuft and gigantic; and his difpofition would, undoubtedly, have been tirefome to the company, if one of the ladies had not found the means of taming that lion, wliich impelled him to mifs no party of pleafure,
pleafure, and to exert every faculty to flic w himfelf in the moil advantageoi..> light. «Donna Elvira, theDutchefsofS 4 ' - XJr \ deferved the firft rank amongft the buliev, after Augufta: flie was the wildeft, mop contradictory being on earth ; halfa maïi, and yet provided with a good number of female whimSj and of a pretty firm cha¬ racter, which, however, was a fira^c mixture of bad and of charming caprices. She poOefled the moil excellent heart, bîcathing nothing but philanthropy, but \ wis fometimes fevere, merely to conceal lier humanity. The latter, having been impeled upon and abufed feveral ťmes, flic imagined" an affectation of fevcri,\ would be the carici! wav of avoiding a π - petition of a fimilar ingratitude. Yet il.. 1 had frequently reafon to repent her whim- iieal behaviour, and then had mech to do to repair the mifchicvous cflecls of her af¬ fected fevcrity. She wept and lau^hcxi frequently without the leaft caufo; o.i!s 1 : 2 Inenuie
ί becaufe fne had a whim to do fo· Some¬ times flie found fadnefs very droll, and at other times drollery very fad; admired in one minute what flic abhorred in the next. She poíľeffed fo much wit and eloquence, as to be capable of convincing one half of the company, and of perfuading the other, that all were in the wrong, ex¬ cept herfelf; and of proving, a few mi¬ nutes after, that it had been ab furd to ap¬ plaud her. It was a misfortune to be in love with her, which was the fad lot not only of her brother-in-law, but alfo of fe¬ veral other young gentlemen of the com¬ pany, All of them were obliged to pay for her whims with a total flavery, which afforded us ample fcopc for merriment, as they were a fort of philofophers. No one could keep her a little in order, except Count V******, who flattered lier humour without the leaft derogation from that îmniv diynitv wliich always is fure to gain tlie female heart. t( Elizabeth
. " Elizabeth В*****", a young Englifli Lady, whom the Duke had brought with hini from his traveis when flic was a little girl, and who now was a charming beauty, was cne of Lhe principal ornaments of our fociety. Hei form was, without doubt, the finell in the whole circle. The edu¬ cation which the Duke and his Lady hud frivcn her, and which was intended to train hcv up to the voluptuous difpofition of the Spanila clime, had produced juft the contrary effect; а cocinéis without meafure, notwithftanding her fierv imagi- narion, indifference blended with 1ì\l1) ideas, and an unbounded propenfitv to ftudy and the improvement of the mind, amid the amufements and the luxuries of the warmeft clime. She had improved every opportunity of forming her mind, and produced the moft aftonifliing effects by little means. Although flic confined herfelf chiefly to rhis ferious fort of amufe¬ ment, yet ihc had not renounced the pleafures of the linearts, played on iberas F з inílruments
hiitrumeius in a mafterlv manner, and was veiled in almoil all fciences which ferve to fweeten life. u The Duke had the misfortune to be deci-Ív enamoured with his fofter-dau<?h- t т. She returned his paífion with the cul deft indifference, as far as her grati¬ tude would admit, and had a \cry falutary influence on his character, lie c:'*ew о more ferious, and paid a greater at tenth.'a to the choice of his pleafurcs, renouncing many of his favourite amufements, beca uie they difplcafed his Elizabeth. He found a new way to plcafure by indulging the moil dedicate fecret love. " Our circle was graced by fcvcral more very interefting characters. Yet I will not tire you, deareft Count, with a minute defcription of them, as it would contri¬ bute nothing to render the courfe of my narrative more diftindt and clear. The whole fociety compofed a charming pic¬ ture, and not one member of it was fu- periluous. Every one was happy m being at.
at liberty to purfue the principal idea of his mind, and of his difpofition. u I was, in a fliort time, completely initiated in that fpirit of fociablencfs, or ratlier infected by it. We feemed to live ina fairy land; amufements of the moft exquifitc kind loi lowed each other in rapid fucctiflon, and alwavs had fome charm of novcl r v that pleafed the fenfes and the heart. íť A new intereft foon attached me with more tender ties to the fociety. I became srraduallv the rhal of the Duke in his af- fection for the beautiful Elizabeth. I wanted to conceal it from myfelf; how¬ ever, my inclination had already diverted the whole company before I was aware of the fituation of my heart, bcinsc the laft that difcovercd that fecret. Being no longer fit to join in the witty fall ies and gambols of my companions, an internal inftinct urged me to have recourfc to phi¬ lofophy. Crowing more intimate with the fair enchantr-efs that reprefented it in F 4 human
human fliape, and being deemed worthy to receive a kind reception, I foon paid for my boldnefs with the lofs of my li¬ berty. You fee, deareft Count, what an unfettled being I ftill was, without the Ieaft firmnefs, without a fixed fyflern, and yet burning with an ardent defire of attaining it. tc Elizabeth B****** feemed not to dif¬ iiké me. Notwithftanding her apparent referve, ihe poffeffed a certain fclf-confci- oufnefs, which was not reluctant to com¬ municate its greatnefs and beauty; yet fhe was deftitute of a companion that could or would properly underftand her. In that moment I offered myfelf unto her. The love of the Duke probably was only tranfitory, and certainly without any fixed aim; but me fhe could expect to enthral for ever, I will not prcfume to maintain that flie Ht for me what generally is called love; yet I may make bold to faý, that it was a certain namelefs fenfation which fre¬ quently reprefents the former in a moft y illufivc
illu five manner. Yet the little enchan- trefs was fo coy as to conceal her inclina¬ tion for me with confummate art; or, at Ieaft, was fo niggardly in conferring her favours on me, that I was frequently more impatient to know her real defign than to be treated with more indulgence. I dis¬ covered, however, at length, at a great feaft, which the Duke gave, that fne en¬ tertained more tender fen ti ments for me than flie chofe to let me know. CHAPTER VI. GREAT preparations had been making for the Duke's feaft for fomc weeks. It was to be a theatrical amufement for the night; and he had fitted up a conve¬ nient fpot in his garden for that purpofe. The theatre was only compofed of hedges : the decorations confifted of a charmin'*- t? mixture of lemon and orange trees; and the whole, being illuminated with va¬ riegated lamps, feemed to be the work of F 5 enchantment,
enchantment. Two little brooks were car¬ ried to an uncommon height, to fall down again thro' filver tubes into an alabafter ba¬ fon, to refrigerate the hot fumr ?r-nights: the trees concealed a number of nightin¬ gales in cages, which being animated by the foft notes of flutes, mingled their melodious ftrains with the tinkling ofthe defcending waters. An harmonious unity pervaded the whole, which augmented the effects of the tout enfemble to an aftonifhing degree. " The piece, which was to be the intro¬ duction to the feafl, was a farce compofed by the Duke. It had little intrinfic me¬ rit, but produced a moil enchanting ef- feet on the eye. The fplendor of the dreffes and decorations, the excellency of the orcheftra, and the unfpeakable fweet- nefs of fome voices, but particularly the ikili of the players, rendered the whole piece excellent in its kind. " The plot was extromely fimple. A young nobleman falls in love with the daughter
daughter of his gardener, courts her fa¬ vour, and not being able to prevail upon her to crown his wi flies at an eafy price, promifes to marry her. The girl being, however, pre-engaged to a young'peafant, marries her lover at laft, notwithftanding the numbcrlefs arts employed by her fa¬ ther and mother, who are nattered by the high rank ofthe young nobleman, and in defiance to the menaces and folicitations of her fiimily not to rej eel the fplcndid for¬ tune offered to her. u The parts were diftributed in the fol¬ low ins* manner. Elizabeth Jî****** was the handfome gardener's daughter: ladled the voung nobleman, which was naturali but it was ftill more fo that the Duke played the part of the young peafant. No one could ftart the ieaft rcafonable objection againft this arrangement before the conclu¬ fion of the play : however, the Duke felt the bad confequences of it as foon as the curtain was drawn; for the peafant was moil unfa¬ vourably received by his inamorata, and the F 6 nobieman
nobleman was in a fair way of gaining the heart of the fair damfel. Nay, fiie even forgot herfelf feveral times fo much as to confound the two rivals, and to diih up for one what was prepared for the other. Yet the whole piece went off tolerably well, without any material interruption; and flie was, at length, going to beftow her hand, which flie had reluctantly drawn back more than ten times, upon the hap¬ py fwain, when the play fuddenly termi¬ nated with a cataftrophe widely different from that which the author's book con¬ tained. A large cat, who wanted to have her ihare of the luxuries of the feaft, had probably been on the watch for fome time to feize a propitious opportunity of run¬ ning away with one ofthe nightingales; and, in that critical moment, ventured a leap from one tree to another; but miffing her aim, dropt in the m id ft of the en¬ raptured family, who were beftow ing the bleffings on the happy couple. It is im¬ poffible to give an adequate defcription of the
the terror which this unexpected accident excited. A general feream and confufion enfued. Elizabeth, being ignorant ofthe real caufe of the fudden alarm, withdrew her hand from her fwain, left father and mother, and ran anxiouily to the difcarded nobleman for protection. The caufe of the alarm had, mean time, decamped; the fociety began again to refume their re- ipective ftations and attitudes; the fcreams of the frightened ladies changed into loud laughter, and the difordered features gradually arranged themfelves in proper order: but Elizabeth feémed to be tranf- formed into a ftatue, flaring fpeechlefs at the fpot where the alarm arofe, and encir¬ cling me to fupport herfelf. She was all in a tremble. When the reft ofthe com¬ pany had recovered from their panic ter¬ ror, and perceived the chief perfon in my arms, they approached us, and we were obliged to lead her to a feat, where ihe recovered flowly, and difplayed the greateft confufion. " This incident," faid
faid the Duke, at the clofe of the feaft, « has taught me two rules ; firft of ail, never to court again a peaíant's daughter; and, fecondly, to avoid, in future, to ce¬ lebrate my nuptials in the open air." " The Duke was inexhauftible in amufe¬ ments of this kind. I only fhall give you a brief account of the two laft feafts of that fort at which I was prefent. The firft was called the Feafl of Neptune; but more properly aught to have been deno¬ minated the Feafl of the Fauns. The w ľ hole was nothing but a great mafquerade, to which ail the neighbouring nobility were invited, who crowded, with the firft dawn of day, to the place of rendezvous in their different mafks. The centre of the gar¬ den was occupied by a fmall ifland, where an artificial grotto had been erected, and a fumptuous dinner provided by the Dukes's order. The latter was drefled as Neptune, and fwam in a golden ilici I upon the lake, provided with all his attributes, furrounded by a number of fca-gods, and drawn
drawn by blowing Tritons. He then made a long fpeech, prepared for that oe¬ cafion, in which he invited all his fubjects, even the nymphs, dryads, and hamadry¬ ads, included, who probably did not know how r they came to that honour, to be merry, and to enjoy the pleafures of the day. The gods and goddeffes that were aflembled on fliorc, and impatiently had expected that invitation, did not want much perfuafion, but inftantly made every preparation to be carried over to the pa¬ radife in fliells, which were provided for that purpofe. Thus far the company was pre-informed of every thing; but what follows was an impromptu of feveral members. When the fair ladies juft were going to embark in the fliells, a great troop of Fauns fuddenly ruih cd out of the neighbouring thicket, every one feizing a n)mph, and retreating with his fair prize to their ambufli. A general cry of fur¬ prife was raifed, and foon made room to univerfal laughter. However, the sods on
on íhore being not inclined to part at fo eafy a rate with their better halves, put themfelves in motion to fetch them back by force. The Fauns having entrenched themfelves fo well that it was not advife- able to attack them, they returned to get affiftance, The Tritons and Nereides quitted their element, and advanced in a threatening pofture towards the enemy, who received them with a roaring laughter, and a fhow 7 er of pine-fruit. Neptune himfelf quitted his car to reftore order, but in vain. The gods were obliged to capi¬ tulate, and to refign the nymphs one half of the evening to the Fauns. The feaft concluded with a fupper, excellent mufle, and a dance. " The laft fedi val was the Vigil of Vent* s 3 for which purpofe the Duke had built a beautiful temple of rrfarblc in his myrtle grove. That piece of architecture feemed to have been borrow ed of the fineft period of the Greek art, uniting uncommon fplendor with the moil exquifite tafte in a very
very fmall compafs. The alabafter ftatuc of Venus flood in the middle on an altar, half alive, but fpeechlefs. The temple was adorned the antecedent night with gar¬ lands of myrtle and rofes, in a fimple but noble itile. Two golden eenfors were wait- in£ for the frankincen fe. Twelve of the moft beautiful girls were feledted from the adjacent villages, and dreíTed as priefteflès by order of the Duke. They had been taught the proper hymns, and an excel¬ lent band of muiicians was afíembled. " When evening was fett ing in, a fole tii n proceffion proceeded from the en¬ trance of the park. ' The priefteflès of Venus were in the front, clad in white filk, and burning torches in their hands; they were ioilovvcd by twelve beautiful nymphs; then Venus iucceeded on a gik car, accompanied by the graces, and, con¬ trary to cuftom, drawn by four milk white horfes. The company concluded the train, being joined in couples as accident or inclinât on had paired them. " The
" The girl that reprefented Venus feemed to have been ex ρ refs! y formed for that purpofe; a foft, extremely luxuriant and inviting beauty, animated by the fpirit of her dilguife, and her new rank. The Duke led his Elizabeth, Count y###*** faş Augulla; the Du chefs walk¬ ed by Don Pablo's fide; and I was, to the "greateft diverfion of the whole company, coupled to a gouty lady from the neigh¬ bourhood, a woman that, in fpite of every deformity of old age, was puffed up with the prefumptuous belief to do honour to the fea ft. The reft of our company were followed by fix young couples, whom the Duke intended to portion and to marry on that oecafion. Every one carried a torch. " We arrived at length at the myrtle ' grove, amid the loud acclamations of the gaping multitude. A fweet fymphony of flutes received us, and we joined in a chorus in the hymn which was fung by the virgins. Two fylvans gave, at the en¬ trance
trance of the grove, two garlands of m) r- tles to every lover; one for himfelf, and one for his companion. It had been agreed that every one fhould kifs his lady when crow ning her with the garland; and none had protefted more violently againft: that ceremony than m v antiquated com- panion, though none fubmkted with a better crace to it than herfelf. «„* " Wc beheld the folendor of the tern- pic and its illumination already at a dif¬ tance. The dark verdure of the furround- ing myi ties ferved to fet off the variegated light with which it was emblazoned; the excellent muiic, the filent folemnity ofthe proceffion, and the truly Greek fimplicity of the melodious ftrains, the neat dreffes, and even the exhalation of the myrtles, reflected upon the whole a femblance of reality. I imagined to be tranfported to the ifle of Cyprus ; and, when the temple railed its milk white marble colonnades, decorated with garlands of myrtles and rofes, through the reddiih blaze of the torches,,
torches, and difplayed its fimple elegance more and more diftinctiy ; when I afcended its fteps, I fancied for fomc moments to live in that golden age, when man could en¬ joy all the beauty of art, when every paffion contributed to embellifh it, and every one knew how to avail himfelf of its variegated graces. The illumination was fo artifici¬ ally concealed, that we perceived nothing but its effects. The eenfors emitted two columns of an aromatic exhalation ; and the twelve priefteffes knelt around the altar oppofite to the ftatue of the goddefs. The latter difappeared fuddenly, as if removed by enchantment, when the Deity whom it reprefented alighted from her chariot. She was conducted to the altar, and feated herfelf upon a throne, which emerged from the pavement. We formed a circle behind the priefteffes ; the vigils were be¬ gun, accompanied by folemn mufic, st At length, the priefteffes began their folemn rites, the mufic grew fofter and fofter, and gradually died away in lan- guiihing
guifhing ftrains, imitating the palpitation which pervades the anxious heart at the approach of a folemn vow of love; and the fix couples drew nearer to the altar to receive the benediction of the goddefs. They feemed to be highly fenfible of what they received; their happinefs was legibly written in their fpeaking looks, gazing with delight at the objects of their love; and a reverential aw 7 e feemed to pervade them when the prìeftcfles encircled their temples with the chaplcts they received from the hand of the goddefs. All this was accompanied with, a fuitable addrefs, and with myftic ceremonies. " W r e all now ftept forth to be crowned, and proftratcd ourfclves, raifmg our eyes up to the goddefs; but, gracious heaven! what did my eyes behold! One of the graces feemed to be Elmira, I imagined to be deluded by a dream, and rubbed my eyes, but ftill beheld the fame coun¬ tenance, the fame ftriking refemblance of. features, the fame beautiful energy of Elmira' s
Elmira's looks. Now ihe glanced at me; but her looks pervaded almoft inftantly the whole fpacious building, as if in fearch of fome dear object. She found it, at length. Gracious heaven! how placidly ihe fmiles ! her eye fpeaks the. audible language of internal delight; her bofom palpitates more violently, lifting the Greek garment ; fhe is near her heaven, has found her lover. No, it is not Elmi¬ ra. My Elmira cannot have forgot me thus; my fenfes fail me; a chilly tremor pervades my nerves, and flops the pulfes of my heart. All the objects around me feemed to be over-darkened by a thick mift, I fuffered myfelf mechanically to be crowned vvith my companion, and, with a kind of fenfelefs apathy, fubmitted to the eruption of her excited fenfuality, fcarcely attending to her voluptuous fighs and the preffure of her hand: I only had eyes for my nymph, and for her refem¬ blance with my fainted wife. Her looks met me, at length ; but ihe did not blufh, and
and only fmiled. Her eyes now wandered indifferently from my perfon to reft longer on the other groups. Ere long they be¬ gan again to fparkle with a fecret de¬ fire: I envied the happy object: of her filent fondnefs, following her looks, and, alus! they refted on Count V******, af¬ fli rning an additional luftre, and fparkling with uncommon rapture, while that happy man, abforpt in the contemplation of his Augufta's charms, did not even obferve it. " The whole company rofe at length, and having received the blcfiing of the goddefs, crowded towards the garden, which, being illuminated with coloured lamps, difplayed what one chofe to exhi¬ bir, and hid what another wiflied to con¬ ceal. Cool grottos, elaftic feats of fwel¬ ling turf, concealed in the moil fecret re¬ ceffes of the mazy İh rubbery, the beauti¬ ful night, and the aromatic exhalations of the myrtles, and of numberlefs fweet fcent- cd flowers, invited with a powerful charm the enraptured fenfes to enjoy the pleafures of love, " Fortunately
1
" Fortunately I loft my antiquated com¬ panion in the crowd ; fled into the darkeit labyrinths of the garden to efcape her, and went in fearch of a retired fpot to collect my confufed thoughts, and to commune in folitude with the ideas that perturbated my mind. However, I met in every fecret path a couple that was ani¬ mated with a fimilar defire for folitude ; or, while I was going to feat myfelf down in a retired place, interrupted another that al¬ ready had found what I was feeking after. The Duke met me out of breath, and agitated with all the furies of difappoint¬ ment. - He had loft his Elizabeth, on whofe account he had given the feaft, whofe fenfes he had intended to furprife, and whom he had expected to animate with fweet fentiments propitious to his love. He was in defpair, and ftopping every nymph, examining every fecret re¬ cefs, and difturbing the raptures of each happy couple, vvas whipped through the grove, according to the kws of the feaft.
feaft. I left him to his fooiifh fury, and directed my courfe to a favourite fpot in the neighbourhood of a cafcade, wdiich fo frequently had invited me to fweet medi¬ tations, where I already had fo often ar¬ ranged my confufed ideas, and cheered my hopes, lulled into tranquillity by the harmonious murmurs of the defcending waters, I found it occupied by three per¬ fons, who were engaged in friendly con¬ verfation, and laughing, as I fuppofed, at the Duke, who had overlooked them in the heat of purfuit. As I came nearer, I defcried the Count of V*******, Augufta, and Elizabeth, and feated myfelf by their fide, filent and fpeechlefs. They afked me what ailed me; and apprehended I was not well. 1 was going to reply, buta torrent of tears guihing from my eyes, ï began to fob violently, and dropt to the ground. Elizabeth felt fo much concern at my lamentable fituation, that flie for¬ got the referve natural to her fex, and en¬ circled me with her arms, flo wc ver, I Vol. II, G was
was infenfible of thefe tokens of her af¬ fection, and the Count reftored me to my recollection with great difliculty. He then endeavoured to difcover the caufe of my affliction, taking Elizabeth's hand, and putting it into mine. She not only fuf¬ fered it, but even attempted to cheer me up by the moft tender careffes; yet I did not return the emanations of her affection, turning my eyes from her tender looks, and cafting them melancholy to the ground. * f I fear," the Count exclaimed, at length, with tendernefs, " I fear our friend is very ill. The night is damp, ladies; your drefs is light; you too expofe your- felves to the bad effedts of the chilling air. Let us return to the caftle." «Having feen the ladies to their apart¬ ments, he took me aftedtionately by the hand, led me back into the garden, and feeing feated on a bench, began in footh- ing accents: iC Here we are heyond the reach of obfervation, Carlos: you know I am
am your friend ; I infift upon ftiaringyour grief/' How could I have refilled liis affectionate careffes, and his generous warmth? I informed him of the moft material part of my hiftory, and ac¬ quainted that dear friend vvith the caufe of my affliction and grief. tf He liftened attentively to my tale, comforted me tenderly; and when I had finiflied, faid, " The lady whom you have feen, is not Elmira; I know her. Your plan of going in fearch of the unknown, and of taking vengeance on them, is ex¬ travagant, and bordering on madnefs. Endeavour to find out an afylum where you can remain unknown, and there at¬ tempt to recover the peace of your mind. This is the advice of a friend who fir.- cerely loves you ; but leave this place as foon as poffible. You fee you have gained Elizabeth's heart; don't excite wiflies in her bofom which vou never can erati fv." u He then conducted me back to m\ apartment, and ftayed the whole night G a conferii ι :-;
con verfing with mc on my fituation, and giving me counfels which I afterwards re« collected but too late. He entreated me not to return to my native town before I fliould have made farther difcoveries, and promifed to take all poffible pains to ferve me, for which reafon he wiflied me to re¬ main in the neighbourhood, propoli ng Madrid for my future place of rcfidence. His penetrating and experienced eye dif¬ covercd, with an uninterrupted equani¬ mity, connections which I had entirely overlooked ; and his great and noble heart took fuch a lively fhare in my fate, that it would have proved dangerous to himfelf, if he had been poffeffed of lefs experience and prudence. If Heaven had blefled me for a longer fpace of time with the happinefs of his fociety, and if an un~ forefecn change of circumftances had not removed him from the fituation in which it was poffible for him to make fome dif¬ covery in my behalf, we fhould probably have been enabled by our union to come at
at the bottom of the matter, and, *f> time, have prevented an evil which, by its con¬ fequences, gave reafon to prefage the moil baneful effects. <f Being completely convinced by his fage advice, he promifed me to fpcak to the Duke, in order to render my fudden departure as little fufpicious and furprifing as poflible. A palpable pretext for my journey was invented, and I took leave of the company on the fubfequent day. You may think with what emotions I bade a laft adieu to the amiable Elizabeth. The lovely girl had gained on my affections by a partiality for me, which, in the latter days of my refidence at the caftle, threw off all referve. She would not let me de¬ part before I had given her a folemn pro¬ mife not to forget her entirely, and, if poflible, to fee her once more under hap¬ pier circumftances. I quitted that charm¬ ing fociety with a heavy heart, accompa¬ nied only by the Count, who went a few miles with me. G 3 CHAPTER
CHAPTER ΥΠ. Y journey to Madrid contains no¬ thing worth notice, at leaft nothing that related to my fituation. The fa/cty and the peace with which I continued rny journey, made me once more believe that it wa.s poffible I could efcape my tormen¬ tors; I already began to dream of future ferenity of mind, and to form airy plans of happinefs, I travelled incognito, and my cheering imagination reflected a mild light upon all objects ¡ I enjoyed my inde¬ pendent fituation with internal delight. I can truly fay, that that period was one of the moft cheerful of my life. The con¬ fcioufnefs of having left fome friends, who took a ihare in my concerns, and even my tender affections for the Count, gave a purity to my difpofition, of which I thought it never could be capable. Thus light and darknefs fucceeded each other alternately in my fate. « When
« When I came to Madrid, I took a / houfe, and furnifliedit as if I intended to ' remain there a long time. I had agreed with the Count that he fliould f urni ih me with the requinte money, and began to choofe a circle of acquaintances and friends in which I couid hope to fpend thofe months which I confiderei! as a pro- bat iona ry ti me t ol era b I y h ap p y . Co n : ie с - tions with people of middle rank, m u lie, the play-houfe, and reading, diverted me almoft a whole year in the moft agreeable and fatisfactory manner, when an acci¬ dent, which I drew 'upon me by my own folly and imprudence, deprived me again of that happinefs. " In the companies which I vifited, iť was not always poflible to avoid playing at cards; butas my income was uncertain, and eafily could be ftopt by xny pcrfecu- tors, I carefully avoided all experienced players and noted gamblers. Yet my ill ftars would have it, that my fecret tor¬ mentors fliould find out the way by which G 4 I wa*
I was provided with money ; for I received neither money nor letters from the Count in the courfe of fix months, notwithftand¬ ing my writing frequently to him. My regularity had, till then, preferved me from want, and promifcd to do fo for fome time to come, when, one fatal even¬ ing, I was fo much inebriated with joy and wine, that I flaked more money than í was ufed to do, and was fo unfortunate to fee my caih gradually dwindle away under the hands of cunning thieves. I faved only as much as would ferve to main¬ tain me a few weeks longer. I waited feveral weeks for letters from the Count; and beiHg, at length, reduced, by de- fpair and fhame, to the laft extremity, I refolved to quit Madrid, and to return to Alcantara. I fold my furniture to pay my debts, and was obliged to travel on foot for want of money. Thus I was again reduced to my former unfortunate fituation by my own imprudence, notwith¬ ftanding the fagc counfcls and exhorta¬ tions
tions of my friend, and irt fpite of my firm réfolutions. I gave myfelf volunta¬ rily up to t my fecret enemies, from whom I feemed to have delivered myfelf for fome time, with fo much trouble and through fuch great facrifices; and while I was fu¬ rioufly enraged at my not being able to efcape one misfortune, I ran heedlefsly into the very mouth of a itili greater one. What ought to have bent down my fpirir, only animated me with additional courage; what, at fome other period, would un¬ doubtedly have exhaufted my firmnefs, raifed it now to a higher degree. While I was poor, a helplefs beggar, and expofed to every danger and diftrefs, I cheered my¬ felf with hopes of which my wearied foul wouid not have been fufeeptible amid all the encouragements 01 a fmiling life. <( Negligence, and a want of knowledge. of thofe little advantages which are fo ufe¬ ful to a traveller, foon leffened my little wealth rapidly; and I was fcarcely a few days journey diftant from the. capital, G 5 when
when I had but very little money left. Yet my courage did not forfake me: the remainder of my caih was juft fufficient to purchafe a miférable lute at the next town: I have fome talent for mufic, and knew then a number of popular fongs by heart, which I had learned in better days for my amufement. My misfortunes and my enthufiafm animated the miférable inftru¬ ment: I addreffed myfelf chiefly to the female fex, and being gifted with a tole¬ rably good form, I obtained every where bread and a favourable reception: for, fludying the temper of thofe whom I had to deal with, f only played fuch tunes as were agreeable to their fituation and dif¬ pofition of mind. Thus I finiflied one half of my journey, pretty well fatisfied with my fituation, animated with bodily ftrength, bleffed with ferenity of mind and with a cheerful countenance. " On a fultry afternoon, when the heat of the fun, hunger, and fatigue, had ex¬ haufted me entirely, I was juft going to quit*
quit the high road, and to reft my weary limbs in the refrefhing iliade of a diftant wood, where I expected to find fome fruit, when I defcried a little cottage, at the foot of a hill, not far off from the highway, in the centre of a fmall garden, and a neat grove of fruit trees. A bell, which was fufpended near that humble manfion, told me that it was the refidence of a hermit. The whole bore fuch an inviting afpedt of neatnefs and elegance, that I was pre-occupied in favour of its poffeflbr. The God of plenty feemed to have bleffed that little Paradife, Bloffoms and fruits were moil beautifully blended with each other. Every little fpot nou- rifhed fome plant, and every plant was covered by a cooling iliade. A tinkling rill crept from the neighbouring moun¬ tains towards that enchanting afylum of folitary piety, and feemed to creep flower through the luxuriant verdure of the gar¬ den, and to leave it with regret. I have never beheld a more charming picture of G 6 peace
Ч* THE HORRID MYSTERIES. peace and chcerfulnefs than that refidence offequeftered pleafure. Its beauties unfold¬ ed themfelves more diftinctiy and charm¬ ingly the nearer I approached. A fmall grove embofomed the whole : every cor¬ ner was adorned wich a bloffomingbower; and the murmuring rill was received in the centre by a bafon, to protect the flowers and plants againft the heat of the noontide fun, and to refrefh them with its cooling exhalations. A refrigeratingcoolnefs per¬ vaded that terreftrial paradife, and the whole exhibited a picture of reft after a toilfome labour. " I rang the bell at the little gate. The hermit ftepped out of his humble manfion, looking for his gueft ; and when he faw r me, went to open the garden gate. While he performed that hofpitable taik, I look¬ ed at his countenance. What an intereft¬ ing afpečl did my eyes behold ! The grief of many years, and the felicity which he feemed to have found at laft, had pro¬ duced features which penetrated into the deepeft
deepeft receffes of my heart. His looks bade defiance to the impofing deception of external appearance. Silent feriouf- nefs· refted in his mien: his countenance difplayed the veftiges of a dear-bought conqueft over every warring paflîon of former years : his reverend brow was fur¬ rowed by early misfortunes : a faint gloom of melancholy fat upon the penfive eye: the tone of his voice was full and charm¬ ing, but awful even to the innocent; and his whole form exhibited a moft intereft¬ ing picture of virtue, purified from every dreg in the furnace of adverfity ; of hu- maiiitVj that feemed to embrace every fellow-creature ; unaffuming nobility, pa¬ ternal goodnefs, and of filent internal contentment. " I had forgot the words I intended to addrefs to that reverend being when I ap¬ proached him, and flood before him feized with fpeechlefs awe. All the images of venerable fuavity and humani¬ ty, which I had borrowed from the myftic cavern.
cavem, and ftill carried in my mind, biuihed at the fight of that reverend countenance. Here I faw happinefs united with peace: I approached her humble abode with blifsful dreams, and now trembled to be fo near its venerable in¬ mate. I had taken the firm réfolution to preferve equanimity in every fcene of life, to meet every hope and fear with tranquil¬ lity: I had already made a toilfome be¬ ginning, and neverthelefs had remained confiant to that réfolution ; but here, at the fight of that picture of terminated years of forrow, the former weaknefs, fo natural and fo dear to the human heart, awoke again, and I again began to tremble for my happinefs, " He was, befides, no hermit of the common fort. He had, indeed, fecluded himfelf from the fight of men; but he did not abfcond himfelf in inacceffible caverns, nor in the moft fecret receffes of impenetrable forefts. His peaceful cot¬ tage was fituated on an open fpot; a happy, encouraging
encouraging example; it admitted every one, » as a comfortable afylum for the weary w л derer. He had retired from a fmaller circle of his brethren only to be enabled to ferve in peace a greater one. My grateful heart, fo irrefiftibly attached to the hoary fage at firft fight, diffolved with reverential awe into fentiments of virtue and humanity, which I had become a ftranger to«, " Step in, poor ftranger," he faid, on perceiving my wearinefs and aftoniihment : <f walk in ; reft yourfelf in the iliade of my trees; refreih yourfelf at my fpring, and eat of my fruits." " For* give, reverend father, (I faid, while I ap¬ proached him:) I am aftoniihed and con¬ founded : forgive me that I cannot return your kind reception as I ought to do. Yet I hope my iilent thanks will fatisfy ycu." " He fqueezed my hand without reply¬ ing a word; ihut his garden-gate, and went to open his cottage ; fetched an eafy chair, and having covered it with a mat, placed
placed it for me beneath a fprcading wal¬ nut tree, which over-ihadovvcd his hum¬ ble manfion. He then fetched water from the fpring, and having placed it before me with a little baiket of figs, peaches, and grapes, feated himfelf upon a wood¬ en bench againft which my chair was reclined, and faid, " Eat, dear friend, and refrefh yourfelf: you feem to want it." " How happy are you, reverend father, (I refumed, taking him tenderly by the hand, and looking in his fmiling counte¬ nance,] to live in the bofom of this ter¬ reftrial paradife, where you reprefent the image of the all-bountiful Father of na¬ ture amongft men whofe warmeft grati¬ tude you deferve, and, without doubt, are rewarded with." " Happy ! Yes, I am happy, at prefent, my young friend. I rejoice at you and iny brethren whom I can comfort." « He then appeared to be abforpt in a tranfient reverie; but I foon roufed him with thefe words; « I am quite exhaufted, good
good father: will you give me leave to ftay at your cottage to-night?" w With pleafucç, my fon ; to-night, to-morrow, as long as you choofe. It is, in general, not my cuftom : however, your countenance infpirés me with confi¬ dence, and I will readily make an excep¬ tion from my rule." « Do not think that I fliall w T afte my time in idle nefs while with you; you are already bent down by the burden of hoary age; the vigour ofyour body is fled: your garden requires labour ; thefe arms are fincwv, and I underftand a little of gardening." " Well, my fon, I give you leave to ftay with meas long as you choofe: I fliall be a tender father to you while you are with me. You feem not to be born for the fi¬ tuation whofe badge you wear. You will ailift me, and I fliall not let you depart without falutary advice and relief." So laying, he inclofcd my hand tenderly in his. I rofe, and kiffed it with filial affec¬ tion»
tion. Burning tears, u hich I could nor retain, bedewed that reverend hand; and l dropt at his feet, in the feline's of my heart, encircling his knees. Iiis heavenly eyes too f wam in tears, and his bofom heaved higher. ï beheld his noble coun- tenance bríghtning up with a heaven of amiable fentiments which had lain dor™ mant, and now pervaded all his features with fpeaking vivacity and redoubled energy. He ftrained me to his bofom, calling mc his haplefs fon, and promifed to convey comibrt to my mind from hh parental heart and experience. I (di my whole exiftence changed at once, in that facred moment of pureft reverence, for a being of a higher order,; and my fpirit was ftraitencd by novel, unknown fenfa¬ tions and new profpects. " IL· raifed me, at length, and made me fit down on the bench. " Refrefh yourfelf now, my foii; wc ihall be fuffici¬ ently at leifure to unbofom ourfelvcs to cachother: you may relate your hiftory to
to mc to-morrow, or at any other future period, and alk my advice, if you choofe. í now fhail leave you, to work in my gar¬ den : you may follow, and affift me, if you are not too much fatigued/' He dropt my hand, and left me. * f No fooncr was I in private, than I was vifited by pleafing fancies. I had lor.ped fora peaceful afylum as the higheft object of my ardent w i flies, and here í had found it, at laft, in the 'arms of a tender father and a loving friend. í was already fo happy in the moment, ib con¬ tent, that ï forgot the item frowns of fu¬ tu ri ty j being chained to préfence by its fmiling afpedt, i abandoned my fel f ib entirely to the firft charm of new hope, as if they were already realized. The re¬ collection of time paft vaniíhcd fuddenly ; ï could not recai to my memory even the moft trifling incident of former times; my life being at once cheered up by the imexpected dawn of rofcate joy, appeared to promife an uninterrupted train of plea¬ fing
fing enjoyment. The laft moment of terminated fufferings is always a fufficient atonement, and even a fweet reward, for mifery paft; and being rendered more fenfible and fufeeptible by pain, we gra¬ dually ripen in the mutable changes of life, for the moil rapturous blifs, " A fliort, tranquil flumber having re- invigorated my whole frame, I rofe, taking up a fpade, which the hermit had left for me at the entrance of his cottage, and went the way he had pointed out to me. I found him at work in the midfl of a beautiful fpot of ground, covered with a gay tapeftry of variegated flowers, leaning on his working tool, and looking at the children of his diligence, abforpt in fe¬ cret joy. ITearing me approach, he fmiled kindly at me, aiking if I had any knowledge of the cultivation of vines; and, upon rry anfwering in the affirmative, directed me to look after a little vineyard bordering on the fouth-end of his garden* Wé worked till the finking fun had hid his>
liis radiant orb behind the weftern moun¬ tains; he fmiled frequently at my dili¬ gence, applauding my afliduous dexterity; and I w as happy beyond the power of de¬ fcription, " Can the noify buftle of the * f world," he exclaimed repeatedly during our work, "afford that fweet and tranquil pleafure one enjoys in the fociety of the plants our dil'gence has reared and forter- cd, and in the unclouded converfation with that modeft, gentle part of the crea¬ tion? Animated Ly their example, and their paffivenefs, comforted by the myfte¬ ries of their nature, with higher profpects, and refrcihed by their fragrant exhalations, I have frequently, in their fociety, forgot men, and even learnt to cherifh them. I have examined their ftructure, and am become the confident of the rofe that re- frefhes me with its fpicy odour, ofthe fruit that nourifhes me, and of the grove that fpread s İrs cooling iliade around my cot¬ tage. I have found friends amongft them ; their life ferves me as an example and a -rule ;
ч rule; and I am grown a ftranger to for¬ row. How frequently has their * filent growth recalled to my mind the fweet dor¬ mant images of my juvenile years ; how often have they animated me to keep firm on the road of unfullied virtue and wifdom ! Even a dream exalts the mind, if it occupies it fufficiently, and renders it happy in the midit of its occupations." " Thus he entertained me with cheer¬ ful and ínílručting leffons of wifdom till evening was fetting in ; and I faw the fun decline with unufual contentment and inward rapture. All the objects around fmiled, and feemed to ihare my happinefs. We took our woiking implements, and re¬ turned to the cottage; feat ing ourfelvcs upon an elevation of elaftic turf before the door of that humble afylum of con¬ tentment and tranquillity. " You have worked well," faid my venerable hoft, "and deferve a proportionate reward.'* He then fetched fome fruits, a loaf of white bread, and a bottle of wane. We ate with
with a keen appetite, and feafoned our meal with cheerful talk, tranfported into the golden age of yore, till the laft ray of the fun had died away, and a fparkling hoft of twinkling ftars covered the azure firmament in filent majefty. A fimple couch was our bed, and I never had en¬ joyed fuch a fweet and profound fleep, nor had I ever rifen fo early and fo cheerful. CHAPTER ΥΙΠ. SEVERAL days elapfed equally ferene with the firft, and divided between labour, reft, and happinefs. Whatever the hermit fpoke, contained fage precepts, rules of virtue, and directions of happi¬ nefs. His actions were of the fame na¬ ture. I always went to reft happier than I had rifen, and always rofe more content than I had laid down, The hoary hermit preferved a confiant filence with regard to my hiñory, putting not one queftion to me 2 concerning
concerning my fate; and I was too much oc¬ cupied with my felicity, to reflect on misfor¬ tunes pail, and introduce that painful fub¬ jedt " One evening I was fitting later than ufual upon the turfy feat before our door, contemplating the charms of my new re¬ fidence, and the folemn beauties of the ferene night. The hermit was already gone to reft, and I left to myfelf. I was entirely abforpt in profound meditations on my peaceful fituation, and yet open to all the charms that furrounded me. I inhaled the refrcfhing exhalation of the trees, and the balfamic odour of the fpicy flowers, diffufing their rich perfumes through the nocturnal air on wings of cooling breezes. I was Ion in the capa¬ cious fpace of time; eternity reprefented itfelf before my flowery imagination, with its numerous train of never-fading blef¬ fings, as a juft rewarder of well-fpent years. The myftic ftrains of night un¬ folded themfelves gradually from the ge¬ neral filence of the creation like harmonics from
from a better world; the undulation of the night-air, the ruftling of the leaves, the chirping of a cricket, and the dying tinkling of the rill, vibrated in my liften¬ ing ears like whifpers of an invifible train of fpirits fporting on the wings of fra¬ grant breezes. Tbe creative dufk, com¬ pofed of the mifty vapours of the night, and of the filver light of the rifing moon, ethereal images, and the trembling rays ofthe Queen of night, which fiole timidly through the half tranfparent leaves, paint¬ ed them with the pale'" dappling mi ft of the realm of fpirits. The murmuring rill reprefented itfelf as a gleaming ftreak, which loit itfelf in the nocturnal ftillnefs of the valley. Solitary bulhes, whofe tops nodded on its banks, formed dancing phantoms on its fmooth furface. My elated foul, confeious of her innate power, foared through tht vapours of the night and the myftic dufk, which enfolded all objects around over the curling clouds and the milky way. The ftars difappeared Vol. II, H without
without returning again: I loft myfelf in the populous realms of my bufy fancy; penetrating to the world where Elmira re¬ fided, where flie awaited me, hoarding up joys unfpeakable for her Carlos. I en¬ joyed her converfation, and dreamed my¬ felf encircled with heavenly glory in her arms; my bridled paffions were filenced, I had improved in virtue, and felt myfclf deferving of her never-fading love. What a moment of blifs ! what a numerous train of years was concentred in it! No joys furpafs thofe of a glowing imagina¬ tion, and of enthufiafm, if they are occu¬ pied with a dear object. " I now had repofed my prefenfions and my wiflies in her iap, and returned with additional contentment to myfelf. I recollected my lute, and went on tip-toe into the cottage to fetch it. Having found it, I returned to my former place, and began to unburden myfelf in melodi¬ ous ftrains of the reft of thofe overflowing fenfations which painfully ftraitened my bofom.
bofom. All the feelings of my foul im- parted themfelves to the artlefs fl rains 1 drew from the melodious chords. Ail na¬ ture feemed to liften to my nocturna. The recollection of the blifs I had enjoyed in Elmira's arms, now made my fingers run quicker over the fonorous chords. However, the cheerful ftrains foon died away in fwelling plaintive notes, vhen my imagination began to cool, and the painful remembrancer in my heart re¬ minded me that ihe was no more. At once the joyous hope ofa future re-union with the darling of my heart lighted upon my mournful foul, while triumphal ftrains rcfounded through the air, and fweet tranquillity was reftored to my agitated bofom. I fancied to fee Elmira's fpirit throning on a filver cloud, and liftening to my raptures. I had never felt with fo much energy how dear that heaven! v woman was to my heart, how indiflolubly flie was united with my whole exiftence, \ han now, when I faw her again, when I II2 enjoyed
enjoyed her purer and without fenfes, con* templating myfelf in her heavenly mind as in a mirror. I felt, to my aftonifliment, and with unfpeakable rapture, that flie was no more the fame Elmira I knew for¬ merly; fhe now appeared to my fancy as a fainted angel, difencumbercd of all ter¬ reftrial qualities and defects ; a pure un- fpotted beauty, glowing with fervent love forme, notwithftanding her raptures, which fprungfrom the confcioufnefs of her exalted virtues. " While I was yet abforpt in thefe ecftatic revenes, I heard a noife clofe by me. The cottage door opened, and my benevolent hoft joined me. tf A new ta¬ lent," he faid, fmiling, fi wtiich I am re¬ joiced -to difcover in you : you fing and play in no inferior flue. You have waked me from my fleep 'm a moil agreeable manner. But what means that tear in your eye, my poor friend? Come, let us beguile the reft ofthe night with confiden¬ tial talk." So faying, he feated himfelf by
by my fide. I was not able to reply ; but took his pale trembling hand, preifing it tenderly to my bofom, and looking with hcart-felc gratitude in his fmiling eye. " Either the recollection- of former times, 0 he continued, iť Ia\s heavy upon your mind, or futurity fills you with anx¬ ious bodings, ìì.it it will be wifer to enjoy the prefent moment. What neeå you to care for ïo^s or ft; ill ring's whicli are nothing elfe hut a dream? and what wül it boot you to guefs at futurity, fince the charm of theprıTent moment directs our inclina¬ tions, and every thing that does not refem- ble it appears terrible to us ?" " No, my father, í do not grieve at the prefent time, nor am I anxious about futurity. You have provided for either with equal kindnefs. You furprifed me only in a converfation with beloved, fainted friends; and my tears were tears of joy, produced by our re-union. " Beloved, fainted friends, did you Ĺ\yi Your looks, my ù>i\, fpcak of great and H 3 early
early forrows, .1 am moil affectionately concerned for you, and take a parent's filare in your fufferings. You know 7 me already fufficiently to be convinced that we are related in that point. You ihall learn my hiftory at forti e future time. Tell me now a part of tlie incidents oi' your life, if you have no objection to ic, iind want any advice or comfort." How coukl I have refilled the confidential rc- queft of a father, how could I have with- itood his tendernefs and his concern ? Being already fufficiently prompted to it by the difpofition of my mind, which juft was returning from the land of peace and fra¬ ternal comfort, my heart readily confented to gratify the wiflies ofthe good old man, and unburthened itfelf of a heavy load of grief and melancholy by fliaring it with a friend. í related to him, in that night, my hiftory to the prefent period, and nearly in the fame manner in which I have communicated it to }ou, dear Count. « Th,;
<f The hermit liftened patiently to my tale, and without ?,ny apparent furprife; fcarcely one mien befpoke his concern or compaffion. He feemed to be abferpt iu a dream« in which his reclines took a mo- derate flaire, without being once ftopt or interrupted in their gentle courfe: they only feemed to be fenfibly intereftcd in the conclufion, which had brouuht mc to his cottage. As foon as í came to thru- point, he folded me in his arms, without uttering а fingie found. I reclined my face againft his heart, wliich audibly beat more violently than ufual. I was ex¬ haufted, and half fainting : incoherent accents, mingled with fobs, Hammered my gratitude. The enthufiafm of filial love, which had been weakened and in¬ terrupted by early misfortunes and for¬ rows, awoke again with redoubled force. While I fearched for my lure to exprefs my grateful fenfations, I found а language deferving of him and of myfelf, H 4. «You
u Ycu have loft every thing, Caí los," he refumed; "parents, wife, and happi¬ nefs. I am as fenfible of your lofs as yourfelf; but hearken; one treafure has not yet been taken from you; you have ftill a friend left, and I will convince you that I deferve that facred name. You arc, therefore, not ifolatcd nor forfaken, as you dieam. Renounce, for a İh ort time, do you hear? only for a ÍLort time, your lofty wiflies, and you will be enabled again to hope to find happinefs and peace." "Oh! I have already found them in your fociety, in your parental goodnefs, in aflifting you, and in returning }our lo\e. Look! here is the gaol of all my wiflies. I am in want of nothing fur¬ ther." " And my happinefs too will encreafe, if )ou continue to be my friend, dear Carlos, and to ftay with me. My hair is already bleached by age; my hands trem¬ ble; and being bent down by the lead of years,
vears, I flagger already tovvards the grave: you ihall be my heir; not the heir of this little eftate, but of my experience and principles. Wait only a few years longer, and then mix again with the world, to practife them; and if you find them ufe¬ ful, and have improved all your faculties amid the bu fy crowd of incidents and per¬ plexing fituations, as you can and ought to do, then return to this folitude to enjoy them." " Wïx with the world, did you fay? with men who have deceived and repelled me fo frequenti} ?" ' " Have you not alfo left fiends behind you who love you? Don't be unjuft to them, dear Carlos." * ct No friend whom I have not found again in this peaceful folitude; no pleafiue which you could not give me too; none of the pureft and moil beneficent enjoy¬ ments, which I could not find in this para¬ dife, without painful trouble and dium- pointment." H S « I will
u I will believe, dear Carlos, that this could fuftice your heart for years, yea for the reft of your life. You certainly would find around this cottage plenty of work to occupy you, and fufficient gratifications to keep you always awake and to charm you : but you fay you would be able to procure them without painful trouble: I only aik you, has the refreih ing fhade and the cooling fpring ever given you fo much delight after an idle walk as when you enjoyed it after along fatiguing journey?" "But, my father, have I not gathered a fuf¬ ficient it ос к of experience, have I not lived long enough ? Has my heart not been nurfed up amid grief and woe, and the vexations of difappouited hopes? Is my mind not fufficiently formed, has it not means enough to render thefe cooling fliades conftantly charmin· without fatigue, and always equally defirable?" Ci No, Cai los, vou are miftaken. Stay with me till I am gone to my eternal home, and you will Le fenfible of it. Grief
Grief is no good piipil of wifdom: and believe me, not here, but amongft men, you will find peace. Peace of mind does not confiti in the/oblivion of ourfclves. To ruih fenfelefs out of the buftle of the world, is no ftep nearer to perfection ; and flying the fociety of men, without knowing them from experience, does not fweeten folitude. But when you have en¬ joyed the world fome time longer, and more frequently feen your hopes and dreams fruftrated; when you have attained a proper Jtno\vledge of things, and of their incrinile value, and thus obtained a right to reflect on, and to judge of them; when you have feen the fufferings of others, and frequently felt how trifling your;: are if compared with theirs; when you, infpired and fu ppor t ed by the expec¬ tation of a peaceful end, have contem« plated e\ery thing w ith the firm look of true liberty, and nothing in the world gives you any more pleafure or grief; then, dear Caries, then wifdom and foii- 1 1 6 tude
tude will cheerfully receive you in their bofom. You muft not go in fearch of them as an exile from your houfe, nor filled with rancour againft your neigh¬ bours; no, you muft go voluntarily, and quit the fociety with a cheerful farewel. "If you reflect now on the time pail, you behold nothing but an empty fpace, nothing but ungratified and loft dreams of your imagination, if ou have experienced a fufficient ihare of adverfity, and lived long enough; but you have been furprifed by the too rapid courfe of your fate, and one half of your experience is irretrievably loft for you, I pity you; yet it would be better for your future happinefs, if the greater part of it were ftill before }OU. " You live in this moment entirely upon the fweet expectations of futurity, with¬ out being aware of it, Hope is always the firft dawn that lights upon our heart when it opens again for the reception of fecial happinefs. If fome accident, againft which
which you cannot guard yourfelf, íhoulď drive you one time out of this cottage, and this folitude, your happinefs would be irrecoverably loft. You would not have ftrength enough to feek it elfewhere." " But, my father, what bufinefs have I with human fociety? How fhall I converfe 1 with men ? Being ufed to the company of your honcfty and love, I ihould fuffer my¬ felf to be deceived again." " That you fliall, Carlos. You íhalľ launch again into the billowing ocean of the world, to learn thcreal value of things by repeated trials. Then you never will mifs in your folitude what your imagina¬ tion at prefent fees only at a diftance; and while you fliall be able to enjoy the pre¬ fent moment, becaufe you are grown in¬ different to futurity, you will, at the fame time, have it in your power to confole yourfelf with diftant profpects, when the unavoidable trifling forrows of the mo¬ ment are hovering over you. The philo¬ fophy of life is nothing but an accurate occular
occular knowledge of the viciflitude of all things." " And is this all that I am to acquire by connecting myfelf again with men, to be content at the clofe of my life?" " This will, indeed, be fufficient to make you content, but not to raife you to the higheft degree of that happinefs of which you arc fufeeptible. This requires a great deal more, makes it requinte that all the powerful paffions of your mind ihould have been active on the great itage of the world, and finifhed their ever- changing play. You muft have acquired the power of ftopping them in their rapid courfe, and of directing them to that point where they can be ufeful. You courted the favours of love, follow now the banners of laudable ambition." " Is fame a good that will contribute to brighten the clofe of my life ?" " Fame in itfelf is certainly no good ; but the defire of attaining it is the crite¬ rion of an exalted mind. Your faculties will
will gradually improve while you make the general love and regard of your cotempo- raries the aim of yourpurfuits; your hap¬ pinefs will by degrees become lefs fub- jectcd to be tainted by thofe trifling incU dents which mix fo much bitternefs with the life of the greater part of mankind. You will, indeed, not be happy while your career hurries you without reft from deeds to deeds; yet while you court the gratitude of nations, and rofes bioflom for you at the limits of time, you will wean yourfelf from your inferior paffions. You will then one time awake from your dream : your prefent difpofition, which was too early and too firmly interwoven with your feelings, warrants the truth of this prediction : and İf ycu fur vi ve that period, the reft of your life will amply reward you for the mifery and ftruggles of former days," " I grant it, my father; but will n^y foul not be wearied too much by the re¬ peated blows of adverfe fate, as to be % able
able to have a due fenfe of that reward? will Aie fave „her pure and beautiful fuf¬ ceptibility from the tempefts of misfortune and difappointment?'*' " Undoubtedly ! provided you never lofe fight of your aim, and beguile your gloomy hours with cheering profpects of future happinefs. Take it as a golden rule of happinefs, to enjoy the prefent moment, when your feelings are awake; and to confo!e yourfelf with the profpect of future times, when you perform the duties of your ftatíon." ťC But has a paftoral life, has that fweet uniform growing of the faculties in the lap of nature, no charms, has it no grati¬ fications to beftow ? Is it no happinefs to lead a life in which every thing charms and pleafes, in which labour and pleafure aid each other in an eternal rotation, upon which no year of fatiety and regret can intrude, and every hour is beftrewed with flowers by the graces? You fmile, my father; but you will forgive me my cnthufiafm,
enthufiafm. How could it be otherwife in this delightful paradife, where I inhale the odourof fragrant bloflbms, where the even¬ ing breeze whifpers gently in the leaves, where the flower raifes its dewy head, nod¬ ding fparkling in the filver light of the moon; where peaceful tranquillity lights upon my foul in the hallowed dufk of night; w liere I feci onl v what lam ; where time oaft fmiles at me only as a cheerful dream, and futurity amu fes me in various pleafing ihapes? How'fweet is it to enjoy, in this filent grove, the peace which is our work, to cat of the fruits,we have grown for our ufe, to live in the iliade wc have planted ourfelvcs! And, when our fenfes grow weary, when the mod eft gloom of the grove, when the mirror of the peace¬ ful pond, when the fields and the night ceafe to charm, the fpirit ftill continues to live amid an eternal change of new and unknown apparitions and pleafing phan¬ toms, our looks, which learn to extend themfelves from individual parts to the whole,.
whole, return with gathered treafures?, and with additional contentment, fupply- mg the mind with an inexhauftible flore of materials for never-fading luxuries." " I have fuffered ycu to go on, Carlos, without interrupting you. Nature and the few peaceful days you have enjoyed 'have infpired you with a poetical fire. I rejoice at it, but fear that it will not be of long duration* The enjoyment of the country, and of peace of mind, is yet too novel to you. Your images will foon be exhaufted. And believe me, Carlos, even if accident and your noble foul ihould ren¬ der this retired life conftantly new to you, jet you would regret this happinefs at the clofe of your days; for your fpirit rather would lofe itfclf in the contemplation of your days pail than be pleafed with them. A tranquil courfe of time renders the mo¬ ments cheerful, but wearies the hours ; and if it continues to flow in the fame eafy tide, without exerting its powers, without beiner roufed bv obftacles to an additional exertion,.
exertion, it becomes an image of tedious inanity» If, on the contrary, you have devoted the greater part of your life to a higher purpofe; if you have facrificed peace and enjoyment to the paffion of ex¬ tending tlie compafs ofyour activity; if you fee the dream of your wearied hours, fame and adoration, gradually rife, ín the realms of futurity, to reality; how diffe¬ rent are then your fenfations î Your glow¬ ing foul does then with ra; ture reflecten the minutes elapfed without enjoyment; the time paft ravifhes your mind with a train of noble, laudable deeds; every par¬ ticle of time is marked with the confci¬¬ oufnefs of internal applaufc; joy and grief, pain and recreation, compofe a pleafing picture; and you behold, at the end of your career, your name refpected by poft cri ty, and adorned with the glory of immortal renown. If, at that period, the paftoral life of rural retirement ftill has fome charms for you, then you may make the filent groves your refidence, and bury
bury yourfelf in the folitary gloom of fe¬ cluded grottos. The recollection of your deeds will then furprife you in your foli¬ tude; you will reflect with fond delight on a well-fpent life; your achievements will be your companions; and the confci¬ oufnefs of your virtues will make you for¬ get the corruptioh of the age you live in. Your memory will always fupply you with pleafing images ; the fource of your plea¬ fure will be inexhauftible; and you will never want means of beguiling the tedi- oufnefs of folitude." <c What you have faid may be true, my father: my underftanding comprehends you, but my heart is yet a ftranger to the happinefs you have fct before me. How¬ ever, you have more experience than I and I ought therefore to be filent." " You cannot but know, dear Carlos, and your own feelings will tell you, thatjoy avoids us when wc feek for it ; that it comes uncalled ; that it oftentimes furprifes us in the moil rapturous fhape, amid our labours and
and dífappointments ; but pays no regard to our folicitations, and refifts all violent efforts of feizing it by dint of force/* " I have frequently experienced it.** " Stay here, and pant after happinefs: ■anatomize the effence of things, and fee what they afford you ; nothing but tedi- ou fne fs and difguft. On the other fide, ap¬ ply your faculties to ufeful labour^ fearch for knowledge: do not firft lift the ob¬ jects how far a more intimate acquaintance with them can afford you pleafure, but throw yourfelf without hefitaLon amengit them. If you do not find enjoyment during your labour, you may be fure to obtain it at thecompletion ofyour work, collected in one cup. And wherewith would you now fill up the time of folitude ; by what ties combine the hours when circumftances interrupt your enjoyment? Your expe¬ riences are far from being fcience. En¬ deavour to improve in any branch of hu¬ man knowledge, and you will become fenfible that you are deftitute of every thing
thing that can fweeten the hours of foli¬ tude. Knowledge only prefer ves the innate energy of the mind, chafes difcontcnt and wearinefs from our folitary retirement, and accompanies us in every occupation, always charming and cheering, and offer¬ ing us in every forrow a certain, never- failing afylum." " I feel, my dear father, that you are right. All the experiences I have picked up are nothing but the children of accident and neceffity ; ftudy has not yet fliaped them into a harmonious whole. But will it be worth while to undergo fufferings in order to acquire knowledge? are wc not here near the fource of the moil beautiful and fublime wifdom ?" <( Very true; but if you will find k, you muil firft have learnt to examine ; you muft prepare yourfelf by a long exert ion of your faculties before you can value it properly, and acquire a nice and unerring fenfe for difccrning the w ? ifdom of the creator in the fmalleft object of nature, arid
and cherifh beauty wherever you find it. The misfortune you arc fo anxious to avoid is, befides, no real evil. Only take care not to deferve it; act with circumfpec- tion, and undertake nothing without having a fufficient ground for it. Even gricf can afford joy to the enlightened: the converfation with dear departed friends produces tears of pleafure; and tlie reflection of times paft thrills the hu¬ man heart with a fweet, luxurious melan¬ choly. Thofe fufferings that improve the mind by exerting its faculties, are certain gain for mankind. When we ftand at the mark, abforpt in nature, with our pains and difappointed hopes, and fome object in it feems to take a fhare İn our grief, the bitternefs of heart diffolves itfelf in a fe¬ cri t fweet melancholy, which exalts every pleafure, and difcerns and catches, fome¬ times even at the brink of the abyfs of time, every moment of contentment which, otherwife would, perhaps, have been loft: to us. in fhort, peaceful retirement is falutary
falutary and pleafing only when it has un¬ folded itfelf from the feenes of the moft energic exertion of our faculties, when we firft have mingled with the world, and contributed our fhare to rhe general happi¬ nefs: it is a bleffing only to the weary wanderer, who has ftruggled with the dif¬ ficulties of a long journey, and can fit down in the folitary fhade furnifhed with a good flore of ufeful obfervations gathered on his pilgrimage. No one can enjoy folitude better than a man who is bent down with the burthen of age, and has made a wife ufe of his life. He can look back with pleafure on a long train of gra¬ tifications, and converfe in his retirement with the ufeful actions of his former days: his contented, fatiated imagination repre¬ fents all the paft feenes of his exiftence in a mild and pleafing light ; the adverfities of former days are buried in oblivion; he recollects only the happier hours; the world is his friend ; and the peaceful con¬ fcioufnefs of his deeds encircles his tem¬ ples with the garland of immortality."
СПЛГТКЯ IX. THE hoary hermit frequently dif- courfed with me in the hours of night, after the fatigues of our labour, while cooling breezes whifpered in the leaves, and the filver rays of the moon gaily fkipped on the fu r fa с с of the rivulet. The philofophy of futurity itole upon my mind, while I imagined to empty the cup of prefent happinefs: the obfervation of the moment gradually delineated to mc rules for fimilar events; 1 learned to huf- band my hours, and to apply them pro¬ perly ; accident ccafed to frown at me, becaufe I learned to improve İt for my be¬ nefit; and I foon began to confider the world as a game for a trifle, in which it is indifferent, when one rifes, whether on«: has loft or gained; and in which one re¬ joices at one's İkili and demerit}, and repents only the faults one has committed. cc The cultivation of the garden a Horded us fufficient amufement during the day; Vol. IJ, I c4Vn r
every thing profpered under our hands ; wc were delighted at the growth of our plants, and derived a wholefome fubfik tence from their fruits. The evenings were facred tó reft and wifdom. A bower of odorous woodbine received us then in its refrcfhing coolnefs. The myftic whif¬ pers of the evening breeze did, indeed, mix fomething enthuiiaftic and melan¬ choly with our ideas ; however, this ferved only to mellow the feelings of my heart. The mind of the venerable hermit un¬ folded itfelf gradually with lefs reftraint and more ferenity. As foon as he per¬ ceived that I was defirous to ihare his ideas, he began to be more communicative. Though he never entered into a minute de¬ tail of hi« hiftory, yeti learnt the greateft part of it from a thoufand little ftrokes of its fecret effects, events great in their caufe, developement and conféquence. I perceived plainly, by his converfations, how an exalted mind educates itfelf, how rapidly it runs through all the accords of
joy and grief; how it derives benefit from either, and improves moments for hours and years. A great variety of events had urged him from fentiment to fentiment ; and yet he had maintained himfelf, after a certain period, which he applied to a re- folute reflection, in an equilibrium of un¬ concern and joy. His juft and virtuous confcioufnefs floated peacefully on the current of time towards a happy or un¬ happy eternity; either of which he awaited with a firm equanimity. He carried his paradife in his heart, created within him¬ felf a confoling and cheerful companion, and needed no other fociety. This was the man who called me his fon, and edu¬ cated mc for this life, and for eternity, in fpite of ail misfortunes, and even of happy incidents, which prevailed upon my weak heart more than all the tempefts of ad ver- li ty ; for I generally loft in one rapturous moment of joy what all the ftorms of life could not take from me. However, this philofophy of my fage inftructor did uot í 2 fin J
find accefs to my heart till after a certain period, and only after he had gained all my little paffions in its behalf; for the former required exertion and activity, and the latter panted after a luxurious and gratifying reft. I was at that period al¬ ready too much difgufted with life, as to wifli to extend it through labour; and being too much flattered by a new and un¬ expected peace, I was rather inclined to fhorten İt by a uniform and imperceptibly pafling joy. Neither wearinefs nor dif¬ guft, which the hermit had prognofticated to me, was to be apprehended for fomc time after fuch a general exhauftion ; the rofy days of my life returned once more adorned with greater charms by experi¬ ence, by a long train of difappointed hopes, and involuntarily bridled paillons, " We were now and then interrupted in our daily labours by pilgrims, who re- frcihed and refted themfelves in our cot¬ tage. They were all welcome to the little comforts we could bellow, and our happi¬ nefs
nefs increafed in the fame meafure in which we could bc ufeful to our weary vU fitors. Our humble abode frequently re- fembled a cottage of the golden age. Our frugal meals were compofed of fruits grown in our garden, of excellent bread, which every day was brought to us from the neighbouring village, -and of cyder and wine of our own making. Two goats furnifhed our table with milk and cheefe; and fome bee-hives with fragrant honey. Every thing appeared to be twice our pro¬ perty, becaufe w e fa w it grow under our hands ; and even our joy was two-fold when we could filare the produce of our toil with the needy. We entered into confidential talk with our pilgrims; our hofpitality and kindnefs unlocked their lips, and they generally left us a part of their hiftory. It is furprifing how much the converfation with fuch different cha¬ racters improved me ; how I deduced from thofe relations, affifted by the hermit, rules which proved falutary to me all the reft 13 of
of my life; and how I grew more fatis¬ fied with my fate, when 1 faw other fuU ferers not entirely comfortlcfs under a heavier and a more preffing load of for¬ rows. The hoary hermit was, befides, the oracle of all the furrounding neighbour¬ hood/ His humanity and great experience were generally known. He lent his affif¬ tance wherever he could, and commonly was fuccefsfui in his advice. Two days in the week v/ere devoted to that bufinefs; at other times he did not like to be dif¬ turbed. Our neighbours knew к 9 and behaved accordingly. Our little cottage was the temple where the wiflies of num¬ berlefs fuppliants were depofited, and many found relief. They rejoiced to fhew their gratitude, loading him with préfents of fruits and meat; yet he ac^ ccpted nothing for himfelf, but diftributed the gifts he received among the poor who affembled before his door. This fituation might well have filled up the reft of my life. My
My happinefs was, how ever, too great to be of long duration. The hermiťs' health began to decline fomc months after my arrival at his folitude. His foul, be¬ ing too pure for his body, gradually began to difengage itfelf from the ties which united it to its terreftrial part ; his ftrength was exhaufted, he left oif working, and prepared himfelf ferionfly to leave this world. Dear Count, that melancholy event gave me the greateft and moil pun¬ gent forrow I ever experienced. It was a moil afflicting fight to fee that beautiful fpirit gradually cxtinguifh, that great and noble heart grow cold, and thofe heavenly features ofthe moil expreffive countenance ftiften by degrees. How frequently did I encircle his knees with my trembling arms when he fat on the turf-fcat to enjoy the cooling breezes of the night, taking the moil lively intereft in my happinefs, pay¬ ing the greateft attention to every thing that could improve and inft rudi me, and con¬ templating, with inward rapture, the 14 beauties
benuties of nature, though he was already on the brink of eternity. He flowly took leave of this world, which omitted nothing to make his parting as painful and affect¬ ing as poffible. Autumn never was more beautiful; never did I behold his hermi¬ tage adorned with fo many спаггш, nor embeliifhed by nature's forming hand in a more delightful manner. Nature ex¬ haufted i t fel f to appear in its gayeft attire before he parted for ever from its num¬ berlefs beauties. I never iliall forget thofe nights in which I fò plainly faw his peaceful mind gradually ripen for a better world. The theme of his difcourfes w 7 as more fublime than ufual; he foared with me beyond the milky way, dwelling with more than com¬ mon warmth on the amiable attributes of the great Creator of the univerfe, and on the profpects of unfpcakable blifs he has opened to our view. The harmony he defcried throughout the boundlefs realms of nature, the paternal care of Providence tot
for the happinefs of man, and the prefer¬ vation and nouriihment ofthe brute crea¬ tion, which ftruck his mind, on the verge of mortality, with additional force, the numberlefs wife means the great Author of our exiftence employs to educate his children, and to qualify them gradually for the enjoyment of greater blifs, made his eyes beam with joy and hope. His difembodied mind roved with inward rao- ture through the boundlefs realms of eter¬ nity, anticipating the happinefs of a more intimate connection with that namelefs Being whofe ways are often hid in mid¬ night darknefs, but are ever wife and ever good.. " He grieved only that he fhould leave me behind.. He wifhed much that it might have been İn his power to form my mind completely for niy own happinefs, and that of my fellow-creatures. He forefaw that I fhould never attain the mark entire'y without an experienced guide: however, his love, and the impreffions his ï 5 , death.
death.left on my heart, faved me many a painful experience, rendering me unfit for it by the difpofition of my mind; and you, .my deareft friend, will foon fee me act with a firmnefs, which, at firft fight, will appear to you totally heterogeneous to my unfettled character. " How frequently did I, at that melan¬ choly, heart-rending period, lay proftratc at his fcet 3 bedewing them with my tears! how frequently did I recline my heaving breaft againft his bofom, uttering convul¬ five fobs ! Every evening made me appre¬ hend it would be the laft I fliould be able to converfe with him : when he went to reft, I kiifed his trembling hand fo fer¬ vently, as if bidding him an eternal adieu ; and as foon as I awoke, made it my firft bufinefs to ileal on tip-toe to his couch, to examine whether his lips were ftill warm, and to fee whether his bofom continued to heave; and when I found my apprehen- ftons contradicted, I repaired with raptu¬ rous joy to the garden, enjoying the beau-
ties of nature with additional delight : every object that met my fparkling eyes, feemed to be new born, and to exift only to give me pleafure. However, the me¬ lancholy parting hour drew vifibly nearer; and one day, when he had fatigued him¬ felf more than ufual with his little occupa¬ tions, he threw himfelf againft night half fainting on the turf-feat, folding his hands acrofs his breaft, and gazing with a flaring look at the fetting fun. A faint-like glory throned already on his countenance ; and I could not help being pervaded with a chilling awe, when I beheld the fervent emanation of his devotion, and the filent ferene joy that fparkled in his looks, a harbinger of his approaching happinefs«. c * To day I fliall fee you for the laft time, dear Carlos," he began at laft. " I part reluctantly with that beautiful fpot the refidence of joys and pleafures ; with that peaceful cottage, the iilent witnefs of my happinefs. Yet Providence has or¬ dained it fo, and I fubmit to the will of 16 the
the beft of Fathers. If I could have been ufeful to this world any longer, my God and heavenly friend, thou wouldll not yet have called me hence. Father of man, a faithful obedient child returns to thy bo¬ fom." So faying, he extended his hands in filent rapture to Heaven ; his drooping head hung on his heaving bofom, and he began to reel. 1 ftarted up, and received him in my arms. <( Are you here, my fon ?" he whifpered : " I thank thee, God, that I can die in the arms of a beloved child. Don't forget me, dear Carlos, and follow/ me." " With thefe words his eyes clofed, as if overpowered by a fweet fleep; his pal¬ lid lips opened once more, uttering a whifper, which I could not underftand; his breaft heaved once again with a deep figh, and the faint preffure of his ftiftning hand, with which he took an eternal fare¬ wel, died gradually away in mine. The beft of men, the tendereit, moft affectio¬ nate father, the friend of human kind, was-
was no more ; he had conquered the laft foe. In vain did I prefs my mouth upon his clay-cold lips, almoft petrified with agonizing forrow ; in vain expend all the breath of my heaving bofom to warm them again; the pulfes of his heart ceafed to beat, and his inanimate body fank motion- lefs into my arms. I could not yet believe that I had loft him for ever, endeavouring to perfuadé myfelf that he only was afleep, and carried him to his couch. Yet I was fcarcely returned into the garden, when I grew fenfible of that melancholy truth, and felt the whole extent of my lofs. "All the objects around me affumed a grave-like appearance. The ftillnefs of the approaching night never had been fo awfully filent, the folitude never fo foli¬ tary. Not one bird fang a doleful dirge, or my ftupefaction prevented my hearing them; not a fingie cricket chirped; even the rivulet ceafed to tinkle: I was ifolated, left aioncin the extenfive creation, with¬ out
out friend, without father, and without a^ protector, being deprived of them at the moment I began to be moft fenfible of the value of the treafure I poíľefľed. f< I will not tire you, deareft Count, with a picture of the juft grief which per- turbated my defponding mind, when I recovered the ufe of my fenfes, afcertain- ing the folitary fituation in which I was left, and feeling myfelf at once deprived of every thing I had formerly been 'm want of to my greateft misfortune. u Is Heaven juft?" I exclaimed, in the height of my agony. " Is Heaven juft, in re¬ paying me for years of woe with happy hours ľ* However, as foon as my mind grew calmer, I implored the Allwifc to pardon my murmurs, I, ungrateful wretch, had forgot what an unfpeakably great gratification he granted me in lieu of thofe trifling fufferings, and that he had made even the latter fubfervient to lead to greater future blifs. *< The
u The moil afflicting fcene was yet to come. As foon as the death of the vene¬ rable hermit was known in the neighbour-* hood, numerous crowds of people throng* ed to our cottage ; hufbands and wives, whom he had made happy ; parents and their families, whom he had affifted with his fage counfels ; hundreds of poor, whom he had fed and relieved, came to facrifice at the fhrine of gratitude. It is impoffible to give an adequate defcription . of that fcene of general w r oe. You can¬ not conceive, deareft Count, how deeply it affected my fenfibility, to fee them fur- round his corpfe, bedewing his clay-cold hands with burning tears, contending with each other who fliould be the firft, and imploring Heaven to reward his vir¬ tues. I did as much as lay in my power to affuage their grief, promifed not to leave them, and to become a faithful repre- fentative oftheir and of my father and be¬ nefactor. Yet they paid little regard to what I faid, being too much occupied with
with the lofs they had fuftained; and while thefe poor people dwelt only on the pain of the prefent moment, they made me fecretly indifferent to their future fate. " The throng of vifitors increafed w ; hen I announced the day on which the dear corpfe was to be interred : hoary men, bent down by the burden of years, women and children, in iliort, people of every age, flocked together; all the inhabitants of the neighbourhood feemed to have af¬ fembled. Every one w 7 anted to affift in digging his grave ; and thofe that were not provided with the proper tools, made ufe of their hands. He was at length interred beneath a fpreading chefnut-tree, on a fpot which he had pointed out a few days before his death ; and as foon as the grave was filled with earth, the whole multitude dropt on their knees, fending fervent prayers to Heaven. They afterwards de¬ fired me to divide his garments amongft them; every one contended for a rag, and carried
carried it home as a relic. His tomb was for feveral days crowded with vifitors. The night was the only time when I was left to myfelf; and I devoted it entirely to the converfation with my fainted friend, repeating in filent ecftafy his valuable principles and rules. I believed to hear his fpirit when the nocturnal breezes fhook the leaves of the chefnut-tree, and was every where haunted by a myftic fenfation of his prcfencc, which followed me to all my labours and amufements. I fancied conftantly to hear his voice, whifperingap- plaufe or blame in. my lifttning ears'; was in a folitude without beins; alone. u I returned, however, to the realms of reality before a month was elapfed. The remembrance of his virtues remained al¬ ways equally ftrong and active in my foul, but I began to be lefs frequently reminded of him. The nature of man and huma¬ nity refcmblc each other every where. The cnthufiafm of the neighbouring pea- fants decreafed gradually, and the number of
of vifitors grew lefs and lefs every day. I was foon left to myfelf, without company, and without the fupport the hoary hermit- had received. A trunk, which ftood in a fecret corner of the cottage, and contained, befides a fum of money he had hoarded up, or faved from the wrecks of his for¬ tune, all the papers relating to his hiftory, and fome loofc refiections, occupied and diverted me for fome time. Yet this fource of amufement too was foon ex¬ haufted, and I entirely left to the reflec¬ tion of my own hiftory. " My folitary fituation, which began to grow irkfome to me, and the promife I had made to rny fainted friend, prompted me foon to mix again with the world, to gather new experience, and new means of reftoring peace to my mind. I prepared rnyfclf for my departure, refolving to re¬ turn one time to the cottage, which I al¬ ways confidered as my laft af} lum. I pre¬ vailed upou an honeft peafant, fiom a neighbouring hamlet, to live with his fa¬ mily
mily at the hermitage, and to promife to keep it in proper repair. Having paid a Jail farewel vifit to the grave of my bene¬ factor, I took my papers and my lute, and defcended the hill with cheerfulnefs, which, however, was blended now and then with anxious apprchenfion. CHAPTER X. 1WAS nov/ going to launch again into the wide ocean ofthe world, prefaging many interefting events, yet without having a clear profpèct before mc. Al¬ though the fum I found in the hermitage w^uld have been fufficient to carrv me through a part of Europe, yet I preferred my former manner of travelling as a min- ftrel and lute-player, having ufed myfelf to mix with the lower claffes, where I found many little joys and means of plea¬ fure, which the higher ranks would not have afforded me. u Having
" Having wandered over a great extent of country, I chofe, one evening, an old ruinous public^houfe for my night's lodg¬ ing. The external appearance of the houfe was, indeed, forry enough; but when I entered it, I was hailed with the laughter of merriment and jocundity. All its inmates feemed tobe happy; the young men and girls were dancing, and the old ones playing at cards. Some lutenifts and flute-players united their efforts, in a corner of the room, to animate the dance and the merry fongfters. This fcene of joviality was extremely welcome to me; I fat down, and joined the muiicians, "I fcarcely had begun to touch the firings of my inftrument, when fomething pulled me by my cloak, and turning round, I beheld a large, ugly, fcabby dog at my elbow. Fie bounded joyfully againft mc, and I found it difficult to repel his careffes. He began at length to raife his voice in a moil doleful accent, and I knew him at once to be my faithful Kuiko, the play-felloe
play-fellow of my juvenile years, and the companion of my gambols and youthful fports. But, alasi how much was he al¬ tered! All his former beauty was gone¿ he had only one eye left: his ears were cropped; his hair was fallen off; and his prefent mafter a fhabby beggar, who held him by a firing. I was deeply affected by his misfortunes, the traces of which were legibly imprinted on his miférable carcafs, and exafperated at the ingratitude of thofe who had expelled him from my houfe after many years of faithful fervice. The tears ftarted from my eyes,- I em¬ braced him as a long-loft friend, and found it impoffible to fcparate myfelf again from the dear companion of my youthful years. " On inquiring after his prefent mafter, I learned not only his but alfo a great part of my own hiftory. One of my grooms had fold him to the beggar for a trifle. « The young Marquis of G******," the beggar faid, " is gone abroad, and no one knows
knows what is become of him. He has committed the management of his eftate to his friend Antonio, who lives in a con¬ fiant round of pleafures, without confider- ing that he may be called to an account fooner or later. A ftrange lady, and a little boy, live with -him, and nobody knows whence they came. She leads, however, a very retired life, and walks frequently weeping in the garden, where I have feen herfeveral times.*' " He alfo informed me of many little circumftances which concerned my do- meftic affairs, and gave me plainly to un- derftand, that the fource of his intelligence was not very pure. Yet I could not but believe that the chief and moft ftriking parts of his information were true. (ζ A ftrange lady with a little boy ! Who can that be?'* My imagination reviewed invaili all poffibilities ; I could not trace out the Ieaft probability. " And Don Antonio abandons himfelf carelefsly to all forts of pleafure, forget- 2 ting
ting a friend who ioves him fo tenderly, and for whom he alfo feemed to entertain the fincereft affeclion ? v I tormented my¬ felf in vain to find out a connection between thofe little excefles of joy and the unaccountable préfence of the melancholy lady. I believed, however, that if fhe was no relation of his, her préfence at the caftle muft be owing to fome new event connected with my hiftory, and had j uil reafon to apprehend that the caufe of it would endanger again my peace of mind. I am naturally difpofed foon to forget pail misfortunes ; however, my cruel imagi¬ nation torments me in return with all the terrors of future adverfities, which I ap¬ prehend not to be able to avoid entirely. It exhaufts itfelf already at a diftance, as it were, and, fortunately for me, leaves little difficulty for the moment behind* " Could any thing be more natural, un¬ der thefe circumftances, than the idea of examining every thing myfelf under the concealment of my difguife ? As foon as this
this thought came into my mind, I ceafed to ruminate on the intelligence I had re¬ ceived from the beggar, and, while I an¬ ticipated the execution of this réfolution, I was as fatisfied as if I had already ob¬ tained the wiihed-for elucidation. The plan in itfelf was not difficult to be exe¬ cuted. A long beard, which I had fuf¬ fered to grow from negligence, a fun- burnt countenance, and a tattered coat, afforded me the greateft reafon to hope to be taken for a beggar or a vagrant knave. I bought my faithful Kufko for a trifling fum of the beggar, took my lute under my arm, and having provided myfclf with a knotty club, began my pilgrimage with the firft dawn of day. " Don Antonio's refidence was not far diftant from the public houfe where I had fpent the night. The beggar had in¬ formed me of this circumitance; and I foon convinced myfelf of it, on meeting with different objects w 7 hich I knew, i recollected to have hunted fometimes fo far
far in the vicinity of my caftle. Allowing me but a fliort time to prepare myfelf for the part I was going to adt, I began feri- oufly to fear for my firmncfs. I recollec¬ ted but too plainly that it had been fre¬ quently fí' aken on fimilar occafions; my heart was attached to the objedts of my happier days with too much warmth, and a too vifible inquietude than that I could expedt to conceal the emotions of my mind. However, my attempt terminated other- wife than I had expected. (i I beheld the turrets of my caftle al¬ ready againft noon, and a few hours later arrived at the wall which enclofed my park. I was furprifed to find myfelf accidentally on the fame way I had taken in that dread¬ ful night in which I left the caftle. I was very much pre-occupicd againft Antonio; however, every ftep that brought me nearer to the caftle, reconciled me more and more with him. I difcovercd a number of alterations in the garden,· but they were fojudicioufly made, that I could not but Vol. IL К be
be pleafed : and I perceived plainly how much my friend had ftudied to gratify my tafte at the expence of his own, which was widely different from mine. Order and cultivation prevailed every where in fuch a degree, that my former aftedtion for him foon returned. He had eredted fome neat buildings on fpots where I had wiih ed to fee them without having had time to execute my plan, and even had adopted fome ideas which I recolledted to have dropt in the courfe of converiation. " I thought it would bc beft to untie Kufko from the cord by which I led that faithful companion, left he fliould betray me. He had for fome time difplayed a ftrong defire to get loofc, and inflantly made the beft ufe of his liberty, running with the greateft hafte to the caftle-gate, without caring any farther for me. Find¬ ing a little garden-gate open, I itole cau- tioufly to a covered walk which le í to a wing of the caflle: but agreat noifc, and loud peals of laughter, which I heard at a fmall
a fmall diftance, prevented me from pro¬ ceeding farther, and I concealed myfclf in an adjacent arbour. This retired fpot was formerly the iilent witnefs of many hours of blifs and forrow, and perhaps had wit¬ neffed, during my abfence, feenes of the greateft importance to me : but, alas ! could tell no talcs. All the leaves and flowers around mc feemed to welcome me as a friend who was thought to be loft for ever; the trees were old acquaintances, and their tops nodded friendly to me. I heard the fame gambols i n the high grafs around me, the fame humming in the air, and the fame murmuring of the rivulet, to which I was ufed to liften with fo much rapture, Numberlefs different fenfations crowded upon my heart: and my fancy recalled all the pleafing pictures of youthful vigour and pleafure, which thrilled my foul with delight, butat the fame time gave me pain. Yet the confcioufnefs of being again at my own eftate, and of beingable to fay, This bower is mine; that iliade, which infolds K o, mc
me fo friendly ; that odour of fweet fcent- ing flowers ; that ruftling and murmuring around me, к mine, expelled all other ideas. " I was foon interrupted in my reflec¬ tions. A little boy went clofe by my hiding place, running after a large dog; an excel¬ lent child, full of energy, and ofa beauti¬ ful form! Open nefs throned on his black eyes, and the fmile of good-nature fat on his rofy cheeks. I could have given half the WOrld for that fweet, heavenly cherub. Soon after I heard more fteps approach, and foft whifpers vibrated in my ears. I beheld a lady, through the leaves, lean¬ ing upon a man, and walking flowly by his fide, with down-caft looks. When they came nearer, I difcerned the perfon of Francifca; of my fweet, dear Fran¬ cifca, and my friend Antonio. She was extremely melancholy, and feemed to la¬ bour under a fecret grief. She had wept, and, if I was not miftaken, feemed to hope, and, at the fame time to fear, fome¬ thing;
thing; and Antonio appeared to comfort her. She was paler and more languid than ever I had feen her. Her eye was doubt¬ fully fixed to the ground; and all the luftre of her innate, innocent cheerfulnef., was over-clouded by a paífion or a grief, which flie feemed to have confcíľed to her¬ felf in that moment with deep bluíhcs* My affected heart felt itfclf reluctantly infnared in her engaging charms, my fenfes were fuddenly over-clouded ; and I forgot to avail myfelf of that propitious moment, as I had intended, " While I hefitated a few féconds to make myfelf known, and to rulli into her arms, the propitious, moil favourable mo¬ ment was vaniihed : they had paffed the arbour where I was concealed, and I was again left to myfelf. What an abfurd in- confiftency of my character ! I was come to watch them fecretly; and in the firft moment of feeing them I burned vvith a defire to embrace her. The propitious moment efcapes without being improved. К 3 I was
I was angry with myfelf for my childiih behaviour, and almoil flied tears ofanguiih. " The beft thing I now could do was to return to the caftle, and to await them there, for I had no farther wiih to watch them, the ftate of my mind being entirely changed. The grief of my Francifca, which was the more affiictinoc to me as I was ignorant of its caufe, though I ima¬ gined to guefs at it, had foftened my mind to pity. Thefe circumftances were no longer dark to me, though I could not perceive the ieaft connection between them. The recollection of that fweet period, in which Francifca had unbofomed, herfelf to me, and in which I was made fenfible of the congeniality of her foul with mine, made me fufpedt the fource of her melan¬ choly, and the diftrefs of my own fituation vaniihed entirely in that moment. " I directed my fteps towards the caftle, and heard, already, at a diftance, a rnoft doleful howling» I diftinguiihed the voice of my Kuiko, whom the fervants feemed to
to beat. This cruel reception ofthe faith¬ ful animal gave me great reafon to fufpect that I ihould not be treated much better. He perceived nie, at length, from the court-yard, bounded into the garden, and ran howling towards me, as if imploring my protection. Some fervants purfucd him with fticks and feveral dogs. Their faces were entirely new to me, and I could not recollect one of them. As foon as they faw me, they exclaimed with one voice, çí What bufinefs has that beggar there in the gar¬ den? Let us cudgel him*out of it;" and began their attack by~ throwing ftones at me. This was certainly one of the greateft difficulties which ever befel me. How could I expect to efcape their dogs and their cudgels ? " I could have killed every one of them if I had had a fword. They drew nearer, brandifhing their cudgels; and the dogs began already to fhew their teeth and to fnarl. Yet they feemed to have ftill fome pity left in their bofom, heiitating awhile К 4 to
to fet the ferocious beafts at me. My old faithful Kufko looked anxiouily up to me, and, notwithftanding the blows he had re¬ ceived, feemed ready to defend his poor mafter. " Villains!" I exclaimed at length, in a fit of defpair, if Don't you know your mafter? I am the Marquis of G******." <{ The fellow is mad," they replied, raif- ing a roaring laughter. One of them was fo daring as to oiler to fpit in my face. I collected myfelf as much as poflible, and exclaimed, with a pathetic grandezza, lf Call Don Antonio, and you will hear who I am." This was, perhaps, the moft ri¬ diculous ftep I could have taken in my. aukward fituation, and produced the ef¬ fect I could naturally havecxpedled, "As true as I am alive," one of them exclaim¬ ed, " the fellow is a drunken Hidalgo." Another replied with a violent blow on my fhoulder, adding, " Don Antonio greets you, and fends you this ľ' A general horfe laugh drowned the words of his compa¬ nions. " I now
Çï 1 now grew frantic with rage, levelling fuch a violent blow at one of them, that he dropt roaring to the ground. I gave him a furious kick into the bargain, and ruflied upon the reft, laying fo effectuali about me with my flick, that I difperfeu them inftantly. My boiling rage gave me more than human ftrength. However, what could I do againft three flout fellows, whofe fury bordered on madncfs, when they beheld the temerity of a beggar, and their companion weltering in his blood, which cried' for vengeance? In vain did I defend myfelf like a'lion; in vain did I drive them back twice; in vain did my faithful Kuiko exert all his ftrength to keep oif the attack of the dogs ; and in vain did I roar w.th all my niight, in hopes of drawing Don Antonio to the field of com¬ bat. No one came to affift me; my poor lute was beaten to. atoms. Kuiko already gave way to the. two dogs; my ilick was fplit; my finali deaths, cloak, and doub¬ let, were torn; and I was obliged to take K 5 щ
to my heels. I fled on wings of defpair, gained with difficulty a little back gate, pur- fuedby the dogs, jumped over a deep ditch, and faved myfelf at length, amid a ihower of ftones, in the neighbouring grove. There I flung myfelf upon the ground with fore limbs, a bleeding face, and la¬ cerated hands, weeping and gnafliing my teeth. I was-entirely exhaufted, and al¬ moft fenfelefs. " A fine welcome, Carlos !" I exclaimed, at length, in broken accents ; " to be cudgelled by thy own fervants ! How much is every thing altered ! For¬ merly they would have licked your feet; and now you are a miférable beggar, that dares not enter his own houfe." This foli- loquy, which would have reduced me to defpair, was feafonably interrupted by Kufko. That faithful partner in my mi- fcrv feemed to have more comfort than myfelf; he had already forgot his bio ws r and licked my bleeding hands. He caref- fed me fo affectionately, his looks befpoke fo much tender pity, that he fucceeded at length
THE HORRID MYSTERIES. *OJ length in confoling me. I was animated with new courage, and began to confider what ftep I fhould take, the refult of which was a réfolution to proceed to Alcantara. I ihook off the duft of my feet, looked with indignation back at a place which for¬ merly had charmed me fo much, and had not the leaft doubt that my faithful friend had infected the fervants with his exam¬ ple ; proceeding with bitternefs and thirft for re\ enge in my heart towards my na¬ tive town. " I was fo much exhaufted by the blows 1 had received, and the tempeft of paffions which raged in my mind, that I want¬ ed two days to accomplifh that little jour¬ ney. I beheld at length the fteeples of Alcantara, -on the morning of the third day; and was thrilled with pleafing fenfa¬ tions by the fweet recollection of my ju¬ venile years, blended with inwaid anguifh by the reflection on the fufferings I had experienced fince. The cruel treatment at my own eftate deprived me of every К 6 hope
hope of being better received any where, Alas ! how weak and inconfequential is the human heart ! It always affumes the fhape of the prefent moment, painting futurity either gloomy or fmiling, guided merely by external circumftances ! CHAPTER XI. I NOW went to my paternal houfe; knocked at the gate, and it v/as inftant¬ ly opened. The firft object I met was Alfonfo, my faithful fervant, who, after my fecret departure from my caflle, had repaired to Alcantara to await my return there. He flared at me with fpeaking marks of amazement and doubtful looks. Yet he foon recollected me, exclaiming, with aftoniihment, " Eternal God! In what a pitiful ftate do I fee you again, my Lord ! What misfortune has happened to- you?" He then grafped my hand, kiffing it with looks of pity. His good-natured, honeft countenance expreffed at once afto¬ niihment
nifhment and rapture, blended with a cer¬ tain anxiety of mind, which ftruck mc^ becaufe I could hót account for it. tf He conducted me inftantly to the apartment I had formerly inhabited, where he informed me, with that open frankneft which is the attribute only of great and noble minds, that my father had died du¬ ring my abfence, and my mother only was alive; that, to his knowledge, fhe was the foie hcirefs of my father; that flie had been almoft diftracted by my fudden dis¬ appearance, and that no one but Count V******, who was at prefent an inmate of our houfe, had been able to fucceed in: comforting her. The latter intelligence contributed very much to confole me for the afflicting news he had communicated to me : I haftened to throw myfelf into the arms of that excellent parent; who re¬ ceived mc with the moft flattering mater¬ nal tendernefs, and on whofe bofom I reli¬ ed from all my mifery, and forgot all the apprehenfions which had perturbated my boding
boding mind. Count V******, who, at the firft intelligence of my arrival, haften¬ ed to embrace me, furprifed me in her arms, and preffed me with unaffected fin- cerity to his noble, generous heart. He affured me, the interruption of our cor- refpondence had not been owing to neg¬ lect or any fault on his fide, that he had written feveral letters to me, and fent bills of exchange to a confidérable amount* His investigations, with regard to the fe¬ cret confederation, had been equally inde¬ fatigable, but fruitlefs. He had learnt feveral inftances of their incredible influ¬ ence and activity, which he communica¬ ted to me. He aifo informed me, that Francifca was returned to the caftle of her lord, and that Don Pedro had difappeared; adding, he had feen her feveral times at my'caftle, without having been able to- gain her confidence, which he had been anxious to obtain on my account:, ihe feemed, however, to live on too intimate a footing with Antonio, than that he ihould not
not know a little more of her hiftory. He affured me, at the fame time, that Don Antonio had increafed my fortune confi- derably, advifing me to inform him and Francifca of my arrival. I did it, and foon had the pleafure of preffing them to my heart. " Finally, Count V****** informed me of his prefent fituation. His family had feparated him from his Augufta through fome artifices. Hehad loft her irrecover¬ ably ; and although his noble heart cherííh- ed the world and humankind too much as to be entirely overcome by his grief, yet his peace of mind was gradually un¬ dermined by fecret anguifli. Being con¬ firions that he deferved to have at Ieaft a little filare in the joys of this life, he law himfelf entirely deprived of it; and while he was only occupied to avoid being urged by his misfortune to do fome raih deed, he faw, to his greateft grief, the opportunities for great actions vanifh un¬ der his hands« And yet he always retained fo
fo much equanimity, as to be capable of adminiftering comfort to his friends; and thofe that were not intimately acquainted with him could not but think that he was happy. Soon after my return to Alcan¬ tara, he took leave of me to recover his peace of mind in another clime, or perhaps in a diftant part of the world, and I ex¬ erted myfelf in vain to divert him from the execution of his plan. His ihort ftay with me was like the apparition of an an¬ gel which quickly paffes away. May hea¬ ven blefs that worthy friend! His noble foul was not fit for this world. <( The arrival of Don Antonio and Fran¬ cifca produced a fcene peculiar in its kind. I haftened down to receive them when they got out of the carriage. They lufhed with rapture into my arms; ftrained me alternately to their heart; put numbcrlefs anxious queftions to me about my health, and evinced the livelieft forrow at the pale- nefs and the fears of my face. I was feized
feized with a tranfport of joy, and felt Heaven's blifs in their tender embraces. <f My old fervants had, mean time, affembled around me to exprefs their joy at my return by thoufand careffes. One of them took my hand gently from Fran¬ cifca^ fhoulder to cover it with his kiffes; a fecond took hold of my coat; a third wanted to fay fomething; to me without being able to find words; and a fourth ihou ted for joy: they all jumped and danc¬ ed around me. The affection of thefe good people moved my ŕ heart fenfibly ; I ihookevery one by the hand, and told them how glad I was to fee them again. On turning round, I beheld fonie more figures in the back ground, leaning againft the carriage, and holding their hats in their hands. They feemed not to know whe¬ ther they fliould weep or laugh; exhibiting ftriking pictures of perplexity, and of a fecret anxiety to fee the event» I recol¬ lected their faces inftantly, and clearly faw that they alfo knew· me again. They bowed
bowed mechanically when I looked at them, made fome motions with their hats, and uttered fome unintelligible founds. I nod¬ ded friendly to them, and thanked them with a motion of my hand» Kuiko was, however, of a different opinion y for as foon as he faw his old enemies, he put himfelf into a pofture of attack, ihewing bis teeth, and fnarling at them. He could never forget the injury he had fuffered from them, fnarling whenever one of them came in his way, and purfuing them oc- cafionally. <f You may eafily conceive, dear friend* that I availed myfelf of the firft opportu¬ nity to enquire after the particulars of Francifca'smyfterious fate: however, Don Antonio knew no more than myfelf; and Francifca was uncommonly referved. She difplayed the moft heartfelt affection for me, but kept the fecret locked up in her bofom ; and foon after I obferved that her former paffion for mc was on the decline, that Antonio had found means to gain up¬ on
on her affection, and was the idol of her foul. It is aftonifliing how fuddenly the inclinations of that charming woman al¬ tered their courfe, and, neverthelefs, were always firmly and completely devoted to the object which attracted them. " Don Antonio informed me that feveral fecret attempts had been made to gain him over to that dreadful confederation. How¬ ever, he had conceived fuch a rooted dif- inciination to that focieiy, that I doubt whether they ever fucceeded to gain him entirely for their caufe. His foul was art¬ lefs, great and open. He hated every thing that was adventurous, romantic, myfterious, and intricate. Even Francifca had loft a great deal in his opinion by her behaviour and her myfterious looks. He had conceived an averfion from her, which flic could not overcome for a confidérable time. Being never afraid to act openly, and ready to give every moment an account of his actions, he required that no action of his friends ihould íhu n his eyes, and detened
detened nothing more than the crooked proceedings of certain people, who ima¬ gined to enfure thereby his affections more firmly. He was the deareft of all my friends, Count V****** excepted, u Being pleafed with my new refidence, and having renewed feveral old connec¬ tions, I had taken it into my head to ftay fome time at Alcantara, and to enjoy the peace which feemed to be within my reach. However, I got, on that oecafion, ac¬ quainted with an evil which afflicted me fo much the more painfully, as I never had fuffered by it before. It was nothing lefs than the evil of goffiping, and foon obliged me to quit my native town again. " Some antiquated dowagers, foon after my arrival at Alcantara, took the pains of racking their brains to find out where I had been all the time. The ftrange man¬ ner in which I returned to my native town was quickly circulated through the whole place. I never could conceive how one çan talk of fubjects in which w ; e have not the-
the leaft intereft ; having been always too much occupied with the nearer concerns of my heart, and of my mind, either fur- rounded by congenial friends or by myfelf, I neverhad taken the leaft notice of other people or their opinion ; but now I was connected with a fet of beings whofe un¬ derftanding was fcarcely fufficient to direct their own affairs; I was obliged to com¬ municate with people who already were infected with the rage of goffiping, and a new friend was ready every moment to in¬ form me of the ftrange rumours which were circulating about me. I was as if dropt from the clouds; without being able to guefs what all thefe people wanted of me, I was obliged to liften to their tales : and while I began to be attentive to their officious communications, I actually was vexed at the unfojicited concern the town took in my affairs. Don Antonio, being more ufed to it than myfelf, ridiculed me conftantly about my vexation. The re¬ ports and fufpicions about my perfon, which
which were circulated in all companies, encreafed every day; and, having offended fome of the chiefs of the town by my un¬ concern, and made them my mortal ene¬ mies by the contempt I treated them with, it being, at the fame time, inconfiftent with the private intereft of forne fneaking priefts to fee me well received in certain houfes, which they found means to refent, I took fuddenly leave of all my acquaint¬ ances, and quitted Alcantara. Count Y####*# na( j afifai me feveral times to relide for fome months at a univerfity, and to apply myfelf to the ftudy of fomc fci¬ ences, which could be ufeful to, and quali¬ fy me for, an active life, which he had pointed out to me as the beft means of re¬ covering my peace of mind. I refolved to put bis advice into practice, and chofe Toledo. <( I perceived, however, plainly, on that ©ccafion, that I and my happinefs were not qualified for a certain kind of civil exiftence· One cannot make that obfer¬ vation
nation in a circle of felečt friends, and if occupied with other ideas. In fuch a fituation one is always an happy hermit, and never can accommodate onefelf to the frivolous nonfenfe one is obliged to take up with in the connection with men of the 4vorId. " I arrived at Toledo attended only by one fervant ; for I had formed the plan of living here retired, and of devoting my time entirely to my ftudies. This would certainly have been the moft prudent way I could have taken ; however, my open and too obliging character frustrated my wife réfolution, and played me fome tricks which produced very difagreeable confe¬ quences towards the end of my ftay at To¬ ledo. I had not refided two months at that feat of learning, when the kindnefs of Count V****** difplayed itfclf torneina very confpicuous manner, receiving, thro' his interceifion, unexpectedly, a very ac¬ ceptable öfter of a place at the court of Madrid, which was connected with bufi¬ nefs
nefs abroad, where I could make a good ufe of my knowledge and the practical good fenfe I w r as gifted with. I accepted it with pleafure, under the condition to have halfa year more to myfelf. " During the firft time of my refidence at Toledo, I fought and found few oppor¬ tunities of violating the réfolution I had taken to live as retired as poflible, and to dedicate my leifure hours to the improve¬ ment of my knowledge. But, alas ! the amufements which I indulged myfelf with encreafed the more I got acquainted with the world in which I lived : I was, indeed, Hill unknown enough; however, my An¬ gularities foon made me an object orgene¬ ral notice ; and the intrufions of the curi· ous, who were defirous to obtain a more fatisfactory knowledge of that eccentric fellow who denied himfelf every pleafure, and whofe language and manners betrayed - a higher rank than that which I had thought proper to aflume, expofed rne frequently to the importunity of the greater number. Amongft
Amongft the new acquaintances which I thus was obliged to form, I found fome that were worth while being cultivated; and feeing no other means of leading a quiet life, than to accommodate myfelf to the humours of the generality, I connected myfelf, by degrees, with a circle of friends : Mr. de B******, a Frenchman, whom fii¬ mily affairs had brought to Toledo ; Don Pablos F******, Don Bernhard H******, and Count S******i. " Mr* de В****** was the moil accom- pliihed amongft them, pqffcffing a great deal of learning, much-knowledge of the world, a practical penetration, polifhcd manners, and a moft captivating eloquence. Our converfation never ilopt a moment when he was with us · 9 and I ftill recollect with pleafure the little talcs which he re¬ lated in our confidential circle with a moll luxuriant humour. His imagination had been extremely well fitted for it by a jour¬ ney which he had made to the Orienr, however, he had conceived fuch a ftromr Vol. II. L predilection
predilection for every thing uncommon and romantic, that he infected with it every one that was frequently in his fociety. He beheld fo many events of former times, fo many occurrences of life in the fame point of view in which Count V****** was ufed to fee them, that he eafily gained my friendihip and confidence. He poffeffed as much gallantry as I did, but difplayed a, moft ftriking and general d i flike to the female fex. In this point he differed very much from Count V******, who enter¬ tained different notions of the dignity of the fex, whom he always treated vvith re¬ fpect and indulgence, which, no doubt, originated in the confcioufnefs of his own fuperiority. It is very probable that the amorous adventures Mr. de В****** fre¬ quently went in fearch of, and carried no at the rifle of his life, while in the Orient, were the chief caufe of that averfion. He never contradicted, never entered feri¬ ou fly into a conteft, except when the con¬ version happened to turn on the ladies, and
and fome one took the trouble to defend them againft his farcafms. Whenever he happened to be in an ill h u mou ι at our evening meetings, and began to philofo- phize, we were fure to roufe him frorn his phlegmatic difpofition through fomc anec¬ dote in honour of the female fex; he then grew generally very violent, and fome¬ times exafperated at the v,ho!e compa¬ ny; yet always related, at laft, fonie charming ftories, which he had colín α J, or invented, to prove that the ladies arc a fort of cats whom we muft il roke without ever lofing fight of their claws. This acrimony was evidently ferious, and indu¬ bitably owing to fome fecret caufe of im¬ portance. But what rendered this fi ligu¬ lari t y more ftriking was his keeping a miftrefs whofe fhape and character was that ofa d racoon. Yerno one ever exer- cifed a more arbitrary fway over a woman than Mr. de В****** maintained over his charmer. He called her his night-lamp, becaufe he infilled that flic difplayed ihc L 2 greateft
greateft luftre in the dark; though lam pretty fure he never did examine that quality during our connection. We fre¬ quently fpent the evenings in her compa¬ ny, to be amufed by her antic tricks, her manner of expreftmg her ideas, her mi¬ micry, and her droll behaviour. Her lover was always the firft who quitted her fociety. " Don Bernhard H****** was his na¬ tural antagonift,- for while Mr. deB****** infilled that all women were good for no¬ thing, his miftrefs excepted, whom he always refpected in fome manner, Don Bernhard maintained the contrary, de¬ claring that the whole fex was good, his miftrefs excepted; and what was moil ri¬ diculous, either endeavoured to prove his aftertion by his own experience. Don Bernhard was the moft fingular man I ever knew, his character being the itrangeft medley of two diametrically op¬ pofite tempers. He could bc choleric and rafli in the higheft degree, and on the other
other fide indolent and eafy beyond belief. I believe, however, that the former tem¬ per was natural with him, and the latter acquired through philofophy, and gradu¬ ally became habitual to hirn, although I could not perceive their tranfition. " His foul was fwayed by a ferioufnefs vhich had tranfmouldcd his whole being. I have not once feen him laugh ; and w hat- ever he contributed to our, frequently, ex- cerine joviaity, was accompanied only with half a fmile; and this feeming un¬ concern was not the effect of a violent exertion, or an internal convulfion, but originated in the natural difpofition of his foul. I alfo muft obferve, that, amongft the many trials he had undergone, only thofe prevailed in his mind which muft have contributed to produce that coldnefs,- for, previous to the greateft misfortunes a mortal can experience, he had enjoyed an uninterrupted train of pleafures and luxu¬ ries, had tailed mifery and happinefs, and nothing could now difturb the equanimity L 3 of
of his minci. Nature feemed to ha\e ex¬ haufted herfelf in the formation of that dreadful man, and had nothing left that could affect or retard him only for a mo¬ ment in his career. Eike a God åk] he behold the agonies of fullering humanitv, without iliedding a tear; without love, without concern, without fuftaining an i ricreale of his internal happinefs, or hia fu.^t confcioufnefs, did he behold the feu of joy and pleafure he had fprcad ar,und himfelf. No prayers, no rcmon- ftrances, couid move him ; no offence could provoke his anger: with a fteady eye, without one weak moment, without being ever thrown off his guard, without caring for his fame, or the talk of the multitude, or even for the opinions of his friends, did he purfue a fixed and dear- bought plan of a rigid virtue, which, as he was wont to fay, would lead him, at Ieaft, wkh equanimity througii an unfor¬ tunate life. " Confidcring
fl Confidering this, it is ccrtainl) highly remarkable that he was far from being a zealous preacher of virtue; for he pati· ently fuffered and beheld vices and follies, even thofe of his friends; however, he generally repaired them filent ly. lie never defended an opinion, or attacked the principles, of others; never fpoke of other peop'e; vet without defpifing them. 1 ie hivd read veiy little, and a book which could tempt his curiofity muft be of а very fingular tenour. He had borrowed his principles neither of a philofopher nor of a moral i ft, but derived them with ftoic coolnefs from the great book of nature and experience, from his communication w ith mankind, and from his own fate; for which reafon they never defer ted him when happening to fall in with thofe ob¬ jects from which hehad abftracted them. His practical virtue did not flow from his heart, but rather was the effect of habi¬ tude. Actions which other people call facrifices, he performed without the leaft L 4 ftruggle
ftruggle or hefitation; his actions and wiihes were the voluntary produce of his nature, " He feemed to have rendered himfelf entirely independent on all his fenfes ; for, although his fenfibility was refin¬ ed to the higheft degree, yet that foul which perceived was entirely different from that whereby his réfolutions and actions were ruled. He was careful of his body merely to prefervc his health; for he maintained that а prudent care of it was the chief means of being virtuous. No one could be more fober than him; he never drank wine or heating liqours; he made only one meal in a day; and chiefly lived upon bread, butter, and dried fruits«. This rigorous diet feemed to encreafe his blooming health every diiy, and kept him in the poffeffion of the full ufe of his faculties, inftead of weakening his con¬ ftitution, as it is commonly thought. iC Count S******i was of a diflerent character, not lefs remarkable, and the Adonis
Adonis of our circle. His form was un¬ commonly elegant and handfome, graced with female meeknefs, and ftamped with a deep impreflion of angelic goodnefs. He was fo amiable, and fo heavenly gen¬ tle, that I doated upon him. His pure imagination, the gentle difpofition of his mmd, a memory which feemed to exift only for the feenes of mild virtue, were charmmgly blended with a foft affecting melancholy, and a meek enthufiafm, " He had facrificed at the fhrine of love only once in his life/ and was unfor¬ tunate in his attachment. The hearts of all women were open to him; he was the idol of all girls; only the object of his paflion was cruel to him, and rendered him miférable íòr the reil of his life, not¬ withftanding his excellent qualifications for happinefs. His difappointment had, however, not fecluded him from his brethren, nor rendered him indiiférent to their welfare; he rather loved mankind, from that period, with additional ardour, L 5 and
and with a more active intereft in the hap¬ pinefs of his fellow-creatures. No man living has ever done more good in the compafs of his activity; and when it was out of his power to afford effectual aflif¬ tance, the affecting emanation of his filent virtues were fure to adminifter at leaft confolation. <( He was entirely formed for this un¬ fortunate age. His beautiful accompliflied form was made for the fenfuality of his time, and his heart, open to every fpecics of forrow, for its mifery. He was fondly cherifhed by all thofe who knew him, and almoft adored. His gentlenefs, his pure, fmiling innocence, his artlefs goodnefs and modefty ingratiated themfelves with e\ery feeling heart; one felt affection and love for him already before one was pro¬ perly acquainted with his worth. He was paflionately fond of the fine arts, and prac- tifed feveral of them in perfection. He refcmbled Apollo attended by the Graces. " Don
" Don Pablos F****** was an amiable, fweet fellow, but at bottom rather infig¬ nificant. His mind was jovial, conftantly ferene, cheerful and happy. He poffeffed more humour than wit; yet it was irrcfif- tible when it began to difplay itfelf in its full force. He was, indeed, not exactly fitted for the characters of the reft of our fociety, but neverthelefs had rendered himfelf fo neceffary to us, that we found our little fuppers always veiy irkfome when he was not prefent. We rcfted our¬ felvcs, as it were, in his genius, and gained many ideas and little pleafures by the gentle flow which he contrived to give to our difcourfe. He was perfectly verfed in the art of conducting a converiation; never interrupted the fpeaker, but fuffer¬ ed every one to talk as much and as long as he chofe, connecting only the thread of our difcourfe where he perceived a chafm. He generally did it by flatting fome eafy and pretty obfervation, which he had been fufficiently at leifure to make, but X-o alv* a·, s -4
always fell into the courfe of our conver¬ fation, as if by accident; or by inter¬ weaving fome little, droll anecdote, which, as it were, dropt from the clouds, by his neat fimplicity, and, fometimes, by a more than common luftre of wit ; and we never feparated at night without being charmed by his remarks and his little ftories, though he had fpoken Ieaft, and was more frequently interrupted, than any one of us. "Our amufements received an addi¬ tional charm by a miftrefs whom he kept, a neat, little, humorous girl, exactly like himfelf It is impoffible two people could agree better than that charming couple d:d. Their fouls feemed to be united into one. If he happened to be ferious, which, by the bye, was not frequently the cafe, ihe began to weep for rarity's fake, lauohed whenever he defired it; and he did the fame at whatever ihe chofe: they frequently happened to laugh at each other. Theirhatredagainft Mr. de B******'s mif¬ trefs
trefswas mutual, and you may eafily con¬ ceive what ridiculous feenes this produced. <c It is impoffible to give an adequate defcription of the little charming baccha¬ nals which we frequently celebrated at night ; for every one had generally fatigued himfelf fo much during the day, that he came to our jovial fuppers with the beil difpofition to divert his mind as much as poffible. B****** and Don Pablos took great pains during the day to collect: little anecdotes and town ftories, which were related at night, and generally occafioned one or the other of us to treat the com¬ pany with a fimilar occurrence of his life. Don Bernhard feafoned all this with his extenfive knowledge of men, and with remarks which were extremely moral, without having the leaft appearance of it; and Count S******i with his tender enthu- fiaftic philanthropy, which fweetened all the bitternefs of wit and humour. Wc always were fure to be entertained by a fmart conteft between the two ladies. The
The miftrefs of Count S******i exerted all her wit and humour to parry the attacks of Mr. de B******'s mafculine inamorata, and occafionally to put in a thruft: we took gradually a general part in their bickerings, which lafted till the table was cleared, when B****** made them con¬ clude a truce. We then formed a fe mi- circle before the cheerful fire-fide, and fpent the reft of the evening with that pleafure which only uninterrupted har¬ mony, unoffending wit, and found hu¬ mour, can afford. Our peculiarities could here unfold themfelves without reftraint, and our mutual remarks added an addi¬ tional poli ill to our character. " Thus wc fpent our evenings; but give mc leave to fay alfo a few words of the application of our days. If the former ferved to elucidate the progrefs of my adventures, the latter contributed to give them a peculiar direction. My connec¬ tion with the fecret confederation was al¬ moft entirely diffolved; I had not been formally
formally expelled; but as they had acted againft our mutual agreement, I thought myfelf at liberty to cancel all obligations which I had taken upon myfelf, and they could clearly perceive what they had to expect from me. I have, befides, never given a promife, not to fpeak of their their union, and always iliall refpect the oath which they made me fwear never to divulge the papers which they intrufted to me. Nothing could, therefore, prevent me to drop now and then as much of my adventures as was fufficieiit to excite and to attract the curiofity of congenial fouls. <c g****** was t tø c flrfl. tnai: p re fled me to explain thofe hints; and one night paid me a ν ifi t at a late hour to meet me alone: having more than ten times broken off the thread of the difcourfe, contrary to his cuftom, and taken it up again moil miferably, toffed himfelf as many times to and Tro on the fofa, and feveral times vexed me with curious, fcrutinizing looks, began, at length, with a deep figh, " Hearken,
"Hearken, Carlos! I can brook your damned referve no longer. You have fome fecret on your mind, and it grieves me that you keep it to yourfelf. What is the meaning of your myfterious words, and of your obfcure hints ? Can't you let me into the fecret? You dont know how you torment me by your füllen filence." " I could not help laughing at his im¬ patience; butat length confen ted to give him a brief account of my adventures. He fmiled repeatedly, even when the fad recollection of fufferings pail made the tears ftart from my eyes, and when I had finiihed, exclaimed laughing, " Upon my honour, Carlos ! you can tell excel¬ lent ftories. But I proteil it won't go down with те." u He had taken hold of my hand, ex¬ amining my countenance with fcrutinizing looks, to fee what effect his fine fpeech would produce on my features. I flung his hand violently on the fofa, and w T ent to
the window, exclaiming, in an angry ac¬ cent, <c Don't fay a word more on that fubject, Mr. de В****** if you value my friendfhip." Indignation had choaked my voice fo much that I was fcarcely able to utter thefe words. He flared at me, feized with aftonifliment; then caft his looks on the floor, and mufed a few mo¬ ments. " That would be a horrid tale, Carlos,'* he refumed, ť< if you did not mean to make rame at me," о (t You will do well to go home," I re¬ plied : ' f you fee it begins already to dawn, and I am fatigued." "Are you?" he replied, in a tragi¬ comic accent : " Well, I wiih you a good night, and will endeavour to digeft pro¬ perly what you have communicated to ine." He now ftretched out his hand, adding, " I hope, Carlos, we are friends?" i{ I hope you will be convinced that I am your friend, when you have more ferL oufly pondered on the confidence I have fliewn you," CHAPTER
CHAPTER XII. THE mind of Mr. de В****** feemed to be uncommonly agitated the day following our late converfation: however, he mentioned not а word about that af¬ fair, hanging his head, and meditating, without appearing to be fenfible of it. On the third day he refumed the fubječt. After the tale of horror I had difclofed to him had fufficiently fermented in his mind, he feemed at once to have come to a réfolution ; and the manner in which he explained himfelf was entirely different from what my knowledge of his character had led me to expect. He had, at firft, excited my indignation by his unbelief; but now his enthufiaftic foul had blown up the fpark, which I had thrown into his mind by my relation, into a blazing flame, and he gave now the moft implicit credit to the tale which he, at firft, had taken for fiction. He was impatient to fift the whole
whole matter to the very bottom, and im¬ portuned me, with numberlefs queftions, about one particular point, about the pur¬ pofe of the confederates, which was to my¬ felf a fecret hidden in the profoundcfl ob- fcurity. It was, therefore, not in my power tofatisfy his impatient curiofity: however, wc found, at length, a probable caufe of that myfterious affociation. A fecret fer¬ mentation had pervaded the kingdom al¬ ready for fome time. The affairs of the ftate, and of private perfons, were guided by unknown hands; but no one, even thofe not excepted who had fuffered by their powerful grafp, had been able to difcover the fecret agents to whom they belonged. Neither of us was favourable to revolutions: we were fenfible that a monarchical government is always the beft: for the general welfare; and burning with an ardent love for real liberty, we were firmly perfuaded-that we always fliould be capable to extricate ourfclves, by a pru¬ dent conduci, from the preffure of defipo- tifm,
tìfm, without a rebellion againft divine and human laws; and without facrifìcing one of thofe ad vantag- «s which the regu¬ larity attending the commands of one head, muft impart to the connection of the whole community. " Thefe ideas, which we gathered from our experience and our obfervations, gra¬ dually engendered a regular plan. The uninterrupted combination of ideas to which В****** was urged by the novelty of the fubjedt, and its affinity with the natural propenfiry of his character, and I, by the lively intere!! he took in it, enlarg¬ ing it, vre formed the wild plan to make a counter-confederation', and to try what our weak and individual exertions could do. We were fo fortunate as to prevail on Don Bernhard to unite himfelf with us, and began our labours with the moft fangu in e hopes of fuccefs, and with vigorous ar¬ dour. Our intimate connection with Count S******i and Don Pablos did not allow us to exclude them entirely; we therefore affigncd
afligned to them a fubordinate parr, which rendered it impoffible the mildnefs oftheir fouls fliould fpoil our plan. " Thus we began to execute our defign, which, for fome time, had confifted only in theory; and every member of our fmall fociety contributed a fufficient fum of money to defray the unavoidable expences,. We drew every one, that promifed to be ufeful to us, in fome manner or other into our intereft; and connected ourfelvcs in a more diftant or intimate manner, as cir¬ cumftances required it, with all the men of genius we knew. Yet thefe prepara¬ tory meafures did not hinder us from pro¬ ceeding with all poffible circumfpection, to conceal our ideas, as much as it could be done, behind the veil of commonnefs, and to keep a careful guard even upon our miens during our little fuppers. We omitted nothing to fecure ourfclves, and exerted all our faculties to make rapid progreffes, when, at once, our plan was thrown
thrown into the utmoft confufion by invi¬ fible hands. " The fix months of my furlough being elapfed, I had the greateft difficulties to encounter when I petitioned for half a year more. After I had taken incredible pains to carry my aim, I was, at length, indulged with three months more, re¬ ceiving, at the fame time, the ftrictcft order to prepare, at the expiration of that term, for my departure for Paris, the place of my deftination. " The money we had collected for de¬ fraying the expences of our plan dimi- nifhed vifibly, although I kept the cheft in which it was locked up in my bed-room, and concealed it beneath the bedding. If we added a fum one day, we were iure to find it decreafed to half the next, and ia the fame proportion every fubfequcnt day. We carried the cheft from one member to the other, and every where took the fame precaution, without being able to prevent the gradual decreafe of our trcafury. It is
inconceivable what an aftonifliing effect this trifling circumitance had on our union. The weaker part of the members were thereby difhcartened, becaufe we were incapable of unfathoming even fuch trifles; and it damped our fpirits, as it convinced us that our fecret was known. We alfo were rather terrified to fee thofe whofe artifices wc intended to difcover and to deftroy, fo dreadfully near us be¬ fore we had made the leaf! difcovery of their plans. Our aflairs vere interrupted by that unaccountable incident, becaufe wc had now the greateft difficulties to en¬ counter before we could collect the necef¬ fary fums; the propitious moment was frequently pail, and our ardour had eva¬ porated before we could make up the money requifite for our purpofes. u Our paners had the fame fate, the moil important paflages being carefully cut out, ib that we plainly could ice that our fecret enemies muft have read them at leifure. The letters we fent away, 2 either
cither were intercepted, or the directions altered in fuch a manner, that our corres¬ pondents received orders which they could not execute, the letters being forwarded to the wrong perfons. All our labours were loft, and our exertions rendered ridiculous into the bargain, which re¬ duced our union again to its former no¬ thing. " The confederates were, however, not fatisfied with having rendered our plan abortive, but at the fame time convinced us that they could fcparate and unite us at pleafure, when and wherever they chofe. The family affairs of Mr. de В******, which could not have been more unfavour¬ able than they were, promifed at once fuch aj>ropitious termination, that he thought proper to return to France to recover his fortune. The cold, dry, and ftoic Don Bernhard was, at a bail, heated to fuch a degree, by fome drug or other mixed with his drink, that he began to quarrel, and killed his antagonift, which obliged him to
to fave himfelf by flight. Count S****-**4 fell inlove with a beautiful Italian, who ha I juft arrived, and foon made him entirely her flave. Don Pablos was, at length,caught in the fame fnare ; and I was drawn in by a girl who abfolutely would marry me, in¬ dicated me in number lefs difficulties, and ñmlly obliged me to quit Toledo. Our little fuppers were, previoufly to that ca¬ taftrophe, entirely interrupted in the fliort fpace of eight or nine days, and all my friends taken from my fide^ or literally alienated from me. Previous to that pe¬ riod, an incident happened which I cannot omit inferring here, and, in every ve f ред:, was fo dreadful, that I cannot reflect upon it without being thrilled with an involun¬ tary horror. I had planned the whole aflociation, was the bolde ft and firmcft member, and even had formed the de fig a to have recourfe to the afliftance of the police to find out the lurking place of the confederates, for which reafon they owed me a more fenfible chaflifement than the Vol. U. M reft.
reft, which actually was inflicted upon me. I had hired a fmall country-houfe before the town, where we ufed to have little feafts, to dance and to fup fome times ; returning very rarely before midnight. Being entirely occupied with our plan, we loved to talk of it on our return to town, and to difcufs the meafures we had taken, and the difcoveries we had happened to make, in the day. We left, therefore, only one of the fociety with the ladies, "and rode together in the fame carriage. One evening we had been uncommonly merry, and I had drunk more than ufual. Midnight was already pail, and we haften- ed to break up. Every thing was ready, but I could not find my hat. The night being rather damp, I would not go with- out it. I. faw it, at length, after a long fearch, on the top of a fet of drawers ; and while I got upon a chair to take it down, the reft went into the yard. Having extinguiihed the lights of the chandeliers, I haftened down flairs to join my friends, 2 and
and found my carriage at the gate. I ftept in, the door was ihut, and the carriage drove away. <c My fpirits being in an excellent flow of hilarity, I jefted, and talked without interruption, but received no anfwer from my friends, whom 1 had feen ftep into the fame carriage. Their obftinate taciturnity ftruck me at length; but thinking they were in a fporting humour, I did not much care for it. However, my eyes were fuddenly opened in a dreadful man¬ ner. I obferved, to my greateft terror, that my companions were drefled in black, and maiked. I boded with horror in what fociety I was ; the w r ords died on my lips ; my hair briftled; a chilly tremor per¬ vaded my whole frame; my teeth began to chatter, and my knees to tremble violent¬ ly. Yet the death-like filence continued uninterruptedly, " My dreadful companions began at length to ftir. One of them, who fat clofe by me, broke the top of fomething, M г and
and a flame buril forth, lighting the wax taper he held in his hand. The faces of my fellow-travellers were unmaiked at once; and, merciful God ! 1 beheld James, and two more of the confederates of the cave. I was ready to fwoon; but three glittering poniards directed at my heart kept me alive, " Do you know 7 us?'* James exclaimed, in a dreadful accent, extinguifliing the light. The former church-yard filence refumed again its ominous fway, and ftrange fenfations thrilled my foul with ter¬ ror and difmay. James pulled the liring; my companions got out of the carriage, and ordered the coachman to go on, dis¬ appearing hke a midnight phantom. u When I came home, only the two la¬ dies and their companion were returned; and my three friends fi in whofe company I had, at firft, imagined to be, were not yet arrived. I fent my carriage back, and afterwards was informed that they had taken a walk in the garden, and waited for me.
mc. I was very ill, and half fainting. No fooner was I carried to bed, than I loft the ufe of my fenfes entirely; and my friends were ftruck with horror when I af¬ terwards related my adventure. All of them were thrown into the utmoft confu¬ fion, except Don Bernhard, who faid, with his ufual equanimity, tť The miféra¬ ble wretches! I certainly ihould have loft niy life, if I had been in your place." " Soon after this incident, the above- mentioned changes took place. Number¬ lefs tearing difagrcements with fome fami¬ lies with whom I was more intimately connected, infpired me with fuch а deci¬ ding difguft againft Toledo, that í awaited my difpatches, and the order for my de¬ parture, with the greateft impatience. They arrived at length; and I never dro\e through a city-gate with a more cheerful heart than that of Toledo. * r Paris is a place where one never is in want of pleafures. My ita t ion did, in¬ deed, uot allow me to bc idle; yet I was M 3 no
no ftranger to an active life, was endowed with a fufficient fhare of dexterity, and could eafily accommodate myfelf to every department, if nothing elfe was required but exertion and attention; and when I had laid down my pen, and divefted my¬ felf of my official drefs, had fufficient time left to take a fluire in the gaieties of Paris, " I was extremely fond of mafquerades, becaufe I enjoyed no where a greater 11 berty ; ncr could I any where indulge, more innocently and fafely, my propenflty to little adventures and amorous fports, and was fure never tomifs an opportunity of amufing myfelf in that manner. " My occupations left me, befides, fuf¬ ficiently at leifure to collect a numerous " circle of acquaintances around me. Yet I had only a few friends, amongft whom the -, ι · Duke of F*#****n occupied the * \\ > ; ice. Fíe was a noble enthufiaft ; of < - лел, untainted heart, which had not , been deceived; confeious of his ele¬ vated
vated dignity, and adorned with all the ge¬ nerofity of a noble extraction ; good-natu¬ red, and yet fufficiently prudent ; of elegant manners, and yet candid and undifguifing ; winning and faithful to his friends. He was fpoiledforacourtier; not becaufe he wanted the external qualifications, but only becaufe he was too indolent for thofe little atten¬ tions which are neceffarily requifite for a court-life. Yet he was always ready to make facrifices to love and friendfhip, which furpafs the power of corruption of common men. We were infeparable; went to the fame hotels, played with a joint- ftock, and vifited the fame companies. Is it poflible a more intimate connection could fubfift between two men ofthe world? Yet we went ftill farther, communicating to one another fubjedts that belong only to the forum of the moil intimate friendfhip. My heart had the fault not to be referved enough, whereby it was expofed to every illufion and impofition, andcircumfpec- M 4 tion
tion was never on the regifter of my vir¬ tues. " The whole fociety which formerly was connected at Toledo gradually met again at the gay capital of France. One after the other arrived, and every one protefted to have been drawn to Paris by fome impor¬ tant motive. We began again to meet frequently, and to talk again of our for¬ mer affociation; and what was worfe, initi¬ ated the young Duke in our myfteries. The great diftance from the fuppofed feat of the confederation, and the tranquillity we had enjoyed for a long time, lulled us into a deeper fecurity than found reafon could approve. " One evening we fat at a mafquerade, before a cheerful chimney in a bye-room, fatigued by the buftle and the fports of merriment; and I related at large the ap¬ parition of Amanuel at my flight with Elmira. It grew late; the fire died gra¬ dually away, and the torches began already to emit a fainter light. We were by our¬ fclves,
felvcs, and only a few mafks, who went from one apartment into the other, paffed us now and then. We took little notice of it, being too much taken up with my adventures. A general gloom prevailed in our little circle, and the looks of the whole company hung with awful aftoniih¬ ment on my lips. Having concluded my tale, the Duke exclaimed, with enthufiafm» " Carlos, I wiih I could have an opportu¬ nity of feeing your Genius/' No fooner had he uttered thefe words, than our com¬ pany was increafed by. one perfon. A white domino pufhed through the chairs towards our fociable circle, and opening its cloak, turned to the Duke, and faid, *-* Here he is!" It was really Emanuel. All eyes were fixed on me, to have his de¬ claration afcertained ; and my pale afto¬ nifliment confirmed it. Don Bernhard ftarted up inftantly to feize the maik : how¬ ever, he was. in the twinkliner of an eve. in the next apartment, and difappeared M 5 among
among the crowd. We fearched every apartment, but were unable to find him. " My political affairs now began to af- fnme an alarming afpečt. I continued to work with an indefatigable zeal, but never¬ thelefs received one reproof after another from the miniftcr. Although I proceeded with the utmoft care and circumfpection, yet always fomething was omitted. I could not account for it; and, at length, was informed by a letter from a friend at Ma¬ drid, that the court was highly difplcafed with my conduct, though he could not di¬ vine the reafon of it, I received, foon after, fuch plain hints to defire my dif- million, that I was obliged to petition for k; and thus I was again removed from a career wtiere I had found myfelf fo happy, and till then had worked with the greateft fatisfačtion. I refolved, in a ñt of the hittere ft indignation, to bid an eternal farewell to my ungrateful country, and, aft.T having travelled overa great part of Jùi î ore, to hide myfclf in fomc remote corn: r
corner of the globe, where I could reft from my misfortunes, and in peace await their final termination. I refolved, there- fore„ to fet out as foon as poflible. A fer¬ vant, and two horfes, encumbered with very little baggage, were the only equipage I intended to take with me. I took an unexpected leave of my friends, and rode away with an eafy heart. CHAPTER XIII. u 'T 1 HE rapid rate at which I travelled, A after I left Paris, foon brought me near the frontiers of Swifierland; for no¬ thing detained me on the road, nothing was able to arreft my attention. I was difľatisfied with every tract of country which I paffed, going in fearch ---- ~»l knew not what. At length I found it. " One evening I came to a fmall dufter of houfes, which were fituated at a fmall diftance from the high road, where I pro- pofed to itay over night. The fmall foot- M 6 path,
path led through feveral buihes, and at length loft itfelf in a fpacious fpot, covered with turf, in the back part of which I perceived a little cottage, illuminated by the pale light of the moon. It diftinguiihed itfelf in a moft pleafing manner from the verdure of an adjacent corn-field, and its neatnefs and natural elegance charmed me in the higheft degree. Midnight was fet¬ ting in, and my fervant and horfes feemed to be tired. A half-lighted window invi¬ ted us cheerfully to requeft a night's lodg¬ ing of its owner. I attempted to knock at the door, but no anfwer was returned, I knocked a fecond time with the fame fuccefs, although wc heard fome perfon ftirring within. Neceffity has no law; and ï opened the door gently. " A female fat in the background, with a lamp before her, and occupied v/ith fome work. Her drefs was more than common, and feemed to agree little with the humble habitation; although the furniture of the fmall apartmant be poke neatnefs, ele¬ gance,
gance, and even fome luxury. She lifted her eyes up at intervals, to look at a pic¬ ture which was fufpended oppofite to her; and tears ftarted from her eyes upon her bofom, wdiich was agitated with heavy fighs. She was fo 'much abforpt in her filent grief, or occupied with her work, that I was clofe by her fide before fhe ob¬ ferved me. I was in a cheerful humour, and anticipated already the little terror and perplexity in which fhe would be thrown by the unexpected fight of a ftranger. At length, when I faw that the noife I made did not roufe her from her profound re¬ verie, I began to cough. She ftarted up, feized with a fudden terror, juft when I flood oppofite her. A piercing feream was her only anfwer. Merciful God 1 it was Elmira, my adored wife. She ex¬ panded her hands towards me in a fupplî- cating pofture. I dropt down at her fnet % and flie into my arms. This was the great, heart-elevating moment of meeting again. " Elmira,
« Elmira, for God's fake!" I exclaimed, " how do I fee you here? Do I really be¬ hold my dear, my adored wife ? Are you really the darling of my heart, refufcitated from the grave ?—" " Yes, Carlos, lam your faithful wife!" €C But is it poffible that I fliould really prefs you again to my fond bofom ? Am I not deceived by a deluding phantom of my imagination? are you really a corporeal being ? Look at this handkerchief, flained with thy blood ; it is the witnefs of that dreadful night when you was murdered in my carriage by my fide. I always have carried it with mc as a holy relic." Elmi¬ ra looked with aftoniihment alternately at the handkerchief and at me. « What did you fay, dear Carlos ? My blood ! Murdered by your fide, in the carriage! I don't know what you mean." " How ! is it poffible you fliould have fo completely forgot that dreadful night, in which we happily efcaped the fury of the Spirit? Have you forgot how I carried you
you in my arms to the carriage, to leave with you the caftle for ever ? how a piilol- ihot wounded you mortally? Can you not recai the leaft recollection of that hor¬ rid incident ?" She looked at me with a fmile of pity. <c Poor Carlos !" fhe replied, " recollect yourfelf. The fudden joy has tranfported you beyond yourfelf! Do you really be¬ lieve what you have faid juft now ?" fc How ! Should it be poflible ! Mefeems a veil is taken from my eyes at once,—- Should it really be poffiblej Should I have been impofed upon a fecond time ? Tell mc candidly, deareft Elmira, can you re¬ collect nothing, nothing at ail of what I have told you ?" " Nothing at all, deareft Carlos. 1 ' " Then, by Heaven, this is the blood of an impoftor !" So faying, I flung the handkerchief upon the floor. < c Moil certainly, if your fenfes are not bewildered." *' Heavens i
" Heavens! what feenes of pureft joy didnowenfue. We had fo much to fay to one another, and therefore faid nothing at all. Never did human language appear tome fopoor. Even our eyes were only imperfect and obfcure interpreters of our fenfations. Morning began to dawn be¬ fore we perceived that midnight was pail. " So, am I then arri ved at the gaol of my fondeít wiihes! and my fufferings are at length terminated!" I exclaimed, when I recovered the power of utterance. * c How differently docs Providence diredi the ftream of futurity, how differently from what we omínate and think ! It has em¬ broidered its banks for me with the gayeft flowers. I prefs my wife with unutterable fenfations of blifs to my panting bofom, and feel with unfpeakable tranfport that Heaven has exhaufted all its flores of joy to render your Carlos happy beyond con¬ ception." "Exhaufted! Carlos," Elmira replied, with a cherub's heavenly fmile : tf When will
will you ceafe to talk thus wildly ? Does nothing remind you of the two blifsful hours of my bridal ftate at St. Jago?" " Elmira, what ideas do you recai to my mind !" " Could it be poffible you fhould not guefs at one happinefs more Heaven has in flore for you !—But, deareft Carlos, tell me fincerely, are you completely reftored to ус г faithful wife? has not another------" " Is it poflible Elmira could fufpect her Carlos ?" <f She preffed me with an angelic fmile to her hearr, exclaiming, with a heavy figh, « Alas ! Carlos, Carlos ! I fear we celebrate to day the feftival of a twofold reunion." " How ! fliould you know— *' " Yes, I know your hiftory, dear Car¬ los; I know that you have been moil trea¬ cherouily feduced. Thofe infernal fiends had very obvious motives to inform me of every afflicting particular of thofe inci¬ dents· However, I was more fortunate than
than you : I efcaped from their cruel fangs- juft in the mof! dangerous moment, and when they thought it leaf! poffible. I fa- ved royfeif with great difficulty, and fled to this country, with no other treafure than your picture and fome rings and jewels, which enabled mctopurchafe this cottage, and to provide for the moft neceffary wants. The whole wealth of your wife confifted, to the prefent moment, in no¬ thing farther than two cows, a little gar¬ den, and thefe hands, whofe whitenefs and foftnefsyou will certainlyadmireno more.'*' " Thefe hands were formerly witnefles of your beauty; but now they are far dearer to me, as witnelTes of your virtue. Believe me, Elmira, I have not kiíľed them with more rapture at the altar than I do now. Sweet, fweet hand, thou haft: commenced my happinefs; wilt thou alfo affift me in completing it?" " Alfonfo, my good, faithful fervant, now entered the apartment. He had not difturbed us all the night long, but now dropt
dropt on his knees before his miftrefs* She offered him her ftill beautiful, charm¬ ing hand, which I had infolded in mine, and he bedewed it with warm, fincere tears, fpeechlefs, and flam m ering only broken accents. Elmira was rejoiced to fee him again, prom ifi ng herfelf, from his acti¬ vity, much affiftance in the occupations of our domeftic life ; and from his fidelity and watchfulnefs, a fecurity for the'dura¬ tion of our love and re-union. The rays of the morning fun illuminated already the little apartment with radiant bright- nefs, and Elmira defired to fhew us her little houihold. I never beheld more neau nefs. Every object befpoke fimplicity, which, however, bore evident marks of elegance. She had gradually purchafeda little collection of books, and an excellent lute, which was neither covered with duft, nor out of tune. Her kitchen, the theatre of her little labours, exhibited all the graces, of unadorned neatnefs ; and the appear» ance of her buttery created appetite by its inviting
inviting cleanlinefs. She ihewed us at laft her embroideries and needle-work, in¬ forming us that flie had fpun the greater part of her garments herfelf; and yet I could perceive every where that flie never had completely forgot her noble defcent; and the Countefs of S w *** and Mar- chionefs of G·**·** appeared to have re¬ tired only fora fliort time from her palace to a cottage, to divert herfelf with acting awhile the part ofa charming country girl. She had derived all her affiftance from a fingie female only* agirl, who, through the example and the converfation of her miftrefs, had attained fuch a high degree of culture, as to be able to cheer fometimes El ni- ra'sgloominefs, and to enliven the tedious hours by her fenfible difcourfes. Her gar¬ den difplayed not lefs natural charms ; and although every little corner was carefully huibanded, yet one could clearly fee that flie had not forgot to provide for her plea¬ fure. A large bower of woodbine and amaranth, cnclofing a cooling duik be¬ neath
neath its leafy arch, occupied a corner of that little beautiful fpot, to afford my be¬ loved Elmira a friendly afylum in the fcorching hear of the day, and a fragrant fheker againft the chilling blafls of the murky night-air. All her favourite flow ers were planted in variegated groups around that hallowed temple of tranquil medita¬ tion. She recalled to my mind, by her fu eet difcourfes, the recollection of former times of blifs ; related the hiftory of every flower and of every tree, generoufly com- munieating to my tranfported foul the joy flie felt at being the creator of her fragrant and grateful nurflings, while her large blue eyes relied with delight on my chearful looks, befpeaking the fympathetic feelings of my heart, and told me, in a lively manner, that no fituation is fo dreadful as not to be cheered up by fomething or other ; and that it affords fometimes mo¬ ments which, even without the fmiles of hope, and without a comforting proi pedi into a clearer futurity, can render it more fupportable. « All
" All that you fee around you," flic ex¬ claimed at length, in a kind of tranfport, * ( all that you fee here, Carlos, is now your property, as well as mine, except that rofary, which I cannot fhare with you." <ť And why not, my deareft wife?" " Becaufe it is not my property." " And who is that happy being whom you indulge with a hallowed fpot in your property?" "I will make you acquainted with him, if you will promife me firft to love him only with half the tendernefs my heart feels for him." " What a fire do I fee fparkling in your eyes ! how your beautiful cheeks arc co¬ vered with a crimfon hue ! Elmira, my deareft wife, is your heart devoted to one more happy being befides myfelf?" " To none for whom Carlos will not deprive his Elmira of a ihareof his affec¬ tion. Will you promife me to love him as tenderly as your faithful wife does?" <( I repofe
<( I repofe an unlimited confidence in you. Here is my hand. You cannot be¬ ilo w your love on any one whom I fliall not be ready to cherifh as much as you do." tť She now led me back to the houfe, trembling with joy and impatience. We afcended the flairs with winged fteps. She difengaged herfelf from my arm, and ran before me, opening a clofet, which I had not obferved at firft; went in on tip-toe; and when I was going to join her, whif¬ pered, in a low accent, " Softly, Carlos j don't makea noice; hefleeps." " Who fleeps ?" I enquired, feized with aftonifliment. cc She took me by the hand, leading me towards a bed, and drew the curtains. Eternal Providence ! what a fcene did my eyes behold ! the beautifulleftboy lay half naked upon it, and feemed to be amufed by a pleafing dream. His rofy cheeks wore the fmiling livery of health ; and the peace that throned on his lovely counte¬ nance befpoke the fweet unruffled temper of
of the little cherub. My wife flung her beautiful arm around my neck, and hiding her crimfoning face in my bofom, whif- pered, " Carlos, it is your fon : iliall he filare your heart with me ?" " I knew him to be my fon. His young features bore the marks of the raptures of that luxurious night; the innocent charms of health graced blufliing his milk-white limbs j the ferenity of his countenance, his heavenly fmiles, and the clear fore¬ head, bcfpoke him only to be the offspring of celeftial blifs, but not the nurfling of grief. " While I gazed with a father's tender- nefs at him, he opened Elmira's black eyes. He was at firft ftartled by the fight of a ftranger ,· but feeing his mother kneel¬ ing by his fide, expanded his little arms fmiling towards her, encircled her neck, and preffed his glowing face to her bofom. She ftrained him with one hand to her heart, and clung the other round my waift. €i Dear mother/' he Hammered, while I covered
covered him with k i iles, " is that father? Did you not tell me that he would love us fo dearly when he fliould come once ?"— " Deareft Count, you have feen and ex¬ perienced much : Fortune has not been a niggard to you. You have been loved by more than one woman, and adored by many. Your lifter died of grief for you. However, in that one point you muft leave me the preference. You do not know the enthuiiaftic rapture with which a fa¬ ther enfolds the child of his love, and re-perufes on its countenance thofe de¬ licious moments in which it was engen¬ dered, while he is united to the wife of his heart by additional bonds. You never have experienced the enchanting charms of the careiľes a father receives, and the gra¬ tification of thofe he distributes, to the darlings of his heart; nor with how much anxiety he watches over every look of his child, how he obfervés its attention, and contemplates all its little motions. One is never more fenfible of the poverty of Vol. II. N human
human fpeech, than in fuch delicious mo¬ ments ; yet one finds a language which af¬ fords complete fatisfačtion. The harmony of fouls cxpreffes itfelf by broken founds, and their foft vibrations mix with the fen¬ fations we decypher on the countenance of the darlings of our heart.------ We ipent the day with making econo¬ mical arrangements. I vowed to myfelf, and to Elmira, never to quit that charm¬ ing fpot. How beneficial were, at that time, the inftructions and the example of the hermit to me! I took his happy life, his change of reft and labour, for a pattern. He had taught me to derive forne pleafure from every labour, and to find cheering intervals of reft even in the rnoft uninter¬ rupted labour. I had learnt of him that one can be happy in every fituation. The party-wail 1 of rank and birth, that fepara¬ ted me from the inferior claffes, difap¬ peared. I did not defpife that prerogative ; it was only grown indifferent to me. < £ With
" With what an exhilarating freihnefs did evening fet in ! amid what enchanting plansand heavenly profpects did it fteal upon me! I had improved the ideal pic¬ ture of the hermit ; a fweet wife was dearer to me than a friend ; and I educated one for me, while I infpired my little Carlos with a fufceptibility of my pleafures and fufferings. Elmira's fweet fenfibility, which animated him, foon taught him to Jove his father. He was, in a fliort time, infcparable from me; and his young foul began to fpeak by tender careffes, when his language was too poor* to exprefs his fent i ments fufficiently. <ť The powerful fenfations which pre¬ vailed in my foul in the morning, had not fuffered me to take a minute fu r vey of my new refidencc. Thctranquillity I enjoyed in the evening, afforded me more liberty of contemplation, and moreleifure to col¬ lect my ideas, to reft with attention on in¬ dividual objects. Elmira was occupied with her domeftic affairs, and her eitl N 2 aflified
affifted her. Alfonfo, who accommodated himfelf with pleafure to his new fituation, watered our horfes and cows ; and 1 had finifhed fome arrangements of our apart¬ ment, and fome little jobs in the garden. I took, therefore, my fweet boy upon my arm, and afcended a little hill, which bor¬ dered on the garden, and feemed to com¬ mand an extenfive view. The grafs was high, and intermixed with fweet fcenting flowers. I fat my little Carlos down, and bade him to gather a nofegay for his mo¬ ther. He told me, by afweet fmile, that he underflood me, and began his tafk with a zeal which moved me to tears. " The fun was fetting on the weftern horizon with uncommon fplendor, little curling clouds preceded him, as if going to form a foft bed; a long filver ftreak trembled over the horizon, and the even¬ ing ftar ftood fingie and cheerful where it terminated. Cooling breezes gamboled already betwixt the trembling leaves, and the diftant river loft itfelf in deeper ob- 4 fcurity.
fcurity. The creation took leave of its warming friend, and wrapped itfelf in its mifty mantle. The feathered fongfters greeted each other once more with harmo¬ nious carols, and gradually difappeared to perch on the tops of flickering trees. " Did I feel myfelf happy in that mo« ment? —No; I did not; but was happy without knowing it. The pail moment, which could have awakened the confciouf¬ nefs of the prefent, was elapfed, and not the leaf! veftige of it left. I had changed my ideas, my profpects, and wifhes, with my drefs and my occupations. My man¬ ner of feeling was indeed every where the fame; but being di veiled of its moral wants, it had been Amplified to the pureft nature. I was as if dropt from Heaven, or from another world, upon this globe : I had forgot, on that journey, all the inci¬ dents of my life pail, and brought nothing with me butan imagination more purified by its events, and a more fenfible fufcep¬ tibility. N 3 «I never
<c I never had enjoyed an evening like that. All my wiihes were fatisfied, all my defires filenced. The ftillnefs which prevailed in my heart, was greater than that which reigned around me; I fcarcely felt the beating of its puifes. As the bluflies of the evening grew paler and more ex ten five, my fentiments became fofter, whiie they could extend themfelves over fomany objects of joy, " I foon perceived that I was not the fole obferver ofthe beauties that prefented themfelves to my delighted looks. My little boy, who, all the time, had not ut¬ tered a word, had dropt his flowers ; and folding his hands, gazed at the blufliing charms of the weftern horizon. On fee¬ ing that I looked at him, he picked up his flowers, dividing them in two halves, of¬ fering one part to me ; with the feraphic fmile of innocence, he crept to the fpot where I was fitting, reclining his head ten¬ derly upon my lap. I ftrained him to my heart, and the darling of my bofom lay with
with his unfpeakable charms in my arm. Elmira looked out of the dark-blue foft- nefs of his clear eyes, and fpoke through the eloquent features of his countenance. " We were interrupted in our mutual careffes by an angelic being that thronged between us. Elmira encircled us with her arms, and took her little idol from my lap, to have him for a few moments to herfelf; yet he left fome friendly looks behind, fliaring his careffes with me. He decorated his mother's hair with thè re¬ maining half of his nofegay, and played with her long treffes. Now he looked with delight at her eyes, fparkling with maternal affection; and now hid his face gamboling in her bofom. Elmira's looks refted upon our little darling with a fmile, with an expreflion which angels would have beheld with pleafure. " When the night grew cooler and darker, we returned flowly to our peace¬ ful habitation, leaning upon one another, and carrying the little Carlos between us. N4 We
We rivalled, as it were, who was proudeft of our dear burden, carrying him in a kind of triumph to our humble manfion. He appeared to us the only treafure we had happily faved out of the wreck of our fortune, and viewed iiim as a pledge of a more cheerful futurity. Our laft and beft wiflies refted on him; and we vowed fecretly to rifk and to fubmit to every thing his prefervation fliould require. "On entering our apartment, I per¬ ceived that Elmira intended to give me a fpecimen of her ikili in keeping houfe. She had exhaufted all her culinary know¬ ledge, and prepared a little fupper, which would have done honour to a table in a town. The places and diflies were, indeed, only earthern and wooden; one of china made alfo now and then its appearance; yet I never have better relifhed a meal v that was ferved up on filver. All diftinc¬ tion of rank was banifhed from our fo¬ ciety. Our table had five covers. The Marquis and the Marchionefs of G****** had
had their little darling in the middle, and Alfonfo on one and the maid fervant on the other fide. The latter were really no defpicable companions. Alfonfo had, on the wanderings in which he attended me, divefted himfelf of all the prejudices of his fituation: my misfortunes, moil of which he had fhared with me, had taught him modefty; and the love with which he had attended me from my earlieft Childhood, and with which he was attached to my fate, had given him a certain re¬ finement of thinking that imparted itfelf to all his expreffions. * Clara, the fervant of my Elmira, was ftill more tenderly at¬ tached to her. She had nurfed her with all poflible care during her lying-in, and the illnefs which fucceeded it; and my wife had rewarded her fidelity by poliihing her natural good underftanding. " Yet it is impoflible to conceive a juft idea of our happinefs, without having tafted it in its artlefs fimplicity; nor of our occupations, without having expe- N 5 rienced
rienced the pleafure they afforded us; nor of the whole complexion of our evening amufements, without having been pre¬ pared for them in the fame manner we were. It would be in Vain to attempt giving you an adequate defcription of the happinefs which reigned in our little cir¬ cle; for imagination, without experience, is never fufficient to deduce one idea completely, naturally from the other, and to reprefent it in a palpable manner, modi¬ fied by all the preceding notions. u Elmira directed our daily occupations, diftributing to every one his taik. Having fpent but very little of the money I had defigned for my travels, I was enabled to improve the order and the commodiouf- nefs of our houfe, yet without the fmalleft detriment to its fimplicity. I took parti¬ cular care to encreafc the number, and to improve the quality, of our cattle, in which Alfonfo affifted me, as well as in the cultivation of our garden. The pro¬ fits accruing from either were placed in Elmira's
Elmira's hands: ihe flocked our pantry with a large quantity of pickled and dried vegetables and fruits, and made excellent butter and cheefes. Our meals were fim¬ ple and frugal, but feafoned in a threefold manner; our hunger gave them an excel¬ lent reliih; they were the produce of our diligence, and prepared by Elmira. " The rifing fun generally found us at work ; and we performed our refpective talks with cheerfulnefs, anticipating the pleafures our fociable circle at night af¬ forded us. We gave wings to the hours by our indefatigable * diligence, and they fled with rapidity while we were abforpt in the performance of our occupations. As foon as the fetting fun touched the limits of the weftern horizon, we left off working: Elmira rambled with me through the garden, leading our fweet boy by the hand; and we badea cheerful farewell to the fetting fun, fatisfied with ourfclves. The variegated colours of the clouds, the carols of the airy fongfters* N 6 the
the firft plaintive notes of the nightingale, the fragrant odour of the flowers and bloffoms, and the foft whifpers of the evening breezes in the air, and betwixt the leaves, filled our foul with unfpeak¬ able pleafure. We gathered flowers, making chaplets of them, and adorned one another while we joined in cheerful fongs. ** When the evening was fine, we placed a bench before the cottage door, beneath a ipreading walnut-tree, which was a fig¬ nai for our neighbours to affemble around us with their families, and to keep us company. We then formed a fociable circle; every one contributed his ihare to a public fupper; we ate out of one pot; and the children gamboled in the grafs, while we cheerfully feafted on the fimple gifts of nature. When the table was cleared, fome fetched their fiddles, and we began to dance. All ages joined in that amufement; and we were merry till the chilling night air, the riling mills, and
and the increafing darknefs, bade us to retire to our humble cottage. We talked then fometimes halfan hour longer of our labours on the following day; or Elmira fang to the harmonious ftrains of her lute; and then I went to reft in the arms of the beft of wives, and a peaceful fleep clofed my weary eyes. "When the weather did not allow us to leave our cottage, our fmall library was fufficient to fill up the few unoccupied hours. Elmira was far from being of a romantic turn, but a real philofophical woman. She had ftudied nature, and been obliged to acquire fome knowledge of man. Poetry and Mufic gave to the ferioufnefs of our amufements an elegant, harmonious turn, and, I may juftly add, enlivened and gave them more energy.
CHAPTER
CHAPTER XIV. YOU will, perhaps, aik me, dear Count, how we educated our Carlos. If I will be fincere, I muft tell you, that we did very little with regard to his im¬ provement. Being more afraid to infect him with fome of our prejudices than to leave him ignorant, we left that fweet offspring of nature to circumftances and to his own reflections: we guarded him againft: all noxious impreffions, extended gradually the compafs of his experience, and he gained thereby the effential advantage that the ideas he abftracted himfelf were purer, more felf-fubfi í t ent, and firmer than all thofe we could have imparted to him. " I frequently took him with me when I drove my little flock into the field, Reft- ing by my fide on the turfy hill, he com¬ menced, as it were, the courfe of his philofophical obfervations. Without my telling him: Behold the pičturefque beauty of yon river, that ferpentines through
through the trees : obferve the fimple and grand effect of the fmoke, which rifes from the ivied chimney of yon folitary cottage: don't overlook the fertility of our corn-field, the luxuriant grafs of our meadows the prolifity of our flock, and reflect upon him who has created and given us all thefe bleffings : Without the affiftance of thefe remarks, did his heavenly foul devour with filent rapture all thefe feenes of nature; and I beheld joy and heartfelt fatisfačtion fparkle in his eyes when he contemplated the extenfive crea- tion. Believe me, my friend, thefe are hours which one enjoys with perfect grati¬ fication. While one fees one's fecond felf gradually improve its mind, one re- perufes once more, with greater pleafure than at firft, the primary rudiments of mental culture. <c But, alas! I was foon reminded of the lamentable truth, that all human hap¬ pinefs is imperfect and tranfitory. Elmi¬ ra's fickly ftate of health, wnich gene¬ rated
rated in her iying-in, and, in fpite of the beft medical affiftance, rather increafed than decreafed, coil me many a tear, and created many a painful hour. She was not ignorant of it; but all her exertions to hide the growing decline of her ftrength from my tender looks ferved only to ren¬ der it more vifible. She ftruggled fre¬ quently to difphy more ftrength than flie really did poffefs ; but the weak ftate. of her impaired conftitution rendered every attempt of that nature fruitlefs. The choice of her books grew from day to day more ferious and melancholy, and her lute had exchanged the cheerful ftrains of heartfelt joy with doleful dirges. This w r as the chief reafon that prompted me to avoid all queftions and hints that could have reminded her of her adventures during her feparation from me. She be¬ gan, indeed, frequently to fpeak, of her own accord, of thofe incidents; however, her heart was always fo full, and her bo¬ fom fo much ftraitened, that I inftantly turned
turned the difcourfe on fome other fubject. At laft ihe faid once, in the courfe of our converfation, <c Dear Carlos, I have em¬ ployed the firft hours which I could fpare in this folitude to write down my hiftory, and you will find thofe papers in yon drawer." From that time I was anxious to avoid every word that pointed at that fubječt, or could remind her or myfelf of the opportunity of getting poífeffion of thofe fecrets. " I only ihall mention here the hiftory which I promifed you in the beginning of my memoirs, that.remarkable inftance of the fecret influence of thofe invifible con¬ federates, which I learnt by accident. I never knew that Elmira had a brother living, till Carlos, one day, brought me a ring which he had found. It was a common one of gold, on which the name Emanuel was engraven. Elmira furprifed me in the contemplation of that trinket, and fnatching it violently from my hand, kiffed and preiTed it to her heart, lifting her
her eyes up to heaven, and exclaiming, "Alas! my poor, unfortunate brother!" " Your brother! my deareft wife? 1 * I replied with aftonifliment. cc Yes, my brother, my unfortunate brother, who fell a facrifice to that fociety whom we have with fo much difficulty efcaped by a for¬ tunate accident. Alas! my whole fiimily has been devoted to mifery by thofe cruel barbarians." <( In that moment I imagined it would not be indelicate to beg her to inform me of that hiftory, and I give it you as fhe related it to me. iC I had two brothers till I was twelve years of age. The youngeft was ofa vio¬ lent fiery temper, went into military fer¬ vice, diftinguiihed himfelf by an uncom¬ mon bravery, and foon died on the field of battle. The eldeft, Emanuel, who was defigned to propagate our name, ftaid, after my father's deceafe, with my mother and myfelf, at our eftate, to repair, through his care and economy, the difor¬ dered
dered ftate of our family aifairs. He was a good-natured, excellent young man; open, candid, brave; a friend of his friends, a kind protecior of his relations, a benefactor and father of all his tenants. He was generally refpedted, and fome¬ times al moft adored. He was capable of facrifìcing every thing for thofe he loved ; and this feature of his character degene¬ rated at I aft into a ftill more amiable weak- nefs, which, however, fome of his ac¬ quaintances abufed in a moft fhameful manner. " Being a friend to little amufements, and in general of a very fociable difpofi¬ tion, he frequently collected a large circle of friends around him, who not only fpent the fine feafon with us, but alfo fometimes fla id a great part of the winter at our caftle. One of them was a certain Don Pedro g******." " Don Pedro G****** !" I interrupted Elmira, feized with aftoniihment. " Yet, go on, deareft love; the man whom I know
know is perhaps a different perfon, and only a namefake of him you mentioned," " Don Pedro was one of the moft inti¬ mate friends of my brother; he was a crooked and cunning villain, much too cunning and impenetrable for the artlefs Emanuel, who beheld in every one, as in a mirror, only his own image. He made him, by numberlefs artful wiles, diffatis- iied with his family, with his limited fitu¬ ation, and with the nature of his pleafures ; and my poor brother loft entirely that tranquil equanimity which had made him value folitude and his ftudies as the greateft treafure, and was involved in an uninter¬ rupted round of pleafures and diverfions. His paternal houfe, and the peaceful cir¬ cle of his family, grew too narrow for him; and he abandoned them for the fo¬ ciety of ftrangers. Even the whole neighbourhood was fcarcely large enough for him; he played, hunted, and danced, uninterruptedly, and we frequently did not fee him for whole weeks. " It
" It was very fortunate for us that my father had declared my mother his fole heir y and fettled only an annuity on him, the amount of which depended entirely on her pleafure. She confined him therefore a little in his extravagancies, by a fmaller allowance, but at the fame time exafpe- rated him thereby in the higheft degree; and as no one attempted to reconcile him, and fome hints were dropt by his bottle companion, which only ferved to inflame him more violently againft his parent, I foon witneffed the moil ihocking feenes in our houfe. I behaved, in that ftate of affairs, wkh as much paffivenefs as I pof- fibly could ; confoled my afflicted mother, and endeavoured to reconcile my brother to her : but all attempts of that nature were abortive; his heart was every day more and more eftranged from us, and he imagined to have a juft ground forconfi- dering me as a kind of accomplice againft him. «We
" We foon difcovered the true reafon of that criminal conduct, it being impoffible it could remain concealed for a long time. The chief caufe of his undutiful behaviour was a girl, who was intimately connected with Don Pedro; and the moil artful, ma¬ licious, and voluptuous being under the fun. It cannot be denied that ihe was ex¬ tremely handfome, and that her phyfiog- nomy and eyes were as lively and attract¬ ing as poffible: however, thefe very charms, which ihe knew how to unfold, or to conceal, moil artfully, as it beft fuited her purpofes, completed the misfor¬ tune of my brother, who poffeffed a large fhare of vanity. He was an entire ftranger to her great underftanding, which was far fuperior to his. She even pre¬ tended to learn from him ; and he exerted all his abilities to convince her of ideas which ihe firft artfully had conveyed to his mind, without his being aware of it. He had fuch a predilection for her com¬ pany, that he foon loathed all other fociety. He
He grew melancholy and morofe when he had not feen her for fome hours ; and his furious paffion for her difplayed itfelf fre¬ quently by fuch ihocking fymptoms, that they made my mother and myfelf tremble for our fafety. " We could plainly fee that fomething important rankled in his mind, on which he brooded without being able to come to fome réfolution. But we learnt too late what it was. The reftraint which my mother put on his diffipations was ex¬ tremely galling to him; and he had no other means left for continuing his enor¬ mous expences and unbridled diverfions than her fortune. His heart was gradu¬ ally led from thoughtleffnefs to crimina¬ lity : he had received hints, and even was offered affiftance, to attain the poffeflion of a fortune, which he was milled to be¬ lieve was unjuftly withheld from him: his creditors were incited to prefs him unin¬ terruptedly for payment : he faw no means of extricating himfelf: his pretended friends
friends were, or diffembled to be, poor; and he began to conceive deflgns of a moft atrocious nature. '* . « The waiting woman, who flept in the fame apartment with my mother, was, one night, roufed from her fleep by a fudden noife, and faw my brother enter the bed-chamber with hafty ftrides, car¬ rying a candle in one hand and a poniard in the other; his countenance being pale, difordered, and almoil entirely changed. He ftept to the bed of my mother, and lifted up his arm, as if going to ftrike at her heart; but having hefitated a few fé¬ conds, ejaculated loud fobs, flung the poniard indignantly on the floor, placed the candle upon a tabic, and throwing himfelf upon one knee, kiifed her de¬ pending hand, upon which he ftarted up; a window flew open, and my unfortunate brother threw himfelf headlong into the court-yard. The petrified waiting-woman recovered the power of utterance at that ihocking fight, and breaking out in loud fcreams,
THE HORRID fcreams, we haftened to the apartment.; but, alas! came too late: he had dafhed his head to pieces, and a part of his brains fmoked on the pavement. i( It would be a vain attempt to give a faithful defcription of our grief. Suffice it to fay, that my mother died ofa broken heart ; and I myfelf was at the brink of the grave. She made me promife, on her death-bed, never to mention that circum¬ itance; and I have been as good as my word till now.. Reflecting upon what I have experienced myfelf, and heard in the circle of my friends, of thofe fecret con¬ federates, I cannot but believe that they have been concerned in that lamentable event." " Here Elmira concluded her mournful tale. "This then was thy friend Don Pedro," I faid to myfelf, " who influenced thy feelings in fo artful a manner.. His fettling in my neighbourhood, which guided me without my knowledge, and his theatrical geftures, which impofed on me with fo much art, ferved to car- Vol» IL O rv
ry on a fecret purpofe?" I recollected his cunning converfations, and plainly faw that he defigned to act the fame part with me the miftrefs of Elmira's brother had aded with thatunfortunatc young man» I now plainly perceived that he had in- fpired me with thofe ideas which I after¬ wards imagined to have inftilled into bis mind : he then attended me to the cottage in the forell» to deliver his victim fafely into the hands of hi&ai&ciates; and itole away to avoid every accidental difcovery which the fmalleft overfight would cer¬ tainly have produced. The myfteriouf- nefs of his behaviour, as well as the real nature of his connection with Francifca, I refolved to leave to time and to favour¬ able circumftances. As for the reft, I was not ill fatisfied with this new experience of the little reliance one can repofe in the outfide of mankind. " But, alas! what fufferings awaited me! the grief of feeing Elmira's health • decline gradually; to fee the fwceteft and beft of women fade away by degrees, and the
the horrors of approaching death over¬ cloud her ferene countenance and her ex¬ tinguifliing eyes. The genius of immor¬ tality hovered already around her; flie met him with a refigning fmile, and ex¬ tended her hand to bc led by him to the maniions of everlafting peace. " Alas ! I was once more doomed to wit nefs the dying fcene of the moil valua¬ ble treafure I poffeffed. The hermit left me when he fcarcely had taught me to know happinefs; and Elmira was taker* from me when fhe fcarcely had begun to blefs my days. I was too happy in the fociety of thefe two dear perfons, and it could not but end thus. Fluman fife changes from one extreme to the other,, from one dream to the other, and nothing renders it more diftreffing than the inter¬ vals in which one awakes from one's flum- ber without recovering one's confciouf- nefs entirely. " Elmira grew foon fo weak that fhe fcarcely could quit her bed any more, I Ο α was
was now infeparable from her, and ap^ plied every thing in vain care and nurfing could contribute to eafe and to cheer her up. Ί he art of the beft phyficians I could procure exerted itfelf in vain. A vomiting of blood deprived her at length ofthe laft remaining fpark of life; and fhe had fcarcely fufficient time left to re¬ commend our little Carlos to my care, to embrace me, and to kifs, with her lail breath, the tears from my eyes, when flic died in my arms. " Carlos too began rapidly to ripen for eternity. He had imbibed the diftemper of his mother, on w'hofe bed he had been day and night, с are fling her, and cheering her gloomy hours by his infantine prattle* When he faw that flie could reply no more to his fweet talk, that her eyes were clofed, and her tender looks told him no more how unfpeakably fhe loved him ; when he exerted himfelf in vain to awaken her from that profound fleep; when he faw me almoft petrified, and Alfonfo, Claras and
and all our neighbours, bathed in tears 4 , he began awfully to omínate that his dearcft mother had left him for ever. He did not weep, but fearched now all the day long for fomething, and then came to hide his glowing face in my lap, aiking me, " if it would be long ere his good mother would awake? if ihe were angry with him; and why lhe did not anfwer me too?" My convulfive filence told him plainly enough what he had to expedi, and he comprehended it gradually. When he heard that ihe foon would be carried from him, he gathered a nofegay of his favourite flowers, and faftened it to her bofom* " I frequently furprifed him, after¬ wards, walking in profound reverie in the garden* gathering flowers, and afterwards tearing them. When he happened to meet me, he divided his nofegay, as ufual, in two parts, and gave me one half; but afterwards hung his head j, and one flower after the other of the remaining half dropt
dropt out of his hand. He then fobbed aloud, picking them them up again, and lifting his nofegay up to heaven, becaufe Elmira had told him that fhe was going thither. Thus my beautiful, lovely boy gradually faded away; and before two Bionths were elapfed, the darling of my heart had joined his mother in the grave. " The friends whom I had gained amongft my neighbours did every thing in their power to divert my mind; and I cannot but confefs that their innocent and natural fympathy contributed a great deal to alleviate my grief; their fincere con¬ cern convincing me that I ftill had friends that loved me, and that I was not entirely forfaken. The little diverfions they in¬ vented to amufe me, the innocent feafts^ that were given on my account, extended the convulfively contracted compafs of my ideas; they became more eafy, and lefs diftracting, as foon as they began to ex¬ pand themfelves· u However,
" However, I found the greateft com¬ fort in Elmira's papers, from which I firft learnt the whole extent of my lofs. They contained emanations of a greatnefs of foul that could not but convey tranquillity to my heart. Her refignation to her fate> the patient fubmiflion with which ihe viewed all the events of her life, and the confolations which had raifed her above her misfortunes, eafily imparted them¬ felves to my foul, fo congenial with hers. They conftituted a foothing philofophy of life, that never miffes its aim under the preffure of fufferings. I had fecured thefe papers as foon as I imagined to be intitled to do fo, and thus faved them for me; for, I no fooner had taken poffeflion of them, than attempts were made to rob me of that treafure. My locks were, however, too ftrong; and the unknown agents, that were lurking about me, did, perhaps, not think it worth their while to ufe greater exertions to get them in their poífeffion. I read them
them İn the night after Elmira's burial, and committed them to the flames the next morning, their contents being fafely repofed in my memory. This precaution alfo preferved the fecrets they contained; and I triumphed in my heart over the con¬ federates, flattering myfelf to have out¬ witted them at leaft once. " I ihall now communicate to yoi^ deareft Count, from Elmira's records», fome parts of her hiftory, that are not yet known to you. I even fhall attempt to demand from my memory a great part of her own words, with which flie ex- preffed and painted the train of thefe events. It is pity that the papers could not be preferved; for I never have feen fuch ftriking proofs of female perfection» as they contained.
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
