Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Horrid mysteries: a story: fom the German of the Marquis of Grosse; by P. Will
THE
HORRID MYSTERIES.
CHAPTER I. Y aftonifhment could not be greater than that of my friends; and it is impoffible we could have ftared at each other with more terror, if a thunder cloud had unexpectedly burft over our heads, without depriving us of the ufe of our fenfes. We were almoft petrified ; and Amanuel could fafejy nave efcaped us a fécond time, if his fituation had per¬ mitted it. The íhades of night furprifed us with an involuntary awe, and the illumination of the fky perfectly fuited fuch a difcovcry. A black cloud, which feemed to terminate the northern horizon, emitted luminous ftrcams of light, which caufed a trembling Vol. IV. В in
M
in the air, as if the upper part of the hea¬ vens was, as it were, in convulfions: a univcrfal filence rendered the pulfations of the heart audible; the leaves vibrated with a faint ruftling: we were furrounded with phantoms ; and even our exiftence feemed to be a phantom. Don Bernhard, the boldeft and cooleft of the company, was the firft that raifed Antonio up; and the Count gazed at that awful fcene, feized with amazement, and fcarcely daring to breathe. The working of various paifions expreffed itfelf ftrongly on his countenance, overfpread with a deadly palenefs. Obfcure bodings ftrug¬ gled with expiring hopes. His fury had been excited in a violent degree on feeing himfelf betrayed ; it now had changed its object; but when he was going to give vent to his rage, his noble heart fuddenly impelled him to beg my pardon: he em¬ braced me, and wept on my bofom. Alfonfo was mortally wounded. We all were anxious to prolong his life at leaft a few
a few hours, as his confeffion promifed to clear up the myfteiy which hung upon the events of my life, and to remove the veil which lay on the incidents of that event¬ ful evening. When he opened his eyes after a long fwoon, his firit look was directed at me. I w T as fufficiently contiguous to him to be fenfible of the fentiments it befpoke. It was the look of an expiring man, who re- lučla^Iy parts with the idol of his heart; ofea guardian angel, who takes an eternal farewell of the object of his tendereit cares, and quits the world with the fweet- cft of all thoughts, to have executed his great commifiion. The emotions of his mind imparted themfelves powerfully to my foul, recalling the feenes of former times. The ideas which crowded forcibly upon my memory aîmoft overpowered me. He was, at length, carried to the cafilc; and the furgeon declared his wound was lethal, his inteffines being mortally hurt. В % He
He defired to know his real flate, and re¬ ceived the candid anfwer, that nothing ivas to be hoped from the affiftance of art. His great and noble foul feemed to brighten up at that declaration: he fmiled with more than human tranquillity at thofe that ftood mournfully around his couch, and then turningto me, feized my hand, and killing it, faid, in a trembling accent, " I have finiihed my career: I thank you, Don Carlos!" I cannot recollecT what my thoughts were in that awful moment; but they were undoubtedly obfcure and confufed. Al¬ fonfo had made me fenfible , on number¬ lefs occafions, that I was dear to him: Amanucl frequently had been my guardian ahgcl; he never had rendered me actually unhappy; I had efcaped many dangers by his affiftance; and if he did accompany me by order ofthat dreadful confederation, I did not know it fufficiently as to tax him with criminal views. Many of my ideas had been purified during that time; and Adelheid
* Adelheid rather had inclined my heart to that myfterious fociety than rendered it averfe · therefrom, My whole exiftence ftill refembled a dream. I had deri\ed, from my connection with the confederates, the brighter! notions ; he had, if not oc¬ cafioned, at leaft connived at, my fwecteft connections; and Alfonfo's fidelity and attachment to me claimed my fincereft gratitude. There are certain periods in human life, in which the thoughts rapidly crofs the mind in fuch a firm union that one fur- * veys them with one look. All the feenes of former times now clearly concentrated themfelves in one harmonious picture; 1 never have feen them again in fuch a ftrik¬ ing and perceptible unifon. Elmira, my faithful, fweet, and loving confort, pre¬ ferred herfelf to my imagination. Al¬ fonfo, perhaps, had guided my fteps to her, and to the felicity I enjoyed on her bofom ; he had, at leaft, (nothing was more cer¬ tain,) with the tendereit fympathy of foul» В 3 participated
participated in that unfpeakabte blif Ä . Alfonío had been the dear partner of my juvenile pleafurcs, my companion in the fwecteft hours of a ferene and domeftic philofophy ; he had ihared the fulFcrings of my deluded and felf-dcluding hopes, and all the ftrugglcs, ftorms and dangers of an active life. He had giv en me many proofs of the moít cordial and difinterefled friend il: ip; and л heart fo paffionatc and finliblc as mine docs not caft oif its old feci ines in the firft moment. Adelheid 's violent emotions fi ruck me with additional afton i iii m ent. She had watched us at a diftance, from the begin¬ ning of that fatal fcene, and drawn nearer on the firft noife. Hearing our exclama¬ tions, and feeing us Handing around the wounded in fpeechlefs amazement, fhe comprehended the whole inltantly. She obfecrated the furgeon to exert all his ikill to prolong the life of the dying at leaft for a fhort time; and being firmly deter¬ mined to improve even the ihorteft refpite for
for the fatîsfaction of her mind, th¡ruing after the deveiopement of the imftenous veil that hung on the event* of n»> lift, was more zealous in affirting my dying fervant than the reft. No one da ined her motives fo well as rnvfelf : flit* hai derived piefenfions from my hiftory, which pant¬ ed after liirht and confirmation; thev had become the fuhjects of her fweetcfl dreams, and Hie \\¿s determined Alfonfo fbouLl fpeak, if poifible. He furvejed us m:h marks of the deecpeft emotion and affection : my wife anxioufly v.arched his looks, prefaging, from every ex ρ re ¿Тю α of his features, important elucidations ; and the thought that now the faireft crea¬ tions of her imagination either would be completed, or entirely deilroyed, violently agitated her bofom, and animalei all* her motions with an uncommon alacrity. We were ftanding around Alfonfo's couch in filent, awful expectation. Our looks were anxioufly caft down, and every ear watched eagerly the loweit whifper; В 4 we
we fcarcely ventured ю fujh breath. Don Bernhard flood with folded arms at Al- f info's head, clofiívc;uardincrcvi.r\ chanre or к:ч íearures; the Count reclined his К .J upon my íhcJ.^ľ; ϊ.;.λ iv.y iooU were il\^J at :ry w[ù- t v Uo leaned over the bed, agitated w 1:1; lading c.\pec*.a- ι:η:κ Wc had, in the firft hurrv. foi^ot to ^ivkr the fervants to withdiaw. They fii r rounded us, exchanging timid looks, without being able to comprehend orto divine any thing; and their fpeaking anxioufhefs rendered the groupe complete. However, as foon as Alfonfo feemed to lie inclined to fpeak, Don Bernhard gave them a fignal to retire. They were glad to be fpared the fight of that mournful fVcnc, and left us inftantly, Alfonfo now- erected himfelf a little, as if awaking from a profound flecp, fur- v.yed us with an eloquent look, and put¬ ting his hand to his wound, which feemed to give him great pain, lifted .his eyes up to
io Heaven—an awful moment! His fea¬ tures w ere r entirely changed; I fcarcely kneu- him^argam. *' í think you, my lady/' he faid, dro;\r>"*"ï^ my hand, and taking hold of tha: ot my wife; <c I thank} ou for the rr.arlvNof vourlove, even for hav incocca- fioneil my death. My friend whs mlf- íruided: I Ъз.\е ovei heard vot:r moft fe- eret converfations; undi: îs you to v, hom he o^es hi î prefent fufceptibility for future happiiv.fo/' Mv wife remained filent; not knowing. perhap-, what anfwer fac ihould gi\c¡ for fiie did not ycc comprehend him perfectly. u My moments are counted,** he refumed, after a fhort paufe of reficelion, <ť aml I feel that I am on the brink of eternity. My papers contain the hiftory of my whole life. They will inform you, my dear Carlos, more plainly of my love for you; of my defigns, my fidelity, and more than human tcndernefs. I received you from the hands of your mother to watch over В 5 your
your happinefiî. lhv¿ you never ht ari cf Count м**·***?" « Eternal Go¿\" u as ггу fole rej »'r, л* İnle I dropt down hy his bcd-fidc : M n i e;- î f rc olivet \ ou non : jou are ηΐ> i.n-„!e." " Vt*, I am uur uncle, dear Cai les. The favoLnte of fortune kí; the luxuries of lite м watch in this humble difguife over lbs fa\;4irite*& fare. I \owcd to my adored filter te* dc- fine \our friendfuip, and í die \*ith the- proud confeioufnefsto havereligioufiy kept my promife. I lived forjou, Carlos, and now í die for vup !" It is impoffibîe to give an adequate de- fcription of that grand and au ful íc^m. It vas tlie moít folemn and affecting of my whole life. The greatnefs of my dear uncle's affection lor me, the perfeveranee in his noble paffion, the facrificeb he had made to me during the courfe of fo many- years, notw ithftanding his claims to fplen¬ dour, the greatnefs and the magnanimity of his mind, cannot be defcribed, and fit rpaffes the concepii vc powers of the moft
moft fenfiblc mortal. Ì read ìbis clearly in the looks of thofe that íutmimãca hts touch, deeplv < oniuoui ei' niv \\¿nx ot mene. Adelheid tied capici. ï ft reams oí teaib; lX>n Ikrnhardlbicd ííKnil;* a: my cxru.rtjr trua rd ian anjel, aílÍiacd vuth sii'>*u/in^ H/irowN л and the refi uere ^ tth- Oi.it motion, рсгпаръ, L>ert *c ι »i c\ erv fLthnar. îr Alfonfo refumcd, at length, tť You have vıÎco;^ j\ul the confederation; for I v as at lis head, and procured }(*ϊ:γ admifľ.on.. í lould лог delien ro make \ou grent, without rendering you happ> through that irreatncfs. I could direct the circum* flanet^, but could not rommand ovc** un- forekenaccidents. You тл'Л not put die latter to my account. I had violent dis¬ putes with my brethren on your account, i ha\e faved Ľlmira's life; and the İmpof- tor whom they wanted to inuucle upon you in her room, againft my will, died by my orders. í kept )ou out of Spain as foon аз I faw myfcif over-voted by the Б 6 reil; .
. reft. Rofil Ια had л c w ed your de rt ru Suon î I rancia a was τ he firft \ it tim of her vcn- í'cancí*: tonnt S****** was prefent when flie к·! 1 a fünfte to the hatred ιΛ' her mal. î\vı Fed.iohnd betrayed ln, and I í oţ.!d ïu^t p:*c'\;r,t it. I \) «i.,hcd o\er '. «:i;r 1 í e .r:d happi π 'h, л°ч! renewed ' our í on г i. по" 1 u lit; th.. c. j.". fe h-r.ií·»'''. lv- апГо : u e г. v ivi".-;-, nu'.\ arv ün;.J^a!n. Car- къ! I have fome deferes of \ои.** * f Aïydearefi une h !" 1 inr^rriirt^J ihm, in :v.i ¿iTCi:\ oí lükî, 'ind »et wi^íiour; fiied- ι!. 'пег a cea r . " Cnrlo-, thefe worthy gentlemen, thai now are a fiem!*.! ed around u^, are \o»u' lMer.d-*. Acquaint them with the extent ;;nd the merita of the confederation, and challenge them to oblitérate me from yo*jr foid. í have, indeed, not attained the mark; yet it gives me the greateft fatis- facuon that I chofe m> laborious and toil- fomc- career for your fake. You was the fole object of my exiftence and activity ; and now I leave you without a guide. Your
Λ our geniu я leme:-* this world for betrer ivgine. You have friends ; but let me gn с vou a confidant, whofe noble mind diwned the asm of our conlld* ration.'* So fa} ing ţ he rook Don Bernhard *s hand, хла lã\cá it in mine. That firm and un- fhaken man broke out mio tears and fi ghs, a¡id oí; Sra, ( η ·χ n*v ur^lo, (aid, " í com- prebend \ Ouj my l'roiJÎcr : icceive my I( Нсд\сп be rraifi-d! L w onlv com- pronend ал. The rnvfiic veil or nature (ivucaw her greateft and îîncit creation*. It ^ U> great and io fu eet to bc ;;e;¿.v£, and zo p:rf 'ыъ: evrry thing. Yet it is itili Глее re r to die at the mark. My i-rength raib me before I bme at;ained it.'' 41 \ou have ^:i\en a confidant and guide to my Carlos/* Adelheid faid, " and me you have overlooked/' (t I counted you amongft his deareft and warmeft friendo: have you not the firft place m his heart ? Did I not choofe you to be his wife, the partner in his fu¬ ture
ture happinefs; aml a vornan like you ought to be uttUfiťd by the merit of hav- |Ä$g awakt^ncd the great and noble ideas which lay dormant in the mind of my Carlos.'* ** You mak me proud, Alfonfo!" ** Conclude the bond of eternal friend¬ ihip in my prefence, before I die!" We embraced reciprocally, and he extended his trembling hands to give us his bene¬ diction. ec May heaven blefs your union ! I con¬ jure you to remain faithful to my Carlos, and never to quit the path of virtue and true greatnefs. No bond unites congenial hearts more firmly than that of a common great aim; ftrive to attain it; unite your exertions, your happinefs, and life; do never forget that the happinefs of your fellow creatures is the fcope of your ex¬ iftence ; endeavour to be deferying of the great confederation. 1 he angel of peace will be your guardian! my fpirit never will forfake you* The fofteft undulation of
oí the air, the fwect-fcenting odours, and a myftic ruftling, will announce my pre¬ fence, and recai to your minds the vom s you now have repofed into my hand. Farewell ! My eyes grow dim : the mcf- fenger of iternity draws near: the curtain is drawing between you and me. Carlos, give me your hand once more; my fpirit u ill be \xith you: 1 die." He had ftrained me to his clay-cold lips, and I caught his laft expiring figh from his lips. We embraced each other over his clay-cold corpfe, and renewed the vow of eternal fidelity. * None of us was more powerfully affect¬ ed by this fcene than Adelheid. She rc- flecfed upon Alfonfo's ferene departure withanintenfenefs and perleverance which could not but produce the nobleft refolu¬ tions. Her foul, which had a natural propenfity to every thing uncommon in nature, was fertile in thoughts, and en¬ dowed with an extraordinary activity, found in her new-begotten dreams a fpa¬ cious
cious field for the fecret employment of ail her faculties. She was confeious that ihe ftill was in a fleeping fiate; yet {he con¬ fided herfelf with her activity in r vih a charming dream. " Deareft Carlos i'* fhe faid to me, one day, " how unaccountably blind you have been!" "Could I be otherwife?'* I replied. " I not only was fuffered to grope in the dark, but my ideas were alfo defigncdly confufed. I never could difguife my feel¬ ings, and my whole foul lay open to Al- fon fo. I fo met i mes had formed forne nev idea, and taken a refolution, when unex¬ pectedly new incidents furprifed me, be¬ getting notions of a contrary nature, and entirely obliterated the preceding ideas/* " Any other perfon, dear Carlos, would have learnt, from that diverfity of impref- fions, miftruft in himfelf, and circumfpec- tion; but you was only plunged thereby into greater incertitude. A great confe¬ deration tenderly extended their arms to receive
receive you; you knew that a far-ftretch- |ng power proceeded from their centre, and yet you was imprudent enough to fufpect thofe great men of a fcope which would havedifgraced even the meaneftand 11 .oft abject criminal." " You allude to the crime of regicide, of which 1 fufpected them, and whereby I was deterred from a more intimate union with them. But recai to your mind their words en my admiifion, the particulars of which I have fo frequently repeated to vou; coniider that I always was ufed to take faithfully every expreifion in its na¬ tural and peculiar fenic^ that I conftantly looked upon an abalienation from the ex- ifting laws as liccntioufnefs, and then tell me, how could I otherwife underftand their words ?" " I confefs, Carlos, I ceafe being a woman, if I reflect upon the particulars of your hiftory. It comprifes fomething fo fuper-human, that it tranfports me to a new world of ideas and wiihes." "You
u You have made me extremely de- firous to examine Alfonfo's papers; but have only patience a little longer; Paris is not a place fit for ftudying them. Wc will return into the country next fpring, and then read them together/* í. \y e (j ia |i k e fufficiently at leifure now ; nothing is more certain; for it is highly probable that Alfonfo's death has inter¬ rupted every immediate connection be¬ tween yourfelf and the confederates.*' " This is merely probable^ dear Adel¬ heid. The events and contradictions of my life have rendered me rather appre- henfive with regard to that point. AU fonfo*s laft words have ftruck me very much ; he called Don Bernhard his bro¬ ther, recommending me to his guidance and confidence." " You are right: I quite forgot that circumftance. Don Bernhard is, perhaps, more intimately connected with the con¬ federates than we imagine; for his noble mind entirely fits the great defigns of that fociety.
fociety. His eye was bedewed with tears when Alfonfo bade us an eternal adieu : I am inclined to think that they have made that valuable acquifition but a fhort time fince/* « And why do you think fo, my deareft wife?" «* I know that lofi y fpirit, who ftood alone in the world, proud to be able to purfuc the courfe of his virtues without affiftance; proud to be the fele father of his greatnefs, and to profecute his career, free like a god, fecured by his experience againft all common allurements. He has, perhaps, received fome hints ; but Al¬ fonfo's dying fcene renders it certain that he knew nothing of Amanuel.** « I comprehend you ; yet the love of CountS****** is itili a myftery to me." « I think I can pretty weil account for it. The relation of your hiftory has made me conclude that the confederates diflike his intimacy with you. How frequently have they attempted to difunite you ! and your
your plans always mifcarried when you wanted to execute them in concert with him. Even his life was already once in danger; and, what is more dreadful, it was, perhaps, their intention to let him die by your hands. Could, therefore, not the affair have been a contrivance of theirs ?" <c Perhaps you are right, dear Adelheid. All the circumftances attending that affair confirm and render your fufpicion proba¬ ble. It is not unlikely that his paffion for you uas excited and nouriihed by fecret hints, without his being au are of it; and his note, which you have communicated to me, relates to another from your hand/' This fuppofition of my wife threw a wonderful light upon many events of my life ; yet a great deal, which, by the fub~ fequent train of incidents, was completely cleared up, was, at that period, not quite plain to me. Being now pre-occupied rather for than againft the confederation, I agreed
I agreed with my wife to make fure of Don Bernhard, as we had great reafon to think that he acted a principal part in it; and we beheld in his friendihip, infured to us by Alfonfo, certain means of attain¬ ing a mark which now was the chief object of our life. CHAPTER II. W 'INTER glided away flower than ufual, becaufe wc awaited rhe fet- ting in of fpring with the greateft impa¬ tience. My wife's fuppofitions foon re¬ ceived the flrongeft confirmation. Don Bernhard was no more than a novice in the con federation > whofe members had been prompted, by their knowledge of his character, to flip fome papers into his hands, which thawed his frozen heart, clearing up many events upon which he had reflected for fome time. He naturally hated and fcorned men, merely to be able to relieve them more effectually,· and be- 4 ing
ing obdurated againft tears and fufferings, proceeded over ruins and bleeding corpfes towards his great mark of perfection. This being the very principle upon which the confederates acted, it was natural that he beheld in them his brethren. Alfonfo's death evidently contributed to give the neceflary impulfe to the phleg¬ matic courfe of his blood. He fell with cagernefs upon Alfonfo*s papers, reading ing them through with impatient hafte. Hethen ftudiedthem with an indefatigable application, extracting the fpirit of the confederation, and tranfplanting every thing that fuited him into his own mind. He never had been fo cool and fo refer ved as he was during that period : when I beg¬ ged him to return the papers to me, he always replied, " I am now occupied to digeft them ; give me only time to regulate my fyftem properly/' He then feemed again to cheer up a little, vifited us more frequently, and when he found Adelheid . alone with me, always turned the conver¬ fation
fation în a natural manner upon ourdifco- veries. One could eafily difcern, by his expreffions, that they flowed from ideas which were going to attain an unfhaken ftability. Being no ftrangers to his inqui- fitive and penetrating turn of mind, wc w ere certain that he now had learnt every thing he was defirous to know. Count S****** being firmly convinced that Alfonfo had mifguided him, and divining, perhaps, more of the truth than we at firft could imagine, began to avoid the company of my wife" ever after the fatal cataftrophe in the garden. Yet his fufccptible heart ftill carried on a very dubious conteft with his underftanding. On begging Adelheids pardon, after Al- fonfo's death, he had vowed to her, on his knees, an eternal friendihip, which could not but be very fufpicious to me; and even my wife had taught me to behold him in a different point of view. I ftill con¬ tinued to be his warmeft and moft cordial friend, yet I fufpečted the impetuofity of his
his paffions, the deplorable difpofition of a difappointed lover, his undeferved dif- fatisfaction with me, and finally, futurity, w r hich conftantly threatened mc with un¬ expected momentous incidents, and the contradictions of chance. s******i and my father-in-law feemed, however, to have entirely forgot all the gloomy impref* fions of the time paft. I may truly fay, that never two men, of fuch different cha¬ racters, were fo intimate; and that never an obdurated mifanthrope fo fuddenly was turned into a jovial rake as the old Baron. They were conftantly upon their legs ; and one may juftly fay that no perfon ever had more extenfive connections at Paris than them. They were every where welcome, and famous for being the cheerfuleft com¬ panions of the whole capital. They involved us alfo, againft our in¬ clination, into their revels, dragging us to numberlefs aflemblies, feafts, and card parties; and feeing at laft no poifibility of refifting them, we fubmitted with a good grace
grace to their importunate and pre ılı ng invitations. Adelheid had an excellent talent for every thing; ihe filone in every company; and, without defigning it, was every where the firft perfon. 1 watched Don Bernhard ftrictly, and perceiving that his ftern mien began to gain пюге mildnefs, found no farther difficult} to abandon myfelf to all the cxtravagnr.tics of a eav life. От* chief rendezvous was at the palace of the Duchefs of Β γ,,: ****ιι, who, at that time, was the toatt of uli companie*. We met every night at her houfe to fup with her; every one had fomething to re¬ late; and her table, which was frequented by an incredible conflux of people of all nations, afforded an inexhauflible fource of the moít entertaining obfervations. We met, for inftance, almoft every night, two moft extraordinary country fquires, Lord T******d of Derby (hire, and Mr. de R****** of the Mark. Both of them were caricatures of a curious Vol. IV. С forti
fort; u n poi ite, learned, and without a grain of plain fenfe. The latter of the two fparks became particularly remarkable to us through an adventure which made all Paris laugh. He had taken it into his head to pay his court to my lady. Adelheid, being not inclined to difturb our common pleafure, took care not to intimidate him, but treated her admirer with the fineft coque¬ try, which always afforded us new matter for amufement. He made verfes upon her, and even honoured me with wonder¬ ful poems Ín my praife. But we paid him in the fame coin ; I did not read his verfes, and Adelheid laughed at them. He grew at length fo prefling, that his love began to be troublefome to the whole company. Count S****** maintaining ftill fome little claims to Adelheids affec¬ tion, took the trouble to grow jealous of him, and, in order toget rid of him, de¬ viled a plan, which promifed to make him an
an object of general ridicule, and thus to drive him out of Paris. One day Mr. de R****** fcarcely had ftept into a bookfellcr's ihop, where he frequently ufed to fpend whole days, to learn all the titles of the books by heart, to hunt after and to invent anecdotes, when an old lady, of a very unfufpicious appearance, entered, faluting him with a familiar air, and telling him that ihe wanted to fpeak a few words in private to him. Having retired with her to a con¬ tiguous apartment, (he, informed him, with the moít honcít and fimpie air, that a young lady had fent her to let him know ihe w i fiied to have a private converfation with him. Poor Mr. de R******, who was an amorous fool by profeiììon, and a poetali er into the bargain, fancied to be tranfported to the gates of Parad ile on receiving that meflage. His imagination got the better of his Icanty portion of reafon, and he began to fancy that young lady was dying С 2 of
of love for him. Yet, if he had not learnt that fhe was a lady of quality, he would have fcorned her invitation; for Mr. deR****** talked conñmüy of his noble and ancient pedigree, though his real father was not known. He, there¬ fore, accepted the invitation with the greateft cheerfulnefs, begging the anti¬ quated mciľenger to lead on, and to be af- fured that he would follow her ftep by ftep. He was conducted through a num¬ ber of ftrects and alleys, till his local knowledge of the town was entirely puz¬ zled; and he, at laft, arrived in one of the moft notorious lanes of Paris. Though 'his courage, which naturally was not very great, had vifibly dwindled au ay with every ftep he proceeded farther into that labyrinth, and was covered with a cold f w eat, yet he replied, with an intrepid accent, to tlie repeated exhorta* tions of his condučtrcfs, to fear nothing, «« I am not afraid ! indeed I am not, my good woman!" He pofit fled a natural talent
talent of finding every thing very natural, that, perhaps, would have ftruck every other honeft man. - For ail people he met with in the ftreets 'contiguous to that where he finally ftopt, had gazed at him with vifible aftoniihment; and, on his arrival in that famous lane, all the win¬ dows were opened, and a number of young ladies gazed at him with fignificant fmiles, bowing to him as he pafled them. Mr. de R****** was, however, very far from fufpecting any foul play; and conceived no other idea, than that he,.perhaps, was handfomer than his looking glafs had told him, marching onward with the greateft fatisfaetion at the admiration which his fine perfon created. Being elated with the flattering idea of his all-conquering charms, he was tran¬ fported with the fweeteft hopes, and his apprehenfions were filenced at once. He ftept, at laft, in high fpirits, into a fmall houfe, of a good and decent appearance, which was opened by his rufty conductrefs. С 3 Having
Having afcended a few fteps, a lady, who had been waiting for our Adonis, flung her hands round his neck, ftrained him to her heaving bofom, and covering his face with burning kiffes, and a few tears, ex¬ claimed in German, «'Oh! my brother, my deareft brother!" R******, who, notwithftanding the roughnefs of his manners, was proud of being a German, was enraptured with the melodious accent of thefe words; and al¬ though he could not recollect ever to have heard of a fifter, yet thought proper to give the fulleft credit to that artlefs effu- fion of innocent nature. He returned, therefore, her endearments with an equally ardent tendernefs, and went with her to her apartment, rejoicing at having met, at 3aft, with the firft female being that had fo much felf-denial tot receive him with tendernefs, or only to endure his careffes. He was fhewn to an apartment, whofe furniture befpoke tafte, and no fmall de¬ gree
gree of wealth. He beheld every where an abundance of plate, exhibited in an artlefs manner, rich carpets, excellent prints and pictures, and finally fplendid drefles, which were negligently fcattered about, moft of which Count S****** had fent thither the preceding day. They were, afterwards, ferved by the Counťs people; and the girl, who had ftrayed from Saxony to Paris, had been fo mi¬ nutely inftructed of Mr. de R******'s fa¬ mily circumftances, that, with a good ftock of natural cunning, fhe could not fail acting her part in a moft impofing manner. Having led him to her fofa, fhe be¬ gan her embraces anew. Tears of joy glided from her beautiful eyes upon her rofy cheeks; her fwelling lips were im- moveably fixed to thofe of her new bro¬ ther; and fhe imitated the tremulous ac¬ cents of the moft ardent and heart-felt feelings fo fuccefsfully, that the poor fel¬ low began to fob as loud as herfelf. С 4 The
The iirft fcene of that dumb act being fuccefsfully finiihed, Mr. de R****** ventured to afk the young lady how he came to the honour of being received by her asa brother? She replied, with an oath, that no per- Jon could have a greater right to call him brother than herfelf. Inftead of fufpecting this mark of her low extraction, he mif¬ took it for the indignation of a noble mind that felt itfelf injured. She availed herfelf, with great dexterity, of his emo- i'on, making a fepfonable ufe of the in¬ formation fhe had received of her em¬ ployer; and, at laft, nothing was clearer ihan that Mr. de R******'s father had feduced Julia's (thus the girl called her¬ felf) mother at B*****, where he had refided for a fhort time to fettle fome fa¬ mily affairs, and aftetwards treacherouily h ft her and her child to fliift for them¬ felves. Though fuch incidents are not uncom¬ mon in the great world, yet Julia feemed to
to be half ^diftračted at it, miftaking the fon for the perfidious rather, and loading him with the bittereit reproaches. She blended tears and fighs fo dexteroufly with the moft pungent invectives, that poor R******, who, in his heart, called all the faints to his affiftance, begged her pardon, again and again, in his unhappy father's name, and protefted, in the. moft folemn manner, that he would do every thing in his power to make amends for his father's cruelty. Yet fhe was not fatisfied" with his pro- teftations, but fwore a dreadful oath, that flie had come to Paris for no other purpofe than to avenge herfelf and her mother in his perfon, taking, at the fame time, a large knife from under the cufiiion of the fofa, and declaring that flie would cut his curfed throat. The fight only of an edged infiniment made our hero faint. He fcarcely ever had ventured to take a piftol without a- lock in his hand, from fear that it would C S go
go off if a misfortune ihould happen. One may, therefore, eafily conceive how dreadfully he was agitated at fuch a fight. His teeth began to chatter violently, his knees to beat together, and his hair to briftle up. He obfecrated the furious fair one in a trembling accent, and, with quivering lips, to fpare his life, calling Heaven to witnefs, that he was as innocent as the child unborn; and, at length, called for affiftance. He wore, indeed, a large fword, but feemed to be more in fear of it than of Julia's knife. The latter being, however, not ignorant that even fear fometimes will urge a certain clafs of people to perform aftonifhing deeds, fuffered herfelf, at length, io be moved by his fupplications, tears, and folemn promifes, and con* eluded a peace with her dear, recovered brother. The merrieft humour gradually oblite¬ rated every veftige of that threatening tempert. R****** was eafily charmed, and
and the happieft being, if one only be</an to make game at him, taking the blunteft mockeries for fince re compliments ; and found, in every converfation, fomething flattering for his family pride. Julia was, befides, very handfome; ¿md R****** could not he!p wiihing that ihe was not fo nearly related to him. The vifible figns of this wifii, which was legibly written on his countenance, animated Julia with the higheft fatisfae¬ tion, and enabled her to acquit herfelf of her tafk in a moft fuccefsful manner. The livclicft fal í ies of wit followed each other in rapid fu с ceffion ; and an overflowing vein of good humour, originated, perhaps, in the Count's prefents and promifes, charmed the happy R****** in fuch a degree, that he fwore never to have fpent fuch an agreeable evening. Julia related to her new brother a number of family anecdotes, which convinced him, in the ftrongeft manner, that ihe was really his natural fifter, whom he ought to che- C 6 riili
ri fli and to refpect. An excellent fupper, ferved up on the Count's plate, completed their good humour. The moft exquifite viands, and the neateft wines, completed the idea R****** had formed of the qua¬ lity and fortune of his fifter. She not only did not demand money of him, which would have thrown him into the greateft confufion, but even offered him her purfe, if he fhould want it ; and he fecretly re¬ folved to avail himfelf, on the firft occa¬ fion, of that acceptable offer. The time glided imperceptibly away amid the laughter of merriment, and it now ftruck twelve o'clock. The night was, indeed, extremely fine, the moon ihining with an uncommon brightnefs, and the air being warmed by tepid breezes : the ftreets, too, were ftill crowded with people; but Julia perfuaded her brother fo firmly that it would be highly dange¬ rous to go, at that hour, through the in¬ tricate mazes of ill-famed lanes and nar¬ row ftreets, that he comprehended, at laft,
laft, it would be better for him to ftay at her houfe. Being offered the ufe of an apartment, which was far enough remote from her's, even the niceft delicacy could not have objected againft her propofal. R#«»* began, therefore, to be animated with additional cheerfulnefs, and enjoyed the good things which were fet before him with an encreafing appetite. The wine did not fail to produce the defired effect; and at two o'clock, when midnight filence fway ed in all the ftreets, he found himfelf inclined to go to bçd. His drow¬ finefs was fo powerful, that one eye al¬ ways fliut itfelf reluctantly when he had juft fucceeded to open its neighbour with the greateft difficulty : in ihort, he found himfelf neceifitated to defire Julia to fhew him to his apartment. She conducted him herfelf to a diftant chamber, whofe windows opened into a narrow lane; and having acquainted him with the commodities of the apartment, embraced
embraced him once more, and wiíhed her dear brother a good night» She had no fooner retired, than R****** began to undrefs himfelf flowly. This occupation difpelled his drowfinefs a little, and having difencumbered himfelf of his garments, he went to the window, without either ftockings or fmall cloaths, to enjny the refreihing breezes of the air, the night b^ing extremely hot. All around him was as filent as a church-yard, and he had now the beft opportunity to reflect on the ftrange occurrences of the day. He could not deny that the whole adventure was rather unaccountable, and was inca¬ pable of comprehending how his fifter could have found him out in fuch a large town. Yet he foon made himfelf eafy by fome conclufions fu i table to the fhallow- nefs of his diminutive underftanding, and, having fhut the window, went to lay down. On his way to the bed, he recollected that he had firft fome bufinefs to fettle be¬ fore
fore he could go to reft, and opened the door of the clofet, which Julia had pointed out to him, for that purpofe: but, alas! while he was making the necefi- fary preparations, the boards beneath his feet gave way, and he fell with a terrible noife into the ftreet. Count S****** having not had the in¬ tention of doing him the leaft hurt, all the mud which could be collected had previoufly been gathered beneath the clofet, which rendered his fall extremely foft. Being, however, *fo unfortunate to turn himfelf in the air, and to arrive in his bed with his head foremoft^ he found it rather difficult to extricate himfelf from his unpleafant fituation. Yet he fuc¬ ceeded, at laft; and lifting up his head, found himfelf furrounded with odours, which plainly told him the whole extent of his misfortune. He began, at firft, to curfe his miihap; but being as yet ignorant of the original caufe of this accident, he rofe patiently, with
with his ufual phlegm, apprehending no greater misfortune than to catch a little cold before the door fhould be opened for him. He, therefore, haftened to knock at the houfe, but received no anfwer. He repeated his blows, and ftill not the moft diftant found of footfteps was heard with¬ in. It is impoffible to defcribe the def¬ pair to which this additional misfortune reduced the poor fellow. The night air fported cruelly with his íhirt, and nothing was more certain than that he ihould catch a cold, which would confine him at leaft eight days to his bed. Having knocked repeatedly, without hearing any thing ftir, he grew more urgent and noify, when a window opened, and an unknown female voice exclaimed, "What does that terrible noife mean? what do you want? what bufinefs have you here at fuch an unfeafonable hour?*' "Open the door!'* he replied; "I fhall, certainly, get the tooth-ache: for Goďs fake, be quick, good woman!** «Who
" Who arc you; and what do you want?" " I am Mr. de R******, a nobleman from the Mark, and want to go to Julia, my natural fifter." ,c The fellow is drunk," faid a fécond voice, which he knew to be that of his conductrefs : u have you ever heard fuch a name? Pour the chamber-pot upon his head, Charlotte!" Nothing could have terrified the poor fellow more dreadfully than that exhorta¬ tion: he retired into the, middle of the lane, to get out of the reach of the threat¬ ened inundation ; and mccffantly ex¬ claimed, tc For God's fake! children, don't you know me? Upon my honour, I am Mr. de R******.» ζ< I never have heard fuch a name! Go about your bufinefs, good friend, and don't difturb honeft people in their fleep." His violent and repeated knocking againft the door, meantime, had roufed the whole charitable fifterhood from their fleep,
fleep, and in a fhort time all the windows in the lane were crowded with female faces. The tranquillity and honour of one of their fifterhood being at ftake, all of them joined againft him, loaded the poor naked fellow with the coarfeft invectives, threw ftoncsand rotten eggs at him, threatening to come down and to tear his eyes out, if he fhould dare to difturb their reft once more. Poor R**#*## now was in the moft diftŕeffing fituation; for not every one like's to be expofed to the chilling night air, without either ftockings or fmall cloaths, and to be mocked into the bar¬ gain. He was almoft diftračted; and being urged by the height of his diftrefs, ventured to knock once more againft the door with all his might; but at the fame moment a window was opened, a man of a moft terrible afpečt, which was rendered the more frightful by a pair of enormous whifkers, looked out of it, and roared, in an
an accent that would have terrified a lion, "Who are you? Whence do you come, and what do you want?" r****** was almoft petrified with terror, and gazed fpeechlefs, but with fpeaking looks, at the terrible man. " What do you want, you dog?" the man repeated. <( I am coming down di¬ rectly." With thefe words he fhut the window, and was going to make good his words; yet I cannot fay whether he really came down, for Mr. de R*»**#* trufted to his cold, but alert, heel«, and was far enough from the houfe before the man could reach the ftreet door. Mr. de R***### being happily arrived in the nextflreet, fell, moil unfortunately, into the hands of the patrol, who con¬ ducted him to the lieutenant of police, to whom he related his lamentable tale at large, and, in the courfe of a few days, it was repeated with many additions in all the fafhiooable circles of Paris* CHAPTER.
CHAPTER III. THE winter paiTed away; and Adel¬ heid was, at length, tired of all the pleafures of the capital, longing for the country, and, perhaps, alfo for her native fields. The Baron, S*«*»i, myfelf, and my wife, returned to the country-feat of the former, which my matrimonial happinefs had rendered dear to me. We did, however, not mean to be ruf- ticated there for ever, but had formed the moft charming plan for our common plea¬ fure and amufement. Don Bernhard, Adelheids intimate friend, who was in a clofe correfpondence with her about her new ideas, which yet were in an infantine ftate, had given us a prornife to pay us a vifit İn the middle of the fummer: we agreed, therefore, to poftpone our more ferious philofophical inveftigations to that period ; and, mean time, to enjoy the in¬ nocent pleafures of the country, and of a congenial
congenial and uninterrupted harmony of fouls fuitable toit; to think little of, and never to mention, futurity; and to culti¬ vate, with our neighbours, a cheerful and unreftrained intercourfe. A young man, whofe name was G******, and who had retired with an amiable wife into the country, was our neareft neighbour. He had travelled a great deal, and experienced ftill more. He now confoled himfelf in the circle of his family for all his difap- pointed hopes; was happy in his retire¬ ment from the world; rich, without pof- feífing a large fortune ; and content, though debarred from the common plea¬ furcs of the wealthy. His character was ftamped with a certain cheerful philofo¬ phy, with a certain unconcern for every thing that did not immediately relate to him, which rendered his converfation very attracting and deii rable to us. His lady was of a high rank, and had eloped with him from her native country. He ban. nifiied himfelf from the friends of his youth ;
youth; but his heart, which was not cor¬ rupted, but only had been afflicted by undeferved fufferings, procured him every where new ones. He confoled himfelf for the ftain his honour had received, by the confcioufnefs of having mjured no perfon but himfelf, by the happinefs of his wife, and his own contentment and tranquillity. Poflèflìng a fmall independent fortune, he amufed himfelf with writing. We read the products of his pen jointly; and . I obferved, with pleafure, the cheering influence the fancies from another and a better world had on his fituation, and the difpofition of his heart. His lady had difencumbered herfelf, in the arms of an attentive and tender confort, of all the prejudices of her rank, and was grateful to him for the facrifice of his fame and friends he had been obliged to make to her. She was a woman fit for every fitu¬ ation, and lived amongft us as if fhe al¬ ways had been a member of our fociable circle. Through
Through G*******s affiftance I ob¬ tained a greater knowledge of literature. The prejudices and transformations of it, too, afforded many opportunities of at. taining knowledge of the human heart; for a man of learning blends with his fen¬ timents and foibles all the little follies which adhere to mankind in general* We all inftantly know ourfelves in the diffe¬ rent pictures which are fet before us; and it is rather owing to accident, than to a peculiar exertion of an author, if fome individuals are more painted to the life than the reft. " You are almoft entirely fecluded from the world, dear G******," I faid to him one time : " fame, of courfe, can have no influence on you; why, therefore, do you write, and why fo much?" " I am not fo much fecluded from the world as you think," he replied. " I ftill poflefs friends, who remember me with tendernefs ; who excufe me for endeavour¬ ing to juftify myfelf at leaft in their όρι¬ α nion ;
nion; who take a filent and tender intereft in my domeftic happinefs; who rejoice, for my fake, to fee me gain the regard of other people; and,' perhaps, too, to de- ferve it more and more. I do, indeed, not hear what my redders think of me, yet this does not leíľen my joy at thofe compofitions in which I fucceed." " But give me leave, dear G******, to repeat my firft queftion: Why do you write fo much? Would you not accom- plifh your purpofe better, if you were to polifh more, and to dedicate more time to the elaboration of your compofitions?" " This would be the cafe if I did occu¬ py my pen with ferious inveftigations. However, the fubječts of which my works are compofed, the airy and gay children of a warm and active fancy, to which the language naturally accommodates itfelf, always appear to greater advantage at the firft ftroke, than if produced by a flow and anxious elaboration. I obferve every thing that is going on around me as much as
as poffible ; however, I obferve tny own imagination with more attention; and the principal fauh of which I find myfelf guilty, rather conflits in an irregular ex¬ uberance than in a iterile drynefs." " I find (faid I) that an author is ex¬ pofed to fo many mortifications, that I do not think I fhould be able to prevail upon myfelf to publifh any thing. For inftance, criticifms." u Not to fo many as you, perhaps, think, (he replied,) in a fituation like mine. I hear not much either of praife or cenfure, and derive all poifible advan¬ tage from the little that comes to my knowledge. I frequently imagine that the critics fpeak of fome other përfon when they cenfure me; and being ufed to apply the errors and defects of every one to my own improvement, I coolly felect thofe remarks which I think can be ap¬ plicable to myfelf too. Thus, dear Mar- quis, we advance in perfeäion, and vex our enemies, and thofe that envy us, by Vol. IV, D ' the
the confcioufnefs of having, againft their will, contributed to our perfection." <f I admire the equanimity which you oppofe to public fame, though you know that it is not much in your favour; parti¬ cularly, as your domeftic fituation urges you ftrongly not to let a difcovery be made that would juftify your character at once." " Do you know what confoles me for that trifling misfortune? My happinefs, the felicity of my wife, my independence, and the firm perfuafion, that the truth will unfold itfelf fooner or later without injuring us, if prudence only has prompted us to conceal it for fome time." We lived extremely happy together; and what elfe could.we have wifhed? The Baron, S******i, G******, myfelf, and our two amiable conforts, compofed a more than tolerable fociety. We had no other care but that of enjoying life; and fweetened the unavoidable, but tranfient, difficulties of it as much as poifible.
V******l is a charming fpot, and pof- fefles every thing that can render a rural life agreeable. Adelheid and G******'s lady were very fond of fifhing; V******l and S******i partial to the pleafures of the chafe; I loved agriculture; and G*#****, mean time, compofed fome pretty tale, whofe moral and application reprefented fome fcene of our life and nature in an amu fing and ufe ful manner. Our time being unemployed by ferious occupations, we were at leifureto criticife him: little amicable difputes arofe; he altered, or perfifted, in his opinion; but always confefled to have derived fome be¬ nefit from our criticifms, particularly from thofe of the ladies; for a female ear is the beft judge of the purity and the graces of dielion. Don Bernhard arrived, at length; and the prefence of fuch a man produced fome change in our diverfions, to which the gaieties of awaking nature, our li¬ berty, and the temperature of our blood, D 2 had
had habituated us. I reluctantly facrificed the fimple and unreftrained exchange of our ideas to the more ferious and impor¬ tant train of thoughts which a new com¬ panion produced within me, and I could not but perceive that the reft were in the fame predicament with myfelf. Even Adelheid, who naturally was inclined to melancholy, had, till then, been as thoughtlefs as the reft of our fociable cir¬ cle, and taken a more than paifive fhare in our fportsand diverfions; and if, fome¬ times, our little feafts and amufements really were blended with fome romantic charms, they were certainly the produce of her enthufiaftic turn of mind. Yet it was high time á change fhould take place in our manner of living, left we fhould have awoke of, our own accord, fooner or later, from our fweet dreams, which, with¬ out doubt, would have been attended with more painful .fenfations: it was highly beneficialo us that Don Bernhard roufed us foftly to reflore energy to our minds. r His
His foul, mean time, had conceived great defigns : he felt an internal ¡rrcfifli- с? О ble impulfe to realife his refolutions; and being fenfible that his remorfelefs feverity had, indeed, proved advantageous to him¬ felf, but that he could expect to derive no benefit therefrom as an aflive member of a far-ftretching confederation, he conde¬ scended with more mildnefs to men. He took a friendly filare in our notions, f Ό widely different from his; and while he feemed to embrace them with ardour, found an opportunity of removing them imperceptibly from the theatre of our fouls. One may eafily conceive how frequently the confederation became the theme of our converfations. G****** knew very little of, or feemed to have fcarcely any feeling, for it; and not being deftitute of a fuf¬ ficient filare of perceptivity to form a proper idea of its greatnefs, his filent in¬ difference vexed the proud Don Bernhard more than the moft decifive enmity would D 3 have
have done. Lonn: and never decided dif- ¿г? putes arofe. We could, at lea ft, not de¬ cide, at firft, on which fiele vi Догу had in¬ clined; yet Don Bernhard carried, at laft, the palm; for his caule was juft; he was cooler, and not fo difcordant, as G******, whofe chief argument always was deduced from his own happinefs and patient tran¬ quillity. " Of what ufe would it be," faid he, ** to facrifice the gratifications which are within our reach, to a happinefs that is placed at fuch a diftance, and perhaps not even attainable for us?" « So y ou think, Mr. Ğ******," Don Bernhard replied: " and I confefs it is eafily believed in a narrow domeftic cir¬ cle, to which one has been habituated by degrees. « I think I fee your whole fyftem in thefe words. You imagine that I have been obliged to habituate myfelf firft to that domeftic circle, which premifes a different difpofition: I proteft, however, that
that nothing in the world ever has been lefs difficult to me than that ; that I looked upon all the d ifa iters of my life only as fo many rocks, through which one muft ftcer to a peaceful port ; and that I have left nothing of that elevation of foul which you may have experienced. Thence, I conclude, that, if you will allow me to poíľefs fome ability and feeling, men may have fimiiar talents, and yet a different calling and compafs of activity." " Then you fuppofe you are called to adorn a fingle apartment in the great edi¬ fice of the world, and I to make fome alterations in theftručture of the whole/ " Very right. Yet I do not think that I am bound to confine myfelf abfolutely to my apartment when I have put it pro¬ perly in order/' " By that you fee what a difference exifts between you and myfelf. You pof. fefs talents for particulars, and I believe to poflefs fome for generals; yeti think it is evident which of the two difpofitions is D 4 more
friore important to the world, and which of thefe internal impulfes excites activity moft powerfully." " With regard to the htter^ the fpirit for generals is undoubtedly the moít forci¬ ble incentive to activity ; and as for the former, it is equally evident that talents which contine themfelves to particulars are moít important to mankind. Nothing is plainer than that a man who is born for great purpofes, who is hurried on by an irrefiftible internal impulfe, and feels him- ülf endowed with extraordinary faculties, boldly overleaps the limits which are fet to the reft of his brethren; yet I alfo am firmly convinced, that a complete and con¬ venient edifice would be raifed, if every individual would exert himfelf to the ut- moft of his abilities in the ftation allotted to him by the great Difpofer of the world." " This is perfectly true,- and you have, againft your own will, proved my fyftcm more ftrongly than I, perhaps, ihould have
have been able to do* The world would be perfect,, if every one did occupy his proper flation; but it is a difficult matter for many to know which place is moft pro¬ per for them ; and let me tell you, we be¬ lieve it to be our calling to remove that obftacie. 1 ' " And with what right?" α With more right than the profoundeft moralift defines the duties of mankind, and enforces the obfervation of the fame : for, do we afpire to any reward; do we claim any compenfation/or our trouble? Is it not a fundamental principle of oujf fociety, that titles, rank, and fplendour, are nothing but fools jackets ; and that it is the firft ftep leading to perfection, and real adivity, to wander through the world unknown, and fubječt to few wants ? And do we not apply that voluntary indépen¬ dance to ftudy men whom we defign to lead towards the gaol of happineis, even againft their own will? A long and unin¬ terrupted active experience ; a compafs oí D 5 activity,,
activity, which one can change without difficulty in every moment of life; a far« ftretching and noble family, upon which one reclines; a certain futurity, which the firmnefs of our difpofitions at leaft renders pretty independent on fate ; all this muft roufe even the moft phlegmatic fpirit to an indefatigable activity. And, finally, my dear G******, you will confefs that, to have built a houfe upon a high mountain, and above the clouds, is materially differ¬ ent from having erected one in a valley, where every loofe rock expofes us to the danger of being buried under its weight.** CHAPTER IV. TOWARDS the autumn Don Bern* hard propofed to return to Spain. g******i føj taken an amicable intereft in our union, while he was fpared the trou¬ ble of taking an active part in it ; but now he pleaded numberlefs excufes for ftaying with the old Baron at V******l. Count S ******
S***»^ too, who was invited to accom¬ pany us on our journey to Spain, ftarted many objections; and Don Bernhard, myfelf, and Adelheid, departed without them. We arrived at Alcantara, at the houfe of my mother, the beft and tendereft of parents. I had informed her previoufly of the death of her brother, and we now mingled our tears. Her bofom was ani¬ mated with fentiments, the force of which I fcarcely deferved. It is fo fweet to love a mother, and to be beloved by her ! Adel¬ heid foon became her favourite. Her mild fcrioufnefs, her melancholy fenfi¬ bility, open to the fufferings of her fellow creatures, and ever active to alleviate the mifery of the diftreffcd, and her attach¬ ment to every thing that belonged to me, rendered her dearer to my heart everyday. I certainly ihould have relinquifhed the confederation with ail its great profpects, if Adelheid had not been capable of tak¬ ing an equal fhare in it with myfcif:. but D 6 Don
Don Bernhard pacified us on that head, and feemed to have fufficient authority for doing it. He WaSi vei 7 adive for the con¬ federation, but carefully concealed his proceedings from us. With how much pleafure did I now in¬ troduce my dear wife to the theatre of all my former fufferings and amufements! The voracious tooth of time had, how¬ ever, made great havock at my caftle dur¬ ing my fhort abfence. Every thing was fuffered to decay after the death of Don Antonio, the friend of my juvenile days* The caflle was in a ruinous ftate; and its dilapidated walls now let me perceive fe¬ cret communications, of which Alfonfo could avail himfelf with fafety in executing his plans. The whole fabric of my myf¬ terious adventures now was exhibited to my view in a palpable iketch. Don Pe¬ dro's caftle had met the fame fate after his difappearance; and I found no where a monument of my happinefs, not a veftige of my tears was lefti all the favourite fpots,
fpots, where I ufed to give audience to anxious and ferene meditations, had loft their attractive charms, and even the ri¬ vulet was dried up. This fcene of general deítručtion feemed to have been defigned to prepare me for the fucceeding events. I relapfed into my former melancholy. Adelheid having a natural propenfity the fame way, fympathifed with my ideas and feelings ι yet our reveries opened our mind to the moft elevated hopes, notwithftand- ing the melancholy gloom that hung upon them. Don Bernhard returned, at length, from a fecret expedition, and our difcourfes foon turned upon a fingle objects and it dawned gradually in our fouls. After Don Bernhard had left us repeatedly on fecret bufinefs, he returned, one morning, from one of thefe excurfions, more cheerful and ferene than he was ufed to be. if To-mor¬ row night, Don Carlos !" he faid fmiling: u To-morrow night, Adelheid !" We had left every thing to him, and inftantly comprehended
comprehended the meaning of his words. My dear wife was violently affected by this intelligence ; I felt all her limbs quiver in my embraces: foft blufiies overfpread her charming face ; her fparkling eyes were animated with the fmiling dawn of new hopes. We mounted our horfes the fub¬ fequent day with the fetting in of night; and the wild, myftic foreft, with its awful terrors, received us. I conducted Adel¬ heid to James's cottage; and all the for¬ mer feenes crowded again upon my ima¬ gination, yet without creating the leaft fenfation of fear. Dçn Bernhard made us proceed by an eafier path than that which the old man had led me. The fetting fun concealed his blufhing orb behind the lofty trees, but left a foft twilight behind, which, be¬ ing blended with the nodding ihades be¬ tween the moffy rocks, the ancient oaks, the colonades of tapering fir trees, and the ruins of decayed buildings, reflected^ an unfpeakable grandeur upon all the fur- rounding
rounding objects, and elated our fouls, vvhich expanded themfelves more and more with the gradual encreafe of the awful íhades of night. Adelheid was of a manly turn of mind, but had not yet divefted herfelf of all womanhood in fuch a degree as to be able to meet with tranquillity a moment, the prcfeniion of which always had thrilled her frame with a chilling tremour. We endeavoured, indeed, to infpire her with courage: however, her perturbated heart made her change coioyr more than ten. times in a minute ; me fcarcely could keep the faddle, and the reins vifibly trembled in her hand. Night having thrown, at length, her my flic veil over the face of the earth, we alighted from our horfes, and tied them to a tree ; I took Adelheides hand under my arm, and we followed Don Bernhard, who turned into a narrow foot-path. Profound filence reigned all around; fcarcely a breath of air was ftirring, and the palpi« 4 tations
tations of ourhearts were diftindtly heard. A low humming noife vibrated in our ears from a diftance like confufed whifpers, and lights flopped through the bufhes. The fenfations I had formerly experienced on this awful fpot crowded on my memory. The fcene changed, and my ideas imper¬ ceptibly turned into the recollection of Count S******'s hiftory. I beheld again the bufhes he had defcribed to me in fuch a picturefque manner. My imagination led me through the various myftic feenes he had experienced, and, at length, into the bower where Francifca's arms received him. Adelheid felt my heart beat violently under her hand, whifpering, in a tender accent, " What is the matter with you, dear Carlos?" I pacified her anxiety: however, Francifca's fate ruihed irrefifti- Ыу опту imagination; and, alas! I felt that the burning kifs fhe had preifed on the Counťs glowing cheeks was intended for me* A fudden
Ã fudden glare of blazing flames now illuminated the foreft. We directed our looks to the alley which was before us, and beheld a numerous proceffion moving towards us in awful pomp. A low, ma*- jeflic fong,, interrupted, by intervals, the folemn filence in which they advanced. A train of priefts and prieftefies unfolded themfelves gradually from the confufed throng. They were clad in long white robes; their hair, which was decorated with flowers, floated down their fhoulders in artlefs ringlets. I beheld again moft of thofe apoftolic faces at which I had gaxed with trembling awe on my firft reception. They faluted me with ferene heavenly fmiles on paffingby with their torches. Ï beheld my brethren celebrating my return with rapture. Amongft the priefteffes, who carried covered bafkets, I inftantly defcried my dear Rofalia. She glanced at me with foft blufhes, and the tears ftarted from her beautiful eyes. Her looks then turned with
with the fmile of heavenly reügmüon on Adelheid, whofqueezed my hand tenderly, whifpering in my ear, " Is this Rofalia?" Don Bernhard joined the train at laft, We followed his example, and foon ap¬ proached the avenues of the caftle. We defcended the long vaulted paffage, and, while I exhorted my trembling wife, en¬ tered the blazing hall. The members feated themfelves on the exalted chairs; the reverend old man em¬ braced me, and all my brethren advanced to give me the fraternal kifs. The vow was now taken from Don Bernhard and Adelheid, and blood ftreamed mingled with tears. Awful, immortal words were uttered; and, on raifing our looks from the ground, a curtain was drawn. Un¬ fpeakable, myftic rites commenced; celef¬ tial founds ftruck our ears with rapture; heavenly vifions aftoniihed our gazing eyes; all prefenfions were accornplifh¬ ed, and the boldeft hopes filenced by rea¬ lity.------------· CHAPTER
CHAPTER, V. 1MUST once more take up the pen, which I imagined to have laid down for ever on the clofe of the laft feet ion of my memoirs. All my misfortunes feemed to have happily terminated at that period, being bleffed with the poffeffion of a faith¬ ful and dear wife, an attentive confidant, who was animated by the fame fpirit with myfelf, encircled by a large number of tender friends, arrived at the pure fource of the molt exalted ideas, and at the gaol of my fondeft wifhcs. My fate feemed to be fettled for ever, and unadulterated fe¬ licity appeared to have firmly rooted in my mind for the firft time. But, alas! while I was preparing myfelf to enjoy the bleifings of life in peaceful ferenity, trea¬ cherous time fecretly engendered new events. The life of fome people js never bleffed with a long point of reft; and the few hours of enjoyment and ferenity which now
now and then come to the relief of their worn-ouťfpirit, feem to be defigned mere¬ ly to revigorate them as much as is re¬ quired, if they iliall not fink entirely un¬ der the load of their adverfe fate, An invifible hand adminifters a ftrensrtheninff cordial tothem to revive theirdefpond ing fpirit againft the eruption of new tern— pefts. My adventures are of that complexion. The power of the ftorms, which hunted me through the variegated but gloomy feenes of my eventful life, feemed fre¬ quently to be exhaufted: however, the roaring thunder always burft again over my head, when I fcarcely had proceeded a few fteps on a flowery ground, exhiku · rated by the fmiles of a ferene iky. I fre¬ quently imagined my firength was com- pletely exhaufted; but an unexpected event always enabled me to difcover new refources hitherto unknown to me. I was oftentimes in the fituation of a weary, ex¬ haufted wanderer, who, furrounded by midnight
Tnidnight darknefs, enfeebled by hunger and fatigue, and drenched by pouring tempefls, flings himfelf down on the flip- peiy ground in an agony of defpair, and fuddenly difcovers, by the light glare of a vivid flafh of cracking lightening, a hof* pitable cottage clofe'by his fide. Thus misfortunes are always good for fomething: they teach us to know ourfelves, and that every thing changes, as well as that this mutability is of great benefit to ourfelves. One fays very little if one compares human life with a romance-, it is much more than a fairy tale } or a fummer-midnigbťs - dream . CHAPTER VÎ. E fpent the whole night in'the per¬ formance of rites, whofe fimplb city and harmony rendered them very fit to imprefs upon the affected heart thofe things whofe fymbols they were. We considered ourfelves as one family, and the whole
W
whole world as our habitation. Being initiated in the plans, and the moft fecret connections, of the fociety, furveying all its collateral branches, and the whole ex¬ tent of its influence, knowing how to direct and to preferve the latter, and being in¬ formed of its internal ftrength, it was but natural we ihould be tranfported by the confcioufnefs of our importance, and that all former ideas of joy and happinefs were obliterated by the impreffions our minds received from the ecftafies of that night. I do not know how it came that I took a cooler and more inconfiderate ihare in the general feftivity than the reft. The firft powerful impreifion I received from the myftic pomp died foon away, my fenfes grew more fober, and I plainly perceived that feveral rites were inadequate to the purpofe for which they were intended. My feelings being not quite the fame with thofe of the reft, I was, as it were, al¬ ready excluded from their circle, reflected ferioufly upon the relaxation of my ima¬ gination ;
gination; and, while I watched the other members with attention, to find whether none of my brethren was of my opinion, my coldnefs encreafed gradually. Having never been able to difguife my real fenti- ments fora long time; my inattention and abfence of mind was noticed, and this naturally encreafed it. A faint fenfarion of jealoufy itole, for the firft time, upon my heart: I obferved that Adelheids fenfes were intoxicated with cefi arie rapture; and faw her mingle with the reft, elated with the higheft en- thufiafm. Her ardentand ea^er fervour diftinguifhed her in a moft ftriking man¬ ner from the other females ; and fhe even appeared to me to take more notice of her new brethren than of myfelf, and to feek Don Bernhard's hand and looks in an un¬ common and ftriking manner. The re- colleeTdon of former intimacies and fami¬ liarities I had obferved, but not much re¬ garded, forced itfelf, at the fame time, again upon my mind, I frequently had heard
heard her launch out into the warmeft ,praifesand admiration of his underftand¬ ing, which never appeared weaker and more diminutive to me than in that mo- mart. If, therefore, I would not believe that a fecret fympathy exifted between them, Ï could not but fufpect Don Bern¬ hard's myfterious fneaking officioufnefs to¬ wards her. The whole throng of thefe ideas, un¬ folding themfelves with fo much the more -violence and rapidity, the longer they had, perhaps, fermented in my foul unknown to me» blunted all my fenfes, enfeebled my attention, and gave to the awfulleft folemnity the appearance of a miferablc farce. Thefe ideas received an additional force by Rofalia's patient, modeft, and affecting deportment. Her character feemed to have been totally divefted ofthat incredible firmnefs and energy with which fhe feafbned her tendernefs for me on that blifsful morning, and which afterwards occafioned Francifca's horrid cataftrophe. The
The progrefs of time feemed to have weaned her from love, and inftructed her mind in the patient humility of a faint. Her fpeaking looks were directed at me with expreffions of a filent grief, yet I could not difcern whether I or her¬ felf was its object. Alas! I recollected but too well that blifsful time, that day w r hich Rofalia made fleet away like a fingle hour, all her heavenly charms, and the ecftatic rapture of my fenfes. My foul was involuntarily abforpt in that charming recollection. Senfations which admit of no defcription pervaded my whole frame: I felt that my face was cold, and all my blood rufhing towards the heart; a tear of fenfibility ftarted from my eye; and turning round, I beheld the aftoniihed looks of the aflem¬ bly directed at me. Rofaiia's beautiful face was covered with blufiies; I loft the ufe of my fenfes, and was ready to drop from my feat. Vol. IV, E Some
Some drops of water, which were fprinkled in my face, reftorcd me to recollection, and I beheld all my bre¬ thren anxioufly occupied with my per¬ fon. Rofalia leaned mechanically over my head. I fearched for Adelheid, and beheld her leaning upon Don Bern- hard, and abforpt in deep converfation. She even had not perceived that I was not well; and obferving it, at length, flie gave me a look which almoit petrified me. Such a want of tendernefs and attention was certainly unpardonable: my pride awoke ¿ I refolved to be revenged for her negligence. A few moments of reflection reftored meto the full ufe of my faculties, and I beheld the whole extent of my mi¬ fery. "This is the fruit of the influence of fuch focieties/' thought I: "this is that very Adelheid who doated upon me before fhe had feen me. Who would have thought that flie could have changed thus?" The my flic rites were, at length, finiihed with lefs devotion and awe than they
they had excited at firft. I. had inter¬ rupted their courfe; and as, perhaps, no one, but Rofalia, guefled the real ground of the violent emotions which agitated me, the whole aflembly were alarmed at the confequences which might follow. My uneafmefs was raifed to the higheft degree by Adelheids vifible unconcern. She diflembled, perhaps, defignedly, not to have perceived any thing, whifpering, more than ufual, to Don Bernhard; at¬ tempting to cure me, thereby, of every fenfation of jealoufy, and preparing a fevere curtain lecture againft our return to my caftle. The poor woman was, however, much miftaken; for fhe fooner could have tamed a furious lion than appeafed my boiling anger. Don Bernhard, who had ftudied my character better than her, feemed to have a fecret prefenfion of it. I am certain they confulted what was to be done: he appeared to diffuade her from her refolution; however, flie would not E 2 liften
4iften to his advice. We took leave, ^mounted our horfes, and returned home in profound filence; neither of us utter¬ ing a fingle word. My heart was agitated with certain melancholy fenfations, for which I know no name; and Count §*#***# occupied my mind more than •ever. The tendereft friendihip had united υ s for many years. It was very well known to the confederates that, while I ihould continue to love him, no other fenti ment would be able to get the fway over my mind. Was it honourable to fe- parate us in fuch a manner? "Alas!" thought I, " love is nothing in compari- fon with the intimacy of two congenial friends. The years of our union glided away like minutes. Not one gloomy hour difturbed our life, before the fatal influence of that fociety began to exercife its baneful fway over me. Our friendihip was fo cordial, fo difinterefled, and af¬ forded us fo many hours of heavenly blifs! May the bleifing of God attend my dear
dear Count, and reward his unfpeakable - love for an ungrateful wretch!" Thefe fent i m ents almoft overpowered me, and loud fobs interrupted the pro¬ found filence which prevailed in our fo¬ ciety. I clearly faw Don Bernhard give a hint to Adelheid, who ftopped her horfe, and then turned him towards me; yet flie could not directly find words, and re¬ lapfed into her former reverie. "What does that change mean, Car¬ los?" fhe began, at length. tc I know of none, Madam," I replied, in a cold and cutting accent, which came naturally from my heart. That woman was then an entire ftranger to me, and methought · I never had known her. My refolution was taken, and I did not care for the reft. The tone in which I fpoke to her had the defired effect. It was the firft time flie ever had heard fuch a difa- greeable found from my lips. She \\as confounded, and feemed to look for advice in Don Bernhardt geftures. But, probably, the good man had none ttHi»*™,........ - ........ E ■» _______________ far
for her; and ihe attempted to difguife her perplexity by boldnefs, like people that have no good confcience. "lam aftoniihed, Don Carlos, to hear you anfwer in that unkind accent; I never have heard you fpeak to me in fuch a ftrain. What ails you? what is the matter?" tf Nothing, Madam! as'I already have had the honour to tell you." She relented when {he perceived the agitation of my mind, and refumed, in a milder accent, Cf What ails my dear Carlos? Docs he know his Adelheid no more?'* However, fhe uttered thefe words in fuch an artificial, trembling accent, that they only ferved to increafe my contempt of her. The heart cannot be deceived when the enchantment that has fettered the fenfes is removed. I beheld that comedy with the eyes of an indifferent fpectator, fhook the hand fhe offered me with cold civility*
civility, and then dropt it again, though flie endeavoured to hold me by one finger. This polite and firm coldnefs, which was not blended with the leaft bitternefs, offended her in the higheft degree. She fet fpurs to her horfe in the firft ebulli¬ tion of her anger; but inftantly ftopped him again. The animal raifed himfelf upon his hind legs, while the body reared up in the air; flie ftaggered, and I fcarcely had time to alight, and to receive her in my arms. The horfe, in the mean time, ran away in full fpeed, and Don Bernhard went after it, while I was occupied with my lady, who was ready to faint. Having reftored her to the ufe of her fenfes by the application of a fmelling bottle, I mounted her upon my horfe, and led it by the bridle. " You will excufe me, Madam, for taking the bridle in my hand, for a fhort time ; but I think you don't ride fo well to day as you are ufed to do." E 4 She
She returned no anfwer to this remarks which flung her to the heart ; yet I could plainly fee that her bofom almoft burft with boiling anger. We exchanged not a word more on cur way to the caftle: I walked flowly by the fide of the horfe, without letting the bridle loofe· and al¬ though 1 perceived, unobferved by her, that íhe furveyed mefideways with feruti- nizing looks, yet I did not once lift my eyes up to her. We arrived, at length, at the caftle; and having affiited her to difmount, handed her up flairs. When we came to her apartment, I openecfthe door, and making a low bow, faid, " I dare fay you will lay down a little, though the morning is already far advanced;" and left her without flaying for the anfwer ihe was going to return. She fhut the door of the anti-chamber foftly, but that of her own apartment with uncommon violence. I went into the garden to let my paffion cool, and foon after heard Don Bernhard return with
with the ftrayed horfe. He enquired,. with evident concern, after the Marchio¬ nefs: however, íhe fent word fhe could not fee him, upon which he left the caflle without inquiring after me. CHAPTER VIL I WAS at a lofs how I ihould treat Adel¬ heid properly. It is of the greateft importance to behave, in fuch a cafe, with the utmoft delicacy and circurafpec- tion, as an unjuft and fooliih world is but too apt to make the honour of a hufband dependent on the conduct of his wife. My fufpicion being not yet fufficiently confirmed, I refolved to inform the Mar¬ chionefs, by way of letter, of my will, to poftpone more rigorous meafures till I ihould be able to collect more convincing facts, and to continue to live with her on a polite footing, but to refrain from every familiarity, which only would ferve to render her more fecure. I determined, at E 5 the
the fame time, to treat Don Bernhard as ufual; to watch, however, his conduct, and to keep my jealoufy in proper bounds* This plan was, indeed, prudent enough, but not adapted to Adelheids violent temper, which could not brook a ftate of dubious fufpenfe, and urged her to infift upon an explanation. It was, however, certain that I was in danger to be thrown off my guard on fuch an occafion. She really demanded fuch an explanation with a zeal that could not have been more ardent if the happinefs of her whole life had depended upon it. I am certain the poor woman had, at that time, not yet anatomized her own fentiments ; and being ftrongly perfuaded not to have done wrong, boaited upon her innocence, and taxed me with injuftice. I apprehended, at firft, Rofalia*s unguarded looks had excited her refentment, and prompted her to fhew more attention to Don Bernhard than ufual; however, her refufing to fee him was a certain proof that flie mifun- derftood,
derftood, and wanted to perfuade me that he was nothing to her. I went, at the ufual hour, into the dining room. The Marchionefs made me wait a long time for her; and having fent the fervant twice to inform her that the dinner was on the table, I fat down in pretty good fpirits, and with an excellent appetite. I was fo much altered, that I fcarcely knew myfelf again. A twelve¬ month before I ihould have been diC- traced under fuch circumftances, and in¬ capable to have eat a morfei : but on that day I had a better appetite than ever. I did not think a fyll able of Adelheid; the events of the preceding night appeared to me like a dream: and mv whole foul was with Count S**ľ****, w-hofe image pre fented i t fe If fo lively to my imagina¬ tion, that no other thought could obtrude upon my mind. The firft coiirfe being finiihed, Adel¬ heids valet came to inform me that ihe could not come to dinner, and begged tc* E 6 be
be cxcufcd. I ordered him to tell the cook to lay the cloth in her apartment, when flie tmexpeâediy entered into the dining room, having either repented the meflage fhe had fent røe, or followed the fervant to hear my anfwer. I returned her filent falutation, without fuffering myfelf to be interrupted in my occupa¬ tion. She unfolded her napkin, and feemed to expect, for fome time, that I fhonld help her: I was, however, too much occupied with myfelf, than that I could havetiad the leaft idea of anfwering her expectation, fcarcely taking the trou¬ ble to glance now and then negligently at her. Her looks were caft down, and her countenance was pale and difordered; her hair, which was curled in natural ringlets, depended upon her heaving bofom. I remarked by myfcif that fhe looked much better than when dreffed for a ball. Yet my ideas returned foon again to my dear Count, to our cordial intimacy, our common adventures, the duration of our union,
onion, and die worthier wretches who in¬ terrupted it. She began, at length, after a long paufe, during which fhe fcarcely had breathed : ■" I fee you have a very good appetite, Don Carlos!" ■« Nothing, my dear, is more natural/' Having given a hint to the fervant to re¬ tire, I continued, " you know I have not flept a moment laft night, and this morn¬ ing I have run about in the garden and the park to difpel my drowfinefs a little; and exercife, you know, fharpens the ap¬ petite. But fhall I help you to this or to that d i ih? You feem to have not much appetite, and your face is extremely pale. I hope laft night has not hurt you?* 1 « Very much, as it feems, Don Carlos." " Is it poifible? yet this is the courfe of this world. No pleafure is unmixed with fome bitternefs. (The Marchionefs did not reply a fyllable, ftruck with aftonifh« ment at my merry humour and the volu¬ bility
bility of my tongue.) In fhort, the moft amazing and unexpected changes happen in this life. Laft night no perfon could be happier, more attentive, cheerful, and communicative, than that very Marchio¬ nefs who now is fitting before me, mute, mufing, pale, and without the leaft appe¬ tite. Who would think, my Lady, that you are a native of France?" She held her napkin before her face, probably, to conceal the tear that ftarted from her eye. Her countenance was over¬ fpread with a glowing rednefs, and her eyes fparkied with anger when fhe re¬ moved her hand. I pretended to be ftruck with aftoniihment, exclaiming, "Gracious Heaven! you are in a high fever, Ma¬ dam ! Shall I give you a glafs of water?" So faying, I pufhed my chair back, and ftarted up. " Don't trouble yourfelf, rny Lord," fhe replied mildly. However, ihe could not difguife her rage, gnafhing with her teeth, and adding, in a trembling accent, « And,
"And, believe me, you would be the laft perfon of whom I would accept a fervice." " Then I fhall ring for a fervant.'* I rung the bell. " James, you will find a glafs with a red powder upon my writing defk; make hafte, and fetch it; your Lady is not well." " I don't want it, Marquis!" The fer¬ vant having withdrawn, fhe added, with a killing look, " It is, perhaps, poifon, my Lord ?" I was going to give vent to my rage, but fortunately recollected the part I was acting. " No, İt is the red powder you bought for me at Paris. Who could have thought that you would want it firit? Poifon ľ' I added; after fome reflection, " A man of underftanding could draw a number of fine conclufions from that queftion. For inftance, that you have adopted very ftrange principles, and are totally infected by the fpirit of a certain fociety." "Is
** Is this the only caufe of your difplea* fure? >J £he faid, with vifible fatisfaetion, deceived by the unexpected turn of my difcaurfe, "Is that all? And who made me firft acquainted with that fpirit?" " Did I do it? Look at thefe glafs panes, on which the name of Elmirn¡ a facred name, is inferibed. This is a fra* gik glafs, and has ftood ftorms and tem¬ pers ; 4*nd my heart is a marble, from which timecan obliterate nothing." She comprehended me entirely, and ihuddered; I do not know why. She either envied Elmira, or apprehended to meet with a fate fimiiar to her's. The firft paffion that fteals upon the heart is always the moft powerful, and it might, perhaps, have hurt her that I recollect* ed it. ** You are right,** fhe replied: f€ it is very difficult to obliterate old and power¬ ful impreffions." It appeared to me that fhe wanted to lead me, by this obfervation, impercepti- 5 Ъ] У
bïy from the chief point; I, therefore, interrupted her: "I did not make that remark with regard to you, but to that fo¬ ciety, with which you feem to be entirely captivated. You tax me with having pre-occupied you in favour of it, and no¬ thing is more untrue. I was entirely tired of it before our marriage. It tore me out of the arms of my belt friends, becaufe they did not fuit the plans of the confederates: thofe infernal fiends con¬ nected me with people whom 1 did not love, perhaps with no other view than to carry fome of their fecret purpofes." " Do you fpeak of me, Marquis?'* " I fpeak of no particular perfon ; my remark is entirely general; however, I was born free, Madam j and it is infup- portable to be governed by a mafter whom we have not chofen ourfclves.'* " Who has forced that mafter upon you?" " Can you ferioufly afk that queftion? Firft of all my unfortunate fate, from which
which I, at laft, fucceeded to difengage myfelf, after it had robbed me of every thing dear to me; and then you, Ma¬ dam." "I! Marquis?'* fhe replied, more joy¬ fully than fhe, perhaps, ought to have done. I faw but too well how much it was her intereft to miflead me from the point in queftion. I was, however, lefs ductile than ihe had expected. " Undoubtedly, you !" I refumed with forne heat. t( Recollect only your new diicoveries ; your fecret converfations with your friend Don Bernhard, who, fome- times, was locked up with you for hours ; and your warm difputes with me, which were the refult of the ideas he initilled into your mind. This will always be the con- fequence, if a married woman prefumes to reform the world. She cannot avoid getting into numberlefs dangerous con¬ nexions ; and our worthy friend G****** juftly obferves, that real domeftic happi- пей entirely depends upon the tender and undivided
undivided love of a wife that is attentive to her duties, and fets no value on other goods, that can contribute nothing to the improvement of the former/' Adelheid fhed a torrent of tears during that lecture, to which fhe wantonly had provoked me. Her fobs and tears made, however, very little impreffion upon me; my heart was obdurated, and I had begun to perfuade myfelf firmly, that much art w-as concealed under her pretended inno¬ cence and candour. ** Yet,** I replied, with fome acrimony^ «* thefe are only general remarks^ which have no relation to you.** <f Is this the confequence of my tender love for you, Don Carlos?** flie replied, wiping the tears from her face. "One ought to expect fuch abufes, if one is fo inconfiderate as to lay one's heart too much open to you proud lords of the creation.* * This awkward fhift of eluding me vexed me uncommonly ; and I exclaimed, with
with rifing indignation, c< What name do you give to thofe little hints which I have taken the liberty to fuggeft as a friend? Abufes, Madam? I think the Marchionefs of G****** needs to fear none, particu¬ larly from her hufband. Your expreffions are very fevere. You will excufe the li¬ berty I prefume to take. No one will be better able to judge of the motives of your behaviour than yourfelf. I always have repofed an implicit confidence in your underflanding, and I hope you will never forget that your own honour depends en¬ tirely upon the prefervation of mine." "May I make bold to alk you, my Lord, what part of my conduci: is fo of- fenfive to you, that you cannot fee the motives of it? I hope you are not jealous of Don Bernhard?" This queftion was attended with a laugh, which rendered her completely defpicable in my eyes ; and I replied very ferioufly, " Madam, you have juft now given me an inftance of the principles of your nation ; but I muft tell you
you that in this point, lama true Briton. If you were only my miftrefs, 1 fhould demand nothing elfe of you than not to endanger my health ; but having honoured you with the rank of a wedded confort, I infift that you betray the weakneffes of your heart to no perfon but myfelf" In lieu of an anfwer fhe gave me а 1оок л which, at any other time, would have made forne impreifion on me; but the times were paft in which beauty could di¬ vert me from the execution of a plan. She now abandoned herfelf to a profound reverie; being, perhaps, aftoniihed at the difcovery of a new fide of my character. I did not ftay for the deffert, but made a low bow and retired. I imagined that I could let the whole affair reft here. " It is impoflible (thought ï by myfelf) that Adelheid fhould have been fo entirely debafed in fuch a fhort time, A prudent woman is not likely to rifk much if ihe knows that her fteps are clofely watched· The moft vioknt paffion only
only can urge her, under fuch circum¬ ftances, to go great lengths; and it is not probable that it fiiould have rooted fo firmly in Adelheid's heart. Too much love on my part has, perhaps, rendered me indifferent to her; and Don Bernhard may have feduced her from her duty by too much art and flattery. The hint I have fuggeited to her will aifift her to fee the impropriety of her conduct, and I fliall be able to reftore harmony between us without expofing her to the world." Thus I endeavoured to difpel every ap- prehenfion from my boding mind; but I was miftaken; and, in the courfe of a few minutes, had an opportunity of perceiv¬ ing my error. I was fcarcely arrived at the door of my apartment, when I heard the Marchionefs call to the fervant in a moft vehement accent, that ihe ihould not be at home whenever Don Bernhard fiiould inquire after her. This order, which befpoke but too plainly the real ftate of her heart, afflicted 4 me
me more than words can exprefs; and I was on the point of running down ftairs, and recalling it; but coniidering that this would only ferve to encreafe the painful confequences of her imprudence, and ex¬ pofe us to the fervants, I defifted from my intention. The more I reflected upon this circum¬ ftance, the more dreadful did its fecret import appear to me. Adelheid's temper was extremely violent; I had offended her; nothing was more certain than that fome fecret underftanding exifted between her and Don Bernhard ; I frequently had obferved clandeftine hints, and almoft imperceptible affignations ; though I had reafon to conclude, from their imprudence, that my honour had not yet been injured. 1 could, therefore, not fuppofe that Adel¬ heid would facrifice her friend to a mere fufpicion on my part, and that flie muft know fonie expedient to make him amends for that public denial of admiifion. The horror which that clandeftine correfpon¬ dence
dence caufed me can be better felt than defcribed, for I was' but too fenfible that this would totally ruin my domeftic peace, and encourage Adelheiďs fecret averfion from me, which was but too evident. Not having deferved the latter, I could not but afcribe it to Don Bernhard's arti¬ fices and cunning; and it would have dif¬ tračted me, if I had not poffeffed fo much pride, and fuffered a confiderable abate¬ ment in my love for the Marchionefs, fince the laft fatal night- This, however, enabled me to think with more coolnefs of the propereft meafures for obviating the injury my honour was threatened with. I determined to fift Adelheid more clofely, in order to fix on the beft plan of recalling her to her duty, and made re¬ peated attempts to fee her: however, ihe always pretended to be bufy, and begged to be excufed, which made me conclude that ihe was writing. Don Bernhard came to the caftle againft evening. I obferved that he was received by one of Adelheid's waiting
waiting women, who, for fome time, had been very fufpicious to me. She went with him into her own apartment, wRence I juftly concluded that flie either informed him of my difference with my wife, or wanted to give him a letter· Having ftaid fome time with her, he mounted his horfe, and rode away, abforpt in profound thought. This incident fixed my refolu¬ tion either to carry Adelheid back to France, or to confine her in a cloifter. Thinking, however, that it would be proper to confult my mother previoufly, I ordered my valet to get my horfes ready the following day againft noon, informing him that I intended to make a fhort excur¬ fion to Alcantara to fee my mother. My chief motive for doing this was to let the Marchionefs know it in time, and thus to enable her to prevent the execution of my defign if flie fhould fufpect my in¬ tention. However neceflary fuch a ftep appeared to me, yet I did it reluctantly, Vox. IV. F on
on account of feveral circumftances, and I fincerely wifhed to avoid it. At night I ordered the cloth to be laid in my bed-chamber. Adelheid generally ufed to come to me ; but that time fhe fent me an invitation to fup with her in her own apartment, which I declined. Alas ! how weak is the human heart ! This little incident rendered me unable to get only a wink of fleep all the night long, in fpite of my wearinefs. I was repeatedly tempted to get up, and to pay hera vifit; only the uncertainty how ihe would receive me kept me back. I dreffed myfelf; but laid down again, groaning, complaining of her want of love for me, and curving my fate, Don Bernhard, and myfelf. The night elapfed amidft numberlefs follies; and I do not know what would have been the confequence, if the rifing light of the fun had not reftored me to a proper ufe of my underftanding, But, fortunately, the inebriation of my reafon was difpelled by the enc rearing fplendour of the morning. I fettled
I fettled my little affairs with the greateft tranquillity, in order to lofe no time after my mother fhould have given her opinion, and gave all neceffary inftrue^ions to my confidential fervant to keep a watchful eye over the Marchionefs during my abfcnce, and at laft fent up a good morning to Adelheid, Jetting her know that I was going to Alcantara for a fhort time. Hav¬ ing fettled every thing, I flung a fmall gun over my fhoulders, which I always ufed to do on my excurfions, mounted my horfe, and rode away· While I was going through the caftle gate, I turned once more round. The Marchionefs ftood upon the balcony, and looked after me: her countenance was overfpread with the rofy hue of health, and her eyes fparkied wich pleafure. She was dreffed in a loofe gown, and wore a hat exactly of the fame fhape and colour with that in which 1 faw her the firit time in her father's park. This obfervation afflicted me fevcrely. I waved my hand- F 2 kerchicÇ
kerchief, which I carried in my hand; ihe returned my farewel falutation, but went into her apartment before I had pafled the gate. This new mark of indifference and dif- refpect tempted me ftrongly to return in¬ ftantly, and, inftead of going to Alcan¬ tara, to order the carriages to be got rea¬ dy, and to fct off with her for France that very day. Finding, however, on maturer confideration, that it was my duty to fee my mother firft, «t all events, I dropt that <dcfign; and no fooner was in the open fields, than I forgot all the injury I had received. CHAPTER VIII. HEN I drew nearer towards the famous foreft which was the thea¬ tre of my moft remarkable adventures, the image of Rofalia itole fuddenly upon my heart. Her foft looks had made a deep impreffion upon my mindj I now reflected
w
reflected upon them, and on her ardent love for me, which made me think that it would be very unkind to quit her, per¬ haps for ever, without taking leave. My hand directed the horfe mechanically to¬ wards the caftle in the foreft; I was on the road which led thither without intending it, and arrived at James*s cottage before I was aware of it. I had fent my fervant before me, and ordered him to await my arrival in a public houfe on the road to Alcantara: I, therefore, tied my horfe to a poft in the cottage, and went in feareh of Rofalia. I was foon profoundly abforpt in the reflection on the memorable incidents in which I was engaged in thefe environs; and every object I met, every tree, and all the veftiges of former cultivation my eyes beheld, reminded me of paft events. The tears ftartcd from iv.y eyes when I arrived in-the avenue leading to the caftle, which had been repaired, and received a more decent and modern front. I was told that· F 3 Rofalia
Rofalia was in the garden; anda cold tre¬ molìi* pervaded my frame on that intelli¬ gence ; my heated imagination recalled all the images of former times, and filled me with anxious bodings. The fetting fun feemed to imitate, with his faint rays, the ferene morning which led Rofalia into my arms. The aromatic exhalations of the orange trees, the hollow murmurs of the purling rills, and the ruftling between the young leaves, recalled former feenes of happinefs to my mind; and every foft, melodious vibration of the warm vernal air feemed to convey to my liftening ears one of thofe fweet accents with which that cnchantrefs raviflied my organs on that happy day when I faw her the firft time arrayed in fairy charms. My impatient looks defcried her, at length, on the very fpot which had wit¬ nefled our firft interview, and I haftened with eager fteps to meet her. Her form was the fame as on that momentous day, except that the budding rofes of her vir¬ gin
gin charms now had unfolded themfelves 1n full fplendor. I gazed with enraptured looks at the harmonious fymmetry of her elegant ihape, which was fet off in a moft advantageous manner by the fimplicity of her drefs, and could not help groaning, "Alas! thatmafter-pieceof plaftic nature once was in thy poffeifion !" She faw me when I came nearer, but fuddenly turned into a bye-path. I ima« gined fhe wanted to fliun me, though I perceived nothing in her fteps that indi¬ cated flight. A fecret voice in my bofom urged me to follow her; and no fooner had I ftept into the bye-path, than the charming enchantrefs enfolded me in her arms, imprinting burning kiffes on my eager lips. " Dear, dear Carlos!" flie whifpered, <r how much am I obliged to you for this kind vifit! I knew that your generous heart would remind you now and then of your Rofalia; I knew that the man upon whom fhe doats could not forget her en- F 4 tirely."
tircly." 1 preffed the fweet girl to my heaving bofom. Her glowing face, which ihe reclined on mine, had a freihnefs which I then felt for lhe firft time; the tender fentiments of her heart fpoke plainly through her fparkling looks, the foft ena¬ mel of love bluihed on her dimpled cheeks, and the quickening pulfation that heaved her fwelling bofom thrilled me with fenia- tions of unfpcakable blifs. u Beautiful angel of lovet" I exclaimed, with admiration, u have you really falter¬ ed thefe fentiments fo long in your breaft, to blefs thereby once more your unfaith¬ ful Carlos without either hatred or jea- loufy?" " Unfaithful, indeed!* 1 ihe replied: " you have called it by the right name. But don't fpeak ill of that fweet traitor: I have forgiven his treachery, and am changed from a miitrefs into a warm and tender friend." « This renders you dearer to my heart than even The flame of paffion laits for months;
months; whereas the tranquil, modeft and unaiTuming warmth of friendihip unites two congenial fouls for ever. Entertain thefe fentiments always forme, fweet girl; count upon meas a brother in every emer¬ gency. Where could you hope to meet with the fame fentiments in a higher de¬ gree than in the heart of a man whom you have loved once?*' " I am rather vexed, Carlos, that that time is paft; yet it is better to have fome-. thing than nothing at all. I receive you with unfpeakable joy as a brother, and al¬ ways fhall take a fond filter's fhare in your happinefs." She then gave me one of ber kiffes, which were the children of pureft nature. Her inmoft fentiments afcended upon her rofy lips, imparting their original warmth to them. Her foul refided vifibly, and, as it were, embodied in her looks, or mixed itfelf with a foft fentimental tear gliding down her dimpled cheeks. F 5 Perceiving
Perceiving that the day was on the de¬ cline, I difengaged myfelf from her em¬ braces. « Dear Rofalia,** I faid, " you fee, by my gun, that the chafe and acci¬ dent have brought me uither. I thank my ftars that I have met you; but now I muft be gone. Give me one kifs more, and then fare wel ľ' " You fay that with fmiling looks, Car¬ los,'* fhe replied; "but I have no great confidence in them. Your vifit has fome myfterious meaning; and it is a fiale in¬ vention of yours to afcribe it to the chafe and accident." " If it has any, it is no other than the delire of feeing you once more.*' " Once more, Carlos !" " I mean in private, and without being interrupted. Are we not watched by more than an hundred eyes, and who knows what may happen ? ъ She med a copious ftream of tears, whifpering, " I comprehend you, Carlos; but I fear nothing; I am your fifter, and thank
thank you for this melancholy proof of your love. You could, undoubtedly, be more explicit with your fifter; yet doas you think proper." u But fwear/' flie refumed, after a fhort paufe, f€ that you will return once more. Nol nol do not fwear. You have already fworn a dreadful oath in yon bower, and dared to break it." (She fhuddered, and grew deadly pale.) " I have kept it facredly, Carlos. 1 * So faying, fhe enfolded me again in her tender arms, and, reclining her wan face againft my fhoulder, continued, " I always have been faithful to you ; and what woman would not have done the fame?" I fighed. Fortunately fhe miftook the real motive of my vifible agitation, which her laft words had wound up to the higheft pitch. " Farewcl. May Heaven's beft bleffing attend you, Carlosi" fhe added, fobbing. " I know your heart. Our curfed fate has forced you to be forfworn; elfe you would certainly have i een more faithful to your Rofalia. She would not have been obliged
to be fatisfied with the mere name of a fifter; and, alas! you would, perhaps, have been as happy with heras with ano- ther." « I certainly ihould, dear Rofalia ; and perhaps happier! You juftly call our fate curfed: Heaven only knows how it will terminate/' " Take courage, Carlos. I will watch over your fafety; and endeavour to warn you of every danger that may threaten your happinefs and life.** With thefe words fhe ftrained me again to her panting bofom, and then difengag¬ ing herfelf reluctantly from my arms, fled into an adjacent grove. I returned to the cottage, and was fo profoundly abforpt in various thoughts that I almoft miffed it. The difference be¬ tween Rofalia and Adelheid was, indeed, extremely ftriking; and yet the latter had not the leaft reafon to complain of me. I loved her moft ardently, and never mifled an opportunity of convincing her of my fondnefs.
fondnefs. "Thus women are! thought I. They are flattered by a conqueft only as long as it is not entirely accornplifhed, or threatened by fome danger." The re¬ freihing íhades of evening were already defcending when I arrived at the cottage; and I confulted with myfelf, whether I ihould join my fervant, and fpend the night in a forry public-houfe, or fleep in my own bed, and make up for the delay in the morning. After a fhort confideration, I preferred the latter, and rode fo flowly back, that I did not arrive at the caftle before it was completely dark. I alfo had mifled the road, diverted by various thoughts which crofíèd my mind, and was at the back-gate of the park when I imagined to be arrived at the drawbridge. I dismounted, and fattened the horfe to a tree, intending to fend a fervant for it, opened the gate with a mafter-key, and went through the little myrtle bofcage to¬ wards the caftle» I could fee no light in the
the bed-chamber of my lady, which looked into the garden, and a general filence prevailed in the environs of the caftle. I imagined the Marchionefs was already gone to bed; and although the evening was not far advanced, yet I re¬ flected no farther upon it, opened the caf¬ tle gate foftly, and went with all poffible precaution up ftairs* I met not a fingle perfon; but heard fome people converfe in the kitchen, and in the apartments of the fervants. I do not know why I feared being difco* vered ; whether I was prompted to tread fo foftly by a defire to fee how the fervants behaved while I was fuppofed to be abfent, or whether the human mind really has a prefenfion of future events. I trembled like an afpen leaf, and feared every mo¬ ment to meet fome perfon, without being able to account for it,. However, I col¬ lected myfelf, and was going to proceed to my apartment, when I faw the door of Adelheid's
Adelheid's anti-chamber wide open, and beheld a faint light in her fitting room. " I will bid her a good evening, I thought; left fhe might form no favour¬ able opinion of my ftealing thus like a thief into my own houfe. I, therefore, went boldly onward, but found her apart¬ ment empty. Two candles were burning upon her working table, which had very large fnuffs. " Where can fhe be ?" faid I to myfelf. u I hope ihe is not running about in the damp night-air; ihe will cer¬ tainly catch cold." I fat down to await her return; but feeling fomething under me, I got up, and faw a man's hat lying on the chair. I imagined, at firft, that it was my own; but, on clofer examination, found that it belonged to Don Bernhard. I flung it vehemently upon the floor, in the firft heat of my paffion, ftamping it with my feet; fnatched a candle from the table, and ran into Adelheid's bed-chamber. The bed was, however, empty, and in perfect or¬ der.
der. I recovered a little from my violent agitation, returned flowly and foftly to the fitting room, and having laid the hat on its former place, waited a little longer; but hearing fome perfon approach, con¬ cealed myfelf behind a fcreen, where the Marchionefs ufed to have fome cloaths hung up, and made an opening with the bayonet of my fowling-piece, large enough to enable me to fee what was doing in the apartment« The Marchionefs appeared almoit in¬ ftantly, led by Don Bernhard, who made room for her on the couch ; and having pufhed the table a little farther back, feated himfelf by her fide« I certainly fhould have imagined the whole fcene to be the produce of fairy art, if I had had the leaft belief in enchantments and transfor¬ mations, eithe*r being wonderfully changed. Adelheids face was all in a glow; her beautiful countenance never had expreffed fo much life and internal emotion. My blood began to ferment; and yet I could not
not help gazing with admiration at that heavenly form. Her handkerchief was difordered, and, gracious Heaven! it alfo was doubled in numberlefs folds, She trembled, and breathed with diffi¬ culty. Her looks breathed wanton defire¿ her mien, and every motion of her limbs, fpoke the language of the moft unbridled voluptuoufnefs. There was not a veftige left of that innocence and modeft reluc¬ tance with which fhe ufed to bridle the bold carcffes of her hufband, nor of that virgin pudency which granted nothing, but yielded every thing to compilinoli« I imagined to fee a lafcivious woman be¬ fore me who loves the firft time, her looks and geftures being bold, nay encouraging beyond expreffion* Nothing was more certain than that Don Bernhard had mixed fomething with her wine. The latter ap¬ peared to have ftudioufly prepared himfelf for fuch an adventure, having changed the fimpie frock which he generally ufed to wear for the full drefs of a Parifian beau. The
Theroughnefs and gravity of his language and expreffions was changed into the foft whifper of fine flatteries. He always had appeared to me a handfome man, in his natural character, but on that occafion I thought him fo abfurd and grotefque, that I lhould have laughed at him at any other place. His eyes flaihed with a wild and cri¬ minal fire; his bofom was violently agi¬ tated, and his frantic paffion almoft bereft him of the power of utterance. There was, indeed, no occafion for the affiftance of words, as his convulfively trembling hands befpoke but too plainly the wild de- fires of his heart. .The accurfed, attro- cious villain now prophaned the pure throne of love; and, alas! Adelheid did not pre¬ vent the vile attempt. Having imprinted thoufands of ardent kiffes upon her agitated bofom, he pre¬ pared to confummate the moft infernal crime. Adelheid was exhaufted, and feemed to be willing to yield to his brutal luft
luft without reluctance, I fcarcely could keep myfelf upon my legs, and was ready to drop on the floor: however, the near- nefs of the impending danger reftored me to the ufe of my faculties, which the fear of it had deprived me of. Defpair roufed me from the ftupor to which fury had re¬ duced me. I ftept forth from my lurking place, cocked my fowling piece, and was going to terminate the exiftence of the two vile wretches with one bali. A guardian angel watched, however, over Adelheid's life. The noife I made in cocking my gun made Don Bernhard, who had enfolded my wife in his arms, flart up, and turn his head on one fide: but he had not a moment's time to recol¬ lect himfelf; I difcharged my piece, and he relapfed lifelefs upon his miftrefs. Adelheid lay in a deep fwoon beneath the corpfe of her feducer. I was, at firft, vexed at her having efcaped her doom, and, feizing her by the hand, roufed her from her fwoon, " Accurfèd woman!" I exclaimed,
I exclaimed, with a thundering voice, " awake, to receive the punifhment of your hideous crime!" As foon as I per¬ ceived that her fenfes were return iner, I preffed her bleeding lover into her arms, and went into the anti-chamber to appeafe the fervants, who, as I apprehended, might have been terrified by the report of my gun. I really met fome with candles in their hands, and told them not to be alarmed, as my gun only had gone off through my carelefsnefs, without doing any harm. The waiting women, and particularly Adelheid's confidant, were haftening toward their lady's apartment; but I defired them to retire into a conti¬ guous chamber, and locked them up. I then ordered my confidential valet to go down ftairs, and not to fuffer any perfon to ftir. I gave him my gun, enjoining him ftrictly to ihoot the firft that ihould offer to be difobedient. He was a brave German, and I could rely upon his fidelity. On
On my return to the Marchionefs, flic had entirely recovered, and awaited, not far from the corpfe, which lay on the floor, her impending doom. She w 7 as firmly perfuaded that inftant death would be her portion, and wiflied for it; for how could flie ever have looked at ine again, without fiiamé and pungent remorfe? She lifted her eyes up when flie heard me ftep into the apartment. Her face was horribly difiorted : the rofes of love, and of libi¬ dinous defires, were faded away; and the grifly fpecire of impending death had thrown his grey veil over it. The horror which agitated her mind ereâed one part of her hair, while the reft, ftained with the blood of her feducer, depended upon her forehead. Her eyes were dim, and flared motioniefs, like thofe of a midnight fpecire, blinking convulfively when they beheld her fuppofcd executioner. Her lips were contorted, and opened only when her ftraitened bofom could no longer retain her dying groans. This
This (hocking fight ferved, however, only to render my indignation more re- Ientlefs, inftead of affecting me with fen¬ timents of compaflion. I opened the window, feized the corpfe by the throat, and flung it furioufly into the garden, " Rife, madam!" I now exclaimed. She endeavoured to get up, but dropt down again. I, therefore, took her under the arm, and helped her up. She imagined, without doubt, that I would throw her after her lover; and laid, in a trembling accent, €< I thank you, Don Carlos: make hafte to rid me of an exiftence that is a burden to me." Having raifed her up, I refumed» " I have feen your waih-hand bafon behind yon fcreen ; fetch it, and waíh up that blood." She went to fetch it, obedient to my order, and finding no cloth, took out her pocket handkerchief, wiped her eyes, and kneeled down to clean the floor. She was, however, repeatedly obliged to flop, and to fetch breath. The tears ftreamcd down her
her face, and mixed with the congealed blood. I ftood by her fide, lighting her with the candle, and exclaiming repeat¬ edly, " Rub a little more, Madam; there is another fpot! 1 * Having finiihed her painful taík, fhe dropt with her face upon the floor. I raifed her up again; and having lighted a torch, gave it her in her hand, and or¬ dered her to go before me. I then took the bafon with the blood, and we went into the garden, where I gave the veflel to the Marchionefs; and having taken the corpfe upon my fhoulders, ordered her to conduct me to the hermitage, as the remoteft part of the garden. She did not utter a found, not even a figh, but trembled violently, and fpilled a great deal of the blood. I called repeatedly to her, <c Hold the bafon fafter ¿ Madam!" but fhe endeavoured in vain to obey me. We arrived, at length, at the hermitage, and I began to dig a grave in the remoteft corner* The ground being very loofe, I foon
foon had finiihed my taik; and taking the torch from her hand, commanded her to give a farewell kifs to her lover. She kneeled patiently down by the corpfe, like a lamb that is going to be flaughtered, and kiíľed his livid lips; and I was pleafed to fee that her looks befpoke fome averfion. Having buried the body, I poured the blood over the grave, and broke the bafon, adding, " Thus I devote thee to damna¬ tion and eternal remorfe : thou haft robbed thy friend of his greateft treafure !" Adelheid fhed not a fingle tear during that awful tranfaction, being, perhaps, too much occupied with reflections on her impending doom. Her dark eye was only now and then directed at me with marks of horror and fear; yet I fhunned her anxious looks, and ordered her to lead me back to the caftle. We were not far advanced when I heard the report of a gun. I inftantly con¬ ceived the meaning of it; but Adelheid ihuddered, and the torch dropped from ι her
her weary hand. Having taken it up, I took Adelheid by the arm, and led her to her apartment. On our arrival in her fit¬ ting room, I placed her on the couch, and faid, "Here, Madam, is the key to the apartment in which I thought proper to lock up your attendants: you will be pleafed to order your trunks to be packed inftantly, that we may depart in an hour's time. On the road you will tell me whether you wiih to return to your father, or prefer a cloifter in France." This unexpected lenity overpowered her; fhe dropt down upon her knees, and kiffed my feet. The fudden tranfition from the fear of death to the certainty of having her life fpared, was too much for her, and flie was unable to rife again. I lifted her up, and feated her again on her former place, fprinkling water into her face, and rubbing her temples. She per¬ ceived the emotions of my mind, which muft have been ftrongly marked in my countenance, and was going to kneel Vol. IV, G down
down again; but I prevented it, exhorting her to prepare for our departure without delay. " For Goďs fake! Carlos! 0 fhe now exclaimed, in a trembling accent, "For God's fake! Carlos! don't diffract me by your kindnefs: I have deferved death ; here is my breaft ; have pity with nie, and put an end to my dreadful ago¬ ny." With thefe words flie bared her bofom ; but I turned my face another way not to fee it. " Make yourfelf eafy, Madam,*' I replied, coolly, α and thank God that I did not furprife you after the confummation of that horrid crime. My vengeance terminates here. I have for¬ given you.** So faying, I itretched out my hand to her. She covered it with burning kiffes, exclaiming, with an un¬ fpcakable emotion, " How fhall I thank you, beft of men, for your forbearance, and more than human kindnefs, to a cri¬ minal, to an ungrateful wife, that, how¬ ever, rather has erred and ftrayed than abandoned herfelf to vice. Heaven will reward
reward your virtue! Alas! I never fliall be able to do it!" She fobbed violently, and I began to fear the confequences of her unfpeakable agony. In the firft ftupor, which had fufpended the ufe of her faculties, fhe had not had fufficient confcioufnefs to cometo a refolution; butin that dreadful ftate of the bittereit remorfe and contrition, the effervefcence of her blood rendered her capable to attempt any 'hing. I trembled to fee her abforpt in profound meditation* The whole extent of her guilt, of her loft happinefs, her ignominy, and her future mifery, the dreadful thought to be torn from me for ever, to be deprived, for the reft of her life, of the care and love of a tender huiband, and to pine away her days in the melancholy folitude of a cloiftered confinement, left to all the horrors of her fenfations, to be buried, asit were, alive; all thefe ideas forced themfelves upon her agonized foul; and I could clearly per¬ ceive that flic wiflied for annihilation. G ?, Everv
Every convulfed motion of her ghaftly looks thrilled me with the apprehcnflon of a horrid cataftrophe. I feated myfelf down by her fide, taking hold of her quivering hands : "Adelheid/* faid I, <c my poor, feduced wife; do not abufe the weaknefs of your huiband; he has forgiven you; give him no caufe for repenting his lenity. Endea¬ vour to convince him, by your future conduct, that you have been feduced only for moments, and that you deferve his compaifion. You are yet in the bloom of your life; and a good and noble wife al¬ ways has it in her power to make amends for paft errors, if flie is but inclined to do it." She preffed my hands to her bofom, and then reclined her face upon them. Her fpeaking eyes, which feemed to re¬ joice at the prefervation of her life, thanked mc with an enthufiaftic look. But more ihe did not venture. She re¬ fembled
femblcd a repenting angel, that beholds new hopes at a diftance. " I now fhall call your women, Adel¬ heid," I added, " and hope you will make hafte to be ready for a fpeedy departure. We have no time to lofe: I am furrounded with lurking fpies; the ihot you heard fall in the garden, has, probably, termi¬ nated the exiftence of one of them that attempted to efcape, I requeft it as a fa¬ vour of you that you will difcharge Ifabel in the next town." ifabel was her confidant, and Adelheid underftood the motive of my requeft, and, kiffing my hands, replied, in a tender accent, " Fear nothing, my Lord: liliali endeavour to obliterate every veftige of my crime." I prefled her hands affec¬ tionately, and retired, enlarging her wait¬ ing women, and ordering them to go to the Marchionefs. My valet had done his duty. We buried the corpfe in the gar¬ den. The carriages were got ready, and G3 the
the firft dawn of day found us on the road to France. ч I aiked the Marchionefs on the road whether flie had fixed upon her future place of abode? She replied that ñ\e could not bear to fee the face of her worthy father with the deep impreffion of her guilt, and that ihe ihould prefer the cloif¬ ter at D****** > the Abbefs of which was a near relation of her's. We now con- fulted what flie ihould fay to her, and the reft of her family, with regard to our fepa- ration, and arrived, after a pretty pleafant journey, at D******, where I was to leave her with two of her attendants. No lan¬ guage can exprefs the fenfations that agi¬ tated my mind when I took leave of her. I fcarcely was equal to ftand the parting fcene. Adelheid had fpoken very little during our journey; a deep, mute melan¬ choly had reduced her almoit to a ihadow; and her woe-worn countenance moved every one who faw her to tears of com¬ panion. A fine woman, fuffering with filent
filent refignation, and with the meeknefs of a repenting or guiltlefs heart, is irre¬ fiftible. All our fervants, and all thofe who faw her on the road, were infected by her melancholy, I myfelf could not refift that fecret influence, notwithftanding the ftrong rcafons I had to hate and to defpife her. I did as much as lay in my power to cheer her up, and to divert her mind, but all my kindnefs and attention only ferved to encreafe her affliâion. She thanked me with filent tears, and with the modeft warmth of a broken, contrite heart; butat the fame time proved that flie defpaired of every thing. When we got within fight of the cloif¬ ter, fhe began, for the firft time, to weep aloud, and to bemoan her melancholy fate. She had fpent fome happy years of her innocent virginity at that place, and the recollection of the rofy hours of her youth crowded on her mind. She beheld in every object we met a witnefs of her mirthful age and her juvenile fports, and G 4 felt
felt the deepen compundion that ihe had rendered herfelf incapable of enjoying the pleafure her heart would have derived, under different circumflances, from a \ifit to that fee ne of former happinefs· I read thefc reflections in her countenance, but hoped that folitude would heal her bleeding heart fooner than ihe dared to flatt erherfclf. We were, at length, obliged to part: I recommended Adelheid once more to the care of her relation, and then went to her apartment to take leave. She ftartcd up from her chair when ihe faw me, and ruihed without hefitation into my arms. My heart did not furFcr me to repel a wife that I had loved fo dearly in fuch a foicmn moment of affliction; and preffing my lips upon her ice cold cheeks, faid, in a foothing accent, " Be eafy, my deareft wife; endeavour to be reconciled to your¬ felf, and Carlos will not be totally loft to you. Although that fweet ecftafy of for¬ mer blifs, that unconftrained confidence, and
and that artlefs and unfufpicious love, which brightened the horizon of our life, fhould not return quite unimpaired, yet you will have no warmer and nearer fncnd than me. My heart never can wean itfelf entirely from an object to which it has been once fo completely devoted." ** No, Carlos, takeyour friendihip back again; I will not have it. Do you think a fingle drop would fatisfy me, fince it was in my power to have emptied the whole cup of love and matrimonial blifs ? Do you think I could impofe by miferable deluiion upon my glowing feelings? No, man of my heart, Adelheid would never have deferved your love, if ihe could. li ve without pofľeífing it unimpaired. My deftiny was fo beautiful; and Γ have wan¬ tonly fhortcned it; what elfe is now left me, but to die nobly?· I have rendered myfelf undcferving of your love, but I wifh to merit at leaft your regard. Give me a parting kifs, Carlos! Abs! I fhail fee you no more!" G s I did
I did not know what to reply, thinking it imprudent to let her hope too much; and yet I wiflied to fpeak comfort to her agitated, defponding mind. My fenfes almoft denied me their fervice; her dying charms, the deadly palenefs of her beauti¬ ful cheeks, and the dimnefs of her eyes, touched the tendereit parts of my foul; and I replied, in a tone which plainly be¬ fpoke the agitation of my mind, " Do not defpair, dear Adelheid; futurity may foften the rigour of your fate: who knows whether it may not unite us again? Time weakens the ftrength of all impreffions, obliterates their dark fides, and leaves only thofe that are of a brighter com¬ plexion." "No, no! I will not delude myfelf by thefe hopes: and if you would generoufly receive me again to your bofom, and blefs me \uth the fame tender confidence, with the fame fullnefs of unfufpicious af¬ fection, which I formerly enjoyed, yet I never would return to it; for every tear
tear of pleafure that ihould glide from your eye would burn upon my cheeks like corroding poifon. But will you grant me one favour more, dear Carlos?** flie re¬ fumed, after a fhort paufe. " I wear a picture of you on my bofom, which my poor brother gave me, and was my idol before I knew you : will you let me keep it?** She trembled violently while fhe took it from her heart, and dropt upon her knees, when I hefitated to return an an¬ fwer. My feelings were powerfully af¬ fected : I rung for her attendants ; and as foon as they entered the apartment, quitted it with the greateft precipitation. CHAPTER. IX. 1NOW refolved to pay a vifit to Count S******, being certain that I was not miftaken in my opinion of his noble heart. I did not doubt that it would depend en¬ tirely upon myfelf to find again in him G 6 the
the warmeft and tendereft friend. The love which abalienated myfelf from all other fentiments, and from the whole world, was not able to throw even a light veil over the genial fplendor of his friend¬ fhip. He never hefitated to facrifice every thing, even the greateft happinefs of his life, to me; and I was convinced that nothing but the firm perfuafion that Adelheid did not love me, and that I de¬ tened her, which was effected by the in¬ fernal viles of the confederates, had tempted him to pay his addrefles to her. I went firft to the old Baron, where I met S******i ; but there I heard that he was returned to his efta tes in Germany. I informed my father-in-law of the refidence of Adelheid, and of the motives of her retirement, pretending, as we had agreed, that a flight indifpofition and nervous weaknefs prevented her to follow me to Germany. The good Baron, who doated upon me, promifed to vifit his daughter at D**"****, to write frequently to her during
during my abfence, and complained bit¬ terly of her having preferred a cloifter to the houfe of her father* This affected me more than I can exprefs: and I hinted to him, that Adelheid had been fubječt, of late, to an unaccountable melancholy, which made her fo much inclined to cloif¬ tered retirement. Having engaged myfelf folemnly to fee him again in a fhort time, I took the road to the eftate of Count S******. I was, at firft, inclined to inform him pre¬ vioufly of my vifit, and the plan I had formed; however, it it fo unfpeakably fweet to furprife a dear friend, that I dropt that intention; and could I have feen fo plainly the amiable difpofition of his foul towards me, if I had given him time to prepare himfelf for my reception? When I came within fight of his country- feat, I difmounted, to get, by a private path, with which I was well acquainted, into the garden; and fent my carriage to the public houfe, ordering my fervant to wait
wait there till he ihould hear from me. On my entrance into the bofcage, the theatre of fo many fweet and dreadful events, all the feelings which formerly had pervaded me fingly now ruihed united upon my heart. The recollection of thofe events was, at the fame time, aflbciated with all the fubfequent incidents of my life: I faw the turf feat where Amanuel appeared to the Count, and where his and my life was in the moft imminent danger. The ruins in which he was buried alive for fome time, every tree, every grafly fpot, the undulation of the air, which re¬ ceived me as an old acquaintance, repro- created in my foul thofe fenfations which they formerly had occafionedor witnefled. I alfo recollected many children of my invention, and many creations of my fweeteft hours; for moft of the alterations the garden had undergone, either had been begun or pointed out by me; and I plainly recollected to have fown the feeds of many fweet-fcenting fhrubs and flowers, which
which now hailed my organs by their o r erous exhalations. A father cannot re A into the lap of his family with a purer and more heartfelt rapture than I felt when I was faluted by my mute ac¬ quaintances and favourites. Having reached the terrace, the firft object I beheld was a fweet child fitting on the turf, and playing with two large dogs. I was, at firft, terrified at the danger of the little cherub; but my ap-, prehenfions vanifhed, when I faw him defend himfelf fmiling ;. and the dogs, who feemed to be ufed to his chiidifh fports, fcarcely daring to touch him, awed by the charms of innocence, or fearful to hurt their little play-fellow. What a foft fweetnefs did his infantine features exprefs! It appeared to me like the foft blufhes of the morning fun fmiling on the eaftern fky, when the emerging king of day unfolds his cheering rays, growing gradually warmer and more diftinft. The fweeteft innocent joy, young and unim¬ paired
paired, fat modeftly on his brow; and the happy unconcern of his infantine foul fmiled in his ferene looks. The fight of that little cherub enraptured me with filent happinefs j and the celeftial tran¬ quillity of the charming boy imparted itfelf imperceptibly to my mind; but, alas! recalled, at the fame time, former times to my memory, reminding me of my unexpected meeting with Elmira. I beheld again the beautiful nurfling of her love, faw him itretched out on his couch, enfolded in the arms of peaceful fleep, adorned with the budding rofes of health, and by inftindt expanding his little arms to encircle the neck of his long-loft father. My reflections were interrupted by the approach of a third perfon. It was the Count, who anxioufly haftened to drive the dogs away. He then took the fweet boy upon his arm, preffing his face ten¬ derly againft his glowing cheek. What a grand expreffion of delight and joy did his countenance
countenance difplayl Paternal love, the nobicft fentiment of nature, beautifies every countenance, and it gave the Count the appearance of a celeftial being. His little darling underftood the tender mean¬ ing of his carefles, and returned them with a fpeaking fmile. I was tranfported by that heavenly fcene. The dogs ran, mean time, towards me. They were two old acquaintances and nurflings of mine, and recollected me inftantly, bounding jo> fully againft my breaft, whining, and ejcpreifing their pleafure by numberlefs antic geftures. The Count, who, mean while, had feated the boy again upon the turf, was ren¬ dered attentive by the barking and whin¬ ing of the dogs, and, turning round, beheld his old friend. A moment of aftoniihment, and he jumped down the terrace, and prefled me to his panting heart. «Oh, Carlosi" «Oh, Lewis Γ " What
" What fortunate accident has brought you hither !" " How happy am I to fee you again ! Beit, deareft Count, I already had def¬ paired to prefs you once more to my bo¬ fom." Our tender and rapturous em¬ braces fuffocatcd even thofe fimple and abrupted founds with which exhaufted na¬ ture expreiľes the higheft degree of plea¬ fure. Our tears mingled upon our cheeks. Heaven fmiled with fynipathetic ferenity upon us ; and the feathered choirifters of the air celebrated our joyous meeting with their fweeteft ftrains. The glowing and fenfible imagination never produces more blifsful fancies than on the happy re-union of two congenial fouls. He took my hand under his arm, and led me towards the caftle. " Although you know but too well all thefe objects, dear Carlos/* he faid, " yet you will find a new one." That inftant we came to the fpot where the boy ftill was fitting on the turf, playing with flowers, and offer¬ ing
ing a nofegay to his father as foon as he faw him. The Count took, with pater¬ nal affection, his child upon his arm, re- fuming, " This is my fon, Marquis; and your narnefake; our little, fweet Carlos I" " May Heaven be more propitious to him than to his narnefake 1" I replied. "How, Carlos?" gazing at me with aftonifhment, "are you not happy? In¬ deed, you are paler than ufual, and your looks are clouded î But come, the philo¬ fophy and fympathy of your friend will foon cheer you up. That angel of good¬ nefs that once endangered the peace of your heart, will now aifift me to difpel the gloom that hangs over your tranquil¬ lity." The good Count imagined to fpeak in a prophetic fpirit; but, alas! how far was he from divining the impend¬ ing horrors of futurity ! I encircled his waift with my arm, and we proceeded. When we came oppofite the balcony, I obferved a lady that was leaning
leaning over it, and feemed to fufvey us with uncommon curiofity , and attention. Her drefs befpoke her to be a perfon of rank, but her face was entirely unknown to me. It appeared to me extremely ugly; and having reflected for fome time who it could be, I aiked the Count, with fome furprife, <ff Have you got vifitors at the caftle?" «Not afinii." if Then who was that ftrange lady on the balcony ?" " I thought you would not recollect her; it is my lady, the mother of this boy," " Eternal God ! then Caroline is dead?" He fmiled bitterly. "No, my friend," he refumed, " I will not furprife you in an unpleafant manner. It is that very Caro¬ line with whom you was fo violently in love. The fmall-pox have disfigured her thus.' > I wrung my hands in filent grief. "But
" But don't be uneafy, Carlos," he added: " I warrant you, you will be more pleafed with her than ever. She is, in¬ deed, lefs handfome, but much, much more amiable than fhe was at that time." My underftanding did in vain attempt to perfuade me of the truth of that affer- tion, my refractory heart reprefenting her to me as an utter ftranger ; and my natu¬ ral averfion from new connexions infpired me with a fecret difiiké to her. She was once the idol of my foul ; and my vile pride was pleafed that I now ihould have nothing to fear from her charms, but even find many opportunities of humiliating her, in cafe of neceffity. A number of vicious inclinations, which I thought to be entirely rooted out, unexpectedly re¬ appeared in that fatal moment : my atten¬ tion withdrew, however, from the obj eel: that had recalled them, and I began to defpife myfelf. In this ftate of mind I entered the apartment. Caroline rofe from the fofa, where
where flie feemed to have awaited our ar¬ rival ; and a fecret emotion, which blufhed on her countenance, urged her to advance a few fleps towards us. I took all poffi¬ ble care to difguife my aftoniihment at the uncommon alteration of her features; yet her own confcioufnefs probably told her more than my looks could have ex¬ preffed ; and fhe caft down her fweet, un- changeble eye, while ihe faluted us with a filent curtefy. The Count came to the affiftance of her lovely confufion, and taking me by the hand, faid, w Madam â you will be happy to fee our old friend, the Marquis of G******, who returns to us after all his adventures; and being, perhaps, fa- tiated by the gratifications of love, means to tafte again the fweets of friendihip.'* He pronounced thefe words flowly and fmiling, to give her time to collect herfelf. Caroline foon recovered her equanimity, and replied modeftly, and in an accent which affected my heart, « You are wel¬ come,
come, dear Marquis; but I fhould be forry if the latter were the cafe.'* The converfation foon grew more ani¬ mated; and our former confidential fami¬ liarity was completely reftored before half an hour was elapfed. I found her face not quite fo difagreeablc as it had ap¬ peared to me at firft fight. The marks which the fmall-pox had left had, indeed, given a different form to her countenance; but the natural foft nefs of her features had refifted all the eftorts of the malady. Her lips were as freih and rofy as ever; her looks were rather more captivating and fweet than formerly; the pa le nefs of her complexion d i ft ufed a charming langour over her face; and the confcioufnefs of her lofs imparted to all her motions and geftures a foft modefiy, which, however, ferved only to gain upon the heart of the beholder with invigorated irrefiftibility. But nothing can be compared with the charms of her converfation. Her voice, 2 which
which received a fweet infinuating tone from fentiment and fome internal pain, the ftamp which her feeling heart im¬ printed upon her words, the vivid flafhes of a naturally raih but good-natured wit, bridled by a light tincture of melancholy, and the harmony of her words emanating from the bottom of her foul, rendered her charming beyond conception. If one had loved her formerly, one could now not help adoring her. She took the boy from the arms of her lord ; and the ftrongeft maternal feelings, the moft heart- fel t tendernefs, animated her looks. The boy was fenfible of her affection, and feemed to exchange his heart with hers for the firft time. The additional warmth which pervaded her blood, blufhed fweetly on her counte¬ nance. The ftrength of her amiable feelings deprived her of the power of ut¬ terance, and fhe kifled the innocent fmiles eagerly from the lips of her little darling. I now was but too fenfible that the name fhe
fhe had given to the child had fome fecret meaning. The Count put me again in poffeffion of my old apartments. I found every thing in them in its ufual place, and unaltered; and even met my former fenfations again. The moft tranquil, unpaifionate, and hap¬ py period of my whole life returned once more into my foul ; and the fweeteft tears glided, on that evening, from my eyes, while I was fitting on the fame fofa where I was fo frequently and anxioufly occupied with the ideas of the confederation; a fecret tremor pervaded· my frame at the fight of the memorable turf-feat, which I could difcern from mv chamber windows; and I /pent the greater part of the night with liften ing to the plaintive ftrains of the nightingales, whom my heated ima¬ gination introduced to me as old ac¬ quaintances. The Count did not fail to afk me, the following day, when we were in private, about my hiftory. He was aftoniihed when Vol. IV. H I U avc
I gave him a minute account of the whole; but, after fome reflection, faid, "Alas! Carlos, I foreboded it but too ftrongly. A connection with fuch a fet of people was fit neither for myfelf nor for you ; and that I foftered that idea in my bofõm, and initilled into your mind as much of it as I could, that the confederates had proofs of thofe attempts, and endeavoured to difiblve our union, could have been very fatal to me ; but actually contributed to eftabliih my happinefs. How much mi¬ fery did I, perhaps, efcape, becaufe they thought me incapable of bearing it!" " It is but too true, dear Lewis, that you frequently have hinted it to me; but the greatnefs of the idea, and the extent of their impofing plan, deluded and charmed me, as it were, to their intereft." " Alas! it is but too true that you was deluded; for your late adventures cannot but convince you, that you was ignorant of the real nature of the confederation. Does it not appear, by the vifible familia¬ rity
rity Don Bernhard was fuffered to keep up with your lady, that a complete com¬ munion of all things was a fundamental law of the order ?" " Who could АлГреД that the impofing appearance of the molt perfeft virtue could conceal crimes of fuch an atrocious nature? 0 " They are crimes in our eyes ; but may not thofe people be of a different opinion? They, perhaps, are among the number of their greateft virtues." " But who knows whether the confede¬ ration really were privy to Don Bernhard 's defign upon Adelheid?" I replied. " This is entirely indifferent ; for it was a fault of the fociety if they did not per¬ ceive İt in its beginning; nor endeavoured to obviate fach crimes before they could be brought to maturity, and expofed them¬ felves to the danger of being undone by wantonly provoking the rcfentrncnt of an individual member, who was not previ¬ eni fly initiated in fuch an important my Γ¬ Η 2 ' tery*
tery. And what can you expect of a fet of people, who tear the nobleft and moft natural bonds of love and friendihip afun- der, to obtrude upon you, againft your inclination, plans, againft the ufefulnefs of which your temperament and difpofi¬ tion conftantly object, though they ihould fucceed to convince you of their real im¬ portance?" CHAPTER X. THE Count was too much enamoured with his filent domeftic happinefs than to have any reliih for other pleafures. Our natural indolence, particularly if we have been harafled by misfortunes, and want recreation, renders us fond of that peace; it charms all our fenfes, and grows dearer to us, becaufe it makes us prouder of ourfelves; as we feel no want in the deprivation of all other goods, and obtain a more intimate knowledge of our own refources
refources and treafures than in any other fituation. Our courfe of life, and the train of our occupations and amufements, foon were again the fame they had been before the Count's marriage. I endeavoured, as much as poifible, to difpel, or at leait to conceal, the gloom that hung on my mind. Caroline did not only not interrupt my fweet familiarity with the Count, but alfo contributed very much to give it a proper reliih. She was the arbiter of all our lit¬ tle difputes, and poflefled the great art always to fatisfy both parties. She accom¬ modated her humour to our rcfpective dif¬ pofitions, laughing and joking with her lord, and roving with me through the folitary parts of the garden, harmonizing with my melancholy, complaining of the mutability of human happinefs, and fome¬ times even mixing her tears with mine. The good Count, being completely occupied with his domeftic concerns, was glad that I had found in his lady an agree- H 3 able
able companion of my idle hours during the day; but infifted to have my company entirely to himfelf in the evening, and the beginning of night; his friendihip for me prevailing fo much over love, and every other fentiment, that he was jealous of every thing that deprived him of my fo¬ ciety. He was always the firft who rofe from fupper, and wifhing a good night to the Countefs, took me by the arm, and fiaid two or three houvr. in my apartment; or roved with me through the garder, when the night was warm and ferene. Thefe walks frequently were continued till the dawning morning reminded us of the fleetnefs of time. While we difclofed our inmoft thoughts to one another, and mu¬ tually unfolded the moft fecret receífes of our hearts, our minds expanded themfelves, and great and new hopes reconciled us to the time paft, and the gloom of frowning futurity was gradually cleared up. Yet my melancholy muft have made a greater impreifion upon the Countefs than on
on my friend. The more the latter law my gloominefs encreafe, the more did he exert his good humour to difpel it. Caro¬ line, on the contrary, caught the chccrlefs difeafe of my over-clouded mind ; and the defpondency which my looks expreffed but too ftrongly frequently bedewed her eyes with tears of compaifion. Some heavy and infupportablc fecret feemed, at length, to deprefs her amiable heart. The Count did, fortunately, not obferve it; but it did not efcape me, that flie neglected him more than ufual, that her careffes gradually grew colder and more ambiguous, and that ihe even ihewed lefs anxious attention and care to the tender nurfling of her love. She did not choofe to difclofe her mys¬ tery to me, and I would not intrude upon it; though her friendihip for me would have fufficiently juftificd fuch a ftep. A fecret inftinct, which frequently guided my actions, without my knowing it, did perhaps make me omínate that 1 ihould î ï 4 find
find more in fuch a difcovcry than I ex¬ pected. I left it, therefore, to time to unfold that fecret. Yet I thought it was my duty to confult the Count about it. Ki 1 have made the fame obfervation fomc time fince/' he replied; " but being per¬ fuaded that her melancholy cannot origi¬ nate in a moral caufe, I have afcribed İt to a phyfical one, and think I ought to apply toa phyfician.'* Being defirous not to let him fee the whole extent of my anxious apprehenfions, I replied, " Has flic had this melancholy turn for a long time?" " I perceived it for the firft time after her lying in. I have found her frequently weeping over her fon; and whenever I tenderly enquired after the caufe of her tears, ihe always pleaded an unaccountable internal anxioufnefs which her lait illnefs had left behind. You know that I fpare no pains to exhilarate her; but I think travelling will do her more good than any thing
thing elfe, and intend to make a journey to Italy next year." I approved his plan, although I was unable to explain why I did not repofe much confidence in the efficacy of that expedient, Her beautiful eyes were fre¬ quently fixed at me; I always met her af¬ fectionate looks when we were in private; and what ftruck me moít, fhe never en¬ quired after my lady, or my late adven¬ tures, or the caufe of my feparation from Adelheid; though I knew that the Count never had betrayed my fecret to her. Autumn fet in at laft; the country feats were again vifited by the inhabitants of the town, and our neighbourhood grew more lively. Wc received, of courfe, more frequently, company, which inter¬ rupted the train of our ufual occupations to our greateft regret. The Count, being an utter ftranger to diifimulation, could not difguife his difpleafure at that change; and I joined him in declaiming againft all thofe idle talkers who intruded upon our H 5 focial
focial happinefs, but we endeavoured in vain to get rid of their tirefome company. They ftuck like burs, and there was no poffibility of fhaking them off. The poor Countefs fuffered moft by their importu¬ nity; for we left them frequently to their goffiping, and efcaped into the field, while fhe was expofed to their tedious, inane chit-chat. Not being at liberty to give vent to her grief, it rankled in her heart, and almoft reduced her to a íhadow. Chance, which is as unpropitious as favourable to lovers, unfolded, at lait, on a fatal day, her unfortunate fecret. We had a great number of guefts at the caftle*, and being at a lofs how to amufe them after dinner, propofed a walk to a neigh¬ bouring mill. The company fet out in high fpirits, and myfelf and the Count lea the way. The path grew narrower and narrower the nearer wc came to the miii, and, at laft, fcarcely permitted us towaikabreaft. Our fituation was, there¬ fore, highly difagreeable, on our meeting the
the miller's man, with a loaded horfe, walking ftrait towards us with his facks, in fpite of the drivers exclamations. We feparated to let the animal pafs. The Count was fo fortunate to efcape by a dexterous turn the danger of being knock¬ ed down. I got upon the outcrmoft ex¬ tremity of a deep ditch, fqueezing myfelf into the fmalleft compafs that was poifible ; but in vain! the horfe bruihed againft me with his facks, and I glided with a piece of loofe ground into the ditch, which was overgrown with briars and thiftles. When the company, who walked be¬ hind us, faw me fink down, they raifed a loud feream. The ditch being, however, perfectly dry, and not the leaft danger to be apprehended, they foon began to laugh loudly at my awkward fituation. The Countefs almoft fwooned away, at firft; but being reftored to her recollection by the exultations of the company, her ap- prehenfion turned imo a violent rage, and fhe began to exercife her walking cane H 6 moít
moít unmercifully upon the back of the animal and his driver, who was in the greateft confufion, and received her blows in a humble, fupplicating pofture. The Count beheld the uncommon rage of his lady withaftonifliment, and feemed to guefs its fecret motive. I alfo was ftruck by the extraordinary behaviour of theCountefs; and no fooner had difen- gaged myfelf from my uncomfortable fituation, than I took again hold of his arm, and endeavoured to difpel his gloomy reverie by lively fallies of good humour. Yet his overcaft eye remained gloomy, although I could perceive that he was not in the lea ft angry with me. That day was very tn ine for the Cou n te fs; for a new adventure was awaiting for her. We ar¬ rived at the mill, where the Count had ordered an excellent collation to be pre¬ pared. We were, in general, in a pretty good humour. After our repaît was fi- niihed, we began to amufe the ladies by various little fporrs, and, at lait, attempted to
to walk upon the baluftrade of a bridge. The experiment was rather dangerous; and thofe that were fubječt to giddinefs feparated themfelves from the reft. Moft of us having fhewn their fkill with fuccefs, the Count too tried his dexterity, to the fatisfaetion of the company; but when my turn came, I faw the Countefs fud¬ denly grow pale: " It is enough, it is enough!** fhe exclaimed: " thefe dange¬ rous tricks make my head quite giddy," Seeing, however, that I paid no attention to her exclamations, flie ran without re¬ flection towards me, and took hold of my arm, exclaiming vehemently, and with a look which expreffed the anxiety of her foul, " Marquis, you know you have a weak head ; why would you expofe your¬ felf to fuch a neçk-breaking danger?*' I made a filent bow, and withdrew. The Count was almoft petrified, and the whole company ftruck with aftonifhment. I was not able to utter a word. The Count was the firft that fpoke. <c I think, Ca¬ roline,'*
roline," he faid, u it grows late; will you conduct the ladies back to the cattle?" That heavenly goodnefs would have moved a itone j and the Countefs was feelingly afiecled by the kindnefs of her lord. She recovered, however, foon from her emo¬ tion, and began to be naturally cheerful and merry, taking two of the ladies by the arm, and returning gaily to the caftle, as if nothing had happened. The Count faid nothing, but his coun¬ tenance betrayed filent grief. 1 exerted myfelf in vain to difpel the gloom of his mindi yet I was firmly perfuaded that his great and noble heart could harbour nei¬ ther fufpicion nor bitternefs againft me. He was fure that I was incapable of a perfidious breach of friendihip. His re¬ gard for me drew a glory round my image; and he could not fuffer that the leaft fpot fhould appear in it. My paffion for Ca¬ roline, before his marriage, was too vio¬ lent than that it could have lain dormant fo long, and now fuddenly awake ia its* priftine
priftine force. Nay, I am certain that not evenone of thefe reflections came into his mind. Our guefts left us foon after our return to the caftle ; and the Count was as cheer¬ ful and obliging at fupper as ever. He behaved with more than common atten¬ tion and kindnefs to his lady, anticipating every wiih of her's before flie could form a complete idea of it. He dreifed with more elegance than ufual, ivas attentive to the leaft trifle, invented numberlefs little amufements for her diverfion, and did с every thing a man of feeling can do to recai a ftrayed heart to the right path. I, on my part, carefully avoided every opportunity of thwarting his tender en¬ deavours, fhunning Caroline's company as much as decency would allow. I was, indeed, as cheerful as ever at table; but appeared rather in the character of a gueft, and a polite companion, than in th<r; of her former confidential friend, who took a tender fhare in all her little family con¬ cerns.
cerns. I fpent the greateft part of the day with attending to the Counťs domeftic affairs, or with forming new connections amongft our neighbours; received com¬ pany, or joined fome pleafure parties; paid my addrefles to every fine woman ; was the difpofer and king of all feafts and balls : in fhort, I was every where more at home than at the caftle. This change of my conduct made a very bitter impreffion upon the Countefs. A more keen-fighted connoiffeur of the female heart than the Count and myfelf, would eafily have forefeen the fatal confe¬ quences of that conduct. The Count's tender and ftudious attention appeared af¬ fectation to her, and rendered his com¬ pany irkfome and tedious; and my con¬ fiant abfence gave an additional charm to the few accomplifhments I poffeifed. Jea¬ loufy contributed to make me dearer to her than ever, and her heart was infected with a baneful poifon. A fpeechlefs me¬ lancholy rankled in her foul, preyed on her vitals,
vitals, and rendered her a riddle to her acquaintances. The Count apprehended a public eruption of her paffion, and, therefore, avoided all great companies; but this almoft imperceptible conftraint only ferved to add fuel to the flame. I ordered, mean time, my trunks to be packed with all poifible fecrefy; and be¬ ing firmly refolved todepart without delay, only waited for a proper opportunity of acquainting the Count with my intention. I was convinced that he fecretly wiíhed for the fame; and that nothing but a ten¬ der regard for his lady'$ honour prevented him from difclofing his real fenti ments to me without referve. But I was miftaken; for he thought, on the contrary, that fuch a ftep would only make bad worfe, and that one ought to have recourfe to it if all gentler means ihould have been applied without fuccefs. One night I came home after twelve o'clock; and having been abfent from the caftle all the day, joyfully anticipated the pleafure
pleafure of fpending a few hours with the Count in confidential talk. The Countefs at that time, being generally gone to bed an hour or two, I was aftoniihed to fee her apartment ftill illuminated. A heavy load fell, at that fight, upon my heart,» a num¬ ber of ominous apprehenfions pervaded my mind, and I flackened my horfe's pace not to come home fo foon. My aftoniihment was raifed to the high¬ eft pitch when I found the Countefs wait¬ ing for me at the landing-place, leaning her head againft the baluftrade of the ftair¬ cafe. She no fooner faw me, than flic ex¬ claimed, in a trembling accent, " Oh ! Carlos!" I could not conceive what that ftrange ejaculation meant, and quickened my paces, expecting every moment that fhe would faint away. When I came to the top of the ftairs, flie added fobbing, « Merciful God ! О my God !" " What has happened to you, Madam?" I replied. u Are you not well?" " I am
" I am very ill» Carlos," fhe refumed, rai ring her head. I never faw a more hag¬ gard and ghaftly countenance than hers* " Have pity with me, Carlos !" fhe added : " For God's fake, have pity with me!" I thought her intellects were difordered, " or very near being fo. What could I do? Prudence forbade me to flatter her paffion even for a moment only; and if I had been prompted by an ill-timed compaffion with her lamentable ftate, I fhoulď have run the danger of being overheard by the Count, whofe heart was dearer to me than , life. I did not know what to reply. ic Heavens!, have you no feeling at all, Carlos?'* fhe exclaimed. cf For God's fake, my lady," I replied, in a low whifper, u what is the matter with you? Confider the place, and that the Count is not yet gone to bed/' " Well, then, come into my apart¬ ment." €ζ I believe the Count has feen, and waits for mc," u Come
** Come into my apartment!** fhe re¬ peated, with great emotion. " Beit, deareft Caroline," I replied, frightened at her fituation, " what is the matter with you ? You arc beyond yourfelf. Shall I call fomebody ?" She íhook her head. " You wont to communicate fomething to me? But confider the unfeafonable hour and the place. 1 rather will meet you to¬ morrow after midnight in the garden, if you infift upon fpeaking to me in pri¬ vate.*' " Will you, Carlos? Will you indeed?'* fhe exclaimed, with the greateft emotion. " Yes, yes % I knew that you ftill have forne love for me.*' She was going to prefs me to her panting bofom; but I turned fuââenly round, pretending to hear a diftant noife, and led her to her apart¬ ment. Having placed her on her fofa, I withdrew filently ; but (he called after me, « To-morrow night, Carlos ! To-morrow night!" chapter
CHAPTER XL I WAS in the greateft diftrefs about the propereft meafure I was to take. I could not avoid the nocturnal meeting without treachery; and yet felt myfelf bound by every tie of honour and friend¬ fhip to inform the Count of the whole affair. I pretended, therefore, to go to my apartment, but went on tip-toe to the Count. He was already uçdrefled, and occupied with reading; but I could per* ceive, by his looks, that his mind was agitated. Being defirous to know whether he had hada difpute with the Countefs at fupper, I began, in a tender accent, " How are >ou, Lewis? How does the t Countefs?" c< I don't believe," he replied, " that flie is gone to bed. She was, to night, uneafier than I ever faw her. She has wept from morning till night, and found fault with
with every thing. What iliall I do with that whimfical woman?" " Send her to the cloifter where the Marchionefs is," I replied imprudently. He ftared at me with wild and anxious looks, exclaiming, in an agony of defpair, « Oh ! my God ! Oh í heavenly Father ! for what a dreadful fate haft thou preferved me!" " You fee, Lewis, you are to have no preference before your friend. A limila- rity of our fate and our forrows is to ce¬ ment our union more firmly ľ* " But have I deferved it, Marquis? Have I neglected one of my conjugal du¬ ties? Have I not done every thing to pleafc her, and were not all my moft anxious endeavours fruitlcfs? My very tendernefs feemed to make her more averie to me?*' " And I, Lewis?" He fell into meditation. "> You are right, friend of my heart!" he refumed after fome reflection. " I repeat the words 2 I have
I have already aliedged; let the world never fay that a woman has interrupted the union of two fouls like ours." " This opennefs is a proof that you know me! Rely upon the fidelity of your Carlos." " But what do you intend to do?" I acquainted him with the whole of my adventure on the ftaircafe. Expecting that my relation would reduce him to defpair, I was aftoniihed to fee him fmile, while a few gentle tears glided down his cheeks, and the gloom that overihaded his brow gradually brightened up. That uncom¬ mon phenomenon was, at bottom, not difficult to be accounted for. He had, indeed, never doubted the rectitude of his friend, but was furprifed to find him fo totally devoid of vanity and of prefumption, fo candid and open. The fweet fympathy uniting our fouls was more to him than the moft ardent love; and was it matter of aftonifhment that the raptures of the for¬ mer gradually obliterated the fufferings of the
the latter? He was too much occupied with my image, than that any thing cife could have found room in his noble foul. " Oh! my Jonathan, my fécond felf !" he exclaimed with ecftafy, when I had concluded my narrative, u are you really a mortal? are you really my friend? Oris my happinefs only the work of a delufive dream? 0 u No, no % Lewis ! my love for you is reality. Your Carlos is not ungrateful. Has he not reafon to prefer you to all mortals? Have we not repeatedly tried each other? You have, perhaps, fre¬ quently found me weak and ir refolute; but falfe!—Lewis!— " Never, never! Let us frequently re¬ new the bond of eternal friendfhip! Hea¬ ven and earth maydiflblve, but our friend¬ ihip fliall laft for ever!*' We agreed to try gentle means once more with the Countefs. He hated all feverity; though it was the only thing that could have been applied with fuccefs in
in the beginning. The appointed rendez¬ vous promifed to give me the beft oppor¬ tunity for an explanation; and the Count left it to my eloquence, and to the influ¬ ence I had gained upon Caroline, to-ren¬ der that explanation as ftrong and affect¬ ing as poifible. I infifted upon his being a fecret witnefs of our difcourfc. He ftarted numberlefs objections; but con¬ fented at length, when I vow r cd to keep the affignation only under that condition. Heaven only knows in what a ftate of mind I fpent the reft of the night, and the fubfequent day. My foul was fo violently agitated, that I have only an ob¬ fcure idea of the fenfations that pervaded my mind. I was entirely occupied with thinking of what I ihould fay to combat her fooliih paffion, and even neglected to obferve the Count and his lady mean¬ time. My friend appeared to be neither more nor lefs attentive to Caroline during that interval; for it was of the higheft im- Vol. IV, I portance
portance to make her fecure, as our inti¬ macy eafily could have excited her fuf¬ picion. The Countefs ate not a morfei at fup¬ per, being fcarcely able to conceal the tremor that pervaded her frame and at laft entirely loft the command over her wandering, imprudent looks. The Count was as kind as ever, but ftruggled in vain to conceal his anxiety. I, on my part, was intolerably merry, jocofe without wit, talkative without fenfe, and gallant with¬ out any defire of pleafing. The Countefs had not the courage to rife firft from table, notwithftanding her impatience at the long duration of ^r meal, being fearful to excite fufpicion. Yet her internal difpleafure could not be difguifed, fpeaking loudly through her gloomy looks, and, at length, venting it¬ felf through half-ftifled fighs. The Count did not lofe fight of his lady for a fingle moment, and was obliged to rife firft, his agitation encreafing fo violently, that he feared
feared not to be able to conceal it any lon¬ ger. He pretended to have a violent head-ache, wifhed Caroline a good night» prefled her hand tenderly, and retired. I ftaid a few minutes longer, and infinuated to her, that we could not truft the Count, and ought to be circumfpect. We then began to converfe on indifferent fubjeets ; but I could not prevent her rifing, and preifing me violently to her bofom. Hav¬ ing difengaged myfelf from her arms, I retired to my bed-chamber, after I had given the pre-concerted fignal to my un- fortunate friend. The night was fine and ferene, as warm as one could expect it in October. I was half an hour before the appointed time at the fpot fixed for our interview. My heart beat anxioufly, my fenfes were agi¬ tated by every diftant ruftling, a::d I ftruggled in vain to conquer the ominous bodings which affailed me. The vapours of the pond, which was before me, rofe in wonderful ihapes, and 1 ft floated
floated over the turfy back ground of the garden. The pale orb of the moon emerged from the gloomy womb of a dark cloud, and trembled in the blue ether, herfilver rays fkipping on the curl¬ ing waves of the water. My heated ima¬ gination transformed the nodding íhades of the trees, and the floating vapours, into fpirits celebrating their nocturnal revels, and produced ftrange, unutterable fenfations in my heart. The foft ftream of my fancies tranfported me to fairy re¬ gions, and totally avocated my ideas from reality. I had forgot Caroline, and all my fine plans, when fuddenly a foft, warm hand took hold of mine. An un¬ expected eleflric ftroke could not have furprifed me more violently. I ihuddered vehemently: it was the Countefs, who faid, with an angelic fmile, « Have I fur¬ prifed you, Carlos! But why are you frightened at your Caroline?" She gave me no time to return an anfwer. Before I could collea myfelf fufficiently, I felt myfelf
myfelf enfolded by her foft arms, and my face covered with burning kiffes. I fcarcely could refift a human wcaknefs, the defi re of returning to her rofy lips the animated kiffes, which thrilled .my whole frame with unutterable fenfations; only the idea of the Count's prefence enabled me to difengage myfelf from the fweet cnchantrefs. She was ftartled; but I left her no time for a moment's reflection, taking her by the hand, and leading the trembling woman to a turf-feat contiguous to the pond. She perceived my careful- nefs, and fank again enraptured into my arms. I do not think that it would have been in my power to refift Caroline's ardent kiffes, her fupplicating pofture, and her tears, if ihe had been capable to rekindle a fingle fpark of my former paffion for her, and if we had been unobferved. This was one of the motives that urged me to infift upon the Counťs prefence; for I had made the unfortunate obferva- 13 tion
tion that Caroline had, for fome days, appeared to me handfomer than ever. Her impatience had, befides, made her as charming that night as a woman can be. She faw that I endeavoured to dÜenaarc о о myfelf from her; but thinking that this was nothing but affectation, would not let me go. " Why do you ftruggle to difen¬ gage yourfelf from my arms, Carlos?" •fhe fáid fmiling. (< No, no! you filali not efcape me this time, as you did yef- terdav!" f( And yet, I muft, Caroline. Recol¬ lect yourfelf, deareft friend. You know I am your friend ; but I am alfo the inti¬ mate friend of your hufband," She ihuddered violently, flatting from my arras with a convulfive emotion, as if I had been a hideous moniter. Her looks fparkied with burning rage; and fhe re¬ plied, with a contemptuous fiiccr, " Vile wretch! is this the reception you have prepared for me, and that your perfidious looks promifed?" « Yesj
" Yes, it is. Did you not want a confi¬ dant to communicate forne fecret forrow to in private ? Did you not choofe mc to be your friend, and demand any thing- better and more noble from me, than the fincereft friendfhip?" The accent of my words plainly befpoke the emotion of my heart. She was af¬ fected, and eafed her ftraitened bofom by heavy fighs ; and dropping on her knees, faid, in a fupplicating pofture, <( No, no, Carlos; I neither wiih for friendfhip, nor for confidence: what I defire is love, an ardent and everlafting love/ í have no fecret to difclofe to you, befides that of my love. Love for you is the only bur¬ den that bends me down; I lay it down at your feet; and, God knows, if you don't accept of it, I fliall patiently bear it to my grave.'* I fobbed and wept aloud; and am fure the Count, who witnefled the whole fccne, alfo could not retain his tears. They flowed for his erring, unhappy wife; mine 14 flowed
flowed for him. I endeavoured to raife the Countefs up, but flie was ftronger than myfelf. u Rife, Caroline/* I re¬ plied : " you defire too much of me. My heart has been deadened by fevere afflic¬ tions, and beats only faintly even for its deareft friends. Could fuch a heart be acceptable to Caroline?" I imagined this expedient would be the fafeft and gentlèft to recai her to her duty ; but it did not fucceed. ft No! no!" flie exclaimed, " You cannot deceive me, Carlos ; love is more keen-fighted than you think. I know and have obferved you fecretly for years, and am convinced that your heart is but too fenfible. Alas! you are fo good, fo kind to every one, and only to me you would be cruel." <c No, Caroline. The wife of the friend of my bofom always will be dear to my heart. I loved you once with a vio¬ lent, juvenile ardour: you repelled my paffion with fcorn ; and in that moment I repofed all my claims to your heart into the
the hands of the worthieft, the beft of men." I chofe this language on purpofe, hoping that it would exafperate her; but ihemif- underftood me, imagining that it pro¬ ceeded from a kindling fpark of love and jealoufy ; and exerting herfelf to the ut¬ moft of her power to blow it up into a flame, " And can you really make me that reproach?" ihe replied. " Can you be fo cruel to a poor unhappy woman, dead for the world, and for herfelf?" Have I not fufficiently atoned for my dreadful error? Have I not lingered away the rofy time of my youth, the bloom of my life, feparated from you? And can you now repel me with fcorn, when I re¬ turn repenting to you, offering every atonement I can make?*' She lifted her hands up to heaven, and dropt upon the ground entirely exhaufted. I availed myfelf of that opportunity to raife her up, and to place her by my fide upon the turf-feat. She fhed a torrent of I 5 tears,
tears, and wrung her hands in a convul- iive agony. No man ever has been in a fituation like mine. I was watched, and yet entirely left to myfelf. I could ex¬ pect no affiftance in that dreadful diftrefs but from myfelf. I implored all the powers of Heaven to come to my relief. u Deareft Countefs,'* I now refumed, cf you never was in a greater error than at prefent. I do not deferve your love, nor ever did. Were it otherwife, would you then have forgot me fo foon, and fo completely?" " So fion! Jo completely! did you fay? Heavenly powers î Can you perfecute me with fuch a dreadful, unrelenting ire? And have I nothing to hope, Marquis? Nothing at all ? Good God ! why don't you fpeak? Why have you appointed this meeting, in fuch a damp, foggy, and' dark night?" She began to rave. The images her troubled hncy formed were incoherent and wild ; her words disjointed. Her whole frame was in a convulfive tremor, her
her face wan, and her eye dim and over¬ clouded. The pale light of the moon rendered her afpect ftill more ghaftly and horrible: The moral lecture which I was going to read to her, all the fine fenti¬ ments of wifdom and virtue I intended to urge, were filenced at once. She feemed to hear me no more, ejaculating only hol¬ low and unintelligible accents. I was be¬ reft of the power of reflecting, and held her hands mechanically in mine* A low ruftling excited her attention; and flie raifed herfelf flowly, directing her fearful looks at the fpot whence it pro¬ ceeded. But fhe averted them fuddenly, feized with horror; her hair began to briftle, and her face to glow. She puflicd me violently back ; and ftarting up in a fit of wild frenzy, was going to plunge into the pond. I caught her in my arms. Her looks liad catched the Count, who haftened to my affiftance. Shame, fury, difappointed and fcorned love, deprived her of the ufe of her intelleds: the pain î 6 which
which had been rankling in her heart for a long time, now broke forth with impe¬ tuofity, contracted her veins, and ftopt the courfe of her blood. The poor Count was reduced by that fhocking fight to a ftate not much better than heťs. Caro¬ line refembled a lifelefs corpfe before we arrived at the caftle. All our endeavours to reftore her to Ufe were fruitlefs for- fome time. At length fhe opened her eyes, and began to fpeak; but, alas! her underftanding was difor¬ dered. She miftook me for the Count, but would fuffer neither of us to come near her. She recovered but flowly, and had fre¬ quent relapfes. We went but feldom to her apartment; and flie feemed to have loft all recollection of us. She fpoke to no perfon, her little boy excepted, with whom fhe amufed herfelf conftantly. He fat all the day long on her bed, and they diverted themfelves with infantine gambols. Nothing
Nothing was fpared to exhilarate the gloom of her mind; but fhe feemed to be dead to every thing, having completely loft all recollection of her former friends. A deep melancholy preyed on her mind, and all the faculties of her foul were in a kind of lethargy. The Count was at a lofs what he fhould do, and, at length, aiked me whether I did not think a journey to Italy would be of fervice to her? I advifed him to propofe it to the Countefs, but ihe could not be perfuaded to return an anfwer, ftaring at him like a perfon that hears fome words without comprehending their meaning, and cafting her eyes down again. I now thought that it, perhaps, would be better to carry her to the cloifter at D******, where my Adelheid was; being firmly perfuaded that their former friend¬ ihip would revive again, and fome happy change might be effected by the recipro¬ cal communication of their fentiments; for nothing is more capable to roufe the torpid
torpid fenfes from their lethargy, than the fweet recollection of paft times, fpent in a happy congeniality of foul with a dear and defervi ng friend. Being, however, ignorant of Adelheid's real ftate of mind, about which her tender letters were entirely filent, I hefitated to expofe the Countefs to a far greater dan¬ ger, inftead of curing her. I alio appre¬ hended Adelheid *s returning love for me might provoke the Countefs's jealoufy, and then every thing would have been loft. I agreed, therefore, with the Count, to make a little excurfion to D******, to inform myfelf of the real ftate of Adel¬ heid's mind. I began my journey with¬ out delay, and wrote to the Marchionefs on the road, informing her of an intended vifit from the Countefs of S******; painted my face and eye-brows, laid a large patch upon my right eye; and having exchanged my garments for a pea¬ fanťs drefs, proceeded on foot to D******, to
to deliver the letter myfelf, difguifed as a meíľenger. The nuns were at chapel when I ar¬ rived; and I had fufficiently time to fift the portrefs about Adelheids fiate of mind. " Is this the cloifter of D******? 1 ' I began with an affected ruiticity, and gap¬ ing at the direction of the letter. " Where elfe fhould it be, mafter block¬ head?" ihe replied, in a morofe accent. " But what have you got there? For whom is that letter?" With thefe words ihe was going to fnatch the letter from my hand, but I retreated a few iteps, refuming, " Does a certain Marchionefs of G****** live in this cloifter?" "The poor Marchionefs! Is the letter for her? I will run and inform her of the joyful neves ; for I dare fay you come from the Marquis. She almoit devours his letters, even before fne has read them/' She was going to fliut the door in my face, and
and to run to the Marchionefs, but I exclaimed, " One word more, miftrefs ! one word more, if you pleafe!'* She turned round, and replied, " Well, what do you want? Don* t detain me long; I have no time to lofe.*' " Will you not tell me who that Mar¬ chionefs of G****** is?" I afked, appre¬ hending that her fatal hurry would leave me no time to fift her fufficiently. But I had fcarcely touched the floodgates o/ her eloquence, when they opened at once, difcharging an overflowing ftream of thoughts, which, perhaps, had burdened her mind for fome time. " What!'* fhe exclaimed, "are you fo impudently curious to afk me fuch quef¬ tions? The Marchionefs of G******, you muft know, is fuch a great lady, that you don't deferve to pronounce her name.'* " Well! \\eil! my good lady,'* I replied, coaxing her, " I have feen the King of France, and the handfome majeftic Queen, the dear Dauphin, and the charming Princefs
Princefs, who has fuch fine eyes, that I could have given her a kifs.*' I made, at the fame time, a pantomine with my hand, which plainly and ftrongly exprefled that defire. The nun crimfoned at that profane expreifion, but, neverthelefs, could not help fmiling at it. " What an abominable fellow you are! But to return to the dear Marchionefs, I muft tell you, that I did not call her a great lady on account of her high rank, but becaufe of her mildnefs, gentlenefs, kindnefs, and virtue." " And virtue?" I repeated mechani¬ cally. "She did nothing but weep, at firft; and grief almoft reduced her to a living fkeleton. None of us could prevail upon her to fpeak. What ails you, dear Mar¬ chionefs? what is the matter with you? all of us aiked. There was not one fifter in the cloifter that was not curious to know the caufe of her grief." " I believe
"I believe it!" I replied fmiling. But, fortunately, I recollected that this was too witty for a fimple clown, adding, " I ihould like to know it myfelf/' " No perfon can tell it with certainty.'* " But what do you think may be the reafon ?'* She feemed to hefitate; but, at length* refumed, ft They fay the Marquis is very- hot; and who knows how he may have treated her?*' "Good God!" I thought, <c fomc per¬ fon muft have betrayed her; but who can guefs at the real ground of her melan¬ choly, befides ourfelves?" M Has the Marquis, perhaps, been jea¬ lous?" I replied. " That would have been very natural, if fhe is really fo handfome/* "No, it is impoflible íhe could have given him a reafon for it; for ihe is a pattern of goodnels and virtue. Several people have been here to fee and to fpeak to her: however, ihe never would receive a drangen
a ftranger. I rather think the hot-headed, wild Marquis is the caufe of her grief." This took a great load from my heart; and I cared little for the flander which was directed at me, if but the honour of my poor wife was fpared. " There you are right, miftrefs,'* I ex¬ claimed : " the Marquis is really a very hot-headed man. He has already played numberlefs wild tricks; and Heaven only knows how many more he will play." " Then you know him?" " Who fhould not know him ? But only from heariay; you underftand me, mif¬ trefs? All the world fpeaks of it." "Will you not tell mea little of it?" " By and by, dear lady/* I replied. " The fervice will now be over; and I am directed to give this letter into the Mar¬ chionefs's own hands. Will you be fo good to inform her of it?" " I fear flie will not confent to fee you.'* « Tell
* c Tell her only that I come from the Marquis, and have orders to deliver the letter to nobody but herfelf." I was fure that ihe would admit a mef- fenger from her confort, how great foever her averfion from ftrangers might be. I, therefore, prepared already anfwers to a thoufand anxious queftions; and my im¬ prudent heart flattered itfelf with the hope that, perhaps, a fecret boding would whifper to her who was concealed under that mafk. But that was thefureft way of betraying myfelf, if the tender tenour of the letter fhould leave her only a little at¬ tention for other objects. The portrefs returned after a few mi¬ nutes, with the intelligence that ihe had orders to (hew me to the parlour. My knees fhook, and my legs fcarcely could carry me. My heart either muft have palpitated audibly, or my impatience have exprefled itfelf by forne hafty gefture. In fhort, my conductrefs gazed at me with a dubious
a dubious look when flie opened the par¬ lour door. Adelheid was waiting for me when I came to the grate. Without deigning to look at me, ihe took the letter eagerly out of my hand, examining the direction and the feal, kiffed and opened it. She read, however, with fo much impatience, that ihe was frequently obliged to begin again, in order to underftand the import of its contents. I was, mean time, at leifure to examine the countenance of my wife, and found her features exactly correiponding with thofe that were deeply engraven in my heart. My looks gazed with inward rapture at her fweet Madonna-face ! Her pale and interefting features unfolded themfelves clearer and heavenlier the more ihe comprehended the import of the let¬ ter. I faw her pure foul reftored again to the throne of innocence, candour, and tender friendihip, which fhe formerly had graced in fuch an adorable manner. " I thank you, ye benevolent heavenly powers!"
powers!" I faid within myfelf: "My wife is again deferving of my love," A big tear fparkied in her eye when flic had finiihed the letter, dropping upon the paper, while ihe kifled it once more. fC Do you come directly from S******, good friend ! ь íhe faid, putting the letter into her bofom. <c Directly from S******, Madam." " Do you know the Marquis of *' Who ihould not know him ? He is kind to every one, and wiihes to make all the world happy." Thefe words ftruck her heart. " You are right," flie fighed; " but he may fre¬ quently lavifh his benefactions upon un¬ grateful people." « The world is full of fuch wretches, Madam." Her eyes gliftened again with a pearly dew; but the internal confcioufnefs of her guilt rendered thofe tears fufpicious; flie
íhe averted her face, wiping her cheeks with her handkerchief. " Do you fee him frequently ?'* « Yes, Madam V' " You are happier than me!" " Why, Madam? you too will fee him again!*' " God blefs you for that word, good man. I will remember you if I ever fliall leave thefe cloiftered walls. Take this little badge of my gratitude for your gladfome meflage.' 3 With thefe words flie offered me a piece of gold through the grate. I feized her .hand, and im¬ printed fervent kiifes upon it. But while I kept it enfolded in mine, I took a diamond ring, which was well known to her, out of my pocket, flipping it on the finger on which ihe wore her wedding ring, and left her abruptly. " Eternal God! what is this?" flie exclaimed, when I opened the door. " Should it------For God's fake, ftay a little ľ* But I fhut the door, and hurried away. CHAPTER
CHAPTER ХИ. IT may eafily be conceived what reflec¬ tions occupied my mind on my return to the Count's caftle. I was almoft fran¬ tic with joy, and felt myfelf regenerated to a new life. My blood circulated quicker and warmer; a benign fire glowed in my breaft, animated my feelings, and gave wings to my ideas. What delightful plans did I now devife ! They appeared to me to be founded on a firm, unfhaken bafe. Heaven fmiled upon me with additional brightnefs; every threatening cloud had difappeared; the tempeft was blown over; a train of rofy hopes danced cheerfully before my enrap¬ tured foul. I was certain that Adelheid was able to cure the Countefs entirely from her men¬ tal difeafe. They were intimate friends in their infantine and juvenile days, and female forrows can meet vyith no fafer afylum
afylum than a female bofom affords. The meeknefs of my.wife promifed Caroline a fweet encouragement; her experience held out to her a fafe guide; her forro w a warn¬ ing example; and her returning virtue, and unfhaken friendfhip, affiftance, ad¬ vice., and lenient fympathy. But, alas! how prone is the feeble heart of man to deceive itfelf! Being a ftranger to futurity, deluded by felf-cre- ated dreams, intoxicated by its own feel¬ ings, and eafily to be impofed upon by lively hopes, it raifes its own fooliih be¬ lief to convincing certainty, fcarcely has conquered the impediments debarring it from happinefs, and no fooner begins to feel the bleifings of fweet tranquillity, than it is fuddenly overtaken again by new tempefts of adverfity. How could I, unhappy man! have ominated, òli drawing nearer to the caftle, the new misfortune that, during my ab¬ fence, had been prepared for me by my unhappy fate? The Count ftood at the Vol. IV. Κ , window
window, waving his handkerchief to me when he faw me at a diftance, and turn¬ ing afide, wiped his eyes. " Gracious Heaven !" I thought, "what can have happened? Should, per¬ haps, Caroline?—But, no; it cannot be. She was vifibly mending when I left the caftle. His lait letter was, indeed, me¬ lancholy enough; but he did not fpeak of himfelf; and rather feemed to be defirous to be capable of fpeaking comfort to my heart, and of reconciliating me to the mutability of lie. Me! But what can have happened? Should,perhaps,accounts from Spain? Impoffible !** My breaft was ftraitened by anxious bodings, and I fcarcely could fetch breath when the car¬ riage ftopt at the caftle. The Count came down the fteps to meet me. His face was extremely pale and difordered: his gloomy looks were fixed at me with fome dreadful myfterious meaning; and he en¬ circled me warmer and clofer than ufual when I ruíhed into his arms. His wan¬ dering
dering eyes were big with tears, and his hand trembled in mine. I gazed at him with marks, of the higheft afloniflimcnr. He feemed not to be able to bear my look, and caft his heavy eyes to the ground. u Are you not well, deareft friend," I began. " I am very indifferent, dear Carlos." cc How is Caroline?" I refumed haftily. tc She is much better, and eafier: very melancholy, but knows mc again. She was very ferene yefterday. However, you fliall fee her yourfelf." The good Count endeavoured to divert my attention from himfelf, and to prevent mc from aiking more queftions; but my heart was too full, and I refumed, trem¬ bling, «has fomething elfe happened?" He meditated a while, and affecting an indifferent tone, replied, in a tranquil, but audibly trembling, accent, «Nothing, that I know of, Carlos!" " And yet your looks are fo ominous, fo entirely altered!" К г " Can
"Can you really wonder at it? Does my fituation afford me any ground for cheerfulnefs ?" " But for defpondency neither !" I now gave him a brief account of all my hopes and profpecb. He thanked and embraced me. и Believe me, Car¬ los!" he added, fobbing, and with an agony which he could no longer conceal, " I ever, ever fhall love you." We now approached the apartment of the Countefs. He opened the door, I looked at him with aftoniihment ; but he replied, fmiling, " You fee I live on a very friendly footing with her. It would certainly have grieved her, if you had not furprifed her once more." The Countefs fat at her ufual place, reading in a book. When we entered the room, flie laid it down, looking at us without either furprife or aftoniihment. Her beautiful eyes were more ferene than ufual. She rofe, extending her hand to me without any affectation, and gave me a cordial
a cordial welcome, making room for me on the fofa. She then enquired after my health, and the hiftory of my journey, with fo much unconcern and natural grace, that I fcarcely could conceal my furprife. Yet this only ferved to encreafe my appre¬ henfions. I knew but too well that wounds which clofe fo foon generally break open again in a moft dangerous manner. The Counťs downcaft looks plainly told me that he was of the fame opinion. She endeavoured to fmile, but the tempeit through which* the fun ihone was not quite blown over, and it was un¬ certain whether it was drawing nearer or paifing away. Her eyes itili flared too much at the objects, or ftrangcly wandered from one to the other. Her countenance had loft its amiable expreffion; and being inanimated, and devoid of every paffion, it caufed difagreeablc fenfations in the be¬ holder. It is extremely difguiting to hear fentiments uttered that are not expreffed &3 by
by a concomitant gefture bearing their beautiful ftamp. However lamentable this was, yet it did not appear to me a fufficient ground for the Counťs defponding melancholy ; for all thefe fymptoms contained nothing that was not a natural effect of her illnefs, or cou Id not be expected to be cured by the lenient hand of time. I was impa¬ tient to be alone with my friend, to learn what gloomy fpot in his foul my hopes could not brighten up, and to pour the healing balfam of fympathizing friendfhip into his wounded heart. We fupped earlier than ufual, that I fhould go to reft in good time. I never had fpoken fo little at our meals. The Countefs looked ftaring at the light, per¬ illing the flight of a fly, which, at lait, burned itfelf, and dropt dead upon the" table. »Don Carlosi" fhe faid, "do you think that there can cxift a beatiti- fuller iymbol of love than that fly, who plunged
plunged into the light to be confumcd by the fíame?" I trembled at that new eruption of her paifion, and was at a lofs what anfwer ï fhould return to that unexpected queftion. I confulted the looks of the Count: how* ever, he played with his knife upon the jjîate, and feemed to be entirely abforpt in thought«, 1 took this for a hint to do the fame, and caft down my eyes as if I had heard nothing. The Countefs darted a cutting look at mc, but did not deign to repeat her queftion. This little incident changed at once the fituation of my mind. My breath was ftraitened, the rofy dawn of hope died away, and I trembled at the idea of her being fent to my wife, with whofe conduct I was fo highly fatisfied. Nothing is more catching to a fenfible heart than melan¬ choly; and who could forefee whether it would not finally turn in my wife into bitternefs and hatred againft mankind, if frequently provoked by jealoufy in Caro* К 4 line's
line's company. Thefe refleâions were fo much the more painful and alarming, as I durft not communicate them to the Count. We retired, at length, to my apartment. The Count feated himfelf by my fide upon the fofa, and affectionately took hold of my hand. 1 ftared with af- toniihment at him, while he meditated upon what he was going to fay. " But why am I an x i ou ft y fearching for words to explain myfelf to you?" he, at laft, be¬ gan : f c Is not Carlos a man ? Have we not jointly borne fo many evils, and has not our union rendered the load of mifery eafier?'* " Deareft Count/' I replied refolutely, though trembling, u your anxious looks, your circumlocutions, your ominous pre¬ parations, are worfe than death itfelf. Let me hear the worft at once! Why would you agonize the heart of your friend by your tormenting anxioufnefs? Do I ap¬ pear fo cowardly and pufillanimous to you, as not to be able to face boldly the moft dreadful
dreadful calamity? Have you ever feen me tremble at a danger?" " Your glowing fancy raves too wildly, dear Carlos. I intended to prepare you neither for death, terror, nor danger, I am going to difclofe to you a moft affecting fcene, that will lacerate your feeling heart, and for which you cannot be prepared. Come with me, friend of my bofom, Your Lewis will mingle his tears with yours. Your friend will once more fwear the folemn oath of eternal fidelity and love at the altar of grief." He encircled me with weeping eyes* raifing me from the fofa-. We went into the garden, and he conducted me to the labyrinth in gloomy filence. The night was cold and ftormy; the dry leaves ruf- tied beneath our footfteps. Black clouds fwept the horizon with great velocity; a folitary ftar twinkled now and then through the leaflefs branches of the trees ; a damp mift obfcured the objects that furrounded us, 4 and was raifed in various fhapes by К 5 the
•the fwelling wind. The general torpor of decaying nature harmonized with the numbneís of my heart; the horrors of death were paiTed over, and methought the eternal filence of the grave furround¬ ed me. The Count led me towards the pavi¬ lion which I had cauíèd to be built over Ehe famous, myfterious grotto. As foon as we got within fight of it, my friend faid, in a trembling accent, " Know, Carlos, that James has brought me the dear treafure I am going to ihew you now." " James!" I exclaimed, feized with aC tonifhment. " He told me that was his name, and that you did know him very well. He was going with his lady to a country in the North, and expecting to find you at my caftle, called here, but ftaid only a few moments. We too are old acquain¬ tances, for he was the ftranger who wanted to fettle in our neighbourhoodi and
and difappeared fo fuddenly. He told me; on taking leave, <c Inform your friend that the confederation has been difit/Ived, and ' that he is fafe. The death of Don Bern- hard and the fervant excited the attention* of the police : we were furprifed in the centre of our refidence, and only a few efeaped.'" « Eternal God!—and Rofalia?" " He did not mention a word about her: I believe ihe did not live to witnefs- that fcene." « Not live?' 9 u It is but too certain, dear Carlos! 17 So faying, he opened the door of the pavilion. The walls- were hung with' black]: a folitary lamp, fufpended to the ceiling, fpread a pale melancholy light through the awful fpace; and two more burnt with a dying glimmer on an altar in the back ground. An alabalter urn ftood in their middle. I difengaged myfelf from the Count's arm, and rufiling towards that melancholy fanituary, beheld thefe К 6 two*
two words, written with black letters, upon the urn: « Rofalia* s heart." "Be a man, Carlos !" the Count faid. " Do you fee me fwoon, at the foot of the altar, like a woman? Or do I weep like a child over the facred relics in that urn?" He faw that my agony was the more violent, becaufe it was not attended with tears, and, enfolding me with his arms, fighed, u Carlos, you have a tender friend, that filares your grief." Ci T know it, and thank you for that token of your love. If ever I could have doubted it, this teftimony of your love would have gained you my affection for ever. You honour the memory of my dear, departed Rofalia : this deferves my eternal gratitude." We dropped fpeechlefs upon our knees at the foot of the altar, and mingled our tears. I do not know by what accident, the Counfefs happened to be in the garden at the fame time* She faw us walk arm in arm,
arm, and with an unufual impetuofity, through the garden : a natural impulfe of curiofity tempted her to follow us; and feeinsf us kneel down at the foot of the altar, dropt alfo on her knees behind us, without knowing the meaning of our pof¬ ture. Her ftraitened bofom feemed te> have watched for a pretext to vent its cut¬ ting agony through fighs a,nd tears. A ruftling at the door difturbed us in our devotion: the Count flarted up, and look¬ ing round, beheld his wife, kneeling be¬ hind him. He raifed her up, and. leading her towards me, faid, with tender emo¬ tion, €i Rofalia's heart is enclofed in that urn; mourn with our unhappy friend!** The dear woman encircled me with her arm without referve or fear; the Count preffed her to my bofom, and fhe kiffed the tears from my checks.
CHAPTER
CHAPTER ХШ. THE Count now carried Caroline to- D******. Adelheid was animated with new life on feeing her old friend again. The fweet re-union with the partner in her juvenile pleafurcs feemed already, in the ñrñ hour, to cafe the heavy load of her forrows. The Count beheld with pleafure the happy change the fociety of Caroline's new companion had pro¬ duced, during the fhort time of his ftay, on his wife's mind^ and returned with fanguine hopes to the caftle, where I, mean time, had fpent my hours with pleafing reveries. Futurity ferenely fmiled at me through the tears of the prefent moment ; and profpecb of better days foothed the melancholy that hung on my afflided mind. The Count found me eafier on his return than he had expected, and thinking that a change of objects would completely cure both of us, brought the journey to 5 Italy
Italy again upon the carpet. The time of the carnival was near, and we refolved to go to Venice. Having informed our ladies of our refolution, promifing to re¬ turn in a twelvemonth, we departed. We ftopped fome time on the road, James*s account having made me fecure. I ought, perhaps, not to have put fuch an implicit confidence in his aflurance; but my poor heart eagerly grafped at every friendly fupport on the ftormy ocean of grief. I had taken the firm refolution to be tranquil, and to grieve for nothing in the world. 1 ftrove to enjoy every plea¬ fure with an unpaifionate mind, and found in the novelty and variety of the characters and manners I met with, an ample fcope for attention and diverfion. The higheft warmth of human nature blown up to a devouring flame by a voluptuous clime, a lubricous wit, a hot andinfatiable temper; jealous men, who, at the fame time, are reduced to abject flavcry by the gratifica¬ tions of fcnfuality ; confined and libidinous women 5
women ; all this could not but produce ä mixture of forms that wanted no difguife to compofe 4 mafquerade. Although I was fufceptible only of a tender and rea* fonable love, yet I found, as a diftant fpectator, numberlefs new charms in the moft violent eruptions of a paffion whofe power I had experienced but too fen- fibly. The Cornit fhared my obfervations and feelings. We imagined to be already too old and experienced than to have any thing ţo fear of that omnipotent paffion. But that infatuation nearly had proved fatal to us on feveral occafions, where no danger would have threateaed us if we had been more cautious. We efcaped with the greateft difficulty thofe little fnares which the leaft circumfpection would have dif- eovered to us ; the feducing, wanton gef¬ tures which every Italian has at her conv mand; the flatteries which allured, and thee repelled, us again; the licence that knows no reftraiat; the charms of the fafhionable
fafiıionable tone; and, finally, the un¬ bounded licentioufnefs to which the mafk feduces or intitles every one at that fea- fon. The conflux of foreigners at Venice was uncommon, and no one remembered to have feen fuch a fplendid carnival. The place of St. Mark was crowded all the day long by numberlefs whimfical mafks: plays, bails, and pleafure parties, afforded a fpacious field for intrigues, and every day produced new forts of amufement. The man who is not fuccefsful with the ladies of Venice ought to give up all far¬ ther claims to love. We were met half- ways in various manners. Our names went before us$ and as we had not the leaft reafon for living incognito, we en¬ deavoured to do honour to our rank by a becoming fplendor. We were, therefore, looked upon as very good conquefts. The Count was, befides, one of the fineft and handfomeft men I ever faw; his pleafant and more flattering than offending wit enchanted
enchanted every one, while the gcnerofity and opcnnefs of his character conquered all hearts. I pofľeíľed, indeed, more knowledge of the world, and the female fex, than my friend; but, neverthelefs, acted always only a fubaltern part in great circles w hen I was İn his company. ] was tempted neither by envy nor jealoufy to impede him in his fplendid career, arreft- ing him only occafionally, when í thought he encroached too much upon Caroline's rights. He loved me fo tenderly, that he would have entirely fubmitted to my guid¬ ance; however, his warm temper, and the uncommon fenfibility of his heart, urging him to return every inclination, feduced him into many exceffes which I could not behold with indifference. He was, indeed, not inclined to mere fenfual love, which prevails at Venice ; yet it was concealed under fuch a charm¬ ing cloak of tendernefs, fentiment, and .difintereftednefs, that it became dangerous to him. I frequently wifhed that he were attended
attended by a guardian genius, who could have watched him where he was out of the reach of my looks. The Duchefs of F****** nxeå t at laft, his tafle. She was adorned with all thofe qualities which the Count admired in a woman ; that expreffion which a nice fen¬ fibility imparts to a form rather fine than perfectly handfome; a humour that rather was good natured and cordial than bright; the art of not conferring her love, but of conceding every thing to importunate de¬ fires; of enhancing her favours, and of rendering them more valuable, by a fea- fonable coynefs; and of facrificing and yielding every thing to her lover, while ibe checked him and herfelf in the midft of the higheft enjoyment of the pleafures of love. Such a female character could fed u ce the Count to any thing. He confefled his fentiments to me with¬ out referve. I rejoiced iiricereiy at it; for a ferious paifion could not but divert him from exceifes of a more dangerous nature*
nature. He viewed his miftrefs merely in the light of a feeling woman, that was willing to render him happy by a tender friendihip. I confirmed him in his per« fuafion of the difintereftednefs and purity of her love, in order to make him averfe from an attempt againft a virtue that pro¬ bably was too weak as not to yield without great refiftance. The Duchefs being, however, not over partial to a long con¬ tinued reftrai nt, and ufed to fetter her countrymen through the fenfes, did not choofe to make an exception from her principles in a connection with a fo¬ reigner. She was married to an old and intole¬ rably jealous man, who confined the poor woman, that thirfted after gratification, and, perhaps, had not been guilty of an effential breach of truft before fhe got ac¬ quainted with the Count. The Duke had, till then, watched her fo clofely, that fhe was incapable of giving fo much encou¬ ragement to any тал as to animate him to undertake
undertake fomething extraordinary; and no one had, as yet, found out the fecret of gaining the confidence of her lord, fo far as to be admitted by him to the com¬ pany of his lady. The Count fucceeded, however, to gain the friendihip and con¬ fidence of the Duke, and was introduced by him to the Duchefs. He afterwards was obliged to fup or to dine almoft every day at his houfe, and generally fpent the reft of the night with his new friend, either with playing at chefs, or with roving the ftreets, or frequenting all balls, plays, and mafquerades, in his company. They ufed to mix in the moft whimfical difguife with the general buftle, to play numberlefs fooliih tricks, to their acquaintances, were feveral times in danger of being foundly cudgelled, and committed a thoufand merry follies. Although I knew that the Count reluc¬ tantly fuffered himfelf to be dragged through a confiant round of irrational pleafurcs, and that his foie view was to 4 ingratiate
ingratiate himfelf with the Duchefs, by removing her jealous fentinél, yet I thought he went too far. The price for which he facrificed his time and health appeared to me not to be worth the trouble he took of attaining it; and I endeavoured to reftrain him as much as poifible in his rakifli courfe of life. I had, indeed, not much reafon to fear that he would ruin his health and fortune, but trembled at the fatal im¬ preffion a continual diifimulation would make, at lait, on his amiable opennefs, and even on his unreftrained friendfhip for me. The Duchefs was highly fenfible of the great obligations fhe owed him for that diifolute courfe of life, which afforded them the beft opportunity of availing themfelves of the firft propitious moment to gratify their mutual \rifhes. Love, which had ftolen into their heart already, before the Duke introduced the Count to his houfe, taught them a thoufand little arts to impart their fentiments to each other
other unobferved by the world, and to de- vife the means of eluding the jealous vigi¬ lance of her lord. I alfo gained, at length, free admiifion to the houfe through the Count's inter- ceffion, but difplayed fo little care to im¬ prove that acquaintance, that the Duke did not think it worth his while to be jea¬ lous of me. I took, befides, very feldom a part in the amufements of thefe two friends; but when I did, always ihared their revels with fo much warmth, that the Duke imagined fomc fecret grief was rankling in my heart, and did every thing in his power to amufe me. Thus I be¬ came gradually his confidant, and had the pleafure to render many effential fcrvices to the lovers. Yet they were itili very far from the gaol of their wiihes; for al¬ though the Duchefs was not fo clofely watched as ufual, yet the Duke never loft fight of the Count. This reftrain t in¬ flamed, at length, the defires of the fair Italian
Italian in the higheft degree, and flie refolved to rifle and to hazard every thing. The lover was informed of this refolu¬ tion; receiving, at the fame time, the fevereft reproaches for his want of fpirit. The Duchefs threatened him with a noc¬ turnal vifit as foon as fhe ihould be able to give the flip to her vigilant keeper; and the Count, who now plainly perceived that his love w T as rather the effect of whim than of a ferious paifion, trembled at the danger which the execution of that refo¬ lution would expofe him to, and took every poifible precaution to obviate the fatal r confequences it might produce. The night which the Duchefs impati¬ ently was wiihing for arrived at length. Her lord returned, one evening, in fuch a dreadful ftate of intoxication to his pa¬ lace, that the Duchefs was obliged to fend for a phyfician ; but he was feized with fuch a violent fever, that he began to rave, which rendered it neceflary that he fhould be removed from his lady's apartment.
apartment. No fooner was the latter de¬ livered from her jealous fentinél, than flic * went through a back door out of the pa¬ lace, and got into a gondola, which had been in waiting for feveral nights. The Count had taken every precaution at our houfe to admit her without noife. He never went to bed before day-break ; and I was always on the watch, when he was obliged to go out, to let her in, and to fend him intelligence of her arrival. The Count always came home at an early hour, becaufe heexpected her every night ; and we generally beguiled the time by confidential difcourfes. He was in the greateft agitation; not relying much on the prudence of his miftrefs, who feemed to be entirely blinded by the impetuofity of her paifion. The leaft noife, a diftant ruftling, a cracking in the wood, made him ftart and tremble ; his countenance changed at every knock, even at the houfe of a neighbour« Vol. IV, L One
One night we heard, at length, a rap at our door : it was opened, but profound filence refumed its former fway. The Count ftarted up, and liftened; but fome minutes pafled without any farther noife being heard. It was improbable that fome other perfon than the Duchefs ihould have knocked; and yet fhe knew all the opportunities of our houfe perfectly. We could, therefore, not account for the filence which continued to prevail. The Count grew, at length, impatient, and taking a candle in his hand, went foftly to the door. Having liftened a while, he opened it, and faw fomething white lying on the uppermoft ftep. He ejaculated a loud feream, which prompted me to follow him precipitately. He had placed the candle on the ground, and was raifing up a lady that feemed to be lifelefs. Her veil was torn to pieces, and her gar¬ ments were in vifible diforder. I ftept nearer, and, to my utter aftoniihment, beheld the Duchefs in his arms. Our
Our nocturnal vifitor was only with the greateft difficulty reftored to the ufe of her fenfes, which, however, continued to be in great diforder. The firft found ihe uttered was a requeft to be carried back to her palace. We promifed to fee her fafe home, entreating her to make herfelf * eafy, and anxioufly enquired by what accident ihe had come into that fitua¬ tion. " Order your houfe to be fearched in¬ ftantly," flie replied, all in a tremor: " fome ftranger muft be concealed in it." The Count having rung the bell, and or¬ dered his fervants to feareh evejy corner, fhe refumed, " I arrived above half an hour fince at your door on the channel, but feeing two young men engaged in a deep converfation before your houfe, could not leave the gondola. They were dreffed in a kind of uniform, and fpoke very low, which prevented me to difcern the fubject of their difcourfe. Having waited a long time, and being afraid to lofe too much L 2 time.
time, I ventured, at length, to go on fhore, and to knock at your houfe. The door was opened, but in the moment I was going to enter, one of them threw me down, tore my veil from my face, and beat me till I fainted away. You know that I durft not venture to call for affift¬ ance, which encouraged them to treat me in fuch a manner, that the marks probably will remain on my frame for the reft of my life." So faying, fhe bared her arms, and a part of her neck, which was black and blue: we even found feveral marks of nails. " I affure you," fhe continued, " there is no part of my body that has not fuffered by thofe furious hands," The Count grew almoft diftračted at that fatal accident. He fetched his fword, and fwore that the ruffians fhould pay with their lives for their villainy. However, the Duchefs retained him, declaring that ihe had no time to lofe, and conjuring us to conduct her home without delay. 5 М У
My friend feeing that the morning was dawning, was fenfible of the reafonable- nefs of her requeft. We, therefore, arm¬ ed ourfelves, and faw the Duchefs to her palace. On our return, we fearched every corner of the houfe, but were not more fuccefsful than the fervants. The Count apprehended that accident would have greatly lefiened the paffion of his inamorata, or at leaft make her very careful for the future j and he was well aware that a woman that begins to reflect coolly on her paffion, is not very far from fuppreifing it entirely. . Yet the Duchefs was far from realizing his apprehenfions, and grew more daring than ihe ever had been. This created apprehenfions of a differ¬ ent nature in the Count's mind. The Duchefs's courage, which rather had en«* creafed than abated fince that nocturnal adventure, made her neglect all rules of prudence and found reafon. Her eyes gliftened with impatience, and her looks L 3 wandered
wandered about every where without re¬ ferve. The Duke was fortunately too much occupied with his illnefs to take notice of his lady's ftrange conduci:: her lover was, however, neverthelefs, con- flantly on the rack. The Duke was foon able to leave his bed, and refolved to give a little fcaft to his friends at his villa, in fpitc of winter and the badnefs of the weather. He was determined it fhould be as fplendid as poifible. The firft nobility were invited; the beit muíícians and fingers engaged; and he ftayed whole days there to make the neceffary preparations. Two days previous to that feaft, the Count happened to fall out with him at a coffee-houfe, leaving him abruptly with a kind of challenge, and taking the firm refolution to break off all connection with his houfe. He came inftantly home to inform me of the incident. On feeing him heated with a violent paffion, and his face as red as crimfon, I could not help laughing
laughing aloud at his complaints. He aiked me, with kindling anger, what I meant by that ftrange behaviour. " You ought to rejoice ; for nothing could have happened more fortunate, if you will take my advice." I then explained my whole plan to the Count, who could not help laughing at it, though he did not think it would fuc¬ ceed. Having fettled the proper mea¬ fures, we went, without delay, in feareh of the Duke, who fcarcely recollected the incident, and, without difficulty, was pre¬ vailed to fettle all differences in an ami¬ cable manner. He went the next morn¬ ing to his villa; and I repaired, without delay, to the inquifitor of ftate, to inform him of the Duke's quarrel with my friend. Having already received intelligence of it, my information only ferved to confirm the fact, and to render the general opinion that a duel would be fought more certain. No one having heard of their reconcilia¬ tion, the danger feemed to be cogent, and L 4 the
the Duke was ordered not to ftir from his villa. The Count bein£ a ftranger, was obliged to give his word of honour that he would not leave the town within three days. Thus our plan fucceeded as well as we could have wifhcd. The Duke was almoft frantic with rage, and for fome time rack¬ ed his brains in vain to trace out thecaufe of that order. This ftate of fufpenfe grew, at length, fo intolerable to him, that he difguifed himfelf in the garb of a peafant, and arrived at Venice after mid¬ night. Being afraid to go directly to his houfe, he went to all the public places, expecting to learn, by the general talk, fomething of the true nature of that myf¬ terious incident. He really heard all the world talk of nothing elfe; but the opinions were fo different, that he was not a jot wifer fót¬ it. He was juft going to leave the place of St. Mark, when he was accofted by a ftranger, in the drefs of an Englifh officer, who
who whifpered in his ear, " My Lord, you will do better to go home than to remain any longer in the ftreets. You will find Count S****** at your houfe." With thefe words the ftranger retired, leaving the Duke in a ftate of utter aftoniih¬ ment. " The Count of S******?" he faid to himfelf. " What bufinefs can be have at my houfe at this late hour? And why did that ftranger inform me of it in fuch a myfterious tone? But, what is ftill worfe, I am betrayed, and it will be dangerous for me to rove the ftreets any longer. The good Count has, perhaps, heard of my misfortune, and is confultingwith the Duchefs about the beft meafures of ex¬ tricating me from my difagreeable fitua¬ tion." Jealoufy, fear, vexation at his arreft, attachment to the Count, and mif¬ truft of his lady, caufeu a ftrange conflict in his fhallow brains. The Count, who had previoufly informed his miftrefs of the real nature ofthat event, went, againft L 5 nights
night, to her palace, to reap the fruit of our artifice. She received him with marks of the greateft tendernefs,- and her con¬ jugal fidelity would undoubtedly have fallen a facrifice to her defires, notwith- ftanding the Counťs refolution to refpečt her virtue, if not a fudden violent knock¬ ing at the ftreet door had relieved my friend unexpectedly from his perilous fituation. The two lovers were feized with terror when the Duchefs's waiting woman, who w 7 as on the watch, entered the apartment, out of breath, and in¬ formed them that a man, in a peafanťs drefs, was at the door, and that fhe be¬ lieved it could be no other perfon but the Duke. The fituation of the apartment made it impoflible for the Count to efcape; and even if the Duchefs could have con¬ cealed him fome where, yet ihe could be certain that the Duke would feareh every comer, if he had only the moft diftant fufpicion, and undoubtedly facrifice her lover to his fury. They agreed, there- fore,
fore, to face the unexpected intruder bold¬ ly, and to have recourfe to art. The chefs-board was placed on the table, and they began to play a party in a moiW furious manner. This expedient was by far the beit they could have chofen. The Duchefs laughed immoderately v at her fituation and artifice, which the Duke could hear İn the anti-chamber. The Count too was feized with a fit of laughter; and thus the whole fcene received fuch a harmlefs, unfufpicious air, that it would have impofed upon a more keen-fighted man than the Duke was. They appeared to be profoundly abforpt in their play, and the Duchefs to have made a decifive move. The Count, who fat oppofite to her with a grave and meditating air, feem* ed to bein the greateft diftrefs; and the Duke advanced on tip-toe, to fee whether - he could not unexpectedly extricate him from his difficulty. But how great was his aftoniihment, when he perceived no-* thing but confufion on the chefs-board.^ L 6 and
and was utterly unable to make any thing of the pofition of the men. He imagined the night air had dimmed his fight, and rubbed his eyes: however, the Duchefs left him no time to examine the matter more minutely, and, ftarting up, when fhe faw him, exclaiming, " Jefus! Maria!*' overturned the table. " Thefe are ñnc doings, my Lord ľ 1 fhe faid ; " you know- that the leaft thing in the world is apt to frighten me!" " Don 3 t be angry, my angel !" the Duke replied, with a profound tow: <( I imagined it would give you pleafure to fee me thus unexpectedly." W A fine pleafure, indeed!'* fhe re¬ fumed fcolding. <c You have fpoiled the fineft game in the world. 1 ' * c I affure you, I only wanted to come to the Counťs affiflance; but, upon my honour! the men were in fuch a confufed, ftrange pofition, that 1 found it impoffible to form the leaft idea of your plan." The
The Count now welcomed his friend, laughing, and, without the leaft mark of perplexity; but the poor Duke had fo much to do to pacify his frightened and fcolding lady, that he was not at leifure to return his falutation. He fucceeded, at length, to mollify her by his careflesj and having ftaid half an hour with her, went with the Count to his clofet, to con¬ fult with him upon the beft means of ter¬ minating his affair before the next night. The latter promifed to fettle every thing on the fubfequent morning; but infifted upon his returning immediately to his villa, and accompanied him part of the way. The Duke informed him, on the road, of his adventure at the place of St, Mark, and of the alarm that incident had given him. The Count was, as well as myfelf, aftoniihed at that myfterious incident, wtiich pervaded our minds with number¬ lefs apprehenfions, particularly when we reflected that the villain who treated the Duchefs, before our houfe, in fuch a bar¬ barous
barou s manner, alfo was an officer, and probably the fame perfon that accofted the Puke at night. The decree of arreft was repealed the following morning,· and the feaft at the Duke's villa was celebrated with the greateft pompând gaiety. The general buftleaf¬ forded the lovers frequent opportunities to fettle a plan for the laft public mafquerade. it was agreed the Duke, his lady, the Count and myfelf, fhould go together to the ball. The former confented cheer¬ fully to be of the party, and requefted me to take charge of the Duchefs. But I declined that honour; protefting that his lady would find me but a dull and awkward companion, He laughed at my philofo¬ phy,- and it was, at laft, fettled, that the Count fhould take that charge. We agreed that the Count and the Duchefs ihould go in the mafk of fhepherds, the Duke as Pantaloon, and I in my ufual domino. When
When we arrived at the aíľembly room, we found it extremely crowded; and fcarcely had proceeded a few fteps, when our poor Pantaloon was completely hem¬ med in between the mafks, and ftruggled in vain to difengage himfelf from a Harle¬ quin who had taken hold of him. We left him to fhift for himfelf; and, after thefhepherd and his fhepherdefs had taken fome turns through the room, they flipt into a private apartment where they were to exchange their drefs, and then to re«. pair to our houfe. The Count had ordered one of our fervants, who refembled him jnuch in ftature and fhape, and a girl, to mafk themfelves as fhepherds, and never to lofe fight of the Pantaloon, who could not well be miftaken. They acted their part with admirable dexterity; and the poor Duke could not conceive the leaft fufpicion, particularly as we had agreed to fpeak only through figns. His fitua¬ tion grew, however, at length, fo irkfome and tedious, that he endeavoured to per¬ fuade
fuade his fuppofed lady to go home with him,- but being not able to prevail upon her and her fhepherd to coincide with his requeft, he grew highly exafperated at their obftinacy, and went to a contiguous card room. However infignificant my mafk was, yet I faw myfelf already, in the beginning, furrounded by a number of perfons, who endeavoured to involve me in a difpute, and to feparate me from my friend. An¬ other domino even knew my perfon, afk- ing me, in broken Spanifh, " How do you like the ladies of Venice, Don Car» los?" Yet I difengaged myfelf from the importunate crowd, returning no anfwer to their troublefome queftions, and kept a careful guard over my friend and his inamorata, till I knew they were in a place of fafety. But I was no fooner returned into the midft of the crowd, than a maik, who pafled me, haftily whifpered in my ear, " Marquis, your friend is in danger ; the Duke mifles his lady. Not a moment is
is to be loft." I was almoit petrified; and in the fame moment faw our Panta¬ loon run through the room like a madman, making figns to and ftaring at all the rnaiks, to know who they were. I took hold of his arm, aiking him, in a whifper, " What is the matter? What has hap¬ pened?" He anfwered me with the pan· tornirne of a ftriking poniard, and left me abruptly. I now thought it high time to inform my friend of his danger, and met him with the Duchefs on the ftaircafe, juft as they-were going to-leave the houfe. I briefly acquainted them with that alarming incident; and we agreed, after a fhort confultation, that it would be beft to enquire more minutely into the matter. We, therefore, returned to the ball-room, and, on feeing the Pantaloon ftill running up and down like a diftračted perfon, the Duchefs faid, " Let us avoid him, and go into one of the card rooms." The
The Count obferved, mean time, a white mark on my back, which fome per¬ fon probably had made, on my entrance, to know me again. He erafed it; and we ftept into one of the card rooms, where we beheld our Pantaloon, to our greateft aftoniihment, fitting at a faro table, and flaking with the compieteti tranquillity. He knew us inftantly, and was infeparable from us all the reft of the night. о On coming home, we made our remarks on thofe myfterious and fingular incidents. Ail our plans were rendered abortive by fome unknown perfons, and Heaven only knew what intereft they could have in vexing us thus. " Who can thofe perfons be? (faid I to myfelf. ) Should perhaps a new Genius, a new Amanuel^ watch our fteps? Yet, fuppofe the confederates ihould not be difperfed, what intereft could they have in meddling with the iove affairs of the Count, whom they always kept at a proper diftance ? and has not their invi¬ fible
fible influence over me ceafed fince AU fonfo's death ?*' The two officers, whom the Duchefs obferved at our door, feemed, neverthe¬ lefs, fufpicious enough to keep our atten¬ tion fixed to that point. It was certain they had fome defign upon us; and al¬ though their fecret influence appeared rather to exert itfelf to keep us in certain limits, than to hurt us, yet it foon dif¬ played itfelf in feveral more inftances. The Duke grew vifibly cooler to his old confidential friend. We afcribed it, at firft, to the numerous ferious occupa¬ tions which took up the greateft part of his time : however, his referve continued to encreafe even when he was more at leifure. He behaved in a fimiiar manner to the Duchefs, who was rendered mife- rable by that fudden unaccountable change. The Count too was vexed, but foon com¬ pofed himfelf. The Duchefs comforted him as "much as poffible, promifing that flie never would lofe fight of their mutual intereft,
intereft, when a new incident happened, which, at once, entirely changed their fituation. The Count loved women rather from a predilection for an eafy and agreeable con¬ verfation, than from other lefs honourable motives. He did, therefore, not care where he could meet with it; and Venice, where the number of the ladies of plea¬ fure İs pretty large, afforded him fufficient opportunities of indulging that propenfity, by a familiar but cautious connection with fome of the firft rate beauties of that clafs. His favourite was Irene, a Greek, who united, with an uncommon beauty, all the charms of art and wit, and of an uncorrupted heart. She was very delicate in the choice of her admirers, and admit- ted only a few, though fhe could have feen half Venice at her feet. The Count was one of that number; and we fpent fome- times whole evenings at her houfe. Our little fuppers were a repetition of thofe I formerly had enjoyed at Toledo in the lap of
of the moft intimate friendihip. Good humour, and the gayeft fallies of the moft luxuriant wit, gave to our moderate fup¬ pers the higheft reliih, and we fpent the happieft hours at Irene's houfe. One evening, on which we intended to meet at the houfe of our charming Greek, the Count was detained by fome urgent bufinefs. He defired me to go without him, and promifed to follow me as foon as poifible, I was engaged in a familiar converfation with Irene, when, unexpect¬ edly, the Duchefs of F****** fent up her name. I was ready to faint when that name was mentioned, and begged Irene to conceal me fomewhere. She directed meto an alcove with glafs doors. I juft had time enough to get in, and to conceal myfelf behind the curtains, through which I could fee every thing that was doing in the apartment. I never trembled fo much for the Count as in that fatal, ominous moment, when I faw not only his life ex¬ pofed to the fury of a jealous and deceived Italiaa-
Italian, but alfo his tranquillity and hap¬ pinefs at ftake. The Duchefs entered the apartment with all the dignity natural to her rank, and her large eyes wandered inquifitively through the room. Irene received her with her natural grace, and aiked her modeftly, to what flie was to afcribe the diftinguifhing honour of fuch a vifit. iC Your great fame, Signora, 0 fhe re¬ plied, " has made me fo bold. I wanted to convince myfelf perfonally, whether your charms really are fo irrefiftible, and your manners fo poliihed and agreeable, as I have been told. You will excufe the injuftice I have done you ; for you know that our fex is not over credulous with re¬ gard to thefe points." Irene never was at a lofs for an anfwer, and eafily found a way to every heart. The Duchefs now declared that fhe was fo much charmed with her amiable man¬ ners, and mental accomplifhments, that ihe begged leave to ftay fupper; and, 4 without
without waiting for Irene's anfwer, fixed herfelf upon a chair, firmly determined to make good her words. Irene protefted flie was extremely forry that fhe could not accept her condefcend- ing offer, as fhe expected fome ftrangers, who probably were not prepared to meet with company at her houfe. The Duchefs crimfoned at that reply; but, neverthelefs, declared that nothing would be able to alter her mind. Irene certainly would have been able to find out means of get¬ ting rid of her fair vifitor, if flie had had the leaft fufpicion of the Counťs connec¬ tion with the Duchefs ; but being entirely ignorant of it, ihe thought he would not be difpleafed to meet with one lady more at her houfe. It is impoffible to conceive how great my anxiety was, as it was not in my power to efcape, or to receive the Count at the door, without going through the apart¬ ment where the Duchefs was. Nothing was more certain than that flie had heard of
of his connection with Irene, and that flic was come to be an occular witnefs of his infidelity. It was equally certain, that s if flie fhould meet the Count, it would be moft advifeable to quit Venice as foon as poffible, as every thing was to be ap¬ prehended from the vengeance of a Vene¬ tian lady under thefe circumftances. I refolved, therefore, rather to run any rifk â and threw a glafs, which was on the table, on the floor. Irene underftood the hint ; but defpairing to get rid of her vifitor, rung for the fervant, and faid, u Go into the alcove, and look whether my little dog has done no mifchief:" She could not come herfelf, as the Duchefs probably would have been clofe at her heels. The fervant entered my afylum with a candle in his hand, when I whifpered, " Go inftantly down flairs, and if Count g****** fl lou id come, tell him to go home immediately, becaufe his life is in the greateft danger." The fervant took the little dog from the bed, where he was fleep¬ ing
ing quietly, and turning him into the apartment, faid, " He has broken a glafs, Signora." But, alas! Heaven had de¬ creed it otherwife; for while the fervant was going to leave the apartment, the Count entered, humming an air, and in high fpirits. He went familiarly to Irene, bidding her a good evening, and then turned to pay his refpects to her vifitor. But a clap of thunder from the blue ferene fky could not have furprifed him more than the fight of the Duchefs. He ftag¬ gered a few fteps back, ånd dropped fenfe¬ lefs to the floor» Irene was feized with terror, and wanted to fìy to his affiftance; but the Duchefs took hold of her arm, exclaiming, in a voice choaked with rage, u For God's fake, Signora, let him die!" " Barbarous woman!" replied the dear girl, difengaging herfelf from her furious gripe, and ringing the bell vehemently. I now alfo broke forth from my lurking Vol. IV. M place,
place, and haftened to the Counťs afììft- žmce. « You too, Marquis?" the Duchefs fad, with Cefaťs words. The Count recovered at length, ftaring wildly at the Duchefs, who felt an in¬ fernal pleafure at our confufion, changing her colour more than ten times in a mu nute. I was on the point of reading a ferious lecture to her, when ihe rofe with uncommon dignity, leaving the room with flow fteps and filent contempt. The Count was in a lamentable fitua¬ tion; but foon grew fenfible that certain difafters become lefs heavy the longer they are borne. On our return to our lodgings, I took occafion, from that fatal incident, to read him a fevere lecture, reminding him how fooliih it was to feek abroad what he could have enjoyed in the higheft per¬ fection at home; and recalling to his me¬ mory the feenes of former blifs, of the tendereit friendfhip, and of the moft at¬ tentive love,- the exhilarating joys of a fmall
fmall but happy circle, animated by a gay humour; and the fallies of an innocent wit, which art can neither produce nor improve. The recollection of domeftic happinefs awoke at once powerfully in his foul; and he longed for his peaceful fields, which bloomed beautifuller under his hands; for the ferene, uninterrupted tran¬ quillity of an artlefs life; and for the heart of his Caroline, of which he believed to have made himfelf not entirely un¬ worthy. Thefe reflections could not but make him entirely indifferent to the Duchefs. Every moment divefted her of fome of thofe charms which love had lent her; he confidered her as the principal caufe of his infatuation, and of the painful con- fcioufnefs not to return fo pure and inno¬ cent to Caroline's arms as he had left them. The laft fcene of a more than female fury, which threatened to endanger M 2 his
his life, finally deftroyed every remnant of that fatal paffion. We could not comprehend how the Duchefs could have learnt the Count's connection with Irene; nothing but the certain-knowledge of which could have determined her to ftay, notwithftanding the excufes of the fair Greek, and to con¬ vince herfelf; of his infidelity. The idea that thofe unknown ftrangers, perhaps, had had a hand in that dangerous affair, was the only one that afforded us fome light, and rendered the Count impatient to leave Venice as foon as poifible. I was highly pleafed with his refolution; and we agreed to wait only for the remittance of our money; and, meantime, to live as retired as our fituation would allow. Yet our tranquillity was of no long duration. The Duchefs meditated upon nothing elfe but plans of bloody revenge. The Duke, who probably had been more firmly convinced of his friend's treachery, and
and was prevented, by family reafons, from venting his fury againft his lady, was determined to punifh the Count for his temerity. We received, almoft every day, anonymbus letters, in which our danger was reprefented with the livelieft colours; and our fervants informed us that our houfe was, every evening, befet with maíked perfons, who feemed to have no good intention. We knew the re¬ vengeful fpirit of the Venetians but too well as not to be on our guard; but at the fame time were fo firmly convinced of the excellence of their police, that we were not afraid of an open attack. We, therefore, provided ourfelves with good cuirafles, and, without fear, went abroad every day; but always avoided narrow lanes and alleys, and returned as foon as night began to fct in* One day we ftaid later than ufual at one of the coffee-houfes, near the place of St* Mark j and the day being fine and M 3 ferene,,
ferene, I defired the iherbet I had or¬ dered to be brought before the houfe, where we feated ourfelves upon a bench. We waited a confiderabletime for it; but, as the houfe was crowded with company, I afcribed the delay to the confufion and buftle which haraíľed the waiters. We faw, at length, one of them prefs through the throng; but while he was going to prefent the iherbet to us, a man, in a green cloak, ran againft him, and threw the poor fellow upon the ground. Although the ftranger endeavoured to make that accident appear natural, yet he behaved in fuch an awkward manner, that we could clearly fee it was premeditated. The Count being of a very irafcible tem¬ per, took it as an aflront, and was going to chaftife the ftranger for his impudence : however, I retained him by his cloak, whifpering in his ear, " For God's fake! confider that we are at Venice ľ' His
His dog began, mean time, to lick the broken plate on which the waiter had carried the fherbct: the Count kicked him with his foot; and rofe with boiling an¬ ger, reminding me that it was very late, and high time to go home; He was, however, fo dry, that we were obliged to ftop at another coffee-houfe to drink le¬ monade, I now obferved that his dog was very uneafy, and foon after he began to howl in a moft pitiful manner. The Count, who was very fond of the animal, took him on his arm, to carry him home; but we had not proceeded twenty fteps, when he ceafed howling, and expired. My friend could not retain his tears at that fight; and throwing his little favourite into the canal, faid, €< Marquis, the poifon was ftrong." « Very ftrong!" I replied, fhuddering with horror. When we came to the bridge before Santo Giovanni c Paolo> which was only a 4 few
few fteps diftant from our houfe, we heard a fhrill whittling on the oppofite fide. Night was already fetting in, and no hu¬ man being to be feen in the ftreet and on the canals. I inftantly drew my fword; the Count did the fame; and we difen¬ gaged ourfelves from our cloaks, to have both arms free in cafe of an attack; for I had a poniard in my left hand, with which I could parry pretty well. .We were no fooner arrived at the op¬ pofite fide of the bridge, than we faw three maíked men rufh forth from an alley, and join with a fourth, who feemed to have been on the watch. The conteft was very unequal ; yet we were not dif- heartened. The Count was an excellent fencer, and I had an exceeding ftcady hand. Our only care was to keep our backs free; and juft when they rufhed upon us with their long fwords, exclaiming, « Death! death!" we had gained the wall of the church. I threw my cloak into the
the face of the firft who attacked me; and while he endeavoured to difengage himfelf pierced his breaft; but while I extraäed my fword, I was wounded in the fhoulder by one of his aflbciates. I dropt the dagger to take hold of his fword; but he drew it with fo much force through my hånd, that fome of my fingers were ftvereìy wounded. The Count had, mean time, alfo wounded one of them, and the combat became more equal. The wound in my ihoulder burning violently, I apprehended it was poifoned, and de· fpair made me fight with unfpeakable fury. Yet our three antagonifts were no common banditti, but excellent and cool fwordf- men. I loft a great deal of blood, and the Count too was entirely exhaufted, when fuddenly two ftrangers attacked our adver- farics from behind, and foon obliged them to give up the conteft, and to fly to a contiguous narrow lane. One
One of our prefervers now withdrew, without flaying for the effufions of our gratitude. His companion feemed to be dangeroufly wounded, and to follow him with great difficulty. We haftened after them, and found they were dreffed in a red uniform ; but we could not get the leaft anfwer to any of our queftions, nor to the warm expreffions of our grati¬ tude. We took the wounded between us, lead¬ ing him to our houfe, and were aftoniihed to hear him fob violently. The Count aiked him repeatedly whether his arm» which bled copioufly, pained him much? But not the leaft anfwer enfued. His companion, too, feemed to be fpeechlefs, and walked mufing with л drooping head, by our fideл We arrived at our houfe; and the fervants carried the wounded un¬ known, who had fainted away, to my apartment. While wc fent for a furgeon, and my valet dreffed my wound, which feemed
feemed to be of no confequence, the Count began to undrefs our kind pre¬ ferver; but when he took his large hat off, he dropt the candle. I turned round, and faw my friend lying fenfelefs at the feet of his patient, and the latter encircling him with his arm. I wanted to fly to his aifi fiance, when the orher ftranger fud¬ denly threw off his cloak, and dropt down at my feet, encircling my knees. I now looked in his face, and—heavenly pow¬ ers!—it was Adelheid. i( Adelheid, my clear, adored wife !" This was all that I could fay. I raifed her up, and led her to the Count, where we jointly embraced Caroline. " Do you fee, Carlos," my angelic wife faid, "you have not iofl your guardian Genius ľ 9
CHAPTER
CHAPTER XIV. 1NOW fhall bid an eternal adieu to my friends, wifhing to be remembered by them as often as the incidents of their lives may have fome refemblance with mine. I do, indeed, not flatter myfelf that fate will fuffer me to proceed in fweet tranquillity on my pilgrimage to a better world ; however, as the future events of my life, probably, will be fimiiar to my paft adventures, I fhall not trouble the patience of my friends by a communica¬ tion of them. All that I have to add, is confined in the fincereft wifh that the life of my friends may refemble mine as far as all the evils that have befallen me have contributed to put me in poffeffion of a felicity, which, at prefent, is fo complete, that it even does not require a witnefs.
THE END«
