Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The forest of St. Bernardo: a novel
THS FOREST OF ST..BERNARDO.
'* '' ', ' CHAP. I. , . *\ NOTHING material happened during five years at LTpton HalL—Juliana had riiade-arapid progress in every branch of education : she was in her ninth year, rather tall of her age, and formed by , the hand of the graces ; her strength of mind even at that early period astonish¬ ed every one ; yet shp was all obedience, vot. χα. J в her '
2 her temper sweet, and her manners ele¬ gant and captivating to a degree. She considered Mr. and Mrs. MUIward as parents, and felt the greatest respect and love for them ; the good old General she idolized. Edward and MatUda shared her infantine affections : she had entire¬ ly forgotten the Marquis, as in all his letters he requested never tó be men¬ tioned to Juliana. i Father Edmund enjoyed his health and faculties undiminished, and it was with enthusiastic píeasu/è that he wit¬ nessed the opening ! perfections and growing virtues of the youthful part of the family*at the HaU. He kept up a - constant correspondence with the Mar¬ quis; time, joined to the unremitting * tenderness
3
enderness of his charming Marchioness, had softened his grief; yet he revered the memory of his Juhana. Sophronia had in the course of six years presented him with a son and daughter : speaking of them in one of his letters to Father Edmund, he says ; c both of them are lovely ; my boy prattles at a great rate, and ^ the joy and pride of the Duke and Don Sebastian. Once more I feel I am a father ; yet, believe me, the first time the appellation caught my ear, painful indeed were my sensations. My little Juliana rushed on my memory; oh Heavens ! what would I not give to clasp that charming child to my bosom ! the flattering accounts I constantly re¬ ceive of her from you and my kind ' friends Mr, and Mrs. JVIillward, afford me в 2 real
4
real comfort; yet to be the owner of such a treasure, and forever deprived the enjoyment of it, drives me on the verge of madness ; but I musť lay· down my pen, for if I give a loose to my feelings on this subject I shall incur your, displea¬ sure.' -
5
CHAP. И, - * * * »i , t 'W It was at this period that the son of tlie Pretender, encouraged by promises from France, made an eflort for gaining the crown of England. He was enter¬ prising and ambitious, but utterly un¬ equal to the bold undertaking ; he was flattered by the rash and discontented that the kingdom was ripe for a revolt. He embarked for Scotland accompanied by a few desperate adventurers, several в 3 officers,
6
officers, and arms for two thousand men. " As soon as the news of Charles's land- mg reached Devonshire, the General lamented in strong terms to Mr. Mill- ward his incapacity of taking an active part in suppressing the rebellion, and in supporting the House of Hanover on the throne of Great Britain. "You, Sir,*.' replied Mr. Millward, "have already done your duty, and more than once have bled in the defence of your king and country ; but I cer- " tainly^ ought not to remain inactive. No one has more at stake, oris more sensible of the many blessings we enjoy under the mild sway ofthe Brunswick family ;
7 family; it is therefore incumbent on me ţo lend my aid to quell a rebel¬ lion that threatens to overturn our constitution and religion. If you, Sir, approve of it, I will offer to raise a, troop of horse, free of all expense to govern- ment. I am certain I shall have no difli¬ culty to find men amongst our tenants." " I more than approve," replied the General; "itgratifies my most sanguine wishes. ţ We must break your intention with caution to Emma, who, I think, will not oppose your plan, though I fear it will be a severe trial to part with you ; yeti trust she will exert lier fortitude on this occasion»" " I have no doubt of my Emma act- в-, 4 ing
s
ing worthy of herself," was Mr. Hen-^ ry's reply.—At that instant she entered the room. " My dearest Emma," said Mr. MiU¬ ward, taking her hand, "I wish to consult you on a subject- of greabimpor- tance ; to a woman of your understand¬ ing it is needless to point out that it is v necessary at the present critical juncture for even the lowest individual to assist in quefling the effort made by the young- Pretender to plunge this happy island into y civil war ; how much more is * it my duty to exert myself, possessed of á princely fortune, blessed as a father and husband, surrounded by hundreds of dependants and tenants, who look up to me for protection ? it would Ш become '" me
в me to remain a calm âpectátor. Say then, my Emma, have I your consent to offer my service to the state ?" Mrs. Millward's feelings are more easily imagined than described ; with dif¬ ficulty she suppressed them. v She ¿aw the propriety of Mr. Millward's taking an active part, and her judgment ap-< proved what her heart condemned. After a short pause, she said— > 1 " Yes, my beloved husband, you have my full consent to act as honour dic¬ tates." - .- ", 4 . Mr. MiUward pressed her to his heart, but'neither for some minutes could ut¬ ter a syllable. At length he cried— -в 5 "Thanks,
10
"Thïmks,my noble-minded Imma; never can I repay you for thb, permit me to call it, heroic conduct. Did I not teH you, Sir, (turmng to the General,) that my Emma would act worthy of herself? I wul immediately write to the ministers and tender my service, and offer to bring in a very short time a troop of Horse into the field properly accoutred and fit for semce." Fe sent the letter express, and re¬ ceived a polite and speedy answer, in¬ forming him that his Majesty had ac¬ cepted his proposals and appointed him colonel, and desired him to join the royal army as soon as possible. Mr* MiUward had previously called a meeting
fc*
meeting of the farmers and the rest of the tenants belonging to Upton and Thorpe, and had the pleasure to find they were, ай willing to take up arms ; he took „care not to take those who had large families. With a few exceptions his troop was composed of young un¬ married men. His only difficulty lay in refusing without hurting their feelings ; when he urged for an excuse their wives and chüdren, their reply was : " Why aare ^e to be exempted on their account from sharing the danger of our beloved patron ? Oh ! Sir, what До we not owe ypu ? suffer us then to follow you to the field, and evince by our actions that you have taught us how в 6 to
12
to prize the privfleges we enjoy, and the dμty we owe our King and country." Mr. MiUward expressed his thanks for this proof of their attachment, and with the help of the good rector, whom they aU revered, adjusted matters ţo the satis¬ faction of the honest rustics. >■ James was in his glory, as he was ap¬ pointed to teach the men tjieir exercise, nor was the General idle ; he regularly attended the driU morning and evening, and by astonishing exertions this little chosen band were properly accoutred, clothed, and fit to talie the field in a very short space of time. Poor James longed to accompany Mr. MUIward;
13
Milliard; but he waâ so necessary to the General that he was fearful of mak- irig the request. At last he assumed courage to mention it to Mr. Millward, who' was much pleased at the-zeal of this veteran soldier, and would have been glad to have taken him, for though turned of sixty he was active and robust, well skilled in military tactics, and had seen a good deal of actual service ; yet as he was certain the General would be unhappy to part with his old favourite, - he determined to persuade James to re¬ linquish his 1 design before'he could re¬ turn an answer to the request. James finding Mr. Millward was not displeas¬ ed, gave loose to his honest feelings : " If your honour," said he, " would obtain
14
obtain Ae General's, consent, I should be the fiappiest treature in the world; I bave got Betty's leave, who. has pro¬ mised.to- double to attentions to my dear master ; and Ms vabt has been so? many years inour service that I should not be afraid to tiust Ы$ honour to his. car«, as he knows afl his ways, noc quite so wdl as I "do to be sure» but with a- little of my instmeëon be would not be at a loss.** t "IshouM Ы bappy, my gçsod James* to tpmpiy ш*к your request, and was 1 to consult my own melhiatipn and com¬ fort I should most wïflingly accept your. offer; but lap certain it would distress the General to be without you even for a short tirnem another consideration, which lam
1$
I am sure wifl have its due weight with you, is, that Mrs. Mtliward wishes you to remain at the HaB, for if the General should be ill during my absence, she would be miserable if you were not about him." " Your honour has said enoughs the Lord forbid that I should add to my lady*«, uneasiness; she will suffer too much in parting with your honour; though I should have liked to have had a pop or two at the rebels, a pack of Popish Jacobites j but as I cannot be spared, it h my duty to submk»** James retired highly pleased to find he was of so ишф consequence in the family. Åt
ιβ
At length the day arrived that was for the first time since their marriage to separate Henry and Emma, 'and break in on their domestic feUcity; which, during the course of thirteen years, had not met with the smaUest interrup¬ tion. Mr. MiUward had previously taken leave of the Hermit, and received the good old man's benediction. " Go, my son," said he, " and may the God of battles nerve your arm and protect you in the hour of danger ; and return you, victorious, to the bosom of your family! My prayers shaUuriremit- ■>. tingly be offered to the aU-wisş and powerful Deity (in whose hands are life
17 -life and death) for your preservation. I trust I shall Hve to see peace restored to this" frilly happy island : did the in¬ habitants duly estimate their invaluable constitution ; did they reflect on the mildness of the government, and the\ virtues of tlie family that now sway the sceptre, never would discord spread her baneful influence, and the miseries at¬ tending a civil war be unknown." 'Mr. Millward rose at break of day and stoic softly down stairs, hoping to escape the painful task'of bidding farewell to his wife and family ; but Emma, who had not closed her eyes'during the night, followed him immediately, and to his great surprise, he found every one in ' motion. On
18
On entering the breakfast room, the General, Mr. Smith, Mrs. Owen, and the children were already assembled; Em¬ ma's fortitude had almost forsaken her* but perceiving Mr. MiUward was ex¬ ceedingly agitated, she collected herself and thus addressed him ι " My dear Henry, the moment of se¬ paration is now arriyed : painful are the sensations I feel in parting with the hus¬ band, of my fondest affection, and the beloved father of my children ; yet con¬ vinced you act from motives of duty, and that the rank you hold in society demands your exertions, it is neces¬ sary you sliould animate by example your tenants and dependants ; I there¬ fore trust, my dear Henry, that Heaven will
19
will crown your efforts with success;- that the rebellion will be shortly crushed, and you restored to these arms: my prayers and those of our dear little ones shall be daily offered for your preserva¬ tion and protection." " Thanks, my dearest love ; ten thou¬ sand thanks for the strongest proof you could give me of your, affection : your whole conduct on this trying occasion only more strongly confirms, what ever was , my opinion, that your mind and feelings aresuperiorto false tenderness and the weakness of your sex.—To you, Sir," turning to- the General, "T leave the care of all I value on earth ; but sen¬ sible they are equally dear to you, it is
20 is needless to say more on " the sub¬ ject." '- '- " The General embraced him and presented him with a sword, saying : " This, mý Henry, has often dealt destruction'to the enemies ofour coun¬ try ; in your hand I am certain it wifl not be inactive or useless : it was ^my ever lamented friend , your revered fa¬ ther's ; he bequeathed it to me with his dyingbreath ; he fought by my side in the glorious battle of------ where he gained immortal honours,· though alas ! he purchased it with his life—take it, my _ son, and may victory prove the reward of valor !" ■ ' -
Mr.
21 Mr, Millward grasped the sword, pressed the General's hand, which he kissed respectfully, but could not utter a word : the children by their caresses and innocent questions had almost un¬ manned him; he ,kissed and blessed them-^-the girls clung round him and burst into tears. Mrs. Owen obser\ung the scene was too affecting, led them out oì tlie room.. f Edward and Henry could hardly suppress their grief, but Mr. Smith told them if they would be¬ have like men, they should, with Mr. Millward's permission, accompany him a few miles. This being granted, in some measure dispelled the gloom, and the horses were ordered. ,Mr. Millward once more embracing Emma, mounted his horse and joined his companions, who
22
who were waiting for him in the Park, which was crowded with specta¬ tors. As soon { as he approached, the 'air rung with acclamations and loud huz¬ zas: James was busy giving his final instructions and orders to the troop— the honest veteran dropped a tear, and sincerely lamented he could not share their dangers. ' \ The cavalcade set off in high spirits 'accompanied by the prayers and wishes of all present. 7 I ■ As soon as they were out of sight, Emma retired to her apartment to give vent to her feelings : a flood of tears relieved
23 relieved her, 'ând 'she was able to meet the family at dinner with tolerable com¬ posure. Both the Mrs. Montagues and Louisa spent the day at the HaU ; the General, though evidently affected, ex¬ erted himself: Mrs. Owen took Juliana and MatUda to visit the Hermit, who by his affectionate manner and good advice soothed their sorrow and dried their tears ; he charged them to ' be cheerful, as otherwise they would add to the af¬ fliction of their worthy ' parent : they promised to endeavour to obey him, and do aU in their power to amuse'their mamma and grandpapa. 1 f In the evening, thé Rectory his son, Mr. Smith, and the boys returned :/they had dined witlr Mr. MiUward, who tliey had left
24 left in good spirits ; he, wrote a few lines to Emma, saying she should hear from him by every opportunity. , Μ ' ι — 'l In a few days she had the pleasure of hearing he had joined General H ------ y at Edinburgh, a few days after the King's ; troops had been obliged to make a precipitate retreat from Fal¬ kirk. f .Mr. Millward, or the Colonel, (as we must in future call him,) was 4 received , ' ' '"'l with, every mark of attention and res¬ pect, and was complimented in the most flattering manner on the fine appearance " of his men and their soldier-like con- duct. * Indeed, considering the shortness of the time, the progress tliey had made in
ús
in thea military '■: science was astonish- : ingj and this reinforcement was looked on as a great acquisition to the royal army.;.:'-; : dW;w: ^ddyw^j м · : . : ."■ ^'.'-"■va-' 1 -:■■■;.. Notwithstanding every effort on the; part of Mrs¿MUlward," the being seipara- teď from her husband, and the reflection of the danger^ he was hourly exposed to,- preyed on her mind. During the day she appeared perfectly composed and eveh i cheerful ; but her niğlıts ^were \ mostly spent in tears arid in prayers for tlie;säfety of her adored husband : v every post-.brought her ■letters which for the montent ; ţranquiUised her , as he - con¬ stantly assured her of his being in good· health and spirits ; at length he inform¬ ed her that his ' Royal Highness the à you in. с *■.-. Duke
26
Diake of C*-—-d had joined them, to whom he had had the honour of bemg introduced, and had been received with, something more than politeness. The Duke had reviewed his troop, and ex¬ pressed his approbation in the strongest terms. ' They are,* continued he, e a set of fine spirited young fellows, eager to engage in the cause, nor will they bc long before they are called to action ; the presence of our royal commander has revived the drooping spirits ofthe army, and I think I may venture to pronounce that the triumphs of the rebels are at an end. We reached Aberdeen last night, and have already been joined by several of the Scotch nobility, who are attached to the House of Hanover.' *
Louisa
27
Louisa Montague was a daUy vi¬ sitor at the Hall, she had just' entered her eighteenth year, and was a fine lively girl ; she hàd a pretty turn for poetry. In one of her rambles, she entered a neat retired cottage, lately taken by a young woman who gained her living by making lace : Louisa was struck by her appearance, which interest¬ ed her greatly, and sho inquired into the particulars of her situation. She made a purchase of some edging, and returned to the Rectory highly pleased with the simpleness of the cottager's story. Louisa was so full of her adventure with the fair cottager, that she paid an eariy visit at the Hall, so impatient was she to communicate to her friends Su- c 2 san's
28
san's little tale, whose modesty and artless behaviour' Louisa described in such lively colours that she interested tlie famfly in her favour ; and it was agreed that thé next morning, accom¬ panied by the young folks, they - would caUat.the cottage. 1 ' нУ As often as possible inteUigence was received from the 'Colonel,! but as they were in pursuit of the rebels, some days passed without hearing. At length the pleasing hews arrived of the total defeat 'of the rebel army at the memorable battle of Culloden, where Colonel Millward and his troop gained weU-merited laurels, and were public¬ ly thanked by H, R. H. the Duke of С ------ d
29
С ------ d at the head Ofthe army. In his letter which was written immediately after the engagement, he thus expresse? himself: ; ·'" Thank Heaven, my dearest life, we have conquered : , peace wiU soon . ; be, restored : the public prints wfll give you the particular events of this glorious day. I write at the drum head ; so have only time to say that I have escaped the perils of the field, and have the pleasure. to add, that notwithstanding~the troop I have the honour to command was en- , gaged the whole action and pursued a flying party of the enemy, I have not lost a man ; about ,twenty are wounded ; but none mortaUy. I enclose, three lines « to our dear father. My ( blessirig attend с 3 the
30
the children ; soon shall I fold them and mý adored wife to the bosom of her most tender and affectionate f " H. MlLLWARB." This pleasing account, which came express, diffused a general joy, and 're¬ stored tranquillity at Upton Hall. The worthy James as usual gave a loose to his feelings, arid was quite proud of being the messenger to the villagers of the good news, that theyhad not to de-* plore the loss of any of their relatives. t As soon as every thing was settled and"peace perfectly re-established in the North, the Colonel attended His Royal Highness to London, and after paying his respects at St James's, where he was received
ài received by his Sovereign in the most gracious manner, he set out foť De¬ vonshire : his youthful band of warriors had returned home some weeks before, but being apprised of their revered com* mander being on the road, they met him within twenty miles, and he entered his own domain escorted by his troop, and was welcomed by his numerous tenants and dependants with the most heart¬ felt joy ; át the liead of whom was James, who could not express what he felt on this happy event; and as th? tears rolled down his sun-burnt cheeks, he could hardly articulate—· ι '' " Heaven be praised ! your honour is come back safe. Ah! Sir,*' cried he,' when he could speak; "though your с 4 honour
$2
honour has been silent on the subject, ihe papers have told us how bravely you fought, and that our regiment and their gallant commander performed pro¬ digies of valour." "Thanks, my honest friend," r said Mr. Millward, shaking him heartily by the hand ; ic I trust all are weU at the .Hall." "AU, aU, your.honour, and*waiting impatiently in the park for your arri¬ val," At that instant the cavalcade was in¬ creased by the rector, his son, and a number of the neighbouring gentlemen, Mn Smith, Edward, and Henry. Mr. MiUward
S3
Millward affectionately embraced the boys : he was much affected by the un¬ common respect paid him by all ranks. Words cannot describe the meeting of Mr. and Mrs. Millward.' 4ţ Oh ! my Henry," she exclaimed, as he pressed her to his heart ; " I trust we mőet to part no more. Thanks to the Almighty Ruler of the world, who has heard my prayer and restored my hus¬ band ; kneel, my children, and express your gratitude to Heaven." The sensations of all present were ex¬ quisitely painful. The elder Mr.Montague proposed to the gentlemen to take leave, but the General would not part with them till they had promised to spend the « ă ensuing
34
ensuing day at thè Ha)l. James was ap¬ pointed tp entertain the peasantry, the cottagers, and his brother soldiers. The family retired, but for some time were whoUy absorbed in pleasing sensations, till the General roused them by asking Mr. MUIward if he would not take some refreshment as he looked fatigued. In a few hours they recovered sufficient composure to enjoy each others' company. No one presumed to break in on the domestic circle that evening; but next morning the Hall was crowded with visitors of all ranks to congratulate the .Colonel on his safe return. As soon as the ceremony of receiving and paying visits was over, Mr. MiU,ward resumed his* usual occupa¬ tions.
' S5 tions. On malting the tour of his estate he had the satisfaction of finding that every thing during his absence had been conducted with the greatest regularity by the·, truly good rector and Ms spn ; the temporary absence seemed to give a double zest to his domestic enjoyments. The worthy Hermit received him with raptures ; tears of unfeigned joy coursed one another down his furrowed cheeks, while liis eyes and hands were raised in speechless ecstacy to Heaven. " Now," cried he, when he couldfind utterance, " I shall die content.'* " Long, my friend, long may you be с 6 spared,"
-.. · ■· ' se , . w spared," said Mr; Millward, " for the benefit Of mankind;" .Ido riot wish, my deaf patron, to have thè period òf riiy existence shorten¬ ed, but wait with patience Heaven's ap¬ pointed time,** 1 He then entered into còriversation relative to the rebéUion, anď learnť with extreme pleasure that in future there would be nothing tp apprehend, for the Brunswick famfly were firmly seated on the throne of these realms. 1 "Long, long"may their posterity,", continued Mr. Millward, " sway the Bri¬ tish sceptre," -'^ ;'"■-■■ м'-; ■'":
A grand-
37
A grand entertainment was given on the appointed day to disband tKe troop, and they received each a handsome gra¬ tuity for their service, and the thanks of their commander ; those who had been wounded had a pension of ten pounds a year settled on them for life.
38
CHAP. IIL
The eighteen months that Mr. Mill- ward had been absent from his family had made a considerable alteration in - the younger part of it ; they had in¬ creased in stature and made a rapid pro¬ gress in their education and different accomplishments. Edward approached his sixteenth year ; he strongly resembled his father both
3Q
both in person and disposition. Henry had had the same advantages in point of education as Edward ; he was a very fine manly boy, possessed of sentiments that did him honour ; his manners were pleasing ; young as he was, hid breast glowed with gratitude for his benefac¬ tors without fawning : he was humble and respectful in his behaviour. It was now thought time for Henry *o choose his mode .of life, as the General meant him to be a useful not an idle member of society. Mr. Smith was consulted on the occasion ; he replied, he had often sounded Henry on the subject and thought he had a predeliction for the law. "If that is his choice," said the Ge¬ neral,
40
neral, "suppose we settle him with our land steward; he is getting in years and will soon want an assistant : we will propose his taking Henry for five years to instruct Mm in the law^ for which he shall have a handsome fee at the expira¬ tion of his clerkship. 'I should hope, with Mr. Bernard's advice, Henry will be able to take his place, and Mr. Ber¬ nard shall enjoy the salary for life. You see (turning to Mr. and Mrs. Mfflward) I have taken the liberty of nominating your future land steward.'* " Any proposition of yours, Sir, can¬ not fail of meeting our approbation," replied Mr. Millward, " but this in par¬ ticular. I think it a suitable provision for Henry, who is now arriyed at an age tfiat
41
that to continue his present mode of edu¬ cation would only be prejudicial to him, by inspiring notions above the rank he is destined to fill in society, which might militate against his fixture happiness." Mr. Bernard was sent for and the pro¬ posals made, which he accepted with gratitude« "We do not mean, Mr. Bernard, that you should ever resign a post you have held so many years with honour, and to the advantage ofyour employers ; but when Henry is capable чге intend he should act for you and release you irom the fatigues of business.*' Mr. Bernard once more expressed his thanks,
42
thãnksy and assured them he would âo every thing in -his power to render Henry's situation agreeable to him in every respect. Henry and James were sent for, and· the )General addressed the former as follows : • M " You are now, Henry, of an age to enter on some employment : the educa¬ tion you have received will, I trust, en¬ able you to rise in the world. Tell me then with sincerity if the plan I have formed meets your wishes ; your parents are likewise'to be consulted.", '' M " Lord bless your honour!" exclaim¬ ed James, " we have no will but yours. I and Betty it is true shall be foolish enough to lament the loss of our boy's - - company,
43
companyj but štiU whatever your lion¬ our thinks is for his good we will -whh. thankfulness giveour consent to." .. v ■.:. ■■·■■ -*■■ ..-].'■ .■■'·.,■' " I expected, James, you would ac¬ cede to any proposition of mine relative . to the boy ; but be assured, if my desti¬ nation of him should be contrary to your wishes or his inclination, I shaU not be offended by a refusal." He then briefly informed them ofthe arrangements .he had made with 'Mr. ■ Bernard.'"'" v': ■'■■.■-v* : '■■'■-■'''-.■' j" Now speaki^ehryv your real senti- merits ; í have ever accustomed you to treat me as-a ,;: friend."^" ; '. ' ■'■'"·. · :: -! ■ : ' л \.'' :
Henry
44
. Henry was delighted with his destiny, and with great sincerity thanked the- General and Mr. Millward for their kind attention to his interest, and hoped his conduct would procure him the 'con¬ tinuation of their patronage. t As to, James he could not express his joy that his son was to continue so near him." "Your honours were always' too good to me and mine ; God reward you for it ! we cannot." - " You have, James, by your faithful services merited our protection," said the,Generals "as,to уои^Депгу, only fojlow the track you have been trained in, and pursue the same line of conduct you
45 you" have hitherto done, and you wiU more than repay-us for our protection." 1 In a few days the articles were drawn, signed, and sealed; andvHenryentered on his new employment. Mr. Bernard received a fee of three-hundred pounds, and Henry had fifty pounds ayear al¬ lowed him for?pocket money and clothes. " Edward with regret relinquished his youthful companion ; but Mr. Smith pointed out to him the necessity of their taking different paths in life ; at the same time he told Edward, he hoped the friendship between them would terminate only with their existences The
46 Tlie ensuing summer was fixed on for Edward and Mr. Smith to make the tour of Great Britain and Wales ; they were to spend one month in London previous to ' fheix setting off on their extensive excursion. It was Mr. Mill- ward's design that his son should be thoroughly acquainted ' with his own country, its custom, manners, laws, and constitution; and that he should visit Ireland. Before he made the grand tour, one day converbing on the subject with Mr. Smith, hc expressed his surprise that our yourig men of fashion were suflered to visit foreign countries before they had a proper knowledge of their own. - '
" The
47 . "The observation," replied Mr. Smith, " is certainly just, and I attribute to this unpardonable neglect the 'follies and vices the young men acquire on their travels,and tliat contempt they too often at their return express for their own country r were their minds properly prepared; were they made to understand the difFerent advantages each country enjoys according to its situation and cli¬ mate ; were they likewise to observe and pay due attention to, the arts, manufac¬ tures, curiosities, and soil, and be fully sensible of the blessings and advantages which result from an extensive com¬ merce ; they then would certainly reap more solid improvement from their travels, yet would enjoy with double relish
48
relish the beauties and comforts of their native land." "4 Mrs. Owen had the pleasure of finding her pupils were universally admired. . Juliana, though only in he]* fourteenth year, had almost reached perfection in the different branches of education : her voice'was uncommonly sweet, her ear perfectly correct, and her taste exquisite. She played on several instruments, but excelled particularly on the harp. She was 'mistress of painting in general, though landscapes was her favourite branch, and she took views from nature with an accuracy and correctness that astonished her master ; the delicacy of her colours might vie with a Titian. She
49
She and Matilda, accompanied by Mrs. Owen, often visited the Temple of the Muses. Mr. Smith and Edward gene¬ rally joined them ; the former gave les¬ sons on geography, history, and astro¬ nomy ; nor was Poetry neglected, they often courted her favours. Mr. Smith frequently conveyed his advice in rhyme, especially to Matilda and Juliana; by this means he blended praise with in¬ struction. ι ΐ í x* 1 J { I 4
VOL. III. D
50
• L· . ШАР. IV. The buildings and improvements at Thorpe were completed; and the cottage Mr. MUIward had mentioned his design of erecting to the Marquis Vaena at the time he committed JuUana to his care, had been some time finished, in an ele¬ gant yet simple manner. The grounds were laid out with taste, which added to the extensive and beautiful prospect, it formed a most charming retreat. Many tenants
51 tenants had offered who had been po-- litely refused; Mr. Millward being- determined, if he could not let it accor¬ ding to. his original plan,- he would furnish it and keep it'in his own hands. At length a lady appUed whose appear¬ ance deeply interested Mr. Edward Montague in her favour, ancl he pro¬ mised to inform the family at Upton of her proposals. Early the next morning he rode over to the HaU; after the tisual compii- * **** ments— , " I am come to acquaint you," said* he, í c 'that I have had an appUcation for the cottage, which I think, my dear Sir, (addressing Mr. MiUward,) wfll meet ; D 2 . your
52 your approbation.' Yesterday as Fanny and I were sitting at breakfast, a post chaise stopped at the door, in »which was a lady in deep mourning, and a "handsome youth about fourteen: an elderly servant inquired if his lady could see the cottage ; I immediately desired her to alight, and introduced Mrs. Mon¬ tague to her. She seems to be between forty and fifty ; her manners are piepo- sessing, and her language and deport- mant bespeak her to have moved in the highest sphere. She told me her name was Carre, that she was a widow, and her income smaU. " ť This boy,* continued she 6 is my only surviving child:' tears started in her eyes and for some minutes she' could
' 53" could not proceed; aţ length she re¬ sumed ; * the" great character the owners of this estate bear for every virtue, has determined'me to seek an asylum on their domain, and I shall' esteem it some alleviation of my misfortunes, if I am permitted to become an inhabitant of the beautiful cottage—I understand," Sir, that you have the letting of it.' - " I told her in some measure I had, and I was certain from her appearance, Mr. and Mrs/Millward would be happy to receive her tfor a tenant, as they wished to have an agreeable neighbour ; that as soon as I had your answer I would let her know, v and begged to be favoured with her address." D 3 « β My
54
" ' My present place of residence, Sir,' said she, 'is at a farm house at —— where I have been about a month. I „came into Devonshire for/the expreás purpose of settling at this delightful vfllage ; I should have paid my respects to Mr. and Mrs. MiUward, but Waited foï ah introductory letter from an in* timate friend, who had the pleasure of knowing the Colonel during tlie unhap¬ py disturbances in thé North. Not having received it as I expected, I grew impatient, and determined to pay you a visit and learn the particulars relative to the cottage.' " We prevafled on Mrs. Carreto stay dinner * r Fanny and I were charmed with hér conversation, and equaUy pleased with
55
with her son, who she told us was all a fond mother could wish." м , 6t It must be the Earl of A------, who is her friend," said Mr. Millward ; " I received great 'civilities from him du¬ ring my stay in Scotland. Suppose m dear," (turning to Emma,) ** we order the chaise and pay Mrs. Carre a ■* visit." " From the account I have jusť heard," replied Mrs. Millward, " lam 1 all impatience to be known to herj and" already anticipate the pleasure we shall· receive from her society. As you ima- ' gine it iş the Earl of A—— who· interests himself in her favour, I think H ■ we
56 we should pay every attention to her." 3 " I desire," said the General, " you wilL prevail on her to spend to-morrow at the HaU, and make my apology for not paying my respects in person, as my lameness makes me fearful of venturing out this severe weather." Mr. and Mrs. MiUward, accompanied by Mr. E. Montague, in less than an hour^ reached Farmer Blunťs, the resi¬ dence of Mrs. Carre: they were received with the greatest politeness ; " every word, every action of Mrs. Carre's bespoke her a person of tlie first fa¬ shion. г "I
57 "I know not how to л express my thanks," said she, " for the poUte con- r descensión you nave evinced by visiting one entirelyunknown ; but it confirms the character I have heard of the bene¬ volence of Mr. and Mrs. MiUward, that to be unfortunate is a sufficient plea to claim their protection. > I am happy to" have it in my .power to convince them I am not entirely unworthy their notice : this morning's post has brought me the long-expected letter from the.Earl of- A------ ; some family concerns prevent¬ ed my receiving it sooner. Give me leave," continued she smiling, " to pre¬ sent my credentials." Mr. MiUward bowed,and took the letter^ assuring.her she needeď no re- 4 d 5 com
SB
commendation but. her merit. She thanked him, but begged him to see what her friend had to say in her fa¬ vour. He immediately obeyed, and having read it, gave it to Mrs. Millward; ' saying— " This lady and her son, my dear, are recommended in the warmest terms to our friendship by. his Lordship; any request ofhis I should be happy in com¬ plying with, but in this instance he has added, to the obligations I already owe him.", The Earl of A ------ had not entered into any particulars relative to Mrs. Carre; he only begged Mr r and Mrs. Millward's protection, for her. ' The unhappy
59
unhappy disturbances in the* .North,* said his Lordship, «has obliged Mrs. Carre to seek refuge with her only re* mailing child' in England ; particular circumstances pbfige her to Uve re-i tired, and for some time will involve, her in mystery ; even to you, my dear Sir, she must assume a borrowed name, but I flatter myself you will rely pn my honor, and receive' her as a most amic¬ able woman, possessed of virtues and accomplishments that wifl merit your esteem. Favour her with your advice in regard to Charles ; his education, as far as it is advanced, has been,- you will find, ofa superior kind: one fatal blow has destroyed his prospects, but he may yet rise superior to his misfor^ tunes.* d 6 Mr.
60 Mr. and Mrs. Miflward were strongly prepossessed in- favour of both mother and son, and before they parted, it was agreed that Mrs. Carre should take pos¬ session of the Cottage ; Mr. Millward insisted on furnishing it : they were so ' mutually pleased' witli each other that the visit was a long one. The General's message was not forgotten ; Mrs, Carre promised to accept the invitation, and to accompany Mr, and* Mrs. E. Monta¬ gue to ,Upton Hall on the following day., '' m ■ } During the ride home Mrs. Carre and her son engrossed the conversa¬ tion, i ■ » " " I am convinced," said Mr. MiUward, "she
- 61 ".ghe is the relic of one> of the unfortu¬ nate noblemen, whose misguided prin¬ ciples led him to espouse the cause of the Pretender, and who fell a sacrifice to his imprudent zeal : but be that as it may,, she and her child are entirely en- titled'by their situation ţo our care and attention." On their arrival at the Hall they re¬ lated to the General all that had passed, and shewed him Lord A------ *s letter : he agreed with Mr. Millward in his' con¬ jecture. f . '. " Far be it from us," said this wor¬ thy man, " to raise the veil ;· as long as they think it necessary, let them remain 'in obscurity; their unprotected state . has
62
has the strongest claims on our hospi¬ tality.'* " * " The next day the Montagues, Mrs. Carre, and her son, came at an early hour ; the party was augmented hy the family from the Rectory: Charles-was introduced to the young folks, and Mr. Millward told Edward he presented him a companion worthy his esteem, and he hoped an intimacy would ensue, and shortly ripen into friendship The boys were delighted with each other ; the more Mrs. Millward conver¬ sed with Mrs. Carre,' the more she was convinced of her rank. She had a most expressive countenance, and her person^ and deportment were graceful in the ex¬ treme :
es Uerne : one might with propriety,' in describing her, make use ofan expression of the late celebrated Sterne, "^withsuch an^ understanding it would be 1 a shame to be handsome ;" like his Eliza, her fea¬ tures couldnot be termed beautiful ; yet the Whole contour of her face had something superior to it. '\ , Mr> and Mrs. MUIward had deter* mined, if possible, to prevail on Mrs· Carre to become their guest till the cot·. tage was properly aired and made ready for her reception. Mrs. Carre accept¬ ed this kind invitation, and Mr. E. Montague undertook to settle with Far¬ mer Blunt, and to send the baggage and domestics the next day. They consisted of two faithful servants ; a man
64 man and*a:,maid who had lived many years in the family. .Witli this agreeable addition to the fire-side, six weeks*passed; Mrs. Carre was charmed with,the institutions and the various plans for the'general good. The house and pleasure grounds excited her admiration, nor were her visits to the Hermit unfrequent : her mind gra¬ dually gained strength, and she acquired fortitude sufficient to bear her misfor¬ tunes Uke r christian. 4 Mr. Smith had taken Charles under his tuition, and he took his lessons re¬ gularly with Edward. w Mrs. Carre and her son were so much domesticated
65 domesticated at the Hall, that notwith¬ standing every thing at the cottage was ready for her reception, and a strong girl hired to do the drudgery, the time of separation was protracted. At last a day was fixed for Jher depar¬ ture : the evening previous to it, the General perceived their social party was interrupted by an unusual glooni ; the young folks in particular were discon¬ certed ; even the lively Juliana was pen¬ sive. After a long pause in the conver¬ sation,'he suddenly exclaimed— ** I have something to propose which I hope will meet with the approbation of this good company; I, shall put the question, most votes carry the day; Ido
66
I dó think í shaU gain my point, which I have set my heart upon : it is simply this—that the agreeable addition we have received-to our family circle, and the acquisition my boy Edward has gain- ' ed by the society of his young friend may not be interrupted, I vote that we continue one. family. Mrs. Carre shafl take possession of the cottage,' as in¬ tended, "to-morrow, and occasionally re¬ side there ; but her permanent' abode must absolutely be with*us.. We will take frequent excursions to Thorpe, and during the summer ;make parties to spend the day at her Uttle retreat— now speaks good people.*' * - ι r i i - * / * í ■'■■« jMy ; dear grandpapa,"- cried Ju- liana* " you are always promoting; our . happiness;
67 happiness ; I am entirely of your opi¬ nion." " And I," said Edward and Matilda in the same breath. Mf. and Mrs. MiUward said*— " You have, my dear Sir, not only our voťe but interest also." " Weil, the majority is already in my favour : what says'Mrs. Owen and Mr.Smith?" , " We are of the strongest side," was the reply ; " indeed it would be with the greatest reluctance I should part with
68 with mý newly acquired pupU," said the ktter. " WeU," continued the General, "*I shaU carry my motion with flying co¬ lours, and I trust that Mrs. Carre and my young friend Charles wfll not op¬ pose it." '- ' ? Charles's eyes 'were fixed on his mo¬ ther in the most supplicating manner : her feelings, which were very refined, were worked .up to the highest pitch : Charles perceived the agitation of his mother and burst into tears ; this roused her, and before she could express her thanks, the good General stopped her—
" My
69 " My dearest tìiadam, I am extreme¬ ly hurt that my ill-timed pleasantry should distress you ; I wished for the continuance of your society, you wijl pardon an old man being a little selfish. Unable to go much abroad, I am natu¬ rafly desirous to render home as agree¬ able and comfortable as possible ; but not for worlds would I put any restraint on your actions." " My dear Sir," replied Mrs. Carre, " you entirely mistake niy feelings ; they arise from joy and gratitude to Heaven, that in our aflliction has raised us up such inestimable and powerful friends, whose kindness not only miti· \ gates, but makes us almost forget our misfortunes, I should indeed be unwor¬ thy-
70
thyyour kindness if I slighted so gene¬ rous an qffer, and .should be wanting in parental affection if ï refined the great ; advantages my boy will receive from this union of families," 44a "Be assured, .my deax madam, yeu have infinitely obliged üs by consenting to this arrangement" ' w* ; Charles expressed his thanks in very warm terms ; Juliana was in high: spi¬ rits, vänd begged 'the a evening might conclude with a dance : the General se¬ conded the request ; his chief pleasure being that of gratifying everyr wish of his girls and boys as he ; termed them. Each day added to Julianas iniprpye- . ' . nient)
71 ment; her understanding ripened and nearly reached maturity: she became anxious to have some information re¬ lative to. her parents : she of late often hinted her wish to Mrs. Millward, who had hitherto evaded her questions on that subject ; often would she discourse with MatUda and/Edward,-and entreat the latter to try and recoUect,every cir¬ cumstance attending her first coming to Upton. He replied he perfectly weU' remembered her being brought to the HaU by a gentleman in deep mourning, whom she called papa, and that he ca¬ ressed her as his chUd ; but after staying a few days he left her, and promised to - come again soon. Some months after, I asked my mother when Juliana's papa would come back, and was told her
72 her parents were both dead, and that Mr. Seymour was only a distant relation, and that he had left England. I J was # you know, too young to make any far» ther inquiries»/: but why, my dearest JuUana, wiU you make yourself,unhappy ; every thing bespeaks them to have been of rank, and you are certain your for¬ tune is large. One day Juliana had been particularly anxious and' entreated Mrs. Owen, (whom next to, Mrs. Millward she loved,) if possible to gratify her, aiid reveal the mystery of her birth. " My dear Juliana," rephed this ex¬ ceUent a woman, ^.suppress tliis idle curiosity, and cease to importune me ; "''..■·.'. how .
73 how often have I assured you that I am - ignorant of any particular circumstances having attended your birth. Why should you suppose it is involved in' mystery ? you know that you lost your parents at an early period of your life,- indeed in your infancy,· and that you were left an orphan, with a Urge for¬ tune, to the care of Mr. and, Mrs. Mill- ward. You must be sensible they have- in. every respect faithfully discharged their duty, and reared you with the care and solicitude of the most indul¬ gent parents ; nay, I am certain you share their affection equally with Matil¬ da and Edward : cease then, my child, to torment yourself, and rest assured ( if any thing is concealed from you,·, it will at a proper time berevealed ; your im- r ...vol. т. в portunities
74 portunities hurt Mrs. MUIward : let m-e beg of you to desist from them. You have I find been sounding of Mrs. Evans, but without effect: if she was entrusted with any secret event, she certainly would not, fondly as she loves you, be¬ tray the confidence reposed in her. You know she suckled your mother and has attended you from the first moment ofyour existence: promise me, my be¬ loved pupil, to rest satisfied, and at least for the present let things remain as they are." - JuUana complied with Mrs. Owen's request in regard to ceasing aU inquiries, but she could not suppress a wish to know the history of the authors of her being. • -Mra*
75 Mrs Owen perceiving that JuUana wás restless and uneasy, took occasion to mention it to the famfly, and related the different conversations she had had witli her on this subject/ This determined Mr. MiUward to write to the Marquis,- and desire his permission to inform Ju¬ liana of his existence and the rank she was entitled to : after stating his reasons for urgmg this request, he added— " You may depend on the discretion of JuUana ; tliat strength of mind so ob¬ servable even in her infancy, encreases with her years—would to Heaven, my dear friend, you could see her, you would indeed pride yourself on being the, father of so beautiful and so accom- б 2 pUshed
.-■ ; ';'■■ 7ВУ :d ".;' í \ plished;;á : girl·: it'4Ís impossible;; to "do justice to the virtues she possesses; or to describe,; the4grace·aof everyr : motion; The ..picture dl send according d to;■; your*·..: ordets ;. h though well-'i j executed^ у » iť 4 * conveys ¡jonly a faint a idea of ; the iprigi- nal·: r Juliana's ; ìsj a countenance dì that; pairitiţig cannot delineate with 1 ianya de-i gree of í accuracy ; the ; worthy Evans says şhe>is the;^unterpart iof the laţe Marchioness her mother, Only she has more yivacity of expression. ¡"What I mentioned in a:former: letter, every day confirms ; that Edward; though totally unconscious;o£ itjíisperfectly sensible of your; daughter's ; perfections; fand that she viewsi him with ¡ a. partial eye. ' ■' As you do me the honour to. say ypu wish tlie alliance mayi take place, I shall let
77 things take their course; but I think that Juliana should be acquainted with herbigli'birth and* future expectations. Of Edward you shaU form your own judgment, as nextyear I mean him to commence his travels, under the gui¬ dance of Mr. Smith : during h*s stay at 1 Madrid, I shaU claim your protection for him." Some months had elapsed and no an¬ swer had been received from the Mar¬ quis, which occasioned much uneasiness to Mr. and Mrs. MiUward, as he had "ever been a punctual correspondent, und in his last letter had expressed an - impatience to have Juliana's picture. Father Edmund, to whom he wrote by e 3 almost
78
almost every packet had not received a line : to account for his silence we must take a view of the transactions that hap¬ pened at Madrid. , , !;"■'■.
79
CHAP. V. * ' ». . ' For some years the Marquis had en¬ joyed undisturbed tranquiUity ; Sophro¬ nia was theaffectionate wife, the tender mother, andthe agreeable companion: his son, the young Alphonsa, was an ele¬ gant youth and strongly resembled his father: his little Elvira was a most charming chUd ; she was endued with every feminine and fascinating quality; her features were the seat of softness, at е. 4 all
80
all times blushful and bewitching; the graces of symmetry and smoothness blended their perfections in the shape, complexion, and hair of Elvira : a mu¬ sical education had added to these advantages the improvement of art; and no one could exhibit in the dance with more airy and transporting ele-. gance: nòr were the more valuable branches of learning neglected; the Marchioness herself had formed Elvira's mind, and assiduously cultivated every : growing, virtue. The Marquis fondly loved his chUdren and devoted many hours to thein improvement; he had the satisfaction of observing they made a great progress in their education, yet a sigh would sometimes escape him as he listened to the praises, of Alphonsa and
81
and his sister, at the thought of being forever separated from his Juliana : most ardently did he wish ^to' repose,die se¬ cret in the bosom of Sophronia, and form some pretext to visit England ; but his vow he held too sacred to break, and the age and increasing infirmities of the Duke, joined to the post he filled at court, was a bar to his being absent even for a short period. The calm which the Marquis had so long experienced, was destined to be in¬ terrupted by a most severe and unexr pected blow* The family resided occasionaUy at a pleasant vUla within · a few mUes of Ma¬ drid, it stood on the verge of the Forest e 5 of
82
of St. Bernardo. Frequently the youth¬ ful Alphonsa attended only by his go'-^r- nor and one domestic, rode out and re¬ turned- to breakfast ; sometimes they extended their ride and spent the day at a Castle which stood in the Forest, belong¬ ing to the-Duke of Torcella, whose son and Alphonsa vrcre in the'habits ofthe strictest intimacy : one of these excur¬ sions proved fatal to Alphonsa ; he had set out ratlier earlier than common with his usual escort, intending to pass a long ■morning with his young friend Ferdi¬ nand; theweatherbeinguncommonlysul- try, they struck out of the high road into a more shady one which was seldom fre¬ quented, except by foot passengers that had business at the Castle, They had not proceeded
83 '■.'.■ * proceeded far when they were _ ; alarmed by the trampling of horses ; before they had time to reflect, they were surround¬ ed by six armed men in 7 masks, who in¬ stantly seized Alphonsa. It is impossi¬ ble to describe the, consternation of, his governor; resistance ; was-in yain,' aş. . neither he nor the servant had any wea r pon pf .defence, and the .spot was, '¡ hv· from .anyhabitation ; the .Castle .they, were going to -was the nearest,and, that was .two miles distant^.; He, şat ,,motipn r less with horror till, he was aroused by v thé voice of Alphonsa, crying for, help*. andibegginğhimto saye hini |¡ he^ rent ,; the; idr wjth exclamations for .assistane^ One who seemed to have the command^ of the assassins in a'feigned voice, said— -.: ■ -ι ϋ- ,JjW.\ . ,.' . ; .,. M*. Mi !·· W'- i ' J ^ J ·" μ ι 6 "Dispatcb
84
« c Dispatch the boy, and stop the noise ofthat man. v The servant perceiving three öf their daggers raised to murder his young 'Tiord* rushed between and received the point of one of them in his own breast, at that itisťäiit thé Other two ruffians stabbed Alphonisa tõ ^tiie heart, and he expired instantly. The governor, who had struggled with the тал who held Ша;' teas shockingly mangled, and -'fifl, „ covered with wounds^ / "Háve ybu made all sure?** was ask¬ ed by the leadar of the gang in a whis- pÕtW - .. ■ Μ* ",- ■: >■ л... *.·. : : : ,- * We -have, my Lord," was the reply -амм. г а - ; ,■ UX
85
in the same low voice, " what shall we do with the bodies ?" Before he could answer, the sound of a distant haUQO disturbed them, and they struck into the thicket and in an in¬ stant disappeared. t In less than ten minutes two peasants arrived at the ratal spot. Alphonsa and the governor had no signs of life, but the servant opened his eyes and endea¬ voured to speak ; they poured a Uttle brandy down his throat and bound up his wounds which had bled a good deal ; he in a feint voice briefly related the horrid tale, and conjured them to get help and pursue the murderers ; one of the
d ■ l ßb~ '- ťhe ? men fán to the Cašde and the other remained with the servant Д ■: : n a w w Thë H püke ( :Of · Torcella and family ľwérestŕuck ■ with íiorror .'oň·.. hearing of the melancholy: tale '£■ Ferdinand "was in¬ consolable.' The ; servants - were 'imme¬ diately armed and dispatched different #äyš ; }a carriage was sent totconvey the 'bodies of Alphonsa. and the 'governor to¬ the Castle; aşurgeori attended to assist -the servant' and tb I examine * the wounds ч$ the others;? in hopes that; life wasistill ■' remaining. ' The ŕ aocöuht the peasants gave wasj they heard the· most shocking shrieks ¿arid perceived they came from tlie ; path· that led to the Castle, they quicken^ -ed their pácé but arrived ígo Jatè ; iq aaf- iord any succour to the yictim ; had they ■beea
been armed they t would instantly ; haye pursued the murderers, but they hoped, as the Forest í ïwas intricate, they would bêïtSLkehwwj IjhWh fwj *¡:h" ì&&w:i :.. d Eyéry - eflort was made to restore ani¬ mation, tjo the young Alphonsa ; · he was stiU warm when; his body .arrivedat athe . Castle, but Ufé; had foreyer· fled '; ithe : ser^ vant ;being „too ; weak, to answer any questions was ordered to be taken care of. - The Duke of TorceUa sincerely felt for, the. parents and relations of this love¬ ly boy, the only hope of one of the first and most ancient houses in Spain. ,,-■ He was at a-loss :how to break it to the famfly in terms the; most likely to soften the horrors ; of his, recital ^before, the return ofthe people he had sent in pur- '4'·4'' SUİt,
V. 88 5uit^he'set off for the'¡Marquis's: viUa, ; attended by several domës^cSï well· arm·; ecl v as he thought it'! might, be a set of banditti that perpetrated this shocking murder ; yet it was scarcely probable. For years no robbery had happened ·; the traveller- had at * all; hour,; f . df the -"night pursued his way- in safety:" nothing had been taken either '> from •Alphonsa ór his governor ; the life , of the yduth was certainly what they aimed at. 4 * v Bewildered with reflection on; thè- me¬ lancholy; occurrehcëj^ thè XDuke found himself at the residence of the Marquis; It was nearly sun-set : the stay of Al¬ phonsa ή had excited ho alarm" 'as hè often returned by moon-light. ч The un¬ expected visit ^ i of the Duké -surprised ím them;
89
them; as he entered the drawing room he could not conceal the agitation of his mind, which, Sophronia, perceiving, ex¬ claimed with eagerness : "Where is Alphonsa? has any thing happened to my son ? your Grace's man¬ ner leads me to imagine that sometlung unusual has occurred, 0 The Duke without answering So¬ phronia, said, he had business of great importance to communicate to the Mar¬ quis, and must beg leave to speak to him in private. Alonza arose to attend the Duke, but he too had caught the alarm, and'a uni¬ versal tremor seized him; they had just
so , t just "reached the dooi* of the apartment when Sophronia^ whose feelings-had nearly overpowered her, cried·— ; , i' ľ l . ''d w " For Heaven sake ! my Lord, relieve my anxiety ; something I am certain has béfel my child. ■ Oh! do not attempt to .deceive a mother,-nbr keep me longer in suspense" \ ' íŕ v '' J r ! The puke perceiving the mind of Sophronia was prepared for some fatal .stroke, t returned, and with as much composures he could assume,- said— " What I have to relate may as well be told here ; be seated, my фаг friends ; I am concerned to be the messenger of
91 ill news, but an' accident has happened to the Lord Alphonsa." * · ' ' ■ ·' "Of what Hnd?" interrupted the "Marquis, " does my boy sfcfll Uve ?" \ ' Sophronia had fainted, the attendants werecaÜed 1 to carry her to her apärt- riieht,and the Duke in the, teriderest manner informed the Marquis as far as he had learnt of the dreadful particulars : òf his son's fate. The Marquis raised his eyes'toHeaven: , ··'··■ '.."·*. *w : " Almighty Pro^dence I" cried he, " enable riie to bear this afflicting stroke, ahd, oh ! inspire -me with the meaiis of comforting my ^Sophronia, my ratlier, ' ,,: ' ( 1V : "'" '·' ' and
m
and thëgood IJoniSebaşţiahjwhoşe livqsà l'fear, are èritwinçdin.thisjdea^boy.",. . wì Aţ that instant a party of ?ţheu3uke's servantşvhad arriyed, ţhey- hád j^en un- -successful in tracing the assassins^ but others were stifl in pursuit. ^rThecJbouse- dlMây werje ; no sooner; informed,. pf ihis •sad jeyent, than they begged tO: r he ,per- •miţţed to: joinj in the search.; a w ·, τ . .j·^-: ¿j^lphp^sa^was; idolized-by ^thémý. and .their lamentations added geatly to, ţ}ie distress of the Marquis ; ¿message from Sophronia ^ requesting tò see the,T)uke аЫ -him^ arpused;^qnza • sţupefacHonV ¡apd he, paced the røpm^in ■' f an ;agony оГ grie£ ; , , Jor a some \ time ^the jDuke vainly erideavoüred to calm his emotions,
93 emotions'/ arid Inspire 'hihi with. forti-. túdè to meet the 'Marchioness ; 'at length he in sorbe measure succeeded, and he conducted/the Duke p to .her' apart¬ ment.. They- founds that 'admirable woman perfectly composed, though her countenance betrayed 'the strongest marks of affliction, blended with resig¬ nation. Λ ϊ I -will spare, your Grace,' 1 said she, as -they 1 entered, " the painful task of repeating the sad tale : my chfld is mur- . dered ! thé particulars 'of the* barbarous, act, at present, I cannot'bear to hear. (Observing a wildness in the looks of Alonza,) For my sake, my beloved hus¬ band," said she, taking his hand, "do jaot suffer your feeUngs to overpower .... you ;
94
you ; exer,t yourself and aid my feeble¬ ness to bear with patience this dire event. ' Oh ! let us bow submissive to the stroke, and fervently implore the Almighty to endue us with strength to bear our aflliction. We have yet' a dreadful task to perform, to acquaint our parents with—■" » Sophronia could not proceed, her voice faflf d her, and she threw herself in the arms of the Marquis ; this action recaUed his recoUection, aná pressing her tenderly to his breast, he burst into a violent flood of tears which after some time greatly reUeved him. " My life, my love,'* said he, as soon as he * could articubte ; " thou best of women,
95 women, yes, for, thy sake I wiU exert myself, and endeavour to bear my sor¬ rows Uke a man." , ,, y The Duke, who had remained silent, during this affecting scene, perceiving they were more composed, insisted on their taking some refreshment and re¬ tiring to rest. . · ' "It is now, my dear friends, near morning, in a few hours I wiU set off for Madrid, and inform the minister of the unhappy circumstance which pre¬ vents you from attending at court \ leave every thing to me, even the pain¬ ful office of conveying the sad intelli¬ gence to the Duke your father and Don Sebastiani? Sophronia,
9в -■ SöphroriiaV who was 1 · quite exhausted^ consented to retire, but the Marquis insisted on staying with the Duke of TorceUa, as he anxiously expected the return of -the different parties sent in search of the ruffians/ '; ' ; - ■ - By-eight in thé morning they afl came .* back unsuccessful, not a trace of the vil¬ lains could be found ; this excited great astonishment,, and farmed the· whole country, as the Forest had been con- · sidered perfectly safe, nor had there been a murder or robbery committed in the memory of the ; oldest man living. The more the Marquis revolved these circumstaricešin his mind, the more he was convinced that Don Gusman was **■·■■■■■ ■<■''.·;■■·. '.■'- the
9?
the perpetrator of this atrocious murder; but he was totally at a loss how to pro¬ ceed, or what steps to take in order to detect him. Ever since his banishment, he and Donna Triphosa had lived per¬ fectly retired, and far removed from the capital; not the least intercourse had taken place between the families,: this determined him to keep his suspicions to himself, at least for the present ; he flattered himself that the servant would be able to give some information on the subject, and he resolved as soon as the Duke of TorceUa set off for Madrid, to ride over to the Castle and question the man, and at the same time to indulge himself in the melancholy pleasure of viewing the body of his 'son. Finding Sophronia had risen, he paid her a visit; vol. ui. f he
98 hé found her in tears but · seemingly cairns the Uttle Elvira was seated by her, whose innocent grief : for her bro¬ ther pn whom she doated added to the affliction öf her parents : the Marquis taking her tenderly in his arms, soothed her and charged her to do everything in her power to co*mfort her mother, which the poor child sobbing promised to do ; but her heart was ready to break, which tiie Marquis perceiving rang, and ordered the servant to take Elvira to her governess -and to desire she would /endeavour to amuse her ; but Sophronia starting exclaimed— "Oh 1 , do not deprive me öf my only child, 'she too vrôll be murdered." "My
m
. "My dearest love, be composed, she shall not leave you ; ï trust Providence will ever protect her from the wicked machinations that has deprived us of our amiable and lovely boy." " My А1опга/' said Sophronia, press¬ ing the Marquis's hand and fixing her eyes earnestly on his face ; " tell me, does not the same idea strike us, our darl¬ ing Alphonsa has fallen a sacrifice to the infernal malice and ambition of Gusman and Triphosa; their revenge has laid smothered so -many years only to burst with ten-fold violence on our devoted .heads?" " You have, my Sophronia, penetrat¬ ed my thoughts; I do indeed impute the f 2 guilty
100 guilty deed to them ; but we must act with taution, nor dare accusé them till we have something to. aUedge that wül ¡amount to proof. The Duke Of TorceUa has promised to return as sóon, as possi¬ ble ; to.him and him alone I shaU impart our suspicions and take his counsel ; in •the mean time I shaU go to the Gastle and interrogate Peter, i PoorEather Aus- , tin, we have scarcely thought of him, he too fell a victim ;; (Spphronia's tears flowed a fresh ;) hewas a truly pious man, and had had the educating of Al¬ phonsa from four years old." "Letme," said Sophronia, "accom¬ pany you, I must once more embrace mychild." m '■'."'■■'■■■
"Most
101
-' " Most certainly you shall, my love, ' but let me entreat you will rest tranquil ' this day ; I will not be absent long ; have no fears for my safety; I will take my faithful Pedro and four other ofour domestics well armed." Sophronia still pressed to go, but the Marquis prevailed, and she consented he should depart 'without her. It is impossible to describe the sensa¬ tions of the Marquis during the ride; he struck into the path that led to the fatal spot, and when he reacheel it he was quite unmanned; his attendants were lit¬ tle less affected, especially Pedro. The blood was yet visible, and a dagger lay at the foot of a tree; Pedro 'dišmoúnted 9 ' and taking it up the poor fellow burst f S into
102
into tears, perceiving it bloody up to the hUt; í' This," says he, " is the cursed in¬ strument that deprived my young Lord of Ufe, inay it be the means of bringing the murderers to justice." The Marquis was so enveloped in gloomy reflections that he heeded not what Pedro had been saying, nor did he notice his having picked up the dagger. A profound sUence ensued till they reached the Castle. The Dutchess of TorceUa and her son received the Mar¬ quis with every mark of affection ; they were sensibly affected by his recent loss : his looks shocked her Grace exceedingly; his
103 his soul seemed harrowed up, a thought struck her, she ' led him to · thé room where the lifeless bodies of Alphonsa and Father Austin lay on different sophas, the former'beautiful even in death ; there Was a strong expression of fear on his countenance, otherwise (as they had closed his eyes, he looked a,sleep:) every respect and attention had been paid; the apartment had been hung with black velvet and Ughted with wax tapers in silver branches; attendants in- deep mourning sat in silence around the' corpse. The Marquis stood absorbed in contemplation; at length he was aroused from his painful reverie by the ,sobs pf young Ferdinand. " Thanks, my dear boy," cried he, f 4 embracing
104
embracing him with fervour ; " "thanks for this mark of affection to your de¬ parted friend." The tears involuntary flowed; the Duchess joined hers. -After viewing the lifeless body of his son and examin¬ ing his wounds, he turned to that of Father Austin's which was shockingly mangled : i'Thou exceUent man," cried he, " these wounds prove what you suffered in endeavouring to save the life of thy beloved pupil. Mayst thou receive the reward of aU thy goodness from our Heavenly Father. Now, Madam, with your leave, I will visit poor Peter, whom I hear with satisfaction, is in a fair way of recovery."
105
The Duchess assured the Marquis he was, and that every care had been taken. Observing the Marquis seemed quite exhausted, she requested he would defer his visit tiU he had taken some refreshment. We will now leave him to examine Peter, and as he could give no satisfac¬ tory intefligence relative to the murder, we wifl follow the Duke of Torcella to Madrid.
F S
106
CHAP. VI. Тнж first steps the Duke of Torcelh took was to wait on the minister, and. acquaint him with the melancholy cir¬ cumstance which prevented the Marqpis Vaenafrom attending his duty at court,' and of the extreme distress of the fa¬ mily. The Minister was much shocked, and begged the Duke to wait till he communicated the circumstance to his Majesty, who, as soon as he was informed of
107 of it, desired the Duke to attend him in his closet.' After minutely inquiring into every particular, he ordered parties of soldiers to scóur ihe Forest in every direction, to continue their search for¬ mues round, and to offer a reward of a thousand pistoles and a free pardon to any of the accomplices who would give up the instigator of this atrocious mur¬ der. '- - ; * ( í ■ * / *. - M v The Duke of Torcella next drove to r the Duke of Ildefonsa ; he found with him only Don Sebastian ;- with the ut- * most caution he disclosed the occasion/ ofhis visit, and endeavoured to prepare them for the dreadful stroke he was re¬ luctantly going to inflicts But, with alD his precaution it proved ahttost too much - F б for
108
for the Duke and Don Sebastian to sup¬ port ; to relate.the scene that foUowed would, only be a repetition of what has already been described ; suffice it to say, that the, Duke of TorceUa used every argument ; reUgionj, and reason could suggest to inspire them with fortitude to, bear with some degree of resignation the. death bf,their adored grandson. At length they became sufficiently composed to hear all that he knew on the subject ; the Duke St.; Ildefonsa remained some timé/ ih .mental prayer, then raising -his eyes io Heaven, exclaimed with fer¬ vency: î ; ^ У 'd У Li, i ¡'j f ·*■' 'd , 4 ,-) ' м'ГГЪу ууШ, O Lordj.be done! the, fatal ' prophecy is then fuIfiUed, that no immediate ^descendant of mine should inherit
109
inherit my title." Then recoUecting him¬ self, he said—"My son, my dear Alonza," stiU lives : spare, oh ! spare him, Hea- * ven." " What mean you, Sir ?" asked the Duke of Torcella with evident surprise, " your words impart some dreadful mystery." " Your Grace," repfled the · Duke St. Ildefonsa, " must pardon me, if for the present I decline explaining myself; a time may come when you shall be ac¬ quainted with the meaning of my words." The Duke bowed, and poUtely drop¬ ped the subject. ., . At
по
At lhe instant the Minister was an¬ nounced, who was a very old friend of the family ; he sincerely sympathized in their affliction, and brought a message of condolence from the King, and in¬ formed them of the great exertions making to discover the murderer. Don Sebastian was particularly de¬ sirous for the immediate removal ofthe Marquis and Marchioness to Madrid, as he feared for their safety. " Some secret enemy," continued he,' " lurks in that fatal Forest, and be as¬ sured the lives ofour son and daughter are at stake ; it is no common foe we have to deal with, nor will his malice stop till he has extirpated our race." "Does
ш "Does your suspicions faU on any one ?" asked the Minister, Don Sebastian recoUecting he had said too much, evaded giving a direct an¬ swer, saying— "Excuse me, my Lord, I hardly know what to think ; time, I trust, will develope this dark aflair/' The Duke of Torcella now took his leave, being impatient to return to his friends; Don Sebastian wished to ac¬ company him, but the Duke St. Ildefon¬ sa so earnestly requested he would not quit him, that he acquiesced on a pro¬ mise that on thefoUowingday the Mar¬ quis
112
quis and Marchioness should return to Madrid. The Duke of Tor cella found the Mar¬ quis just returned from his Castle ; he related aU that had passed, and the" re¬ quest of Don Sebastian that they would quit the villa and take up their- abode iii the capital; he mentioned his sur¬ prise at the fears Don Sebastian express¬ ed for their safety. The Marquis, after thanking the Duke for so kindly in¬ teresting himself in his aflairs, communi¬ cated his strong suspicions of Don Gus¬ man and Donna Triphosa being the instigators ofthe murder. " And, I dare say, (addressing himself to
113
to Sophronia,) your father is of the same opinion." After some consultation on the sub¬ ject, it was determined fo send Pedro to the place of Don Qusman's residence, and to make the most minute inquiries relative to the state of the family. " But I must," said the Marquis, (< cau¬ tion him against being known ; for should Gusman discover him, I am cer¬ tain the poor fellow wouid be dispatched, and I should never forgive myself for being the occasion of his losing his life." Pedro was summoned, and the proper instructions given, and a strict charge not to be too venturesome, He pro¬ mised
114
miseá his master to pay strict obedience to his commands, and proposed dis¬ guising himself as a peasant and setting off that evening. It was settled that the Duke of Tor- cella's family and the Marquis and Mar¬ chioness with Mttle Elvira, should leave the country early in the morning, and tjß the funeral rites were performed they were toreside at the Duke St. Bde« fonsa*s palace. The meeting was affect¬ ing in the extreme, and what added to the distress of the Marquis was finding the shock of Alphonsa's untimely death had brought on the gout in the Duke's stomach. The body of Alphonsa was brought to
115 to the Marquis's hotel, where after lay¬ ing in state during three days, it was deposited in the family vault with great funeral pomp, and every ceremony of the Roman Catholic Church duly per¬ formed. In respect to the memory of Father Austin, he was interred by the side of his young Lord ; a superb mo nument was erected, on which was en¬ graved the particulars of their death. In less than three weeks Pedro re¬ turned. The Marquis was much sur¬ prised to hear that Don Gusman and Donna Triphosa had been absent from Spain above two years, and resided in a retired village in the south of France : only a few domestics remained on the estate. Pedro got acquainted with the man
Ilo
man who acted as steward, who told him, Gusman had had several children, but had lost all except the eldest son, and that on account of his being in an ill state of health, the physicians had advis¬ ed a milder climate ; that the family in¬ tended to return home, shortly, but was at present prevented by the illness of Don Gusman. This was all Pedro could learn; this instead of throwing any light 'on the affair, only deepened tlie mystery, yet far frofn removing the suspicions of the Marquis and Don Se¬ bastian, it only combined them. The soldiers had not been able to make the least discovery, nor had the reward offered, though doubled by the Duke, produced any information. An
Л 17
An obelisk had been erected on the spot where Alphonsa and Father Austin were murdered, with a suitable inscrip¬ tion. The villa was entirely deserted, as neither the Duke nor Don Sebastian would permit the Marquis or Mar¬ chioness ever again to inhabit it. The packet from Mr. Millward con¬ taining Juliana's picture, had arrived the morning the Marquis left the Forest, and not choosing to open it before the Mar·- chioness, he put it into his writing box, anxious as he ever had been to hear of his idolized daughter : so totally had his thoughts been engrossed and his time occupied in endeavouring to support the spirits of the Duke, of his Sophro¬ nia, and Don Sebastian, that he never once
lib
once recollected having received the packet. Three months had elapsed, and time had in some measure softened the grief of the Marquis and enabled him to bear his loss with resignation. One morning looking into his writing desk the parcel caught his eye, on opening h various sensations assailed him; the sight of Juliana's picture, the strong likeness it bom to the hte Marchioness struck him forcibly; he gazed on it før some mi¬ nutes with painful «transports, (as it re¬ called scenes long past,) then ľairŕng it to his lips emprmfeed enthusiastic bisses on the inanimate representative of Ids child. " Thou
119
eť Thou dear resemblance of thy ever lamented mother^ ж ! could I clasp thee to my heart and hear thy voice, I could die content." After reading Mr. Millward's and Father Edmund's letters, he thus ad* dressed the miniature: "And dost thou, dearest innocent, wish to know the authors of thy being? in that request at least you shall be gra¬ tified : the dead Saint, thy angefic mo¬ ther, permitted that when you was in a proper age, you should be informed of every circumstance relative to your pa¬ rents. What if I break my vow and trwn my child! yet what would that avail? Gusman and Triphosa would murder
1^0 murder ; her, for. oh ! too sure,. they and they alone deprived me of my ■ son." ;. "'r'.:- Alonza had worked himself up to a pitch of frenzy ; Pedro entered with a message from the Duke : on perciev- ■a.-.'· f' " ing the ; agitated state of the Marquis, he hesitated, and was going to with¬ draw : the Marquis observing him, caUed himjback. a "See, my faithful Pedro," said he grasping his hand with viplencç, " look at this picture and teU me whom you think itis done for ?" Pedro took it trembUng ; the vehe- mence
121 meneé of his · master, and the wild ex¬ pression of his eyes alarmed him. " My liorioured Lord, whaf has dis¬ composed you thus ?" Examining the picture, he exclaimed, " Gracious Hea¬ ven ! it is the late Marchioness, the exact copy of herseff." " Yes, Pedro, it is indeed the copy, the only copy she has left me." " My Lord; is it possible ? can it be drawn for Lady Juhana ;· she whom you left an infant to the care of Mr. MiH- ward ?" " The same, Pedro ; and if 1 'am not flattered, she inherits with her dear vol. иг. . о departed
122 departed mother's beauty, all her virtues and perfections." The Marquis's mind, weakened by recent calamity, was overpowered by the recollection of scenes which he had ever endeavoured to obliterate from his memory ; at this instant they returned with double force : Pedro did all in his power to sooth the perturbation of Alonza's mind. After some time, he grew more composed ; but it was with the utmost exertion he could subdue his feelings and meet the family at din¬ ner. Sophronia, ever attentive to his looks, and who sedulously watched every change in his countenance, perceived the
123 the conflict in his bosom, and on his leaving the table _sooner than usual, fol¬ lowed him, and entreated to know what fresh cause of sorrow had assailed him. The tears, the solicitations of the amiable Marchioness made him almost forget his vow, and he had nearly re¬ vealed the secret he had with > so much caution concealed .from her so many years. A dread of violating his promise to the dead alone restrained him, and he only told her that some papers he had been looking over had recaUed af¬ flicting scenes long past : embracing her with tenderness, he abruptly quitted hern promising to rejoin her in less than an hour. Though by no means satisfied by о € 2 Alonza's
124
Alonza's answer and manner of leaving her, yet Sophronia determined not to importune him with any further inqui¬ ries, for she ever thought some secret grief at times preyed on his mind. It was some days before the Marquis obtained sufficient tranquillity to write to his friends in England : he apolo¬ gized to Mr. Millward for his long si¬ lence and seeming neglect, and entered into a minute detail of the unhappy circumstance which had occasioned it. He described the mixed emotions of pleasure and pain the sight of Juliana's picture caused him ; and the great self- denial he experienced by not producing to the world his lovely daμghter. He consented not only to her being inform¬ ed
125
ed that she had a father living, but desired she might be permitted to peruse the manuscript, " which, with my letter," continued Alonza, " will make her completely mistress of the fate of her parents; tell the dear -girl all I have suffered "and still do suffer on her ac¬ count ; assure her tbat never father's breast beat with more parental affection than mine : you say she is endowed with judgment far above her years; tell me, my friend, her sentiments on my con¬ duct ; if indeed she has the same hea¬ venly disposition her revered mother possessed, she will not only pardon, but pity and love me. I have no objection to your domestic circle being informed of my daughter's rank ; but let it, my dear friend, be confined to them : Ju- G 3 liana
:iü6
liana must retain thé- name öf Seymour. No part of your letter afforded irne more pleasuŕethan the í hint of : the growing ^affection of '. Edward and Juliana^ arid your intentions of entrusting the former :fo my care : believe- me during his stay at Madrid he shaU experience the ; same tender soUcitude you have shown my child. Mr. Smith has also a! strong j claim on ' my. friendship, for he : lias helped tó form the mind of JuUana ; tell my young ■ friend Edward I am prepared to love him, and that hè musť consider me asan indulgent father. Mý Sophro¬ nia wiU receive and treat him as the son of my dearest and ¡best friend.; I \yrite this packet to good Father Edmund ; I trust his pious admonitions wfll enable me to bear my recent Joss with the for- :...■:.■; í -a ,.■ titude"
127
titude ofa christian : yet* oh ! MiUward had you seen my boy.... But I must stop my pen and conclude in haste. Ever yours, with unalterable friendship and esteem,. VAENA." We must now convey the reader to Devonshire, where news from the Mar¬ quis was expected by Mr. and Mrs. Millward with the greatest impatience*
G 4
128
4
CHAP. VII. - ' After an absence of three months, Edward and Mr. Smith were just retur¬ ned from making the tour of England and Wales ; this was the first time the youthful lovers (for such they were though hardly conscious of it) had been separated for any length of time : the sensations the meeting excited in the breasts of Edward and Juliana, convin- ced them, how dear they were to each other,
129
other, and that their attachment exceed¬ ed the .bounds of brotherly and sisterly affection : this discovery * threw a res¬ traint on the conduct of JuUana ; she no longer caUed him her dear; Edward ; a blush suflused itself over her coun¬ tenance whenever he addressed her; this alteration in her behaviour would haye given Edward great uneasiness, had not her expressive eyes betrayed to him the real state of her heart, and con¬ vinced him it arose alone from an in¬ nate modesty. This heightened the passion of Edward, and he determined, before he left Upton, to open his mind to his father, and request his permission to avow his love to Juliana. The arrival of letters from the Mar- G 5 quis
İSO quis relieved his friends from a state of suspence, but the contents plunged them in sorrow: as parents they felt severely the loss he had"sustained by the untime¬ ly death of Alphonsa: the perusal 4 of his affecting epistle cost them many tears. They were at a · loss ' how to acquaint Juliana· with the history of her parents, as they were fearful it would make a deep impression on her too susceptible mind. The General pro¬ posed consulting Mr. Smith and Mrs. Owen. " They fondly love our Juliana, and will assist us in preparing her for the im¬ portant discovery ; for I cannot bear the idea that charming flow of spirits the dear
m dear girl possesses should · meet with any interruption." Mr. Smith and Mrs; Owen were much flattered by the confidence reposed in them ; the former proposed the disco¬ very should be made in the course of the day. " In the mean time Mrs. Owen may apprise Miss Seymour of it, by saying that Mr. Millward had obtained leave to gratify her curiosity relative 'to her family, and be assured, my dear Sir," addressing the General, " you need not be apprehensive on Miss Seymour's ac¬ count, as I am certain, notwithstanding her feelings are exquisitely refined and tremblingly alive to every tale of woe, g 6 even
13Ö s even ifit dóes not concern her,- yet are they so properly regulated and so much under the controul of reason, that de¬ pend on it she will bear' the discovery . she has so long wished for, with an equanimity that will evince her under¬ standing is far more mature than 'could be expected at her age." " щ I perfectly agree with you," said Mr. Millward'; " Juliana has an uncom¬ mon strength of mind." " It is lucky," observed Mrs. MiU¬ ward; " that Mrs. Carre and Charles are at the Cottage, as being unknown to the Marquis he could not mean, to include them in our domestic circle. , Do
133 Do you intend, щу dear Henry to pre¬ sent Juliana with the, casket ?"' " Certainly, my dear, and every thing it- contains excepting the pa¬ pers, which I shall still take the charge of" . ... '..-.■.. * As soon as thefamilyadjourned to the drawing room, Mr. Millward. addressed Juliana.nearly as follows.: " The period, my dearest Juliana, is* at length- arrived that is to gratify your, anxious desire of knowing to whom you owe your being;, every thing 'relative to your birth and; connections wifl now be revealed; the reasons for the secrecy which has been observed, this paper will inform
134 inform you ; it is written by your father the Marquis Vaena, only son to the Duke St. Ildefonso, and addressed to me pre¬ vious to your being consigned to our care. You will find the Marchioness your mother died in your infancy, that the sea and an insurmountable bar divides you from your only surviving parent, and prevents him from acknowledging you pubUcly as his daughter ; yet believe me when I assure you, that every as¬ severation he makes of his unbounded affection for you is the genuine dictates of a noble heart, superior to falsehood. WUl you, my love, retire and peruse it, or shaU I read it, as I have the Marquis's leave to acquaint all that is present with the contents ?" Juliana
'135
Juliana was visibly agitated, ■'l " Gracious God!" she exclaimed, " does my father Uve ?" and throwing herself into Mrs. MiUward's arms, burst into a violent flood of tears. 'l ' ' 1 As soon as she recovered some degree of serenity, she begged Mi /Millward would do her the favour to read thé rnanuscript, which affected the whole party. Juliana heard it with the strictest attention ; she seemed almost afraid to breathe, yet her sensibUity was often put to the proof: Edward was uncom¬ monly agitated, and when he congratu¬ lated her on the rank and splendid prospects that awaited her, as he raised her hand to his lips an involuntary sigh escaped
13$ escaped him, and his voice faltered in addressing her as Lady Juliana, who trembled exceedingly. She had sup¬ pressed her feelings which were wound to the highest pitch : various sensations rose in her bosom and almost over¬ powered her ; Mr. Millward seeing her ready to faint, said— " Retire, my love, Edward and Ma¬ tilda will accompany you ; when you ^ are sufficiently composed, return, and I will relate the sequel of the Marquis's melancholy story." As, soon as the young friends left the room— « I think," cried the General,' "Ed¬ ward
137
ward and JuHana have betrayed their secrets to us : I wifl venture to pro¬ nounce that this discovery will produce a declaration of his attachment; if it should, how do you intend to act, Hen¬ ry?" " I shall, my dear Sir, in some mea¬ sure be guided by circumstances, yet as vre intend Edward to set out early next month on his tour to Scotland and Ire¬ land, and almost immediately on his re¬ turn to pursue his travels, if you and Emma approve of it, I shall inform them ofthe Marquis's sentiments in his fa¬ vour : the only objection is, they are too young to enter into an irrevocable en¬ gagement ; but as they will bc separated for two or three years, that will be done away.'
138
away. An attachment to so lovely and deserving an object will, I trust, pre¬ vent Edward's forming any improper engagements or connections." " For that, my dear Sir," said Mr. Smith, " I will venture to pledge my honour, even without the strong tie that binds him to Lady Juliana. Ed¬ ward has, I grant, strong passions and a natural warmth "of temper ; but young as he is, I think him perfectly under the controul of reason, and such is my opinion of the rectitude of his mind and the goodness of his heart, that I flatter myself I shall bring him back to his na¬ tive country ivithout having imbi¬ bed any of those vices which disgrace so
1Э9 so many of our young men of fa¬ shion." " Under your guidance," replied Mrs. Millward, " I shall not have an anxious moment on my son's ac¬ count, during his residence on the Continent." The General expressed Ыз surprise ať the long absence of the juvenile party. ■t " If I thought I should not interrupt an interesting love scene," said Mrs. Millward, " I would go in search of them.'" Nor was Mrs. Millward mistaken in her.
140 her conjecture ; ţhe unexpected disco¬ very had thrown Edward off his .guard by awakening his fears pf losing Juliana. His'natural impetuosity burst forth; as soon as they entered the garden, he seized the hand of Juhana ahd his sister, and conducted them to the pavilion in silence. ' , As soon as they entered, he threw himself at the feet of the former, and in the most empassioned language, de¬ clared he adored her, and conjured her as she valued his existence to consent to be his before he left England, lest the Marquis should forbid their union. The abruptness of his entering ~on a subject so interesting ■ to her feelings,
léi
joined to the already agitated state of her mind, was too much even' for the for-' titude of Julianas and she faintbd in his arms. This in a moment roused him to a conviction ofthe impropriety of his conduct, and he stood like a statue : Matilda gently chid him for his rashness, andi though much affected, yei was suf» ficiently composed to administer relief ; by the assistance of salts and giving Ju¬ liana air, she soon restored herj Ed¬ ward fell on his knees and entreated pardon. i " Can you, my idolized Juliana, for¬ give the vehemence of my temper, for which I can plead no excuse ? but be¬ lieve me the effects it has produced will teach me to correct it in future ; nor, by Heaven,
142
Heaven, shaU it ever again master my reason ; speak, my love, I conjure you, say that you do not hate me." t Juliana, whose dignity of mind was happily blended with sweetness of dispo¬ sition, elegance of manners, and real sensibility, was far superior tothe Uttle arts too often practised by the sex, and scorning, by affecting anger she did not feel, to inflict unnecessary pain on one whom her heart told her she really loved, held out her hand, and with a smfle, said—· " My dearest Edward, let me entreat of you to rise, or I shall really fancy my¬ self some heroine of romance ; the time, the
143
the romantic situation you have cho- sen... .'* She was going on, but Edward stop¬ ped her, by conjuring her not to trifle with his feelings, or add the torture of suspence to his already agonized heart. " No, my dear Edward," she replied, fixing her fine and expressive eyes on his, whflst a modest blush overspread her lovely visage, " I have 'no intention to give you a moment's pain ; you have ever possessed my affections, but for the present let us drop a subject, which, before I consent to listen to, must be sanctioned by those I must ever revere as my parents. It is time we return to the
144
the family, as I am very impatient to hear the subsequent events of the Mar¬ quis Vaena." " You shall be obeyed, my charming Juliana ; only permit me to say that to¬ morrow I mean to acquaint our parents with my, may I add, our mutual attach¬ ment," She bowed assent, and Edward kis- Ή- ' sing her hand with rapture, led her out ofthe pavilion. She had perfectly regained her sere¬ nity, and no ill effects remained from the surprise occasioned by the unex¬ pected declaration ; on the contrary the animated glow that usually adorned her cheeks
145
cheeks was considerably heightened, and.never did Juliana appear more beautiful or interesting than when they re-entered the drawing room* her anxious friends rejoiced to find her quite composed ; as to Edward he seem¬ ed to tread in air, and his eyes sparkled with uncommon brilliancy ; in short the whole party were convinced the lovers had come to an explanation. At Ju¬ liana's request, Mrs. Millward related every particular relative to the Marquis. Juliana was greatly shocked by the me¬ lancholy catastrophe of the young Al¬ phonsa. Mrs. Millward presented her with the jewels and trinkets belonging to the Lute Marchioness and Mrs, Beaumont ; vol. m. n the
146
the picture of her mother gave her most pleasure, and she pressed it to her Uns with an enthusiasm so natural to youth ; she asked if she might be permitted to write to the Marquis; Mr. MiUward promised to- inform him of her re¬ quest. " TiU I have leave to address him, wiU you, my dear Sir, say I already love and respect him; assure the Marquis, my dear father, (I cannot renounce йл appeUation,) that my breast beats with filial affection, and that he shall ever « find me a dutiful chUd : teU him I feel much more than I can express." " Enough, my dear girl," said Mr. MiUward fondly kissing her y " I hope I ehall
147 shall ever prove myself a father to you ; never wiU I give up the pleasure of caU¬ ing you daughter. As you are stiU to retain the name of Seymour, every thing that "has passed must be confined to this circle. Ah ! would I might inform Fa¬ ther Edmond : he, my love, has long known every circumstance and holds a constant correspondence with the Mar¬ quis, so you are perfectly free to dis¬ course with that excellent man on the subjects" The next morning 'as soon as break¬ fast was over, Edward foUowed his father to the library and laid open every secret pf his heart. After a long and interesting conversation, Edward had the satisfaction of finding his sentiments « 2 and
148
and love for Juliana met with the appro¬ bation of his father and family; but words cannot describe his transports on perusing the Marquis's letters. " And will he consent to bestow his charming daughter on me r" cried he, " what ecstatic bliss is mine !" i " Moderate, my dear boy, these vio- ' lent sallies, nor suffer the wild flights of fancy to conquer your understanding: do not imagine that the union between you and Julianais to take place till after you return from your travels ; you are both at present much too young to en¬ ter the marriage state, nor will I suffer either of you to contract any engage¬ ment that cannot be revoked, which I do
149
do not approve of even at a maturer age: aţ. the same time remember that a man of honour wiU ever hold his pro¬ mise sacred, and that no crime, seduction excepted, can be more enormous than that of gaining the affections of an art¬ less innocent girl, and afterwards break¬ ing vpws voluntarily made ; but Matter myself, mya dear. Edv/aţdj the rectitude ofyour morals, the. integrity of your heart, and above aUypur religious prin¬ ciples wiU make any farther admonitions on the subject unnecessary. In Mr. Smith you. have not only a kind moni. tor, but a steady and sincere friend ; whose enlightened· mind, long ex¬ perience and perfect knowledge of mankind wifl conduct you safely througli the ordeal fire, which every young man h 3 in
150
in an elevated line of life is exposed to* May you, my son, return to my arms what you now are, and I shall not have a wish ungratified." " Tľhou best of fathers receive my thanks, and be assured your words are deeply engraven on my heart: ever shall it be my study and ambition to merit the approbation of my parents, and that ofmy adored JuUana." " Go, my son, seek JuUana, give lier the Marquis's letters, which, teU her I only withheld tiU T was certain the contents would afford her plea¬ sure." As Edward was quitting the library, _ the
151
the General and Mrs. MUIward en¬ tered. " Juliana and Matilda," said the latter, " are gone to the Hermi- ■ tage, Edward, and desired you would foUow them." " An injunction," replied he, " my dear mother, I shaU be happy to obey." JuUana had in the most artless and candid manner repeated aU that had passed between Edward and her, and blushing owned her attachment. Mrs. MiUward embraced her with maternal affection,'and assured her the right to caU her daughter,- and to see her be¬ ti 4 loved
152 loved son united to such excellence was the first wish of her heart. As to the good General hardly could he keep his joy within· bounds, and had it depend- e4 entirely on him, the young people would have entered fthe marriage state immediately. This he hinted to'* Mr. and Mrs. Millward, who with some difficulty at length convinced him' of the propriety öf delaying it till Edward attained the age of twenty-one, of which he wanted above two years. " Consider, my dear Sir," said Mr» MiUward, " Juliana will at that period be little more than eighteen." The good hermit sincerely rejoiced at the prospect, though remote, of Ed^ ward's
из
ward's and Juliana's happiness ; by his truly fatherly advice he moderated the impetuosity of Edward, and in a great measure reconciled him to the separa¬ tion that must unavoidably take place * before the completion of his wishes. He entered into a short but instructive discourse onthe important duties ofthe marriage state, and concluded with a fervent prayer for their mutual felicity. He delineated the character of the Mar¬ quis Vaena in terms that charmed Julia¬ na and Edward, and dwelt on his virtues with parental enthusiasm: they pro¬ longed their visit till the clock reminded them they would scarcely have time to dress for dinner; reluctantly they bid Father Edmund adieu.
h 3 On
154 On their return they found Mrs. Carre and Charles just arrived from the Cottage, where they had passed a month, Mrs. Carre 'having had some very particular business to trans¬ act with a gentleman who had been ön a visit to her. The young* folks were much pleased at the meeting; Charles saluted Matilda with evident emotion, who trembled excessively, and the tear that started in her eye spoke forcibly the state of her heart: 'this was not unobserved, J but no'notice being taken of it, they soon recovered themselves. As soon as an opportunity offered, jEdward related to Charles the pleasing explanation
155
explanation which had taken place be¬ tween'him and Juhana. · " Congratulate me, my dear friend, on being certain that the dear girl re¬ turns my affection, and that our attachment is sanctioned by our pa- * rents.*' " Happy, thrice happy Edward," exclaimed Charles with á sigh, " may thy felicity be as lasting as this transi¬ tory world wiU permit," " Thanks, my dear Charles, but you are uncommonly, grave, has anything material happened to depress your spi¬ rits ? if there has, let me share your h 6 grief,
UG grief, for devoted as my heart is to Ju¬ liana, it has stfll a part for a friend." Charles pressed his hand and begged him to believe he estimated his repeated marks of friendship as he ought ; " But—but...." He hesitated, and Edward percei¬ ving he was much embarrassed poUtely changed the discourse. Mr, MiUward had written a circum¬ stantial detail to the Marquis Vaena of the intended arrangement relative to Juliana and Edward, and mentioned the sentiments of filial love and duty that glowed in the breast of his charming daughter :
157
daughter: "nor are Edward's much inferior ; but he shall pay his respects and thanks in person, the ensuing au¬ tumn." / Mr, Smith and Edward set, out early in May to embark for Ireland; they were to spend only two months in that country, as Mr. MiUward did not choose his son should make tob long a stay in that truly hospitable island, fearing he mignt imbibe too 'great a refish for that spirit of conviviality that prevails uni- versaUy at their ¿ruly social boards. They were to return by way of Scot¬ land. The parting of Juliana and Edward cost the former many tears; finding that
158 fc that Edward 7was much affected, she ex¬ erted herself and strove as much, as pos¬ sible ,to conceal the poignancy;of her feelings: a secret dread she could riot account for, hung over her, nor could the united efforts of her. friends restore her to her ^ natural harmony of spi* rits. ' * ¿ . At length the repeated letters of Ed¬ ward, replete with the most · animated expressions of love and tenderness, in some .measure -tranquillized her mirid, but she was bereft ^ of her charming vi- .. vacity and innocent gaiety that rendered her conversation and society so engaging. Edward in one of his letters expressed himself as follows, : " Your
159
> " Your letters, my., adored Juliana, have the magic power.of soothing whilst ihey increase the regret I feel -at our se¬ paration, which. witlij every, alleviation that can arise from the delightful cer¬ tainty of possessing your affection, and thè fond hope of being restored to your society, is, when. I consider the dis¬ tance between· ,us,;, almost insupport¬ able." ; "»¿Uw Mi У 4 ; 47 . ,. · -'Wi.- >.m; . d ! : A packet was received from rthe Mar¬ quis containing letters to Mr.. and Mrs, Millward ; that addressed to his daugh¬ ter was wriUen in the language of the purest affection, and in the warmest terms,' expressive of his approbation of .his intended şon-in-law, to whom he wrote
160 wrote a few lines, assuring him how impatient he was to embrace him : his letter to father Edmund was long and in a melancholy strain : " If Heaven," said he, " permits me to fold to my heart my adop¬ ted son, (alas ! I have no other,) and through him to convey my blessing to my dearest Juliana, I shall with pleasure quit this - delusive world ; my path through which, my respected friend, has been a'thorny one. Oh: thou Power .Supreme, grant that the proposed union may be accomplished; and may it prove a happy one.*' Before he concluded, the Marquis 1 ' mentioned
161 mentioned that he almost hourly expec¬ ted the dissolution of the Duke his father, who had never recovered the shock of Alphonsa's death.
162
CHAP. VIJL· Four months passed without any thingmaterial occuring at the Hall, except that Charles's affection for Matilda in¬ creased daily, and at last was perceived by Mrs. Carre, who immediately men¬ tioned it to the family and proposed se¬ parating the young people before it had taken too deep root : " she should ill re¬ pay," she said, " the generous friend¬ ship she had been treated with, by suffering
163 suflering her son to gain the affection of the daughter of her much esteemed patrons ; therefore, though it wfll prove a seyere pang, I am determined to quit this hospitable roof, and give up the so- **. ciety of those who for these four last years have solaced my afflictions and. have been the means of my boy's receir ving a Uberal education." The General in his blunt way _ asked—.; -- ;'..■■ ,....; "And what, my dear madam, is your reason for flying from. our alliance, and dooming our darling Matilda, and your son to misery, for miserable they wfll be if they are parted ? I am certain that neither Mr. or Mrs. MiUward hás -the ' least.
164
least idea of thwarting their inclinations, or any objection when of a proper, age of receiving my friend Charles for their son;,and as to ,me, I suffered so much by "preventing for some years the mar¬ riage, of Henry and Emma, that Ishall be the last person to oppose the happi¬ ness of my grand-child." Nothing could equal the surprise of Mrs. Carre at this totaUy unexpected declaration : highly as she thought of the disinterestedness of their characters, and the nobleness and Uberality of their senti¬ ments, she could not suppose they would, approve of their daughter connecting herself with a family, deprived not only of its hereditary honours, but stripped of its patrimony, and reduced from the highest
165
highest pitch of affluence to astate of comparative poverty, for such might be stiled the slender pittance of two hun¬ dred a year, and even for that they were indebted to the bounty of the worthy Earl of A------, who recom¬ mended them to the protection of the Millward's. Some minutes elapsed be¬ fore she could reply. ' " Is it possible," exclaimed she, " that my worthy friends are not displeased with my presumptuous boy? I this morning questioned him on the sub¬ ject ; and in a most candid manner he owned he had aspired to the affections of Miss Millward. e I know, my dear mother, your rigid notions of lionour and strict adherence to the rules of rec¬ titude
166
' titude will condemn me, and you nwill reproach me not only for breaking the laws of hospitality, but with ingratitude to my best friends ; yet let me conjure ' you to make some allowance for the frailty of .youth, and the irresistible charms of the too lovely Matilda ; be¬ sides,* continued he, and a spark of pride glowed on his countenance, ť there was a time I might have claimed the hand of Miss Millward without being accused either of ingratitude or presumption/ In short, after a long and painful con¬ versation in which he vainly endea¬ voured to drive me from my purpose of quitting not only Upton Hall but its environs, and retiring'to an obscure part of Wales, he left me in a situation of mind
167, mind that roused every parental feeling, though it did not shake my resolution.? , • Mr. and Mrs, MiUward' expressed much concern ; they had not long since entered on the subject, as they, had per¬ ceived the partiaUity of Charles and Ma¬ tilda for eaph otiier some time ; they then with~ that natural urbanity and polite¬ ness, for which they were so eminently distinguished, assured her they should esteem her alfiance an honour. " By birth," continued Mr. MiUward, ce I have no doubt ofyour son's equality, nay, of his superiority ; his morals are „ good and his disposition amiable ; add to this, he is highly accompUshed, and the graces of his person exactly corres- " ' pond
168 pond with'the virtues of his heart: what more, my dear madam, can >we wish for in the man who is to rule the future destiny of our daughter ?" Mrs. Carre after giving vent to the various feelings of her grateful heart, said— " lt is certainly right you should be acquainted with the real names and cha¬ racter of persons whom you esteem suf¬ ficient to rank as part of your family. I have often reproached myself for not acquainting you with particulars of our misfortunes; but a reluctance I could not conquer, has hitherto prevented me from entering into a detail of cir¬ cumstances
169 cumstances wluch recaU ideas of scenes that harrow up my soul." The General begged Mrs. Carre would defer tiU a future period a re¬ cital which he was certain would distress her. " Let us dedicate the rest of the day to happiness, we only want the presence of Edward to render it complete." Mrs. Carre replied, she would avail herself of- his kindness, that she had committed a great part of it to paper, which she would finish and submit to their perusal. *. ч The young people who had been voi., ш. ι * rambUng
J 70
rambling in jthe park, now joined the circle. The looks of Charles and Ma¬ tilda -showed how much they dreaded the proposed separation : they were in¬ stantly changed on the General's inform¬ ing them' that Mrs. Carre had been prevailed on to continue an inmate at the Hallj nothing more at that time passed. - Edward and Mr. Smith was expected in the course of a week from Scotland, where none had been more attentive to them than the Earl of A------ , of whom Edward spoke in the highest'terms ; and in his last letter to Juliana, he says : " In two days we shall quit this de¬ lightful spot, where we have experienced every
171
every instance of kindness tliat the truest benevolence and most unbounded hospitality can bestow, nor should I ' leave it without extreme regret, but for the pleasing reflection that I am on the * point of returning to Upton Hall, the place where all my happiness iá cen¬ tered." About a mile from the park was a most beautiful plantation of lime and fir trees intermixed with various Jlöwery shrubs, some fine exotics and myrdes ţ in the midst stood a small rustic temple which had been built at the express déf¬ aire of Edward, and under his inspec¬ tion. A serpentine walk led to a small ι 2 creek ι
172
' creek of the sea, where a few fishermen's huts were scattered on the beach : this was a favourite resort of JuUana's, and few days passed without her visiting it. Charles and Matilda always accompanied her ; while they were engaged in an in¬ teresting discourse and rambled farther on, JuUana would amuse herself with reading till their return. One uncommon fine evening Charles anď Matilda had been induced to pro¬ long . their walk beyond their usual bounds ; they had been laying future plans of happiness and anticipating the time that Edward would have finished his travek, their probation be past, and the wished-for unions take place. 'Thus employed, they thought not of returning
173 returning till the sun had long set, and was greatly surprised to find they were above three miles from home ; fearing that Juliana would be uneasy, they quickened their pace and had nearly reached the plantation, when they were overtaken by a violent and sudden storm : tremendous peals of thunder foflowed each other in quick succession, and vivid lightning darted from the sky in every direction. As they entered the temple the ¡rain began to descend in torrents ; it is impossible to paint the distress of Matilda on finding JuUana was not there. ' " Good Heaven ! protect her ; what, my dear Charles, can have become of jier r' 13 "Be
1*74
" Be pacified, my dearest Matilda, 1 J rust she is not far off." Repeatedly they caUed her, on re¬ ceiving no answer, Charles became alarmed. The storm now raged with increased violence. Scarcely were they sheltered from it, yet were they un- wiUing to leave the spot. At length it occurred to them, Juliana might have sought refuge in the cottage which" stood at the park gate, thither they hastened and arrived drenched with rain. Matilda was almost exhausted with fright and fatigue: Charles thundered at the door, which was immediately opened by the good old couple who had resided there many years. "God
175 " Godbiess my soul!" cried the mân, " your honours are wet to the skin ; here, Mary, light a fire quickly." · " Is Juliana here ?" exclaimed Charles and Matilda, as soon as they recovered breath. " We have not seen Miss Seymour since she passed the cottage with your honours three hours agone." "What can be done?" exclaimed Matilda, wringing her hands ; " some accident has happened to her." Charles endeavoured to quiet her ap¬ prehensions, though his own were Uttle short of hers. ι 4 "Stay
Г/б '-
" Stay here, my dear MatUda, I and JoЪn wifl search every avenue that leads to the temple and park, she possibly may have gained the latter." At that instant à loud knocking at the door inspired them with hopes ; Charles flew to open it, saying— - " This must be our dear Juliana." It is easy to guess his feelings when he found it was only several servants who had been sent from the Hall with fights. The storm and the lateness of the hour had alarmed the family ; a general consternation took place ; all seemed panic struck ; Juliana was the idol of every
m every one. Charles suddenly snatched a torch from one of the servants ,-and ordering the rest to follow him, flew out of the cottage without uttering a syllable. Matilda thought it proper to acquaint her father that Juliana could not be found, and were giving orders to the servants that were left when Mr. Mill- ward and James arrived ; on entering the cottage, seeing Matilda, " Heaven be praised ! they are safe ;" cried he ; " my dearest child, (embracing Matilda,) you know not what we have suffered by the uncommon length of your stay : my Juliana and Charles where are you ?" ' j. 5 Matilda
IIS
Matilda burst into tears. " Charles, my dear rather, is safe, but Juhana— ·" " What means, my child, no acci¬ dent has, I trust, befaUen her ?" Before she could answer, Charles re¬ turned and gave Mr. MUIward .an ac¬ count of aU he knew relative to Juhana. The storm being considerably abated, a faint hope was entertained of her having reached the HaU. The ser¬ vants with James were orderod to go over tjie pleasure grounds, and Mr. MiUward with the assistance of Charles conveyed Matilda home. The
179
The first inquiries were after Juliana, never was more anxious concern ex¬ pressed than for her safety. The whole village assembled to offer their aid, nor would the honest rustics retire to rest, but spent the night in vainly endea¬ vouring to trace Juliana. Not an eye was closed at the Hall by the female part, it was passed in tears ; the morn¬ ing only brought fresh disappointments, no intelligence could be gained, nor any probable conjecture formed relative to the sudden disappearance of Juliana. Day after day arrived, and only added to their misery, as the whole affair seemed enveloped in a most profound mystery. Matilda and Charles continually re- i 6 proached
180
proached themselves for having staid so Iong on that fatal evening. The country had been searched and every magistrate applied to: hand-bills had been circu¬ lated, and Juliana had been advertised in the daily papers, and an immense re¬ ward offered; but every effort to re¬ cover . her had proved abortive. Ed¬ ward and Mr. Smith were hourly expected, and they dreaded thè effects the uncertain fate of his adored Juliana would have on the former. _ ,Henry, who we have not mentioned for some time, had not been either in¬ active, or unconcerned on this occasion : he was grown a fine young man, and had gained the love of Mrs. Bern by his amiable conduct and his great atten- • ' tion
381
tion to his profession. Daily he conr tinued his inquiries, though" hopeless of success. Peace was fled from the till then happy abode ; visitors were entire¬ ly excluded ; ho persons, however inti¬ mate, were admitted, except the worthy Rector and family, and even his pious admonitions in a great measure failed of effect. , Mrs. E. Montague was almost con¬ stantly at the Hall, but she could only mingle her tears with those of Matilda's. The General was so much affected by the loss of his favourite, that it brought on a violent fit ofthe gout, and Mr. ancl Mrs. MiUward were forced to suppress their
182
their own feelings to comfort him and Matilda, whose health visibly declined. Mrs. Owen's grief was silent, but deep ; she was unremitting in her kind attentions in endeavouring to sooth- sorrows she too severely felt. Things were in this state when the arrival of Edward and Mr. Smith, added, if possible, to their distress ; unfor¬ tunately he had dismounted at the en¬ trance of the pleasure ground, and sent the attendants and horses round the back way, meaning to surprise the fa¬ mily. - Edward entered the drawing-roòm with unusual gaiety ; but in a moment was
ISS
was struck with the deep melancholy- impressed on every countenance. Find¬ ing Juliana was absent, he concluded she was ill: hastily embracing his pa¬ rents, he inquired with the greatest anxiety after Juliana» Mrs. Millward could not suppress her tears, and his sister from extreme weakness fainted. " My God !" cried he, " my adored Juliana is dead ; for mercy's sake ! tor¬ ture me not with suspense, but let me know the worst !" His whole frame,shook with emo¬ tions; unable to support himself he sunk into a chair. Mr. Millward em¬ bracing him, said— "Let
184 "Let me conjure you, my dear Edward, tò' moderate this' excess of sensibility, not only for your own sake, but in pity to those who are infinitely dear ťo you ; attend with calmness to all we know of an'event, which is needless to say, has plunged us in the deepest affliction." He then related every circumstance relative to the unaccountable disappear¬ ance of Juliana, and every step which had been taken to fathom this mys¬ terious transaction* It was some hours before the endea¬ vours of Mr. and Mrs. Millward, united to those of Mr. Smith, ŕ could bring him to any degree of composure : ! at length the situation of his grandfather and sister
185
sister induced him to use every effort to confine his grief within bounds, as he perceived they were already overpower¬ ed, and when he retired for the night he was more collected, though not less wretched. Early the next morning he sought 1 the advice and counsel of the venerable hermit, who he found in great affliction for the uncertain fate of JuUana : his as¬ pect was serene, mUdly expressive of grief, and from his stiU expressive eyes beamed resignation, and saint-like pa¬ tience blended with hope. On perceiv¬ ing Edward he advanced to meet him, and clasping him to his heart with fa¬ therly affection, he thus addressed him :
" Remember,
186
" Remember, my son, that afflictions are often blessings in disguise, which I have proved in many instances; nor should you be surprised at being des¬ tined to" experience those vicissitudes from which the most fortunate cannot be whofly exempted. This event is, I own, a severe trial ; endeavour to sup¬ port it with a fortitude becoming a christian; remember that the AU-wise and Merciful Power, who has hitherto strewed your path of life with flowers, would not afflict you but for the most salutary purposes ; reflect likewise, my child, that our dear and lamented Ju¬ liana, whatever has been her fate, and though separated frorn 'her earthly pa¬ rents and friends, is stiU under thé pro¬ tection of her Heavenly Father, who will
187
will, I am certain, shield her from every danger, and have no doubt restore her to you." The hermit at length reasoned him into a rational state of mind, and by his arguments he was enabled to subdue the violent expressions of grief, but it sunk deep in his heart. It was with the utmost difficulty he was prevented from setting out in pursuit of Juliana ; nothing but the absolute commands of his father prevailed, both he and Mr, Smith pointed out the folly of such an expedient: daily did he visit the plan¬ tation and explore every avenue that led to the temple, in hopes of finding some clue to direct him ; but vain was every exertion to fathom this dark affair.— Thus
I8fS Thus passed a month, and every suc¬ ceeding day seemed to add to their dis¬ tress ; no letter had been received from the Marquis, to whom Mr. Millward dared not write, fearing the intelligence he had to communicate, added to his late misfortunes, might deprive him of his reason.
189
í.
CHAP. IX. One evening Mr. Millward was told a person in deep mourning wished to speak to him, as he had something of importance to communicate: nothing could equal the surprise of Mr.. Mill- ward on finding it was Pedro, the Marquis of Vaena's old and favourite valet, whom he instantly recollected, though he was greatly altered and appeared weak and debilitated. Mr. Millward
190 MiUward eagerly inquired after the Mar- quis— " " What of my friend ? have you no letter for me ?" The poor feUow bursting into tears, exclaimed— " О ! Sir, I' haVe sad news ; but" may I ask how my young mistress does, the Lady Juliana r " » * " My faithful Pedro, I have a short but melancholy account to give of that dear .girl, but tell mc what of my friend?" - Pedro concluding from Mr. Mill- ward's
19Ì
ward's manner of speaking that JuUana was dead, * raised his eyes to Heaven and crossing himself, ejaculated a short prayer for the repose of her soul. " God's will be done!" continued Pedro, " the only consolation I hoped is denied me ; but I ask your pardon, Sir, for keeping you in suspence, yet I know not how to inform you of the dreadful fate of my beloved and ever honoured master." " Stop, Pedro j" said Mr. Millward, " your dress and words too sure in¬ form me he is no more ! then you, my friend, my dear Alonza, are spared tlie pangs I feel at the uncertainty of JiiUa- na's
192
na's destiny. —^Proceed, Pedro, to know the wor.*· 'r will besóme relief," - Pedro in broken accents acquainted Mr. MiUward that a few days after the Marquis had sent his last packet to Eng¬ land, business of importance obliged him to visit- an estate which lay on the con¬ fines of ------ ·. The steward having died suddenly made the Marquis's presence absolutely necessary, as the Duke was too infirm to undertake the journey. " My master meant to be -absent a short time and travel privately, and took only me and two other domestics : we arrived perfectly safe, but found the accounts in so perplexed a state, and things in such confusion, that the Mar¬ quis
193
quis was detained much ionger than he expected. The loneliness of the situa¬ tion, and the largeness of the castle, added to its having few inhabitants, seemed to suit the melancholy the Mar¬ quis frequently indulged since the loss of Lord Alphonsa ; and frequently by moonlight he would walk for an hour or two in a retired grove, which lay contiguous to the pleasure ground?! ; nor would he ever permit my attendance ; he constantly returned by eleven. On the fatal night he had ordered me to settle some accounts, which being intri¬ cate, so entirely engrossed my attention, that the time passed imperceptibly ; till hearing the clock strike one, I was alarmed for the safety ofmy lordi, whom I instantly went in pursuit of. I hastily s ι voh. iu. к caught ι
194
caught up a pistol and called to the other servants to arm and follow me : " Ihadscarcely entereďthegrove,when the sound of voices made me quicken my pace. -Before I reached the centre, I beheld my master on the ground, wel¬ tering in his blood : I called for assist¬ ance and endeavoured to raise him, as I perceived some signs of life remaining. At that instant! received a stab in my back, and fell ; I must, have remained a considerable time insensible : on my re¬ covering I found myself in bed, my wounds dressed, and the good old house¬ keeper İn tears by me, I inquired ea¬ gerly for the Marquis, on which I was told that the most diligent search had been made after him,- but in vain, and that
195
that they waited rny coming to myself for information ; that Father' Francis, (the domestic chaplain,) wished to speak to me. I desired to see the holy man immediately, to whom I related particu¬ lars, but did not communicate my sus¬ picions relative to the murder: the good father was struck with horror; from my situation he had apprehended some danjer to the Marquis, but flatter¬ ed himself he might have escaped the assassins. - j " He told me that Fabian and Stephen lud ' followed me immediately well armed, but unfortunately had mis¬ taken my orders ; instead of the grove at the end of the garden, they had ran to a large wood that lay at some distance к. 2 from
196 from the Castle ; that not being able to find me they returned, greatly alarmed, and appUed· to Father Francis, who dis¬ patched them with several others, to search the-pleasure grounds. ■ " On entering the grove they had not advanced far' when a faint groan'' caught their ear ;- foflowing the sound, they perceived the-earth newly turned up, and removing it, found me ap¬ parently dead; some of them con¬ veyed me to the castle, whilst the others pursued their search. On ex¬ amining me, Father Francis found I had stiU life in me, and having employ¬ ed proper 1 remedies and dressed ' my wound, I began to breathe and opened my eyes, but remained several hours in¬ sensible ;
197 sensible; he told me my wound was deep but not dangerous, and that-in 'a few days I should be able' to go out. I thanked Father Francis for his kindness, and entreated him to use every endea¬ vour to find the body of the Marquis. The worthy man needed not my solici¬ tations, his own attachment to the fa¬ mily led him to take every possible step to discover where tlie body of the Mar¬ quis was deposited, and to bring the murderers to justice, but every exer¬ tion was in vain. In my own breast I was cqnvinced that the same attrocious villains had deprived father and son of life. An express was sent off to Don Sebastian to acquaint him with the hor¬ rid circumstance : as soon as I was able I again had every spot of the grove and к 3 places
198
places adjacent searched, but could not find the least trace of my beloved mas¬ ter, wliich leads me to imagine they had carrieďhis body off. " I sealed up aU the effects in the Cas¬ tle, and deUvered every thing in charge to Father Francis. I set out for Madrid with a heavy heart, and reached it only a few hours before the Duke departed : he had given strict orders that if I ar¬ rived before his death I should be ad¬ mitted to his apartment. I am con¬ vinced his Grace knew me, though he was unable tó speak : never shaU I for¬ get his look ; he fixed his dying eyes on me with such earnestness that quite Overpowered me ; vainly I attempted to articulate, my sobs prevented utterance : the
199 v. the Duke pressed my hand and fell for a short time asleep ; on waking he was perfectly composed, 1 and plainly said— " 4 O! Pedro; this last blow has proved too much.* " Shortly after he expired in my arms ; the shock indeed had been too severe for his years, and, already debili¬ tated frame, and he sunk under the pressure. " Don Gusman being heir to the ti¬ tle and estate, the Duke had in the strongest'terms disposed of his personal property, jewels, plate, and furniture, in favour of the Marchioness and Lady к 4 ' Elvira,
tíOO
Elvira, and provided fbr all his servants ; tp me he bequeathed a handsome annui¬ ty; this will had been made during his last illness. " To our great surprise, Don Gus- man and Donna Triphosa came and demanded possession the very day the Duke died ; we had no idea of their being returned to Spain. The distress and confusion that reigned throughout the house prevented me from securing my master's papers, and the illness of the Marchioness prevented me from seeing her. Don Gusman insisted on putting his seal on all the effects, alledg·*· ing he had a right to inspect them, as the title deeds, bonds, &c. were in the possession of the late Marquis. I should ■ mention
201 mention that since the murder of the Lord Alphonsa our family had resided constantly with the Duke. " I believe, Sir, you are well acquain¬ ted with the real character of Don Gus¬ man, and Donna Triphosa, and of the strong suspicions entertained concerning tlie murder of my young Lord. If I had a doubt remaining, Don Gusman's astonishment and confusion at the sight of me, (whom he supposed dead, would have dispelled it ; I was almost tempted to say, thou art the man!—but pru- dence tied my tongue. As soon as he could recover himself, he expressed how happy he was to see me, and with well- dissembled grief lamented the melan¬ choly events that had followed each к 5 otiier
202 other in.such quick succession. Scarce¬ ly could I restrain my indignation ; but though my heart was ready to burst, I suppressed my feelings as much as pos¬ sible. Spight of my endeavours my tears would flow: he commended my fidelity and attachment to my master, and put various questions relative to the murder,' which I answered with the greatest cau¬ tion ; at length I was permitted to quit his presence. " The next morning Don Gusman sent for me into the library, after a long preamble and a promise of being a friend and providing for me— " c Pedro,* said he, « I know you were in possession of all your Lord's .. · secrets ;
203 secrets ; there îs a point' I wish to be satisfied on : did not the Marquis in the early part of his life form a connection with an English lady ? and has he not a daughter living, for whom hejkas "am¬ ply provided ?'— " 1 was convinced he had searched the pocket book my lord had about him ; it contained some papers of conse¬ quence and the. last packet of "letters he had received from England. I imagined he'was in · possession of Lady Juliana's picture, ,from some hints he dropped of her being a paragon of beauty : how¬ ever, I resolved, as I could not "evade answering, to plead ignorance, and assured Don Gusman he^ was mista¬ ken. * '·' ко « « No ;
$04 íM ť No; Pedro:' he replied, with a frown and look .which almost petrified me,j£;Joain .not mistaken, you had betteni have', accepted ,my proffered friendship, but your folly.be on your head ; severely you will "repent it : as you are so good at keeping secrets, take, care you do not betray this con¬ versation; you may now leava me, but-bcommand you not to quit the hoiise.'^ í * . л «t'. j ,ι , ' 'jtf I determined to consult Doh Sebas- tián^ buť by -the machinations 4 of Don; Gusman -I was prevented from seeing him/thèugh hehad passed several hours· with the Marchioness and had 'particu¬ larly masked for me: this almost dis¬ tracted rne. lb the dusk of the evening OW " ' * ÍS
205
as İ was crossing the court yard & boy puţ a parcel in my hand and disap¬ peared instantly. yOn opening it, to my great surprise I found it contained the r Marquis's last will, to which I had been a witness, atid the following fines ad¬ dressed to me. ' . w> -s • 'Fly, Pedro,, you have not a ,mo-. ment to lose,, this night you will be dispatched ; ypu know , too much,, and b are too firmly attached to the late-owners of this mansion.and to those that ( yet remain, to be permitted ,to live. A ves¬ sel sails for England in less.thaţi three, hours ; get on board immediately. , .On your arrival make all, speed ,to-Devon¬ shire; may you reach it in· time tp y prevent 4 the Lady .Juliana from falling into
206 into the' hands of Don Gusman ; give the will in charge to Mr. Millward; 1 have not time to add more. Adieu I Heaven preserve 'ybu.' " Astonishment for some minutes deprived me ofthe use ofmy faculties ; as soon as my recollection returned, I determined, if possible, to fl follow the advice of my unknown friend ; I had ao doubt of the truth of the information given, how obtained and conveyed to me was' a mystery I could not fathom. I packed up a few necessaries and what money I had, but haa а thousand fears I should not be able to' escape, as I was certain Don Gusman had placed a spy over me; but I had the good fortuné to elude his vigilance and reached the ship ' in
207 in safety at the very instant they weigh¬ ed anchor ; we had a very tedious pas¬ sage. " As soon as I landed at Falmouth I took post for Upton, and was in hopes to have arrived in time to prevent the threatened danger to my Lady Juliana, but the words you let fall, Sir, makes me fear she is either dead' or fallen into the power of Don Gusman," ' *, Good-Heaven!" said Mr,"Millward, " can it be possible that the deargirMias been carried off by* that atrocious vfl- lain ? how he could effect it I cannot possibly imagine.** ! He acquainted Pedro with the par: ticulars
208 ticulars and the vain endeavours that had been made to'gain some intelli¬ gence ; Pedro was extremely shocked at the recital. " How comes it,'* asked Mr. MUI¬ ward iç that Don Gusman is permitted to carry on his iniquitous schemes with - impunity ; he has been in ţ disgrace at Court for many years, and though the recent transactions cannot be brought home to him, he is entirely an object of suspicion ; and I should have thought that Don Sebastian would have had suf¬ ficient interest to have brought him to trial." L -. м- ■ ι ι x · « ι · " Unfortunately, Sir, the minister who was so firmly attached to our fa¬ mily,
209
mily, and that of Don .Sebastian's died suddenly ; and his successor is a parti¬ cular friend of Donna Triphosa, over whom -she has despotic power. Don Gusman, I was told, is to be immedi¬ ately reinstated in his former employ¬ ment, and to be received into royal fa¬ vour.'* Pedro gave the will of the Marquis to Mr. Millward ; in it he owns Juliana as his ligitimate and eldest daughter, and refers to Mr. and Mrs. Millward for particulars ; and for the vouchers of her birth and his marriage, he names· Pedro as one ofthe witnesses, and brief¬ ly gives his reasons for concealing his marriage and the existence, of his daugh¬ ter, and mentioned that he thought his vow
aw
vow of secrecy ended with his life. He named Juliana as the undoubted heiress of the Castle of ------and an estate of six thousand a year, which he enjoyed in right of his mother, the late Duchess of St. Ildefonsa. He leaves his personal fortune between his two daughters, Ju¬ liana and Elvira; it was all written in his own hand, signed, dated and sealed. I ' When Mr, Millward had read it, after a pause, he said— " What step can be taken as we have only surmises to go on ? have you any conjecture who your anonymous friend is ? he could lead to the wished for discovery," «I
ün " I am not certain, Sir, but Don Gus- man*s valet once or twice hinted he was displeased with his conduct, and that he feared his master was a bad man." """ Have you the letter you received containing the information ?" " I have, but if written by him, he has so disguised his hand that I could not swear to it ; but what strengthens my opinion of its being him, is, I once rendered him a very essential ser- vice." " I must take ä little time for reflec¬ tion ;" said Mr. MiUward, " to-morrow we will fix on some plan, for very strong measures must be taken without delay : you
•Sl 2". you ■ neecl refreshment^ Pedro, and rest after the fatigue you have '.lately expe¬ rienced a in body ' änd^ ' mirtd ; you muât "s ее poor Evans and endeavour to con¬ sole her ; she persists that our dear 'Julianaismiirdered." η í r м - Mr. Millward acquainted the, family with' the. afflicting a'intelUgericé he had received - from [ Pedro. ' ' Edward wás frantic^ he entreated he might be. al¬ lowed tö set doff ^ for Spain, arid vowed 'he would" iriidcë' Don Gusman restore Ju¬ liana. In vain did Mr. Smith expostu¬ late withhim and entreat of him to be calm. 1 · : ■■ !Γι; :·.· ΐ ! "' J ď, ■ à. .;."■■"':.'. ."'■■''"■ ■■"' УУ* Edward,** said Mr. Millward with firmness ; ťe I insist on your hot giving ■W( " .. / '"■■'... ..'·■, "way,·
2L3 way to these gusts of passion ; you see your grandfather, mother and sister sink¬ ing under the pressure of affiiction ; it is your duty, and I trust affection wiU lead^you to sooth their sorrows, not increase them by-this boyish behaviour. Every one in this x famfly is equaUy in¬ terested in. the fate of JuUana, nor are their feelings on her account less acute than yours, though they are restrained· by religion and reason from giving way to them; if you cannot controul yours, I desireyou will retire to your apartment." This reproach and the look that ac¬ companied it, had the wished-for effect, and in a great measure moderated the transports of rage and grief he had given way to, and taking his father's hand. which he respectfuUy kissed, he entreat¬ ed
214
ed pardon, and promised, if possible, to obey him. After various schemes and consulta¬ tions, Mr. Millward proposed setting off for London the next day, and laying the whole affair before the Spanish Ambas¬ sador, with every particular relative to the Marquis and Juliana, and to beg his assistance and counsel how to proceed. " I shall on this occasion," continued Mr. Millward, " claim the royal promise of granting any request I should make, as I think it necessary to interest our court in the affair." This proposition was highly approved of; Edward's looks expressed an anxious wish to be ofthe party, but he was un¬ willing
215
willing to mention it, as* it was ever a rule with Mr. Millward to comply with his children's inclinations where he could do it with propriety. He resolved to take Edward, as he thought it would amuse his mind ; sin¬ cerely did he commiserate his sorrows, and made every allowance for the natu¬ ral impetuosity of youth: still he thought it right to correct it. Edward was highly gratified by * having permission to attend his father, who requested the favourof Mr. Smith's . company— " As I shall stand in need of your advice, my friend ;" said he.
Mr.
'...-.216;' Mr¿ Smith assured· him-he would not only go to London, buť if necesşary : he would with pleasure undertake a voyage to'Spain. '- ■'·■;, Early in the morning they set off; they wished to have taken Pedro, "as .his deposition was ' of 'the greatest ■ conse¬ quence, but owinig to his weak state he was not sufficiently recovered from his latent fatigue ; he was therefore ordered to follow in a few days, and to'travel by easy stages. ' « ■*' p j l "■:·. *""·■· * We will nov/ leave them to pursue their journey, and attend to ihe situation ofour heroine, and account for her sud- '■- den departure. - " ,' ■ t , ' ■* END OF- ·Π-ΪΒ THIRD VOLUME. *
- D. N. SI1UIIY,. 1Ί inter, Uerwicl·. Street , EoUo.
