Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Montalva: or, Annals of guilt: a tale
" » ""¿"^ ^■MtoHiMhHO^MH^i ■■ ! и шЕ**тштш*^г—+-*ттт*
MONTALVA, &с.
CHAP. L tť Viola, and tbe service she had done me, occupied my thoughts till we met again. I took care to be at the garden gate by the appointed time; in a few minutes it was opened, and Viola ap¬ peared. ť Follow me, signor/ (said she, in a low tone;) I did so, and she led me to an arbour, which we entered^ ςζ ( Here we are safe for some time, (cried she). Mindez, I know, has not sent to you ; he thinks that tbe delay of a few days will make you more anxi- VOL. п. в
2
ous for the money ; he waits, therefore, to see if you will send to him/ " ' Thanks to you, my kind Viola (said I), his schemes will fail ; but I anr alL impatience to know your story/ cc ' It is briefly this, signor (replied she). I am an orphan, and have no- friend but the lady whom you saw» and who is my aunt. Under'her protection I lived happily, from the time I lost my parents till about a year back, when her husband, the Signor Velloni, happened to have an affair of honour with the son of one of the most powerful of our Neapolitan nobles; he had the misfor¬ tune to kill his antagonist, and in conse¬ quence was obliged to fly. His property was confiscated ; but my aunťs friends procured her a small pension, and we retired to the cottage where you saw us. Signora Velloni had reason to sup¬ pose that in time her husband's fortune would be restored, and during his exile she sent him the greatest part of her pension. My little portion I had re-
3 peatedly begged her to use, but this she declined doing, and no entreaties couid prevail upon her to accept of it. Pas¬ sionately fond of his wife, the signor languished for her society, and in order to raise the means of going to him, my aunt applied to Méndez for money ; he at first did not seem willing to accom¬ modate her, but in a little time he con¬ sented to let her have the sum she wanted ; and in a few davs after he had agreed to do so, he came one morning with the greatest satisfaction in his countenance. €C ς I am happy to tell you (cried he to my aunt), that there is scarcely a doubt, if the business is properly fob lowed up, that the Signor Velloni will have his fortune restored. The Coun¬ tess Strozzi has promised me to use all her influence (which is very conside¬ rable) to effect this point ; but it would be necessary, signora, for you to pay particular attention to the countess, and ţo see her often/ в 2
4
а й Then I must renounce my project of going to my husband (answered she) ; but that will be a small sacrifice, if I can, by doing so, obtain for him that fortune, which we thought for ever forfeited. Wiien, sir, can you let me have the money ? I will remit it, and explain to the signor my reasons for not being myself the bearer of it-* " * You should have had it before, signora (cried he), but that I had much to pay. I shall, however, get it for you in a very few days/ iC With this promise she was obliged to be content. The next day an express arrived from my uncle; he was dan¬ gerously ill. We sent for Méndez, and my aunt told him the circumstance. * if you can Taise me the money im¬ mediately (cried she), it will be of material service to me ; but if not, I must go without it. No consideration shall keep me from my husband/ " ť I will bring it to you this evening,* (cried he) ; and so indeed he did. ť I
&
have thought of a means, signora (said he, as he entered), that may serve the signor as effectually as your stopping here. Nothing can be done with the Countess Strozzi without flattery and attention ; 1 know her influence, and I know that she is disposed to exert it. suppose you leave the Signora Viola at Naples. She can see the countess often, and—* íť * But under what protection can I leave her (cried my aunt) ? my friends, or rather those who called themselves my friends, behaved with such unfeel¬ ing coldness at the time of the siguor's flight, that I know not any of them whom I would ask to také charge of my niece ; I can, it 13 true, place her in a convent, but------ * " s I could name an asylum secure, but humble (said Méndez), ifyou would condescend to accept it for the signora till your return; and one where she would have frequent access to the coun¬ tess. I mean my house. I have a
в sister who lives with me (continued he, perceiving my aunťs surprise) ; she would, I know, be most happy to pay the signora every attention. I am just now very necessary to the Countess Strozzi, who visits me frequently, and should the signora honour my humble roof, it is more than probable she may, in a short time, exchange it for the countess's, since I am certain that she would soon be one of that lady's first favourites/ ** Mv aunt thanked him, and desired a few hours to consider of the propo¬ sal. He promised to call in the morn¬ ing to know her determination, and , then took his leave. u Nothing could be apparently more sincere than his wish to serve us ; and my aunt was possessed of too much tole¬ ration to view him with an eye of pre¬ judice, because he was not a christian. His influence too with some of the high¬ est classes of our nobility, was well known to her, aud after mature deli-
7
beration, she resolved to consent to his proposal, if I agreed, and if we both thought that his sister was such a wo¬ man as I could be happy with till my aunt's return* She communicated her determination to me, and I assured her that I had no will but hers. (t In the morning Méndez came again ; and on my aunt's expressing a wish to see his sister, he begged we would accompany him to his house. We did so, and we were both highly gratified by the appearance of his sister. In short, my aunt consented to my remaining under his protection, and that very day I removed to his house, as she was impatient to begin her journey. I had supposed that as soon as I became Mendez's inmate^ he would have introduced me to the coun- tess 9 and I was surprised when three days passed without his mentioning her* On the fourth, I asked when I was to see her; he told me she was at her villa, a few miles from Naples ; but that he
β every day expected her return. A short time, however, discovered to me that he had deceived us, for the purpose of getting me into his power; and I have reason to suppose that he forged the account we received of my uncle's ill¬ ness, in order to induce my aunt to leave Naples. He dared to insult me by an offer of his hand, and on my rejection of it, he insolently avowed a determina¬ tion that 1 should be his. The woman who passed for his sister was in reality hired by him, in order to induce my aunt the more readily to intrust me to his protection. 1 found from her a degree of sympathy and kindness which 1 had not expected, and when, in con¬ sequence of my overhearing the plot laid for your ruin, 1 pressed her to assist in saving you, she readily consented. She i.s oidered to confine me strictly ; but she relied on my promise of not en¬ deavouring to escape, and allowed me to meet you/' * r * t'en thousand thanks for your kind*
9
ness (replied I) ; but surely you do not intend to remain in the power of this wretch/ " ' No, signor (answered she) ; I hope in time to persuade Fiametta to suffer me to fly, and to accompany me. If she does, I will take refuge in a convent till I can hear from my aunt, who has left my little fortune in my own possession. I shall not, therefore be distressed, if I can escape/ " ť I shall be unhappy (cried I) till I know tbat you are out of the power of this monster. May ľ hope that you will sometimes permit me to see you r' " After some hesitation Viola granted my request, and told me that she would write me word when she could again see me. I returned home with my thoughts filled with her story and situa¬ tion, and my own fortunate escape. In two days Méndez came to me. ** * Well, signor (««aid he), I shall now, I think, be able to oblige you. It gave me pain to refuse you ; bat Xtim в а
10
it was utterly out of my power to я d vanee the money ; now I can do it, and' -—- c î wish (said I, interrupting him), that you could have done it be¬ fore. Now it is too late to be of service to me. I was obliged to have recourse to a friend, who has lent me what ï wanted/ * c He looked thunderstruck. — * I have put myself to considerable incon¬ venience to procure it for you, signor (cried he) ; do you mean to say that you will not borrow it r* 4f ť I am sorry to have occasioned you trouble (said !), hutas I do not want it, and as my debt to you is aheady so large, it would be folly to add to it/ tk He made no reply, but he quitted røp (with an expression of suppressed ran· iu his countenance, which 1 did not appear to notice 4 )* The next day I had a note frum Viola, which coutai neo! au appointment lo meet lier at the gai tién¬ date. She was not abk» to give me any inlclliííťncc of Mende?, hut bhe told
и
me that she hoped speedily to persuade Fiametta to liberate her, and to be the companion of her flight. " Our interview was long, and î coukl not refrain from some professions of admiration, which Vioîa listened to with a blushing timidity, that rendered her, in my eyes, more lovely than I had ever before thought her. At part¬ ing, she promised to let me know as soon as she had settled her plan of escape. " My situation now was a most un¬ pleasant one ; harrassed for money, и hich I had no means to raise, and not daring to apply to my aunt, lest my extravagance might injure me in her opinion. To add to niy perplexities, Mender, to my utter astonishment, sent to me for his money. I reminded him, that by the terms of our agree¬ ment he wdb nut to be piid till my aunťs decease, and for a few days I heard no moie from jam. Jubt as I had begun to. congratulate myself on
12
getting rid of the business, he came to me one morning. " c I am at present much distressed, signor (cried he), and if you cannot let me have the sum due to me, I must apply to your aunt ¿ probably she may liquidate the debt/ " I besought his forbearance, but for some time in vain ; at last he- pro¬ mised to allow me a few days to make up the money; but he peremptorily declared that he must have it in a given time, and he left me. Forsorne time' after his departure, I traversed my apartment in an agony, which I had never experienced before. At one mo¬ ment I resolved to tell my aunt all, and the«ext I shrunk from a step, which would most probably occasion my ruin. While tný mind was in this state, I received a note from Viola, containing a request to see me that night, as she had something of consequence to. say tõ roe/ I was punctual"to the time, and Viola informed me, that she knew
13
Méndez had pressed me for the money, and that she feared a wish to be revenged on me for the disappointment I had occasioned him, would make him apply to my aunt. ' Pardon me, signor (continued she, blushing), but from what Méndez said, I thought it might he inconvenient to Jrou to settle with him. Should that be the case, perhaps it might be in my.power to be of some service to you. My little fortune is at my own disposal, and if any part of it can be of use in this affair, you may command it freely/ <ζ I thanked the generous Viola in the warmest terms,' but I declined ac¬ cepting her offer; she was, however, peremptory in pressing it; she repre» sented to чие that it was but exchanging one creditor for another, and that if I did'not do so, my aunt must inevitably know alî, tliat I was so much interested to conceal from her. She added, that Fiametta had at last consented to her
Î4
escape, and had agreed to accompany her. " The beauty and generosity of this lovely girl sensibly touched me, and I told her that, upon one condition, I was willing to become her debtor.-— c Situated as I now am (signora; cried I), I eannot ask you to accept my hand, but if you thought me worthy of your esteem, and would promise hereafter to become mine; my aunťs health is pre¬ carious, and from that circumstance, and her time of life, her dissolution may be speedily looked for; and what transport would it give me to repay my beloved Viola, by sharing with her the noble fortune of which I shall then become possessed/ " The blushes and the downcast eyes of Viola convinced me that my propo-, sal was not displeasing to herj and', after some hesitation, she agreed to it. I found out a retreat, which, though bumble, was npt devoid of comfort,, and.
15
thither, in a few days, she fled, accom¬ panied by Fiametta. The sum which I wanted to discharge the usurer's debt was, as I afterwards learned, nearly the whole of what my Viola possessed. She gave it to me chearful ly, and I dis¬ charged the debt, much to the surprise of Méndez. u My aunt grew daily weaker, and I own I anticipated with pleasure, that the time would soon arrive when I could reward the generous conduct of my Viola, whom I now visited almost daily, ami of .whom every hour ren¬ dered me more enamoured. In an accursed moment, heated with wine, I presumed upon her apparent fond¬ ness, to take liberties, which she ought to have repulsed witb indignation ; sjie did not repulse them, and her compli¬ ance with my desires plunged us both into misery. " I soothed the mind of Viola with assurances of eternal love and constan¬ cy ; but in my heart I solemnly abjured
ιβ
the thought of making her my wife; to return tenfold the pecuniary obliga¬ tion I was under to her, and to love and protect her, as a mistress, I was re¬ solved; but to marry her, after what had passed, was impossible. I still con¬ tinued to visit her as frequently as ever, for my inclination for her person rather increased than diminished ; but our connection had a consequence which, though natural, í had not foreseen : she proved with child; and vvlien she re¬ vealed the ci ι cumstance to me, she claimed, though in the most gentle ierm.% my promise to make her mine hv tin; rights of the chinch. I pleaded the ruin that would attend us both, if the marriage was discovered ; but Viola, vvho Inel hitherto appeared the gentlest of her sex, and whom 1 thought í could at any time pei suade into a compliance with my wishes whatever they might he, now firmly insisted on my making her rnv wife. ît whs, she sai(L the only way to save her t'wni that disgrace/
which must otherwise overwhelm her. After endeavouring iu vain to evade an immediate compliance with her lequest, I was obliged positively to refuse her, and wc parted, for the first time, in anger. i£ When I again visited her, I saw only Fiametta, who told шс that Viola was ill ; I desired to see her instantly, ť Par¬ don me, signor, (cried she), but before you do 9 have you made up your mind to grant her request r' ťí 'Nay, (continued she, seeing me look surprised) ifc was impossible for tfie signora to keep her situation a se¬ cret from me; and why indeed should she try to do so, since a confidant would be necessary, and bhe has ex¬ perienced my fidelity/ <f I began to uso io Fiametta the same arguments which 1 had before tried with Viola, but she did not allow me to pro¬ ceed. u ' Your marriage may be kept secret as long as you please, signor (said she),
Î8
my lady does not object to that, but her honour must be repaired, and your child must be legitimated. Ask your own heart, signor, whether Viola is not entitled to justice) and she asks no more/' ŕí f She seeks our mutual ruin, (cried I, passionately), and I must be a mad¬ man to consent to it.' " ( You are then determined not to marry the signora ?' (said Fiametta). " ť She knows tliat I cannot immedi¬ ately/ (answered I). íC i But you vvill not object to give her a written promise to do so at the death of your aunt r' (cried Fiametta.) "This was a question for which I was not prepared, and I hesitated, for, to say the truth, 1 knew not bow to an¬ swer it. " * Oh ! my poor deceived lady, (cried Fiametta) > I see too plainly you have undone yourself ; yet if a spark of honour, of humanity, remains in your breast, signor, save her, I conjure you,
19
from that ruin which your breach of faith will bring upon her. Keenly sus¬ ceptible as her nature is, the agonies that she suffers would move any heart not callous, and can you, signor, reflect, without pity, that you are the cause of them ?' " I was touched with the manner in which Fiametta spoke ; but could I make a wanton the legal partner of my bed ? No ; honour forbade that sacrifice, and I was compelled to refuse Viola tbe promise she demanded. " Fiametta heard me w : ¿h calmness, and left me without a reply; I had sup¬ posed that the matter would have ended there, and that, finding me inflexible, Viola would at length agree to continue mine on my own terms ; for 1 yet loved her too well to think willingly of giving her up. Fool that 1 was; I knew not the nature of the sex ; I knew not the lengths to which an offended woman's resentment will carry her. Instigated by Fiametta, Viola revealed the whole
20
to my aunt, who sent for me, and after the bitterest reproaches, enquired whe¬ ther I was prepared to do the injured girl justice. ςς Шу love for Viola was now converted into hatred, and I think, that sooner than have espoused her, I would have put a period to my existence. My aunt ordered me never again to appear in her presence, and immediately took Viola, who was then dangerously ill from a miscarriage, under her protection ; from that moment I was banished from her affection '"к'-Ьт house; and the only condition on which I couid regain her favour, was, she assured me, my mar¬ riage with Viola. ts 'Then I must be for ever an alien, (cried I), for I will perish sooner than espouse her/ ŕí My allowance was withdrawn, and penury and disappointment together influenced me to take the desperate step which has placed me in your house. İ have now, signor, gratified
21
the curiosity you expressed, and am ready to surrender myself into the hands of justice." Montalva had listened attentively to his tale ; in him he thought he had met with a fit instrument for his purpose, and he affected to .compassionate his misfortunes. " I will not give you up to those laws you have offended, (said he), on the contrary, I feel inclined to serve you ; I want a secretary, and if I could be certain of your fidelity-------" ť! Signor (interrupted the man), after what has passed, you have not, I own, much reason to credit my professions ; I will not, therefore, make many ; if you are indeed inclined to he my friend, trust me, you shall have no reason to complain of want of gratitude." " Well, (replied Montalva), I will trust you ; but on one condition, that you will acquaint me truly with your birth and family." u The condition is a hard one, (cried
22 * he), but it shall be complied with ; my name is Anselmo Di ------, -and my fa¬ mily------" ft I know is noble, (interrupted Mont¬ alva) ; come to-morrow to my Falazza, and we will talk further." He then gave Anselmo his direction, and tHey parted. i( This man will suit my purpose well, (thought Montalva) ; but if he should betray me? Pshaw! why should I think he will ? gold, all powerful gold, will secure his fidelity ; and, once possessed of the rich domains of D'Rosonio, I shall have amply the means to bribe him to silence/' Tlie following morning, Anselmo waited upon him, and Montalva took him immediately as his secretary. Some time elapsed before the signor gave to Anselmo the most distant hint of his intentions respecting Isabel ; but he longed most impatiently'for the time when he couid strip, the innocent'or¬ phan of her rights ; the remorse which
23
he could not help feeling for the mur¬ der of D'Rosonio, he flattet ed himself would be obliterated by time ; and in the possession of wealth, and the en¬ joyments which it would procure him, he fancied that he should be happy.
24
"■* ..... ...... " «■»—■;■■■■.■ '■—-»■.■-■
CHAP. II.
Montalva ventured slowly to give to Anselmo an idea that he wished to pos¬ sess the inheritance of Isabel, but timi¬ dity and distrust, the inseparable com- panions of guilt, prevented him for a long time from being explicit; at length he ventured fully to disclose his wishes to Anselmo, who met them half-way. u I am certain, (cried the artful Montalva), that I do no wrong to the memory of my late dear friend. I know from circumstances that the coun¬ tess was unfaithful ; and much do I doubt whether -Isabel is really the cfiild of D'Hosomo."
βΐ>
This pretence was too poor to impose upon Anselmo; but he seemed to be persuaded that the signor spoke the truth. tc It is indeed a pity that this infant should stand between you and so noble an inheritance; she must be removed/* " But how, Anselmo?" (cried Mon¬ talva). * c That, signor (said he), demands consideration." " You will observe, Anselmo, (said Montalva),Isabel's life must be sacred" " Heaven forbid that I should wish it otherwise, (said Anselmo) ; if we can devise any means to make the world suppose her dead, our point will be gained ; and ď you will allow me, sig¬ nor, I dare say that I can soon think of some plan that will give you the do¬ mains of D'Rosonio, and consign Isa¬ bel to obscurity/' Montalva thanked his confidant, who in a few days afterwards proposed to him to give Isabel a sleeping draught, vol· И. с
26
and when the domestics were persuaded of her death, he observed, that it would be easy to remove her from Naples, and place her in safety in some obscure si¬ tuation, where her birth could never be discovered, and where she might pass for an orphan, dependent upon the bounty of Montalva, whose name and condition it would be easy to conceal. When Anselmo related his project to Montalva, the signor execrated his own folly in not thinking of it himself; a plan at once so simple, and so secure, would have been easy of execution without ε confidant ; u and the secret (thought he) would still have been my own/* He readily agreed to Anselmos pro¬ posal. A powerful soporific gave to the little Isabel a death-like slumber, tbat imposed upon all who saw her. In the night before her funeral obsequies were to be performed, Montalva and Ansel- mo remove * her from the magnificent coffin in which she had been laid, and
Anselmo secreted himself with her at a cottage, some miles from Naples, for a few days, till he was joined by Mon¬ talva, who determined to take the little orphan to a convent at a considerable distance. " There (said he, mentally) she will je ¿afe ; and, if it is not her own fault, she may be happy." " And what right hast thou to be the arbiter of her des¬ tiny," whispered conscience, but ner voice was disregarded, and the wretched Montalva, in adding crime to crime, dared to look forward to the future, and to hope for peace. Montalva fabricated a stoiy which he thought would answer his purpose. He represented Isabel as an orphan des¬ titute of fortune, and solely depi idant on the bounty of a relation, who in· tended her, at a proper age, to take the veil ; he paid five years' pension in ad¬ vance, and received from the lady abbess every assurance that she should meet with the kindest treatment. с 2
28
The abbess of St. Teresa, was truly an honour to the religion that she professed. Early disappointments had in¬ duced her to chuse a monastic life; and, in the duties of religion, she found consolation for the perfidy of a man whom she had adored. Her sub¬ lime piety, and her unaffected meekness and humanity, made her equally be¬ loved and venerated by the sisterhood ; and, at a very early age, she attained the rank of superior, an office which she filled equally to her own credit, and the satisfaction of her daughters, whom she treated as if they were indeed her chil¬ dren. When Montalva presented the little Is. зе! to her, she embraced the child with a mother's tenderness, and Isabel returned her caresses with all the in¬ genious simplicity of childhood. " It may be years before you again ?ee me (cried Montalva to the lady abbess), but I will take care that Isabel's pension shall always be paid in advance ;
29
and you, holy mother, will impress upon her mind, atan early age, tbat she is intended for a monastic life; it will indeed, from her education, be most pro¬ bably the one that she would prefer/' The abbess promised to follow his in¬ structions, and he set out on his return to Naples. On the second day of his journey, Anselmo was taken suddenly ill, and in a few hours was unable to pro¬ ceed ; Montalva himself attended him with the most anxious care. i£ How good, how humane, is this signor (cried the inn-keeper), with what watchful kindness he hovers over his poor sick servant !" Alas! how little able are we to judge the real motives of human actions* Humanity had no share in the attentions wliH'h Montalva lavished on his secretary ; he dreaded that remorse would force his secret from the lips of Anselmo, and this apprehension was the cause of his apparent kindness ; his fears, however, were vain, in a few hours Anselmo ^expired, and, from the mo-
so
ment they had stopped at the inn, Montalva had never quitted him. " The secret (cries Montalva, exult¬ ingly), is now my own; every bar to my happiness is removed, and I will quaff the cup of pleasure, and enjoy the riches of which I am possessed." Such were the resolutions of Mon¬ talva, but he had yet to learn that neither the possession of riches, nor sensual enjoyments, can stop the voice of conscience. He had flattered him¬ self that Isabel once removed, the un¬ easiness of his mind would subside ; but his unhappiness every day increased, and while seated at the festive board, surrounded by the most beautiful cour¬ tezans in Naples, the spirit of his mur¬ dered friend seemed to menace him with thai punishment which his crimes had deserved. On the supposed death of Isabel, he had taken the title of count, and many were the overtures of marriage made him by the noblest families in Naples ;
31
but th^ soul of Montalva was unfitted for the enjoyment of domestic happi* ness, and those motives which formerly would have urged him to a mercenary marriage, had ceased to exist ; * he re¬ flected with bitterness, that it was not himself, but his rank and riches that made the Neapolitan dames desirous of an alliance with him. " While I was the untitled and the poor Montalva, I sought in vain for a rich wife (thought he), but now, when rank and wealth are mine, I am courted by those who turned from me formerly with disdain. Oh! gold, thou all power¬ ful demon, at what a price have I pur¬ chased the possession of thee !" His thoughts now reverted to Bianca, the original cause or his sufferings and his guilt ; from the time she had refused him, and quitted Naples, he had never heard of her, and the love of revenge, which was a predominant trait in his character, had at times excited him to endeavour to discover the place of her
32
retreat, but every enquiry tbat he had hitherto made was fruitless. Some years passed away, and the torments of his mind daily increased, till his existence became burthensome to himself. His company was no longer courted by the sons of riot and dissipa¬ tion, and meretricious beauty turned from bis harsh and ungentle manners with disgust; he resolved to hide from the world that wretchedness which he could not conceal from himself, and he quitted the gaieties of Naples for the solitude of the castle D'Rosonio. He had regularly remitted in advance the pension of the little Isabel, but he de¬ termined never to behold her again. Soon after he had placed her in the con¬ vent of St. Teresa, he had discharged tbe domestics who, for years, had served the family of D'Rosonio, and re¬ placed them with others, to whom all former transactions at the castle were unknown ; different indeed was the scene which its pompous ha)l now pre-
ВЗ
sented, to what they had formerly ex¬ hibited; the cheerful hospitality, the unbounded munificence of the late Count D'Rosonio, died with him; haughty, gloomy, and tyrannical, the conduct of his successor, rendered him feared by his domestics, and abhored by his vassals.
c&
34
CHAP. III.
Solitude, so delightful to the good, is beyond measure irksome to the wicked ; this truth the unhappy Mon¬ talva daily experienced. Every object at the castle D'Rosonio recalled to his memory his muidered friend; he re¬ solved to travel—and he quitted the castle in search of that peace he was destined never more to taste. Madrid was the first place that he meant to visit, and he arrived there in safety. Change of scene had some little effect upon his spirits, and he endeavoured (by viewing tîıe various
3õ
things so worthy of a traveller's atten' tion in the capital of Spain) to dispel the bitter reflections which still preyed upon his mind. One evening, as he returned from vespers, he strolled along heedlessly, till he got to some distance from the city ; and when he would have retraced his steps, he found him¬ self puzzled by the intricacy of the path ; a small cottage appeared at some distance, and he hastened to it to enquire his way ; there was no person in it, and he sat down by a cheerful fire, which blazed on the humble hearth, to wait lhe return of its owner. Ina few moments a woman appeared; she started at seeing him but when he told her what he wanted, she desired that he would wait the ar¬ rival of her husband, whom she ex¬ pected every moment, and who would accompany him a part of the way, for she was, she said, unable to direct him. Montalva consented, and his hostess busied herself in preparing sup-
зб
per. His walk had given the count an appetite, and he looked with a longmg eye upon Teresa's rustic fare. tc I could wish our humble supper was such as you could partake of, sir (said she), but it is too homely to tempt your appetite." Montalva replied in the negative, and Teresa flew to cover the board with part of the provisions prepared for her husband and son. Never had repast appeared more luxurious to the count, for never before had he tasted a meal sweetened by so keen an appetite. In a little time., Teresa began to wonder that her husband was not yet re¬ turned. " I can't think (said she, anxiously), what can delay Jacques, I never knew him so late." While she spuke, he entered. He was accompanied by his son, a youth of about nineteen. *'Oh, yon are cotne at lastj Jacques (cried his w »ft*), in truth I began to be Midly
37
frightened! what can have detained yqu ?" Jacques and his son saluted the count, respectfully, and the former said, * c Let us have some supper, Teresa, and then I will tell you our adven- ture." (< Nay, prithee, tell me now** (cried she). ** My bunge*· must be satisfied before your curiosity, wife," (replied he), and placing himself at the board, he began his meal with heartiness. " And now, wife, (said he, when they had nearly finished their supper), Saint Francis be praised, Tomaso has saved tbe life of our neighbour's son, Vincentio/* " What! that wretch (cried she), who has occasioned so much mischief, and done us, in particular, so much harm ? In good faith, I would not have saved him, for many there are that would have rejoiced at hi* death." * s Wife, wife (cried Jacques), would you then suffer a fellow-being to perish
38
for want of succour, before your eyes, because he had injured you r No, Teresa, thou speakest not as thou wouidst act. But mothers, sir (said he, turning to Montalva), cannot forgive those who injure their children ; Vin¬ centio was married but a few weeks since, to a maiden whom we hoped to have seco the wife of our Tomaso. My boy deeply regretted the loss of his Ursula, and Teresa shares her son's grief» and his resentment/* Montalva cast his eyes upon the young man ; his countenance bore the traces of dejection, and the agitation u hich he shewed at the mention ot hi?* mistress, proved that she was йШ dear to him. Thai a man should save tho life of his rival, was a species of generosity which the count could not cotnprt'hcnd, ami he desired io hcav the talc. ** I will relaie it to you, sir (sani Jacques), hut \ou, Tomaso, had hc*t retire to bed î \ « ur clothes are &c«*rtv!y
39
dry, and you must, I think, feel fa¬ tigued/* Teresa laid her hand upon the arm of her son ; she found, what she had not before observed, that his clothes were very wet ; and, exclaiming t fiat he must have caught his death, she hurried him from the room. " From his early youth, sir (said Jacques, addressing Montalva), my poor boy loved Ursula, and she re¬ turned his passion. H«r parents, like ourselves, are peasants, and they ap¬ proved of the young people's regard for each other. We agreed that, when they came to a proper age, they should be married ; and Tomaso, who was always a good and dutiful boy, la¬ boured incessantly, in order, as he said, to shew me how capable he was of supporting Ursula, We were content, and the young folks happy in the pros¬ pect of their approaching union, when the family of ViticenUo came to seitit? m øm neighbourhood*
АО
сс Vìncendo soon paid particular attention to Ursula, who is indeed the prettiest and the best girl for many miles round; but though Vincentio * handsome, and bought her man) things, such as my son could not af¬ ford to purchase, she listened to him with indifference, and refused to ac¬ cept any of his presents ; her parents, however, were mercenary, and they scolded poor Ursula severely for her behaviour to him ; she pleaded her en¬ gagement to my son, but her mother declared that she would never consent to her marrying Tomaso, if she could get a better match, and that if Ursula would but behave differently to Vin¬ centio, there was little doubt that he would make her an offer of marriage ; and poor Ursula^ from a fear that he should, did all that she could to dis¬ gust him by her coldness ; but in vain. He asked her hand from her parents, and they commanded her to accept him for her hushand. Ursula had
!
41
never in her whole life disobeyed their wishes, but now phe thought that it would be almost criminal to obey them* Her vows were plighted to my son, and for some time she steadily refused to break them. At last, her mother fell sick, or rather, I believe (heaven forgive me), pretended to be sick, and she persuaded Ursula that her recovery depended upon the poor girľs marrying Vincentio ; she promised that she wotdd, on condition that she was al¬ lowed to come and tell us the cause of her doing so ; her mother at first re¬ fused, but Ursula would not consent upon any other terms, and she was suffered to see us for the last time. " She had not been in our cottage for some months, and my wife was re¬ joiced to see her. ť Ursula, my dear child (cried she), how welcome you are. I hope you have brought us good news—Oh ! how I wish that Tomaso was here/ 4i I saw by Ursula's countenance
42
that there was no cause for joy, but I was shocked when, at the mention of my son, she turned as pale as ashes and burst into tears. " * Oh, my mother (cried she to Teresa), I am come to ) T ou for the last time—in a few days I am to be mar¬ ried.' " f Well (said my wife^ hastily), you had no need to be yourself the messenger of this news, we should have known it soon enough ; my poor Tomaso de¬ served a more constant heart—but Vin- centio's riches may not make you hap¬ pier than you might have been with my son/ " I stopped my wife, for I saw the distress of poor Ursula, and I thought that she could not be to blame ; and, indeed, when she told us how matters were, wc both acknowledged that she could not act otherwise than she did. • ((t I would see you once more, (cried she), that I might tell you all, and that I might beg of you to tell Tomaso —*
43
Her voice faltered, and she could not proceed. iC We embraced^ and endeavoured to comfort her; she staid with us for some time, and would have remained longer, but from u fear of meeting my son. In the evening Tomaso returned; he seemed more cheerful than he had been for some time, and I felt verv loth to wound him with the cruel news, but yet it was necessary that he should know it ; his countenance changed se¬ veral times while I was speaking, and when I had finished he remained silent. I would rather he had appeared more agitated, for I dreaded the effects of the deep despair, which was visible in his eyes, I tried to rouse him. a * Tomaso (said I), for my sake and your mother's, do not thus despond, be more a man/ " ( Not for myself, father (cried he), but for Jier do I grieve. Oh î may heaven give her strength to hear this trial/
44 ik ï a few days afterwards, the news of i rsula's marriage reached us, and írom that time to the present, which is now some weeks, we have nevtr seen her. My son strove all that he could to prevent our seeing the impression winch the los*s of lier made upon his mind ; but, alas! it was ' о plain. To¬ day we went a lew miles from hence, with some grapes that we wanted to Г-н f sell, and in returning, Vincentio passed us ; he was much intoxicated, so much so indeed, that he could hardly walk. He gave my zon a look of scorn as be passed, and poor Tomaso sighed deeply. " f Ah ! father (said he), how hard is poor Ursula's lot ; how different would it have been if-------he checked himself, ai.d I did not pursue th" subject. We loitered, for I did not wish to over¬ take V'ucentio, uho walked, or rather btaggered forward till he came to a stream, where there was a plank laid across. The plank was a broad one,
4Г> and perfectly secure, if he had been sober, but in his present state, it was very dangerous for him to attempt to ' cross it. £i We now hurried forward, but be¬ fore we came up to him, he svas more than half way over.— ( He will get across with safety' (said I); but I had scarcely uttered the words, vhen his foot slipped, and he fell into the water. "Tomaso ¡shut and indifferent swim¬ mer, but he darted forward with the rapidity of lightening, and p'ü jed in after Vincentio : for some moments I trembWl for the life of my son, for the stream was very broad and deep ; but my fears were soon dispelled, by his bringing the insensible Vincentio in bis arms to the opposite side. For some time we thought that Vincentio was actually dead, at last he shewed signs of life, but the fright hdd affect¬ ed him so much, that when he recover¬ ed, he was unable to walk, and we were
46
obliged to support him to the nearest cottage; he recovered himself sufficient¬ ly to express his gratitude to Tomaso. and we did not leave him for som® time. Jacques ceased, but Montalva re- muhied silent; the peasant's simple tale had indeed created the bitterest reflec¬ tions in his breast, he could not but approve of the magnanimity which led tlie young rustic to risk his own life to preserve his rival's, but the involuntary comparison which he drew between Tomaso's conduct and his own, at once mortified his pride and stung his con¬ science. He started \ip abruptly, and haughtily desired to know, whether Jacques could shew him the road to Madrid. Jacques, with gì eat readiness, said he would attend him, and the count with hasty steps quitted the cot¬ tage, where he had received a lesson that he was not destined soon to for¬ get. In a short time tbey approached the city, and Montalva liberally re-
4Ì
warded his conductor, whom he dis¬ missed ; Jacques would have attended him into the town, but the count stern¬ ly told him that he chose to proceed alone, and the peasant dfc^od him with many thanks for the lib«Bty which be so ungraciously bestowe<
•íš
CHAR IV.
Montalva could not banish from his mind the story which he had heard at the cottage, and the more he thought of it the more troublesome the re¬ proaches of his conscience became. n Yet, why, (said he, mentally), should the foolish action of this ro¬ mantic peasant disturb me ? D'Rosonio was indeed what the world calls my friend, but he had robbed me of hap¬ piness ; but for him, love and fortune would have showered upon me their choicest favours ; he stept between me and both; how know I, that he did not
49
seek to gain the affections of the weak, wavering Bianca, merely that he might make a parade of his generosity in not availing himself of her folly; but if I even suppose him innocent, yet was the injury to me the same ; and through his means, I was destined to remain for life a beggar ; could I bear such a lot ? No, priestcraft may call my killing him a crime, but reason tells me, that from his death only could I derive the meani* to live," Vainly did the count endeavour by these and similar arguments, to stifle the emotions of remorse, which the good actions of Tomaso had so poignant¬ ly revived in his mind ; he lost the pleasure that he had enjoyed in view¬ ing the city, and hoping relief from change of scene : he was about to leave it, when an incident happened which detained him some time longer. Returning home late one night, he perceived two cavaliers engaged in combat, they fought with the greatest vol, n. d
50
impetuosity, and he stopped a moment to consider whether he should inter¬ fere; he had but a moment, for the one made such a dexterous feint of re¬ tiring, that his adversary, in pressing forward, ran upon his sword and fell dead at his feet. The moment he fell, the other hast¬ ened away, but he had received a wound in the arm, which bled pro¬ fusely; and the count, who followed him, saw him in a few moments stagger, and but for Montalva he would have fallen. " Let me support you, sir'' (cried the count, catching his arm), the stran- ger thanked him, and readily accepted his assistance. €i I witnessed your rencontre (cried Montalva), and I regret that it has been so fatal/' c< And I rejoice that I have revenged the cause of injured truth and inno¬ cence upon the vilest miscreant that ever disgraced humanity (cried the stranger) : the wretch whom you saw
.51
perish by my hand, has tried to rob me of all that rendered life desirable to me, he poisoned for months a happi¬ ness that, but for his baleful wiles, might have been termed almost celes¬ tial, and not satisfied with rendering me a prey to all the horrors of jealousy and suspense, he had almost wrought my feelhigs to such a pitch of phrenzy, as to make me lift my hand against the life of a beloved and innocent wife; but Providence is ever just, and the villain has at last met with his re ward." The blood, which still flow r ed profuse¬ ly, and the exertion which he used in speaking, made the stranger so very faint, that it was with the utmost diffi¬ culty he could proceed ; and the count rather carried, than supported him, till they reached a large and magnificent mansion, at which he knocked with the authority of a master ; it was open¬ ed by a servant, who started with af» d 2
52
fright, when he beheld the situation of his lord. ____ 4 The stranger invited Montalva to en¬ ter, and the count, whose curiosity was strongly excited, followed him into a handsome apartment, " tell the marchioness that I am engaged (said the stranger), and send Agnes to me ;" the domestic retired, and in a few moments an old female, who ap¬ peared something above the common class, entered. ce Oh î holy Mary (cried^ she), in what dreadful adventure has your ex¬ cellency been engaged ?"—" Ask no questions, good Agnes (said be), but prepare to dress my arm, and re¬ member I charge you on your life, not to let your lady know I am wounded." Agnes did as the marquis desired, and though it was easy to see what pain the dressing of his wound gave him, yet, he did not shrink from the
55
operation ; when she had done it, and retired, he turned to the count. " I have most probably to thank you for my life (said he), since without your assistance, I do not think that I could have reached my own house; when we have supped, I will relate to you all the circumstances that urged me to the act which you witnessed/' They now went into another apart¬ ment, where a magnificent supper was laid, the most exquisite viands, graced the board, and the most delicious¡wines, * in g>blets of gold, tempted the mar¬ quis and Montalva in vain; they nei¬ ther did honour to the repast, which was soon concluded, and when it was over the marquis addressed Montalva as follows :— " You see before you, sir, the Mar¬ quis de Santenos, sprung from one of the noblest families in Spain, and mas¬ ter of a princely fortune; I entered life with the happiest prospects ; while I was yet very young, I saw and loved
54
Donna Maria âfè, Guzman ; neither her birth nor fortune were equal to mine, but the graces of her mind and bosom, were such as to render her a wife for an emperor: she heard my vows with complacency, and as I stood high in the favour of her relations, w»e were speedily united. * c For some time, nothing could ex¬ ceed the felicity that I enjoyed; my Maria, at the end of a year, brought me a son ; if you have ever been a father, you may conceive the pleasure which I derived from this circumstance ; with what delight did 1 behold my wife, bending with the sweetest smiles over her infant as it received nourish¬ ment from her bosom; never did she appear so beautiful in my eyes, as when employed in the tender offices of maternal love. I had, when I first married her, believed my happiness in¬ capable of increase, but I saw it daily augment, and I bent in fervent grati-
55
tude to that almighty power, who had allotted me so large a portion of bliss. " Don Carlos de Padilla had been the friend of my youth, but accident had separated us for some years; he had travelled, and though we promised to correspond with each other, it was a promise that he did not keep ; and he re¬ turned to Madrid in something more than a year after my marriage. He hastened to my house, I received him with the utmost warmth, and introduc¬ ed him to Maria, as a man, whom I re¬ garded with the affection of a brother. To be my friend, was a sufficient re¬ commendation to the favour of my wife, and her behaviour to him was equally friendly and attentive. Don Carlos is, or rather (continued he sigh¬ ing), " was, one of the handsomest men in Spain; he had the «weakness and vanity to suppose that his person and accomplishments had caught the heart of my wife, and in ъ short time he pre¬ sumed to лзаке /isîıonourable overtures
5ß
to her. The marchioness, who, to the natural dignity of virtue joins that pride, inherent I believe in every noble Castillian, repulsed him with scorn and indignation ; but fearful of endangering my life, she did not acquaint me with the traitor's perfidy. This well meant precaution of her's, was the source of all the uneasiness which I have since suffered ; Don Carlos conceived against her the most implacable hatred, and he resolved to risk every thing in order to be revenged. " He began by infusing into my mind a suspicion tbat the marchioness's love was not equal to my own ; the delicate reserve of my Maria became to the jaundiced eye of jealousy, coldness and indifference; I doated upon her, and from the moment 1 suspected ť<at her regard was inferior to mine, I was mi¬ serable : I became gloomy, and the marchioness wondered at, without sus¬ pecting the cause of the alteration in my behaviour.
6?
(< Amongst the number of my friends was a young Englishman, |of the most engaging person and address; he had exiled himself from his own country on account of his ill success in an affair of the heart. The English are na¬ turally a grave people, and the mis¬ fortunes of Lord Clerimont had given to his manners a seriousness, and at times, a melancholy, that was far from unpleasing to a Spaniard. The young Englishman won my friendship, and at my desire the marchioness was par¬ ticularly attentive to him. t( The kindness of your lovely wife (said he to me one day), frequently opens those wounds which it is meant to heal ; when I see her smiling cheer¬ fully on your guests ; when, with the benevolence of an angel, she endea¬ vours to chace away my sorrows by the soft accents of peace and consola¬ tion, she brings to my recollection the similar virtues of that adored being whom I have for ever lost ; and^ fox-*.
ûö
give me, my dear friend (continued he, grasping my band), but though I hate myself for it, yet, at those moments, ï envy your felicity." *' My heart bled for poor Clerimont ; I returned the pressure of his hand, and we were both silent. Don Carlos, who was also present, had listened with an air of the most marked attention to the young Englishman, and for some days after this conversation, I could not help noticing, that whenever Clerimont was with us, Don Carlos seemed to look with an eye of suspicion on his behaviour, and that of the marchioness ; I too, became involuntarily attentive to the manners of both, and I could not help fancying, that there was a peculiar softness in the marchioness's eyes and voice, whenever she addressed him ; the artful Carlos seemed to double the vigilance with which he watched them, but to ine, he preserved a profound si¬ lence upon the subject. *' Mutters continued in this state for
ô9
some time, when Clerimont received a· summons to his native country ; he parted from us with regret, and as his going destroyed in a great measure the suspicions I had entertained, I bade him adieu, with much cordiality. <ζ I could not hide frøm myself, that from the time of his departure, the behavour of the marchioness gradually changed, she became gloomy and ab¬ sent, and though she strove to treat me in her usual manner, yet, the change was too evident to pass unobserved by the prying eye of love ; returning one day unexpectedly, I surprised her in tears, I besought her in vain to .tell me the reason why she wept. " ' My dear lord, cried she (attempt- · ing to hide lier dejection under an assumed vivacity), I have no reason to be sad, but women are not always rea¬ sonable, and you must not expect that I should differ from the rest of my sex ; my spirits are low, but they will he better/ 1 did not press her further,,
6ο
but the idea I had before entertained, that her dejection proceeded from Cleri- monťs leaving us, returned. In a few days after this, i was sauntering in a close walk in the garden of my house, .and within a few paces of rne I per¬ ceived Don Carlos, he was alone, and his hurried step, and the agitation of his manner, betrayed a mind ill at ease. I hastened tojóin him, but at the sight of me, he started, and seemed inclined to avoid me ; ï inquired what had dis¬ turbed him, but for a long time Ы evaded a reply, at last------ -. tť ( 1 know not how to answer you, my friend (cried he), í am indeed dis¬ turbed, and did you know the cause, you woidd, hz equally so; but for your own реаее-ъаке, De Santenos, inquire no farther ; ignorance in some cases, constitutes happiness.' (€ My thoughts were always fix^d upon Maria's fancied coldness, and I could not help exclaiming, e good Heavens ! the marchioness is then—«*
6ì
" ζ The marchioness (interrupted he), I did not name her surely, or if I did, 'twas unintentionally." " These words confirmed my belief that he had discovered Maria's partia¬ lity for Clerİmont, and I urged him so vehemently to come to an explanation with me, that at last, with an appear¬ ance of the greatest rehictance, he owned tint he had reason to believe that me maichiouess ar»d Clerimont were mutually attached, and that his being obliged to return to Li »gland was the cause of her evident unhappmess. u How inconsistent is the human heart. Though I had persuaded my¬ self that this was the case, yet, I roar¬ ed and stormed as if I never before had had an idea of it ; I vowed that J would instantly fly to her, and upbraid her with her infamv. " ť What (cried he), before you are convinced that she is guilty ? recollect that you have but my word for her in¬ fidelity, and that the strongest evidence
e*
only, should make you doubt the ho¬ nour of a wife/ " *I am convinced of her guilt (cried' I), but if I was not, what evidence can I now obtain of it? the absence of her paramour deprives me of all chance of gaining actual proof of her infidelity, since surely she does not presume to correspond with him/ ťí * I know not that (replied he), but thus for Is can convince you, I can show you the marchioness weeping over the portrait of her lover ; but first, De San r teuos, you must solemnly swear to me, that you will not rush from your place of concealment to upbraid your guilty wife,- without you will do this, I can¬ not pledge myself to give you the satisr. faction which you demand/ *' I thought bis terms hard, but upon no other would he agree to give me the damning proof 1 sought, and I bound myself by a solemn oaih to be silent, whatever í might ьее or hear,
63
" ŕ And now, De Santenos (cried he)^ I have to intreat your pardon, fcr I own to you I came by the knowledge of the marchioness's infidelity in a way that I am ashamed to tell you ; the beauty of her attendant, Leonora, cap¬ tivated my fancy ; I ought to have re¬ spected the rights of hospitality, but human nature is frail, the girl seemed partial to me, and I had not fortitude to resist her allurements ; it is now some time since she told me of the affection which her lady showed for Lord Clerimont, and from the time of his departure, the marchioness has, when alone, spent her time in weeping over a portrait which chance discovered to Leonora was that of his lordship ; still your wife's love might not have led her to any criminal lengths, and never should I have suspected her of actual infidelity, but from a part of a letter which Leonora found in her lady's cabinet, and which put it beyond a
64
doubt that she had granted to the Eng¬ lishman every favour that she had to bestow/ "' By Heaven! (exclaimed I), she shall die ; my injured h :our demands the sacrifice of her bîr, uoi shall the universe shield her р«;га:г<>\г ftom my just revenge ; I will pursue him to Eng¬ land/ " * First obtain complete conviction of your wife's infidelity, and then'take what measures you please (said he)., but do nothing rashly, I beg of you/ By the advice of this * arch fiend, I pretended business that would, I said, detain me some few days from Madrid, and I endeavoured to disguise my feel¬ ings, and to bid the marchioness adieu with some degree of composure! " The apparent tenderness with which she returned my embraces, struck me as the blackest dissimulation ; ' vile hypocrite! (thought I), thy perfidy will soon meet with its just reward/ . ·* That night I returned, and Leoupra
вэ
stationed me so, that I could plainly see every action of the marchioness without being myself observed ; Don Carlos accompanied me to prevent, as he said, any ill effects from my rash¬ ness. " When the marchioness was nearly undressed, she dismissed her woman, and as soon as she did so, she took from her cabinet a picture, which she gazed upon for some time in silence ; it was_th.e largest miniature I had ever seen, and the setting was plain gold. " € Ah î (cried she, as she pressed it to her lips), time has been, whea the ori¬ ginal smiled as sweetly on me as the inanimate likeness appears to do;* she burst into tears, and to such a pitch cf frenzy was I wound, that forgetful of my vow, I should have burst into her chamber, had not Don Carlos forcibly torn me from the spot. " He hurried me into the garden, and for some moments, I could not breathe·
66
" ζ Are you now convinced' (cried he). " ŕ Yes (replied I), and the blood of the adultress shall expiate her crime r' " ' Not so, my friend (said he), do not rashly presume to rob offended Heaven of its power to punish/ " c What (exclaimed I)¿ would you then, that she should triumph in her guilt ? would you have me still cherbh in my bosom a wretch who has sacrik ficed my honour and her own/ " c No (said he), but there are modes of punishment more lenient in appear¬ ance^ but as severe in reality to a guilty mind, as the one you have named; secluded from the world, mnd robbed pf all those enjoyments .to which she has been accustomed, the unhappy and guilty marchioness might, by a life of penance and austerity, expiate her faults/ ' « For some time I would'not listen to this plan, but at last I agrees to it j wc
67
settled that I should the following day charge my wife with her guilt, of which the picture, found in her cabinet would be sufficient evidence, and then remove her secretly to some convent at a dis¬ tance from Madrid ; that done, I pro¬ posed to visit England, and to execute, with my own' hands, justice upon the destroyer of my honour and my peace. " These resolutions were approved by the villain Carlos, and early the follow¬ ing day I entered the camber of my wife. ζζ She was in a sound sleep, and never had I seen her look more lovely. * Oh/ Heavens! (cried I), how can guilt so black as this woman's, taste of sweet repose r' . The noise I made roused her, she started up, ť What, my dear lord (cried she), so soon returned r' " *' I am returned (replied I), to punish the perfidy of a wanton ; know that \ have at last discovered all/ The steadiness of her countenance amazed me. ( I understand ' you not,
0*8
mv loid (said she), what have you dis¬ covered ?* ic l Thib is too much (exclaimed I), shameless audacious woman î därest thou hope still to blind me ? but I will instantly cover thee with confusion/ ťí 1 fiew to her cabinet, it \\аъ locked, aod ï demanded the к ¿y ; *.he gave it to me with the utmost composure ! ζί I soon found what I sought for ; I drew the portrait from ib ease, it was a strong resemblance of Clerimont ; I held it before lier, she shrieked and fainted. Ci it was well for us both, that she did, since I cannot answer to what ex¬ tremes my passion might have trans* ported me ; but her insensibility dis¬ armed my rage, in some degree, and I hastily kit the apartment. " The marchionesses scream had brought up her woman, whom I met as I wab rushing down stairs; I ordered Leonora, when her lady recovered, to
69
let me know, and in about half an hour she came to me. " * The marchioness has now recover¬ ed her senses ; my lord, (^aid he), but she is so extremely ill, that she begs you vvill not ask to see her/ " Though 1 longed to upbraid her with her guilt, yet, I resolved to wait till she was i u a condition to hear me, but the whole of that day she continued according to Leonora's account very ill, and the n jxt morning ¡she was delirious ; though I had persuaded myself that 1 abhorred her, yet the shock that this intelligence gave me, proved that she had still too much power over my heart ; I wouhi fain have persuaded myself that she counterfeited, but the physicians, whose testimony I could not doubt, assured me that lier life was in imminent danger. u Never had 1 passed such a day of misery, at one moment, 1 reproached myself for what 1 had done ; ' I ought
?о
to have proceeded with more caution, (cried I), frail as she had been, I knew her sensibility, and if she dies 1— I am her murderer/ Ihese reflections, were almost immediately succeeded by others of a different nature. ff * She deserves her fate (said I), and I am but an instrument in the hands of Heaven to punish her perfidy/ " In these, and similar thoughts I spent the day. Tbe night was perfectly still and serene^ not a cloud obscured the face of the Heavens ; and hoping that the air would a little relieve the agitation of my spirits, I walked out, and wandered 1 knew not whither. ťí I continued to stroll for some hours, till at last, overcome by fatigue, I bent my steps homeward ; I had in my pocket the key of a private door in the garden, and through that I resolved to enter. ťC I did so, and was proceeding to the house, when in passing a small temple, I thought I heard the sound of voices ;
n
I paused a moment, and was surprised to find that it was Don Carlos, and Leonora in earnest discourse. " I felt indignant, that he should think of continuing his intrigue with this girl, when the following words rivetted me to the spot where I stood. " e Let me hear no more of this folly (cried he angrily), our plan has most happily succeeded, and would you now mar all ? beware Leonora, how you dare betray me ; by Heaven î the moment that discovers to De Santenos the innocence of his wife shall be your last/' " You know that I dare not, that I will not disobey you (said Leonora in a supplicating accent), hut could you only hear the incoherent ravings of the unhappy marchioness, could you see the state to wliich we have re¬ duced her, even your heart would be touched with pity/ % " I stopped to hear no more. I burst
72
into the temple, and would instantly have sacrificed the traitor Cai los to my vengeance, but he fled. I pursued, but could not o"crtake him, and I hastily returned to the temple, ahnost despair¬ ing to find Leonora, as I supposed that she too had e caped ; but I was mistaken, she had fainted, and still continued in¬ sensible. ' c I locked the door, and flew to the house for assistance ; when I returned with some of my domestics we found lier recovering, she threw herself at my feet, and hurst into tears. tcc Oh! my lord (cried she), have mercy upon me, I am indeed a guilty wretch, but spare my life, and I will confess every thing ľ " I promised her a pardon, and she proceeded to disclose to me a scene of iniquity that struck me at once with horror and indignation. To be brief, from the time that the marchioness had repulsed Carlos, his whole thoughts were bent upon revenge ; by bis artful wiles
?з
he poon succeeded in seducing the un¬ happy Leonora, whom he intended to make a principal instrument in his de¬ signs. This girl, at his instigation, per¬ suaded the marchioness that I was un¬ faithful to her, and hence arose her me¬ lancholy. " The mai chioness had two minia¬ tures of me, but neither of thein pleas¬ ed her, and a portrait painter of emi¬ nence having arrived at Madrid, she ex¬ pressed to me a wish to have a miniature from him; I replied, coldly, and she did not again mention it, but she privately had one drawn, which was, in fact, the portrait I had seen her weep over; this circumstance inspired Don Carlos with \ project, which had nearly proved fatal to Maria and myself. He possess¬ ed both taste and skill in the art, and he drew from memory a good likeness of Lord Clerimont. On the night tbat I had, as I imagined, demonstration of Maria's infidelity, Leonora had given to her mistress a soporific mixture, and VOL. II. £
7* no sooner bad it taken effect than she changed the pr>rtrait«. When I pre¬ fented Clerimonťs to th* narrinone«*, attou^hment and terror d<pri\td her of her h п««еч ; hut no sooner did she re- enrrr than 4to sent И >peak to me; but the artful I-t onora dvli\ered a con¬ trary me^a«re,and she, and her vih' para- m<*ur, exulttd m having, as thev thought, con»plttcly ^ucretdtd in their diabolical «i'heme. When, however, Le moia found lier mistress"*, life was in dangt·*, her con«cience, which had «to long slept, menaced her with the punishment due to her crimes ; harden¬ ed as she iva«, $he could not reflect with¬ out remorse, that if the ma r chioncss died she was in fact her murderer; the contrition which she expressed startled Dť Pachila, and he appointed her to meet him iu the gaulen, in the hope of terrifying her into silence; but eter¬ nal justice, which never sleep·", led me to the spot at the moment that those
7^
wretches supposed the malves secure from all human ob^n*ation. u Scarcely could the sex of th** offend¬ er protect her from m y ventanee. When «.he had concìudtd her talc, and J *aw how completely 1 had been her dupe, and that of the villain**, De Padilla, I flew instantly to the chamber of my wife; but she w a* insensible to my repent¬ ance; her delirium wis now at its height ; and oh ! how did the unconsci¬ ous sufferer tear my heart by expres¬ sions of the tenderest love for rne : for ten davs I never left her bed-side. At the end of that period it pleased heaven to restore her reason, 'Ihough I used the utmost caution in informing her that her innocence was cleared, yet her joy had nearly occasioned a relapse; Piovi- dencc, however, spared her tc my pray¬ ers, and I had at last the satisfaction s of hearing her pronounced out of danger.
E 2
76
шякг*ют>т1ШЕшштттШЕ1втЕавнщ1ашшшаштти ттттщрйЕ1ЩЕ>щ рш
CHAP. V.
" You w ül tvlieve that í made the strict¬ est enquiry after De Padi îla. în vain did my gentle Maria beseech me to leave the wretch to the punishment of Heaven; my soul thirsted for vengeance, and I was determined, if possible, to ob¬ tain it; he secreted himself, however, so artfully, that I could not discover his retreat, and I began to believe that he had quitted Spain, till I met him by accident to. night ; he would have avoid¬ ed me, but it was not possible, I at¬ tacked him with fury, and he fell." The marquis ceased, and Montalva »aid he deserved his fate, but hoped he
n
had nothing to appreherwi from doing himself justice. 4i My secret (replied De Santenos), is known only to you, ind from vour honour I doubt not of its at being faithfully kept/* The count assured him secrecy, and be left the marquis to his repose, with a promise to see him the following day. The next morning he repeated his visit, and was received with much friend¬ ship by De Santenos, who introduced him to the marchioness, Montalva gazed upon her with admiration, for never be¬ fore had he beheld such loveliness ; not even Valeria, beautiful as he had thought her, could be said to equal the marchio¬ ness De Santenos : grace, dignity^ and beauty 7 were in her most happily blend¬ ed ; and even the cold and callous heart of Montalva, acknowledged the power of her charms. The relations of Don Carlos De Pa¬ dilla, made use of every effort to discover hi« murderer, but in vain, and the af¬ fair grati ually died away. Montalva be-
rs
came almost domesticated in the family of the marquis, who treated hinx with the most brotherly regard ; nor was the lovely marchioness less attentive to her husband's friend. The count had in¬ tended to quit Spain for England, but the intreaties of the marquis and his lady prevailed upon him from time to time to defer his departure. In the midst of the felicity which De Santenos enjoyed, Montalva per¬ ceived that he was frequently a prey to gloom and abstraction. " How is this, my friend (said he, one day when they were alone), what is it that ithus depresses thy spirits r who is then so blest as thou art ? Love and fortune crown thee with their choicest favours, and yet there are times when thou seernest insensible of their bounty/* " My mind, Montalva, has received a shock which it wilbnot easily recover (said De Santenoe), injured friendship, and insulted honour urged me to seek the life of De Padilla ; I did it fairly too,
79
but shall 1 own to thee, that since his death I have not tasted peace ; a thou¬ sand times have I wished that I had taken the advice of my Maria- and left him to the punishment of his own con¬ science." " Nay, this is childish, marquis (said the count), his life was too small an at- tonement for his perfidy, and most justly did he deserve to lose it." " It is true he did so (replied De San¬ tenos), but my hand should not have iu- flicted the blow ; the form of this un¬ happy man is for ever before me, and I shudder when I reflect that I hurried him into eternity with all his unrepent- ed sins upon his head; vengeance should extend but to .the grave, and how dread* ful is the thought that I have, perhaps, caused, my victim to expiate his crime by endless tortures. Oh, heavens ! if such are my feelings, what must be those of tlie assassin." 1Ъе marquis was too much absorbed in his own thoughts, to heed the effect
80
which this speech produced upon Mon* tal ya, whose blanched cheek, and qui¬ vering lip, would have betrayed toan at¬ tentive observer that all was not right within; he turned from the marquis, and walked hastly to the window ; in a few moments he recovered himself, and he took his leave. " I must fly from Spain (said he, mentally, as he was returning, home), but whether can I fly to avoid reflec¬ tion ? am I destined to be ever as now, pursued Бу the stings of conscience ? I am surely thè accursed of heaven, since í perpetually meet with fresh mementos of my guilt Within a few days the count quit¬ ted Madrid, spite of the entreaties of thé marquis and marchioness DeSante- no*, who urged his stay'with all· the warmth of friendship, he resolved to ▼wit England, and the' marquis gave him a letter to Lord Clerimont, which Montalva accepted, though he did not mean to avail himself of it, and he sailed
81
for England, in the vain hope of regain¬ ing that peace which must ever be a stranger to the bosom of unrepented guilt. They had not been long at sea when a violent storm arose, and in a few hours the destruction of the vessel seemed ine¬ vitable; all was tumult and confusion. In the field of battle, Montalva would have met death without shrinking, but he now regarded its approach with terror. " AH hopes in this world are over, my friends (cried the captain, rushing into the cabin), and we must endeavour to make our peace with Heaven," The passengers knelt to supplicate its mercy, and the count also dropt upon his knees, but the wretched Montalva could not pray, the form of the murdered De Rosonio seemed to stand before him, and he could almost have thought that the voice of the count thundered in his ear, t€ the hour of vengeance iş at last ar¬ rived/ ε 5
82
<c We have discovered the leak, and she may yet weather the storm" * (was ф vociferated from above). " Blessed be that Providence who thus deigns to give us a chance of life (exclaimed one of the passengers), but let us try whether we cannot assist the sailors." He flew upon deck, and most of the other passengers followed his example. In a few moments all hands were call¬ ed to the pump, and Montalva heard them say, " The leak increases/* " We are lost," exclaimed he, and at the same moment an old sailor entered the cabin· " Why, yes, we should be, I think, if we were all like you (cried the tar, with that bluntness which characterises the lower order of his countrymen), here is every one, old and young, hard at work, and so' t hey ought to be» when life's at stake, but you are content to sit still and bemoan yourself, while other people work for you, but may-
83 hap you think your life is of greater value than any body's else." Montalva did not reply, and the sailor left the cabin; the haughty tem¬ per of the count would have prompted him at anv other moment to resent what he would have termed the man's insolence: but his spirit was at this moment so completely humbled, that he scarcely felt it ; he went upon deck ; there, all . were busily employed. Ashamed to appear inactive, he took a tunv at the pump ; in a short time the storm abated, and the captain (an old experienced seaman), assured the passengers that their danger was over. Nothing could exceed the joy which tliis intelligence caused, they embraced and congratulated eachodier with trans· port ; Montalva alone, did, not partici¬ pate in the general happiness, he could not lift his heart in humble gratitude to the Giver of ail good ; he dared not re¬ turn thanks to that Almighty Power,
ñ4
^ ho Î!3<î thus snatched him from an un»imcly death. ťí Never before did I feel my*elf a coward (said the captain), but it is only itst year (continued he, address¬ ing one of the passenger*), that I lost my son, and his widow and three help» le*s babes have, since that time, been wholly dependant upon me; for myself, it matters not whether I go to my last account now, or a few years hence ; 1 have looked death in the face too often to fear it, and I trust in the Divine Goodness to pardon those frail¬ ties incident to our nature; but when I thought of leaving my poor Fanny, and her helpless little ones to that un· pitying world, where ! myself have met no mercy, I could have wept like a very woman. Oh ! how rejoiced fliall I be, to clasp my poor girl again in my arms, and to hear the little ones as they cling about me, lisp out their joy at my return/*
Ш5
This speech was a dagger to the count, " All, all, save me, (tliought he) have some object, for whom they wish to live ţ but I am a solitary wretch, a wanderer on the earth ; why then do S continue to exist r What can I have to suffer in another world, worse than I now endure r'* For a moment the idea of suicide crossed the mind of the wretched Montalva, and with all the inconsistency of guilt, he now regret¬ ted his escape from that death, which not an hour before he would have given worlds to avoid. He retired to the cabin, to meditate upon his dread¬ ful purpose, but the agitation which his mind had undergone affected his frame, and in a few hours he was delirious. The captain paid him every attention that humanity could suggest, and by the time they reached the British shore, he was out of danger ; but weak as infancy. In this state he was removed to a hotel, and the worthy captain, anxi¬ ous as he was to embrace his daugh-
86
ter-îö~Iaw 5 and his grand-chi híren, would bot leave him for a few days, till he was. les* an invai id. The heart of tîıe count, though na¬ turally bad, \i as not wholly inaccessible to the fctlmgs ti' humanity ; and he ft It grateful for the disinterested kind- lit ss of the rough, but honest staman; as soon as Montai va was able to go abrrad, the captain hastened to embrace hb family, who lived in retirement a few m ile;» from the metropolis. " if I thought that your lotddup- could put up u ith wry humble accom¬ modation (cried he to the count), I am sure that change of air would be of service to you, and you would find my daughter an excellent nurse" This invitation Montai va did not hesitate to decline ; a calm scene of do¬ mestic happiness, was not one in which he was likely to ta^te of peace; he ex¬ pressed a wish to see Captain Sterling upon his return to London, and he forced upon the tar, a much larger sum
«7
than that he had agreed to py for his passage. As soon as he was able, the count endeavourefl to amuse himself with a survey of every tiling curious in the splendid and busy metropolis of the first commercial city in the world, and had not his mind been diseased beyond the power of cure, he would have been pleased with the novelty of all that he saw ; but the barbed arrow was doomed to wrankle for ever at his heart, and he found peace as unattain¬ able in the midst of the gaieties of London, as in the solitude of D'Koso- nio's castle. The count had arrived in England a short time previous to the commence¬ ment of a general election, and as he was one day walking towards Coven t Garden, he saw a crowd assembled ; and struggling to get out of it, was a youug woman, who was nearly faint¬ ing. " Pray, for Heavens sake! let me pass" (said she), but the mob intent
88
on pressing forward to the hustings, paid no attention to her, and Montalva saw that in a few moments she would most probably fall, and be trampled to death; he made his way through the mob with some difficulty, and getting near the female, he desired her to hold one arm, at the same lime he put his ©ther round her waist, and conducted her in safety through the crowd. When she could speak, which was not for some moments, she thanked him with a grace and propriety which, from the plainness of her appearance, he had not expected. The colour, which ter¬ ror had robbed her of, began to return while she was speaking, and the ro¬ seate glow that overspread her counte¬ nance, when on looking up, she beheld the eyes of the count fixed upon her, gave to her soft features the charm of animation; the only one they wanted. Sh"e was in truth a perfect English beauty, delicate, regular features, soft
89
blue eyes ; and a profusion of tbe love¬ liest flaxen hair, rendered her an in¬ teresting object, even to Montalva. " You are not yet perfectly recovered from your fright (said he), have you much farther to go ľ* She replied in the negative, and he continued to walk by her side, till they reached a small neat house, at the door of which she knocked, and on its being opened, she bade him good morning. Though a libertine, the mind of the count had long been toe much harrass¬ ed by remorse to feel sensible of the charms of beauty ; but he was pleased with the person of this girl, and as her circumstances were apparently hum¬ ble, he thought that he should find no difficulty in obtaining her for a mis¬ tress, as he could not, from her ex¬ treme youth, suppose that she was mar¬ ried. Near the house which she en¬ tered was a fruiterer's shop, and he re¬ solved to make enquiries there after
»о
her, but all that he could learn, wa», that she was unknown ¿» the neigh¬ bourhood ; that she seldom went out, and tlijt she had no visitors. From this information, the ccunt was "íatbfied that she was at least poor, and unprotected ; two circumstances, that would, he supposed, induct? her tv receive his proposals with pleasure; he waited however for some days, and he attentively observed her conduct, but sbe did not go out ; srhe never ap¬ peared at her windows, and he was, from the perfect solitude, and the ap¬ parently blameless tenor of her life, in¬ clined to believe her innocent. No sentiment of compassion or re¬ morse however, interfered to prevent his trying to render her otherwise ; the money wliich he had in his power to bestow would, be thought, be a suffi¬ cient compensation for the loss of chas¬ tity. For years back, had this wretch¬ ed man experienced the insufficiency of money to procure happiness ; yet,
*)»
he proposed to deprive a fellow hemg of the greatest earthly good, and to give her in return, that drosà wfvch wab to himself is nothing. But- the proposais of Montalva, though liberal, and even splendid, were rejected with disdain by Ellen Dudley ; her answer was concise, but decisive. f 'Neither my heart, uot my person, are saleable. " E. Dudley/ This laconic billet, was the only an¬ swer she vouchsafed to send the count, for though he wrote repeatedly, yet his letters were returned unopened, and be never could gain admittance to her pre¬ sence ; this unexpected disappoint ment piqued his pride, and what at first was merely an inclination, became a pas¬ sion, which he was determined at any risde to gratiiy. The single hue that she had written him, was rather, he thought, the language of insulted pride
92
than offended virtue, and he execrated the haughtiness to which he attributed hk rebuff* ιζ Yet who (thought he), could suppose it possible, that a girl so apparently gentle, so meek and unassum¬ ing, should possess so much insolence ? but I will humble her spirit proud as it is/' While he was devising a plan to carry her off^ he received a note from her, desiring to see him, and he immediate¬ ly obeyed her summons ; he was shewn into a small apartment, and in a few moments she appeared. She had evidently tried to collect her¬ self, but the sight of the count seeimd to deprive her of her self-possession, and too much agitated to speak, she motioned him to be seated. The count began a complimentary speech, but she interrupted him, " I have to request your patience, sir (cried she), what I have to say will sur¬ prise, perhaps offend you, but I wish to be sincere with vou, and to act without
93
disguise. In refusing the proposals which you made me—proposals which I will acknowledge were liberal in the extreme, I was not actuated by virtuous motives, for I am an unhappy being, who to the indulgence of a mad passion have sacri¬ ficed my honour/' Her voice faltered, and for a few moments she was silent. "Until lately, very lately, 1 knew not that I should be deserted ; I knew not that the man to whom my whole soul was devoted, would from the cold considerations of worldly prudence, abandon me to poverty and shame ; but be has done so, and I-—" " In my arms (cried the count interrupting her), thou shalt find a shelter from both ; my rank and wealth are known to thee, and all they can bestow, thou shalt freely command/* " I thank your lordship (replied she), but can you be content with the possession of a woman whose hcait is dead to love ? a woman, who frankly avows to you, that distress alone could
94
induce her to give herself to your arms, and tells you that gratitude and fide¬ lity, are all that you have ,o expect from her," " Well, madam (cried the count), I will accept you on your own terms, and yon shall have no cause to repent your confidence in my honour." It was not without an effort that Montalva spoke thus, for his pride was stung to the qtiick, by what he in¬ ternally termed the insolence of Ellen : and he formed the ungenerous resolu¬ tion of gaining possession of her per¬ son, and then retaliating the contempt with which she treated him. It was his wish to take for her ele¬ gant apartments, and to bestow upon her every luxury and enjoyment that wealth could purchase ; but a life of retirement was more congenial to her disposition, and she declined mixing in the gay scenes which the count spoke of. Her determination was not displeas-
9S
ing to Montalva, who soon made fcr her a small, but elegant establishment, and visited her daily. The novelty of her character interested him. The sprightly graces of the French ladies, and the voluptuous allurements of the Italians, he was no stranger to ; but the mixture of gentleness and hauteur, of sensibility and firmness, which he found in Ellen Dudley, he had never before met with ; always grave, simple, and rarional, the re.serve and coldness of her manners would most probably coon have disgusted the count, but for a circumstance that gave her a strong hold upon his heart : this was her being pregnant ; often, and deeply had he regretted the child of Valeria ; had she lived, he thought that he should at least have one being whom the ties of con¬ sanguinity would have attached to him ; and frequently had he envied De Roso¬ nio the possession of tbe little babel. The intelligence of Ellens pregnancy gave to his bosom a degree of pleasure
ϋβ
which it had long been a stranger to ; he redoubled the tenderness and atten¬ tion with which he had hitheito treated her, and she appeared more grateful for those attentions than she had yet been. One day the count expressed a strong curiosity to know the particulars of her life. " It does not contain any incidents worthy of your attention, my lord (said she), my days have been latterly mark¬ ed with error, and its natural conse¬ quences misery and disappointment ; I was plunged into distress while I was yet a stranger to guilt; and from a scrupulous attention to the opinion of the world, despair taught me to brave it ; I looked around me, and I saw that with the major part of mankind appear¬ ances were all, and that rank and wealth were deemed a sufficient excuse for the greatest enormities ; death had deprived me of the only being upon earth on whom I had a natural claim ; I was poor and unprotected, and these I
97
found were considered as sufficient reasons why I was to be treated with insult or neglect ; my temper became soured, and my disposition changed : that glow of benevolence, which I had hi¬ therto felt for all the human race, was converted into misanthropy. I learned to consider my fellow-creatures with sus¬ picion and distrust, and to think that every appearance of kindness proceeded from interested motives ; but my heart was not made for a state of apathy, and in exchanging it for a warmer sen¬ timent, 1 entailed upon myself endless regrets ; but I beg your pardon, my lord (continued she), I am giving you a detail of my sentiments, instead of my actions. " My father, who was a naval oflicer, was as brave and worthy a man as ever lived"; he married, early in life, a woman whose birth was much superior to his own, and whose fortune would have been large but for her preference of him. My mother was under the guardianship of VOL. II. F
98
an uncle, and if she married without his consent she forfeited nearly the whole of her property. Both my father and herself were, however, too much attach¬ ed to regard this circumstatfce in the light of a serious obstacle to their union. ic ζ My income, small as it is, my dear Charlotte (said my father), will afford us the decent comforts of life, and could you but be content with them, I should esteem myself the happiest of men in calling you mine.' ζζ ( Was I desirous of more, I should be unworthy the possession of your in¬ valuable heart (replied she), what indeed have we in this-world to wish for be¬ yond the joys of mutual affection, peace, and competence.' With such sentiments as these, you will suppose thai the union of the lovers soon took place, and for some time their felicity was great indeed. A summons to my father to join his ship was the first in¬ terruption it met with; it was the first time that lie ever felt reluctant to per-
99
form his duty, my mother was far gone in a state of pregnancy, and he dreaded the effect which his departure might produce upon her health and spirits ; but the call of honour and of duty must be obeyed ; and he tore himself aw T ay, after a thousand charges to her to be careful of her health for his sake, and for that of the dear expected one. - i( My mother assumed the heorine, but it was a character that her native softness rendered her ill calculated to support; and her anxiety of mind brought on a premature labour. I was born two months before the usual time, and for some weeks after my birth, my mother entertained daily apprehensions of losing me: her fears were however vain, 1 began to thrive; and on my father's return at the end of a } r ear, I was a stout, healthy child; and, as he declared, while he pressed me to his bosom, the perfect image of my mother. Some years rolled away, and the occa¬ sional absences of my father served to f 2
100
give a keener relish to his domestic pleasures ; they had no further increase of their family, and I was the little idol of both : but how transient is human felicity ; the news of a battle, and of my father's health and safety, reached my mother at the same moment ; he had taken a valuable prize, and the papers of the day were filled with aTcuots of his bravery, and of his generosity to tlie conquered enemy. Tears of gratitude to heaven for the preservation of her dear George's life, fell from the eyes of my mother, while her heart swelled with an honest pride at the well-earned applause so liberally bestowed upon him, and she anticipated with delight the transport of clasping him to her bosom in a few weeks, perhaps days. Alas ! these hopes were destined never to be fulfilled; my father arrived safe in port, and immediately on his land¬ ing was seized with a violent fever, which carried him off in a few days. i( The news of this event had nearly proved fatal to my mother; and nothing
101
could, I believe, have er bled her to survive it, but her doating fondness for me. ζ For thy sake, my beloved child, (said she), I must a little longer bear the load of life ľ And to her it was in¬ deed a load. I was at this period in my twelfth year, and I regretted rny father as much as a girl at that age could do ; but time soon reconciled me to my loss; not so my poor mother ; her struggle with her feelings undermined her con¬ stitution, and though she lived for near¬ ly four years after this event, she never could be said to enjoy a day's health. tc She devoted herself wholly to me ; and as she could not bring herself to part with me, I had masters at home, and the care of my mind and morals was her only solace. í knew nothing of the world but from books and the conversation of my mother ; for, after the death of my father, she never mixed with society. My natural disposition was open and unsuspecting, and I grew up in the belief, that to deserve friends
102
was the way to obtain them, and that I should everywhere meet with kindness and sincerity. Fatal, though innocent error, what misery do I not owe to thee í " Before I had quite attained my six¬ teenth year, my mother died, and I was left under the guardianship of Mr. Wilmot, a man of whom she knew little, but his character was excellent, and he had been under the greatest obligations to my father. My little for¬ tune of four thousand pounds, my mo¬ ther left at my own disposal, as soon as I had attained my eighteenth year. Mr. Wilmot was a merchant, and appeared an amiable and benevolent man ; he did not attempt to check the first exube¬ rance of my grief; for he knew enough of human nature to know tbat, during the violence of sorrow, the voice of con¬ solation is unheeded, or turned from witb disgust ; but he gradually weaned me from the contemplation of my irre¬ parable loss, by pointing out to me the
103
happiness that was still within my reach. ' Friendship and benevolence offer their treasures to you, my dear ward (said he), in the duties of the one, as far as your limited fortune will afford you the means of fulfilling them, and the con eolations of the other, you will soon re¬ cover peace.' u He was right ; I gradually regained my serenity, and my grief subsided into that fad but pleasing remembrance of my dear parenťs virtues, that will, I trust, accompany me through life. I resided with Mr. Wilmot, whose sister kept his house. She was a plain good woman, and behaved to me with great civility ; I neither expected nor wished for more, since our dispositions were too dissimilar for any degree of friendship to subsist between us. " Frederic Wilmot, my guardian's only child, was soon considered by me as a brother ; and I found that his father would not have been displeased to know that 1 was willing to exchange that
104
title for a tenderer one ; but though my reason acknowledged that Frederic was amiable, my heart remained untouched, and I rejectee his suit; but my doing so did not render us less friends, and I continued to be treated by Frederic as his sister, and by Mr. Wilmot as his daughter. " My guardian was visited, and on terms of intimacy with many people whose rank and fortune were superior to his own ; amongst these was the fa¬ mily of Sir Charles Cheslyn ; it con¬ sisted of three daughters, all amiable girls, at least so they appeared ; Lady Cheslyn had been dead some years, and áir Charles was likely to remain a wi¬ dower. The Misses Cheslyn paid me particular attention, and Harriet, the eldest, professed for me the warmest friendship. We soon became insepar¬ able, and the house of Sir Charles was as much my home as that of my guar¬ dian. When I was turned of seventeen, Mr. Wilmot died suddenly, and as I
105
did not think it would be proper to re¬ main in the house of his son, I removed, at their earnest invitation, to my friends the Cheslyns. Frederic Wilmot was our frequent visitor. As his father had died without any settlement having taken place of his affairs, Frederic had offered to pay my fortune into my own hand*, but I declined receiving it. One morning he came, an 1 said that he wanted to «ipeak to me alone. " c My dear Ellen (cried he), I have an opportunity of employing a sum of money in a way that cannot fail to double it. J shall embark a few thou¬ sands in this scheme ; what say you, will you speculate with me?* ŕť * You know (replied I), that tiie little I can call my own is in your hands, but I would not rashly venture it in the hope of gaining more; that sum will always be to me a competence, but should I lose it, beggary awaits me ; I mu^ therefore decline your of¬ fer, and I beg of you to be careful how ï à
106*
you proceed : you know your late father was no friend to speculation, and you know too the thousands whom it has ruined.' fe ť You may depend upon it that I will never be one of them (cried he), since I shall not venture deeply/ He soon took his leave, and I thought no more of our conversation ; but, alas ! I bad soon'reason to recollect it. He had obtained money from different peo¬ ple, under the pretence of laying it out to advantage, and he quitted England in a few months, taking with him every. shilling that he had thus iniquitously raised. " This intelligence was to me like a thunder-clap; scarcely could I believe it possible that a man, of whose probity I had always thought so highly, should be so dreadfully depraved, if in a mo¬ ment of folly he had rashly speculated, and lost, dreadful as the consequence would have been to me, I could have forgiven him ; but this settled plan to
107
impose upon the confidence of the un¬ wary, proved him to possess the black¬ est, ancl the most insensible of hearts. ie It was some time before I was sen¬ sible of the extent of my misfortune. I knew indeed that I had lost my for¬ tune, but I knew not, that with it I had abo lost my friends. The behavi¬ our of the Misses Cheslyn grew gradu¬ ally colder ; even Harriet, whom I loved with the affection of a sister, and whose regard I had every reason to be¬ lieve was reciprocal, treated me with a kind of haughty civility, that at once mortified my pride and deeply wounded my heart. " I cannot describe to your lordship the variety of trivhil slights which for months I was forced to endure in si¬ lence, since I had no friends to whom I could fly for kinder treatment. I was now looked upon, by all the visitors of the family, as the humble compa¬ nion of the Misses Cheslyn, and 1 was indeed literally their companion, for
108
they never suffered me to be a moment out of their presence. The behaviour of their father was, however, still un¬ changed ; and his friendship, and the politeness with which he treated me, softened in some degree the misery of my situation·
юз
CHAP. VI.
íť From being of an open and cheerful temper, I gradually became reserved and silent. One day that Miss Ches- lyn was rallying me on the change, with more flippancy than wit or good man¬ ners, my spirits were so oppressed by a variety of painfi.l recollections, that I hastily quitted the roorri, and retired to the garden to indulge those tears that I could not suppress. " I entered a small temple, where ï sometimes sat wiih my work, and sup* posing myself wholly unobserved, í gave a loose to the grief and indigna*
по
tion that swelled my heart almost to bursting. u Absorbed in tears, I did not perceive that any one had entered, till I was roused by the voice of Sir Charles. " ť Dearest Miss Dudley (said lie), (et me beseech you not to suffer the levity of a thoughtless girl thus to affect your spirits/ * € I hastily dried my eyes, and tried to speak, but I could not articulate, and he continued, ' c ζ I have long scon, with regret, that у ovr situât» m in my family is not a happy one ; my dauçjhttr* are cot as se. чЫ" as I could wish of your merits; and ?ven if they wve. you arr not formed for ι We ot depf ida \ce ; how hapiybhould I be in inducing you to exc *aoge it for one of freedom and affloence/ u I gazed at him in sile* ^e; for tho* bis woids were equivocal, I was un¬ willing to i»ndt retatiti them in tlie li^ht of an insult, or to suppose that a man,
Ill
who had repeatedly declared, that he considered me as his daughter, would wish to render me infamous ; but he, conceiving, I suppose, that-my silence was intended to signify my acquiescence with his wishes, seized my hand, which he pressed to his lips, and thanked me for my condescension in the warmest terms ; my reply undeceived him, but it stung his pride, and he was mean enough to reproach me with the obli¬ gations I was under to him. " However numerous they may be, sir (cried I), this behaviour is sufficient to cancel them all ; you shall not, how¬ ever, add to favours which at this mo¬ ment are sufficiently oppressive to my feelings; I willquit your house as speedi¬ ly as possible." " I left him when I had ceased speak¬ ing, and returned to the house; I re¬ tired to my own apartment to consider how I should dispose of myself. Oh! bow wretched h the situation of that being, who looks round the universe
П2
and sees no soul on whom she has the claim of consanguinity, or the still dearer one of friendship ! no heart that beats for her distresses, or pan is to re¬ lieve them. This forlorn situation was mine ; and with a heart almost broken did I apostrophize the spirit of my dear mother, and pray to Heaven that í might speedily join her in those blessed mansions, where the wicked cesse from troubling, and the wc ary are at rest. <6 1 remained in my ownivomtru rest of the day, and I thought of, and re¬ jected a variety of plans. The next morning I went as usual to preside at the breakfast table, and happening to cast my eyes upon a morning paper, I saw an advertisement from a lady of distinction, who wanted a companion. Dependence upon any one must, 41 thought, be less iiksorne than my pre¬ sent situation ; and indeed, after what had passed, my pride forbade me to remain in the Cheslyn family. I waited upon Lady Diana Douglas, but at the
113
first glance of her ladyship my heart sunk ; her haughty and forbidding countenance, her austere and formal manners, seemed to say that any de¬ gree of comfort was incompatible with dependence upon her. I had, how¬ ever, the good, or rether tbe ill for¬ tune to please her, and I agreed to remove to her house the following week. ** When the Misses Cheslyn found that I intended to leave them, they were equally mortified and surprised ; they made, however, no efforts to prevent my departure, and the following week saw me the inmate of Lady Diana Douglas. " I soon found that I had engaged myself in a mode of life of all others the most repugnant to my feelings ; I was the slave of a haughty and, capricious woman, who treated me indeed with the ceremonious politeness which she thought due to me as a gentlewoman, but, at the same time, with a formality
114
and austerity, that no being who pos¬ sessed more animation than an automa¬ ton could patiently submit to. She was of a very retired and domestic turn, and rarely partook of any public amusements ; but when she did, I al¬ ways accompanied her. The restraint under which I lived preyed upon my health, and I was sinking fast inio a state of despondency, when an incident occurred that awakened me to feelings equally new and delightful. " Her ladyship hada favourite nephew, whom I had heard her speak of as a very promising young man ; her senti¬ ments and mine, however, were too dis¬ similar for me to pay any attention to the encomiums she lavished upon him ; but when I saw him, I was competed to own that they were just. Graceful, elegant, and insinuating, he concealed the most brilliant talents under an un¬ assuming suavity of manners, that ren¬ dered him at once respected and be¬ loved.
115
" He dined with us on the day that I first saw him; and Lady Diana, who was in unusual spirits, behaved to him with more kindness than I thought she had been capable of shewing : he once or twice called a frown into her coun¬ tenance by being rather too attentive to me ; but when he saw tbat his civilities drew upon me some unpleasant looks from his aunt, he ceased to regard me, and attended wholly to her. " For some months he passed several hours daily at her ladyship's house; and every interview added to the interest with which he had inspired me. When í listened to those brilliant sallies of wit that flowed from his lips ; when I contemplated the benevolence that glow¬ ed in his expressive countenance, I re¬ garded him as almost a superior being, and a passion the most fatal to my re¬ pose stole into my bosom under the guise of esteem and admiration. " Mr. Pembroke depended wholly on his uncle, Lord Robert Douglas, who
V6
had promised to make him his heir, and who behaved to him in every re¬ spect but one with the kindness of a father ; that one was a positive stipula¬ tion on the part of Lord Robert, that Percival should never marry without his consent, which he declared he would never give to his uniting himself to any woman who was not of noble blood; money was not so much his lordship's object, but birth was indispensible; and Pembroke saw, tbat if he ever married, he would probably be obliged to give his hand rather in obedience to the dic¬ tates of ambition than affection. " He took every opportunity, in the absence of Lady Diana, to endeavour to give me that consequence with myself which she sedulously laboured to de¬ prive me of ; and a succession of those little delicate attentions which, as one of our favourite authors expresses it, " are neither so pointed as to alarm, nor so vague as to be misunderstood," be¬ gan by slow degrees to open my eyes as
П7
to the nature of his sentiments for me. How did my heart throb with trans¬ port when I first ventured to think that he loved me ; but the impossibility of our union soon chaced the delightful vision which, for a few moments, I had indulged ; and I awoke to sober reflec¬ tion and to real misery. u Lady Diana had for some time been menaced with an attack of the gout, and it had rendered her unusually peev¬ ish ; she began to lay aside the cere¬ monious politeness with which she had at first treated me, and at times she be¬ haved with a degree of capricious rude- »ess that hurt me inconceivably. Mr. Pembroke saw and sympathized in my sufferings ; and one day that he had witnessed her treating me with more than usual severity^ he abruptly left the room. I saw by tbe change in his countenance, and the glance of disdain which he cast at her ladyship, how feelingly sensible he was of her insolent tyranny. ,
118 (C In the evening I received from him a letter, which contained an avowal of his passion in the most delicate and respectful terms ; he lamented the rea¬ sons that prevented his offering me his hand immediately, but would í conde¬ scend (he said) to promise him mine, his uncle was far advanced in life, and it was probable that a short time would enable him to make me his in the face of the world ; until then I would, he hoped (if I accepted bis proposals), allow him the happiness of placing me far above the tyranny of Lady Diana, which must, he,knew, be utterly in¬ supportable to my spirit. " The momentary transport which this letter gave me, was perhaps the great¬ est I have ever experienced ; it gratified equally my love and my pride, though tbe latter induced rne positively to re¬ fuse placing myself under any pecuniary obligations to him. I did not, how¬ ever, hesitate to acknowledge my pre¬ dilection for him ; but while I promised
119
him my hand at the death of his uncle, I steadily refused to leave the protec¬ tion of his aunt. I was now, I thought, possessed of a talisman, that would ena¬ ble me to bear with patience her ill humour, and I could not think of a state of dependance upon Pembroke, dear as my heart whispered he was to me, u In his answer Mr. Pembroke thanked me with transport for my acquies* cence with the first part of his wish, but be remonstrated with warmth against my continuance with Lady Diana. -1 was, however, firm in my determination ; most happy would it have been for me if I could have kept it ; but this her ladyship's temper rendered impossible; and, spite of my reluctance to leave her house, I was compelled to seek another asylum. " Percival now insisted so warmly upon the right he had, as my affianced husband, to provide for me, that I con¬ futed to remove to a small retired ha-
1120
bitation in the environs of London, which he had fitted up for me in a style of simple elegance. I was indeed the more readily induced to agree to this plan, because Lord Robert, who had been for some time Ín a declining state of health, grew daily worse, and his reco¬ very was considered impossible. Mr. Pembroke now visited me when¬ ever he could leave his uncle; and for a short period I tasted the purest hap¬ piness. At first, indeed, I felt the auk- wardness of my situation, bvt the uni¬ form respect and tenderness with which he treated me, soon banished every uneasy sensation, and left no room i u røy heart for aught but love and confi¬ dence; that heart which, previous to my knowledge of Percival, had appeared shut to every human being, now ex¬ panded with hope and delight; my mind recovered its tone, and cheerful¬ ness again spai kled in my eyes, and decked my countenance with smiles. " Your lordship will excuse me if I
131
pass over the circumstances of my un* doing'; suffice it to say, that I had no cause to reproach Percival ; there was not, I firmly believe, the least intention on his part of seduction. One un¬ guarded moment plunged us both into guilt, and robbed me of peace for ever. ' c Pembroke vehementlv insisted .ι upon marrying me immediately,but I as positively refused. I well knew that, should our marriage he discovered, it must prove his utter ruin; and I had too high an opinion of his honour, to doubt his making me his wife the mo¬ ment he could do so with safety. " By arguments that were more spe¬ cious than solid, he endeavoured to reconcile me to the past, and most so¬ lemnly did he invoke the Almighty to witness his intention to make me every reparation in his power. I cannot without shuddering recollect the mo¬ ment in which he imprecated Heaven's vengeance on his head, if ever he de¬ serted me. Unhappy man î may that vol. п. a
122
power, whose sacred name he so dread¬ fully prophaned, forgive you as sin¬ cerely as I do. "Accident discovered to Lord Robert that Pembroke visited me ; be w r rote to acquaint me with this circumstance, and to say, that for some few days he feared he could not see me ; but he besought me to keep up my spirits, and to rely upon him ; he also begged that I would write to him immediately. " This intelligence terrified me. í dreaded that Lord Robert mii;ht insist upon bis nephew's giving me up, and, in case of his refusal, might proceed to the greatest extremities. I determined to leave my house directly, and as I thought that I should be more likely to remain concealed in an obscure lodging in London, I took those in which you first saw me, and immediately apprised Pembroke of what I had done, and my reasons for it. When I came here, I found I had a new cause of uneasiness. Pembroke had sent me bank bills to a
123
considerable amount, and I thought that I had placed the pocket-book that contained them amongst my clothes ; but when I unpacked them, I found I had not done so. I went immediately to the house I had just quitted, but my search was vain; the money wus irre¬ coverably gone. (i A few guineas was all that í possessed; but the vexation that this circumstance gave me, soon gave place to a far deeper grief. Day after day passed, and I heard nothing of Mr, Pembroke. I wrote, but in vain; and I was nearly distracted from an idea, tbat illness might probably occasion his absence. Every rapat the door, every coach that I heard stop, caused my heart to throb with a painful violence, known only to the victims of suspense; and when nearly a month had passed away, I thought I should have lost my reason. " One of the candidates for the borough (ï %
124
of-------, was related to Lord Robert Douglas, and was I knew r on terms of the strictest friendship with Pembroke. I thought it probable that, in compli¬ ment to his friend Percival, he might be on the hustings, and I dressed myself as plainly as I could the morning I first saw you, and ventured to Coven t - Garden, in the hope of seeing him. To your lordship's humanity I probably owe my life; but bitterly did I regret your having preserved it, when í saw by the morning paper, on my return home, that Lord Robert and Pembroke bad that day quitted England for Spain. Scarcely could I believe my senses, that Pembroke could thus abandon me; but I was soon convinced that it was the case. I caused enquiry to be made, and found that the paragraph was in¬ deed true. Your lordship knows the rt»?t/* Ellen ceased, and the count thanked her. Though her narrative had severely
125
mortified him, he did not suffer his chagrin to be visible to her ; but the manner in which she had spoken of Pembroke convinced him, that her lover's hold on her heart was as strong as it had ever been, and but for the circumstance of her pregnancy, he would, in all probability, have broken off the connexion ; but this incident gave her a consequence with him, that she would not otherwise have had. A play was amongst the few amuse¬ ments of which Ellen was fond, and one morning she expressed a wish to see Hamlet, which was to be performed that evening. Montalva knew nothing òf the piece, but he offered to accom¬ pany her, and they accordingly went. Ellen, whose whole attention was given to the performance, did not perceive the effect it had upon the count, whose conscience was sensibly touched. The remorse that had so long tormented him had slumbered for a little, but the impressive language of our divine bard,
isti
aided hy the magic of Rembte's acting, brought his crime fresh to his memory. and he could almost have fancied he beheld the dying D'Rosonio ; he sat with his eyes rivetted to the stage ; but when Hamlet repeated the speech in which are these lines : .-----,—--------------- 1 havo heard, That guilty creatures, sitting at a play» Have, by the very cunning of the scene, Been struck so to the soul» that presently They have proclaim' d their malefaction!*. He couid bear it no longer, but starting <ip, complained of illness, and Ellen, who was alarmed at the alteration visi¬ ble in his countenance, hurried home with him immediately. During their drive, Montalva was silent ; but he frequently sighed deeply, and when Ellen, in the gentlest accents, inquired whether he felt himself better, he replied in the negative. Though he was in general temperate, he drank
127
freely of Madeira as soon as they reached home, in the hope that the potency of the wine would banish reflection, and enable him to obtain some rest; but he was disappointed; for he never closed his eyes, and tbe morning found him unrefreshed, and a prey to fever. For some days his behaviour was so gloomy and strange, that Ellen won¬ dered what had affected him, and as she knew that he spent some of his time at a gaming-house, she feared that he had probably injured his fortune by play ; but in truth, though he often lounged there, he had never, till after the night on which his conscience wa so dreadfully awakened, played but for small sums; from tbat time his mind was iu so perturbed a state, that he hoped to alleviate the torments he suf¬ fered by plunging into the vortex of deep play. This p'an, in some degree, succeed¬ ed. The Neapolitans are fond of gam-
128 ing, and Montalva had formerly been much addicted to it. His success was wonderful ; night after night he rose from table a winner, and in a very short time he had realised a considera¬ ble sum.
129
CHAP. VII.
One riufit two gentlemen entered, and placed themselves near the count. " I think it will be madness (said one to the othei), for though the sum in question is too small to be of actual service, yet in what a predicament will the loss of it place you." u It is now, no time to deliberate (replied the other) ; it is wholly insuffi¬ cient, and the loss of it cannot make me more wretched than I am; b> t should I succeed, what happiness awaits me!" This conversation passed io a low G 5
130
tone, but the count, who was particu¬ larly attentive to it, heard it distinctly. The gentleman soon after placed him- seif at one of the tables; he threw, and was successful, liever did Mon¬ talva behold anxiety so strongly de¬ picted as in the countenance of this young and interesting man ; he did not appear more than twenty, and his features were strikingly handsome and expressive. For nearly an hour his success was uniform ; at the end of that time his antagonist declined play- imjany more, and the count challenged him. The stranger readilly accepted his offer, and for a short time he con* tinued to win ; hut Montai va's usual good fortune prevailed, till he had stripped the young man not only of all his gains, but a sum besides. From the time he began to lose, his countenance had gradually changed from the expression of delight that it had worn while he was winning, to an
131
anxiety that was succeeded by the deepest despair. " I will play no more" (said he¿ rising abruptly). " 1 am willing to give you your re¬ venge at any time, sir" (cried the count). " I shall not trouble you (replied he) ; I shall never play again/* There was something in his tone, rather than tbe words, that struck Montalva with an idea that he medi¬ tated suicide ; and when he left the room, the count followed him. The gentleman who had accompanied him to the gaming-house, had been gone a considerable time, and he hurried for¬ ward alone, with a degree of speed that almost mocked the counťs efforts to keep up with him. He continued walking at this pace till he reached Buckingham-gate, through which he entered the Park; he walked a few paces farther, and then made a full stop» For some moments his gestures.
132
betrayed the greatest agitation, and heavy sighs burst from bis bosom. On a sudden he threw himself on his knees, and appeared to pray with uncommon fervency; he then rose, and taking a pistol from his pocket, he exclaimed aloud, t( Oh í may Heaven forgive me/' He grasped the pistol with an unsteady hand, and at that moment Montalva rushed forward, and seized his arm. i€ Rash man î (cried the count) what would you do r'* Astonishment rendered the young man motionless for a few seconds ; but he speedily recovered himself. " You have but delayed, not prevented my purpose (cried he). I must die, for never will I face the open infamy that awaits me if I live/* The moon shone uncommonly bright, and the agitation, tlie deep distress, that was viribie in the young man'*« counte¬ nance, created a sentiment of pity in the heart of Montalva ; it was the first
133
time he had ever felt interested for a fellow being; for to the feelings of pity and benevolence he had hitherto been a stranger. " Tell me (cried he), is it the loss you have this night sustained, that forces you to this dreadful determination ?" (t It is (replied the young man); the small sum I had in my possession was risked in the hope of wmning enough to extricate me from the difficulties into which credulity a id fa be friendship have plunged me, 1 had nearly gained the sum I \ anted when you became my opponent ; your good fortune prevailed,, and I saw myself stripped of ah." Ci Well (cried the count), taking out his pocket-book, this loss shall not drive you to despair; I wi I return your money, and if the additional sum i'* not a very large one, you shall have it too." The sudden transition from misery to happiness was more than the stran-, ger could bear ; he staggered, turned
IM
pale, and but for the support of Mon¬ talva's arm, would have fallen to the ground ; when he could speak, he ex¬ pressed his gratitude with an incoherent fervour, that proved his sincerity ; he declined, however, taking the money till he had explained the particulars of his situation, and as the count, wben he was out late, usually slept at a hotel, he asked the young man to accompany him, and they walked to the Hum- mums. Montalva made the stranger recruit his spirits with some Madeira, before he would suffer him to relate the follow-* ing tale. " My name is Henry Villars, and, my father was once looked on as one of the first merchants in London, and no man was ever better calculated to sup¬ port with credit the character of a British merchant ; open, benevolent, and sincere, of known probity, and ac- kuottle Iged skill in business, hischarac·* ter was respected by all ranks, and his
135
credit was unbounded. By one of those vicissitudes, to which commercial men are liable, he saw himself stript of wealth ; but friends and credit he thought yet remained ; he was mis¬ taken, he had hitherto seen the world only on one side, and he suspected not that it had another ; that there were men, malignant enough to exult in his downfal and that even those whom he had saved from beggary, could, with¬ out the smallest uneasiness, behold him reduced to it. He applied to a man to whom he had been a most liberal bene¬ factor, to lend him five thousand pounds, he thought not of soliciting this loan as a favour, he asked it as an act of friendship, which he supposed Mr. Clementson would be happy in having the power to show ; I have fre¬ quently heard him mention the manner in which it was refused. " * 1 am really very sorry, Mr. Villars, (Mr was an appellation rarely used between the friends), that it is not in
ľ 6
my power at present to serve you, I assure you there is no one whom í would so willingly oblige, but you can't be at a lo^s for so small a sum, you have ma^y friends who will doubt¬ less be happy to come forward on this occasion/ " My father dia hi ned to reply to this speech, which nevertheless cut him to the heart; thee was not one of his friends on whom he had so firm a re¬ liance, as the man whom he had just proved to be fake and hollow ; neces¬ sity, however, urged him to try others, but, alas î he met with ingratitude and disappointment everywhere. u He determined to call his creditors together, to give up the remnant of his all amongst them, and then to seek a subsistence at a distance from London. Ihe morning before the meeting of the creditors, he was told that Mr. Thornton wanted to see him ; he would gladly have dispensed wiih this gentleman's visit í Mr, Thornton was. a merchant,
137
he was a man just in his dealings, but parsimonious in the extreme. fť c He comes (thought my father), to exult in my misfortunes, but he shall at least see that I can bear them like a man ;* and he ordered the servant to admit him. " < Good morning to you, Mr. Villars, (said the old man, entering with an air of unusual respect, for his manners were blunt, and unpolished.) I am sorry to find that you have met with those misfortunes to which we are all Hable, and 1 came to offer you my services.' " My father thanked him with no small degree of surprise, but said he had no occasion to trouble him ; Mr. Thornton, however, would not take this answer. " e Look'ee, Mr. Villars (cried he), I can assist you without injury to myself, and I am determined that I will do it, so no compliments, but let us proceed like men of business/
138
*' i How happens it (said my father), that y ou, with whom I never was on terms of friendship, or even intimacy, should thus generously step forward at a time when I find myself deserted by all who ought to serve me/ " Mr. Thornton pressed his hand, * you are an honest man, sinking under the pressure of unmerited calamity, and that is' enough for me* (cried be). " The generosity of this eccentric, but worthy man, was the means of enabling mý father to settle his affairs ; he paid his creditors twenty shillings in the pound, and in a short time saw him¬ self clear with his friend Thornton, and in possession of a sum that would be a moderate independence for the rest of his days. ' I will not tempt my fortune farther (said he), and he retired from business. He was rather advanced in life, and had no thoughts of marrying, but the person and dis¬ position of my mother, induced him
139 to enter a state, in which he experienc¬ ed the greatest happiness. " I was their only child, and at a very early age I showed a strong disposition to a life of commerce; in compliance with my earnest wishes, I was placed with Mr. Denton, a gentleman of eminence in the line, and with him I still am. " Mr. Denton has the strongest confi¬ dence in me, and until a few days since, it was not ill placed, but in an unfor¬ tunate moment, I was prevailed upon to lend to a gentleman whom I had known from infancy, a large sum that I had in my hands of Mr. Denton's, he solemnly promised to return it with¬ in a few hours, and as I knew that it would essentially serve him, I thought not of the imprudence of which I was guilty. Oh, sir! what were n y feelings, when I learned the next morning, that the villain had absconded ; ruin and infamy stared me in the face, and what was worse than all, î should bring
140
disgrace upon the grey hairs of my beloved father. In a moment of de¬ spair, I formed the desperate resolution of trying my fortune at the gaming table, and though the hope of winning «uch a sum appeared almost chimerical, yet, I had nearly realized it, when my reverse of fortune, tempted me to the rash act which you prevented/' Montalva presented him with the money, and added to it the sum he wmtedy which was not a large one ; he interrupted Villars's acknowledgments, by expressing a wish to take some rest, and giving Henry his address, they re¬ tired to separate apartments. It was the first time in Montalva's whole life that he had ever done what might be termed a disinterested good ac¬ tion, and oppressed as his conscience was with a load of guilt, he enjoyed for some moments the pleasure of having relieved a fellow creature from despair ; but the worm that never dies, ьооп dissipated the pleasing reflections that
141
he indulged, and he relapsed into those nightly horrors that rendered existence burthensome to him. The time of Ellen's accouchement approached, and Montalva saw with concern that she suffered a great deal, and apparently more in her mind than in her health ; the physician who at¬ tended her, was of opinion that it would be wrong for her to suckle her child, and Montalva insisted so strenu¬ ously upon her giving it to the care of a nurse, that she reluctantly agreed ; but her acquiescence with his wishes appeared to render her very unhappy, and for some days she suffered under the most dreadful depression of spirits. * c My dear Ellen (cried the count to berone evening), you will injure your¬ self, and the infant, by the indulgence of this melancholy ; let me beg of you to lay it aside, what cause can you have for sorrow ?" " My situation, my lord (replied she), makes me serious. ^Heaven only
142
knows how I shall bear the approaching trial; but whatever may happen to me, may ï hope that you will he indeed a father to------", she stopped, for she could not proceed, so excessively was she agitated. " What part of my conduct (cried the count, sternly), makes you think me such a monster of inhumanity, as to behave unkindly to my own off¬ spring ?" He was proceeding, when Ellen burst into tears. " Pardon me, my lord (said she), I meant not to offend you, but this weakness that hangs upon my spirits, renders me almost childish ; and though I have not a doubt of your kindness to the babe, should it survive, yet, I would wish to be indulged with a so¬ lemn promise from your own lips, tbat whatever happens to me, you will protect and provide for it." " Doubt it not (replied the count), may Heaven desert me, when I riesert, or neglect the infant/* A thought of
143
Valeria at this moment crossed his mind, and forced a sigh from his bosom. His promise seemed to tranquillize the spirits of Ellen, and she became more cheerful ; her health amended w 7 ith her spirits, but in going down stairs one day,vhen the w r asin the seventh month of her pregnancy, her foot slipped, and she was prematurely delivered of a fine boy. The infant, notwithstanding the circumstance of its birth, throve amaz¬ ingly ; and the mother, who recovered very fast, was well enough to suckle it herself: a task she fulfilled with delight. The pleasure that Montana would have taken in seeing her execute the office of a nurse, was poisoned by more than one bitter retrospect. Often did the recollection of, Valeria's tears, and dis¬ traction when he tore her infant from her arms, give a pang to his heart, while he witnessed the fond caresses which Ellen bestowed upon the little Stephano ; and frequently while he gazed with delight upon the child, who was
144
indeed a lovely boy, the remembrance of the unhappy D'Rosonio, and the innocent wronged Isabel, dashed the cup of happiness with gall, and made him in bitterness of heart curse the fatal action that had poisoned his life. His feelings were one night roused to agony hy a conversation that took place in a coffee-house, where he some¬ times went. A few weeks before, two men of rank and fortune had fought a duel, one had fallen, and as it was sur¬ mised not fairly ; his antagonist had fled, but tormented by the reproaches of his conscience, he had returned and surrendered himself to justice : a gentle¬ man who was an intimate friend of the deceased, was relating the particulars of the. duel, a»* the count entered. u Poor Sydenham (cried he) ; his noble nature was above suspicion, he thought not of the villainous hands into whieb he had fallen, and he was utterly unconscious of the long cherished pique which Wilberforce harboured against
145
him ; the dispute which was on a poli¬ tica! subject, was of so trivial a nature that Sydenham would have thought no more about it ; but to the villain Wil- berforce, it presented an opportunity to execute his vile design ; he sent for Sydenham, and desired satisfaction ; the other was willing to accommodate the matter, but this, Wilberforce would not hear of, and Sydenham consented to meet him the next day. ťí f It is now too late (said Wilber¬ force), to trouble any of my friends ? nor do I think a second necessary ; you, Mr. Sydenham, will do as you please/ " ' If you do not wish for a second, neither do I (replied Sydenham) : this was all Wilberforce wanted. They met early the next morning; and before Sydenham was prepared to receive his antagonist's fire, a ball from Wilber- force's pistol, entered his lieart ; he fell, and expired without a groan." (i The viilain had now gained his long sought revenge ; and he resolved on in- VOL, il h
14б
stant flight. No soul had witnessed the death of Sydenham, and he thought that there was no possibility of the manner of it ever being discovered ; an affair of honour, as it is falsely termed, though it may exile a man from his native country, does not stamp him with the guilt of murder, and happy in the secrecy with which he had exe¬ cuted his diabolical purpose, be thought little of being compelled to quit Eng¬ land. " But he speedily found tbat the com¬ pletion of his crime was but the be¬ ginning of horrors that were to ter¬ minate only with his existence ; for he acknowledges, taat from the moment Sydenham fell, he has never known peace. He reached the place of his destination in safety, but the horrors of his mind were inconceivable ; the mur¬ dered Sydenham was for ever before him, antl the agonies he endured, had almost drove him to suicide, when the idea of giving himself up to justice
147
occurred lo him, and he eagerly sought an ignominious death, as a refuge from the torments of conscience/' ŕí Unhappy man (cried a gentleman present), let us hope that his punish¬ ment will be only in this world, he is indeed a striking proof of the power of conscience ; nor can we wonder at it, when we consider the heinousness of his crime ; since, depraved as human nature is, there are, I hope, very, very few, whom any temptation could induce to be guilty of cool deliberate murder : what think you, sir?** (continued he, turning to Montalva). It was with difficulty the count could reply, for the question shook his evevy nerve, and spite of his efforts to com¬ pose and colîect himself, his agitation was visible; it passed, however, for ill¬ ness, aad on that pretence he left the room as soon as he could. " What, (cried he, mentally, when he was alone), am I never again to taste of peace ? Is every object to remind me of my h 2
148
crime? by wb* f fatality i* it that this accursed de j d is for ever before me ? oh ! would to Heaven that it was possible to recai the past." Tîıe endearing attentions of Ellen, and the smiles of his infant, were for some time lost upon Montalva; Henry Villars had called upon him, but the transient feeling of pity which that young man had excited, was over, and the count did not ask him to repeat his visit. The birth of her child had effected a material change in the temper of Ellen ; there were indeed times when she sunk into a fit of melancholy musing, but in general, she was more cheerful than the count had ever seen lier, and the infant was to her a perpe¬ tual source of delight. α I cannot conceive (said she one diiy to Montalva), how any human being can negltrt an infant to whom th y have given life ; when I hang over the cradle of шу child, and see
149
his eyes the moment they are opened fixed upon me, when he smiles and holds out his little arms, as if he already began to notice, and to love me, how happy do I feel, I am convinced that the loss of life, would be э thousand times preferable to the loss of my Stephano, and that I should sooner forgive an attempt to deprive me of it, than to deprive me of him." " What occasion is there for this declaration ? (cried Montalva, sternly), you are not about to be deprived of him." α No ; Heaven Ьр praised (replied she), I have nothing of that sort to dread, but these reflections came into my head I believe from reading a pretty and affecting French tale, in which the distraction, and subsequent death of a mother deprived of her infant, is de·* scribed in the liveliest colours/' Montalva half-uttered, half-sup¬ pressed the execration that was upon the point of bursting from his lips, and
150
hastily Jeft the room ; that moment had indeed amply avenged the wrongs of the unfortunate Valeria, conscience pre¬ sented her to him as she was when he first beheld her ; her soft cheek, glow¬ ing with the rich tints of health, her mild blue eyes, now sparkling with animation, now shooting through their long and silken lashes, glances, that spoke a heart the seat of innocence and peace. The voice of his internal monitor reversed the picture, and he saw her pale, emaciated, and a prey to melancholy ; her eye robbed of its lus¬ tre, her cheek of its bloom, and her form of all those soft and attractive graces that had once rendered her the delight of every eye, and the wbh of every heait: imagination carried the picture farther, and he shuddered as he beheld his victim on the bed of death ; her meek and uncomplaining spirit, awaiting with patience the nio^ ment that was to release her from her sufferings, and anxious only for the
151
fate of her child ; " and this (exclaimed he, franticly), this was my work ï Oh, Valeria T wronged, lost, innocent, could thy meek spirit look down from Heaven, thou wouidst pity even the wretch that destroyed thee/* The emotion that Montalva betrayed^ filled Ellen with surprise, but wholly ignorant of the former events of his life, she had no suspicion of its real cause ; but imputed it to some embarrassment of his affairs, of which he did not chuse to make her the confident. Time, though it could not stifffe the remorse of Montalva, vet, enabled him in some degree to overcome the violent motions which circumstances had led him to give way to. Nearly three years had passed from the birth of his son, and every day rendered him more doatingly fond of the child ; he had frequently expressed a wish to return to Naples, and take Ellen and Stephano with him, but Miss Dudley had always appeared so averse to this
152
measure that he never pressed it ; his life during these years had been marked with no particular incident ; he formed no connexions, and mixed with no other society than such as coffee-houses or taverns afforded him ; he spent the most part of his time with Ellen and his child ; to the former indeed he was attached solely by his regard for the latter ; the inclination he had at first felt for her person was long since over ; and of real and sincere love, the heart of Montalva was utterly incapable. Ellen Dudley, notwithstanding her fall from virtue, was formed for something better than to be the mere amusement of any man's idle hours ; but her talents, her virtues, and her graces were regarded by Montalva with indif¬ ference ; he was indeed incapable of appreciating them as they deserved. The count saw a small villa in a ro¬ mantic situation, a few miles from the capital, which pleased him, and as it was advertised to be sold, he purchased
153
it ; he went there for a few days to give orders about some repairs, and Ellen and her son remained in London. On Montalva's return to town, he went immediately to her house. What was his astonishment to find it shut up, and to learn in the neighbourhood that she had left it some days back. " Where was she gone?" he impatiently asked the person who informed him of her departure, but the w r oman could not tell him. Miss (or as she was called Mrs.) Dudley had discharged her ser¬ vants, and departed with her son in a post-chaise, but what road they took no one could tell. Montalva drove im¬ mediately to the hotel that he frequent¬ ed when iu London, in the hope of finding there some explanation of this strange step ; it was indeed explained by the following packet, which awaited his arrival.
H 3
154
тят&ятЕщщшЕшшн&ятшваттщшхм
CHAP. VIII.
u By the time you receive this, my lord, I shall be many miles distant from London, nor shall we, 1 hope, ever meet again. " I have been guilty of a cruel and infamous deception, for which I am at length punished, and for which my conscience has a thousand times re¬ proached me ; a deception which you can never pardon, but which I am com¬ pelled to reveal to you. In a short time after I had reason to suppose myself deserted, 1 feared that 1 was with child. Oh ' what words can paint the horrors of my mind. Destitute as I was, X
155
might, by some honest means, have gained a subsistence ; but if my fears were true, how was I to provide for my infant ? how was 1 to obtain a sufficient sum even to defray the expences of a certain time? for a 'moment the idea of suicide presented itself. It will be mercy, thought 1, to the unborn wretch, to take it from a world where I mvself have met with none î Yet when I re¬ flected upon the double crime I was about to commit, I shrunk with hor¬ ror from my dreadful purpose. Ybu had made me the most liberal proposals, which I had, as you know, rejected ; for however distressed, however forlorn. I miţdit be, I was far above being bribed into the prostitution of my person ; that was, as 1 conceived, the lowest state of degradation to which any human being could fall, and it was one that í was determined m ver to submit to. In the first moments of despair, I chanced to meet with vour letter, which I had thrown carelessly into a drawer. ¿
256
those proposals which I had thought so little of, when they were made, now struck me as affording a means of pro¬ viding for the infant ; yet I call Heaven to witness, that at that time I had no thought of imposing it upon you as yours. I had indeed no settled plan ; but I was destitute of every means to support myself or the fruit of my in¬ discretion, and I hastily resolved to ac¬ cept your lordship's offer. " When I had done so, I hoped that you would perform your promise of rendering me independant ; but you seemed to have forgotten it ; and tho* you were liberal to exce&s, I knew not how long your liberality would conti¬ nue. A hundred times the acknowledg¬ ment of my situation was upon my lips, and as often did the coldness, I may say, sternness of your manners repress it. In a short time î saw, or fanned I saw, that you were becoming indif¬ ferent to me ; want and desertion again stared me in the face, and inspired the
157
idea of the deception which I so suc¬ cessfully practised ; I do not ask your forgiveness, my lord, for I feel that I deserve it not. ei The pleasure that you expressed when you learned my situation ; the attentions that you paid me, and your doating fondness for my boy, whom, at your desire, I named after yourself, were bitter stings to my heart; but the die was ca*-t, and to confers ťie truth could now be attended only with ruin to myself. I endeavoured to make my mind easy, by the reflection that I heard you say, you had no near relations to inherit your foitunc, and that a decep¬ tion which was **> materially serviceable to me and my babe, was not an actual injury to any one ebe. This sophistry had not, however, the effect of quiet¬ ing my mind; and I can truly say, that I never saw you caress the child with¬ out uneasiness. " But deception, sooner or latter, metts with that punishment which is its
158
just reward. You have often noticed Stephanos extreme likeness tome. One day that the servant had the child in the Park, a gentleman setm^d struck with his beauty, and enquired the name of his parenis. f He is Mrs. Dudley's son, sir* (was the reply of his maid), 'Dudley? (repe ited he), but it cannot be, and yet 1 never saw so strong a likeness. Tell me, does he resemble liis mother ?' The wo¬ man's answer in the affirmative, ap¬ peared to agitate him very much, and he enquired where I lived, which the servant made no difficulty in informing him of. ' r This took place two day* before that on which you left town, and the very morning of your departure, as I stood fur a mommt at the drawing room win- dow, I saw Mr. Pembroke on the op¬ ponile side of the streit, he wa» walk¬ ing slowly, and had his eyes fixed upon the window where I stood. АЦ most doubting lhe evidence of my sen-
ï59
ses, f threw up the sash ; he saw me, and darting across, gained admittance to me in a moment. 6i i Ellen (exclaimed he), base, faith¬ less, perjured woman î spite of the pains you have taken to avoid me, I have at last an opportunity to upbraid you with your perfidy/ What пи re he would have added, was prevented by mv falling senseless at his feet. When I recovered, an explanation took p!ace, and I learned that we were the victims of a deep laid plot. Lord Robert had intercepted my letter, in which I stated to Percival the reasons why I had left my house. This letter his lordship destroyed, and substituted a forged one in its place; the contents of wl ich as¬ tonished Percival ; they were, that I was completely tired of the recluse life I led, and as there was no imme¬ diate prospect of changing it, without invidvmg him in the most unpleasant circumstances, 1 had determined to ac-
ϊβο
cept the offer of a man of immense for. tune, and accompany him abroad. Ci The hand was so good an imita¬ tion of mine, that Pembroke could scarcely doubt of its being my writing, and wheu he found that I had left my house, he execrated me as the most perfidious of beings. A paragraph that appeared in one of the morning pa¬ pers and was pointed out to him by hb uncle, v\a*, he thjught, a confirma¬ tion of my supposed infidelity ; it an¬ nounced tlie dt pai ture of tbe Honour¬ able Mr Danvers, for Ameri« a, and mentioned, that he had prevailed upon a young and lovely woman to accom¬ pany him as his chère amie. Pembroke suffered not less than myself from this plan that severed us, and he gladly ac¬ cepted his uncle's invitation to accom¬ pany him to Spain ; where, in two year-. Lord Robert ílied. Percival bad been so ne months in England, and he had diligently sought me at every place
16*1
of public amusement, but in vain, when at the moment that he least ex~ pected it, chance brought about our meeting. " This explanation overwhelmed me with unhappiness; and bitterly did I now regret the moment in which I had accepted your proposals, to deprive Pembroke of his child, was not to be thought of; for myself, my future plan is fixed in the most humble retirement; and equally distant from the man whom I loved, and him whom I had injured, I purpose to wear out my fu¬ ture days ; for every sentiment of pride and delicacy, forbade my listening to Percival' s generous offer to forget the past. " And now, my lord, farewel for ever, Heaven only knows how deeply I regret the pain, which I am sensible this discovery will cause you ; may you in a more pure and fortunate connec¬ tion, lose those bitter reflections, which my duplicity will occasion you. Be-
1б2
lieve me, that to know you had recover¬ ed that peace which i can never again hope to taste, would be a cordial to the heart of " Ellen Dudley." The perusal of this letter, nearly un- fcettled the reason of the wretched Mon¬ talva ; driven almost to frenzy, by re¬ morse and despair, the affection which he felt for the little Stephano was the sole sweetener of his existence; from his supposed child must be derived the only comfort that he could promise himself in this world, and to the next the guilty and unhappy man dared not look. At one moment, he was inclin¬ ed to suppose that Stephano was in¬ deed his son, and that bilen deprived him of the child, merely to conciliate the favour of her former lover; the next instant he recollected the circum¬ stances of the birth of the child, Ellen's lowness or spirits, and the solemn man¬ ner in which she had implored him to
1бЗ
be a father to her child ; these circum¬ stances convinced him that her tale was indeed true, and that the child he had so fondly cherished as his own, was Pembroke's. u The justice of Heaven pursues me, (thought he), and all efforts to evade it are vain : I will return to Naples, and shut myself for ever in the Castle de Rosonio, I will no longer seek, hy mix¬ ing with society, to regain that peace, which it is my lot never more to taste/ This resolution he determined to put immediately in practice; but a chance meeting with the Marquis de Santenos, delayed his doing so for a few days. The marquis expressed the liveliest joy at seeing him, and made him many friendly reproaches for not deli vering his letter of introdut tion to Lord Cleri- monl. Ci You have sufíered much, my poor friend (^aid de Santenos, in a tone of com m isserai ion), you are so altered as scarcely to be known, but
1б4
the society and attentions of your friends, will, I trust, restore you to your former self/' The kind intentions of the amiable marquis were however of no avail : the count obstinately persisted in return¬ ing to Naples within a few days. De Santenos was now easier in his mind, and his spirits were better: he had visited England, accompanied by the marchioness on the occasion of the nup¬ tials of Lord Clerimont, with the lady to whom he had been so long attached \ Montalva cotud not refusé ine request of the marquis, to suffer himself to be introduced to Lord Clerimont, but the sight of the pure happiness which that nobleman appeared to enjoy, as well as the recovered peace of his friend De Santenos, and the delight which the marchioness apparently felt, from the felicity of her husband and her friends, was an aggravation of tlie horrors that preyed upon the mind of the count ; he b^de the marquis and his lady an eter-
J65
nal farewel, and quitted the hospitable shores of England for those of his na¬ tive Naples, where he arrived in safety. He hastened forward to his estate, where he found every thing in order ; his return was a cause of regret, rather than joy, to his dependants, who soon found that time had neither meliorated his temper, nor enlarged his benevo¬ lence. While the consciousness of guilt was withering the form, and rending the heart of Montalva, the innocent Isabel, in the solitude of St, Teresa, was daily increasing in goodness and beauty ; she was indeed beloved by the whole con¬ vent, and though Montalva had not expressed a wish that she should ac¬ quire any of the feminine accomplish¬ ments usually taught to the children of people of rank, yet the abbess had her carefully instructed in them, and well did her capacity and diligence re¬ pay the pains bestowed upon her. Soon after Isabel became an inmate of
166
St. Teresa, the Signora Sforza placed her youngest daughter in the convent. Laura was about the age of Isabel, and the childish partiality which they soon discovered for each other, ripened in time into the tenderest friendship. The Signora Sforza, who was passion¬ ately fond of her daughter, soon be¬ came attached to Isabel; and the lady abbess could not refuse her repeated requests, that the young orphan should sometimes accompany Laura in her visits to her mother's castle. The signora was a widow, and of large fortune ; to inherit wliich, she had two daughters and a son, whom she loved with more than maternal fond¬ ness. Julia, the eldest, was lovely in her person, but her haughty and un¬ gentle temper, was a source of uneasi¬ ness to her mother, who had tried every lenient method to reclaim her, but in vain, Laura, both in person and disposition, strongly resembled her mo¬ ther ; graceful, feminine, and interest-
ιβγ
ing, she was formed rather to be loved than admired ; her features were not regularly beautiful, but the sweetness of her countenance, the mild lustre of her full, blue, expressive eyes, was sufficient to disarm the severity of even the cold¬ est critic : and no one ever gazed upon Laura de Sforza without allowing her the meed of beauty. Alberto, the pride and hope of his mother, gave promise even in the dawn of his youth, of every great and noble quality ; he was not indeed free from faults, his temper was haughty and impetuous ; keenly alive to the small¬ est insult, he resented it with the great¬ est asperity: yet, open to conviction, and attentive to the voice of deserved reproof, sullenness, or malignity, had no place in his disposition. His mo¬ ther was not blind to the faults of his temper, but she was aware that they were faults which time would correct, and greatly indeed were they over-ba¬ lanced by his virtues.
i6s
His sister Laura was Alberto's favou rite, and he soon loved Isabel also as a sister. The family of Sforza had free access to Laura, and she scarcely went to the grate to receive her mother or her brother unaccompanied by Isabel. The lady abbess and the signora had been friends from infancy, and she re¬ joiced that her dear child, as she fondly called Isabel, was the distinguished fa¬ vourite o,f the Signora Sforza. u Look at this portrait (said the sig¬ nora one day to the mother of Teresa), ^ and tell me whether you perceive any resemblance between it and any one whom you have seen/' The abbess gazed upon it for some time in silence; at last (she said), if the countenance, though handsome, has an expression of haughtiness, that totally disfigures it; yet, was it not for that circumstance, î should think that iti the soft features of Isabel I could trace a likeness/* " I have thought so frequently (cried
169
the signora) ; the expression of the face indeed is different, but in the features there is a resemblance. You have said, that you know not ought of Isabel's family, and I am ignoraut for whom this portrait was drawn ; but from the mannerin which I became possessed of it, I have reason to believe the original was of rank/' ťí You know (continued she), that I was destined for the veil, and, during my noviciate in the convent of St. Clara, at Rome, a lady young, and of noble ap^, jaranee, applied to the abbess for permission to reside in the convent ; her dignified and elegant manners, as well as the large sum that she offered for her pension, made the holy mother readily grant her re<~ °st. Scarcely ever did I behold a form and face so beauti¬ ful ; but she appeared a prey to the deepest melancholy; and, after a little time, she avowed a resolution of tak¬ ing the veil. I had just entered upon my noviciate when she became an in- VOL. II. i
IfD
'mate of the convent, and everyday in¬ creased my reluctance to a monastic life. I was aware of the arts generally practised by the nuns, to hide from the eyes of the novices thegloomy destiny to which they are about to devote them¬ selves ; but with me those arts were not practised, because, being brought up in the convent from my infancy, and being a destined victim, they thought the trouble was unnecessary, and would, from my knowledge of their artifices, be useless ; but with Maria, as she was named, every stratagem was put in practice that could allure her to become a member of the sisterhood ; she ap¬ peared to receive their caresses and attentions with indifference, but she still persevered in her intention to become a nun. One day I had, for the first time, an opportunity of speaking to her in private, and I resolved not to lose it· ťť * You are about to become our sister, I find' (said I). ťí i Yes* (replied she, without raising
tyi
her eyes, which, as usual, were fixed upon the ground). u < Ah ! (cried I) did you but know the lot which you are voluntarily going to .embrace, I am well convinced you would shrink from it with horror.* I proceeded to paint, in the most ener¬ getic terms, the various miseries of a monastic life, and she heard me with¬ out interruption. :ί ζ I am aware (cried she, when I had concluded), that all you have said is trufe ; but it will not, cannot change my resolution. Never again can I taste of happiness, and in the gloom of a cloister I cannot be more miserable than in the gaietv and bustle of the world/ и с Whatever disappointments you may have metw r ith (cried I), time will perhaps obliterate the remembrance of, and if the world is displeasing to you, why cannot you remain here, and yet preserve the power of returning to the world when you please r* ι 2
172
a She looked up, and I saw that her fine eyes were swimming in tears. tr ( I have been in the world (said she, emphatically), would to Heaven I had never entered it î but never, never can I mix with society again. I thank you, my kind friend, for advice which, I own, might be a means of saving any one but myself from a destiny the most painful. My doom is fixed, and nothing can change it/ " Never before had I beheld such an expression of despair, as marked the features of Maria during this speech, and rr.ost sincerely did I commisserate her sorrow; but delicacy forbade my saying more. I pressed her hand in silence, and left her. " Through the kindness of my aunt, ä ignora Florentini, who saw, and pitied the reluctance with which I submitted to the will of my family, I was res¬ cued from a life of monastic slavery, My generous aunt offered me a daugh¬ ter's portion, and my parents, to my
if'ò
great joy, permitted me to leave the convent. " In some time after my departure, Maria took the veil, and the sisterhood were unanimous in their praises of her piety, and the strictness with which she performed the duties which she had imposed upon herself. Her perseve¬ rance in the austerities of her profes¬ sion, in a short time injured her health, but no intreaties could prevail upon her to relax from her severity. I fre¬ quently visited the convent, and I saw 5 with regret, that Maria grew every day weaker, and more languid ; she always appeared to receive me with pleasure, and I was delighted to find, that her mind grew more tranquil than it had been when I fir.*t knew her· i{ Some time elapsed without my seeing her, and I heard that she was dangerously ill. I hastened to the convent, and the lady abbess informed me tbat the physician thought she had not many days to live, ς She has
174
mentioned you several times, daughter {med she), and 1 think the sight of you will do her good, poor child! Her sufferings have been great, and she ha* borne them in the mobt exemplars manner. Never did I witness, in one so young, such piety, such resignation î She is indeed an honour to our order." *' One of the sibterhood conducted rm to the cell of Maria, who was una¬ ble, from extreme weakness, to leave her bed. On seeing me, she extended her hand, and a faint glow suffused her still lovely countenance. (í ·' I thought you had quite forgot me' (said she, in* a tone ьо hollow that I involuntarily stai ted). I took the hand that she held out to me ; but when I contemplated her pale and emaciated coimtenance, I could not reproes my feelings, and I burst into геагч. c * £ i)o not weep for me (said sne, pressing my hand), my sufferings are near their close. Heaven only knows
ljb
how severe they have been ; but they arc past, and I look forward in humble hope and confidence that my offences are forgiven/ She paused a few mo¬ ments, and then continued : c Perhaps we may not meet again ; let me now thank you for that sympathy, which, though it has not been acknowledged, has been felt. When I entered this house, I thought my heart was shut against every human being; your kind¬ ness taught it once more to throb with gratitude towards a fellow creature. I reviewed my own conduct; the painful reflection burst in upon me, that all I suffered was my own fault. The natu¬ ral pride of my character began to give way to the humiliating consciousness of error; yet the passion which made me fly from society, and which I still vainly endeavoured to subdue, preyed upon my heart; and even now it prevents my raising, as I ought, my whole soul to Heaven ; but that Almighty Being, who expects not perfection from his creatures,
ï7b'
will, I trust, look down with an eye oí pardon on the weak and erring being, who humbly supplicates that mercy, which she is conscious she has not de¬ served/ i( ( Pardon me, dearest Maria (cried I), 3 r ou judge yourself too severely; surely whatever errors you might have fallen into, your penitence must have more than expiated. Tranquillise your mind then, my friend, and if there is yet a ray of hope, if, as I would fain flatter myself your recovery is yet possibly, your future days may yet be happy/ " c Hope (said she) is over ; over did I say ? no, my hope, my wish is death. Oh ! I fee] that life to me would be misery; but as I may not see you again, let me undeceive you in one point. I am free from what the world calls crime; I have done nothing to dishonour myself, or the noble family from which I sprung. From an un¬ happy want of stability in my charac¬ ter, the fatal error that poisoned my
47
life has arisen. Bitterly, oh! how bit¬ terly, has it been expiated/ " She drew from beneath her pillow a case, from which she took this minia. ture. e I have promised (said she) never to part with this while I exist, and my word shall be religiously kept s though the motives that influenced me to make that promise have long since ceased. After my death, I would wish / it to be yours; it is the portrait of a man whom I once thought I loved, and while the delusion lasted, it was very dear to me ; but it has long, long been as odious to my sight, as it was formei ly pkasing, and my promise solemnly given to keep it has been the only reason why I have done so/ iC She stopped, apparently exhaust¬ ed, and, after sitting with her for some time, I took my leave. Poor Maria î she was indeed a prophet, for we met no more. That night she ex¬ pired; and oh! may my last moments be like hers. She met death with a ι Л
iye
pious fortitude, that robbed it of its hor¬ rors, and her spirit appeared impatient to burst its frail tenement, and soar to a better worid. " The portrait was, at her request, delivered to me, and I have ever since carefully preserved it. Its resemblance to Isabel struck me, but 1 thought that might have been only fancy, till you agreed with me in opinion/' " I am sorry that you know not the name of the original (cried the abbess), * for I own that I wish to penetrate the mystery of Isabeľs birth; not from idle curiosity, but from real interest for the sweet orphan, whom I love as a daughter," " And wefl worthy is she of your affection, (replied the signora). Sweet Isabel ! my heart too adopts thee for its own." *' I do not think (cried the lady abbess), that Isabel, though destined for a religious life, and educated in a convent,* is partial to it ; yet, alas ! sh?
»Гь
will not, I fear, be allowed any other choice. I am convinced, were Isabel at liberty, her heart would prompt her. to remain in the abode of her early years ; but I know she fears the vows· She spoke the other day in terms of en¬ thusiasm of the fortitude with which sister Frances had pronounced them." (C ζ A lire of religious retirement (said I to her), is the choice of sister Frances ; she has lived in the world; she has been disgusted with its vain and empty pleasures. The time she spent. in our convent previous to heiyioviciate, convinced her that here she was likely to find релсе ; and though still young, beautiful, and rich, she quitted the world without a sigh/ Cf * Happy sister Frances ! (exclaimed Isabel). Oh ! how much is she to be envied ; she had the power to chuse her destiny/ " The unconscious emphasis which' the dear orphan laid upon her words, gave me, for the first time, an idea
180
that she disliked a monastic life, and my heart bled for her ; since, alas î if my fears are just, her portion of tem¬ poral happiness will be small." <f She cannot be forced co take the veil (cried the signora) ; and surely her mysterious protector would not be bar¬ barous enough to sacrifice herhappmess. Willingly would I receive her as my third daughter, if he would yield her to me/' " A short time (said the abbess) must decide her destiny ; the Virgin grant that it may be a happy one." The signora joined her friend most heartily in this wish, and they parted,
181
CHAP. IX.
Isabel now approached her sixteenth year, and Montalva had signified to the lady abbess at that age she was to commence her noviciate. ťí In three months Isabel takes the white veil (said the signora, to her daughter Julia, in the presence of Alber¬ to). How is it that there are moments when the mind shrinks from those truths, which it has been accustomed to hear? Alberto Sforza had known for years that Isabel was destined to the veil, he had loved her as a sister, but how he might bear the loss of her so-
182
ciety was a question that he had never asked himself; now, the conviction burst upon him, that she was dearer to his heart than the life-blood that flowed within it. His instant change of countenance caught the signora's at¬ tention, and she tenderly enquired whether he was well ? he answered, yes; and left her that he might ruminate in silence on tlie discovery that he had • : And, why (thought he, when he was alone), why dearest Isabel, should I lose you ? beloved as you are by my mother, surely she will not object to receive you as a daughter, and what objection can be made to your choice by your friend?> ? Friends, they do not deserve the name, for so many years to let a lovely orphan remain unnoticed ; what hearts must they have, but thou wast not formed, sweet Isabel, to whither in the gloom of a convent; thy mild virtues are fitted to adorn a worthier lot ; and oh î how blest, how transcendent!^
183
blest, shall I be, if it is my fate to res¬ cue thee from the one for which thou art designed!" Such were the thoughts and wishes of Alberto ; nor did he hesitate to dis¬ close them to his mother. Signora Sforza had some of the pride of blood, which distinguishes most noble Neapo¬ litans; she loved Isabel, fondly loved her, yet, could she have wished that Alberto"*· choice had fallen elsewhere; but when her son, her beloved son, knelt at her feet and implored her not to destroy the happiness of his life; her pride gave way to her maternal ten¬ derness, and she consented to his espousing Label, if the consent of her protector could be obtained. The sig¬ nora wished Isabel to remain ignorant of their intentions, till the lady abbess should have heard from Montalva, ubo had assumed to her the name of Val¬ dorno. It was now near the time when the abbess expected a remittance, which he always took care punctually to send,
184
and by his messenger, the signora pro¬ posed making known to him her wish to call Isabel by the tender name of daughter. u 1 do not (cried she) think that he will object to such an union for his ward, since he seemed to say that mo¬ tives of prudence influenced Isabel's friends in chusing that lot for her, which you are so anxious to rescue her from; but as it is possible that they may object to her marrying, and as in that case—" " Dearest mother (interrupted Al¬ berto), do not, í beseech you, conjure np so terrible a phantom; you will not çrant my wishes by halve*: ho\* know I that Alberto's hand would he preferred by babel to a monastic lifer mv mo¬ tlier, I beseech you, suffer me but to receive from her own dear lips, a confes¬ sion that I am not i ud liferent to her, and I \\ ill then cheerfully submit to wait any time that you please for this man's approbation/*
18$
ŕ * You arc unreasonable, Alberto 7 ι fsaid the signora), but such is always lhe case. If our wishes are granted in one point, we know not how to restrain them i u any other; I will, myself speak to Isabel, and then if you must plead your own cause, I shall not prevent you." Sforza rapturously thanked his mo¬ ther, who soon after this conversation opened her heart to the b^y abbess. ci I own to you my friend (cried she), that as the last male representative of a noble family, I could have wished that Alberto's choice, had fallen elsewdicre, yet Isabel is very dear to me, but I much fear that there are circumstances attending her birth, which may render the alliance, in the eye of the world, degrading to Alberto; yet, to cross his affections, fixed as they are on Isabel, svould be cruel ; and when I think of her gentleness, her sweetness of temper, and the thousand graces of her mind
İSO'
and person, 1 can neither wonder ar, nor oppose the chioce of my son."' " May every blessing attend their union (said the abbess), and with such a wife as our babel, Sforza must be blessed; I am not surprised at your generosity in consenting to his happi¬ ness; wave but one circumstance, and Isabel is a wife of whom a monarch might be proud." çc True, she is so (replied the sig¬ nora); I meant to have opened the busi¬ ness to her myself, but you, I think, can do it better; there is one thing that I could wish; should my son's pro¬ posals meet with Isabel's approbation, should Alberto know that lier pure and ingenuous heart is his, no power on earth, í am well convinced, could force him to resign her, and you are well aware that, from her peculiar situation, the union of Alberto and herself may be impossible, should this man on whom, I fear, she wholly depends, refuse his consent/ 1
187
* l 1 hope, nay, î think, thatiıe will not," cried the abbess. " 1 hope so too, most sincerely (said the signora), all I wish is, that our Isabel would strongly impress Alberto with the necessity there is of submission to his decree." " That I am sure she will not fail to do, for she has long considered that her fate is in his hands (said the abbess), I long for the time that we may ex¬ pect his messenger/* " And so in truth do I (cried the signora). Oh î my friend, how many anx¬ ieties rend the heart of a mother; sus¬ ceptible as my Alberto is, should his wishes be disappointed, his early hopes of happiness blighteiî, how fatal will iuch a blow be to the peace of his fu¬ ture life/' rC Let us hope better (said the ab¬ bess); I will prepare Isabel for the good fortune which awaits her, and speedily, I hope, that ours and the dear orphan's suspence, will be happily ended."
Î88
Most fervently, did the signora join in the wish of her friend ; and that day the abbess determined to acquaint Isabel with the passion of Alberto. " We may soon, my child (cried she), expect to hear from your guardian. babel sighed. Tell me Isabel the cause of that sigh," continued the abbess, A crimson glow suffused the cheek of the lovely orphan, but for some mo¬ ments she could not speak, at last she timidly replied, <c indeed I know not, dearest mother, how to account for my wayward heart; I love our sisters, i love you : ah ! heaven knows how truly the poor orphan, fostered by your bounty, returns the affection you have always shewn her: yet, when I think of making a solemn, and irrevocable vow, never to pass these walls, my breast is filled with anguish, and my eyes with tears/' '· Hemcmber, my dearest IsabeL those lesfout» of piety and resignation
189
which you so early shewed a disposition to imbibe (cried her maternal friend) ; anguish and despondency, my child, ought to arise only from a consciousness of guilt, and from that consciousness the heart of my Isabel will, I trust, be al¬ ways free. Mistake me not so far as to suppose I wish to influence your choice, if a choice was indeed allowed you ; I wish only to fortify your mind, to en¬ able you to submit with cheerfulness to what may be unavoidable ; but on the contrary, should the Signor Val- domo consent to your quitting us, most willing shall I forego, for your happi¬ ness, that pleasure which your society has for years afforded me." Isabel's tears bore testimony to her sense of the holy mothers kindness, and she * cast herself, weeping, into her arms. " Oh î (sobbed she) how is it pos¬ sible for me to repine, when í think that my future days are to be spent with you? pity and forgive your Isabel,
1Э0
who will conquer this weakness, of which she is indeed ashamed." The abbess pressed her to her bosom, ζί Thou hast no cause for shame, my dear and innocent girl (cried she), I know not whether I ought to inform you, and yet my word is pledged to do so ; there is a chance, that if motives of prudence alone influence the Signor Valdorno in destiniug you to a monas¬ tic life, you may escape the veil, u Alberto Sforza," she paused, and a glance at Isabel betrayed to her pene¬ trating eye the reason of that reluct¬ ance which her young friend had ex¬ pressed to a religious life : the heart of Isabel had unconsciously imbibed a passion for Alberto ; treated by him as a beloved sister, she never suspected that her regard was different to what she would have felt for a brother ; but this mention of his name gave birth to a thousand hopes and wishes that she had never hitherto dared to iu-
m
dulge, and her secret was for the first time known to herself. The abbess (without seeming to notice her confusion) continued — > ťí Al¬ berto Sforza loves you." -The blood rushed tumultuously into the fair face and neck of Isabel, while in low, but delighted accents, she exclaimed, " good Heavens· is it possible V " His passion I perceive is not displeasing to you (said the abbess), but this, dear Isabel, is a subject on which you must not indulge too much hope ; recollect the power which the Signor Valdorno pos¬ sesses, and remember that we know not how he may exert it." The flush of hope and exultation gave place to a deadly paleness, but Isabel continued silent. " On your prudence, my beloved child (said the lady abbess), Signora Sforza and myself rely ; Alberto has received from his mother permission to open to you his heart, but my Isabel Snust not let him see heťs; if he is
192
once assured of being beloved ; reason and prudence will plead in vain, and should Valdorno refuse his consent, we shall have, from the impetuosity of Alberto, much to fear ; remember then dear Isabel, that on your guardian's decision every thing must depend/* Isabel promised an implicit compli¬ ance with the wishes of her friend, and the Jady abbess left her to her own reflections ; she could not for some time arrange her thoughts. Alberto's passion, his mother's goodness in sanctioning it, and the strong probabihty, which to her appeared almost a certainty, that her guardian would rejoice in such an offer for her, formed altogether such a pic¬ ture of enchanting, unhoped for happi¬ ness, that she could scarcely believe it real, and it was not till tears relieved her full heart, that she. became suffi¬ ciently calm to pour out her whole soul in prayer before the throne of grace, Though educated in a convent, tlie piety of Isabel was free from supersti?
193
tion, but not wholly URtinctured by enthusiasm ; with the most fervent de¬ votion did she beseech the assistance of her patroness, the Virgin, and she arose from prayer with a mind soothed and relieved. Hard, however^ was her task when Alberto opened to her his whole heart; tlie secret of hers, hovered on her lips, but prudence suppressed it ; yet had Alberto no reason to Complain of her behaviour, she did not indeed own her passion; but her varying countenance, her eyes, in which every emotion of her soul was painted, told a tale that her tongue refused to utter ; and Sforza ouitted her happiest of the happy. iwelve years nearly had elapsed since Montalva had placed babel in the solitude of St. Teresa : and vainly had he sought in every pursuit an antidote for the remorse which, preyed upon his life. For years past he had resided at the castle of D'Rosonio, and lost in gloom and despondency, he renounced vol. и. к
194
all idea of ever again mixing with the worid. One evening, as he sat lost in melancholy musing, the distant sound of ïaughter struck his ear, he listened, and heard it more distinctly ; he sum¬ moned oneof his domestics, and sternly enquired the cause of their riotous me¬ rim ent* " So please you my lord (replied Antonio), a wandering minstrel be¬ sought from us a shelter for the night, he is in truth not meanly skilled in melody, and it was one of his romances that caused the laughter which has dis¬ turbed your excel lenza." A low, but sweetly plaintive strain, at this moment arrested the counťs atten¬ tion ; he waved his hand as a signal for Antonio to throw open the folding-doors —again the strain vibrated on his ear. " Thou art right, Antonio, this minstrel is indeed a master of his art (said he), bring him before me." " The del igli ted Antonio fiew to obey the orders of his lord. From the
195
habitual sternness of the count, he had feared a severe reprimand, for the voice of mirth was rarely heard iu Montalvão castle ; and never had one of his do« mesties seen his cheek dimpled by a smile. The minstrel now entered the chamber, and for a moment the eye of Montalva rested upon him with curio¬ sity and surprise. He appeared of mid¬ dle age, his -countenance was fine, though pale; and there was an indescri¬ bable expression in his dark and pierc¬ ing eve, that rivetted the attention of the count. Antonio, in a low voice, bade him make bis obeisance, and he obeyed ; but the bow of the minstrel was not the lowly bend of a vassal to his lord, it was slight and haughty. íŕ Montalva motioned Antonio to leave thtm, and then desired the min¬ strel to play again the'plaintive air that had caught his ear before he saw him ; the nnnstrtf began, ^\)d with an atten¬ tion the niQbt profound, Montalva Ь. Jk
lpi> listened to the sweet strains of his harp ; they were indeed such as : ** Take prisoner ¡he %vraj)t soul and lap it in elysiuia." At length they ceased. (i Go on," (said the count). " Would not your lord¬ ship wish to hear a sprightlier strain," demandad the minstrel « " No (replied the count), ï have no relish for the sound of joy. 11 n 'Tis strange, ŕsaid the minstrel), the wretch oppressed by poverty or guilt, may indeed be deaf to the voice °f j°y* but why should the lord of these rich domains be a prey to gloom ? why should the brow of the noble Montalva be overcast with care ?" " What ! (haughtily exclaimed the count), därest thou enquire into tbe cause of my sorrows r rash presumptu* «гш man, retire, and thank the obscurity that shields thee from my resentment ; a lowly minstrel is beneath the notice of the Count Montala/» (i The lowly minstrel need r thank
197
the clemency of the proud Montalva ; í am surrounded by agents most poten t, though to thee invisible (cried he), I came here thy friend, but these taunts have changed my purpose. Know, that thou standest in the presence of one to whom every action of thy life is known. Yes, thou can'st insult a lowly minstrel ; thou can*st boast thy rank and power ; say how acquired?—The murdered LVRosonio—The infant Isa¬ bel—/* u Astonishment and horror rendered Montalva motionless; he gazed in silence on the minstrel, whose counten¬ ance might have dismayed even a heart un appal led by guilt ; his large dark eyes were rivetted on Montalva, while round his mouth played a smile of de¬ moniac joy at witnessing the agony he had caused/' ** I know not (at length exclaimed Montalva), by what means my crimes are discovered, nor wherefore thou thus rendest my heart, by recalling to my mind what I thought hidden from every
3 98
human eye; say, minstrel, how <ame these horrors known to thee;" * f By no earthly means (replied the minstrel); but speak not thus Mon- talva, let monks and women talk of crime, it exists but in idea ; D'Rosonio stood between thee and happiness, thou did'st right to destroy him ; but why does Isabel exist ?" 6ť What can I have to fear from her r'' (cried Montalva.) u Every thing (exclaimed the min- strti), even now is her hand solicited by one of the noblest youths of Naples ; her birth may be discovered------ ." <ť Impossible ?" (interrupted Mon¬ taba). *' No! not impossible; I tell thee it mat/ be discovered (continued the minstrel), what then becomes of thee r'* Montalva was silent. 4i Another blow (said the subtle tempter), and all is sure." 6ť Again imbrue my hands in blood ? (cried Montalva) Oh î no, no." f * Thou shoulďst have thought thus
1ЭД before thou dickt imbrue thy hands in blood (said the minstrel, with a malig¬ nant smile) ; but mark me, Montalva, 1 came here tby friend, why I am so* it is not of import to thee to know. I tell thee, and thou wilt find it true, that one only means is left to hide what thou cai lest thy guilt from the world. While Isabel D'Rosonio exists thou art not safe ; think of this warn¬ ing, and if thou hast the spirit of a man, take it/' A gleam of blue and sulphurous light flashed round the minstrel, and in an instant he vanished from before the eyes of the astonished count ; for some moments the greatest horror took pos¬ session of the soul of Montalva; when he could reflect, the only conjecture he thought it possible to form was, that his visitor must be a magician. He had avowed that his knowledge of Mon¬ tai va's guilt was not obtained by earthly means, yet, wherefore had he for twelve years kept tlie secret, and why did he now urge the wretched
200
Montalva to plunge still deeper in guilt ? " No, Isabel ; (exclaimed be, men¬ tally) no consideration, save my own safety, shall prevail on me to sacrifice % life.** He now summoned his domestics, and smoothing his brow, enquired whe¬ ther tbe minstrel had departed ? They all declared they had not seen him, and Montalva affected to suppose that he had quitted the castle unobserved. Such was the horror of the counťs mind;, that he did not dare to remain entirely alone ; he commanded Antonio to remain in an antichamber, and while lost in a maze of distracting thoughts, he paced his apartments. He every moment expected again to behold his late te.rific visitor. Alore than twelve years had now clapped since the murder of the count, and the voice of conscience Montalva had supposed was all that he could posribly have to dread; but this mys«
201
terious minstrel had awakened every dormant fear,—and the count resolved on a journey to the convent of St· Teresa, to learn if indeed he had spoken truth. 44 í will have her professed as soon as possible (thought he), and then min¬ strel I shall not heed thy prophet cies." He left the castle as he pretended on business^ which carried him to Naples, ajid his departure was indeed a day of jubilee to his domestics, who were now for the first tirne at liberty to indulge iii that noisy gaiety which distinguishes the lower order of people; but which their lord's severity had hitherto, re- pressed, *. Montalva, after stopping [a few days at Naples, ret out unattended for the convent of St. Teresa; his arrival filled the bosom of the lady abbess with plea¬ sure, she hastened ta receive him, and sent to summon Isabel to the grate«—A »trange aud new sensation filled the. к Г»
202
breast of Montalva, when he bebt Id the lovely girl whom he had rendered an orphan ; he was not surprised at feel¬ ing remorse on seeing one whom he had so greatly injured ; but how could he account for the inexplicable pleasure which the sight of Isabel occasioned him. Loveìy as she was, the heart of Montalva had ceased to throb at the *ight of beauty, nor was the sentiment he felt, while he gazed on the blushing IsabeL of that natu*e which beauty creates ; it was neither desire nor ad¬ miration, hut a feeling equally tender and pure. lie recovered self-command enough to express his pleasure at the sight of Isabel, whom he informed that it was his intention that she should immediately take the veil. The suddenness of the information lobbed Isabel of that fortitude which «die thought she had acquired, and she burst into tears. iC How is this 5 (cried Montalva an¬ grily ) have you not long known that
203
you were destined for a religious life, and do you now------/' " Pardon me for interrupting you, signor (said the mother of St. Teresa). Retire my child (added she, turning to Isabel), I wish to speak to the signor in private/* Isabel curtsied in silence, and obeyed*
204
CHAP. Χ.
·' Can you, madam (cried Montalva), as soon as they were alone, inform me whence springs the reluctance which Isabel expresses to a destiny for which she has been intended from the first moment she saw the light ; a destiny which she must embrace?" " I regret to hear you say so, signor (replied the lady abbess), for it is one, at which the soul of Isabel recoils; but, perhaps, when you have heard what I am authorized to propose, you may change your purpose. Alberto Sforza, of a noble Neapolitan family,
205
and possessed of a princely fortune, solicits in marriage the hand of your ward." The abbess paused, and looked earn¬ estly at the signor, but no expression of pleasure animated his countenance ; his features were convulsed, and he vainly strove to hide his agitation under an appearance of anger. (e I know not (continued she), what the family of Isabel may be, but she is the child of my fondest affection ; and Signor Sforza has my warmest wishes for his success/* " Isabel then loses the signor," (in¬ terrupted Montalva). 4f A confession of her affection for him has never yet passed her lips (said the abbess), but her heart may be read in her expressive countenance ; and that heart I am convinced is Sforza's/' " 'Tis well, madam (haughtily re¬ plied the count) ; a convent is the last place where I should have supposed an amour would be carried on, and a girl
20G
destined to the veil, I had thought you would have seciuded front ť vry eye." ζζ Hear me, signor (mil* ily inter¬ rupted the lady abbess), when you placed lsabel under my care, you told me that it was your rush $he riiould, at a proper apre, he« ome a member of our sistetboiv 1 , butyou represented her as an f 'phan without fortune. The Signoi Storža might aspire to a rich and highlv-born bride; how then could I suppose it wrong to sanction h's pas¬ sion for vour ward ? vet Isabel lias not tl ť violated the duty which she may owe you ; that she is decidedly against a mona«tic life, f am well convinced : hut I a'so know, that she will not become the w ife of any шап in defiance of your wish, if you have a right to insist upon her obedience/' The abbess ceased, and Montalva knew not how to reply ; at length, he said, " there are many reasons why Isabel mu*"t take the veil, what those
207
reasons are, I will acquaint you to-mor¬ row, if vou will then allow me v the honour of seeing you/ The abbess ac¬ quiesced, and the count took his leave. When he returned to the inn, where he intended to remain during the few days of his stay, he shut himself in his apartment, to consider what measures he should take. u Minstrel, I fear thou wast right," (burst involuntarily from his lip«, and in an instant the form of the minstrel appeared before him.) 4t Thou art now convinced, Montalva (cried he, while the astonished count sunk motionless on a couch), that I told thee truth, wouidst thou wish to know more ?" u First tell me, I beseech thee (said Montalva) to v\hat, or whom ï speak ; art thou indeed of earthly mold, or ------- .*' u Why this enquiry (cried the minerei), thiukesl thou not ï am thy fritnd ?"
208
He fixed upon the ^ount those piercing eyes that had before struck horror to the soul of Montalva. * f I read thy heart (continued he), thou thinkest me a demon." Montalva shuddered, Cf whether I am so or not, what matters it to thee ? I have told thee what to happened, Γ will show thee what ?nust happen, if thou hast not a spirit to prevent it." He drew from beneath his cloak a mirror, which he held before Montalva, who, with a ?onvuIsive shudder, closed his eyes, and inarticulately tried to pray. " This pious mockery, suits well with the actions of Montalva (cried idle demon, for it was indeed an in¬ fernal spirit, that stood before the count), thou ha4 need of prayer, soon will the husband of Isabel demand of thee the domains of his, bride, soon will· thy public and ignominious death appease the manes of the murdered Count D Roson io."
soa
" It cannot be," (cried the agonized Montalva). " Lookand convince thyself" (continued the demon). Montalva cast his eyes upon the mirror ; hebeheid Isabel weeping in the arms of a young and noble looking man ; presently they vanished, and he saw them before an altar, the priesL ap¬ peared to give them the nuptial bene¬ diction, and the bridegroom embraced Isabel. This scene also disappeared, and Montalva saw himself in the hands of officers of justice ; near him were placed implements of torture, and the officers approached him with menacing looks, as if prepared to bind him on rack." ťC Are there no means to prevent this?" (exclaimed he). " Yes ; one, and only one (replied the fiend), Isabel must die." " No (cried Montalva) ; I vvill fly from Naples : of the counťs death there can be no proof; nor see 1 how Isabel's birth could ever be discovered/'
210
" You thought yourself secure of Anselmo's fidelity" (replied the de¬ mon). e; I knew myself so T ' (interrupted the count), ťÉ thou art mistaken (said the fiend), the secret of thy design to re¬ move the Lady Isabel, was intrusted by him to a woman now in the service of Signor Sforza's mother, through her will Isabel's birth become known, and thy injustice to the orphan of D'Ro¬ sonio, will excite suspicion of her father's fate. When groaning on the rack, an acknowledgment of thy crime shall burst from thy lips; thou wilt then wish that thou hadst taken my counsel ; thou wilt then own, that the death of Isabel D'Rosonio would have ^insured ψ e life of Montalva." " She shall perish !" (exclaimed the almost frantic count). ζί Thou speaker now like the un¬ daunted Montalva (cried the fiend) ; away with the girlish weakness, called compassion. If Isabel dies, thou art
'211
secure; if she live*, a d* graceful death awaits thee : thou canst t*ot hesitate." " I will not (returned MontaK'a), would she had perisìied with her father." ťí Aye (cried the demon), that would have been indeed a secure blow, but it is not yet too late. Fare. vel, Montalva, my friendship thou mayest command." cť The minstrel vanished, and fain would Montalva have persuaded him¬ self that what he had seen was fancy ; the distracting images which the min¬ strel had conjured up of destruction to himself, seemed but too probable, and to remove and sacrifice the hapless Isabel was, he persuaded himself, the only step that could insure his safety : yet, how to take her immediately from the convent without exciting suspicion, he knew not. How did he now wish (as in an agony of despair he execrated the past) that he coukl recai the life of D'Rosonio ; yet, it was not remorse, it
212
was not a recollection of the noble and disinterested friendship of the count, which racked the breast of his assassin ; from selfish motives alone would he have recalled the murdered count to life/' " Never (exclaimed he), since his death have I known a momenťs peace ; and now to peri&h ignominiously ! No, by Heaven ! that at least shall be pre¬ vented—Isabel shall die ; her death will secure my life and honour. And why should I feel reluctant to destroy her? one of us must perish, and can 1 sub¬ mit to be that one ? No, self-defence authorizes the act ľ* With this wretched sophistry did the unhappy count try to reconcile himself to the murder of Isabel ; but it was sometime before he could fabri¬ cate a tale to impose upon the lady abbess ; at length he thought of one, that would, he hopeds lull suspicion to sleeps and early the next morning he repaired to the convent.
213 With well dissembled reluctance he told the abbess that he felt himself compelled to divulge the secret of Isabel's birth: she was, he said, the daugnter of a noble Neapolitan lady. who, during the absence of her hus¬ band, had an intrigue with a man of high rank, the fruit of which was Isa¬ bel; as the lady dreaded that her hus¬ band might discover her infidelity, she had, as soon as Isabel was born, placed her with a nurse in an obscure situa¬ tion. The father of the child, who, he rdded, was his particular friend, had, when she was neaily four years of age, intrusted him with the secret, for the purpose of getting him to place her in the convent of St. Teresa. " It is (continued he), the will of both her parents biat she shall be pro¬ fessed as soon as the term of her novi¬ ciate expires, and it was their desire that she should instantly enter upon it ; if she consents it is well ; if not, my orders are to remove her immediately/'
214
" But surely, signor (cried the ab¬ bess), if the secret of Isabel's birth is still preserved inviolate, if the Signora Sfurza and her son are still anxious for her alliance, and that lam sure they will be, the parents of Isabel cannot object to----- —/' " í can only tell you, madam (in¬ terrupted Montalva), that were a prince to seek in marriage the hand of Isabel, her parents would refuse him: her des¬ tiny is iixed, and no power on earth can change it/* The abbess, dearlv as she loved the interesting girl, could not oppose the will of her parents. With tears did she reveal to Isabel what she had heard, and with a firmness, which to the ab¬ bess appeared surprising, did she re¬ fuse the veil. " I cannot now, dearest mother (cried she), over hope to be the wife of Sforza, even were my parents to con¬ sent to our union, and his noble mo¬ tlier and himself would deign to over-
215
look the ignominy of my birth, yet, never could the offspring of guilt aspire to his hand, whatever my unhappy mother may command, save only that, I will willingly obey." Ci Thou hast sealed thy doom," (men¬ tally exclaimed Montalva), when the abbess repeated to him the answer of Isabel. " Tis well, madam (cried he). Ibis obstinacy, 1 own ï did not expect ; but as Isabel rejects the peaceful, and happy lot, which her parents have chosen for her, she must abide the consequences. In two days I depart, and she must accompany me." fi Nay, signor (cried the lady abbes.«), let me at least plead for a little de¬ lay." * e It is impossible to grant it, madam (replied Montalva), my orders are most strict, and Isabel shall not in vvery in¬ stance disobey the will of her parents/* The abbess did not venture to remon¬ strate, though her heart swelled at what
й\в
she considered the most tyrannical in* justice. Ci Isabel shall know your will, signor (replied she coldly), and I doubt not of her obedience." Montalva now departed, and the ab¬ bess prepared to undertake the ungrate¬ ful task of announcing to Isabel her approaching departure. " Good Hea¬ vens î (thought the mother of St* Teresa,) what cruelty and injustice, to tear thee, my poor child, from the hap¬ piest lot, and consign thee to ene so full of misery. Shame on the w T eak, tlie guilty being, who would thus hide her fault at the expence of thy peace.*' While she was lost in rumination, Isabel enrered. " WeH, dearest mother (cried she), I heard the signor had just left vou, and I felt most anxious to know what he says to the determination which I have made." My tidings are unpleasing ones, my beloved Isabel (said the abbess, ten¬ derly), but it is the lot of humanity to
2\Ţ
suffer ; and blessed are those who bear their sufferings with patience, a bright unfading reward awaits them." " I understand your kind caution (cried Isabel, turning pale), you have something to say that will, you think, afflict me, and you wish to prepare me for it hy degrees, but fear not my for¬ titude, dear and venerable friend, your child will not disgrace those instruc¬ tions you have deigned to bestow upon her. * tf You recollect my child (said the abbess), the declaration of Signor Val* domo, that if you refused the veil, you were to accompany him ; I grieve to say that he is about immediately to depart, an d------ . M " I must be torn from the dear abode of my infancy (cried Isabel), this is a blow, indeed. Oh ! my more than mo¬ ther, must 1 then leave you, never, never, perhaps, to see you again ?" For a moment, the boasted fortitude VOL, lb L
21S
of Isabel gave way to grief, and she burst into tears. " Hear me Isabel (said the abbess) ; was there a hope, that from your parents you would find that affection of which you a~e most worthy, was there a chance that your repugnance to a monastic life would induce them toallowyou the liberty of returning to the worid, I would not seek to alter your determination ; but alas! my love, of this event there is not the smallest hope; their pride con¬ demns you to obscurity, that the secret of your birth may never transpire, and destined as you are to a life of retire¬ ment, when 1 you will be so fondly sheltered, as here ? where your infancy was matured, and where your virtues aie known; could you, my child, but resolve to remain with us——/' i( Oh ! no (interrupted Label) ; let me at least preserve my innocence. Oh! what punishments might I not expect if, kneeling at the throne of grace, I presumed to oder wholly to the Al-
219
mighty, that heart in which, alas ! one of his creatures has but too great a share; it is the first time that my secret has passed my lips (continued she, with firmness), and from henceforth it must be buried in my heart ; but,, oh ! dear¬ est mother, that heart has long, though unconsciously, been Sforza's ; I know Ihat I never can be his, but at least the remembrance of his anection, the de¬ light of contemplating his virtues, may be mine, ; his image will follow me in solitude and obscurity, ani shed a gleam of comfort over my cheerless days/' The countenance of babel, as she spoke, was lighted up with all the en¬ thusiasm of pure affection, and never in the eyes of the abbess, did she appear so lovely. u My child, my Isabel (cried ¿he), I will not,farther seek to combat }our resolution ; in two days I must lose you, and may the Virgin protect and guard you." 3, 2
220
* ť We must not (said Isabel), 'till I actually have left the convent, let Sig¬ nora Sforza, know what has passed ; to see her would add fresh pangs to those which I suffer ; when I am gone, you, dear mother, will------/* She paused, but the abbess understood her. " Yes (replied she), the signora and Alberto shall then know all/' On the second morning Montalva came at an early hour to take Isabel from the convent ; bitter were the tears which she shed in the bosom of the lady abbess, whose sorrow equalled her own; the whole sisterhood indeed deeply regretted her departure, and with an almost breaking heart she left the scene of all her infant pleasures. Montalva handed her into a carriage, which waited to receive them, and for some hours they travelled in silence; ¡t was at last broken by IsabeL u May I hope to see my mother,
231
when we reach our journey's end, sigr nor f" (timidly enquired she). " No, not immediately (replied Montalva), but probably soon/* " After so long supposing myself an orphan (cried Isabel), I feel most anxious to be clasped, if but for a mo¬ ment, to the bosom of a parent ; per¬ haps my father would deign to see his child ?" " Perhaps he may" (said Montalva, hesitatingly), and the idea which at the moment crossed his mind, how soon, through his means, the innocent Isabel would be sent to join her murdered parent, blanched the crimson of his cheek, and gave to his countenance an expression of horror, which Isabel, absorbed in her own thoughts, did not notice. A large mansion, situate at some distance from Naples, and which was a part of the small hereditary possessions of Montalva, would, he thought, be a place well suited to bis cruel purpose.
222
Montalva's bride had hitherto prevented him from parting with this half-ruined edifice ; and he now rejoiced that it was still in his possession.. One old domes¬ tic only resided there, and of him the count thought there would be no neces- nty to make a confidant. When tbey stopped for the night, he told Isabel, that they were going to a castle which belonged to a friend of her father's, and where her parent would probably soon join them ; but for fear of any possibility of discovery, she must con* sent to appear in a masculine habit. 1 *' The lovely face of Isabel was dyed with blushes at this proposal ; but as she supposed it was her father's wish, she did not venture to express any re¬ luctance ; she longed to reach the end of her journey, for though Montalva laboured to appear at ease, yet the manner in which he sometimes fixed his eyes upon her, gave a sensation of fear to the heart of Isabel, to which it had till now been a stranger. When
223
they reached the cattle, Isabel shud¬ dered at its gloomy and ruinous ap¬ pearance; and in the welcome which Montalva gave her, there was something that chilled her blood ; she strove to appear calm, but her agitation was evi¬ dent to the count : nor was his, though from a different cause, much inferior. Determined as he was to sacrifice her, he almost forgot his purpose, when he gazed upon t her as she sat at supper ; she may yet be saved, thought he ; I will make one effort to induce her to take the veil/' fl I regret, signora (said he, endea¬ vouring to assume an insinuating ac¬ cent), the destiny which you are pre¬ paring for yourself/* " Know you what my fate will be, signor?'' (cried Isabel). " Yes (answered he), perpetual im¬ prison nient/* Isabel turned pale. " I wonder not, (cried Montalva), that you should be shocked at such a
354
1 ot ; *tis indeed a dreary one, but it is your father's positive determination. * Tell her (cried he, to me), that no chance shall ever publish to the world, a secret on which the peace and ho¬ nour, nay, more, the life of her mo¬ ther depends j if she selfishly prefers the indulgence of her own wishes to the duty that she owes her parents, they have at least, the power to punish her obstinacy ; in a convent she may, if it be not her own fault, be happy ; but should she reject a life, to which she was destined, even before her birth, should she presumptuously insist in mixing with that world, which she is doomed never to enter, perpetual and solitary imprisonment will be her por¬ tion» Tell her this, Valdorno, and should she then refuse, what, as a father, ï have a right to demand, her fete be upon her own head'/' '* 'Tis well, signor (cried Isabel, whose spirit, though the meekest under Heaven s wag imised by this injurious
доа
treatment), I have at least to thank my parents for tranquillizing my mind· In one respect, they are indeed the ar¬ biters of my destiny, and that fate to which they destine me, I must beam but their conduct absolves me from all. duty to them, from all regret at disap* pointing their views/* " Ha ! (thought Montalva), thou, dost indeed inherit the haughty spirit of D'Rosonio ; should I ever be in thy power—my fate is sure. In thy power i Heavens ! can I bear the thought ! no, thy obstinacy is the cause of al!$ I do not seek thy life, thou forcest me to take it- While these reflections were pas¬ sing in his mind, his countenance assumed an appearance of desperate re¬ solution that startled Isabel;, and her terror increased, when, on catching her eye, he tried to smile. "Good Hea· vens! (said she, mentally) into "*> ~ hands arø I fallen î but surely I can have no cause for fear—is he not røy L5
22β
father's friend ì ' yet, her heart sunk as she surveyed the.stern countenance of the count, and she expressed a wish to retire; Montalva did not attempt to detain her, but as he bade her " good night ;" the expression of his voice and countenance, froze her innocent heart with horror.
227
CHAP. XL The old domestic attended to light her to her chamber, and as soon as they reached it, she dismissed him, and gave vent to her feelings in a burst of tears ; when she bad a little relieved her full heart, she strove to tranquillize her mind, but in vain. Her apartment, was large, and its gloomy magnificence, added to the depression of her spirits. She approached the bed which seemed not to have been slept in for years; at th*H moment Isabel regretted the choice that she had made.
2 f 2B
eţ Ah! (thought she), did my deaf abbess know the lot to which I am destined, how would her heart bleed for her Isabeb Oh! that I had been allowed to remain with her, but the terms on which such a boon would havç been granted, I could not, I dared not accept them. Oh ! Alberto, how could I offer to my God, a heart that thou wouidst share with htm? No, let me not wish that I had purchased a secure aayíum, at the expence of everlasting remorse; whatever may be my destiny, at least, the consciousness of guilt shall not be added to my sufferings/* She now prepared to undress, but the dampness of the bed prevented hen a thousand vague apprehensions filled her minds but determining to subdue them, she threw herself on her knees Ä and poured out her whole soul in prayer to Heaven ι nor were her prayers vain 5 she arose from her devotions, with a mind mare tranquil, md spirits soothed^ by a reliance on the justice^ m weil &t
аэд
the mercy of that Almighty Being, at whose nod creation trembles; yet, whose loving kindness is extended even to the meanest of his creatures, Isabel loosened the- collar of her shirt, and wrapping her cloak around her, she sought repose for sometime in vain; at length, fatigue overcame her disinclination to sleep, and she sunk into a sound and tranquil slumber. When she had retired, Montalva again reviewed his situation, and again, did the declaration of the minstrel steel his heart against the hapless Isabel, The chamber to which, by his orders â she had been conducted, had, as he well knew, a trap-door that led to vaults beneath the castle; these vaults were known only to himself, and in them he* proposed to deposit the body of.Isabe!, When he thought she was lost in sleep, he proceeded to her chamber ; the door^ as he expectedj was fastened; but he knew of another in the arras, which was «ot easily discovered j through thia^ b$
230 entered. When he approached his dis¬ tilled victim, her repose was calm as the sleep of infants; the скак in wbich i>he had wrapt herself had fallen aside, and discovert d her lovely neck and bosom, which was pai'ly exposed; Montalva's hand was on his dagger, but his arm was nei velers. ŕ< Fool, coward, that 1 a.<n! (cried he,) shall 1 spare this ^jrl, 'till I myself perhh? no, nev* 3 !* sl a'l public disgrace overtake Viorit/lva, ' he approached her, but m urn esa ved to strike. " What madness (sai'i he, mentally, and avert¬ ing his eyes from babel) to suffer this weakness to uuman me!" she made a slight movement; a low, and inarticu¬ late sound escaped her lips, nod a blush suffused her ingenuous and lovely coun¬ tenance. Spite of himself, Montalva gazed upon her ; and to his surprise, Le traced in her fea f ure* a strong re- fíemblance to Valeria JTBranzo. The thought of her, again suspended his purpose; when the minstrefs mirror,
ÍÍ31
and the objects it presented* darted into his mind. " There is but one way,'*» (thought be), and his dagger wa* pointed at the bosom of Isabel ; but what was the astonishment, the horror of the count, when the form of Valeria, bending over the sleeping Isabel, was distinctly visible to him ! tc Wretched Montalva, to what un¬ utterable woe would tbe murder of Isabel have consigned thee ! She is thy own daughter/* Too well did the count recollect in the low and hollow accents of the ærial form, on which he gazed in mute horror, the sweet voice of the betrayed Valeria; and with a groan of agony, he sunk senseless on the floor; his fidi awakened Isabel, and her screams brought the old domestic to the cham¬ ber. Long did they vainly endeavour to recover tlie wretched count; at length, he ope neri his eyes, which he fixed upon Isabel svitli a convulsive »hudder.
23U
t( Where is she'* (said he, after a long pause). * e I am here, signor** (said Isabel)» u I mean thy mother. Knowest thou not that she has burst the confines of the tomb, to save thee from perishing by a father's hand/* groaned out Mon¬ talva. íc Alas! his senses wander'* (said Isabel), for to her the spectre had not been visible. u ï tell thee, I would have murdered thee; yes, though thou art røy child" (cried Montalva). " There is a convent near us, the fathers are skilled in medicine" (said Lopez). " Fly then for one" (sajd Isabel), yet, the next moment she was terrified at the idea of remaining alone with Mon¬ talva. ** His purpose here was surely an ©vil oue" (thought she), and she called back Lopez:, but he was already gone. The count sunk into a state of stupor*
333
and when the domestic returned with one of the holy fathers, he was appa¬ rently calm. The monk questioned Isabel as to the cause of the count's illness, but her account gave no clue to it. In mild accents, father Francisco addressed the unhappy Montalva, but his reason had fled, and the wildest rav¬ ings, burst from his lips ; yet from them the father could conjecture a part of the truth. For two nights, did the good Francisco watch by the bed-side of tbe wretched count : reason at length resumed her sway, and he hastened to make a full confession of his crimes í but the hope of expiating them by pe¬ nitence, was denied him ; he had scarcely owned his guilt, when he again lost his senses. Many were the expiring sinners by whom Francisco had watch«· ed and prayed, but never did he wit¬ ness a death, bed scene so full of horror: dreadful indeed were the agonies in which Montalva expired. ť< Almighty power! thy unerring
234
arm, though slow, is ever sure to pu¬ nish (said father Francisco, as he vainly presented the symbol of his faith to the expiring count). Oh ! could the wretched children of avarice and ambi¬ tion behold this scene, could they wit¬ ness the torture which ι ack the bosom of this unhappy and guilty man, how would they shrink appalled from the commission of crimes like his!" Isab " at the desire of the father, had f о ¡rne to approach the chamber of Montalva ; but when all was over, tbe good friar revealed to her the secret of her birth; and he now informed her, that as Montalva had no other heir, she was intitled to the castle and do¬ mains of the murdered count D'Ro¬ sonio. " Ah ! never, never (exclaimed Isa¬ bel), I will return to the convent of St. Teresa ; there I shall find an asylum; but never will I call the inheritance purchased by blood mine." " On this point, my child (said the
235
father), thy conscience must decide; nor will 1 urge the*' but calm thy spirits, lady Isabel, the crime of Mon¬ talva attaches not to thee; in tiie sight of Heaven, thou art guiltless." " Oh! hcly father ("ried the weep¬ ing Isabel), can the chiid of a murderer hope for peace?" " Re not more severe to thyself, than Heaven is to thee (exclaimed the friar). I again repeat, that in its eye thou art guiltless; and in the duties of religion, in the consolations of friendship, thy innocent mind will soon be soothed to peace/' íť Peace! (thought Isabel) Ah! can I hope for peace, when Alberto is for ever lost to me ? No prospect, however distant, of our union now remains ; for never, never can I become his." The good « friar procured for Isabel a conveyance, and a trusty escort to the convent of St, Teresa. The young orphan was formed to attract regard ; she had made her way to the heart of
236
Father Francisco, and the benediction which he gave her on parting, was truly paternal* " Do not dismiss Fa¬ brício, till you have reached the con¬ vent, my child (said the good father), and let me know by letter how you have borne the journey." Isabel promised to comply with the father's injunction, and again did he recommend her to the protection of the Virgin, as he pbced her in the vehicle that waited to convey her to the con¬ vent« Isabel (or rather Valeria^, for so she had been named by her unfortunate mother), travelled without stopping, until sbe reached the abode of her in¬ fancy : great indeed was the joy of the lady abbess at once more clasping her favourite in her arms. ζς My child, my Isabel (cried she), by what miracle art thou restored to me?" " By a miracle, indeed (said Valeria, as she returned the abbess's embrace). Oh ! dearest mother, but for the pecu-
23JT
liar interposition of Heaven, never would you hi /e beheld your Isabel again; but I will tell thee all/* " Not now, my child (said the mo¬ ther of St. Teresa) ; thou needest restand refreshment, to-morrow we will con¬ verse more calmly/* The whole sisterhood rejoiced in the return of Valeria; and when the next day she told the lady abbess by what awful means her fe had been pre· served, that kind friend joined her in thanks and praises to that divine power who would not suffer innocence to perish. The abbess highly approved of her resolution not to appropriate to her own use any part of the estate of D'Rosonio. " The soul of Alberto (cried sbe), is, I well know, far above the consi¬ deration of fortune ; he seeks thy hand alone.*' " My dearest mother (cried Valeria), on this subject spare me ; never, even should the signora Hrself wish it 3 never
2Г>$
can I become the wife of Sforza. What* loaded as I am with ignominy, think you that I woul· 1 stain the honour of Alberto, by an alliance with a i,ameles« wretch, the child of guilt and shame ? No, I will at least be just, nor take ad¬ vantage of a lover's weakness ίκ lender him for evvr miserable/' Vainly did the abbess try to combat the resolution of her beloved Valeria ; but hard indeed did she find it to resist the tears and «entreaties of Signora Sforza. Wheu the abbess made known her departure, the grief of Alberto knew no bounds ; he sunk into a degree of melancholy imd despondence, that alarmed his mother for his intellects : and uo sooner did she hear that Valeria wa« returned, than she flew to the con¬ vent. The abbess had besought her not to inform Alberto oi the arrival of Valeria, and when the signora reached the convent, the mother of St. Teresa went bereif to receive her. 4i Oh ! my thai friend, how great is my happiness (said the signora), but
239 *
say, is our dear child indeed restored to us ? are all the obstacles that opposed her j n ion with my son, removed ?" Tbe abbess's account considerably damped the joy of the signora. " Yet, (cried she), I will not despair; surely this dear child will never perseveie in her cruel resolution, when she is con¬ vinced that the peace, perhaps the life of Alberto, depend upon her com¬ pliance with our wishes." But the arguments, nay, even the tears of the bignora were vain. u You rend my heart, oh ! my more than mother (cried she), but my resolution is not to be shaken/' This was an answer that Alberto would not take. 4t I will see her (cried he), I will hear from her own lips the sentence of my life or death. What ! shall inat angel, whose mind is the seat of purity and truth, and in vriios-e heart every viitue finds a place; shall she reproach herself for fuüt in vvhicii she had no share ? No, dearest babel,
240
the voice of thy Alberto shall soothe thy spirit to peace and compliance/* Fearful of her own weakness, Valeria refused ίο see Sforza. " She cannot (cried he), interdict my writing; surely she does not know, she does not con¬ ceive what I suffer ; I have deceived myself, she never loved me." u Be not unjust, my son (said his mother), the noblest motives actuate this charming and disinterested girl ; nor is her heart less a sufferer I am con¬ vinced than your's ; believe me, I regret her resolution not less than you do ; but I respect her motives, and I know well what a perseverance in them must c\,at her." That day, Alberto sent her the fol- lowi g letter :— " In what words can ï beseech my adored Isabel (for by that name only does my heart acknowledge you), to grant me at leásta hearing? my mo¬ ther, my dear mother, tells me, that her prayers and tears have oeen un-
ÍMJ
availing ; and can I expect that my in¬ fluence will prevail, where her's has failed ? yet, to resign that hope, which is the charm of my existence ; that prospect which alone enables me to live. Oh, Isabel ! do not require from your Alberto such a sacrifice. " Suffer me to picture to you, be¬ loved of my heart, what must be the consequences of your persisting in the cruel resolution which you have form¬ ed. Yes, Isabel, I must call it a cruel one ; think you behold my mother, whose heart is known to you, sinking into old age, and surrounded, perhaps, by the children of my sisters, but languishing to add to the little groupe, those of her Alberto ; and reflecting with bitterness, that no hopes of such a blessing remains, and that the name of Sforza must perish. You love my mother, can you consent then to plant a perpetual thorn in her breast ? (or you well know that my happiness w ould constitute hers. You have owned thai VOL. H» M
242
I am not indifferent to you ; and yet to what a dreary late would you con¬ sign me ; for it is my resolution, should you persist iu refusing me your hand, never to marry : you possess, and will always possess my whole heart, and no other woman shall ever have my hand. ťí I am sensible that the scenes through which you have lately passed, must have shocked your gentle nature ; but 3 my Isabel, say only that you will at last be mine,, and * W} ^ patiently wait your own time. Ì will not, 1 can¬ not believe that my beloved can per¬ sist in a resolution which will destroy the peace of those whom she tenderly regards. More, much more could I say r on this subject, but ï cannot be satisfied without an assurance that you will suffer me to see you ; one inter¬ view is* all î askj and that you will not, you cannot deny İne. Ob, Isabel ! think for a moment, tbat the happiness or misery of my life hangs upon your
iUJ
decision. Ah î need I say more to in¬ fluence that best, and, most gentle of human hearts in favour of "Alberto Sforzi/ Laura, the beloved friend of Valeria's youthful days, was the bearer of this letter, and the lady abbess was present when Valeria received it. <c Oh ! my mother (cried Valeria), guide and support your poor child ; I cannot, I daie not become the wife of Sforza." 4Í Hear me Valeria (replied the ab¬ bess), there is a middle way, and one that 1 think you ought to pursue. Alberto has declared that he will wait your own time; should his love stand the test of absence, you may, you must be assured, that by refusing to become his, you will eventually render hiin miserable. Dearly as the signora loves her son, she would, I am sure, consent to his travelling for one year; M 2
244
and if at the end of that period his constancy remained unshaken, you would then owe it to the purity and constancy of his affection. Shake off the prejudice which at present presents your blessing him with your hand, and do not, my Valeria, suppose, that that Providence which has so miraculously preserved you, would be pleased with your devoting your future days to misery ; for well do I know what youť heart would suffer, if you gave up Sforza/' Laura joined her entreaties to those of the abbess; and at length Valeria consented to see Alberto. i( I will try every argument to induce him to agree to our separation (said she), and should all fail, should I find that my entreaties arc unavailing, İ will then submit to him your proposal, but not for one year, that is surely too short a period." The next day, Alberto was allowed to see her, and his entreaties, his solemn declaration, that on her, and her only,
245
the future happiness of his life de¬ pended, wrung from Valeria a reluctant consent to become his, if, at the ex¬ piration of a year, he continued to de¬ sire it. Scarcely did the enraptured Alberto allow her time to finish the sentence, which was to him the mandate of future bliss ; the violence of his transports al¬ most frightened the timid Valeria ; but when he left her, when she found her¬ self clasped in the arms of his mother, when Laura on one side, and the abbess on the other, congratulated her with tears of joy, her heart found relief in weeping; and she endeavoured to per¬ suade herself, that she ought to be happy : yet, still the circumstances of her birth hung upon her spirits, and she shuddered while she thought of the crimes of that man, to whom she owed her being. Every pains was taken by her kind and attentive friends, to chace from her mind these melancholy re¬ jections; and Alberto resolved to un-
2 tU
dertake a journey to the castle of ÍTRoíouio, to discover, if possible, by what means Valeria had been exchanged for tlie heiress of the count. The heart of Valeria felt this proof of her lover's attention ; and he departed, after a thousand charges from her, to be careful of his health and safety.
CHAP. XII.
АьпЕкЮ was cliarged by his Valeria. with a letter to the good Father Fran- cisco, whose convent was in his way to D'Rosonio. The father rejoiced at the intelligence which Alberto brought of the health and safety of Valeria, in whose fate he took the warmest in¬ terest, lie pressed Alberto to stop for a few days at his convent, and the youth complied with his request. From Fraucisco, Sforza had a detail of the agonies which the wretched Montalva had suffered, and he joined the father in lamenting the suddenness of his Ые.
24В
* s Yet, who (said the pious and to¬ lerant Francisco), shall dare to limit the mercies of the Most High ? and in the sight of Heaven, how know we that the -unhappy count's pangs have not expiated the enormity of his guilt í My profession renders me acquainted with the depravity of the human heart, and many are thedeath-bed scenes which I baye witnessed ; but I hope to be spared the sight of such a one again ; for never, never did I view such hor¬ rors/* That night the father was sent for to a ladv, who had been a benefactress to the convent, and who was suddenly seized with an ill ncss that threatened to be fatal. It was late when he re¬ turned. íť I have been witnessing a h cene different to the one we spoke of yesterday (said he to Sforza). I have seen a woman meet death with the re¬ signation of a saint, and the courage of a martyr. Poor Viola î one error, one single erior, clouded thy life with woe;
249
but years of penitence have long since expiated it, and thou art now gone * where the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest'/* The deceased penitent, was indeed the Viola, whom Anselmo had seduced. When, instigated by her attendant» she had thrown herself upon the generosity of his aunt, the signora, she dkl it not from a spirit of revenge, but a hope that the signora, whose benevolence was the theme of universal praise, would influence her nephew to do lier justice. She totally concealed the pecuniary transaction« between them, from a ge¬ nerous wish not to lessen Anselmo more than she could help iu the eyes of the signora; and wiien she fotmd that Im steadily refused to many her, and that his aunt, in consequence, cast him from lier affection^ she bitterly regretted what she had done, With tears did ¿he supplicate the β ignora to pardo« hiin« but tliat lady would not lirico î^ her, m i
250
ť * He knows the conditions on which alone he can hope for pardon (cried she), and surely they are easy ones ; if he will nót comply with tliem, let him embrace the beggary he deserves." Had Viola possessed the means, her faithless lover would have been amply supplied; but the signora, who feared that some step of that kind might be taken by the generous girl, though liberal to her in every other way, dis¬ pensed her pecuniary favours with n sparing hand. When the signora learned that Anselmo had entered the service of Montalva, as his secretary, she hoped that a station so inferior to what he had been born to expect, would soon grow irksome, and that he would gladly accept her offered pardon, antl give his hand to Viola ; but these hojies were destroyed by his death. He had *Ъееп highly beloved, and he was deeply regretted by his aunt ; but from the moment that she learned the intelli¬ gence of his fate, all hope of happiness
изЬ
fled from Vioku Tlie signora decíarrd her heiress to her large fortune ; but riches could not heal the wounds of disappointed love, and though outwaully composed, she was internally misera¬ ble.. The interest which her patrones« made amongst the great, procured the pardon of her uncle ; and she enjoyed the pleasure of being again clasped to the bosom of 1шг kind and indulgent aunt. The Jew, who feared that he might be punished for his villainy, fled. from Naples.; and the Signora Villoni remained ignorant of the events tliat. had taken place during her absence.. In a few vears, Viola lost her. bene- factress, who bequeathed to her tlie whole of her fortune; and never was money appropriated to a* nobler pur¬ pose. Viola was indeed charity jier- sonified; her heart and her purse were- alike open, to the children of distress; and from that time till the close of her îMt-ritoriaus life, her only pleasure cour
252
sisted in the exercises of benevolence and religion. Her beauty and her for¬ tune procured her many lovers ; but never did she lose the remembrance of Anselmo, and no entreaties could pre¬ vail upon her to enter the bands of Hymen, To the good Francisco, who had been for years her spiritual director^ every secret of her soul was known and he encouraged her to hope a par¬ don for the only sin that had ever stained her life,—a sin that had been $ύ truly expiated. She fell a martyr to her huraanitv ; a servant who had lived with her for years, caught a pes¬ tilential distemper, and the benevolent Viola would attend upon her herself. u My life is in the hands of God (said she, when her friends dissuader her from doing so), and to liis will I am rt signed; bat I should repioarh myself for ever, ih thiough a fear <»f danger, I shrunk from what I think is a positive dutv/ 1
253
She caught the distemper, which at first wore a favourable appearance; but by a sudden turn it became mortal. Father Francisco was sent for, and in the most mild and parental manner, he apprized her of her approaching fate. She heard him with calmness. " The will of Heaven be done (cried she), I have but one wish, and that is, that you would not leave me, holy father, till all his over/* The friar promised that he would not, and a few hours re¬ leased Viola from a life of suffering for one of everlasting joy and peace. Her death cast a gloom over the spirits of the good father, and Alberto staid with him a few days longer than be had intended. Every hour made the signor and the father more pleased with each other, and Alberto was sur¬ prised to find that Francisco possessed talents which his modesty had hitherto obscured, and a knowledge of tîıe world that appeared wonderful in tlie inhabi¬ tant of a cioMer; on his expressing
2Ы
seme curiosity to know the events* of the monk's life, Francisco replied^ " Mine, my son, is a simple tale ; yet it wiU serve to show thee that even vir¬ tue may be carried to excess ; aud as it will beguile a tedious hour I will relate it· The Friar's Story. K< Thou art right, my son, in sup¬ posing that I was not originally in¬ tended for an inhabitant of a cloister, I am descended from one of the noblest families in Italy ; and possessed of an almost princely fortune, 1 aspired to the highest dignities of'the state;, and. ambition left, as I fancied, no room i u my heart for any softer passion.. * É The family of Bernini solicited my alliance, and as theirs ivas reckoned die most powerful at Rome, I" readily en¬ tered into a treaty of'marriage witli a daughter of the Count Vincentio Ber¬ nini. Of the mind of. Corinna I knew.
255
nothing, but I saw that her person was charming, and her talents and graces were the admiration of all Rome ; yet, lovely as she was, í viewed her only as a creature who might be a means of increasing that power and popularity which I sighed to obtain, and I gave her my hand without the least sensation of tenderness for her. i4 The temper of Corinna was, un¬ happily for us both, strongly tinctured with romance, and her views in marriage were widely d i flere n t from mine ; iu . short, she loved me ; she was not blind to my indifference, but she hoped in time to subdue it, and she gave mc her hand with a lieart full of hopes that were destined, alas î never to be rea¬ lized. _** Of what materials my heart was composed I cannot denne ; but neither tiie beauty nor. the tenderness of my wife; neither the cheerfulness with which «he bore my neglect, nor the |)ains she took lo contribute to my lwippiijess, not even .the birth of a son, could make any
250 impression ujoon it ; I treated her with cold respect, but nothing more. ζζ The time, however, was approach¬ ing, when the phantom, ambition, that had hitherto dazzled and misled me, was about to lose its influence over my mind ; but, alas î I was destined to ex¬ change it for a passion that afterwards became the torment of my life. " I grew disgusted at the treatment which I met with at court, and I re¬ tired for a short period to a beautiful villa at a little distance from Rome; thither Corinna accompanied me, and, for the first time, I began to taste of pleasure in the society of my wife, and to feel a father's tenderness warm my breast, as I caressed my infant son. Delighted at the change in my conduct, my wife exerted all her powers to gain my hearts and never surely did nature bestow on a creature so many rare gifts. I was amused and grateful; but yet, I was «jot more than grateful. u One di\y that I had stiolled to *>оше
257
distance from the villa, I was alarmed with the groans of one in pain ; I look- ed around, and espied amongst the trees, a young female seated on the grass. She was chafing her leg, which was naked, and of uncommon beauty , and the expression of her countenance^ while she d'td so, convinced me that siie was suffering violent pain. At my ap¬ proach, she hastily covered her leg and foot. I enquired whether she had hurt herself, and she replied, that she feared she had sprained her ancle. On attempt¬ ing to rise, this opinion was confirmed, for she sunk upon the grass unable to stand. I learned that she lived in a cottage at a little distanco, and I offered to carry her thither. This offer she at first refused hut at last, she was persuaded to ac¬ cept of it, and I raised her in iny arms. Fearful of falling, she threw her arm round me, but the next moment she withdrew it, and with a countenance covered with blushes, she said she fear¬ ed that her weight was too much for me to support. How strange, how in-
258
consistent is the human heart ï I had beheld the loveliest women of Rome with indifference ; yet, in. one moment, this girl, who possessed, perhaps, in tlie eyes of a connoisseur, but few claims to beauty, inspired me with the most ardent passion· " A few minutes brought us to Lau¬ retta's cottage, and I was then reluct¬ antly obliged to relinquish ırçy lovely burthen· Her mother and herself load¬ ed me with acknowledgments ; and the simple, but touching manner of Lau* retta, appeared to me all grace and elo¬ quence· I returned to tlie villa without making known mv rank to these rustics. On entering my house, I. was. met by шу wife. 44 I have just received that music, iny dear lord (said she), which jou wished so much for the other day ; shall I now play to you r'* " I answered * yes,' without, in fact, knowing what I said; and I m echa u ь cal Iy followed, her into the. salooiu
2jy
Music was always a favourite pursuit of mine, and Corinnas proficiency in the science was admired and acknowledged by the best judges. Struck by my absent and disturbed air, she tenderly inquired whether I was unwell. The question roused me from my re¬ verie, and I replied in the affirmativt at the same time saying I would try the eflect of a little rest; " When I was alone, I reflected with wonder on the strange infatuation which had overcome my reason ; but unused to combat my inclinations, I determin¬ ed to possess myself of an object that appeared necessary to my peace. I did not for a moment reflect upon the in¬ jury which I meditated doing to this inuoceut girl ; I thought only that the riches which I had it in my power to bestow, would be a sufficient compen¬ sation for her innocence. c Heaven has, I hope (cried he, raising his eyes to it), pardoned mc for so base, a thought/ As I wished to possess my-
2б'0
self of the heait, as well as the person of Lauretta, I resolved for some time to conceal from her who I was, and the next day ! repeated my visit to her cottage. I need not dwell upon this part of my story. Day after day did my heart imbibe fresh poison from the soft blue eyes of the artless Lauretta ; and I could soon see that I was not in¬ different to her. c My rank still remained a secret, * Now (thought I) is the time to daz* zle her imagination with visions of splendour, of which she has not yet conceived an idea. Love and ambition united, must sure'y be too strong for the virtue of a girl, whose whole life has been spent in a cottage/ But I little knew the purity of the angel, whose mind I wished to contaminate, t( I always thought, my lord (said she, when I disclosed to her who I really was), that your rank in life must be much superior to my own, though 1 knew not how much, but believe me
2βί
your whole fortune could not purchase either the heart or the person of Lau¬ retta; from this moment, my lord, we meet no more/ te Nearly distracted at a resolution which I had not foreseen, î tried every means to make her revoke ii, but in vain; and finding that neither tears nor intreaties had the power to change her purpose, I became a prey to gloom and melancholy. ť; The altei ation in my manners did not fail to strike mý wife with equal grief and surprise; but she carefully concealed her thoughts, and not a word, not a look, upbraided me for a conduct that rent her gentle heart: our infant now became her only pleasure, and in caressing, and I fear weeping over him, she spent most of her time ; but of this happiness it was the will of Heaven to deprive her. Our son was seized with a disorder which is often fatal to infants t his mother never left his bed-side, and during twenty days successively, she
2(>2
wearied Heaven with prayers for hb recovery, but in vain ; on the twentieth day he expired, and so great vas the grief of Corinna, that I thought she would have followed him to tbe £rave. " llvr youth and naturally good consti- tution prevailed, at length, over the violence ofher disorder, and slie slowly recovered ; but in losing lier son, she had lo«t all that could render life desir¬ able to her. Tbe hope of touching, and at length subduing my heart was vanished, and my poor Corinna found herself an isolated and unhappv being, though surrounded by every thing that in the eye of the world constituted feli¬ city. Some time after the death of my sou, I resolved on making a last effort to subdue the resolution of Lauretta, and 1 wrote to her. This letter I in¬ trusted to,the care of, as 1 imagined, a faithful servant ; in it I painted in the most glowing colours, the violence of my love and my despair ; I made use of all the sophistry in which I was then but too conversant, to prevail on her to
2бЗ
sacı ilice what l calieri her prejudice^ to my haj>piness ; and 1 solemnly vowed that without she did so, I would not answer for the evtiemes to winch disap¬ pointment and despair might di ι ve me. 4ί To this rhapsody Lauretta did not deign to return an answer, but as m\ evil geniu* would have it, the domestic on whose fidchtv I thought I could de- pend, betrayed my seci et to my wife. She reads my letter to Lauretta, need I say that it pierced her heart with a thousand daggers? She charged the ser¬ vant, as I afterwards learned, to ht ing her the answer to it; and when »he found that there was none, she ex¬ pressed a strong curiosity to see Lau¬ retta ; this curiosity she found means to gratify, and she formed the sti anlest resolution that ever pei haps entered into the head of woman. " She expresse d a w ish to visit a con¬ vent at some d i« tance from Home, and as her absence was rather a relief than
26*
otherwise to me, I did not oppose her desire ; she set out on her journey, at¬ tended by a proper retinue, whom she dismissed when she reached the convent. The time fixed upon for her return had nearly elapsed when I received from her this letter. The friar presented one to Alberto, who read as follows. LETTER. ie For the first time perhaps Fer¬ nando, any thing that comes from me will be welcome to you ; yes, I am at last aware of the cause that has con¬ verted indifference into disgust, and I am sensible that all hope, all possibility of my gaining your »leart is for ever at an end. " Was the object of your passion a licentious woman, did she willingly re¬ sign herself to your unhallowed desires, I mightthink, satiated by time and pos¬ session, you might at las*, return to me with a heart more sensible than your's has yet been of my love for you ; but
2ÚJ
the native purity and nobleness of this voung creature's mind, will never suffer her to become your mistress ; and tor¬ mented by a passion wliich you c;m neither gratify nor forget, your future days present the most gloomy pros¬ pect. tc Fernando this shall not be: to what purpose should I suffer j t ou to drag a chain the most gallili;; ť Life has not for me a single charm ; my infint, for whom alone I wished to live, is gone to the abode of bliss and peace ; my hus¬ band's heart is for ever a i ic ated from me, alienated did I say, al lis î I never possessed it; we are a strong proof how truly involuntary is the passion of love. Caressed, flattered, and admired from my childish days, hy parents and rela¬ tions who doated upon mc, and accus¬ tomed as I grew υ r^ to the voice of adu¬ lation wherever I turned my steps, I rashly married you iu the hope, c r ra¬ ther certainty, that a very short time would render your affection equal to vol. и. n
2вв
my own ; if 1 know my own heart, this idea sprung not from vanity, but love; it was however erroneous; and severely, oh ! lieaven only knows how severely, have I been punished for ever enter¬ taining it. C( When I quitted you I o virit the convent of St. Sebastiano, it was m ν fixed purpose never to return ; you shall at least be freed from the sight of a be¬ ing, who I am convinced is odious to you : 1 shall he henceforth dead to the world, for to the gloomy duties of a monastic life will I devote my future days ; make what use of my doing so you please; a rumour of my death will never be contradicted ; and should you lead to the altar another and a happier bride, never shall her felicity be dis¬ turbed by the unfortunate Corinna, " You will, 1 know, think more highly of this sacrifice than it merits. Believe, me Fernando, in the solitude of a cloister, I shall be less miserable than in your splendid palace; I shall at least
ati;" have the comfort, in parting with you ii-r ever, to reflect that you mubt at last be sensible how much, how tenderly you were beloved; I shall also know that "the future happiness of your life will be my gift; and that the sacrifice vvhicii I have proved myself capable of making willentitle me to your gratitude; and oh î may that sacrifice be the means of bestowing upon you that felicity which is for ever lost to ft COÌÌINNA." " Generous, but extraordinary wo¬ man (cried Alberto, returning the let¬ ter), but proceed, father/" u You may suppose,jn\ чш (conti¬ nued the f riai j, how much this leitor astonished me. 1 lost no time m endea¬ vouring to discover the retreat of Coi ni¬ na, but in vain ; all that i could learn was, that she had privately quitted tho convent of St. Sebastiano; but whither she had bent her steps, none knew. I returned to Rome, and sought to lose the remembrance both of Corinna and N 2
26$
Lauretta in business, but in vain. The causes of disgust, which 1 had received, had ceased, but the reign of ambition was over, and its i Пич ve splendours could not restore pence to my heart. *' í had given out that my wife was no moie, but í was not yet wicked enough ίο think, w ithout a pang, of giving my hand to another. The torments of my mind t İti, gib i nipah ed my health, and by the adwee ol my physician, í re¬ turned to m v villa. ťe I will not, mv son, repeat to \ on the false and sophistical arguments which I used to persuade myself that my wife had herself exonerated me from the nuptial vow. I forgot, or rather I en¬ deavoured to folget, that no human power can sunder those whom H^neu has joined; m bhort, i di îcî mined to espouse Lauretta. tc My honourable propoli* were re- cehed with equal modesU and giatitude. Lauretta became mine, and now said I to myst Г, at 1.Ы ï am happ\. I ac-
-b'9 knowledge the truth ofthat reptoving glance, my son, I was indeed mistaken. Oh! who was ever othnwise, that thought happiness compatible with ¿mit. 4Í in one vear after our mariia&o, Lau- retta brought me a son, nnd the fallow¬ ing v^ar anoťner; doatiugly f ·ιπ1 of mv wife and childien. I looked im,\aid to those honoms for my boy-, \>im.h I despised for myself, but Heaven had decreed otherwise; both my children died within one mouth of each otilar. <c Lauretta yet remamed, and in en¬ deavouring to consolo her, I lost a part of my own affliction. Time in some degree calmed our sorrows, and for five years after the death of my chi Ith en, I might, but for the visitations of con¬ science, have been happy, ίς In the íl ft h year, J lost Lauretta, that beinf. whom ï adored, and for whose «ake I had plunged into crimes, was suddenly snatched from mc, without any previous indisposition : oue hour,
*7<*
мн ber blooming iu health and beauU , the noxt beheld her a lifeless corpse/' The friar's voice faultered, and his íves filled with tears. After a few mo¬ ments раиче, he continued—" This t vent plunged me into affliction, but it produced a salutary eflect upon my mind. 1 reviewed my conduct, and I acknowledged the justice of that un¬ erring arm which tore from me the ob¬ ject of my sinful passion. The world now became hateful to me ; I resigned my estates to my nearest of kin, and assumed the monastic habit. Cff Slowly did peace again revisit my troubled soul ; but penitence and prayer have at length, í trust, atoned for my sins; and I look forwatd in the humble hope of pardon. Some years after I had assumed the cowl, the confessor of a neighbouring convent being ill, I was sent for to supply his place among the penitents, who poured forth the secrets of their hearts at the foot of the con¬ fessional ; one well-remembered voice
27 1
Struck my ear, it was Comma's. î cautiously made myself known to my injured wife, and besought her forgive¬ ness for the sorrows I had occasioned her. I had the happiness to find that religion had enabled her to conquer those wild emotions which at first de¬ stroyed her peace. Severely did *he blame herself for the misplaced genero¬ sity which induced her to le»\e mo; and 1 learned ihe means by which >4ie had discovered my pertìdy. My ge¬ nerous Corinna would not allow of my self accusations. * Heaven (said she), in its own proper time, rt wards and punishes its creatures; u e have both been wrong, we have both from dif¬ ferent causes suffered ; let us then ac¬ cept with joy the dawn of peace which Providence has blessed us with, as an eaniot of its pardon.' u From that time to the present, J have every day been easier in my mind. Our order is one of those few that are useful ; and i a works of mercy to my
2Ţ2 fellow créatures, in the duties of reli¬ gion. 1 haw found that solid peace winch seutual enjoyments can never be¬ st-v. /' '* he friar ceased, and Alberto thank- Cf ! him for his tide. His stay bad al¬ ready exceed* d the time he proposed to devote to the good father, who, though he acknowledged the propriety of \i\b oiiu . yet parted from him with ,if;:*et; he charged him with a bene- dic tion to Valeria, and he bade him adieu with the warmest wishes and prayers for his future happiness,
CHAP. XIII.
When Alberto reached the demesnes of D'Rosonio, he found, on enquiring amongst the domestics at the castle, that the woman who had nursed the supposed Label was still alive, and re¬ sided in a cottage at no great distance. Alberto soon reached it, and found her alone : he complained of fatigue, and Marcella, with rustic courtesy, brought out such refreshments as her cottage afforded, and begged the signor to rest and partake of them. fi I find (said Sforza) tliat there lias been, within the last t w vive year«. N 5
274
strange changes at the castle D'Ko- sonio." Ci Ah î strange indeed, signor (cried Marcella), 1 did hope that the Lady Isabel won hi have supplied to the vas¬ sals the place of her good father, but Heaven w a* pleased to take the cherub to itself/' u Have you lived here long?" (asked Alberto). (i From rny birth, signor (replied she). Ah ï ï shall never forget the time the countess died. How grieved tlie count was, and the little Isabel was sent to my poor cottage to nurse, be¬ cause the sight of her reminded him so strongly of her mother/' 44 You were then the nurse of the count's heiress ?" ( r aid Sforza.) ** Yes, í ignor (-aid she), and had the Lady Isabel but lived, Marcella would not have been the inhabitant of this poor place. But thank the saints, 1 am cou tent/' íŕ What, though you have been
27ò
guilty of the grossest imposture;—tho* you have substituted the child of an¬ other person in the place of the heiress of DRosouio (said Alberto, sternly), yet you can be content ?" " Oh î holy Virgin (cried the as¬ tonished Marcella), how has it been dis¬ covered ?" " It is discovered; and the only way in which you can avoid the punishment that threatens you (said Alberto), is by a frank and open confession of the means you used to perpetrate the fraud/ 1 " Pray, pray, signor (exclaimed the terrified Marcella, dropping on her knees), have mercy upon me, and I vvill tell you all ; indeed, indeed, I will." Alberto raised, and reassured the trembling crimiual by a promise of pardon, if she v/as sincere, and she proceeded. 41 Fur .some time after the death of the countess, the count did not see hri
27$ her ьш ding in its plact ; for a long time í refused, but at ia^t, the dread of the counťs displeasure, and the know¬ ledge that 1 injured no one, (for my si.^ter said that she v\as sure the father of the child would be glad to hear that it nas dead, which she meant to tell him), prevailed upon me to consent; and as the children were both so young, and the colour of tlicir eyes alike, as well as some resemblance in their other features», the deception was never dis* covered ; and the count was as fond of the little Valeria as if she had been his own. And now, signor (continued Marcella), 1 have told you all, and í hope that you will not punici me/ As her account appeared to Alberto loo simple and unstudied to be fabc in any particular, he readily promised that she should not he punished. He had now obtained all the information ht wanted, but he would not yet return to Valeria ; I must give her gentle spirit time to recover from the horron
2Г9 that ha\e oppressed ii (thought lu·) ; and iu my mother 1 Hiall, during my absence, have a warm and, zealous friend. He was indeed right, the sig¬ nora was most tenderly attentive to Valeria, who, iu her soft soothing««, and the natural kindness of the hdy abbess began again to taste of peace : but happiness pure and unmixed is des¬ tined never to be the lot of humanity, and the heart of Valeria was yet, at times, torn by the remembrance of her fathers crimes. Signora Sforza had a female servant about her person, who had h ved with her for years, and who was uncom¬ monly attached to her ; one алу she sent this woman to her cabinet, where the portrait, whose resemblance to Va¬ ici» she had once noticed, was depo¬ sited. The case that contained it hap¬ pened to he open ; an cvchmatton ot surp гье from her servaut occasioned ihe signora to enquire into tho саиье, and she learned that her woman know
280
the signor for whom the portrait was taken. " Poor Siguora Bianca (continued she), it had been well both for her and the Signor Montalva if ------/' " Was that portrait taken for Signor * Montalva ?" (interrupted the Signora Sforza). " It" was, indeed, lady (replied the woman). I was then in the service of Signora Bianca·; but, perhaps, you kno)v her story ?" The signora replied in the negative, and she related to her Signora Lu- pinetti's story· - " When, my lady (pursued she), foupd herself treated with disdain by Count DTiosonio, I thought that the violence of her rage would have de¬ stroyed her love for him ; but I was mistaken ; she grew melancholy, and instead of „conquering her passion^ it daily increased. The Signor Montalva became odious to her. That portrait had been given her at her own desire - f
2Sİ
and on receiving it, she had vowed never to part with it; and for a long time she wore it day and night sus¬ pended from her neck. One day when the Count D'Rosonio had, I believe, answered a letter that she sent bim in a manner that displeased her, she took the portrait from, her bosom. . " c Here (said she to me), hide this from my sight ; would I had mver seen it.' I did not presume to rejJ.y, hut I placed the portrait in a caslet that contained her jewels. " For some time she continued a prej to melancholy, and at last she declared to me a resolution of retiring from the world, and ending her days in a con¬ vent. She quitted Naples, and I ac¬ companied her to the monastery which she had fixed upon as her future resi¬ dence. With tears did I see my be¬ loved lady enter this gloomy abode, never more to leave it ; but all places, she said, were now alike indiflerer.t to
2Я2 lier, She generously recompensed my pa>t serviço, v tid ì returned to Naples, alicie í remained till í entered your service, ignora."* The Signora Sforza was now con¬ vinced that lhe portrait v\as that of Vale-ias father; but she kept the dis- co^e'v to herself, a* she rightlv judged th. ta know'jdge uf i*. could mt uiiord lieryoimg fiiéiul any pleasure. 1Ъе year w^ three parts gone when Aberto \cntured to reiurn. The joy tfat sparkled in the eyes of Valeria, csűrni him of that weicomo \\ hich her aultering tongue ahnost refused to give him ; and when the first congratulations were over, she was obliged to leave the room abruptly, iti order to give \ent to her tears. The signora found her on her knees, in her own apartment, iu fervent prayer. ťt Oh, my belo\ed mother! (erit d she,) what transcendant happiness would be mine, d'd 1 but dare to enjoy the en-
'2$3
viable lut that offers itself to nie ; bui memory poisons the delightful hope of future b h ss." The signora råhed and preved her ίο her bosom. Every thing that mater¬ nal love could inspire, did she sav to baurdi the apprehensions of the timid giri, ť: Never, my beloved Valeria (cried she), never will you be less dear than you are at present to our hearts. Cruel indeed must that being be that could attach reproach to innocence like yours." At the earnest iutreaty of the sig¬ nora, Valeria quitted the convent for some tune ; and accompanied tlie family of Sforza to Naples. u A sight of that world which she has hitherto been pre¬ vented from mixing with, will be of use to her spirits (said the signora to the lady abbess) ; and the event proved that she was right. Valeria was amused, and her mind was diverted from brood¬ ing over its own cares. l'ut though adulation followed her footsteps yet
184
Valeria saw not amongst her numerous admirers any one that her partial fancy could compare to Sforza. Her spirits became gradually better, and that native vivacity, which had been one of her greatest charms, again sparkled iu her eye, and wantoned in the dimples that played round her lovely mouth- Laura Sforza, not less than Valeria, was admired by the youth of Naples. Less lovely, she was infinitely more attractive than her sister Julia, in whose bosom ambition only reigned ; -and to the wish of contracting a splendid alliance, she would willingly have sacri¬ ficed every prospect of domestic com¬ fort. Don Juan De Santenos, a rich and noble Spaniard, but much advanced in life, and of a haughty and stern temper, was struck with the charms of the Signora' Julia ; and notwithstanding her mother's avowed disinclination tp the matchs Julia persisted in deter¬ mining to give him her hand. " -" As the wife of Don Juan .(said.
285
Signora Sforza), you will, my child, be possessed of rank and riches above your most sanguine expectations ; butyou will speedily find the insufficiency of either to procure" happiness ; that, in the married state, must spring from a simi¬ larity of temper and disposition, and from those unobtrusive virtues tbat teach us to bear with each others de- feets ; but a momenťs reflection will serve to show you how vain is every hope of that kind. Don Juan is stern and imperious, and his wife will find herself a slave, though surrounded by splendour and magnìficence/ , " I will owrn to you, my dearest mother (cried Julia), that a splendid alliance is necessary to my felicity, I was not formed for a domestic life; to shine,and to dazzle are necessary to my happiness. As the wife of Don Juan, I shall enjoy all that I wish for; con¬ sent then, I hcg of you, to the wish of your child." . Thus urged, the signora no longer
18ŕj
withheld her consent; but she gave it with a foreboding, that Julia would, ere long, repent the choice that she had made. r fhe nuptials were solemnized with much splendour; and, soon after, Don Juan and his lady departed for Spain. {i I have been thinking of a plan, my Valeria (said Alberto, to his be¬ loved), that will, I hope, be pleasing to you. You have a legal right to the demesnes of D'Rosonio ; but I think with ycu, that the possession of them would not add to our happiness: yet, they might he so disposed of as to he a blessing to thousands/' " I think I comprehend you (said she), you mean to employ them in founding a monastery/' ťí I did, indeed, think of such a plan (cried Alberto), hut our convent, my love, should not be merely a house of prayer and medi¬ tation. For the mere recluse, I have, I must own, little respect ; but those men who voluntarily resign the riches
ss;
and pleasures of the world in order to devote themselves to the service of Heaven, and of their fellow creature?, these are indeed to be venerated. The demesnes of D'Rosonio are amply suffi¬ cient to found a monast cry on such a plan as to be a blessing to the neigh¬ bouring poor, not hy encouraging them through it* blind and lavish dona¬ tions to live in idleness, but by reliev¬ ing their real wants; by inciting them to industry, and gradually dispelling those mists of ignorance and error into which the lower orders arc plunged : but it is not only to the hungry and the weary, but to the distressed and persecuted thai jnr monastery would afford a refuge. Its gates should evei¬ be open to suffeiiiig virtue or penitent vice; ami could be benevolent spirit of D'Rosonio look down ou the disposal of hi.' propeity, it would, 1 am con¬ vinced, meet with \\\» approbation." " Oh ! Alberto (cried she), how su¬ perior arc you every way to the poor
£88
Vah ria ! when I declared that í would renounce all right to the demesnes of ÏVlioFonio, I forgot of what a hap¬ piness ï deprived myself—the power of doing goad. Yes, dear Alberto, most cheerfully do I agree to a plan equally wi^e aiid benevolent ; and oh î may the i 'í?hťs so dreadfully acquired, answer the pious and charitable purpose to which you intend to devote them/' Tears of painful recollection fell from the lovely eyes of Valeria; but the toothings of Alberto soon dried them, The twelvemonths had now expired, and the signora reminded Valeria of her promise. She pleaded for yet a little longer delay ; and as Signora Sforza liad reason to think that her daughter Laura would soon add another votary to the train of Hymen, she consented; and prevailed on Alberto to indulge Valeria. " '1 hink me not affected or capricious (said she to her lover), but indeed I feel most grateful ίο you for this indul-
ÊS3
gence ; my mind is daily recovering its peace, but I would, if possible, be free írom every unpleasant reflection when I bestow upon you my hand. You merit a whole and undivided heart, no cankering cares, no painful recollec¬ tions, should poison the happiness of vour bride." " Nor shall tbey, my gloved (cried Alberto). To ¿hare your regrets, and to endeavour to chase them from your mind, will be at once my pleasure and my care ; that good and pure mind has, in fact, no cause for painful recollec¬ tions, but such as arises from its own susceptibility, and every day will dì-* minish those." Valeria proposed, and Albeito agreed to request fhe good Francisco to take upon himself the superi ntendance of their monastic plan ; to which he readily consented. The spacious and noble castle of D'Rosonio, which had so lorn* witnessed the pangs of unrepented vil¬ lainy ; was now appropriated to the VOL, II, Q
290
purposes of religion and charity. Money rendered the workmen employed in the necessary alterations expeditious ; and it was soon fit for the reception of the monks. Father Francisco was their abbot, and well were the mild virtues of his character adapted to that sacred office. The monastery of St. Francis, as it was called, might indeed be termed of the order of mercy ; for most truly did Father Francisco second the pious views of its founders ; and while, with the mild benignity of a true christian, he comforted the dismayed and guilty penitent, the treasures of the convent were ever open to the distressed ; and never did the poor or destitute turn from its gates unrelieved. A shoit time justified the signora's suspicions, that the heart of Laura had plated its misstress truant. Count D'Aîbertini, a young and amiable Nea¬ politan, solicited from her the hand of her daughter, and the blushing Laura ©wned, that if her mother consented.
291
she had no objection to the signor, who w r as -------. Laura could say no more, but her #yes spoke a language sufficiently in¬ telligible to her fond mother, whose wishes coincided with her daughter's. The temper and disposition of Albertini was such as to give her ever^ rational prospect of happiness, and most grate¬ fully did the signora thank Heaven, for bestowing upon her children that feli¬ city which would constitute hers also. The al )ot of St. Francis bestowed the nuptial benediction upon the two brides, who vi¿re both agitated, though from different causes. The natural timidity of Laura, and the reflection that she was about to quit a beloved mother, made the change peculiarly awful to her : Valeria, on the contrary, was to reside with the signora, whom she loved as a mother ; and was it not for the single idea of her fathers mi¬ serable fate, joy, the most pure and О 2
UţtU
unmixed would have been her por¬ tion. The benevolent abbess of St. Teresa felt all the satisfaction of a parent at the happy lot of her beloved child, who ever treated her with fíiia! affec¬ tion ; and, perhaps, a happier family than that of Sforza could rarely be found. One single cloud disturbed the serenity of the signora's days : it arose from the fate of Julia. Too soon did she find that her mother was indeed a prophetess ; and galling was the chain which she was destined for life to drag ; it was rendered doubly so by the re¬ flection, that she had rushed upon her fate, and that her sufferings were solely occasioned by her own fault. Very indifferent was the fate of Laura and Valeria ; the many virtues of Laura, and her angelic temper, while they rendered her adored by her husband, made her a blessing also to her mother, her children, and her friends.
ЗДЧ
Nor was the union oí Sforza and Valeria less happy; sometimes, indeed, the circumstances of her birth w^uld throw a transient damp on the spirits of Valeria, but these slight sorrow?, which were soon chased away by the tenderness of an adoring husband, were the only ones she ever knew after she became his. Blest with a lovely family, happy in each other, and gifted with the means which they liberally used of doing good to their fellow creatures ; it was not possible for frail humanity to enjoy a felicity more complete than that of Sforza and his Valeria.
FINIS
R.Juijjnéj Printer, 17, Margaret-street, Cavendislbsquare,
